ROBOFRIEND: AN ADPATIVE STORYTELLING ROBOTIC TEDDY
BEAR – TECHNICAL REPORT
A PREPRINT
Ido Glanz∗
Technion Autonomous Systems Program
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Matan Weksler∗
Technion Autonomous Systems Program
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Erez Karpas
Faculty of Data and Decision Sciences
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

Tzipi Horowitz-Kraus
Faculty of Education in Science and Technology
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology

ABSTRACT
In this paper we describe Robofriend, a robotic teddy bear for telling stories to young children.
Robofriend adapts its behavior to keep the childrens’ attention using reinforcement learning.
Keywords Robotics · Education · Reinforcement Learning
Introduction
Language exposure at an early stage of development is critical for the facilitation of brain networks associated with
language Kuhl [2004], Cardillo and Kuhl [2009], Moon et al. [2013]. Storytelling is one form of language exposure,
which was found to be associated with a greater engagement not only in language processing but also in visualization
and cognitive abilities in children Hutton et al. [2015]. Interestingly, it was suggested that it is not the storytelling itself
that is related to these improvements, but it is the interaction during the stories that amplify these abilities in children
Twait et al. [2019]. A recent study demonstrated how a group of 4–6-year-old children attending storytelling sessions
interactively vs. a group attending non-interactively (storytelling sessions on the screen), shared greater cognitive and
language abilities Twait et al. [2019]. Hence, a question was raised regarding this positive effect during interactive
(dialogic) storytelling – is the positive effect due to the human interaction? or due to the interactive nature of the
storytelling? in other words, will an interactive robot during storytelling result in similar results as the human-based
interactive condition?
To study this question, we designed Robofriend (shown in Figure 1) – a robotic teddy bear that reads young children
stories. Robofriend is constructed by taking a regular teddy bear and inserting a tablet in its belly, as well as a
rudimentary skeleton, motors and sensors that allow it to move its head and arms. Robofriend can read a story to a
small group of children, with the robot’s main objective being to engage the children, keeping their attention on the
story. Thus, although our main motivation for designing Robofriend is the scientiﬁc study described above, Robofriend
can also serve as a tool that a teacher in a daycare class can use. Robofriend can read a story to one group of children
while the teacher engages with the other children in the class.
Each story that Robofriend can tell is divided into prerecorded video segments. Typically, each segment will correspond
to showing a still image of one page in the printed book, with a human reading the text on the page. Note that Robofriend
does not perform any text to speech, the segments are all prerecorded. At the end of each segment, Robofriend chooses
which action to perform out of several actions it has available. Possible actions include asking a simple question
about the story (there is a set of prerecorded questions for each segment of the story, Robofriend chooses one of these
∗denotes equal contribution
arXiv:2301.01576v1  [cs.RO]  4 Jan 2023

Robofriend TR
A PREPRINT
Item
Use
Quantity
Price
Bear doll
-
1
US$30.00
Display
Play video
1
US$200.00
Camera
Monitor kids
1
US$79.00
Arduino + wiring kit
Control Servos
1
US$37.00
Servo
Move head
4
US$24.00
Speakers
Playing Sound
1
US$20.00
Total:
US$462.00
Table 1: Robofriend Bill of Materials
randomly), giving positive feedback (e.g., “very good children, I see you are paying attention”), or negative feedback
(e.g., “children, are you listening to the story?”).
As previously stated, the objective of Robofriend is to keep the childrens’ attention. The ﬁrst step to optimizing
something is to measure it, or at least some proxy of it. Robofriend uses a camera to measure some things, which
can serve as a proxy for engagement. First, Robofriend uses computer vision to detect the faces of the children, and
the direction of their gazes. We remark that these faces are anonymous – Robofriend does not try to associate faces
to identities in any way. From these face detection, we extract several measurements: how many faces are looking
at the robot, how focused are they on the story (using their relative gaze) as well as how “jumpy” the faces are (an
"excitement" metric). Aside from the visual attributes, we also monitor the noise level as and its momentary change
(its derivative) to serve as supportive metrics capturing the children’s state. These are aggregated into a reward signal
for each camera video frame, and aggregated throughout each story segment to produce a state and reward for each
segment.
Having deﬁned the rewards, we can now try to optimize our objective – the total sum of rewards. Of course, we do
not know in advance what is the right action to take after each story segment, nor do we have a model for how each
action will affect the children’s engagement. Therefore, we chose to use reinforcement learning to control Robofriend’s
actions. However, because young children are involved, we do not want to allow the robot to explore sequences of
actions we know are not beneﬁcial for the children (for example, always using the negative feedback action). Therefore,
we adopt the approach of using LTL “restraining bolts” Giacomo et al. [2020], and manually encode what are the
allowed trajectories for Robofriend.
In the remainder of this paper, we describe the design of Robofriend in more detail. We also describe our preliminary
evaluation of the robot at a local daycare center. Finally, we conclude with some lessons learned and a discussion of the
ethical considerations that arose in this project.
Robofriend Design
We now describe the design of Robofriend in more detail, starting with the mechanical build.
Robofriend Mechanical Build
As previously stated Robofriend is constructed by taking a large, 1m tall, teddy bear, and instrumenting it to be able to
move its head and arms, play videos and sound, and look at the children it is reading the story to. First, we inserted an
aluminum skeleton into the robot to support the other devices. To do so, we removed the majority of the stufﬁng and
decoupled the head momentarily to mount the camera in the bear’s nose and create a ﬁxture for the servo motors to
connect to. We then mounted a 12.3 inch display, which the robot displays the story segments on, as well as 4 servo
motors which are used to move the head and arms (one for each arm and 2 for the the head pan and tilt). As mentioned
above, a camera was placed into the teddy bear’s nose, to monitor the children and measure the reward signal, ﬁnally,
speakers were connected to play sound, see ﬁgure 2 for a schematic diagram.
This hardware was controlled from a PC, which was connected directly to the camera, display, and speakers. The servo
motors are controlled by an Arduino Uno (see Figure 3), which was connected to the PC as well. The controller for the
servo motors runs in a separate process on the Arduino, following instructions from the PC.
The Bill of Materials (BOM) for Robofriend is shown in Table 1, while a detailed BOM with links to each item
is available online at: shorturl.at/efBZ2. Overall, the total cost to construct Robofriend was less than US$500,
making it fairly accessible.
2

Robofriend TR
A PREPRINT
Figure 1: Robofriend in Home Testing
3

Robofriend TR
A PREPRINT
Figure 2: Hardware schematic block diagram
Robofriend Code Architecture
To operate and coordinate the different algorithms, hardware and user interactions, a proprietary python software
stack was developed and will be brieﬂy described below. The code is available at https://github.com/IdoMatan/
RoboFriend.
The code architecture is based on RabbitMQ, which is a ROS-like publisher-subscriber framework that implements
asynchronous parallel process control. RabbitMQ allows us to simultaneously control the robot’s servos, camera, screen
and any other needed peripherals, as well as to run the algorithms we will describe later.
Figure 5 shows the schematic structure of our software, showing the processes and the messages that are passed between
them. The main process is the StoryTeller, which coordinates the ﬂow among the other processes and displays the video.
This process runs a loop which plays the next story segment, then calls the algorithm service to get the next action. This
loop repeats until the story ends. Throughout this loop, the robot moves its head, aiming to center its viewing angle so
to center all faces in the frame. This ﬂow is illustrated in Figure 4.
The other services are either timer-based (e.g. send a frame every N milliseconds) or event-driven, e.g., a page-ended
message would trigger a next action calculation in the algorithm-service. All metrics, actions and useful metadata (not
4

Robofriend TR
A PREPRINT
Figure 3: Arduino sub-system
video footage) were logged in real-time in a local Postgres database, allowing both post-analysis of the trial as well as
live monitoring using a Grafana dashboard.
Figure 6 shows the simple GUI implemented where a user can run the app, choose one of the supported stories, an
operation mode (which will be discussed later) and start and stop the story.
Robofriend Algorithm
Having described the mechanical construction of Robofriend and the code architecture, we can now discuss the
algorithm which is used to control it. As previously mentioned, our high-level control algorithm involved using
reinforcement learning with “restraining bolts” Giacomo et al. [2020], to avoid the robot following trajectories which
we know will not be good. We begin by describing our sensing and reward function, then we describe the actions which
are available to the robot, and ﬁnally, we describe the constraints which were used as the “restraining bolts” in our
preliminary evaluation.
5

Robofriend TR
A PREPRINT
Figure 4: Software Operational Flow
Robofriend Sensing and Reward Function
As previously mentioned, the reward is based on using computer vision to detect the children’s faces and gaze direction,
and on measuring the noise level. Speciﬁcally, we used an MTCNN neural-network-based face detector to detect the
faces of the children within the frame Zhang et al. [2016], followed by a gaze estimation step for each using GazeNet
Zemblys et al. [2018] to generate a gaze vector relative to the camera lens. This results in the following metrics:
Number of Faces The number of detected faces by the MTCNN face detection algorithm. A change in the number of
faces would likely indicate a child walking away or not looking at the camera.
Average relative gaze (attention) For each detected face (denoted by index i), a gaze vector θi, φi is predicted by
the GazeNet algorithm, where θi is the lateral (left/right) angle and φi is the vertical (up/down angle) – both
angles are relative to the center of the frame (the camera lens center). Based on these measurements, we deﬁne
the gaze component of the reward as:
rgaze := 1
n
n
X
i=1
cos(θi)
Roughly speaking, our attention metric, ranging from 0-1, corresponds to how focused the children are on the
robot as opposed to looking around the room.
Excitement Using consecutive frames we are able to calculate a per-face jumpiness metric corresponding to how still
the children are. This is another proxy to their attention and engagement. Formally, let us denote the positions
of (centers of) faces detected in the ﬁrst image by xi, yi (for i = 1 . . . n), and the positions of the faces detected
in the next image by x′
j, y′
j (for j = 1 . . . m). As the faces do not have identities associated with them, we
must ﬁrst align the faces in the ﬁrst image to the faces in the next image. We do so greedily by ﬁnding, for
each face position xi, yi in the ﬁrst image, the closest face position x′
j, y′
j (using Euclidean distance) in the
next image (which is also under a feasible max possible distance). We then deﬁne the jumpiness for face i by
6

Robofriend TR
A PREPRINT
Figure 5: Software Architecture Diagram
this Euclidean distance, and the total jumpiness is the sum of jumpiness for each face, that is:
rjump :=
n
X
i=1
min
j
q
(xi −x′
j)2 + (yi −y′
j)2
Noise Level The average noise level over a 1 second period as measured by the microphone inside the teddy bear. This
is a proxy for how much the children are talking to each other instead of listening to the story. We denote this
by rnoise.
Deviation of Noise Level The derivative of the noise level, again averaged every second, denoted by rnd. The
motivation behind this metric is to capture changes in the sound level within a page, indicating the children are
getting noisier or quieter potentially due to the effect of the previous action.
To aggregate the reward signal throughout the duration of a story segment, we average each of these metrics for each
video frame that belongs to this segment. Note that we use average instead of sum, as different story segments have
different durations. This gives us a state vector ⟨rgaze, rjump, rnoise, rnd⟩.
Finally, to aggregate these different metrics into a single reward function we use a weighed sum, and thus our reward
denoted by r is deﬁned as:
r := α1 ∗rgaze −α2 ∗rjump −α3 ∗rnoise + α4 ∗rnd + ltl_reward
7

Robofriend TR
A PREPRINT
Figure 6: A simple python-based graphical user interface to interact with the robot
Where the ltl_reward will be described in details below, but conceptually corresponds to a set of pre-deﬁned restraining
rules the robot should learn to obey.
We conclude the discussion of the reward by noting that these measurements serve as a proxy for the real reward (the
children’s attention), which we can not measure directly.
Robofriend States and Actions
As we described above, Robofriend reads a story, which is divided into segments, and chooses which action to perform
after every segment. Note that the order between the story segments is linear, and so there is no choice with regard to
which story segment to read next. The only choice is which action to perform after every story segment.
Robofriend’s actions correspond to different types of feedback it can give the children and are divided into:
Positive Feedback This action randomly chooses from a set of positive feedback sentences, such as “great job” or
“you are listening nicely”.
Negative Feedback This action chooses randomly from a set of (mildly) negative feedback sentences, such as “please
pay attention” or “please be quiet”.
Question This action chooses a random question relating to the story segment Robofriend just ﬁnished reading.
Robofriend does not attempt to extract an answer but merely pauses for an appropriate amount of time.
Continue Continue immediately to the next story segment.
Move head and arms Execute a series of random head and arm movements for a few seconds.
Note that all of these actions are applicable regardless of where Robofriend is in the story (the question action changes
as a function of it, but is always applicable). Furthermore, the only information Robofriend extracts from its sensors is
the reward signal. Thus, there is no notion of state for where we are in the story, and the only state information is the
state vector ⟨rgaze, rjump, rnoise, rnd⟩described above. However, the LTL constraints used for the “restraining bolts”
do carry their own notion of state, as we discuss next.
Robofriend Restraining Bolt
The ﬁnal part of Robofriend’s control architecture is the “restraining bolt” – the LTL constraint which the robot needs
to obey Giacomo et al. [2020]. That is, we specify LTL trajectory constraints over allowed and forbidden trajectories
for the robot, where in this case a trajectory is a sequence of actions. For example, we can specify the constraint to not
ask two questions in a row as
G(ask_question →X¬ask_question)
(that is, if the current action is ask question, then the next action is not ask question). This ensures the robot will not ask
questions constantly.
8

Robofriend TR
A PREPRINT
For the preliminary evaluation of the robot, we tested the following restraining bolts which felt sensible to include,
where the overall constraint is a conjunction of the following:
Do not ask two questions in a row
G(ask_question →X¬ask_question)
Do not wave hands twice in a row
G(wave_hands →X¬wave_hands)
Eventually ask a question
F(ask_question)
Eventually wave hands
F(wave_hands)
Robofriend Learning Algorithm
Robofriend can use reinforcement learning to ﬁnd a policy which optimizes expected sum of rewards, while still
having a high chance of conforming to the LTL constraints. Speciﬁcally, we use an Actor-Critic reinforcement learning
algorithm Konda and Tsitsiklis [1999] which is fed at each step the state of the children and predicts the next action
towards maximizing the expected sum of rewards throughout the episode, accounting also for the LTL constraints
modifying the rewards Giacomo et al. [2020].
Bearing in mind these type of algorithms often need a massive amount of diverse enough training data to converge,
and with the speciﬁc problem setting complexity and training availability, we added an option to conduct imitation
learning of the policy network based on an external "wizard of oz" feedback given in real-time by a supervision/teacher.
Essentially, during the ﬁrst trials of the robot, a teacher could manually select an appropriate action, and the algorithm
would use that as a labeled training set to conduct initial training of its policy network. This allows to both give a better
baseline to start the learning process as well as avoid unwanted situations in the very beginning of the training process.
Ethical Considerations
During the construction of Robofriend, many ethical considerations came up. We now discuss these in detail.
The ﬁrst consideration is privacy, which is a potential problem, especially when children are involved. Therefore, we
designed Robofriend in a way that maximizes the privacy of the children. First, Robofriend does not keep any recorded
images. All images are processed online to detect faces (without any attempt to associate faces with names – which the
robot does not have anyway). The only data Robofriend records involve a count of how many faces it detected in any
given frame, as well as the direction of their gaze.
Another potential concern is that Robofriend will replace human contact with a teacher. As previously mentioned,
Robofriend is meant to be a tool to be used by a daycare teacher, so that part of the class can listen to a story, while the
teacher engages more personally with the remaining children. This can help the teacher devote more individual time to
children who experience challenges attending to stories with background distractions, or to supplement activities for
those who experience challenges with social interaction. Thus, Robofriend serves as a supplement for the teaching staff,
and not as a replacement for the teacher.
Conclusion
We have described the construction and software architecture for Robofriend, a robotic story-telling teddy bear. In
future work we intend to examine how children react to Robofriend, as well as its ability to learn to engage children in
the story.
