arXiv:1702.02302v2  [cs.AI]  24 Apr 2017
Autonomous Braking System via
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Hyunmin Chae, Chang Mook Kang, ByeoungDo Kim, Jaekyum Kim, Chung Choo Chung, and Jun Won Choi
Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a new autonomous braking
system based on deep reinforcement learning. The proposed
autonomous braking system automatically decides whether to
apply the brake at each time step when confronting the risk of
collision using the information on the obstacle obtained by the
sensors. The problem of designing brake control is formulated
as searching for the optimal policy in Markov decision process
(MDP) model where the state is given by the relative position
of the obstacle and the vehicle’s speed, and the action space is
deﬁned as the set of the brake actions including 1) no braking,
2) weak, 3) mid, 4) strong brakiong actions. The policy used
for brake control is learned through computer simulations using
the deep reinforcement learning method called deep Q-network
(DQN). In order to derive desirable braking policy, we propose
the reward function which balances the damage imposed to the
obstacle in case of accident and the reward achieved when the
vehicle runs out of risk as soon as possible. DQN is trained for
the scenario where a vehicle is encountered with a pedestrian
crossing the urban road. Experiments show that the control agent
exhibits desirable control behavior and avoids collision without
any mistake in various uncertain environments.
I. INTRODUCTION
Safety is one of top priorities that should be pursued in
realizing fully autonomous driving vehicles. For safe au-
tonomous driving, autonomous vehicles should perceive the
environments using the sensors and control the vehicle to travel
to the destination without any accidents. Since it is inevitable
for an autonomous vehicle to encounter with unexpected and
risky situations, it is critical to develop the reliable autonomous
control systems that can cope well with such uncertainties.
Recently, several safety systems including collision avoidance,
pedestrian detection, and front collision warning (FCW) have
been proposed to enhance the safety of the autonomous vehicle
[1]–[3].
One critical component for enabling safe autonomous driv-
ing is the autonomous braking systems which can reduce
the velocity of the vehicle automatically when a threatening
obstacle is detected. The autonomous braking should offer safe
and comfortable brake control without exhibiting too early
or too late braking. Most conventional autonomous braking
systems are rule-based, which designate the speciﬁc brake
control protocol for each different situation. Unfortunately, this
approach is limited in handling all scenarios that can happen
in real roads. Hence, the intelligent braking system should
be developed to avoid the accidents in a principled and goal-
oriented manner.
Recently, interest in machine learning has explosively grown
up with the rise of parallel computing technology and a
large amount of training data. In particular, the success of
deep neural network (DNN) technique led the researchers to
investigate the application of machine learning for autonomous
driving. The DNN has been applied to autonomous driving
from camera-based perception [4]–[6] to end-to-end approach
which learns mapping from the sensing to the control [7],
[8]. Reinforcement learning (RL) technique has also been
improved signiﬁcantly as DNN was adopted. The technique,
called deep reinforcement learning (DRL), has shown to
perform reasonably well for various challenging robotics and
control problems. In [9], the DRL technique called Deep Q-
network (DQN) was proposed, which approximates Q-value
function using DNN. It was shown that the DQN can outper-
form human experts in various Atari video games. Recently,
the DRL is applied to control systems for autonomous driving
vehicle in [10], [11].
Fig. 1.
The proposed DRL-based autonomous braking systems.
In this paper, we propose a new autonomous braking system
based DRL, which can intelligently control the velocity of the
vehicle in situations where collision is expected if no action is
taken. The proposed autonomous braking system is described
in Fig. 1. The agent (vehicle) interacts with the uncertain
environment where the position of the obstacle could change
in time and thus the risk of collision at each time step varies
as well. The agent receives the information of the obstacle’s
position using the sensors and adapts the brake control to the
state change such that the chance of accident is minimized.
In our work, we design the autonomous braking system for
the urban road scenario where a vehicle faces a pedestrian

who crosses the street at a random timing. In order to ﬁnd
the desirable brake action for the given pedestrian’s location
and vehicle’s speed, we need to allocate appropriate reward
function for each state-action pair. In our work, we focus on
ﬁnding the desirable reward function which strikes the balance
between the penalty imposed to the agent when accident
happens and the reward obtained when the vehicle quickly gets
out of risk. Using the reward function we carefully designed,
we train DQN to learn the policy that decides the timing of
brake based on the given pedestrian’s state. We also provide a
new DQN design which can rapidly learn the policy to avoid
rare accidents.
Via computer simulations, we evaluate the performance of
the proposed autonomous braking system. In simulations, we
consider the uncertainty of the vehicle’s initial velocity, pedes-
trian’s initial position, and whether the pedestrian will cross or
not. The experimental results show that the proposed braking
system exhibits desirable control behavior for various test
scenarios including autonomous emergency braking (AEB)
test administrated by Euro NCAP.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, we describe the basic scenarios and the framework of the
proposed system. In Section III, we provide the details of
the DQN design for autonomous braking. The experimental
results are provided in Section IV and the paper is concluded
in Section V.
II. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
In this section, we describe the overall structure of the
autonomous braking system. We ﬁrst deﬁne the possible
scenarios for autonomous braking and explain the detailed
operation of the proposed system.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2.
Though a pedestrian is detected for the cases (a) and (b), the proper
control actions are different for two cases. For case (a), the vehicle should
stop in front of the pedestrian while for case (b), the vehicle should be on
standby without stepping the brake yet.
A. Scenarios
One of the factors that hinders safe driving in autonomous
driving is the threat from nearby objects, e.g. pedestrians.
Many accidents could happen when the vehicle fails to stop
ahead of it when a pedestrian crosses the road. Hence, in order
to avoid accidents, the vehicle should detect the threat that can
potentially cause accidents in advance and perform appropriate
brake actions to stop vehicle in front of the obstacle. However,
there exist various degrees of uncertainty which make the
design of autonomous braking challenging such as
• Vehicle’s initial velocity
• Pedestrian’s position
• Pedestrian’s speed
• Pedestrian’s crossing timing
• Pedestrian’s moving direction
• Sensor’s measurement error
• Road’s condition
Even if a pedestrian is detected accurately, it is hard to
know when it can become a threat to the vehicle. Hence
we need appropriate braking strategy for different situations.
(see Fig. 2.) That is, for the given state of the pedestrian
(i.e. position, velocity), the autonomous braking system should
decide what brake action to apply.
Fig. 3.
Behavior of a pedestrian modeled by the discrete-state Markov
process.
In our system, we consider the scenario where behavior
of the pedestrian follows the discrete-state Markov process
described in Fig. 3. The state Snobody implies that the sensors
have not detected any obstacle. Once a pedestrian is detected,
the state Snobody can change to the state Sstay or the state
Scross, where Sstay is the state that the pedestrian stays at
sidewalk and Scross is the state that the pedestrian crosses the
road. The pedestrian’s initial position can be either from far-
side and near-side of the vehicle and the pedestrian walking
speed can vary between vpedmin m/s and vpedmax m/s.
Note that the vehicle’s initial velocity is distributed between
vvehmin m/s and vvehmax m/s. In practical scenarios, it is
difﬁcult to know the transition probabilities of the Markov pro-
cess and the distribution of the pedestrian’s states. Therefore,
reinforcement learning approach can be applied to learn the
brake control policy through the interaction with environment.
B. Autonomous Braking System
The detailed operation of the proposed autonomous brak-
ing system is depicted in Fig. 4. The vehicle is moving

at speed vveh from the position (vehposx, vehposy). As
soon as a pedestrian is detected, the autonomous braking
system receives the relative position of the pedestrian, i.e.,
(pedposx −vehposx, pedposy −vehposy) from the sensor
measurements where (pedposx, pedposy) is the location of the
pedestrian. Using the vehicle’s velocity vveh and the relative
position (pedposx−vehposx, pedposy−vehposy), the vehicle
decides whether it will step brake at each time step. The
interval between consecutive time steps is given by ∆T . We
consider four brake actions; no braking anothing and braking
ahigh, amid and alow with different intensities. We can include
more brake actions with more reﬁned steps or continuous
brake action which are not considered in this work.
III. DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR
AUTONOMOUS BRAKING SYSTEM
In this section, we present the details of the proposed
DRL-based autonomous braking system. We ﬁrst introduce the
structure of the DQN and explain the reward function used to
train the DQN in details.
A. Structure of DRL
Our system follows the basic RL structure. The agent
performs an action At given state St under policy π. The
agent receives the state as feedback from the environment and
gets the reward rt for the action taken. The state feedback
that the agent takes from sensors consists of the velocity of
the vehicle vveh and the relative position to the pedestrian,
(pedposx −vehposx, pedposy −vehposy) for the past n time
steps. Possible action that agent can choose is among decelera-
tion ahigh, amid, alow and keeping the current speed anothing.
The goal of our proposed autonomous braking system is
to maximize the expected accumulated reward called “value
function” that will be received in the future within an episode.
Using the simulations, the agent learns from interaction with
environment episode-by-episode. One episode starts when a
pedestrian is detected. Note that the initial position of the
pedestrian and the initial velocity of the vehicle are random.
The vehicle drives on a straight way based on the brake policy
π. If the distance between the vehicle and the pedestrian is less
than the safety distance l, it is considered as a collision event.
(see Fig. 4.) The episode ends if at least one of the following
events occurs
• Stop : the vehicle completely stops, i.e., vveh = 0.
Fig. 4.
Illustration of the autonomous braking operation
• Bump : the vehicle passes the safety line l when the
pedestrian is crossing road.
• Pass : the vehicle passes the pedestrian without accident.
• Cross : the pedestrian completely crosses the road and
reaches the opposite side.
Once one episode ends, the next episode starts with the state
of environment and the value function reset.
B. Deep Q-Network
Q-learning is one of the popular RL methods which searches
for the optimal policy in an iterative fashion [12]. Basically,
the Q-value function qπ(s, a) is deﬁned as
qπ(s, a) = Eπ[Σ∞
k=0γkrt+k+1|St = s, At = a]
(1)
for the given state s and action a, where rt is the reward
received at the time step t. The Q-value function is the
expected sum of the future rewards which indicates how good
the action a is given the state s under the policy of the agent π.
The contribution to the Q-value function decays exponentially
with the discounting factor γ for the rewards with far-off
future. For the given Q-value function, the greedy policy is
obtained as
π(s) = arg max
a
qπ(s, a).
(2)
One can show that for the policy in (2), the following Bellman
equation should hold [12];
qπ(s, a) = E
h
rt+1 + γ max
a′ qπ(St+1, a′)|St = s, At = a
i
.
(3)
In practice, since it is hard to obtain the exact value of qπ(s, a)
satisfying the Bellman equation, the Q-learning method uses
the following update rule for the given one step backups St,
At, rt+1, St+1;
qπ(St, At) ←qπ(St, At)
+ α

rt+1 + γ max
a
qπ(St+1, a) −qπ(St, At)

(4)
However, when the state space is continuous, it is impossible
to ﬁnd the optimal value of the state-action pair q∗(s, a)
for all possible states. To deal with this problem, the DQN
method was proposed, which approximates the state-action
value function q(s, a) using the DNN, i.e., q(s, a) ≈qθ(s, a)
where θ is the parameter of the DNN [9]. The parameter θ of
the DNN is then optimized to minimize the squared value of
the temporal difference error δt
δt = rt+1 + γ max
a′ qθ(St+1, a′) −qθ(St, At)
(5)
For better convergence of the DQN, instead of estimating both
q(St, At) and q(St+1, a′) in (5), we approximate q(St, At)
and q(St+1, a′) using the Q-network and the target network
parameterized by θ and θ−, respectively [9]. The update of the
target network parameter θ−is done by cloning Q-network
parameter θ, periodically. Thus, (5) becomes
δt = rt+1 + γ max
a′ qθ−(St+1, a′) −qθ(St, At)
(6)

To speed up convergence further, replay memory is adopted
to store a bunch of one step backups and use a part of them
chosen randomly from the memory by batch size [9]. The
backups in the batch is used to calculate the loss function L
which is given by
L = Σt∈Breplayδt
2,
(7)
where Breplay is the backups in the batch selected from
replay memory. Note that the optimization of parameter θ for
minimizing the loss L is done through the stochastic gradient
decent method.
C. Reward Function
Unlike video games, the reward should be appropriately
deﬁned by a system designer in autonomous braking system.
As mentioned, the reward function determines the behavior
of the brake control. Hence, in order to ensure the reliability
of the brake control, it is crucial to use the properly deﬁned
reward function. In our model, there is conﬂict between two
intuitive objectives for brake control; 1) collision should be
avoided no matter what happens and 2) the vehicle should get
out of the risky situation quickly. If it is unbalanced, the agent
becomes either too conservative or reckless. Therefore, we
should use the reward function which balances two conﬂicting
objectives. Taking this into consideration, we propose the
following reward function
rt = −(α(pedposx−vehposx)2 + β)decel
−(ηvt
2 + λ)1(St = bump)
(8)
α, β, η,λ > 0
where vt is the velocity of the vehicle at the time step t,
decel is difference between vt and vt−1 and 1(x = y) has
a value of 1 if the statement inside is true and 0 otherwise.
The ﬁrst term −(α(pedposx −vehposx)2 + β)decel in the
reward function prevents the agent from braking too early by
giving penalty proportional to squared distance between the
vehicle and pedestrian. It guides the vehicle to drive without
deceleration if the pedestrian is far from the vehicle. On the
other hand, the term −(ηvt2 + λ)1(St = bump) indicates the
penalty that the agent receives when the accident occurs. Note
that this penalty is a function of the vehicle’s velocity, which
reﬂects the severe damage to the pedestrian in case of high
velocity at collision. Without such dependency on the velocity,
the agent would not reduce the speed in situation when the
accident is not avoidable. The constants α, β, η and λ are
the weight parameters that controls the trade-off between two
objectives.
D. Trauma Memory
As mentioned in the previous section, autonomous braking
systems should learn both of the conﬂicting objectives. How-
ever, when we train the DQN with the reward function in
(8), we ﬁnd that the learning performance is not stable since
collision events rarely happen and thus there remains only
a few one-step backups associated with the collisions in the
replay memory. As a result, the probability of picking such
one-step backups is small and the DQN does not have enough
chance to learn to avoid accidents in practical learning stage.
To solve this issue, we propose so called ”trauma” memory
which is used to store only the one-step backups for the rare
events (e.g., collision events in our scenario). While the one
step backups are randomly picked from the replay memory,
some ﬁxed number of backups associated with the collision
events are randomly selected from the trauma memory and
used for training together. In other words, with the trauma
memory, the loss function L is modiﬁed to
L = Σt∈Breplayδt
2 + Σt∈Btraumaδt
2
(9)
where Btrauma is the backups randomly picked from trauma
memory. Trauma memory persistently reminds the agent of
the memory on the accidents regardless of the current policy,
thus allowing the agent to learn to maintain speed and avoid
collisions reliably.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed
autonomous braking system via computer simulations.
A. Simulation Setup
In simulations, we used the commercial software PreScan
which models vehicle dynamics in real time [15]. We gener-
ated the environment in order to train the DQN by simulating
the random behavior of the pedestrian. In the simulations,
we assume that the relative location of the pedestrian is
provided to the agent. To make the system practical, we add
slight measurement noise to it. In each episode, the initial
position of vehicle is set to (0, 0). Time-to-collision T T C is
chosen according to the uniform distrubution between 1.5 s
and 4 s. The initial velocity of the vehicle is uniformly
distributed between vinitmin = 2.78 m/s (10 km/s) and
vinitmax = 16.67 m/s (60 km/h). At the beginning of the
episodes, the position of the pedestrian is ﬁxed to 5 ∗vinit
meters away from the position of the vehicle. The pedestrian
stands either at the far-side or at near-side of the vehicle with
equal probability. The behavior of the pedestrian follows one
of two scenarios below;
• Scenario 1 : Cross the road
• Scenario 2 : Stay at initial position.
During training, either of two scenarios is selected with equal
probability. In Scenario 1, the pedestrian starts to move when
the vehicle is crossing at the “pedestrian crossing point”
ptrig = (5 −T T C) ∗vinit. (see Fig. 4.) The safety distance l
for the pedestrian is set to 3 m. The agent chooses the brake
control among ahigh = −9.8 m/s2, amid = −5.9 m/s2,
ahigh = −2.9 m/s2 and anothing = 0 m/s2 every ∆T = 0.1
second. The detailed simulation setup is summarized below.
• Initial velocity of vehicle vinit ∼U(2.78, 16.67) m/s
• Velocity of pedestrian vped ∼U(2, 4) m/s
• Time-to-collision T T C ∼U(1.5, 4) s
• Initial pedestrian position pedposx = 5 ∗vinit m

• Trigger point ptrig = (5 −T T C) ∗vinit m
• Safety line l = 3 m
• ∆T = 0.1 s
• ahigh, amid, alow, anothing
=
{−9.8, −5.9, −2.9, 0} m/s2
B. Training of DQN
The neural network used for the DQN consists of the fully-
connected layers with ﬁve hidden layers. RMSProp algorithm
[14] is used to minimize the loss with learning rate µ =
0.0005. The number of position data samples used as a state is
set to n = 5. We set the size of the replay memory to 10,000
and that of the trauma memory to 1,000. We set the replay
batch size to 32 and trauma batch size to 10. The summary of
the DQN conﬁgurations used for our experiments is provided
below;
• State buffer size: n = 5
• Network architecture: fully-connected feedforwared net-
work
• Nonlinear function: leaky ReLU [13]
• Number of nodes for each layers : [15(Input layer), 100,
70, 50, 70, 100, 4(Output layer)]
• RMSProp optimizer with learning rate 0.0005 [14]
• Replay memory size: 10,000
• Replay batch size: 32
• Trauma memory size: 1,000
• Trauma batch size = 10
• Reward function: α = 0.001, β = 0.1, η = 0.01, λ =
100
Fig.
5 provides the plot of the total accumulated rewards
i.e., value function achieved for each episode when training
is conducted with and without trauma memory. We observe
that with trauma memory the value function converges after
2,000 episodes and high total reward is steadily attained after
convergence while without trauma memory the policy does
not converge and keeps ﬂuctuating.
C. Test Results
Safety test was conducted for several different T T C values.
Collision rate is measured for 10,000 trials for each TTC value.
Table I provides the collision rate for each T T C value for
the test performed for Scenario 1. The agent avoids collision
successfully for T T C values above 1.5s. For the cases with
T T C values less than 1.5s, we observe some collisions.
According to our analysis on the trajectory of braking actions,
these are the cases where collision was not avoidable due to
the high initial velocity of the vehicle even though full braking
actions were applied. The agent passed the pedestrian without
unnecessary stop for all cases in the Scenario 2. The detailed
trajectory of the brake actions for one example case is shown
in Fig. 6. Fig. 6 (a) shows the trajectory of the position of the
vehicle and the pedestrian recorded every 0.1 s. The velocity
of the agent and the brake actions applied are shown in Fig. 6
(b) and (c), respectively. The vehicle starts to decelerate about
20 m away from the pedestrian and completely stops about 5 m
ahead, thereby accomplishing collision avoidance. We observe
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
Episodes
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Accumulated rewards
Accumulated total rewards in episodes
Without trauma memory
With trauma memory
Fig. 5.
Achieved value function achieved during training
that weak braking actions are applied in the beginning part of
deceleration and then strong braking actions come as the agent
gets close to the pedestrian.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time (s)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Position (m)
Longitudinal position of vehicle and pedestrian
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time (s)
0
5
10
15
20
Velocity (m/s)
Velocity of vehicle
Action trajectory
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time (s)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Deceleration (m/s2)
Fig. 6.
Trajectory of position, velocity and actions in one example episode
for the case TTC = 1.5s
Fig.
7 shows how the initial position of the pedestrian
and the relative distance between the pedestrian and vehicle
are distributed for 1,000 trials in the scenario 1. We see
that the vehicle stops around 5 m in front of the pedestrian
for most of cases. This seems to be reasonable safe braking
operation considering the safety distance of l = 3 m. Note
that this distance can be adjusted by changing the reward
parameters. Overall, the experimental results show that the

TABLE I
COLLISION RATE IN TEST SCENARIOS
TTC (s)
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.1
2.3
2.5
2.7
2.9
3.1
3.3
3.5
3.7
3.9
Collision rate (%)
61.29
18.85
0.74
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
proposed autonomous braking system exhibits consistent brake
control performance for all cases considered.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Episode
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Distance (m)
Pedestrian position
Distance between vehicle and pedestrian
Fig. 7.
Initial position of the pedestrian and relative distance between the
pedestrian and vehicle after the episode ends.
D. Test Results for Euro NCAP AEB Pedestrian Test
Additional autonomous emergency braking (AEB) pedes-
trian tests are conducted. We follow the test procedure spec-
iﬁed by Euro NCAP test protocol [16], [17]. Tests are con-
ducted for both farside (CVFA test) and nearside (CVNA test)
under the velocity range between 20 to 60 km/h with 5 km/h
interval. T T C is set to 4 s and the pedestrian crosses the road
at 8 km/h for CVFA and 5 km/h for CVNA. Tests are scored
according to the rating parameters and the metric suggested in
[17]. The proposed system passed all tests without collision
and the rating scores acquired by the proposed method are
shown in Table II.
TABLE II
AEB TEST RESULT
vinit(km/s)
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
CV F A score
1
2
2
3
3
3
2
1
1
CV NA score
1
2
2
3
3
3
2
1
1
V. CONCLUSIONS
We have presented the new autonomous braking system
based on the deep reinforcement learning. The proposed
system learns an intelligent way of brake control from the
experiences obtained under the simulated environment. We
designed the autonomous braking systems using the DQN
method with carefully designed reward function and enhanced
stability of learning process by modifying the structure of
the DQN. We showed through computer simulations that the
proposed autonomous braking system exhibits desirable and
consistent brake control behavior for various scenarios where
behavior of the pedestrian is uncertain.
