arXiv:1203.0697v2  [stat.ML]  30 Jun 2012
Learning High-Dimensional Mixtures of Graphical Models
Animashree Anandkumar

UC Irvine
Daniel Hsu

Microsoft Research New England
Furong Huang

UC Irvine
Sham M. Kakade

Microsoft Research New England
September 6, 2018
Abstract
We consider unsupervised estimation of mixtures of discrete graphical models, where the class
variable corresponding to the mixture components is hidden and each mixture component over
the observed variables can have a potentially diﬀerent Markov graph structure and parameters.
We propose a novel approach for estimating the mixture components, and our output is a
tree-mixture model which serves as a good approximation to the underlying graphical model
mixture.
Our method is eﬃcient when the union graph, which is the union of the Markov
graphs of the mixture components, has sparse vertex separators between any pair of observed
variables. This includes tree mixtures and mixtures of bounded degree graphs. For such models,
we prove that our method correctly recovers the union graph structure and the tree structures
corresponding to maximum-likelihood tree approximations of the mixture components.
The
sample and computational complexities of our method scale as poly(p, r), for an r-component
mixture of p-variate graphical models. We further extend our results to the case when the union
graph has sparse local separators between any pair of observed variables, such as mixtures of
locally tree-like graphs, and the mixture components are in the regime of correlation decay.
Keywords:
Graphical models, mixture models, spectral methods, tree approximation.
1
Introduction
Graphical models oﬀer a graph-based framework for representing multivariate distributions, where
the structural and qualitative relationships between the variables are represented via a graph struc-
ture, while the parametric and quantitative relationships are represented via values assigned to
diﬀerent groups of nodes on the graph (Lauritzen, 1996). Such a decoupling is natural in a va-
riety of contexts, including computer vision, ﬁnancial modeling, and phylogenetics.
Moreover,
graphical models are amenable to eﬃcient inference via distributed algorithms such as belief prop-
agation (Wainwright and Jordan, 2008). Recent innovations have made it feasible to train these
models with low computational and sample requirements in high dimensions (see Section 1.2 for a
brief overview).
Simultaneously, much progress has been made in analyzing mixture models (Lindsay, 1995). A
mixture model can be thought of as selecting the distribution of the manifest variables from a ﬁxed
1

set, depending on the realization of a so-called choice variable, which is latent or hidden. Mixture
models have widespread applicability since they can account for changes in observed data based on
hidden inﬂuences. Recent works have provided provable guarantees for learning high-dimensional
mixtures under a variety of settings (See Section 1.2).
In this paper, we consider mixtures of (undirected) graphical models, which combines the mod-
eling power of the above two formulations. These models can incorporate context-speciﬁc depen-
dencies, where the structural (and parametric) relationships among the observed variables can
change depending on a hidden context.
These models allow for parsimonious representation of
high-dimensional data, while retaining the computational advantage of performing inference via
belief propagation and its variants. The current practice for learning mixtures of graphical models
(and other mixture models) is based local-search heuristics such as expectation maximization (EM).
However, EM scales poorly in the number of dimensions, suﬀers from convergence issues, and lacks
theoretical guarantees.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for learning graphical model mixtures, which oﬀers
a powerful alternative to EM. At the same time, we establish theoretical guarantees for our method
for a wide class of models, which includes tree mixtures and mixtures over bounded degree graphs.
Previous theoretical guarantees are mostly limited to mixtures of product distributions (see Sec-
tion 1.2). These models are restrictive since they posit that the manifest variables are related to
one another only via the latent choice variable, and have no direct dependence otherwise. Our work
is a signiﬁcant generalization of these models, and incorporates models such as tree mixtures and
mixtures over bounded degree graphs.
Our approach aims to approximate the underlying graphical model mixture with a tree-mixture
model. In our view, a tree-mixture approximation oﬀers good tradeoﬀbetween data ﬁtting and
inferential complexity of the model. Tree mixtures are attractive since inference reduces to belief
propagation on the component trees (Meila and Jordan, 2001). Tree mixtures thus present a mid-
dle ground between tree graphical models, which are too simplistic, and general graphical model
mixtures, where inference is not tractable, and our goal is to eﬃciently ﬁt the observed data to a
tree mixture model.
1.1
Summary of Results
We propose a novel method for learning discrete graphical mixture models. It combines the tech-
niques used in graphical model selection based on conditional independence tests, and the spectral
decomposition methods employed for estimating the parameters of mixtures of product distribu-
tions. Our method proceeds in three main stages: graph structure estimation, parameter estima-
tion, and tree approximation.
In the ﬁrst stage, our algorithm estimates the union graph structure, corresponding to the union
of the Markov graphs of the mixture components. We propose a rank criterion for classifying a node
pair as neighbors or non-neighbors in the union graph of the mixture model, and can be viewed as a
generalization of conditional-independence tests for graphical model selection (Anandkumar et al.,
2012c; Bresler et al., 2008; Spirtes and Meek, 1995). Our method is eﬃcient when the union graph
has sparse separators between any node pair, which holds for tree mixtures and mixtures of bounded
degree graphs. The sample complexity of our algorithm is logarithmic in the number of nodes. Thus,
our method learns the union graph structure of a graphical model mixture with similar guarantees
as graphical model selection (i.e., when there is a single graphical model).
In the second stage, we use the union graph estimate bG∪to learn the pairwise marginals of
2

the mixture components. Since the choice variable is hidden, this involves decomposition of the
observed statistics into component models. We leverage on the spectral decomposition method
developed for learning mixtures of product distributions (Anandkumar et al., 2012a; Chang, 1996;
Mossel and Roch, 2006). In a mixture of product distributions, the observed variables are con-
ditionally independent given the hidden class variable. We adapt this method to our setting as
follows: we consider diﬀerent triplets over the observed nodes and condition on suitable separator
sets (in the union graph estimate bG∪) to obtain a series of mixtures of product distributions. Thus,
we obtain estimates for pairwise marginals of each mixture component (and in principle, higher
order moments) under some natural non-degeneracy conditions. In the ﬁnal stage, we ﬁnd the
best tree approximation to the estimated component marginals via the standard Chow-Liu algo-
rithm (Chow and Liu, 1968). The Chow-Liu algorithm produces a max-weight spanning tree using
the estimated pairwise mutual information as edge weights. We establish that our algorithm re-
covers the correct tree structure corresponding to maximum-likelihood tree approximation of each
mixture component. In the special case, when the underlying distribution is a tree mixture, this
implies that we can recover tree structures corresponding to all the mixture components.
The
computational and sample complexities of our method scale as poly(p, r), where p is the number
of nodes and r is the number of mixture components.
Recall that the success of our method relies on the presence of sparse vertex separators between
node pairs in the union graph, i.e., the union of Markov graphs of the mixture components. This
includes tree mixtures and mixtures of bounded degree graphs. We extend our methods and analysis
the a larger family of models, where the union graph has sparse local separators (Anandkumar et al.,
2012c), which is a weaker criterion. This family includes locally tree-like graphs (including sparse
random graphs), and augmented graphs (e.g. small-world graphs where there is a local and a global
graph). The criterion of sparse local separation signiﬁcantly widens the scope, and we prove that
our methods succeed in these models, when the mixture components are in the regime of correlation
decay (Anandkumar et al., 2012c). The sample and computational complexities are signiﬁcantly
improved for this class, since it only depends on the size of local separators (while previously it
depended on the size of exact separators).
Our proof techniques involve establishing the correctness of our algorithm (under exact statis-
tics). The sample analysis involves careful use of spectral perturbation bounds to guarantee success
in ﬁnding the mixture components. In addition, for the setting with sparse local separators, we
incorporate the correlation decay rate functions of the component models to quantify the additional
distortion introduced due to the use of local separators as opposed to exact separators. One caveat
of our method is that we require the dimension of the node variables d to be larger than the number
of mixture components r. In principle, this limitation can be overcome if we consider larger (ﬁxed)
groups of nodes and implement our method. Another limitation is that we require full rank views
of the latent factor for our method to succeed. However, this is also a requirement imposed for
learning mixtures of product distributions. Moreover, it is known that learning singular models,
i.e., those which do not satisfy the above rank condition, is at least as hard as learning parity with
noise, which is conjectured to be computationally hard (Mossel and Roch, 2006). Another restric-
tion is that we require the presence of an observed variable, which is conditionally independent
of all the other variables, given the latent choice variable. However, note that this is signiﬁcantly
weaker than the case of product mixture models, where all the observed variables are required to
be conditionally independent given the latent factor. To the best of our knowledge, our work is
the ﬁrst to provide provable guarantees for learning non-trivial graphical mixture models (which
3

are not mixtures of product distributions), and we believe that it signiﬁcantly advances the scope,
both on theoretical and practical fronts.
1.2
Related Work
Our work lies at the intersection of learning mixture models and graphical model selection. We
outline related works in both these areas.
Overview of Mixture Models:
Mixture models have been extensively studied (Lindsay, 1995)
and are employed in a variety of applications.
More recently, the focus has been on learning
mixture models in high dimensions. There are a number of recent works dealing with estimation of
high-dimensional Gaussian mixtures, starting from the work of Dasgupta (1999) for learning well-
separated components, and most recently by (Belkin and Sinha, 2010; Moitra and Valiant, 2010),
in a long line of works.
These works provide guarantees on recovery under various separation
constraints between the mixture components and/or have computational and sample complexities
growing exponentially in the number of mixture components r. In contrast, the so-called spectral
methods have both computational and sample complexities scaling only polynomially in the number
of components, and do not impose stringent separation constraints, and we outline below.
Spectral Methods for Mixtures of Product Distributions:
The classical mixture model
over product distributions consists of multivariate distributions with a single latent variable H
and the observed variables are conditionally independent under each state of the latent vari-
able (Lazarsfeld and Henry, 1968).
Hierarchical latent class (HLC) models (Chen et al., 2008;
Zhang, 2004; Zhang and Kocka, 2004) generalize these models by allowing for multiple latent vari-
ables. Spectral methods were ﬁrst employed for learning discrete (hierarchical) mixtures of product
distributions (Chang, 1996; Hsu et al., 2009; Mossel and Roch, 2006) and have been recently ex-
tended for learning general multiview mixtures (Anandkumar et al., 2012a). The method is based
on triplet and pairwise statistics of observed variables and we build on these methods in our work.
Note that our setting is not a mixture of product distributions, and thus, these methods are not
directly applicable.
Graphical Model Selection:
Graphical model selection is a well studied problem starting
from the seminal work of Chow and Liu (1968) for ﬁnding the best tree approximation of a graph-
ical model. They established that maximum likelihood estimation reduces to a maximum weight
spanning tree problem where the edge weights are given by empirical mutual information. How-
ever, the problem becomes more challenging when either some of the nodes are hidden (i.e., latent
tree models) or we are interested in estimating loopy graphs. Learning the structure of latent tree
models has been studied extensively, mainly in the context of phylogenetics (Durbin et al., 1999).
Eﬃcient algorithms with provable performance guarantees are available, e.g. (Anandkumar et al.,
2011; Choi et al., 2011; Daskalakis et al., 2006; Erd¨os et al., 1999).
Works on high-dimensional
loopy graphical model selection are more recent.
The approaches can be classiﬁed into mainly
two groups: non-convex local approaches (Anandkumar and Valluvan, 2012; Anandkumar et al.,
2012c; Bresler et al., 2008; Jalali et al., 2011; Netrapalli et al., 2010) and those based on convex
optimization (Chandrasekaran et al., 2010; Meinshausen and B¨uhlmann, 2006; Ravikumar et al.,
2008, 2011). There is also some recent work on learning conditional models, e.g. (Guo et al., 2011).
However, these works are not directly applicable for learning mixtures of graphical models.
4

Mixtures of Graphical Models:
Works on learning mixtures of graphical models (other
than mixtures of product distributions) are fewer, and mostly focus on tree mixtures. The works
of Meila and Jordan (2001) and Kumar and Koller (2009) consider EM-based approaches for learn-
ing tree mixtures, Thiesson et al. (1999) extend the approach to learn mixtures of graphical mod-
els on directed acyclic graphs (DAG), termed as Bayesian multinets by Geiger and Heckerman
(1996), using the Cheeseman-Stutz asymptotic approximation and Armstrong et al. (2009) consider
a Bayesian approach by assigning a prior to decomposable graphs. However, these approaches do
not have any theoretical guarantees.
Recently, Mossel and Roch (2011) consider structure learning of latent tree mixtures and provide
conditions under which they can be successfully recovered. Note that this model can be thought
of as a hierarchical mixture of product distributions, where the hierarchy changes according to the
realization of the choice variable. Our setting diﬀers substantially from this work. Mossel and Roch
(2011) require that the component latent trees of the mixture be very diﬀerent, in order for the
quartet tests to distinguish them (roughly), and establish that a uniform selection of trees will ensure
this condition. On the other hand, we impose no such restriction and allow for graphs of diﬀerent
components to be same/diﬀerent (although our algorithm is eﬃcient when the overlap between the
component graphs is more). Moreover, we allow for loopy graphs while Mossel and Roch (2011)
restrict to learning latent tree mixtures.
However, Mossel and Roch (2011) do allow for latent
variables on the tree, while we assume that all variables to be observed (except for the latent
choice variable). Mossel and Roch (2011) consider only structure learning, while we consider both
structure and parameter estimations. Mossel and Roch (2011) limit to ﬁnite number of mixtures
r = O(1), while we allow for r to scale with the number of variables p. As such, the two methods
operate in signiﬁcantly diﬀerent settings.
2
System Model
2.1
Graphical Models
We ﬁrst introduce the concept of a graphical model and then discuss mixture models. A graphical
model is a family of multivariate distributions Markov on a given undirected graph (Lauritzen,
1996). In a discrete graphical model, each node in the graph v ∈V is associated with a random
variable Yv taking value in a ﬁnite set Y and let d := |Y| denote the cardinality of the set. The set
of edges1 E ⊂
 V
2

captures the set of conditional-independence relationships among the random
variables. We say that a vector of random variables Y := (Y1, . . . , Yp) with a joint probability mass
function (pmf) P is Markov on the graph G if the local Markov property
P(yv|yN (i)) = P(yv|yV \v)
(1)
holds for all nodes v ∈V , where N(v) denotes the open neighborhood of v (i.e., not including v).
More generally, we say that P satisﬁes the global Markov property for all disjoint sets A, B ⊂V
P(yA, yB|yS(A,B;G)) = P(yA|yS(A,B;G))P(yB|yS(A,B;G)),
∀A, B ⊂V : N[A] ∩N[B] = ∅.
(2)
where the set S(A, B; G) is a node separator2between A and B, and N[A] denotes the closed
neighborhood of A (i.e., including A). The global and local Markov properties are equivalent under
1We use notations E and G interchangeably to denote the set of edges.
2A set S(A,B; G) ⊂V is a separator of sets A and B if the removal of nodes in S(A, B; G) separates A and B
into distinct components.
5

the positivity condition, given by P(y) > 0, for all y ∈Yp (Lauritzen, 1996). Henceforth, we say
that a graphical model satisﬁes Markov property with respect to a graph, if it satisﬁes the global
Markov property.
The Hammersley-Cliﬀord theorem (Br´emaud, 1999) states that under the positivity condition,
a distribution P satisﬁes the Markov property according to a graph G iﬀ. it factorizes according
to the cliques of G,
P(y) = 1
Z exp
 X
c∈C
Ψc(yc)
!
,
(3)
where C is the set of cliques of G and yc is the set of random variables on clique c. The quantity
Z is known as the partition function and serves to normalize the probability distribution. The
functions Ψc are known as potential functions. We will assume positivity of the graphical models
under consideration, but otherwise allow for general potentials (including higher order potentials).
2.2
Mixtures of Graphical Models
In this paper, we consider mixtures of discrete graphical models. Let H denote the discrete hidden
choice variable corresponding to the selection of a diﬀerent components of the mixture, taking
values in [r] := {1, . . . , r} and let Y denote the observed variables of the mixture. Denote πH :=
[P(H = h)]⊤
h as the probability vector of the mixing weights and Gh as the Markov graph of the
distribution P(y|H = h).
Our goal is to learn the mixture of graphical models, given n i.i.d. samples yn = [y1, . . . , yn]⊤
drawn from a p-variate joint distribution P(y) of the mixture model, where each variable is a
d-dimensional discrete variable. The component Markov graphs {Gh}h corresponding to models
{P(y|H = h)}h are assumed to be unknown. Moreover, the variable H is latent and thus, we do not
a priori know the mixture component from which a sample is drawn. This implies that we cannot
directly apply the previous methods designed for graphical model selection. A major challenge is
thus being able to decompose the observed statistics into the mixture components.
We now propose a method for learning the mixture components given n i.i.d. samples yn drawn
from a graphical mixture model P(y).
Our method proceeds in three main stages.
First, we
estimate the graph G∪:= ∪r
h=1Gh, which is the union of the Markov graphs of the mixture. This
is accomplished via a series of rank tests. Note that in the special case when Gh ≡G∪, this gives
the graph estimates of the component models. We then use the graph estimate bG∪to obtain the
pairwise marginals of the respective mixture components via a spectral decomposition method.
Finally, we use the Chow-Liu algorithm to obtain tree approximations {Th}h of the individual
mixture components3.
3
Estimation of the Union of Component Graphs
Notation:
Our learning method will be based on the estimates of probability matrices. For any
two nodes u, v ∈V and any set S ⊂V \ {u, v}, denote the joint probability matrix
Mu,v,{S;k} := [P(Yu = i, Yv = j, YS = k)]i,j,
k ∈Y|S|.
(4)
3Our method can also be adapted to estimating the component Markov graphs {Gh}h and we outline it and other
extensions in Appendix A.1.
6

Let c
Mn
u,v,{S;k} denote the corresponding estimated matrices using samples yn
c
Mn
u,v,{S;k} := [ bP n(Yu = i, Yv = j, YS = k)]i,j,
(5)
where bP n denotes the empirical probability distribution, computed using n samples. We consider
sets S satisfying |S| ≤η, where η depends on the graph family under consideration. Thus, our
method is based on (η + 2)th order statistics of the observed variables.
Intuitions:
We provide some intuitions and properties of the union graph G∪= ∪r
h=1Gh, where
Gh is the Markov graph corresponding to component H = h.
Note that G∪is diﬀerent from
the Markov graph corresponding to the marginalized model P(y) (with latent choice variable H
marginalized out). Yet, G∪represents some natural Markov properties with respect to the observed
statistics. We ﬁrst establish the simple result that the union graph G∪satisﬁes Markov property
in each mixture component. Recall that S(u, v; G∪) denotes a vertex separator between nodes u
and v in G∪, i.e., its removal disconnects u and v in G∪.
Fact 1 (Markov Property of G∪) For any two nodes u, v ∈V such that (u, v) /∈G∪,
Yu ⊥⊥Yv|YS, H,
S := S(u, v; G∪).
(6)
Proof:
The set S := S(u, v; G∪) is also a vertex separator for u and v in each of the component
graphs Gh. This is because removal of S disconnects u and v in each Gh. Thus, we have Markov
property in each component: Yu ⊥⊥Yv|YS, {H = h}, for h ∈[r], and the above result follows.
✷
Thus, the above observation implies that the conditional independence relationships of each
mixture component are satisﬁed on the union graph G∪conditioned on the latent factor H. The
above result can be exploited to obtain union graph estimate as follows: two nodes u, v are not
neighbors in G∪if a separator set S can be found which results in conditional independence, as
in (6). The main challenge is indeed that the variable H is not observed and thus, conditional
independence cannot be directly inferred via observed statistics. However, the eﬀect of H on the
observed statistics can be quantiﬁed as follows:
Lemma 1 (Rank Property) Given an r-component mixture of graphical models with G∪=
∪r
h=1Gh, for any u, v ∈V such that (u, v) /∈G∪and S := S(u, v; G∪), the probability matrix
Mu,v,{S;k} := [P[Yu = i, Yv = j, YS = k]]i,j has rank at most r for any k ∈Y|S|.
Proof:
From Fact 1, G∪satisﬁes Markov property conditioned on the latent factor H,
Yu ⊥⊥Yv|YS, H,
∀(u, v) /∈G∪.
(7)
This implies that
Mu,v,{S;k} = Mu|H,{S;k} Diag(πH|{S;k})M⊤
v|H,{S;k}P(YS = k),
(8)
where Mu|H,{S;k} := [P[Yu = i|H = j, YS = k]]i,j and similarly Mv|H,{S;k} is deﬁned. Diag(πH|S;k)
is the diagonal matrix with entries πH|{S;k} := [P(H = i|YS = k)]i. Thus, we have Rank(Mu,v,{S;k})
is at most r.
✷
Thus, the eﬀect of marginalizing the choice variable H is seen in the rank of the observed
probability matrices Mu,v,{S;k}. Thus, when u and v are non-neighbors in G∪, a separator set S
7

can be found such that the rank of Mu,v,{S;k} is at most r. In order to use this result as a criterion
for inferring neighbors in G∪, we require that the rank of Mu,v,{S;k} for any neighbors (u, v) ∈G∪
be strictly larger than r. This requires the dimension of each node variable d > r. We discuss in
detail the set of suﬃcient conditions for correctly recovering G∪in Section 3.1.1.
Tractable Graph Families:
Another obstacle in using Lemma 1 to estimate graph G∪is
computational: the search for separators S for any node pair u, v ∈V is exponential in |V | := p
if no further constraints are imposed. We consider graph families where a vertex separator can be
found for any (u, v) /∈G∪with size at most η
|S(u, v; G∪)| ≤η,
∀(u, v) /∈G∪.
There are many natural families where η is small:
1. If G∪is trivial (i.e., no edges) then η = 0, we have a mixture of product distributions.
2. When G∪is a tree, i.e., we have a mixture model Markov on the same tree, then η = 1, since
there is a unique path between any two nodes on a tree.
3. For an arbitrary r-component tree mixture, G∪= ∪hTh where each component is a tree
distribution, we have that η ≤r (since for any node pair, there is a unique path in each of
the r trees {Th}, and separating the node pair in each Th also separates them on G∪).
4. For an arbitrary mixture of bounded degree graphs, we have η ≤P
h∈[r] ∆h, where ∆h is the
maximum degree in Gh, i.e., the Markov graph corresponding to component {H = h}.
In general, η depends on the respective bounds ηh for the component graphs Gh, as well as the
extent of their overlap. In the worst case, η can be as high as P
h∈[r] ηh, while in the special case
when Gh ≡G∪, the bound remains the same ηh ≡η. Note that for a general graph G∪with
treewidth tw(G∪) and maximum degree ∆(G∪), we have that η ≤min(∆(G∪), tw(G∪)). Thus, a
wide family of models give rise to union graph with small η, including tree mixtures and mixtures
over bounded degree graphs.
We establish in the sequel that the computational and sample complexities of our learning
method scale exponentially in η. Thus, our algorithm is suitable for graphs G∪with small η. In
Section B, we relax the requirement of exact separation to that of local separation. A larger class
of graphs satisfy the local separation property including mixtures of locally tree-like graphs.
Rank Test:
We propose RankTest(yn; ξn,p, η, r) in Algorithm 1 for structure estimation of
G∪:= ∪r
h=1Gh, the union Markov graph of an r-component mixture. The method is based on a
search for potential separators S between any two given nodes u, v ∈V , based on the eﬀective
rank4of c
Mn
u,v,{S;k}: if the eﬀective rank is r or less, then u and v are declared as non-neighbors
(and set S as their separator). If no such sets are found, they are declared as neighbors. Thus,
the method involves searching for separators for each node pair u, v ∈V , by considering all sets
S ⊂V \ {u, v} satisfying |S| ≤η. The computational complexity of this procedure is O(pη+2d3),
where d is the dimension of each node variable Yi, for i ∈V and p is the number of nodes. This is
because the number of rank tests performed is O(pη+2) over all node pairs and conditioning sets;
each rank tests has O(d3) complexity since it involves performing singular value decomposition
(SVD) of a d × d matrix.
4The eﬀective rank is given by the number of singular values above a given threshold ξ.
8

Algorithm 1 bGn
∪= RankTest(yn; ξn,p, η, r) for estimating G∪:= ∪r
h=1Gh of an r-component
mixture using yn samples, where η is the bound on size of vertex separators between any node pair
in G∪and ξn,p is a threshold on the singular values.
Rank(A; ξ) denotes the eﬀective rank of matrix A, i.e., number of singular values more than ξ.
c
Mn
u,v,{S;k} := [ bP n(Yu = i, Yv = j, YS = k)]i,j is the empirical estimate computed using n i.i.d.
samples yn. Initialize bGn
∪= (V, ∅).
For each u, v ∈V , estimate c
Mn
u,v,{S;k} from yn, if
min
S⊂V \{u,v}
|S|≤η
max
k∈Y|S| Rank(c
Mn
u,v,{S;k}; ξn,p) > r,
(9)
then add (u, v) to bGn
∪.
3.1
Results for the Rank Test
3.1.1
Conditions for the Success of Rank Tests
The following assumptions are made for the RankTest proposed in Algorithm 1 to succeed under
the PAC formulation.
(A1) Number of Mixture Components:
The number of components r of the mixture model
and dimension d of each node variable satisfy
d > r.
(10)
The mixing weights of the latent factor H are assumed to be strictly positive
πH(h) := P(H = h) > 0,
∀h ∈[r].
(A2) Constraints on Graph Structure: Recall that G∪= ∪r
h=1Gh denotes the union of the
graphs of the components and that η denotes the bound on the size of the minimal separator
set for any two (non-neighboring) nodes in G∪. We assume that
|S(u, v; G∪)| ≤η = O(1),
∀(u, v) /∈G∪.
In Section B, we relax the strict separation constraint to a local separation constraint in the
regime of correlation decay, where η refers to the bound on the size of local separators between
any two non-neighbor nodes in the graph.
(A3) Rank Condition: We assume that the matrix Mu,v,{S;k} in (4) has rank strictly greater
than r when the nodes u and v are neighbors in graph G∪= ∪r
h=1Gh and the set satisﬁes
|S| ≤η. Let ρmin denote
ρmin :=
min
(u,v)∈G∪,|S|≤η
S⊂V \{u,v}
max
k∈Y|S| σr+1
 Mu,v,{S;k}

> 0,
(11)
where σr+1(·) denotes the (r + 1)th singular value, when the singular values are arranged in
the descending order σ1(·) ≥σ2(·) ≥. . . σd(·).
9

(A4) Choice of threshold ξ: For RankTest in Algorithm 1, the threshold ξ is chosen as
ξ := ρmin
2 .
(A5) Number of Samples: Given δ ∈(0, 1), the number of samples n satisﬁes
n > nRank(δ; p) := max
 
1
t2
 2 log p + log δ−1 + log 2

,

2
ρmin −t
2!
,
(12)
for some t ∈(0, ρmin) (e.g. t = ρmin/2,) where p is the number of nodes and ρmin is given by
(11).
Assumption (A1) relates the number of components to the dimension of the sample space of the
variables. Note that we allow for the number of components r to grow with the number of nodes p,
as long as the cardinality of the sample space of each variable d is also large enough. In principle,
this assumption can be removed by considering grouping the nodes together and performing rank
tests on the groups. Assumption (A2) imposes constraints on the graph structure G∪, formed by the
union of the component graphs. The bound η on the separator sets for node pairs in G∪is a crucial
parameter and the complexity of learning (both sample and computational) depends on it. We relax
the assumption of separator bound to a criterion of local separation in Section B. Assumption (A3)
is required for the success of rank tests to distinguish neighbors and non-neighbors in graph G∪. It
rules out the presence of spurious low rank matrices between neighboring nodes in G∪(for instance,
when the nodes are marginally independent or when the distribution is degenerate). Assumption
(A4) provides a natural threshold on the singular values in the rank test. In Section B, we modify
the threshold to also account for distortion due to approximate vertex separation, in contrast to the
setting of exact separation considered in this section. (A5) provides the ﬁnite sample complexity
bound.
3.1.2
Result on Rank Tests
We now provide the result on the success of recovering the graph G∪:= ∪r
h=1Gh.
Theorem 1 (Success of Rank Tests) The RankTest(yn; ξ, η, r) outputs the correct graph G∪:=
∪r
h=1Gh, which is the union of the component Markov graphs, under the assumptions (A1)–(A5)
with probability at least 1 −δ.
Proof:
The proof is given in Appendix C.
✷
A special case of the above result is graphical model selection, where there is a single graphical
model (r = 1) and we are interested in estimating its graph structure.
Corollary 1 (Application to Graphical Model Selection) The RankTest(yn; ξ, η, 1) outputs
the correct Markov graph G, given n i.i.d. samples yn, under the assumptions5 (A2)–(A5) with
probability at least 1 −δ.
5When r = 1, there is no latent factor, and the assumption d > r in (A1) is trivially satisﬁed for all discrete
random variables.
10

Remarks: Thus, the rank test is also applicable for graphical model selection. Previous works
(see Section 1.2) have proposed tests based on conditional independence, using either conditional
mutual information or conditional variation distances, see Anandkumar et al. (2012c); Bresler et al.
(2008). The rank test above is thus an alternative test for conditional independence. In addition,
it extends naturally to estimation of union graph structure of mixture components.
4
Parameter Estimation of Mixture Components
The rank test proposed in the previous section is a tractable procedure for estimating the graph
G∪:= ∪r
h=1Gh, which is the union of the component graphs of a mixture of graphical models.
However, except in the special case when Gh ≡G∪, the knowledge of bGn
∪is not very useful by
itself, since we do not know the nature of the diﬀerent components of the mixture. In this section,
we propose the use of spectral decomposition tests to ﬁnd the various mixture components.
4.0.3
Spectral Decomposition for Mixture of Product Distributions
The spectral decomposition methods, ﬁrst proposed by Chang (1996), and later generalized by Mossel and Roch
(2006) and Hsu et al. (2009), and recently by Anandkumar et al. (2012a), are applicable for mix-
tures of product distributions. We illustrate the method below via a simple example.
u
H
v
w
Consider the simple case of three observed variables {Yu, Yv, Yw}, where a latent
factor H separates them, i.e., the observed variables are conditionally independent
given H
Yu ⊥⊥Yv ⊥⊥Yw|H.
This
implies
that
the
Markov
graphs
{Gh}h∈[r]
of
the
component
models
{P(Yu, Yv, Yw|H = h)}h∈[r] are trivial (i.e., have no edges) and thus forms a spe-
cial case of our setting.
We now give an overview of the spectral decomposition method. It proceeds by considering
pairwise and triplet statistics of Yu, Yv, Yw. Denote Mu|H := [P(Yu = i|H = j)]i,j, and similarly for
Mv|H, Mw|H and assume that they are full rank. Denote the probability matrices Mu,v := [P(Yu =
i, Yv = j)]i,j and Mu,v,{w;k} := [P(Yu = i, Yv = j, Yw = k)]i,j.
The parameters (i.e., matrices
Mu|H, Mv|H, Mw|H) can be estimated as:
Lemma 2 (Mixture of Product Distributions) For the latent variable model Yu ⊥⊥Yv ⊥⊥
Yw|H, when the conditional probability matrices Mu|H, Mv|H, Mw|H have rank d, let λ(k) = [λ(k)
1 , . . . , λ(k)
d ]⊤
be the column vector with the d eigenvalues given by
λ(k) := Eigenvalues
 Mu,v,{w;k}M−1
u,v

,
k ∈Y.
(13)
Let Λ := [λ(1)|λ(2)| . . . |λ(d)] be the matrix where the kth column corresponds to λ(k) from above.
We have that
Mw|H := [P(Yw = i|H = j)]i,j = Λ⊤.
(14)
Proof:
A more general result is proven in Appendix D.1.
✷
Thus, we have a procedure for recovering the conditional probabilities of the observed variables
conditioned on the latent factor. Using these parameters, we can also recover the mixing weights
11

πH := [P(H = i)]⊤
i using the relationship
Mu,v = Mu|H Diag(πH)M⊤
v|H,
where Diag(πH) is the diagonal matrix with πH as the diagonal elements.
Thus, if we have a general product distribution mixture over nodes in V , we can learn the
parameters by performing the above spectral decomposition over diﬀerent triplets {u, v, w}. How-
ever, an obstacle remains: spectral decomposition over diﬀerent triplets {u, v, w} results in diﬀerent
permutations of the labels of the hidden variable H. To overcome this, note that any two triplets
(u, v, w) and (u, v′, w′) share the same set of eigenvectors in (13) when the “left” node u is the
same. Thus, if we consider a ﬁxed node u∗∈V as the “left” node and use a ﬁxed matrix to
diagonalize (13) for all triplets, we obtain a consistent ordering of the hidden labels over all triplet
decompositions. Thus, we can learn a general product distribution mixture using only third-order
statistics.
4.0.4
Spectral Decomposition for Learning Graphical Model Mixtures
We now adapt the above method for learning more general graphical model mixtures. We ﬁrst make
a simple observation on how to obtain mixtures of product distributions by considering separators
on the union graph G∪. For any three nodes u, v, w ∈V , which are not neighbors on G∪, let Suvw
denote a multiway vertex separator, i.e., the removal of nodes in Suvw disconnects u, v and w in
G∪. On lines of Fact 1,
Yu ⊥⊥Yv ⊥⊥Yw|YSuvw, H,
∀u, v, w : (u, v), (v, w), (w, u) /∈G∪.
(15)
Thus, by ﬁxing the conﬁguration of nodes in Suvw, we obtain a product distribution mixture over
{u, v, w}. If the previously proposed rank test is successful in estimating G∪, then we possess correct
knowledge of the separators Suvw. In this case, we can obtain estimates {P(Yw|YSuvw = k, H = h)}h
by ﬁxing the nodes in Suvw to k and using the spectral decomposition described in Lemma 2, and
the procedure can be repeated over diﬀerent triplets {u, v, w}. See Fig.1.
Everton
Mets
Manchester United
Baseball
Soccer
w
v
H
G∪
u
S
Figure 1: By conditioning on the separator set S on the union graph G∪, we have a mixture of
product distribution with respect to nodes {u, v, w}, i.e., Yu ⊥⊥Yv ⊥⊥Yw|YS, H.
An obstacle remains, viz., the permutation of hidden labels over diﬀerent triplet decompositions
{u, v, w}. In case of product distribution mixture, as discussed previously, this is resolved by ﬁxing
the “left” node in the triplet to some u∗∈V and using the same matrix for diagonalization over
diﬀerent triplets. However, an additional complication arises when we consider graphical model
mixtures, where conditioning over separators is required. We require that the permutation of the
12

hidden labels be unchanged upon conditioning over diﬀerent values of variables in the separator set
Su∗vw. This holds when the separator set Su∗vw has no eﬀect on node u∗, i.e., we require that
∃u∗∈V, s.t.
Yu∗⊥⊥YV \u∗|H,
(16)
which implies that u∗is isolated from all other nodes in graph G∪.
Condition (16) is required to hold for identiﬁability if we only operate on statistics over diﬀerent
triplets (along with their separator sets). In other words, if we resort to operations over only low
order statistics, we require additional conditions such as (16) for identiﬁability. However, our setting
is a signiﬁcant generalization over the mixtures of product distributions, where (16) is required to
hold for all nodes.
Finally, since our goal is to estimate pairwise marginals of the mixture components, in place of
node w in the triplet {u, v, w} in Lemma 2, we need to consider a node pair a, b ∈V . The general
algorithm allows the variables in the triplet to have diﬀerent dimensions, see Anandkumar et al.
(2012a) for details. Thus, we obtain estimates of the pairwise marginals of the mixture components.
The computational complexity of the procedure scales as O(p2dη+6r), where p is the number of
nodes, d is the cardinality of each node variable and η is the bound on separator sets. For details
on implementation of the spectral method, see Appendix A.
4.1
Results for Spectral Decomposition
4.1.1
Assumptions
In addition to the assumptions (A1)–(A5) in Section 3.1.1, we impose the following constraints to
guarantee the success of estimating the various mixture components.
(A6) Full Rank Views of the Latent Factor: For each node pair a, b ∈V , and any subset
S ⊂V \ {a, b} with |S| ≤2η and k ∈Y|S|, the probability matrix M(a,b)|H,{S;k} := [P(Ya,b =
i|H = j, YS = k)]i,j ∈Rd2×r has rank r.
(A7) Existence of an Isolated Node: There exists a node u∗∈V which is isolated from all
other nodes in G∪= ∪r
h=1Gh, i.e.
Yu∗⊥⊥YV \u∗|H.
(17)
(A8) Spectral Bounds and Random Rotation Matrix:
Refer to various spectral bounds
used to obtain K(δ; p, d, r) in Appendix D.3, where δ ∈(0, 1) is ﬁxed. Further assume that
the rotation matrix Z ∈Rr×r in FindMixtureComponents is chosen uniformly over the Stiefel
manifold {Q ∈Rr×r : Q⊤Q = I}.
(A9) Number of Samples: For ﬁxed δ, ǫ ∈(0, 1), the number of samples satisﬁes
n > nspect(δ, ǫ; p, d, r) := 4K2(δ; p, d, r)
ǫ2
,
(18)
where K(δ; p, d, r) is deﬁned in (58).
Assumption (A6) is a natural condition required for the success of spectral decomposition, and
is imposed in (Mossel and Roch, 2006), (Hsu et al., 2009) and (Anandkumar et al., 2012a). It is
also known that learning singular models, i.e., those which do not satisfy (A6), is at least as hard
13

as learning parity with noise, which is conjectured to be computationally hard (Mossel and Roch,
2006). The condition in (A7) is indeed an additional constraint on graph G∪, but is required to
ensure alignment of hidden labels over spectral decompositions of diﬀerent groups of variables,
as discussed before6 Condition (A8) assumes various spectral bounds and (A9) characterizes the
sample complexity.
4.1.2
Guarantees for Learning Mixture Components
We now provide the result on the success of recovering the tree approximation Th of each mixture
component P(y|H = h). Let ∥· ∥2 on a vector denote the ℓ2 norm.
Theorem 2 (Guarantees for FindMixtureComponents) Under the assumptions (A1)–(A9), the
procedure in Algorithm 2 outputs bP spect(Ya, Yb|H = h), for each a, b ∈V , such that for all h ∈[r],
there exists a permutation τ(h) ∈[r] with
∥bP spect(Ya, Yb|H = h) −P(Ya, Yb|H = τ(h))∥2 ≤ǫ,
(19)
with probability at least 1 −4δ.
Proof:
The proof is given in Appendix D.
✷
Remarks:
Recall that p denotes the number of variables, r denotes the number of mixture
components, d denotes the dimension of each node variable and η denotes the bound on separator
sets between any node pair in the union graph. The quantity K(δ; p, d, r) in (58) in Appendix D.3
is O
 p2η+2d2ηr5δ−1 poly log(p, d, r, δ−1)

. Thus, we require the number of samples scaling in (18)
as n = Ω
 p4η+4d4ηr10δ−2ǫ−2 poly log(p, d, r, δ−1)

. Since we operate in the regime where η = O(1)
is a small constant, this implies that we have a polynomial sample complexity in p, d, r. Note that
the special case of η = 0 corresponds to the case of mixture of product distributions, and it has the
best sample complexity.
4.1.3
Analysis of Tree Approximation
We now consider the ﬁnal stage of our approach, viz., learning tree approximations using the
estimates of the pairwise marginals of the mixture components from the spectral decomposition
method. We now impose a standard condition of non-degeneracy on each mixture component to
guarantee the existence of a unique tree structure corresponding to the maximum-likelihood tree
approximation to the mixture component.
(A10) Separation of Mutual Information: Let Th denote the Chow-Liu tree corresponding to
the model P(y|H = h) when exact statistics are input and let
ϑ := min
h∈[r]
min
(a,b)/∈Th
min
(u,v)∈Path(a,b;Th) (I(Yu, Yv|H = h) −I(Ya, Yb|H = h)) ,
(20)
where Path(a, b; Th) denotes the edges along the path connecting a and b in Th.
6(A7) can be relaxed as follows: if graph G∪has at least three connected components, then we can choose a
reference node in each of the components and estimate the marginals in the other components.
For instance, if
C1, C2, C3 are three connected components in G∪, then we can choose a node in C1 as the reference node to estimate
the marginals of C2 and C3. Similarly, we can choose a node in C2 as a reference node and estimate the marginals
in C1 and C3. We can then align these diﬀerent estimates and obtain all the marginals.
14

(A11) Number of Samples: For ǫtree deﬁned in (69), the number of samples is now required to
satisfy
n > nspect(δ, ǫtree; p, d, r),
(21)
where nspect is given by (18).
The condition in (A10) assumes a separation between mutual information along edges and non-
edges of the Chow-Liu tree Th of each component model P(y|H = h). The quantity ϑ represents
the minimum separation between the mutual information along an edge and any set of non-edges
which can replace the edge in Th. Note that ϑ ≥0 due to the max-weight spanning tree property
of Th (under exact statistics). Intuitively ϑ denotes the “bottleneck” where errors are most likely
to occur in tree structure estimation. Similar observations were made by Tan et al. (2011) for error
exponent analysis of Chow-Liu algorithm. The sample complexity for correctly estimating Th using
samples is based on ϑh and given in (A11). This ensures that the mutual information quantities
are estimated within the separation bound ϑ.
Theorem 3 (Tree Approximations of Mixture Components) Under (A1)–(A11), the Chow-
Liu algorithm outputs the correct tree structures corresponding to maximum-likelihood tree approxi-
mations of the mixture components {P(y|H = h)} with probability at least 1−4δ, when the estimates
of pairwise marginals { bP spect(Ya, Yb|H = h)} from spectral decomposition method are input.
Proof:
See Section D.5.
✷
Remarks:
Thus our approach succeeds in recovering the correct tree structures corresponding
to ML-tree approximations of mixture components with computational and sample complexities
scaling polynomially in the number of variables p, number of components r and the dimension of
each variable d.
Note that if the underlying model is a tree mixture, we recover the tree structures of the mix-
ture components.
For this special case, we can give a slightly better guarantee by estimating
Chow-Liu trees which are subgraphs of the union graph estimate bG∪, and this is discussed in Ap-
pendix D.4. The improved bound Ktree(δ; p, d, r) is O
 p2(d∆)2ηr5δ−1 poly log(p, d, r, δ−1)

, where
∆is the maximum degree in G∪.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we considered learning tree approximations of graphical model mixtures. We proposed
novel methods which combined techniques used previously in graphical model selection, and in
learning mixtures of product distributions. We provided provable guarantees for our method, and
established that it has polynomial sample and computational complexities in the number of nodes
p, number of mixture components r and cardinality of each node variable d. Our guarantees are
applicable for a wide family of models.
In future, we plan to investigate learning mixtures of
continuous models, such as Gaussian mixture models.
