MNRAS 526, 1–15 (2023)
Preprint 2023-11-08
Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0
Stellar Karaoke: Deep Blind Separation of Terrestrial Atmospheric Effects
out of Stellar Spectra by Velocity Whitening
Nima Sedaghat,1,2★Brianna M. Smart,1† J. Bryce Kalmbach,1† Erin L. Howard1 and Hamidreza Amindavar3
1DiRAC Institute and the Department of Astronomy, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, U.S.A
2The Raw Data Speaks Initiative
3Department of Electrical Engineering, Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
Accepted 2023 August 22. Received 2023 August 22; in original form 2023 January 17
ABSTRACT
We report a study exploring how the use of deep neural networks with astronomical Big Data may help us find and uncover new
insights into underlying phenomena: through our experiments towards unsupervised knowledge extraction from astronomical
Big Data we serendipitously found that deep convolutional autoencoders tend to reject telluric lines in stellar spectra. With
further experiments we found that only when the spectra are in the barycentric frame does the network automatically identify
the statistical independence between two components, stellar vs telluric, and rejects the latter. We exploit this finding and turn it
into a proof-of-concept method for removal of the telluric lines from stellar spectra in a fully unsupervised fashion: we increase
the inter-observation entropy of telluric absorption lines by imposing a random, virtual radial velocity to the observed spectrum.
This technique results in a non-standard form of “whitening” in the atmospheric components of the spectrum, decorrelating
them across multiple observations . We process more than 250,000 spectra from the High Accuracy Radial velocity Planetary
Search (HARPS) and with qualitative and quantitative evaluations against a database of known telluric lines, show that most of
the telluric lines are successfully rejected. Our approach, ‘Stellar Karaoke’, has zero need for prior knowledge about parameters
such as observation time, location, or the distribution of atmospheric molecules and processes each spectrum in milliseconds.
We also train and test on Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) and see a significant performance drop due to the low resolution. We
discuss directions for developing tools on top of the introduced method in the future.
Key words: techniques: spectroscopic – atmospheric effects – methods: data analysis – methods: statistical
1 INTRODUCTION
Throughout this paper, we introduce and elaborate a method based
on a novel signal processing-based technique combined with a fully
unsupervised1 deep neural network to remove the non-linear, time-
variant effect of telluric lines out of observed spectra without any
need for manual modelling and tuning – Fig. 1. Concretely, we show
how looking at an enormous dataset of spectra reveals new insights
into their features, allowing for novel solutions to existing, difficult
problems.
Through our experiments towards unsupervised knowledge extrac-
tion from astronomical Big Data, we trained deep neural networks
for non-linear dimensionality reduction of a large number of archival
stellar spectra and serendipitously found that the networks tend to
drop (Fig. 1) specific regions in the reconstructed version of the spec-
tra: the telluric lines. With further experiments we found that only
when the spectra are in the barycentric frame, the network shows this
behaviour. A “barycentric frame” is a reference frame centered on
the center of mass of a celestial system, providing a stable reference

† These authors contributed equally to this work
1 A training scheme that does not require ground truth data – see James et al.
(2023) for an overview.
4000
4500
5000
5500
6000
6500
Wavelength (Å)
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Normalized Flux (-)
Input Spectrum
Reconstructed Spectrum
Figure 1. We exploit the statistical properties of stellar spectra in large
datasets, pass them through a convolutional autoencoder, and get telluric
lines rejected with minimal effort. The three red arrows in the figure high-
light spectral lines that the autoencoder identified as telluric lines and did not
include in the reconstructed spectrum.
© 2023 The Authors
arXiv:2301.00313v2  [astro-ph.SR]  7 Nov 2023

2
Nima Sedaghat et al.
for high-precision astronomical measurements (Soffel et al. 2003;
Bohlin et al. 2014). Contrastingly, a "topocentric frame" is centered
on an observer’s location on Earth. The latter, which is the natural
coordinate system in the as-observed representation of spectra, does
not account for the movement of Earth around the Solar System’s
barycenter, and thus may introduce variability or inaccuracies into
measurements of stellar spectra, often calling for transformation to
the barycentric frame.
Our further experiments showed that, by looking at a large num-
ber of such transformations, the network automatically identifies the
statistical independence between two components, stellar vs telluric,
and decides to reject the latter. We exploit this finding and turn it
into a proof-of-concept method for removal of the telluric lines from
a whole set of stellar spectra in a fully unsupervised fashion: we
increase the inter-observation entropy of telluric absorption lines by
imposing a random, virtual radial velocity to the observed spectrum,
in the original, topocentric frame. This technique results in a non-
standard form of “whitening” in the atmospheric components of the
spectrum, decorrelating them across multiple observations – similar
to what transformation to the barycentric frame would do, but with
zero need for observation-related parameters.
1.1 Atmospheric Effects on Stellar Spectra
In ground-based observations of stellar spectra, it is not unusual
for the source’s spectrum to reach our detectors in an altered state.
The spectrum may be affected by a number of events in space (red-
shift/blueshift, emission, absorption, etc.). When finally reaching the
Earth, the photons in the spectrum will undergo additional transfor-
mations as they travel through the Earth’s atmosphere and are col-
lected by telescopes. Telescope effects are often well characterised
and constrained (CCD noise, fringing, mirror defects, etc.). However,
other effects are usually more difficult to model and correct.
Particularly, passing through the terrestrial molecules present in
the Earth’s atmosphere results in absorption lines in the observed
spectrum. These absorption lines, known as telluric lines, are the re-
sults of interactions between photons and molecules due to a number
of electron, rotational, and vibrational transitions (Rybicki & Light-
man 1986). These interactions are a persistent source of contamina-
tion and loss of information in the observed spectra – e.g. see Bolton
et al. (2012), Artigau et al. (2014). The majority of the molecules
responsible for absorption are O2, H2O, CO2, CO, CH4, COH, O3,
N2O, and the Chappuis ozone absorption bands (Catanzaro 1997;
Griffin 2005; Moehler et al. 2014; Smette et al. 2015). Many of
these absorption features lie in the near-infrared and ultraviolet part
of the electromagnetic spectrum, with weaker absorption features
from ozone, oxygen, and water present in optical wavelengths. Ad-
ditional emission features are also added to the spectrum as photons
are emitted from the molecules. The emission features are relatively
straightforward to handle by observing source-free portions of the
sky. Observed emission lines in "empty" regions provide an easily ac-
cessible template for emission removal. The absorption features are
more complicated. Different telluric lines can scale linearly or non-
linearly dependant on the airmass, and are affected by atmospheric
conditions at the time of observation (Bailey et al. 2007).
Most of the traditional methods used for the removal of telluric
lines consider each spectrum as a single independent entity, discard-
ing the set of observed spectra as a whole – e.g. see Hrudková &
Harmanec (2005). One group of such methods use standard stars
to assist with atmospheric line removal. They do this by observing
standard stars with relatively featureless spectra and using them as
atmospheric templates. This is often done by observing A0V or G-
type stars, though this is predominantly used at the near-infrared and
IR wavelengths (Vacca et al. 2003; Artigau et al. 2014). When using
G-type stars, high resolution Fourier transform of spectra of the sun
can be used as templates to correct for the intrinsic lines in the star
(Livingston & Wallace 1991; Hase et al. 2010).
The reference star should be ideally located near the target star
and observed close in time to measure the atmospheric conditions as
accurately as possible. The target source’s spectrum is then divided
by the telluric template. However, this method is limited if there are
no such standard stars available during an observing run or if observ-
ing conditions result in a poor spectrum. Atmospheric absorption
can also vary rapidly, on the order of minutes (Moehler et al. 2014),
requiring significant time and resources dedicated to observing the
template stars. The division is an iterative process requiring wave-
length and intensity scaling adjustments to match the atmospheric
effects.
Another common method is to model the Earth’s atmosphere and
create a synthetic spectrum which precisely models the atmospheric
absorption. These models solve the radiative transfer equation of
the Earth’s atmosphere using numerical models – e.g. Allart et al.
(2022). These methods are dependent on atmospheric conditions
measurements from the night’s observations. This is commonly done
with programs such as molecfit (Smette et al. 2015; Kausch et al.
2015) and telfit (Gullikson et al. 2014). The radiative transfer
code retrieves the temperature, pressure, and humidity from the time
of observation and uses a database of molecular parameters to create
a fit for the telluric absorption. While this technique is relatively
successful, it may perform poorly if there are a large number of
intrinsic features, little or no continuum, low signal-to-noise ratio
(S/N), or large airmass observations with high water vapour content
(see Alonso-Floriano et al. (2019); Shulyak et al. (2019)). Moreover,
current implementations of this technique, e.g. molecfit, suffer
from rather slow performance to the extent that fitting a model to a
single spectrum may take up to several minutes on today’s computers.
McCloat et al. (2021); Nicholls et al. (2017) report on other types of
model-fitting problems that molecfit encounters in their particular
experiments. See Ulmer-Moll et al. (2019) for a comparison of the
above methods.
1.2 Dimensionality Reduction
Some recent lines of work in astronomy have used implicit modelling
of the spectra by looking at a set of examples, potentially eliminat-
ing the need for manual, explicit modelling. Such methods, loosely
dubbed data-driven approaches, have gained a good momentum in
the past couple of decades. Particularly in astronomy, a data-driven
look at spectra has been mainly utilised in the broad context of di-
mensionality reduction.
Arguably the most popular dimensionality reduction method used
in astronomy has been the Principal Component Analysis (PCA –
see Jolliffe & Cadima (2016) for a review), which has been applied
on astronomical spectra for many years now. Connolly et al. (1995)
used it to classify galaxy spectra with only the first two principal
components while Bailer-Jones et al. (1998) showed that PCA can
compress stellar spectra by a factor of over 30 and classify anomalous
and non-stellar spectra in the dataset. Furthermore, Bailer-Jones et al.
(1998) found that the compression removed noise as well as bogus
features in the spectra such as dust appearing on the plate during plate
scanning. Some works such as Artigau et al. (2014), even attempt
to remove telluric lines of a few specific objects in the High Accu-
racy Radial velocity Planetary Search project (HARPS; Mayor et al.
2003) dataset using PCA decomposition and demonstrate improved
MNRAS 526, 1–15 (2023)

Stellar Karaoke
3
radial velocity measurement accuracy. However, their method does
not operate solely on the stellar spectra and still requires observations
of telluric standard stars. Our approach solely requires a set of input
stellar spectra and zero additional information.
Moreover, the very important, but often overlooked point about
applicability of PCA for such use-cases, is its linear nature, making it
unable to account for modelling non-linear phenomena by definition.
E.g. in the case of telluric lines, a method simply based on PCA, may
not be able to tell the difference between a telluric and stellar line, in
busy regions of the spectrum. This inability has been well observed
as early as in Bailer-Jones et al. (1998). In this work, we show how
transformation to a more sophisticated feature space is necessary for
such a task.
1.3 Autoencoders
There is a closely related family of neural networks known as
encoder-decoder networks (Fig. 2). The contraction part compresses
the input to an often low-dimensional representation, also known as
“latent representation” or simply a “code”. The expansion part is
then used to decode this low-dimensional representation up to the
desired output. The transformation used for coding (and decoding)
is learnt during training, according to the task at hand. A special
case of such networks, an autoencoder, is an unsupervised network
trained to reconstruct the input without the need for labelled input
data. As described in Hinton & Salakhutdinov (2006) these networks
can be used to reduce the dimensionality of input data in a non-linear
generalisation of PCA. Wang et al. (2016a) shows comprehensive
experiments on dimensionality reduction using autoencoders, and
studies the effects of different latent dimensions using synthetic and
real images.
In Yang & Li (2015) the authors use a classical (non-convolutional)
autoencoder to transform 3000-dimensional spectra from the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) Data Release 7 (Abazajian et al. 2009)
to lower-dimensional features, which are later used for estimation
of atmospheric parameters. Wang et al. (2016c) use semi-classical
(fully-connected decoder) autoencoders for feature learning on as-
tronomical spectra. They compare spectral classification based on
their learnt features with PCA and locally linear embedding (LLE),
an alternate non-linear dimensionality reduction method. They find
that their autoencoder approach performs the best when classifying
spectra among a dataset of F, G and K-type stars.
One problem with the mere use of autoencoders, especially for
applications in (astro-)physics, is the entangled mapping of concepts
into the reduced signal – the latent space. The Variational AutoEn-
coder (VAE; Kingma & Welling 2014) has shown to mitigate this
effect to some extent. Portillo et al. (2020) used a VAE to reconstruct
SDSS galaxy spectra re-sampled to an input spectrum with 1000
components. They found that when limiting the dimensionality of the
latent space to 2, 4, 6 or 10 components (≥99% compression) the
VAEs and traditional autoencoders both reconstructed SDSS galaxy
spectra with a lower reconstruction error than PCA and non-negative
matrix factorisation (NMF) applied with the same number of com-
ponents. The authors then demonstrated that different galaxy classes
occupied different areas of the latent space enabling classification.
Classical neural networks (including autoencoders) are merely
composed of fully-connected layers (Hinton 2006). But on the one
hand, with the advent of deep neural networks we have learnt that
having deeper networks is essential for learning more useful fea-
tures (Szegedy et al. 2015), and on the other hand, fully-connected
networks suffer from a lack of scalability to deeper networks and
high-dimensional data (Bengio et al. 2009). As such, a deep enough
autoencoder merely based on fully-connected layers is not tractable
for modern spectroscopic signals: e.g. with ∼300,000 pixels in case
of HARPS, a fully-connected autoencoder composed of merely 6
layers has more than 6.5 billion trainable parameters, which does not
fit into the memory of a normal GPU of today, even with a single
spectrum as input. See Appendix B for an example of such an archi-
tecture. Therefore, stellar spectra have usually been down-sampled
to tractable resolutions: 1000, 2000 and 3000 pixels in Portillo et al.
2020, Wang et al. 2016b and Yang & Li 2015, respectively. This
results in irrecoverable loss of high-resolution information content
in originally high-resolution spectra, as we will show in one of our
experiments too. We address this issue by additionally making use
of convolutional and up-convolutional layers for transformation of
data to the desired feature space; an idea borrowed from computer
vision, which also allows the network to obtain a degree of transla-
tion invariance (Fukushima 1980). This way we manage to train an
autoencoder as deep as 32 layers with less than 6 million trainable
parameters, which is now tractable with today’s hardware and gives
us new insights in to stellar spectra. Further study of technicalities of
convolutional layers, their advantages and choice of hyperparameters
is beyond the objectives of this paper; but the interested reader may
refer to the computer vision literature of the two first decades of the
current millennium (including the above mentioned works) to obtain
an elaborate picture of this transition from classical machine learning
to deep learning.
Note that although convolutional neural networks have been vastly
applied on astronomical data in the past years, they have mostly
focused on extracting information from 2D images: from photometric
redshift regression (Hoyle 2016; Pasquet et al. 2019) and galaxy
morphology classification (Dieleman et al. 2015; Huertas-Company
et al. 2015; Ghosh et al. 2020) to image-generating encoder-decoders
for transient detection (Sedaghat & Mahabal 2018). However, 1D
convolutional networks, necessary for work on spectra, have been
rather rarely used in astronomy. Sharma et al. (2020) implement
such a network to classify stellar spectra from SDSS and compare
their method to a fully connected (feed-forward) implementation.
1.4 Blind Source Separation
Telluric lines inherently originate from a source different to that
of stellar lines. This makes their elimination a “source separation”
problem; a topic mainly studied in digital signal processing. The
general definition of the problem assumes multiple sensors and mul-
tiple signals – a Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) system. In
the problem at hand, however, we only have a single output, making
the task slightly more difficult. Moreover, most of the classic formu-
lations of source separation consider linear mixing of signals from
various sources, whereas in our case we are far from such a simple
configuration. Due to the random nature of the radial velocity in each
observed spectrum, and the fact that we do not make any assumptions
about the nature of the effects after the mixing of the two signals has
happened, it can be seen as a “blind” source separation task (BSS).
Recent BSS methods have typically centreed around Independent
Component Analysis (Comon 1992) and its extensions – e.g. see Choi
et al. (2005); Pal et al. (2013) for a review. Denoising Source Sepa-
ration (DSS), introduced by Särelä et al. (2005), is another approach
that casts the task of source separation as a denoising procedure,
making it similar to the basic concept utilised in our method. But
DSS aims for statistical estimation of the mixing matrix (the mix-
ing mechanism), whereas the objective in our method is to directly
recover the desired signal by whitening the unwanted component,
making it more noise-like.
MNRAS 526, 1–15 (2023)

4
Nima Sedaghat et al.
Many recent methods of source separation, particularly for au-
dio/music signals, have utilised encoder-decoder neural networks as
the canonical component of their methods (Kameoka et al. 2018; Seki
et al. 2019; Grais & Plumbley 2017; Liu & Yang 2018). But they
mainly rely on explicit supervision calling for availability of synthetic
ground truth. Neri et al. (2021) train a variational encoder-decoder
network, where they rely on disentanglement properties of the VAE
to produce separated sources in the output. The mentioned audio-
processing methods all train 2D neural networks on spectrogram
images. Wisdom et al. (2020) introduce a semi-supervised audio
source separation method, working directly on the time-domain sig-
nals. Although they implement both supervised and self-supervised2
networks, the authors show that the latter should be regularised by
the former to work properly. The unsupervised part of the last two
papers relies on the strong assumption that the input is a linear mix-
ture of its constituent sources. Our network is a simple autoencoder
with no linearity assumptions and proves to work well in the complex
non-linear conditions formulated in the upcoming sections. In this
context, our Karaoke network sees the stellar spectrum as the music,
and the adversarial effects as the vocal to be removed from it.
1.5 Composite Spectra
Another line of research towards disentanglement of composite spec-
tra has existed as early as 1994, when Simon & Sturm (1994) try to
decompose the constituent components of spectra of binaries. More
recently, tools like wobble (Bedell et al. 2019) have similarly mod-
elled the stellar and telluric parts as two separate components and
have tried to fit these parametric models to the observed spectra. Such
methods, however, rely on availability of parameters of observation
time, the main of which being BERV: the Barycentric Earth Radial
Velocity. More importantly, they require several observations of the
same star in a single data collection, to obtain a diverse enough set
of BERV values for a single object, which is not usually available for
too many objects. These models are also object-specific, in the sense
that each model is prepared (i.e. optimised) for a single object and is
dedicated to processing of spectra from that object only.
Our method, conversely, does not require any external information
other than the spectra themselves: a raw set of scalar vectors. Al-
though the underlying physical mechanism that justifies the usage of
different BERV values is close to that of our whitening technique, our
method relies on the diversity across several spectra of different ob-
jects, while at the same time captures the common patterns in them,
and therefore is not limited to specific objects – neither during the
training phase, nor when being applied on spectra. We also provide
performance comparison to wobble in our experiments section.
Perhaps the closest to our work, both in terms of the used net-
work architecture, as well as the data-driven unsupervised concept
is Sedaghat et al. (2021), where a convolutional VAE is used to ex-
tract knowledge from a large number of HARPS spectra, in a fully
unsupervised manner. We borrow and use the exact same neural
architecture for our work.
Our Contributions
• We process a huge number of very high-dimensional spectra as a
whole, letting statistical properties emerge in them, allowing to be
treated as random processes.
2 A training scheme which relies on ground-truth data that comes “for free”:
the labels are automatically obtained from the unlabelled input data.
• We model the telluric components in stellar spectra as independent
stars and impose a virtual radial velocity on them to achieve statistical
whitening/decorrelation.
• We use a convolutional autoencoder, that automatically acts as a
source separation tool, rejecting telluric lines in a fully unsupervised
fashion: zero explicit modelling and zero annotation efforts.
• Our method is object-independent and processes new observations
in a fraction of a second.
2 PROBLEM FORMULATION
We seek to clean adversarial atmospheric effects out of an arbitrary
observed signal, 𝑥. The observed signal in our case is a stellar spec-
trum, and so is a function of wavelength, 𝜆, letting us denote it as
𝑥(𝜆).
We use the below formulation to model the various phenomena
affecting a stellar spectrum, before it is captured by our sensors:
𝑥(𝜆) =

𝑠(𝜆)𝑡(𝜆)

∗ℎ(𝜆) + 𝑛(𝜆)
(1)
where 𝑠is the stellar spectrum, incorporating line-of-sight effects
from relative stellar velocity and the interstellar medium. 𝑡is an imag-
inary signal representing the telluric lines affecting the spectrum, also
referred to as the atmospheric transmission spectrum (Rudolf et al.
2016).
We use ℎto denote what we call the observation transfer func-
tion, which models the changes the signal goes through during the
sensing process, and includes, but is not limited to, the instrumental
profile (Rudolf et al. 2016). 𝑛models the additive noise which is not
modelled in the transfer function, ℎ.
We work with a large ensemble of 𝑁observations, mostly com-
ing from different sources. We use the subscript, 𝑖, to differentiate
between various observations:
𝑥𝑖(𝜆) =

𝑠𝑖(𝜆)𝑡𝑖(𝜆)

∗ℎ(𝜆) + 𝑛𝑖(𝜆)
𝑖∈{1, 2, . . . , 𝑁}
(2)
Note that the spectrum, 𝑠, depends on 𝑖, as we work with various
objects at the same time. The atmospheric conditions are also time-
variant, an important point that is reflected in dependence of 𝑡on 𝑖.
The same is true for noise, 𝑛. Without loss of generality, and for the
sake of simplicity, we assume that ℎis constant across the whole set
of observations.
We seek to eliminate the effect of telluric lines from the observed
signal, which in this model is equal to extracting 𝑠𝑖(𝜆) ∗ℎ(𝜆) for
every observation – note that removal of the observation effect, ℎ, is
not part of the objective here.
We also model the effect of the radial velocity, 𝑣, of the target
object on the observed spectrum, 𝑠as:
𝑠𝑖(𝜆) = V {˚𝑠𝑖(𝜆), 𝑣𝑖}
= ˚𝑠𝑖

𝜆 1 −𝑣𝑖
𝑐

(3)
where ˚𝑠𝑖would be the observed spectrum, if the radial velocity was
zero – i.e. no Doppler shift. We call ˚𝑠𝑖the static spectrum hereafter.
The V {·, ·} operator represents the nonlinear 3 effect of the radial
3 The operator is linear with respect to its first argument, but nonlinear with
respect to the second one: V {𝑠, 𝑣1 + 𝑣2} ≠V {𝑠, 𝑣1} + V {𝑠, 𝑣2}
MNRAS 526, 1–15 (2023)

Stellar Karaoke
5
Figure 2. A typical variational autoencoder trained to reconstruct stellar spectra, can decompose physically meaningful components out of the input, when the
compression is high enough and the number of convolutional kernels is kept low. The variational implementation of the bottleneck is omitted for the sake of
simplicity. The main contraction and expansion parts on the left and right are composed of (up)convolutional layers, while fully connected layers are necessary
at the bottleneck. Blue is the input spectrum and orange is the reconstructed version. This image has originally been published in Sedaghat et al. (2021).
velocity, 𝑣𝑖, on the spectrum, as expanded in the second line of the
above equation, and 𝑐is the speed of light. The physical units of 𝑣𝑖
and 𝑐can be arbitrarily chosen, as long as they are kept the same.
𝑡𝑖on the other hand, and by definition, do not have any dependence
on 𝑣𝑖, and therefore can be modelled as:
𝑡𝑖(𝜆) = V
˚𝑡𝑖(𝜆), 0
	
(4)
2.1 Continuous vs Discrete
All the signals discussed above are of continuous nature up until
the point they are sensed by the detector. Sensing by the detector
is a process that involves sampling as one of its steps, converting a
spectrum into a series of real-valued samples. Therefore, the data we
work with in our experiments is the discrete representation of 𝑥𝑖(𝜆),
namely 𝑋𝑙
𝑖– we use 𝑙as the discrete-valued index for the sampled
pixels.
However, for the reasons below, keeping the formulation in the
continuous representation is safe – and clearer. First, the signals
modelled so far are all the constituent elements of the pre-sampling
signal, 𝑥𝑖(𝜆), and so the continuous models hold. Secondly, the only
part of our method which explicitly modifies the signal along the
wavelength axis, the V operator (Section 3.1), does its job by regrid-
ding the interpolated version of the signal; practically converting the
discrete signal back to its continuous version, applying the transfor-
mation and sampling it back again to the discrete space. Therefore
mathematical definition of the operator in the continuous space is
valid.
2.2 Signals as Random Processes
The process of sensing a signal, 𝑥𝑖, from an arbitrarily chosen object
in the sky, which is affected by many non-deterministic phenomena
along the way, can be seen as one realisation of a random process.
In other words, the set of 𝑥𝑖, or their discrete representation, 𝑋𝑖, for
various 𝑖, represent an ensemble of realisations of a random process,
{𝑋}4. Note that in this particular application, the index set of the
4 The term random in this context is not in contradiction with the structure
in stellar spectra. The structure is encoded in the basic parameters of the
random process is sampled from wavelengths, 𝜆– a bit counter-
intuitive, as it is usually of a temporal nature in typical applications.
Therefore each 𝑋𝑙(as defined in Section 2.1) represents a random
variable, with outcomes 𝑋𝑙
𝑖. Similarly, we can model {𝑆}, { ˚𝑆} and
{𝑇} as discrete-index random processes of the same type for 𝑠𝑖, ˚𝑠𝑖
and 𝑡𝑖, respectively. {𝑆} is then a generator of various clean spectra,
𝑆𝑖, while { ˚𝑆} generates the static ˚𝑆𝑖spectra. As we will see in the
next section, this non-deterministic view on signals allows us to
explain the statistical operations and properties of the components
more clearly.
3 METHOD
The method is composed of two key steps:
a) Increasing the entropy of telluric components across observations
and,
b) transforming the spectra into a space where the stellar and telluric
components are separable, then removing the non-dominant one.
Median Normalisation As a pre-processing step, we normalise
each spectrum in the dataset based on its median, to mitigate the
effect of different distances in sources, which otherwise results in
extreme inter-sample flux range variations.
3.1 Velocity Whitening
In the default conditions, the spectroscopic observations are in the
so-called topocentric reference frame where the telluric lines, if they
exist, take on the same wavelengths – or pixels locations. What it
means from a statistical point of view though is the following:
Let us assume, for simplicity, that all the observed objects have the
same static spectra, ˚𝑠𝑖(𝜆). The resulting spectra, 𝑠𝑖(𝜆) would then
only be different based on their radial velocities, 𝑣𝑖, which, by defi-
nition, are modelled as scaling transformations along the wavelength
axis (Eq. (3)). However, since 𝑣𝑖are outcomes of a random variable,
constituent set of random variables, such as the expected value and covariance
matrix.
MNRAS 526, 1–15 (2023)

6
Nima Sedaghat et al.
6265
6270
6275
6280
topo-centric
6265
6270
6275
6280
ADP.2014-09-16T11:03:35.377
randomized
6265
6270
6275
6280
6265
6270
6275
6280
ADP.2014-09-16T11:03:36.737
6265
6270
6275
6280
Wavelength (Å)
6265
6270
6275
6280
Wavelength (Å)
ADP.2014-09-16T11:03:38.307
Figure 3. On the left a set of exemplar spectra are depicted. Stellar lines are
unaligned due to different radial velocities. But telluric lines are aligned, even
though they may have different shapes due to their inherent time dependence.
On the right the same spectra after velocity randomisation are depicted.
Telluric lines are now unaligned too, but with a pattern different to that of
stellar lines. The red and green dotted vertical lines indicate the location of
exemplar telluric and stellar lines, respectively. More telluric lines can be
seen to the right of the marked one.
Figure 4. Visual illustration of the covariance matrix of the ensemble of
signals, before and after whitening. On the left, the covariance matrix of the
[6275, 6285] Å region for some subset of size 90 of the observations is visu-
alised. On the right, the same is done after velocity whitening, where 𝑣𝑖were
sampled from the uniform distribution: 𝑉∼𝑈(−30 km/s, 30 km/s). The co-
variance matrix is closer to the identity matrix now, confirming achievement
of some degree of whitening/decorrelation.
𝑠𝑖(𝜆) would still be highly uncorrelated due to the resulting random
displacements. Note that each random variable is defined at a specific
pixel, over various observations, as defined in Section 2.2.
𝑡𝑖on the other hand, are composed of a set of absorption lines with
different strengths, but all happening at pre-defined specific wave-
lengths. This feature makes them highly correlated across multiple
observations and easy to fit for any model – Fig. 3, left column.
To decrease the existing correlation between realisations of the
telluric signals, we increase the entropy across 𝑡𝑖by randomising
them using an emulated radial velocity,
𝑡′
𝑖(𝜆) = V
˚𝑡𝑖(𝜆), 𝑣′
𝑖
	
(5)
where each 𝑣′
𝑖is a random velocity and is drawn from
𝑉′ : R →R,
(6)
a real-valued random variable generator with an arbitrary distribution
– which in our experiments was chosen to be uniform. The above
effect can be implemented by simply contracting or expanding the
wavelength axis, according to Eq. (3). Note though that this is a
purely artificial phenomenon, and although it is chosen to have the
same effect as the “real” radial velocity of stars, it has no particular
meaning for telluric lines – a similar deterministic effect occurs when
an observed spectrum is transformed into the barycentric frame.
In practice, however, we only have access to the observed signal, 𝑥,
and not its forming components. Hence the proposed randomisation
cannot be applied directly on 𝑡alone, and the whole observed signal
gets affected. But in the below, we show that it can still have the
desired effect:
𝜆−→𝜆′
𝑖= 𝜆(1 −
𝑣′
𝑖
𝑐)
(7)
𝑥′
𝑖(𝜆) = V

𝑥𝑖(𝜆), 𝑣′
𝑖
	
= V
n
𝑠𝑖(𝜆)𝑡𝑖(𝜆)

∗ℎ(𝜆) + 𝑛𝑖(𝜆), 𝑣′
𝑖
o
= V
n
𝑠𝑖(𝜆)𝑡𝑖(𝜆)

∗ℎ(𝜆), 𝑣′
𝑖
o
+ V

𝑛𝑖(𝜆), 𝑣′
𝑖
	
(8)
which, according to the proof provided in Appendix A becomes:
𝑥′
𝑖(𝜆) = (1 −
𝑣′
𝑖
𝑐)V

𝑠𝑖(𝜆)𝑡𝑖(𝜆), 𝑣′
𝑖
	
∗V

ℎ(𝜆), 𝑣′
𝑖
	
+ V

𝑛𝑖(𝜆), 𝑣′
𝑖
	
= (1 −
𝑣′
𝑖
𝑐)

𝑠𝑖(𝜆′
𝑖)𝑡𝑖(𝜆′
𝑖)

∗ℎ(𝜆′
𝑖) + 𝑛𝑖(𝜆′
𝑖).
(9)
Now since

1 −𝑣′
𝑖
𝑐

is, for each 𝑥′
𝑖, a constant coefficient and is
normalised out before being passed to the next step of the method, we
can see that the emulated randomised velocity has found its way from
𝑥𝑖down to 𝑡𝑖. In other words, we have achieved the required velocity
randomisation in 𝑡𝑖by modifying 𝑥𝑖. The two main components in
the tweaked signal can now be rewritten as:
Telluric:
Stellar:
V
˚𝑡𝑖(𝜆), 𝑣′
𝑖
	
V

˚𝑠𝑖(𝜆), 𝑣𝑖+ 𝑣′
𝑖
	
(10)
So, we have achieved two components which are virtually moving
independently of each other, when going over various observations.
Figure 3 illustrates this effect in practice.
From a statistical point of view, what we achieve with the above
MNRAS 526, 1–15 (2023)

Stellar Karaoke
7
velocity randomisation is a degree of “whitening” of the telluric’s
random process, {𝑇}. More precisely, we decrease the mutual corre-
lation between every pair, (𝑇𝑙,𝑇𝑚), pushing the statistical behaviour
of the telluric component toward white noise (Li & Zhang 1998; Eldar
& Oppenheim 2003; Kessy et al. 2018). Note again that (𝑇𝑙,𝑇𝑚), the
random variables we try to decorrelate, are each defined on a single
pixel of the spectrum, and their outcomes vary along with different
observations. A visualisation of the results of the above whitening
process is illustrated in Fig. 4.
3.2 Deep Feature Space
We borrow and use the exact architecture of the 1D convolutional
autoencoder introduced by Sedaghat et al. (2021) – Figure 2. The
convolutional layers of the encoder transform the input spectrum
down to a pre-defined number of “latent variables” at the bottleneck
of the network. This low-dimensional representation of the input,
also known as the “code”, is the most compressed version of the
input spectrum. The dimensionality of this vector is chosen based
on the desired compression rate in various experiments. Note though
that in the VAE version of our networks, which is the case in most
of the experiments of this work, the latent nodes are implemented
probabilistically, each being modelled with a pair of scalars: mean
and standard deviation of a normal distribution. On the other side of
the bottleneck, the decoder receives the compressed code and takes it
step-by-step up to the same dimension as the original input (218 +216
for HARPS). We use the same per-pixel L1 end-to-end loss function,
as introduced in the original work, to achieve acceptable pixel-level
accuracy.
This typical architecture has proven to be able to transform the
input to a space where noise-like components of the signal are easily
separable. As we show with our experiments, the novel statistical
technique developed in the previous section pushes the telluric com-
ponents farther from the stellar features and closer to the noise, in
the learnt feature space, letting them be rejected as easily as noise.
We of course need to constrain the reconstruction abilities of the
network with a high compression rate as well as a latent loss at the
bottleneck, not to have too strong of a network capable of fitting the
two independent components at the same time.
Training a typical network for 100 epochs on HARPS data (number
of times all the training samples are seen by the network during the
training phase), using an Nvidia V1005, roughly takes 60 hours. We
stop the training when the validation loss plateaus.
4 DATA
We use data from two publicly available collections: HARPS and
SDSS. Each data collection calls for its own network that is trained
from scratch6. Our main experiments are run on HARPS, while
SDSS is used as a difficult collection for comparison purposes.
Unlike typical ML implementations, our method, originated from
archival data exploration, technically does not need to generalise to
unseen data: one can, if needed, train it on a whole set of spectra
with the aim of processing the same set, which has been used during
5 A card with 16GB of GPU memory.
6 We loosely use the term ‘data collection’ to refer to all the spectra collected
by either a specific instrument (e.g. HARPS) or a survey (e.g. SDSS). There-
fore our model that is trained on HARPS, is applicable on any new stellar
spectrum that is captured by HARPS even after the date we have collected
our training set.
the training phase. For this particular application, since no objective
for the high-level task of telluric line rejection is used, the network
cannot overfit to the task. Yet, we do want the method to generalise
to unseen data. So for each data collection, we keep a small portion
of samples separate from the training set, for validation purposes and
to make sure that the network is not overfitting to the lower-level task
of reconstruction – i.e. memorising the spectra. The train-validation
splits are published along with our code.
4.1 HARPS
HARPS is an instrument on the 3.6 m La Silla Telescope. It is a fibre-
fed high-resolution Echelle spectrograph dedicated to the discovery
of exoplanets, with a spectral resolution of 𝑅= 115, 000 and covers
the spectral range 378–691 nm7. The data used has been instrument-
corrected and detector-corrected, as well as sky-subtracted.
Our downloaded dataset initially consisted of 272376 total spectra,
which after automatic removal of corrupted files, undefined values
(NaN: Not a Number) and noise-like ones, was reduced to 267361
“stable” ones. This collection is mainly composed of stellar spectra.
However, there are some spectra of random irregular target objects
too, such as SUN, MOON, etc., which we allowed to enter our training
set on purpose, to increase robustness of the learnt features. We
trimmed, re-gridded and homogenised all spectra before being passed
to the network in exactly the same way as is done by Sedaghat et al.
(2021) , 327680 pixels with a uniform resolution of 0.01 Å.
Note that the pipeline the HARPS spectra go through is set up
such that the spectra are automatically transformed to the barycentric
reference frame and re-gridded before being stored in the archive.
The originally captured version, in the topocentric reference frame,
is also not preserved. Therefore we had to transform them back to
the topocentric frame for our experiments. Although this is touching
the core concept of our presented method, it turned out to be a
safe procedure: transformation to the barycentric frame exerts added
randomness on the radial velocity, which is perfectly compatible with
our method. In fact, our method has been inspired by observing traces
of the above-mentioned fact in our initial experiments.
4.2 SDSS
Our second dataset consisted of spectra from the SEGUE (Yanny
et al. 2009) and SEGUE-2 spectroscopic surveys (Rockosi et al.
2022) that were part of the larger Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS).
The SEGUE surveys both used the 2.5m Sloan Foundation Telescope
(Gunn et al. 2006) located at Apache Point Observatory with the two
original Sloan Digital Sky Survey fiber spectrographs (Smee et al.
2013). The SDSS spectrographs have a resolution of R ∼1800 and
together have 640 fibers (320 each) that plug into aluminum "plug
plates" for each observation. In each plate 32 plugs are reserved for
blank sky observations and 16 for spectrophotometric standard stars
in the field. Each spectrograph has a red and a blue channel that
collect data on separate CCDs with the blue wavelength range from
approximately 3800 Å to 6100 Å and the red wavelengths spanning
approximately 5900 Å to 9200 Å. Sources in the original SEGUE
survey sampled Milky Way stars at a variety of distances, colours
and metallicities while the SEGUE-2 targets focused on stars in the
Milky Way halo.
In our experiments we used the ~660,000 uncalibrated spectra from
the red CCD of one of the spectrographs (labelled as ’r1’ in the SDSS
7 http://archive.eso.org/wdb/wdb/adp/phase3_main/form
MNRAS 526, 1–15 (2023)

8
Nima Sedaghat et al.
Figure 5. Qualitative illustration of the results on an exemplar selection of HARPS spectra. Each row depicts one spectrum, with its HARPS ID written on the
right, while columns focus on different regions of interest (indicated as grey regions on the left). Interpretation hint: reconstruction (orange) should follow the
pseudo-truth (green – see Section 5.2 for definition). The left-most column covers the whole spectrum, as is fed into the network, and illustrates the robustness
of the network to different characteristics of the spectra (continuum, noise level, etc.). Major stellar lines such as 𝐻𝛼can be easily spotted in the less ‘busy’
examples. In the middle column we zoom in on a potentially complex region where narrow stellar lines, when existing, can collide with telluric lines of similar
shapes. E.g. in the second and 4th row there are examples of such cases, where the network rejects the telluric component, while still preserving the stellar part
very well – thus rejecting the hypothesis that it might be simply rejecting narrow lines by a applying a moving average. In the third column, we focus on a region
where stellar lines occur in some of the spectra, but not in the others. This way we reject the hypothesis that the network might have ‘memorised’ the locations
of the lines.
MNRAS 526, 1–15 (2023)

Stellar Karaoke
9
data archive) provided with SDSS Data Release 17 (Abdurro’uf et al.
2022) and accessible via the DR17 FITS website8. The uncalibrated
spectra consist of multiple 10-30 minute exposures of each source.
Since the SEGUE surveys imaged each source multiple times to
create coadded spectra this means we have multiple spectra in our
dataset for the same source. For each plate we exclude the fibres
that were intentionally pointed at empty patches of sky and labelled
"SKY" in the data. Finally, just as in case of HARPS, we homogenise
the spectra before passing them to the network. In this case, however,
due to the low resolution, we end up having 2048 pixels for each
spectrum, with a uniform resolution of 1.66 Å.
The uncalibrated spectra used are labelled ‘spFrame’ in the SDSS
data model9 and according to the details of the SDSS spectroscopic
pipeline (Stoughton et al. 2002) they are flat-fielded but not flux-
calibrated. The flux calibration spectra (‘spFluxCalib‘ in the data
model) include telluric absorption calculated by the spectroscopic
pipeline based upon the spectrophotometric standard stars that are
included in the observation set of each plate. These calibration are
what we use as a "pseudo-truth" for comparisons of our network
results.
5 EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
We train and evaluate multiple networks based on various combina-
tions of the below (hyper-)parameters:
• Latent-space dimensionality
• Velocity randomisation level
• Use of a variational loss
The HARPS dataset is our primary focus and our main experi-
ments, which include hyper-parameter sweeping and controlled tests
are solely performed on this dataset. The SDSS dataset is only used
for comparative testing of the method in extreme conditions – i.e.
very low resolution. We also compare our results to the tool called
wobble (Bedell et al. 2019) in Section 5.6.
Also, unless otherwise specified, the networks have had 128 latent
dimensions, the random velocities have been drawn from a uniform
distribution, roughly inspired by the tangential velocity of earth in
the barycentric coordinates:
𝑉∼𝑈(−30 km/s, 30 km/s),
(11)
the test set has been a fixed subset of HARPS spectra10, and the
region of interest (ROI) for obtaining the quantitative metrics has
been [5800, 6910] Å, where there is a high density of both stellar
and telluric lines.
5.1 Primary Results
Figure 5 illustrates a few examples of how the method manages to
reject the telluric lines and preserve the stellar features. The example
spectra and regions are specifically chosen to rule out potential naive
hypotheses for how the network rejects telluric lines. In other words,
the results confirm that the network has learnt a semantic represen-
tation of the constituent components and is separating the sources in
that feature space, as opposed to e.g. simply having “missed” nar-
rower lines (simple averaging, low-pass filtering). In the caption of
8 https://data.sdss.org/sas/dr17/
9 https://data.sdss.org/datamodel/
10 1000 spectra of unique objects. The list is available to the public as part
of the released code.
4000 4500 5000 5500 6000 6500
Wavelength (Å)
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Transmittance
<mtrans>
4000 4500 5000 5500 6000 6500
Wavelength (Å)
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Our Reference Tellurics
6268
6270
6272
6274
6276
6278
6280
6282
Wavelength (Å)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Normalized Flux (-)
S
S/T
S/T (smooth) 
G
Figure 6. On the top left, the mtrans signal for one observation of the 51
Pegasi is illustrated (HARPS ADP ID: ADP.2014-10-06T10:07:52.453).
The image on the top right is the same signal, after removal of the slow
continuum absorption component, which forms our reference tellurics profile
(T). In the bottom image, three different steps for generating the pseudo-truth
spectrum are illustrated: the input spectrum (S), the result of dividing it by
the tellurics profile (S/T), and finally the smoothed version.
Fig. 5 a few other such hypotheses are elaborated and rejected. The
pseudo-truth used in this illustration is explained in the following
subsection.
5.2 Quantitative Evaluation
Various (hyper-)parameters, such as the degree of compression dur-
ing dimensionality reduction, or the degree of velocity randomiza-
tion, may influence the network’s ability to reject the telluric lines.
There is also often a trade-off between telluric-rejection and stellar-
reconstruction.
Therefore, we develop the below mutual metrics to quantify both
aspects at the same time:
𝑄𝑡=
Í 
𝑀𝑡 ˆ𝑆−˜𝐺


𝑁𝑡
(12)
𝑄𝑠=
Í 
𝑀𝑠 ˆ𝑆−˜𝐺


𝑁𝑠
(13)
where 𝑄𝑡is a proxy for the quality of rejection of telluric lines
and 𝑄𝑠, conversely, represents the quality of stellar reconstruction.
Since they are both distance metrics, lower values are desirable. ˆ𝑆
represents the reconstructed spectrum (i.e. the direct output of the
network) and 𝑀𝑡is a binary mask; a vector of the same size as the
input, having ones at all pixels containing known telluric lines, and
zeros everywhere else. 𝑀𝑠is the dual of the tellurics mask and is
simply obtained by negating it: 𝑀𝑠= 1 −𝑀𝑡
MNRAS 526, 1–15 (2023)

10
Nima Sedaghat et al.
The Pseudo-Ground Truth , ˜𝐺, is the key component of our quan-
titative evaluation. An ideal ground-truth for the above formulation
would mean a spectrum which exactly matches the input spectrum
in all aspects, but the telluric lines: same redshift, emission, absorp-
tion, CCD noise, mirror defects, but without the telluric lines. Such an
ideal spectrum would be necessary for every single object in the data
collection. Obtaining such a set of signals for real spectra is close to
impossible. Note also that a mere list of wavelengths of telluric lines
would not suffice for this purpose, as in the above formulation we
compute pixel-by-pixel distances. Therefore, we define the pseudo-
ground truth, as a close-to-ideal truth, based on the database of lines
provided by HITRAN (Rothman et al. 2009). We utilise the tools
provided by the molecfit package to access the database, taking
into account the observation parameters of each spectrum, as well as
the estimated density of molecules. Specifically, the mtrans com-
ponent produced by molecfit encapsulates the realisation of the
atmospheric transmission spectrum for the observation at hand – see
Fig. 6 for an exemplar illustration of such a spectrum. We remove the
slow, continuum absorption components (Rosenkranz 1998; Bara-
nov et al. 2008), by passing the signal through a high-pass filter11
to obtain a reference profile of telluric lines. Now to obtain ˜𝐺, we
first divide the input spectrum by the obtained reference profile of
tellurics and then pass it through a median-smoothing kernel. The
latter is done to remove both noise and the spikes that appear at
the aperture of lines, as a results of the unstable arithmetic task of
division.
An example of the process leading to ˜𝐺is illustrated in Fig. 6.
The Normalisers , 𝑁𝑡& 𝑁𝑠in Eqs. (12) and (13), are chosen such
that the metrics are meaningful even when running cross-region or
cross-dataset comparisons. Specifically, 𝑁𝑡is obtained by replacing
the reconstructed signal with the input and computing a unnormalised
distance metric:
𝑁𝑡=
∑︁ 𝑀𝑡𝑆−˜𝐺
.
(14)
The idea is that the worst outcome is when nothing has been done
for removal of the telluric lines: the untouched input signal. This is
of course not a very accurate assumption as there are irregular cases
that can push the metric to above 1. We simply clip the value to [0, 1]
in such cases. For 𝑁𝑠, we calculate an estimate of the continuum, ˆ𝐶,
of ˜𝐺to represent the worst case in which all the stellar lines have
been rejected, and plug it into the (unnormalised) metric formula12:
𝑁𝑠=
∑︁
𝑀𝑠 ˆ𝐶−˜𝐺


.
(15)
This way, the normalised metrics are mostly independent of the
length of the considered region of interest (ROI), or the density of
lines in there. Note though that, as explained before, the metrics are
not designed to be robust to irregular selections of regions such as
line-free areas. In all the equations of this subsection, the subscripts
𝑖, indexing the observed spectra, are omitted in 𝑆, ˆ𝑆, ˜𝐺, ˆ𝐶, 𝑀𝑠and
𝑀𝑡, for the sake of simplicity and the summations are calculated over
all the pixels of each spectrum.
11 This “continuum normalisation” code snippet can be found in the publicly
available code repository of this project.
12 This “continuum estimation” code snippet can be found in the publicly
available code repository of this project.
Figure 7. Illustration of the correlation between the whitening level (velocity
randomisation) and tellurics rejection quality. Randomisation is set to zero
in the leftmost item (‘topo’), but is increased in the ones to the right of it.
The numbers define the extrema of the random velocity (N in Eq. (16)) in
km/s: e.g. V15 means N = 15 km/s and so on. The right-most item, indicated
by a ∗, is our primary network, where the tellurics rejection quality has
also plateaued. Note that there is not a significant difference in the stellar
reconstruction quality across the randomised networks. The high variance
in the stellar reconstruction quality of ‘topo’ may be explained by the fact
that part of the learning capacity of the network is dedicated to learning to
reconstruct the telluric lines.
Figure 8. Quantitative comparison of a deterministic autoencoder (AE, left)
with its variational couterpart (VAE, right). In the VAE, the weight of the
latent loss is set to 0.1.
MNRAS 526, 1–15 (2023)

Stellar Karaoke
11
Figure 9.
Quality of stellar line reconstruction vs telluric line rejection
on HARPS, for different number of dimensions of the code, or the latent
representation. A lower number is better in both plots. Networks with 1024
latent dimensions and above have clearly started to learn to reconstruct telluric
lines too. Our primary network (∗128) has been chosen roughly at the optimal
point, considering 𝑄𝑡and 𝑄𝑠at the same time.
5.3 The Effect of Velocity-Whitening
To demonstrate the effect of the whitening step, we train and compare
multiple networks in controlled conditions. We start with a network
trained on spectra in the topocentric frame, representing zero velocity
randomisation. Then continue to train networks with increased levels
of randomisation. Concretely, we define 𝑉′ of Eq. (6) as a random
variable with a uniform distribution:
𝑉′ ∼𝑈(−N, N)
(16)
where N represents the allowed maximum absolute random velocity.
We increase N in three steps across three different networks, while
other configurations are kept fixed. In Fig. 7 the correlation between
the randomisation level and telluric rejection is evident.
5.4 Variational vs Deterministic Autoencoder
A deterministic (i.e. non-variational) autoencoder, normally tends to
give a better reconstruction quality at the cost of learning entangled
features – e.g. see Sedaghat et al. 2021. In this work, the study of dis-
entangled features is not the focus. But through our experiments we
found that the VAE component acts as a regulariser for the network,
and prevents it from learning to fit the deeper telluric lines – i.e. mem-
orising them. In Fig. 8 a deterministic autoencoder (AE) is compared
to its counterpart VAE. As expected, the AE gives a slightly better
reconstruction quality, while it significantly falls behind the VAE in
rejection of the tellurics.
5.5 The Effect of Compression
It is reasonable to expect, and is supported by our experiments that,
with a lower dimensionality at the information bottleneck of the net-
work, the network’s capacity for preserving many concurrent features
Figure 10. Spectral observations of 51 Pegasi are passed through wobble
and Stellar Karaoke and the results are compared. In green, we have the
pseudo-truth used by our method. The depicted ROI is the one used in our
other visualisations, consisting of both stellar and telluric lines. For this we
needed to merge two separate outputs (orders) from wobble: orders 62, 63.
during compression diminishes. This results in a higher rejection of
details in the reconstructed spectra, which can be naively interpreted
as an improvement in telluric line rejection – a decrease in 𝑄𝑡. Note
however that stellar reconstruction quality can get worse at the same
time, and so the two metrics need to be considered at the same time.
Figure 9 compares results of various runs with different dimension-
alities at the latent space. Note how the stellar reconstruction quality
starts to decay by increasing the compression (lower latent dimen-
sions). On the other hand, by increasing the number of latent nodes,
the network starts to become too powerful, managing to reconstruct
both components and losing the source separation capability.
5.6 Comparison to wobble
The model used by wobble (Bedell et al. 2019) for fitting the ob-
served spectra has two main components: stellar vs telluric. In this
sense it is one of the best candidates for comparison to Stellar
Karaoke. However, it is object-specific, in the sense that it uses
multiple observations of the same astrophysical object to optimise
a model dedicated to that specific object. This limits the available
wobble results to a few objects, not allowing for a statistically mean-
ingful comparison over a large number of spectra. Moreover, e.g. in
case of HARPS, wobble fits 72 different models to small wavelength
spans corresponding to various echelle orders.
These make it difficult to have a like-for-like comparison of the
results. Nevertheless, in Fig. 10 we illustrate a visual comparison
of both methods on 51 Pegasi13. A quantitative comparison is not
13 To the best of our knowledge, finding an exact correspondence between
HARPS IDs and the spectra used by wobble is not trivial. We picked
ADP.2014-10-06T10:07:52.453 which is simply one of the observations
of 51 Pegasi for this comparison. Similarly we used the first ‘epoch’ from the
pre-computed published results of wobble.
MNRAS 526, 1–15 (2023)

12
Nima Sedaghat et al.
6260
6265
6270
6275
6280
6285
6290
6295
6300
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Transmittance
HARPS
SDSS
6840
6850
6860
6870
6880
6890
6900
Wavelength (Å)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Transmittance
HARPS
SDSS
Figure 11. Telluric features are compared in a high-resolution collection
(HARPS) vs a rather low-resolution one (SDSS). The two plots depict two
different regions of the tellurics reference profiles, selected from the telluric-
rich overlapping areas of the two collections. Most of the “information” in
the features is lost in the low-resolution profiles. In SDSS, the tellurics profile
is obtained in the same way as in HARPS, except we directly use the flux
calibration provided by the survey, rather than extracting them through the
molecfit package. See Section 4.2 for details.
possible, since wobble follows a per-order normalisation of the flux
values and performs continuum normalisation, while our method
does global median-based normalisation. Qualitatively though, Stel-
lar Karaoke and wobble have both rejected most of the telluric lines,
as compared to the pseudo-truth – e.g. between 6278Å and 6281Å.
wobble outperforms Stellar Karaoke in following the input spectrum
in shallow lines e.g. between 6271Å and 6276Å. In the region around
6278 Å, the overlapping of two orders in wobble can be seen14.
Apart from the above mentioned methodological differences, as-
suming availability of multiple observations and relevant external
info, wobble takes around 60 minutes to fit a model to an object
(Bedell et al. 2019), whereas, Stellar Karaoke is trained only once,
and then runs inference on any new spectrum in just 50 ms on a single
CPU (4 ms in case it runs on a typical Nvidia GPU).
5.7 HARPS vs SDSS: High- vs Low-Resolution
Figure 12 depicts the results of training and applying our method
on SDSS spectra. The extremely low pixel resolution of this dataset
(2K pixels with 1.66 Å spacing, as opposed 300K pixels with 0.01
Å resolution in HARPS), makes this in practice a stress test for our
method, as many of the telluric lines are merged, appearing as wide
artefacts – see Fig. 11 for a comparison. Therefore, Stellar Karaoke
cannot find and learn a very meaningful representation of the telluric
lines: even if the stellar lines are recovered and some of the telluric
14 See
https://github.com/megbedell/wobble/blob/
fe32e885eba4704ff4f24345f4f99337d7d81a34/docs/quickstart.
rst for notes on current limitations in combining different orders.
lines are being rejected, the more significant telluric artefacts are
learnt and reconstructed (i.e. not rejected) by the network. Since the
quantification metrics introduced in Section 5.2 are mainly designed
around the concept of telluric “lines”, their values are not meaningful
in this case and we determined that the qualitative comparison is
conclusive.
5.8 Comparison to molecfit
molecfit is a widely used tool for modelling and correcting for
atmospheric absorption in spectroscopic observations, particularly
in case of high-resolution ones such as HARPS (Smette et al. 2015;
Kausch et al. 2015). Since we have used a component provided by
the molecfit package to access the HITRAN database for valida-
tion purposes, we do not provide direct comparison to molecfit
results here. However, we list a set of methodological differences, to
highlight the benefit of our method compared to molecfit.
molecfit operates by fitting synthetic transmission spectra
to observed spectra, necessitating a priori knowledge of several
observation-time parameters. These parameters include atmospheric
pressure, temperature, humidity, airmass, observing site latitude, lon-
gitude, and altitude, time and date of observation, and instrumental
setup. The accuracy of molecfit’s correction is, therefore, closely
tied to the precision of these parameters, and any uncertainties in
these values propagate into the correction process. The tool retrieves
two atmospheric profiles from the Global Data Assimilation System
(GDAS) website that bracket the time of the observation. These pro-
files are then interpolated to match the observation time and merged
with a standard profile and local meteorological data to create an
input profile for the radiative transfer code. molecfit uses a radia-
tive transfer code to simulate atmospheric emission and transmission
spectra, and it relies on a molecular spectroscopic database. In our
experiments molecfit’s ‘fit-time’ in average takes 3.36 cpu-minutes
for each input spectrum – this excludes any time spent on accessing
databases, etc.
In contrast, an instrument-specific Stellar Karaoke network, simply
receives a raw vector of scalar values as the input spectrum, and
processes it in less than a second15.
6 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
We presented a study that, drawing upon a Big Data-inspired view
of stellar spectra, exploits the statistical independence of the radial
velocity of stars with telluric lines in their observed spectra, rein-
forces it using a novel technique, and utilises a fully unsupervised
convolutional neural network to reject the undesired part.
We see two aspects in the achievements: First, we have reported a
cross-disciplinary scientific finding which exemplifies how bringing
ideas from one field of science (data science), can give new insights
and open doors into the other field of science (astronomy). Secondly,
we have presented a method, or a prototype of it, as a promising
avenue for further development when compared to traditional telluric
line removal tools.
From a practical point of view, Stellar Karaoke benefits from its
ability to identify telluric lines without requiring any external in-
formation; whether it be the observation-time parameters needed in
the existing methods, to manual model initialisation with lists of
15 E.g. the HARPS model presented in this paper is already trained and
removes telluric lines of any new, unseen HARPS spectrum.
MNRAS 526, 1–15 (2023)

Stellar Karaoke
13
telluric
telluric
stellar: H-alpha
104_3110_spFrame-r1
00055323_230
stellar
Normalized Flux (-)
104_3114_spFrame-r1
00056165_144
Normalized Flux (-)
8900
9000
9100
Wavelength (Å)
8100
8150
8200
8250
8300
Wavelength (Å)
6400
6500
6600
6700
6800
Wavelength (Å)
8400
8500
8600
8700
Wavelength (Å)
104_3112_spFrame-r1
00056918_83
6000
7000
8000
9000
Wavelength (Å)
Normalized Flux (-)
input
pseudo-truth
reconstruction
input
pseudo-truth
reconstruction
input
pseudo-truth
reconstruction
Figure 12. Test results on a low-resolution data collection: SDSS. We show three random samples in the three rows. On the left, the whole spectrum is depicted,
while the other columns zoom in on various regions of interest along the wavelength axis , each of which containing mainly the dominant feature specified on
top of the column, indicated as grey regions in the left-most column. Even if stellar features are preserved even in bad signal-to-noise conditions, some of the
wider telluric lines are not fully rejected, due to the significantly low resolution as compared to HARPS. The spikes seen here are artefacts not captured by the
calibration profile, hence appearing in the pseudo-truth too.
known telluric lines or the distribution of molecules in the earth’s
atmosphere in case of molecfit and similar methods. Training our
model in practice, simply requires passing a large number of spectra
through the network – and it will do the rest. This has the potential
to reduce the complexity of telluric line fitting, as well as fill in the
gaps where the atmospheric and sight measurements may be missing
or inaccurate.
Stellar Karaoke is extremely fast. Training one network suffices for
an entire data collection, as well as any new spectrum to be added to
it in the future. Once trained, it processes each spectrum in a fraction
of a second, a noteworthy benefit considering the current processing
times are several minutes and tens of minutes for molecfit and
wobble respectively, while today’s data collections encompass hun-
dreds of thousands of spectra. To highlight the importance of this,
we ran Stellar Karaoke on all of the approximated 260K publicly
available HARPS data and made the results available to the public;
to the best of our knowledge this is an unprecedented step, likely due
to the previously required time and computational resources.
Nevertheless, the current version is still a demonstration of a novel
research product, showcasing the strengths of a fully unsupervised
approach. For Stellar Karaoke to evolve into a ready-to-use tool in
every application, additional refinements are needed. Notably, due
to the unsupervised nature of the research, the network has now
decided to reject the telluric component and reconstruct the stellar
one. This is of course a result of the statistical nature of the two
phenomena (more significance in stellar lines, etc.). But to make it a
more robust tool, less sensitive to the hyperparameters involved, one
can introduce a ‘hint’ to the training process to direct the network’s
attention towards the desired component – e.g. mutual information
between the decomposed components.
Another avenue for exploration is the case of outliers. Like any
other method, there are cases for which the method underperforms
– either completely, or to a noticeable extent. A slight degree of
supervision, such as the manual injection of rare samples to the
training set, can come to help in such a case.
