arXiv:1504.03425v1  [cs.HC]  14 Apr 2015
1
Automated Analysis and Prediction of Job
Interview Performance
Iftekhar Naim, Student Member, IEEE, M. Iftekhar Tanveer, Student Member, IEEE, Daniel Gildea
and Mohammed (Ehsan) Hoque, Member, IEEE
Abstract—We present a computational framework for automatically quantifying verbal and nonverbal behaviors in the context of
job interviews. The proposed framework is trained by analyzing the videos of 138 interview sessions with 69 internship-seeking
undergraduates at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Our automated analysis includes facial expressions (e.g., smiles,
head gestures, facial tracking points), language (e.g., word counts, topic modeling), and prosodic information (e.g., pitch, intonation,
and pauses) of the interviewees. The ground truth labels are derived by taking a weighted average over the ratings of 9 independent
judges. Our framework can automatically predict the ratings for interview traits such as excitement, friendliness, and engagement with
correlation coefﬁcients of 0.75 or higher, and can quantify the relative importance of prosody, language, and facial expressions. By
analyzing the relative feature weights learned by the regression models, our framework recommends to speak more ﬂuently, use less
ﬁller words, speak as “we” (vs. “I”), use more unique words, and smile more. We also ﬁnd that the students who were rated highly while
answering the ﬁrst interview question were also rated highly overall (i.e., ﬁrst impression matters). Finally, our MIT Interview dataset
will be made available to other researchers to further validate and expand our ﬁndings.
Index Terms—Nonverbal Behavior Prediction, Job Interviews, Multimodal Interactions, Regression.
✦
1
INTRODUCTION
Analysis of non-verbal behavior to predict the outcome
of a social interaction has been studied for many years
in different domains, with predictions ranging from
marriage stability based on interactions between new-
lywed couples [1], [2], to patient satisfaction based on
doctor-patient interaction [3], to teacher evaluation by
analyzing classroom interactions between a teacher and
the students [4]. However, many of these prediction
frameworks were based on manually labeled behavioral
patterns by trained coders, according to carefully de-
signed coding schemes. Manual labeling of nonverbal
behaviors is laborious and time consuming, and there-
fore often does not scale with large amounts of data.
As a scalable alternative, several automated prediction
frameworks have been proposed based on low-level
behavioral features, automatically extracted from larger
datasets. Due to the challenges of collecting and analyz-
ing multimodal data, most of these automated methods
focused on a single modality of interaction [5], [6], [7],
[8]. In this paper, we address the challenge of auto-
mated understanding of multimodal human interactions,
including facial expression, prosody, and language. We
focus on predicting social interactions in the context of
job interviews for college students, which is an exciting
and relatively less explored domain.
Job interviews are ubiquitous and play inevitable
and important roles in our life and career. Over many
years, social psychologists and career coaches have ac-
cumulated knowledge and guidelines for success in job
interviews [9], [10], [11]. Studies in social psychology
Audio-Visual
 Recording
of an Interview 
Prediction
 Framework
Automated Feature 
Extraction
Human Rating
Human Rating
Mechanical Turk 
Workers
Facial 
Expressions
Prosody
Lexical
Text
Fig. 1. Framework of Analysis. Mechanical Turk workers
rated interviewee performance by watching videos of job
interviews. Various features were extracted from those
videos. A framework was built to predict Turker’s rating
and to gain insight into the characteristics of a good
interview.
have shown that smiling, using a louder voice, and
maintaining eye contact contribute positively to our
interpersonal communications [9], [11]. These guidelines
are largely based on intuition, experience, and studies
involving manual encoding of nonverbal behaviors on
a limited amount of data [9]. Automated data-driven
quantiﬁcation of both verbal and non-verbal behaviors
simultaneously has not been explored in the context of
job interviews. In this paper, we aim to quantify the
determinants of a successful job interview using a com-

2
putational prediction framework based on automatically
extracted features, which takes both verbal speech and
non-verbal behaviors into account.
Imagine the following scenario in which two students,
John and Matt, were individually asked to discuss their
leadership skills in a job interview. John responded with
the following:
“One semester ago, I was part of a team of ten
students [stated in a loud and clear voice]. We
worked together to build an autonomous playing
robot. I led the team by showing how to program the
robot. The students did a wonderful job [conveyed
excitement with tone]! In ten weeks, we made the
robot play soccer. It was a lot of fun. [concluded
with a smile]”.
Matt responded with the following:
“Umm ... [paused for 2 seconds] Last semester I led
a group in a class project on robot programming.
It was a totally crazy experience. The students did
almost nothing until the last moment. ... Umm
... Basically, I had to intervene at that point and
led them to work hard. Eventually, this project
was completed successfully. [looked away from the
interviewer]”.
Who do you think received higher ratings?
Most would agree that the ﬁrst interviewee, John,
provided the more enthusiastic and engaging answer.
We can easily interpret the meaning of our verbal
and nonverbal behavior during face-to-face interactions.
However, we often cannot quantify how the combination
of these behaviors affects our interpersonal commu-
nications. Previous research [12] shows that the style
of speaking, prosody, facial expression, and language
reﬂect valuable information about one’s personality and
mental states. Understanding the relative inﬂuence of
these individual modalities can provide crucial insight
regarding job interviews.
In this paper, we attempt to answer the following
research questions by analyzing the audio-visual record-
ings of 138 interview sessions with 69 individuals:
• Can we automatically quantify verbal and nonver-
bal behavior, and assess their role in the overall
rating of job interviews?
• Can we build a computational framework that can
automatically predict the overall rating of a job
interview given the audio-visual recordings?
• Can we infer the relative importance of language,
facial expressions, and prosody (intonation)?
• Can we make automated recommendations on im-
proving social traits such as excitement, friendliness,
and engagement in the context of a job interview?
To answer these research questions, we designed and
implemented an automated prediction framework for
quantifying the ratings of job interviews, given the
audio-visual recordings. The proposed prediction frame-
work (Figure 1) automatically extracts a diverse set of
multimodal features (lexical, facial, and prosodic), and
quantiﬁes the overall interview performance, the likeli-
hood of getting hired, and 14 other social traits relevant
to the job interview process. Our system is capable of
predicting the overall rating of a job interview with a
correlation coefﬁcient r > 0.65 and AUC = 0.81 (baseline
0.50) on average. We can also predict different social
traits such as engagement, excitement, and friendliness
with even higher accuracy (r ≥0.75, AUC > 0.85).
Furthermore, we investigate the relative weights of the
individual verbal and non-verbal features learned by
our regression models, and quantify their relative im-
portance in the context of job interviews. Our prediction
model can be integrated with the existing automated
interview coaching systems, such as MACH [13], to
provide more intelligent and quantitative feedback. The
interview questions asked in our training dataset are
chosen to be independent of any job speciﬁcations or
skill requirements. Therefore, the ratings predicted by
our model are based on social and behavioral skills only,
and they may differ from a hiring manager’s opinion,
given a speciﬁc job.
Parts of the research included in this article have been
presented in [14]. In this article, we present an improved
system by including additional facial features and pro-
vide more comprehensive results and analysis. The re-
maining structure of the article follows. In Section 2, we
discuss the background research on automated quan-
tiﬁcation of multimodal nonverbal behaviors. Section 3
describes the interview dataset and the data annotation
process via Mechanical Turk. A detailed discussion of the
proposed computational framework, feature extraction,
and automated prediction is presented in Section 4. We
present our detailed results in Section 5. Finally, we
conclude with our ﬁndings and discuss our future work
in Section 6.
2
BACKGROUND RESEARCH
In this section, we discuss existing relevant work on non-
verbal behavior prediction using automatically extracted
features. We particularly focus on the social cues that
have been shown to be relevant to job interviews and
face-to-face interactions [9]. We also discuss previous
research on automated conversational systems for job
interviews, which is one of the potential applications we
envision for the proposed prediction framework.
2.1
Nonverbal Behavior Recognition
Nonverbal behaviors are subtle, ﬂeeting, subjective, and
sometimes even contradictory. Even a simple facial ex-
pression such as a smile can have different meanings,
e.g., delight, rapport, sarcasm, and even frustration [15].
Edward Sapir, in 1927, referred to non-verbal behavior
as “an elaborate and secret code that is written nowhere,
known by none, but understood by all” [16]. Despite
years of research, nonverbal behavior prediction remains
a challenging problem. Gottman et al. [1], [2] studied
verbal and non-verbal interactions between newlywed

3
couples and developed mathematical models to predict
marriage stability and chances of divorce. For exam-
ple, they found that the greatest predictor of divorce
is contempt, which must be avoided for a successful
marriage. Hall et al. [3] studied the non-verbal cues in
doctor-patient interaction and showed that doctors who
are more sensitive to nonverbal skills received higher
ratings of service during patient visits. Ambady et al. [4]
studied the interactions of teachers with students in
a classroom and proposed a framework for predicting
teachers’ evaluations based on short clips of interactions.
However, these prediction frameworks were based on
manually labeled behavioral patterns. Manually labeling
non-verbal behaviors is laborious and time consuming,
and is often not scalable to large amounts of data.
To allow for the analysis of larger datasets of social
interactions, several automated prediction frameworks
have been proposed. Due to the challenges of collecting
and analyzing multimodal data, most of the existing
automated prediction frameworks focus on a single be-
havioral modality, such as prosody [8], [17], [18], facial
expression [6], gesture [7], and word usage pattern [19].
Analysis based on a single modality is likely to overlook
many critical non-verbal behaviors, and hence there has
been a growing interest in analyzing social behaviors in
more than a single modality.
Ranganath et al. [20], [21] studied social interactions
in speed-dates using a combination of prosodic and lin-
guistic features. The analysis is based on the SpeedDate
corpus, a spoken corpus of approximately 1000 4-min-
speed-dates, where each participant rated his/her date in
terms of four different conversational styles (awkward-
ness, assertiveness, ﬂirtatiousness, and friendliness) on a
ten point Likert scale. Given the speech data, Ranganath
et al. proposed a computational framework for predict-
ing these four conversational styles using prosodic and
linguistic features only, while ignoring facial expressions.
Stark et al. [22] were able to reliably predict the nature
of a telephone conversation (business versus personal,
familiar versus unfamiliar) using the lexical and prosodic
features extracted from as few as 30 words of speech
at the beginning of the conversation. Kapoor et al. [12]
and Pianesi et al. [23] proposed systems to recognize
different social and personality traits by exploiting only
prosody and visual features. Sanchez et al. [24] proposed
a system for predicting eleven different social moods
(e.g., surprise, anger, happiness) from YouTube video
monologues, which consist of different social dynamics
than face to face interactions.
Perhaps the most relevant, Nguyen et al. [25] pro-
posed a computational framework to predict the hir-
ing decision using nonverbal behavioral cues extracted
from a dataset of 62 interview videos. Nguyen et al.
considered only nonverbal cues, and did not include
verbal content in their analysis. Our work extends the
current state-of-the-art and generates new knowledge
by incorporating three different modalities (prosody,
language, and facial expressions), and ﬁfteen different
social traits (e.g., friendliness, excitement, engagement),
and quantiﬁes the interplay and relative inﬂuences of
these different modalities for each of the different social
traits. Furthermore, by analyzing the relative feature
weights learned by our regression models, we obtain
valuable insights about behaviors that are recommended
for success in job interviews (Section 5.2.3).
2.2
Social Coaching for Job Interviews
Several automated systems have been proposed for
coaching the necessary social skills to succeed in job
interviews [13], [26], [27]. Hoque et al. [13] developed
MACH (My Automated Conversation coacH), which
allows users to improve social skills by interacting with
a virtual agent. The MACH system records videos of the
user using a webcam and a microphone, and provides
feedback regarding several low level behavioral patterns,
e.g., average smile intensity, pause duration, speaking
rate, pitch variation, etc.
Anderson et al. [26] proposed an interview coaching
system, TARDIS, which presents the training interac-
tions as a scenario-based “serious game”. The TARDIS
framework incorporates a sub-module named NovA
(NonVerbal behavior Analyzer) [27] that can recognize
several lower level social cues: hands-to-face, looking away,
postures, leaning forward/backward, gesticulation, voice activ-
ity, smiles, and laughter. Using videos that are manually
annotated with these ground truth social cues, NovA
trains a Bayesian Network that can infer higher-level
mental traits (e.g., stressed, focused, engaged, etc.). Au-
tomated prediction of higher-level traits remains part of
their future work.
Our framework (1) quantiﬁes the relative inﬂuences
of different low level features on the interview outcome,
(2) learns regression models to predict interview ratings
and the likelihood of hiring using automatically ex-
tracted features, and (3) predicts several other high-level
personality traits such as engagement, friendliness, and
excitement. One of our objectives is to extend the existing
automated conversation systems by providing feedback
on the overall interview performance and additional
high-level personality traits.
3
DATASET DESCRIPTION
We used the MIT Interview Dataset [13], which consists
of 138 audio-visual recordings of mock interviews with
internship-seeking students from Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT). The total duration of our interview
videos is nearly 10.5 hours (on average, 4.7 minutes
per interview, for 138 interview videos). To our knowl-
edge, this is the largest collection of interview videos
conducted by professional counselors under realistic set-
tings. The following sections provide a brief description
of the data collection and ground truth labeling.

4
Fig. 2. The experimental setup for collecting audio-visual
recordings of the mock interviews. Camera #1 recorded
the video and audio of the interviewee, while Camera #2
recorded the interviewer.
3.1
Data Collection
3.1.1
Study Setup
The
mock
interviews
were
conducted
in
a
room
equipped with a desk, two chairs, and two wall-mounted
cameras, as shown in Figure 2. The two cameras with
microphones were used to capture the facial expressions
and the audio conversations during the interview.
3.1.2
Participants
Initially, 90 MIT juniors participated in the mock in-
terviews. All participants were native English speakers.
The interviews were conducted by two professional MIT
career counselors who had over ﬁve years of experience.
For each participant, two rounds of mock interviews
were conducted: before and after interview interven-
tion. For the details of interview intervention, please
see [13]. Each individual received $50 for participating.
Furthermore, as an incentive for the participants, we
promised to forward the resume of the top 5% candi-
dates to several sponsor organizations (Deloitte, IDEO,
and Intuit) for consideration for summer internships. We
chose sponsor organizations which are not directly tied
to any speciﬁc major. After the data collection, 69 (26
male, 43 female) of the 90 initial participants permitted
the use of their video recordings for research purposes.
3.1.3
Procedure
During each interview session, the counselor asked in-
terviewees ﬁve different questions, which were recom-
mended by the MIT Career Services. These ﬁve questions
were presented in the following order by the counselors
to the participants:
Q1. So please tell me about yourself.
Q2. Tell me about a time when you demonstrated
leadership.
Q3. Tell me about a time when you were working
with a team and faced a challenge. How did you
overcome the problem?
Q4. What is one of your weaknesses and how do
TABLE 1
List of questions asked to Mechanical Turk workers. First
two questions are related to interviewee performances.
Others are on various traits of their behavior
Traits
Description
Overall Rating
The overall performance rating.
Recommend Hiring
How likely is he to be hired?
Engagement
Did he use engaging tone?
Excitement
Did he seem excited?
Eye Contact
Did he maintain proper eye contact?
Smile
Did he smile appropriately?
Friendliness
Did he seem friendly?
Speaking Rate
Did he maintain a good speaking rate?
No Fillers
Did he use too many ﬁller words?
(1 = too many, 7 = no ﬁller words)
Paused
Did he pause appropriately?
Authentic
Did he seem authentic?
Calm
Did he appear calm?
Focused
Did he seem focused?
Structured Answers
Were his answers structured?
Not Stressed
Was he stressed?
(1 = too stressed, 7 = not stressed)
Not Awkward
Did he seem awkward?
(1 = too awkward, 7 = not awkward)
you plan to overcome it?
Q5. Now, why do you think we should hire you?
No job description was given to the interviewees.
The ﬁve questions were chosen to assess the inter-
viewee’s behavioral and social skills. The interviewers
rated the performances of the interviewees by answering
16 assessment questions on a seven point Likert scale.
We list these questions in Table 1. These questions to
the interviewers were selected to evaluate the overall
performance and behavioral traits of the interviewees.
The ﬁrst two questions – “Overall Rating” and “Rec-
ommend Hiring” - represent the overall performance.
The remaining questions have been selected to eval-
uate several high-level behavioral dimensions such as
warmth (e.g., “friendliness”, “smiling”), presence (e.g.,
“engagement”, “excitement”, “focused”), competence
(e.g. speaking rate), and content (e.g., “structured”).
3.2
Data Labeling
The subjective nature of human judgment makes it
difﬁcult to collect ground truth for interview ratings.
Due to the nature of the experiment, the counselors
interacted with each interviewee twice - before and after
intervention, and provided feedback after each session.
The process of feedback and the way the interviewees
responded to the feedback may have had an inﬂuence
on the counselor’s ratings. In order to remove the bias
introduced by the interaction, we used Amazon Mechan-
ical Turk workers to rate the interview performance.
The Mechanical Turkers used the same questionnaire
to assess the ratings as listed in Table 1. Apart from
being less affected by bias, the Mechanical Turk workers

5
could pause and replay the video, allowing them to rate
more thoroughly. The Turkers’ ratings are more likely to
be similar to “audience” ratings, as opposed to “expert
ratings”.
In order to collect ground truth ratings for interviewee
performances, we ﬁrst selected 10 Turkers out of 25,
based on how well they agreed with the career coun-
selors on the ﬁve control videos. Out of these 10 selected
Turkers, one did not ﬁnish all the rating tasks, leaving
us with 9 ratings per video. We automatically estimated
the quality of individual workers using an EM-style op-
timization algorithm, and estimated a weighted average
of their scores as the ground truth ratings, which were
used in our prediction framework.
One of our objectives was to model the temporal rela-
tionships among the individual interview questions and
the overall ratings. To accomplish this, we performed a
second phase of labeling. We hired a different set of 5
Turkers for rating the performances of an interviewee
in each of the ﬁve interview question separately. This
was done by splitting each interview video into ﬁve
different segments, where each segment corresponds to
one of the interview questions. The video segments were
shufﬂed so that each Turker would rate the segments in
a random order. These per-question ratings were used
only to analyze the temporal variation in the ratings
and measure how the temporal order of the questions
correlates with the ratings for entire interview.
4
PREDICTION FRAMEWORK
For the prediction framework, we automatically ex-
tracted various features from the videos of the inter-
views. Then we trained two regression algorithms - SVM
and LASSO. The objective of this training is twofold:
ﬁrst, to predict the Turker’s ratings on the overall perfor-
mance and each behavioral trait, and second, to quantify
and gain meaningful insights on the relative importance
of each modality and the interplay among them.
4.1
Feature Extraction
We collected three types of features for each interview
video: (1) prosodic features, (2) lexical features, and
(3) facial features. We selected these features to reﬂect
the behaviors that have been shown to be relevant in
job interviews (e.g., smile, intonation, language con-
tent, etc.) [9], and also based on the past literature on
automated social behavior recognition [24], [20], [21],
[18]. For extracting reliable lexical features, we chose
not to use automated speech recognition. Instead, we
transcribed the videos by hiring Amazon Mechanical
Turk workers, who were speciﬁcally instructed to in-
clude ﬁller and disﬂuency words (e.g., “uh”, “umm”,
“like”) in the transcriptions. Our lexical features were
extracted from these transcripts. We also collected a wide
range of prosodic and facial features.
TABLE 2
List of prosodic features and their brief descriptions
Prosodic Feature
Description
Energy
Mean spectral energy.
F0 MEAN
Mean F0 frequency.
F0 MIN
Minimum F0 frequency.
F0 MAX
Maximum F0 frequency.
F0 Range
Difference between F0 MAX and F0 MIN.
F0 SD
Standard deviation of F0.
Intensity MEAN
Mean vocal intensity.
Intensity MIN
Minimum vocal intensity .
Intensity MAX
Maximum vocal intensity .
Intensity Range
Difference between max and
min intensity.
Intensity SD
Standard deviation.
F1, F2, F3 MEAN
Mean frequencies of the ﬁrst 3
formants: F1, F2, and F3.
F1, F2, F3 SD
Standard deviation of F1, F2, F3.
F1, F2, F3 BW
Average bandwidth of F1, F2, F3.
F2/F1 MEAN
Mean ratio of F2 and F1.
F3/F1 MEAN
Mean ratio of F3 and F1.
F2/F1 SD
Standard deviation of F2/F1.
F3/F1 SD
Standard deviation of F3/F1.
Jitter
Irregularities in F0 frequency.
Shimmer
Irregularities in intensity.
Duration
Total interview duration.
% Unvoiced
Percentage of unvoiced region.
% Breaks
Average percentage of breaks.
maxDurPause
Duration of the longest pause.
avgDurPause
Average pause duration.
4.1.1
Prosodic Features
Prosody reﬂects our speaking style, particularly the
rhythm and the intonation of speech. Prosodic features
have been shown to be effective for social intent model-
ing [8], [17], [18]. To distinguish between the speech of
the interviewer and the interviewee, we manually anno-
tated the beginning and end of each of the interviewee’s
answers. We extracted and analyzed prosodic features
of the interviewee’s speech. Each prosodic feature is
ﬁrst collected over an interval corresponding to a single
answer by the interviewee, and then averaged over all
her/his ﬁve answers. We used the open-source speech
analysis tool PRAAT [28] for prosody analysis.
The important prosodic features include pitch infor-
mation, vocal intensities, characteristics of the ﬁrst three
formants, and spectral energy, which have been reported
to reﬂect our social traits [17]. To reﬂect the vocal
pitch, we extracted the mean and standard deviation of
fundamental frequency F0 (F0 MEAN and F0 SD), the
minimum and maximum values (F0 MIN, F0 MAX), and
the total range (F0 MAX - F0 MIN). We extracted similar
features for voice intensity and the ﬁrst 3 formants. Ad-
ditionally, we collected several other prosodic features
such as pause duration, percentage of unvoiced frames,
jitter (irregularities in pitch), shimmer (irregularities in
vocal intensity), percentage of breaks in speech, etc.
Table 2 shows the complete list of prosodic features.

6
TABLE 3
LIWC Lexical features used in our system.
LIWC Category
Examples
I
I, I’m, I’ve, I’ll, I’d, etc.
We
we, we’ll, we’re, us, our, etc.
They
they, they’re, they’ll, them, etc.
Non-ﬂuencies
words introducing non-ﬂuency in
speech, e.g., uh, umm, well.
PosEmotion
words expressing positive emotions,
e.g., hope, improve, kind, love.
NegEmotion
words expressing negative emotions,
e.g., bad, fool, hate, lose.
Anxiety
nervous, obsessed, panic, shy, etc.
Anger
agitate, bother, confront, disgust, etc.
Sadness
fail, grief, hurt, inferior, etc.
Cognitive
cause, know, learn, make, notice, etc.
Inhibition
refrain, prohibit, prevent, stop, etc.
Perceptual
observe, experience, view, watch, etc.
Relativity
ﬁrst, huge, new, etc.
Work
project, study, thesis, university, etc.
Swear
Informal and swear words.
Articles
a, an, the, etc.
Verbs
common English verbs.
Adverbs
common English adverbs.
Prepositions
common prepositions.
Conjunctions
common conjunctions.
Negations
no, never, none, cannot, don’t, etc.
Quantiﬁers
all, best, bunch, few, ton, unique, etc.
Numbers
words related to number, e.g.,
ﬁrst, second, hundred, etc.
4.1.2
Lexical features
Lexical features can provide valuable information re-
garding the interview content and the interviewee’s per-
sonality. One of the most commonly used lexical features
is the unigram counts for each individual word. How-
ever, treating unigram counts as features often results
in sparse high-dimensional feature vectors, and suffers
from the “curse of dimensionality” problem, especially
for a limited sized corpus.
We address this challenge with two techniques. First,
instead of using raw unigram counts, we employed
counts of various psycholinguistic word categories de-
ﬁned by the tool “Linguistic Inquiry Word Count”
(LIWC) [29]. The LIWC categories include words de-
scribing negative emotions (sad, angry, etc.), positive
emotions (happy, kind, etc.), different function word cat-
egories (articles, quantiﬁers, pronouns, etc.), and various
content categories (e.g., anxiety, insight). We selected
23 such LIWC word categories, which is signiﬁcantly
smaller than the number of individual words. The LIWC
categories correlate with various psychological traits,
and often provide indications about our personality and
social skills [19]. Many of these categories are intuitively
related to interview performance. Table 3 shows the com-
plete list of the LIWC features used in our experiments.
Although the hand coded LIWC lexicon has proven
to be useful for modeling many different social be-
TABLE 4
Additional features related to speaking rate and ﬂuency.
feature Name
Description
wpsec
Words per second.
upsec
Unique words per second.
fpsec
Filler words per second.
wc
Total number of words.
uc
Total number of unique words.
haviors, the lexicon is predeﬁned and may not cover
many important aspects of job interviews. To address
this challenge, we aimed to automatically learn a lexicon
from the interview dataset. We apply the Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA) [30] method to automatically learn
common topics from our interview dataset. We set the
number of topics to 20. For each interview, we estimate
the relative weights of these learned topics, and use
these weights as lexical features. Similar ideas have been
exploited by Ranganath et al. [20], [21] for modeling
social traits in speed dating dataset, but they used deep
auto-encoders [31] instead of LDA.
Finally, we collected additional lexical features that
correlate to job interview ratings. These are features
related to our linguistic and speaking skills. Table 4
contains the full list. Similar speaking rate and ﬂuency
features were exploited by Zechner et al. [18] in the
context of automated scoring of non-native speech in
TOEFL practice tests.
4.1.3
Facial features
We extracted facial features for the interviewees from
each frame in the video. First, faces were detected us-
ing the Shore [32] framework. We trained a classiﬁer
to distinguish between neutral and smiling faces. The
classiﬁer is trained using the AdaBoost algorithm. The
classiﬁer output is normalized in the range [0,100], where
0 represents no smile, and 100 represents full smile. Fi-
nally, we averaged the smile intensities from individual
frames, and used this as a feature in our model. We
also extracted head gestures such as nods and shakes
as explained in [13].
In addition to the smile intensity and head ges-
tures (nod and shake), we also extracted a number of
other facial features using a Constrained Local Model
(CLM) [33] based face tracker1, as illustrated in Fig 3.
The face tracker detects 66 interest points on a face
image. It works by ﬁtting the following parametric shape
model [33][34]:
xi = sR(¯xi + Ψiq) + t,
(1)
where xi is the coordinate of ith interest point and
¯xi denotes its mean location pre-trained from a large
collection of hand-labeled training images. Ψi denotes
the bases of local variations for the ith interest point.
1. https://github.com/kylemcdonald/FaceTracker

7
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32 33 34 35 36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
Lip Corner Distance
OBH
OLH
ILH
IBH
Eye Open
Fig. 3.
Illustration of facial features: OBH (outer eye-
brow height), IBH (inner eye-brow height), OLH (outer lip
height), ILH (inner lip height), eye opening, and LipCDT
(lip corner distance).
Each element of the vector q represents a coefﬁcient cor-
responding to a basis of local variation. The parameters
s, R, and t corresponds to the global transformations
associated with scaling, rotation, and translation respec-
tively. The face tracker adjusts the model parameters
p = {s, R, q, t} so that each of the mean interest points
(¯xi) ﬁts best to its corresponding point (xi) on the test
face.
While extracting features from these tracked interest
points, we want to disregard the global transformations
(translation, rotation, and scaling), and consider only the
local transformations, which provide useful information
regarding our facial expressions. After the face tracker
converges to an optimal estimate of the parameters, we
recalculate each of the interest points xi by applying
the local transformations only, while disregarding the
global transformations (s, R, and t). Mathematically, we
calculate the following shape model from the optimal
parameters obtained from the face tracker:
ˆxi = (¯xi + Ψiq)
(2)
Once we ﬁnd ˆxi, we calculate the distances between
the corresponding interest points to ﬁnd out the fea-
tures OBH (outer eye-brow height), IBH (inner eye-
brow height), OLH (outer lip height), and ILH (inner lip
height), eye opening, and LipCDT (lip corner distance),
as illustrated in Figure 3. By disregarding the global
transformation parameters, the extracted facial features
are invariant to global translations, rotations, and scaling
variations. In addition to the features shown in Figure 3,
we separately incorporated three head pose features
(Pitch, Yaw and Roll), based on the corresponding el-
ements of the rotation matrix R.
4.1.4
Feature Normalization
We concatenate the three types of features described
above and obtain one combined feature vector. To re-
move any possible bias related to the range of values
associated with a feature, we normalized each feature to
have zero mean and unit variance, which allows treating
all the features uniformly.
4.2
Ground Truth Ratings and Turker Quality Estima-
tion
We aim to automatically estimate the reliability of each
Turker, and the ground truth ratings based on the Turk-
ers’ ratings. We adapt a simpliﬁed version of the existing
latent variable models [35] that treat each Turker’s reli-
ability and ground truth ratings as latent parameters,
estimate their values using an EM-style iterative opti-
mization technique.
Let us assume an input
training
dataset D
=
{xi, yi}N
i=1 containing N feature vectors xi (one for
each interview video), for which the ground truth label
yi is not known. Instead we acquire subjective labels
{y1
i , . . . , yK
i } from K Turkers on seven point Likert scale,
i.e., yj
i ∈{1, 2, . . ., 7}. Given this dataset D, our goal is
to learn the true rating (yi) and the reliability of each
worker (λj).
To simplify the estimation problem, we assume the
Turkers’ ratings to be real numbers, i.e., yj
i ∈R. We also
assume that each Turker’s rating is a noisy version of
the true rating yi ∈R, perturbed via additive Gaussian
noise. Therefore, the probability distribution for the yj
i :
Pr[yj
i |yi, λj] = N(yj
i |yi, 1/λj)
(3)
where λj is the unknown inverse-variance and the mea-
sure of reliability for the jth Turker. By taking logarithm
on both side and ignoring constant terms, we get the
log-likelihood function:
L =
N
X
i=1
K
X
j=1
1
2 log λj −λj
2 (yj
i −yi)2

(4)
The log-likelihood function is non-convex in yi and
λj variables. However, if we ﬁx yi, the log-likelihood
function becomes convex with respect to λj, and vice-
versa. Assuming λj ﬁxed, and setting ∂L
∂yi = 0, we obtain
the update rule:
yi =
PK
j=1 λjyj
i
PK
j=1 λj
(5)
Similarly, assuming yi ﬁxed, and setting
∂L
∂λj = 0, we
obtain the update rule:
λj =
PN
i=1(yj
i −yi)2
N
(6)
We alternately apply the two update rules for yi and
λj for i = 1, . . . , N and j = 1, . . . , K until convergence.
After convergence, the estimated yi values are treated as
ground truth ratings and used for training our prediction
models.

8
4.3
Score Prediction from Extracted Features
Using the features described in the previous section, we
train regression models to predict the interview scores.
We also train models to predict other interview-speciﬁc
traits such as excitement, friendliness, engagement, awk-
wardness, etc. We experimented with many different
regression models: Support Vector Machine Regression
(SVR) [36], Lasso [37], L1 Regularized Logistic Regres-
sion, Gaussian Process Regression, etc. We will only
discuss SVR and Lasso, which achieved the best results
with our dataset.
4.3.1
Support Vector Regression (SVR)
The Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a widely used
supervised learning method. In this paper, we focus
on the SVMs for regression, in order to predict the
performance ratings from interview features. Suppose
we are given a training data {(x1, y1), . . . , (xN, yN))},
where xi ∈Rd is a d-dimensional feature vector for the
ith interview in the training set. For each feature vector
xi, we have an associated value yi ∈R+ denoting the
interview rating. Our goal is to learn the optimal weight
vector w ∈Rd and a scalar bias term b ∈R such that the
predicted value for the feature vector x is: ˆy = wT x + b.
We minimize the following objective function:
minimize
w,ξi,ˆξi,b
1
2∥w∥2 + C
N
X
i=1
(ξi + ˆξi)
subject to
yi −wT xi −b ≤ǫ + ξi, ∀i
wT xi + b −yi ≤ǫ + ˆξi, ∀i
ξi, ˆξi ≥0, ∀i
(7)
The ǫ ≥0 is the precision parameter specifying the
amount of deviation from the true value that is allowed,
and (ξi, ˆξi) are the slack variables to allow deviations
larger than ǫ. The tunable parameter C > 0 controls
the tradeoff between goodness of ﬁt and generalization
to new data. The convex optimization problem is often
solved by maximizing the corresponding dual problem.
In order to analyze the relative weights of different
features, we transform it back to the primal problem
and obtain the optimal weight vector w∗and bias term
b∗. The relative importance of the jth feature can be
interpreted by the associated weight magnitude |w∗
j |.
4.3.2
Lasso
The Lasso regression method aims to minimize the resid-
ual prediction error in the presence of an L1 regulariza-
tion function. Using the same notation as the previous
section, let the training data be {(x1, y1), . . . , (xN, yN))}.
Let our linear predictor be of the form: ˆy = wT x + b.
The Lasso method estimates the optimal w and b by
minimizing the following objective function:
minimize
w,b
N
X
i=1
 yi −wT xi −b
2
subject to
∥w∥1 ≤λ
(8)
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
SpeakingRate
Paused
Authentic
NotStressed
Focused
Calm
StructuredAnswers
NotAwkward
EyeContact
Overall
RecommendHiring
NoFillers
Smiled
Friendly
Excited
Engagement
Average
 Correlation
Krippendorﬀ
 Alpha
0.61
0.55
0.54
0.53
0.51
0.49
0.49
0.46
0.44
0.37
0.33
0.31
0.30
0.23
0.15
0.07
0.36
0.29
0.24
0.20
0.24
0.21
0.19
0.14
0.13
0.07
0.05
0.08
0.03
0.08
0.00
-0.40
Fig. 4.
The inter-rater agreement among the turkers,
measured by the Krippendorff’s Alpha (varies in the range
[−1, 1]) and the average one-vs-rest correlation of their
ratings (range [−1, 1]).
where λ > 0 is the regularization constant, and ∥w∥1 =
Pd
j=1 |wj| is the L1 norm of w. The L1 regularization is
known to push the coefﬁcients of the irrelevant features
down to zero, thus reducing the predictor variance. We
control the amount of sparsity in the weight vector w by
tuning the regularization constant λ.
5
RESULTS
We organize our results in two sections. First, we analyze
the ratings by Mechanical Turk workers (Section 5.1).
The quality and reliability of Turkers’ ratings are as-
sessed by observing how well the Turkers agree with
each other (Section 5.1.1). In addition, we identify which
traits are important to succeed in job interviews by
measuring the correlations of the ratings for individual
traits with the overall ratings (Section 5.1.2). Further-
more, we examine the correlations between the ratings
for individual video segments with that for the entire
videos. This allowed us to evaluate the temporal patterns
in job interviews (Section 5.1.3).
In Section 5.2, we present the prediction accuracies for
the trained regression models (SVR and Lasso) based
on automatically extracted features, and analyze the
relative inﬂuence of different modalities and features on
prediction accuracy.
5.1
Analysis of Mechanical Turk Dataset
5.1.1
Inter-Rater Agreement
To assess the quality of the ratings, we calculate Krip-
pendorff’s Alpha [38] for each trait. In this case, Krip-

9
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Not Awkward
Focused
Reco. Hiring
Engagement
Excited
Smiled
Friendly
Structured
Eye Contact
Authentic
Stressed
Fillers
Calm
Speaking Rate
Paused
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Correlation
Mutual Information (bits)
0.40
0.39
0.38
0.36
0.34
0.28
0.24
0.23
0.16
0.21
0.16
0.13
0.05
0.08
0.65
0.73
0.94
0.69
0.64
0.51
0.51
0.49
0.49
0.44
0.41
0.36
0.32
0.15
0.14
0.92
Fig. 5. Correlation and Mutual information between over-
all rating and ratings on other traits.
pendorff’s Alpha is more meaningful than the frequently
used Fleiss’ Kappa [39], as the ratings are ordinal values
(on a 7-point Likert scale). The value of Krippendorff’s
Alpha can be any real number in the range [−1, 1], with
1 being the perfect agreement and -1 being absolute
disagreement among the raters. We also estimate the
correlation of each Turker’s rating with the mean rating
by the other Turkers for each trait. Figure 4 shows that
some traits have relatively good inter-rater agreement
among the Turkers (e.g., “engagement”, “excitement”,
“friendliness”). Some other traits such as: “stress”, “au-
thenticity”, “speaking rate”, and “pauses” have low
inter-rater agreement. This may be because the Turkers
were not in a position to judge those categories with the
video data only.
5.1.2
Correlation among the Behavioral Traits
We are interested in identifying the traits that correlate
highly with overall ratings. This knowledge can help
interviewees understand the most important behavioral
traits in job interviews. We plot the mutual information
and correlation between various ratings given by the
Mechanical Turk workers and the overall rating of the
interviewee performance in Figure 5.
The ﬁrst bar in Figure 5 represents whether the rater
will recommend hiring the interviewee. It is another
form of the overall rating and shows high correlation
and mutual information with the overall rating. It is
evident from the plot that the most important trait in
an interview is to stay focused. This trait shows a 73%
correlation with the overall rating. Some other top traits
include possessing an engaging tone, not appearing
awkward, being excited, and displaying an appropriate
smile. The mutual information and correlation coefﬁcient
closely follow the patterns. This plot gives us an insight
into what constitutes a good interview.
5.1.3
First (and Last) Impression Matters
We would like to understand how the performance in
different interview questions during an interview affects
the overall rating. To understand this temporal relation-
ship, we calculated the correlation and mutual informa-
tion between the ratings for each individual interview
question and the ratings for the entire videos. In Figure
6, we plot this relationship. It is evident from Figure 6(a)
that performance on the ﬁrst question correlates most
with the overall performance. After the ﬁrst question,
the correlation gradually decays. We can interpret this
result as follows: If an interviewee performs well for
the ﬁrst question, it is more likely that he/she will end
up receiving an above average rating. It is true in the
opposite case as well; if an interviewee performs poorly
in the ﬁrst question, he/she is more likely to receive a
poor overall rating. This ﬁnding is also supported by
existing evidence from psychological point of view [40],
[5].
A similar pattern of ﬁrst impression matters holds for
ratings on various other traits of the interviewee’s be-
havior, such as whether he/she was excited, smiled,
maintained eye contact, talked in engaging tone, or even
appeared friendly. Figure 6(b) illustrates this. We notice
from this ﬁgure that there is a sudden spike in correlation
for the last question. This indicates the fact that, although
the ﬁrst question matters the most, the interviewee can
signiﬁcantly change the interviewer’s perception during
the response to the ﬁnal question.
Figure 6(c) shows some traits (e.g., pause, calmness,
stress) do not follow the pattern discussed above. How-
ever, they have very low correlation values to begin with.
We believe it is difﬁcult for Mechanical Turk workers to
accurately judge these traits as these judgments demand
considerable concentration.
We need to be cautious while interpreting this result.
Although the ratings for the ﬁrst question had maximum
correlation with the overall ratings for the entire inter-
view, we can not say whether it is due to the temporal or-
der or the verbal content of the question itself. However,
we would like to emphasize that our mock interviews
start with a question about interviewee’s background,
which is consistent with many real-world job interviews.
5.2
Prediction using Automated Features
5.2.1
Prediction Accuracy using Trained Models
Given the feature vectors associated with each interview
video, we would like to provide feedback to users about
their overall performance in the interview, the likelihood
of getting an offer, and insights into other personality
traits that are relevant for job interviews. We train re-
gression models for predicting ratings for a total of 16
traits or rating categories (as shown in Table 1).
The entire dataset has a total of 138 interview videos
(for the 69 participants, 2 interviews for each partici-
pant). We used 80% of the videos for training, and the

10
1
2
3
4
5
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Interview Questions
Mutual Information (in bits) 
and Correlation
Mutual Info 
Correlation 
(a) Correlation and Mutual Information for
overall performance
1
2
3
4
5
Interview Questions
Correlation Coeﬃcient 
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
Eye Contact
Excitedness
Engaging Tone
Friendliness
Smile
(b) Traits following patterns similar to the
overall performance
0.2
0.3
0.41
2
3
4
5
-
-
-
0.1
-
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Segments of Video
Correlation Coeﬃcient 
Paused
Structured
Calm
Stressed
Focused
(c) Traits not following patterns
Fig. 6. Correlation between ratings of different segments and the rating on the whole interview.
remaining 20% for testing. To avoid any artifacts related
to how we split the data, we performed 1000 random
trials. In each trial, we randomly select 80% videos for
training, and use the rest for testing. We report our
results averaged over these 1000 independent trials. In
each trial, we trained 16 different regression models for
all 16 traits. For each of the traits, we used exactly the
same set of features. The model automatically learned
the weights for individual features for each trait.
We measure prediction accuracy by the correlation
coefﬁcients between the true ratings and predicted rat-
ings in the test set. Figure 7 displays the correlation
coefﬁcients for different traits, both with SVM and Lasso.
The traits are shown in the order of their correlation
coefﬁcients. We observe that we can predict several
traits with 0.75 or higher correlation coefﬁcients: en-
gagement, excitement, and friendliness. Furthermore, we
performed well in predicting overall performance and
hiring recommendation scores (r 0.70 for SVM), which
are the two most important scores for interview decision.
We also evaluate the learned regression models for a
two-class classiﬁcation task. For each trait, we split the
interviews into two groups by the median value for that
trait. Any interview with a score higher than the median
value for a particular trait is considered to be in the
positive class (for that trait), and the rest are placed in
the negative class. We then vary the threshold on the
predicted scores by our regression models in the range
[1, 7], and estimate the area under the Receiver Operator
Curve (ROC). The baseline area under the curve (AUC)
value is 0.50, as we split the classes by the median value.
The AUC values for the learned models are presented in
Table 5. Again, we observe high accuracies for engage-
ment, excitement, friendliness, hiring recommendation,
and the overall score (AUC > 0.80 for SVM).
When we examine the traits with lower prediction
accuracy, we observe: (1) either we have low interrater
agreement for these traits, which indicates unreliable
ground truth data (e.g., calm, stressed, structured an-
swer, pause, etc.), or (2) we lack key features necessary
to predict these traits (e.g., eye contact). In the absence of
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Not Stressed
Calm
Eye Contact
Speaking Rate
Authentic
Focused
No Fillers
Paused
Not Awkward
Structured Answers
Overall
Smiled
Recommend Hiring
Friendly
Engagement
Excited
0.80
0.77
0.75
0.70
0.70
0.69
0.66
0.60
0.57
0.56
0.54
0.53
0.44
0.36
0.33
0.30
0.77
0.77
0.74
0.67
0.71
0.65
0.65
0.53
0.61
0.67
0.49
0.41
0.44
0.31
0.40
0.25
Correlation
Correlation
LASSO
SVR
Fig. 7. Regression coefﬁcients using two different meth-
ods: Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Lasso.
eye tracking information (which is very difﬁcult to ob-
tain automatically), we do not have enough informative
features to predict eye contact.
5.2.2
Feature Analysis
The relative weights of individual features in our regres-
sion model can provide valuable insights on essential
constituents of a job interview. To analyze this, we
observed the features with highest weights for the SVM
and the Lasso model. We considered ﬁve traits with
high accuracy: overall score, recommend hiring, excite-
ment, engagement, and friendliness. We considered the
top twenty features in the order of descending weight
magnitude, and estimate the summation of the weight
magnitudes of the features in each of the three categories:
prosodic, lexical, and facial features. The relative pro-
portion of prosodic, lexical and facial features are illus-
trated in Figure 8(a), which shows that both SVM and
Lasso assign higher weights to prosodic features while
predicting engagement and excitement. This indicates

11
Prosodic
Lexical
Facial
SVR
LASSO
Overall Recommend
Hiring
Engagement Excitement Friendly
(a) Relative proportion of the top twenty prosodic, lexical and facial (smile) features as learned by SVM and LASSO
classiﬁers. The weights semantically match our perceptions on the traits
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
F+P+L
P+L
F+L
F+P
L
P
F
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
F+P+L
P+L
F+L
F+P
L
P
F
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
F+P+L
P+L
F+L
F+P
L
P
F
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
F+P+L
P+L
F+L
F+P
L
P
F
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
F+P+L
P+L
F+L
F+P
L
P
F
Overall Rating
Hiring Recommendation
Excitement
Engagement
Friendliness
Correlation Coeﬀ SVM
(b) Correlation Coefﬁcients for SVM, for different combinations of facial (F), prosodic (P), and lexical (L) features
Fig. 8. Analysis of relative importance of facial, prosodic, and lexical features.
TABLE 5
The average area under the ROC curve.
Trait
SVM
Lasso
Excited
0.904
0.885
Engagement
0.858
0.850
Smiled
0.845
0.845
Friendly
0.824
0.793
Recommend Hiring
0.815
0.796
Structured Answers
0.812
0.799
Not Awkward
0.808
0.787
Overall
0.805
0.777
No Fillers
0.803
0.855
Focused
0.791
0.677
Paused
0.749
0.749
Authentic
0.688
0.642
Eye Contact
0.676
0.622
Calm
0.651
0.669
Speaking Rate
0.608
0.546
Not Stressed
0.604
0.572
that engagement and excitement are expressed through
prosodic features, which agrees with our intuition. For
both models, the relative weights of features for pre-
dicting the “overall rating” and “recommend hiring” are
similar, which is expected, as these two traits are highly
correlated (Figure 5). Since we had smaller number of
facial features, the relative weights for facial features is
much lower. However, facial features, particularly the
smile, were found signiﬁcant for predicting friendliness.
This result provides a solid ground for claiming that
smile is very important in order to appear friendly.
Figure 8(b) shows the importance of using multimodal
features for predicting social traits in job interviews. In
most cases, the best correlation coefﬁcient was obtained
when we incorporated all three modalities. Although
lexical features were critical for predicting overall ratings
and likelihood of getting hired, they were not strong
predictors of excitement, engagement, and friendliness.
Prosodic features played important role for predicting all
the ﬁve traits, indicating that our speaking style plays a
critical role in job interviews.
5.2.3
Recommendation from our Framework
To better understand the recommended behavior in job
interviews, we analyze the feature weights in our re-
gression model. The weights with positive signs and
higher magnitudes can potentially indicate elements of
a successful job interview. The negative weights, on the
other hand, indicates behaviors we should avoid.
We sort the features by the magnitude of their weights
and list the top twenty features (excluding the topic
features) in Table 6. We see from this table that people
having higher speaking rate (higher words per second
(wpsec), total number of words (wc), and total num-
ber of unique words (uc), etc.) are perceived as better
candidates in a job interview. People who speak more
ﬂuently and use less ﬁller words (lower number of
ﬁller words per second (fpsec), total number of ﬁller
words (Fillers), total number non-ﬂuency words (Non-
ﬂuencies), less unvoiced region in speech (%Unvoiced),

12
and fewer breaks in speech (%Breaks)) are perceived as
better candidates. We also ﬁnd that higher interview
score correlates with higher usage of words in LIWC
category They (e.g. they, they’ll, them, etc.) and lower
usage of words related to I. The overall interview per-
formance and likelihood of hiring correlate positively
with proportion of positive words, and negatively with
proportions of negative words, which agrees with our
experience. Individuals who smiled more performed
better in job interviews. Finally, those speaking with a
higher proportion of quantiﬁers (e.g., best, every, all,
few), perceptual words (e.g. see, observe, know), and
other functional word classes (articles, prepositions, con-
junctions) obtained higher scores in interview. As we
saw earlier, features related to prosody and speaking
style are more important to appear excited and engaged.
Particularly the amplitude, variations in the voice inten-
sity, and the ﬁrst 3 formants had high positive weights
in our prediction model. Finally, besides smiling, people
who spoke more words related to “We” than “I” were
perceived as friendlier.
6
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
We present an automated prediction framework for
quantifying social skills for job interviews. The proposed
model shows encouraging results and predicts human
interview ratings with correlation r > 0.65 and AUC
∼0.80 (compared to the baseline AUC = 0.50). Several
traits such as engagement, excitement, and friendliness
were predicted with even higher accuracy (r ∼0.75,
AUC > 0.85). One of our immediate next steps will be to
integrate the proposed prediction module with existing
automated conversational systems such as MACH to
allow valuable real-time feedback to the users.
To our knowledge, the interview dataset used in our
experiments is the largest collection of job interview
videos, collected under reasonably realistic settings. The
interviews are conducted by professional career coun-
selors. We included the questions that would be relevant
in most real-world job interviews. Despite efforts to
record interviews in realistic settings, we do need to
acknowledge several caveats and trade-offs.
All the participants in our dataset were MIT under-
graduates, all of junior status, which may introduce a
selection bias in our data. In future, we plan to conduct
a more comprehensive study over a more general and
diverse population group. We deliberately chose not to
specify a job description to encourage larger number of
student participants. At the time of the study, there were
nearly 1000 junior students present at MIT, and nearly
30% were international students. Out of the remaining
700 native English speaking juniors, we were able to
recruit 90, which would have been difﬁcult if we had
limited our study to a speciﬁc job description. However,
in the absence of a speciﬁc job description, the ground
truth ratings may not necessarily correspond to actual
hiring decisions, and may show a stronger bias towards
non-verbal cues, as there is no speciﬁc skill requirements.
Furthermore, our mock interviews may lack the stress
present in a real job interviews. Although we promised
to forward the resumes of the top 5% candidates to
several sponsor organizations, the incentive was not as
strong as an actual job offer. In the future, we would like
to conduct more controlled experiments with a speciﬁc
job description and with stronger incentives to induce
stress and competition.
We aimed to rate each video with multiple indepen-
dent judges to avoid personal bias. As a ﬁrst step, we
recruited Turkers as this was scalable, quick, and less
expensive. To ensure reliable ground truth ratings, each
video was rated using 9 Mechanical Turk workers, and
aggregated using the EM algorithm taking the reliability
of each worker into account. However, Turkers’ ratings
may not correspond to professional experts. In future,
we plan to collect ratings from a panel of experts, and
re-validate the results.
Interestingly, while training regression models using
SVR, we obtained better prediction accuracy using the
linear kernel, compared to other non-linear kernels (e.g.,
quadratic, cubic, or Gaussian kernels). This may indicate
that our features do not exhibit complicated non-linear
interactions. However, the features used in the current
models were mostly aggregated features, averaged over
the entire duration of the video (e.g., average pitch,
average smile intensity). It is plausible that our smile
and intonation while uttering a speciﬁc word can be
a determinant of the ﬁnal interview decision. The cur-
rent aggregated features are incapable of modeling such
temporal interactions. Modeling ﬁne-grained temporal
features across multiple modalities is left as our future
work.
The outcome of job interviews often depends on a
subtle understanding of the interviewee’s response. In
our dataset, we noticed interviews in which a momen-
tary mistake (e.g., the use of a swear word) ruined the
interview outcome. Due to the rare occurrences of such
events, it is difﬁcult to model these phenomena, and
perhaps anomaly detection techniques could be more
effective instead. Extending our prediction framework
for quantifying these diverse and complex cues in job
interviews can provide valuable insight and understand-
ing regarding job interviews and human behavior in
general.
Caveats aside, the results presented in this article show
the importance of including multiple modalities while
analyzing our social interactions. The analysis of the fea-
ture weights learned by our prediction models provides
quantitative insights to the determinants of successful
job interviews. With the knowledge presented in this
article, we could train a system to help underprivileged
youth receive feedback on job interviews that require a
signiﬁcant amount of social skills. The framework could
also be expanded to help people with social difﬁculties,
train customer service professionals, or even help med-
ical professionals with telemedicine.

13
TABLE 6
Feature Analysis using the SVM model. We are listing the top twenty features ordered by their weight magnitude. We
have excluded the topic features for the ease of interpretation.
Overall
RecommendHiring
Excited
EngagingTone
Friendly
avgBand1
-0.111
wpsec
0.138
avgBand1
-0.152
intensityMax
0.175
smile
0.239
wpsec
0.104
avgBand1
-0.134
diffIntMaxMin
0.134
avgBand1
-0.168
mean pitch
0.156
Fillers
-0.085
Fillers
-0.126
wpsec
0.13
diffIntMaxMin
0.155
f3STD
-0.11
Quantiﬁers
0.084
percentUnvoiced
-0.116
intensityMax
0.125
intensityMean
0.144
LipCDT
0.1
avgDurPause
-0.081
smile
0.101
nod
0.121
wpsec
0.132
intensityMax
0.098
smile
0.079
PercentBreaks
-0.094
mean pitch
0.118
avgBand2
-0.112
diffIntMaxMin
0.095
upsec
0.078
upsec
0.088
smile
0.117
f1STD
-0.107
intensityMean
0.087
percentUnvoiced
-0.076
avgDurPause
-0.088
f3STD
-0.11
f2STDf1
0.101
f1STD
-0.086
f3meanf1
0.075
intensityMean
0.085
intensityMean
0.11
Quantiﬁers
0.092
wpsec
0.085
Relativity
0.074
nod
0.085
f1STD
-0.108
intensitySD
0.092
Adverbs
0.081
Positive emotion
-0.073
f1STD
-0.08
percentUnvoiced
-0.107
f3meanf1
0.091
I
-0.08
nod
0.069
Prepositions
0.078
PercentBreaks
-0.099
f3STD
-0.085
shimmer
-0.077
PercentBreaks
-0.067
Positive emotion
-0.077
intensitySD
0.092
smile
0.085
fmean3
0.077
maxDurPause
-0.066
f3meanf1
0.077
f2STDf1
0.092
Cognitive
0.083
percentUnvoiced
-0.073
f1STD
-0.065
Quantiﬁers
0.075
wc
0.089
upsec
0.083
PercentBreaks
-0.071
Prepositions
0.063
wc
0.074
Adverbs
0.081
percentUnvoiced
-0.079
max pitch
0.071
intensityMean
0.061
max pitch
0.07
f3meanf1
0.081
PercentBreaks
-0.075
avgBand1
-0.07
f2STDf1
0.06
uc
0.07
Cognitive
0.08
max pitch
0.074
nod
0.07
uc
0.059
Articles
0.069
f2meanf1
0.078
f2meanf1
0.07
Sadness
0.069
f2meanf1
0.058
maxDurPause
-0.069
avgBand2
-0.074
Adverbs
0.069
Cognitive
0.064
