1
Deep Learning for Fast and Reliable Initial Access
in AI-Driven 6G mmWave Networks
Tarun S. Cousik, Vijay K. Shah, Tugba Erpek, Yalin E. Sagduyu, and Jeffrey H. Reed
Abstract—We present DeepIA, a deep neural network (DNN)
framework for enabling fast and reliable initial access for AI-
driven beyond 5G and 6G millimeter (mmWave) networks.
DeepIA reduces the beam sweep time compared to a conventional
exhaustive search-based IA process by utilizing only a subset
of the available beams. DeepIA maps received signal strengths
(RSSs) obtained from a subset of beams to the beam that is
best oriented to the receiver. In both line of sight (LoS) and
non-line of sight (NLoS) conditions, DeepIA reduces the IA time
and outperforms the conventional IA’s beam prediction accuracy.
We show that the beam prediction accuracy of DeepIA saturates
with the number of beams used for IA and depends on the
particular selection of the beams. In LoS conditions, the selection
of the beams is consequential and improves the accuracy by
up to 70%. In NLoS situations, it improves accuracy by up to
35%. We ﬁnd that, averaging multiple RSS snapshots further
reduces the number of beams needed and achieves more than
95% accuracy in both LoS and NLoS conditions. Finally, we
evaluate the beam prediction time of DeepIA through embedded
hardware implementation and show the improvement over the
conventional beam sweeping.
Index Terms—Beyond 5G, 6G, machine learning, deep learn-
ing, mmWave, initial access, beam sweeping, feature selection
I. INTRODUCTION
A shift to millimeter wave (mmWave) frequencies has been
proposed to satisfy the ever increasing bandwidth requirements
of wireless communication systems. This shift has forced the
adoption of highly directional antennas and/or arrays (HDAs)
to combat the path loss associated with these high frequencies.
Initial access (IA) in mmWave systems serves the purpose of
orienting the HDAs of two or more radio devices (which are
unaware of their relative positions) to point at one another to
establish the initial connection [1]–[4]. IA is a key component
in 5G and beyond systems to establish the initial connection
of a mobile user and the cellular network.
The adoption of HDAs introduces an alignment window
challenge in IA for 5G systems which are currently being
deployed and for anticipated 6G systems. This challenge is
further exacerbated due to the potential operation at high
frequencies such as mmWave bands. Beam alignment becomes
more difﬁcult when narrower beams are used at higher fre-

Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA. Tugba Erpek and Yalin E. Sagduyu are with

This effort was supported by the U.S. Army Research Ofﬁce under contract
W911NF-20-P0035. The content of the information does not necessarily
reﬂect the position or the policy of the U.S. Government, and no ofﬁcial
endorsement should be inferred.
quencies and needs to be repeated more frequently due to
potential blockage effects that may otherwise result in loss of
beam alignment. IA is an expensive process in terms of delay,
transmit power and computational costs involved, and if not
properly orchestrated, the communications system may fail to
achieve high data rates.
5G NR allocates up to a maximum of 64 synchronization
signal blocks (SSBs) for each beam sweep in the mmWave
bands. These SSBs contain the relevant information required to
establish synchronization between devices. The time allocated
to sweep 64 beams is 5 ms and the beam sweeping process
occurs periodically every 5-20 ms [5], [6]. Each SSB is
typically mapped onto a unique beam (sector) in the spatial
domain. Consequently, this ﬁxes the number of beams that we
need to evaluate before choosing an optimal beam. However,
the coherence time (over which the channel remains constant)
experienced by mobile platforms is much smaller than 20 ms.
Therefore, novel methods are needed to decrease the time it
takes for the IA and improve the connection time to start
communications in 5G and beyond.
The IA time consists of two components, (i) time for
beam sweeping where the received signal strengths (RSSs)
for different beams are measured, and (ii) time for beam
prediction where the beam for a given transmitter-receiver pair
to communicate with is identiﬁed. The beam sweeping time
dominates the overall IA time, and therefore it is essential
to improve the IA time by utilizing fewer beams. Transmit
power consumption also decreases by utilizing fewer beams in
IA. However, conventional beam sweeping (CBS) approaches
sweep all beams in general. If they are extended to select the
best beam based on RSSs from a reduced subset of beams, this
selection may not be necessarily accurate since CBS cannot
predict the correct beams for users located in beams that
are not present in the subset that is swept. Hence, the CBS
approach cannot realize the advantages that arise from using
a subset of beams. In this work, exhaustive beam search is
referred to as CBS. In general, the mapping from the RSSs
measured for a subset of beams to the best beam is a complex
process due to various channel, antenna, and network topology
effects. This limitation motivates us to understand if and how a
data-driven approach could be leveraged to predict best beams
that include ones that are not part of the beam sweeping
process.
Machine learning provides automated means to learn from
spectrum data and perform complex tasks such as spectrum
sensing [7], signal classiﬁcation [8], anti-jamming [9], and
waveform design [10]. Supported by recent advances in algo-
rithmic techniques and computational resources, deep learning
arXiv:2101.01847v1  [cs.NI]  6 Jan 2021

2
has emerged as a viable solution to capture high-dimensional
representations of spectrum data [11]. The ‘mappable’ nature
of input RSS to beams is particularly well suited for a deep
neural network (DNN)-based approach. In this paper, we
present DeepIA, a deep learning-based solution for IA that
reduces the beam sweep time by utilizing measured RSSs
from a subset of all available beams and maps them to the
best oriented beam in the entire set of beams.
The DNN trained in DeepIA learns to associate the cor-
rect/best oriented beam between the transmitter and receiver
with the RSS measured by the receiver. Hyperparameters of
the DNN are carefully selected to avoid both underﬁtting
and overﬁtting. For both line-of-sight (LoS) and non-line-of-
sight (NLoS) mmWave channel conditions, we compare CBS
and DeepIA using various number of beams and show that,
DeepIA not only provides a faster IA scheme but also a more
reliable one in terms of prediction accuracy. For example,
DeepIA predicts the optimal beam with close to 95% accuracy
in LoS conditions by sweeping only 7 out of 24 beams. The
accuracy of the CBS for the same setting is limited to 24%.
While a CBS approach would traditionally not use a subset of
beams, nevertheless, we implement it in this fashion to achieve
a fair comparison between the accuracy and input size of the
two approaches.
We identify that the DNN’s accuracy is not just depen-
dent on the number of beams used in its input, but is also
dependent on the speciﬁc combination of beams that are
used. In other words, if we ﬁx the number of inputs to the
DNN’s, certain combinations of beams are more effective in
accurately predicting the best oriented beams. We propose
using a sequential feature selection (SFS) algorithm to help
identify better performing combinations of beams for DeepIA’s
input. We ﬁnd that using beams predicted by the SFS algorithm
further appreciably improves the accuracy of DeepIA in the
LoS case. In LOS conditions, it offers enhanced and robust
improvement in accuracy for situations where 8 or fewer
beams are utilized. Not much improvement is observed by SFS
in NLoS cases. Motivated by the performance gain obtained
by feature selection in LoS situation, we investigate alternate
solutions to improve the NLoS performance and ﬁnd that using
the averaged RSSs as input further improves the performance
in both LoS and NLoS conditions. For instance, a DeepIA
network that uses the averaged inputs from 25 measurements
is able to achieve a 95% accuracy with just 7 beams in NLoS
conditions.
We validate the practicality of our approach by computing
the time needed to run DeepIA’s DNN through embedded
implementation with the Field Programmable Gate Array
(FPGA) and comparing it against the computation time for
the CBS. We ﬁnd that both computations are on the order of
a few microseconds. The beam sweep time is on the order
of milliseconds for CBS and a few hundred microseconds for
DeepIA depending on the channel conditions. This analysis
supports the claim that DeepIA decreases the overall time
required for initial access.
DeepIA is poised to reduce the overall operational costs
as it reduces the number of transmissions/beams each trans-
mitter has to sweep through during IA. Consequently, it also
decreases the temporal and spatial footprint of the signal
over the air which reduces the interference from/to other
ongoing transmissions (such as in spectrum sharing scenarios)
as well as the probability of detection/intercept. Thus, DeepIA
could potentially improve the resiliency against out-of-network
interference and jamming.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II discusses related work. Section III describes the system
model and the assumptions. Section IV describes in detail
the DeepIA framework. Section V provides an analysis on
prediction accuracy and computation time taken by CBS and
DeepIA in LoS and NLoS mmWave channel models. Section
VI concludes the paper. A preliminary version of the material
in this paper is available in [12].
II. RELATED WORK
Conventional IA involves an exhaustive beam search. A
predeﬁned number of beams divide the azimuth plane into
sectors, with each beam covering a unique sector [13]–[15]. A
common implementation of the exhaustive search involves the
transmitter cycling through every sector while the receiver runs
in a quasi-omnidirectional mode and listens for the transmitted
signal. The receiver (e.g., a user equipment (UE) in 5G)
records the RSS for each transmit beam and ﬁnally sends back
the beam with the highest RSS to the transmitter (e.g., gNodeB
in 5G). The transmitter then turns on this particular beam,
and the receiver performs the same beam sweeping process
from its side to determine its best sector. This exhaustive
search is computationally inefﬁcient. Unlike omnidirectional
sub-6 GHz systems, this IA process has to be periodically
repeated in mmWave systems in order to ensure that there is
no misalignment between transmitter-receiver pairs over time.
Another variant of the exhaustive search runs narrow trans-
mitter beams against narrow receiver beams [13]. Iterative
search uses a combination of wide and narrow beams on
the transmitter and receiver to minimize the computational
cost of the exhaustive search at the expense of decreasing
the detection accuracy [14]. In addition to this, since only a
partial set of the antenna elements are used to create the beams,
it can decrease the range over which these wide beams can
be used. A hybrid IA process was introduced in [14], where
ﬁrst the iterative process is performed and then the receiver
sends the uplink signals in the best beam. The transmitter
ﬁnds its best narrow beam after cycling through all its narrow
beams against the best receiver beam. This hybrid IA process
performs equally with the iterative search in terms of accuracy
but utilizes approximately 86-90% of the time resources. Both
the iterative and hybrid approaches are handicapped by the
dependency to use two sets of beams. As the number of beams
in a system increases, the cost of the memory (typically SRAM
based solution) needed to store corresponding antenna element
weights increases rapidly, thus discouraging commercial appli-
cability of these types of solutions. Additionally, while they
are faster than the exhaustive beam sweep, at their very best
they tend to perform as well as exhaustive beam search [14].
Using multi-beam analog beamformers which simultane-
ously overlay several narrow beams in the spatial domain for

3
IA was proposed in [15]. While the transmit time is reduced,
computational and temporal requirements for the back-end
processing needed to distinguish the beams and detection
accuracy remain unclear. [16] proposed the use of compressed
sensing to leverage the change gradient of RSS/SNR to detect
the best beam from a subset of beams. They found that
their approach scaled appreciably with an increase in the
sparsity of a channel. [17] leveraged the DeepIA algorithm as
a means of determining the action-policy in a reinforcement
learning framework called DeepIA-DRL. Additionally, they
also propose a new algorithm called RapidIA, that attains
beam orientation with a single transmission. This is achieved
by leveraging transmissions from/to several coordinated base
stations/APs to transmit to the user which roughly translates to
transmitting multiple beams but from different spatial regions.
It shows good promise in scenarios whenever multiple BS can
exist within each other’s broadcasting range. The subsequent
related work that are discussed leverage various forms of
context-based information to enhance and accelerate the IA
process. The average discovery time by leveraging knowledge
obtained from real time arrival statistics of incoming users
was reduced in [18]. Gated recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
were used in [19] to predict the sequence of the beams swept
during IA. Using call records to ﬁnd the user’s location, [19]
used this information to determine the number of users in each
sector such that the beams are swept in a descending order of
users in each sector, i.e., sector with the highest number of
users goes ﬁrst and so on. Pseudo-directional patterns were
considered in [19] since the operations are in the sub-6 GHz
band. Leveraging channel state information (CSI) as the input
variable for a DNN was investigated in [20] to predict the 𝑘
best beams for initial access. A context-aware IA approach was
proposed in [21], where global positioning system (GPS) data
is fed to the UE and BS to help predict the optimal beam
choice for IA. The main challenge for this approach is to
generate the reliable GPS data for various scenarios including
indoors.
In our work, we compare DeepIA results with the CBS
since it is the de-facto technique 5G NR prescribes and show
the performance improvement in terms of time and accuracy.
The simple nature of collecting and processing RSS makes it
feasible for DeepIA to be implemented on hardware platforms.
Iterative and hybrid techniques do not necessarily perform
better than CBS; as a result, an increase in DeepIA’s accuracy
over CBS also means DeepIA’s accuracy is higher than both
hybrid and iterative techniques.
III. SYSTEM MODEL
We consider a 6G mmWave network that consists of a
directional transmitter and omnidirectional receivers as shown
in Fig. 1. Without loss of generality, we consider a 2D plane
where 𝑅receivers are uniformly distributed in a square area
and the transmitter is located at the center. No receiver is
placed within a 1 meter radius of the transmitter to support the
close intercept (CI) model explained in Section III-B. First, the
transmitter performs the IA process. While it is not explicitly
shown, it is assumed that the subsequent processes in this
paper are repeated again from the receiver’s side as is the
case with any IA strategy outlined in the related work.
Fig. 1. System model.
A. Transmitter and Antenna Array Characteristics
We design a 10 × 10 antenna array at the transmitter which
generates a beam width of about 15◦using the standard planar
array formulation [22]. This array points at an azimuth angle
𝜙= 0◦and an elevation angle 𝜃= 90◦. Since we consider a
2-D scenario, we take the azimuthal slice of the array factor
at 𝜃= 90◦. We then subtract 10 dB from this standard array
slice for azimuth angles between 180◦and 360◦as shown in
Fig. 2. This modiﬁcation serves two purposes. First, antenna
designers routinely modify the array/antenna patterns to ensure
minimal backlobe radiation. The goal is to avoid transmitting
in unnecessary directions, reduce electromagnetic interference
to back-end electronics and avoid interfering with users in
the backlobe’s direction. Second, using a standard 10 × 10
planar array pattern severely degrades the performance of CBS
because of pattern symmetricity. When the array factor of
the backlobe has the same magnitude as that of the front
lobe, the CBS process gets confused on which beam to pick.
This modiﬁed array pattern is consistently used for all of the
sectors.
Fig. 2. Antenna pattern (gain values in dB).

4
B. Channel Models
In this work, we consider both LoS and NLoS mmWave
channels. Speciﬁcally, we use the close-in (CI) path loss
model, where at distance 𝑑, the path loss in dB is given by
𝑃𝐿(𝑑) = 𝑃𝐿(𝑑0) + 10𝑛log10
𝑑
𝑑0
+ 𝑋𝜎,
(1)
where 𝑃𝐿(𝑑0) = 10 log10

4𝜋𝑑0
𝜆
2
, 𝜆is the signal wavelength,
𝑑0 = 1 m, 𝑛is the best ﬁt minimum mean squared error path
loss exponent (PLE) (note 𝑛= 4.5 for NLoS conditions and
𝑛= 1.9 for LoS conditions) and 𝑋𝜎is the shadow factor
representing large scale signal ﬂuctuations (note 𝑋𝜎is a zero-
mean Gaussian random variable with a standard deviation of
10 for NLoS conditions and 1.1 for LoS conditions [23]).
The LoS and NLoS parameters in [23] were obtained
from empirical results, thus meriting applicability in practical
situations. Other alternative path loss models derived from ray
tracing simulations have also been presented in the literature.
While these ray tracing models offer a complex environmental
model, the models they deliver are speciﬁc to the locations and
situations they are simulated for. Additionally, these models
are better suited for experiments that require additional param-
eters such as number of reﬂections and delay characteristics.
C. Overview of the Baseline IA
The baseline IA that we refer to is Conventional Beam
Sweeping (CBS) approach that uses exhaustive search (i.e.,
sweep all beams [13]). We deﬁne N = {1, ..., 𝑁} as the set of
all 𝑁beams that the transmitter can sweep. Let 𝑟𝑘denote the
𝑘th receiver, where 𝑘∈{1, 2, 3, ..., 𝑅}, and 𝑅𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑘denote the
RSS corresponding to the 𝑖th beam between the transmitter and
the receiver 𝑟𝑘. In CBS, all 𝑁beams are swept sequentially
and ˆ𝑖𝑘th beam which provides the highest RSS is selected,
i.e., for receiver 𝑟𝑘, the selected beam is ˆ𝑖𝑘= argmax
𝑖∈N
𝑅𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑘.
Algorithm 1 shows the baseline CBS algorithm.
Algorithm 1 Baseline CBS Algorithm
Input: Receiver 𝑟𝑘
Output: Selected beam ˆ𝑖𝑘
1: for 𝑖∈N do
2:
Measure 𝑅𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑘
3: end for
4: ˆ𝑖𝑘= argmax
𝑖∈N
𝑅𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑘
D. Overview of DeepIA
While a detailed description of DeepIA’s inner workings is
provided in Section IV, it is beneﬁcial to know that DeepIA
uses the global information of receiver positions during the
training phase. Given that the receiver’s position is known
to the transmitter during the training stage, the best beam is
calculated based on the angle between them; this process is
described in Section IV-B. The DNN is trained by feeding
the RSS values from a subset of beams, M (where 𝑀is the
cardinality, i.e., 𝑀= |M|), as the input, where M ⊆N.
To support fast implementation on an embedded platform
(see Section V-E), the DNN uses a simple feedforward neural
network (FNN) architecture. The input layer consists of 𝑀
neurons, each receiving input from one beam from M. At
the output layer, there are 𝑁output neurons corresponding
to the 𝑁beams and their magnitudes denote the respective
probabilities of being the optimal beam. During training,
the label, i.e., the best beam for a given transmitter and
receiver position, is determined based on the angle between the
transmitter and receiver instead of the measured RSS values.
The subsets of 𝑀beams are uniformly sampled from 𝑁and
the same subset is used during both the training and test times
in our simulations.
IV. DEEP LEARNING FRAMEWORK OF DEEPIA
This section describes the details of DeepIA’s deep learning
framework; namely, DNN architecture, beam mapping and
label generation, and training and testing phases.
A. Deep Neural Network Architecture
The DNN architecture of DeepIA consists of seven layers
including the input and output layers. The input layer has
𝑀neurons, and the output layer has 𝑁neurons with each
neuron providing a likelihood score. The hidden layers have
32, 64, 128, 64 and 32 neurons, respectively. These hidden
layer structures are determined after tuning the hyperparam-
eters based on the training and validation performance. In
simulations, we set 𝑁= 24 and select 𝑀between 1 and
24. All the hidden layers are activated by a ReLu activation
function and Softmax activation function is used at the output
layer. The number of neurons in each layer and the activation
functions used are shown in Table I. Each layer’s output
except that of the output layer is batch normalized before
passing it on to the next layer. This architecture was selected
for after comprehensive experimentation with various other
architectures, after the validation accuracy showed that the
other models either over-ﬁt or under-trained the training data.
TABLE I
DEEP NEURAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURE.
Layers
Number of neurons
Activation function
Input
𝑀= 1, 2, 3, . . . , or 24
−
Dense 1
32
ReLu
Dense 2
64
ReLu
Dense 3
128
ReLu
Dense 4
64
ReLu
Dense 5
32
ReLu
Output
𝑁= 24
Softmax
B. Beam Mapping and Label Generation
As shown in Fig. 3, the angle between the 𝑘th receiver 𝑟𝑘
and the transmitter is denoted as 𝐴𝑘. This angle represents the
relative orientation between any receiver position and transmit-
ter. 𝐴𝑘can take values between 0◦and 359.99◦, and is rounded
to the lowest integer. Transmitter 𝐴𝑘for every receiver 𝑟𝑘is
then mapped to its corresponding beam as follows. When 𝑁=

5
Fig. 3. Angle between the transmitter and the receiver.
24, angles ((−8◦, 7◦], (7◦, 22◦], (22◦, 37◦], . . . , (337◦, 352◦])
are mapped to Beams 1, 2, ..., 24 respectively. Note that −𝑎◦
is the same as 360◦−𝑎◦. This is performed by setting 𝑖∗
𝑘=
l
𝐴𝑘+8
15
m
, where 𝑖∗
𝑘represents the true beam sector that receiver
𝑟𝑘should correspond to. 𝑖∗
𝑘also corresponds to the labels that
we use against our training, test and validation features. In
addition, we use 𝑖∗
𝑘in evaluating the accuracy of both the CBS
and DeepIA. In practical situations, wireless network providers
can obtain these labels from propagation modelling tools that
model the localized environment and/or through measurement
campaigns in the local area.
C. Deep Neural Network Training
DeepIA uses RSS values from 𝑀beams as inputs. The
typical training time varies depending on the number of beams,
number of epochs as well as the hardware used in training. In
simulations, we use GoogleColab Pro to train the DNNs and
for any given input of 𝑀beams, it takes roughly 2 minutes
to train a DNN. Since training will be performed ofﬂine, the
training time and computational resources can be ignored in
subsequent performance comparisons. The input variables are
transformed to linear units and normalized using the maximum
of the absolute value. Note that the values in Tables II and III
are only written in dB scale, to aid in visualizing the procedure.
In reality, the DNN has input features that range from 0 to 1.
The DNN is trained to learn to map {𝑅𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑘}𝑖∈M values to the
corresponding 𝑖∗
𝑘values. We show an example of how DNN
training set would look like in Table II. The receiver column
corresponds to the index of different receivers. The true beam
column corresponds to the best beam that is determined based
on the angle between the transmitter and receiver instead of
the measured RSS values.
We separate 𝑅receivers and their corresponding data into
3 sets for training, validation and testing. The number of
receivers used for training, validation and testing are given by
𝑅𝑡𝑟, 𝑅𝑣𝑎𝑙and 𝑅𝑡𝑒, respectively. Therefore, 𝑅= 𝑅𝑡𝑟+𝑅𝑣𝑎𝑙+𝑅𝑡𝑒.
The output of training for beam set M is the trained DNN
model DeepIAM : {𝑅𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑘}𝑖∈M →ˆ𝑖𝑘∈N.
DNN models are trained for 𝑀= 1, 2 . . . 24 and 10 epochs
are used to train each model. The backpropagation algorithm
is used to train the DNN by minimizing the cross entropy
loss function. We experimented with various learning rates and
ﬁnally chose an initial learning rate of 10−2 and a ﬁnal learning
rate is 0.2. A batch size of 1024 is consistently maintained for
TABLE II
AN EXAMPLE OF TRAINING DATA ENTRIES.
Receiver
Beam 1
. . .
Beam 𝑀
True Beam
1
-30
. . .
-46
1
2
-51
. . .
-24
5
-
-
. . .
-
-
𝑅𝑡𝑟
-65
. . .
-68
2
all the models. We observed that while the training time for
smaller batch sizes (i.e., 512, 128, 64) took longer they offered
no beneﬁt in terms of validation accuracy. Larger batch sizes
(i.e., 5000, 10000) showed slight deterioration in performances
and we settled for 1024. The hyperparameters of the DNN are
determined after evaluating the validation accuracy and epochs
where the training loss saturated. After checking a variety
of optimizers including ADAM, Adamax, Stochastic Gradient
Descent, and Adabound, our results indicate that Adabound
converges to the minimum of the loss function the quickest,
while the accuracy is practically identical for Adabound and
Adam. Therefore, the Adabound optimizer [24] is used during
training.
D. Deep Neural Network Testing
The RSS values from the same 𝑀beams used during
training are measured and fed to the DNN model for receiver
indices that have not been encountered in the training process.
The index of the output with the highest probability is selected
as the best spatially oriented beam. This process is shown in
Algorithm 2. Table III shows an example test input and output
with M inputs. The predicted beam should match exactly with
the true beam for a correct prediction. In cases where they do
not match up such as that of receiver 𝑟𝑘, DeepIA makes an
error in its prediction.
Algorithm 2 DeepIA Algorithm
Input: Receiver 𝑟𝑘, DeepIAM
Output: Predicted beam ˆ𝑖𝑘
1: for 𝑖∈M do
2:
Measure 𝑅𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑘
3: end for
4: ˆ𝑖𝑘= DeepIAM ({𝑅𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑘}𝑖∈M)
TABLE III
AN EXAMPLE OF TEST DATA ENTRIES.
Receiver
Beam 1
. . .
Beam 𝑀
Predicted
True
Beam
Beam
1
-35
. . .
-46
1
1
2
-51
. . .
-64
5
5
-
-
. . .
-
-
𝑟𝑘
-27
. . .
-71
4
5
-
-
. . .
-
-
𝑅𝑡𝑒
-25
. . .
-28
2
2
E. Selection of Features
As discussed above, the input to the DeepIA framework is
the subset of beams, M. Thus, an important question arises

6
at this point on the selection of the beams in the subset M.
We investigate whether certain beams matter more than others
when it comes to the actual selection of the beams.
In order to investigate this question, for any subset M of
beams, we utilize a baseline set that consists of 𝑀beams that
are spatially equally separated. We call this set as Manually
Selected Beams (MSB) denoted by M𝑀𝑆𝐵. The MSBs for a
given number of beams 𝑀, can be calculated as
M𝑀𝑆𝐵( 𝑗) =

𝑗24
𝑀
  𝑗∈{0, 1, 2, . . . , 𝑀−1}

,
(2)
where ⌊·⌋is the ﬂoor function and M𝑀𝑆𝐵( 𝑗) denotes the 𝑗th
beam in the set M𝑀𝑆𝐵.
It is important to identify the best combination of input
beams to increase prediction accuracy while minimizing the
total number of beams used. In fact, the whole domain of
feature selection is developed with the objective of identifying
a minimal set of features for a given dataset, that when used,
typically minimizes the objective function. Feature selection
can be categorized into three basic approaches:
Filter Methods: These methods rely on processing input
variables with respect to some criterion (e.g., mutual infor-
mation, Pearson’s correlation, Fischer score, etc.), ranking the
processed data and then selecting the 𝑀desired number of
input variables that obtain the highest 𝑀ranks [25].
Embedded Methods: These methods incorporate the feature
selection process as part of the training process; regularization
can in essence be thought of as feature selection. Typically
algorithms like Lasso/L1 norm based regularization introduce
feature sparsity while approaches like Ridge regression help
regulate performance in the presence of large outliers [26].
Wrapper Methods: Wrapper methods typically involve cy-
cling through the various combination of input variables in
the learning algorithm in question, measuring a predetermined
score and then selecting the feature set with the best score.
This technique is favorable because the features selected are
speciﬁc to both the input data and learning algorithm.
Note that, since the total combinatorial search space for 24
input variables is over 16 × 106, exhaustively cycling through
all of them is not practical. To overcome this limitation, in this
work, we utilized a variant of the wrapper method termed the
naive sequential feature selection (SFS) [25]. DeepIA served
as the learning algorithm for the SFS, the prediction accuracy
obtained from the validation data served as the score. SFS
reduces the feature search space to 299 combinations. On
average, it takes about 2 minutes to train DeepIA for a given
number of beams and this wrapper-based feature selection
algorithm takes on average 30 hours in total for any given
channel condition.
We show the implementation of the SFS approach for
selecting optimal M subset of beams (out of N beams) in
Algorithm 3. As shown in line 1, an empty beam subset M is
initialized. Then, beams (or features) are iteratively added to
the subset M, on the condition that the beam that is included
obtains the highest prediction accuracy amongst all the other
available beams (See lines 4 - 14). Beams that are selected
and added based on these criteria are permanently retained in
the M and this process is repeated until the required number
of features (𝑀) are added (See line 2).
Algorithm 3 Sequential Feature Selection (SFS) Approach for
selecting M subset of beams
Input: Number of beams to be used, 𝑀
Output: Selected subset of beams, M
1: Chosen beam subset, M = 𝜙
2: for 𝑖= 1, . . . , 𝑀do
3:
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑥= −1
4:
for beam, 𝑏∈𝑁\ M do
5:
M𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝= M ∪𝑏
6:
ˆ𝑖𝑘= DeepIAM𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝({𝑅𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑘}𝑖∈M𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝)
7:
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝=
Í𝑅𝑣𝑎𝑙
𝑘=1
1(𝑖∗
𝑘=ˆ𝑖𝑘)
𝑅𝑣𝑎𝑙
8:
if 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝> 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑥then
9:
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑚𝑎𝑥= 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝
10:
M = M𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝
11:
end if
12:
M𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝= M𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝\ 𝑏
13:
end for
14: end for
15: return M
V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
A. Simulation Setting
We consider a two-dimensional 6G mmWave network sce-
nario where transmitters and receivers all lie on the same
plane. The location of the transmitter is ﬁxed at (0, 0) and
the receiver’s X and Y positions each uniformly randomly
distributed between −25 m and 25 m. This bounds the simu-
lation cell to an area of 50 × 50 m. The transmit power is set
to 20 dBm.
A total of 106 receiver positions are generated, which act
as data samples. Out of total 106 data samples, 65% are used
to train DeepIA, 15% of data samples are used for validation,
and 20% of data samples are used for testing.
B. Comparison Approaches
We evaluate the performance of DeepIA and compare it to
that of CBS in terms of both accuracy and beam prediction
time, when varying the subset of beams out of total beams.
Prediction Accuracy: The prediction accuracy is computed
as the ratio of receivers for which the predicted beam matches
the true beam, namely
Prediction Accuracy[%] =
Í𝑅𝑡𝑒
𝑘=1 1(𝑖∗
𝑘= ˆ𝑖𝑘)
𝑅𝑡𝑒
× 100,
(3)
where 1 is the indicator function (1(𝐸) = 1 if 𝐸holds and 0,
otherwise).
IA Time: The IA time is the total time incurred in predicting
the correct beam for a certain transmitter-receiver position. It
constitutes two parts described below.
1) Beam Sweep Time – the time taken to sweep a desired
number of beams. The beam sweep time is directly
proportional to the number of beams swept. For instance,

7
5G NR [5] allows a duration of one half frame or 5
ms for sweeping across a total of 64 beams. Using
these numbers, it should take 1.875 ms to sweep 24
beams, 0.9375 for 12 beams, 0.675 ms for 8 beams,
and so on. In simulations, we consider the same subset
of beams to sweep for both DeepIA and CBS. Therefore,
we compare the accuracy performance under the same
beam sweep time.
2) Beam Prediction Time – the time it takes to process the
collected RSS data and predict the beam it belongs to.
In CBS, this roughly involves calculating a maximum
operation on the RSS collected from 𝑁beams. In
DeepIA, this involves calculating the time it takes to
run the DNN model using 𝑀inputs in order to predict
the beam a given receiver belongs to.
In this section, we compare the performance of DeepIA
against CBS, in terms of prediction accuracy and computa-
tional time. The prediction accuracy portion of the work, also
examines the improvement in accuracy obtained when the SFS
beams are used in both LoS and NLoS channel conditions.
We then analyze performance improvement observed when the
average RSS of multiple measurements are fed to the DeepIA.
In the time analysis section, we discuss the beneﬁts of
utilizing DeepIA in terms of time taken for computation.
C. Prediction Accuracy Analysis
Since the exhaustive beam search in CBS relies on scanning
the entire spatial plane, its accuracy continuously deteriorates
as fewer beams are utilized. The user distribution contributes
to the slightly non-linear prediction accuracy curve seen in
Fig. 4. In addition, the shadow fading factor in LoS condition
also causes incorrect prediction in a few users (explained in
later part of this section), thus accuracy is 95% with 24 beams
as shown in Fig. 4. On the other hand, in LoS conditions
DeepIA demonstrates a more robust and reliable prediction
accuracy over the range of beams that are swept as shown
in Fig. 4. For example, in the LoS scenario, setting 𝑀= 7
achieves close to 100% prediction accuracy. The performance
of DeepIA deteriorates when less than 7 beams are utilized.
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
Number of Beams Used
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Prediction Accuracy in % 
1 LOS MSB DeepIA 
1 LOS CBS DeepIA 
1 LOS SFS DeepIA 
Fig. 4. Improvement from using Feature Selection in LoS.
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
Number of Beams Used
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Prediction Accuracy in % 
1  CBS 
1 MSB DeepIA 
1 SFS DeepIA 
Fig. 5. Improvement from using Feature Selection in NLoS.
The relevance of feature selection becomes evident as we
observe that the prediction accuracy by DeepIA is better
with a 5 beam input than a 6 beam input, when these input
beams are selected based on the MSB criterion. Recall, MSB
refers to the Manually Selected Beams which are equally
separated from one another as described in Eq. 2. If each
feature/beam is considered equally important, this ﬁnding is
obviously counter-intuitive. In other words, DeepIA is able to
perform better with 5 beams selected using the MSB criterion,
because the ‘quality of the information’ in those beams is more
valuable to DeepIA in determining the prediction accuracy.
When beams are selected based on the SFS algorithm, we
ﬁnd that the prediction accuracy for DeepIA models that take
inputs of 1 to 6 beams are all further improved relative to the
MSB case. Furthermore, we note that the beams selected based
on the SFS criterion correspond to a rough upperbound to what
the MSB can achieve. The maximum accuracy achieved with
a 24 beam CBS in LoS conditions is achieved using a DeepIA
model trained on just 5 SFS selected beams. In LoS scenario,
SFS is able to reasonably discern ‘quality’ beams for DeepIA.
Therefore, using more than 8 adds very little beneﬁt in terms
of accuracy in the DNN approach under LoS conditions.
With the introduction of the severe shadow fading in the
NLoS mmWave channels, DeepIA’s performance deteriorates
compared to LoS case as shown in Figure 5. Nonetheless,
DeepIA still outperforms CBS. In fact, the gap in performance
increases as the number of input beams increases from 1
to 24. The NLoS fading factor adds considerable amount of
ﬂuctuations in the collected RSS values and this in effect leads
to the following two phenomena which contribute to the rapid
drop in CBS accuracy under NLoS conditions.
Since the ﬂuctuations are random, it can increase or de-
crease the value of the ‘clean’ RSS measurements where
‘clean’ refers to the calculated RSS values based on the path
loss for a given distance excluding the shadow fading factor.
The clean RSS values from users positioned in between the
main lobes of two adjacent beams decreases rapidly as the
user position changes closer to the boundary/intersection of
the two beams. Fluctuations due to shadowing can cause the
RSS of the incorrect adjacent beam to exceed the RSS of
the correct beam, thus resulting in inaccurate predictions for

8
the CBS. These ﬂuctuations directly impact the performance
of CBS for both LoS and NLoS conditions by boosting the
RSS of an incorrect beam. Moreover, in NLoS conditions, the
relatively large shadow fading factor is able to inﬂuence the
back lobe and force it to overshoot the main lobe’s power,
thus adding another possible culprit that reduces prediction
accuracy in CBS.
Fig. 5 also shows that the introduction of sequential feature
selection (SFS) does not improve the overall performance by
reasonable measure, but the earlier observation we made on the
SFS-based DeepIA being the upper limit of the MSB-based
DeepIA still holds. Previous work [27] which implemented
sequential feature on various other data sets reported that SFS
could potentially have higher prediction accuracies for a model
trained with lower number of input features and attributed this
effect to the forced retention of features in the SFS approach.
In this paper, we did not observe that effect and conclude that
this effect may be data dependent.
In certain time-constraint cases, it would be practical for
LoS scenarios to use a feature selected DeepIA with 7 beams,
since it gives close to 100% and performs better than an ex-
haustive search with 24 beams in CBS while utilizing approx-
imately 29% of the total computation time. If the performance
is critical and the channel is predominantly NLoS, it makes
sense to use DeepIA with 24 beams. Thus, DeepIA ordinarily
provides the network operator with a prediction accuracy vs.
beam alignment time trade off to work with. However, in next
subsection, we discuss an additional “averaging” enhancement
which allows performing IA with just a subset of beams even
in NLoS conditions; thus, realizing faster and reliable IA in
both LoS and NLoS conditions.
D. Averaging of Input Beams and its Effects on Accuracy
It is clear that the larger NLoS shadow fading factor has
a signiﬁcant impact on the performance regardless of the
number of beams used. Motivated by the fact that the LoS
performance far exceeds the NLoS performance, we consider
alternative ways to boost the NLoS accuracy. It is expected
that DeepIA in NLoS may beneﬁt from input data fed with
less variance, similar to what it got in LoS conditions. Since
averaging a signal decreases the variance we build a new
dataset that is of size [𝑅, 𝑀, 𝑠] where 𝑠is the number of
measurements/snapshots collected for averaging. Recall, 𝑅and
𝑀are the number of users and the number of beams in the
subset, respectively. We select the values of 𝑠as 10 and 25.
Averaging provides a signiﬁcant increase in the performance
of DeepIA for NLoS conditions. We observe that in NLoS
conditions, DeepIA converges to a more than 95% prediction
accuracy with just 6 SFS beams if 25 averages are used (and
with 11 SFS beams if 10 averages are used). This leads to
an interesting observation for our dataset - when fed with
data corrupted by AWGN noise, even if the DeepIA network
leverages the higher quality features it tends to perform at the
level of the MSB. In other words, while noise brings down the
performance of a network fed with MSBs, it tends to affect
a DeepIA network fed with SFS features more severely. The
lower limit seems to plateau towards the MSB performance.
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
Number of Beams Used
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Prediction Accuracy in % 
25 MSB DeepIA 
10 MSB DeepIA 
1 MSB DeepIA 
25  CBS  
10 CBS  
1  CBS 
25 SFS DeepIA 
10 SFS DeepIA 
1 SFS DeepIA 
Fig. 6. Improvement from using averaging data in NLoS.
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
Number of Beams Used
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Prediction Accuracy in % 
25 LOS MSB DeepIA 
10 LOS MSB DeepIA 
1 LOS MSB DeepIA 
25 LOS CBS DeepIA 
10 LOS CBS DeepIA 
1 LOS CBS DeepIA 
25 LOS SFS DeepIA 
10 LOS SFS DeepIA 
1 LOS SFS DeepIA 
Fig. 7. Improvement from using averaging data in LoS.
Fig. 8.
Confusion matrix of Beam Predictions from a 4 beam DeepIA
framework in LoS conditions.
The confusion matrices in Figures 8, 9, 10, and 11 show how
prediction accuracy is affected at the beam level. The previous
prediction degradation due to ﬂuctuations distorting adjacent

9
Fig. 9.
Confusion matrix of Beam Predictions from a 7 beam DeepIA
framework in NLoS conditions.
Fig. 10. Confusion Matrix for CBS with 24 beams in NLoS.
Fig. 11. Confusion Matrix for CBS with 24 beams in LoS.
and main beams can be seen in all the CBS confusion matrices.
We can also observe that, in the NLoS CBS case, the back lobe
begins to degrade prediction accuracy. In DeepIA, the deep
learning network has the ability to recognize this back lobe
related performance degradation and circumvents it by relying
on the general trend of RSS values for each beam it observes.
Nonetheless, it is still susceptible to the effects of ﬂuctuations
and sometimes incorrectly selects adjacent beams. However,
prediction accuracies for the users in individual beams are not
uniform and do not seem to be related to the input beams fed
to the network.
E. Beam Prediction Time Analysis
For practical implementation aspects, 5G allows 5 ms peri-
odicity by default to complete the beam sweeping procedure
in the IA. However, coherence time over which the channel
remains unchanged is much smaller for highly mobile users
communicating at high frequencies. Coherence time 𝑇𝐶is
inversely proportional to the maximum Doppler spread 𝐷𝑆=
𝑓𝑐𝑣
𝑐, where 𝑓𝑐is the center frequency, 𝑣is the speed of mobile
user, and 𝑐is the speed of light [28]. As an example, consider
𝑓𝑐= 28 GHz. If the user moves with walking speed (e.g.,
𝑣= 1.4 m/s), then 𝑇𝐶is less than 7.7 ms. On the other hand,
if the user moves with a car speed of 𝑣= 25 m/s, then 𝑇𝐶is
less than 0.43 ms. Therefore, it is important to make the beam
prediction decision within this time frame.
To better understand the computation time in practice, we
consider running the DNN conﬁguration of DeepIA on an
embedded platform. For that purpose, the procedure of [29] to
convert the trained software model for a deep neural network
to the FPGA code is followed and computational aspects of
running DeepIA’s DNN are evaluated for the FPGA imple-
mentation. Vivado Design Suite [30] is used to simulate and
then synthesize the FPGA code with the 16-bit implementation
for Xilinx UltraScale FPGA.
We evaluate the processing time associated with beam
sweeping and beam prediction as follows. Beam sweeping
involves a pilot tone transmitted from each beam at the
transmitter one at a time to the receiver. The receiver measures
the RSS value for each beam. This process is repeated 𝑁times
for CBS algorithm and 𝑀times for DeepIA. Note 𝑁is the
total number of beams in consideration, and 𝑀⊆𝑁is the
number of subset of beams using in DeepIA framework. The
selection of the best beam from RSS values can either be
performed at the transmitter or receiver. In the former case,
the receiver transmits the measured RSS value back to the
transmitter after every beam transmission as a feedback. In
the latter case, the receiver predicts the best beam itself and
transmits a single feedback. Assuming it takes 𝑡𝑠to receive a
tone signal at the receiver, the beam sweeping time is reduced
from 𝑁𝑡𝑠. to 𝑀𝑡𝑠by switching to DeepIA. This is because
the duration of beam sweeping is linearly proportional to the
number of beams swept, and we ﬁnd that it is much larger
than the beam prediction time that we discuss next.
The duration of beam prediction, however, depends on
whether CBS or DeepIA is used. Suppose 𝑀= 7 beams
are swept to ﬁx the beam sweeping time for both CBS
and DeepIA. The duration to take the maximum operation
in CBS is 𝑀𝑇with one comparator,   𝑀
2

+ 1 𝑇with two
comparators, and so on, where 𝑇is the time for one FPGA
cycle at 100 MHz clock. Hence, CBS selects its beam in
at most 0.06 𝜇s. On the other hand, DeepIA runs the RSSs
from 6 beams through its DNN. The latency to process one
input sample (namely, 6 RSSs) through the DNN architecture
given in Table I is 3.85 𝜇s. Since the beam prediction time

10
in both CBS and DeepIA is at most at microsecond level, the
time for beam sweeping dominates the total time spent for
IA. Therefore, DeepIA reduces the time for IA signiﬁcantly
and leaves more time for data communications to carry ever-
growing trafﬁc demands of 5G and beyond.
When considering averaging the RSSI data, it is reasonable
to question if there are any additional time costs associated
with that. The 5G NR standard speciﬁes a subcarrier spacing
of 240 MHz or a symbol duration of 4.16 microseconds for
the mmWave frequency sync signals [31]. The bandwidth
required for the synch transmission is roughly 60 MHz or
a time period of 16 ns. Each synchronization signal block
(SSB) is 4 symbols long and the length of 1 symbol is 4.16
𝜇s . The SSB comprises of the Primary Broadcast Channel
(PBCH), Secondary Synchronization Signal (SSS) and Pri-
mary Synchronization Signal (PSS). The SSS is responsible
for the RSSI estimation and is one symbol long. Assuming
a sampling speed of 5 GSPS (available from dual channel
mmWave ADCs) [32], we note that we can obtain 21840
samples in 1 symbol/SSS duration or about 870 samples
for each RSSI value, assuming 25 averages are performed
within the 1 symbol duration. Note that the number of I/Q
samples used for capturing the RSSI data is speciﬁc to the
chip/radio being implemented. We limit the scope of this work
to investigating how the prediction accuracy scales with the
number of samples used in averaging. There are other radio
design constraints that may dictate the number of samples that
are needed per average, so the basis of this work should not
be used to determine that. If the number of averages we need
is not served in 1 symbol duration, the averaging would be
done over multiple SSS, however this impacts both CBS and
DeepIA.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we developed the deep learning-based IA
solution, DeepIA, for 5G and 6G mmWave networks. DeepIA
collects measurements only from a small number of beams
to predict the best beam for data communications. It is
suggested as an alternative to CBS that iteratively searches
for the best beam from among all possible beams. DeepIA
can successfully capture the complex patterns of transmitter-
receiver locations and beam patterns, and can predict the best
beam with very high accuracy even when a small number
of beams are swept in the IA. Compared to CBS, DeepIA
signiﬁcantly reduces the time for IA and leaves more time for
communications. Our simulation results show that DeepIA is
able to predict the optimal beam with nearly 100% accuracy
even when 7 out of 24 beams are used in LoS conditions,
while the beam prediction accuracy of CBS drops to around
24% with the same number of beams utilized. We identiﬁed
that certain beams are more valuable in determining accuracy
and leveraged this to increase prediction accuracy to close to
100% using just 5 beams in LoS. In NLoS we found that the
signiﬁcant amount of ﬂuctuations present prevented signiﬁcant
features from contributing to further increase in accuracy. We
also found that by using the averaged RSSI we could further
boost the performance of both LoS and NLoS conditions
and that NLoS can exceed 95% prediction accuracy. Finally,
we assessed the beam prediction time of DeepIA through
embedded implementation on FPGA and showed that DeepIA
signiﬁcantly reduces the time needed for IA.
