arXiv:1202.3602v1  [cs.AI]  16 Feb 2012
Towards quantitative measures in applied
ontology
Robert Hoehndorfa,1 Michel Dumontierb Georgios V. Gkoutos a
a Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge
b Department of Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and School of Computer Science,
Carleton University
Abstract. Applied ontology is a relatively new ﬁeld which aims to apply theories
and methods from diverse disciplines such as philosophy, cognitive science, lin-
guistics and formal logics to perform or improve domain-speciﬁc tasks. To support
the development of effective research methodologies for applied ontology, we criti-
cally discuss the question how its research results should be evaluated. We propose
that results in applied ontology must be evaluated within their domain of applica-
tion, based on some ontology-based task within the domain, and discuss quanti-
tative measures which would facilitate the objective evaluation and comparison of
research results in applied ontology.
Keywords. research methodology, applied ontology, ontology evaluation, philosophy
of science, quantiﬁable result, biomedical ontology
1. Introduction
Applied ontology is an emerging discipline that applies theories and methods from di-
verse disciplines such as philosophy, cognitive science, linguistics and formal logics
to perform or improve domain-speciﬁc tasks. Scientiﬁc disciplines require a research
methodology which yields reproducible and comparable results that can be evaluated in-
dependently. Methodological progress in applied ontology will be recognized when dif-
ferent methods generate results that can be objectively compared, such that it can be eval-
uated as to whether the methods yield better results. To illustrate, text mining, which was
ﬁrmly established as a scientiﬁc discipline in the early 1990s, leveraged knowledge from
computational linguistics, cognitive science, philosophy, graph theory, machine learning,
and other areas of computer science to create new, large scale methods to uncover in-
formation from natural language documents. Although text mining could, in principle,
be evaluated from the perspective of computational linguistics (i.e., how well a particu-
lar linguistic theory was implemented and applied), it is most commonly evaluated from
the perspective of scientiﬁc contribution (i.e., how well some scientiﬁc question was ad-
dressed by the text mining method) through quantitative measures that include precision
and recall based on comparison to a gold standard, the F-measure (i.e., the harmonic
mean between precision and recall), the area-under-curve (AUC) in an analysis of the

receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve [1], or the use of kappa-statistics to deter-
mine agreement between manual evaluation by domain experts. Establishment of a com-
mon set of (quantitative) measures has made it possible to compare different methods
and approaches in text mining with respect to their contribution to particular tasks and
has the ﬁeld as a whole allowed to measure its progress.
Research in applied ontology currently lacks established quantitative metrics for
evaluating its results. More importantly, applied ontology lacks agreement about the per-
spective from which its results should be evaluated. Evaluation of applied ontology re-
search is more often than not based on criteria stemmed from philosophy, knowledge
representation, formal logics or “common sense”, while an evaluation based on the do-
main of application is rarely performed [2]. In the absence of commonly agreed criteria
for evaluating research results, the evaluation and comparison of research in applied on-
tology is prone to subjectivity, lack of transparency, opinion, preference and dogma. Fur-
thermore, the lack of established evaluation criteria for applied ontology research hinders
the development of an effective research methodology for the ﬁeld of applied ontology:
before a research methodology in any scientiﬁc ﬁeld can be established, it is ﬁrst neces-
sary to determine what constitutes a research result, what constitutes a novel research re-
sult (i.e., what does it mean that two research results are different), and what constitutes
a better result than another (i.e., how can two competing results be compared and eval-
uated). Only after these questions are answered will it be possible to design a research
methodology in a scientiﬁc ﬁeld than enables the ﬁeld as a whole to make progress with
respect to the evaluation criteria that the discipline has established.
Here, we being to explore ways for evaluating research in applied ontology. Our
arguments and examples will primarily focus on ontologies that are used in science,
in particular for biomedicine, but we believe that many of our arguments will hold for
research in other areas of applied ontology as well. From a certain perspective, this work
is a continuation and extension of the work of Barry Smith [3], who made one of the ﬁrst
moves towards questioning the status of applied ontology as a scientiﬁc discipline, and
who already stated that “[c]entral to ontology (science) is the requirement that ontologies
[...] should be tested empirically”.
Our central claim will be that research in applied ontology must be evaluated within
the domain to which it is being applied. More precisely, we claim that research results
in applied ontology need to be evaluated with respect to a speciﬁc task that is supposed
to be achieved, and that any contribution in applied ontology should be motivated by a
task and evaluated based on it. In many cases, the results of such an evaluation can be
quantiﬁed, leading to objective, empirical criteria for the success of applying ontological
methods within a domain. We do not intend to propose a comprehensive list of such
evaluation criteria, but rather aim to make suggestions for the research community in the
hope to spawn a discussion that results in community agreement and a ﬁrst step towards
the development of a commonly agreed research methodology for our ﬁeld.
2. Biomedical ontologies
At the end of the 1990s and early 2000s, genetics made a leap forward with the avail-
ability of the ﬁrst genome sequences for several species. The availability of genome se-
quences for multiple species enabled comparative genomic analysis, and it was recog-

nized that a large part of the genetic material in different species was conserved and that
many of the genes in different organisms have similar functions. The Gene Ontology
(GO) [4] was designed as a controlled vocabulary to provide stable names, textual def-
initions and identiﬁers to unify descriptions of functions, processes and cellular com-
ponents across databases in biology. Today, with the rise of high-throughput sequenc-
ing technology, genome sequences for thousands of species are becoming available, and
large international research projects, such as the 5,000 genomes project (which aims to
sequence the genomes of 5,000 insects and other arthropods) or the Genomes 10k project
(which aims to sequence the genomes of 10,000 vertebrate species), will collect even
more data in the near future. High-throughput technologies are not limited to genome
sequencing, but entered other areas in biology as well, from high-throughput phenotyp-
ing (to determine the observable characteristics of organisms, often resulting from tar-
geted mutations) over microarray experiments (to determine gene expression) to high-
throughput screening (in drug discovery). The amount of data produced in biology today
makes the design of strategies for integration of data across databases, methods for re-
trieving the data and developing query languages and interfaces a central and important
part of research in biology. The prime purpose of ontologies such as the GO is to address
these challenges that arose in biology and bio-medicine within the last few years.
To facilitate the integration of databases, retrieval of data and the provision of query
languages, ontologies provided not only terms and textual deﬁnitions, but also a basic
structure. Initially, this structure was not expressed in a formal language (i.e., a language
with an explicit semantics). Instead, ontologies were seen as graph structures in which
nodes represent terms and edges relations (such as is-a or part-of) between them. Rea-
soning over these graphs was stated as operations on the graph, in particular the com-
position of edges and the transitive closure [4]. It was not until much later that formal
languages were used to represent biomedical ontologies and recast the graph operation
in terms of deductive inference over formal theories [5,6,7,8].
The graph structure of biomedical ontologies is not only a valuable feature to im-
prove retrieval and querying, but is widely used in the form of Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA) [9] to analyze gene expression. GSEA utilizes the graph structure of
the GO to determine whether a deﬁned set of genes shows statistically signiﬁcant, con-
cordant differences between two biological states; it utilizes the annotation of sets of
genes with GO terms and the GO graph structure and inference rules to statistically test
for enriched GO terms. A large number of tools were developed to perform GSEA, and
it has lead to discoveries of cancer mechanisms [9], evolutionary differences in primates
[10], and GSEA is now a standard tool in many biological analyses, as evidenced by more
than 3,000 citations2 for the original paper. Similar enrichment analyses are now being
performed using ontologies of other domains, such as the Human Disease Ontology [11].
The graph structure of ontologies is also widely utilized for semantic similarity anal-
yses [12]. Semantic similarity measures apply a metric on an ontology in order to com-
pare the similarity between data that is annotated with classes in the ontology. Some
metrics are based on the distance between two nodes in the ontologies’ graph structure,
while others compare sets of classes that are closed with respect to relations in the on-
tology. In some cases, the metrics include further information, such as the information
content that a class in an ontology has within a given domain. Importantly, however, se-
2Based on Google Scholar, 12 Jan 2012.

mantic similarity measures rely on the number and the kind of distinctions that the on-
tology developers have made explicit, and utilize the explicit semantics in an ontology
only indirectly.
Another application of ontologies is in text mining and literature search and retrieval.
The availability of a common terminology throughout biology enables the task of named
entity recognition, i.e., the identiﬁcation of standardized terms in natural language texts.
When terms from ontologies can reliable be detected in natural language texts, ontologies
can be used for retrieving text documents from literature archives such as PubMed [13].
This task is made easier when terms in ontologies are widely used, and several biomed-
ical ontologies have been evaluated based on how well their terms can be recognized in
scientiﬁc literature [14].
Neither of the applications of biomedical ontologies we discussed so far actually
relies on formalized semantics, axioms, the use of knowledge representation languages
and automated reasoning, or philosophical foundations. Nevertheless, the past years have
seen a rapid increase in applying formal methods to biomedical ontologies. In particu-
lar, the Web Ontology Language (OWL) [15] is now widely used to represent biomedi-
cal ontologies [5]. In some cases, more expressive languages such as ﬁrst- and monadic
second-order logic is used to specify ontologies, in particular for biological sequences
[16] and molecular structures and graphs [17]. The stated aims of using the axiomatic
method [18] and knowledge representation languages for biomedical ontologies are man-
ifold, and include, among others, the search for philosophical rigour and a foundation
in “good” philosophy [19], providing “unambiguous” documentation of the meaning
of terms in a vocabulary [20], verifying the consistency of a (conceptual) data model
[21,22], verifying the consistency of data with respect to a data model [21,23], enabling
complex retrieval and querying through automated reasoning [24], integrating multiple
ontologies [25,26], and decreasing the cost of developing and maintaining an ontology
[27,28]. Furthermore, the application of formal methods in biomedical ontologies has the
potential to reveal mistakes in the design of ontologies and thereby improve their utility
for scientiﬁc analyses [7,29]. Several projects have started to axiomatize biomedical on-
tologies [22,26,30,31], and these projects have led to changes in the ontologies and the
detection and removal of contradictory statements [25,22]. Other researchers have sug-
gested changes to improve ontologies’ structures and axioms based on applying formal,
ontological and philosophical methods [7,29,32,33], or they provide ontological inter-
pretations of domain-speciﬁc knowledge by applying some formal ontological theory to
some phenomena in a domain [34,32,35,36].
Despite the large number of research projects that apply formal ontological theories
to (scientiﬁc) domains, no common evaluation criteria are being applied in these stud-
ies. Examples of criteria of evaluation include formal consistency [37], identiﬁcation of
unsatisﬁable classes [22,25], conformance to a “good” philosophy (i.e., some particular
philosophical view) [38,39,19], user acceptance [40], conformance to naming conven-
tions [41] or the recall of ontology class labels in scientiﬁc literature [14]. Only few of
these criteria actually evaluate the application of ontologies to some task, while the ma-
jority of these criteria evaluate the research results based on philosophical, formal and
technical criteria that lie within the domain of ontology or its underlying technologies
themselves.

3. Towards quantitative evaluation criteria for research results in applied ontology
The selection and application of evaluation criteria may provide us with the means to dis-
tinguish research in applied ontology from research in non-applied ontology. In applied
ontology, ontologies are being used for some task within a domain, and that task lies usu-
ally outside of the domain of ontology itself3. Consequently, quality criteria for research
in applied ontology will be derived from the task to which the research is being applied,
and not from the domain of ontology itself. On the other hand, the search for philosoph-
ical foundation and rigour, including the demonstration that a particular philosophical
theory is capable of expressing distinctions that are being made within a domain, are
examples of research goals of non-applied ontology, not of applied ontology, because
the aim of the research and its evaluation will generally lie within the realm of ontology
or philosophy, not within the domain of application. Applying a particular philosophical
theory can, in many cases, improve the utility of an ontology within a domain. Never-
theless, the fact that a philosophical theory can be applied within a domain alone does
not, in our opinion, constitute a result in applied ontology; on the other hand, that the
application of a particular philosophical theory or perspective improves the utility of an
ontology for some task in a domain would constitute a result in applied ontology.
We can also observe who or what directly beneﬁts from a particular aim of research
in ontology: either the users and uses of an ontology, ontology-based applications, and
speciﬁc tasks to which ontologies are being applied, or the developers and maintainers
of an ontology. Developers and maintainers of ontologies will beneﬁt directly from de-
creased maintenance work, ease of construction and the availability of technical docu-
mentation, while users and applications of an ontology will only beneﬁt indirectly from
such research goals (and these beneﬁts would normally have to be demonstrated). Users
and applications of ontologies beneﬁt from the community agreement which ontologies
can bring about and their resulting potential for ontology-based data annotation and inte-
gration, retrieval and querying, novel scientiﬁc analyses, and in some cases consistency
veriﬁcation of data. In particular, users and uses of ontologies will beneﬁt from some-
thing that ontologies can do, and research in applied ontology – ontology research to
serve some domain’s use case – will have to be measured on how well they perform their
task.
One of the most widely cited applications of ontologies in science is their potential
to facilitate community agreement of the meaning of terms in a domain. These terms are
frequently used as metadata in scientiﬁc databases and publications. Consequently, ap-
plying ontologies to standardize the vocabulary used as meta-data can enable the integra-
tion and interoperability of databases and research results. Yet, how could such a research
result – an ontology that is intended to effectively standardize the meaning of terms in
a vocabulary in order to support interoperability and integration – be evaluated? Since
the prime aim of such a research result is to achieve community agreement, an obvious
evaluation criterion would be to conduct a user-study that evaluates whether different
users can consistently apply terms within a standardized task such as the annotation of a
3A notable exception to this is when we apply ontological methods to the domain of ontology itself, and
classify different kinds of ontology, analyze the types of relations between classes, relations, instances and
individuals, etc. Such an ontology could, for example, be used to provide the conceptual foundation of an
ontology editor, to enable interoperability between different ontology learning algorithms, in portals providing
access to different ontologies, or in an ontology evaluation framework.

data set with classes from an ontology. For this task, Kappa statistics can be applied and
a κ value can be reported that measures the degree to which annotator can consistently
apply an ontology within the task [42]. Alternatively, an integrated scientiﬁc analysis
of the data in multiple databases between which interoperability is intended to achieve
can be performed and evaluated on a scientiﬁc use case. For example, the development
of formal deﬁnitions for phenotype ontologies [43] could be quantitatively evaluated by
using these deﬁnitions to integrate multiple model organism databases and analyze the
integrated knowledge with regard to its potential for revealing novel candidate genes for
diseases [44].
The support of queries and the accurate retrieval of data is another task that ontolo-
gies or the axioms in ontologies are developed for. Information retrieval is a discipline in
computer science for which rigorous quantitative evaluation criteria are available [45],
often based on the comparison to a gold standard or a set of positive and negative exam-
ples based on which statistical measures can be applied. Quantitative measures include
the F-measure (the harmonic mean between precision and recall) or the area-under-curve
in an analysis of the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve [1]. If an ontology, or
axioms in an ontology, are intended for retrieval, measures of this kind can be applied to
demonstrate the success.
In many cases, axioms in ontologies are added in order to enable novel queries that
make distinctions which could not be made before. For example, adding axioms that
assert a partonomy to a purely taxonomic representation of anatomical structures enables
new kind of queries based on the use of parthood relations. Such a result – the addition
of new axioms in order to enable novel types of queries and retrieval operations – can be
evaluated using the same quantitative measures as ontology-based retrieval. All of these
descriptions assume that there is already some data which is being retrieved using queries
over the ontology. In the absence of such data, e.g., when a new ontology is proposed
within a domain with the intent to use this ontology to annotate data in the future, data
could still be simulated and used in the evaluation.
Further applications of formalized ontologies include the veriﬁcation of data with
respect to certain constraints that are expressed within the ontology. For example, in the
domain of biological pathways4, the BioPax ontology [21] has been proposed, and one of
its aims is to verify pathway data with respect to the model that the BioPax ontology pro-
vides. Similarly, a recent study used formal ontological analysis and automated reason-
ing to investigate the consistency of data stored in the BioModels database (a database of
computational models in systems biology), and identiﬁed a large number of incorrectly
characterized database entries [23].
Applications of ontology research in scientiﬁc analyses and in the process of making
novel scientiﬁc discoveries are maybe the best evaluated contributions in applied ontol-
ogy, since the contributions that ontology research can make in these areas is commonly
subject to the same evaluation criteria as other contributions in the scientiﬁc domain of
application. For example, the GSEA method was evaluated both using statistical mea-
sures and experimentally veriﬁed data that has been extensively studied [9], and the use
of semantic similarity measures to identify interacting proteins based on similar Gene
Ontology annotations is rigorously evaluated and compared using ROC analysis and cor-
relation coefﬁcient analysis [46]. In each case, the scientiﬁc domain to which ontology-
4A biological pathway is a series of interactions that lead to a particular outcome, such as a chemical product
or the realization of a particular function.

Application
Potential evaluation method
Quantiﬁable result
Establish community agreement of
the meaning of terms within a
domain; facilitate data annotation;
support integration and interoper-
ability
User
study;
integrated
analysis;
completeness proof
Inter-annotator agreement,
Cohen’s Kappa
Retrieval
Comparison to gold standard, ROC
analysis, unit tests
area-under-curve,
F-
measure, precision, recall
Scientiﬁc analysis (GSEA, seman-
tic similarity)
Comparison to gold standard, sta-
tistical analysis
p-value, area-under-curve,
F-measure, precision, re-
call
Consistency of data
automated reasoning, performance
evaluation
computational complexity
Determine the consistency of a
(conceptual) model
automated reasoning, consistency
proof
consistent or not (binary)
Test the accuracy of a (conceptual)
model
automated reasoning, unit tests (for
inferences), unit tests (for applica-
tion)
number
of
unsatisﬁable
classes, number of tests
passed/failed
Table 1. Opportunities for the quantitative evaluation of research results in applied ontology.
based methods are being applied has established (and often demands) quantitative eval-
uation criteria that can guarantee – at least to some degree – the objective and empirical
evaluation and comparison of research results.
There are several other tasks that may fall in the domain of applied ontology re-
search. For example, formal ontological analysis can be applied to specify a (concep-
tual) model, verify its consistency and identify modelling choices that potentially lead
to faulty results; or formal ontology can be applied to formally and “unambiguously”
specify the meaning of terms in a vocabulary (e.g., to enable communication between
autonomous intelligent agents). Some of these tasks can also be evaluated quantitatively:
while consistency of a conceptual model is a binary quality that relies on a consistency
proof, incorrect consequences can be estimated using predeﬁned tests that aim to make
inferences of a certain kind. The “unambiguous” formal speciﬁcation of the meaning of
a term using an ontology would require a meta-theoretical analysis and a completeness
proof for the ontology.
To summarize, depending on the task that is being performed using some ontology
research result, we will be able to derive different quality criteria, some of which are
illustrated in Table 1. However, the heterogeneity of ontology-based applications and
ontology-driven approaches prevents the application of a single quality and evaluation
criteria. Instead, we have to evaluate research results in applied ontology in conjunction
with a particular task to which this result is being applied. For example, instead of eval-
uating the quality of an ontology O that represents biological pathways, we evaluate O
with respect to different tasks that it is intended to perform. For example, O may be used
to achieve community agreement about the terms used to annotate pathway databases
(task t1), and we can evaluate O with respect to this task. On the other hand, O may
also be used to verify the consistency of biological pathway data (task t2), and we may
evaluate O with respect to t2. It may then turn out that O achieves one task very well
while its performance in a second task is poor.

Finally, robustness of research results in applied ontology can be evaluated based on
how well a research result in applied ontology performs in multiple tasks, or how well
it can be adapted to other tasks, including tasks that are performed in other domains.
Robustness can be evaluated based on how much the quantitative evaluation changes un-
der changing application conditions. For example, if the research result is an ontology
that is being developed for the semantic annotation of a particular database and has been
demonstrated (e.g., based on a user-study and the report of the inter-annotator agreement)
to perform well in this task, changing the database and performing a similar study and
quantitative evaluation allows to evaluate robustness: does the quantitative evaluation re-
sult change signiﬁcantly, or does it remain the same? If the quantitative evaluation results
do not change signiﬁcantly under changing conditions of application (or they improve),
evidence for a robust research result have been found. Notably, it is the application of
quantitative evaluation criteria that enables the direct comparability of the suitability of
a research result in different tasks, and therefore enables an objective demonstration of
robustness.
4. Proposed evaluation and quality criteria
Several evaluation methods for research in applied ontology have been proposed, and
multiple studies have attempted to evaluate the quality of ontologies in several domains.
To the best of our knowledge, no study has yet emphasized the need for objective, quan-
titative evaluation criteria for applied ontology research; on the contrary, many criteria
that aim to measure the “quality” of ontologies are derived from philosophical consider-
ations or based on social considerations. In particular, several studies emphasize the need
to treat ontologies similarly to scientiﬁc publications and propose an evaluation strategy
similar to scientiﬁc peer review. For example, Obrst et al. aim to identify “meaningful,
theoretically grounded units of measure in [ontology]” and perform an extensive review
of previous ontology evaluation attempts, including a brief discussion of application-
based evaluation approaches and quantiﬁable results [2]. However, Obrst et al. dismiss
application-based evaluation strategies since they are “expensive to carry out”, and seem
to favour evaluation by humans based on principles derived from common sense, from
formal logics or from philosophy (especially in the form of philosophical realism). A
similar route is being taken by Smith who suggests that peer review of ontologies should
become standard practice, since “[p]eer review provides an impetus to the improvement
of scientiﬁc knowledge over time” [3]. Such a peer review system is intended to be
adopted by the OBO Foundry ontology community [47,3]. The use of expert peer review
to evaluate ontologies seems like an uncontroversial suggestion since peer review is the
established method for evaluating contributions throughout science. However, different
from applied ontology, most scientiﬁc ﬁelds have widely accepted, and in many cases
objective, quantitative, criteria on which peer reviewers can base their judgement. The
criteria for peer review proposed by Smith [3], Orbst et al. [2], and others [48], are largely
derived from “common sense” or particular philosophical positions and have not been
demonstrated to improve the performance of ontology-based research in any application.
Peer review cannot be used to evaluate research results when there is no agreement as to
how a discipline is supposed to achieve scientiﬁc progress and how these achievements
can be measured. In the absence of accepted and empirically tested criteria, peer review

will merely reﬂect the personal opinions of the reviewers, and not lead to a fair evaluation
of a research result’s quality or its ﬁtness for a particular purpose.
A prime example of a conﬂict resulting from the lack of accepted, empirically tested
evaluation criteria is the realism debate [49,50,39]. The realism debate is an argument
between the proponent of the “realist methodology”, who argue that ontologies must be
evaluated with respect to some form of philosophical realism [39,2,48], and researchers
in applied ontology who argue for a research methodology in which ontological deci-
sions are motivated and evaluated by applications and not philosophical considerations
[49,50]. The difference between a philosophical and an application-centric perspective
may be one of the reasons for misunderstandings between the two sides in this debate:
while one side attacks the other in the realm of philosophy – where philosophical po-
sitions are attacked and defended, and some of the arguments have been exchanged be-
tween philosophers for thousands of years –, the proponents of an application-centric
view would expect it to be a matter of empirical investigation to determine which onto-
logical design decisions address the needs of the ontology users better than another. In
many cases, it may turn our that two philosophical theories are indistinguishable for a
particular scientiﬁc task (e.g., when two theories are empirically equivalent), in which
case the particular choice of philosophical explanation will not affect the performance of
an application: when it is in principle impossible to design an experiment that can distin-
guish between two alternative theories, we would leave the realm of empirical science if
we attempt to defend or attack either theory.
There are some notable previous studies which applied quantitative measures for
formalized ontologies in biomedical applications. For example, Boeker et al. [40] “aim
to analyze the correctness of the use of logic by the OBO Foundry or close-to OBO
Foundry ontologies and related mappings”, and they identify approximately 23% of the
axioms in the evaluated ontologies as incorrect based on the judgement of four experts.
These results are consistent with another study by Hoehndorf et al. [25] that evaluates
contradictory class deﬁnitions in OBO ontologies and identiﬁes several thousand unsat-
isﬁable classes using automated reasoning. Common to these two studies is that they
evaluate ontologies based on aspects that can be derived from their formal representa-
tions alone, assuming that considerations such as the consistency of an ontology or the
absence of undesired inferences from an ontology will always give some indication about
an ontology’s quality. However, for some tasks, not even consistency of an ontology is
required. Boeker et al. “hypothesize that the main and only reason why [the problem-
atic axioms have] little affected the usefulness of these ontologies up to now is due to
their predominant use as controlled vocabularies rather than as computable ontologies”
[40], already acknowledging that their evaluation has not addressed the main task for
which the evaluated ontologies are being applied, but rather some task (retrieval through
automated reasoning) that these ontologies could potentially also be used for. Similarly,
Hoehndorf et al. identify several unsatisﬁable classes in biomedical ontologies, but fail
to identify the problems that these may cause – except again in the hypothetical task of
using automated reasoning to answer queries over the ontologies. Even more problemat-
ically, the evaluated ontologies are successfully being used for automated reasoning al-
though they contain unsatisﬁable classes and may lead to undesirable inferences. In these
reasoning tasks, applications such as database queries restrict the types of operations
that are being performed over the ontologies. From a certain perspective, applications
provide an interface to formal ontologies that may limit the ontology to a lower expres-

sivity than the knowledge representation language in which the ontology is formulated.
For example, if an inference mechanism that lacks the capability to interpret negation is
used to process an ontology, retrieval operations can be successful even in the presence
of contradictory class deﬁnitions or inconsistencies. Similarly, undesired inferences may
disappear when only certain kinds of queries can being performed. In some cases, “in-
correct” consequences may even be desirable: for example, in analyses that utilize mea-
sures of semantic similarity, the similarity between two classes in an ontology may not
coincide with some ontological distinctions (such as between occurrent and continuant)
that are deemed to be “correct” within the domain [2], but lead to undesired results in a
similarity-based analysis.
Finally, Widely used criteria for ontology development are the OBO Foundry princi-
ples5. The accepted criteria (as of 12 Feb 2012) include that ontologies must be (1) open
and freely available to all users, (2) that they are expressed using a common syntax, (3)
that they use unique URIs, (4) that they include versioning information, (5) that their con-
tent is clearly delineated and orthogonal to other ontologies, (6) that they contain natural
language deﬁnitions for all their terms, (7) that they deﬁne relations based on patterns
described in the OBO Relationship Ontology, (8) that they are well-documented and (9)
have multiple, mutually independent users, (10) that they are developed collaboratively
while (11) only a single person is responsible for the ontology, (12) that they follow on-
tology naming conventions, and (13) that they are maintained in light of scientiﬁc ad-
vance. The majority of these criteria (1-5, 9-13) are intrinsically social criteria; although
their discussion is outside the scope of the current article, it must be emphasized that
these criteria are highly valuable for enabling wide access to the content of the ontolo-
gies within the OBO Foundry, and therefore serve to enable scientiﬁc discourse about
and investigations into the ontologies and their content. The remaining criteria could be
classiﬁed based on methods to demonstrate that they are satisﬁed and based on the tasks
which they aim to improve. For example, while the inclusion of textual deﬁnitions (cri-
terion 6) and documentation (criterion 8) may improve comprehensibility of ontologies,
comprehensibility also depends on the quality of the textual deﬁnitions and documenta-
tion; user-studies may be used to evaluate and quantify the effect of these criteria, and
compare them against automated methods to generate textual deﬁnitions [51]. Criterion
(7), the use of relations that are deﬁned in the OBO Relationship Ontology [7], aims to
improve interoperability between ontologies through reuse of relations. However, while
relation names may be reused across ontologies, it is not always guaranteed that they
are reused in the same meaning. To quantify whether criterion (7) succeeds in enabling
interoperability between ontologies, it would, for example, be possible to combine two
ontologies that both use relations from the OBO Relationship Ontology, and evaluate
whether or not they yield desired inferences (i.e., a comparison of inferences against a
gold standard).
5. Conclusions
Our central position is that research results in applied ontology should always be eval-
uated against a task for which they are intended, i.e., the evaluation must be based on
the behavior of the whole system consisting of the ontology and the applications that are
5Both accepted and proposed principles can be found on http://obofoundry.org/crit.shtml

based on it. Whether the research result is an ontology, or an ontology design pattern, or
a method to formulate particular phenomena within a domain, the beneﬁt it can bring to
the domain cannot be evaluated based on the research result alone; instead, any evalua-
tion criteria must evaluate the whole system consisting of the research result and a task
– or a set of tasks – to which the ontology-based research is being applied.
Many of the applications and tasks in which ontologies play a role are amenable to
quantitative evaluation criteria. Quantitative measures enable the objective comparison
of research results and can play a crucial role in the evaluation of research. We have
reviewed several common applications of applied ontology research in biomedicine, and
discussed potential quantitative evaluation measures for each of them.
These quantitative measures could be adopted in addition to already established
qualitative evaluation criteria, and they can also serve to justify and reﬁne existing qual-
itative measures. For example, while we have little doubt that qualitative measures such
as formal consistency and the absence of contradictory statements in an ontology are
useful and important quality criteria, we believe that many of these qualitative criteria
can be derived from underlying quantitative measures of the performance of ontology-
based research within a task: consistency of ontologies is a useful criterion because many
applications of ontologies depend on consistency and because consistent ontologies will
often lead to better outcomes in whatever application an ontology is being applied for.
Furthermore, with the application of quantitative measures, ontology development
methodologies can be evaluated with respect to how well they ensure or improve the
performance of research results in particular tasks within a domain. More importantly,
accepted evaluation criteria for research results are the ﬁrst step in developing a research
methodology for the ﬁeld of applied ontology. It was not our aim to establish such criteria
for research in applied ontology; instead, we believe that we, as a community of scientists
and scholars, must increase our efforts towards establishing such evaluation criteria for
research in applied ontology, based on which we can derive a research methodology
within our ﬁeld.
