Forthcoming in Operations Research (2021)
Computing Large Market Equilibria Using Abstractions
Christian Kroer*
IEOR Department
Columbia University
Alexander Peysakhovich*
Facebook AI Research
Eric Sodomka
Facebook Core Data Science
Nicolas E. Stier-Moses
Facebook Core Data Science
Abstract
Computing market equilibria is an important practical problem for market design, for example in fair
division of items. However, computing equilibria requires large amounts of information (typically
the valuation of every buyer for every item) and computing power. We consider ameliorating these
issues by applying a method used for solving complex games: constructing a coarsened abstraction
of a given market, solving for the equilibrium in the abstraction, and lifting the prices and allocations
back to the original market. We show how to bound important quantities such as regret, envy,
Nash social welfare, Pareto optimality, and maximin share/proportionality when the abstracted
prices and allocations are used in place of the real equilibrium. We then study two abstraction
methods of interest for practitioners: (1) ﬁlling in unknown valuations using techniques from matrix
completion, (2) reducing the problem size by aggregating groups of buyers/items into smaller numbers
of representative buyers/items and solving for equilibrium in this coarsened market. We ﬁnd that in
real data allocations/prices that are relatively close to equilibria can be computed from even very
coarse abstractions.
1
Introduction
The problem of computing the equilibrium prices and allocation of a market economy has large informational and
computational requirements (Hayek 1945, Scarf 1967). In this work we apply the idea of abstraction to market
equilibrium computation. We construct a simpliﬁed model of a market, referred to as an abstraction, solve for the
equilibrium in the abstraction, and then lift the solution back to the original market. We derive analytic bounds for the
error in the computed equilibrium as a function of abstraction quality, describe two methods of abstraction that can be
useful in practical problems, and evaluate our approach on real datasets.
Computing optimal allocations subject to constraints has been a problem of interest since the inception of modern
economic theory. Early applications included trying to use linear programming to plan the entire Soviet economy
(Kantorovich 1960, 1975). Modern market designers, with slightly less grand visions, also use centralized algorithms to
construct allocations with various properties such as incentive compatibility, envy freeness, stability, efﬁciency, and
notions of fairness (Roth 2002, Klemperer 2018).
We will focus on the canonical case of Fisher markets. In Fisher markets we have a set of divisible items to be
allocated and a set of individuals who may receive the items (our theoretical results also hold for the indivisible setting).
Individuals have a total budget of money and valuations for each item. Formally, a market equilibrium consists of a
price for each item and an allocation such that (1) individuals cannot improve their utility by using their budgets to
purchase a different set of items (given the prices) and (2) the total demand for each item (i.e., the sum of the solution
of each individual’s maximization problem of allocating their budget) is equal to the supply. The equilibrium in Fisher
Preprint. Work in progress.
arXiv:1901.06230v2  [cs.GT]  3 Sep 2021

markets that maximizes Nash social welfare can be computed by solving the Eisenberg-Gale (EG) convex program
(Eisenberg and Gale 1959).1
An important reason for computation of market equilibria in practice is the problem of eliciting valuations and assigning
items to individuals in the absence of money. One such mechanism is known as competitive equilibrium from equal
incomes or commonly simply CEEI (Varian et al. 1974). Individuals are endowed with a budget of pseudo currency,
give their valuations for items, an equilibrium of the resulting market is computed, and individuals receive the allocation
from this equilibrium. This mechanism is known to have good properties: it is envy free,2 achieves a Pareto-optimal
outcome, and is incentive compatible when the market is large (Budish 2011, Azevedo and Budish 2018). A version of
CEEI is used in practice in course allocations at business schools (Budish et al. 2016).
While the course allocation setting has complex preferences and constraints, we are primarily motivated by applications
where the assumptions of linear additive utilities are appropriate and where scales are large.3 One may consider using
Fisher markets in recommender systems. Here buyers are content creators and items are impressions. An advantage of
Fisher market based allocation, rather than standard click-through rate maximization, is that it creates a more equal
distribution of impressions across creators which is desirable in many cases. One example is the recommendation of
jobs on online market places. There, click-through rate maximization can lead to congestion issues where some jobs
receive many applicants and others receive few. Such an extreme outcome is bad for both the job posters and the job
seekers.
As another example, it is known that in online advertising, Fisher markets with quasi-linear utilities are directly related to
the budget-management problem faced by large internet platforms that sell impressions using paced auctions (Conitzer
et al. 2021, 2019).4 These systems are typically online (e.g., using auction-based pacing). In this setting, the static
model can either be used to warm start pacing multipliers off past data (as these multipliers can be derived from the EG
program (Conitzer et al. 2019)), or to run a posted price-based system where prices are updated by computing static
markets from past demand and supply. In addition, computation of static Fisher market equilibria is of interest even in
the online case for ex-post market analysis and counter-factual reasoning (“what would happen to prices if supply of X
were to go up by Y %?”) in such markets. An interesting future direction is to consider how to solve the Fisher-market
convex program in an online fashion. In an online setting some of our proposed abstraction methods could be combined
with an online algorithm directly, for example our low-rank market model.
Scaling market equilibrium computation to larger markets, such as internet-scale ones, requires solving two major
challenges. First, one needs access to large amounts of information (e.g., every person’s valuation for every item or
item combination). Second, one needs access to enough computing power to solve the related convex program which is
solvable in polynomial time (Nisan et al. 2007) but still unwieldy for very large markets (e.g., thousands or millions of
buyers).
In this paper we propose a solution methodology for ﬁnding the equilibria of large markets using market abstractions.
We use the available details of a market instance to create a compact abstraction (a simpliﬁed model of the market),
solve for the equilibrium in the abstraction, and then lift the solution to the original market. We provide a general set
of results that allow us to bound various metrics of relevance that capture the distance to equilibria for the allocation
and prices derived from the abstraction. This is the best that one can hope for large instances since computing the
true equilibrium is computationally hard. Some metrics for which our bounds are valid include regret, envy, Pareto
optimality, and Nash social welfare. We show that these results hold both for standard and quasi-linear Fisher markets.
We then turn to practice and focus on two abstraction methods of particular interest. The ﬁrst uses techniques from
matrix completion to infer valuations for person-item pairs that we may not have access to. We refer to this case as
low-rank markets. The second consists in reducing the size of the market (and thus the computational burden) by
replacing groups of buyers and items with representative buyers and representative items, respectively. We solve for
equilibria in the space of representative buyers/items and then split the allocation of each representative among the
buyers/items it represents. We refer to this case as representative market equilibrium. We show that this abstraction
reduces the computational complexity and can be efﬁciently parallelized. We provide two lifting procedures to go from
1Nash Social Welfare is of independent interest as a welfare criterion as it “exhibits an elusive combination of fairness and
efﬁciency properties” (Caragiannis et al. 2016).
2When goods are not divisible, an approximate version is envy-free-up-to-one-good (Budish 2011).
3We also assume divisible items, but this can instead be thought of as lotteries over items being permitted rather than items
themselves actually being divisible.
4The standard Fisher model assumes that leftover budgets are useless outside the market. This assumption can be removed by
making the utility function quasi-linear. In the quasi-linear Fisher market, equilibria can still be computed using a convex program
(Cole et al. 2017). A full discussion of division mechanisms with real money is beyond the scope of this paper, though we will show
that our main allocation results hold in both standard and quasi-linear Fisher markets.
2

the abstract solution to the original market—a proportional and a recursive version—and discuss the tradeoffs between
them.
We apply these abstraction methods, which can be used together, to real datasets including a novel one which we have
collected, and evaluate the quality of solutions for various abstraction levels. We ﬁnd that the equilibria found even
in coarse abstractions have low errors in envy, regret, maximin share, distance to Pareto optimality, and Nash social
welfare.
2
Related Work
The use of equilibrium assumptions to make estimates of deep ‘structural’ parameters is of interest in both applied
micro and macroeconomics (Berry et al. 1995, Ljungqvist and Sargent 2018). Often, the lack of individual-level data, or
computing power, requires the use of representative agents (i.e., a single consumer that represents all individuals in the
economy). To get around this issue, analysts typically make (strong) assumptions which imply that the equilibrium prices,
aggregate decisions, and some structural parameters computed using a representative-agent stand-in are equivalent
to the ones that would be derived from a model which includes all individual agents. In our work we are speciﬁcally
interested in the situation where these assumptions are not true and the lifted answer from the abstraction does not
yield the true equilibrium prices/allocation. There is increasing interest in using heterogeneous agent models in applied
economic modeling (Hommes 2006) and expanding our results to these cases is an interesting direction for future work.
Abstraction is an idea often used in the context of games. In two-player, zero-sum games (e.g., poker) a popular goal is
to compute a Nash equilibrium strategy during training time and use it in actual play against opponents. In large games,
however, it is impractical to solve for the Nash equilibrium of the original game and practitioners solve for the Nash
equilibrium of an abstraction and then lift it to be a strategy for the original game. Abstractions often use heuristics and
are hand tuned (Gilpin et al. 2007, Waugh et al. 2009, Ganzfried and Sandholm 2014, Brown et al. 2015, Brown and
Sandholm 2018) but they have more recently begun to be constructed automatically using function approximation (e.g.,
deep learning) (Moravˇcík et al. 2017, Brown et al. 2019). In games, unlike in markets, the relationship between the
quality of abstraction and the quality of the lifted strategy in the original game has been heavily studied (Lanctot et al.
2012, Kroer and Sandholm 2014, 2016, 2018).
There is a literature on abstraction in non-market-based allocation problems (Walsh et al. 2010, Peng and Sandholm
2016, Lu and Boutilier 2015). The scalability problem faced in the allocation setting is similar to ours, but because the
underlying optimization problem is very different (i.e., the maximization of allocative efﬁciency rather than a market
equilibrium) the abstraction methods and results in these papers are quite different in character from ours.
There is a large literature on computing market equilibria in Fisher markets using convex programming (Eisenberg and
Gale 1959, Shmyrev 2009) or gradient-based methods (Birnbaum et al. 2011, Nesterov and Shikhman 2018), typically
via the Eisenberg-Gale convex program (EG). There is also work extending the EG program to new settings such as
quasi-linear utilities, indivisible items, or set-valued utility functions (Chen et al. 2007, Caragiannis et al. 2016, Cole
et al. 2017, Cole and Gkatzelis 2018, Murray et al. 2020). Our paper complements this existing work as our results are
agnostic to the algorithm used for equilibrium computation; any of these algorithms can be employed for computing a
market equilibrium in conjunction with our market abstraction model.
The literature on utilitarian welfare maximization in the context of market equilibrium is related to the quasilinear
variant of the Fisher-market setting that we consider. In particular, that literature is motivated by applications to
auctions, where market equilibrium with quasilinear utilities is a natural concept. Typically, this literature focuses
on indivisible items, but does not allow budget constraints. For example, Baldwin and Klemperer (2019) study such
a setting motivated by the auctions used for auctioning off loans during ﬁnancial crises. Leme and Wong (2020)
study fast oracle-algorithms for computing market equilibria in this setting when only an aggregate demand oracle is
available. Bichler and Waldherr (2019) study an exchange setting with utilitarian welfare maximization, where budgets
are allowed. However, the problem of computing a market equilibrium in that setting turns out to be signiﬁcantly harder
than in our setting (Σp
2-hard in particular). See Bichler et al. (2020) for a survey of the general literature on market
equilibrium with utilitarian welfare. In this paper, we focus on the case of Fisher markets with budgets, where the EG
convex program and its quasilinear extension naturally leads to market equilibrium. An interesting direction for future
work would be to apply abstraction techniques to more general market equilibrium problems under utilitarian welfare
maximization.
Another reason for computing market equilibria is to perform counterfactual reasoning in complex systems such as
online advertising (Bottou et al. 2013, Peysakhovich et al. 2019). For example, it is known that market equilibrium
is also the equilibrium that results from budget smoothing in ﬁrst and second-price auction markets such as those for
online advertising (Borgs et al. 2007, Conitzer et al. 2021, 2019). Thus, computing EG equilibria in large markets gives
3

a way to answer counterfactual questions like: “what would happen to prices if supply of some items changed by 10%?”
using only supply and demand information without having to simulate the actual rules of the market.
A related setting to ours is the one with linear additive utilities but indivisible items. In such settings, market equilibrium
is not guaranteed to exist, but a closely related solution concept is to compute the discrete allocation that maximizes the
EG objective (i.e., simply discretize the EG program). This computation is used in allocation mechanisms on Spliddit,
an online application which helps groups of individuals allocate items fairly (Goldman and Procaccia 2015), motivated
by problems such as fairly splitting jewelry, artworks, or even an entire estate. The site also allows some of the goods to
be divisible (e.g., cash or ﬁnancial assets). Our theoretical results also apply to this setting, though our algorithmic
results for generating smaller markets via clustering would require changes in order to yield a reasonable solution
approach.
3
Market Equilibrium in Fisher Markets
In this paper we focus on the canonical Fisher market setting with linear utilities. We have a set of n buyers and a set of
m items (or goods; we will use the two terms interchangeably). Each item j has a supply of sj units that are divisible.
We denote by X ∈Rn×m
+
the allocations of items to buyers where xij refers to the share of item j allocated to buyer i.
We say an allocation is a full allocation if the sum of each column j of X is sj. We use the convention that a vector xi
corresponding to buyer i and denoted in lower case is the i-th row of X, and use the shorthand [n] = {1, . . . , n} to
denote the index set of buyers or items.
Each buyer i is endowed with a budget Bi. We denote by V ∈Rn×m
+
the matrix of values with vij being the value
of buyer i for item j and vi the vector of values for buyer i. For a given allocation X we assume that total values are
additive and linear, i.e.,
ui(xi) = vi · xi =
X
j
vijxij.
We assume throughout that each item j has at least one buyer i such that vij > 0, and each buyer i has at least one
item j such that vij > 0. Note that if this does not hold then we may preprocess away such degenerate buyers and items.
Deﬁnition 1. Given (linear, anonymous) prices p ∈Rm
+ for the items, the demand set for buyer i is
di(p) = {arg max
xi∈Rm
+
vi · xi : p · xi ≤Bi, xi ≤s}.
Note that in our deﬁnition of demand computation each buyer is supply-aware: they require xi ≤s in their computation.
This is not crucial for any of our results and we could also remove that constraint from the deﬁnition of di(p). Including
it is motivated by the fact that supply-aware buyers allow market equilibria to capture budget-smoothing in second-price
auction markets (Conitzer et al. 2021).
Deﬁnition 2. A set of prices and an allocation (p∗, X∗) is a market equilibrium if x∗
i ∈di(p∗) for all i ∈[n] and X∗
is a full allocation.
A market equilibrium is, in general, hard to compute (Chen et al. 2009, Othman et al. 2016), even in the piecewise-linear
Fisher case (Chen and Teng 2009). Furthermore markets may have multiple equilibria in the case of supply-aware
buyers. However, in linear Fisher markets a particular market equilibrium is computable using the Eisenberg-Gale (EG)
convex program (Eisenberg and Gale 1959):
max
X∈Rn×m
+
X
i
Bilog(vi · xi)
subject to
X
i
xij ≤sj ∀j.
This convex program has no incentive constraints and no prices, so it may be surprising that it is somehow related to
a market equilibrium. However, it can be shown that the optimal solution X∗for this convex program is a market
equilibrium allocation. The corresponding prices are the dual variables associated with each of the supply constraints.
An attractive feature of the EG equilibrium is that it tells us exactly what the equilibrium outcome actually maximizes—
the geometric mean of individual utilities weighted by budgets—i.e., the Nash social welfare when budgets are 1 (Varian
et al. 1974, Caragiannis et al. 2016). For this reason the EG solution is also referred to as the max Nash welfare (MNW)
allocation.
4

The equilibrium found by the EG procedure has a useful structure: for every item that an individual is receiving in their
equilibrium allocation they receive equal ‘bang per buck.’ Formally, in the EG equilibrium (p∗, X∗)
if x∗
ij, x∗
ij′ > 0 then vij
p∗
j
= vij′
p∗
j′ .
This also corresponds to the unique equilibrium in the case where buyers are not supply-aware. From the convex
program it can be shown that the set of EG prices and per-buyer utilities are unique. On the other hand, there may be
multiple associated equilibrium allocations, for example, if buyers view two items as perfectly interchangeable.
3.1
Quasi-Linear Fisher Markets
So far we have considered Fisher markets where money has no intrinsic value. These are useful for fair division
applications such as the computation of CEEI where the ‘money’ allocated to each individual is indeed useless outside
the mechanism. Another type of Fisher market is a quasi-linear Fisher market where leftover budget is useful outside
of the market. For example, if we are considering the case of online ad markets, any unspent budget is refunded to the
buyers and can be used in outside purchases. Formally, this changes the utility function to depend on prices as follows:
ui(xi, p) = vi · xi + (Bi −xi · p).
The deﬁnition and existence of equilibrium prices and allocations can be derived just as above. In addition, it is known
that such quasi-linear Fisher market equilibria can also be found via a slightly modiﬁed version of the EG convex
program (Cole et al. 2017).
To keep notation simple, we will focus on the standard Fisher market case for the theory section of this paper. However,
in the Appendix we show that all of the results in terms of bounds on the error introduced by abstraction readily extend
to the case of quasi-linear Fisher markets. In addition, we perform an experiment in the quasi-linear setting and show
that, just as in the standard Fisher setting, abstractions give good results in practice.
4
Abstractions of Markets
We are interested in settings where we do not have full access to the valuation matrix V . Let us call the original market
M = (V, B, s). Instead of M, we consider some smaller market ˜
M = ( ˜V , ˜B, ˜s) which is an abstraction of M. The
number of buyers and items in ˜
M may be smaller than that of M. A market equilibrium (˜p, ˜X) is then computed for the
abstraction ˜
M. Finally, we specify a lifting procedure that generates a set of prices ˆp and an allocation ˆX for M, based
on the abstraction solution (˜p, ˜X). This lifting procedure also produces a valuation matrix ˆV of the same dimensions as
V , such that (ˆp, ˆX) is an equilibrium under the market ˆ
M = ( ˆV , B, s). The purpose of the matrix ˆV , which encodes
the abstraction and lifting procedures, is that we will use it to derive bounds on the solution quality of (ˆp, ˆX) in terms
of V .
To be concrete, the abstract market ˜
M could arise from a clustering of the buyers and items: every buyer is assigned
to a representative buyer, and every item is assigned to a representative item. In that case, the approximate valuation
matrix ˆV would be such that each value ˆvij is equal to the value ˜v˜i,˜j of the corresponding representative buyer ˜i and
representative item ˜j.
Given this setup, our main question is:
Question 1 (Main Question). If (ˆp, ˆX) is an equilibrium with respect to ˆV what can be said about it relative to the
true valuation matrix V ?
Deﬁnition 3. We deﬁne the abstraction error as ∆V = V −ˆV . We use ∆vi to denote vi −ˆvi.
Throughout this section and the section on approximation results we assume that sj = 1 for all j. This is only for ease
of notation, and is without loss of generality as valuations and prices can be rescaled to ﬁt the assumption. The next
section will be focused on showing a rather technical and general theorem which implies the following results:
Result 1 (Main Results, Informal Statement). For commonly used evaluation metrics of candidate solutions such as
regret, Nash social welfare, envy, Pareto optimality, and maximin share, the error from using ˆV instead of V can be
bounded using various matrix norms of ∆V .
Individual bounds will largely be in terms of ∥∆vi∥1, the ℓ1-norm of the change in values for buyer i. Bounds over all
agents will mostly use the ℓ1, ℓ∞-norm for matrices, but where the ℓ1 part is applied to rows rather than columns:
∥∆V ∥1,∞= max
i∈[n] ∥∆vi∥1.
5

Note that the standard deﬁnition of this norm is to apply it to columns, not rows.
Again, we note that while this paper primarily focuses on the divisible Fisher market setting, our results in this section
all carry over to the indivisible setting as well as to quasi-linear Fisher markets.
4.1
LQFS Properties Under Market Abstractions
We now deﬁne a general class of properties of allocations and prices, referred to as linear and quantiﬁed over a ﬁxed set
(LQFS), that will be approximately preserved under abstractions. Our deﬁnition is a generalization of the Balkanski
et al. (2014) notion of linear properties in fair division mechanisms (see Appendix A.1 for why the Balkanski et al.
(2014) deﬁnition does not give us what we want).
We give an abstract deﬁnition of a property that we use to prove a general approximation result. We then instantiate
it for several types of guarantees such as no envy, which compares the current allocation across agents, and global
properties such as the potential for Pareto improvement. The intuition is relatively simply: we wish to capture properties
such that if the property holds in the abstracted market with valuation matrix ˆV , then the error in the property when
measured under V is linearly related to the error ∆V . This will more-or-less follow from the linearity of utilities.
However, a second crucial concern is the set of comparisons that need to be checked, in order for the property to hold.
Intuitively, this set of comparisons should remain invariant under changes to the valuation matrix V .
Deﬁnition 4. A property k of an arbitrary tuple of valuations, prices, and allocations (V, p, X) is per-buyer LQFS
(linear and quantiﬁed over a ﬁxed set) if it can be represented as follows: We are given some set of allocations X k that
we compare to, a quantiﬁer Q ∈{∃, ∀}, weights λk
1, λk
2 ≥0, and sets of buyers Ii for each i ∈[n]. We then ask that for
all X′ ∈X k, Qi ∈[n] (i.e., either for all i, or there exists i), we have
ui(xi) ≥λk
1 max
i′∈[n] ui(xi′) + λk
2 min
i′∈Ii ui(x′
i′),
(1)
where Ii is the set of buyers we wish to compare i’s allocation to.
A property k of (V, p, X) is global LQFS if, given wk
i ≥0 for each i ∈[n], it can be represented as follows
X
i∈[n]
wk
i ui(xi) ≥
X
i∈[n]
wk
i ui(x′
i) ∀X′ ∈X k.
(2)
In both cases, X k is a subset of all supply-feasible allocations, which is allowed to depend on p and X, but not V .
Equation (1) compares the utility of buyer i under the current allocation and prices to various other allocations: the ﬁrst
term on the right-hand side with weight λk
1 is used to measure the extent to which buyer i likes the bundles assigned to
other buyers under p, X; the second term with weight λk
2 measures how much buyer i improves under the alternative
allocation X′, if forced to take the worst allocation in the set Ii. Practically speaking, Ii is typically either equal to [n]
or {i}.
The goal will be to show that each LQFS property on ( ˆV , ˆp, ˆX) is an approximate LQFS property on (V, ˆp, ˆX).
Crucially, the sets X k
i in per-buyer LQFS properties and X k in global LQFS properties will remain the same both in the
abstraction and in the original market since they do not depend on V ; for most properties we examine, this set is either
a singleton, the set of all supply-feasible allocations, or the set of budget-feasible allocations under p.
We now show our main technical result:
Theorem 1. LQFS properties are approximately preserved under abstraction in the following sense:
Consider some particular per-buyer LQFS property k which is satisﬁed under ( ˆV , ˆp, ˆX). Then the property is
approximately satisﬁed for (V, ˆp, ˆX). In particular, for all X′ ∈X k, we have that Qi ∈[n]:
ui(ˆxi) ≥λk
1 max
i′∈[n] ui(ˆxi′) + λk
2 min
i′∈Ii ui(x′
i′) −max(1, λk
1 + λk
2)∥∆V ∥1,∞.
Consider some global LQFS property k, quantiﬁed over a set of allocations X k which is satisﬁed under ( ˆV , ˆX, ˆp).
Then the property is approximately satisﬁed for (V, ˆp, ˆX). In particular,
X
i∈[n]
wk
i ui(ˆxi) ≥
X
i∈[n]
wk
1ui(x′
i) −
X
i∈[n]
wk
i ∥∆vi∥1, ∀X′ ∈X k.
The proof is given in the Appendix.
6

4.2
Which Properties Are LQFS?
We now show that a large number of market equilibrium properties are in fact LQFS properties and thus they are
approximately preserved under abstraction.
One notion of the quality of a pair (p, X) of prices and allocation is the induced regret. That is, how close is ˆxi to
actually being a demand vector given the prices ˆp? Here we measure regret with respect to the supply constraints when
the buyer can buy all items for themselves. Formally the regret of a buyer under a solution (ˆp, ˆX) is
Regreti(ˆp, ˆX) = ui(di(ˆp)) −ui(ˆxi).
By deﬁnition, in equilibrium, regret is 0.
Another important metric of allocation quality is envy (Varian et al. 1974, Budish 2011, Caragiannis et al. 2016). The
envy for buyer i is the amount by which they prefer any other buyers’ allocation over their own. Importantly, when
buyers have the same budget, equilibrium allocations are envy free. This is a major reason for the popularity of CEEI as
an allocation mechanism. Formally, the envy is
Envyi( ˆX) = max
i′∈[n] ui(ˆxi′) −ui(ˆxi).
Finally, we look at the maximin share (MMS) guarantee. MMS is the value that buyer i would obtain if they were
allowed to split the allocation X into n bundles, but were then assigned their least-valued bundle mini′ ui(xi′). MMS
was introduced by Budish (2011), and it generalizes the proportional-share notion of divisible assignment to the
indivisible setting. In proportional-share assignment, each buyer i is required to receive an allocation that they like at
least as much as the one where they receive a fraction 1
n of each item. Since MMS generalizes fair share our result
below applies to both fairness notions.
Formally, the MMS guarantee of buyer i is
MMSi = max
x∈X min
i′∈[n] ui(xi′).
We say that the MMS gap for buyer i in allocation x is
MMS gapi( ˆX) = max(0, MMSi −ui(ˆxi)).
Often in market design the goal is to maximize social welfare, i.e., the sum of buyer utilities. However, in general,
a market equilibrium may not lead to a social-welfare-maximizing solution. This is easy to see by considering the
solution to the problem of maximizing geometric-mean utility: it is a market equilibrium, but it will never set any buyer
utility to zero, even when that is the only way to maximize social welfare.
Instead, the usual efﬁciency criterion for market equilibria is that they are Pareto optimal (see, e.g., Varian et al. (1974),
Budish (2011), Caragiannis et al. (2016)). We focus speciﬁcally on ability to strongly Pareto improve an allocation ˆX:
for any Pareto-improving allocation X′, we say that its strong Pareto improvement is the utility gain of the buyer who
gained the least. For a market equilibrium, we are guaranteed that there does not exist any Pareto-improving allocation,
and thus there is also no strongly-improving allocation.
While market equilibrium has no guarantees regarding social welfare, it can nonetheless be related to weighted social
welfare maximization. Negishi’s theorem (Negishi 1960) says that given a market equilibrium, there exists a set of utility
weights {βi} specifying the utility weight of each buyer such that the market-equilibrium allocation is the allocation
that maximizes weighted social welfare (in Fisher markets these weights are simply the inverse bang-per-bucks).
Our next result shows that each of these commonly studied properties falls into the LQFS class.
Theorem 2. Regret, envy, MMS, proportional share, and strong Pareto improvement are per-buyer LQFS properties.
Weighted social welfare maximization is a global LQFS property.
Proof. Throughout the proof, we let (p, X) be the allocation and prices satisfying a given property for V .
For regret, we instantiate LQFS with the comparison set X k equal to all supply-feasible allocations that are budget-
feasible for every buyer under p, quantiﬁer Q = ∀, weights λk
1 = 0, λk
2 = 1, and Ii = {i}. This yields that for all i and
all supply-feasible allocations X′ such that x′
i′ · p ≤Bi′, we have the inequality (note that this includes supply and
budget-feasible allocations which allocate only to i)
ui(xi) ≥ui(x′
i).
7

For envy, we instantiate LQFS with comparison set X k = {X}, quantiﬁer Q = ∀, weights λk
1 = 1, λk
2 = 0, and
comparison set Ii = ∅. This yields that for all i, we have the inequality
ui(xi) ≥max
i′∈[n] ui(xi′).
For MMS and proportionality, we instantiate LQFS with the comparison set X k equal to the set of all supply-feasible
allocations, quantiﬁer Q = ∀, weights λk
1 = 0, λk
2 = 1, and Ii = [n]. This instantiation gives MMS when goods are
indivisible, and proportionality when goods are divisible. In particular, we get that for all i and every supply-feasible
allocation,
ui(xi) ≥min
i′∈[n] ui(x′
i′).
In the divisible case the proportional allocation xi = 1
n is included in this set, and every other supply-feasible allocation
has some i′ with lower ui(x′
i′) than in the proportional allocation. In the MMS case, this is exactly the same as the
MMS deﬁnition.
For strong Pareto improvement, we instantiate LQFS where the comparison set X k is the set of all supply-feasible
allocations, quantiﬁer Q = ∃, weights λk
1 = 0, λk
2 = 1, and Ii = {i}. This guarantees that for every supply-feasible
allocation X′, there exists some i such that
ui(xi) ≥ui(x′
i),
which is equivalent to saying that there is no strong Pareto improvement.
For weighted social welfare maximization with weights β ∈Rn
+, we instantiate global LQFS with the comparison set
X k equal to the set of all supply-feasible allocations and weights wk
i = βi equal to the weights we use in our weighted
social welfare objective. This gives that for all X′ we have
X
i
wk
i ui(xi) ≥
X
i
wk
i ui(x′
i),
which is exactly the guarantee needed for maximizing weighted social welfare.
Using the fact that each of our measures of interest is an LQFS property, the main result follows immediately from
Theorem 1. First we cover the per-buyer LQFS properties.
Theorem 3. Let (ˆp, ˆX) be equilibrium allocations and prices computed under ˆV . We can give the following bounds
for each of the properties under the true valuation matrix V :
1. The regret, envy, and MMS gap for each buyer is at most ∥∆V ∥1,∞
2. Any strong Pareto improvement from ˆX is bounded by ∥∆V ∥1,∞.
Since weighted social-welfare maximization is a global LQFS property, we get the following.
Theorem 4 (Negishi Welfare is Preserved Under Abstraction). Let {βi} the Negishi social-welfare weights for the
equilibrium under ˆV . Then ˆX solves the problem of maximizing social welfare for V under weights {βi} up to an
additive error of at most P
i∈[n] βi∥∆vi∥1 ≤∥β∥1∥∆V ∥1,∞.
4.3
Properties that are not LQFS
Another global optimality condition that has gained recent interest from the perspective of fairness is Nash social
welfare (Caragiannis et al. 2016). The Nash social welfare (NSW) is the product of buyer utilities, formally
NSW(X) =
Y
i∈[n]
ui(xi).
NSW is appealing as compared to regular social welfare, since it ensures that we must give all buyers a reasonable
amount of utility, or they will cause the whole objective to be small. In fact, the EG program computes the solution that
maximizes NSW, so market equilibria themselves are exactly the set set of NSW maximizers.
While NSW is not an LQFS property, we can show that it is approximately preserved under abstraction:
8

Theorem 5 (NSW is Preserved Under Abstraction). The NSW of the optimal EG solution ˆX under ˆV upper bounds the
NSW of the optimal solution X∗to the original EG problem as follows:
NSW(X∗) ≤
Y
i∈[n]

1 + ∥∆vi∥1
ˆui(x∗
i )

NSW(ˆx).
This assumes ˆui(x∗
i ) > 0 for all i, i.e., the difference between V and ˆV should be such that the original optimal solution
still has nonzero value under ˆV .
In contrast to the various properties above, the improvement to social welfare in any Pareto-improving allocation is not
bounded. Consider the following counterexample:
V =

1
ϵ
ϵ
0
1
ϵ

,
ˆV =

1
ϵ
0
0
1
ϵ

,
B1 = B2 = 1,
s1 = s2 = s3 = 1.
In the abstracted valuations ˆV the unique market equilibrium has prices ˆp = (0, 2, 0) and allocates item 1 to buyer 1,
item 3 to buyer 2, and splits item 2 in half among the buyers. But now, in spite of ∥∆V ∥1,∞= ϵ, we get that we can
improve social welfare by 1
2 −ϵ under a Pareto-improving allocation by splitting item 3 instead of item 2.
The reason can be seen through the lens of LQFS properties. Maximizing social welfare over Pareto-improving
allocations can be thought of as solving the linear program maxx′{P
i ui(x′
i) : ui(x′
i) ≥ui(xi) ∀i, P
i x′
ij ≤1 ∀j},
where xi is the allocation of buyer i in the allocation we are trying to Pareto improve. If ˆX is Pareto optimal under ˆV
and the utility functions in the constraints are deﬁned with respect to ˆV , then this can be thought of as quantifying over
the set of allocations satisfying the constraints in the LP, and indeed we are guaranteed that the objective at ˆX is higher
than for any other allocation in this quantiﬁcation (under ˆV ). But when we use V to deﬁne the utility functions in the
constraints, we change the set of allocations we compare to (in other words, the quantiﬁcation is not ﬁxed when moving
from ˆV to V ).
4.4
Tightness of Bounds
We now show that our bounds are tight. Consider the following market:
Example 1. There are n ≥2 buyers and nm items with supply equal to one, with m ≥1. Each buyer i has value 1
for every item, except items (i −1)m + 1, . . . , im, for which they have value 1 + ϵ. Each buyer has budget m. Now
consider an abstraction ˆV where every buyer has value 1 for every item, this abstraction has ∥∆V ∥1,∞= mϵ, since
every buyer has m items for which their utility is lowered by ϵ. Under ˆV , every market equilibrium has all prices equal
to 1, and any allocation that allocates exactly m units of items to every buyer is a corresponding market equilibrium
allocation. Consider the allocation where buyer i gets all of items im + 1, . . . (i + 1)m (with buyer n getting the ﬁrst
m items); this is a market equilibrium allocation under ˆV with all prices set to 1. But now i envies buyer i −1 by mϵ,
and has regret mϵ. Furthermore, by rotating the allocation we can improve every buyer’s utility by mϵ, and improve
Negishi-weighted social welfare by ∥β∥mϵ (note that the Negishi weights must all be the same in this market). This
example works for any n ≥2, m ≥1, and thus shows asymptotic tightness.
5
Abstractions in Practice
The two major obstacles to computing equilibria in practice are information requirements (needing to know every
element of V ) and computation requirements. We now describe two techniques—matrix completion and the use of
representative buyers/items—that can be used to reduce these burdens. We discuss how they ﬁt into the framework
of abstractions, and relate them to our abstraction bounds derived above. Figure 1 summarizes the two abstraction
approaches.
9

Figure 1: Two abstraction methods that can be used together to reduce information and computational constraints.
Left: Low-rank matrix completion uses observed data to discover a latent vector for each item and buyer. Unobserved
valuations are approximated using the dot product of these vectors. Right: Representative buyer/item abstractions
collapse multiple buyers and/or multiple items into single representative agents.
Recall that most of the bounds (with exception of the Nash social welfare) related the quality of the equilibrium (ˆp, ˆX)
to ∥∆V ∥1,∞. This norm is computationally difﬁcult to work with in practice since it is non-smooth. Instead, we will
consider a much better understood matrix norm for practical applications, the Frobenius norm, which is deﬁned as
∥∆V ∥F = (P
i,j ∆v2
i,j)1/2.
Using the Frobenius norm implies that we have to settle for a less tight bound given by:
∥∆V ∥1,∞= max
i∈[n] ∥∆vi∥1 ≤max
i∈[n]
√m∥∆vi∥2 ≤√m∥∆V ∥F .
Using the Frobenius norm gains us the ability to use well-known techniques to construct our abstractions. We will
use low-rank matrix completion to learn missing entries and here it is well known that if ˆV is the optimal k-rank
approximation to V then ∥∆V ∥F = (Pmin(n,m)
i=k
σ2
i )1/2 where σi is the ith singular value of the original matrix V —that
is, the Frobenius norm is related to the ‘cut off’ singular values of the matrix.
Furthermore, if our matrix completion is being done from samples (as is common in many online applications) we can
use a hold-out test set to estimate ∥∆V ∥F .
In addition to rank-k approximation, we will also use k-means clustering to reduce the size of V ; this technique can
also be viewed as a way of ﬁnding an approximation that minimizes the Frobenius norm (Bauckhage 2015).
Remark 1. While our bound tells us about the quality of the allocations and prices, it tells us little about how close
the values themselves are to the exact solution. It is known that the equilibrium (p, X) is continuous in V (Megiddo
and Vazirani 2007). Thus, we can make the allocation and prices arbitrarily close by making ∥∆V ∥sufﬁciently
small. However, unlike quantities like regret, envy, etc., there is no linear relationship between ∥∆V ∥and how far the
abstracted price vector and allocation matrix is from the equilibrium under V . This is an interesting area for future
work.
5.1
Low-Rank Matrix Completion
We begin with the information problem, that is, the case where not all entries of V are known to us. Without some
imputation of the missing entries, we cannot compute an equilibrium. If every vij is completely independent and
unpredictable from other valuations of the same buyer or other valuations of the same item by other buyers, then we
have no hope of ﬁlling in missing entries in a sensible way. However, in most real world situations this is likely not the
case and there is shared information across entries of the valuation matrix. To ﬁll in the missing entries we can use
standard techniques from matrix completion (e.g., Recht 2011).
A standard method for matrix completion is as follows: given a set of observations O of elements from a matrix V with
generic element vij, we try to ﬁnd a set of vectors vec(i) ∈Rd for every buyer i and vec(j) ∈Rd for every item j to
solve
min
vec
X
vij∈O
(vij −vec(i) · vec(j))2.
After we ﬁt this model, we can construct a now complete matrix ˆV of the original dimensionality with ˆvij =
vec(i) · vec(j) and use this in place of V for our task of interest. The solution ends up effectively minimizing
10

min ˆV ∥V −ˆV ∥F over rank d matrices ˆV .5 Note that matrix completion is not guaranteed to give positive ˆvij even if all
observed vij are positive, so we replace all ˆvij ≤.001 with .001.
5.2
Representative Market Equilibrium
The issue of computation constraints when solving for market equilibrium arises because the EG program grows linearly
in the size of the matrix V . This can lead to issues both with computation time, and especially memory usage. If an
abstraction can reduce the number of buyers (and/or items), it can make the computation of equilibrium much more
efﬁcient. Given a valuation matrix V we consider abstracting the market as follows.
5.2.1
Proportional Lift
Algorithm 1 Representative Market Equilibrium
Input: Set O of known valuations with generic element oij (not necessarily the full matrix), ˆn, ˆm.
procedure CONSTRUCT REPRESENTATIVES
If matrix is fully available, use the row/columns as the vectors
Else solve for vectors for each buyer vec(i) and item vec(j)
Use k-means clustering on the buyer vectors with ˆn centroids
Use k-means clustering on the item vectors with ˆm centroids
Use centroids of k-means as vector representations of representatives
Set representative market valuations as dot products of above vectors
procedure COMPUTE REPRESENTATIVE SUPPLIES/BUDGETS
Sum budgets of buyers assigned to representative i by k-means to get budget
Sum supplies of items assigned to representative j by k-means to get supply
Compute market equilibrium in the representative market
Algorithm 1 constructs a representative market equilibrium (RME) which we denote as (˜prep, ˜Xrep). The RME is of a
different dimension than the original market. The question is now how to lift the prices and allocations to the original
items and buyers. Prices are simple, we can just assign to every item j the price of its representative item from the
RME.
Allocations are more difﬁcult. We ﬁrst consider a proportional lift. We perform the lift in two steps. First we begin
with ˜Xrep and construct a new allocation X′ of dimension ˆn × m with x′
i being the allocation of original items to
each representative buyer. Each representative buyer receives a supply weighted share of each item. Let r(j) be the
representative item for real item j. Then the amount of item j that is allocated to representative buyer i in this step is
x′
ij =
sj
P
k∈r(j) sk
˜xir(j).
Given X′ we ﬁnish the lift by now splitting items across individuals proportionally to their budget. We denote the ﬁnal
allocation as ˆX ∈Rn×m
+
. Let r(i) denote the representative buyer for real buyer i. The allocation of item j to real
buyer i is
ˆxij =
bi
P
k∈r(i) bk
x′
r(i)j.
Because everything is allocated proportionally we have that the supply constraint binds and thus the allocation is a
full allocation. The proportional lift has the advantage that it is simple to compute and that our bounds can be applied
directly. The allocations from the proportional RME are equivalent to those which would result if we constructed
an approximate valuation matrix ˆV by getting vector representations for each buyer/item, getting their representative
abstraction, and replacing vij by vec(r(i)) · vec(r(j)).
5.2.2
Recursive Lift
Proportional lifting is arguably the most direct and natural way to lift a solution. However, it makes no attempt to utilize
the fact that the different buyers mapping to a single representative buyer are generally heterogeneous, even if similar.
5This formulation is non-convex and thus does not have guarantees. However, it is well-known to perform well in practice, and it
is much more scalable than the convex relaxation (Ge et al. 2016, Bhojanapalli et al. 2016)
11

Next we present a lifting procedure which exploits the heterogeneity within each group of buyers assigned to the same
representative buyer to improve on proportional lifting.
First, let us deﬁne XR to be an allocation of original items to representative buyers. We deﬁne a lift L(XR) to be an
allocation to the original buyers such that they are only allocated items from their respective representative buyer. We
let Li(XR) be the bundle of goods received by buyer i in the lift. We denote by r(˜i) the set of buyers assigned to
representative buyer ˜i.
Deﬁnition 5. L(XR) is a local lift if for any representative buyer ˜i, we have that P
i∈r(˜i) Li(XR) ≤xR
˜i .
Secondly, we shall use the less formal restriction that a local lift should be computable using only XR and the set of
valuations {vi : i ∈r(˜i)}.
To be concrete, consider the following example:
Example 2. There are three buyers and three items, all with supplies and budgets equal to one. A representative market
is created with two buyers: {(1), (2, 3)} and two items: {(1), (2, 3)}. So, the ﬁrst buyer and item remain unabstracted,
but the latter two buyers and items are merged into a single representative buyer and item. Now, say that the solution to
the abstraction is to split each of the two abstracted items in half. Then, the proportional lift is for buyers 2 and 3 to
receive 1
4 of each of the three original items. A local lift on the abstracted buyer is any reallocation of the items such
that buyers 2 and 3 receive at most half of each item in aggregate.
The concept of a local lift is natural when we want to consider using parallelization for the computation of the lift.
Locality means that only information about the allocation a representative buyer received is used to compute the
re-allocation to the buyers represented by the representative buyer. Thus, we can solve the main abstraction and then
solve each component of the lift (deﬁned by each representative buyer) in parallel without any message passing. The
proportional lift is a local lift.
Recall that the original objective function for the EG equilibrium is the maximization of Nash social welfare. Thus, we
now consider a lift which is optimal in the family of local lifts in the sense that it is the NSW-maximizing one.
The lift works as follows: For each representative buyer, we look at the allocation of original items to that representative
buyer in the abstraction equilibrium, denote this by ˜xR
˜i . We then construct a new local market for each representative
buyer i. The buyers in the local market are individuals in r(˜i), their budgets are their original budgets, and supplies are
˜xR
˜i .
The lift L(XR) is the solution to
max
X



X
i∈r(˜i)
log(vi · xi) :
X
i∈r(˜i)
xi ≤˜xR
˜i


.
This lift yields a market equilibrium in the local market. We call this approach recursive representative market
equilibrium (RRME). From the way the lift is constructed it is obvious that a local lift maximizes Nash social welfare
among all local lifts if and only if it is an RRME.
In Example 2, the RRME is constructed by creating a new market with buyers 2 and 3 in it, and where the supply of
each item is 1/2. Then, we lift their allocation by ﬁnding a market equilibrium allocation of this new market. More
generally we would need to solve for multiple markets, but here there is only one representative buyer that represents
multiple original buyers.
We can also show that RRME is guaranteed to improve on several metrics relative to the proportional lift: Pareto
gap, regret, MMS gap, and NSW by Theorem 5. Intuitively, this is due to the utility guarantee provided by market
equilibrium, which says that each buyer does better than their budget-proportional allocation of each item.
Theorem 6. Let (p, X) be a solution obtained from proportional allocation from solving a representative market
instance. Let (p, XR) be the solution obtained by applying RRME to (p, X). The RRME solution leads to weakly lower
Pareto gap, regret, and MMS gap, as well as weakly higher NSW.
Proof. First we note the following simple fact which holds for any agent i: the utility of i under XR is weakly greater
than that under X, i.e., vi · xR
i ≥vi · xi. This is because (a subset of) XR is a market equilibrium in the recursive
market for the corresponding ˜i, and an agent is guaranteed to get at least the value of the budget-proportional allocation
in any market equilibrium.
12

The Pareto gap is the value of a linear program that maximizes social welfare (minus current welfare) subject to the
constraint that each agent is weakly better off. Since utilities are greater in XR this is a strictly more constrained
problem than for X, and thus the value, i.e., the Pareto gap, is lower.
Since we keep prices the same the optimal bundle x∗
i for each agent remains the same for (p, X) and (p, XR). Thus the
only affected part of regret is the negative term, which is weakly greater under XR since utilities are weakly greater.
That the MMS gap is smaller and NSW greater follows directly from each agent having weakly-higher utility.
While the objectives in Theorem 6 are all guaranteed to improve in the RRME over the proportional lift, the example
below shows that envy may not. Intuitively, this is because we may have an agent i who does not envy agent j very
much in the proportional lift, but in the RRME j improves very much while i improves very little, thus generating an
increase in envy.
Example 3. Consider a 5-buyer-4-item instance with valuations v1 = v2 = [1.5, 1.5, 0, 0], v3 = [0, 0, 1+ϵ, 1−ϵ], v4 =
[0, 0, 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ], v5 = [1.5, 1.5, 1 + ϵ, 1 −ϵ], and budgets and supplies equal to 1. Now consider the abstraction
where buyers 1, 2, 5 are clustered to a representative buyer with valuation v˜1 = [1.5, 1.5, 0, 0] and budget 3, and
buyers 3, 4 are clustered to a representative buyer with valuation v˜2 = [0, 0, 1.5, 1.5] and budget 2. The representative
market equilibrium with equal rates is to assign representative buyer ˜1 all of items 1 and 2, each with price 1.5 and
assign representative buyer ˜2 all of 3 and 4 at price 1 each. This assignment leads to no envy when we perform the
budget-proportional allocation. However, if we apply RME to representative buyer ˜2 then buyers 3 and 4 get assigned
all of items 3 and 4, respectively. Now buyer 5 envies buyer 3, as they could get ϵ more utility.
We view the potential increase in envy as a necessary price to pay in order to reap the beneﬁts of locally optimizing
each of the representative allocations. In order to avoid potential envy increases, we would need to take into account
agents i /∈r(˜i) when computing the lift, which would often not be feasible computationally (since the whole point of
the representative abstraction was to avoid a convex program whose size is on the order of n × m).
6
Experimental Evaluation
6.1
First-Order Methods for Market Equilibrium
We initially considered solving the EG convex program directly via the CVXPY package (Diamond and Boyd 2016,
Akshay Agrawal and Boyd 2018), which is a package for formulating convex programs in a uniform way, while
utilizing underlying optimization solvers such as ECOS (Domahidi et al. 2013), CVXOPT (Andersen et al. 2013), and
SCS (O’Donoghue et al. 2016). However, this approach turned out to have numerical problems once the number of
agents and items reached around 130 each, regardless of the underlying solver.
To deal with those scalability issues, we solve the EG convex program via ﬁrst-order methods. We consider the
following Lagrangian relaxation:
min
0≤p≤∥B∥1/s
X
i∈[n]
max
0≤xi≤s Bi log(vi · xi) −xi · p + s · p .
(3)
This formulation allows us to apply standard algorithms for solving convex-concave saddle-point problems such as
the primal-dual algorithm of Chambolle and Pock (2011, 2016) (henceforth referred to as PD). PD is an algorithm for
solving problems of the following form (we omit some unnecessary generality):
min
x∈X max
p∈P L(x, p) := xT Kp + f(x) + s · p
(4)
where K is a matrix with bounded norm L = ∥K∥= max∥x∥≤1,∥p∥≤1 xT Kp, and f is a proper, lower semicontinuous
convex function with a Lipschitz-bounded gradient, i.e., ∥∇f(x) −∇f(x′)∥≤Lf∥x −x′∥for all x, x′ ∈X.
An iteration of PD is as follows:
(ˆp, ˆX) =PDτ,σ(¯x, ¯p, ˜x, ˜p) where
ˆx = arg minx∈X f(¯x) + ⟨∇f(¯x), x −¯x⟩+ xT K ˜p + 1
τ ∥x −¯x∥,
ˆp = arg minp∈P 1
σ∥x −¯x∥−˜xT Kp .
The algorithm repeatedly calls PD to generate a sequence of iterates as follows (note that the function invocation
depends on the computed value, this is implementable because xt+1 is computed before pt+1):
(xt+1, pt+1) = PDτ,σ(xt, pt, 2xt+1 −xt, pt).
13

The average iterates ¯x = PT
t=1 xt and ¯p = PT
t=1 pt converge to a saddle-point solution. The performance of the
algorithm is usually measured in terms of reducing the saddle-point residual: maxp L(¯x, p) −minx L(x, ¯p). A natural
question is how quickly this error measure is driven to zero.
Nesterov and Shikhman (2018) study a formulation similar to (3), but where prices are unbounded, and they arrive at
an algorithm where the saddle-point residual goes to zero at a rate of O(1/
√
T), but achieve additional auction-like
properties in terms of the resulting dynamics. Leveraging the structure of our problem gives us even better worst-case
bounds on convergence. Because in practice such worst case bounds are rarely reached and because these theoretical
results are not the primary focus of our paper we discuss them informally here for completeness and relegate the formal
statements to the Appendix:
Result 2. Under mild assumptions the PD algorithm reduces the saddle-point residual of the EG problem at a rate of
O

n7/2m2
T

.
The expression above makes some simplifying assumptions for readability. We include the full treatment in the
Appendix. From the perspective of abstraction, the most important thing is that we have a O(n7/2m2) dependence on
problem size. For this simpliﬁed rate we can give a nice expression for the savings in worst-case convergence rate due
to our representative buyer/item abstraction:
Result 3. Let n, m be the number of buyers/items in the original market and ˆn, ˆm be the number in the abstracted
market. Under mild assumptions the representative buyer/item abstraction with proportional lift has a worst case
convergence rate that is O( ˆn7/2 ˆm2
n7/2m2 ) of the convergence rate of the full problem. If we use the recursive lift instead the
relevant speedup is O( ˆn5/2 ˆm2
n5/2m2 ).
While asymptotic analysis does not tell the whole story, the results do suggest that we should expect larger savings in
computational complexity for ‘long and thin’ markets (those with many buyers and relatively few items) than those
with many items and few buyers, which is precisely what we see in our experiments.
In practice, the primary concern is the memory usage of PD, as well as the cost per iteration. For the optimization
formulation that uses PD, a variable is needed for every buyer and item pair, and thus memory usage is linear in the
market size. Similarly, each step of PD can be computed in linear time for our setting. In practice, we thus get an
asymptotic linear improvement to both memory usage and cost per iteration. In theory, we get much more than a linear
improvement in total running time, based on the above estimates of the number of iterations needed in the worst case.
However, in practice the number of iterations needed does not seem to grow much with the size of the market, and so
the primary practical savings are those due to the memory and cost-per-iteration improvements.
In extremely large cases (e.g., online ad systems with millions of buyers and billions of impressions) it would not even
be feasible to run PD on the original problem instance (typically due to memory usage), and so abstracting down to a
manageable size becomes compulsory.
6.2
General Analysis Plan
We now evaluate the abstraction approaches above on several real datasets. We ﬁrst discuss the analyses we perform on
all datasets then we discuss each dataset in detail and give results.
For each dataset we compute the EG equilibrium in the full market and compare to the prices/allocations we generate
using abstractions. We set budgets to 1 and supplies to be such that there is one item per person (note that since we are
in the divisible case, this only affects the prices/allocations up to a scaling factor).
We vary three properties of abstractions jointly. First, we replace the valuation matrix V with a rank k approximation
for various k. To compute these low-rank representations we use the singular value decomposition (SVD). Second,
we consider compressing the large number of buyers into a smaller set of representative buyers. We refer to this as
abstraction coarseness and measure it as a percentage of the original market size. Thus, a 40% abstraction is one which
replaces 7200 original buyers with 2880 representative buyers via the k-means procedure above. Third, we compare the
use of a proportional split and the recursive splitting. The goods were not abstracted in the ﬁrst two datasets (but see
Section 6.5 where we do abstract both sides).
In the results reported here we replace abstracted valuations (e.g., low-rank estimated ones) that are below 0 with 0.01.
This means that we do not allow our abstractions to turn any player into a ‘dummy player’ that receives no items.
We measure all of our theoretical quantities of interest: regret of each individual given each allocation (we normalize
this by the maximum utility of the allocation), an individual’s envy (again, normalized by the utility that an individual
would receive from the envied bundle), Nash social welfare (normalized by the Nash social welfare of the unabstracted
14

Nash Social Welfare
Pareto Optimality
Regret
Efficiency
Envy
Maximin Share
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
−0.009
−0.006
−0.003
0.000
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Abstraction Coarseness
Value
Rank Used
20
40
80
100
Split
Proportional
Recursive
Jester1
Figure 2: Market created by using valuation matrix from the Jester1 dataset with 7200 buyers and 100 items (left panel).
There is clear structure suggesting compressibility. In this experiment we apply representative buyer abstraction only.
Equilibria computed in quite coarse abstractions maintain good properties (right panel).
market), Pareto optimality (normalized by the utility in the Pareto-optimal allocation), maximin share (normalized by
utility being achieved).
We also look at one quantity for which we do not have bounds: total welfare/efﬁciency of the allocation (normalized by
the total welfare of the unabstracted market). Note that market equilibrium makes no pretense of maximizing efﬁciency
(indeed it only guarantees Pareto optimality and, in the case of EG equilibrium, Nash social welfare).
6.3
Dataset: Jester1
We begin by considering an existing dataset used for the evaluation of recommender systems. In typical recommender
system datasets individuals give a rating (rather than a monetary evaluation) for each object. Nevertheless, standard
recommender system datasets are still useful examples of valuation matrices for two reasons: ﬁrst, when equilibrium
computation is used for market design/fair division (e.g., CEEI and related algorithms at Wharton or Spliddit) the
budget given to each individual is only virtual currency and, second, allocations in EG equilibrium are not affected by
the scaling of an individual’s utilities so they are relatively robust to different ways individuals may interpret ratings.
The ﬁrst dataset we consider, Jester 1, contains the evaluation of 100 jokes by over 79,000 individuals (Goldberg et al.
2001). We extract a submatrix of 7200 individuals that have rated all of the jokes giving us a complete market. Ratings
in Jester are on a continuous scale between −10 and 10 and our theory requires positive valuations so we shift the
valuations to be (weakly) positive by shifting the whole matrix by +10.
Figure 2 left panel shows a representation of the Jester1 valuation matrix with lighter colors representing higher
valuation. To show the structure more clearly we normalize each individual’s valuations to lie in [0, 1] for the ﬁgure6
(not the experiments) and perform clustering on the rows and columns to set the order they will be displayed. There is
clear block structure suggesting that we can abstract the market using the representative buyer method effectively.
The right panel shows our main results. Even a coarse abstraction with recursion (720 representative buyers for 7200
original buyers and 20% rank compression) can yield an allocation that achieves almost 90% of the Nash social welfare
and efﬁciency of the unabstracted allocation and is almost Pareto optimal (there exists an allocation that improves total
utility by 10% without leaving anyone worse off). Individuals display some regret (the abstracted allocation achieves
85% of the utility they could achieve if buyers optimized given the abstraction prices) and some envy. Finally, we see
that a weak notion of fair division, maximin share, is almost completely guaranteed under even the coarsest abstraction.
15

Nash Social Welfare
Pareto Optimality
Regret
Efficiency
Envy
Maximin Share
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
−0.020
−0.015
−0.010
−0.005
0.000
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Abstraction Coarseness
Value
Rank Used
10
20
40
50
Split
Proportional
Recursive
Household Items
Figure 3: Market created by using a valuation matrix from the Household Item dataset with 2876 buyers and 50 items
(left panel). There is clear structure suggesting compressibility. In this experiment we apply representative buyer
abstraction only. Equilibria computed in quite coarse abstractions maintain good properties (right panel).
6.4
Dataset: Household Items
We also construct a new dataset of individuals who estimated their willingness-to-pay for 50 household items selected
from a well-regarded online review site. Unlike in typical recommender datasets where items can often be naturally
clustered into ‘types’ (e.g., romance movies, horror movies) we speciﬁcally chose items to span a broad range of product
categories. (Examples: rain jacket, tool box, toaster, shovel, bluetooth headphones, thermos, blackout shade, bike pump,
etc; see Figure 4 for full list of items and average valuations for each one.) Items were chosen to be representative of a
large number of categories to make our compression problem more difﬁcult.
In a survey conducted on an online labor market, individuals from the US were presented with a photo and brief
description of each item. To deal with quality issues, speciﬁc brands and models for each item were selected from an
online review site to be the ‘best in their class’ and participants were informed of this. Items were presented in a random
order and participants entered their personal US dollar valuation for each item. At the end of the survey, participants
were asked how well they felt they understood the questions/task. We use data from the 2876 individuals (out of 3300)
that said they felt the task was natural and they could give a good personal valuation for all of the items. Here we list
the items we used as well as their average valuations by individuals.
For this computational experiment, we apply matrix approximation, representative buyer/item modeling, and recursive
reallocation.
Figure 3 shows the market, represented as in the Jester1 experiment above (left panel) as well as our main results
(right panel). We see that even coarse abstractions can yield good properties and that recursive allocation meaningfully
improves Pareto optimality and Nash social welfare of the approximations. There is a sharper tradeoff between
compression and abstraction performance than in Jester. Recall though that this is because our candidate items were
speciﬁcally chosen to be of quite different types and so display lower inter/intra item correlations in valuation than
typical recommender datasets of, e.g., jokes or movies.
6.5
Dataset: MovieLens
Both datasets above includes many more buyers than items. We would like to consider a dataset where both sides of
the market are large. However, asking individuals to evaluate many hundreds of items would be expensive and likely
yield low quality data. Instead, we construct such a market from MovieLens 1M (Harper and Konstan 2015), a standard
dataset for the evaluation of matrix completion algorithms. This dataset contains 6040 individuals with their ratings for
a selection of 3952 total movies. In total, the dataset includes 1 million ratings. We treat each 1-5 rating as a valuation.
6Recall that since EG equilibrium with budgets is equivalent to equal utility rates per item being received multiplying an
individual’s utility by a constant does not affect the equilibrium allocation.
16

G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
christmas.tree.stand
multi.use.screwdriver
bike.pump
cat.bed
dog.coat
shovel
travel.mug
snow.shovel
growler
food.thermometer
smartphone.tripod
hairdryer
thermos
bath.towel
knife.sharpener
casserole.pan
lumbar.pillow
white.noise.machine
clothing.iron
sunrise.alarm.clock
bluetooth.keyfinder
wireless.receiver
toaster
toolbox
carbonator
blender
electric.toothbrush
electric.kettle
blackout.shade
portable.speaker
usb.battery
fireextinguisher
backpack
portable.ice.maker
space.heater
sheet.set
smart.bathroom.scale
coffee.maker
handheld.vacuum
tool.set
humidifier
vacuum.sealer
drone.for.beginners
Amazon.echo
air.mattress
portable.gas.grill
bluetooth.headphones
pressure.cooker
rainjacket
external.harddrive
0
20
40
60
80
Mean Valuation
Item
Figure 4: Items used in household item survey as well as their average valuations and ﬁrst and third quantiles.
MovieLens 1M is very sparse (only a small percentage of possible user/movie rating pairs are observed) so we cannot
use the data directly to construct a market as we could in the other datasets.
Instead, we will construct a semi-synthetic dataset by using the data to ﬁt a low-rank approximation to the true rating
matrix and doing our analysis on this model. We consider the submatrix which consists of the 1500 movies with the
most observed ratings (avg. number of ratings: 579) and the top 1500 users who have rated the most movies (avg.
number of ratings: 425). We use this submatrix as our valuation matrix for the market (Figure 5 left panel shows the
market).
To generate the complete submatrix for the MovieLens 1M market we take the observed ratings denoted as O with
generic element oij. We use PyTorch (Paszke et al. 2017) and minimize the loss function
X
oij∈O
(oij −vec(useri) · vec(moviej) + bias(useri) + bias(moviej))2
over d dimensional vectors for each user and movie and 1 dimensional biases for each user and movie. We randomly
split the data into an 80% training set and a 20% validation set and use the validation set to choose d from the set
{20, 30, 50, 70, 100} and the weight decay parameter from the set {10−5, 10−4, 10−3, 10−2, 10−1}. We choose the
best performing hyper-parameters from this group via the validation set (d=20, weight decay=10−5).
We do not do any extensive tuning nor consider ‘proper’ test set accuracy as we are simply using this model to construct
a simple semi-synthetic dataset for our experiment rather than trying to achieve state of the art prediction results.
Because the completion method already uses a low-rank approximation and because we cannot get the ground truth
market equilibrium we only test the representative buyer abstraction here. Unlike in the datasets above, we construct
both representative buyers and representative items. The right panel of Figure 5 shows that in this case even an
extremely coarse abstraction (150 representative buyers, 150 representative items instead of the original 1500) can
achieve outcomes that are quite close those of the full equilibrium.
17

Nash Social Welfare
Pareto Optimality
Regret
Efficiency
Envy
Maximin Share
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
−6e−06
−4e−06
−2e−06
0e+00
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Abstraction Coarseness
Value
Rank Used
1500
Split
Proportional
Recursive
MovieLens
Figure 5: Market created by using valuation matrix from the MovieLens dataset with 1500 buyers and 1500 items (left
panel). There is clear structure suggesting compressibility. In this experiment we apply both representative buyer and
representative item abstraction. Equilibria computed in quite coarse abstractions maintain good properties (right panel).
6.6
A Large Market
In each of the experiments above, we used markets where we could compute the equilibrium for the full instance. We
now consider an experiment for a market that is too large for us to compute the equilibrium for the full instance. In this
case we cannot compute metrics like the NSW loss or the Pareto gap but we can still compute individual-level metrics
like envy and regret.
As a large dataset we consider the larger MovieLens 10 million dataset. Here 69, 897 users rate 8228 movies, for a total
of ∼10 million ratings. We construct the valuation vectors as in the smaller MovieLens markets above except using a
100 dimensional embedding.
This problem is too large to solve the full instance on our commodity hardware. Instead, we solve a 4, 000 × 4000
abstraction—this is a more than 97% reduction in size from the full market. We compute the allocations using both the
proportional and recursive lifts.
Figure 6 shows the results of sampling 1, 000 buyers and computing their envy and regret associated with the lifted
allocations and prices. We attain average regret near 16% for the proportional lift and 14% for the recursive lift, and
correspondingly small average envy values. The worst values of regret and envy are not much higher.
Envy
Regret
Proportional Lift
Recursive Lift
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
Normalized Metric
Density
Figure 6: In the large MovieLens market, we cannot solve for the full equilibrium, however, we can compute individual
levels of regret and envy for some sampled buyers. We see that a 97% reduction in problem size is associated with a
relatively small regret and envy in both the proportional and recursive lifts.
18

6.7
Quasi-Linear Markets
So far we have focused on the case where budgets are useless outside the market. This is the setting of interest for
market designers that are using equilibrium as a tool for fair division of items (e.g., CEEI) and also marketing managers
in ads marketplaces. However, our approximation results are also applicable to quasi-linear Fisher markets—those
where leftover budget has use outside the market. In our household items dataset (unlike in Jester and MovieLens)
individual valuations are given in dollars. Although quasi-linear valuations are not the main focus of this work, we
present a preliminary experiment to investigate whether abstractions are useful in a quasi-linear market.
We use the same household items setup as above but now we consider quasi-linear utility and give each individual a
budget of $10. The quasi-linear case is slightly different from the standard one in several other ways. First, we know
that there exists an equilibrium that can be found via a convex program but that this program no longer maximizes Nash
social welfare. Second, doing a recursive lift generates multiple prices per item (different prices within each cluster)
and is thus not interpretable anymore. Thus, we do not look at either of these in this experiment.
In addition, because now money is ‘real’ rather than existing solely for the sake of the mechanism, now we also consider
an additional metric of interest: how well abstraction prices match up with true equilibrium prices. To measure this we
consider the normalized price accuracy given by
1 −
P
j(ˆpj −pj)2
P
j p2
j
.
A value of 1 means prices are perfectly predicted. It is known that prices are continuous in the V matrix, so for a given
desired level of price accuracy there exists a sufﬁciently small ∆V that attains that level. However, like efﬁciency or
weak Pareto optimality, prices are not an LQFS and thus we have no formal guarantees about their accuracy when ∆V
is not small.
Figure 7 show our main results. As with the standard Fisher case, we see that even coarse abstractions lead to fairly
good results.
Efficiency
Envy
Pareto Optimality
Price Accuracy
Regret
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Abstraction Coarseness
Value
Rank Used
10
20
40
50
Household Items − Quasi−Linear
Figure 7: Quasi-linear Equilibria computed in quite coarse abstractions maintain good properties.
7
Conclusion and Future Directions
Computing market equilibria is a difﬁcult problem. We have shown that the method of abstraction—solving a coarser
problem and lifting the solution—can be used to reduce the information requirements and computation requirements of
equilibrium computation. In addition, we have introduced a new dataset that we hope others can use for work on fair
division.
There are many future directions to expand this research. In this work we looked at Fisher markets which assume
additive valuations. This rules out situations where goods can be complements or substitutes. In the case of such
preferences the information required to compute a market equilibrium becomes extremely large as we need to know
the valuations of individuals for every possible combination of goods (Porter et al. 2003). However, recent work has
19

begun to explore representing preferences with complements and substitutes in low-rank vector format (Ruiz et al.
2020, Peysakhovich and Ugander 2017). An interesting future direction is combining such techniques with abstraction
methods. Generalizing beyond linear valuations could lead to greater scalability for problems such as public decision
making, which have recently been related to market equilibria (Garg et al. 2020). Another interesting direction would
be to apply abstraction techniques to more general market equilibrium problems under utilitarian welfare maximization.
A problem related to our setting is the cake cutting problem, where the goal is to allocate (WLOG) the interval [0, 1]
to agents with heterogeneous preferences over subsets of the interval (Edmonds and Pruhs 2011, Chen et al. 2013,
Balkanski et al. 2014, Aziz and Mackenzie 2016). This setting is signiﬁcantly more complicated than linear Fisher
markets. It would be interesting to investigate how our abstraction approach can be generalized to this harder setting,
although the relationship to matrix decomposition becomes less pronounced. Some variants of cake cutting can be
related directly to Fisher markets. Aziz and Ye (2014) show that cake cutting with piecewise-constant utilities is
equivalent to linear Fisher market equilibrium, and Gao and Kroer (2021) show that general piecewise-linear utilities in
cake cutting can be handled via Fisher markets with a continuum of items. The results of Aziz and Ye (2014) imply that
our results extend directly to piecewise-constant-utility cake cutting, An interesting research direction is to what extent
our results can be used to extended to other cake-cutting settings, for example via the relationship established by Gao
and Kroer (2021).
We considered the use of market equilibria as allocation mechanisms (as in, e.g., the literature on fair division).
However, another important use of computation of market equilibria is counterfactual estimation as in structural models
in economics (Berry et al. 1995, Chawla et al. 2017). For example, an online marketplace may want to know how
prices (and thus revenues) would change if certain market conditions (e.g., supplies, budgets) were to change. Using the
method of abstracting large markets to answer such questions is also an important future direction.
We looked at two methods that could be jointly used to create abstractions: low-rank approximation and representative
buyer/item modeling. The representative market abstraction speeds up computation but we did not use low-rank
structure for anything but ﬁlling in missing data. An interesting algorithmic question is whether the low-rank structure
can be leveraged to speed up the gradient calculation steps of our ﬁrst-order methods, for example, by employing recent
techniques for fast nearest neighbor search (Johnson et al. 2019).
Our work ﬁts into the nascent but growing literature on combining techniques from machine learning/AI with classical
results from game theory to solve market design (Feng et al. 2018, Golowich et al. 2018), game abstraction (Moravˇcík
et al. 2017, Brown et al. 2019), and agent design (Lerer and Peysakhovich 2017, 2019) problems that cannot be easily
solved in closed form. In this work we leveraged standard linear abstractions (low-rank approximation, k-means
clustering). A question for future work is whether more complex, non-linear methods, can be used to construct even
better abstractions.
8
Author Biographies
Christian Kroer
Christian Kroer is an Assistant Professor of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research at
Columbia University, as well as a member of the Data Science Institute at Columbia. His research interests are at the
intersection of operations research, economics, and computation, with a focus on how optimization and AI methods
enable large-scale economic solution concepts. He obtained his Ph.D. in computer science from Carnegie Mellon
University, and spent a year as a postdoc with the Economics and Computation team at Facebook Research. He was a
winner of the 2016-2018 Facebook Fellowship in economics and computation, and a runner-up in the 2017 INFORMS
Computing Society Student Paper Competition.
Alexander Peysakhovich
Alexander Peysakhovich is a senior research scientist at Facebook Artiﬁcial Intelligence
research. His work includes both basic and applied research at the intersection of behavioral science, economics, game
theory, and artiﬁcial intelligence. He holds a PhD in Behavioral Economics from Harvard."
Eric Sodomka
Eric Sodomka is a Research Scientist on the Core Data Science team at Facebook, as well as an
advisory board member of Data Science Nigeria. His research interests lie at the intersection of economics and computer
science. In particular, he is interested in designing markets that facilitate collaboration across academic disciplines,
that connect theoreticians and practitioners, and that improve opportunities for underrepresented groups. He currently
resides in Edinburgh, Scotland. Prior to that, he worked in Facebook’s Menlo Park ofﬁce, where he managed the
Algorithmic Game Theory and Market Design Research group. He received his Ph.D. in Computer Science from Brown
University.
20

Nicolas Stier-Moses
Nicolas Stier-Moses is a Director at Facebook Core Data Science. His work leverages innovative
research to drive impact to the products, infrastructure and processes at Facebook, the company. The group draws
inspiration from a rich and diverse set of disciplines including Operations, Economics, Mechanism Design, Algorithms,
Statistics, Machine Learning, Experimentation, and Computational Social Science. Between 2014 and 2017, he
supported the Economics, Algorithms and Optimization team, which is one of the areas of focus of Core Data Science.
Prior to joining Facebook, Nicolas was an Associate Professor at the Decision, Risk and Operations Division of
Columbia Business School and at the Business School of Universidad Torcuato Di Tella. He received a Ph.D. degree
from the Operations Research Center at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
