JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
1
JMA: a General Algorithm to Craft Nearly Optimal
Targeted Adversarial Examples
Benedetta Tondi, Senior Member, IEEE, Wei Guo, Niccol`o Pancino, Mauro Barni, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Most of the approaches proposed so far to craft tar-
geted adversarial examples against Deep Learning classifiers are
highly suboptimal and typically rely on increasing the likelihood
of the target class, thus implicitly focusing on one-hot encoding
settings. In this paper, a more general, theoretically sound,
targeted attack is proposed, which resorts to the minimization
of a Jacobian-induced Mahalanobis distance term, taking into
account the effort (in the input space) required to move the latent
space representation of the input sample in a given direction. The
minimization is solved by exploiting the Wolfe duality theorem,
reducing the problem to the solution of a Non-Negative Least
Square (NNLS) problem. The proposed algorithm (referred to as
JMA) provides an optimal solution to a linearised version of the
adversarial example problem originally introduced by Szegedy
et al. The results of the experiments confirm the generality of
the proposed attack which is proven to be effective under a
wide variety of output encoding schemes. Noticeably, JMA is also
effective in a multi-label classification scenario, being capable to
induce a targeted modification of up to half the labels in complex
multi-label classification scenarios, a capability that is out of
reach of all the attacks proposed so far. As a further advantage,
JMA requires very few iterations, thus resulting more efficient
than existing methods.
Index Terms—Adversarial Examples, Deep Learning Security,
Adversarial Machine Learning, Multi-Label Classification, Ma-
halanobis Distance, Non-Negative Least Square Problems
I. INTRODUCTION
A
DVERSARIAL examples, namely, quasi-imperceptible
perturbations capable to induce an incorrect decision, are
a serious threat to deep-learning classifiers [1], [2]. Since the
publication of the seminal work by Szegedy et al. [1] in which
the existence of adversarial examples was first observed, a
large number of gradient-based methods have been proposed to
implement adversarial attacks against Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) in white-box and black-box scenarios [2], [3], [4], [5].
Most attacks create the adversarial examples by minimizing
a cost function subject to a constraint on the maximum
perturbation introduced in the image. Moreover, they focus
on single-label classifiers based on one-hot encoding. In this
setting, the final activation layer consists in the application of
an activation function (usually a softmax) and a normalization,
mapping the last layer outputs, called logits, into a probability
vector, associating a probability value to each class. The loss
function corresponds to the categorical cross entropy. As a
B. Tondi, N.Pancino and M. Barni are from the Department of Information
Engineering and Mathematics, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy. W. Guo
is from the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University

This work has been partially supported by SERICS (PE00000014) under
the MUR National Recovery and Resilience Plan funded by the European
Union - NextGenerationEU
consequence, in the targeted case, adversarial examples focus
on raising the probability value of the target class. This is
obviously the best strategy with single-label classification
however, this strategy is not optimal in general, e.g., in the
presence of output encoding schemes based on channel coding,
and in the case of multi-label classification. A more flexible
attack working at the logits level has been proposed by Carlini
and Wagner [6]. The attack works by decreasing the difference
between the largest logit and the logit of the target class (in
the targeted case). Working at the logits level allows to avoid
vanishing gradient problems [7], hence Carlini and Wagner
method often yields better performance compared to methods
that directly minimize the loss term. However, working on
two logits at a time, without considering the effect of the
perturbation on the other logits, is clearly suboptimum in
general, with the consequence that the approach in [6] often
results in a greedy, lengthy, iterative minimization process.
The problem is more evident when the attacker aims at
attacking a DNN adopting different encoding mechanisms, like
Error Correction Output Coding (ECOC) [8], and also multi-
label DNNs. In this case, all the logits have to be modified
simultaneously.
Crafting adversarial examples for networks adopting a
generic output encoding scheme, and for multi-label classi-
fication, is a very challenging task, that, to the best of the
authors’ knowledge, has not been given much attention, with
the exception of some scattered works proposing suboptimum
approaches [9], [10], [11]. From the attacker side, the difficul-
ties of applying an optimal attack in this case are due to the
fact that the labels are not mutually exclusive (like in the one-
hot case), and decreasing or increasing the network output in
correspondence of some nodes may change the values taken
by the other nodes in an unpredictable way.
To overcome the above drawbacks, we introduce a new, the-
oretically sound, targeted adversarial attack, named Jacobian-
induced Mahalanobis distance Attack (JMA). JMA solves
the original formulation of the adversarial example problem
introduced in [1], which aims at minimizing the strength of
the adversarial perturbation subject to the constraint that the
image is classified as belonging to the target class. The solution
is found via a two-step procedure: i) given a target point
in the output space, the optimum perturbation moving the
input sample to the target point is first determined, under a
linear assumption on the effect of the distortion on the model
output; ii) then, the target point that minimizes the perturbation
introduced by the attack is determined by minimizing the
Mahalanobis distance induced by the Jacobian matrix of the
network input-output function. By exploiting the Wolfe duality
theorem, the problem is reduced to the solution of a Non-
arXiv:2401.01199v2  [cs.LG]  14 Aug 2025

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
2
Negative Least Square (NNLS) problem, that can be efficiently
solved numerically. The optimal perturbation derived in this
way is then applied to the input image. Ideally, JMA should
produce the adversarial image in just one-shot. However, due
to local optimality, in practice, it is sometimes necessary to
carry out some iterations to obtain a valid adversarial example,
recomputing the Jacobian matrix every time.
The results of the experiments confirm that the proposed
attack is more efficient than state-of-the-art attacks from a
computational perspective, requiring lower iterations to carry
out the attack. State-of-the-art attacks are also outperformed in
terms of distortion and attack success rate. The effectiveness of
the proposed adversarial attack method is particularly evident
when it is used to attack networks adopting ECOC and in
particular in multi-label classification scenarios, where JMA is
capable to simultaneously change in a desired way up to 10 out
of 20 labels of the output label vector, a capability which is out
of reach of the algorithms proposed so far. We also verified the
very good behavior of JMA in the one-hot encoding scenario,
where it achieves performance that are comparable to the state-
of-the-art with a significant reduction of the computing time.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are:
• We propose a new targeted adversarial attack for gen-
eral classification frameworks, named Jacobian-induced
Mahalanobis distance Attack (JMA). The attack resorts
to the minimization of a Jacobian-induced Mahalanobis
distance term, with the Jacobian matrix taking into ac-
count the effort (input space) to move the latent space
representation of the input sample in a given direction.
In theory, the algorithm is one-shot.
• We solve the constrained minimization of the Maha-
lanobis distance by exploiting the Wolfe duality theorem,
reducing the problem to the solution of a non-negative
least square (NNLS) problem, that can be solved numer-
ically.
• We validate the new attack on various datasets (CIFAR-
10, GTSRB, MNIST, VOC2012, MS-COCO, NUS-
WIDE, and ImageNet) and networks adopting different
encoding schemes, namely ECOC, multi-label, and one-
hot encoding. Validation involves different types of archi-
tectures, including CNNs, Transformers and large visual
models. The experiments confirm that the proposed attack
is very general and can work in all these cases, being very
efficient, often requiring only very few iterations to attack
an image.
• We compare our new approach against several state-of-
the-art attacks, showing that JMA is more efficient and
requires less iterations. In particular, in the multi-label
classification scenario, JMA is capable to change up to
half labels of the output vector, even when the number
of labels increases.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
gives an overview of the related work. Section III provides
the main formalism and introduces the various classification
frameworks. In Section IV, the most relevant adversarial
attacks that can be applied against DNNs adopting output
encoding are reviewed. Then, in Section V, the details of
the JMA adversarial attack are described. The experimental
methodology and setting are described in Section VI, while
section VII reports and discusses the results of the exper-
iments. The papers ends in Section VIII with some final
remarks.
II. RELATED WORKS
Adversarial attacks can be categorized in two main groups,
namely white-box and black-box methods [5].
Starting from Szegedy et al. [1] work, research on white-box
attacks has mainly focused on the development of gradient-
based approaches that can reduce the complexity of the attack.
Many greedy algorithms have been proposed that permit to
find an effective adversarial example in a reasonable amount
of time [2], [3], [12], [13], [14], [6]. The Fast Sign Gradient
Method (FGSM) method [2] obtains an adversarial perturba-
tion in a computationally efficient way by considering the sign
of the gradient of the output with respect to the input image. In
[12], an iterative version of FGSM is introduced by applying
FGSM multiple times, with a smaller step size, each time by
recomputing the gradient. This method is often referred to
as I-FGSM, or Basic Iterative Method (BIM). Another attack
similar to FGSM is the projected gradient descent (PGD)
attack [13], that can be regarded to as a multi-step extension
of the FGSM attack where the clip operation performed by
BIM on the gradient (to force the solution to stay in the
[0,1] range) is replaced by gradient projection. Carlini and
Wagner (C&W) [6] propose a more flexible method, working
at the logits level, which can mitigate the gradient vanishing
problem and improve performance in many cases. Recently,
the AutoPGD and AutoAttack [15] attacks have also been pro-
posed. Such attacks improve PGD by designing an approach
that automatically chooses the most suitable step size and
perturbation size (in the case of AutoAttack) at every attack
iteration, based on the behaviour of the objective function, and
by using a different loss function, which improves performance
and reduces the gradient vanishing problem. Among the other
white-box gradient-based attacks it is worth mentioning the
Jacobian-based Saliency Map Attack (JSMA) [3] and the
DeepFool attack [14]. JSMA [3] consists of a greedy iterative
procedure which relies on forward propagation to compute,
at each iteration, a saliency map, indicating the pixels that
contribute most to the classification, while DeepFool [14]
is an efficient iterative attack that considers the minimal
perturbation with respect to a linearized classifier, stopping
the attack when the boundary is crossed.
A large segment of recent literature has also focused on the
development of attacks that can work in real-world settings
where the exact victim model is unknown. This includes
transfer-based attacks, e.g. [4], [16], [17], which retain part
of their effectiveness even against DNN models other than
the one targeted by the attack, as well as black-box attacks
operating under the assumption that the victim model can be
queried a limited number of times [18], [19].
All the above methods focus on single-label classifiers
adopting one-hot encoding schemes. The problem of crafting
adversarial attacks against classifiers adopting different output

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
3
encoding schemes is a challenging one that, to the best of
the authors’ knowledge, has not been much studied, with
the exception of a few scattered works. Song et. al [9]
first addressed this problem and extended the C&W and the
DeepFool attacks to a multi-label setting. These extended
algorithms are referred as ML-C&W and ML-DF. Inspired
by ML-DF, another approach to implement an adversarial
attack in the multi-label case, named Multi-Label Attack
via Linear programming (MLA-LP), has been proposed in
[10]. Recently, [11] proposed a fundamentally different multi-
label attack method that enforces semantic consistency across
all predicted labels in the adversarial image. The approach
introduced in [11] leverages an efficient search algorithm
over a knowledge graph that captures label dependencies.
Beyond multi-label classification, a white-box attack tailored
against DNNs adopting the ECOC encoding scheme has been
proposed in [20]. A completely different approach, that can
be applied to any network regardless of the encoding scheme,
often leading to a large attack distortion in the input space,
is the Layerwise Origin-Target Synthesis (LOTS) attack [21].
Due to their relevance for our research, the attacks targeting
classifiers adopting output encoding are presented in detail in
Section IV-B.
III. BACKGROUND AND NOTATION
In this section, we review the main output encoding schemes
for DNN classifiers.
Let x ∈Rm denote the input of the network, and y(x) (or
simply y) the class x belongs to. Le l be the number of classes.
To classify x, the neural network first maps x into a reduced
dimensional space Rn (n < m). Every class is associated to
an output label column vector ck = (ck1, ck2, ..., ckn)T . Let
f(x) : Rm →Rn be a column vector indicating the end-to-
end neural network function, and fi(x) the i-th element of
the vector. Classification in favour of one of the l classes is
obtained by applying a function ϕ to f(x), the exact form
of ϕ depending on the output encoding scheme used by the
network. In the following, z = (z1, z2, ..., zn)T denotes the
vector with the logit values, that is, the values of the network
nodes before the final activation function, which is responsible
to map the output of the penultimate layer of the network
into the [0,1] (sometimes [-1, 1]) range. Given an image x,
the notation f −j(x) is used to refer to the internal model
representation at layer L −j (L being the total number of
layers of the network). With this notation, z(x) = f −1(x).
A. One-hot encoding
In the case of networks adopting the one-hot encoding
scheme, the number of output nodes corresponds to the
number of classes (l = n), and ck is a binary vector with
all 0’s except for position k, where it takes value 1. In this
case, the length of z is l, and the logits are directly mapped
onto the output nodes through a softmax function as follows:
fk(x) =
exp(zk)
Pl
i=1 exp(zi)
,
(1)
for k = 1, .., l. This allows to interpret fk(x) as the probability
assigned to class k, and the final prediction is made by letting
ϕ(x) = arg maxk fk(x).
Typically, in the one-hot encoding case, training is carried
out by minimizing the categorical cross-entropy loss defined
as L(x, y) = −Pl
i=1 cyi log(fi(x)) = −log(fy(x)).
B. Error-correction-output-coding (ECOC)
Sometimes the output classes are encoded by using the
codewords of a channel code. In this way, error correction
can be applied to recover from incorrect network behaviors.
In this case, the network output dimension n corresponds to
the length of the codewords and ck is the codeword associated
to the k-th output class. The number of classes is typically less
than 2n (l < 2n). An example of the use of channel coding
to define the class label vectors is given in [22] (ECOC). The
use of ECOC has also been proposed as a way to improve the
robustness against adversarial attacks in a white-box setting
[8]. The rationale is the following: while with classifiers based
on standard one-hot encoding the attacker can induce an error
by modifying one single logit (the one associated to the
target class), the final decision of the ECOC classifier depends
on multiple logits in a complicated manner, and hence it is
supposedly more difficult to attack.
Formally, with ECOC, a distinct codeword ck is assigned
to every output class. Let C = {c1, c2, · · · , cl} define the
codebook, that is, the matrix of codewords. Each element of
C can take values in {−1, 1}. To compute the output of the
network the logits are mapped into the [−1, 1] range by means
of an activation function σ(), that is f(x) = σ(z), where σ() is
applied element-wise to the logits. A common choice for σ() is
the tanh function. To make the final decision, the probability
of class k is first computed:
pk(x) =
max(f(x)T ck, 0)
Pl
i=1 max(f(x)T ci, 0)
,
(2)
where f(x)T ck is the inner product between f(x) and ck.
Since cij’s take values in {−1, 1}, the max is necessary to
avoid negative probabilities. Then, the model’s final prediction
is given by ϕ(x) = arg maxk pk(x). Note that Eq. (2) reduces
to Eq. (1) in the case of one-hot encoding, when C = Il and
where Il is the identity l×l matrix. In the ECOC case, training
is usually carried out by minimizing the hinge loss function,
defined as L(x, y) = Pn
i=1 max(1 −cyifi(x), 0).
C. Multi-label classification
Multi-label classification is the scenario wherein the classi-
fier is asked to decide about the presence or absence within the
image of n image characteristics or features. For example, the
classifier may be asked to detect the presence of n possible
classes of objects, or decide about n binary attributes (like
indoor/outdoor, night/day, sunny/rainy). The presence/absence
of the looked-for features is encoded by the n outputs of the
network (see, for instance, [23], [24]). In general, the number
of possible outputs is l = 2n, and each output is encoded
in a matrix C having size n × 2n. In fact, it is possible that
some labels’ combinations are not feasible. In such a case,

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
4
C contains only the allowed combinations, somewhat playing
the same role of channel coding. In this paper, multi-label
classification indicates a situation where all combinations of
labels are possible.
In the case of multi-label classification, given the logit
vector z, the activation function σ() is applied element-
wise to the components of z, and the prediction on each
label component is made component-wise. Assuming that
ck ∈{0, 1}n for any k, and that the logistic function is
applied to the logits, decoding corresponds to 0.5-thresholding
each output score independently1. For the loss function, a
common choice is the (multi-label) binary cross-entropy loss
L(x, y) = −Pn
i=1(cyi log(fi(x)) + (1 −cyi) log(1 −fi(x))).
IV. ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS AGAINST DNNS
The vulnerability of deep neural networks (DNNs) to ad-
versarial samples has been first pointed out by Szegedy et
al. in [1]. When the goal of the attacker is to induce a
generic misclassification, the attack is referred to as untargeted
Conversely, if the misclassification aims at a specific class,
the attack is referred to as targeted. According to [1], the
generation of a targeted adversarial example can be formally
described as
minimize
||δ||2
s.t.
ϕ(x + δ) = t ̸= ϕ(x)
and
x + δ ∈[0, 1]m
,
(3)
where ||δ||2 denotes the l2 norm of the perturbation δ, and t
is the target class of the attack. The same formulation holds
for the untargeted case, with the first constraint replaced by
ϕ(x + δ) ̸= ϕ(x). The constraint x + δ ∈[0, 1]m makes sure
that the resulting adversarial example is a valid input.
A. Basic adversarial attacks
Solving the minimization in (3) is generally hard, then the
adversarial examples are determined by solving the simplified
problem where a functional L(x + δ, t)+λ·∥δ∥2
2 is minimized,
where L(x + δ, t) is the loss function (usually, the categorical
cross entropy loss) under the target class t, and λ is a parameter
balancing the two terms. This problem can be solved by the
box-constraint L-BFGS method [1]. Specifically, a line search
is carried out to find the value of λ > 0 for which the
solution satisfies the adversarial condition, that is ϕ(x+δ) = t.
It is immediate to see that, in the one-hot case, when the
categorical cross entropy loss is considered, only the target
class contributes to the loss term, and then the attack only
cares about increasing ft(x), regardless of the other scores,
all the more that, due to the presence of the softmax, this also
implies decreasing the other outputs. To reduce the complexity
of the L-BFGS attack, several suboptimal solutions have been
proposed, considering the problem of minimizing the loss
function L subject to a constraint on the perturbation δ, like
I-FGSM (or BIM) [12] and PGD [13].
A flexible and efficient method working at the logits level
has been proposed by Carlini and Wagner [6]. In the C&W
attack in fact, the loss term is replaced by a properly designed
1If ck ∈{−1, 1}n, tanh activation followed by 0-thresholding is applied.
function depending on the difference between the logit of
the target class and the largest among the logits of the other
classes. The perturbation is kept in the valid range by properly
modifying the objective function. In this way, the following
unconstrained problem is considered and solved (for the case
of L2 metric):
min
w
||δ(w)||2
2+
λ · max(max
i̸=t zi(x + δ(w)) −zt(x + δ(w)), −κ),
(4)
where δ(w) = 1/2(tanh(w) + 1) −x is the distortion intro-
duced in the image, and the constant parameter κ > 0 is used
to encourage the attack to generate a high confidence attacked
image. Since logits are more sensitive to modifications of the
input than the probability values obtained after the softmax
activation C&W attack is less sensitive to vanishing gradient
problems. However, by considering only two logits at time,
and neglecting the effect of the perturbation on the other logits,
this approach is particularly suited to the one-hot case and is
highly suboptimum when other output encoding schemes are
used.
B. Attacks against DNNs with output encoding
The adversarial attack algorithm and methods described
above focus on models based on one-hot encoding. This is a
favorable scenario for the attacker, who only needs to focus on
increasing the output score (or logit) of the target class t. This
is not the case with DNNs based on different output encoding
schemes. The simplest examples are multi-label classifiers.
From the attacker’s side, the difficulties of carrying out the
attack in this case are due to the fact that the labels are not
mutually exclusive, and decreasing or increasing the network
output in correspondence of some nodes may change the
values taken by the other nodes in an unpredictable way. In
addition, the attacker may want to modify more than one
output label in a desired way. For instance, he may want to
induce the classifier to interpret a daylight image showing a
car driving in the rain, as a night image of a car driving with
no rain. This prevents the application of the basic adversarial
algorithms described in the previous section.
As mentioned in Section II
the problem of crafting ad-
versarial examples against multi-label classifiers has been ad-
dressed in [9], where the C&W and the DeepFool attacks have
been extended to work in a multi-label setting. The extension
of C&W attack, hereafter referred to as ML-C&W, works as
follows: for every output node, a hinge loss term similar to
the one in Eq. (4) is considered in the minimization. More
specifically, the following term is added to the minimization:
Pn
i=0 max(0, γ −cti · zi(x + δ)), where ct is the target label
vector and γ is a confidence parameter. Note that the extension
implicitly assumes that decoding is carried out element-wise.
This is not true when all labels’ combinations are possible
and with schemes adopting output channel coding. However,
by working at the logits level, the C&W attack is general and
can also be extended to work with different output encoding
schemes (as discussed below).
The extension of the DeepFool attack (ML-DF) works as
follows: instead of targeting an objective function minimizing

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
5
the distortion, ML-DF looks for the minimum perturbation that
allows to enter the target region under a linear assumption
on the model behavior. ML-DF works at the output score
level, and hence is more prone to the vanishing gradient
problem than ML-C&W. Given the threshold vector ρ =
(ρ1, ρ2, .., ρl)T for the score level output (ρi = 0.5 when
fi ∈[0, 1], 0 when fi ∈[−1, 1]), a vector with the distance to
the boundary is derived and used to compute the perturbation.
The perturbation obtained in this way is applied to the image.
ML-DF applies the above procedure iteratively until the attack
succeeds or the maximum number of iterations is reached.
ML-DF is a greedy method and often leads to very large
distortions; Moreover, the performance obtained are always
inferior with respect to ML-C&W [9], [10].
MLA-LP, which also implements an adversarial attack for
the multi-label case, works as follows. By assuming that the
loss changes are linear for small distortions, a simplified
formulation of the attack is solved to minimize the L∞
distortion introduced in the image subject to a constraint on
the loss value, requiring that the final loss is lower than the
threshold value. Thanks to the adoption of the L∞distortion,
the problem can be easily solved by linear programming
methods. Similarly to ML-DF, MLA-LP works at the final
score output level. By considering the loss function instead
of the model output function, MLA-LP tends to modify less
the confidences of non-attacked labels with respect to ML-DF,
with a lower distortion of the attacked image.
When the output coding scheme is based on ECOC, an ad-
versarial attack can be carried out by extending to this setting
the C&W method. Specifically, the C&W attack can be applied
at the probability level, exploiting the specific mapping of the
logits to probabilities. In particular, C&W attack can be used to
attack networks adopting ECOC output encoding by replacing
the logit terms zi(x) with f(x)T ci, that is, by considering the
loss term max(maxi̸=t f(x+δ(w))T ci−f(x+δ(w))T ct, −κ).
In the case of an ECOC-based network, adversarial exam-
ples can also be obtained by using the attack described in [20]
(in the following, this method is referred to as ECOC attack).
Such an attack incorporates within the minimization problem
the ECOC decoding procedure. Formally, the optimization
problem solved in [20] is defined as:
min
δ

||δ||2
2 −λ · min
i (cti · zi(x + δ), η)

,
(5)
where η is a constant parameter setting a confidence threshold
for the attack.
Although not specialized for this case, ML-C&W can
also be used to attack ECOC-based networks. Instead, ML-
DeepFool and MLA-LP, that work at the score output level
and requires knowledge of the threshold vector ρ, cannot
be extended to the case of networks adopting an output
encoding scheme like ECOC. In fact, the threshold vector ρ
is not available in the ECOC case since the decision is made
after the correlations are computed. A straightforward, highly
suboptimum, way to apply these methods to the ECOC case
is by setting ρ = (0, 0, ..., 0)T , as if all the codewords were
possible, and performing the decoding element-wise.
1) The LOTS attack: A completely different kind of attack,
which can be applied to any network regardless of the output
encoding scheme is the Layerwise Origin-Target Synthesis
(LOTS) attack [21]. LOTS generates the adversarial example
by modifying the input sample so that its representation in the
feature space is as similar as possible to that of a given target
sample. Formally, given the internal representation f −j(x) of
an image x at layer L −j and a target internal representation
f −j(xt), LOTS attempts to minimize the term:
||f −j(xt) −f −j(x)||2.
(6)
At each iteration, the algorithm updates the input sample as
x(i) = x(i−1) −
ν−j(x, xt)
maxx(|ν−j(x, xt)|)
(7)
where ν−j(x, xt) = ∇x
 ||f −j(xt) −f −j(x)||2
, and | · | is
applied element-wise, until the Euclidean distance between
f −l(x) and the target is smaller than a predefined threshold.
The final perturbed image xadv obtained in this way has an
internal representation at layer L −j that mimics that of the
target sample xt. In LOTS, the target point xt is any point
belonging to the target class of the attack. It is worth noticing
that in general xt may not be available, e.g. in the multilabel
case when the attacker targets an arbitrary labels’ combination.
When
applied
to
the
logits
level
(f −1),
LOTS
simultaneously modifies all the logits. However, by focusing
on the minimization of the Euclidean loss, the distortion
introduced in the input space is not controlled.
2) JMA and prior art: In contrast to LOTS [21], JMA
defines the target point in the feature space that minimizes
perturbation necessary to move the feature representation of
the input sample to the target point. It does so, by relying
on the Mahalanobis distance induced by the Jacobian matrix
of the neural network function so to take into account the
different effort, in terms of input perturbation, required to
move the sample in different directions. ML-DF and MLA-
LP [9], [10] are also based on the Jacobian matrix, however,
in [9], the Jacobian matrix is used to implement a greedy
algorithm, while in [10] is used to solve a suboptimum
formulation of the attack. With JMA, instead, the original
formulation of the attack by Szegedy et al. is solved under
a first-order approximation. With such an approximation, in
fact, the solution of the attack problem can be reduced to
the solution of a constrained quadratic programming problem
(where the objective function is a Mahalanobis distance term
induced by the Jacobian). Moreover, our algorithm is a general
one and can work either at the output level or at the logits level,
regardless of the output encoding scheme used.
V. THE JMA ATTACK
As mentioned in Section I, our method is designed to
operate at the logits level. In fact, while modifying one or
two logits at a time allows to carry out a close-to-optimal
adversarial attack in the one-hot encoding case [6], in the
more general case of DNNs based on output encoding, this
approach is highly suboptimum. In this scenario, in addition
to considering all the logits simultaneously, as done in the
ML-C&W attack, the correlation among the logits and the

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
6
effort required in the input space to move the input sample
in a given direction (in the logit or feature space) must
be considered. JMA tackles the above problems and finds
the optimal adversarial image, by solving the optimization
problem in Eq. (3), under a first-order approximation of the
behavior of the network function.
In the following, we look at the output of the neural network
function f 2 as a generic point in Rn. According to Eq. (3), the
optimum target point for the attacker corresponds to the point
in the target decision region that can be reached by introducing
the minimal perturbation in the image x. Such a point is not
necessarily the point in the target decision region closest to
the current output point f(x) in the Euclidean norm, since
evaluating the distance in the output space does not take into
account the effort necessary to move the input sample into the
desired output point. Let x0 be the to-be-attacked image and
let us denote with δ the perturbation applied by the attacker.
Let r = f(x0) + d denote a generic point in the output space.
The goal of the attacker is to determine the displacement d, in
such a way that r lies inside the decision region of the target
class, and for which the Euclidean norm of the perturbation
δ(d) necessary to reach r is minimum, that is:
min
d:ϕ(f(x0)+d)=t


min
δ:f(x0+δ)−f(x0)=d
x0+δ∈[0,1]m
||δ(d)||2

.
(8)
The proposed attack works in two steps:
1. the optimum perturbation δ∗(d) moving the input
sample to the (generic) target point r is determined;
2. we find the optimum target point r∗, i.e., the optimum
displacement d∗(where r∗= f(x0) + d∗) by solving a
constrained quadratic programming problem. The result-
ing δ∗(d∗) gives the minimum perturbation necessary to
reach the target region.
In the following, we first rewrite the minimization in a
more convenient way, then we solve Step 1 and 2 under a
first order approximation. Without loss of generality, we will
assume that all the label codewords have the same norm, and
that ϕ() applies a minimum distance decoding rule. In this
case, forcing ϕ(f(x0) + d) = t is equivalent to impose the
following conditions:
rT ct ≥rT ci,
i = 1, 2 . . . l,
(9)
that can be rewritten as a function of d as
dT (ci −ct) ≤gti,
i = 1, 2 . . . l,
(10)
where gti = (f(x0)T ct −f(x0)T ci), and hence the optimiza-
tion problem in Eq. (8) can be rewritten as:
min
d:dT (ci−ct)≤gti
∀i,i=1,··· ,l

min
δ:f(x0+δ)−f(x0)=d ||δ(d)||2

.
(11)
Note that we neglected the constraint x0+δ ∈[0, 1]m, trusting
that if δ is small the constraint is always satisfied. We will
2For ease of notation, in the following, the model output is considered,
however the same procedure can be applied at the logit level.
then reconsider the effect of this constraint at the end of our
derivation in Section V-A.
Under the assumption that the input perturbation is small
(which should always be the case with adversarial examples),
we can consider a first order approximation of the effect of
the perturbation δ on the network output:
f(x0 + δ) ≃f(x0) + Jx0δ,
(12)
where Jx0 denotes the Jacobian matrix of f in x03:
Jx = ∇xf(x)|x0 =
∂fi(x0)
∂xj

i=1,··· ,n,j=1,···m
.
(13)
We now show that the minimization in Eq. (11) can be solved
under the first order approximation in Eq. (12). In particular,
Step 1 corresponds to solving the following problem:
δ∗(d) = arg
min
δ:f(x+δ)−f(x0)=d ||δ||2,
(14)
that, under the linear approximation, becomes4
δ∗(d) = arg min
δ:d=Jδ ∥δ∥2,
(15)
that corresponds to finding the minimum norm solution of the
system of linear equations d = Jδ. The solution of the above
problem is given by the following proposition.
Proposition 1. Since n < m, under the assumption that J
has full rank5, the solution of the minimization in Eq. (15) is:
δ∗(d) = JT (JJT )−1d.
(16)
Proof. Eq. (15) can be rewritten as the solution of the follow-
ing non-negative least-squares problem:
min
δ
∥Jδ −d||2
2 = min
δ

δT (JT J)δ −2δT JT d + dT d
	
.
(17)
In fact, since (JT J) is positive definite, the to-be-minimized
function in the right-hand side of the equation is (strictly)
convex and thus admits a minimum. If J has full rank, the
solution of the above problem is unique and is given by [25]:
δ∗= JT (JJT )−1d,
(18)
which satisfies Jδ∗= d (and hence ∥Jδ∗−d||2
2 = 0), thus
also corresponding to the minimum norm solution in (15).
From Proposition 1, we can express the norm of the
optimum perturbation as follows
||δ∗(d)||2 =δ∗T δ∗= (JT (JJT )
−1d)T (JT (JJT )
−1d)
=dT (JT (JJT )
−1)T (JT (JJT )
−1d)
=dT (JJT )
−1d,
(19)
where in the last equality we have exploited the symmetry of
(JJT )−1 (being the inverse of a symmetric matrix (JJT )),
and then ((JJT )−1)
T = (JJT )−1.
3f can describe the output of the network or the logits (strictly speaking,
in the latter case, f should be replaced by f−1)
4To keep the notation light, here and in the sequel, we omit the subscript
of the Jacobian matrix.
5We verified this assumption experimentally as discussed in Section VI-D.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
7
f(x0)
r∗
r′
Region boundary
level curves of J
r′ = closest in the Euclidean norm
{f ∈Rn s.t. φ(f(x)) = t}
Target region
Fig. 1: Illustration of the intuition behind the formulation
in (20). The point in the target region closest to f(x0) in
the Euclidean norm is r′. Then, r′ = f(x0) + d′, where d′
is the minimum norm displacement necessary to reach the
target region. Instead, the point that can be reached with the
minimum distortion in the input space, i.e., the point which
minimizes δ, is r∗(this point corresponds to a displacement
d∗having larger norm than d′). r∗is the optimal target point
that the attack wants to reach.
The optimal target point r∗, and hence the optimal distance
term d∗, is then determined (Step 2) by solving the following
minimization:
min
d:dT (ci−ct)≤gti,∀i̸=t dT (JJT )
−1d.
(20)
Note that the above formulation corresponds to minimizing
the Mahalanobis distance induced by the Jacobian matrix,
between the current output of the network and the target point.
The above formulation has a very intuitive meaning, which is
illustrated in Fig. 1. The term dT (JJT )
−1d allows to take into
account the effort required in the pixel domain to move along
a given direction in the output domain.
To solve (20), we find convenient to rewrite it as follows:
min
d:Ad≤b
1
2dT (JJT )
−1d,
(21)
where A = [(c1 −ct)T . . . (cl −ct)T ] has size (l −1)×n, and
b is an (l −1)-long vector defined as bi = gti. We observe
that when l > n + 1 the system is overdetermined.
Theorem 1. Problem (21) (and hence (20)) has a unique
solution given by:
d∗= −(JJT )(AT λ∗),
(22)
where
λ∗= arg min
λ
1
2λT A(JJT )AT λ + bT λ,
λ ≥0,
(23)
and then
δ∗= JT (JJT )−1d∗= −JT (AT λ∗).
(24)
Proof. The optimal solution of the quadratic problem in (21)
can be obtained by solving the easier Wolfe dual problem [26]
defined as:
max
d,λ
1
2dT (JJT )
−1d + λT (Ad −b)
s.t. (JJT )
−1d + AT λ = 0
λ ≥0,
(25)
where λ is a column vector with l −1 entries. By rewriting
the objective function as −1
2dT (JJT )
−1d + dT ((JJT )
−1d +
AT λ)−bT λ and after some algebra, the optimization problem
can be rephrased as:
min
d,λ
1
2dT (JJT )
−1d + bT λ
s.t. (JJT )
−1d + AT λ = 0
λ ≥0.
(26)
Solving the equality constraint yields d∗in (22) as a function
of λ. By substituting d∗in the objective function and exploit-
ing the symmetry of (JJT ) we obtain (23).
The problem in (23) is a NNLS problem [26], [25], for
which several numerical solvers exist [27], many of them
belonging to the class of active set methods, see for instance
[28], [29]. In particular, an easy-to-implement algorithm,
whose complexity grows linearly with the number of label
vectors, named Sequential Coordinate-Wise algorithm, has
been proposed in [30]. Theorem 1 identifies the minimum
perturbation necessary to enter the target region δ∗(d∗) (simply
indicated as δ∗in the following). Then the adversarial image
is computed as xadv = x + δ∗.
Note that in the multi-label case, the number of label vectors
grows exponentially with n (since l = 2n). However, in this
case, the problem can be significantly simplified, as discussed
in Section V-B.
A. Iterative formulation of JMA
In principle, JMA should produce an adversarial example
in one-shot. In practice, however, this is not always the case,
due to the fact that the linear assumption of f holds only in a
small neighborhood of the input x, hence the assumption may
not be met when the distortion necessary to attack the image
is larger. In order to mitigate this problem, we consider the
following iterative version of JMA:
• When δ∗does not bring x into the target region, that
is, ϕ(x + δ∗) ̸= t, we update the input in the direction
given by the perturbation considering a small step ϵ, thus
remaining in the close vicinity of x.
• When the target class is reached, a binary search is
performed between the perturbed sample x + δ∗and the
original input x, and the adversarial example resulting in
the smallest perturbation is considered.
Finally, in practice, after that the optimal perturbation δ∗
is superimposed to x, a clipping operation is performed to be
sure that the solution remains in the [0, 1]m range.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
8
The iterative version of JMA resulting from the application
of the above steps is described in Algorithm 1. In the algo-
rithm, the maximum number of iterations (updates) is set to
nit,max.
Algorithm 1 Jacobian-induced Mahalanobis-distance attack
Require:
max no. of iterations nit,max, to be attacked image x,
target class t (target label vector ct), updating step size ϵ
Ensure:
adversarial example xadv
1: for i ∈[1, nit,max] do
2:
calculate f(x)
3:
calculate the Jacobian matrix by backward propagation:
J = ∇xf(x)
4:
calculate matrix A and vector b
5:
calculate λ∗in Eq.(23) via the sequential Coordinate-
Wise algorithm in [30]
6:
calculate adversarial perturbation: δ∗= −JT (AT λ∗).
7:
x = x + δ∗
8:
x = clip(x, 0, 1)
9:
if ϕ(f(x)) = t then
10:
while ϕ(f(x)) = t do
11:
do binary search between x and x −δ∗
12:
x = clip(x, 0, 1)
13:
end while
14:
return xadv
15:
else
16:
x = (x −δ∗) + ϵ
δ∗
||δ∗||
17:
end if
18: end for
B. Simplified formulation for the multi-label case
In most cases, the number of classes l, determining the
number of rows of matrix A in Eq. (21), is limited. For
multi-label classification, however, all labels’ combinations
are possible, and l = 2n. Therefore, the size of A increases
exponentially slowing down the attack. Luckily, in this case,
the minimization problem can be significantly simplified by
properly rephrasing the constraint in (9). Specifically, since all
the codeword combinations are possible, the constraint forcing
the solution to lye in the desired region can be rewritten
element-wise as follows:
fj · ctj ≥0,
j = 1, 2 . . . n.
(27)
By rewriting (27) as a function of d, we get
dj · ctj ≥−fj(x0) · ctj,
j = 1, 2 . . . n.
(28)
that can be rewritten in the form Md ≤e, where e is a n-
length vector with elements ej = f(x0)j·ctj and M is an n×n
diagonal matrix with diagonal elements Mjj = −ctj. Then,
the minimization problem has the same form of (21), with M
and e replacing A and b, and Proposition 1 remains valid, with
the difference that the scalar vector λ has now dimension n.
Therefore, the NNLS problem can be solved by means of the
sequential Coordinate-Wise algorithm in [30] with complexity
O(n) instead of O(2n) as in the original formulation.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL SETTING
To evaluate the performance of JMA, we have run several
experiments addressing different classification scenarios, in-
cluding ECOC-based classification [8] and multi-label classi-
fication. Although less significant for this study, we have also
run some experiments in the one-hot encoding scenario. In all
the cases, JMA is applied at the logits level.
We implemented JMA by using Python 3.6.9 via the
Keras 2.3.1 API. We run the experiments by using an
NVIDIA
GeForce
RTX
2080
Ti
GPU.
The
code,
as
well as the trained models and the information for the
reproducibility of the experiments are publicly available
at
https://github.com/guowei-cn/JMA–A-General-Close-
to-Optimal-Targeted-Adversarial-Attack-with-Improved-
Efficiency.git. In the following sections, we describe the
classification tasks considered in the experiments, present
the evaluation and comparison methodologies, and detail the
experimental setting.
A. Classification networks and settings
1) One-hot encoding: To assess the performance of JMA
in the single-label classification scenario, we considered the
task of traffic sign classification on the German Traffic Sign
Recognition Benchmark (GTSRB) dataset [31], with a VGG16
architecture. In this scenario, the accuracy of the the trained
model on clean images is 0.995. Moreover, to validate the
effectiveness of the JMA algorithm in a challenging classifica-
tion scenario with a large number of classes, we defined a new
classification task by selecting 2,000 classes from the most
populated categories in the ImageNet21K dataset [32] (referred
to as ImageNet2K in the following). A ViT-B/16 network
pretrained on ImageNet21K and fine-tuned on a training subset
of ImageNet2K was used for this task. The accuracy on clean
images is 0.66.
2) ECOC-based classifier:
We considered the ECOC
framework for three image classification tasks, namely MNIST
[33], CIFAR-10 [34], and GTSRB [31]. We implemented the
ECOC scheme considering an ensemble of networks, each
one outputting one bit6. The number of branches h of the
ensemble is h = 10 for MNIST and CIFAR-10, and h = 16 for
GTSRB. We used Hadamard codewords as suggested in [8].
We considered an Hadamard code with n = 16 for MNIST and
CIFAR-10. For the GTSRB case, we set l = 32, by selecting
the classes with more examples, and used an Hadamart code
with n = 32. Following the original ECOC design, we
considered the VGG16 architecture [35] as baseline, with the
first 6 convolutional layers shared by all the networks of the
ensemble (shared bottom), and the remaining 10 layers (the
last 8 convolutional layers and the 2 fully connected layers)
trained separately for each ensemble branch. The weights
of the ImageNet pre-trained model are used for the shared
bottom.
6According to [8], resorting to an ensemble of networks permits to achieve
better robustness against attacks.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
9
3) Multi-label classification: We primarily tested the per-
formance of JMA in a multi-label setting by using the
VOC2012 dataset [36], which is a benchmark dataset adopted
in several multi-class classification works [24], [23]. This
dataset has been used to train models to recognize object inside
scenes. Specifically, the 11,530 images of the dataset contain
objects from 20 classes. Then, n = 20 and the number of
possible label vectors is 2n ≈106. The dataset is split into
training, validation, and testing subsets, with proportion 6:2:2.
We considered the same model architecture adopted in [9] that
is, a standard InceptionV3 [37]. The categorical hinge loss was
used to train the model, with a standard Adam optimizer with
lr = 10−4 and batch size 64. The performance of the network
in this case are measured in terms of mean average precision
(mAP), that is, the mean of the average precision (AP) for
all the classes, where AP is a measure of the area under the
precision-recall curve. According to our experiments, the mAP
of our model is 0.93, which is aligned with [9].
To better show the generality of the proposed attack, we also
trained additional models using different and more modern
architectures, namely, ResNet50 [38], ViT-B/16 [39], and
CLIP+MLP [40] , and ran attacks against them The results
regarding these networks are reported in Section VII-D.
We further validated the effectiveness of JMA on multi-label
classification by running some additional experiments on more
complex datasets, namely MS-COCO [41] and NUS-WIDE
[42] (see again Section VII-D).
B. Comparison with the state-of-the-art
We have compared the performance of JMA with the most
relevant state-of-the-art attacks for the various classification
scenarios. In all the cases, we used the code made available
by the authors in public repositories.
For the multi-label case, we considered ML-C&W [9],
MLA-LP [10] , LOTS [21] and the method in [11], referred to
as SemA-ML in the following. We did not consider ML-DF,
since its performance are always inferior to those of ML-C&W
[9], [10])
Regarding LOTS, as described in Section IV, it can be
applied to any internal layer of the network. In the experi-
ments, for a fair comparison, we have applied LOTS at the
logits layer. By following [21], for every target label vector,
we randomly selected 20 images with that label vector, and
averaged the logits to get the target output vector (for target
label vectors for which the total number of images available is
lower than 20, we used all of them). We stress that, in the way
it works, LOTS can not target an arbitrary labels’ combination,
since examples for that combination may not be available.
For the case of ECOC-based classification, the comparison
is carried out against C&W, which is also the attack considered
in [8], and [20] (ECOC Attack) specialized to work with the
ECOC model [20]. Although suboptimal in this case, we also
considered ML-C&W and MLA-LP, by applying the latter as
discussed in Section IV-B. However, given the complexity of
the attack in the ECOC scenario and the high sub-optimality
of MLA-LP, the performance of this attack are extremely
poor, and no image can be attacked by using it. Finally, the
performance of LOTS are also assessed. In this case, the target
output vectors are computed by averaging 50 images (when
the number of available images is lower than 50, we averaged
all of them).
For the one-hot encoding scenario, we considered the orig-
inal C&W algorithm [6], which is one of the best performing
white-box attack working at the logits level.
We did not consider attacks like I-FGSM, PGD, and also
AutoPGD and AutoAttack, as they cannot be applied to frame-
works different than single-label classification (see discussion
in Section II), e.g. to ECOC and in particular to the multi-label
case, for which they would need a suitable extension via the
definition of a proper loss function.
C. Evaluation methodology
To test the attacks in the various scenarios, we proceeded
as follows: we randomly picked 200 images from the test set,
among those that are correctly classified by the network model
(in the complex multi-label classification tasks of MS-COCO
and NUS-WIDE, some label errors always occur, hence the
attacked samples are chosen at random); then, for each image,
we randomly picked a target label vector, different from the
true label vector.
For multi-label classification, in principle, there can be -
and in fact there are - combinations of labels that are not
represented in the training set. it is also possible that some of
these combinations do not correspond to valid label vectors.
Since LOTS requires the availability of samples belonging
to the target label vector, for ease of comparison, in the
experiments, we considered label vectors that appear in the
training set as target label vectors. For the other methods, some
tests have also been carried out in the more challenging case
where the target label vectors correspond to randomly chosen
target vectors. Such target vectors are obtained by randomly
changing a prescribed number of bits in the label vector of the
to-be-attacked image.
An attack is considered successful only when the predicted
label vector and the target label vector coincide. If only a
subset of the labels can be modified by the attack, and the
target label vector is not reached, we mark this as a failure.
We measured the performance of the attacks in terms of Attack
Success Rate (ASR), namely, the percentage of generated
adversarial examples that are assigned to the target class. To
measure the quality of the adversarial image, we considered
the Mean Square Error (MSE) of the attack, evaluated as MSE
= ||δ||2/
√
H × W × 3, where H × W × 3 is the size of the
image (image values are in the [0,1] range).
For the tests with random choice of the target vector, we
also report the average percentage of labels/bits successfully
modified by the attack, indicated as bASR.
The computational complexity is measured by providing the
average number of iterations required by the attack, and the
time - in seconds - necessary to run it. In the following, we let
nit denote the number of iterations necessary to run an attack,
that is, the number of attack updates. The average number of
iterations is denoted by ¯nit.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
10
D. Attack Parameters Setting
The tunable parameters of JMA are the maximum number of
iterations (nit,max) and the step size ϵ. The maximum number
of iterations takes also into account the number of ‘for’ loops
and the number of steps of the binary search in the final
iteration (see Algorithm 1), the total number of updates of
JMA, then, is nit = (v −1) + nbs, where v is the number of
‘for’ loops of the algorithm (v < nit,max, see Algorithm 1)
and nbs is the number of steps of the binary search. nbs is set
to 6 in our the experiments.
For C&W, ML-C&W and ECOC attack, the parameters are
the initial λ, the number of steps of the binary search nbs,
and the maximum number of iterations nit,max. For all these
attacks, a binary search is carried out over the loss tradeoff
parameter λ (see Section IV-A). At each binary search step,
iterations are run (until nit,max) to obtain the adversarial
example. The number of iterations that we report considers
only the number of attack updates corresponding to the final
λ value used by the attack. Hence, in these cases, the actual
complexity of the attack is better reflected by the attack time.
As for the setting of these parameters, we consider nbs = 5
and 10, and various values of the initial λ. For SemA-ML,
we set nit,max = 300 following the official code, with the
other settings left as the default. For MLA-LP and LOTS,
the only parameter is the maximum number of iterations
nit,max allowed in the gradient descent. In the experiments,
we considered various values of nit,max. For MLA-LP, we
set nit,max = 100 for the multi-label classification case, and
raised it up to 3000 in the ECOC case when the attack is
more difficult. For LOTS, we set nit,max = 2000, namely
the maximum number considered in [21], maximizing the
chances to find an adversarial example. Given that the time
complexity of LOTS is limited compared to the other methods,
in fact, the time complexity of the attack remains small also
for large values of nit,max. We have verified experimentally
that LOTS converges within 1000 iterations 92% of the times7,
validating the soundness of our choice. For ML-C&W, we set
nit,max = 1000 as default value, and in most of the cases re-
sults are reported for (λ, nbs, nit,max) = (0.01, 10, 1000), that
resulted in the highest ASR. Finally, for JMA, we generally
got no benefit by increasing the number of iterations beyond
200, since most of the time JMA converges in by far less
iterations, and 200 is more than enough to get and adversarial
image in all the cases.
To simplify the comparison, the confidence parameter is set
to 0 for all the attacks. To avoid that the an attack gets stuck
with some images (e.g. in the multi-label case when many
labels have to be changed), we set a limit on the running time
of the attack, and considered the attack unsuccessful when an
adversarial example could not be generated in less than 1 hour.
Regarding JMA, we found experimentally that, the assump-
tion made in the theoretical analysis that the Jacobian matrix
has full rank always holds when the number of iterations of the
attack remains small. However, when the number of iterations
increases it occasionally happens that the rank of the Jacobian
7Convergence is determined by checking whether the new loss value is
close enough to the average loss value of the last 10 iterations.
TABLE I: Results against one-hot encoding classification for
GTSRB.
Parameters
ASR
MSE
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
0.81
1.6e-4
50.65
7.44
(0.1, 200)
0.88
2.1e-4
38.00
5.66
(0.2, 200)
0.94
2.6e-4
29.63
4.41
(0.6,200)
0.98
4.3e-4
16.20
2.46
C&W
(1e-4,5, 100)
0.19
2.2e-5
85.95
45.06
(1e-4,5,200)
0.33
3.0e-5
171.88
90.11
(1e-2,5, 500)
0.55
5.8e-5
443.18
233.45
(1e-1,10, 2000)
0.75
7.7e-5
1661.11
875.35
(1e-1,10, 5000)
0.82
7.9e-5
3577.5
1884.59
TABLE II: Results of JMA against one-hot encoding classifi-
cation with a large number of classes (ImageNet2K).
Parameters
ASR
MSE
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.1, 200)
0.99
3.8e-6
26.59
445.61
(0.2, 200)
1.00
6.2e-6
19.17
297.00
(0.6, 200)
1.00
2.1e-5
13.59
178.78
(1, 200)
1.00
4.2e-5
12.11
160.06
matrix is not full. In this case, an adversarial perturbation can
not be found, resulting in a failure of the attack.
VII. RESULTS
The results we obtained in the various settings are re-
ported in this section. In all the tables, ¯nit refers to the
average number of iterations/updating of the attack, averaged
on the successful attacks. The attack parameters reported
are (λ, nbs, nit,max) for C&W, ML-C&W and ECOC attack,
(ϵ, nit,max) for JMA and nit,max for LOTS and MLA-LP.
A. One-hot encoding
The main advantage of JMA with respect to state of the art
is obtained for classifiers that do not adopt one-hot encoding.
In such a scenario, in fact, focusing only on the target logit
or the final score, as done by the most common adversarial
attacks, is approximately optimal. Nevertheless, we verified
that JMA is also effective in the one-hot encoding scenario.
Table I reports the results on GTSRB. We see that JMA
achieves a larger ASR compared to C&W, yet with a larger
MSE. This is due to the fact that JMA tends to modify all
the output scores, while C&W directly focuses on raising the
target output, which is an effective strategy in the one-hot
encoding case. In addition, JMA can obtain an adversarial
image with much lower iterations, requiring only very few
seconds (2.45 sec in the best setting) to attack an image.
The results of JMA against ImageNet2K are reported in
Table II. We observe that, although JMA is not specifically
designed for this scenario, it can successfully attack all the
images in very few iterations, with an MSE similar to that
obtained on GTSRB. The attack time is larger, due to the
higher complexity of the NNLS problem.
B. ECOC-based classification
The results for ECOC-based classification on GTSRB,
CIFAR-10, and MNIST are reported in Tables III-V. In all
the cases, JMA achieves a much higher ASR for a similar

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
11
MSE, with a significantly lower computational complexity. In
the tables, NA stands for ‘Not Applicable’, when no image
can be attacked (ASR = 0) and then the corresponding metric
can not be evaluated.
Specifically, in the case of GTSRB (Table III), JMA
achieves ASR=0.98 with MSE = 1.5e-4, a total average
number of iterations ¯nit = 29.15 and attack time of 9.41
sec. This represents a dramatic improvement with respect to
the other methods. In the case of ECOC attack, for instance,
the best result is ASR=0.93, reached for a similar distortion
(MSE = 1.9e-4), with ¯nit larger than 1000 (¯nit = 1089.03),
which is two orders of magnitude larger than JMA. We also
see that the C&W method fails in this case, with the ASR
being about 0.30 for comparable MSE values. Remind that
the C&W method is not designed to work in the ECOC case
(the results are aligned with those reported in [8], [20]), and
when applied to the ECOC classification scenario it loses part
of its effectiveness (see discussion in Section IV). ML-C&W
is more effective, however it can only achieve ASR=0.78 with
a significantly larger MSE (9.7e-4) and at the price of a larger
complexity. A very poor behavior of the attack is observed for
LOTS and in particular MLA-LP, that is never able to attack
the test images in 1 hour, notwithstanding the large value of
nit,max. Since this method implements a greedy approach, it is
not surprising that it fails in the complex ECOC classification
scenario (more in general, the performance of MLA-LP are
poor whenever the attack aims at changing several bits/labels
- see the results on multi-label classification).
In the case of CIFAR-10 (Table IV), JMA achieves ASR
= 1 with a pretty small distortion (MSE = 1.1e-4) and a
very low complexity. C&W attack achieves a much lower
ASR (ASR = 0.49) for a slightly lower MSE, with higher
complexity. The ECOC attack can achieve ASR = 0.99 with
MSE=1.9e-4 in the setting with nit,max = 2000, in which
case the computational complexity of the algorithm is high
(¯nit = 1347.42 for an average attack time of 557.86 sec).
Regarding LOTS, it can achieve ASR = 1, yet with a larger
MSE. The results with LOTS confirm the lower complexity of
this method with respect to ECOC attack and C&W.
The effectiveness of JMA is also verified in the MNIST
case (see Table V). In this case, JMA reaches ASR = 1 with
MSE=2.3e-3, while the ASR of ECOC attack (in the best
possible setting) and LOTS is respectively 0.73 and 0.78 for a
similar MSE. The computational time is higher for LOTS and
much higher for the ECOC attack. Both C&W and ML-C&W
have poor performance with an ASR lower than 0.52 for a
MSE similar to that obtained by JMA.
Fig. 2 reports some examples of images (successfully)
attacked with the various methods for the three tasks.
C. Multi-label classification (VOC2012 - InceptionV3)
Table VI. shows the results in the case of multi-label
classification when the target label vector is chosen randomly
among those contained in the training dataset. The average
number of labels targeted by the attacks is 2.18. It can be
8Most of the images in the VOC2012 dataset contains one or very few
labeled objects, hence the label vectors have few 1’s and choosing the target
label from the training dataset results in few bit changes
CW
JMA
ECOC
LOTS
Benign
Cifar10
GTSRB
MNIST
MSE: 
    1.07e-04 
9.25e-05           8.61e-05 
  1.06e-04
Time(s):       1584.37               6.68                  1788.28            122.06
MSE: 
     1.22e-03 
 1.81e-04          5.01e-05 
   1.14e-03
Time(s):        50241.86 
   8.56 
           4591.38 
     62.25
MSE: 
      4.61e-02 
3.94e-02           4.67e-02 
   5.56e-02
Time(s):         800.42 
 18.46 
            2542.97 
     422.01
Fig. 2: Examples of attacked images in the ECOC classifica-
tion case. The attacker’s goal is to cause a misclassification
from ‘cat’ to ‘airplane’ (CIFAR-10), from speed limitation
‘80kph’ to ‘30kph’ (GTSRB), and from digit ‘1’ to ‘3’
(MNIST). The distortion and time required for the attack are
also provided for each case.
TABLE III: Results against ECOC- classification on GTSRB.
NA means ‘Not Applicable’ (the metric can not be evaluated
as no image can be attacked).
Parameters
ASR
MSE
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
0.93
1.2e-4
58.46
18.14
(0.1, 200)
0.98
1.5e-4
29.15
9.41
(0.2, 200)
0.99
2.0e-4
25.30
8.27
C&W
(1e-4, 5, 100)
0.08
1.2e-5
65.69
51.31
(1e-4, 5, 200)
0.11
1.6e-5
97.73
97.67
(1e-4, 5, 500)
0.12
1.8e-5
148.33
235.76
(1e-2, 5, 500)
0.21
6.1e-5
194.19
221.63
(1e-1, 10, 2000)
0.31
1.1e-4
782.29
1453.85
ECOC
Attack
(1e-4, 5, 100)
0.35
4.5e-5
71.22
87.87
(1e-4, 5, 200)
0.40
3.8e-5
109.90
305.28
(1e-4, 5, 500)
0.43
3.6e-5
175.67
332.88
(1e-2, 5, 500)
0.61
8.6e-5
309.03
501.80
(1e-1, 10, 2000)
0.93
1.9e-4
1089.03
2312.64
ML-CW
(0.01, 10, 1000)
0.78
9.7e-4
111.02
2973.17
LOTS
2000
0.40
1.2e-4
395.33
97.52
MLA-LP
1000
0.00
NA
NA
(> 1h)
TABLE IV: Results against ECOC classification on CIFAR10.
Parameters
ASR
MSE
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
1.00
1.1e-4
14.78
3.14
(0.1, 200)
1.00
1.3e-4
6.88
1.92
(0.5, 200)
1.00
1.5e-4
6.10
1.20
C&W
(1e-4, 5, 100)
0.49
8.3e-5
40.76
23.20
(1e-4, 5, 500)
0.60
7.2e-5
119.45
68.49
(1e-4, 10, 500)
0.96
1.7e-4
187.96
107.78
(1e-1, 10, 2000)
0.99
1.6e-4
593.09
340.09
ECOC
Attack
(1e-4, 5, 100)
0.65
1.2e-4
83.08
50.36
(1e-4, 5, 500)
0.92
1.4e-4
337.53
180.37
(1e-4, 10, 500)
0.95
1.8e-4
383.74
557.86
(1e-1, 10, 2000)
0.99
1.9e-4
1347.42
2173.31
ML-CW
(0.01, 10, 1000)
0.565
1.0e-3
49.57
1409.02
LOTS
2000
1.00
2.6e-4
38.85
8.61
MLA-LP
1000
0.04
1.1e-4
5
7.04

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
12
TABLE V: Results against ECOC classification on MNIST.
Parameters
ASR
MSE
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
0.95
3.9e-3
48.61
196.55
(0.5, 200)
1.00
5.8e-3
12.04
45.53
(1, 200)
1.00
9.3e-3
8.69
33.58
C&W
(1e-3, 10, 100)
0.01
2.2e-3
53.00
48.96
(1e-3, 10, 500)
0.37
8.4e-3
176.81
163.32
(1e-3, 10, 1000)
0.42
8.2e-3
328.05
327.64
(1e-1, 10, 2000)
0.52
8.7e-3
910.73
841.25
ECOC
Attack
(1e-3,10,100)
0.18
7.7e-3
92.28
131.46
(1e-3, 10, 500)
0.59
7.0e-3
488.73
697.33
(1e-3, 10, 1000)
0.69
6.5e-3
967.56
1387.41
(1e-1, 10, 2000)
0.73
6.0e-3
1921.29
2754.74
ML-CW
(0.01, 10, 1000)
0.64
1.4e-2
297.53
1679.72
LOTS
2000
0.78
4.3e-3
242.23
600.14
MLA-LP
1000
0.00
NA
NA
NA
3000
0.00
NA
NA
(>1h)
observed that both JMA and ML-C&W attack achieve ASR
= 1. However, JMA has an advantage over ML-C&W both in
terms of MSE and, most of all, in terms of computational
complexity, being approximately 64 times faster than ML-
C&W. LOTS achieves much worse performance, with ASR =
0.66 and a larger MSE. However, the average bASR is 0.979,
that confirms that the method has some effectiveness. One
possible interpretation for the not so good results of LOTS
relies on the construction of the target vector performed by
the method. In fact, compared to single-label classification,
where images belonging to the same class have similar content
(e.g. images showing the same traffic sign), in the multi-label
classification case, images sharing the same label vector may
be very different from each other. For instance, an image of
a crowded city street and an image with footballers on a
soccer field are both instances of the people category, with
the ‘people’ label equal to 1. As LOTS chooses the target
output vector by averaging the logits of the target images, the
resulting target vector might not be plausible when the logits
of the target images are significantly different. Finally, the
performance of MLA-LP and SemA-ML are also poor, with a
much lower ASR w.r.t. JMA and ML-C&W. Moreover, in the
case of MLA-LP, the complexity of the attack is very high9.
Tables VII through IX show the results in a challenging
scenario where the target vector labels are not chosen from
the training/test set but are obtained by randomly changing
a certain number of bits of the groud truth label vector.
Specifically, Tables VII, VIII and IX correspond to attacks
inducing respectively 5, 10 and 20 bit errors (in the latter
case all the bits should be changed). The results are reported
for JMA, ML-C&W, MLA-LP and SemA-ML. As stated
previously, LOTS can not be applied in this case, since it
requires the existence of a number of samples corresponding
to the target label vector.
Looking at the results in Table VII (5 flipping bits), JMA
can achieve an ASR = 0.95 (bASR = 0.99), which is 5% higher
than ML-CW, with an average attack time approximately
6 times faster, while MLA-LP and SemA-ML are totally
9These results are not in contrast with the results reported in [10] for the
same dataset, given that in [10] the method is validated for target attacks that
change only one bit of the original label vector, while the average number of
bits changed in our experiments is larger than 2.
ineffective (ASR = 0). As shown in Table VIII, in the 10
flipping bit case, JMA can still achieve an ASR close to 0.90,
at the price of a longer time necessary to run the attack,
with an average number of iterations ¯nit that goes above 240.
C&W attack achieves a lower ASR when nit,max is raised to
5000, with a very large computational cost. The MSE reported
for C&W is lower, however, this value is not computed on
the same set of imagesand, arguably, a stronger distortion is
necessary to attack the additional 16% images attacked by
JMA.
Fig. 3 shows some examples of images successfully
attacked by JMA in the 10-bit error case, when half of the
labels are modified.
As shown in Table IX, the ASR drops in the 20 bit case
(when the attacker tries to modify all the 20 bits of the
label vector). Arguably, this represents a limit and extremely
challenging scenario. It can be observed that, by increasing
nit,max to 2000, JMA is successful 26% of the times, at the
price of a high computational cost, while ML-C&W is never
successful. Moreover, it is interesting to observe that JMA can
achieve a bASR of 0.68, meaning that almost 70% of the labels
are modified by the attack, while the bASR for ML-C&W is
below 0.1. Not surprisingly, the MSE is large in this case.
TABLE VI: Results against multi-label VOC2012 classifica-
tion (the target label vector is taken from the training set). On
average, the attacks are asked to flip 2.1 labels/bits. 10
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
1.00
1.0000
2.2e-6
29.94
25.97
(0.1, 200)
1.00
1.0000
2.6e-6
17.50
15.39
(0.5, 200)
1.00
1.0000
1.1e-5
7.51
7.32
(1, 200)
1.00
1.0000
3.3e-5
6.42
6.45
ML-C&W
(0.01, 1000)
1.00
1.0000
6.3e-6
180.93
469.90
LOTS
2000
0.66
0.9787
8.1e-6
437.20
268.16
MLA-LP
100
0.58
0.9560
7.6e-6
50.44
1361.29
SemA-ML
300
0.12
0.8742
8.02-5
30.30
6.55
TABLE VII: Results for VOC2012 classification with random
choice of the target label vector (5 bits out of 20 are flipped).
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
0.49
0.9032
1.2e-5
129.85
139.31
(0.1, 200)
0.82
0.9687
1.8e-5
110.21
106.98
(0.2, 200)
0.95
0.9942
3.0e-5
87.96
79.05
ML-C&W
(0.01, 1000)
0.90
0.9883
2.9e-5
113.35
420.21
MLA-LP
100
0.00
0.4264
NA
NA
NA
SemA-ML
300
0.00
0.7412
NA
NA
NA
D. Multi-label classification (VOC2012 - ResNet50, ViT-B/16,
CLIP+MLP)
To validate the effectiveness of JMA against different
types of architectures, we also trained a residual network
(ResNet50), a Transformer-based architecture (ViT-B/16) and
a network based on pre-trained vision-language models
(CLIP), obtained by adding a lightweight classification head
- namely a Multi-Layer Perceptron - on top of CLIP features
(CLIP+MLP). The models were trained using the multi-label
10In this and the following tables, the parameter nbs is omitted for ML-CW,
being always equal to 10.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
13
Benign
JMA
MSE: 4.67e-05
MSE: 2.57e-05
Benign
JMA
Difference*50
Difference*50
Fig. 3: Examples of JMA attacked images for which the attack can successfully flip 10 targeted bits of the label vector
in the multi-label (VOC2012) classification task. For the car: the original image has label vector (car=1, person=0,
cat=0, cow=0, dog=0, sheep=0, bike=0, chair=0, potted-plant=0, monitor=0, aeroplane=0, bird=0, horse=0,
boat=0, dining-table=0, train=0,...) while the JMA attacked image is classified as
(car=0, person=1, cat=1,
cow=1, dog=1, sheep=1, bike=1, chair=1, potted-plant=1, monitor=1, aeroplane=0, bird=0, horse=0, boat=0,
dining-table=0, train=0, ...). For the airplane: the original image has label vector
(car=0, person=0, cat=0,
cow=0, dog=0, sheep=0, bike=0, chair=0, potted-plant=0, monitor=0, aeroplane=1, bird=0, horse=0, boat=0,
dining-table=0, train=0,...), while the label vector of the JMA attacked image is (car=0, person=1, cat=1, cow=1,
dog=0, sheep=0, bike=0, chair=0, potted-plant=1, monitor=1, aeroplane=0, bird=0, horse=1, boat=1, dining
table=1, train=0,...).
cross-entropy loss with Adam optimizer with lr = 10−3, batch
size of 32 samples, and early stopping based on the mAP
computed on the validation set. The ResNet50, ViT-B/16, and
CLIP+MLP models obtained a mAP score on the test set of
0.94, 0.87, and 0.90, respectively.
Table X and XI report the results respectively in the case
of attack target vector chosen randomly from the training
set and in the case where 10 bit at random are modified
in the label vector. For a more comprehensive evaluation on
the quality of attacked images and the amount of distortion
introduced by the attack, in the tables we also report the
SSIM in addition to MSE. We see that the state-of-the-art
methods, especially ML-C&W and MLA-LP, achieve worse
TABLE VIII: Results for VOC2012 classification with random
choice of the target label vector (10 bits out of 20 are flipped).
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05,200)
0.01
0.5714
1.5e-5
161.00
157.41
(0.1, 500)
0.56
0.8892
4.3e-5
312.42
397.42
(0.5, 500)
0.88
0.9805
2.7e-4
245.24
278.02
ML-C&W
(0.01, 1000)
0.295
0.8697
3.2e-5
270.17
498.63
(0.01, 2000)
0.4186
0.9156
3.6e-5
451.78
939.53
(0.1, 2000)
0.475
0.9147
3.1e-5
433.75
934.58
(0.5, 2000)
0.475
0.9147
3.3e-5
430.96
908.92
(0.1, 3000)
0.575
0.9331
3.3e-5
581.53
1461.05
(0.1, 5000)
0.72
0.9557
3.4e-5
775.97
2183.79
MLA-LP
100
0.00
0.5167
NA
NA
NA
SemA-ML
300
0.00
0.4994
NA
NA
NA
TABLE IX: Results for VOC2012 classification with random
choice of the target label vector. Case of 20 bit errors (all
labels are changed by the attack).
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
0
0.1109
NA
NA
NA
(0.1, 200)
0
0.1276
NA
NA
NA
(0.2, 200)
0
0.1475
NA
NA
NA
(0.5, 200)
0
0.1845
NA
NA
NA
(0.5, 500)
0
0.3288
NA
NA
NA
(0.5, 1000)
0.03
0.5068
8.2e-4
938.16
980.82
(0.5, 2000)
0.26
0.6795
1.1e-3
1484.34
1677.49
ML-C&W
(0.01, 10, 1000)
0
0.0659
NA
NA
NA
(0.5, 10, 2000)
0
0.0882
NA
NA
NA
performance than in the InceptionV3 case, while LOTS is
more effective. With regard to JMA, performance are very
good and ASR = 1 can be obtained in all the cases and in both
attack settings. Furthermore, JMA is the attack introducing the
lowest distortion, with an MSE in the range [10−6, 10−4]. The
SSIM is also very good, being always above 0.99 in the first
attack setting, and remaining good also in the challenging 10-
bit flips attack. Compared to the InceptionV3 case, JMA takes
more iterations to run (¯nit is larger), however the algorithm is
extremely fast and the attacked image can be found in a few
seconds in most cases.
TABLE X: Results for VOC2012 using different architectures
(target label vector from the training set): (a) ResNet50, (b)
ViT-B/16 and (c) CLIP+MLP.
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
SSIM
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
1.00
1.0000
3.3e-6
0.999
32.50
2.88
(0.1, 200)
1.00
1.0000
3.8e-6
0.999
21.96
1.60
(0.5, 200)
1.00
1.0000
1.4e-5
0.993
12.84
0.79
(1, 200)
1.00
1.0000
4.0e-5
0.982
11.84
0.80
ML-C&W
(0.01,1000)
0.58
0.9583
3.1e-5
0.989
761.00
307.27
LOTS
2000
0.83
0.9610
2.0e-2
0.386
34.84
138.20
MLA-LP
100
0.22
0.9500
3.5e-4
0.964
10.98
648.39
SemA-ML
300
0.31
0.9167
9.3e-5
0.969
5.30
5.45
(a) ResNet50
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
SSIM
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
0.99
0.9993
4.4e-5
0.990
26.01
3.89
(0.1, 200)
1.00
1.0000
4.4e-5
0.990
17.65
2.22
(0.5, 200)
1.00
1.0000
3.9e-5
0.991
9.49
0.85
(1, 200)
1.00
1.0000
4.6e-5
0.989
8.48
0.69
ML-C&W
(0.01, 1000)
0.81
0.9825
3.3e-5
0.992
635.34
996.74
LOTS
2000
0.84
0.9750
1.5e-2
0.603
38.00
217.00
MLA-LP
100
0.52
0.9705
6.0e-4
0.910
5.79
787.87
SemA-ML
300
0.16
0.8835
8.6e-5
0.974
17.91
11.52
(b) ViT-B-16
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
SSIM
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
1.00
1.0000
1.6e-6
0.999
28.65
4.46
(0.1, 200)
1.00
1.0000
2.3e-6
0.999
19.72
2.81
(0.5, 200)
1.00
1.0000
1.2e-5
0.994
11.88
1.30
(1, 200)
1.00
1.0000
3.5e-5
0.984
11.07
1.13
ML-C&W
(0.01, 1000)
0.14
0.9095
4.8E-05
0.983
684.75
1613.82
LOTS
2000
0.97
0.9818
1.3E-02
0.496
19.59
106.17
MLA-LP
100
0.11
0.9400
2.1E-04
0.977
5.57
710.85
SemA-ML
300
0.09
0.8788
9.9E-05
0.973
1.00
21.84
(c) CLIP+MLP

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
14
TABLE XI: Results for VOC2012, for a 10-bit flipping attack
(10 bits out of 20 are flipped). (a) ResNet50, (b) ViT-B/16 and
(c) CLIP+MLP.
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
SSIM
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
0.00
0.5483
NA
NA
NA
NA
(0.1, 500)
0.94
0.9780
4.8e-5
0.984
291.08
25.76
(0.5, 500)
1.00
1.0000
2.4e-4
0.916
166.60
14.66
ML-C&W
(0.01, 1000)
0.37
0.8805
5.0e-4
0.884
631.78
275.72
(0.5, 2000)
0.59
0.8808
1.1e-1
0.155
1108.74
1154.25
(0.1, 3000)
0.42
0.8710
1.6e-2
0.464
581.57
1747.41
(0.1, 5000)
0.45
0.8690
1.6e-2
0.470
756.03
3340.60
MLA-LP
100
0.00
0.5625
NA
NA
NA
NA
SemA-ML
300
0.00
0.4980
NA
NA
NA
NA
(a) ResNet50
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
SSIM
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
0.65
0.9073
1.1e-4
0.974
154.64
25.00
(0.1, 500)
1.00
1.0000
1.6e-4
0.967
126.64
19.87
(0.5, 500)
1.00
1.0000
2.6e-4
0.948
63.89
9.79
ML-C&W
(0.01, 1000)
0.51
0.8680
5.5e-4
0.903
582.63
996.45
(0.5, 2000)
0.74
0.8888
5.6e-2
0.272
358.84
3230.31
(0.1, 3000)
0.62
0.8445
1.2e-2
0.584
912.28
4074.83
(0.1, 5000)
0.66
0.8445
1.9e-2
0.565
1497.76
6674.43
MLA-LP
100
0.00
0.5635
NA
NA
NA
NA
SemA-ML
300
0.00
0.4995
NA
NA
NA
NA
(b) ViT-B/16
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
SSIM
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
1.00
0.9975
3.8e-6
0.998
59.16
8.70
(0.1, 500)
1.00
1.0000
5.8e-6
0.997
41.45
5.86
(0.5, 500)
1.00
1.0000
3.3e-5
0.986
22.73
2.79
ML-C&W
(0.01, 1000)
0.51
0.8680
5.5e-4
0.903
582.63
2052.44
(0.5, 2000)
0.74
0.8888
5.6e-2
0.272
358.84
3600.40
(0.1, 3000)
0.62
0.8445
1.2e-2
0.584
912.28
4149.43
(0.1, 5000)
0.66
0.8445
1.9e-2
0.565
1497.76
4867.13
MLA-LP
100
0.00
0.5755
NA
NA
NA
NA
SemA-ML
300
0.00
0.4970
NA
NA
NA
NA
(c) CLIP+MLP
TABLE XII: Results of the 10-bit flipping attack on MS-
COCO dataset.
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
SSIM
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05,200)
1.00
1.0000
7.7e-6
0.997
53.80
76.86
(0.1, 500)
1.00
1.0000
9.5e-6
0.997
38.59
51.66
(0.5, 500)
1.00
1.0000
4.4e-5
0.984
30.25
40.24
ML-C&W
(0.01, 1000)
0.00
0.7649
NA
NA
NA
NA
(0.5, 2000)
0.00
0.7984
NA
NA
NA
NA
(0.1, 3000)
0.00
0.7578
NA
NA
NA
NA
MLA-LP
100
0.00
0.8892
NA
NA
NA
NA
SemA-ML
300
0.00
0.8518
NA
NA
NA
NA
(a) Swin-B
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
SSIM
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
0.46
0.9177
8.9e-6
0.996
149.17
98.73
(0.1, 500)
1.00
1.000
1.9e-5
0.993
163.08
109.78
(0.5, 500)
1.00
1.000
1.4e-4
0.957
101.66
66.38
ML-C&W
(0.01, 1000)
0.21
0.9373
5.3e-4
0.905
320.93
1377.91
(0.5, 2000)
0.11
0.9476
1.1e-1
0.222
853.68
3154.67
(0.1, 3000)
0.19
0.9331
2.1e-2
0.481
793.53
4507.12
MLA-LP
100
0.00
0.8816
NA
NA
NA
NA
SemA-ML
300
0.00
0.8596
NA
NA
NA
NA
(b) CLIP+MLP
TABLE XIII: Results of the 10-bit flipping attack on NUS-
WIDE dataset (the network is CLIP+MLP).
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
SSIM
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05,200)
0.99
0.9975
5.1e-6
0.998
81.65
48.80
(0.1, 500)
1.00
1.00
7.8e-6
0.996
59.96
35.23
(0.5, 500)
1.00
1.00
5.3e-5
0.976
36.53
20.35
ML-C&W
(0.01, 1000)
0.00
0.7559
NA
NA
NA
NA
(0.5, 2000)
0.00
0.7612
NA
NA
NA
NA
(0.1, 3000)
0.00
0.7070
NA
NA
NA
NA
MLA-LP
100
0.00
0.8843
NA
NA
NA
NA
SemA-ML
300
0.00
0.8630
NA
NA
NA
NA
E. Multi-label classification (MS-COCO, NUS-WIDE)
To validate the effectiveness of JMA against more challeng-
ing datasets, we considered the MS-COCO [41] and NUS-
WIDE [42] datasets, containing 80 and 81 labels respectively,
resulting in a huge number of possible label vectors. For the
MS-COCO dataset, we trained a Swin-B architecture (which
obtained a better mAP than the ViT-B/16) and CLIP+MLP,
with input size of 224 × 224 pixels. The models were trained
on the original split of the dataset using the Asymmetric Loss
(ASL) proposed in [43], with Adam optimizer, lr = 10−3 and
batch size of 32 samples. Early stopping on the validation set
was employed based on mAP. The Swin-B and CLIP+MLP
models scored an mAP of about 0.82 and 0.81, which is
aligned with benchmarks for similar input shapes. For the
NUS-WIDE case, we split the dataset into 129,431 training,
32,358 validation, and 107,759 test images. A CLIP+MLP
architecture was trained, using the same learning setting as for
MS-COCO, obtaining a mAP score of 0.59, which is aligned
with banchmarks.
Table XII reports the results on MS-COCO in the 10-bit
flipping attack scenario. We see that the architecture has a
noticeable impact on the performance of the attacks. For the
state-of-the-art methods, attacking the Swin-B network is more
difficult. Specifically, the bASR values achieved by ML-C&W
range from 0.75 to 0.80 and from 0.93 to 0.95 across the
various parameter settings respectively in the Swin-B and
CLIP+MLP case, thus being similar to the VOC2012 case.
However, the ASR is much lower and only very few images
can be fully attacked in the CLIP+MLP case, while in the case
of Swin-B the ASR is 0. On the contrary, MLA-LP and SemA-
ML work better on MS-COCO w.r.t. the VOC2012 case and
the bASR is higher. Regarding JMA, in both cases the attack
can reach ASR = 1 with low attack distortion, thus surpassing
the state-of-the-art. In the CLIP+MLP case, the attack takes
more time to run and the distortion introduced by the attack
is larger, yet the SSIM remains above 0.99.
For the NUS-WIDE dataset, the results of the 10-bit flipping
attack are reported in Table XIII. We see that the ASR is
always 0 for the state-of-the-art methods, while attacking with
JMA resulted in ASR = 1. Results in terms of distortion and
computational efficiency are similar to the best results on MS-
TABLE XIV: Comparison between JMA and SemA-ML [11]
on the NUS-WIDE dataset in the case of semantic consistent
multi-label attacks.
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
SSIM
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
1.00
1.0000
1.2e-6
0.999
26.98
14.16
(0.1, 500)
1.00
1.0000
1.8e-6
0.999
19.57
9.39
(0.5, 500)
1.00
1.0000
1.2e-5
0.994
12.33
4.76
SemA-ML
300
0.20
0.9568
7.2e-5
0.978
36.43
5.10
(a) Target label vector from training dataset. The average number of
bits that the attack is required to flip is 4.37 bit.
Parameters
ASR
bASR
MSE
SSIM
¯nit
Time(s)
JMA
(0.05, 200)
1.00
1.0000
6.6e-7
1.000
19.03
8.84
(0.1, 500)
1.00
1.0000
1.0e-6
0.999
14.17
5.77
(0.5, 500)
1.00
1.0000
6.6e-6
0.996
9.58
2.88
SemA-ML
300
0.48
0.9709
5.8e-5
0.975
13.65
4.20
(b) Attack removing all labels/bits. The average number of bits that
the attack is required to flip is 2.90 bit.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
15
COCO, achieved using Swin-B.
It is worth observing that SemA-ML is a multi-label attack
which enforces that semantic consistency among the labels is
retained by the attack. Differently from the case of VOC2012
and MS-COCO, in the NUS-WIDE dataset, labels correspond
to both categories and subcategories (e.g. , ‘vehicle’ and ‘car’
are distinct labels). Hence, semantic consistence may not be
verified when bits are flipped at random (e.g., the label ‘car’
may be turned on while the label ‘vehicle’ remains off, leading
to a semantically inconsistent vector). Hence, to compare JMA
with SemA-ML in a setting that satisfies this method’s working
assumptions, we also ran some tests considering the following
simple attack settings, where semantic consistency is satisfied:
i) target label vector chosen at random from the training/test
set; ii) target vector with all labels/bits set to zero. The results
in these cases are reported in Table XIV. SemA-ML can now
attack most of the labels and reach the target in some cases
(and the ASR is no longer 0). This is especially the case when
the attack is asked to set all the bits to zero (in this case, the
attack involves flipping a lower number of bits - 2.90 on the
average). In this case, SemA-ML can achieve bASR = 0.971
and ASR = 0.48. In any case, the performance of JMA remains
largely superior, achieving ASR = 1 in all the settings with
a lower MSE and an SSIM above 0.99 (still with a lower
complexity).
F. JMA as a one-step attack
Experiments show that JMA requires a small number of
iterations to find an adversarial example, much smaller than the
other algorithms, and gets an ASR that is generally higher (in
some cases, much higher) for a similar distortion. It is worth
stressing that the number of updates ¯nit reported in the tables
takes into account also the steps of the binary search carried
out at the end of the iterations (see Section VI-D). Specifically,
it = (v −1) + nbs, where v is the number of ‘for’ loops, that
is, the number of image updates (see Algorithm 1), and nbs is
set equal to 6. Therefore, JMA can indeed find an adversarial
image in one shot in a considerable number of cases, see
for instance Table IV for CIFAR-10 ECOC classification and
Table VI for the multi-label classification, where ¯nit is lower
than 7 for the attack settings with larger ϵ11. This confirms a-
posteriori the validity of one of the most basic assumptions
underlying our approach, namely the local linear behavior,
that, when it holds, allows to perform the attack in one-shot.
When the linear approximation does not hold in the close
vicinity of the initial point, and possibly of other points during
the updates, the perturbation is added with a small ϵ in order
to change the initial point, and the Jacobian is recomputed (see
Algorithm 1). By inspecting the tables (see for instance Table
I), we can see that, when this happens, it is often preferable
to use a not-too-small ϵ so that the point is moved farther
from the initial point, where the behavior of the local function
can be closer to linear, instead of remaining in the vicinity of
the initial point where the local approximation may still be
11Note that, even when a one-shot attack is possible, a perturbation applied
to the image with a weak strength ϵ may not result in an adversarial image,
thus requiring that more iterations are run.
not satisfied. Doing so, a high ASR can be achieved with a
reduced number of iterations and a similar distortion.
VIII. CONCLUDING REMARKS
We have proposed a general, nearly optimal, targeted attack,
that can solve the original formulation of the adversarial attack
by Szegedy et al. under a first order approximation of the
network function. The method resorts to the minimization of
a Mahalanobis distance term, which depends on the Jacobian
matrix taking into account the effort necessary to move the
feature representation of the image in a given direction. By
exploiting the Wolfe duality, the minimization problem is
reduced to a non-negative least square (NNLS) problem, that
can be solved numerically. The experiments show that the JMA
attack is effective against a wide variety of DNNs adopting
different output encoding schemes, including networks using
error correction output encoding (ECOC) and in particular
multi-label classification, outperforming existing attacks in
terms of higher ASR, lower distortion and lower complexity,
with attack capabilities far exceeding those of existing attacks.
JMA remains effective also in the case of one-hot encoding,
with much reduced computational complexity with respect for
instance to the C&W attack.
Finally, we observe that JMA can inspire new defences. In
particular, given its efficiency, JMA can be used to reduce the
load of adversarial training and develop effective adversarial
training defences [2], [44], [45]. Furthermore, while with the
exception of scattered works ([44]) adversarial training is
primarly limited to applications of single-label classification,
JMA can be used to implement effective adversarial training
also for other types of classifiers (e.g. multi-label classifiers).
In addition, thanks to its efficiency, JMA could also be
used to perform adversarial training of provably robust multi-
label classifiers exploiting randomized smoothing [46]. In fact,
similarly to what has been done for standard single-label
randomized smoothing classifiers ([47]), by training with JMA
attacked samples it could be possible to boost the provable
robustness of smoothed multi-label classifiers.
Future work
could also focus on the extension of JMA to a black-box attack
scenario, to develop powerful targeted attacks with certain
transferability properties.
