Dialogue Design and Management for Multi-Session Casual
Conversation with Older Adults
S. Zahra Razavi
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY

Lenhart K. Schubert
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY

Benjamin Kane
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY

Mohammad Rafayet Ali
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY

Kimberly A. Van Orden
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY

ter.edu
Tianyi Ma
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY

ABSTRACT
We address the problem of designing a conversational avatar
capable of a sequence of casual conversations with older adults.
Users at risk of loneliness, social anxiety or a sense of ennui
may beneﬁt from practicing such conversations in private, at
their convenience. We describe an automatic spoken dialogue
manager for LISSA, an on-screen virtual agent that can keep
older users involved in conversations over several sessions,
each lasting 10-20 minutes. The idea behind LISSA is to
improve users’ communication skills by providing feedback
on their non-verbal behavior at certain points in the course
of the conversations. In this paper, we analyze the dialogues
collected from the ﬁrst session between LISSA and each of 8
participants. We examine the quality of the conversations by
comparing the transcripts with those collected in a WOZ set-
ting. LISSA’s contributions to the conversations were judged
by research assistants who rated the extent to which the con-
tributions were “natural", “on track", “encouraging", “under-
standing", “relevant", and “polite". The results show that the
automatic dialogue manager was able to handle conversation
with the users smoothly and naturally.
ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.2. Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI):
User Interfaces; I.2.7. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Natural Lan-
guage Processing
Author Keywords
Spoken Dialogue Agents; Older Users; Dialogue
Management; Casual Conversation; Social Skills Practice.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission

CHI’16, May 07–12, 2016, San Jose, CA, USA
© 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 123-4567-24-567/08/06...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.475/123_4
INTRODUCTION
The population of senior adults is growing, in part as a result of
advances in healthcare. According to United Nations studies
on world population, the number of people aged 60 years and
over is predicted to rise from 962 million in 2017 to 2.1 billion
in 2050 [2]. Moreover, large numbers of older adults live
alone. According to 2017 Proﬁle of Older Americans, in the
US about 28% (13.8 million) of noninstitutionalized older per-
sons, and about half of women age 75 and over live alone [1].
Some studies show a signiﬁcant correlation between depres-
sion and loneliness among older people [17]. Also many have
difﬁculty managing their personal and household activities on
their own and could potentially beneﬁt from technologies that
increase their autonomy, or perhaps just to provide engaging
interactions in their spare time.
However, learning to use digital technology can be difﬁcult
and frustrating, especially for older people, and this negatively
impacts acceptance and use of such technology [16]. But the
ever-increasing accuracy of both automatic speech recognition
(ASR) systems and text-to-speech (TTS) systems, along with
richly engineered apps such as Siri and Alexa, has boosted the
popularity of conversational interaction with computers, ob-
viating the need for arcane expertise. Realistic virtual avatars
and social robots can make this interaction even more natural
and pleasant.
Spoken language interaction can beneﬁt older people in many
different ways, including the following:
• Dialogue systems can support people with their health care
needs. Such systems can collect and track health infor-
mation from older individuals and provide comments and
advice to improve user wellness. They can also remind
people about their medications and doctor appointments.
• Speech-based systems can help users feel less lonely by
providing casual chat as well as information on news, events,
activities, etc.
• They can also provide entertainment such as games, jokes,
or music for greater enjoyment of spare time.
arXiv:1901.06620v2  [cs.AI]  26 Jun 2019

• Dialogue systems can help older people improve some skills.
For instance, cognitive games can help users maintain men-
tal acuity. They can also enable practice of communication
skills, as may be desired by seniors experiencing social iso-
lation after loss of connections to close family and friends
[17].
• In limited ways, conversational systems can lead “reminis-
cence therapy" sessions aimed at reducing stress, depression
and boredom in people with dementia and memory disor-
ders, by helping to elicit their memories and achievements
[6].
All of the above types of systems require a powerful dialogue
manager, allowing for smooth and natural conversations with
users, and taking account of the special needs and limitations
of the target user population.
In this paper we describe how we adapted the dialogue capabil-
ities of a virtual agent, LISSA, for interaction with older adults
who may wish to improve their social communication skills.
As the centerpiece of the "Aging and Engaging Program"
(AEP) [5], this version of LISSA holds a casual conversation
with the user on various topics likely to engage the user. At the
same time LISSA observes and processes the user’s nonverbal
behaviors, including eye contact, smiling, and head motion,
as well as superﬁcial speech cues such as speaking volume,
modulation, and an emotional valence derived from the word
stream.
The conversation is in three segments, and at the two break
points the system offers some advice to users on the areas they
may need to work on and how to improve in those areas. In
addition, a summary of weak and strong aspects of the user’s
behavior is presented at the end of the conversation.
The system was designed in close collaboration with an ex-
pert advisory panel of professionals (at our afﬁliated medical
research center) working with geriatric patients. A single-
session study was conducted with 25 participants where the
virtual agent’s contributions to the dialogue were selected by
a human wizard. The nonverbal feedback showed an accuracy
of 72% on average, in relation to a human-provided corpus
of annotations, treated as ground truth. Also, a user survey
showed that users found the program useful and easy to use.
As the next step, we deployed a fully automatic system where
users can interact with the avatar at home. We planned for a
10-session intervention, where in each session the participants
have 10-20 minutes of interaction with the avatar. The ﬁrst
and last sessions were held in a lab, where experts collected in-
formation on users and rated their communication skills. The
remaining sessions were self-initiated by the users at home.
We ran the study with 9 participants interacting with the avatar
and 10 participants in a control group.
Our framework for multi-topic dialogue management was in-
troduced in [14]. To ensure that the conversations would
be appropriate and engaging, our geriatrician collaborators
guided us in the selection of topics and speciﬁc content con-
tributed to the dialogues by LISSA, based on their experiences
in elderly therapy. As an initial evaluation of LISSA’s con-
versational behavior we have analyzed 8 in-lab conversations
using the automated version of LISSA, comparing these with
8 such conversations where LISSA outputs were selected by
a human wizard. In all cases the human participants were
ﬁrst-time users (with no overlap between the two groups). The
transcripts were deidentiﬁed, randomized, and distributed to 6
research assistants (RAs), with each transcript being rated by
at least 3 RAs. Ratings for each transcript were then averaged
across the RAs. The results showed that the interactions with
the automatic system earned high ratings, indeed on some
criteria slightly better than WOZ-based interactions.
We have initiated further data analyses, and three aspects
relating to conversation quality are the following. First, we
will be looking at the level of verbosity for different users in
different sessions, to determine its dependence on the user’s
personality and on the topic under discussion. Second, we
will measure self disclosure and study its correlation with user
mood and personality. Third, we will track users’ sentiment
over the course of conversations to determine its variability
over time, and its dependence on dialogue topics and user
personality.
The main contributions of the work reported here are
• demonstration of the ﬂexibility of our approach to dialogue
design and management, as evidenced by rapid adaptation
and scaling up of previous versions of LISSA’s repertoire,
suitable for the Aging and Engaging domain; our approach
uses modiﬁable dialogue schemas, hierarchical pattern trans-
ductions, and context-independent “gist clause" interpreta-
tions of utterances;
• integration of an automated dialogue system for multi-topic
conversations into a virtual human (LISSA), designed for
conversation practice and capable of observing and provid-
ing feedback to the user;
• an initial demonstration showing that the automated dia-
logue manager functions as effectively for a sampling of
users as the prior wizard-guided version; this signiﬁes an
advance of the state of the art in building conversational
practice systems for older users, with no constraints on
users’ verbal inputs (apart from the conversational context
determined by LISSA’s questions).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst com-
ment on extant work on spoken dialogue systems that are
designed to help older adults; then we introduce our virtual
agent, LISSA, and brieﬂy explain the feedback system. We
then discuss the dialogue manager structure and the content
design for multi-session interactions with older users. In the
next section, we evaluate LISSA’s ﬁrst-session interactions
with users, referred to above. We then mention ongoing and
future work, and ﬁnally summarize our results and state our
conclusions.
RELATED WORK
As noted in the the introduction, thanks in part to recent im-
provements in ASR and TTS systems, the use of conversa-
tional systems to help technically unskilled older adults has
become more feasible.

According to [23], employing virtual agents as daily assis-
tants for older adults puts at least two questions in front of
us: ﬁrst, whether potential users would accept these systems
and second, how the systems can interact with users robustly,
while taking into account the limitations and needs of this user
population. [7] showed that older people who are unfamil-
iar with technology prefer to interact with assistive systems
in natural language. The most important features for effec-
tive interaction of virtual agents with a user are discussed in
[16]. Key among them is ease of use, especially for older in-
dividuals with reduced cognitive abilities. Virtual agents also
should have a likable appearance and persona. Moreover, the
system should be able to personalize its behavior according
to the speciﬁc needs and preferences of each user. Another
important yet challenging feature is the ability to recover from
mistakes, misunderstandings, and other kinds of errors, and
subsequently resume normal interaction.
[22] found high acceptance of a companionable virtual agent
– albeit WOZ-controlled – among users, when they could talk
about a topic of interest to them. Some systems provide a
degree of social companionship with older users through in-
quiries about subjects of interest and providing local infor-
mation relevant to those interests. For instance [9] tried
single-session interactions where a robot reads out newspa-
pers according to users’ topics of interest and asks them some
personal questions about their past, attending to the response
by nodding and maintaining eye contact. The survey results
showed that the participants liked the interaction and were
open to further sessions with the system.
[3] introduced
“Ryan" as a companion who interprets user’s emotions through
verbal and nonverbal cues. Six individuals who lived alone
enjoyed interacting with Ryan and they felt happy when the
robot was keeping them company. However, they did not ﬁnd
talking to the robot to be like talking to a person. Another
application is to gather health information (such as blood pres-
sure and exercise regimen) during the interaction and provide
health advice accordingly [11]. Unlike the work reported
here, none of these projects make an attempt to engage users
in topically broad, casual dialogue, to understand users’ inputs
in such dialogues, or to allow for conversational skills practice,
with feedback by the system.
Virtual companions have also been proposed for palliative care
– helping people with terminal illnesses reduce stress by steer-
ing them towards topics such as spirituality, or their life story.
In an exploratory study with older adults reported in [20], 44
users interacted with a virtual agent about death-related topics
such as last will, funeral preparation and spirituality. They
used a tablet displaying an avatar that used speech and also
some nonverbal signals such as posture and hand gestures;
users selected their input utterances from a multiple-choice
menu. The study showed that people were satisﬁed with their
interaction, found the avatar understanding and easy to interact
with, and were prepared to continue their conversation with
the avatar. Again, however, systems of this type so far do not
actually attempt to extract meaning from miscellaneous user
inputs, apart from answers to inquiries about speciﬁc items of
information. Nor do they generally provide feedback based
on observing the user, or provide opportunities for practicing
conversational skills.
Other systems have focused on assisting older adults with their
speciﬁc daily needs. For instance [19] introduces a virtual
companion, “Mary", for older adults that assists them in orga-
nizing their daily tasks by responding to their needs such as
offering reminders, guidance with household activities, and
locating objects using the 3D camera. A 12-week interaction
between Mary and 20 older adults showed that the companion
was accepted very well, although occasionally verbal misun-
derstandings and errors caused some user frustration. The
authors note that high expectations by users may have lim-
ited full satisfaction with the system. “Billie" [8] is another
example of a virtual home assistant that helps users organize
their daily schedule. Although the task scope was limited,
and the ﬁrst study was not completely automatic, Billie was
designed to handle certain challenges often encountered with
spoken language systems, especially with older users, such as
verbal misunderstandings and topic shifts. The virtual agent
also used gestures, facial expressions and head movement for
more natural speaking behavior (for instance for emphasis, or
to signal uncertainty). The study results showed that users can
effectively handle the interaction. However, this system does
not track the user’s non-verbal behavior, and is not capable of
casual conversation on various topics. Instead, it focuses on
the speciﬁc task of managing the user’s daily calendar.
Another approach that has proved effective in ameliorating
loneliness and depression in older people is reminiscence ther-
apy [6]. A pilot study aimed at implementing a conversational
agent that collects and organizes memories and stories in an
engaging manner is reported in [10]. The authors suggest that
a successful companionable agent needs to possess not only a
model of conversation and of reminiscence, but also generic
knowledge about events, habits, values, relationships, etc., to
enable it to respond meaningfully to reminiscences.
Robotic pets are another interesting technology offered for
alleviating loneliness in older people; such pets react to user
speech and petting by producing sounds and eye and body
movements. Studies [18] show that such interactions can
improve users’ communication and interaction skills.
In almost all applications of virtual agents, the system needs
to somehow motivate users to engage conversationally with
it. (Robotic pets are an exception.) An interesting study of
people’s willingness to disclose themselves in interacting with
an open-domain voice-based chatbot is presented in [12].
The authors discovered that self-disclosure by the chatbot
would motivate self-disclosure by users. Moreover, initial
self-disclosure (or otherwise) by users is apt to characterize
their behavior in the rest of the conversation. For instance,
users who self-disclose initially tend to have longer turns
throughout the rest of the dialogue, and are more apt to self-
disclose in later turns. The authors were unable to conﬁrm
a clear link between a tendency towards self-disclosure and
positive evaluation of the system. However, they found that
people enjoy the conversation more if the agent offers its own
backstory.

Figure 1. “Aging and Engaging" Virtual Agent
THE LISSA VIRTUAL AGENT
The LISSA (Live Interactive Social Skills Assistance) virtual
agent is a human-like avatar (Figure 1) intended to become
ubiquitously available for helping people practice their social
skills. LISSA can engage users in conversation and provide
both real-time and post-session feedback.
The system
To help users improve their communication skills, LISSA
provides feedback on their nonverbal behavior, including eye
contact, smiling, speaking volume, as well as one verbal fea-
ture: the emotional valence of the word content. In the original
implementation of LISSA, feedback was presented in real time
through screen icons that turn from green to red, indicating that
the user should improve the corresponding nonverbal behavior.
Feedback was also presented at the end of each interaction,
via charts and ﬁgures providing information on the user’s per-
formance. However, as both real-time visual feedback and
charts could be cognitively demanding for older users, the Ag-
ing and Engaging version of LISSA offers feedback through
speech and text during the conversation. Furthermore, at the
end of each conversation session, the current system generates
a speech- and text-based summary of the feedback provided
during the dialogue, mentioning users’ strong areas, weak-
nesses and suggestions for improvement. More details on how
feedback is generated and presented can be found in [4].
Previous LISSA Studies
Two versions of LISSA were previously designed based on the
needs and limitations of the target users. LISSA showed poten-
tial for impacting college students’ communication skills when
it was tested as a speed-dating partner in a WOZ setting [4],
offering feedback to the user. Subsequently, a fully automatic
version was implemented, designed to help high-functioning
teens with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) to practice their
conversational skills. Experiments were conducted with 8
participants, who were asked to evaluate the system. The ASD
teens not only handled the interaction well, but also expressed
interest in further sessions with LISSA to improve their social
Figure 2. An example of dialogue between LISSA and a user
skills [13]. These results encouraged us to improve the system
and to prepare for additional experiments with similar subjects.
The quest for additional participants, and for evaluation of con-
versational practice with LISSA as an effective intervention
for ASD teens, is still ongoing. At the same time the prelimi-
nary successes with LISSA led to the idea of creating a new
version with a larger topical repertoire, to be tested in multiple
sessions, eventually at home rather than in the lab. The idea
was implemented as the “Aging and Engaging Program".
Aging and Engaging: The WOZ Study
Social communication deﬁcits among older adults can cause
signiﬁcant problems such as social isolation and depression.
Technological interventions are now seen as having potential
even for older adults, as computers, cellphones and tablets
have become more accessible and easier to use. Our most
recent version of LISSA is designed to interact with older
users over several sessions, with the goal of helping them
improve their communication skills. The system offers low
technological complexity and the feedback is presented in a
format imposing minimum cognitive load. The interface was
designed with the assistance of experts working with geriatric
patients, focusing on 12 older adults.

The program is designed so that each user becomes engaged
in casual talk with the system, where two or three times during
the conversation, the system suspends the conversation and
comments on the user’s weaknesses and strengths, and sug-
gests ways of improving on the weaker aspects. Also at the
end of the conversation, the system briefs the user on what they
went through and summarizes the previously offered advice.
To evaluate the program’s potential effectiveness, we con-
ducted a one-shot study with 25 older adults (all more than 60
years old, average age 67, 25% male), using a WOZ setting
for handling the conversation. The results showed that the
participants’ speaking times in response to questions, as well
as the amount of positive feedback, increased gradually in the
course of conversation. At the same time, participants found
the feedback useful, easy to interpret, and fairly accurate, and
expressed their interest in using the system at home. More
details on the study can be found in [5].
Multi-session Automatic Interaction with Older Adults
Based on the outcome of the WOZ studies, we designed a
multi-session study where participants can interact with the
system in their homes at their convenience. The purpose is
to study the acceptability of a longer-term interaction and its
impact on users’ communication skills. The design enables
each participant to engage in ten conversation sessions with the
avatar. The ﬁrst and the last sessions are held in the lab, where
users ﬁll out surveys and are evaluated for their communication
skills by experts. The rest of the sessions are held in users’
homes where they need to have access to a laptop or a personal
computer.
Each interaction with LISSA consists of three subsessions
where LISSA leads a natural casual conversation with the user.
Users receive brief feedback on their behavior, during two
breaks between subsessions. At the end, users are provided
with a behavioral summary, and some suggestions on how they
can improve their communication skills. The study has been
under way with 9 participants using the avatar to improve their
skills. We also recruited 10 participants as a control group.
The data has been collected and partially analyzed.
In the next section, we provide some details on how the system
manages an engaging conversation with the user, along with an
evaluation of the quality of the conversations gathered. Figure
2 shows a portion of a conversation between a user and LISSA
in the ﬁrst session of interaction.
THE LISSA DIALOGUE MANAGER
In order to handle a smooth natural conversation on everyday
topics with a user, the dialogue manager (DM) needs to follow
a coherent plan around a topic. It needs to extract essential
information even from relatively wordy inputs, and produce
relevant comments demonstrating its understanding of the
user’s turns. The DM also needs a way to respond to user
questions, and to update its plan if this is necessitated by a
user input; for instance, if a planned query to the user has
already been answered by some part of a user’s input, that
query should be skipped. The LISSA DM is capable of such
plan edits, as well as expansion of steps into subplans. We now
Figure 3. Overview of the dialogue management method
explain the DM structure along with the content we provided
for the Aging and Engaging program.
The DM Structure
Our approach to dialogue management is based on the hy-
pothesis that human cognition and behavior rely to a great
extent on dynamically modiﬁable schemas [15] [21] and on
hierarchical pattern recognition/transduction.
Accordingly the dialogue manager we have designed follows
a ﬂexible, modiﬁable dialogue schema, specifying a sequence
of intended and expected interactions with the user, subject to
change as the interaction proceeds. The sequence of formal
assertions in the body of the schema express either actions
intended by the agent, or inputs expected from the user. These
events are instantiated in the course of the conversation. This
is a simple matter for explicitly speciﬁed utterances by the
agent, but the expected inputs from the user are usually spec-
iﬁed very abstractly, and become particularized as a result
of input interpretation. Schemas can be extended allow for
speciﬁcation of participant types, preconditions, concurrent
conditions, partial action/event ordering, conditionals, and iter-
ation. These more general features are still in the early stages
of implementation, but so far have not been needed for the
present application.
Based on the main conversational schema, LISSA leads the
main ﬂow of the conversation by asking the user various ques-
tions. Following each user’s response, LISSA might show one
of the following behaviors:
• Making a relevant comment on the user’s input;
• Responding to a question, if the user asked one (typically,
at the end of the input);
• Instantiating a subdialogue, if the user switched to an “off-
track" topic (an unexpected question may have this effect
as well.)
A dialogue segment between LISSA and one user in the Aging
program can be seen in Figure 2.
Throughout the conversation, the replies of the user are trans-
duced into simple, explicit, largely context-independent En-
glish sentences. We call these gist-clauses, and they provide
much of the power of our approach. The DM interprets each
user’s input in the context of LISSA’s previous question, using
this question to select pattern transduction hierarchies relevant
to interpreting the user’s response. It then applies the rules

in the selected hierarchies to derive one or more gist-clauses
from the user’s input. The transduction trees are designed so
that we extract as much information as we can from a user in-
put. The terminal nodes in the transduction trees are templates
that can output gist-clauses. As an example of a gist clause,
if LISSA asks "Have you seen the new Star Wars movie?"
and the user answers "Yes, I have.", the output of the choice
tree for interpreting this reply would be something like "I have
seen the new Star Wars movie."
The system then applies hierarchical pattern transduction meth-
ods to the gist-clauses derived from the user’s input to generate
a speciﬁc verbal reaction. Figure 3 shows an overview of the
dialogue manager. The most important stratagem in our ap-
proach is the use of questions asked by LISSA as context for
transducing a gist-clause interpretation of the user’s answer,
and in turn, the use of those gist-clause interpretations as con-
text for transducing a meaningful reaction by LISSA to the
user’s answer (or multiple reactions, for instance if the user
concludes an answer with a reciprocal question). The interest-
ing point is that in gist-clause form, question-answer-reaction
triples are virtually independent of the conversational context,
and this leads to “portability" of the infrastructure for many
such triples from one kind of (casual) dialogue to another.
More details can be found in [14].
The Content
To enable a smooth, meaningful conversation with the user,
the pattern transduction trees need to be designed carefully
and equipped with appropriate patterns at the nodes. For
the Aging and Engaging program we needed ten interactions
between LISSA and each user. Each interaction consists of
three subsessions, and each subsession contains 3-5 questions
to the user, along with sporadic self-disclosures by LISSA.
In these disclosures LISSA presents herself as a 65-year old
widow who moved to the city a few years ago to live with her
daughter, and relates relevant information or experiences of
hers. LISSA leads the conversation by opening topics, stating
some personal thoughts and encouraging user inputs by asking
questions. Upon receiving such inputs, LISSA makes relevant
comments and expresses her thoughts and emotions.
LISSA’s contributions to the dialogues, including the choice
of the character and her background, were meticulously de-
signed by 4 trained research assistants (RAs), in extensive
consultation with gerontologists with expertise in interven-
tions. Details of her character, interests, beliefs and thoughts
were designed and inserted into the interaction along the way.
The contents of the DM’s transduction trees were designed
based on the suggestions provided by our expert collaborators,
as well as on the experience gathered from previous LISSA-
user interactions in the WOZ study.
Since we planned for ten interactions between LISSA and each
user, we collected a list of 30 topics that could be of interest
to our target group. The gerontological experts divided the
topics into three groups based on their emotional intensity or
degree of intimacy: easy, medium, and hard. All the topics
were ones that older people would encounter in their daily
lives. While the “easy" ones involve little personal disclosure
or intimacy and are typical of conversations they might have
Figure 4. Average emotional intensity of interactions based on the topics
of conversation. (Easy = 1, Medium = 2, Hard = 3)
at a senior center with new people or at a dining hall in a
senior living community, the harder conversations contain
more emotionally evocative topics. Table 1 shows a list of
topics in each group. We designed each conversation for
smooth topic transitions from easier topics in the ﬁrst session
to progressively more challenging topics in the later sessions.
Figure 4 shows how the emotional intensity increases as we
move through the study.
It is noteworthy that the design and implementation of the
infrastructure for the 30 topical dialogues represented an order-
of-magnitude scale-up from the previous dialogue designs
for speed-dating and for interaction with autistic teens. This
testiﬁes to the effectiveness of our use of schemas, transduction
hierarchies, and interpretations in the form of gist clauses for
rapid dialogue implementation. The individual topics were
mostly implemented by three of the authors, including two
undergraduates, and typically took about half a day or a day
to complete.
CONVERSATION EVALUATION
To evaluate the efﬁcacy of the DM system, we compared con-
versation transcripts from the initial WOZ-based study with
transcripts from the fully automatic dialogue system. To do
this, 16 conversation transcripts were chosen, each consisting
of a single session with three subtopics. 8 transcripts (the ﬁrst
8 that became available) were pulled from the WOZ study, and
the other 8 were pulled from the automated sessions. These
transcripts were de-identiﬁed, assigned random numerical la-
bels, and cleaned so that the transcripts followed a uniform
format.
The transcripts were then assigned randomly to 6 RAs, with
each RA being responsible for assessing 3 transcripts. Each
RA was tasked to rate each assigned transcript on six criteria
related to the quality of the conversation, which are shown in
Table 2. Each criterion was independently rated on a scale
from 1 (not at all) to 5 (completely). No other guidance was
provided to the RAs; rather they were directed to make natural
judgments for each criterion based on the transcript alone.

Emotional intensity
Topics
Easy
Getting to know each other, Where are you from?, City where you live (I), Activities and hobbies, Pets,
Family and friends, Weather, Plan for rest of the day, Household chores
Medium
Holidays and gathering, Cooking, Travel, Outdoor activities, City where you live (I), Managing money,
Education, Employment and retirement, Books and Newspapers, Dealing with technology, The arts,
Exercise, Health, Sleep problems, Home
Hard
Tell me about yourself (hopes, wishes, qualities), Driving, Life goals, Growing older, Staying active,
Spirituality
Table 1. Conversation topics and their emotional intensity in Aging and Engaging Program
Figure 5. Means and Standard Deviations of Dialogue Ratings for WOZ
vs. Automated System
Ratings across RAs were then averaged for each transcript to
represent the consensus score for that transcript. The average
rating and one standard deviation for the WOZ study compared
to the automated LISSA system are shown for each criterion
in Figure 5.
As can be seen in the evaluation results, the automated LISSA
system was able to achieve fairly high ratings for each of the
criteria. This suggests that the system was able to hold con-
versations that were of good overall quality. Compared to the
WOZ study, the automated system was able to achieve slightly
higher ratings, although none of the gains were sufﬁciently
large to be statistically signiﬁcant. Nonetheless, these results
suggest that the automated LISSA system is capable of produc-
ing conversations that are approximately of the same quality
as the human-operated (i.e., WOZ) system.
The largest difference between the WOZ ratings and the auto-
mated LISSA ratings was in the “On Track" metric, where the
average LISSA rating was half a point higher than the WOZ
average. Again, this improvement is not statistically signiﬁ-
cant, given the variance and low number of samples, but it is a
result consistent with the overall design of the system. Since
the DM was designed to follow a well-established conversa-
tion plan, while also being equipped with some mechanisms
to handle off-topic input and then return to the main track, we
expected the system to be particularly effective at remaining
on track as compared to the human-operated systems.
The good scores we achieved for the “Encouraging" and “Po-
lite" metrics strike us as signiﬁcant. They suggest that the
guidance provided by psychiatric experts on the design of the
topics, questions, and comments was advantageous. Addition-
ally, our strategy of including self-disclosure and a backstory
in the LISSA dialogues was probably a factor in the success-
ful performance of our system. As mentioned in the Related
Work section, self-disclosure by an avatar tends to encourage
self-disclosure by the users [12], and enjoyment is increased
if the avatar is provided with a backstory.
USABILITY OF THE SYSTEM
The results discussed above indicate that LISSA’s dialogue
system is functioning well. Conﬁrmation of LISSA’s potential
for improving users’ communication skills will require addi-
tional study, including: transcription and analysis of the ASR
ﬁles from the at-home sessions; expert evaluation of users’
communication behaviors in the initial and ﬁnal lab interviews
and surveys that were conducted; and additional, longer-range
studies with participants in the target population. However, we
have been able to obtain some insights into people’s feelings
about their interaction with LISSA after completing all 10
sessions.
The surveys administered at the end asked participants nu-
merous questions about their assessment of LISSA, including
various aspects of the nonverbal feedback they had received
throughout the sessions. A subset of questions of interest here
concerned the usability of the system. In particular, partici-
pants were asked to rate the following statements:
• I thought the program was easy to use.
• I would imagine that most people would learn to use this
program very quickly.
• I felt very conﬁdent using the program.
• Overall, I would rate the user-friendliness of this product
as:...
Responses were given on a ﬁve-point scale ranging from
"strongly disagree" (=1) to "strongly agree" (=5). The re-
sults from nine participants showed an average score of 4.33
(sd = 0.67) for the ﬁrst statement, meaning that they found the
system easy to use. The second statement averaged 3.88 (sd =
1.27). The average score on the third statement was 4.25 (sd =
0.43), indicating that participants felt no anxiety in handling
the interaction at home on their own; and along similar lines,
the “user friendliness" rating of 4.56 (sd = 0.50) suggests that
users had no real difﬁculties in dealing with the system.

Criterion
WOZ Average
WOZ SD
LISSA Average
LISSA SD
How natural were LISSA’s contributions to the conversation?
3.7
0.91
3.9
0.65
LISSA’s questions/comments encourage the user’s participation.
4.1
0.95
4.2
0.76
The conversation stayed on track.
3.8
1.19
4.3
0.75
LISSA’s responses were relevant to the conversation.
3.8
0.93
3.8
1.06
LISSA understood what user said.
3.8
1.10
3.9
0.97
LISSA’s responses were polite and respectful.
4.2
0.96
4.3
0.92
Table 2. Average Ratings of Each Criterion for the Automated LISSA System
We also provided some qualitative questions about users’ opin-
ions about the system and their experience with it. One ques-
tion asked what they liked about the system. Some dialogue-
related responses were the following:
- “having someone to talk to, even though it was a computer"
- “starting out with a topic that ﬁt in well with lifestyle that
allowed responses and conversation, and providing feedback
about responses"
- “I liked her personality and her calmness"
- “questions were relatable and answerable"
- “conversational topics were ﬁtting, though at times seemed
more elementary"
- “simple and straightforward"
- “interfacing with LISSA was like having someone in my home
visiting"
- “the topics seemed general enough and enjoyed talking about
them; helped with self-reﬂection and have deeper conversa-
tions rather than just shallow, surface-level conversations"
When asked what they didn’t like about the system, few users
registered any complaints about the dialogue per se. One
participant wanted longer conversations, commenting: “a bit
more time [should be] devoted to the conversations - ask 4-5
questions (rather than just 3) to help participants feel more
comfortable with the conversation". One commented that
“having humans instead of computers may be more motivating"
– a salient reminder that computers remain tools, not surrogate
humans.
FUTURE WORK
We plan to use the conversational data collected from multi-
session interactions between LISSA and older users to gain a
deeper understanding of certain key aspects of these interac-
tions. These aspects include the following:
• Verbosity: We plan to study the level of verbosity of par-
ticipants from session to session, and also the variability
of verbosity among participants. Questions of interest are
whether verbosity is dependent on the user’s personality,
the topic and questions asked, and other factors; and also
whether verbosity is correlated with a positive view of the
system.
• Self-disclosure: Self-disclosure is considered a sign of con-
versational engagement and trust. We intend to use known
techniques for measuring self-disclosure in a dialogue to as-
sess whether the extent of self-disclosure is more dependent
on the user’s personality or the inputs from the avatar; and,
how self-disclosure might correlate with the user’s mood,
social skills and evaluation of the system.
• Sentiment: As this program targets older adults who are
at risk of isolation and depression, we want to know more
about users’ moods, based on the emotional valence of
their inputs. We plan to track sentiment over the course of
successive sessions, taking into account the context of the
dialogue (e.g., the topic under discussion). We should then
be able to detect any correlations between the users’ moods,
and their evaluation of the system at various points.
CONCLUSION
We introduced the design and implementation of a spoken
dialogue manager for handling multi-session interactions with
older adults. The dialogue manager leads engaging conver-
sations with users on various everyday and personal topics.
Users receive feedback on their nonverbal behaviors including
eye contact, smiling, and head motion, as well as emotional
valence. The feedback is presented at two topical transition
points within a conversation as well as at the end. The goal
of the system is to help users improve their communication
skills.
The DM was implemented based on a framework proposed in
previous work, employing ﬂexible schemas for planned and
anticipated events, and hierarchical pattern transductions for
deriving “gist clause" interpretations and responses. We pre-
pared the dialogue manager for 10 interaction sessions, each
covering 3 topics. Our DM framework allowed quite rapid
development of the 30 topics. The content was adapted to
the needs and limitations of older adults, based on collabo-
ration with an expert advisory panel of professionals at our
afﬁliated medical research center. A broad spectrum of topics
was established, and the sessions were designed to progress
from emotionally undemanding ones to ones calling for greater
emotional disclosure.
We ran a study including 8 participants interacting with the
virtual agent. To evaluate the quality of the conversations,
we compared the conversations of these participants in the
initial in-lab sessions with 8 such conversations where LISSA
outputs were selected by a human wizard. The transcripts
were randomly assigned to 6 RAs, who rated the transcripts
based on 6 features of high-quality conversation. The results
showed high ratings for the automatic system, even slightly
better than wizard-moderated interactions. The overall usabil-
ity evaluation of the system by users who completed the series

of sessions shows that users found the system easy to use and
rated it as deﬁnitely user-friendly. Further studies of interac-
tion quality and effects on users, based (among other data) on
ASR transcripts of the at-home sessions, are in progress.
