406 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
PEGASUS: A policy search method for large MDPs and POMDPs 
AndrewY.Ng 
Computer Science Division 
UC Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA 94720 
Abstract 
We propose a new approach to the problem 
of searching a space of policies for a Markov 
decision process (MDP) or a partially observ­
able Markov decision process (POMDP), given 
a model. Our approach is based on the following 
observation: Any (PO)MDP can be transformed 
into an "equivalent" POMDP in which all state 
transitions (given the current state and action) are 
deterministic. This reduces the general problem 
of policy search to one in which we need only 
consider POMDPs with deterministic transitions. 
We give a natural way of estimating the value of 
all policies in these transformed POMDPs. Pol­
icy search is then simply performed by searching 
for a policy with high estimated value. We also 
establish conditions under which our value esti­
mates will be good, recovering theoretical results 
similar to those of Kearns, Mansour and Ng [7], 
but with "sample complexity" bounds that have 
only a polynomial rather than exponential depen­
dence on the horizon time. Our method applies 
to arbitrary POMDPs, including ones with infi­
nite state and action spaces. We also present 
empirical results for our approach on a small 
discrete problem, and on a complex continuous 
state/continuous action problem involving learn­
ing to ride a bicycle. 
1 
Introduction 
In recent years, there has been growing interest in algo­
rithms for approximate planning in (exponentially or even 
infinitely) large Markov decision processes (MDPs) and 
partially observable MDPs (POMDPs). For such large do­
mains, the value and Q-functions are sometimes compli­
cated and difficult to approximate, even though there may 
be simple, compactly representable policies that perform 
very well. This observation has led to particular interest in 
direct policy search methods (e.g., [16, 8, 15, 1, 7]), which 
Michael Jordan 
Computer Science Division 
& Department of Statistics 
UC Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA 94 720 
attempt to choose a good policy from some restricted class 
of policies. 
Most approaches to policy search assume access to the 
POMDP either in the form of the ability to execute trajec­
tories in the POMDP, or in the form of a black-box "gen­
erative model" that enables the learner to try actions from 
arbitrary states. In this paper, we will assume a stronger 
model than these: roughly, we assume we have an imple­
mentation of a generative model, with the difference that 
it has no internal random number generator, so that it has 
to ask us to provide it with random numbers whenever it 
needs them (such as if it needs a source of randomness to 
draw samples from the POMDP's transition distributions). 
This small change to a generative model results in what 
we will call a deterministic simulative model, and makes it 
surprisingly powerful. 
We show how, given a deterministic simulative model, 
we can reduce the problem of policy search in an ar­
bitrary POMDP to one in which all the transitions are 
deterministic-that is, a POMDP in which taking an ac­
tion a in a state s will always deterministically result in 
transitioning to some fixed state s'. (The initial state in this 
POMDP may still be random.) This reduction is achieved 
by transforming the original POMDP into an "equivalent" 
one that has only deterministic transitions. 
Our policy search algorithm then operates on these "sim­
plified" transformed POMDPs. We call our method PEGA­
SUS (for Policy Evaluation-of-Goodness And Search Us­
ing Scenarios, for reasons that will become clear). Our 
algorithm also bears some similarity to one used in Van 
Roy [12] for value determination in the setting of fully ob­
servable MDPs. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Sec­
tion 2 defines the notation that will be used in this pa­
per, and formalizes the concepts of deterministic simulative 
models and of families of realizable dynamics. Section 3 
then describes how we transform POMDPs into ones with 
only deterministic transitions, and gives our policy search 
algorithm. Section 4 goes on to establish conditions un­
der which we may give guarantees on the performance of 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
407 
the algorithm, Section 5 describes our experimental results, 
and Section 6 closes with conclusions. 
2 
Preliminaries 
This section gives our notation, and introduces the concept 
of the set of realizable dynamics of a POMDP under a pol­
icy class. 
A 
Markov 
decision 
process 
(MDP) 
is 
a 
tuple 
(S,D,A,{Psa(·)},/,R) where: Sis a set of states; D 
is the initial-state distribution, from which the start-state 
s0 is drawn; A is a set of actions; { Psa ( ·)} are the tran­
sition probabilities, with Psa giving the next-state distri­
bution upon taking action a in state s; 'Y E [0, 1) is the 
discount factor; and R is the reward function, bounded 
by Rmax· For the sake of concreteness, we will assume, un­
less otherwise stated, that S = [0, 1jds is ads-dimensional 
hypercube. For simplicity, we also assume rewards are de­
terministic, and written R(s) rather than R(s, a), the ex­
tensions being trivial. Lastly, everything that needs to be 
measurable is assumed to be measurable. 
A policy is any mapping 1r : S 1-t A. The value function 
of a policy 7r is a map v11" : s f-t IR, so that v11" ( s) gives 
the expected discounted sum of rewards for executing 1r 
starting from states. With some abuse of notation, we also 
define the value of a policy, with respect to the initial-state 
distribution D, according to 
V(1r) = EsoWD [V1r(so)] 
(1) 
(where the subscript s0 ,..., D indicates that the expectation 
is with respect to s0 drawn according to D). When we are 
considering multiple MDPs and wish to make explicit that 
a value function is for a particular MDP M, we will also 
write VA1(s), VM(7r), etc. 
In the policy search setting, we have some fixed class IT 
of policies, and desire to find a good policy 1r E IT. More 
precisely, for a given MDP M and policy class IT, define 
opt(M,IT) =sup VM(7r). 
(2) 
1rEll 
Our goal is to find a policy ir E IT so that V ( ir) is close to 
opt(M, IT). 
Note that this framework also encompasses cases where our 
family IT consists of policies that depend only on certain as­
pects of the state. In particular, in POMDPs, we can restrict 
attention to policies that depend only on the observables. 
This restriction results in a subclass of stochastic memory­
free policies.1 
By introducing artificial "memory vari­
ables" into the process state, we can also define stochastic 
limited-memory policies [9] (which certainly permits some 
belief state tracking). 
1 Although we have not explicitly addressed stochastic policies 
so far, they are a straightforward generalization (e.g. using the 
transformation to deterministic policies given in [7]). 
Since we are interested in the "planning" problem, we as­
sume that we are given a model of the (PO)MDP. Much pre­
vious work has studied the case of (PO)MDPs specified via 
a generative model [7, 13], which is a stochastic function 
that takes as input any ( s, a) state-action pair, and outputs 
s' according to Psa (-) (and the associated reward). In this 
paper, we assume a stronger model. We assume we have a 
deterministic function g : S x A x [0, 1]dp 1-t S, so that 
for any fixed (s, a)-pair, if pis distributed Uniform[O, 1]dp, 
then g(s, a,jf) is distributed according to the transition dis­
tribution Psa ( ·) . In other words, to draw a sample from 
Psa ( ·) for some fixed s and a, we need only draw p uni­
formly in [0, 1]dp, and then take g(s, a,jf) to be our sample. 
We will call such a model a deterministic simulative model 
for a (PO)MDP. 
Since a deterministic simulative model allows us to simu­
late a generative model, it is clearly a stronger model. How­
ever, most computer implementations of generative models 
also provide deterministic simulative models. Consider a 
generative model that is implemented via a procedure that 
takes sand a, makes at most dp calls to a random number 
generator, and then outputs s' drawn according to Psa ( ·) . 
Then this procedure is already providing a deterministic 
simulative model. The only difference is that the determin­
istic simulative model has to make explicit (or "expose") its 
interface to the random number generator, via P. (A gen­
erative model implemented via a physical simulation of an 
MDP with "resets" to arbitrary states does not, however, 
readily lead to a deterministic simulative model.) 
Let us examine some simple examples of deterministic sim­
ulative models. Suppose that for a state-action pair ( s1, a1) 
and some states s' and s", Ps1a1 (s') = 1/3, Ps1a1 (s") = 
2/3. Then we may choose dp = 1 so that p = pis just 
a real number, and let g(s1, a1,p) = s' if p \ 1/3, and 
g(sl,al,P) = s" otherwise. As another example, suppose 
S = IR, and Psa ( ·) is a normal distribution with a cumula­
tive distribution function Fsa(·). Again letting dp = 1, we 
may choose g to be g(s, a,p) = F8]1(p). 
It is a fact of probability and measure theory that, given 
any transition distribution Psa ( ·), such a deterministic sim­
ulative model g can always be constructed for it. (See, 
e.g. [4].) Indeed, some texts (e.g. [2]) routinely define 
POMDPs using essentially deterministic simulative mod­
els. However, there will often be many different choices of 
g for representing a (PO)MDP, and it will be up to the user 
to decide which one is most "natural" to implement. As we 
will see later, the particular choice of g that the user makes 
can indeed impact the performance of our algorithm, and 
"simpler" (in a sense to be formalized) implementations are 
generally preferred. 
To close this section, we introduce a concept that will be 
useful later, that captures the family of dynamics that a 
(PO)MDP and policy class can exhibit. Assume a deter­
ministic simulative model g, and fix a policy 1r. If we are 

408 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
executing 1r from some state s, the successor-state is deter­
mined by frr(s,if) = g(s, 1r(s),if), which is a function of s 
and p. Varying 1r over II, we get a whole family of func­
tions :F = Urrlfrr(s,P) = g(s,1r(s),P)} mapping from 
S x [0, 1]dp into successor states S. This set of functions 
:F should be thought of as the family of dynamics realiz­
able by the POMDP and II, though since its definition does 
depend on the particular deterministic simulative model g 
that we have chosen, this is "as expressed with respect to 
g. " For each f, also let fi be the i-th coordinate function 
(so that fi(s,if) is the i-th coordinate of f(s,P)) and let :F; 
be the corresponding families of coordinate functions map­
ping from S x [0, 1]dp into [0, 1]. Thus, :F; captures all the 
ways that coordinate i of the state can evolve. 
We are now ready to describe our policy search method. 
3 
Policy search method 
In this section, we show how we transform a (PO)MDP into 
an "equivalent" one that has only deterministic transitions. 
This then leads to natural estimates V(1r) of the policies' 
values V ( 1r). Finally, we may search over policies to opti­
mize V(1r), to find a (hopefully) good policy. 
3.1 
Transformation of (PO)MDPs 
Given a (PO)MDP M 
= (S,D,A,{Psa(·)},')',R) and 
a policy class II, we describe how, using a determinis­
tic simulative model g for M, we construct our trans­
formed POMDP M1 
= (S1,D1,A,{PUJ)},')',R1) and 
corresponding class of policies II1, so that M1 has only de­
terministic transitions (though its initial state may still be 
random). To simplify the exposition, we assume dp = 1, 
so that the terms pare just real numbers. 
M1 is constructed is as follows: The action space and dis­
count factor for M1 are the same as in M. The state space 
for M1 is S x [0, 1]00• In other words, a typical state in M1 
can be written as a vector ( s, PI, P2, . . .  ) -this consists of 
a state s from the original state space S, followed by an 
infinite sequence of real numbers in [0, 1]. 
The rest of the transformation is straightforward. Upon 
taking action a in state ( s, PI, P2, . . .  ) in M1, we deter­
ministically transition to the state ( S1, P2, P3, . . .  ) , where 
s1 = g(s, a, pi)· In other words, the s portion of the state 
(which should be thought of as the "actual" state) changes 
to s1, and one number in the infinite sequence (pi, P2, . . .  ) 
is used up to generate s1 from the correct distribution. By 
the definition of the deterministic simulative model g, we 
see that so long as PI ,..., Uniform[O, 1], then the "next­
state" distribution of s1 is the same as if we had taken action 
a in states (randomization over PI). 
Finally, we choose D1, the initial-state distribution over 
S1 = S x [0, 1]00, so that (s, PI, P2, . . .  ) drawn according to 
D1 will be so that s ,..., D, and the p; 's are distributed i.i.d. 
Uniform[O, 1]. For each policy 1r E II, also let there be a 
corresponding 7r1 E II1, given by 7r1(s,pi,P2, . . .  ) = 1r(s), 
and let the reward be given by R1(s, PI ,p2, . .. ) = R(s). 
If one observes only the "s"-portion (but not the pi's) of a 
sequence of states generated in the POMDP M1 using pol­
icy 1r1, one obtains a sequence that is drawn from the same 
distribution as would have been generated from the original 
(PO)MDP M under the corresponding policy 1r E II. It fol­
lows that, for corresponding policies 1r E II and 1r1 E II1, 
we have that VM(7r) = VM' (1r1). This also implies that the 
best possible expected returns in both (PO)MDPs are the 
same: opt(M, II) = opt(M1, II1). 
To summarize, we have shown how, using a deterministic 
simulative model, we can transform any POMDP M and 
policy class II into an "equivalent" POMDP M1 and policy 
class II1, so that the transitions in M1 are deterministic; 
i.e., given a state s E S1 and an action a E A, the next-state 
in M1 is exactly determined. Since policies in II and II1 
have the same values, if we can find a policy 1r1 E II1 that 
does well in M1 starting from D1, then the corresponding 
policy 1r E II will also do well for the original POMDP 
M starting from D. Hence, the problem of policy search 
in general POMDPs is reduced to the problem of policy 
search in POMDPs with deterministic transition dynamics. 
In the next section, we show how we can exploit this fact 
to derive a simple and natural policy search method. 
3.2 
PEGASUS: A method for policy search 
As discussed, it suffices for policy search to find a good 
policy 1r1 E II1 for the transformed POMDP, since the cor­
responding policy 1r E II will be just as good. To do this, 
we first construct an approximation VM' (-) to VM(·), and 
then search over policies 1r1 E II1 to optimize VM' (1r1) (as 
a proxy for optimizing the hard-to-compute VM(7r)), and 
thus find a (hopefully) good policy. 
Recall that V M' is given by 
(3) 
where the expectation is over the initial state so E S1 drawn 
according to D1• The first step in the approximation is to 
replace the expectation over the distribution with a finite 
sample of states. More precisely, we first draw a sam-
1 { (I) (2) 
(m)} 
f 
. . . 1 
d" 
p e s0 , s0 , 
•
.
.
 , s0 
o 
m mitla states accor mg to 
D1• These states, also called "scenarios" (a term from the 
stochastic optimization literature; see, e.g. [3]), define an 
approximation to V M' ( 1r): 
(4) 
Since the transitions in M1 are deterministic, for a given 
state s E S1 and a policy 1r E II1, the sequence of states 
that will be visited upon executing 1r from s is exactly deter­
mined; hence the sum of discounted rewards for executing 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
409 
1r from s is also exactly determined. Thus, to calculate one 
of the terms VM-, (sbi)) in the summation in Equation (4) 
corresponding to scenario s6i), we need only use our de­
terministic simulative model to find the sequence of states 
visited by executing 1r from Sbi), and sum up the result­
ing discounted rewards. Naturally, this would be an infinite 
sum, so the second (and standard) part of the approxima­
tion is to truncate this sum after some number H of steps, 
where H is called the horizon time. Here, we choose H to 
be theE-horizon time H, = log1(E(l-!)/2Rmax). so that 
(because of discounting) the truncation introduces at most 
E/2 error into the approximation. 
...., 
. 
. 
. 
(1) 
(m) 
Ķo summarize, given m scenanos s0 , ... , s0 , our ap-
proximation to V M' is the deterministic function 
VM'(-rr) = 	 fR'(sbi))+!R'(s0i))+· · ·+!H'R'(s}%) 
i=I 
where (s1i), s0i), ... , s}%) is the sequence of states deter­
ministically visited by 1r starting from s1i). Given m sce­
narios, this defines an approximation to V M' ( 1r) for all poli­
cies 1r E TI'. 
The final implementational detail is that, since the states 
s1i) E S x [0, 1]00 are infinite-dimensional vectors, we 
have no way of representing them (and their successor 
states) explicitly. But because we will be simulating only 
( i) (i) 
( i) 
H, steps, we need only represent PI ,p2 , ... ,PH,' of 
the state s1i) = (s(i) ,p0i) ,p2i), . . . ), and so we will do 
just that. Viewed in the space of the original, untrans­
formed POMDP, evaluating a policy this way is therefore 
also akin to generating m Monte Carlo trajectories and tak­
ing their empirical average return, but with the crucial dif­
ference that all the randomization is "fixed" in advance and 
"reused" for evaluating different -rr. 
Having used m scenarios to define V M' ( 1r) for all 1r, we 
may search over policies to optimize V M' ( 1r) . 
We call 
this policy search method PEGASUS: Policy Evaluation-of­
Goodness And Search Using Scenarios. Since V M' ( 1r) is a 
deterministic function, the search procedure only needs to 
optimize a deterministic function, and any number of stan­
dard optimization methods may be used. In the case that 
the action space is continuous and n = { 7ro IO E ll_l} is 
a smoothly parameterized family of policies (so -rro(s) is 
differentiable in(} for all s) then if all the relevant quanti­
ties are differentiable, it is also possible to find the deriva­
tives (djdO)VM' (-rr0), and gradient ascent methods can be 
used to optimize VM' (no). One common barrier to doing 
this is that R is often discontinuous, being (say) 1 within 
a goal region and 0 elsewhere. One approach to dealing 
with this problem is to smooth R out, possibly in com­
bination with "continuation" methods that gradually un­
smooth it again. An alternative approach that may be use­
ful in the setting of continuous dynamical systems is to al­
ter the reward function to use a continuous-time model of 
discounting. Assuming that the time at which the agent en­
ters the goal region is differentiable, then V M' ( 1r o) is again 
differentiable. 2 
4 
Main theoretical results 
PEGASUS samples a number of scenarios from D', and 
uses them to form an approximation V ( 1r) to V ( 1r) . If V is 
a uniformly good approximation to V, then we can guaran­
tee that optimizing V will result in a policy with value close 
to opt(M, TI). This section establishes conditions under 
which this occurs . 
4.1 
The case of finite action spaces 
We begin by considering the case of two actions, A = 
{a I , a2}. 
Studying policy search in a similar setting, 
Keams, Mansour and Ng [7] established conditions under 
which their algorithm gives uniformly good estimates of 
the values of policies. A key to that result was that uniform 
convergence can be established so long as the policy class 
TI has low "complexity." This is analogous to the setting of 
supervised learning, where a learning algorithm that uses 
a hypothesis class 1i that has low complexity (such as in 
the sense of low VC-dimension) will also enjoy uniform 
convergence of its error estimates to their means. 
In our setting, since TI is just a class of functions mapping 
from S into { a1, a2}, it is just a set of boolean functions. 
Hence, VC(TI), its Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension [14], 
is well defined. That is, we say TI shatters a set of m states 
if it can realize each of the 2m possible action combina­
tions on them, and VC(TI) is just the size of the largest set 
shattered by TI. The result of Keams et al. then suffices to 
give the following theorem. 3 
Theorem 1 Let a POMDP with actions A = { a1, a2} be 
given, and let TI be a class of strategies for this POMDP, 
with Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension d = VC(TI). Also 
let any E, c5 > 0 be fixed, and let V be the policy-value 
estimates determined by PEGASUS using m scenarios and 
2More precisely, if the agent enters the goal region on some 
time step, then rather than giving it a reward of 1, we figure out 
what fraction r E [0, 1] of that time step (measured in continuous 
time) the agent had taken to enter the goal region, and then give 
it reward'"( instead. Assuming r is differentiable in the system's 
dynamics, then, ... and hence V 
M' ( 1re) are now also differentiable 
(other than on a usually-measure 0 set, for example from trunca­
tion at H, steps). 
3The algorithm of Keams, Mansour and Ng uses a "trajectory 
tree" method to find the estimates V ( 1r); since each trajectory tree 
is of size exp(O(H,)), they were very expensive to build. Each 
scenario in PEGASUS can be viewed as a compact representation 
of a trajectory tree (with a technical difference that different sub­
trees are not constructed independently), and the proof given in 
Kearns et al. then applies without modification to give Theorem 1. 

410 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
a horizon time of H<. If 
( ( Rmax 
1 
1 )) 
m = 0 
poly d, -€-, log J, 1 
_ 'Y 
, 
(5) 
then with probability at least 1 - 8, V will be uniformly 
close to V: 
jv(1r)- V(1r)l ::; E 
for al11r E II 
(6) 
Using the transformation given in Kearns et al., the case of 
a finite action space with JAJ > 2 also gives rise to essen­
tially the same uniform-convergence result, so long as II 
has low "complexity." 
The bound given in the theorem has no dependence on 
the size of the state space or on the "complexity" of the 
POMDP's transitions and rewards. Thus, so long as II has 
low VC-dimension, uniform convergence will occur, inde­
pendently of how complicated the POMDP is. As in Kearns 
et al., this theorem therefore recovers the best analogous 
results in supervised learning, in which uniform conver­
gence occurs so long as the hypothesis class has low VC­
dimension, regardless of the size or "complexity" of the 
underlying space and target function. 
4.2 
The case of infinite action spaces: "Simple" II is 
insufficient for uniform convergence 
We now consider the case of infinite action spaces. 
Whereas, in the 2-action case, II being "simple" was suffi­
cient to ensure uniform convergence, this is not the case in 
POMDPs with infinite action spaces. 
Suppose A is a (countably or uncountably) infinite set 
of actions. A "simple" class of policies would be II = 
{ 1r a j1r a ( s) = a, a E A} - the set of all policies that al­
ways choose the same action, regardless of the state. Intu­
itively, this is the simplest policy that actually uses an infi­
nite action space; also, any reasonable notion of complexity 
of policy classes should assign II a low "dimension." If it 
were true that simple policy classes imply uniform conver­
gence, then it is certainly true that this II should always 
enjoy uniform convergence. Unfortunately, this is not the 
case, as we now show. 
Theorem 2 Let A be an infinite set of actions, and let 
II = {7raJ7ra(s) = a, a E A} be the corresponding set 
of all "constant valued" policies. Then there exists a finite­
state MDP with action space A, and a deterministic simu­
lative model for it, so that PEGASUS' estimates using the 
deterministic simulative model do not uniformly converge 
to their means. i.e. There is an f > 0, so that for estimates 
V derived using any finite number m of scenarios and any 
finite horizon time, there is a policy 1r E II so that 
(7) 
The proof of this Theorem, which is not difficult, is in Ap­
pendix A. This result shows that simplicity of II is not suf­
ficient for uniform convergence in the case of infinite ac­
tion spaces. However, the counterexample used in the proof 
of Theorem 2 has a very complex g despite the MDP be­
ing quite simple. Indeed, a different choice for g would 
have made uniform convergence occur.4 Thus, it is natu­
ral to hypothesize that assumptions on the "complexity" of 
g are also needed to ensure uniform convergence. As we 
will shortly see, this intuition is roughly correct. Since ac­
tions affect transitions only through g, the crucial quantity 
is actually the composition of policies and the determinis­
tic simulative model -in other words, the class :F of the 
dynamics realizable in the POMDP and policy class, us­
ing a particular deterministic simulative model. In the next 
section, we show how assumptions on the complexity of :F 
leads to uniform convergence bounds of the type we desire. 
4.3 
Uniform convergence in the case of infinite action 
spaces 
For the remainder of this section, assume S = [0, 1]ds. 
Then :F is a class of functions mapping from [0, 1]ds x 
[0, 1]dp into [0, 1]ds, and so a simple way to capture its 
"complexity" is to capture the complexity of its families 
of coordinate functions, :Fi, i = 1, . . .  , ds. Each :Fi is a 
family of functions mapping from [0, 1]ds x [0, 1]dp into 
[0, 1], the i-th coordinate of the state vector. Thus, :Fi is 
just a family of real-valued functions -the family of i-th 
coordinate dynamics that II can realize, with respect to g. 
The complexity of a class of boolean functions is measured 
by its VC dimension, defined to be the size of the largest set 
shattered by the class. To capture the "complexity" of real­
valued families of functions such as :Fi, we need a general­
ization of the VC dimension. The pseudo-dimension, due 
to Pollard [10] is defined as follows: 
Definition (Pollard, 1990). Let 1i be a family of functions 
mapping from a space X into Ilt Let a sequence of d points 
x1, .. . , Xd E X be given. We say 1i shatters x1, ... , Xd 
if there exists a sequence of real numbers h, . . .  , td such 
that the subset of JRd given by {(h(x1) - tb . . .  , h(xd) -
td) Jh E H} intersects all 2d orthants of JRd (equivalently, 
if for any sequence of d bits b1, .
.
•
 , bd E {0, 1 }, there is 
a function h E 1i such that h(xi) × ti {::} bi = 1, for 
all i = 1, . . .  , d). The pseudo-dimension of H, denoted 
dimp(H), is the size of the largest set that 1i shatters, or 
infinite if 1i can shatter arbitrarily large sets. 
The pseudo-dimension generalizes the VC dimension, and 
coincides with it in the case that 1i maps into {0, 1}. We 
will use it to capture the "complexity" of the classes of the 
POMDP's realizable dynamics :Fi. We also remind readers 
of the definition of Lipschitz continuity. 
4For example, g(so, a,p) = S-1 if p $ 0.5, s1 otherwise; see 
Appendix A. 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
411 
Definition. A function f : m_n H ffi. is Lipschitz con­
tinuous (with respect to the Euclidean norm on its range 
and domain) if there exists a constant B such that for all 
x,y E dom(f), llf(x)- f(y)lh ::::; Bllx- Yll2· Here, 
B is called a Lipschitz bound. A family of functions 1l 
mapping from m_n into ffi. is uniformly Lipschitz contin­
uous with Lipschitz bound B if every function h E 1l is 
Lipschitz continuous with Lipschitz bound B. 
We now state our main theorem, with a corollary regarding 
when optimizing V will result in a provably good policy. 
Theorem 3 Let a POMDP with state spaceS = [0, 1]ds, 
and a possibly infinite action space be given. Also let 
a policy class II, and a deterministic simulative model 
g : S x A x [0, 1Jdp H S for the POMDP be given. Let :F 
be the corresponding family of realizable dynamics in the 
POMDP, and :Fi the resulting families of coordinate func­
tions. Suppose that dimp(:Fi) ::::; dfor each i = 1, . . .  , ds, 
and that each family :Fi is uniformly Lipschitz continuous 
Using tools from [5], it is also possible to show similar 
uniform convergence results without Lipschitz continuity 
assumptions, by assuming that the family 1r is parameter­
ized by a small number of real numbers, and that 1r (for all 
1r E II), g, and Rare each implemented by a function that 
calculates their results using only a bounded number of the 
usual arithmetic operations on real numbers. 
The proof of Theorem 3, which uses techniques first intro­
duced by Haussler [6] and Pollard [10], is quite lengthy, 
and is deferred to Appendix B. 
5 
Experiments 
In this section, we report the results from two experiments. 
The first, run to examine the behavior of PEGASUS para­
metrically, involved a simple gridworld POMDP. The sec­
ond studied a complex continuous state/continuous action 
problem involving riding a bicycle. 
with Lipschitz bound at most B, and that the reward june-
Figure I a shows the finite state and action POMDP used 
tion R: S H [-Rmax, Rmax] is also Lipschitz continuous 
in our first experiment. In this problem, the agent starts 
with Lipschitz bound at most BR. Finally, let E, 8 > 0 be 
in the lower-left comer, and receives a -1 reinforcement 
given, and let V be the policy-value estimates determined 
per step until it reaches the absorbing state in the upper-
by PEGASUS using m scenarios and a horizon time of H,. 
right comer. The eight possible observations, also shown 
If m = 
in the figure, indicate whether each of the eight squares 
( ( R 
1 
1 
B 
) )adjoining the current position contains a wall. The policy 
0 
poly d, 
max
, log s; , ----=- ' log B, log R 
R 
, ds, dp 
class is small, consisting of al148 = 65536 functions map-
E 
u 1 
"f 
max 
ping from the eight possible observations to the four ac-
then with probability at least 1 -6, V will be uniformly 
tions corresponding to trying to move in each of the com-
close to V: 
pass directions. Actions are noisy, and result in moving 
for all 1r E II 
(8) 
Corollary 4 Under the conditions of Theorem 1 or 3, let 
m be chosen as in the Theorem. Then with probability at 
least 1 - 6, the policy it chosen by optimizing the value 
estimates, given by it = argmax,.En V(1r), will be near­
optimal in II: 
V(it) V opt(M,IT)- 2t: 
(9) 
Remark. The (Lipschitz) continuity assumptions give a 
sufficient but not necessary set of conditions for the the­
orem, and other sets of sufficient conditions can be en­
visaged. For example, if we assume that the distribution 
on states induced by any policy at each time step has a 
bounded density, then we can show uniform convergence 
for a large class of ("reasonable") discontinuous reward 
functions such as R(s) = 1 if s1 > 0.5, 0 otherwise.5 
5Space constraints preclude a detailed discussion, but briefly, 
this is done by constructing two Lipschitz continuous reward 
functions Ru and RL that are "close to" and which upper- and 
lower-bound R (and which hence give value estimates that also 
upper- and lower-bound our value estimates under R); using the 
assumption of bounded densities to show our values under Ru 
and RL are €-close to that of R; applying Theorem 3 to show uni­
form convergence occurs with Ru and RL; and lastly deducing 
from this that uniform convergence occurs with R as well. 
in a random direction 20% of the time. Since the policy 
class is small enough to exhaustively enumerate, our opti­
mization algorithm for searching over policies was simply 
exhaustive search, trying a1148 policies on them scenarios, 
and picking the best one. Our experiments were done with 
'Y = 0.99 and a horizon time of H = 100, and all results re­
ported on this problem are averages over 10000 trials. The 
deterministic simulative model was 
16(s, up) 
6(s, left) 
g(s, a,p) = 
o(s, down) 
6(s, right) 
6(s, a) 
ifp::::; 0.05 
if 0.05 < p::::; 0.10 
if 0.10 < p::::; 0.15 
if 0.15 < p::::; 0.20 
otherwise 
where 6 ( s, a) denotes the result of moving one step from s 
in the direction indicated by a, and is s if this move would 
result in running into a wall. 
Figure 1 b shows the result of running this experiment, for 
different numbers of scenarios. The value of the best policy 
within II is indicated by the topmost horizontal line, and the 
solid curve below that is the mean policy value when using 
our algorithm. As we see, even using surprisingly small 
numbers of scenarios, the algorithm manages to find good 
policies, and as m becomes large, the value also approaches 
the optimal value. 

412 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
!l  
{ 
& 
(a) 
Results on 5x5 gridworld 
-9 
..................................................... ................................................................................................... ...... ................................ 
·1
0 
·11 
·1
2 
-13 
-14 
-15 
"16
o 
L -----'----'-
1
0---
1-'-
5
------'2'-0 ------'-
2
5
------'30 
m 
(b) 
Figure 1: (a) 5x5 gridworld, with the 8 observations. (b) PEGASUS results using the normal and complex deterministic simulative 
models. The topmost horizontal line shows the value of the best policy in II; the solid curve is the mean policy value using the normal 
model; the lower curve is the mean policy value using the complex modeL The (almost negligible) 1 s.e. bars are also plotted. 
We had previously predicted that a "complicated" deter­
ministic simulative model g can lead to poor results. For 
each (s, a)-pair, let hs,a : [0, 1] I-t [0, 1] be a hash function 
that maps any Uniform(O, 1] random variable into another 
Uniform[O, 1] random variable.6 Then if g is a determin­
istic simulative model, g'(s, a,p) = g(s, a, hs,a(P)) is an­
other one that, because of the presence of the hash function, 
is a much more "complex" model than g. (Here, we appeal 
to the reader's intuition about complex functions, rather 
than formal measures of complexity.) We would therefore 
predict that using PEGASUS with g' would give worse re­
sults than g, and indeed this prediction is borne out by the 
results as shown in Figure 1b (dashed curve). The differ­
ence between the curves is not large, and this is also not 
unexpected given the small size of the problem. 7 
Our second experiment used Randl!?)v and Alstr!?)m's [11] 
bicycle simulator, where the objective is to ride to a goal 
one kilometer away. The actions are the torque r applied to 
the handlebars and the displacement v of the rider's center­
of-gravity from the center. The six-dimensional state used 
in [11] includes variables for the bicycle's tilt angle and 
orientation, and the handlebar's angle. If the bicycle tilt 
exceeds 1r /15, it falls over and enters an absorbing state, 
receiving a large negative reward. The randomness in the 
simulator is from a uniformly distributed term added to the 
intended displacement of the center-of-gravity. Rescaled 
appropriately, this became the p term of our deterministic 
simulative model. 
We performed policy search over the following space: We 
6In our experiments, this was implemented by choosing, for 
each (s, a) pair, a random integer k(s, a) from {1, ... , 1000}, 
and then letting hs,aCP) 
= fract(k(s,a) · p), where fract(x) 
denotes the fractional part of x. 
7Theory predicts that the difference between g and g' 's perfor­
mance should be at most 0( Jiog IIII/m); see [7]. 
selected a vector x of fifteen (simple, manually-chosen but 
not fine-tuned) features of each state; actions were then 
chosen With sigmoids: T = a-(w1 · x)(rmax- Tmin) + Tmin• 
V 
= a-(w2 
· x)(vmax - Vmin) + Vmin• Where a-(z) 
= 
1/(1 + e-z). Note that since our approach can handle 
continuous actions directly, we did not, unlike [11], have 
to discretize the actions. The initial-state distribution was 
manually chosen to be representative of a "typical" state 
distribution when riding a bicycle, and was also not fine­
tuned. We used only a small number m = 30 of scenarios, 
'Y = 0.998, H = 500, with the continuous-time model of 
discounting discussed earlier, and (essentially) gradient as­
cent to optimize over the weights. 8 Shaping rewards, to 
reward progress towards the goal, were also used.9 
We ran 10 trials using our policy search algorithm, testing 
each of the resulting solutions on 50 rides. Doing so, the 
median riding distances to the goal of the 10 different poli­
cies ranged from about 0.995km10 to 1.07km. In all 500 
evaluation runs for the 10 policies, the worst distance we 
observed was also about 1.07km. These results are signifi­
cantly better than those of [11], which reported riding dis­
tances of about 7km (since their policies often took very 
"non-linear" paths to the goal), and a single "best-ever" 
trial of about 1. 7km. 
8Running experiments without the continuous-time model of 
discounting, we also obtained, using a non-gradient based hill­
climbing algorithm, equally good results as those reported here. 
Our implementation of gradient ascent, using numerically evalu­
ated derivates, was run with a bound on the length of a step taken 
on any iteration, to avoid problems near V ( 1r9) 's discontinuities. 
90ther experimental details: The shaping reward was propor­
tional to and signed the same as the amount of progress towards 
the goaL As in [11], we did not include the distance-from-goal as 
one of the state variables during training; training therefore pro­
ceeding "infinitely distant" from the goal. 
10Distances under lkm are possible since, as in [11], the goal 
has a lOrn radius. 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
413 
6 
Conclusions 
We have shown how any POMDP can be transformed into 
an "equivalent" one in which all transitions are determin­
istic. By approximating the transformed POMDP's initial 
state distribution with a sample of scenarios, we defined an 
estimate for the value of every policy, and finally performed 
policy search by optimizing these estimates. Conditions 
were established under which these estimates will be uni­
formly good, and experimental results showed our method 
working well. It is also straightforward to extend these 
methods and results to the cases of finite-horizon undis­
counted reward, and infinite-horizon average reward with 
£-mixing time H<.
