Exploiting Event Cameras for
Spatio-Temporal Prediction of Fast-Changing Trajectories
Marco Monforte1,2, Ander Arriandiaga2, Arren Glover2, and Chiara Bartolozzi2
1 Universit`a degli Studi di Genoa, Italy
2 Event-Driven Perception for Robotics, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Italy

Abstract— This paper investigates trajectory prediction for
robotics, to improve the interaction of robots with mov-
ing targets, such as catching a bouncing ball. Unexpected,
highly-non-linear trajectories cannot easily be predicted with
regression-based ﬁtting procedures, therefore we apply state
of the art machine learning, speciﬁcally based on Long-Short
Term Memory (LSTM) architectures. In addition, fast moving
targets are better sensed using event cameras, which produce
an asynchronous output triggered by spatial change, rather
than at ﬁxed temporal intervals as with traditional cameras.
We investigate how LSTM models can be adapted for event
camera data, and in particular look at the beneﬁt of using
asynchronously sampled data.
I. INTRODUCTION
Predictive capabilities can massively improve the safety
and reliability of robots as they interact with the environment.
Humans make use of predictive estimates daily, and almost
in an unconscious manner, for instance when driving, playing
sports or interacting with other people. A similar capability in
robots could further allow them to be integrated amongst hu-
mans, and be utilised for a wider range of tasks. In addition,
forecasting information about the surrounding environment
can allow a robot to plan actions in advance, and in a way to
compensate for insufﬁciency in their actuation and movement
capabilities. As such, high performance robots will not be
limited to robots with high-quality, highly-precise, but costly,
actuators and parts. However, the motion of many things
in the environment is not easily predictable with simple
extrapolation, as, for example, biological motion can be
highly non-linear and sporadic. Patterns still exist in the data,
but a simple model may not be sufﬁcient, with the need
to resort to data driven learning. Training neural networks
to learn to predict trajectories has been successful in gait
stability for fall-risk monitoring [1], as well as for robot
manipulator control [2] and path planning [3].
To extend beyond what already exists in the ﬁeld, we pro-
pose the use of event cameras [4]. Speciﬁcally, in this paper
we analyse possible advantages in combining a classical deep
learning strategy for sequence prediction with this type of
sensors. Event cameras are a novel paradigm in machine
vision that output a single event for each pixel, but only
when a change in the intensity of light falling on the pixel
occurs. This happens when an object is moving in front
of the camera, or at points of high contrast (e.g. edges of
(a)
(b)
Fig. 1: The trajectory of a bouncing ball comparing the
sample points for (a) a traditional camera that samples at
a ﬁxed-rate in time, and (b) an event camera that samples
with a ﬁxed spatial sampling. The event camera output is
shown with all the pixel-wise events (in purple) as well as
the output of the trajectory tracker (in blue).
structure, edges of objects) when the camera itself moves.
Such a technology acquires highly-compressed and low-
latency (15 µs [4]) visual trajectories of moving targets. The
biggest conceptual difference when compared to a traditional
camera is that an event camera samples a target trajectory
based on its change in spatial value, i.e. the sampling of
the vision signal is driven by the change in position. We
therefore achieve a trajectory with samples at pixel, or sub-
pixel, resolution, independently of the speed of the target. A
comparison to a traditional camera, which samples at a ﬁxed
time period, is shown in Fig. 1.
Event cameras are suited for dynamic tasks, such as
camera pose estimation [5], [6], object tracking [7], and
action recognition [8]. Visual learning has also been per-
formed with event-data for classiﬁcation [9], [10], ego-
motion computation [11], depth estimation [12], and vehicle
steering prediction [13], [14]. However, the majority of these
works use convolutional neural networks (CNN) that do not
inherently represent time, which is a very informative signal
for event cameras.
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) are designed to handle
and learn patterns in sequential data. One of the most
important RNN was introduced in 1990 by Elman [15], but,
the work suffered from vanishing, exploding gradients [16].
Long Short-Term Memory networks (LSTM) [16] overcome
this problem and are currently the state-of-the-art in the ﬁeld
arXiv:2001.01248v2  [cs.CV]  15 Jan 2020

of RNNs. The Encoder-Decoder - or Sequence-to-Sequence
- model [17] achieves state of the art results in several ﬁelds
like Natural Language Processing [17], [18], [19] since it
can map input sequences to output ones with different length.
An Encoder-Decoder network has been combined also with a
beam search algorithm for predicting vehicle trajectories [20]
for self-driving cars.
In this paper we investigate the integration of event-
data with the LSTM architecture for learning to predict
the trajectory of a bouncing ball focusing on the effect
of different sampling strategies when combined with the
learning architecture: ﬁxed-rate sampling, as performed in
traditional cameras, compared with spatial sampling, as is
associated with event cameras. Experiments are performed
using the neuromorphic iCub robot [21] equipped with the
ATIS [4] event camera. The ball bounces on a table in front
of the robot and the robot, using the observed past ball
positions, predicts the future trajectory for a given sequence.
II. METHODOLOGY
The system is comprised of the following components:
• The ATIS [4] event camera on the iCub robot;
• A target tracker that converts raw pixel events to the
center of mass of the target along the trajectory;
• The trajectory sub-sampling strategy: either using a
ﬁxed-rate sample or spatial strategy;
• An LSTM network, trained to predict the future trajec-
tory of the target.
a) The ATIS camera: Event cameras have a number
of interesting properties that make them an intriguing option
for pushing the visual systems of artiﬁcial agents. Traditional
cameras use a ﬁxed-rate sampling strategy in which all the
pixels are queried for the light intensity at ﬁxed intervals
(e.g. 30 Hz). Therefore the trajectory of a target viewed
with a traditional camera will correspond to different spatial
positions at known time intervals, which leads to a trajectory
such as in Fig. 1a. For fast moving objects, ﬁxed-rate
sampling can lead to gaps in the trajectory as it is under-
sampled, or motion blur. The ATIS [4] is a novel visual
sensor with a resolution of 304 × 240 pixels. Each pixel
produces an event when the amount of light changes beyond
a threshold. Each pixel produces independent events with the
following information: < xi,yi,ti, pi >, where < xi,yi > is the
pixel position on the sensor, ti is the time the event occurred
with µs resolution, and pi is the polarity (whether an increase
or decrease in light occurred). Therefore the readout is not
bound by the time it takes to read the entire array. Instead
pixels can emit events with a very short interval between
them. The effect is that a moving target will trigger each and
every pixel, consecutively, along its trajectory. The positions
of target observation are triggered by a spatial threshold
(a change in pixel position), and the time at which a new
observation occurs is asynchronous.
b) Target tracking: To simplify the input to the pre-
diction system, the raw data from the ATIS is processed
to extract the mean position of the target at any point in
time. The target tracking is designed to reduced the effect
Fig. 2: Spatial and temporal error component of the
sequence-to-sequence error for a pair of prediction and
ground truth.
of noise that could occur if the visual data is directly fed
into the learning system, and focus on the effect of sampling
strategies on the prediction. In this work, we implement a
simple tracker with the simplifying assumption of a single
moving target, as shown in Fig. 1b. The tracker accumulates
events within a region-of-interest (ROI) of size R, and then
updates the position of the ROI based on the average position
of events within it. As the events move along the trajectory,
so it does their mean position and the centre of the ROI.
The tracker position is taken as the new centre of the ROI
and is outputted along with the timestamp: < xbi,ybi,tbi >.
Initialisation is performed by setting the ROI size R equal
to the entire image plane on the ﬁrst update, and using the
standard value thereafter.
c) Sub-sampling strategy: The high temporal resolution
of the event camera allows the trajectory to be sampled for
every incoming event. The raw tracker data can therefore
sample at over 1kHz, but (as proposed in this paper) this
raw signal can be sub-sampled to improve efﬁciency without
compromising accuracy. Two sub-sampling strategies are
proposed: in the ﬁxed-rate sampling we sample the signal at
ﬁxed time intervals, taking each sample after F milliseconds;
in the spatial sampling we sample the signal when the spatial
coordinates change by a ﬁxed distance, taking each sample
every D pixels. The event camera enables very high sampling
rates for both ﬁxed-rate and spatial strategies. Note that the
ﬁxed-rate strategy is more similar to a standard camera.
d) The LSTM network: The model used in this work is
a Sequence-to-Sequence LSTM architecture [17] consisting
of two separate sub-networks. The Encoder takes the input
data and encodes the information in a summary vector,
represented by the state of the network after the input has
been fed. This output becomes the initial state vector of
the Decoder, that is queried to extract the information and
produce the output sequence. The decoupling between the
two stages allows to input sequences with a length win
different from the desired output sequence length wout. This
can be useful in tasks as machine translation or where the
input and output physical domains differ, possibly requir-
ing different representations. Our goal is to analyse how
this architecture can be combined with event cameras for

time [s]
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.251.501.75
X [pxl]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Y [pxl]
0
50
100
150
200
Fig. 3: Complete example of a ball trajectory (in blue) with
pairs of input (in green) and prediction (in purple) at different
time instants.
predicting the upcoming trajectory of a tracked object in
an asynchronous fashion. Commonly, RNNs are queried
synchronously, limited by the working rate of devices like
frame-based cameras. In our case, thanks to the event camera
nature, the network can be queried asynchronously every
time a new event is produced by the tracker. In such a way,
not only it is exploited the information coming from previous
queries, but also the temporal information contained within
the events. To do so, the network is fed with a sequence
comprising the spatial coordinates of the trajectory in the
camera space and the time interval between the events in the
sequence. The ﬁnal outcome of the network is a prediction of
the next wout points in space and time, which is continuously
updated by querying the network for each new input. The
prediction consists of future spatial coordinates and, for each
point, its estimated time of arrival from the current instant.
This spatio-temporal trajectory output could be helpful in
robotics, allowing for accurate action planning, considering
both spatial and temporal information. The Encoder archi-
tecture considered has an input layer with 3 neurons, in
order to accomodate the (X,Y) spatial coordinates and the
temporal interval dT occurred from the previous input, and
an output layer of 25 neurons. The Decoder architecture, on
the contrary, consists of an input layer of 25 neurons to be
initialised with the ﬁnal Encoder state vector, and an output
layer of 3 neurons outputting the future spatial position and
its time of arrival. The Sequence-to-Sequence model is ﬁrst
fed with the whole input sequence of win points and, only
then, the output sequence of wout point is generated at the
same time.
III. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A dataset was collected with 250 individual trajectories of
the ball thrown in front of the camera and bouncing 2 or 3
times. The < xbi,ybi,tbi > output of the tracker module was
recorded. For independence to the direction of the trajectory,
all datasets were ﬂipped along the x-axis resulting in a total
of 500 trajectories. The dataset was split into 470 training
trajectories, 20 validation trajectories and 10 test trajectories.
A trajectory example is shown in space-time in Fig. 3.
To choose the right Encoder-Decoder architecture, we
started with a spatial sub-sampling of D = 2 pixels and
trained several models assuming different values for win
Spatial delta D (pxl)
Mean+STD rate [Hz]
-
357±88
2
182±44
4
92±22
6
63±14
8
48±11
10
39±9
12
33±7
TABLE I: Spatial delta sampling values with corresponding
computational rate (mean and standard deviation).
and wout. Then, to compare the effect of the two sampling
strategies, we chose suitable F values for the ﬁxed-rate
sampling and D values for the spatial sampling, to cover
the same time intervals and looked at the test error.
The Adam optimization algorithm [22] was used with a
learning rate of 0.01. Dealing with a regression problem, the
Mean Squared Error (MSE) was adopted as loss function.
No dropout was used and the networks were trained for 200
epochs on batches of size 128.
A. Sequence-to-Sequence Characterisation
To initially characterise some parameters of the LSTM,
the prediction root-mean-square error (RMSE) error was
calculated for prediction trajectories, according to trajectory
spatial error and temporal error reported in to Fig. 2. The
RMSE is the mean error along the entire predicted length,
and not only the ﬁnal position.
The error increases linearly with the output window length
wout, meant as number of points predicted in a single
network interrogation, for both the spatial error and the
temporal error, as shown in Fig. 4a. As the network tries
to predict further ahead, the accuracy at which it can do so
decreases. As the relationship is linear, there is no optimal
point at which the network operates. The choice is therefore
application speciﬁc, trading off the amount of time ahead
that is needed, compared to the highest acceptable error.
The spatial error decreases the more data in the past is
used, win. However, after a certain value, there is no real
beneﬁt in feeding more points, as shown in Fig. 4b. In this
case, a systematic operating point could be chosen to achieve
the lowest error.
In the following, the output window length wout was set
to be 45 and the input window length win was set to 20.
B. Sampling Strategy Comparison
Secondly, a comparison between sampling strategies was
made with respect to the prediction accuracy. Considering an
input window of about 90ms and an output window of about
200ms deﬁned by the previous windows length choice, we
compare the performance of the two sub-sampling strategies
on the same time intervals.
Fig. 5a shows the error for both sampling strategies. In
order to perform a comparison, the mean sampling rate
of the spatial was calculated (after sampling) and used as
a comparison point to the ﬁxed-rate sampling. Fixed-rate
sampling showed an inverse relationship to error. A low
rate results in a high error, and as the rate increases, the

8
15
25
35
45
60
output window size
2
4
6
8
10
Average Spatial RMSE [pxl]
10
15
20
Average Temporal RMSE [ms]
space
time
(a)
2
6
10
15
20
25
30
40
input window size
8
9
10
11
Average Spatial RMSE [pxl]
20
25
30
Average Temporal RMSE [ms]
space
time
(b)
Fig. 4: Spatial and Temporal RMSE for different (a) wout
values assuming win = 20 and (b) win values assuming wout =
45.
error decreases. However, the beneﬁt of increased sample
rate beyond 67 Hz is minimal.
Spatial sampling instead shows a more linear decrease
in error with respect to sampling rate. The error reaches
a minimum value of 7.52 pixels for a spatial of 2 pixels,
compared to a value of 10.08 pixels when using a ﬁxed
200 Hz sampling rate. Importantly, the lower error is also
achieved with less processing requirements as the average
rate (and hence the total number of calculations) is lower
for the 2 pixel spatial sampling.
The reason that the spatial sampling can give a lower error
for an identical mean sampling rate is that it gives a varying
sample rate in time, over the length of the dataset. In periods
of fast and non-linear motion, where ﬁne details are required
to correctly trace the motion, the sample rate increases also
enabling a more accurate prediction. On the other hand,
when the target is moving slowly, the sample rate decreases
and processing savings can be achieved. Fig. 5b shows an
example sample rate (in time) for the spatial sampling, and
it can be seen that for larger spatial deltas the sample rate
becomes more constant across the dataset (a ﬂatter proﬁle).
For sample rates without much variation, the error is much
closer to that of ﬁxed-rate sampling, as shown in Fig. 5a.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
We showed that LSTM networks could be adapted for
event-based data, integrating the temporal component as an
input to deal with asynchronous data. The network was
characterised for a bouncing ball tracking task, and it was
20 30 40 50
67
100
200
rate [Hz]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Average Spatial RMSE [pxl]
synchronous fixed rate
asynchronous average rate
(a)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
time [s]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Predictor rate
[# queries / 100ms]
2pxl subsampling
4pxl subsampling
6pxl subsampling
8pxl subsampling
10pxl subsampling
12pxl subsampling
(b)
Fig. 5: The (a) spatial RMSE for ﬁxed-rate and spatial
sampling, in which the mean sample rate of time is used
to place the spatial sampling, and (b) the sample rate for
spatial sampling over time for an example trajectory.
shown that only a small input window is required to achieve
a low error. On the other hand, the output window can be
extended for as long as necessary, with the trade-off that the
error increases linearly.
Asynchronous spatial sampling outperforms ﬁxed-rate
sampling and therefore we propose that such a strategy,
combined with event cameras, is a promising approach for
learning to predict trajectories for robotics tasks. For trajecto-
ries with variable speeds, more information can be captured
by looking at the change in position with a high-resolution,
rather than simply sampling at a high rate. Importantly
spatial sampling is made possible due to the event cameras,
which allow asynchronous trajectory sampling directly trig-
gered by change in the scene.
This study shows the advantage of spatial sampling in
input data using event cameras and in the following vi-
sual processing, using asynchronous output events also in
computational models such as the tracking, motivating a
further quest in the use of event-driven perception coupled
with LSTM architectures for fast vision tasks in artiﬁcial
intelligence and robotics. Depending on the exact constraints
of the task, other solutions might be to have the network
learn only the ﬁnal position and time of a single trajectory,
rather than the full path of the trajectory, allowing the
robot to intercept the ball with the correct motion timing.
Future work will aim at improving the performance of the
hereby presented architecture and evaluating other possible
solutions, before moving to the robot control.
