Computational Narrative Intelligence: A Human-Centered
Goal for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Mark O. Riedl
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia, USA

ABSTRACT
Narrative intelligence is the ability to craft, tell, understand,
and respond affectively to stories. We argue that instilling arti-
ﬁcial intelligences with computational narrative intelligence
affords a number of applications beneﬁcial to humans. We
lay out some of the machine learning challenges necessary
to solve to achieve computational narrative intelligence. Fi-
nally, we argue that computational narrative is a practical step
towards machine enculturation, the teaching of sociocultural
values to machines.
Author Keywords
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Narrative
Intelligence, Machine Enculturation
ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
I.2.0 Artiﬁcial Intelligence: General
INTRODUCTION
Storytelling is an important part of how we, as humans, com-
municate, entertain, and teach each other. We tell stories
dozens of times a day: around the dinner table to share experi-
ences; through fables to teach values; through journalism to
communicate important events, and in entertainment movies,
novels, and computer games for fun. Stories also motivate peo-
ple to learn, which is why they form the backbone of training
scenarios and case studies at school or work.
Despite the importance of storytelling as part of the human ex-
perience, computers still cannot reliably create and tell novel
stories, nor understand stories told by humans. When com-
puters do tell stories, via an eBook or computer game, they
simply regurgitate something written by a human. They do
not partake in the culture we are immersed in, as manifested
through journalistic news articles, the movies we watch, or the
books we read.
Why does it matter that computers cannot create, tell, or un-
derstand stories? Artiﬁcial intelligence has become more
prevalent in our everyday lives. Soon, it will not be unusual
for us to interact with more advanced forms of Siri or Cortana
on a daily basis. However, when we use those systems today,
we ﬁnd it to be an alien sort of intelligence. The AI makes
decisions that sometimes can be hard for us to make sense of.
Their failures are often due to the fact that they cannot make
sense of what we are trying to accomplish or why.
Narrative intelligence is the ability to craft, tell, understand,
and respond affectively to stories. Research in computational
narrative intelligence seeks to instill narrative intelligence into
computers. In doing so, the goal of developing computational
narrative intelligence is to make computers better communica-
tors, educators, entertainers, and more capable of relating to us
by genuinely understanding our needs. Computational narra-
tive intelligence is as much about human-computer interaction
as it is about solving hard artiﬁcial intelligence problems.
In this position paper, we enumerate a number of human-
centered applications of computational narrative intelligence
that may be of beneﬁt to humans interacting with artiﬁcial in-
telligences in the future. We also discuss some of the machine
learning challenges that will need to be overcome through
research to achieve computational narrative intelligence. Fi-
nally, we describe how computational intelligence can provide
a way forward to creating artiﬁcial intelligences that are more
human-like, better at understanding their human users, and
more easily comprehended by human users.
COMPUTATIONAL NARRATIVE INTELLIGENCE
Winston [37] argues that narrative intelligence is one of the
abilities that sets humans apart from other animals and non-
human-like artiﬁcial intelligences. Research in computational
narrative intelligence has sought to create computational intel-
ligences that can answer questions about stories, generate ﬁc-
tional stories and news articles, respond affectively to stories,
and represent the knowledge contained in natural language
narratives.
Given that humans communicate regularly and naturally
though narratives, one of the long-standing challenges of com-
putational narrative intelligence has been to answer questions
about stories [32, 25, 36]. Question-answering is a way of
verifying that a computer is able to understand what a hu-
man is saying. However, question-answering about narrative
content is considered to be more challenging than fact-based
question-answering due to the causal and temporal relation-
ships between events, which can be complex and are often left
arXiv:1602.06484v1  [cs.AI]  21 Feb 2016

implicit. One prerequisite for narrative question-answering
is a better understanding of how to represent the knowledge
contained in natural language narratives [4, 10, 5].
The ﬂip-side of understanding stories is the creation of novel,
ﬁctional story content such as fairy tales and computer game
plots [12, 31, 28, 38]. The obvious application of ﬁctional
story generation is entertainment. On-demand narrative gener-
ation can maintain a continuous ﬂow of novel content for users
to engage with while customizing the content to individual
preferences and demands. One may imagine serial novels,
serial scripts for TV shows and movies, or serial quests and
plotlines in computer games. However, note that even enter-
tainment can convey morals and other pedagogical aspects.
Computational narrative intelligences can also create plausible
sounding—but ﬁctional—stories that might happen in the real
world [33, 20]. While not meant to be entertaining, the gener-
ation of plausible real world stories provides a strong, objec-
tive measure of general computational intelligence. Plausible
real-world story generation can be used to generate virtually
unlimited scenarios for skill mastery in training simulations
[39]. Computational narrative intelligences could engage in
forensic investigations by hypothesizing about sequences of
events that have not been directly observed. Virtual agents,
such as virtual health coaches, can appear more life-like and
create rapport with humans by sharing ﬁctional vignettes and
gossip [2].
Computational narrative intelligence also brings computers
one step closer to understanding the human experience and
predicting how humans will respond to narrative content. Au-
tomated journalists generate narrative texts about real world
events and data such as sports and ﬁnancial reports (e.g., [1]).
Automated journalists may beneﬁt from narrative intelligence
when determining how best to convey a narrative to different
audiences. Going beyond journalism, it is important to note
that humans can have very visceral emotional responses to
stories. Understanding how the human will interpret and re-
spond to narrative situations has important implications if we
wish for computers to avoid accidentally making people upset
or anxious. Computers may one day intentionally attempt to
induce pleasure, or create a sense of suspense [26] in both
entertainment and journalistic contexts.
Finally, narrative can be used to explain the behavior of arti-
ﬁcial intelligences. Any process or procedure can be told as
a narrative, so it follows that an AI can describe the means
by which it came to a conclusion or the reasons why it per-
formed an action by couching its explanation in narrative
terms. As part of a explanatory process, narratives can convey
counterfactuals—what would have happened if circumstances
had been different. We hypothesize that narrative explanation
will be more easily understood by non-expert human operators
of artiﬁcial intelligence since the human mind is tuned for
narrative understanding.
MACHINE LEARNING CHALLENGES
Automated story understanding and automated story genera-
tion have a long history of pursuit in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intel-
ligence. Until recently, most approaches used hand-authored
formal models of the story world domain the generator or
understander would operate in [32, 23, 18, 25, 13, 31]. This
made open-domain narrative intelligence—the sort employed
by humans—intractable due to knowledge engineering bot-
tlenecks. More recent approaches use machine learning to
attempt to automatically acquire and reuse domain models
from narrative corpora on the Internet [22, 4, 33] and from
crowdsourcing [20].
There are at least four primary challenges related to learning
domain models from narrative corpora and using them to cre-
ate stories or explanations. First, human-written narratives
are written to be consumed by other humans. We use theory
of mind to infer what others are likely to already know and
adjust our storytelling accordingly. Thus, human-written nar-
ratives collected into a corpus often leave out elements that
are assumed to be commonly shared knowledge among other
humans but possibly not known by computers. For example,
a news corpus may have a story about bank robbery, but that
story only has the points that make it unique from other bank
robberies and “newsworthy.” In some sense, all stories inter-
esting enough to tell, or to have been told, are outliers from
each other, making patterns hard to detect. A machine learn-
ing system would never learn about the aspects of the domain
model that are most common to all bank robberies.
Stories are often told to highlight an unexpected obstacle or
event in an otherwise typical situation. By virtue of telling a
story of this sort, one may infer the counterfactual as the norm
[14]. Crowdsourcing allows for greater control of the narrative
content and can be used to acquire a corpus of typical stories
about situations at the desired level of granularity [20]. Many
children’s books and television shows teach expectations for
common situations such as going to a doctor’s ofﬁce or what
to expect on the ﬁrst day of school.
Second, narrative intelligence is closely associated with com-
monsense reasoning. It is necessary for both narrative under-
standing and for narrative generation. Humans learn common-
sense knowledge and reasoning through a lifetime of experi-
ences in the real world. Learning commonsense knowledge as
been an ongoing challenge in AI and machine learning.
Commonsense knowledge in the form of declarative facts
and procedures will be essential in comprehending narratives.
Research into automated commonsense knowledge acquisition
includes [19, 21, 7, 24]. Images and video also implicitly
capture commonsense knowledge (e.g., things fall downward,
people kick balls but not bricks, etc.) [35] and techniques
that jointly learn from stories with accompanying video or
illustrations may provide key insights.
Third, natural language stories written by humans for humans
make abundant use of metaphors and metonymy [17]. De-
coding the meaning of metaphors and metonymy requires
high-level semantic comprehension of the narratives collected
into a machine learning corpus.
A few research projects have attempted to use metaphor in the
automated generation of stories [15, 34]. Hobbs [16] lays out
three general approaches to understanding metaphors: transfer-
ring properties from one entity to another, mapping aspects of

one thing to another by inference, or mapping aspects of one
thing to another by analogy. Analogical mapping has received
the most attention in computational narrative intelligence [8,
30, 38].
Fourth, creating stories requires a model of creativity as pro-
cess that transcend straightforward pattern learning. The space
of all possible, tellable, and interesting stories is vast. This is
one explanation for why the generation of stories via sampling
from recurrent neural networks trained on narrative corpora
has not fared well to date because of the complexity of human-
written narratives and the need for very large training sets.
Further, stories make use of long-term causal connections be-
tween events that have not been easy to model; long term
dependencies mean that stories, and the process of creating
stories, are non-Markovian. However, some recent progress
has been made in using long short-term memory neural nets
that can extract script-like representations from text [27].
Descriptions of human creativity emphasize the blending of
two or more mental models to create new concepts. The appeal
of conceptual blending [9] is the invention of concepts that
might never have existed in a data set or even the real world.
Conceptual blending shares similarities to unsupervised trans-
fer learning, a critical area of research in machine learning.
One example in the domain of creativity is the blending of
two neural nets trained on different aspects of art [11]. How-
ever, an equivalent approach has not yet been found for story
generation.
Solving these challenges will be necessary in order to achieve a
complete, open-domain, computational narrative intelligence
that is trained from narrative corpora. In some cases, the
challenges are those associated with semantic-level natural
language processes. However note that television, movies,
dramatic plays, comic books, and illustrated children’s books
can also be sources of valuable data and require integrated
natural language processing and machine vision.
MACHINE ENCULTURATION
In addition to the applications described ealier—and assuming
the above challenges can be met—computational narrative
intelligence may present a way forward toward machine en-
culturation [29]. Machine enculturation is the act of instilling
social norms, customs, values, and etiquette into computers
so that they can (a) more readily relate to us and (b) avoid
harming us (physically or psychologically) or creating social
disruptions. In a perfect world, humanity would come with
a user manual that we could simply scan into a computer.
However, for any sufﬁciently complex domain, such as the
real world, manually encoding a comprehensive set of val-
ues or rewards in order to recreate sociocultural behavior is
intractable.
If sociocultural values are not easily instilled in artiﬁcial in-
telligences, perhaps they can be learned. Instead of a user
manual we have the collected works of ﬁction by different
cultures and societies. This collected works give us examples
with which to teach an artiﬁcial intelligence the “rules” of our
societies and cultures. These stories includes the fables or
allegorical tales passed down from generation to generation,
such as the tale of George Washington confessing to chopping
down a cherry tree. Fictional stories meant to entertain can
be viewed as examples of protagonists existing within and
enacting the values of the culture to which they belong, from
the mundane—eating at a restaurant—to the extreme—saving
the world.
Stories are an effective means of conveying complex tacit and
experiential knowledge that implicitly encodes social and cul-
tural values [3]. Humans do not need to be trained to commu-
nicate via storytelling, nor be trained to decode the knowledge
contained within narratives. Computers will likely require
require human-level narrative comprehension to mine social
and cultural values from ﬁctional and non-ﬁctional narrative
texts because those values are rarely made explicit.
The actions of characters in stories can be viewed as demon-
strations of socioculturally appropriate behavior under hypo-
thetical situations. Unlike demonstrations, which occur in
the environment that the artiﬁcial intelligence will operate in,
narratives may be more general. This presents some new chal-
lenges. Stories written in natural language can contain events
and actions that are not executable by an artiﬁcial intelligence.
Stories are written by humans for humans and thus make use
of commonly shared knowledge, leaving many things unstated.
Stories frequently skip over events that do not directly impact
the telling of the story, and sometimes also employ ﬂashbacks,
ﬂashforwards, and achrony which may confuse an artiﬁcial
learner. However, learning from narratives can make certain
things easier. Stories can make explicit the normally unobserv-
able mental operations and thought processes of characters.
Written stories make dialogue more explicit in terms of whom
is speaking, although some ambiguity remains [6] and com-
prehension of language is still be an open challenge.
Machine enculturation may give us a way forward toward
achieving artiﬁcial intelligences that understand humans better,
and make themselves more comprehensible—less alien—to
humans. Further, agents and robotics that act in accordance
with social values will naturally avoid situations where humans
will be harmed or inconvenienced whenever possible. Harrison
and Riedl [29] describe a technique, learning from stories
(LfS), for emulating human behavior expressed in simple,
crowdsourced narratives. It is proof of concept that machine
enculturation may be feasible via machine learning over a
corpus of stories.
CONCLUSIONS
Narrative intelligence is central to many of the things we as
humans do, from communication to entertainment to learning.
Narrative is also an effective means of storing and disseminat-
ing culture. In this position paper we argue that future artiﬁcial
intelligences should be instilled with computational narrative
intelligence so that they can act like humans, or understand
human wants, needs, and desires. Artiﬁcial intelligences in-
stilled with computational narrative intelligence may be more
effective at communicating with humans and explaining their
behavior. Finally, computational narrative intelligence may be
a practical step towards machine enculturation.
