Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Digital Agriculture at Scale: Techniques, Policy, and
Challenges
Somali Chaterjiξ∗, Nathan DeLay, John Evans, Nathan Mosier, Bernard Engel, Dennis Buckmaster,
& Ranveer Chandra
January 28, 2020
Abstract. The biggest promise of digital agriculture is the ability to evaluate the system on a holistic basis at multiple levels
(individual, local, regional, and global) and generate tools that allow for improved decision making in every sub-process.
Recent advances in the Internet of Things (IoT) hardware and software makes it possible to collect data from diverse sources
in a so called “smart farm”. By interconnecting these IoT devices, it is possible to collect data from a large connected area
at diﬀerent time scales, including in near real-time (i.e., delays of a few tens of seconds). IoT devices can connect with each
other in a wireless sensor network (WSN) setting and are capable of sensing diﬀerent kinds of information. In row crop
systems, data is generated from a variety of sources. Field operations are a large generator of data. In most systems, the
majority of the data is generated in six operations, namely, soil sampling, fertilizer application, planting, scouting, spraying,
and harvesting.
Strategic importance of digital agricultural solutions. Digital agriculture—encompassing precision agriculture,
data analytics, and data ownership—has the promise to transform agricultural throughput.
It can do this by applying
data science for mapping input factors to crop throughput and that too in a region-speciﬁc and crop-speciﬁc manner,
while bounding the available resources. In addition, as the data volumes and varieties increase with the increase in sensor
deployment in agricultural ﬁelds, data engineering techniques will also be instrumental in collection of distributed data as
well as distributed processing of the data. These have to be done such that the latency requirements of the end users and
applications are satisﬁed. Leveraging the need for increased crop productivity for feeding the masses, Purdue’s Colleges of
Engineering and Agriculture are looking to transform the Midwestern counties surrounding Purdue University and speciﬁcally
consisting of ten counties in the area into a hub for digital agricultural innovation. At the same time, Microsoft has developed
and is looking to spread the reaches of the FarmBeats program [1], which has the vision of empowering farmers with low-cost
digital agriculture solutions using low-cost sensors, drones, and computer vision and machine learning (ML) algorithms.
Understanding how farm technology and big data can improve farm productivity can signiﬁcantly increase the world’s food
production by 2050 in the face of constrained arable land and with the water levels receding. While much has been written
about digital agriculture’s potential, little is known about the economic costs and beneﬁts of these emergent systems. In
particular, the on-farm decision making processes, both in terms of adoption and optimal implementation, have not been
adequately addressed. There are important questions to be answered before we can leap into data analytics for agriculture—
questions related to technical viability, economic feasibility, and data protection and ownership. These questions cannot be
looked upon in isolation. For example, if some algorithm needs data from multiple data owners to be pooled together, that
raises the question of data ownership. This paper is the ﬁrst one to bring together the important questions that will guide
the end-to-end pipeline for the evolution of a new generation of digital agricultural solutions, driving the next revolution in
agriculture and sustainability under one umbrella.
Identiﬁed gaps motivating this vision paper.
One of the key bottlenecks in leveraging the promise of digital
agriculture is the lack of proven beneﬁt from data sharing by farmers (or ranchers in the case of livestock farming. There are
multiple factors that result in so-called adoption challenges, namely: data ownership concerns, economics, ﬁnancial incentives
of data ownership and dissemination, anticipated and quantiﬁed return on investment, data aggregation and pipelining from
the source(s) to the desired locations, to name a few.
If even a subset of the gaps described above can be circumvented using a mix of technology, policies, and awareness, the
possible outcomes of digital agriculture can shine. Some of these include seed-variety mapping to performance characteristics
resulting in better selection and even engineering of seed varieties using precision technologies such as genome editing; better
understanding of regional and temporal conditions leading to sustainable and localized modeling of soil supplementation
needs; and capability for logistical modeling of the system, leading to increased eﬃciency and machine selection. Thus, we
look to present both the bottlenecks and challenges on the one hand and some possible technological and policy solutions on
the other to transform some of the promises of digital agriculture into a reality.
∗ξ: Corresponding Author
1
arXiv:2001.09786v1  [cs.CY]  21 Jan 2020

1
Introduction
By 2050, the world’s population will increase to 9 billion, which will aggravate the food-water-energy nexus challenges.
Demand will also rise because of increase in people’s wealth resulting in higher meat consumption plus the increasing
use of cropland for biofuels.
Site-speciﬁc farm management (precision farming) has the potential to nourish the world
while increasing farm proﬁtability under constrained resource conditions. Despite advancements in ﬁeld sensors, the global
positioning system (GPS), and grid soil sampling, adoption of technology by farm operators has fallen short of expectations [2,
3, 4]. Moreover, it is unclear how proﬁtable the adoption of such technologies will be [5]. Operator demographics, operation
size, and perceived beneﬁts inﬂuence the decision to invest in site-speciﬁc management practices and adoption rates vary
widely across technology types [6, 2]. Use of variable rate technology (VRT), for example, has lagged that of yield monitors and
automated guidance systems. An important distinction has been drawn between farm technology and the farm information
that complements the technology [3].
Figure 1: Example of no-till corn operation, data generation, and lifecycle. In
modern agriculture, practices generate data during almost every operation. This
data may be site-speciﬁc or more broadly deﬁned, but often there is no clear way
to aggregate data layers.
For example, the economic beneﬁt
of a variable rate application technology
(VRT) for fertilizer treatment depends
on accurate intra-ﬁeld soil data, which
is itself expensive to obtain. Unless the
economic returns to site-speciﬁc manage-
ment cover both the up-front investment
and the cost of collecting quality infor-
mation, adoption will be low.
Speciﬁ-
cally, for the deployment of VRT for fer-
tilizer application, the following are some
of the guidelines: marking management
zones for being entered into the VRT sys-
tem; identifying whether the system will
be guided by map-based inputs or sensor-
based inputs; and the identiﬁcation of the
kind of data that will be used for mapping
or the kind of data that will be sensed
for actuation of the dispensers. In terms
of the kinds of inputs, sensor-based in-
puts are more sophisticated because they
are continuously updated based on the
changing conditions on the farm. At the
same time, they are also more logisti-
cally and computationally expensive be-
cause they mean the battery-powered sen-
sor nodes will need to continuously or
intermittently (guided by algorithmic in-
puts related to outlier or bottleneck de-
tection such as in [7]) relay data to the
actuators for VRT dispensing. For farmers to adopt these technologies, concrete savings on fertilizers need to be demon-
strated with potential yield increase and environmental protection from decreased farm eﬄuents from nutrient pollution,
reducing farm runoﬀand eutrophication (hypertrophication), such as from high levels of nitrogen and phosphorous in fresh
water. In the case of livestock farmers, this translates to the decreased use of hormones or antibiotics for the livestock.
There are important questions to be answered before we can leap into data analytics for agriculture, questions related to
technical viability, economic feasibility, sustainability, and data protection and ownership. These questions cannot be looked
at in isolation—for example, if some algorithm needs data from multiple data owners to be pooled together, that raises the
question of data ownership and data privacy. Data privacy is especially important when the raw data and the algorithm
needs to be fed to cloud-based Machine learning-as-a-service (MLaaS) computing platforms [8] or to collaborative learning
based on training data fed by multiple edge devices [9]. Here, data perturbation and encryption needs to be orchestrated
without signiﬁcantly aﬀecting model outputs. This paper is the ﬁrst to bring together these questions under one umbrella,
discussing the goals, path forward, and challenges of digital agriculture to surmount the nexus-sensitive challenges.
2
Data Generation from Sensors
This section will cover the modalities of data gathering and controlled dissemination, the volume of data generated, and the
quality of the data, collected and processed from the large numbers of inexpensive sensors proliferating in farms. Fields,
these days, are increasingly equipped with sensors for sensing the multi-dimensional attributes that determine the quality of
2

the agricultural ﬁeld, mapped to the resultant crop productivity. Here are some of the commonly used measurements from
agricultural sensors.
• Soil sampling: Soil cores are extracted from ﬁeld (may or may not be georeferenced) and sent to a lab for analysis.
Lab results come back in a report detailing fertility levels. In most cases, one must manually assign geo-referenced
points to report values.
• Fertilizer application: Based on the results of the soil sampling, a fertilizer recommendation is generated. If geo-
referenced points are used, a variable rate prescription can be generated. If fertility results are aggregated across the
ﬁeld, a ﬂat rate is applied, maybe proprietary or shapeﬁle.
• Planting: Can generate as applied maps that include information on population, singlulation, misses, again proprietary
or shapeﬁle.
• Scouting: Conducted as frequently as once a week during growing season. Traditionally data comes in from of a report
that details presence of disease, insect, and weed pressure. Currently much research is being conducted on drone based
scouting using multi-spectral imagery to determine nutrient and water deﬁciencies as well as detect disease, insect, and
weed pressure. Data format is large image ﬁles that need post processing.
• Spraying: Based on the results of the scouting reports spaying operations are conducted. Most modern sprayers can
generate as applied maps. Files are saved in a proprietary format based on the sprayer manufacturer.
• Harvesting: Yield maps are generated by harvesters and saved in a proprietary format based on the manufacturer.
In irrigated ﬁelds, soil moisture sensors are often used to determine irrigation intervals. Despite the wealth of available
data in most operations, very little is actual analysis and used to inform future decisions.
The most commonly
used data sets are scouting data (used to make chemical application decisions) and soil sampling data (used to make
fertilizer recommendations). More progressive producers use yield data to determine aid in the generation of variable
rate fertilizer application and for comparison of seed varieties. Much of the data collected only contain value when
aggregated with additional local or regional data.
In terms of VRT, which coincides with advancements in electronic controls and improved communication technologies,
the following could be applications of the technology: fertilizer application both macro- and micro- nutrients, herbicidal and
pesticidal applications, manure, seed applications, tillage as a function of soil compaction, and precise irrigation. Thus, if the
VRT procedures are guided by sensors rather than more static maps, these could be some of the farm processes beneﬁting
from the approach.
Aggregation of agricultural data is possibly the biggest challenge facing digital agriculture. Producers are reluctant to share
data due to fears of regulatory issues and the lack of perceived value added to their operation. Until producers can clearly
see the economic beneﬁts of digital agriculture, adoption will be slow.
3
Data Lifecycle
This section will cover the various phases in the lifecycle of big agricultural data—sanitization, loading, processing, storing,
summarization, and analysis; an example is shown in Figure 1. This will go into some of the general-purpose approaches
(such as, data deduplication, calibration using sensor metadata) as well as agricultural-speciﬁc approaches (such as, known
variations in hyperspectral maps from ground sensing and aerial image data and eﬀective fusion among sensor arrays.
3.1
Data generation sources
Data generation is the ﬁrst stage of a data lifecycle. There are many ways in which data can be generated. The sources of
data generation can be broadly classiﬁed into two types.
1. Localized data or private data: This is the data that is generated on the farm such as soil nutrient composition,
water, and fertilizer usage. This type of data is generated from sensors that are present on the farm.
2. Public data: Data such as historic weather conditions and market prices fall under this category. Imported data is
often generated at outside sources and shared with the farmers to use in precision agriculture. Such data is not farm
speciﬁc. An example of data that is at the crux of localized and public data is topography and soil type, which may be
somewhat localized but follow a trend for farms in geographical proximity.
3

3.2
Data warehousing
Data generated then needs to be stored in repositories called data warehouses.
Data warehousing allows integration of
diﬀerent data from multiple sources and helps restructure the data for better performance. One recent example of data
warehousing is an initiative taken from the government of India [10], titled INARIS (Integrated National Agricultural Resources
Information System).
[11] discusses Ag-Analytics—a platform that provides data warehousing in the ﬁeld of precision
agriculture. Although there are readily available platforms for data warehousing, there are several constraints when using
these platforms directly in precision agriculture. Some of these constraints are discussed in [12].
3.3
Data annotation and cleaning
Due to the large size of data, it is important to perform annotation and cleaning before data analysis. Data annotation is
subjective and depends on the particular use case of precision agriculture. The choice of the data annotation technique is
dictated by the size of the data set, cost of annotation per sample among many other guidelines. [13] proposes a data anno-
tation technique for electricity data in wireless sensor networks (WSNs). Similar annotation techniques could be developed
in the aspect of precision agriculture that can be performed in a WSN infrastructure.
Data cleaning removes or corrects errors that are present in the data. There are several existing works that propose
data cleaning techniques in precision agriculture. [14] proposed a screening algorithm for cleaning yield data that provided
an increase in map precision. [15] proposes an integrated framework for software that increases mean yield through data
cleaning.
3.4
Metadata annotation
Metadata annotation can be done manually or be automated. Since the data that we are considering is prone to be complex,
automated metadata annotation is preferred. [16] provides a comparative study of the diﬀerent learning techniques used for
metadata annotation. [17] provides an algorithm for annotation of metadata. [18] uses a human expert to ﬁrst mark crops
from raw images. Masks were then derived from using these markings. These masks are then used to acquire the metadata.
Similar techniques can be used in diﬀerent aspects of precision agriculture.
3.5
Data processing
The last stage in the lifecycle of data. [19] provides a good overview of the constraints faced in data processing in precision
agriculture. In [19] the authors consider the case of using satellite images for remote sensing in precision algorithms. In such
use cases, one of the important aspects of data processing must be to make the data more readable. One such scenario where
these images can not be directly used is in the case of cloud cover, where the images need to be processed before utilizing
the data. This can be extended to data acquired through other means as well. Data acquired from soil sensors may need to
be processed in order to make it more utilizable. [20] proposes a processing chain that uses data collected from unmanned
airborne vehicles to generate meaningful results. [21] proposes an automated system that performs both the data acquisition
and data processing of soil nitrate measurements. [22] proposes a data processing algorithm that processes yield data on a
distributed systems framework.
4
ML and Low-Power Communication Technologies
Here, we will cover approximate processing for in-sensor analytics, advanced processing for backend analytics on the edge or
the cloud platforms, and interpretable data analytics. The ﬁrst aspect is particularly useful because of the expensive nature of
the wireless communication or the lack of continuous connectivity of the sensors to the backend. The second aspect is useful
because there are edge platforms for agricultural data, such as, Azure IoT Edge device [1], and there may be sensitivity of the
farmer to upload her personal data to a cloud platform. The ﬁnal aspect is important because the farmer, a non-data science
expert, will still need to be given some insights into the results of the algorithm, at her level of understanding, prompting
her to take actionable measures.
Data analytics plays an important role in precision agriculture. It can help farmers decide what crop to grow when,
monitor the crop growth, and decide on the logistics of farm management. But agricultural data is often large and noisy and
needs careful processing to distill insights from them. The following subsections elaborate on the advanced ML capabilities
that can be used for such analysis. In addition, another relevant technology in this context is the use of scalable databases
to house and process these data sets for downstream processing and retrieval. With this in mind, we also include some
innovations in NoSQL database technologies to assist in high-throughput information retrieval from the evolving agricultural
data lakes. With the advent of more sophistication in farm machinery and nutrient application, another related aspect is
the reduction in latency during the application of agronutrients. In such cases, the use of low-latency channels, such as the
deployment of intelligent in-sensor processing and low-latency edge processing will also be discussed.
4

4.1
Approximate processing for in-sensor analytics
A sensor network acquires real-world measurements at discrete points, where each measurement is a snapshot in time and
space. In most scenarios in which sensor networks are deployed, the sensors are frequently queried resulting in continuously
monitoring alongside high energy costs. Thus, one of the chief problems faced by wireless sensor networks (WSN), often
deployed in farm settings, is the constrained availability of resources to these devices. The sensors used in such networks are
low-power embedded devices that are expected to last for long periods of time (order of months) on standard batteries [23].
This issue can be mitigated by leveraging a more distributed architecture and using more energy-eﬃcient algorithms. Further,
these devices generate large volumes of data, which ideally will be processed in real time in a streaming manner for usable
insights.
As a tradeoﬀbetween computational load and accuracy, approximate computing tools and techniques can be
deployed [24]. The idea is to perform approximate computation over carefully chosen subset of the entire input data set. For
example, the approximation can relay whether a particular soil nutrient concentration is above or below a threshold, rather
than the exact value of it. Also, it may compute this over a uniform random subsample of say one in every 10 samples.
Alternately, we can also use information theory principles, such as the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem to decide on the
spacing of the sensors in the WSN [25] and also the actual redundancy needed for robust sampling from these sensors [26].
An important requirement of our target applications is low latency. This can be achieved by using multiple nodes to
parallelize the work. However, this has to be done carefully so that the load is approximately balanced and there is not
much overhead of energy to perform the distribution. For example, ApproxIOT [27] proposes an algorithm based on Apache
Kafka [28] that uses IoT devices to generate data and forward it to edge computers managed by service providers. These
data streams are then sampled and forwarded to a central location, where user-speciﬁc queries can be made. The sampling
in such systems are based on two techniques,
• Stratiﬁed Sampling: The streams of data are categorized based on their distribution. A random sampling is done on
these distributions, with prior knowledge of the data required for this kind of sampling.
• Reservoir Sampling: A reservoir size R is maintained and at most R items are uniformly sampled from the data set.
Here, prior knowledge of the data is not required.
ApproxIOT extends both these techniques to propose a weighted hierarchical sampling. The nodes conduct sampling over
data generated and compute statistics, resulting in a 1.3X to 10X speedup.
In-sensor analytics is relevant to our domain because it means that the data being sensed will be (partially) analyzed
locally at the sensor itself. The value proposition is that raw data will not have to be sent over the wireless network, thus
saving on wireless bandwidth and energy, and thus potentially yielding low-latency decisions. In-sensor analytics algorithms
can either be value tolerant, where the approximation of values can be made and the resulting algorithms are lightweight
or they can be delay tolerant, where the resulting algorithms can be more accurate at the expense of latency.
SERENE [29] is a framework that selects representative nodes, among clusters of correlated sensors. Here, the framework
also takes into account the dynamic changes in the network topology and the presence of outliers. Since sensor data acquisition
and communication are the main power guzzlers and sensors are typically battery-powered, SERENE uses clusering algorithms
to spatially and temporally aggregate the data. For example, it uses a density-based clustering algorithm, DBSCAN [30]
for robustness against outliers and noise. This algorithm can cluster based on any shape, as the sensor readings maybe
correlated. Based on the cluster shape, availability of battery power, and distance of the target node from other nodes, the
representative nodes—M-sensors—are queried.
Another lightweight approach for in-sensor analytics is Snapshot Queries [31]. Here the representative nodes are elected
through a localized process. Each node maintains a data distribution model of its neighboring nodes. Based on this model,
it predicts the values of the neighboring nodes. If the error between the predicted value and the actual value is less than a
threshold, the predicting node can represent the neighboring node in question. The data model maintained is based on the
previous correlation between the values of the node and its neighbors. Here the model is not static and is revised frequently.
Hence it is robust to dynamic changes in the network.
Kartakis et al. [32] proposed a scheme that reduces the usage of computational resources by 85% and memory resources by
55%. The main motivation for this work was that there is a correlation between the compression rates and data ﬂuctuation.
Hence the compression rate can be used to detect anomalies and outliers. Kalman ﬁlters are used to reduce the number of
false positives. The Kalman state is updated by feeding every new input to the ﬁlter. The anomalies are detected as huge
drops in the Kalman states.
SnowFort [33] is another open-source WSN that is energy-eﬃcient and uses open-source hardware in concert with a new
open-source communication scheme to allow for reliable infrastructure and environmental monitoring. The architecture used
in Snowfort is a three-tiered architecture, with wireless sensor nodes, a base station, and a cloud server. The base station or
access point intermediates a group of nodes to form a network. The cloud server is the decision making unit. This type of
decentralization reduces the load on the sensor nodes.
The concept of lightweight algorithms can also be extended to deep neural networks. Distributed Deep Neural Networks
(DDNNs) provide better fault tolerance and security than DNNs. The data generated by sensor nodes is processed locally
at the edge. DDNNs are used to utilize the advantages of distributed computing hierarchy in DNNs [34].
5

Another aspect to reduce the energy consumption of sensor nodes is by reducing the duty cycles (sleep-wake cycling)
of sensors. By activating the sensors only when required, the energy consumed by the sensors will be reduced. One way
to achieve this is by using time multiplexing like in WirelessHART [35]. This also provides an added advantage of non-
interference. Mazo and Tabuada [36] consider a decentralized non-linear control system with a feedback control law. They
continuously check certain parameters and if a certain relation between these parameters is satisﬁed, the computational law
is recomputed providing an event-triggered implementation.
Example of trade-oﬀbetween computational accuracy and resource usage: Sensors used in precision agriculture are Internet
of Things or IoT devices and like all IoT devices have constraints on power and connectivity. It is necessary to have the ﬁrst
step of data processing that takes place at the sensor’s end to be energy eﬃcient. Thus, anomalous data can be suppressed.
Alternately, in some scenarios, the exact opposite is desired—when an anomalous event is detected, that event needs to be
communicated to the gateway.
AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) is used for ﬁtting time-series data in order to predict or estimate
the trend. This is done by using regression on the system’s prior values. Autoregressive models ﬁnd a linear relationship
between current values and prior values of the system, while moving-average models ﬁnd a relationship between the current
value using previous and current residuals. ARIMA models combine both these techniques to transform a non-stationary
time series to a stationary time series using a diﬀerencing approach. Diﬀerencing stabilizes the mean of the time series by
reducing outliers in the time series. Exponential Smoothing (ETS) techniques are used for smoothed curve ﬁtting using
exponential time windows. ETS and moving average models both introduce a lag with respect to the input data. They also
have the same distribution of forecast errors. ETS takes into account all the past values and current value but only requires
the most recent value to be computed, while moving average models only take into account the previous k values and the
current value and requires k + 1 data points.
While ARIMA models work on a linear process, more sophisticated ML algorithms can model non-linear processes. While
traditional ML techniques such as k-Nearest Neighbors (KNNs) and Support Vector Regression (SVR) have more complexity
than ARIMA or ETS, they do not demonstrate better performance than ARIMA models. Recurring Neural Networks (RNNs)
[37] and Long Short Term Memory Neural Networks (LSTMs) [38], however, provide a considerable tradeoﬀ. RNN or Elman
network contains feedback connections that provide a relationship between the previous states and the current input in order
to produce a ﬁnal output. By preserving copies of previous values of recurrent layers, RNNs encapsulate historical events in
the modeling. Hence, dynamic temporal behavior for a time sequence is observed. LSTMs have a similar working principle
as that of RNNs, albeit they preserve information over longer time periods.
While RNNs and LSTMs give a superior performance over statistical methods like ARIMA and ETS, they are more
complex in nature. For simpler user queries and in-sensor analytics, ARIMA and ETS models can be used as a lightweight
alternative. A more detailed analysis can be done on the edge (or cloud platform) using more sophisticated ML approaches
of the likes of RNN and LSTM models or with some context imparted through attention pooling for example. Makridakis et
al. [39] a detailed comparison between the performance, model ﬁtting, and complexity of diﬀerent ML techniques.
4.2
Database management and backend analytics for large-scale agricultural sensor data
Precision agriculture allows for site-speciﬁc crop management to increase throughput and achieve more sustainable farming
by applying data science to agriculture practices, learning from local data trends. More and more agricultural sensing data
is being live-streamed from farms, whether it be through on-board cameras, on manned or unmanned aerial vehicles, or
through ground sensors in the farms. There is thus a need for centralized databases to store and process these data sets,
often in real-time, to get actionable insights for farmers.
Plus, there may be some degree of federation in storage and
compute resources that may be needed as the computing needs of this domain increases, as has been seen in the genomics
domain [40]. For example, if decision can be made about the level of application of some fertilizer while the dispenser is
moving through the ﬁeld, this will be advantageous. Further, the sensing data is multi-dimensional and noisy, coming from
ground sensors deployed in farms to measure an array of soil characteristics, such as, moisture, nutrient levels, temperature
proﬁles, soil acidity, etc. These live-streamed data sets need to be stored in a fail-safe repository of nodes, such as Redis
installations in Amazon Web Services (AWS) Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) [41]. The aggregate live-streamed updates and
queries represent a unique workload for such NoSQL datastores, as these queries vary in rate and type over time. In such
cases, a workload-aware tuning system is needed to reconﬁgure the NoSQL cluster, whether locally or on the cloud, to provide
high performance. This is becoming more important as the data from small-scale farms across the country is burgeoning both
in size and diversity, slowly replacing the previously used manual data-collection processes. Maximizing the throughput of
these processing pipelines of digital farm data will enable actionable insights from agricultural sensing data. Also, given that
these pipelines are hosted on the cloud, we want to maximize the performance within a user-deﬁned cost bound, as shown
in our recent work on cost-aware optimization of noSQL database throughputs [42, 43]. A pipeline for analytical workloads
(OLAP, online analytical processing) consists of two main parts: a storage cluster (e.g., Redis or Cassandra) and a computing
cluster (e.g., Spark), the latter operates on the top of the storage cluster to train ML models and execute complex analysis
on the stored data. The task of the optimization is to ﬁnd the best combination of conﬁgurations maximizing the objective
6

metric, modeled as follows:
P ∗= arg max
Confs
f(Confs(t), WL(t))
(1)
Where P ∗is the optimal performance that is achieved by the best combination of conﬁgurations Confs. The search space
of Confs is large, e.g., noSQL databases, such as Cassandra and Redis, have 50+ and 40+ performance-sensitive conﬁgu-
ration parameters, respectively. Hence, an exhaustive search through all possible conﬁgurations is impractical. Therefore,
evolutionary search techniques are preferred in this case due to their ability to ﬁnd close-to-optimal solutions in practical
time, e.g., Equation 1.
4.3
Microservices and edge-cloud partitioning for low-latency communications
The world of connected devices has fueled the IoT era, where applications rely on a multitude of devices aggregating and
processing data sets across highly heterogeneous networks. In this context, distributed deployment alongside containerization
of the diﬀerent information channels will shield the systems from isolated failures, conferring resiliency. The other important
aspect is the partitioning of the data stream for computing at diﬀerent degrees of latency—computing nodes at the edge

computers become unusable due to intermittent edge analytics. Therefore, the prioritization of the processes need to change
dynamically. In contrast, the application itself needs to be designed in a way that it is insensitive to such dynamic, and
unpredictable, changes to the priority level, e.g., it will not time out if there are client-server interactions. Another aspect of
the prioritization is that the diﬀerent analytics results are needed with vastly diﬀering timing requirements. Such high-level,
user-expressed requirements will be used to dynamically prioritize in the face of unpredictable arrivals of the events (e.g., a
ﬂash ﬂood event, or onset of a locust infestation). Thus, overall the partitioning needs to happen in a top-down or bottom-up
manner. Top-down means that we take the high-level user requirements on latency and accuracy and deﬁne the partitioning
based on that. Bottom-up means that depending on the available resources on each platform, the resource handler decides
where to run the application component. Top-down requirements naturally have a higher priority. This will leverage the
signiﬁcant amount of work that has been done in automatic partitioning of applications to run on mobile devices and the
cloud [44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49].
4.4
Low-power communication technologies
Low-power communication technologies for wireless IoT communication falls broadly in three categories:
• Low-power wide area networks (LPWAN), with a greater than 1 kilometer range, essentially low-power versions of
cellular networks, with each “node” covering thousands of end devices. Examples include LoRaWAN, Sigfox, DASH7,
and weightless.
• Wireless personal area networks (WPAN), typically ranging from 10 to a few 100 meters. Examples include Bluetooth
and Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), ANT, and ZigBee, which are applicable directly in short-range personal area networks
or if organized as mesh networks and with higher transmit power, larger coverage areas.
• Cellular solution of IoT, including any protocol that are reliant on the cellular connection
Some of the bottlenecks in wireless transmission in farm settings include the harsh physical conditions in farm settings and
the proliferation of inexpensive and less reliable sensors coupled with the intrinsic challenges of the LoRaWAN and cellular
network technologies, such as 5G.
4.5
Interpretable data analytics
Although there are several predictive analyses models, it is important that the analysis obtained be interpretable.
[50]
explains the importance of interpretable ML. This could help agriculturalists better understand the crop growth and manage
it better. [51] provides an overview of several works that address the issue of making ML techniques more interpretable.
Dimensionality reduction is a popular choice in this aspect. A comparison of such existing techniques is provided in [52].
After dimensionality reduction, it becomes tractable to rank order the diﬀerent features by their importance, thus providing
an important insight to users of the models [53]. Another aspect of interpretability is to answer post-hoc “sanity check”
questions [54], such as, after a rain event, does the model predict the moisture content in the soil is higher. If the model fails
to answer correctly a sanity-check question, then further examination of the model is done.
7

5
Democratizing AI for Farmers
This will require the accessibility of state-of-the-art wireless, database, and ML technologies to farms—even small-scale
farms—deploying leading-edge analytics and broadband modalities to gather data from farms (e.g., FarmBeats, AirBand
technologies, Open Ag Data Alliance APIs). This will cover the commercial angle of deploying and operating a system and
the foundational (and often open-source) technologies that they build upon, such as, TV whitespace spectrum being used to
upload high volume data. To bring the beneﬁts of digital agriculture, and the ML driven insights to the farmers, we need to
make these systems aﬀordable. However, existing digital agriculture solutions are expensive for two key reasons.
First, is there Internet access, both in the farmer’s house, as well as on the farm. The sensors, drones, and tractors need
to send data to the cloud to train the ML models, and the insights need to be conveyed to the farmer’s devices. However,
the farms are far remote, and do not have access to aﬀordable, broadband Internet. In fact, nearly half the population of
the world, most of whom live is rural areas, do not have Internet access. Even in the US, around 20 million rural Americans
do not have broadband access [55]. And a large part of farmland does not have access either. To bridge this digital divide,
we need to come up with innovative solutions to bring broadband Internet in the farms. One such promising technology is
the TV White Spaces, which refers to unused TV channels [56]. There is abundant unused TV channels in farms, which can
be used to send and receive data in farms. Wireless signals also propagate smoothly in the TV frequencies, and are ideal
for connecting farms. Satellite-based Internet access also holds promise, where low-earth orbit (LEO) satellites could enable
low-cost backhaul Internet access.
Second, the reason for expensive digital agriculture solutions is the lack of platforms of innovation in agriculture. Data
acquisition systems are proprietary, and hence getting data from the farm for research is not easy. There is also a dearth
of clean data from farms that can be used for building ML models. We propose the building of open-source APIs, and
data repositories. These APIs, such as the one from Open Ag Data Alliance, aﬀord researchers and startups a platform to
prototype their innovation. Similarly, a cloud-based data repository, for example with drone imagery and satellite data from
research farms, will enable researchers to train new models. It will also help create a benchmarking data set to evaluate new
innovations in agriculture before bringing it to the growers.
6
Big Data Frameworks for Agricultural Data
Here we will discuss the popular frameworks through which we will invoke the ML algorithms.
This will involve open-
source frameworks such as Apache Spark, streaming data processing frameworks such as Apache Flink, and techniques for
distributing the ML processing among nodes in a cluster.
6.1
Streaming data processing
Since most of the data obtained in digital agriculture is real time, stream processing is preferred over batch processing.
This adds several constraints: ﬁrst, the data analytics code has to function at a rate at least as fast as the rate at which
data is being generated; second, it has to calculate statistics (such as, range for normalization of data) without access to
the entire data and based on some look-ahead window based on the workload dynamism (for example, for a more dynamic
workload, the look-ahead window will be lower for higher accuracy, plus the algorithm should be conﬁgured for some degree
of error handling); and third, the code has to have the right input-output interfaces so that it can ingest streaming data and
output its results in a stream. Further, Now we consider some popular open source streaming analytics frameworks—Apache
Spark Streaming (https://spark.apache.org/streaming/), Apache Storm (http://storm.apache.org/), Apache Flink
(https://flink.apache.org/). These diﬀer in the ways in which they can transform the data stream, i.e., the kinds of
operators that they support, the latency of processing, the programming languages they support, etc. [57] provides an open-
source stream processing framework. Flink however does not provide its own data storage and needs to be supplemented by
frameworks that do, such as Kafka [58] or Cassandra [59]. Apache Spark [60] is an alternative that can also be used for data
parallelism.
6.2
Batch data processing
There are some data analytics applications that need batch processing in this domain. This includes typically analytics that
will be processed for strategic decision-making, which does not have any real-time requirement. Batch data processing is
done through data warehousing tools [61, 62] and analytics frameworks like Spark (as opposed to Spark-Streaming) that can
ingest data from such warehouses. The ease of this mode of processing is that there are no real-time requirements and the
analytics code can access the entire data in one shot. The challenge with this mode of processing is the large volume of data.
To ﬁt within the resources of the compute nodes, the data has to be segmented and the analytics code in practice runs on
the segmented data.
8

6.3
Open-source frameworks
Open-source frameworks provide extensive customization and allow collaboration. These two properties among many make
them more preferable. [63] provides an overview of the existing challenges and solutions to handling big data. Hadoop is one
such open-source framework that can process large data sets [64]. It functions on map-reduce programming models. Several
warehousing solutions built on Hadoop such as Hive [65] are also available. Apache Drill is another open-source framework
that provides interactive analysis of big data [66].
[67] provides a comparative study of three open-source frameworks,
Hadoop, Drill, and the Project Storm.
7
Analytics for Alternative Agriculture
Increasing global energy demand and environmental concerns associated with petroleum have raised interest in carbon-
neutral biofuels for reducing dependency on fossil fuels that result in human-caused (anthropogenic) greenhouse gases. Among
biofuels, although ethanol is a renewable biofuel in use, made from biomass feedstocks, it contains about 30% lesser energy than
gasoline per gallon. Advanced biofuels like butanol, isobutanol, fatty-acid and isoprenoid-derivatives are more energy dense
with combustion properties similar to existing fuels. However, the native pathway of microbes is signiﬁcantly low for these
fuels for commercialization. Metabolic engineering using control theory and ML approaches can redirect the cellular ﬂuxes
toward improving the titer of the microbial synthesis of these higher energy density biofuels. advanced biofuels. Advanced
biofuels are less volatile than ethanol and are often produced from lignocellulose destruction, the structural framework for
which is in the ballpark of 30-50% cellulose, 15-35% hemicelluose, and 10-20% lignin [68]. The biofuel is generated by ﬁrst
breaking down the starting materials into small ingredients, followed by hydrolysis to fermentable sugar products, which are
ﬁnally fermented to biofuels. This is in line with thinking of the entire managed ecosystem of “farming”, whether it be for
food crops, biofuels, or ﬁbers. Following are some of the high-level optimization strategies that can be leveraged for advanced
biofuel production, an exemplar alternative agriculture example for this vision article.
Microbial production of advanced biofuels:
Microorganisms can be engineered to produce bulk chemicals such as
biofuels but the produced chemicals are often toxic to the cultured cells, and there is always a trade-oﬀbetween the biofuel
production and cell survival, limiting biofuel production. One of the possible ways to increase biofuel production is to increase
the tolerance of the cultured cells toward the end product chemical. Biofuel tolerance can be improved by reprogramming the
innate metabolism of these microorganisms, such as by using genome engineering [69, 70] or the newer prokaryotic genome
editors, which do not require the protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) sequence for cleavage [71]. However, tolerance to biofuels
like ethanol, or glucose mixtures is not a monogenetic trait. It requires mutations in multiple genes and pathways to be
accurately mapped. There are several ways in which this mapping can be “learned”, one of them is to culture the cells in
a stressful environment containing high concentration of the chemical, for example, ethanol, against which the tolerance of
the cells, for example, E. coli, is desired to be improved. This triggers mutations in the cells as a response to adapt in the
given environment of high ethanol stress. These mutations could be causal, that is, adaptive mutations triggered by the high
stress, or non-causal passenger mutations. Identifying the adaptive mutations from passenger mutations is a diﬃcult problem.
Studies have successfully identiﬁed single genes that are responsible for the adaptive mutation toward biofuel tolerance, albeit
tolerance is a complex trait inﬂuenced by multiple genes and pathways. Near-lethal stress conditions can enable evolution
producing populations that have acquired a hypermutator phenotype and are tolerant toward the stress applied. The genes
and pathways responsible for this adaptive mutation can be identiﬁed using network-based computational approaches. This
requires analyzing the temporal proﬁle of adaptation to ethanol stress. The identiﬁcation of mutations occurring during the
evolution of the microorganism, coupled with the functional implication of each mutation at the protein level can provide us
with enough information to computationally map out the adaptive pathways that lead to increased tolerance toward a certain
biofuel like ethanol. Once the results are found to be consistent in independent populations of a certain microorganism, the
hypothesis can be validated in actual laboratory settings by genetically modifying the organism’s genome. For example, the
genome sequencing data of E. coli (strain SX4) that gradually evolved to tolerate high ethanol stress is available in the SRA
repository of NCBI, PRJNA380734 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/380734). The data for yeast evolving under
ethanol stress is available as the YEASTRACT database (http://www.yeastract.com/). The mutations in the genes could
be identiﬁed over time, and the corresponding genes could be maintained as nodes in a gene interaction graph. Such a data
structure could make it easy to identify the pathways that lead to increased tolerance toward ethanol stress. Not all mutations
are likely to be a part of the adaptive phenotype, and therefore, in previous studies, for example [?], a relevance score was
computed for all mutations based on some prior information and the frequency of occurrence during a population’s increased
ﬁtness. From this graph, a sub-graph has to be computed in a way that genes with large relevance scores are chosen and
the paths within the sub-graph have a higher frequency of occurrence. Such computation needs to take care that the results
are least aﬀected by noise due to passenger mutations. Since the overall approach is mathematical, the computations may
be repeated with varying parameters that will result in diﬀerent sized sub-graph identiﬁcation, or selection of mutated genes
above a certain relevance score or pathways with occurrence frequency above a certain threshold. After complete analysis of
the results, the best results can be chosen based on certain criteria that reﬂect actual biological phenomena, and biological
validation can be done.
9

8
Economics, Policy, and Decision Making
We will discuss the policy issues that should regulate the use of big data and the economic factors that will be important
for the adoption of big data. The most relevant policy questions in digital agriculture regard the value and legal status
of farm and related business data. Though farm data enjoy some of the intellectual property protections aﬀorded to trade
secrets, its legal ownership structure remains ambiguous [72, 73]. The decision to subscribe to a data service provider may
be impacted by fears of personally identiﬁable information (PII) being misappropriated. Yet farm data generates positive
network externalities when aggregated across a large number of operations. Business models, such as Farmers Business
Network, Inc. (FBN), have demonstrated the value of data sharing. Academic research should focus on designing incentive-
compatible mechanisms that encourage data sharing with public universities while protecting farmers intellectual property
(IP).
8.1
Proﬁtability and on-farm decision making
Site-speciﬁc farm management has the potential to enhance farm proﬁtability while conserving resources.
But despite
advancements in ﬁeld sensors, GPS guidance, and grid soil sampling, adoption by farmer operators of has fallen short of
expectations [2, 3, 4].
Operator demographics, operation size, and perceived beneﬁts inﬂuence the decision to invest in
site-speciﬁc management practices [6, 2]. Subsequent economic returns to adoption depend on the nature of the adopted
technology and its interface with on-farm decision making [5].
Miller et al. (2019) [74] identify two types of precision agriculture technologies: embodied knowledge—tools that gen-
erate value in isolation such as GPS guidance systems or automatic section control—and information intensive—tools that
produce data for use in future decision making such as yield monitors, grid soil sampling, or electro-chemical sensors. Em-
bodied knowledge technologies create convenience the moment they are employed while the beneﬁts of information-intensive
technologies are revealed over a longer time horizon and depend on their role in the on-farm decision making process [6].
Diﬀerences in the immediacy and measurability of realized gains may explain diﬀerences in adoption rates across technology
types. Use of variable rate technology (VRT) and GPS soil mapping, for example, has consistently lagged that of GPS
guidance systems [2].
Rather than assessing technologies in isolation, agricultural economists are increasing interested in how producers bundle
complementary tools to create an overall precision technology strategy [75, 74, 76]. Proﬁtable use of “hard technologies”
such as variable rate planters and fertilizer spreaders depends crucially on the availability of accurate intra-ﬁeld soil data,
or “soft” technology inputs [3]. These data sources however, are themselves costly to obtain. Moreover, the optimal data
collection frequency or sampling density is not obvious and likely varies by ﬁeld [77].
Unless the economic returns to site-speciﬁc management cover both the up-front investment and the cost of collecting
actionable information, adoption will be low. The unit cost of grid soil sampling for example—traditionally around $10 per
sample performed by manually extracting cores and sending to a lab for analysis—will fall as automated sampling technologies
become commercially viable.
This does not however, guarantee a proﬁtable result from site-speciﬁc farm management.
Without a suﬃcient amount of within ﬁeld variation, uniform input application may be economically optimal.
Future
research on decision making in the ﬁeld of digital agriculture should focus both on the adoption decision and how producers
optimally implement technologies given their information constraints.
8.2
Policy
The most relevant policy questions in digital agriculture regard the value and legal status of farm data. Agricultural data
generates beneﬁts when aggregated across a large number of farm operations [72]. These beneﬁts—referred to as network
eﬀects or network externalities—grow with the number of participants [78].
Business models such as Farmers Business
Network, Inc. (FBN) have demonstrated the value of data sharing through its crowd-sourced database of input costs and
performance bench-marking. But farm data often remains siloed within the farm gate [79]. An individual farm’s data leads
to more reliable recommendations when pooled with comparable operations using similar practices and inputs. To overcome
this “small data” problem, the perceived beneﬁts of joining a big data community must exceed the perceived costs—most of
which stem from privacy concerns over data misappropriation [80]. In particular, farm operators may fear that personally
identiﬁable information (PII) could be used against them by regulators or environmental activists [73].
To better understand the privacy concerns of producers, the nature and legal status of agricultural data must be considered.
Miller et al. (2018) [72] discuss farm datas place on the private-public good spectrum. For a good to be a “private good”, i.e.,
its beneﬁts and costs are fully realized by the owner, it must be both rivalrous and excludable. A “public good” is neither
rivalrous nor excludable meaning ones enjoyment of the good does not diminish anothers nor can anyone be prevented from
using it. Farm data is unlike other farm assets in its intangibility. Copies of farm data can be shared without inhibiting its
use by the original owner. In this way, farm data is clearly non-rivalrous [80].
The ability of a farm operator to exclude others from using their data depends on their relationships with data service
providers and the data sharing agreements that govern those relationships. For example, equipment manufacturers collect
telematics data on newly sold products for the purpose of improving performance and service. The equipment owner has no
10

reasonable expectation of excludability and may not even be aware they opted into such an agreement. Farms that subscribe
to a data service provider to manage and analyze their data, e.g. Climate FieldView, are similarly forfeiting excludability.
However, data may be partially excludable if access is limited to within the network, or club, of subscribers. As such, farm
data most closely satisﬁes the deﬁnition of a “club good” [72].
Coble et al. (2016)[81] point out that a farmers data is not legally protected from disclosure in the way medical records
are protected by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) or education information is protected by
the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA). Without overarching legal safeguards for farm data, individual
sharing agreements dictate the terms of access and use. Though farm data enjoy some of the intellectual property protections
aﬀorded to trade secrets, its legal ownership structure remains ambiguous [73]. A recent survey by the American Farm
Bureau Federation highlights this concern. Nearly 80% of farmers reported being concerned or extremely concerned about
which entities can access their data. Even among data service subscribers, 55% did not know whether they themselves owned
or controlled their data [82]. It is not surprising then that organizations such as Ag Data Transparent and the Ag Data
Coalition have emerged to strengthen privacy protections for farm data and give farmers control over how their data is used.
Academic research should focus on designing incentive compatible mechanisms that encourage data sharing while protecting
farmers intellectual property.
9
Looking Ahead
Big data and precision agriculture will likely be a disruptive force in the farm economy over the long-term. Technological
advancements have led to farm consolidation in the past. Newer and more eﬃcient tools reduce per-unit costs, allowing small
and mid-size farms to expand. Moreover, economies of scale—the ability of large ﬁrms to spread investment costs over many
units of production—allow large operations to exploit precision agriculture and big data tools earlier, potentially accelerating
the consolidation trend [81]. As mechanization continues and farm operations become more digitized, their labor needs will
narrow and become specialized. This could mitigate the so-called “brain drain” impacting many rural communities in the
U.S. [83].
The ability to track virtually every farm activity means that eﬀorts to increase sustainability can be veriﬁed and certiﬁed by
third-parties. For example, Indigo Ag, a digital agriculture startup, is attempting to monetize on-farm carbon sequestration
for farms using regenerative practices. Blockchain technology in particular promises to increase sustainability and ensure
food safety by authenticating information across the food system. In additional to privacy concerns, adoption of precision
agriculture and big data is limited by the availability of broadband internet in rural areas [84]. Integrated farm equipment
and sensors pipe data up to the cloud in real time meaning farmers are more reliant on upload speeds than the typical user.
The societal returns to rural broadband far outweigh the private beneﬁts accruing to rural electric cooperatives, suggesting
high-speed internet will be under-supplied in the market and implying a role for external support [85].
