SJIF Impact Factor: 7.001| ISI I.F.Value:1.241| Journal DOI: 10.36713/epra2016                ISSN: 2455-7838(Online) 
 
-
 
2020 EPRA IJRD    |    Journal DOI:  https://doi.org/10.36713/epra2016       | www.eprajournals.com |289 | 
 
 
 
SCIENTIFIC RELEVANCE AND FUTURE OF DIGITAL 
IMMORTALITY AND VIRTUAL HUMANS 
 
Cebo Daniel 
Independent Investigator, Berlin, Germany 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
We are on the threshold of a significant change in the way we view digital life, which will have a major effect on 
the physical world. Computers have increasingly emulated deceased human beings through growing awareness in 
the fields of artificial intelligence, big data, and machine learning, and have symbolically managed to overcome 
death with the help of technology. One thing is clear, though: now that there are proper and legitimate discussions 
happening about human immortality, we can be certain that the future is upon us. This article attempts to explain 
and challenge the ways in which digital immortality, in particular, has manifested itself. This paper summarizes 
the technological solutions, research findings and technical challenges of major researchers by reviewing the key 
technologies and general technical schemes in the field of digital human beings. The prospects of digital human 
beings are being investigated. 
KEYWORDS: computational modelling, virtual visible human, virtual intelligent human, avatar, 
immortality 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Utilizing virtual assistants like Siri, which 
gives voice and conversation interfaces, the growth 
of machine learning techniques for capturing large 
data sets, and the growing autonomy of computer-
controlled systems all represent changes in artificial 
intelligence that promote the creation of digital 
immortality. The growth of the acquisition of 
personality and brain emulation, as well as life after 
death influenced by computation, will alter the future 
of religion, affect the perception of the afterlife, and 
increase the effectiveness of the dead-on society. 
This paper provides an overview of recent 
developments in the field of digital immortality, 
examines how such digital immortals could emerge 
and raises complicated questions. It presents the first 
results of a study that has created a virtual persona. 
This prototype system contains relevant memories, 
knowledge, 
processes 
and 
modelling 
of 
an 
individual's personality, traits, knowledge, and 
experience, including his subjective and possibly 
erroneous view of reality. It is argued this system 
offers the opportunity for the development of a 
personality that learns after death [1]. 
Based on the development plans suggested by 
the Federation of American Scientists (FAS) and 
existing hypotheses, from the beginning of the digital 
human definition to 2014, we have sorted academic 
achievements and relative references into four 
aspects called Visible Human, Virtual Physical 
Human, Virtual Physiological Human and Intelligent 
Virtual Human. Information on data collection, data 
processing and data set-up for Visible Person has 
been obtained. Digital Physical Human references 
have been outlined in four physical categories, 
including radiation, 
ultrasound, electrical, 
and 
mechanics. Relative study related to physiological 
and biochemical changes in the human body has been 
classified in four ways as gene molecules, cells, and 
organs for Virtual Physiological Human. Relative 
study of Virtual Brain Human was primarily based on 
the virtual human brain and virtual human power. 
Digital human simulation blends information 
technology with bioscience applied to an analogue 
analysis of DNA molecules and proteins in cells and 
tissues, as well as organs. It has been widely applied 
in several fields such as aviation, national defence, 
film and television, sports and medical care. This 
paper points out the relative successes and 
advancement of science in recent years and 
summarizes the problems and challenges of research 

 
 
 
SJIF Impact Factor: 7.001| ISI I.F.Value:1.241| Journal DOI: 10.36713/epra2016                ISSN: 2455-7838(Online) 
 
-
 
2020 EPRA IJRD    |    Journal DOI:  https://doi.org/10.36713/epra2016       | www.eprajournals.com |290 | 
 
practice. This paper aims to provide references for 
the development of Digital Humans. 
 
THE IMPACT OF DIGITAL LIFE ON 
SOCIETY 
The consequences of digital life have 
drastically changed over the last few decades. 
Without all those used tools, it is scarcely possible to 
imagine what everyday life will look like. A large 
proportion of people primarily do their job on a 
machine, and everyone checks their mobile phones 
several times every day. Online activities can impact 
the truth and trust of individuals, through Facebook 
conversations, 
etc. 
Also, 
the 
well-being 
of 
individuals may be affected both physically and 
emotionally. Besides, it is possible to affect the well-
being of people, both physically and emotionally. In 
several distinct areas, the effect of digital life on 
society brings exceptional benefits. Whether it 
concerns the regulation of a pregnancy or access to 
knowledge, the healthcare industry profits. Negative 
consequences are in a particular context alongside 
those 
advantages. 
Digital 
life 
can 
impact 
relationships, work and learning environments. 
The rise of digital life brings with it many 
negative impacts. All the data can trigger inattentive 
actions, which in many respects affects personal life, 
whether it is study or friendship. Information 
overload is a detrimental consequence of our digital 
lives. Technology practitioners, scientists, and health 
professionals surveyed by the Pew Research Center 
shared their perspectives and findings on individuals 
from their community. This illustrates that people, no 
matter what time of the day will feel anxious and 
worried about immediate access to everything they 
need. Sleeplessness and impatience are further effects 
of knowledge overload. A close link to digital life by 
missing connections with other people may intensify 
social relationships. A lack of attachment to everyday 
life is induced by entertainment opportunities and the 
opportunity to work everywhere. 
The effect on friendships is another factor. An 
investigation by the University of Washington shows 
that because of their online behaviour, people 
especially teenagers, have the problem of decreasing 
offline friendships. Communicating online is simpler 
for them, and does not involve meetings in person 
and prevents disputes. 
A 
California 
State 
University 
study 
demonstrates that technology decreases student 
attention and induces distraction. It is difficult for 
such students to hold their focus on one thing for a 
longer period through behaviours like updating 
Facebook every 15 minutes. Another phenomenon, 
induced by multitasking caused by technology, 
causes negative student output in class. 
Human nature will not improve, which is why 
in the future, violations will still occur. In the future, 
everything will be open on the Internet, which is why 
cyber-terrorism will take advantage of that. Privacy, 
which offers cybercriminals the ability to strike in 
new ways, would be reduced to a low degree. This 
will make our world less secure than it is now and 
personal skills are the only thing that protects people. 
As well as being social and being democratic, 
our concept of being human can change dramatically. 
That's because the new system is losing relevance 
and significance. Thus to realize new modes and 
activities, the world needs to create a new order. 
Nevertheless, researchers at the Pew Research 
Center believe that one of humanity's greatest booms 
is the Internet. Whether it is schooling, information 
or family, the opportunity to reach out to other people 
for all purposes that an individual might think of 
gives us flexibility and endless choices on how we 
want to spend our life. This enormous advantage 
helps us to live our lives today; the internet has made 
it possible to communicate globally. 
Digital life will invent, reinvent and innovate, 
through networking, private life and career. The Pew 
Research Center and Elon University research project 
explored the views of various technology experts, 
academics and health practitioners on digital life, 
how life could change in the future, and the well-
being that comes with it. Via networking, creativity 
can be achieved and all the knowledge people can get 
from it. Such information helps individuals to create 
new business ideas or simply find an individual job 
through, for example, linked in by inserting personal 
information on the website, job offers can be 
suggested. Careers, but not just careers, can be 
invented and reinvented. 
According to experts surveyed by the Pew 
Research Center, the healthcare industry obtains 
enormous benefits through digital growth. Details 
regarding medical, safety and health services, such as 
patient medication, can be accessed within seconds. 
This is a key advantage and has become a game-
changer, especially in the areas of elderly care and 
pregnancy. The quick access to information helps 
hospitals to identify patients inside the hospital and to 
provide previous illness information through this the 
patient can get support more quickly. Without any 
uncertainties, a pregnant female goes through a 
controlled process. She knows if the baby is fit and 
well and if there will be any complications during the 
pregnancy. 
The use of reliable resources is another plus. 
Digital life helps us to obtain, at any time and almost 
anywhere, online education. Research data can be 
easily identified by search engines such as Google, 
which can provide a single query with thousands of 
answers. Online platforms allow for a quicker, more 

 
 
 
SJIF Impact Factor: 7.001| ISI I.F.Value:1.241| Journal DOI: 10.36713/epra2016                ISSN: 2455-7838(Online) 
 
-
 
2020 EPRA IJRD    |    Journal DOI:  https://doi.org/10.36713/epra2016       | www.eprajournals.com |291 | 
 
convenient way to make purchases from anywhere 
you want with the added convenience of doing it. The 
best example is Amazon, for one it is possible to do 
the buying order more easily. The product range is 
also much wider than in any stores that may exist. It's 
easier than ever before to coordinate, arrange and 
book journeys, vacations or adventures. All the 
information for the trip and comparison portals can 
be accessed by interested individuals such as family 
members, encouraging tenacious searches on various 
pages and even preventing a drive to a travel agency. 
The ongoing growth of knowledge sharing is 
expected by scientists. Devices are going to have 
more automation and power, which contributes to the 
reality that our lives are going to be more and more, 
and all the choices we make are with cooperating 
devices. The web will be more integrated but less 
noticeable as it is now because the web will blend 
into all our background knowledge. 
 
MAPPING THE FUTURE OF CLOSED-
LOOP BRAIN-MACHINE 
NEUROTECHNOLOGY 
To understand the full potential of brain-
machine interfaces (BMIs) designed to communicate 
between the brain and external devices (such as 
computers or prostheses), to meet key technological 
challenges, to develop next-generation closed-loop 
brain-machine interfaces is needed. Using recorded 
signals to control devices. The closed-loop BMI 
continuously records the signals of the brain and 
nervous system, decoding that information and then 
encoding the information and sending it to the brain 
and/or nervous system, usually in the form of local 
stimuli. The research and development of feedback 
techniques for the management of neural activity 
have grown steadily over the past decade, in part due 
to the prospect that reading and writing in the 
nervous system are both for the advancement of 
neuroscience as a field, and therapeutic interventions 
and related consumer applications [2]. Recently, 
closed-loop neurotechnology has shown the potential 
to provide promising therapeutic and rehabilitation 
opportunities for patients as well as additional 
opportunities. These efforts include restoring motor 
function, 
providing 
functional 
treatment 
for 
neurological 
diseases 
such 
as 
epilepsy 
and 
Parkinson's disease, treating memory impairments 
and neuropsychiatric disorders, increasing learning 
speed and capacity, and devices that can experience 
and stimulate the activity of our sensorimotor system.  
 
CLOSED LOOP 
NEUROTECHNOLOGY 
Although the development of closed-loop 
neurotechnology for BMI is still in its infancy, it is 
driven in part by the prevalence of neurological and 
mental disorders, many of which respond poorly to 
drug therapy or lack other viable treatment options. 
The advancement of technology shortly will be 
driven by the capacity to provide proven therapeutic 
devices for the treatment of chronic depression, post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and diseases such as 
epilepsy and Parkinson's disease [3]. Loop closure in 
such devices will provide greater precision and 
customization as therapeutic stimulation becomes 
more tailored to respond more directly to the patient's 
neuronal physiology. Ultimately, next-generation 
feedback devices will reinvent the partnership 
between the brain and the body's nervous system, 
with the potential to provide effective precision 
electronic medicine and stimulate new applications 
for consumers in the fields of healthcare, games, and 
exercise. Given current developmental trajectories, it 
is 
likely 
that 
next-generation 
closed-loop 
neurotechnology that decodes and encodes the neural 
activity of multiple regions of the nervous system, 
such as the central nervous system, the peripheral 
nervous system, and the autonomic nervous system 
(CNS / SNP / ANS), arise within the next ten to 
twenty years. To this end, the IEEE Brain Initiative 
has published a whitepaper that identifies the main 
challenges 
and 
advancements 
required 
to 
successfully develop and implement next-generation 
closed-loop neurotechnology [4]. 
Closed-loop technology is the first document 
to create a technology roadmap outlining the short-
term and long-term goals of development cycle G. 
The guidelines to be followed from this manuscript 
will direct the implementation of these technologies, 
with a focus on the efficacy of these technologies in 
neuroethics and culture, to basic science and clinical 
translation. The growth of information technology 
will make digital immortality open to all. The 
implantation of neuro-nanorobots in the brain will 
accomplish this. Although they have the same 
characteristics as normal cells, they differ from their 
living cousins in many important ways: they are 
programmed to communicate with computers; They 
are immortal; They can obtain permits from organic 
and external sources, etc. These types of nanorobots 
scan information about a cell, assign it to themselves 
and then replace the cell. Initially, it is implanted in 
the blood, then it passes into the vital substance of 
the biowaste of the organs of the body. The brain 
exchange is prolonged and painless for the patient, 
who can continue with their daily activity during and 
after the procedure. Also, the patient can upload the 
firmware to improve reality or improve his 
personality, and after the natural death of the body, 
the brain sends a signal, it needs to be rationed and 
connected to a special computer. Thus, the person 
achieves digital immortality. This brain will be the 

 
 
 
SJIF Impact Factor: 7.001| ISI I.F.Value:1.241| Journal DOI: 10.36713/epra2016                ISSN: 2455-7838(Online) 
 
-
 
2020 EPRA IJRD    |    Journal DOI:  https://doi.org/10.36713/epra2016       | www.eprajournals.com |292 | 
 
centre and processor of the data field and, curiously, 
it will retain its consciousness. 
Essentially, it does not matter how well we 
have prepared these moments. In true sense, most of 
us are completely blinded by the unintended 
consequences of our rapid technological development 
when it comes into motion. Perhaps the most 
appropriate preparation we can establish is to keep 
current progress in the world of intelligent 
technology invaluable and try to think ahead about 
how changes will shape our future lives - not just 
socially, 
But 
also 
legally, 
politically, 
and 
philosophically. Where a place in the discussion of 
digital immortality depends a lot on how one thinks 
about consciousness [5, 6]. There are two major 
camps 
on 
this 
question: 
those 
for 
whom 
consciousness is a product of quantitative processes 
(materialistic approaches) and those who believe that 
consciousness represents more than its parts (virtue 
view). If one would interpret the former, then digital 
immortality is a question of when and not. This is 
because scientists will arrive at a stage of 
technological 
capability, 
at 
which 
they 
will 
artificially imitate the hardware of the brain to 
preserve their software (the sense of our thoughts, 
memories, and proposals). 
However, when further adjusting we from a 
Qualia perspective, it does not matter how scientists 
can imitate the human brain and live there with 
electrical thoughts and memories. Neuroscientist and 
psychiatrist Julio Tony to steal a party from the 
complete zombie "no mass". It is doubtful whether it 
represents 
"us". 
Apart 
from 
the 
issue 
of 
consciousness, 
there 
were 
other 
important 
philosophical and moral debates about digital 
immortality, such as whether a person's digital self is 
entitled after death and whether the digital immortal 
self can be changed. No, and/or its length is included 
[7]. The time to save. Still, no matter how exciting 
the philosophical and ethical debate about digital 
immortality is, the survival tests done with bleach are 
certain. The development of new technology by the 
school is not controlled. Questions and discussions 
about philosophical or ethical issues are more or less 
irrelevant 
in 
terms 
of 
pure 
innovation 
and 
technological progress. 
 
ONGOING PROJECTS 
If some persuasion is needed on this last point, 
one should just take a look at how many tech 
companies already want to walk in the door when it 
comes to extending human life indefinitely. While 
someone who believes that most of us are alive will 
already have a huge digital corpse behind us when 
we die, it's no wonder companies are already looking 
for ways to monetize this. For viewers of the popular 
Netflix series Black Mirror, the privatization of our 
Digital of Fat life for packaging as a show is a family 
theme that can help revitalize a loved one. For the 
rest, it is worth knowing the story of Roman 
Mazurenko, a Ukrainian entrepreneur whose best 
friend created a digital version of him using his 
WhatsApp chat history and social media posts after 
his death in a car accident. Eugenia Cuida, a co-
founder of the Luca company and manufacturer of 
replicas, the software that 'brought her best friend 
Mazurenko back to life', did not just drop a curtain 
that separates life from death [8,9]. 
Another project on the market today is the Blue Brain 
Project, a project led by Eckle Polytechnic Fédrell 
delusion, which seeks to replicate a fully functional 
human brain. Eternity. I state, "Like a library with 
people instead of books, forever preserving the 
memories, ideas, creations and stories of millions of 
people, or the current interactive history and its 
interactive. It is a private venture for "explaining 
history". generation. And he works at the crossroads 
of digital and biological consciousness in another 
start-up, Cincinnati Valley in Carnal 
If you're wondering where Elon Musk is all this, 
thanks to his geotechnical engineer Neuralink here, 
he's working on a "neural race" that can be injected 
into a kind of mesh sitting on a man. Please be 
assured that you are out. is. Connect your brain and it 
to your computer. In a sense, Neuralink is exploring 
simple digital immortality to the point where the 
human 
brain can be 
enhanced 
with 
digital 
capabilities. However, the result includes a direct 
biological and technical interface, which inevitably 
leads to some form of digital preservation. If this still 
seems unlikely, a physician in the field of Biomac for 
Knicks will probably read the electrical brain signals 
of four or fully locked c-in patients and convert them 
into movement or language. Consider the fact that it 
is possible. Faced with these questions, the debate 
over global citizenship seems like a small fry. 
Concerns about the nationalities and freedoms of 
travel around us are somehow appearing under the 
future, the silicone self digitally stored under our 
robotic world. Still, it is worth considering what the 
world will look like in a world affected by loneliness 
/ digital immortality, and how it will affect 
citizenship and freedom of movement [10]. 
 
TECHNOLOGY BEYOND 
TOMORROW 
The leadership of the Future Directions 
Committee 
(FDC) 
considered 
the 
increasing 
worldwide interest in digital transformation at its 
November 2018 meeting in Vancouver. The decision 
was taken at the February meeting to initiate a new 
Digital Transformation project that could benefit 
from the involvement of many Potential Path 
Societies/OUs serving as a catalyst. 

 
 
 
SJIF Impact Factor: 7.001| ISI I.F.Value:1.241| Journal DOI: 10.36713/epra2016                ISSN: 2455-7838(Online) 
 
-
 
2020 EPRA IJRD    |    Journal DOI:  https://doi.org/10.36713/epra2016       | www.eprajournals.com |293 | 
 
The digital transformation we are talking 
about today is largely due to the advancement of 
technology, i.e., mostly transducers, i.e., sensors and 
actuators, and semantics extraction equipment, i.e. 
artificial intelligence auxiliary data. From analytics. 
The main reason why industries and organizations 
are interested in global digital transformation, 
however, is economics. Digital transformation is 
changing the economy a little bit. The economy of 
atoms is the economy of scarcity: atoms are limited; 
If you give an atom, you will not have one. In 
contrast, the economy of bits is the economy of 
abundance: you can give bits while maintaining a 
copy that is no different from the original bits. 
Besides, the atomic economy has a high transaction 
cost, i.e., it costs money and resources to move the 
atoms along the value chain, while the cost of 
working on bits is very low. It is attracting new, 
younger players in various industries [12]. 
Changes in the economic structure caused by 
digital transformation, in the area of transaction 
networks and 
data centres 
such as support 
infrastructures, reduce both capital costs (CAPX) for 
entering a business with bits for management and 
operating cost (OPEX). Opex is still large (so the 
number of companies operating in the sector is 
small). Given the benefits of the bit economy over 
the nuclear economy, industries are making every 
effort to move their atom-based operations to the bit 
domain. Bits and atoms can be integrated by 
technologies such as augmented reality (AR) and 
virtual reality (VR). Provides unique access to the 
world of AR and VR bits and increasingly secures 
connectivity with physical twins through digital 
twins. 
The digital twin physical entity (such as an 
object or process or a set of aggregate objects or 
processes) and the digital shadow of the physical 
entity both reflect its current state (taken) of 
monitoring and simulation (and its history). Support 
for root cause analysis). Digital twins can, in some 
cases, be used as a proxy for physical twins, which 
are exploited in Industry 4.0 as well as other areas. 
AR, in a way, connects the world of bits to atoms, by 
superimposing bits on atoms. VR, on the other hand, 
exploits bits and is used, for example, in the design, 
training or presentation stages of the potential 
solution to the user. IEEE's current two initiatives 
have worked on key components of digital 
transformation: digital reality (AR and VR) and 
symbiotic autonomous systems (SAS) (digital twins). 
The results of these two initiatives and communities 
so far provide an excellent starting point for this new 
initiative to take advantage of the growing interest of 
the industry in the exploitation of the bit economy. 
Numerous industries have already expressed their 
support, and the most effective way to deliver faster 
prices is to compile the results of these initiatives 
[13]. 
Additionally, 
ongoing, 
and 
past 
future 
initiatives and communities will contribute to the 
new. For example, the IoT initiative covers an 
important part of digital transformation, and the 
Future 
Network 
Initiative 
is 
working 
on 
a 
communication fabric for digital transformation. Wi-
Fi 6 is poised to become a commercial reality by the 
end of 2019, and 5G is emerging from the world of 
unified telephone communications (802.11) for the 
first time, simultaneously evolving through IEE-
powered computer networking. Capable, capable of 
uniting. Category quality). The new digital reality 
initiative, led by Steve Dukes, Roberto Sarko and Raj 
Tiwari, will support and enable future digital 
transformation in various IEE communities. 
 
FUTURE 
We 
have 
categorized, 
evaluated, 
and 
concluded detailed preference data based on the 
discrepancies in Digital Human investigations and 
application criteria in all aspects. In each phase of 
research, the overall Digital Human Strategy, as well 
as technological routes, work plans, current states, 
priorities, outcomes, and implementation value were 
summarized. In each aspect of Digital Person, we 
addressed the technological challenges that exist, 
along with the urgent main technologies, including 
data collection, data processing, and modelling 
 
CONCLUSION 
Through this project, what has become 
obvious is that much of the latest software available 
to build your own digital eternal lack long-term and 
in-depth expertise to learn and maintain an efficient 
digital afterlife. We assume, however, that Virtual 
Barry can be adapted and used to create sustainable 
digital people and can be retained or removed 
according to the wishes of those who want to create a 
pre-death identity or those left behind who want to 
retain or remove it. The legal problems concerning 
the management of preservation and privacy 
concerns, and the legal ramifications of a continuing 
existence outside the autonomous jurisdiction of the 
mortal presence, remain both an ethical and 
legislative conundrum. 
Death is complicated in the modern age as we 
now 
have 
posthumous 
persistence 
and 
the 
possibilities for the physically deceased in ways not 
conceivable in previous generations to impact 
contemporary life. Although the development of 
virtual human beings and the prospects for realistic 
digital immortality remains some years away, many 
of these 'opportunities' are both alarming and 
troubling, along with the further uncertainty of how 
effectively digital immortals can learn and learn. 

 
 
 
SJIF Impact Factor: 7.001| ISI I.F.Value:1.241| Journal DOI: 10.36713/epra2016                ISSN: 2455-7838(Online) 
 
-
 
2020 EPRA IJRD    |    Journal DOI:  https://doi.org/10.36713/epra2016       | www.eprajournals.com |294 |
