Compressed Inference for Probabilistic Sequential Models
Gungor Polatkan
Department of Electrical Engineering
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
Oncel Tuzel
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories
Cambridge, MA 02139
Abstract
Hidden Markov models (HMMs) and conditional
random ﬁelds (CRFs) are two popular techniques
for modeling sequential data.
Inference algo-
rithms designed over CRFs and HMMs allow es-
timation of the state sequence given the obser-
vations.
In several applications, estimation of
the state sequence is not the end goal; instead
the goal is to compute some function of it. In
such scenarios, estimating the state sequence by
conventional inference techniques, followed by
computing the functional mapping from the esti-
mate is not necessarily optimal. A more formal
approach is to directly infer the ﬁnal outcome
from the observations. In particular, we consider
the speciﬁc instantiation of the problem where
the goal is to ﬁnd the state trajectories without
exact transition points and derive a novel polyno-
mial time inference algorithm that outperforms
vanilla inference techniques. We show that this
particular problem arises commonly in many dis-
parate applications and present experiments on
three of them: (1) Toy robot tracking; (2) Sin-
gle stroke character recognition; (3) Handwritten
word recognition.
1
Introduction
Assigning labels to sequential data is a common problem
extensively studied in several application domains such
as computer vision and computational linguistics (Rabiner
(1989), Lafferty et al. (2001), Quattoni et al. (2004)). For
instance, in part-of-speech tagging, the problem is to tag
parts of speech by considering the grammatical structure
of the language, e.g., (verb verb noun noun verb adjec-
tive) is a very unlikely sequence in English. Likewise, one
can assign letters to a sequence of images of hand-written
characters by again exploiting the structure enforced by the
grammar of that language. In these examples, sequential
patterns are important and they can be used to extract in-
formation from massive data sets.
Two common models for solving such problems are hidden
Markov models (HMMs), and conditional random ﬁelds
(CRFs, often as a linear-chain). These models have been
extended in various forms to adapt to different types of
problems.
For example, semi-Markovian CRFs are in-
troduced as a solution to segmentation problem allowing
non-Markovian transitions in segments and assigning di-
rect labels not to individual samples but to overall segments
(Sarawagi & Cohen (2004)). Fox et al. (2008) proposes a
non-parametric prior for systems with state persistence to
prevent unrealistically many transitions. This method not
only provides state persistence, but also allows learning the
transition probabilities in an inﬁnite state space.
In these examples, the inference algorithm estimates the
state sequence. But in several applications, this is not the
end goal; instead the goal is to compute some function
of the state sequence.
In particular, we consider a fre-
quently occurring form of this problem, compressed infer-
ence, where the function compress just keeps track of the
state transitions without keeping track of the dwell times at
each state and exact transition points.
A simple example is the detection of actions in the
movement of a human subject where the exact transi-
tion points between states like “sitting(s)”, “jumping(j)”,
“walking(w)”, and “running(r)” are ambiguous and not
important, but the detection of unique actions and the or-
der of appearance is signiﬁcantly important. For exam-
ple, let the observation sequence be x = {x1, x2, ....x9}
and the corresponding true state sequence be y
=
{s, s, j, j, j, w, w, r, r}.
The end goal is the accurate
prediction of the output of the function compress(y)
given the observation sequence x, where compress(y) =
{s, j, w, r} in this case.
When a prediction y￿is
{s, s, j, j, j, j, w, r, r} (which is acquired by converting a
state ‘w’ to ‘j’ exactly at the transition from j to w), it is
an error for conventional applications, but it is not an error
for this application, since compress(y) = compress(y￿).
Inversely, when a prediction y￿￿is {s, s, j, j, w, j, w, r, r},

it is a fatal error for this application, even though it only
differs from the ground truth sequence y by one state.
In contrast to standard sequence labeling problem, the
length of the compressed output is also unknown, e.g., it is
unclear how many unique actions occurred in the order of
appearance during the movement of a human subject. More
precisely, although y has the same length with x, the length
of compress(y) is not known before hand, which might
take values from 1 (means there are no state transitions)
to the length of the sequence x. Therefore the inference
algorithm should estimate the length of the compressed se-
quence in conjunction with the states.
To the best of our knowledge, this is a problem largely un-
addressed in machine learning. In this paper, we present
a polynomial time algorithm to directly infer the length
and the states of the compressed sequence using marginal-
ization over all state sequences.
The experiments show
that the proposed inference algorithm consistently outper-
forms standard inference techniques using the same train-
ing model.
One important application domain that beneﬁts from com-
pressed inference is the labeling of sequence data. The
conventional approach for sequence classiﬁcation applica-
tions such as action recognition, gesture recognition, etc.
requires training a separate sequence model for each ac-
tion/event class. The classiﬁcation task then assigns the
new observations to the action/event classes according to
the observation likelihoods among the trained models. This
approach becomes unpractical or even infeasible when the
number of action/event classes is very large such as rec-
ognizing all the words in a language. In such cases train-
ing a single sequence model and classifying the sequence
data according to the unique states decoded is a feasible
approach which can be obtained via compressed labeling.
2
Background: Conditional Random Fields
and Inference Techniques
The sequence labeling problem can be formulated as ﬁnd-
ing the best function f that can predict y
=
f(x),
given N training sequences {(xi, yi)}N
i=1, where xi =
￿xi,1, xi,2, ....., xi,Ti￿is the observation sequence and yi =
￿yi,1, yi,2, ....., yi,Ti￿is the label sequence. Linear-chain
CRFs and HMMs are two probabilistic models targeting
this problem. Linear-chain CRFs can be thought as con-
ditional HMMs, or HMMs can be thought as a special
case of CRFs with a particular choice of feature function.
While we present algorithms and results for CRFs, they are
equally applicable to HMMs without loss of generality. We
use linear-chain CRFs as our base learners throughout this
paper. Next, we review CRFs and conventional inference
techniques.
2.1
Conditional Random Fields(CRFs)
In a linear chain conditional random ﬁeld of Lafferty et al.
(2001), the conditional distribution is modeled as
p(y|x) =
1
Z(x)
T
￿
t=1
Ψ(yt, yt−1, xt),
(1)
Ψ(yt, yt−1, xt) = exp

￿
j
λjgj(yt−1, yt, xt)
(2)
+
￿
k
µkuk(yt, xt)
￿
.
where Ψ(yt, yt−1, xt) is called the potential function;
gj(yt−1, yt, xt) is called the transition feature function
from state yt−1 to yt; uk(yt, xt) is called the state feature
function at state yt; λj and µk are the parameters estimated
at the learning process, and Z(x) is the normalization fac-
tor as a function of the observation sequence. In this paper,
we assume that the trained model is given, and refer readers
to Sutton & McCallum (2006) and Altun et al. (2003) for
detailed discussions on learning model parameters.
2.2
Vanilla Inference Techniques
Here, we present a brief overview of conventional infer-
ence algorithms on probabilistic sequential models. One
way of labeling a test sequence is the most likely labeling
using the joint density y∗= arg maxy p(y|x). The solu-
tion can be efﬁciently computed via Viterbi algorithm us-
ing recursion δt(j) = maxi Ψ(j, i, xt)δt−1(i), which prop-
agates the most likely path based on the max product rule
(Sutton & McCallum (2006)). However, in many appli-
cations, accurately predicting the whole label sequence is
very difﬁcult so that individual predictions are used. This
is achieved via predicting yt from the marginal distribu-
tion p(yt|x) using a similar dynamic programming proce-
dure, forward-backward. The forward recursion is given
by αt(j) = ￿
i Ψ(j, i, xt)αt−1(i), where αt(j) are the
forward variables, and the backward recursion is given
by βt(i) = ￿
j Ψ(j, i, xt+1)βt+1(j), where βt(i) are the
backward variables.
The marginal probabilities can be
computed by using these variables as given in Sutton &
McCallum (2006).
In Culotta & McCallum (2004) and Kristjansson et al.
(2004), a constrained forward algorithm is used to com-
pute the conﬁdence of a particular state sequence.
The
approach is to restrain the forward recursion to the con-
strained state sequence. In other words, given a set of con-
straints Y ￿= {yq...yr}, a modiﬁed forward algorithm is
used to compute the probability of any sequence satisfying
Y ￿. The modiﬁed forward recursion is given as
￿αt(j) =
￿￿
i Ψ(j, i, xt)￿αt−1(i)
for
j ￿yt+1
0
otherwise
(3)

for all yt+1 ∈Y ￿, where the operator j ￿yt+1 is de-
ﬁned in Culotta & McCallum (2004) as “j conforms to
constraint yt+1”. At time T, the conﬁdence of a speciﬁc
constraint is given as Z￿/Z where the constrained lattice
factor Z￿= ￿
i ￿αT (i) and the unconstrained lattice fac-
tor Z = ￿
i αT (i) are computed by using constrained
forward variables and unconstrained forward variables, re-
spectively. When only a single constraint yt is included in
the constraint set Y ￿, the method outputs the marginal dis-
tribution p(yt|x). Note that our algorithm for compressed
inference is based on a similar idea.
3
Compressed Inference
In this section, we present the core of our inference algo-
rithm designed to solve the compressed labeling problem.
We ﬁrst deﬁne a new sequence s = compress(y), e.g.,
if y = {s, s, j, j, j, w, w, r, r}, then s = compress(y) =
{s, j, w, r}. From now on, we use the symbol C to repre-
sent the function compress. The goal of compressed in-
ference is to predict s given the observation x. Through-
out this paper, we use a traditionally trained Markov model
(e.g. a linear chain CRF).
Next, we construct the mathematical framework for com-
puting p(s|x). The overall joint density p(s|x) can be com-
puted from p(y|x) by using the fundamental rules of prob-
ability theory.
Proposition 3.1. Let y be a random variable taking values
in E and s be a variable taking values in F. Then, the func-
tion C : E ￿−→F is measurable and s is a random variable.
Moreover, the conditional probability of s can be computed
by the conditional probability of y as follows:
p(s = s0|x) =
￿
∀y:C (y)=s0
p(y|x).
(4)
Proof. A measure theoretic proof is given in the appendix.
In a more verbal way, if one would like to compute p(s =
s0|x), brute force approach is to ﬁnd the set Y ￿= C −1(s0),
whose elements are all y sequences with compressed val-
ues s0, and then to compute the cumulative probability of
Y ￿. Since we are working on discrete states, we just use
summations in order to compute this probability.
This operation is a marginalization over all segmentations,
y, whose compressed values are s0. Unfortunately, given
a model, though the computation of p(y|x) by using the
methods in Section 2.2 is efﬁcient, the ﬁnal summation in
equation (4) includes exponentially many operations (M T ,
where M is the number of states and T is the length of y),
which is intractable. Next, we propose a novel polynomial
time algorithm using dynamic programming.
(a) s on a vector
(b) s on a table
(c) Full two dimensional transitions
Figure 1: The recursions of compressed inference
3.1
Compressed Inference Algorithm
In this section, we ﬁrst present solutions to three subprob-
lems of compressed inference and then we perform com-
pressed labeling using these techniques. Finally, we ana-
lyze the complexity of the proposed algorithm.
The ﬁrst subproblem is computing the probability of a
given compressed signal s0. In the second subproblem, we
generalize this result and derive a dynamic programming
algorithm to compute the probability distribution of the
length of the compressed sequence. The third subproblem
is computing the marginal probabilities of the compressed
states. Finally, we perform labeling in the compressed do-
main by ﬁrst ﬁnding the length of the compressed sequence
from the distribution found in second subproblem, and then
ﬁnding the compressed states from the marginal probabili-
ties found in the third subproblem.
Subproblem 1: Computing the probability of a com-
pressed sequence s0, p(s = s0|x).
Here, we present a
dynamic programming technique to compute this probabil-
ity. This construction will help us in deriving the algorithm
for the unknown s case which are explored by second and
third subproblems.
Let c = |s0| be the length of s0. For ease of notation, we
refer to individual terms of s0 with si, i = 1 . . . c. We de-
ﬁne new forward variables αt(i), i = 1 . . . c, which keeps
track of making exactly i −1 transitions on sequence s0 up

to time t. From time instance t −1 to t, the forward vari-
ables are updated based on: (1) Staying at the same state
on observation xt, which is shown with blue arrows in Fig-
ure 1(a); (2) Making a transition from si to si+1, which is
shown with orange arrows in Figure 1(a). The recursion is
as follows:
Proposition 3.2. The probability of a sequence s0, p(s =
s0|x), is given by
p(s = s0|x) =
￿
∀y:
C (y)=s0
p(y|x) ∝
￿
∀y:
C (y)=s0
T
￿
t=1
Ψ(yt, yt−1, xt)
(5)
which can be computed by the recursion
αt(i) = Ψ(si, si−1, xt)αt−1(i −1) + Ψ(si, si, xt)αt−1(i),
(6)
where i = 1 . . . c. At time T, we attain
αT (c) =
￿
∀y:C (y)=s0
T
￿
t=1
Ψ(yt, yt−1, xt).
(7)
Proof. See the appendix.
By this recursion we compute the lattice factor Z(s0) =
αT (c). We will explain the way to compute the overall nor-
malization factor Z later in this section which will convert
Z(s0) to a probability by p(s = s0|x) = Z(s0)/Z.
Subproblem 2: Computing the probability distribu-
tion of the length of the compressed sequence, p(c|x).
Given observations x, the ﬁrst step of ﬁnding the com-
pressed labels s is to ﬁnd the length c of s, where c can take
values from 1 (which means there is no state transition) up
to the sequence length T (which means there is a transi-
tion at every single time step). Note that, for all c0 > T,
p(c = c0|x) is trivially zero.
Let Si be the set of all compressed state sequences of length
i, i.e., Si = {s : |s| = i}, i = 1...T. It is obvious that
Si
￿Sj = ∅for i ￿= j. Then, the probability p(c = c0|x)
can be written as
p(c = c0|x) = p(s ∈Sc0|x) =
￿
∀s￿:
|s￿|=c0
p(s = s￿|x)
∝
￿
∀s￿:|s￿|=c0
￿
∀y:C (y)=s￿
T
￿
t=1
Ψ(yt, yt−1, xt).
(8)
We ﬁrst note that p(s = s0|x) gives the probability of one
possible s0 of length c. Suppose we have two such sig-
nals: s1 and s2 as shown in Figure 1(b).
Then, p(s =
s1|x) + p(s = s2|x) ∝αT (c)s1 + αT (c)s2, where αT (c)si
means forward recursion was run for si. However, these
two signals are different at only one point in compressed
domain. To be able to represent them on the same lattice
and avoid multiple calculations, we extend the vector rep-
resentation of αt into a table, as shown in Figure 1(b). We
note that conventional forward variable αt was M dimen-
sional, previous αt was c dimensional, and new ˆαt is c×M
dimensional.
This new representation requires the signal to traverse the
table through certain cells. From now on we call these cells
“constraints”. Let the set of all constraints on the lattice be
Q = {..., ql−1, ql, ql+1...}, where each constraint ql is a
tuple of the coordinates of the nonzero entries on the ta-
ble. For example, for a particular compressed sequence s0,
it corresponds to {(1, s1), (2, s2) . . . (c, sc)}, and for a par-
ticular set Si, it corresponds to all coordinates of the table
with height i which is denoted by QSi. The recursion for a
given constraint set Q is as follows:
ˆαt(i, j)Q =












Ψ(j, j, xt)ˆαt−1(i, j)Q+
￿
∀k:k￿=j
￿
Ψ(j, k, xt)
×ˆαt−1(i −1, k)Q)
￿



if(i, j) ∈Q
0
otherwise.
(9)
This recursion propagates through all colored nodes (which
correspond to nonzero entries) on the table in Figure 1(b)
and ignores all empty nodes since they are not included in
Q. For simplicity, self loops are removed from Figure 1(b) .
Moreover, the recursion for which the constraints included
all the locations of the table (all entries on the table can be
visited) is explained schematically in Figure 1(c) from t−1
to t and from t to t + 1.
The recursion given in equation (9) computes the probabil-
ity of all compressed sequences which are deﬁned by the
set Q via
p(Q|x) ∝Z(Q) =
￿
j
ˆαT (c0, j)Q.1
(10)
Using constraint set notation QSc0, the probability of p(c =
c0|x) can be written as
p(c = c0|x) ∝
￿
∀s:
|s|=c0
￿
∀y:
C (y)=s
T
￿
t=1
Ψ(yt, yt−1, xt)
= Z(QSc0) =
￿
j
ˆαT (c0, j)QSc0 .
(11)
This corresponds to running the recursion in equation (9)
with constraint set QSc0 and summing the entries at row c0.
As we discussed before, p(c = c0|x) = 0 when c0 > T or
1The proof of this proportionality is just a generalization of the
proof of Proposition (3.2) as given in the supplementary material.

c0 < 1. If we employ this procedure for the constraint set
QST , the row sums of the table ˆαT (i, j)QST produces all
the lattice factors Z(QSi), i = 1 . . . T simultaneously. The
overall summation of this table is equal to the normalizing
factor Z which is necessary for computing p(s = s0|x) =
Z(s0)/Z and p(c = c0|x) = Z(QSc0)/Z. This identity
follows from the fact that Z is equal to the summation of
the lattice factors for all possible lengths and combinations
of s.
Subproblem 3: Computing the marginal probabilities
of the compressed state sequences, p(si = j|x, c).
To
compute the marginal distribution p(si = j|x, c), we con-
struct the constraint set Qi,j by including all the entries
of the table with height c except the ones at row i. Then
we add (i, j) to this set. This particular constraint set con-
ﬁguration includes all the possible compressed sequence
conﬁgurations with length c and si
= j.
Then, the
marginal probability is computed by p(si = j|x, c) =
Z(Qi,j)/ ￿
j Z(Qi,j).
Compressed labeling.
The compressed labeling is a sim-
ple application of the aforementioned methods: (1) Esti-
mate c by ˆc = arg maxc0 p(c = c0|x); (2) Estimate si by
si = arg maxj p(si = j|x, ˆc).
Computational Complexity.
The time complexity of the
Viterbi algorithm is O(TM 2) and space complexity is
O(TM) where T is the length of the sequence and M is
the number of states. The new recursion propagates on a
two dimensional table which requires O(cmaxTM 2) time
and O(cmaxTM) space where cmax is the maximum fea-
sible length of the compressed sequence.
Although the
maximum possible value of cmax is equal to T, in general
cmax ￿T.
4
Experiments
Experiments are performed on three different applications:
toy robot tracking, single stroke character recognition and
handwritten word recognition. In all experiments, we use
both marginal (using forward-backward) and joint poste-
rior (using Viterbi) estimates as input to the compress func-
tion C to obtain smarginal and sjoint as ﬁnal decisions for
the baseline predictions of s. We compare these baseline
predictions with the proposed compressed inference algo-
rithm described in Section 3.1. We used the hCRF pack-
age (Morency (2007)) with the BFGS optimizer to learn the
CRF model parameters. In addition, we present compari-
son with the semi-Markov CRF model in the ﬁrst two prob-
lems where the training and inference are performed us-
ing the semi-Markov CRF package (Sarawagi (2009)). The
semi-Markov CRF model produces segmentation of the in-
put sequence where we discard the transition points and the
labels of the segments give the compressed sequence.
Metrics.
We consider two evaluation metrics which we
call Exact score and Edit Distance Score (EDS). Exact
score is used in order to check the perfect match of the
compressed predictions to the truth. If we miss even one
state in s or C (y), this is a fatal error and we consider this
sequence as missed during the evaluation. Hence, both the
compressed length of the prediction and exact compressed
state sequence should perfectly match with the truth. In
EDS, we measure how well we are performing state by
state. We use edit distance between two strings of char-
acters which is deﬁned as the minimum number of opera-
tions required to convert one to the other. While computing
EDS, in order to prevent the effect of the length of the se-
quences, we normalize EditDistance(prediction, truth) of
each sequence by maxLength{prediction, truth}. Then, we
sum the normalized distances of all sequences and ﬁnally
we ﬁnd EDS = 100 −100 ∗sum/(# of sequences).
Toy Robot Tracking.
Sequential models are frequently
used in robot tracking applications, where a robot is mov-
ing in a small grid-based environment to discover the world
(Baltzakis & Trahanias (2002)). If one is interested in ﬁnd-
ing the visited locations only, the unique grids that the robot
goes through is important but the self-loops and the ex-
act transition times/boundaries are not important. For in-
stance, our robot moves in a small world as seen in Figure
2(a), where transition possible grids are {blue, green, yel-
low, red} colored and obstacles, which prevent motion are
{black}. At every step, the robot attempts to move {up,
down, left, right} based on a random choice of direction.
If there is a block towards the intended direction, it tries
again. In this problem, state refers to the location of the
robot in (x:y) coordinates, and observation refers to an ob-
served color which is the output of a sensor (a camera for
instance) with a color detection accuracy of P%.
We generated 400 training and 400 test sequences at each
of 6 different P values ({100, 90, 80, 70, 60, 50}) by sim-
ulating the robot in the small world as deﬁned in Figure
2(a). The sequence lengths are in the range of 100 - 300
and the compressed lengths are in the range of 5 - 15. In
terms of exact score, our algorithm introduces an improve-
ment when noise level is high or moderate (Figure 2(c)).
But when noise level is very low, we observe that joint es-
timate performs better. We note that for very long state se-
quences (as used in this experiment), the exact score is not
very reliable since a single state error causes a sequence
to be labeled incorrect which drastically changes ﬁnal out-
come. In terms of EDS, as we can see in Figure 2(d), our
state inference algorithm performs better than vanilla infer-
ence algorithms at high and moderate noise and at very low
noise performance is similar.
The predictions of the semi-Markov CRF model are sig-
niﬁcantly inferior compared to the proposed compressed
inference algorithm: the EDS based scores are %{45.4,

(a) Small World
(b) Observations
(c) Exact
(d) EDS
Figure 2: a) Small world with coordinates and true colors of each square, b) A sample sequence of the robot in the small
world in time domain representation. Each color is coded with a number. {b, g, y, r} with {1,2,3,4} respectively, c) Exact
score d) EDS.
40.7, 32.2, 15.5, 5, 4.5 } where as the Exact scores are
%{10.5, 3.25, 2, 1, 0, 0 } for P values of {100, 90, 80, 70,
60, 50} respectively. We attribute the poor performance of
this model to the large number of maximum segmentation
lengths. Likewise, the training and the inference of semi-
Markov CRF models are extremely slow compared to the
original CRF model (and compressed inference). The train-
ing takes 100 hours compared to 1-2 hours for the original
CRF model. Please see Section 5 for a more detailed dis-
cussion.
Character Recognition.
In this experiment, we apply
compressed inference to single stroke character recogni-
tion application (Ozun et al. (2001)). The problem is to
recognize the shape drawn on a touch screen. It is assumed
that the drawing operation is performed by a single stroke.
One well known alphabet which has this property is the
GrafﬁtiTM.
In
this
application,
state
refers
to
directions
{up,right,down,left} and observation refers to quan-
tized angles between successive points acquired from the
user interface as shown in Figure 3(a) and 3(b). Existing
systems use stochastic ﬁnite state machines (FSM) or
HMMs for this purpose (Ozun et al. (2001)). Usually, an
HMM or FSM is trained for each single character, then,
one class is chosen by a likelihood test. One drawback of
this method is its limited capability of handling arbitrary
shapes.
One can train a single model for all characters
and decode the states by using this single model as well.
Nevertheless, a single state error can spoil the whole
prediction in such a setting.
Hence, we need a strong
inference scheme which is robust to noise. Moreover, the
ambiguity in state transitions is an important obstacle as
well, since passing from one state to another is generally
ambiguous. Our approach is robust to all these issues since
it does not spend effort to estimate the exact transition
locations but only produces transition sequences which is
sufﬁcient for this task.
We generated a data set of 20 training and 20 test sam-
ples for each character from the set {0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9}
by using a computer user interface as shown in Figure 3(a).
As shown in Table 3(d), compressed inference outperforms
conventional inference.
It especially performs better on
characters like 0 and 3 which are the ones with the most
ambiguous state transitions.
The results of the semi-CRFs match that of the joint esti-
mate, %60 for the exact and %87 for the EDS based score,
whereas the compressed inference algorithm signiﬁcantly
outperforms both, %95.5 and %98.97 respectively. Partic-
ularly, this problem is a good example where the transi-
tion boundaries are ambiguous. The semi-Markov CRFs
force a segmentation over ambiguous boundaries whereas
our model beneﬁts from marginalization over all possible
segmentations.
Handwritten Word Recognition.
In this application, we
use the data set in Taskar et al. (2003), which includes
16 × 8 size characters from the English alphabet. In the
literature, handwritten word recognition is generally per-
formed by ﬁrst segmenting the characters and then recog-
nizing them by multi class classiﬁcation such as SVMs.
In many studies, the structure of language is used as well
(Taskar et al. (2003)). However, in all these works, the
characters are already segmented during pre-processing
step.
Our setup is more challenging compared to these
studies, i.e., the characters are not segmented and as a result
the lengths of the sequences are not known as well.
For experimental purposes, we speciﬁed 20 names used in
English {jake, conor, taner, wyat, cody, dustin, luke, jack,
scot, logan, deshawn, deandre, marquis, darnel, terel, ma-
lik, reginald, tyrone, wilie, dominique} where none of them
including any successive letters such as ‘nn’, etc. (Appli-
cation can be generalized to arbitrary number of words and
currently we do not consider words with successive letters
which might be handled specially). Each word is written by
different combinations of styles, 20 times for training set
and 20 times for test set. Moreover, each time step corre-
sponds to one vertical column of the image of handwriting,

(a) GUI
(b) A set of characters
(c) Test Results
Exact
EDS
Comp.
95.5
98.97
Mar.
94.5
98.75
Joint
65
89.67
d) % Scores
Figure 3: a) GUI for data generation, b) A set of characters with state labels; Results in c) graphical form, d)tabular form,
in terms of EDS and Exact scores.
states refer to the corresponding character of the time step,
and observations correspond to the shape context features
of Belongie et al. (2001).
For feature extraction, we ﬁrst take overlapping 16 × 7
patches from the word image by sliding window technique.
Next, we apply shape context descriptor of Belongie et al.
(2001) for each data point on the corresponding patch as
shown in Figure 4(d). Then, we apply K-means clustering
to learn a dictionary. In our experiments, K = 50 pro-
duced the best performance. Next, we generate histograms
via vector quantization, which completes the feature ex-
traction.
In the experimental results, we observe improvements in
both scores compared to vanilla inference techniques, as
can be seen in Figure 4(c) and Table 4(e).
5
Related Work
Compressed labeling of sequences is mentioned as a video-
interpretation application in Fern & Givan (2004), where
we get the function name “compress” from. Their main
focus was to model a sequence problem that had an enor-
mous number of states which was not known before hand.
Due to the unknown number of states the conventional
probabilistic models can not be used, hence the approach
is applicable to a limited domain. In contrast our inference
scheme uses a standard CRF or HMM and we do not make
any assumption other than usual sequential modeling as-
sumptions. Therefore the presented algorithm is applicable
to any problem where distinct states are important and state
transitions are ambiguous.
A simple transition-cost model is proposed in Fern (2005)
for video interpretation where self transition is assumed to
have no cost whereas all other possible transitions are as-
sumed to have the same cost K. This is similar to training
a probabilistic sequential model which has zero weights for
all self transition parameters and same K as the weight for
all other transitions. However, this ad-hoc assumption is
unrealistic for many applications.
Segmentation is the process of identifying the boundaries
between segments (e.g., words in natural language process-
ing, set of pixels in image processing). The output of seg-
mentation is a set of segments with exact boundary loca-
tions (e.g. super-pixels with contours in images or state
trajectories with exact state transition points in sequen-
tial models). The Semi-Markovian approach of Sarawagi
& Cohen (2004) proposes a solution to the segmentation
problem. Semi-Markov models explicitly model duration
in a state with different distributions (which violates the
Markovian assumption) and are widely used when one
is interested in exact transition points and segmentation
boundaries. In contrast to Sarawagi & Cohen (2004), our
inference algorithm is designed for Markov models and
beneﬁts from ambiguities in segmentation boundaries via
marginalizing over all boundary locations.
The problems where semi-Markov CRF models were
shown to be successful, such as name entity recognition
(Sarawagi & Cohen (2004)), have relatively short maxi-
mum segmentation lengths (around 3-4). In addition, in
such problems the segmentation boundaries are very well
deﬁned. The experiments in this paper show that when the
maximum segmentation length is large (in most of our ap-
plications it ranges from 50 to 100) or the transition bound-
aries are ambiguous, the compressed inference algorithm
signiﬁcantly outperforms semi-Markov CRFs. Moreover,
the training time of the semi-Markov model is also pro-
hibitive when the maximum segmentation length is large,
which is another motivation for using a Markov model.
6
Discussion
Maximum likelihood or marginal estimate of a full state
sequence is the standard approach for inference on Markov
models. In this paper, we have shown that when the prob-
lem is ﬁnding the state trajectories only, without exact tran-
sition points, inference can be done in a more accurate
way.
To directly infer the unique states, we have pro-
posed marginalization over possible transitions and derived
a polynomial time algorithm. In three different applica-

(a) Word jake
(b) Word conor
(c) Test Results
(d) Shape Context
Exact
EDS
Comp.
34.5
73.65
Mar.
30.5
71.65
Joint
25.75
65.72
e) % Scores
Figure 4: 3 instances of a) jake, b) conor; c) Results; d) Shape context feature extraction of Belongie et al. (2001); e)
Results in terms of EDS and Exact scores.
tion domains, we have shown that the proposed compressed
labeling algorithm outperforms vanilla techniques particu-
larly when there is state transition ambiguity.
The proposed construction also offers signiﬁcant potential
for future research. Here, we have proposed polynomial
time inference using marginal probabilities given the pre-
diction for the length of the signal. Inference of the most
likely joint compressed sequence is still an open problem
which is unlikely to be polynomial time computable.
