1 
 
Abstract—Goal: Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is an allergic 
inflammatory condition characterized by eosinophil accumulation 
in the esophageal mucosa. EoE diagnosis includes a manual 
assessment of eosinophil levels in mucosal biopsies—a time-
consuming, laborious task that is difficult to standardize. One of 
the main challenges in automating this process, like many other 
biopsy-based diagnostics, is detecting features that are small 
relative to the size of the biopsy. Results: In this work, we utilized 
hematoxylin- and eosin-stained slides from esophageal biopsies 
from patients with active EoE and control subjects to develop a 
platform based on a deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) 
that can classify esophageal biopsies with an accuracy of 85%, 
sensitivity of 82.5%, and specificity of 87%. Moreover, by 
combining several downscaling and cropping strategies, we show 
that some of the features contributing to the correct classification 
are global rather than specific, local features. Conclusions: We 
report the ability of artificial intelligence to identify EoE using 
computer vision analysis of esophageal biopsy slides. Further, the 
DCNN features associated with EoE are based on not only local 
eosinophils but also global histologic changes. Our approach can 
be used for other conditions that rely on biopsy-based histologic 
diagnostics. 
 
Index Terms—Eosinophilic esophagitis, deep convolutional 
network, small features detection, digital pathology, decision 
support system 
 
Impact Statement—Deep convolutional neural network (DCNN), 
together with a systematic downscaling approach, can classify 
esophageal biopsies with high accuracy and reveals a global nature 
of the histologic features of eosinophilic esophagitis. Our approach 
of systematic analysis of the image size versus downscaling 
tradeoff can be used to improve disease classification performance 
and insight gathering in digital pathology. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
OSINOPHILIC esophagitis (EoE) is a recently recognized 
chronic food allergic disease associated with esophageal 
specific inflammation characterized by high levels of 
eosinophils [1]. An allergic etiology is strongly supported by 
the efficacy of food elimination diets, the co-occurrence of EoE 
with other allergic diseases (e.g., asthma and atopic dermatitis), 
 
1Dept. of Physiology, Biophysics and System Biology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Technion, Haifa, 35254, Israel. 2Division of Allergy and Immunology, 
3Division of Pathology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 
Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH 45229-3026, USA.  
animal models demonstrating that experimental EoE can be 
induced by allergen exposure, and the necessity of allergic 
mediators of inflammation, such as Interleukin 5 and 
Interleukin 13, on the basis of animal models and clinical 
studies [1], [2]. Disease pathogenesis is driven by food 
hypersensitivity and allergic inflammation and multiple genetic 
and environmental factors [3]. Although a rare disease with a 
prevalence of approximately 1:2,000 individuals, EoE is now 
the chief cause of chronic refractory dysphagia in adults and an 
emerging cause for vomiting, failure to thrive, and abdominal 
pain in children [1]. 
Histologically, 
EoE 
involves 
eosinophil-predominant 
inflammation of the esophageal mucosa. Microscopic 
examination of esophageal mucosal biopsies is a prerequisite 
for EoE diagnosis. During esophagogastroduodenoscopy 
(EGD), several esophageal biopsies are procured. These are 
then formalin-fixed, embedded, sectioned, and subjected to 
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining [4], [5]. Subsequently, a 
pathologist examines the biopsies to determine the peak 
eosinophil count (PEC) [1], [2], [6] (Fig. 1). In addition to 
determining PEC, other histopathologic features of EoE include 
abnormalities of the structural cells, including epithelial cells 
and fibroblasts comprising the lamina propria. These features 
can be reliably assessed and quantified using the newly 
developed EoE Histology Scoring System (HSS) [7]. This 
system not only reports the presence or absence of the features 
but also takes into account grade (severity) and stage (extent). 
This scoring system is trainable across pathologists [7]. 
However, considerable disagreement can occur among certain 
observers, at least based on PEC [8], and even for trained 
observers, scoring esophageal biopsies requires a non-trivial 
time input.  
During the last few years, deep learning and, in particular, 
deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) have become a 
significant component of computer vision. Unlike classical 
machine learning techniques, deep learning involves the net 
performing representation learning, which allows the machine 
to be fed raw data and to discover the representations needed 
for detection or classification automatically [9]–[12]. In 
particular, deep learning is used for the classification and 
#These Authors contributed equally to this work.  

 
Tomer Czyzewski1,#, Nati Daniel1,#, Mark Rochman2, Julie M. Caldwell2, Garrett A. Osswald2, Margaret H. 
Collins3, Marc E. Rothenberg2, and Yonatan Savir1,* 
Machine learning approach for biopsy-based 
identification of eosinophilic esophagitis reveals 
importance of global features 
E

 
 
 
2 
 
diagnosis of conditions in which the diagnosis is based on 
histomorphology, such as cancer [12], [13]. However, the 
application of deep learning to medical applications poses two 
unique challenges: first, DCNN training requires a large 
number of images (hundreds to millions); and second, the size 
of the relevant objects within the images is small [14], [15]. 
Here, we developed a method based on DCNN and 
downscaling of esophageal biopsy images at different 
frequencies. By comparing the results of each frequency, we 
aimed to deduce whether the scattering is global (i.e., features 
appear diffusely throughout the tissue image) or local (i.e., 
features appear in only specific and/or discrete locations within 
the image). We developed a classifier that distinguishes 
between images of H&E-stained esophageal biopsies from 
patients with active EoE and non-EoE control patients with high 
accuracy. We show that some of the features that underlie the 
correct classification of disease are global in nature. 
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS  
A. Dataset 
This study was performed under the Cincinnati Children’s 
Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) IRB protocol 2008-0090. 
Subjects undergoing endoscopy (EGD) for standard-of-care 
purposes agreed to donate additional gastrointestinal tissue 
biopsies for research purposes and to have their clinical, 
histologic, and demographic information stored in a private 
research database. One distal esophageal biopsy per patient was 
placed in 10% formalin; the tissue was then processed and 
embedded in paraffin. Sections (4 m) were mounted on glass 
slides and subjected to H&E staining, in a manner identical to 
the preparation of standard-of-care biopsies. Biopsies were 
viewed at 80X magnification using the Olympus BX51 
microscope, and one photograph of each biopsy was taken 
using the DP71 camera. Images were classified into categories 
on the basis of the clinical pathology report associated with the 
distal esophagus biopsies that were obtained for clinical 
analysis during the same endoscopy during which the biopsy 
for research purposes was procured. In this study, we used 
images defined as being derived from individuals with active 
EoE (biopsy with PEC ≥15 eosinophils [eos]/400X high-power 
field [hpf]) or from non-EoE control individuals (biopsy with 
PEC = 0 eos/hpf); (n = 210 non-EoE; n = 210 active EoE). The 
images were taken with digital microscopy at different 
resolutions: 4140X3096 pixels, 2010X1548 pixels, or 
1360X1024 pixels. In the original dataset, the number of images 
per category and at each resolution was not equal. Therefore, to 
avoid training bias, the images were randomly selected to build 
non-biased training and validation sets. In this new dataset, the 
number of images in each category was equal (training set: n = 
147 active EoE, n = 147 non-EoE; validation set: n = 63 active 
EoE, n = 63 non-EoE). Additionally, the number of images per 
resolution was equal in each category (4140X3096 resolution: 
n = 29; 2010X1548 resolution: n = 126; 1360X1024 resolution: 
n = 55). 
B. Downscale approaches and training  
Two methods were employed to address the challenge of 
training on high-resolution images containing small features: 
first, downscaling the original image with the potential of losing 
the information associated with small features [14]; and second, 
dividing the images into smaller patches and analyzing each of 
the patches [16]. Although the second approach solves the 
image size challenge, if the relevant small feature (e.g., a local 
increase in eosinophil density) appears in only a few patches, 
many patches that do not contain the small feature are still 
labeled as positive. As a result, the false-positive prediction 
 
Fig. 1. (A) Example of a full-size hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained 
esophageal biopsy slide from a patient with active eosinophilic esophagitis
(EoE). The red square marks an example of an area containing eosinophils 
(bright pink cells with purple nuclei; several examples are indicated by black
arrows in the inset). (B) Schematics of the platform. Images (magnification
80X) of research slides (from one esophageal research biopsy per patient) are 
labeled as EoE or non-EoE on the basis of a pathologist’s analysis of 
corresponding clinical slides associated with the same endoscopy during
which the research biopsy was obtained. The full-size images are downscaled
and/or cropped using various approaches to smaller images that are then used 
to train a deep convolutional neural network (DCNN). eos, eosinophils; hpf,
high-power field; PEC, peak eosinophil count. 
 
Fig. 2. Steps in processing esophageal biopsy images to produce patches. (A)
A typical image of a hemotoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained esophageal biopsy 
section obtained from an individual with active EoE. The image was taken at
80X magnification. (B) The same image after background removal with an 
illustration of tissue coverage criteria per patch size to meet the threshold for
inclusion in training or validation sets. Box 1 (red): patch of 224X224 pixels
with less than 10% tissue coverage. Box 2 (yellow):  patch of 224X224 pixels 
with greater than 10% tissue coverage. Box 3 (red): patch of 448X448 pixels
with less than 10% tissue coverage. Box 4 (yellow): patch of 448X448 pixels
with greater than 10% tissue coverage. 

 
 
 
3 
 
might significantly bias the final diagnosis. Yet, this method 
indicates whether the scatter of the features is global or local by 
carefully comparing it to a random classifier.  
In this work, the chosen DCNN was ResNet50. Four different 
DCNNs were trained, wherein each of the input image sizes was 
obtained differently: 1) cropping the full image to patches of 
224X224 pixels (the optimal size for ResNet50), 2) cropping 
the full image to patches of 448X448 pixels and downscaling 
them to 224X224, 3) downscaling the original image to 
224X224 pixels resolution, and 4) downscaling the original 
image to 1000X1000 pixels resolution (Table I). This resolution 
was chosen because it represents nearly the maximum 
resolution possible for training on Nvidia 1080TI with a 
minimal mini-batch size of four images. Downscaling was done 
using bicubic interpolation. 
Patches were cropped with a sliding window of the desired 
input (224X224, 448X448 pixels) with steps of half of the input 
resolution for overlay, covering the full original images (an 
example of a full image is shown in Fig. 2A). Subsequently, 
only patches that had more than 10% tissue comprising the 
patch were chosen for training and validation sets (Fig. 2B). All 
valid patches were used for training. During training, rotation, 
translation, scaling, and flipping augmentation were performed.  
III. RESULTS  
Table Ⅰ summarizes the whole image classification results for 
the four downscale and/or crop approaches employed. First, we 
downscaled the original images to two different input image 
resolutions. If the majority of the information that defines the 
condition were local, we would expect that downscaling, 
resulting in smooth local features, would have a significant 
effect on the classification quality. Surprisingly, we found that 
downscaling the original images to a size of 1000X1000 did not 
result in a random classification, but instead resulted in a true 
positive rate (TPR) of 74.6% and a true negative rate (TNR) of 
96.8%. These results suggest that some of the information that 
defines the condition is local but is large enough to sustain the 
downscaling; alternatively, the information could be global. 
The bias towards negative classification (predicted prevalence 
[PP] <0.5), as indicated by the PP of 0.39, suggests that the 
information that determines the condition is more local, leading 
to more positive-labeled images having the same feature as 
negative-labeled images. Downscaling the full images even 
further to a size of 224X224 reduced both the TPR and the 
TNR. Yet, consistent with the hypothesis that the information 
that defines the positive images is more sensitive to 
downscaling, the PP remained similar, and the TPR was 
reduced more than the TNR (9.5% and 7.9%, respectively]. 
Next, we classified the whole images according to the sub-
classification of their patches. The predicted label assigned to 
the whole image (i.e., active EoE or non-EoE) resulted from the 
majority vote of the predicted labels of its patches (i.e., if 50% 
of patches were classified as active EoE, the whole image was 
classified as active EoE; if 50% of patches were classified as 
non-EoE, the whole image was classified as non-EoE). First, 
each image was parsed into patches, each with a size of 
448X448 that were then each downscaled to a size of 224X224. 
In this case, no substantial classification bias resulted; the PP of 
0.48 and the TPR of 82.5% increased substantially compared to 
the two downscaling methods described previously (Table I).  
Using patches of 224X224 that did not undergo downscaling 
yielded a similar TPR of 82.5%; however, the TNR decreased 
to 77.8%. This is likely due to the inherent tradeoff between the 
local and global information contained within the images. If an 
image is larger, it contains more global information, but the 
downscaling that is required prior to its input into the net is 
larger; thus, small features are smoothed out to a greater degree. 
In our case, using a 448X448 patch with downscaling provided 
a better TNR of 87.3% than did using smaller patches of 
224X224 without downscaling. Figure 3 summarizes the effect 
TABLE I 
WHOLE IMAGE PREDICTION 
Original 
Image 
Final DCNN 
input image 
resolution 
Active 
EoE 
(TPR) 
Non-
EoE 
(TNR) 
Accuracy 
Predicted 
Prevalence 
(PP)  
Full 
Image 
1000x1000 
(Downscale) 
74.6% 
96.8% 
85.7% 
0.39 
Full 
Image 
224x224 
(Downscale) 
65.1% 
88.9% 
77.0% 
0.38 
Patch = 
448x448 
224x224 
(Downscale) 
82.5% 
87.3% 
84.9% 
0.48 
Patch = 
224x224 
224x224 
82.5% 
77.8% 
80.2% 
0.52 
Whole image classification results for four downscale and/or crop approaches. 
The validation cohort of images (n = 63 active EoE; n = 63 non-EoE) was the 
same for each of the classifiers. True positive rate (TPR; number of images
classified as active EoE / number of active EoE images x 100), true negative
rate (TNR; number of images classified as non-EoE / number of non-EoE 
images x 100), accuracy (number of images accurately classified as either 
active EoE or non-EoE / total number of images x 100), and predicted 
prevalence (total number of images classified as active [i.e., true positive + false 
positive number of images] / total number of images) for each method are 
shown. DCNN, deep convolutional neural network. 
 
Fig. 3. Classification results as a function of initial image size and 
downscaling factor in the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) space. 
For each of the four downscale and/or crop approaches utilized to analyze 
the validation cohort of images (n = 63 active EoE; n = 63 non-EoE), the 
true positive rate (TPR) vs. (1 - the true negative rate [TNR]) with TPR 
and TNR expressed as proportions is graphed. Blue lines highlight 
accuracy measurements of 50% and 85% expressed as proportions. 

 
 
 
4 
 
of the initial patch size and downscaling factor in the receiver 
operating characteristic (ROC) space.  
To further analyze the tradeoff between locality and 
downscale factor, we evaluated the classification performance 
of the patches themselves (Table II). The results are consistent 
with the whole image majority vote classification. In particular, 
both the TNR of 79.7% and TPR of 77.0% of the 448X448 
patch downscaled to 224x224 are higher than those of the non-
scaled 224X224 patch. These results indicate that incorporating 
more information in a patch is more important than 
downscaling by a factor of two and supports the notion that 
global information drives the classification for EoE. 
To determine the effect of locality on the classification, we 
compared the distribution of prediction probability for patches 
with a size of 224X224 that did not undergo downscaling in two 
cases. In the first, each patch was labeled with the same label as 
the original image from which it was derived. In the second, 
each patch was assigned a random label.  
Figure 4 shows the distribution for each case. In the case in 
which the patch labels are true (Fig. 4A, B), the distribution is 
bi-modal. In the case in which the patch labels are random (Fig. 
4C, D), most of the patches are ambiguous, and thus the 
distribution is unimodal around 0.5. These collective case 
findings suggest that most of the patches that are classified 
correctly are not ambiguous. This indicates that the local patch 
labeling carries information that is relevant for the majority of 
the patches. 
IV. DISCUSSION  
One of the main challenges in digital pathology is that the 
features of the conditions are very small compared with the size 
of the sample. This feature-sample size disparity leads to an 
inherent tradeoff between the size of the analyzed image and 
the downscaling factor. In the case of small, local features, 
visualizing the image as smaller patches may impede the 
classification because most of the patches will not include the 
small, local features. However, if local features are the primary 
source of information about the condition, downscaling the 
whole image may smooth them out. 
Herein, we used DCNN and different downscaling and/or 
cropping 
approaches 
to 
achieve 
~85% 
accuracy 
in 
distinguishing active EoE from non-EoE esophageal biopsies, 
despite the relatively small number of labeled images utilized 
for training (n = 147 active EoE and n = 147 non-EoE). 
Although labeling relied primarily on a local feature (PEC ≥15 
eos/hpf), our results support that EoE is also associated with 
additional global histopathologic features that are learned by 
the classifier. Figure 5 illustrates possible scatter patterns for 
features that contribute to disease diagnosis. Of note, the 
 
TABLE Ⅱ 
PATCH PREDICTION 
Original 
image 
Final DCNN 
input image 
resolution 
Active 
EoE 
(TPR) 
Non-
EoE 
(TNR) 
Accuracy 
Predicted 
Prevalence 
(PP)  
Patch = 
448x448 
224x224 
(Downscale) 
77.0% 
79.7% 
78.3% 
0.49 
Patch = 
224x224 
224x224 
73.3% 
75.2% 
74.2% 
0.49 
Classification results for individual patches. The validation cohort of images (n
= 63 active EoE; n = 63 non-EoE) was subjected to cropping into patches with
the indicated pixel sizes and downscaled when indicated. True positive rate
(TPR; number of patches classified as active EoE / number of active EoE
patches x 100), true negative rate (TNR; number of patches classified as non-
EoE / number of non-EoE patches x 100), accuracy (number of patches
accurately classified as either active EoE or non-EoE / total number of patches
x 100), and predicted prevalence (total number of images classified as active
[i.e., true positive + false positive number of images] / total number of images)
for each patch size and downscaling method (if applicable) are shown. DCNN, 
deep convolutional neural network; TPR, true positive rate; TNR, true negative
rate. 
 
Fig. 4. Prediction ability of nonrandom (blue) and random (red) classifier. 
(A) 224X224: histogram of the number of patches derived from non-EoE 
images vs. the probability that they will be classified as active EoE by the 
nonrandom classifier. (B) 224X224: histogram of the number of patches 
derived from active EoE images vs. the probability that they will be classified 
as active EoE by the nonrandom classifier. (C) Random 224X224: histogram 
of the number of patches derived from non-EoE–labeled images vs. the 
probability that they will be classified as active EoE by the random classifier. 
(D) Random 224X224: histogram of the number of patches derived from 
active EoE–labeled images vs. the probability that they will be classified as 
active EoE by the random classifier. 
Fig. 5. Schematic of various potential distributions of local patterns within 
an esophageal biopsy section. An esophageal biopsy image is shown; red 
ovals denote a local feature that contributes to disease diagnosis. (A) Local 
pattern confined to a specific place in the tissue. (B) Local pattern 
distributed at the edge of the tissue. (C) Local pattern restricted to only half 
of the tissue. (D) Global pattern spread all over the tissue. 

 
 
 
5 
 
features could be clustered locally (e.g., a local increase in 
density of eosinophils), or they could be distributed uniformly 
throughout the tissue (e.g., morphology of structural cells 
comprising the tissue).   
The fact that images that were cropped into patches but were 
downscaled by a factor of greater than 10 (in terms of the 
number of pixels) provided low TPR, suggests that the features 
associated with the condition were not big enough for the 
classification task. However, if the features were distributed 
only locally (e.g., Fig. 5A-C), many patches cropped from the 
whole image would not include the features, and thus the 
classification according to patches would fail. However, in this 
study of EoE, most of these cropped patches were labeled 
correctly. Moreover, the classification was better with 448X448 
patches downscaled to 224X224 than non-scaled 224X224 
patches, suggesting presence of global features (Fig. 5D).  
Our results thus indicate that although the original labeling 
was based primarily on local features, additional global features 
are associated with EoE (Fig. 5D). This global information 
allows a classification with minimal PP bias (PP 0.49) and with 
only a small number of images. Our work highlights the 
importance of systematic analysis of the image size vs. 
downscaling tradeoff, particularly in digital pathology, for 
improving classification and gaining insight into the features’ 
spatial distribution underlying a condition. These findings 
present an initial artificial intelligence approach to diagnosing 
EoE using digital microscopy and have implications for 
analyzing other biopsy-based disease diagnoses. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Y.S. was supported by the American Federation for Aging 
Research, Israel Science Foundation #1619/20, Rappaport 
Foundation, The Prince Center for Neurodegenerative 
Disorders of the Brain #828931. M.E.R. was supported by NIH 
R01 AI045898-21, the CURED Foundation and Dave and 
Denise Bunning Sunshine Foundation. The authors would like 
to thank Tanya Wasserman for valuable discussions and 
Shawna Hottinger for editorial support.
