International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
DOI : 10.5121/ijsc.2012.3108                                                                                                                        91 
 
Multi source feedback based performance 
appraisal system using Fuzzy logic decision 
support system 
 
GMeenakshi 
 
 
Asst.Prof,Nalla Malla Reddy Engineering College, Department of Computer 
Science 
                   Hyderabad,Andhra Pradesh,India 
 

 
Abstract 
 
In Multi-Source Feedback or 360 Degree Feedback, data on the performance of an individual are collected 
systematically from a number of stakeholders and are used for improving performance. The 360-Degree 
Feedback approach provides a consistent management philosophy meeting the criterion outlined 
previously. The 360-degree feedback appraisal process describes a human resource methodology that is 
frequently used for both employee appraisal and employee development. Used in employee performance 
appraisals, the 360-degree feedback methodology is differentiated from traditional, top-down appraisal 
methods in which the supervisor responsible for the appraisal provides the majority of the data. Instead it 
seeks to use information gained from other sources to provide a fuller picture of employees’ performances. 
Similarly, when this technique used in employee development it augments employees’ perceptions of 
training needs with those of the people with whom they interact. The 360-degree feedback based appraisal 
is a comprehensive method where in the feedback about the employee comes from all the sources that come 
into contact with the employee on his/her job. The respondents for an employee can be her/his peers, 
managers, subordinates team members, customers, suppliers and vendors. Hence anyone who comes into 
contact with the employee, the 360 degree appraisal has four components that include self-appraisal, 
superior’s  appraisal, subordinate’s appraisal student’s appraisal and peer’s appraisal .The proposed 
system  is an attempt to implement the 360 degree feedback based appraisal system in academics especially 
engineering colleges. 
 
Keywords 
 
Multi source feed back, 360 degree feedback, performance appraisal system, fuzzy logic based decision  
support system for standards/rewards. 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
In recent years multi-source feedback systems (MSFS) also known as 360 Degree Appraisal 
became very popular. It became popular as it has been felt for long years that one person’s 
assessment of another individual cannot be free of biases. In addition, with the focus on 
customers (both internal and external) and emphasis on softer dimensions of performance 
(leadership, innovation, team work, initiative,   emotional intelligence, entrepreneurship etc.) it 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
92 
has become necessary to get multiple assessments for a more objective assessment. 360 Degree 
Appraisal is Multi- Rater Appraisal and Feedback System. Almost every Fortune 500 Company is 
using this in some form or the other. In this system, the candidate is assessed periodically (once in 
a year and sometimes even half yearly) by a number of assessors including his boss, immediate 
subordinates, colleagues, internal customers and external customers. The   assessment is made on 
a questionnaire specially designed to measure behaviors. 
 
Performance appraisal the latest mantra for career development is followed by many 
organizations across the world. “Get paid according to what you contribute” this is turning the 
focus of organization to performance management and individual performance. It helps to rate the 
employees and evaluate their contribution towards the organizational goals based on their 
performance. “Free Form method" generally involves description of the performance of an 
employee by his superior. This is an evaluation of the performance of any individual based on the 
facts and often includes examples and evidences to support the information. This system has the 
inseparability of the bias of the evaluator as major drawback. To overcome this new form of 
feedback “360-degree feedback” is formed, it is also known as 'multi-rater feedback'. In this 
system the feedback is taken from all the sources which come in contact with the employee on 
his/her job. The various sources include co-workers, managers and supervisors, customers, staff 
and the individual being evaluated. This provides full assessment of an individual based on 
feedbacks from multiple sources. 
 
It is an evaluation tool utilizing opinions of many different people who interact with the employee 
on a routinely manner. It generates more accurate feedback by gathering information from people 
about individual’s performance as seen by the organizational structure & expectations of their 
boss, self, peers, subordinates & customers. Definition takes different form when this system is 
applied to engineering education. Here participants are principal, head of the department, 
teaching staff members, students & laboratory assistants. 
 
In industries, 360 degree performance appraisal system is widely used nowadays. In 1997, only 
8% industries were using it, while this percentage has gone up to 52% by 2008. As far as 
engineering education is concerned (India & Abroad), this percentage is very less (upto 12%). 
Implementing 360 degree performance appraisal system provides more comprehensive 
performance ratings, as employees are given an opportunity to map their competencies. 
Performance rating of teacher can be decided by taking views of principal, head of the 
department, teaching staff members, students, laboratory assistants & university results. This 
appraisal system fits well in an educational institute. It will be a big task to measure individual’s 
skills, competencies, motivational drivers, work habits & potential for developing future 
competencies precisely. It is the best tool for identification of strengths of staff members for 
career development. It also identifies weaknesses for training & it can be used for salary 
recommendations. Feedback can be obtained by using a questionnaire which asks participants to 
rate the individual according to observed competencies/behaviors & data. 
 
1.1 The 360 degree performance appraisal system 
 
Typically, performance appraisals have been limited to a feedback process between employees & 
superiors. With the increased focus on teamwork, employee development & customer service, the 
emphasis has shifted to employee feedback from the full circle of sources. This multi input 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
93 
approach to performance feedback is called “360 degree assessment” to connote that full circle as 
shown in fig. 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 : 360 degree sources of feedback 
This system is a holistic approach incorporating views from many angles, multi level & multi 
source appraisal. Now by changing focus from industry to academia, sources in the circle will 
change. Different methods are available to assess the performance. Proper questionnaire has to be 
designed. For a teaching staff member, feedback from principal, students, colleagues, HOD & lab 
assistant will play an important role. Different methods are available to assess the performance. 
Subject results should be compared with the university results. While taking feedback from 
students, rating of students should also be decided. Following aspects are important for teaching 
staff member: Subject matter Mastery Contribution to curriculum development, Instructional 
designs & delivery, establishing a positive learning environment completing related 
administrative requirements, Community partnership includes developing partnerships with 
individuals, groups, social organizations outside the Institution.      
   
2. Related Works  
 
2.1. Performance Appraisal System  
 
Performance appraisal systems are quite useful in understanding & assessing the skills, potential 
and productive output of an employee. There are many methods available today for evaluating 
employee performance; 360 degree evaluation is an effective way of evaluating the performance 
of an employee. Like any other method, 360 degree appraisals need to be carried out with care to 
obtain  a fair and an accurate result. Harinder Singh, HR & strategic head, Vigneshwara 
Developers, tells us about the method, "360 degree appraisal is a comprehensive method wherein 
the feedback about the employees' performance comes from all the sources that come in contact 
with the employee on his job. The respondents for an employee can be his/her peers, managers, 
subordinates, team members, customers, suppliers/vendors; hence, anyone who comes into 
contact with the employee and can provide valuable insights and feedback regarding the ‘on-the-
job' performance of the employee. 360 degree appraisal has four integral components that include 
self-appraisal, superior's appraisal, subordinate's appraisal and peer appraisal." 360 degree 
appraisals are found to be very effective in assessing an employee's performance. 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
94 
Vishal Chibber, director HR, Kelly Services India, tells us about the benefits of this method, "360 
degree feedback is one of the most widely used employee assessments today as the process is 
more transparent and beneficial compared to any other appraisal procedure.”  
 
In a developing & knowledge-based economy, it is very important for organizations to understand 
the competencies needed in the workforce for business success, and then develop those qualities 
& skills on an ongoing basis. The appraisal results are used to identify the better performing 
employees who should get the majority of available merit pay increases, bonuses, and 
promotions. 
 
Performance appraisal is a formal management system that provides for the evaluation of the 
quality of an individual’s performance in an organization [4]. As mentioned by Dessler, G [5], 
performance appraisal has the means to evaluate an employee’s current and past performance 
relative to the employee’s performance standards. It is a process which involves creating work 
standards; evaluate employee’s actual performance relative to those work standards; and giving 
feedback to employee so as to motivate him or her to improve the job performance or to eliminate 
performance deficiency. In addition to that, Terrence, H. M and Joyce, M. [6] stated that, some 
potential aims of performance appraisal might include identifying particular behavior or job. 
Various techniques or methods have been used by human resource management experts to 
evaluate the performance of an employee. As outlined by Vicky G. [7], some of the appraisal 
methods include ranking; trait scales; critical incident; narrative; and criteria-based. Terrence, H. 
M. and Joyce, M. [6] mentioned few other methods including management-by-objectives (MBO), 
work planning and review, 360o appraisal and peer review. With all the available techniques, it is 
essential to understand that different organization might use different technique in assessing staff 
performance. Since all the techniques mentioned above has their own advantages and 
disadvantages, most organizations might mix and match different techniques for their own 
performance appraisal system that can fulfill their organizational needs.   Performance appraisal 
system has become one of the most valuable management tool in which organization members 
use to achieve collective goals. In order to ensure that the results of the performance appraisals 
are useful and reasonable to the superior when evaluating their subordinates, it is important for 
the performance appraisal system to consistently produce reliable and valid results for the 
management of an organization. Fuzzy based method has been applied into several performance 
appraisal systems. Proposed a methodology utilizing fuzzy set theory and electronic nominal 
group technology for multi-criteria assessment in the group decision-making of promotion 
screening. The study suggested that the methodology is a good method for a transparent and fair 
multi-criteria performance evaluation in military organizations. Researchers have demonstrated 
that fuzzy set theory could be successfully used to solve multiple criteria problems [8]. This is 
because, in many circumstances, appraiser tends to use vaguely defined qualitative criteria in 
evaluating the performance of their subordinates. Therefore, it creates difficulty for appraiser   to 
precisely quantifying the score of each candidate. worked on applying fuzzy set theory on 
computer-based fuzzy group decision support system (FGDSS). Based on the findings of their 
work, the application of fuzzy set theory in FGDSS is said to be able to assist decision maker to 
make better decisions under different circumstances and alternatives a good example of the 
application of the fuzzy-set theory to decision-making process is multifactorial evaluation model. 
This study has suggested that information can reasonably obtain and saw ability classification is 
reasonable and acceptable. The literatures that have been reviewed supported that the fuzzy set 
theory would be a good concept to be used in the development of the performance appraisal 
system. This is because fuzzy set theory allows the performance appraisal system to be developed 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
95 
by using some fuzzy variables and relationships. Therefore, the idea of incorporating this model 
in the performance appraisal system can be a promising approach. 
 
2.2. Application of Fuzzy based Multifactorial Evaluation Method 
 
Multifactorial evaluation is a good example of the fuzzy-set theory to decision-making process. 
Its purpose is to provide a synthetic evaluation of an object relative to an objective in a fuzzy-
decision environment that has many factors. Let U={u1,u2 ,u3,........ un) be a set of objects for 
evaluation., let F={f1,f2,f3,.......fm} be the set of basic factors in the evaluation process, and let  E = 
{e1, e2,......, en} be a set of descriptive grades or qualitative classes used in the evaluation. For 
every object  u € U there is a single- factor evaluation matrix R(u) with dimension m x p, which is 
usually the result of a survey. This matrix may be interpreted and used as a 2-D MF for fuzzy 
relation F X E. 
 
With the preceding three elements, F,E and R, the evaluation result D(u) for a give n object u € U 
can be derived using the basic fuzzy processing procedure: the max-min composition of fuzzy 
relations, where the resulting evaluation is in the form of a fuzzy set D(u) = [ d1,  d2, 3, d4] : 
 
D(u) = W(u).R(u) = [0.4 0.4 0.2] =            0.6   0.2  0.1   0.1 
 
 
 
 
            0.1    0.5  0.3   0.1 
                                                                      0.1   0.3  0.4   0.2 
 
                                     =[ 0.4   0.4   0.3  0.2 ] 
where example d1 is calculated through the following steps: 
                              d1  = (d1 = (w1 ^ r11) v (w2 ^ r21) v (w3 ^ r31)  
                                     =( 0.4 ^ 0.6 ) v (0.4 ^ 0.1 ) v (0.2 ^ 0.1) 
                                    = 0.4 v 0.1 v 0.1 
                                   = 0.4 
the values for d2 d3 and d4 are found similarly, where ^ an V represent the operations min and 
max ,respectively. Because the largest components of D(u) are d1 = 0.4 and d2 = 0.4 at the same 
time, the analyzed piece of faculty receives a rating somewhere between  SUPERIOR AND 
EXCEPTIONAL. 
 
3. Proposed Methodology 
 
Before the actual implementation of the system, questionnaires were prepared and distributed to 
the human resource section to evaluate the usability and effectiveness of the system. In order to 
demonstrate the application of multifactorial evaluation model in the performance appraisal 
system multifactorial evaluation model was developed. This performance appraisal system uses al 
criteria provided by the company by using the following steps. 
 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
96 
• 
Design questionnaire 
• 
Feedback process 
• 
Evaluation & communication 
• 
Formation of developmental plans 
• 
Follow up 
• 
Survey. 
 
3.1 PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL MODEL  
 
To reward and develop the human resource of the organization Performance appraisal is used by 
an organization to ensure that the organization runs smoothly and grow. Staffs are required to fill 
up every year, Yearly/semester.  Work plans prepared  to report on the progress of the tasks 
assigned as agreed early of the year. This is done at the beginning and at the middle of the year. 
At year end, the Yearly Work Plan is used to evaluate the performance of the staff throughout the 
whole year. The following diagram   describes the performance appraisal model of the company 
can be implemented in academics also as shown in Figure 2           
   
Beginning of the year                
Middle of the year 
              End of the year 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                    
Fig.2 
 
3.2 Staff Evaluation 
 
Four aspects will be taken into consideration when evaluating staff performance and each aspect 
will index into its sub criteria, as follows: audit and helps in revamping HR processes and 
systems for improved performance. Performance appraisals are frequently used in organization as 
a basic for administrative decision such as employee promotion, transfer and allocation of 
financial rewards; employee development, including identification of training needs and 
performance feedback. 
Aspect 1: Planning & Preparation of course (Effectiveness & Punctuality): designing student 
centric instructional content/course objectives, selecting instructional goals, assessing student 
learning. 
 
Aspect 2: The class room Environment (maintaining class room discipline & control of class): 
Creating an environment of respect and rapport, establishing a culture for managing class room 
procedures and managing student behavior.   
 
Aspect 3:Instuction delivery:(Communication & Knowledge skills) Communicating very clearly 
and accurately, using questioning and discussion  techniques engaging student in learning 
providing feedback to students, demonstrating flexibility and responsiveness. 
 
Allotment of subject, 
works and 
responsibilities to 
faculty by the 
Assessment of work 
based on multi source 
FEEDBACK 
Evaluation of 
performance using 
FUZZY LOGIC 
METHOD and 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
97 
Aspect 4: Professional Responsibilities& contributions (towards college and society): 
Maintaining accurate records, communication with families contributing to the college and state, 
growing and developing professionally. 
 
(a) Working output (Aspect 1): This aspect evaluates the quantity, quality and effectiveness of the 
staff’s working output as well as staff’s punctuality.  
 
(b) Knowledge and skills (Aspect 2): This aspect evaluates the staff’s knowledge and skills in the 
working field as well as their effectiveness in communication and realization of rules. 
 
(c) Personal quality (Aspect 3): This aspect evaluates the personal quality appreciated by the 
organization such as discipline, proactive, innovative, cooperativeness and independence. 
 
(d) Informal Event(s) and Contribution(s) (Aspect 4): Staff’s contribution to the organization, 
community, state, country and international.  
 
When evaluating staff’s performance, appraiser will use a scale of 1 to 10 to rate each sub criteria 
for each aspect mentioned above. 1 indicates that the staff was rated poorly in that particular sub 
criteria and 10 indicates that the staff was rated highly in a particular sub criteria. The verbal 
grade for the scale is shown in table 1. 
 
           VERBAL GRADES AND SCALE FOR EACH ASPECT 
 
 
VERBAL GRADES 
 
SCALE 
 
EXCEPTIONAL 
9 or 10 
SUPERIOR 
7 or 8 
FULLY SUCCESSFUL 
5 or 6 
MINIMALLY SUCCESFUL 
3 or 4 
SATISFACTORY 
1 or 2 
TABLE I 
3.3 Performance appraisal Process 
 
The proposed Model , the performance appraisal system is a combination of four multifactorial 
evaluation models. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
98 
 
U1 ,U2,U3,U4                                                                          
Aspect 1)                                                                                                                 
Aspect 2 
Aspect 3                                                                                                                
 
Aspect 4 
 
                                                                                                                        
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overall Rating (OR) 
D(u1),D(u2) ,D(u3),D(u) 
                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3 Proposed Application of Multifactorial Evaluation Model in Performance Appraisal System 
 
Algorithm: 
 
Step: 1.Use linguistic weighting variables. 
Step:2.Use linguistic rating variables 
Step: 3.Linguistic evaluations converted to matrix to  construct fuzzy decision  Matrix. 
Step: 4.The normalized fuzzy decision matrix is a single factor evaluation vector. 
Step: 5. Multiplication of matrices W(u) and R(u) is based on the min-max composition of fuzzy 
relations. 
  
As shown in Fig. 3, the models represent aspects to be evaluated in the staff performance 
appraisal. After getting the performance on each aspect from their superior, the staff’s overall 
ratings can be calculated by the following equation shown in Fig. 3 above. In Fig. 3, U is the 
factors to be evaluated in each aspect whereas D(u) is the result of staff’s performance in a 
particular aspect. The first evaluation model in Fig. 3 uses U1, that is, the factors in Aspect 1 as 
its input.  
 
The sub criteria for this aspect will be used as the basic factors under this aspect which are: 
f1 = quantity of working output 
f2 = quality of working output 
f3= Punctuality and 
f4 = Effectiveness of working output 
 
Therefore, F = {f1, f2, f3, f4}. 
 
The verbal grades used for the appraisal are: 
e1 = Exceptional 
e2 = Superior 
e3 = fully successful 
e4 = minimally successful 
W(u)
W(u).R(u) 
R(u)
Performance Aspect 1 
                                   
 
Performance Aspect 2 
    
                                            
Performance Aspect 3 
                                              
perrformance Aspect 4 
Staff performance aspect 1*10 
 Staff performance aspect 2*15 
 Staff performance aspect 3*25 
Staff performance aspect 4*50 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
99 
e5 = Satisfactory 
 
Therefore, E = {e1, e2, e3, e4, e5}. 
 
The single-factor evaluation for each aspect for a staff’s performance in terms of working 
output(Aspects), can be derived as follows. As an example, the weights of the f1 are, 10% for 
Exceptional, 40% for  superior, 30% for Fully successful, 10% for minimally successful, and 10% 
for satisfactory, thus, the single-factor evaluation vector R1(u) is: 
R1(u) = {0.1, 0.4, 0.3, 0.1, 0.1} 
In the same way, the single-factor evaluation vectors for f2, f3, and f4 which have been gained 
are as shown as below:- 
R2(u) = {0.2, 0.5, 0.2, 0.1, 0.0} 
R3(u) = {0.5, 0.3, 0.1, 0.1, 0.0} 
R4(u) = {0.2, 0.5, 0.2, 0.1, 0.0} 
As a result, by referring to the single-factor evaluations vectors stated above, the following 
evaluation matrix can be built:- 
 
R(u) =     R1(u) = {0.1 0.4 0.3 0.1 0.1} 
                R2(u) = {0.2,0.5 0.2 0.1 0.0} 
              R3(u)={ 0.5 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.0} 
              R4(u)= {0.2 0.5 0.2 0.1 0.0} 
 
W(u) is the weighting factors. Therefore, it is the appraiser’s rating towards a staff for all the sub 
criteria in a particular aspect. As an example, assume that the appraiser’s rating for weight vector 
corresponding to the four factors in all aspects are: 
 
W1(u) = {0.2, 0.3, 0.3, 0.2} 
W2(u) = {0.3, 0.4, 0.3} 
W3(u) = {0.2, 0.3, 0.2, 0.3} 
W4 (u) = {0.1} 
 
Multiplication of matrices W(u) and R(u) is based on the min-max composition of fuzzy 
relations, where the resulting evaluation is in the form of a fuzzy set D(u) = [d1, d2, d3, d4] [9]. 
Since the aspect of Working Output has five verbal grades, that is,  
 
E = {e1, e2, e3, e4, e5} 
 
which would be involved in the performance appraisal system, thus, the resulting evaluation is in 
the form of a fuzzy set D(u) = [d1, d2, d3, d4,d5] as shown below:- 
 
 
D(u) = W1(u) . R(u)= [0.2 0.3 0.3 0.2] .   0.1 0.4 0.3 0.1 0.1 
0.2 0.5 0.2 0.1 0.0       =  [0.3 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.1 
                                  
 
 
 0.5 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.0 
   
                                  
 
 
0.2 0.5 0.2 0.1 0.0]           
 
 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
100 
They are calculated through the following steps as shown below whereby ^ represent the 
operations min and v represent the operation max. 
 
d1 = (w1 ^ r11) v (w2 ^ r21) v (w3 ^ r31) v (w4 ^ r41) 
= (0.2 ^ 0.1) v (0.3 ^ 0.2) v (0.3 ^ 0.5) v (0.2 ^ 0.2) 
= 0.1 v 0.2 v 0.3 v 0.2 
= 0.3 
 
d2 = (w1 ^ r12) v (w2 ^ r22) v (w3 ^ r32) v (w4 ^ r42) 
= (0.2 ^ 0.4) v (0.3 ^ 0.5) v (0.3 ^ 0.3) v (0.2 ^ 0.5) 
= 0.2 v 0.3 v 0.3 v 0.2 
= 0.3 
 
d3 = (w1 ^ r13) v (w2 ^ r23) v (w3 ^ r33) v (w4 ^ r43) 
= (0.2 ^ 0.3) v (0.3 ^ 0.2) v (0.3 ^ 0.1) v (0.2 ^ 0.2) 
= 0.2 v 0.2 v 0.1 v 0.2 
= 0.2 
 
d4 = (w1 ^ r14) v (w2 ^ r24) v (w3 ^ r34) v (w4 ^ r44) 
= (0.2 ^ 0.1) v (0.3 ^ 0.1) v (0.3 ^ 0.1) v (0.2 ^ 0.1) 
= 0.1 v 0.1 v 0.1 v 0.1 
= 0.1 
 
d5 = (w1 ^ r15) v (w2 ^ r25) v (w3 ^ r35) v (w4 ^ r45) 
= (0.2 ^ 0.1) v (0.3 ^ 0.0) v (0.3 ^ 0.0) v (0.2 ^ 0.0) 
= 0.1 v 0.0 v 0.0 v 0.0 
= 0.1 
Since the largest components of  
D(u) are d1 = 0.3, and d2 =0.3 
at the same time. Referring to the verbal grades,  
 
E = {EXCEPTIONAL, SUPERIOR, FULLY SUCCESSFUL, MINIMALLY SUCCESSFUL, 
SATISFACTORY} 
 
the analyzed staff’s performance in terms of working output obtained a rating somewhere 
between “EXCEPTIONAL” and “SUPERIOR”. However, by applying the principle of the 
biggest subjection degree as used  by Guifeng, G. et. al. [12], the staff’s performance in terms of 
working output is Aspect is“EXCEPTIONAL”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
101 
4. Experimental Results 
 
Table II: Verbal grades and weighting for each aspect of performance 
 
                                                              
Aspect 
Verbal Grades 
Weighting for Each 
Aspect 
 
Aspect 1 
Exceptional 
    1.0 
Superior 
     0.8 
Fully Successful 
     0.6 
Minimally Successful 
     0.4 
Satisfactory  
     0.2 
Aspect 2 & 3 
Exceptional 
     1.0 
 
Superior 
     0.8 
Fully Successful 
    0.6 
Minimally Successful 
    0.4 
Satisfactory 
    0.2 
Aspect 4 
Exceptional 
    1.0 
 
Superior 
    0.8 
 
Fully Successful 
    0.6 
 
Minimally Successful 
    0.4 
 
Satisfactory 
    0.2 
 
The same method of calculation can be applied to U2, U3,and U4, which are, the aspect of 
Knowledge and Skills, the aspect of Personal Quality, and the aspect of Informal Event(s) and 
Contribution(s), respectively. Following this, the verbal grades and weighting for each aspect as 
shown in Table II is being referred when calculating a staff’s overall average ratings:-The staff’s 
overall average rating (AR) is:- 
 
AR = (Aspect 1 * 50) + (Aspect 2 * 25) + (Aspect 3 * 20) +(Aspect 4 * 5)Based on Table II, the 
analyzed staff’s performance in terms of working output obtained a rating of “EXCEPTIONAL”. 
As a result, 1.0 would be the weighting for Aspect 1. Meanwhile, according to what have been 
computed by using the multifactorial evaluation model, the staff has been rated as “FULLY 
SUCCESSFUL” or the weighting of 0.6 in terms of Knowledge and Skill. As for the aspect of 
Personal Quality, the staff’s performance is “MINIMALLY SUCCESSFUL” or the weighting of 
1.0 would be selected. As for the Informal Event(s) and Contribution(s), the staff has gained an 
“SATISFACTORY” performance or the weighting of 0.8 for this aspect. Thus, the rating and 
weighting for each aspect is as summarized below:-TABLE III 
 
 
 
 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
102 
Table-III: SUMMARIZED RATING AND WEIGHTAGE OF THE 4 ASPECTS of 
Performance 
 
Aspect 
Rating 
Weighting 
 
Aspect  1 
 
EXCEPTIONAL 
1.0 
 Aspect 2 
 
SUPERIOR 
0.6 
 Aspect 3 
 
FULLY  
SUCCESSFUL 
1.0 
 Aspect 4 
 
SATISFACTORY 
0.8 
 
 
Table-IV: Marks for different sources of  feedback 
 
s.r.no
Feed back
Marks
1.
Feedback from superior
  50
2.
Feedback from peer groups
  25
3.
Feedback from 
students/results 
  20
4.
Self 
    5
 
Here we have following points to remember:  
 
•  Every source of feedback  has marks.  
•  According  to  select  option,  final  getting  marks  of particular  source is  calculated  using     
above table grades and scale.  
Therefore, the staff’s Overall Performance Rating (OPR) is:- 
 
OPR = ((1.0 * 50) + (0.6 * 25) + (1.0 * 20) + (0.8 * 5))= 89  
 
fig 4: 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
103 
 
 
As a result, according to the calculation above and by referring to Table V below, the staff would 
be categorized in the “High Performer(s)” group, Medium Performer(s) group, Average 
Performer(s) group and Low Performer(s) group. 
 
Table V BENCHMARK / STANDARD USED IN DETERMINING STAFF’S PERFORMANCE 
 
Overall Average Ratings 
Group 
Remarks 
 
Above 80%  
(GROUP I) 
 
 
 
High 
performer(s) 
 
• An incentive of RM 1000. 
• A certificate of 
appreciation.  
• Entitled for “Best 
Service Award”. 
Less than 80% 
but more than  60 
(GROUP II) 
 
Medium 
Performer(s) 
• An incentive of RM 500 
• Advised to improve 
their performance in the coming year 
 
Less than 60% 
but more than  50% 
(GROUP III) 
 
Average 
performer(s) 
• Advised to improve 
their performance in the coming year 
•should attend training  sessions& 
workshops 
 
Less than 40%  
 
(GROUP IV) 
 
Low 
Performer(s) 
• Disciplinary action 
might be taken towards the staff. 
• Should constantly report his / her 
work progress to his / her assessors in a 
stated period 
 
Fig 5:     BENCHMARK / STANDARD USED IN DETERMINING STAFF’S PERFORMANCE 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Conclusion & Future direction 
 
Multifactorial evaluation model is used in assisting high-level management, to appraise their 
employees. Utilizing the concept of using four multifactorial evaluation model in the performance 
appraisal system could ease the changes need to be made in this system whenever it is necessary. 
This model follows a systematic step in determining a staff’s performance, and therefore, it 
creates a system of appraisal which is able to consistently produce reliable and valid results for 
the appraisal process. In order to allow others to use this system, the aspect to be evaluated and 
the weightage for each of these aspects need to be define in the system before hand.   
 
Good engineering institutes are those where activities are designed & prompted which result in 
personal, social, academic & career oriented growth of students & staff. 360 degree performance 
appraisal is the best tool to achieve this goal. Objective of this system is to identify areas for both 
organizational & individual improvement. For educational institutes, it is necessary to align 
personal goal of staff member with organizational expectation. This system can be used as a 
diagnostic & assessment tool to increase employee participation & to demonstrate a commitment 
to their workforce. 360 degree feedback determines relationship between strategic plan/vision of 
institute &performance expectations. It increases focus on customer service & reinforce 
continuous process improvement programs. Team based culture can be developed for attaining 
organizational objectives. Staff members become more inclined to consider factors beyond 

International Journal on Soft Computing ( IJSC ) Vol.3, No.1, February 2012 
105 
HOD’s expectations when exhibiting behaviors & striving for results. It detects barriers to 
success.  
 
For performance assessment and adequate support in decision making the proposed model 
produced significant bases. So the research on the issue can be continued. Important aspect of this 
issue that could focus on in the future is that this model can be extended to all types of employee 
assessment in Universities and Engineering colleges. For fast results Excel charts can be used or 
an interface can be developed using math-lab or vc++. 
 
6. Acknowledgement 
 
I am heartily thankful to Dr. Mrs. Divya Nalla , Principal, Nalla Mallareddy Engineering College 
Whose encouragement and support resulted in the preparation of paper.I am thankful to Dept 
HOD for allotting us research hours. I am also thankful to Mr. Mani Sarma Assoc. Prof whose 
encouragement guidance and support from the initial to the final level.
