Identifying centres of interest in paintings
using alignment and edge detection.
Case studies on works by Luc Tuymans ⋆
Sinem Aslan1[0000−0003−0068−6551] and Luc Steels2[0000−0001−9134−3663]
1 Ege University
International Computer Institute, Izmir, Turkey

http://akademik.ube.ege.edu.tr/~aslan/
2 Catalan Institut for Advanced Studies (ICREA)
Institute for Evolutionary Biology (UPF-CSIC) Barcelona

https://www.icrea.cat/Web/ScientificStaff/Steels-Luc-539
Abstract. What is the creative process through which an artist goes
from an original image to a painting? Can we examine this process using
techniques from computer vision and pattern recognition? Here we set
the ﬁrst preliminary steps to algorithmically deconstruct some of the
transformations that an artist applies to an original image in order to
establish centres of interest, which are focal areas of a painting that carry
meaning. We introduce a comparative methodology that ﬁrst cuts out the
minimal segment from the original image on which the painting is based,
then aligns the painting with this source, investigates micro-diﬀerences
to identify centres of interest and attempts to understand their role.
In this paper we focus exclusively on micro-diﬀerences with respect to
edges. We believe that research into where and how artists create centres
of interest in paintings is valuable for curators, art historians, viewers,
and art educators, and might even help artists to understand and reﬁne
their own artistic method.
1
Introduction
There is already a signiﬁcant body of research investigating artistic paintings
using techniques from pattern recognition, computer vision and AI. For exam-
ple, some researchers have used deep learning to extract patterns from a series
of paintings in order to obtain a statistical model of the painter’s style and then
⋆This work was made possible thanks to a ’scientist in residence of an artist stu-
dio’ grant to Luc Steels and Studio Luc Tuymans. The residency was funded by
the European Commission’s S+T+ARTS programme, set up by DG CONNECT. It
was organized by BOZAR, a Belgian art centre located in Brussels, and GLUON,
a Brussels organisation facilitating art-science interactions. Additional funding for
this research has come from the H2020 EU project MUHAI on Meaning and Under-
standing in AI.
arXiv:2101.00858v1  [cs.CV]  4 Jan 2021

2
S. Aslan and L. Steels
create new images in the same style [14]. Others use neural networks for clas-
sifying paintings [3] or semantic web technology for organizing large collections
based on rich ontologies so that these collections can be searched in more pow-
erful ways [2]. In addition, many projects have been using image processing to
assist in conservation work, artist identiﬁcation, detection of forgery, and many
other applications [4]. This paper focuses on a new, complementary aspect of art
investigation, which attempts to understand the artistic creation process through
AI modeling.
We start from the hypothesis that an artist tries to stimulate a process of
narrative creation in the viewer and uses the expressive means available in the
chosen medium. In the case of painting, this includes objects and ﬁgures being
depicted, lines, colors, contrast, composition, blurring of background, etc. The
artist is in a sense engaged in a form of cognitive engineering [5], manipulating
the mental processes of viewers by shaping their sensory experiences and memory
recalls. The creation of an artistic painting is therefore more than the application
of a particular style to an existing image, as done in deep generative adversarial
neural network experiments [14]. A style can certainly be recognized by current
AI technology and even replicated, but the creation of an artwork is more than
achieving formal appearances in a particular style. It is about choosing a perti-
nent subject, transforming images into more powerful ones, and evoking a web
of meanings in the viewer.
Consequently, the interpretation of an artwork has a strong similarity with
the understanding of a text and the creation of an artwork is similar to the
production of a text, with the important diﬀerence that many of the meanings
expressed or invoked by paintings or works in other media, like music or dance,
are pre-verbal. They concern conceptualizations, emotions, moral values and
perspectives that are not so easy to put into words. These meanings resonate
with viewers at a subconscious level and, partly for this reason, they may evoke
a stronger reaction from the viewer than obtainable from a purely rational text.
Art works activate the non-rational, non-cognitive areas of the brain, such as
the emotion system [10] or the social brain [20].
A work of art is complex and rich because it evokes the diﬀerent levels of
meaning (formal, factual, expressional, cultural, intrinsic) at the same time and
the meanings at each level intimately interact with others [12]. Moreover which
set of meanings resonates with one viewer is usually not the same as those res-
onating with another viewer or with those originally felt or intended by the artist,
simply because everybody has their own episodic and semantic memory, their
own prior experiences of artworks, their own social context and psychological
state when viewing, experiencing and interpreting an artwork. There is there-
fore no objectively ‘correct’ set of meanings and it would be futile to develop an
AI system that would extract such a set. However, this paper will try to show
that we can nevertheless study artistic methods, i.e. the kind of transformations
an artist performs on a real scene or a found image in order to induce meanings
in the viewer.
An important part of the artistic painting method consists in the introduction

Detecting centres of interest in paintings
3
of visual centres of interest, attention getters which guide meaning invocation.
They are instantiated partly by what is being represented, for example, an iconic
image of a well known person which is appropriated by the artist, such as the
well-known image of Marilyn Monroe used by Andy Warhol. Partly there are
objects or parts of objects where the human vision system naturally pays atten-
tion to, for example the eyes of a face. And in addition, artists often introduce
deviations from what is expected, for example they deform the nose on a face,
or they use devices such as contrast, bright colors, sharp edges, blurring of back-
ground, ﬂattening out of 3d eﬀect, etc.
There is often a ﬁrst most salient centre of attention, called the primary focal
point, which pulls the viewer into the painting. For example, in the case of Figure
1 (left), the focal point is clearly the left eye and to a second degree the lips. The
primary focal point introduces an organizing perspective from which the gaze of
the viewer starts its exploration. Then there are additional focal points, as the
viewers’ eye gaze glances over the diﬀerent parts of the painting.
In earlier work in collaboration with Bj¨orn Wahle [16], we already used var-
ious computer vision methods to investigate how saliency identiﬁes the primary
focal point. The ﬁrst set of saliency detection methods we tried on the Tuymans
paintings were low-level, in the sense that they estimate saliency based on gen-
eral statististical properties of the visual image [16]. In this paper we introduce
a complementary new and quite diﬀerent methodology to study which areas in
a painting are interest centres. The methodology is based on comparing an orig-
inal source image (for example a photograph) with the painting based on it and
deconstructing the interventions the painter undertook to transform one into the
other. Many contemporary painters expressly use existing images from popular
culture to make contact with their audience and thus comment on contemporary
media culture. Our comparative methodology contains four steps:
(i) Locate the original image, either directly from the painter or searching
information resources like images available on the world wide web or in image
repositories using reverse image search.
(ii) Align the painting with the original image. This involves ﬁnding the min-
imal set of macro-operations performed by the artist, such as cutting, rotating,
or scaling so that the contents of the painting are optimally aligned with the
corresponding segment in the original image.
(iii) Zoom in on regions where there have been micro-transformations focus-
ing on speciﬁc aspects of the painting, for example changes in shape, blurring,
changes in illumination, edges diﬀerences, color changes, etc. The diﬀerence map
between original image and painting for each of these aspects provides us with
hypotheses what areas may be centres of interest and triggers inquiries in their
possible meaning.
(iv) Importantly we then want to understand the meanings of these macro-
and micro-transformations. This cannot be done at the moment with AI but
introspection and conversations with the artist will help us to move in this di-
rection in the future. In any case we have found that the suggestions coming out

4
S. Aslan and L. Steels
of the previous steps are very illuminating because they tell us where to look. In
any case, they have enriched the experience of paintings by the present authors.
2
Case studies
The present paper reports the ﬁrst results from applying our comparative method-
ology using paintings by the contemporary Flemish painter Luc Tuymans. Work-
ing with a living artist makes it possible to validate our hypotheses about what
the centres of interest are in a particular painting and they can tell us whether
AI techniques have yielded anything worthwhile, not only for viewers, curators
or art historians but also for those creating artworks themselves.
Luc Tuymans is considered to be one of the most important contemporary
painters at the moment [19]. He has done solo exhibitions at some of the most
prestigious and inﬂuential art centres in the world such as the MOMA in New
York, the Palazzo Grassi in Venice, the MCA Museum of Contemporary Art in
Chicago, BOZAR in Brussels, the St¨adel Museum in Frankfurt, the National Art
Museum of Beijing, etc. We have been fortunate because we have a direct and
recurrent contact with this painter and have access to the relevant parts of his
digital archives. Moreover Luc Tuymans is very articulate in describing his own
artistic method as well as the methods used by other painters [18].
We have constructed a general interactive pipeline of pattern recognition,
computer vision and AI algorithms to apply our methodology and processed
several paintings by Luc Tuymans. Here we only focus on those parts of the
pipeline that involve alignment and edge detection. The paintings we have stud-
ied in detail so far have come from the solo exhibition of Luc Tuymans at the
Palazzo Grassi in Venice (2019-2020) but we have also done experiments on
all the paintings Luc Tuymans documented in his Catalogue Raison´e[11]. Given
space limitations, we focus in this paper mainly on one speciﬁc painting, entitled
K., shown in Figure 1 (left) where the focus on edge diﬀerence maps has been
fruitful. But we also show a second example, entitled Secrets, shown in Figure
8, where a focus on edge diﬀerences has yielded less results, mainly because the
changes at the edge level are too numerous - hence we get too many possible
centres of interest.
3
STEP I. Finding the original image
Due to direct contacts with the artist, we have had access to several original
sources for the Palazzo Grassi paintings, including the one for K. (see Figure 1,
right). But we also wondered whether, with the massive availability of images on
the web and the sophistication of current image recognition technology, it was
possible to ﬁnd the original source image using reverse image search with the
painting as a key.
Interestingly, a reverse image web search with the painting K. did not deliver
anything close to a possible source image for K., even though the source was
also available on the web (see below). It appears that there are properties of

Detecting centres of interest in paintings
5
Fig. 1. Left: ‘K.’ by Luc Tuymans, 2017, oil on canvas. 135 × 80,2 cm. Andrew Xue
Collection, Singapore. Right: Source image as provided by the artist.
artistic paintings which make the use of reverse image search algorithms diﬃcult,
whereas a human observer immediately recognizes that the painting on the left of
Figure 1 depicts the woman shown on the right. The issue of domain adaptation
has become a recent hot topic in computer vision research but we have not
applied these new methods yet [22].
On the other hand, once an original source image is available, reverse image
search systems, like the one provided by Google or Bing, are able to locate this
original and its variants, even if the provided original image is only a segment
within a larger image or parts of the original image are not included. Thus
using the original image in Figure 1 (right), we found the actual context of the
original image. It turned out to come from an advertising campaign by Dior (see
Figure 2), showing a clothing line designed by fashion designer Raf Simons and
photographed by Willy Vanderperre, both alumni of the Antwerp art academy
where Tuymans studied as well. The scene has been set up on the Normandy
coast in France. Notice that in the advertisement, the top hair of K. is cut out
which is not the case in the original image for K. provided by the painter.
Fig. 2. Image from the Dior Autumn-Winter 2015 campaign with clothes designed by
Raf Simons and photography by Willy Vanderperre. The fashion model to the left, the
basis of K., is Julia Nobis.

6
S. Aslan and L. Steels
Finding the original image of a painting is of interest from an art-history point
of view and it provides important cues as to the factual and cultural meaning of
the painting. This kind of fashion advertisement imagery - not necessarily this
particular image - is familiar to everybody through magazines and posters and it
reﬂects contemporary culture. Luc Tuymans expropriates the esthetic elements
and the staging of the fashion models but at the same time removes completely
the original context in order to create a timeless image.
4
STEP II. Aligning the painting and the original
The next step in our methodology is to align the original image with the painting.
This is a very non-trivial image processing problem. For this paper, we did a
manual selection of a possible candidate image, cutting out a segment that left
out as much as possible of the material that was not in the painting, because we
found that the vision algorithms we tried do not work well when there was too
much additional extra material in the source image.
Given a good candidate, the alignment problem becomes similar to the so
called image registration task [9] which is widely used in medical imaging, au-
tomated manufacturing, satellite navigation, and many other application ﬁelds
for comparing or integrating data acquired from diﬀerent sensors, at diﬀerent
times, or with diﬀerent depth or viewpoints. Image registration algorithms fuse
multimodal information or detect changes on such images. Given a set of two
images, the one that will be transformed is called the moving image, and the
one that is left unchanged, is called the reference image.
In the present investigation, we view the original image (the photograph)
as the moving image and try to align it to the painting by progressively trans-
forming the original image. The painting is therefore the reference image in
image registration terminology. This is the perspective of the painter because
the painter transforms the original image into a painting. Conversely, we can
start from the painting, which now becomes the moving image, and try to align
it to the original image, which now becomes the reference image, by transforming
the painting to look similar to the photograph. This is in a sense the perspective
from the viewer who sees the painting and then tries to align it with an image
stored in his or her episodic memory. Both approaches yield interesting results,
but in this paper we focus mainly on the painter’s perspective only.
Image registration has been discussed intensely in the computer vision lit-
erature and many algorithms exist, primarily feature-based or intensity-based
methods [9]. Feature-based methods aim to ﬁnd a correspondence between im-
age features such as interest points, lines, and contours, while intensity-based
methods aim to align pixel patterns via correlation or similarity metrics. In this
paper, we will rely only on the multi-modal intensity-based registration method,
implemented using the Matlab Registration Estimator App with its default pa-
rameters.1
1 https://www.mathworks.com/help/images/register-images-using-the-registration-estimator-app.
html

Detecting centres of interest in paintings
7
We also experimented with the feature-based approach trying to detect the
candidate features on source and target images by various well-known algo-
rithms, in particular, the Maximally stable extremal region method (MSER)[7]
and the Speeded up Robust Features Method (SURF) [1]. However, we found that
the output of the feature-based approaches performed poorly for the alignment
task, possibly due to the signiﬁcant gap between source and target images, as
one is a photograph and the other a painting. Using features from these classical
methods leads to the detection of too many low quality interest points to yield
eﬀective alignment.
Manual cropping
Resize to
1000 pixels on
the y-axis
Photograph
Painting
Reference: Painting
   Moving: Photograph
 Reference: Photograph
Moving: Painting
Alignment
Fig. 3. Flow diagram for image alignment of K. The top show the ‘viewer’s perspective’,
using the painting as moving image and the photograph as reference image, and at the
bottom, we show the ‘painter’s perspective’ with the photography as moving image and
the painting as reference image. To show the overlay, the painting is rendered using a
purple color and the original photograph using green.
We operationalized alignment using a best-ﬁrst search algorithm, as used
for example in [17]. The Mattes mutual information metric [13] is used to com-
pute the similarity between source and target. It is shown in [13] that this metric
leads to better alignment than the Mean Squares metric when the goal is to align
images from diﬀerent modalities using rigid transformations, which is the case
here. The algorithm searches for a set of transformation parameters that produce
the best possible alignment result. Given a matrix of transformation parameters
M, called the parent, a number of variations M1, ... Mn, called the children,
are generated, at ﬁrst using aggressive perturbations. The perturbations include
shape-preserving transformations like rotation, translation, isotropic scaling, and
reﬂection. If a child Mi’s parameters yield a better alignment, then it becomes
the new parent on the next iteration. But if a parent still yields a better result, it
remains as a parent and new children are computed with less aggressive changes
to the parent’s matrix.

8
S. Aslan and L. Steels
5
STEP III. Micro-transformations
Once we have adequately aligned the original image with the painting, it be-
comes possible to inquire about the micro-transformations that the painter has
introduced and their function. These variations have happened for diﬀerent vi-
sual aspects, e.g. color, contrast, ﬁgure orientation, contours, etc. and so we need
to ﬁrst isolate these aspects from the image. In the rest of this paper we only look
at edges, which means that we investigate which additional edges or edge varia-
tions the painter has introduced, The ﬂow diagram of this pipeline is illustrated
in Fig. 4. We have experimented with two algorithms, a traditional edge detec-
Edge detection
Difference map
Painting and aligned
original image
Fig. 4. Flow diagram for edge detection. It shows the edge maps for K. on top for the
painting and below for the original image at diﬀerent scales based on the TIN method.
The diﬀerence map is shown with purple for the photograph, green for the painting
and black when edges overlap.
tion method, namely the Sobel Isotropic 3×3 gradient operator (SOBEL), and a
deep neural network known as the Traditional Inspired Network (TIN) recently
introduced by Wibisono and Hang [21]. The SOBEL edge detection method has
been a very popular and widely used algorithm in image processing since 1968
[15]. It is based on derivation of a simple and computationally eﬃcient gradient
operator. In order to calculate the approximations of derivatives for horizontal
and vertical intensity changes, the gray-scaled input image is convolved with two
3 × 3 kernels as follows :
Gx =


+1
0
−1
+2
0
−2
+1
0
−1

∗I
Gy =


+1
+2
+1
0
0
0
−1
−2
−1

∗I
where I denotes the input image in grayscale, Gx and Gy are two images which at
each point contain the vertical and horizontal derivative approximations. Then,

Detecting centres of interest in paintings
9
the resulting gradient approximations are combined to have the gradient mag-
nitude at each point in the image, using G =
q
G2x + G2y. Subsequent images
showing the results of the Sobel Method, display this gradient magnitude G.
Deep neural network frameworks have originally been designed for high-level
computer vision tasks such as object recognition or scene understanding through
semantic segmentation. Edge detection is a more local and simpler task so that
a lightweight deep learning network can provide high quality edges with reduced
computational complexity. This approach has been adopted by the Traditional
Method Inspired Network (TIN ) proposed very recently by Wibisono and Hang
[21] with reported state of the art accuracy performances on the BSDS500 test
set. The framework is composed of three modules, i.e., Feature Extractor, En-
richment, and Summarizer, which roughly correspond to gradient, low pass ﬁlter,
and pixel connection in the traditional edge detection schemes. The pre-training
of the TIN method was performed on three datasets of natural images BSDS500,
In our experiment, we used the published code2 by the authors and we used their
pretrained model on the aforementioned datasets for the proposed architecture
TIN2, since higher performances were reported by TIN2 compared to TIN1 in
[21]. To make a fair comparative analysis between the SOBEL and TIN methods,
Fig. 5. Comparison of two edge detection methods, taking the painter’s perspective
(going from photograph to painting). The painting edges are in green and the photo-
graph edges in purple. Left: the diﬀerence map for the SOBEL method. Middle: the
diﬀerence map for the TIN method. We see that the TIN method provides clearer edges
showing the variations introduced by the painter in a clearer way.
we applied the same post-processing operation, namely Non-Maximum Suppres-
sion (NMS), to both edge-detection methods, i.e. we computed edge maps at
diﬀerent scales, 1.5x, 1x, 0.5x, for both the origin and target, took the aver-
age of these maps, and resized the edge maps to the original image size, i.e.,
x = 1000. As mentioned in [21], this procedure provides better-located edges.
2 https://github.com/jannctu/TIN

10
S. Aslan and L. Steels
Finally, we compute the edge diﬀerence maps for further analysis. Figure
5 shows the outcome after thresholding in order to binarize the edge map so
that the signiﬁcant edges stand out more. Before such a thresholding operation,
SOBEL had provided a more noisy edge detection map than TIN. However, after
thresholding we observe that while some edges detected by TIN were preserved,
some edges detected by the SOBEL method where removed. As TIN preserved
better signiﬁcant edges, we proceed for further analysis with the edges detected
by the TIN method.
We now can compute centres of interest, being those areas on the painting
for which there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the two edge maps. The al-
gorithm proceeds in three steps: [i] Compute ﬁrst the bounding boxes around
the thresholded edges only contained in the painting, so neither in the picture
only nor in both. Only those edges are retained which form an area containing
more than a points (pixels) with a perimeter containing more than p points. The
bounding box is extended slightly (with an addition of c). [ii] Concate neighbors
of bounding boxes by merging overlapping boxes from step [i] into larger boxes.
[iii] Step [ii] is iterated until there are no overlapping bounding boxes. The dif-
ferent parameters a, p, and c allow us to tune these steps to get more or fewer
centres of interest. Results are shown in Figure 6. (i) shows the result of step [i]
with a = 100, p = 70, and c = 0.0023. (ii) shows the result of step [i] projected
on the painting. (iii) shows the result of applying step [ii] for two iterations at
which point there are no more overlapping bounding boxes.
Fig. 6. Computing the centres of interest based on edge diﬀerence maps. (i) Aggrega-
tion of edge diﬀerences. (ii) Projection of aggregation on painting. (iii) Expansion of
bounding boxes.
We see in Figure 6,(iii) that the following centres are proposed: (a) the lips
area at the bottom, speciﬁcally the right side of the lips (’right’ from the per-
spective of the person being depicted), (b) the right eye and the area around it,
speciﬁcally the region where the eyebrow reaches the top of the nose, the pupil
and the line under the right eye, (c) the nose area with the nostril and the curve
at the right wing of the nose, (d) the left eye, particularly the corner with the
nose, and (e) the region above the left eye.

Detecting centres of interest in paintings
11
6
STEP IV. Deconstructing possible meanings
Do these newly discovered centres of interest make any sense? A closer look at
the original photograph and the painting shows that there is actually a subtle
diﬀerence in facial expression between the photograph and the painting. This
becomes clearer if we compare the centres of interest projected on the edge map
of the painting (ii) and the photograph (iii) (see Figure 7).
Fig. 7. Edge maps with centres of intrest (TIN method). (i) Projection on edge map
of painting, (ii) Projection on edge map of original photograph.
We see that on the painting, the facial expression of K. is more open and
presents a weak smile, whereas on the photograph, the expression is more sturdy
and closed. The more open facial expression is achieved by very subtle changes.
The left corner of the lips in the painting is curled upward, the nostril more
pronounced, the eye pupil bigger, the eyebrows showing a clearer V-shape, and
the line under the left eye being more visible. These changes are subtle and
unconscious to the viewer but they have an impact on the interpretation process,
as they all point to a more open weakly smiling facial expression.
To see whether this interpretation has any validity. It is instructive to consider
a ‘gold standard’ narrative about painting K. oﬀered by Marc Donnadieu, chief
curator of the Mus´ee de l’Elys´ee in Lausanne and published in the guidebook of
the La Pelle exhibition at the Palazzo Grassi in Venice:[6]
”The artist was inspired by advertising billboards he saw in Panama,
which feature women’s faces that have been smoothed out to the point
of erasing their personality. As a ﬁlmmaker would do, he zoomed on this
face so close that it is partially cut out and incomplete. By moving his
‘paintbrush camera’ so close he treats this female face as if it was an
object, which is precisely the purpose of advertising, in particular when
selling beauty products. This approach renders the face empty, almost
dead, especially because it is not contextualized. But by zooming this
way, the artist also highlights the gaze of this woman who has been so

12
S. Aslan and L. Steels
objectiﬁed that she doesn’t even have a name, just a letter, K. And her
gaze is very expressive, as if she tried to exist beyond the image and
the commercial proﬁt that is sought through her. She seems deﬁant,
aware that she is exploited and ready to stand up as she looks far ahead,
maybe towards a future where women will not be treated as objects. The
treatment is smooth, ﬂat, and the pastel colors highlight the contrast
between the artiﬁcial aspect of advertising imagery and the humanity of
all women. K’s mouth is shut, but she smiles discreetly and her silence
speaks volumes.”
The painting may be inspired by billboards in Panama on beauty products,
although we have seen that the direct inspiration are fashion models from an
advertising campaign of Dior. Nevertheless the way women are represented is
undoubtly similar. There is an objectiﬁcation [8] of the human body, more con-
cretely in this case of the human face. This objectiﬁcation is present in the
photography but even more so in the painting: The extreme focus on the face
so that there is an almost complete elimination of the context, the use of pastel
color, the ﬂat treatment of the skin to smoothen out details that make natural
faces alive, the choice of a letter K. for the title of the painting, instead of a real
name. Marc Donnadieu mentions expressional meanings like: ‘smile discreetly’,
‘deﬁant’, ‘expressive gaze’ which conﬁrm the subtle changes in lips, eyes, eye-
brows and nose that the edge-based comparative methodology detected. This
example therefore illustrates the idea that AI methods can act like a microscope
that draws attention to interest regions and helps us see details that would
otherwise remain unconscious.
7
A second case study
We now show very brieﬂy a second example from the 2019-2020 Palazzo Grassi
solo exhibition by Luc Tuymans, a painting entitle Secrets. It depicts one of
the main ﬁgures of the Nazi regime, Albert Speer, who has always denied any
knowledge of the Holocaust atrocities. Figure 8 shows ﬁrst the painting as well
as the source image, which has been cropped from a larger image that shows
Speer in full Nazi regalia. Figure 8 shows next the results of using the same
alignment process as used for K., both for aligning the picture on the painting
and the painting on the picture.
We see that the alignment algorithm works very well, even though this case is
much more challenging as the face is slightly rotated, stretched along the y-axis
and squeezed along the x-axis. Figure 9 shows the results of edge detection using
the TIN method with the diﬀerence map projected on the photograph. Again
the results are very satisfactory. Finally, Figure 10 shows the same operations
as in Figure 6, now on the edge diﬀerence map of ‘Secrets’. Again we have to
ask whether the regions identiﬁed through this process function as meaningful
centres of interest. Unfortunately there are clearly too many regions to allow a
meaningful analysis, mainly because there are a lot of changes that the artist
has made to the original source image. These changes are all purposeful. They

Detecting centres of interest in paintings
13
Fig. 8. From left to right: (i) painting, (ii) original photograph, (iii) alignment picture
on painting (iv) aligning of painting on picture.
have to do with making the face more geometric, closed-oﬀ, inward-looking and
in denial. Most probably using other aggregation algorithms could lead to more
useful results.
Fig. 9. From left to right: (i) edges from painting, (ii) edges from aligned photograph,
(iii) edge diﬀerence map painter’s perspective.
Fig. 10. Computing the centres of interest based on edge diﬀerence maps. (i) Aggre-
gation of edge diﬀerences. (ii) Projection of aggregation on painting. (iii) Expansion of
bounding boxes.

14
S. Aslan and L. Steels
8
Conclusions
It is well known that painters never attempt to paint exactly a chosen image
(or a real world scene) but transform it to achieve an artistic purpose - except
in artistic movements where realism is in itself an artistic statement, like in
hyper-realistic art. This paper reported on attempts to deconstruct algorithmi-
cally what transformations a contemporary painter carried out and discussed
in how far paying attention to the regions identiﬁed by this process helps us in
the construction of a narrative capturing the meanings invoked by a painting.
AI algorithms are used here as microscopes that allow us to look in detail at
transformations which are normally only experienced at a subconscious level.
This paper focused on edge diﬀerences only. In one case study (the paint-
ing entitled K.), the regions found through comparing edge diﬀerences indeed
point to centres of interest that can be interpreted. In the second case study
(‘Secrets’) alignment and edge detection worked well but useful conclusions in
terms of centres of interest could not be reached. These examples show that the
comparative method is only at its ﬁrst beginning. There are other dimensions of
transformation that must be studied in equal detail and color is the most likely
candidate. More generally, the hard but certainly fascinating, work remains to
see how far the type of analysis proposed here can help to recognize and label
the objects in a painting, detect the general mood, the emotions being expressed
by the depicted ﬁgures, and much more, all in the service of supporting narrative
construction in viewers.
