Solving Markov Decision Processes with Reachability Characterization
from Mean First Passage Times
Shoubhik Debnath1, Lantao Liu2, Gaurav Sukhatme3
Abstract— A new mechanism for efﬁciently solving the
Markov decision processes (MDPs) is proposed in this paper. We
introduce the notion of reachability landscape where we use the
Mean First Passage Time (MFPT) as a means to characterize
the reachability of every state in the state space. We show
that such reachability characterization very well assesses the
importance of states and thus provides a natural basis for
effectively prioritizing states and approximating policies. Built
on such a novel observation, we design two new algorithms
– Mean First Passage Time based Value Iteration (MFPT-VI)
and Mean First Passage Time based Policy Iteration (MFPT-
PI) – that have been modiﬁed from the state-of-the-art solution
methods. To validate our design, we have performed numerical
evaluations in robotic decision-making scenarios, by comparing
the proposed new methods with corresponding classic baseline
mechanisms. The evaluation results showed that MFPT-VI and
MFPT-PI have outperformed the state-of-the-art solutions in
terms of both practical runtime and number of iterations.
Aside from the advantage of fast convergence, this new solution
method is intuitively easy to understand and practically simple
to implement.
I. INTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORK
Decision-making in uncertain environments is a basic
problem in the area of artiﬁcial intelligence [1], [2], and
Markov decision processes (MDPs) have become very popular
for modeling non-deterministic planning problems with full
observability [3], [4].
In this paper, we investigate the exact solution methods for
solving the MDPs.We are especially interested in the MDPs
that are widely applied in the artiﬁcial intelligence domain,
such as the decision-theoretic planning [5], where the agent
following the optimal policy eventually enter a terminal state
deﬁned as a goal/destination.
Contribution:
Our objective is to further improve the
convergence behavior of the MDPs’ solving mechanism.
To realize that, we are introducing a new MDP solution
method with a novel design, and we are showing that such
design allows us to gain insights on designing efﬁcient
heuristics to speed up the convergence of the MDPs. In greater
detail, we introduce the notion of reachability landscape
which is essentially a “grid-map" measuring the degree of
difﬁculty for each state transiting to the terminal/goal state.
1Shoubhik Debnath is with NVIDIA Corporation, Santa Clara, CA 95051,

2Lantao Liu is with the Intelligent Systems Engineering Department at

3Gaurav Sukhatme is with the Department of Computer Science at the

The paper was published in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
By “reachability" we mean that based on the current discrete
stochastic system, how hard it is for the agent to transit
from the current state to the given goal state. In other words,
reachability can be viewed as the reachability with regards
to arriving at the terminal state.
To compute the reachability landscape, we use the Mean
First Passage Time (MFPT) which can be formulated into
a simple linear system. We show that such reachability
characterization of each state reﬂects the importance of this
state, and thus provides a natural basis that can be used
to upgrade and accelerate both value iteration (VI) and
policy iteration (PI) mechanisms, e.g., it can be utilized
for prioritizing states for the standard VI process and
approximating policy for the standard PI procedure. More
speciﬁcally, we design two novel algorithms that have been
modiﬁed from the state-of-the-art solution methods. Our two
algorithms include the Mean First Passage Time based Value
Iteration (MFPT-VI) and the Mean First Passage Time based
Policy Iteration (MFPT-PI). Experimental evaluations showed
that both MFPT-VI and MFPT-PI are superior to the state-of-
the-art methods in terms of both the practical runtime and
the number of iterations needed to converge.
Related Work: The basic computational mechanisms and
techniques for MDPs have been well-understood and widely
applied to solve many decision-theoretic planning [5], [6]
and reinforcement learning problems [7], [8]. In general, the
fundamental solving mechanism is to exploit the dynamic
programming (DP) structure which can be computed in
polynomial time. Value iteration and policy iteration are two
of the most famous and most widely used algorithms to solve
the MDPs [9], [10].
An important related heuristic for efﬁciently solving MDPs
is the prioritized sweeping [11], which has been broadly
employed to further speed up the value iteration process.
This heuristic evaluates each state and obtains a score based
on the state’s contribution to the convergence, and then
prioritizes/sorts all states based on their scores (e.g., those
states with larger difference in value between two consecutive
iterations will get higher scores) [12], [13]. Then in the
immediately next dynamic programming iteration, evaluating
the value of states follow the newly prioritized order. The
prioritized sweeping heuristic is also leveraged in our MFPT
based value iteration procedure, and comparisons with base-
line approaches have been conducted in our experimental
section.
Important related frameworks for solving MDPs also
include compact representations such as linear function
representation and approximation [9], [3] used in the policy
arXiv:1901.01229v1  [cs.AI]  4 Jan 2019

iteration algorithms. The linear equation based techniques
(detailed formulation is provided in the paper) do not exploit
regions of uniformity in value functions associated with states,
but rather a compact form of state features that can somewhat
reﬂect values [14]. Our method for computing the MFPT
can also be formulated into a linear system. However, the
intermediate results generated from MFPT are more direct:
they very well capture – and also allow us to visualize – the
“importance" of states, and can lead to a faster convergence
speed which is demonstrated in the experiments.
Another relevant strategy is called real-time dynamic
programming (RTDP) [15] where states are not treated
uniformly. Speciﬁcally, in each DP iteration, only a subset of
most important states might be explored, and the selection
of the subset of states are usually built on and related to
agent’s exploration experience. For a single DP iteration, the
RTDP usually requires less computation time in comparison
to the classic DP where all states need to be swept, and
thus can be extended as an online process and integrated
into the real-time reinforcement learning framework [16].
Similar strategies also include the state abstraction [17], [18],
where states with similar characteristics are hierarchically
and/or adaptively grouped together, either in ofﬂine static
or online dynamic aggregation style. Although we believe
our proposed framework can be easily extended to the
fashions of RTDP’s partial states exploration and the adaptive
states abstraction/computation, in this work we consider the
complete and full exploration of all states, and compare with
state-of-the-art methods that evaluate across the entire state
space.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Markov Decision Processes
Deﬁnition 2.1: A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a
tuple M = (S, A, T, R), where S = {s1, · · · , sn} is a set of
states and A = {a1, · · · , an} is a set of actions. The state
transition function T : S × A × S →[0, 1] is a probability
function such that Ta(s1, s2) is the probability that action
a in state s1 will lead to state s2, and R : S × A →R
is a reward function where Ra(s, s′) returns the immediate
reward received on taking action a in state s that will lead
to state s′.
A Markov system is deﬁned as absorbing if from every
non-terminal state it is possible to eventually enter a terminal
state such as a goal/destination state [14]. We restrict our
attention to absorbing Markov systems so that the agent can
arrive and stop at a goal.
A policy is of the form π = {s1 →a1, s2 →a2, · · · , sn →
an}. We denote π[s] as the action associated to state s. If
the policy of a MDP is ﬁxed, then the MDP behaves as a
Markov chain [19].
B. MDP Solution Methods
Here we discuss prevalent solution methods including the
value iteration and policy iteration, as well as state-of-the-art
heuristics/variants.
1) Value Iteration: The value iteration (VI) is an iterative
procedure that calculates the value (or utility in some litera-
ture) of each state s based on the values of the neighbouring
states that s can directly transit to. The value V (s) of state s
at each iteration can be calculated by the Bellman equation
shown below
V (s) = max
a∈A
X
s′∈S
Ta(s, s′)

Ra(s, s′) + γV (s′)

,
(1)
where γ is a reward discounting parameter. The stopping
criteria for the algorithm is when the values calculated on two
consecutive iterations are close enough, i.e., maxs∈S |V (s)−
V ′(s)| ≤ϵ, where ϵ is an optimization tolerance/threshold
value, which determines the level of convergence accuracy.
Prioritized Sweeping: The standard Bellman recursion
evaluates values of all states in a sweeping style, following
the index of the states stored in the memory. To speed up
the convergence, a heuristic called prioritized sweeping has
been proposed and widely used as a benchmark framework
for non-domain-speciﬁc applications. The algorithm labels
a state as more “interesting" or more “important" during a
particular iteration, if the change in the state value is higher
when compared to its previous iteration. The essential idea
is that, the larger the value changes, the higher impact that
updating that state will change its dependent states, thereby
taking a larger step towards convergence.
2) Policy Iteration: The policy iteration (PI) is an anytime
algorithm because at any iteration there will be a feasible
policy (although not necessarily optimal). The PI involves
the following two steps. The ﬁrst step also known as policy
evaluation is responsible for calculating the value V (s) of
each state s given some ﬁxed policy π(s) until convergence.
This is followed by a step called policy improvement. Here, the
policy π(s) is updated based on the resulting converged values
of each state. The optimal policy is obtained at convergence
when πi+1 = πi, where i is the iteration index. Each policy
improvement step is based on the following equation:
π(s) = arg max
a∈A
X
s′∈S
Ta(s, s′)

Ra(s, s′) + γV π(s′)

. (2)
There are two ways of computing the policy evaluation step.
1) The ﬁrst approach is to perform Bellman updates
iteratively till convergence given some ﬁxed policy using
the below equation.
V π
i+1(s) =
X
s′∈S
Tπ(s)(s, s′)

Rπ(s)(s, s′) + γV π
i (s′)

.
(3)
We represent this version of policy iteration where policy
evaluation is performed using Bellman updates as Policy
Iteration (PI) throughout the paper.
2) The second approach to perform policy evaluation is
through linear equation approximation where we solve
a linear system as shown in Eq. (4). This outputs the
optimal values of each state corresponding to a given

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 1.
Illustration of reachability landscape. (a) Demonstration of a simple simulation scenario with dark blocks as obstacles, and the goal
state as a red circle; (b)-(e) MFPT based reachability landscapes; (f) Converged optimal policy shown in red arrows.
policy.
∀s,
V π(s) =
X
s′∈S
Tπ(s)(s, s′)

Rπ(s)(s, s′)+γV π(s′)

.
(4)
The variables in this system of linear equation are V π(s),
whereas T, R are constants given a ﬁxed policy. We call
this version of policy iteration as Policy Iteration - Linear
Equation (PI-LE) throughout the paper.
C. Mean First Passage Times
The ﬁrst passage time (FPT), Tij, is deﬁned as the number
of state transitions involved in reaching states sj when started
in state si for the ﬁrst time. The mean ﬁrst passage time
(MFPT), µij from state si to sj is the expected number of
hopping steps for reaching state sj given initially it was in
state si [20]. The MFPT analysis is built on the Markov chain,
and has nothing to do with the agent’s actions. Remember
that, when a MDP is associated to a ﬁxed policy, it then
behaves as a Markov chain [19].
Formally, let us deﬁne a Markov chain with n states and
transition probability matrix, p ∈IRn,n. If the transition
probability matrix is regular, then each MFPT, µij = E(Tij),
satisﬁes the below conditional expectation formula:
E(Tij) =
X
k
E(Tij|Bk)pik
(5)
where, pik represents the transition probability from state
si to sk, and Bk is an event where the ﬁrst state transition
happens from state si to sk. From the deﬁnition of mean ﬁrst
passage times, we have, E(Tij|Bk) = 1 + E(Tkj). So, we
can rewrite Eq. (5) as follows.
E(Tij) =
X
k
pik +
X
k̸=j
E(Tkj)pik
(6)
Since, P
k pik = 1, Eq. (6) can be formulated as per the
below equation:
µij = 1+
X
k̸=j
pik ·µkj
⇒
X
k̸=j
pik ·µkj −µij = −1, (7)
Solving all MFPT variables can be viewed as solving a system
of linear equations






p11 −1
p12
..
..
p1n
p21
p22 −1
..
..
p2n
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
pn1
pn2
..
..
pnn −1












µ1j
µ2j
..
..
µnj






=






−1
−1
..
..
−1






.
(8)
The values µ1j, µ2j, ...., µnj represents the MFPTs calculated
for state transitions from states s1, s2, ...., sn to sj and
µjj = 0. To solve above equation, efﬁcient decomposition
methods [21] may help to avoid a direct matrix inversion.
III. TECHNICAL APPROACH
A. Reachability Characterization using MFPT
The notion of MFPT allows us to deﬁne the reachability
of a state. By “reachability of a state" we mean that based
on current ﬁxed policy, how hard it is for the agent to transit
from the current state to the given goal/absorbing state. With
all MFPT values µij obtained, we can construct a reachability
landscape which is essentially a “map" measuring the degree
of difﬁculty of all states transiting to the goal.
Fig. 1 shows a series of landscapes represented in heatmap
in our simulated environment. The values in the heatmap
range from 0 (cold color) to 100 (warm color). In order to
better visualize the low MFPT spectrum that we are most
interested, any value greater than 100 has been clipped to 100.
Fig. 1(b)-1(e) show the change of landscapes as the MFPT-PI
algorithm proceeds. Initially, all states except the goal state
are initialized as unreachable, as shown by the high MFPT
color in Fig. 1(b).
We observe that the reachability landscape conveys very
useful information on potential impacts of different states.
More speciﬁcally, a state with a better reachability
(smaller MFPT value) is more likely to make a larger
change during the MDP convergence procedure, leading
to a bigger convergence step. With such observation and

Algorithm 1: Mean First Passage Time based Value
Iteration (MFPT-VI)
1 Given states S, actions A, transition probability Ta(s, s′) and
reward Ra(s, s′). Assume goal state s∗, calculate the optimal
policy π
2 while true do
3
V = V ′
4
Calculate MFPT values µ1s∗, µ2s∗, · · · , µ|S|s∗by solving
the linear system as shown in Eq. (8)
5
List L := Sorted states with increasing order of MFPT
values
6
foreach state s in L do
7
Compute value update at each state s given policy π:
V ′(s) =
maxa∈A
P
∀s′∈S Ta(s, s′)

Ra(s, s′) + γV (s′)

8
if maxsi |V (si) −V ′(si)| ≤ϵ then
9
break
the new metric, we can design state prioritization schemes
for the VI and policy update heuristics for the PI, which are
discussed next.
B. Mean First Passage Time based Value Iteration (MFPT-VI)
Classic VI converges the solution through Bellman update
as shown in Eq. (1), which essentially sweeps all states by
treating them equally important. The “prioritized sweeping"
mechanism has further improved the convergence rate by
exploiting and ranking the states based on their potential
contributions, where the metric is based on comparing the
difference of values for each state between two consecutive
iterations.
The new MFPT-VI method is also built on the prioritized
sweeping mechanism, but we propose a metric using the
reachability (MFPT values), because as aforementioned, the
reachability characterization of each state reﬂects the potential
impact/contribution of this state, and thus provides a natural
basis for prioritization. Our reachability based metric is
different from the existing value-difference metric as follows:
The reachability landscape can very well capture the
degree of importance for all states from a global
viewpoint, whereas the classic value-difference strategy
evaluates states locally, and may fail grasping the
correct global “convergence direction" due to the local
viewpoint.
Note that, since the MFPT computation is relatively expensive,
it is not necessary to compute the MFPT at every iteration, but
rather after every few iterations. The computational process
of MFPT-VI is pseudo-coded in Alg. 1.
C. Mean First Passage Time based Policy Iteration (MFPT-
PI)
Remember that the classic PI algorithm involves two steps:
policy evaluation and policy improvement. In this sub-section,
we propose a new policy improvement mechanism.
Policy Evaluation: Classic policy evaluation utilizes either
local policy optimization (shown in Eq. (3)) or a linear
equation approximation (shown in Eq. (4)) to obtain a new
Algorithm 2: Mean First Passage Time based Policy
Iteration (MFPT-PI)
1 Given states S, actions A, transition probability Ta(s, s′) and
reward Ra(s, s′). Assume goal state s∗, calculate the optimal
policy π
2 Initialize with an arbitrary policy π′
3 while true do
4
π = π′
5
foreach state s of |S| do
6
Compute value of each state s, V(s) given the policy
π using Eq. (3)
7
foreach state s of |S| do
8
Improve policy π at each state s using Eq. (2)
9
Calculate the MFPT values µ1s∗, µ2s∗, · · · , µ|S|s∗by
solving the linear system in Eq. (8)
10
foreach state s of |S| do
11
Update policy at state s with the action a that leads to
state s′ with the minimum MFPT value:
π′(s) = arg mina∈A µs′s∗
12
if π = π′ then
13
break
set of values V (s), ∀s ∈S. Our MFPT-PI also employs the
local optimization rule described in Eq. (3).
Policy Improvement: The policy improvement of MFPT-
PI is based on MFPT values. To approximate a good and
feasible policy, the operation can be even simpler than the
classic approach. We propose an intuitively simple and com-
putationally cheap heuristic which shows great performance:
the action selection can be following (or weighted by) the
“gradient" of reachability landscape. For instance, in the agent
motion planning scenario where each state transits to some
set of states in the vicinity, the locally optimal action can
be selected to transit to the neighbouring state with the least
MFPT value.
Alternating the above two steps allow us to converge
to the solution. Fig. 1 illustrates the basic idea. In the
beginning, a random policy is initialized and all states
except the goal are pre-set with high MFPT values, see
Fig. 1(b). In the ﬁrst iteration, after completing the policy
evaluation, the reachability landscape is shown as Fig. 1(c),
which characterizes the reachability regions at a high level.
The result is more like an image segmentation solution
where regions with distinct reachability levels are roughly
partitioned: since in the middle area there are a few obstacles
that separate the space, the reachability landscape is split into
two regions, with upper area being well reachable and the
lower part fully un-reachable. With a couple more iterations,
the reachability landscape is reﬁned until low level details are
well characterized (see Figs 1(d)-1(e)). In essence, a major
beneﬁt of the proposed MFPT-PI algorithm is that: at earlier
stage of the convergence, it captures the big picture; and later
it focuses on improving the details once the policy becomes
better.
It is worth mentioning that, if there are multiple
goal/absorbing states, then each goal state will require to

compute its own MFPT landscape, and the ﬁnal reachability
landscape will be normalized by all MFPTs corresponding
to all terminal states.
D. Time Complexity Analysis
The classic VI algorithm has a time complexity of
O(|A||S|2) per iteration where |S| represents number of
states and |A| represents number of actions. The classic
PI has a time complexity of O(|A||S|2 + |S|2.3) if a linear
equation solver is used (the matrix decomposition has a time
complexity of O(|S|2.3) if state-of-the-art algorithms are
employed [21], given that the size of matrix is the number
of states |S|). Since, both the proposed MFPT-VI and MFPT-
PI algorithms involve a key step for calculating the MFPT
which also needs to solve a linear system, therefore, for each
iteration, both the MFPT-VI and MFPT-PI algorithms have a
time complexity of O(|A||S|2 +|S|2.3). Although, the MFPT
is an extra component (and cost) introduced to the VI and
PI mechanisms, our reachability characterization enables the
MDP solving process to converge in much fewer steps. An
important point to note here is that the MFPT values don’t
need to be computed frequently at every iteration and it is
only calculated when characterizing global feature is needed,
which also reduces the practical runtime.
It is also worth mentioning that, although the time com-
plexity for matrix decomposition is O(|S|2.3) in general, for
sparse matrices, efﬁcient decomposition techniques perform
much faster than O(|S|2.3) where the time complexity
depends on the number of non-zero elements in the matrix.
For example, in certain robotic motion planning scenario, the
robot transits to states within a certain vicinity causing the
transition probability matrix to be sparse by nature. Inspite
of this additional time complexity per iteration, MFPT based
algorithms have faster overall runtime than existing solution
methods because they converge in much fewer steps. Results
are presented in the following section.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Experimental Setting
Task Details: We validated our method through numerical
evaluations with two different simulators running on a Linux
machine. We consider the MDP problem where each action
can lead to transitions to all other states with certain transition
probabilities. However, in many practical scenarios, the
probability of transiting from a state to another state that
is “weakly connected" can be small, even close to 0. This can
potentially result in non-dense transition matrix. For example,
in the robotic motion planning scenario, the state transition
probability from state si to state sj can be correlated with
the time or distance of traveling from si to sj, and it is
more likely for a state to transit to some states within certain
vicinity.
For the ﬁrst task, we developed a simulator in C++ using
OpenGl. To obtain the discrete MDP states, we tessellate
the agent’s workspace into a 2D grid map, and represent the
center of each grid as a state. In this way, the state hopping
between two states represents the corresponding motion in
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 2.
(a) Demonstration of simulation environment, with the
agent’s initial state (blue) and the goal state (red). Grey blocks
are obstacles; (b) Converged optimal policy (red arrows) and a
trajectory completed by the agent to reach the goal; (c)-(f) Evolution
of reachability landscapes.
the workspace. Each non-boundary state has a total of nine
actions, i.e., a non-boundary state can move in the directions
of N, NE, E, SE, S, SW, W, NW, plus an idle action returning
to itself. A demonstration is shown in Fig. 2.
For the second task, we developed a simulator in C++
using ROS and rviz. The agent’s workspace is partitioned
into a 3D grid map where the center of each grid represents
a MDP state. Each non-boundary state has a total of ﬁve
actions, i.e., a non-boundary state can move in the directions
of N, E, S, W, TOP, BOTTOM plus an idle action.
In both tasks, the objective of the agent is to reach a goal
state from an initial start location in the presence of obstacles.
The reward function for both setups is represented as high
positive reward at the goal state and -1 for obstacle states.
All experiments were performed on a laptop computer with
8GB RAM and 2.6 GHz quad-core Intel i7 processor.
B. 2D Grid Setup
In this setup, we compare our proposed algorithms with
their corresponding baseline algorithms in terms of the
practical runtime performance, iterations required to converge
and their convergence proﬁle. Later, we also performed some
analysis on time costs of individual components and MFPT
invoking frequency.
Practical Runtime Performance: We ﬁrst investigate the
time taken by the algorithms with changing number of states.
Fig. 3(a) compares the time taken by VI, VI-PS and MFPT-VI
algorithms. In MFPT-VI, the MFPT component is computed
every three iterations. Also, the convergence thresholds are
set the same for all methods. The results show that VI is the
slowest, and VI-PS is faster than VI due to the prioritized
sweeping heuristic. And our proposed MFPT-VI is much
faster than the other two algorithms. Although, time taken
per iteration for MFPT-VI is higher than that of the classic
VI, overall the MFPT-VI takes the least time due to much
fewer convergence steps and also because MFPT values
are computed every three iterations. Below, we will further

(a)
(b)
Fig. 3.
Time comparisons between the baseline methods and our
proposed algorithms, with changing numbers of states (x-axis). (a)
Variants of value iteration methods. (b) Variants of policy iteration
methods.
elaborate on why we have decided not to calculate the MFPT
values every iteration.
Fig. 3(b) compares the time taken by PI, PI-LE, and MFPT-
PI. The results also show that the MFPT-PI is the fastest
compared to the other two algorithms. Note that, both MFPT-
PI and PI-LE require to compute linear equations, and in
our implementation we use the Eigen library. (Since the
reachability characterization does not require high MFPT
accuracy, among many provided decomposition solvers we
chose one of the fast variants which however do not provide
the highest accuracy.)
Number of Iterations: We then analyze the number of
iterations taken by the algorithms as the number of states
change. Fig. 4(a) compares the number of iterations taken
by VI, VI-PS and MFPT-VI, respectively. The results reveal
that MFPT-VI converges the fastest compared to the other
two algorithms. Fig. 4(b) compares the iterations taken by
PI, PI-LE, and MFPT-PI. Again, we can see that MFPT-PI
converges the fastest among all three algorithms.
Convergence Proﬁle: Here, we investigate the detailed
convergence proﬁle along with the increasing number of
iterations. Since one important criterion to judge the conver-
gence is to see if the error/difference between two consecutive
iterations is small enough, thus, we utilize the maximum error
∆S across all states as an evaluation metric. Speciﬁcally, for
VI, VI-PS, MFPT-VI, the error ∆S is deﬁned as
∆S = max
si∈S |V (si) −V ′(si)|
(9)
where V , V ′ represent the values of states at iteration i and
i + 1. For PI, PI-LE and MFPT-PI, the ∆S is deﬁned as
the total number of mismatches between two consecutive
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.
Iteration to convergence between the baseline methods
and our proposed algorithms, with changing numbers of states (x-
axis). (a) Variants of value iteration methods. (b) Variants of policy
iteration methods.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5. (a) The progress of VI, VI-PS and MFPT-VI across iterations.
(b) The progress of PI, PI-LE and MFPT-PI across iterations.
iterations’ policies:
∆S =
X
si∈S
Iπ(si), where Iπ(si) =
(
0, if π(si) = π′(si)
1, otherwise
(10)
where π and π′ represent the policy at iteration i and i + 1,
respectively.
Fig. 5(a) shows that initially VI, VI-PS and MFPT-VI
start with the same ∆S value. It is very obvious that our
MFPT-VI approach has an extremely steep decrement in the
ﬁrst few iterations. For example, in our simulation scenario
with around 2500 states and a threshold value of 0.1, the
MFPT-VI converged in only 19 iterations; in contrast, VI
took 55 iterations and VI-PS took 45.
Fig. 5(b) shows proﬁles for PI, PI-LE and MFPT-PI. Note
that, with the policy obtained after the ﬁrst iteration, MFPT-PI
already produced a smaller ∆S value compared to the other
two algorithms. After that, the ∆S values in case of MFPT-
PI are lower than those of PI and PI-LE. For instance, in
the same simulation example mentioned above, our MFPT-PI
method converged in 9 iterations whereas PI took 13 iterations
and PI-LE took 11 iterations. The proﬁles also indicate that
the PI based methods take much fewer iterations, but more

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 6.
Time taken by individual components of algorithms. (a)-(c)
Variants of value iteration methods. VI/BE, VI-PS/BE, MFPT-VI/BE
represents the time involved in computing bellman equation for VI,
VI-PS and MFPT-VI respectively whereas MFPT-VI/FPT is the time
involved for computing MFPT values. (d)-(f) Variants of policy
iteration methods. PI/PE, PI-LE/PE, MFPT-PI/PE represents the
time involved in computing the policy evaluation step for PI, PI-LE
and MFPT-PI respectively. PI/PI, PI-LE/PI, MFPT-PI/PI represents
the time involved in computing the policy improvement step for PI,
PI-LE and MFPT-PI respectively. MFPT-PI/FPT is the time involved
for computing MFPT values.
time per iteration, than those of VI based approaches.
Time Costs of Components:
We also looked into the
detailed time taken by critical components of each algorithm.
The VI related algorithms are analyzed in Fig. 6(a)-6(c).
Speciﬁcally, for VI most time is used for Bellman backup
operations as shown in Fig. 6(a); for VI-PS there is an
additional step involved in sorting the states for the purpose
of states prioritization, which is negligible when compared
with the cost of Bellman backup, as illustrated by Fig. 6(b).
In contrast, in our MFPT-VI algorithm, a big chunk of time is
used for computing the MFPT values, as shown in Fig. 6(c).
Fig. 6(d)-6(f) show results for PI based algorithms. We
recorded the time taken by the policy evaluation and policy
improvement phases. In addition, for MFPT-PI, we also
recorded the time used by MFPT calculation. From the results
we can see that, policy evaluation dominates the time in PI
and PI-LE, whereas for MFPT-PI, the MFPT calculation
takes most of the time as shown in Fig. 6(f). However,
MFPT-PI compensated for the expensive MFPT calculation by
converging in fewer iterations, leading to a faster convergence
in general.
MFPT Invoking Frequency: As mentioned earlier, the
MFPT values are computed after every few iterations when
there is a need for characterizing global features. Next, we
present some analysis related to this.
In Fig. 7(a), the number on the x-axis represents that the
MFPT values are computed after every p VI iterations. The
time taken by MFPT-VI initially decreases to a certain point
and then increases from there on as p increases. We also
observe a similar behavior in Fig. 7(b) when we analyze the
number of iterations taken to converge under varying p.
This implies that, (1) invoking MFPT calculation at every
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7. Trends of time and iterations under differing MFPT invoking
frequencies. (a) The overall runtime of invoking MFPT with every
p VI iterations. (b) The number of iterations of invoking MFPT
with every p VI iterations.
iteration is not the optimal way; and (2) for different
application scenarios with different patterns of transition
matrices, the best range of p can be obtained by running
a few trials, using probing mechanisms such as the binary
search. In our testing scenario, a p ranging from three to ﬁve
is a good choice.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 8.
(a) Demonstration of simulation environment, with the
agent’s initial state (pink) and the goal state (red). Green blocks are
obstacles; (b) A trajectory (blue) completed by the agent to reach
the goal.
C. 3D Grid Setup
A demonstration of the trajectory taken by the agent in 3D
simulation environment is shown in Fig. 8. Next, we compare
our proposed algorithms with their corresponding baseline
algorithms in terms of the practical runtime performance and
iterations required to converge.
We ﬁrst investigate the time taken by the algorithms with
changing number of states. Fig. 9(a) compares the time taken
by VI, VI-PS and MFPT-VI algorithms. The results show that
our proposed MFPT-VI is much faster than the VI and VI-PS.
Also, as expected, due to the prioritized sweeping heuristic,
VI-PS is faster than VI. In Fig. 9(b), we compare the time
taken by PI, PI-LE, and MFPT-PI. The results show that
MFPT-PI is the fastest compared to the other two algorithms.
The outstanding performance of MFPT-VI and MFPT-PI
indicate that, reachability characterization based framework is
superior to state-of-the-art solutions, yet the implementation
of our methods are as simple as the classic ones.
As in the case of 2D grid setup, we also analyze the
number of iterations required by the algorithms to converge
as the number of states change. In Fig. 10(a),we compare
the number of iterations taken by VI, VI-PS and MFPT-VI,
respectively. Similar to the 2D grid setup, our results reveal
that MFPT-VI converges the fastest compared to VI and VI-
PS. Fig. 10(b) compares the iterations taken by PI, PI-LE,

(a)
(b)
Fig. 9.
Time comparisons between the baseline methods and our
proposed algorithms, with changing numbers of states (x-axis). (a)
Variants of value iteration methods. (b) Variants of policy iteration
methods.
and MFPT-PI. Again, we can see that MFPT-PI converges
the fastest among all three algorithms.
Another interesting observation is that as the number of
states increase, the number of iterations required to converge
ﬂattens out for both MFPT-VI and MFPT-PI. These results
clearly show the power of reachability characterization, which
very well captures the convergence optimization feature,
thereby requiring much fewer iterations to reach optimality.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose a new framework for efﬁciently
solving the MDPs. The proposed method explores reachability
of states using MFPT values, which characterizes the degree
of difﬁculty of reaching given goal states. Different from the
classic VI and PI methods, the proposed solutions based on
MFPTs reﬂect a patterned landscape of states, which very
well captures – and also allows us to visualize – the degree of
importance of states. The reachability characterization enables
one to design efﬁcient heuristics such as value prioritization
and policy approximation, and we propose two speciﬁc
algorithms called MFPT-VI and MFPT-PI. We show that the
implementation of proposed methods is as simple as classic
methods, but our algorithms converge much faster, with less
runtime and fewer iterations than state-of-art approaches.
