CausalKG: Causal Knowledge Graph 
Explainability using interventional and counterfactual reasoning 
 
Utkarshani Jaimini 
Artificial Intelligence Institute 
University of South Carolina 
Amit Sheth 
Artificial Intelligence Institute 
University of South Carolina 
Humans use causality and hypothetical retrospection in 
their daily decision-making, planning, and understanding 
of life events [1]. The human mind, while retrospecting a 
given situation, think about questions such as "What was 
the cause of the given situation?", "What would be the 
effect of my action?", "What would have happened if I had 
taken another action instead?", or "Which action led to this 
effect?". The human mind has an innate understanding of 
causality [15]. It develops a causal model of the world, 
which learns with fewer data points, makes inferences, 
and contemplates counterfactual scenarios [8]. The 
unseen, 
unknown, 
scenarios 
are 
known 
as 
counterfactuals [2]. 
 
According to Gary Marcus and Judea Pearl, there is a 
need for Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems to have an built 
in understanding of causality and the ability to reason 
about counterfactuals [3,4]. The current KGs, such as 
ConceptNet and CauseNet, represent causality as a 
simple binary relation. 
 
AI algorithms use a representation based on knowledge 
graphs (KG) to represent the concepts of time, space, and 
facts. A KG is a graphical data model which captures the 
semantic relationships between entities such as events, 
objects, or concepts. The existing KGs represent causal 
relationships extracted from texts based on linguistic 
patterns of noun phrases for causes and effects as in 
ConceptNet and WordNet. A KG represents causality as 
hasCausal, causes, and mediator relationships between 
cause and effect entities [9,10]. The KGs should model 
causality in terms of entities and not just noun phrases as 
in Wikidata and DBpedia. The entity-based representation 
model enables broader search space by linking a causal 
entity to relevant effect entities or concepts in KG. 
Causality is a complex relationship that cannot be 
expressed as a single link between the cause and effect 
entities as represented in the current KGs. The current 
causality representation in KGs makes it challenging to 
support counterfactual reasoning. A richer representation 
of causality in AI systems using a KG-based approach is 
needed for better explainability, and support for 
intervention and counterfactuals reasoning, leading to 
improved understanding of AI systems by humans.  
 
 
 
The 
causality 
representation 
requires 
a 
higher 
representation framework to define the context, the causal 
information, and the causal effects, as shown in Figure 1.   
We show that the integration of Bayesian causality 
representation with KG enables counterfactual-based 
reasoning 
for 
better 
explainable 
and 
human-
understandable models. 
 
Integrating causal knowledge with the observational data 
can enable the machine learning models to learn the 
causal relationships behind the inaccurate conclusions, 
eventually improving the model performance. The 
proposed 
Causal 
Knowledge 
Graph 
(CausalKG) 
framework, as shown in Figure 2, leverages recent 
progress of causality and KG towards explainability. 
CausalKG intends to address the lack of a domain 
adaptable causal model and represent the complex causal 
relations using the hyper-relational graph representation 
in the KG. Furthermore, we show that the CausalKG's 
interventional and counterfactual reasoning can be used 
by the AI system for the domain explainability.  The 
CausalKG utilizes the 1) domain knowledge embedded in 
the KG to provide a comprehensive search space for 
possible interventional and counterfactual variables that 
otherwise might be missed with just a Bayesian causality 
representation, and 2) the expressivity of KG to generate 
human understandable explanations.  
Representation of causality in AI systems 
using knowledge-graph based approach 
is needed for better explainability, and 
support 
for 
intervention 
and 
counterfactuals, leading to improved 
understanding of AI systems by humans. 

Figure 1. (a) Causal Representation as a single cause-effect relation. (b,c) Causality as a complex representation of causal effect 
associated with the different pathways. In (b), the total causal effect is associated between a treatment and an outcome, e.g. the 
treatment variable has a total causal effect of 12.51 on the outcome. In (c), the natural direct and indirect effects are associated 
with a mediator variable which acts as an intermediary between a treatment and an outcome. The natural direct effect is the 
effect of treatment on the outcome in the presence of the mediator, where the mediator is under the control (treatment = 0). The 
natural indirect effect is the effect of treatment on the outcome in the presence of the mediator, where the mediator receives a 
hypothetical change in the treatment variable (treatment =1). The treatment variable in the presence of a mediator has a natural 
direct effect of 7.06 and natural indirect effect 10.68 on the outcome.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Causal Knowledge Graph Framework consists of three main steps, i) a Causal Bayesian Network and a domain-specific 
observational dataset, ii) Causal Ontology creation and enriching the domain ontology with causal relationships, and iii) 
Estimating the causal effects of the treatment, mediator, and outcome variable in the domain for a given context
 

Causal Knowledge Graph 
A CausalKG is a hyper-relational graph. It is used to 
represent causality as a complex relation in the graph, 
which may involve more than two entities and may be 
annotated with additional information such as causal 
effect. The edge connected with more than two nodes 
represents the causal relationship, mediator variable, and 
the associated causal effects. The mediator is a variable 
which causes mediation between the Treatment (an 
independent variable) and Outcome (a dependent 
variable). It also explains how different intervention effects 
the outcome variable. The associated causal effects can 
be of three types: total causal effect, natural direct effect, 
and natural indirect effect. A CausalKG explicitly takes the 
causal knowledge into account, e.g., allowing flexible 
incorporation 
of 
the 
causal 
domain 
knowledge 
represented by a causal bayesian network, and 
automating the causal inference tasks. Thus, this 
approach blends causal Bayesian network, causal 
ontology design, and knowledge representation described 
below.  
 
The goal of CausalKG is to support the integration of 
causal knowledge into the KGs for improving domain 
explainability, promoting interventional, counterfactual 
reasoning and causal inference in downstream AI tasks.  
These capabilities cannot be achieved if causality is based 
only on the Bayesian causality representation, and 
observational 
data, 
but 
the 
causal 
knowledge 
encapsulated in the KG makes that possible. 
 
Causal Bayesian Network 
Judea Pearl introduced the causal Bayesian network 
(CBN) as a representation tool for causality. Similar to a 
Bayesian network, a causal Bayesian network is a 
directed acyclic graph G = <V, E>, where nodes V 
represent causal variables and edges E represent the 
conditional causal influences among the causal variables 
[3]. A CBN is a graphical representation that expresses 
causal knowledge in a given domain. The graphical 
representation is intuitive and human-readable. A CBN 
assists in understanding the causal relations, supporting 
the ability to represent and respond to changes in the 
causal system. The graphical representation of causal 
knowledge allows access to the quantitative prediction of 
the effect of an intervention on one or more variables using 
total causal effect, natural direct effect, and natural indirect 
effect. The joint distribution in the Bayesian network is the 
probability of events and how the probabilities will change 
given a set of observations. A CBN evaluates how the 
probability would change due to external intervention and 
estimates the effect of an intervention. This approach is 
extensively used for policy analysis, planning, and medical 
treatment management [11]. Each possible intervention 
has a new causal model, C.  A causal model cannot be 
interpreted in a standard propositional logic or probability 
Explainability 
 
Explainability is the notion that a machine learning (ML) model and its results can be explained in a way that “makes sense” to a 
human being. The traditional machine learning algorithm tends to be more explainable but less performant. In comparison, the deep 
learning algorithms are more performant but are much harder to explain. We are concentrating on the explainability focused on helping 
users develop trust in the AI system and take action. Explainability falls under the following two categories:   
Model-based explainability: 
Model-based Explainability is a broad concept of analyzing and understanding the results provided by ML models. It is most often 
used in the context of “black-box” models. It is not easy to demonstrate how the model arrived at a specific decision. For example, a 
healthcare model predicts whether a patient is suffering from a disease or not. The healthcare provider needs to know what features 
the model is considering to determine the prediction result. There are existing tools for the black box models which assist in 
explaining a given result, such as feature importance, SHAP, LIME, etc.  
Domain explainability:  
Domain explainability is defined as providing human understandable explanations for the results generated by the ML models. For 
example, an explanation could be an answer to the “Why”, “What if” questions that help the human understand the cause of a 
prediction result and gain trust in the model. Data and statistics are not enough for human understandable models. The external 
domain knowledge is needed to model and perform the intervention and counterfactual reasoning. For example, in the above 
disease prediction model, a medical guideline is provided as external domain knowledge to generate a causal explanation for the 
results.   
Explainability henceforth is referred to as domain explainability.  

calculus because it deals with changes in the 
counterfactual world (out-of-distribution) rather than 
changes in our beliefs about observational data. 
 
Causal Ontology 
The Causal Ontology is a taxonomical representation of 
domain facts and relationships between entities that 
represents a generic representation of a causal model. 
The three causal classes are Treatment, Mediator, and 
Outcome 
with 
causal 
relationships 
causes 
and 
causesWith. In addition, total causal effect, natural direct 
effect, and natural indirect effect are represented as data 
properties in this ontology. The designed ontology can be 
extended to a given domain ontology to describe the 
causal relationships between the domain entities. As an 
initial input, the framework requires a CBN describing the 
causal relationships of the domain and the domain 
ontology with causal relations extended using the causal 
ontology. 
 
Causal Knowledge Representation 
A CausalKG utilizes the benefits of CBNs, causal 
ontology, and KGs to provide robust and explainable 
insights. The KGs have often used the resource 
description framework (RDF) to represent information on 
the web. RDF consists of triples or statements with 
subject, predicate, object. RDF captures binary entities, 
connecting two objects, or the relationship between two 
entities. RDF uses reification to represent n-ary relations, 
i.e. relations linking more than two entities. Reification 
creates an intermediate node which groups two or more 
entities, making the RDF complex and less intuitive. RDF* 
(pronounced as RDF-star) is an extension to RDF that 
treats a triple as a single entity using nested or embedded 
triples. An entire triple can become the subject of a second 
triple, which enables assigning metadata and attributes to 
a triple.  CausalKG uses RDF* to represent complex 
causal relationships (as shown in Figure 6). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Causal Artificial Intelligence: From statistical explainability based on data representation and associational support to 
context explainability based on causal relation and interventional support eventually leading to domain explainability based on 
causal representation in KG leading to counterfactual support
 
Explainability 
There is a gap between the observation-based and 
counterfactual-based explainability in AI. Figure 3 
illustrates the future of AI systems transforming from 
purely statistical (i.e., associational) explainability based 
on the observational data to context explainability (i.e., 
interventional), eventually leading to domain explainability 
involving counterfactuals and causal reasoning. We 
emphasize the need for explainability in AI that goes 
beyond explaining the algorithmic inner working to also 
provide human-understandable explanations necessary 
for users to trust a given AI model using three categories 
of explainability - statistical, context, and domain 
explainability.  
 

Statistical Explainability 
Statistical explainability generates an explanation for the 
co-occurrence of a given phenomenon based on the 
statistical (or associational) methods such as correlations 
[6]. The statistical explainability may fail to capture the 
underlying relationship between the observational data, 
which can lead to inaccurate conclusions (such as 
spurious correlations). For example, the statistical pattern 
of higher ice cream sales and a higher number of people 
drowning leads to the incorrect conclusion that increasing 
ice cream sales leads to an increase in people drowning 
in water. The above result is analyzed out of context, 
which disregards the hidden causal knowledge leading to 
an inaccurate conclusion. 
 
Context Explainability 
Context explainability is a means to generate a human-
understandable explanation taking the context information 
of a given observation into account [5]. The inaccurate 
conclusions are a result of out-of-context analyses of the 
relationship between entities. The context information is at 
times not present in the observational data. However, it 
can be deduced from the underlying causal variables 
called confounders (also confounding variables). A given 
context can be represented using a causal ontology and a 
CBN. The causal ontology gives us the causal relationship 
between the entities for a given context. The CBN 
presents a graphical representation of a given context 
enabling interventional reasoning (e.g., "What if I had 
taken action B instead?"). In the above example, the 
statistical results need to be analyzed in the context of the 
weather or the temperature. The higher ice cream sales 
and the higher number of people drowning are both due to 
the rise in temperature during the summer months. As the 
temperature rises during the summer months, people are 
out in the water leading to water-related accidents. The 
hike in temperature also shows the increase in ice cream 
sales to relieve the high temperature. The causal 
knowledge of temperature affecting the ice cream sales, 
and water-related accidents can be captured using a KG 
and can assist in pointing out the underlying cause to both 
the consequences. A CBN constructed using the above 
context information enables interventional reasoning such 
as "What if the temperature was cold? How would it affect 
the ice cream sale and the number of people drowning?", 
"What if the temperature was hot? How would it affect the 
ice cream sale and the number of people drowning?" 
 
Domain Explainability 
Domain explainability explains the underlying causal 
relations using observational data, domain knowledge, 
and counterfactual reasoning. Domain explainability 
considers existing domain knowledge and causal relations 
between entities. David Hume, a philosopher, and 
empiricist analyzed causality in terms of sufficient and 
necessary conditions, A causes B such that A is 
necessary and sufficient cause for B [7]. As defined by 
Hume, causality can be achieved using domain 
explainability accounting for the sufficient and necessary 
conditions for causality. The CausalKG, with the causal 
relations, 
enables 
domain 
explainability 
using 
counterfactual reasoning ("e.g., Was it action A which led 
to this effect?").  
 
The above example can be explained in terms of a given 
domain using counterfactual reasoning such as "Was it the 
new marketing strategy that caused the increase in the ice 
cream sale?", "Was it the lack of supervision near the pool 
that caused the increase in drowning?".  CausalKG 
provides the context to consider necessary and sufficient 
conditions needed to improve domain explainability using 
counterfactual reasoning.  
 
 
 

 
Figure 4. Highway Collision scene, a snapshot of possible scenarios on a highway that might lead to a collision between two 
vehicles when either i) the driver fails to identify the passing vehicle in the nearby lane due to distraction or blind spots, or ii) 
loses control of the vehicle due to slippery road.
 
Use case: Autonomous Driving 
AI systems and domain problems require an accurate 
representation of cause(s) and their effect(s). Therefore, it 
is not sufficient solely to understand the cause(s) of an 
outcome but the underline effect(s) and mediator(s), if any.  
We present a use case in autonomous driving (AD) to 
explain how the CausalKG for causal representation 
supports domain explainability. 
 
Tesla customers can now request a fully self-driving car 
equipped with the beta version of Tesla's advanced driver-
assistance suite (https://wapo.st/3pfx8FB). Driving is a 
complex system that requires meticulous planning and 
vigilance during execution. A human brain, while driving, 
analyses the environment based on the observation and, 
at the same time, retrospects and prospects possible 
scenarios and the corresponding measures to be taken. 
While AD systems are well trained on observational data, 
they perform poorly in unseen, uncertain, and risky driving 
scenarios [12]. 
 
The AD vehicle works in parallel with other entities in the 
driving scenes, such as pedestrians, traffic signs, and 
other vehicles. A representation of the relationship and 
interaction of the entities within a driving scene is essential 
for better understanding the AD vehicle's behavior in a 
given 
context. 
Some 
of 
the 
interventional 
and 
counterfactual reasoning which can assist in AD 
understanding is- "How does the entities in the driving 
scene effects the autonomous driving vehicle?", “What if a 
pedestrian is jay-walking; how would it effect the vehicle's 
behavior (i.e., stop or keep moving)?", "What if the vehicle 
fails to identify the stop line marking? How would it effect 
the vehicle's behavior concerning a pedestrian?" and 
"How does the sudden lane change by a vehicle effect the 
adjacent vehicle?". 
 
According to the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA), in 2019, there were 3142 fatal 
accidents due to distracted driving, 697 accidents due to 
drowsy driving, 718,000 accidents due to rain (2,569 of 
which were fatal), and 182,000 accidents due to snow 
(440 of which were fatal) (https://bit.ly/3D8cWdS). The US 
Department 
of 
Labor, 
Mine 
Safety 
and 
Health 
Administration Safety Manual No. 10 is used for accident 
investigation (https://bit.ly/3d5kW4z). The safety manual 
presents a detailed analysis of an accident investigation 
on what, how, and why the accident happened. It reveals 
three cause levels of an accident: basic, direct, indirect 
cause, which correspond to total, natural direct, and 
natural indirect cause, respectively, in the CausalKG. With 
the fully automated AD vehicles on the road, it is crucial to 
understand the sequence of the events which led to an 

accident to devise a mitigation plan for similar situations in 
the future, and assist with insurance and law related 
proceedings. CausalKG is instrumental in the context of 
AD vehicles to represent and understand the causal 
relationships between entities in a driving scene, their 
behaviors, and possible hypothetical scenarios. It can 
further assist in interventional and counterfactual 
reasoning to equip AD vehicles for unseen and risky 
scenarios. 
 
The typical accident scenario is a collision due to a 
distracted driver or slippery road, leading to sudden lane 
change, as shown in Figure 4. In addition, a driver could 
be distracted due to phone usage or be under the 
influence of alcohol, which might lead to sudden lane 
change and collision into the vehicle in the next lane. The 
collision due to sudden lane change can also be due to 
bad weather leading to slippery roads and loss of control.  
 
Observational data can assist with 
● 
Statistical Explainability - What is the likelihood of 
a vehicle crashing if the driver is distracted? 
● 
Context Explainability - What if the driver is 
distracted? 
● 
Domain Explainability - Was the collision due to 
phone usage or the slippery roads?   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. A Collision Bayesian Network, a graphical representation of the causal relations and interaction between entities in 
collision scenarios.  
 
 
 
Figure 6. A snapshot of CausalKG for collisions due to driver distraction or slippery road scenarios. Each node in the CausalKG 
is a concept in KG and is associated with a conditional probability estimated using the CBN in the previous step (as shown in 
Figure 2). The edges between the nodes represent the causal relationships between the concepts.  
 
 
 

The above collision scenario can be graphically 
represented as a CBN expressing causal relations 
between the driving scene entities. In Figure 5, the 
distraction of a driver (e.g., caused due to cell phone 
usage) or slippery roads (e.g., caused due to snow, or 
rain) causes a sudden lane change, leading to a collision. 
These variables are dependent on other observed 
variables in the system and are known as endogenous 
(dependent) variables. The external variables such as 
cellphone usage, driving under the influence of alcohol, 
weather conditions such as snow and rain are not affected 
by other variables in the system and are known as 
exogenous (independent) variables. The existing driving 
scene ontology is enriched with the causal relation from 
the causal ontology to capture the relationships between 
the entities, such as distracted driving (or slippery road) 
causes a sudden lane change and collision; and a sudden 
lane change causes a collision into the nearby vehicle 
[14]. 
 
The different types of causal effects (i.e., total causal 
effect, natural direct effect, and natural indirect effect) are 
estimated using the autonomous driving dataset for the 
above CBN. They express the quantitative effect of the 
various interventions on the AD entities and aid in 
explainability using interventional and counterfactual 
reasoning. The generated CausalKG shown in Figure 6 
captures the causal relations between the AD entities and 
their quantitative effects.  The CausalKG demonstrates 
the explainability in the AD using the counterfactual and 
interventional reasoning listed below. Such representation 
supports a better understanding of the behavior of entities 
in the driving scene in an unseen, risky situation.  
 
● 
Total Causal Effect (Basic cause): How would 
the driver’s distraction (or slippery road) effect the 
occurrence of a vehicle collision? 
● 
Natural Direct Effect (Unplanned or direct 
cause):  What if the vehicle fails to identify the 
passing vehicle in the adjacent lane (what if there 
is a blind spot), how would it effect the vehicle's 
collision? In this scenario, the lane change is not 
due to the distraction (or slippery road), but the 
collision is due to the distraction.  
● 
Natural Indirect Effect (Unsafe act or indirect 
cause): What if, there is a lane change due to the 
distraction (or slippery road), how would it effect 
the vehicle's collision? In this scenario, the lane 
change is due to distraction (or losing control over 
the vehicle under risky situations). However, the 
collision is not due to distraction.  
 
Knowledge-infused learning using a CausalKG 
CausalKG is a step towards symbolic AI for causality-
based knowledge-infused learning [13]. CausalKG AI 
systems do not learn solely from correlations but, instead, 
have a causal representation of the world around them. 
Apart from causality, CausalKG, with the help of a KG, 
also represents time, space, physical objects, and humans 
and their interactions.  
 
Current AI algorithms rely on independent and identically 
distributed data. As a result, they cannot infer out-of-
distribution or hypothetical, interventional scenarios. 
CausalKG can be used to infuse existing KGs with causal 
knowledge of the domain to enable interventional and 
counterfactual reasoning that can be deduced using 
observational data and domain expert knowledge. The 
advantage of constructing a CausalKG is the integration 
of causality in reasoning and prediction processes, such 
as the agent action understanding, planning, medical 
diagnosis process, etc. Such integration can improve the 
accuracy and reliability of existing AI algorithms by 
providing better explainability of the outcome.
