1
  
Abstract—Aiming at the traditional grasping method for 
manipulators based on 2D camera, when faced with the 
scene of gathering or covering, it can hardly perform well 
in unstructured scenes that appear as gathering and 
covering, for the reason that can’t recognize objects 
accurately in cluster scenes from a single perspective and 
the manipulators can’t make the environment better for 
grasping. In this case, a novel method of pushing-grasping 
collaborative based on the deep Q-network in dual 
perspectives is proposed in this paper. This method adopts 
an improved deep Q-network algorithm, with an RGB-D 
camera to obtain the information of objects’ RGB images 
and point cloud from two perspectives, and combines the 
pushing and grasping actions, so that the trained 
manipulator can make the scenes better for grasping, so 
that it can perform well in more complicated grasping 
scenes. What’s more, we improved the reward function of 
the deep Q-network and propose the piecewise reward 
function to speed up the convergence of the deep 
Q-network. We trained different models and tried different 
methods in the V-REP simulation environment, and it drew 
a conclusion that the method proposed in this paper 
converges quickly and the success rate of grasping objects 
in unstructured scenes raises up to 83.5%. Besides, it shows 
the generalization ability and well performance when novel 
objects appear in the scenes that the manipulator has never 
grasped before. 
 
Index 
Terms— 
Dual 
Perspectives, 
Deep 
Q-Network, 
Pushing-Grasping Collaborate, Reward Design, RGB-D Image.  
 
*Corresponding author  

(Co-First Author), Master; Guan Shangbin *(Corresponding Author), Master 

 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
s one of the basic problems in the field of robot operation, 
grasping is the main means for robots to interact with the 
real world to complete operational tasks (such as sorting, 
assembly, etc.) [1]. The traditional 2D camera-based robot 
grasping methods perform well in grasping with high success 
rate when facing simple scenes. Kathleen A M et al. [2] uses 
thresholding and polygon encircling algorithms to locate the 
fruit to be grasped, and the grasping success rate reaches 85%. 
In [3], the improved HOG (Histogram of Oriented Gradient) is 
used to identify the industrial components for grasping, and the 
success rate of grasping components came up to 92%. In [4], a 
method is proposed aiming at grasping tomatoes, combining 
with two color spaces’ images, using thresholding to locate and 
recognize the targets, and the success rate of grasping came up 
to 93%. However, in actual grasping applications, there are a 
large number of gathering and covering objects in grasping 
scene. Since 2D cameras cannot obtain information of height, it 
is difficult for robotic grasping system based on 2D cameras to 
grasp gathering and covering objects. 
Deep reinforcement learning combines the perception 
ability of deep learning and the decision-making ability of 
reinforcement learning[5],[6], so that many grasping methods 
based on deep reinforcement learning emerged, and the depth 
camera can obtain deep information, which further improved 
the cognition level of the robot. In [7], a method of deep 
reinforcement learning in robotic grasping work was proposed 
for the first time, and it pointed out that the deep reinforcement 
learning algorithm model trained in a simulation environment 
can be applied to the grasping environment in reality through 
less training steps of grasping real objects. In [8], a method of 
knowledge-induced deep Q-network (DQN) was proposed. The 
network integrates perceptual information into DQN to provide 
prior knowledge for network training, so that the trained model 
has better generalization ability than traditional DQN, and the 
manipulator can better grasp unknown objects which do not 
exist in training. In [9], taking Actor-Critic in deep 
reinforcement learning as the main body, with redesigning the 
reward function, a reward function designing method based on 
objects structure matching was proposed. The improved 
algorithm converges faster with higher success rate of grasping. 
In [10], it improves the experience playback mechanism of the 
depth deterministic strategy gradient algorithm proposed by 
A Pushing-Grasping Collaborative Method 
Based on Deep Q-Network Algorithm in Dual 
Perspectives 
Peng Gang a,b, Liao Jinhu a,b, Guan Shangbin a,b 
a Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education 
b School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China 
A 

 
2
Google, which not only improves the performance of the 
algorithm, but also reduces the use of storage space and 
improves the efficiency of the manipulator to grasp objects. 
However, there are still problems in the current grasping 
methods based on deep reinforcement learning such as 
insufficient information utilization, network convergence 
slowly, and low success rate of grasping. In [11],[12], a method 
of using the affordance map to represent the grasp target by 
analyzing the whole scenes is proposed, which greatly 
improves the accuracy of the robot grabbing. Figure. However, 
because the environment is usually complex and unstructured, 
sometimes the grasping position indicated in the affordance 
map is difficult for manipulators to grasp. In [13], a method of 
active affordance exploration for robot grasping is proposed but 
it didn’t provide the design guidelines of the reward. In[14], an 
active exploration algorithm which leverages the deep 
Q-Network (DQN) is proposed to facilitate the robot to actively 
explore the environment until a good affordance map is 
generated, but it just process images from a single perspective, 
so there are inevitably problems of information missing. 
In order to solve the problems above, this paper proposes 
to obtain the top view of objects’ point cloud from two 
perspectives, combine the pushing and grasping actions, use the 
piecewise reward function, and train the model of robot 
grasping iteratively. The trained model gives the best actions 
manipulator takes. The model we trained has a high success rate 
of grasping and has a certain generalization ability for grasping 
unknown objects. 
 
II. DESIGN OF PUSHING-GRASPING METHOD  
When the robot is grasping objects in current scene, the state 
of scene after grasping depends on the current state of the scene 
and the actions taken by the manipulator. The grasping process 
can be described by Markov decision process (MDP) [15]. 
Markov decision process contains 5 elements: state set 𝑆, 
action set 𝐴, state transition probability matrix 𝑃, reward set 𝑅 
and the discount factor 𝛾. The grasping process of the 
manipulator can be described as in the state 𝑠𝑡. According to the 
strategy 𝜋, 
the 
manipulator 
takes 
action 𝑎𝑡 with 
probability 𝑃(𝑠𝑡+1|𝑠𝑡, 𝑎𝑡) to act on the scene so that it changes 
into the new state 𝑠𝑡+1, and get the reward 𝑟𝑡. The goal of 
reinforcement learning for manipulators is to find an optimal 
strategy 𝐺𝑡 and the grasping action of manipulators can obtain 
the maximum return𝐺𝑡 cumulatively, where 𝛾 is a discount 
factor which aims to reduce the influences of current rewards 
acting on future behavior. 
𝐺𝑡= 𝑅𝑡+1 + 𝛾𝑅𝑡+2 + 𝛾2𝑅𝑡+3 + ⋯= ∑
𝛾𝑘
𝑇
𝑘=0
𝑅𝑡+1+𝑘   (1) 
According to Markov decision process, we can know that 
reinforcement learning needs to store the mapping relations 
between the state and the action, which is called the learning 
strategy. The mapping relations are generally stored in a table. 
For large-scale problems, the tables can hardly be maintained 
and stored in memory. Therefore, this paper adopts a method of 
deep reinforcement learning based on value function-deep Q 
network [16], [17]. DQN takes the feature vector ∅(𝑠) of state 
𝑠 as input, and outputs the state-action value function 𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎) 
which corresponds to each action through network processing. 
DQN adopts an approximate description of the value function, 
so it evolves into Regression problem, called function fitting: 
𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎; 𝜃) ≈𝑄∗(𝑠, 𝑎)        (2) 
Where 𝜃 represents model parameters. In order to speed up 
convergence of the network, we designed two convolutional 
neural networks: current value network function 𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎; 𝜃)and 
target value network function𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎; 𝜃−). The parameters of 
the current value network will be updated with the iteration 
process, and the target value network will calculate the 𝑄 value 
along the iteration process, but the network parameters will be 
fixed to a certain number of iteration steps. After certain steps, 
the parameters of the current value network are copied and 
updated, so the optimization goal of model is: 
𝐶= 𝑅+ 𝛾𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑎′𝑄(𝑠′, 𝑎′; 𝜃−)           (3) 
Therefore, by minimizing the square error of the current 
value function and the target value function, the network 
parameters can be updated. 
𝐿(𝜃) = 𝐸[(𝑅+ 𝛾𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑎′𝑄(𝑠′,𝑎′; 𝜃−) −𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎; 𝜃))
2]  (4) 
A. Description of State Set 
In this paper, we use RGB-D cameras to obtain the point 
cloud of objects, but the point cloud image cannot be put 
directly into the DQN as input, so this paper takes the RGB top 
view of point cloud in current scene before each action as a 
state 𝑠𝑡 as the state input of the DQN. But for gathering objects, 
if the camera is still above the grasping area and installed 
vertically downwards, it will make a difference to plans of 
grasping. Therefore, a method with certain angle installation 
which is placed outside the grasping area is adopted, but there 
will be information missing when the top view is obtained 
under a single angle view, as shown in Figure 1. This paper uses 
two RGB-D cameras to capture from two perspectives so that 
complete object information is guaranteed. The pixel resolution 
of the RGB top view obtained is 224×224. 
     
 
B. Description of Action Space 
For the purpose of adapting complex grasping scenes, this 
paper introduces a manipulator pushing based on the grasping. 
For the reasons that pushing can disrupt the original 
arrangement of the objects, which makes it more convenient for 
manipulator to grasp. Two pieces of information need to be 
obtained when the manipulator takes action of grasping or 
pushing, namely target position (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) that the gripper needs 
to move to and the postures of the gripper. The target position 
(𝑥, 𝑦) can be learned by DQN, and the height 𝑧 can be obtained 
from depth maps; for the postures of the end manipulator, this 
paper adopts a vertical downward grasping method, so there is 
            
 
(a) gathering    
 
 
            (b) covering 
Fig. 1. Information Missing in Single Perspective 

 
3
only a rotation angle 𝜃 along z-axis in the postures of the end 
manipulator, and the manipulator can push along the direction 
of an angle 𝛼 while it is pushing. 
When the manipulator is pushing or grasping objects, it is not 
necessary for the end rotation angle and the pushing angle of 
the manipulator to be an accurate angle. Therefore, we 
discretize the angles above and divides 360° into 16 equal parts, 
which are defined by 22.5° as a grasping or pushing direction. 
Therefore, the action space can be described as: 
Pushing action: taking coordinates (𝑥, 𝑦)  learned by the 
DQN as the starting position, the end of the manipulator pushes 
the object in one of the 16 directions set, and the pushing 
distance is half the length of the longest side of the objects, 
which is set to 5cm in this paper; 
Grasping action: Taking coordinates (𝑥, 𝑦) learned by the 
DQN as the target position of the center movement of the 
gripper at the end of the manipulator, which is rotated to one of 
the 16 directions above to grasp the objects. 
It can be seen from the state set that the descriptions of state 
use a top view, while the visual calibration uses an oblique view 
as usual. While manipulator taking actions to push or grasp, we 
need to determine the conversion between the two images, and 
the conversion relationship can be determined by perspective 
transformation. 
C. Wheel Speed Anomaly Detection 
Due to the recognition of images, in this paper, we model the 
Q function as two Fully Convolutional Networks (FCN) [18], 
one of which is used to select the pushing action and the other is 
used to select the grasping action. This two networks have the 
same structure: each network contains a pre-trained 
DenseNet121[19], and then is channel-cascaded with two 
1 × 1 convolutional layers, and each convolutional layer has a 
ReLU activation function and batch normalization, and finally 
bilinear upsampling, each network will capture the RGB top 
view of point cloud of the first two perspective scenes as input. 
In order to obtain the suitable angle of pushing or grasping, 
we rotate the RGB top view 15 times as the input of FCN. That 
is, for each FCN network, 16 × 2 pictures will be set as input, 
and output will be the same size and number of heat maps as 
input images. Each pixel of pictures represents an independent 
Q value prediction. Sorting the Q values of the pixels in the 
output heat maps of the two networks, we can respectively 
obtain the heat maps’ largest Q value in the pushing network 
and grasping network, and we can select the Q value in the two 
heat maps who is larger as the final network output (Figure 2.). 
The final selected pixel and direction are given by the pixel 
corresponding to the maximum Q value in the heat maps which 
the network finally output, and the rotation angle corresponding 
to the heat maps. The selected action is given by the network 
corresponding to the heat map. 
 
D. Reward Configuration 
The traditional reward is set as a reward 𝑅= 1  for a 
successful grasping. If the total change of the difference 
between height maps exceeds a certain threshold 𝜏, a reward 
𝑅= 0.5 is given. Such a reward is too sparse, which will lead 
to non-convergence and slow convergence in model training. In 
order to deal with the problems, a piecewise reward strategy 
instead of a single reward is proposed in this paper. If grasp 
successfully, the reward 𝑅= 1 is given, if grasp failed, the 
reward 𝑅= −1 is given; if the rate of pixel change 𝜏 of the 
scene after pushing is 10%~24%, the reward 𝑅= 0.3 is given; 
If the rate of pixel change 𝜏 is between 24%~40%, the 
reward 𝑅= 0.5 is given; if the rate of change 𝜏 is 40%~100%, 
the reward  𝑅= 0.7  is given; in other cases, the reward            
𝑅= −0.1 is given. 
 
III. CONFIGURATION OF SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT AND 
NETWORK TRAINING 
In order to verify that the DQN algorithm after adding 
pushing action and dual perspectives has a higher success rate 
of grasping and generalization ability, a comparative 
experiment of the two algorithms is carried out on the 
simulation platform for the grasping in the covering scene. The 
hardware used is the Intel i7-8700k as CPU and Nvidia GTX 
1080Ti 16GB as GPU. V-REP[20] is used for training and 
verification under the environment of Ubuntu 16.04. As shown 
in Figure 3, the methods above are used to learn how to grasp 
objects in the area. 
 
Stochastic gradient descent is used to train the FCN network 
during training. In the experiment, the learning rate is set to 
10−4, and the weight decay is set to 2−5. The exploration 
strategy adopts the 𝜖−greedy algorithm. The initial 𝜖 is set to 
0.65, the annealing is set to 0.1 after training, and the discount 
factor 𝛾 is set to 0.6. 
 
IV. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS OF EXPERIMENT IN SIMULATION 
ENVIRONMENT 
Compared with the grasping only strategy, the DQN 
algorithm based on dual perspectives in this paper improves in 
3 aspects: ①The dual perspectives are used to obtain the 
objects’ information in the area to be grasped, avoiding missing 
information in single perspective; ②Introducing a novel 
pushing action, avoiding the limitations of grasping only; ③
Adopt multi-level reward strategy, avoiding the problems of 
slow convergence caused by single reward. In order to verify 
the influence of the improvement above on the model of 
抓取FCN
网络
推动FCN
网络
16

16

max
max
抓取位置和方向
推动位置和方向
抓取
比较
Q值
 
Fig.2. Process of the DQN Algorithm 
 
Fig. 3. Simulation Environment of Grasping 

 
4
grasping performance, this section designs a set of comparative 
experiment for verification.  
A. Comparative Experiment 
In this experiment, the pushing and grasping strategy based 
on DQN and dual perspectives was compared with three 
methods of removing the improvement aspects to verify the 
influence of each improvement aspect on the performance of 
the algorithm. The three methods to remove from the 
improvement aspects are the and pushing-grasping strategy 
based on DQN and single perspective, the grasping-only 
strategy based on DQN and dual perspectives, and the and 
pushing-grasping strategy based on DQN and dual perspectives 
but with only a single reward. The training scene is set as 
follows: select 10 objects randomly arranged and put them in 
the grasping area. Manipulator learns how to grasp the objects 
in the area through trial and error, until the objects in the work 
space are grasped completely or out of the view, and then select 
10 objects randomly again and place them in the grasping area. 
Every 100 objects grasped is a group of training. After one 
group of training, the next group of training starts. The training 
process is shown in Figure 4. 
 
The evaluation of performance is mainly to evaluate the 
success rate of grasping and the convergence speed of the 
model. The success rate of grasping mainly refers to the ratio of 
the number of objects grasped successfully to the number of 
objects to be grasped. The model training results of the four 
methods are as follows Shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
We can find out that compared with the single perspective 
and grasping-only strategies, the pushing-grasping strategies 
based on DQN and dual perspective have higher success rate of 
grasping. The single-perspective strategy achieved a success 
rate of 76.1% in grasping after 170 iterations. The 
grasping-only strategy achieved a success rate of 57.3% in 
grasping after 180 iterations. However, the grasping strategy 
based on DQN and dual perspectives achieved a success rate of 
83.5% in grasping after 180 iterations. The results show that the 
introduction of the push operation has a great contribution to 
the success rate of grasping. For pushing actions disrupting the 
original structure of the objects’ arrangement, it makes the 
sense better for grasping objects.The dual perspectives are also 
beneficial to improving the success rate of grasping, which is 
probably for the reasons that dual perspectives can obtain more 
comprehensive information of objects than single perspective. 
Compared with the strategy of single reward, the 
pushing-grasping strategy based on DQN and dual perspectives 
has a faster convergence speed, but it should be noted that the 
success rate of grasping in the single reward strategy doesn’t 
drop too much, which is also stable at 78.5%. The results show 
that the multi-level reward can make the model have a faster 
convergence speed. 
B. Tests of Model's Generalization Ability 
After the model is trained, in order to verify that the 
pushing-grasping strategy based on DQN and dual perspectives 
has a better generalization ability than the grasping strategy 
based on DQN and single perspective, three unknown objects 
are selected to design three groups of experiments, and three 
unknown objects which are triangles, semicircles, and cylinders. 
The settings of scene for the three experiments are as follows:
①1 unknown object + 5 known objects placed in the working 
space; ②3 unknown objects + 3 known objects placed in the 
working space; ③5 unknown objects + 1 known object placed 
in the working space. Use trained model above to make the 
manipulator to grasp objects in the workspace until the objects 
in the workspace are grasped successfully or the objects are out 
of the workspace. In each group of the experiments, each 
unknown object needs to appear 30 times in total for the 
convenience of statistics. The experiment in the simulation 
environment is shown in Figure 6. 
 
The results of the success rate of grasping with the two 
methods are shown in Table 1.  
 
(a) dual perspective 
 
(b) single perspective 
Fig. 4. Training Process  
 
Fig. 5. Success Rate of Different Methods to Grasp 
0
50
100
150
200
250
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
抓取成功率(%)
训练步数
本文方法
单视角方法
仅抓取方法
单一奖励方法
Fig.6. Grasping of Unknown Objects 

 
5
 
From data in table I, it’s obvious that the DQN-based 
grasping strategy has a low success rate of grasping when 
grasping unknown objects, while the pushing-grasping strategy 
based on DQN and dual perspectives has a better generalization 
ability when grasping unknown objects, with a higher success 
rate especially in grasping cylinders which are similar to the 
objects in training set, but it should be noted that when there are 
an increasing number of unknown objects, the success rate of 
grasping unknown objects is also getting lower. It’s probably 
for the reason that the arrangement structure of unknown 
objects is different from the arrangement structure of the 
objects in the training set. 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
In order to solve the problems of insufficient information 
utilization, slow network convergence and low success rate of 
grasping in current grasping strategy based on deep 
reinforcement learning, a pushing-grasping collaborative 
sorting method based on DQN and dual perspectives is 
proposed in this paper. This strategy obtains the top views of 
the objects’ point cloud from two perspectives, combining 
pushing and grasping actions, with a piecewise reward function, 
and finally trains to obtain a robot grasping model iteratively, 
which gives the best action taken by manipulator. Through 
comparative experiments in V-REP simulation environment, it 
can be seen from the results that the method proposed in this 
paper can not only speed up the convergence of the network, 
but also disrupt the original arrangement structure of the objects 
by pushing actions, which improves the success rate of 
grasping obviously, which can come up to 83.5%. And it also 
has a certain generalization ability when grasping unknown 
objects. 
In future work, in order to further improve the cognitive 
ability of the manipulator, a target detection framework can be 
introduced, so that the manipulator can also recognize the types 
of objects to be grasped, which is more convenient for objects’ 
classification.
