Of Non-Linearity and Commutativity in BERT
Sumu Zhao
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Switzerland

Dami´an Pascual
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Switzerland

Gino Brunner
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Switzerland

Roger Wattenhofer
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Switzerland

Abstract—In this work we provide new insights into the trans-
former architecture, and in particular, its best-known variant,
BERT. First, we propose a method to measure the degree of
non-linearity of different elements of transformers. Next, we
focus our investigation on the feed-forward networks (FFN) inside
transformers, which contain two thirds of the model parameters
and have so far not received much attention. We ﬁnd that FFNs
are an inefﬁcient yet important architectural element and that
they cannot simply be replaced by attention blocks without a
degradation in performance. Moreover, we study the interactions
between layers in BERT and show that, while the layers exhibit
some hierarchical structure, they extract features in a fuzzy
manner. Our results suggest that BERT has an inductive bias
towards layer commutativity, which we ﬁnd is mainly due to
the skip connections. This provides a justiﬁcation for the strong
performance of recurrent and weight-shared transformer models.
I. INTRODUCTION
Since the introduction of the transformer architecture [33],
and in particular of BERT [6], researchers have tried to gain
a deeper understanding of the inner workings of these models
[28]. This research paves the way for better explanations of
model decisions, thereby broadening the range of possible
applications of transformers. Furthermore, based on works on
understanding transformers, in [38] the authors introduce an
improved self-attention mechanism, resulting in state of the
art performance. This shows that deeper knowledge of trans-
formers can not only help with interpretability, but also lead to
new and better architectures. In this work, we aim to advance
the understanding of the inner workings of transformers by
providing novel insights from two complementary angles.
First, we assess the importance and representational power
of different parts of BERT. We propose to use linear approx-
imators to measure the degree of (non-)linearity of BERT’s
building blocks. Due to the large amounts of data used
for pre-training, overﬁtting has so far not been an issue
for transformers. This is exempliﬁed by ever larger models
achieving state of the art performance [2], [27]. It thus seems
clear that models with higher expressive power are beneﬁcial
for natural language tasks. We therefore hypothesise that the
degree of non-linearity of a transformer can give us valuable
insight into its inner workings, and in particular, it can indicate
which components are modeling more complex relationships.
Further, we run exhaustive experiments in which we remove
or replace parts of the model and measure the impact on
performance. We ﬁnd that the feed-forward networks (FFN)
in the transformer architecture are inefﬁcient compared to the
self-attention operation, especially since they make up two
thirds of the model parameters.
Second, we investigate why recent “recurrent transformers”
such as ALBERT [17], which employs weight sharing across
layers, performs on par with or even better than the original
BERT. Here, we ﬁnd that BERT has an inherent tendency
towards weight-sharing, and that layers can be removed or
swapped without causing much performance degradation. By
comparing to simpler feed-forward architectures, we ﬁnd that
skip connections play an important role in inducing layer
commutativity in neural networks.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• A diagnosis tool to measure non-linearity in Transformers
that takes into account the geometry of the embedding
space.
• An extensive architectural study revealing the importance
of the FFNs.
• An empirical justiﬁcation for why BERT is amenable to
weight-sharing across layers, indicating that skip connec-
tions are largely responsible for this.
II. RELATED WORK
The ﬁeld of Natural Language Processing (NLP) has un-
dergone major developments since the introduction of the
transformer architecture [33]. Since then, many different vari-
ants of transformers have been proposed [15], [19], [25]–
[27], [30], [39]. One of the fundamental building blocks
of transformers is self-attention, which allows the model to
learn alignments between words. The possibility of visualizing
attention distributions and the quest for interpretability in deep
learning have sparked a lot of research into understanding
transformer models. Most of this research has focused on
BERT [6], a well-known transformer model, initiating a line
of work now known under the term BERTology [28].
In this ﬁeld, a number of studies look into attention
distributions in order to understand transformers’ decisions
and their internal dynamics [4], [11], [16]. However, recent
work raises concerns about the interpretability of attention
distributions [3], [12], [21], [24]. A complementary line of
research uses probing classiﬁers to test for linguistic properties
of different parts of the model [18], [32].
In this work, we take an architectural approach to the
analysis of BERT and look into how different components
of the model interact to extract features and process language.
Similar to probing classiﬁers, we use a linear approximator
arXiv:2101.04547v4  [cs.CL]  7 May 2021

Input
BERT
Encoder n
Output
Encoder 1
...
(a) BERT
Attention
FFN
Encoder
Hidden Token
Embedding
Hidden Token
Embedding
(b) Encoder
Fig. 1. Architecture of BERT and the Encoder block.
to regress the output of different architectural components in
order to study their non-linearity. While existing work has
focused on analyzing the self-attention heads and the impact
of model depth [14], [20], [34], we direct our investigation
towards the FFN blocks of BERT.
The authors of [31] and [13] show that features are extracted
in BERT following the same order as in the classical NLP
pipeline, with syntactic features extracted in earlier layers
and semantic features in later layers. These features are
extracted in a fuzzy manner, in the sense that multiple layers
are responsible for solving the same tasks (e.g., Part-Of-
Speech (POS) tagging). We study this phenomenon from a
complementary angle by investigating the similarity between
layers. Remarkably, ALBERT [17] directly shares the weights
across the layers of BERT without loss of performance, and
Universal Transformers [5] use recurrence over one single
transformer layer. Similarly, in [23] the authors exploit layer
similarity to re-order the layers and improve performance,
while in [7] and [29] they analyze layer redundancy to prune
BERT with minimal performance degradation. Our ﬁndings
support the idea that BERT has an inductive bias towards
weight sharing, which results in the layers having a strong
degree of commutativity and the features being extracted in
an incremental or fuzzy manner.
III. BACKGROUND
In this section, we give a brief description of BERT.
For more details please refer to [6] and the ofﬁcial GitHub
repository.1 As Figure 1 (a) shows, BERT is composed of n
encoder layers. An encoder block follows the same structure
as in the original transformer [33]; it consists of an attention
block and a feed-forward network (FFN), as shown in Figure 1
(b). Figure 2 shows the detailed structures of the attention and
FFN blocks respectively. The input of BERT is a sequence
of tokens, additionally containing special [CLS], [SEP] and
[PAD] tokens. [CLS] can be used as output for classiﬁcation
tasks and [SEP] denotes sentence boundaries. Since BERT is
trained with a ﬁxed (maximum) sequence length, [PAD] tokens
have to be appended to the actual input sequences.
1https://github.com/google-research/bert
Self-Attention
FF
Dropout
+
LayerNorm
SA-FF
Attention
(a) Attention
FF GeLU
FF
Dropout
+
LayerNorm
MLP
FFN
(b) FFN
Fig. 2. Architecture of Attention and FFN blocks.
TABLE I
DETAILS OF THE BERT MODELS WE USE.
Model Layers Heads Hidden
Size
Params Max. Seq
Length
small
6
8
512
35M
128
base
12
12
768
110M
512
In our study, we use two BERT models of different sizes
(base and small); architecture details are shown in Table I.
For BERT-base we use the pre-trained weights as released by
the authors. All variants of BERT-small are pre-trained by us
from scratch. Pre-training BERT-small takes 8 days on one
Tesla V100 GPU card and 5 days on two cards. In [6] they
pre-trained BERT-base on a 16GB text corpus which is a com-
bination of ENGLISHWIKIPEDIA and BOOKCORPUS [40]. Since
this dataset is not readily available, we use OPENWEBTEXT [9],
which is a 38GB text corpus created using the same method
as for training GPT-2 [26].
We evaluate our BERT-small models on all nine GLUE [35]
tasks. For other experiments, we use the MNLI-matched
(MNLIm) dataset from GLUE. To speed up the experiments,
we select a random subset, MNLIm-sub, consisting of 39,271
examples for ﬁne-tuning, and 983 for validation.
IV. STUDYING (NON-)LINEARITY
A reliable measure of how non-linear different components
of deep neural networks are, can help guide model analysis
and design. Here, we propose to use a linear approximator
to quantify the non-linearity of different components of trans-
formers.
Given an architectural component f, we train a linear
approximator f ∗that, given an input e, maximizes the co-
sine similarity between the actual output f(e) = y and
the approximated output f ∗(e) = y∗. Cosine similarity is
a common choice to measure similarity between words in
an embedding space [3], [8], [22] . We deﬁne the linearity
score γf of a component f as the average cosine similarity

0
1e-4 5e-4 1e-3 5e-3 1e-2 5e-2 1e-1 5e-1
1
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
L2 Regularization Weight
γ
Linear
Linear+ReLU
Fig. 3.
Linearity score of a hidden layer of a linear MLP (Linear) and a
non-linear MLP (Linear+ReLU) for different regularization strengths.
between actual and approximated outputs over a set of inputs:
γf = Ee∼E[cos(y, y∗)]. The larger γf, the more linear the
measured component f is. Intuitively, if f is very non-linear,
a linear approximator will not be able to approximate it
accurately and the linearity score γf will be close to 0. If
f is very linear, γf will be close to 1.
A. Method validation
To validate our method, we ﬁrst consider a simple toy task
where we can manipulate the model’s degree of non-linearity.
Speciﬁcally, we use a Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) on the
MNIST handwritten digit classiﬁcation task, which consists
of 60,000 examples. The MLP has one hidden layer of size
768 with ReLU activations, and one softmax layer with 10
output classes. We train this model on 50,000 examples for 30
epochs with batch size 32 and a learning rate of 0.001 using
the Adam optimizer, and then evaluate it on 10,000 examples.
Next, we use the remaining 10,000 training examples to train
a linear model with 768 neurons for 10 epochs to approximate
the output activations of the MLP’s hidden layer.
To verify the linearity score γ, we train the MLP with
different L2 regularization strengths and calculate γ for each
model using the linear approximator. We expect that the more
non-linear a layer, the smaller γ, i.e., the larger the approxima-
tion error. Since increasing the regularization strength makes
the weights smaller, which causes the hidden layer to behave
more linearly, the linearity score γ should increase with larger
regularization weights. In Figure 3, we observe this exact
behavior, with a monotonic increase in linearity with stronger
regularization. Next, we run the same experiment using a linear
MLP (without ReLU activation). Since this model is linear, we
expect a linearity score of 1 regardless of the regularization
strength; as shown in Figure 3, we observe precisely this
behavior. These results show that the linear approximator can
quantify the non-linearity of a simple MLP. Next, we apply
this method to study the non-linearity of BERT. To do this, we
ﬁrst need to consider the geometry of the embedding space.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Layer
ConeSize
Actual
Pad
All
Fig. 4. Average cosine similarity of 1000 random token pairs. The pairs are
generated from the validation set of MNLIm-sub. Layer 0 denotes the input
token embeddings, layers 1-12 denote the output token embeddings of the 12
layers of BERT.
B. Measuring the Non-Linearity of BERT
In [8] it is pointed out that the hidden embeddings at
each transformer layer are directional and occupy cones of
different sizes in their respective spaces, i.e., the embedding
space is anisotropic, with most hidden embeddings located
within a narrow region (cone) of the space. Since the size
of these cones is different at each point of the model, we
need to normalize the approximation errors by the respective
cone sizes in order enable comparisons across layers. This
is because, for architectural components that generate smaller
cones at their output, the linear approximation is easier since
all the output embeddings are already close to each other.
To calculate the cone size we follow [8] and estimate
the expected pair-wise cosine similarity from 1000 randomly
sampled word representations. The intuition behind this is that
the average similarity between pairs of randomly sampled
vectors describes how narrow the cone is. This way, larger
values correspond to smaller cones. At each layer l, the cone
size is deﬁned as:
ConeSize(l) = E(el
i,el
j)∼El[cos(el
i, el
j)]
Where El are the word embeddings at layer l. A value of
0 represents perfect isotropy and 1 perfect anisotropy. We
then calculate the cone size at each layer of BERT for the
MNLIm-sub dataset. In Figure 4 we report the cone size for
padding, actual and all tokens. We see that there is a signiﬁcant
difference between actual and padding tokens, and that the
cone size for all tokens is roughly the average between both
(weighted by the ratio of actual vs padding tokens). Overall,
we see that the cone size for actual tokens is relatively wide2.
This way, we calculate the cone size of the embeddings
after different components f in BERT. These values are then
2Our results differ from [8]; we tried different settings without being able to
reproduce the exact results. Possible explanations are that we separate padding
and actual tokens, and that we use the original pre-trained weights of BERT
while [8] uses the model from the HuggingFace [36].

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Layer
˜γ
SA-FF
MLP
Fig. 5.
Normalized linearity scores of SA-FF and MLP for each layer in
BERT-base. The scores are obtained using MNLIm-sub.
used to obtain the normalized linearity score ˜γl
f of component
f at layer l. To do this, we ﬁrst subtract the cone size from
γf to correct for anisotropy, following the same procedure as
in [8]. Then, to allow comparison across layers, i.e., to have
the values of ˜γl
f contained in a ﬁxed range, we normalize
the result by dividing by the maximum possible value of the
anisotropy-corrected linearity score 1 −ConeSize(fl):
˜γl
f =
γl
f −ConeSize(fl)
1 −ConeSize(fl)
Using this normalized linearity score, we measure at each
layer of BERT the (non-)linearity of the SA-FF and the
MLPs, which are the core of the Attention and FFN blocks
respectively. For both blocks, the linear approximator is a
fully connected linear layer of the same size as the hidden
dimension in BERT-base, i.e., 768. We train it for 3 epochs
with batch size 64, using the Adam optimizer with a learning
rate of 0.001 on MNLIm-sub. In Figure 5 we show the
normalized linearity score ˜γl
f between the approximator output
and the real tokens after each of the considered blocks for each
of the layers of BERT-base.
Note that, while MLPs perform a non-linear function on
one input token, the self-attention operation in the SA-FF
block performs a weighted sum over all tokens in the input
sequence. This way, the non-linearity introduced by SA-FF
comes mainly from the aggregation of context information.
Given the fundamentally different non-linear mechanisms used
by each block, we refrain from directly comparing their
linearity scores. Instead, we analyse how the non-linearity of
each of them changes along the layers.
Both MLPs and SA-FF blocks follow opposing trends in the
ﬁrst three layers, with the MLPs becoming less linear, and SA-
FF becoming more linear. After layer 3, the linearity scores of
both blocks plateaus until approximately layer 10, when both
become progressively more linear. Interestingly, the U-shaped
pattern followed by both blocks (with the notable exception of
the SA-FF block in the ﬁrst layer), indicates that layers closer
to the input/output space extract more linear features.
(12-12)
(12-11)
(12-10)
(12-9)
(12-8)
(12-7)
(12-6)
(12-5)
(12-4)
(12-3)
(12-2)
(12-1)
0.4
0.6
0.8
Layer
Accuracy
Replace MLP
Remove MLP
Remove SA-FF
Remove Encoder
Fig. 6. Multi-layer backwards replacement/removal of different components
in BERT-base, evaluated on MNLIm-sub.
These results show that 1) MLPs introduce strong non-
linearity, especially in the middle layers; and 2) the non-
linearity introduced by SA-FF follows the same trend as that
of MLPs even if the non-linear mechanism is fundamentally
different. Next, we directly compare the impact of each block
on model performance.
C. MLP vs. Self-Attention
Most research on understanding Transformer architectures
has focused on the self-attention component. However, roughly
two thirds of the total parameters of BERT reside within the
FFN blocks, mainly in the MLPs. Here we compare the impact
on performance of MLPs versus SA-FF blocks.
To this end, we ﬁrst progressively replace the MLPs in
all layers of BERT-base in the backwards direction, i.e.,
starting from the last layer, by their corresponding linear
approximator. We replace backwards because this does not
change the input to the earlier layers (which are not replaced).
After replacement, we ﬁne-tune and evaluate the model on
MNLIm-sub. Then we repeat the process but this time we
simply remove the MLPs, i.e., without replacing them by
linear approximators. We compare the performance of these
experiments with the performance of progressively removing
the SA-FF blocks. The results are reported in Figure 6; as
reference, we also report the performance after removing the
whole encoder layer.
Some surprising insights can be extracted from these ex-
periments. First, replacing the MLPs by linear approximators
yields approximately the same performance as completely
removing the MLPs. This implies that it is the non-linear
contribution of the MLP that is solely responsible for the
performance difference. Second, the drop in performance after
removing MLP blocks is smaller than when removing SA-FF
blocks; especially after layer 6, removing the SA-FF blocks
produces a much more severe degradation. Finally, removing
SA-FF is as harmful as removing the whole encoder layer.

TABLE II
GLUE SCORES OF VARIANTS OF BERT-SMALL.
Model
GLUE score
BERT-small
74.5
no-FFN
69.6
no-FFN-SA+
70.9
no-FFN-GeLU-SA
70.0
no-FFN-GeLU-SA+
72.3
All of this conﬁrms that while the majority of the parameters
are in the MLPs, i.e., in the FFNs, the self-attention operation
is more important for overall model performance. Furthermore,
it raises the question of what happens if we remove all FFNs
and instead add more attention layers. We explore this by
training different variants of BERT-small and evaluating them
on GLUE. In particular, we train:
no-FFN: model without FFN blocks. This model has about
one third of the original parameters.
no-FFN-SA+ : model without FFN blocks, but with more
layers so that the total number of parameters is roughly
the same as BERT-small. This model has 18 layers.
no-FFN-GeLU-SA : same as no-FFN but with GeLU activa-
tion functions after the SA-FF block.
no-FFN-GeLU-SA+ : same as no-FFN-SA+ but with GeLU
activation functions after the SA-FF block.
The results are shown in Table II. We ﬁnd that, as expected,
models with more parameters perform better; we see this
from the performance of the SA+ models. We also see that
adding a GeLU non-linearity [10] to the self-attention block
further improves performance. However, adding more self-
attention blocks in substitution of the FFN blocks degrades the
performance of the model by more than 4 points, and by more
than 2 points when using GeLU non-linearities. This strong
degradation is surprising and indicates that separate FFN
blocks with their own skip connection and layer normalization
are more effective than moving the parameters and non-
linearity to the attention blocks.
Overall, we ﬁnd that the FFNs are an important, albeit
somewhat inefﬁcient, building block of BERT. We believe
that a redesign of these structures could lead to improved
performance, or equal performance with fewer parameters.
However, this redesign is not straightforward and requires a
more extensive investigation.
V. BERT HAS AN INDUCTIVE BIAS TOWARDS WEIGHT
SHARING
Recently there has been a trend towards transformers that
feature recurrence across the layer-dimension [1], [5], [17].
For example, ALBERT achieves this by explicitly sharing
the weights across all layers. Somewhat surprisingly, this
does not negatively affect the performance, despite drastically
reducing the number of parameters by a factor of nlayers. In
this section we show that BERT has an inductive bias that
makes it amenable for explicit weight-sharing across layers.
(1,2)
(2,3)
(3,4)
(4,5)
(5,6)
(6,7)
(7,8)
(8,9)
(9,10)
(10,11)
(11,12)
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.8
Swapped Layers
Accuracy
Direct evaluation
Train 3 more epochs
Fig. 7. Swapping adjacient layers of BERT-base ﬁne-tuned on MNLIm-sub.
Baseline: 80.14% (dashed).
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Layer Distance
Accuracy
Direct eval.
3 more ep.
Fig. 8. Swapping all possible combinations of two layers (mean accuracy).
Baseline: 80.14% (dashed).
In particular, we show that the layers in BERT are highly
commutative, that is, they can be swapped with surprisingly
little impact on performance.
A. Swapping Layers
Figure 7 shows the effect of swapping adjacent layers of
BERT-base and evaluating the resulting models directly on
the validation set of MNLIm-sub. Surprisingly, the average
performance degradation is only 2%.
Next, we investigate swapping any two layers by evaluating
all 66 models that can be created by swapping two layers. Fig-
ure 8 shows the average accuracy for each swapping distance.
Swapping distance refers to the absolute difference between
the indices of the swapped layers. Note that there are fewer
models for longer swapping distances and hence fewer data
points. For example, swapping layers across a distance of 11
corresponds to swapping layer 1 and layer 12, and so there is
only one possible model. The ﬁgure shows that, overall, BERT
is surprisingly robust to this modiﬁcation, and only 3 epochs of

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.33
0.5
0.66
0.8
Number of Fixed Layers k
Accuracy
Fig. 9. Create new BERT models by keeping k layers ﬁxed and shufﬂing the
rest. The models are then directly evaluated on MNLIm-sub without further
ﬁne-tuning. Baseline: 80.14% (dashed).
further ﬁne-tuning can recover most of the performance loss.
However, swapping over longer distances generally results in
worse performance, indicating that adjacent layers are more
similar, as it was also observed in [37]. Interestingly, for
distances above 9 this trend reverses. When examining the
results in more detail, we ﬁnd that this is due to the fact
that swapping layer 1 with either layer 11 or 12 results in
accuracies of 62% and 70% respectively. This indicates that
the very ﬁrst and very last layers of BERT are remarkably
similar, potentially due to their “closeness” to the input/output
space. This is in line with the U-shape observed in our non-
linearity analysis in Section IV-B.
B. Shufﬂing Layers and ALBERT-like Conﬁguration
Next, we extend our analysis from swapping two layers at
a time to shufﬂing different numbers of layers, i.e., changing
their order. Figure 9 shows the results of a series of layer-
shufﬂing experiments on BERT; we ﬁrst randomly choose k
layers to be ﬁxed, and then randomly permute all the remaining
layers. For every value of k we create 100 permuted versions
of BERT. We then directly evaluate each of these models on
the MNLIm-sub validation set without any additional ﬁne-
tuning. The results show that as we decrease the number of
ﬁxed layers, performance monotonically decreases. However,
only for k <= 3 does the median accuracy drops to random
guessing (MNLI has three classes, thus random guessing
corresponds to an accuracy of 33%). Also, for every value
of k, there are many models that still perform well above
random.
Figure 10 shows what happens when we ﬁne-tune the
shufﬂed models for another three epochs. Remarkably, for
values of k >= 5, there are some models that reach or
even surpass the baseline score. Even for k < 5, much of
the performance can be recovered. Note that 3 epochs of
ﬁne-tuning correspond to less than 2000 weight updates at a
reduced learning rate, as is common when ﬁne-tuning BERT.
This stands in stark contrast to the over 1M weight updates
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.33
0.5
0.66
0.8
Number of Fixed Layers k
Accuracy
Fig. 10. Create new BERT models by keeping k layers ﬁxed and shufﬂing the
rest. The models are then ﬁne-tuned again on MNLIm-sub before evaluating.
Baseline: 80.14% (dashed).
during pre-training, and shows that most layers of BERT can
be quickly “repurposed” after shufﬂing, which in turn indicates
that they are very similar to each other.
Finally, we create ALBERT-like models from the ﬁne-tuned
BERT-base by repeating each layer 12 times. Without further
ﬁne-tuning, this reduces performance to random guessing.
However, if we ﬁne-tune for another 3 epochs, performance
improves signiﬁcantly. The results are shown in Figure 11.
Interestingly, models based on layers 2-5 seem to be best,
and higher layers fail to perform well on their own. This
shows that, while BERT has an inherent tendency towards
weight-sharing, its layers do still exhibit a certain hierarchical
structure.
So far, the results in this section suggest that BERT has an
inductive bias towards learning very similar transformations at
each layer, which is why layers can be swapped and shufﬂed
without incurring a large performance loss. We therefore
hypothesize that enforcing weight sharing as in ALBERT [17]
makes this inherent tendency explicit, thus acting as an ef-
fective regularizer. Next, we investigate where this inherent
weight-sharing tendency is coming from.
C. What Causes the Inductive Bias Towards Weight-Sharing?
We now contrast the results on BERT with a simple CNN
baseline trained on MNIST, where we ﬁnd that swapping
adjacent layers instantly reduces the classiﬁer performance
to random. Thus, in order to ﬁgure out which component
of BERT is responsible for the strong commutatity of its
layers, we train two additional CNN versions, one with layer
normalization and another one with skip connections around
every convolutional layer3. The results for all three CNNs
are shown in Figure 12. Adding layer normalization does not
make the CNN more commutative. However, the CNN with
3Ablating components from BERT (e.g. skip connections) prevented con-
vergence during training and thus, we use a simpler CNN model to analyze
the behavior of the different architectural elements.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12
0.4
0.6
0.8
Layer
Accuracy
Direct eval.
3 more ep.
Fig. 11.
Performance of ALBERT-like models on MNLIm-sub. Baseline:
80.14% (dashed).
(2,3)
(3,4)
(4,5)
(5,6)
(6,7)
(7,8)
(8,9)
(9,10)
(10,11)
(11,12)
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
Swapped Layers
Accuracy
CNN
CNN-LN
CNN-LN-SC
Fig. 12. Swapping adjacent layers of CNNs trained on MNIST. LN stands for
layer normalization and SC for skip connections. Baseline: 99.1% (dashed).
skip connections shows almost no performance drop when
swapping adjacent layers. These result are very similar to the
ones on BERT from Figure 7.
Analogously to the previous section, we also investigate how
the CNN behaves when more than two layers are shufﬂed.
The results are shown in Figure 13. Direct comparisons to
the results on BERT are difﬁcult due to the differences in
training task and architectures. However, the ﬁgures clearly
show that layers of models with skip connections are highly
commutative, especially when compared to baselines without
skip connections. These results suggests that much of the
inherent weight-sharing bias of BERT comes from the skip
connections in the FFN and Attention blocks.
Our ﬁndings in this section suggest that feature extraction in
BERT is not strictly hierarchical, but happens incrementally,
and that it is not the “early layers” per-se that extract low-
level features, but low-level features are simply extracted ﬁrst,
regardless of the order in which the layers are applied. We
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
0.5
1
Number of Fixed Layers
Accuracy
Fig. 13. Creating new skip-connection CNN models by keeping k layers ﬁxed
and shufﬂing the rest. The resulting models are evaluated without further ﬁne-
tuning. Baseline: 99.1% (dashed).
believe that this is partly due to the commutativity of BERT’s
layers, which seems to be caused mostly by the use of skip
connections.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work we propose a tool to measure non-linearity in
transformers which takes into account the geometry of the
embedding space. With this, we ﬁnd that the non-linearity
introduced by the MLPs and SA-FF blocks follow the same
U-shaped pattern. Further, we ﬁnd that although FFN blocks
contain approximately two thirds of the parameters, attention
has a considerably stronger impact on the performance of the
model. Finally, we investigate how BERT’s layers interact with
each other and observe that features are extracted in a fuzzy or
incremental manner, with the layers being very similar to each
other. By comparing BERT to simple CNNs we ﬁnd that the
commutativity of the layers is induced by the skip connections.
This inductive bias towards weight sharing and recurrence
provides an explanation for the strong performance of weight-
shared models like ALBERT or the Universal Transformer.
We hope that this work will motivate further investigation of
architectural elements of transformers other than self-attention.
We believe a more efﬁcient use of the parameters contained
in the FFNs is possible, and we expect that further research
will ﬁnd a better way of exploiting the representational power
of those parameters. Although we ﬁnd that skip connections
make adjacent layers commutative, the role of self-attention
in enabling recurrence over layers remains unclear. Since
self-attention is an input-dependent operation, it provides
additional ﬂexibility to the model that may further enforce
the inductive bias towards weight-sharing. Hence, we deem
the investigation of weight-shared architectures an exciting
direction for future work.
