arXiv:1202.2167v1  [cs.AI]  10 Feb 2012
Abstract Representations and Frequent Pattern Discovery
Eray ¨Ozkural
Bilkent University Computer Engineering Department

Abstract
We discuss the frequent pattern mining problem in a
general setting. From an analysis of abstract represen-
tations, summarization and frequent pattern mining,
we arrive at a generalization of the problem. Then, we
show how the problem can be cast into the powerful
language of algorithmic information theory. This al-
lows us to formulate a simple algorithm to mine for all
frequent patterns. 1
Introduction
The ﬁeld of data mining is changing faster than we
can deﬁne it.
In recent years, foundations of data
mining has received considerable interest, helping re-
move some of the ad-hoc considerations in the the-
ory of data mining and expanding the frontiers. The
problem deﬁnitions of early data mining research have
now been analyzed meticulously, considering especially
the performance and scalability of methods, giving a
performance-oriented character to most data mining re-
search. Qualitative work has usually focused on slight
variations of the original problems; staying within the
framework of basic problems such as association rule
mining and sequence mining.
However, the ever ex-
panding computational and storage capacity challenges
us to devise new ways to look at the data mining tasks,
to discover more interesting/useful patterns. The sub-
ject of this paper is a substantial revision of the fre-
quency mining problem, this time mining for any kind
of a pattern instead of frequent item sets. We arrive
at our formulation from a philosophical analysis of the
problem, conceiving what the problem might look like
in the most general setting. After reviewing some of the
recent literature on generalizing data mining problems,
1: This paper has been written in 2006, however, it was
generously refused from two conferences; one of them being
ICDM. And the later one is AGI-10. The paper is going to
be revised, eventually, according to the AGI-10 reviewers’
criticism, which claimed, among other things, that algorith-
mic statistics supersedes this paper. The author would like
to share this paper with the public until the criticism can
be adequately addressed, which will unfortunately not be
possible for some time due to my PhD studies.
we examine the relation of abstraction to the summa-
rization task and in particular frequent pattern discov-
ery. We then present a novel formulation of the frequent
pattern discovery problem using algorithmic informa-
tion theory, derived from our philosophical analysis.
We show that our formulation exhibits similar formal
relations to the original frequent itemset mining prob-
lem, and is arguably a good generalization of it. Then,
we present the Micro-Synthetic algorithm which has
the capability to detect any kind of a pattern given our
information theoretic deﬁnition of pattern occurrence.
The algorithm is similar to the Apriori algorithm in
its logic of managing the task in a small number of
database scans. After discussing the pros and cons of
our approach, we outline future research directions.
Related work
We will skip the deﬁnitions and methods of tra-
ditional
frequent
pattern
discovery
for
consid-
erations
of
space.
For
an
introduction
to
the
subject,
see
(Agrawal & Srikant 1994;
Zaki 1999;
Hipp, G¨untzer, & Nakhaeizadeh 2000).
There
has
been some promising research in applying the generic
methods of Kolmogorov complexity to data mining.
The authors report favorable results for classiﬁcation
and deviation detection tasks in (Eamonn Keogh ). A
mathematical theory of high frequency patterns which
uses granular computing was presented in (Lin ). We
will now take a closer look at algorithmic methods
which have attracted a great deal of interest.
Algorithmic Information Theory
Algorithmic information theory (AIT) gives an ab-
solute characterization of complexity for arbitrary
bit strings (Chaitin 1987).
A computer is a com-
putable partial function C(p, q) of self-delimiting pro-
gram strings p and data q, where both input and output
datum are bitstrings in {0, 1}∗. Empty string is denoted
with Λ and the shortest program which computes s is
denoted with s∗. U is a universal computer that can
simulate any other computer C with U(p′, q) = C(p, q)
and |p′| ≤|p| + sim(C) where sim(C) is the length
of simulation program for C. An admissible universal
computer is LISP with its eval function.

The algorithmic information content H(s) of a bit
string s is the size of minimal program s∗which com-
putes it. H(s/t) is the algorithmic information content
of s relative to t (conditional algorithmic entropy). An-
other deﬁnition from AIT is mutual algorithmic infor-
mation H(s : t) which is relevant to our work. H(s : t)
is the extent to which knowing s helps one to calculate
t. The probability P(s) of a bitstring s is the probabil-
ity a program evaluates to s. Likewise, the conditional
probability P(s/t) is the probability a program evalu-
ates to s given the minimal program t∗for calculating
t.
In the deﬁnitions below, the characterizations are
given for particular computers, when we use a univer-
sal computer for C we drop the subscript (Since then
the deﬁnitions indeed become universal in that the dif-
ference between a universal computer and another com-
puter will always be a constant simulation cost, a result
which is known as the invariance theorem)
AIT gives an analogous formalism to information
theory, and is deemed more fundamental since Shan-
non information can be derived from algorithmic (Kol-
mogorov) information. It is not possible to include all
theorems here, but some relevant consequences and re-
sults will be stated, mostly without proof.
H(s, t) is the joint algorithmic information of s and
t where “,” denotes concatenation of bitstrings (at any
rate it is straightforward to convert between any two
pair encodings). Algorithmic information is asymptot-
ically symmetric, e.g. H(s, t) = H(t, s) + O(1) since in
high level languages it is not problematic to accomplish
this sort of feat with a short constant program. The
conditional entropy of a string with itself is constant,
similarly.
Theorem I8 of (Chaitin 1987) states that conditional
entropy measures how easier it is to compute two strings
together than separately.
HC(t/s) = H(s, t) −H(s) + c
(1)
Theorem I9 of (Chaitin 1987) exposes the relation-
ships between joint, mutual and conditional informa-
tion, as well as probability and joint probability.
In
particular, algorithmic information is subadditive and
conditional and mutual information can be calculated
from probabilities.
H(s, t) = H(s) + H(t/s) + O(1)
(2a)
H(s : t) = H(s) + H(t) −H(s, t) + O(1)
(2b)
H(s : t) = H(t : s) + O(1)
(2c)
There are several other interesting theorems in AIT,
however they fall beyond the scope of the present work.
Algorithmic distance metrics for
classiﬁcation
H(s) is uncomputable.
However, it can be approx-
imated with a reasonable compression program from
the above.
The standard UNIX compression pro-
grams gzip and bzip2 have been used exactly for
this purpose by Cilibrasi et al (Rudi Cilibrasi ) for
clustering music ﬁles.
In the predecessors to this
paper, Vitanyi et al (Bennett et al. 1998; Li et al. ;
R. Cilibrasi 2003) have introduced a distance function
based on algorithmic information theory which can be
used for domain unspeciﬁc classiﬁcation and clustering
algorithms.
Let ρ(., .) be a distance function for a metric space
(A, ρ), then the following must hold:
1. ρ(a, b) = 0 if and only if a = b
2. ρ(a, b) = ρ(b, a) (symmetry)
3. ρ(a, c) ≤ρ(a, b) + ρ(b, c) (triangle equality)
The authors propose to use normalized information
distance (NID) which is based on algorithmic (Kol-
mogorov) complexity of bit strings.
d : {0, 1}∗× {0, 1}∗→[0, 1]
d(a, b) 7→max{H(a/b), H(b/a)}
max{H(a), H(b)}
(3)
If we assume H(y) ≥H(x) without loss of generality,
then we can substitute H(y/x) = H(y)−H(x : y) from
basic deﬁnitions and we will have
d(x, y) = 1 −H(x : y)
H(y)
which satisﬁes requirements for a metric function.
A signiﬁcant property of NID is the normalization of
distance according to the dominating complexity among
two objects. Therefore, a small diﬀerence between two
large strings is considered more similar than the same
amount of diﬀerence between smaller strings. Formally,
a normalized distance is a metric m(., .) that takes val-
ues in [0, 1] and satisﬁes the Kraft inequality:
X
{y|y̸=x}
2−m(x,y) ≤1
(4)
Whereas information distance metric e(x, y)
=
max{H(y/x), H(x/y)}
(Bennett et al. 1998)
is
not
normalized, NID achieves normalization by an appro-
priate denominator to e(x, y), acknowledging that the
diﬀerence of two strings is not absolute, but relative to
their complexity (i.e. magnitude) (Li et al. ). NID has
been applied to clustering in diverse domains such as
genomics, virology, languages, literature, music, hand-
written digits, astronomy, and has reported success
even in heterogeneous domains using a variety of com-
pressors (R. Cilibrasi 2003), therefore it seems a useful
tool for machine learning research.
By Theorem 1 mentioned in last subsection we can
approximate the conditional entropy since H(t/s) ≈
H(s, t)−H(s). Each of the terms on the right hand side
can be approximated by a compression program from
the above. Normalized Compression Distance (NCD)
uses a standard compression program such as gzip or
bzip2 to approximate d(x, y).
ncd(a, b) = |C(a, b)| −min(|C(a)|, |C(b)|)
max(|C(a)|, |C(b)|)
(5)

where C is the compression function.
In
another
work,
Kraskov
et
al
propose
us-
ing
mutual
information
both
in
Shannon’s
ver-
sion and Kolmogorov’s version based on the same
proof
(A. Kraskov & Grassberger 2003). These stud-
ies are relevant to our problem in that they show the
versatility of Kolmogorov complexity. We shall now try
to answer if we can achieve similar feats in data mining.
Abstract representations
Before proceeding with our formulation of frequent pat-
tern discovery from an information theoretic perspec-
tive, it is worthwhile giving a philosophical overview of
the task. The main objective of frequency mining is to
summarize a large data set. With a suitable threshold,
we obtain a smaller data set that is representative of
the most signiﬁcant patterns in the data.
By means
of such an abstract representation, one then achieves
more speciﬁc tasks such as discovering association rules
or clustering the data.
Recent formulations of association rule mining have
characterized the task as generalization of the data.
This is a necessary condition for any successful abstrac-
tion, else what use can we imagine of an abstract repre-
sentation? According to Marvin Minsky, another way
of putting this would be the removal of unnecessary
details from the representation. (Minsky 2006) Statis-
tically, “detail” could be understood as infrequent pat-
terns in data, which is precisely what frequent item set
mining eliminates. Thus, a comparison of the common
sense notion of “abstraction” and the familiar data min-
ing task of summarization is in order.
Let us conceive of an abstract sketch A. If this draw-
ing is an abstraction of a lively picture B, we expect to
ﬁnd the most “important” features of B in A, perhaps
only some of them. We would also expect to see the
details, for instance the texture, shading and colors of
B to be removed in A (assuming that it is quite ab-
stract). In addition, we would not like to see anything
in A that does not correspond to a signiﬁcant feature
in B. Some caricatures, like those of politicians drawn
in a clean generic style, may set a good example of this
kind of sensory abstraction (Note however that some
caricatures are highly stylized and will set a bad exam-
ple for abstraction). The facial features in a caricature
are highly informative; they convey much information
about the facial identity of the person at a small cost
of representation. On the other hand, like any other
image, the abstract representation must be built from
low-level components, which are apparently not part of
the original image. If these components, such as the ba-
sic drawing patterns of the caricaturist, are kept simple
enough, the resulting work will look abstract.
If we are to relate the above characterization of ab-
straction to data mining, the most problematic part
might be the “important” term. After all, an important
feature for one task might be unimportant for another.
Consider the notes of a symphony. The pitch and du-
ration information is considered signiﬁcant because it
helps us to quickly discern one piece of music from the
other. This is true for any given application domain.
For recognition of music, it is the pitch or the inter-
val that matters.
But for speech, it is the phoneme
that matters. The truly generic summarization algo-
rithm might be able to discover the concept of note or
phoneme merely by looking at the data. If we take B
to be only one datum in a data set, we will ﬁnd it more
productive to think of the importance of a feature de-
termined by the frequency of its occurrence. This ap-
proach suggested also in the beginning of the section
does not completely solve the problem, however. We
also need universal and objective criteria for determin-
ing if a feature approximately occurs in a given datum.
Let us now make our explanations more precise. We
say that A is an abstract representation of B if and only
if:
1. A is substantially less complex than B.
2. Every important feature of A is similar to an impor-
tant feature of B.
Note that condition 2 can also be stated as: “There
is no important feature in A that is not similar to an
important feature in B”.
This deﬁnition is more relevant to abstraction than
lossy compression. Especially, in lossy compression the
only purpose is to reproduce the data set with a low
error rate (e.g.
deﬁned in terms of how well the re-
production is), it does not necessarily take into account
simpliﬁcation of condition 1. Neither does it address the
“similar” predicate of the last condition. One might de-
cide to exclude color from the abstract representation
of a house, but in traditional image compression such
choices would not be considered.
Furthermore, lossy
compression does not take into account the generaliza-
tion power of the representation over an ensemble of
objects. However, in frequency mining, we can give a
rigid meaning to importance, e.g. statistically signiﬁ-
cant patterns.
If we now consider a frequent pattern discovery al-
gorithm, we may say that the set of frequent patterns
satisfy conditions 1 and 2 to be an abstract represen-
tation of the entire data set. A useful frequent pattern
set is smaller than the transaction set and each fre-
quent pattern (all of them above the given support can
be said to be important) occurs in B as an important
feature.
In this sense, the pattern set does not only
model the current data set, but presumably also future
extensions of the data source. (We can note here that
the non-traditional statistics provided by the frequent
itemset-like computation may have use for predictive
modelling in general).
Analysis of common objections
An objection may be raised at this point with respect
to the traditional duality of syntax vs. semantics. It
may be suggested that abstraction crucially depends on
semantics which does not seem to be mentioned in our
deﬁnition. It need not be, since semantic relations, too,

may be accounted for in the “similar” predicate. On
the other hand, it must be reminded that cryptic ref-
erences should not in general be considered as abstract
in themselves. By abstraction, we refer to manifestly
useful, generalized, compact representations. Any cryp-
tic representation may be conceived of as an encrypted
form of such an underlying “successful” abstract repre-
sentation.
Other approaches for pattern
interestingness
Equating frequency with importance may not be
the only or satisfactory way of deﬁning interesting-
ness of a pattern objectively.
If we go back to
the caricature example,
an approach which takes
the locality and statistics of the image might be
able to produce abstract features which are closer
to the common sense description of interestingness.
In particular, using wavelets may capture the local-
ity of many data types (Arno Siebes 2002).
Com-
pare also the approach of non-linear PCA to im-
age analysis (for
the
later
task
of
classiﬁcation,
etc.) (Rosipal, Girolami, & Trejo 2000).
Algorithmic information and the
concept of pattern
As noted by (Lin ), a pattern may be conceived of the
shortest program that generates a string. Otherwise,
the concept of a pattern is something else entirely in
every machine learning and data mining paper. By us-
ing bit strings and programs, we can give an objective,
and universal deﬁnition of a pattern. Algorithmic in-
formation theory can then be used to deﬁne pattern
operators in a way that is surprisingly close to cogni-
tive processes. However, at this stage of our research,
we do not yet concern ourselves with the programs, our
patterns are simply bit strings for now.
In particular, information distance and normalized
information distance which were brieﬂy covered in Sec-
tion are universal measures of similarity that are com-
pletely independent of the application domain, and
some amazingly simple implementations have achieved
success in diverse domains and learning tasks. Our use
of information theory is directly related to the concept
of information distance.
We also use conditional en-
tropy to quantify structural diﬀerence.
A general model
We are now going to generalize the set-theoretic deﬁni-
tion of the classical frequent item set mining to cover
a wider range of scientiﬁc measurement. Assume that
we have samples of sensor data from a “ﬁxed” instru-
mentation device, for instance image data from a ra-
dioastronomy telescope examining a certain region of
the space. A better example could be seismograph data
which transmits measurements irregularly and for any
number of samples.
Let transaction multi-set (set with repetition) T =
{x|x ∈{0, 1}∗} be the unordered list of observations
from the same domain. Let also a pattern x ∈{0, 1}∗.
We will say that an abstract pattern x occurs in datum
y ∈T iﬀ:
1. H(x) ≤c1.H(y) (entropy reduction)
2. H(x/y) ≤c2.H(y) (noise exclusion)
where 0 < c1 < 1 and 0 < c2 < 1. We denote “x occurs
in y” by x ≺y.
in compliance with our observations about the nature
of abstract representations.
Note that we have paid
attention to make our conditions scale-free, in that we
want to ﬁnd patterns that have only a fraction of the
datum complexity, and we want to exclude patterns
which carry more than a speciﬁed ratio of noise (w.r.t.
datum). If we did not care for the deﬁnition to be scale-
free, we could use additive terms for our deﬁnition:
1. H(x) ≤H(y) −c3
2. H(x/y) ≤c4
which seems less useful since in our deﬁnition we put
no restriction on the bit strings (as in the seismograph
example). Therefore, we will stick with the scale-free
variants.
Having generalized the pattern occurrence operator
in the set theoretic deﬁnition from the subset opera-
tion to the information-theoretic conditions, the rest
of the problem deﬁnition is trivial. Let the frequency
function f(T, x) = |{x ≺y|
y ∈T}|. Our objective is
the discovery of frequent patterns in a transaction set
with a frequency of ǫ and more. The set of all frequent
patterns is F(T, ǫ) = {x ∈{0, 1}∗|f(T, x) ≥ǫ}, which
is guaranteed to be ﬁnite due to the entropy reduction
condition. (Note that we consider the classical deﬁni-
tion of Kolmogorov/Chaitin/Solomonoﬀcomplexity as
mentioned in Section ). However, the size of F can be
quite large, as in the frequent item set mining problem.
The downward closure lemma which states that the
subsets of a frequent pattern are also frequent makes the
Apriori algorithm possible in the context of frequent
item set mining (Agrawal, Imielinski, & Swami 1993).
There is an analogue of the contrapositive of this lemma
for our general formulation. Note that to simplify mat-
ters we assume a self-delimiting program encoding such
as LISP. According to Chaitin, this is not much of a
requirement. (The analysis without the self-delimiting
condition would introduce an additive logarithmic term
which we would address separately.)
Lemma 1. If x /∈F(T, ǫ) then xy /∈F(T, ǫ).
Less
formally, any extension of an infrequent pattern is also
infrequent.
Proof. If x /∈F(T, ǫ) then, f(T, x) < ǫ. Let z be any
datum in T for which it is not the case that x ≺z.
Then, at least one of the pattern occurence conditions
does not hold.
We can now analyze whether an ex-
tended xy ≺z.

• Suppose that the entropy reduction condition does
not hold: H(x) > c1.H(z). Then, H(x, y) > c1.H(z)
since H(x, y) > H(x).
• Alternatively, suppose that the noise exclusion con-
dition does not hold:
H(x/z) > c2.H(z).
Then,
it doesn’t hold for x, y either.
H((x, y)/z)
=
H(y/(x, z)) + H(x/z) + O(1) by subadditivity of
algorithmic information.
Since H(y/(x, z)) > 0
(since it has to be at least O(1)), then we ﬁnd that
H((x, y)/z) > c2.H(z).
Therefore, it is not the case that xy ≺z.
Then,
f(T, xy) ≤f(T, x) < ǫ which entails that xy /∈F(T, ǫ).
The Synthetic algorithm
By Lemma 1, we are inspired to write an algorithm
which starts with a number of primitive candidate pat-
terns and searches the pattern space in breadth ﬁrst
fashion like the Apriori algorithm. First, let us look
at the calculation of pattern occurrence conditions.
Approximate calculations
Algorithmic information content is uncomputable us-
ing a universal computer.
Neither of the conditions
we give are recursively enumerable. Fortunately, that
should not trouble us too much, for we can use the
methods mentioned in Section
to approximate these
uncomputable values. However, it is arguable whether
using a dictionary-based simple compressor is suﬃcient
for the range of data mining applications we are inter-
ested in. At the present, the only obvious advantage
of using a traditional compressor would seem to be ef-
ﬁciency.
We again approximate the conditional entropy using
subadditivity of information H(t/s) ≈H(s, t) −H(s).
With a compressor C(·) such as gzip, our two conditions
become:
1. C(x) ≤c1.C(y) (entropy reduction)
2. C(x, y) ≤(1 + c2).C(y) (noise exclusion)
BFS in pattern space
We will adapt a generate and test strategy similar to
Apriori for our ﬁrst algorithm, applying the theory in-
troduced in the paper. The pruning logic is quite simi-
lar, we do not extend infrequent patterns by Lemma 1.
We will keep the algorithm as close as possible to
Apriori to show the relation, although there could
be many eﬃciency improvements following various fre-
quent itemset mining algorithms. Micro-Synthetic
extends the pattern length by n bits at each iteration
of the algorithm. Initially, a fast algorithm ﬁnds all fre-
quent patterns up to n bits (akin to discovery of large
items). The Generate procedure extends the frequent
patterns of the previous level up to n bits.
Then, a
database pass is performed and the pattern occurence
conditions are checked for each candidate pattern and
transaction element. Then, the algorithm iterates, gen-
erating candidates from the last level of frequent pat-
terns discovered, until we reach a level where there are
no frequent patterns, exactly as in Apriori.
Algorithm 1 Micro-Synthetic(T, ǫ, c1, c2)
1: F0 ←{|x| ≤n|x ∈{0, 1}∗∧f(T, x) >= ǫ}
2: k ←1
3: while Fk−1 ̸= ∅do
4:
Ck ←Generate(Fk−1)
5:
for all y ∈T do
6:
for all x ∈C do
7:
if C(x) ≤c1.C(y) ∧C(x, y) ≤(1 + c2).C(y)
then
8:
count[x] ←count[x] + 1
9:
end if
10:
end for
11:
end for
12:
Fk ←{x ∈Ck| count[x] ≥ǫ}
13:
k ←k + 1
14: end while
15: return S
k Fk
Discussion
The algorithm is called Micro-Synthetic, because di-
rect search in pattern space has obvious limitations.
On the other hand, that is also what all frequent pat-
tern discovery algorithms do, therefore it may not be
at a greater disadvantage. Like in the basic frequent
itemset mining algorithms, the support threshold must
be given. However, we also require two extra param-
eters to delimit the pattern occurence. Unfortunately,
our formulation falls short of the “parameter-free” ideal
(Eamonn Keogh ).
At the moment, we can give no
guidelines for setting c1 and c2 except that they must
be small enough. Especially c2, which controls vague-
ness in our model. The basic frequent item set mining
problem has no place for vagueness, the pattern relation
is strict. On the other hand, our formulation places no
bounds on the kind of data/pattern representation, and
allows for vague representations, which are useful for a
system that can abstract.
An implementation eﬀort is ongoing.
Micro-
Synthetic has been implemented and tested on small
datasets. We have tried a variety of compressors like
gzip, bzip2 and PAQ8f for the information distance ap-
proximation.
While we have managed to ﬁnd some
interesting character patterns this way (such as ﬁnd-
ing an abstract pattern of 00000001111111 from exam-
ple strings of diﬀerent length which contain a sequence
of 0’s and 1’s in them, with errors), we have observed
that the suboptimality of the compressors (relative to
the particular decompressor) causes too many random
patterns to be found, which cannot be attenuated by
the c2 parameter.
We have been thus working on a
simple but optimal compressor that will ﬁt out imple-
mentation better. After we get some results using the
Micro-Synthetic on toy problems, we are planning

to devise an algorithm with many optimizations to deal
with more realistic data sets.
We think that an im-
plementation could demonstrate results on both tradi-
tional tabular datasets, and novel kinds of data due to
the generality of data schema, depending on the avail-
ability of a suitable compressor.
Conclusions and Future Work
We have made a high-level analysis of the frequent
pattern discovery problem, by observing relations be-
tween the common sense notion of “abstraction”, and
the summarization task.
We have determined objec-
tive criteria for a pattern to be an abstract represen-
tation. These criteria were interpreted as information
theoretic conditions of reduced entropy and noise exclu-
sion for a problem deﬁnition where patterns and data
are any bitstring.
We have replaced the pattern oc-
curence operation in frequency mining with the con-
ditions we have proposed. Thus, we have achieved a
generalized version of the frequent pattern discovery
problem. Thereafter, we have demonstrated that our
conditions allow for pruning which is essential for the
search in pattern space, which is vast but bounded. We
have then used commonly employed methods to apply
Kolmogorov complexity in real-world to design an algo-
rithm suitable for the discovery task. Finally, We have
introduced an Apriori like algorithm which enumer-
ates all frequent patterns in our formulation.
Our research requires yet a lot of work to be done,
both in the theory and experimental studies.
First,
there should be theoretical properties that should be
clariﬁed, and alternative search methods should be an-
alyzed.
Especially, pattern space clustering methods
and eﬃcient representations may be sought. We have
given an algorithm only for all frequent pattern discov-
ery, the analogues of closed/maximal mining may be
investigated.
Second, a synthetic data set generator
should be written, which highlights the virtues of our
model and if possible real-world data should be tried
out. Third, the eﬀects of diﬀerent kinds of compressors
must be analyzed.
