UNDER REVIEW: IEEE NETWORK, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 20XX
1
Smart-Edge-CoCaCo: AI-Enabled Smart Edge with
Joint Computation, Caching, and Communication in
Heterogeneous IoT
Yixue Hao, Yiming Miao,Yuanwen Tian, Long Hu, M. Shamim Hossain, Ghulam Muhammad, Syed Umar Amin
Abstract—The development of mobile communication technol-
ogy, hardware, distributed computing, and artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI) technology has promoted the application of edge computing
in the ﬁeld of heterogeneous Internet of Things (IoT). In order
to overcome the defects of the traditional cloud computing model
in the era of big data. In this article, we ﬁrst propose a new AI-
enabled smart edge with heterogeneous IoT architecture which
combines edge computing, caching, and communication. Then,
we propose the Smart-Edge-CoCaCo algorithm. To minimize
total delay and conﬁrm the computation ofﬂoading decision,
Smart-Edge-CoCaCo uses joint optimization of the wireless
communication model, the collaborative ﬁlter caching model in
edge cloud, and the computation ofﬂoading model. Finally, we
built an emotion interaction testbed to perform computational
delay experiments in real environments. The experiment results
showed that the computation delay of the Smart-Edge-CoCaCo
algorithm is lower than that of traditional cloud computing model
with the increase of computing task data and the number of
concurrent users.
Index Terms—Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Computation Ofﬂoading,
Edge Computing, Internet of Things.
I. INTRODUCTION
The development of Internet of Things (IoT), wireless com-
munication technologies, and computing science has brought
about tremendous changes in people-to-people communica-
tion [1]. From 1G and 4G to the rapidly evolving 5G mobile
communication technology, IoT applications further realize the
interconnections between things and things as well as people
and things, based on these increasingly powerful modern
communication technologies [2]. IoT becomes a bridge for
communication between humans and physical world. Due to
the extensive ﬁelds and disciplines involved, the development
of IoT and mobile ubiquitous technology has transformed the
shape of technological innovation in recent years. The nature
of IoT applications has led to a complication of wireless
communication systems and overlapping coverage of the IoT
structure, which has formed a unique heterogeneous IoT for
the modern physical information world.
Y. Hao, Y. Miao Y. Tian and L. Hu are with Huazhong University of Science

M.S. Hossain is with the department of Software Engineering, College

G. Muhammad and S.U. Amin are with the Department of Computer
Engineering, College of Computer and Information Sciences, King Saud

Long Hu is the corresponding author
With the current development of mobile communications
technology, the 5G application scenarios deﬁned by 3GPP
provide three computing modes: Enhanced Mobile Broad-
band (eMBB), Massive Machine Type of Communication
(mMTC), and Ultra Reliable & Low Latency Communication
(uRLLC) [3]. However, the heterogeneity of IoT applications
and devices lead to higher requirements for low cost, energy
efﬁcient, wide coverage, low delay, and reliable communica-
tion. To satisfy complex and diverse user computing tasks and
content requests, operators adopt cloud computing technology
to make up for the limitations of storage and computing in
devices [4].
Nowadays, heterogeneous IoT devices have an increas-
ing number of functions. For example, smart phones can
implement many functions that were previously limited to
computers and televisions. This leads to cloud computing
being further approached to users [5]. However, due to the
heterogeneity of the IoT, the massive data and the extremely
high latency of the IoT to the cloud, the concurrent access
of IoT devices has further intensiﬁed the contradiction be-
tween high bandwidth requirements and the lack of spectrum
resources. The traditional single cloud access mode cannot
meet the quality of experience (QoE). As a result, cloud
computing has extended as edge computing of the IoT in the
process of advancement [6]. However, current edge computing
still faces challenges. The services in heterogeneous IoT are
characterized by intensive and high concurrency, especially
in dealing with delay-sensitive applications (such as virtual
reality, emotion recognition [7], etc).
The deployment of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) technology
in the remote cloud and edge cloud is an effective way
for implementing intelligent services [8]. We can deploy
intelligent algorithms on the cloud or edge clouds to im-
plement new smart IoT applications [9]. Researches in this
area include robots, language recognition, image recognition,
natural language processing, and expert systems. Since the
birth of AI, theory and technology have become increasingly
mature, and the ﬁeld of AI applications has also continued to
expand. For example, AI researchers perform deep process-
ing and analysis of unstructured data through deep learning
technologies, and provide more intelligent cognitive services.
As a recent research hotspot, cloud computing has begun to
use AI’s cognitive functions to enhance QoE. In addition, the
edge cloud, combined with AI technology, is also expected
to promote the development of edge computing by providing
arXiv:1901.02126v1  [cs.NI]  8 Jan 2019

UNDER REVIEW: IEEE NETWORK, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 20XX
2
distributed AI services.
Therefore, in combination with AI, cloud computing, edge
computing [10], and heterogeneous IoT, we want to reduce the
total delay to achieve the joint optimization of computation,
caching and communication of edge clouds. However, The
following challenges still need consideration:
• Content caching strategy: We must consider content
caching strategy from the point of improving the cache hit
ratio [11]. From the caching perspective of the edge com-
puting node, when the user requests content or computing
results and the service server already stores relevant data,
the content or result may be directly fed back to the
user. This reduces the computation delay of the edge
computing node. From the communication perspective,
when the edge computing node has cached the required
data, the user can directly initiate a request to the edge
cloud without sending a request to the remote cloud.
The data trafﬁc of the core network will be signiﬁcantly
reduced, which helps to avoid network congestion [12].
• Computation ofﬂoading strategy: A computation can
not only be processed locally, but also on the edge cloud
and remote cloud [13]. Therefore, it is challenging to
make a computation ofﬂoading decision with different
nodes (where to ofﬂoad). Furthermore, even though edge
computing nodes have more computing resources than
local devices, computation bottlenecks can still occur
when dealing with large numbers of concurrent com-
puting tasks or very complex computing [14]. To avoid
a sharp drop in edge computing speed, we tend to
ofﬂoad complex computing to remote cloud execution to
optimize computation latency.
Thus, in this article, we propose a new AI-enabled smart
edge with joint computation, caching, and communication in
heterogeneous IoT (Smart-Edge-CoCaCo). The Smart-Edge-
CoCaCo establish new modes of computation, caching and
communication for these emerging technologies and appli-
cations to improve the efﬁciency of user-service processing,
and reduce computation and communication delays. The main
contributions of this article include:
• We propose the AI-enabled smart edge with hetero-
geneous IoT architecture for the network congestion
caused by the traditional cloud computing model. A new
heterogeneous architecture for IoT that combines edge
computing, caching, and communication is introduced to
improve the hardware infrastructure in order to reduce
delay and improve user QoE.
• We propose the Smart-Edge-CoCaCo algorithm to imple-
ment joint optimization mechanism of edge computation,
caching and communication. Through the combination
of wireless communication model, collaborative ﬁltering
cache model of the edge computing node, and computa-
tion ofﬂoading model, we deﬁne the minimum time delay
objective to determine the computing ofﬂoaded position
and the ofﬂoading delay.
• We conduct an experiment under the real environment
on the AIWAC (Affective interaction through wearable
computing and cloud technology) emotion interaction
Gateway
Cognitive Engine
Cloud
Gateway
Cognitive Engine
Cloud
Edge Cloud
Heterogeneous 
IoT
Router
Edge cognitive engine
Smart 
computation
Base 
station
Effective 
communication
Data 
caching
Data Cognitive 
Engine
Resource Cognitive 
Engine
Intelligent Devices
Gateway
Edge Cloud
Router
Edge cognitive engine
Smart 
computation
Base 
station
Effective 
communication
Data 
caching
Fig. 1. AI-enabled smart edge with heterogeneous IoT architecture
system. The experimental results showed that the average
delay in the AI-enabled smart edge with heterogeneous
IoT architecture with Smart-Edge-CoCaCo algorithm was
shorter than traditional cloud computing.
The article is organized as follows: The AI-enabled smart
edge with heterogeneous IoT architecture is presented in Sec-
tion II. The algorithm and model of Smart-Edge-CoCaco are
described in Section III. The obtained experimental results and
related discussions are given in Section IV. Finally, Section V
concludes the article.
II. AI-ENABLED SMART EDGE WITH HETEROGENEOUS
IOT ARCHITECTURE
To realize the humanization, intelligence and automation
of heterogeneous IoT services, a new network structure must
be designed to address the current weaknesses of the cloud-
central network (traditional cloud computing mode). Thus,
in this section, we propose the architecture of AI-enabled
smart edge with heterogeneous IoT, as shown in Fig. 1. This
new architecture includes heterogeneous IoT, edge cloud and
remote cloud. Through the introduction of edge computing
and AI technology, we can dynamically monitor and adjust
the conﬁguration of network resources, and realize real-time
data collection of IoT, efﬁcient processing of computation, and
intelligent interaction of smart applications.
A. Heterogeneous IoT
Users are the group most direct contact to the smart
services provided by operators in heterogeneous IoT. They
can receive feedback on the QoE based on the actual ef-
fect. The applications and services provided by these smart

UNDER REVIEW: IEEE NETWORK, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 20XX
3
terminals cover almost all the environments in which people
live, including smart phones, wearable or portable devices,
smart homes, smart transportation, smart cities, etc. The AI-
enabled smart edge with heterogeneous IoT architecture we
designed mainly uses the delay-sensitive application service
as the most important research subject to ensure the dynamic
adjustment of network communication resources and efﬁcient
caching and computing. The most important function of the
intelligent terminal is to collect user’s multi-modal data. For
example, a mobile phone can collect user’s voice, images,
action videos, etc., and request computing resources or content
of interest through relevant operations to the local, edge cloud
or remote cloud. The server can acquire the user’s audiovisual,
physiological, and emotional data resources, and perform data
mining and data processing through the cognitive engine.
Eventually, the computation results are obtained. Based on
this, it pushes the requested content, feedback computing, and
subsequent interactions to intelligent terminal.
B. Intelligent Devices
Intelligent devices are consist of a variety of multimedia
sensors. Sensor is the key equipment for collecting and trans-
mitting user data. Human sensor is responsible for collecting
various human physiological information, including portable
device, wearable device, etc. Dynamic sensor can sense human
motion and audiovisual information, including voice sensors,
cameras, gyroscopes, accelerations, GPS, etc. Edge clouds
or remote clouds can infer people’s intent through complex
model analysis by synthesizing the perception of people’s
surroundings and own information.
C. Edge Cloud
The edge computing node is an important part of the edge
cloud and supports the edge caching and computing functions.
The edge computing nodes can be gateways, routers, switches,
service servers, wireless access points, micro base stations, etc.
It migrates the computing power of the remote cloud to the
edge of the IoT, buffers the big data ﬂow generated by smart
devices, and reliefs network congestion during transmission.
With the help of edge computing nodes, cloud computing no
longer assumes all the computing tasks, but is instead more
focused on investing computing resources in high-precision
computing to provide optimal computing services. Edge cloud
computing capacity is weaker than cloud computing capacity.
However, its communication delay is much lower than the
local-to-cloud. Under normal circumstances, the equipment of
the IoT is connected to the edge computing nodes through
wireless network, and the communication delay is greatly
reduced so it can meet the demand of delay-sensitive compu-
tation. We deploy the Smart-Edge-CoCaCo algorithm on the
edge cloud to achieve efﬁcient integration and optimization of
computation, caching, and communication.
D. Cognitive Engine
The cognitive engine is the brain of AI-enabled Smart
Edge with Heterogeneous IoT. The remote cloud can pro-
vide high-precision computing, it deploys high-performance
artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms and stores a large amount
of user history analysis data and information. In addition
to deploying cognitive engines in the cloud, we also deploy
simple cognitive engines (intelligent algorithms for content
caching and computation ofﬂoading) in the edge clouds to
improve the performance of edge cloud. Cognitive engines
is consist of data cognitive engine and resource cognitive
engine. Data cognition engine includes AI algorithms about
data mining, machine learning, deep learning, etc. Resource
cognition engine includes SDN (Software deﬁned network),
NFV (Network function virtualization), SON (Self-organizing
network), network slicing technologies. [15] give a detailed
description of these two engines.
III. SMART-EDGE-COCACO ALGORITHM
In this section, we will propose a Smart-Edge-CoCaCo
algorithm to improve communication efﬁciency and cache hit
ratio, so as to achieve efﬁcient computation ofﬂoading. On
the other hand, for different computation complexity and data
volume, our method can reasonably select the computation
ofﬂoading location so as to balance the network load, relieve
network congestion, and reduce the delay of the computation
ofﬂoading.
However, there are some challenges for Smart-Edge-
CoCaCo: The decision of which computation task should be
processed locally and which tasks should be processed on the
edge cloud or remote cloud. The edge caching and ofﬂoading
aim to reduce the total delay of the computation. Therefore, we
need to consider the computation, caching, and communication
of the edge computing node comprehensively, optimize the
computation ofﬂoading strategy, determine where to ofﬂoad,
and reduce the total delay of the computation.
A. Wireless Communication Model
In a cloud-based network, the user’s computation task or
content request ofﬂoad typically through data transmission
over the uplink of the wireless network. After preprocessing, a
computation, or a request content, goes through cloud comput-
ing (data analysis and processing), and then the cloud returns
the computation result to the user through the downlink.
Here, for computation ofﬂoading delay, we do not consider
downlink delay because the downlink bandwidth resources are
adequate in the case of the same calculation results and the
computation result packet is quite small. Here, we introduce
the general wireless communication model and deﬁne the
uplink data rate when ofﬂoading the computation to the edge
cloud. Let h and p respectively represent channel power gain
and transmission power of devices. Then, the ofﬂoad data rate
of computation Qi can be deﬁned as r = B log2

1 + ph2
σ2

,
where σ2 represents the noise power, and B represents the
channel bandwidth.
B. Collaborative Filtering Caching Model
As the mobile communication technology era is changing
from 4G to 5G, users and devices in the IoT are usually

UNDER REVIEW: IEEE NETWORK, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 20XX
4
Intelligent devices
Intelligent devices
Intelligent device
I t lli
Gateway
Edge Cloud
Router
Edge cognitive 
engine
Smart 
computation
Base 
station
Effective 
communication
Data 
caching
Cloud
Ś Computation offloading
Ŝ Computation result feedback 
Ŝ Cached content feedback
Ś Content request
Smart-Edge-CoCaCo
vs. 
Traditional Cloud Computing
Ś Content / Computation result not 
cached & Complex computation
Transfer from Edge to Cloud
ś
ś
ŝ
ś
Data 
caching
t
tion re
ompu
Traditional cloud computing
Smart-Edge-CoCaCo
Ş
Fig. 2. Computation ofﬂoading strategies of Smart-Edge-Cocaco and tradi-
tional cloud computing
distributed in communities. Terminal devices in the same com-
munity share one or more edge computing nodes. For an edge
computing node, there are some challenges in computation and
caching capabilities: the heterogeneity of IoT applications, the
high concurrency of user requests, and the density of delay-
sensitive intelligent services. If an edge computing node can
ﬁnd the data originally saved in the edge from the storage unit
in time and feedback to the user when the user initiates the
content request or the ofﬂoad instruction, such solution can
not only reduce network congestion, decrease computing and
communication delay, but also bring about better user QoE.
However, what is cached is the main issue of edge comput-
ing caching strategies. First, we need to make sure what con-
tent or computation results are popular, that is, the similarity
of the request content or the computation result for different
users. Therefore, we use a collaborative ﬁltering cache model
to cache content or computation with similar popularity. The
collaborative ﬁltering cache model can also be used to predict
what content is usually requested, contribute to dynamically
adjust computation resources, and reduce computation delays.
The domain-based collaborative ﬁltering caching algorithm
can be further subdivided into user-based collaborative ﬁltering
and content-based collaborative ﬁltering.
Both user-based and content-based caching have their scope
of application. The former is suitable for pushing content
according to multi-user history interest and making active
content pushing more personalized. The latter tends to ﬁlter
the cache based on multi-user concurrency requested content
or computation ofﬂoading and can retrieve and feedback the
result of the computing in a timely manner, which is more
social. In general, we tend to use user-based collaborative
ﬁltering caching strategies in remote cloud. The reason is that
the permanent storage of user historical data, and powerful
data analysis and computation capabilities. However, this is not
suitable for edge computing nodes. On the contrary, we deploy
a content-based collaborative ﬁltering caching algorithm on the
edge cloud.
The user’s requested content or ofﬂoaded computation is
represented as a vector, and the cosine similarity represents
the angle between the two vectors. The smaller the angle is,
the more similar the user needs. Here, we use the Euclidean
Distance to measure the similarity between the requested
content / ofﬂoaded computation and cached content / result. A
similarity computing function for ofﬂoaded data can be deﬁned
as sim(u, vj) = (PI
i=1 |ui −vji|2)
1
2 , where u represents a
user-initiated request or uninstalled computation. I represents
the total number of elements in the vector. vj represents the
current comparison of the edge cloud cache, where j ∈N, N
represents the total amount of cached content. Therefore, we
compare the user-initiated request or ofﬂoaded computation
with all cached content.
After obtaining the similarity result of the requested content
or computation, the highest value of the similarity can be
deﬁned as Eq.(1),
ru = ⌊max(sim(u, vj)) + 1
2⌋
(1)
where ru represents the cache hit ratio for the user’s request.
In order to provide a better service experience and achieve
computation efﬁciency of edge computation ofﬂoading, we
round off the cache hit ratio, i.e., the ﬁnal cache hit ratio
ru ∈[0, 1]. Therefore, if the edge cloud does not cache the
related content or the computing result, the edge computing
node needs to immediately perform the computation, and the
total delay will include the computing delay and communica-
tion delay. Otherwise, the computing delay can be saved.
C. Smart-Edge-CoCaCo Computation Ofﬂoading Model
In the Smart-Edge-CoCaCo algorithm, we introduce the
edge computing and caching technology to perform dense
application computing on the edge of the IoT while guarantee
the low delay. As shown in Fig. 2, there are 3 modes for
computation ofﬂoading. Our Smart-Edge-CoCaCo algorithm
includes two modes about Edge computing (procedure 2)
and Edge-Cloud collaborative computing (procedure 3), while
traditional cloud computing only follow up procedure 1. This
is why we have introduced edge computing. We should deter-
mine where to ofﬂoad based on the amount of data generated
by the user or the complexity of the computation, that is,
whether or not to directly ofﬂoad computation to the cloud.
• Traditional cloud computing: As shown in procedure 1 in
Fig. 2, a large number of users and their smart devices
will generate massive amounts of multi-modal data every
day. The concurrency and heterogeneity content requests
received by the cloud have brought tremendous pressure
on network spectrum resources and bandwidth utilization.
The network congestion and communication and comput-
ing delay increases dramatically if there is no intelligent
algorithm to implement regulation.
• Edge computing: As shown in procedure 2 in Fig. 2, if
the content or computation result requested by the user
is stored in the edge cloud, the service server at the edge
of the IoT can directly feedback the content or result
to users, which can effectively reduce the computation
delay. If the edge cloud does not cache relevant content,
but the computation complexity of the user’s ofﬂoading
is within the computation capacity of the edge computing

UNDER REVIEW: IEEE NETWORK, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 20XX
5
node, it can also perform the computation and feedback
the results to the user.
• Edge-cloud collaborative computing: As shown in pro-
cedure 3 in Fig. 2, if the edge cloud does not cache
related content and the computation complexity exceeds
the capacity of the edge computing node, the edge cloud
will ofﬂoad computation to the cloud. The cloud will feed
back the cached content or computation results to the user
via the edge cloud.
The Smart-Edge-CoCaCo communication, caching, and
computation joint model, that combines the above discussion
of edge computing ofﬂoading with the collaborative ﬁlter
caching strategy, can be deﬁned as Eq.(2),
(
TLtoC =
R
rE−up +
D
PCloud +
F
rE−down + αEtoC
TLtoE =
R
rE−up +
D
PEdge ∗(1 −ru) +
F
rE−down
(2)
where, TLtoC represents the total delay of the computation
ofﬂoaded from local to cloud through edge and receiving
feedback of the results (edge-cloud collaborative computing
in procedure 3). TLtoE represents the total delay for the
computation ofﬂoaded to the edge cloud and receive feedback
of the results (edge computing in procedure 2). R represents
the amount of data sent by the user, that is, the amount of
ofﬂoaded data. D represents the amount of data or complexity
of the computation. F represents the amount of feedback
computation results or content data, which is usually every
small. PCloud represents the processing power of the cloud.
PEdge represents the processing power of the edge computing
node. rE−up represents the ofﬂoad data rate from local to the
edge cloud, which is computed by the wireless communication
model. rE−down represents the download data rate from the
edge cloud to the local computer which is very large. The
download delay can be ignored due to the small result data
and large downlink data rate. αEtoC represents the optical ﬁber
transmission delay from edge to cloud which is very small. ru
represents the cache probability of computation/requests in the
edge cloud, computed by Eq.(1). ru = 1 means the edge cloud
cached related content and the computation delay in edge is
saved. If ru = 0, we should compare the the total delay of
edge-cloud collaborative computing and edge computing, so as
to determine where to ofﬂoad. After getting the total delay of
above two modes, we will choose the ofﬂoad location based on
the smaller time delay between the two, that is, the objective
function of this model is min(TLtoC, TLtoE). When TLtoE is
smaller, the users will ofﬂoad their computation to edge cloud.
If TLtoC is smaller, the edge cloud will transmit the complex
computation to the remote cloud to get better performance.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we discusses the performance experiments
on the Smart-Edge-CoCaCo algorithm and the traditional
cloud computing mode under real-world conditions. We use
the AIWAC emotion recognition system [15] to perform com-
putation ofﬂoading experiments for facial expression recogni-
tion applications. Speciﬁcally, the proposed architecture uses
smart phones as intelligent devices in real environments, the
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Average delay (ms)
Image size (pixel)
Smart-Edge-CoCaCo
Traditional Cloud Computing
Growth rate (Smart-Edge-CoCaCo)
Growth rate (Traditional)
Fig. 3.
Task computing comparison between Smart-Edge-CoCaCo and
traditional cloud computing
service server as the edge computing node, and the data center
as the remote cloud. At the same time, deep learning algo-
rithms are deployed at each computing node to provide facial
expression recognition services. The purpose is to test the
impact of the computation load and the number of concurrent
users on the total delay, and compare the performance of
the Smart-Edge-CoCaCo algorithm with the traditional cloud
computing mode.
More concretely, our experiment is testing the performance
of the Smart-Edge-CoCaCo algorithm through the commu-
nication and interaction between mobile devices and edge
computing nodes or cloud data centers. To test the computation
bottlenecks in the edge computing nodes and cloud data
centers in the real environment, we performed emotion recog-
nition with different image sizes in two computation ofﬂoading
modes (Smart-Edge-CoCaCo algorithm and traditional cloud
computing). The total delay of the computation is shown in
Fig. 3.
In the ﬁrst experiment, we ofﬂoad different computa-
tions to test the average delay of two modes. The sizes
of facial expression image we used are Imagewidth
∈
[16, 32, 48, 64, 80, 96, 112, 128, 144, 160], which also shows
that the computation complexity or amount of data in emotion
recognition applications increases gradually. As shown in
Fig. 3, the overall delay of the Smart-Edge-CoCaCo algorithm
is lower than that of the traditional cloud computing. This is
because the direct communication between the local device
and the cloud data center causes the core network load to be
too large. Although cloud data center has stronger processing
power as well as stronger computation and caching capabili-
ties, its total delay was still higher than that of our proposed
algorithm due to the long communication delays on the
computation ofﬂoading. The Smart-Edge CoCaCo algorithm
considers the computation delay and communication delay,
and the computation ofﬂoading mode is more ﬂexible and can
effectively reduce the delay. Besides, when the computation

UNDER REVIEW: IEEE NETWORK, VOL. XX, NO. YY, MONTH 20XX
6
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
The number of concurrent users
Average delay (ms)
Smart−Edge−CoCaCo
Traditional cloud computing
Fig. 4. Concurrent computing comparison between Smart-Edge-CoCaCo and
traditional cloud computing
complexity was low, the system tended to ofﬂoad computation
to the edge cloud because the processing power of the edge
computing nodes met the requirements and the communication
delay was low. When the computation complexity was high,
the system tended to ofﬂoad computing to the cloud, that is,
the total delay was the same as traditional cloud computing.
Therefore, the growth rate of the two tends to be consistent in
the end.
Then, we tested the average delay of two modes with
increasing concurrent number of users (each user conduct
ofﬂoading with same computation complexity), as shown in
Fig. 4. We assume that all user-initiated sentiment analysis
requests are consistent and the number of users is gradually
increasing to visualize the difference. Speciﬁcally, the image
size Imagesize = 16 ∗16, the number of users Numuser ∈
[5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35]. We found that, in this kind of facial
expression recognition application, the average delay of tra-
ditional cloud computing mode increased exponentially with
the number of concurrent users as the user number has a
greater impact on the occupancy rate of bandwidth resource.
However, our Smart-Edge-CoCaCo algorithm performs better.
The average delay of Smart-Edge-CoCaCo is always lower
than traditional mode due to the collaborative ﬁltering and
computation ofﬂoading mechanism. Some computation will
be ofﬂoaded to the near edge cloud depending on the network
conditions and edge caching. Moreover, if some user request
same/similar content which was already cached in the edge
cloud, the delay will be greatly reduced. From the trend of
delay curves, as the number of concurrent increases, the gap
between these two modes will be narrowed due to the network
congestion.
V. CONCLUSION
In this article, we proposed a new AI-enabled smart edge
with heterogeneous IoT architecture to address the disad-
vantages of traditional cloud computing mode in terms of
communication delay and network load. Then, we proposed
the Smart-Edge-CoCaCo algorithm for the joint optimiza-
tion mechanism of computation, caching, and communication.
From the perspectives of joint optimization of the wireless
communication model, the collaborative ﬁlter caching model
of the edge cloud, and the computation ofﬂoading model,
the principle of minimization of delay is speciﬁed, and the
computation ofﬂoading strategy is implemented and regulated.
Finally, in a real experiment of the AIWAC affective interac-
tion system, the average delay of the Smart Edge-CoCaCo
algorithm was lower than the traditional cloud computing
mode with the increasing computation and concurrent users.
In the future, we will conduct more research on the caching
of the edge computing nodes and ofﬂoading model. Moreover,
we will do additional comparative veriﬁcation experiments on
cache hit ratio, coverage, and ofﬂoading delay to optimize
network architecture and algorithm performance, and provide
theoretical and experimental references for the joint optimiza-
tion of computing, caching, and ofﬂoading of edge clouds in
heterogeneous IoT.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors extend their appreciation to the Deanship of
Scientiﬁc Research at King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia for funding this work through the research group
project no. RG-1436-023.
