AIRI: Predicting Retention Indices and their
Uncertainties using Artificial Intelligence
Lewis Y. Geer1*, Stephen E. Stein1, William Gary Mallard1, Douglas J. Slotta1
1National Institute of Standards and Technology, 100 Bureau Dr., Gaithersburg,
Maryland 20899, United States

Abstract
The Kováts Retention index (RI) is a quantity measured using gas chromatography and
commonly used in the identification of chemical structures. Creating libraries of
observed RI values is a laborious task, so we explore the use of a deep neural network
for predicting RI values from structure for standard semipolar columns. This network
generated predictions with a mean absolute error of 15.1 and, in a quantification of the
tail of the error distribution, a 95th percentile absolute error of 46.5. Because of the
Artificial Intelligence Retention Indices (AIRI) network's accuracy, it was used to predict
RI values for the NIST EI-MS spectral libraries. These RI values are used to improve
chemical identification methods and the quality of the library.
Estimating uncertainty is an important practical need when using prediction models. To
quantify the uncertainty of our network for each individual prediction, we used the
outputs of an ensemble of 8 networks to calculate a predicted standard deviation for
each RI value prediction. This predicted standard deviation was corrected to follow the
error between observed and predicted RI values. The Z scores using these predicted
standard deviations had a standard deviation of 1.52 and a 95th percentile absolute Z
score corresponding to a mean RI value of 42.6.
Introduction
The Kováts Retention index1 (RI) is a widely used measure of gas chromatographic
retention times relative to the retention times of n-paraffins of similar mass. RI values
and the mass spectra of unknown chemicals are commonly measured in tandem to
identify the chemicals through comparison to reference libraries containing both the
mass spectra and RI values of known compounds. While we have maintained a
multi-year program to measure a significant number of RI values matched to
compounds for inclusion in the NIST/EPA/NIH mass spectral reference library2–4, there
remain a significant fraction of entries without measured values. In recent editions of
this library, we have augmented these measured values with predictions from a group

connectivity method5 and more lately the deep neural network described in this paper to
estimate RI values from molecular structure. Since these values are predictions, we
report here newly developed methods to estimate the uncertainty of these predictions.
A retention index is determined by normalizing the retention time of a vaporized analyte
passing through a column using selected reference compounds with retention times
similar to the analyte. The Kováts index uses n-paraffins as these reference
compounds. Modern columns are generally fused silica capillary columns coated with a
stationary phase. This stationary phase consists of compounds that interact with the
analyte through a variety of intermolecular forces, mechanisms of adsorption, and by
steric constraints6 that affect the adsorption of the analyte into the stationary phase. An
increase in adsorption results in longer retention times. These RI values are highly
reproducible and dependent on molecular structure, making them a useful quantity for
structural identification by comparison to known standards.
Multiple approaches to estimating RI values have been described in the literature.
Quantitative Structure Activity Relationship (QSAR) analyses have been used to predict
RI values6–12 with a large number of these analyses focused on specific classes of
molecules13. Stein et al.5 used group additivity to estimate the RI values of diverse
compounds passed through polar and nonpolar columns with mean absolute prediction
errors of 46 and 65, respectively. The use of deep learning methods for improving upon
QSAR has been a topic of investigation since the start of the deep learning revolution14
and has grown to encompass a large number of methods15,16. A number of these deep
learning QSAR methods have been used to predict RI values13,17–28 from molecular
structure with varying degrees of success.
Since group additivity methods yield reasonable estimates of RI values, we set out to
examine deep neural net architectures inspired by the group additivity approach from
Stein et al.5 The group additivity results imply that each layer of the architecture ought to
have the ability to perceive for each atom in a structure not only the atoms bonding to it,
but also the atoms that are more distant neighbors of the atom. This suggests that each
atom should be characterized by not only its atomic number, but a variety of other
structural concerns such as branching, nearest neighbor atoms, whether it is part of an
aromatic system, and whether it is in a ring or not. Furthermore, the architecture ought
to use this information to be able to select those atoms it believes are part of a group
and ignore those that are not part of a group. This reasoning led us to exploring the use
of Path-Augmented Graph Transformer Networks (PAGTN)29, which can examine long
range paths in a graph and uses an attention mechanism30 to ignore or emphasize
atoms in the paths. A hyperparameter search was performed to adjust the architecture
of the PAGTN network to minimize the errors in RI prediction.
In the same sense that standard measurements become more useful when stated with
an error, the practical use of RI predictions requires quantification of uncertainty. This
need, however, is often left unexplored beyond aggregations performed on entire test
sets. The most common aggregation is the Mean Absolute Error (MAE), which is the
mean of the absolute difference between observed and predicted values. However, the
MAE does not communicate the typically heavytailed distribution of RI predictions nor

the variations due to individual chemical structures, which we quantify using the 95th
percentile of the errors For example, a network that generates predictions with an MAE
of 15 but with a 95th percentile absolute error of 70 can be less useful in terms of
accuracy than a network that generates predictions with an MAE of 20 but a 95th
percentile absolute error of 34. Furthermore, simple aggregations over the entire test
set do not reveal uncertainties due to structural differences. To address this issue, we
explore methods to yield a per structure uncertainty prediction that is less heavy-tailed.
Methods
Data
The 2023 NIST spectral reference libraries include measured standard semipolar RI
values for 142,462 compounds. This data was randomly partitioned into training,
validation and test sets. Compounds with RI values exceeding 6280 were omitted from
these datasets as there are few RI values above this cutoff. Table 1 breaks down the
number of compounds in the datasets. This breakdown includes whether the
compounds were derivatized by trimethlysilane or not to allow separate examination of
these groups since some RI prediction networks make poorer predictions for
underivatized compounds.
Table 1: Numbers of compounds in the datasetsa
All
TMS
no TMS
Train
132,440
24,461
107,979
Validation
2870
531
2339
Test
7152
1389
5763
a "All" means all compounds, "TMS" means the compound is derivatized with
trimethylsilane, and "no TMS" are compounds not derivatized with trimethylsilane.
Standardization of compound structures
The structures of the compounds in the datasets were processed through a
standardization method based on the RDKit31 MolStandardize library to ensure the
uniformity of the data input to the AIRI network. In the first step, the chemical structures
were Kekulized, aromatized, conjugated and hybridized using standard rules. Valencies
were not checked for allowed values since the V2000 version of the MOLfile format is
largely limited to covalent bonds. Hydrogen atoms not explicitly necessary for the
definition of the chemical structure were made implicit (that is, as an atom feature rather
than a bond feature) and functional groups were corrected to standard forms. Finally,
stereochemistry was recalculated. The precise rules for these computations can be
found in the RDKit library, version 2023.03.2.

PAGTN Architecture and Usage
The PAGTN architecture used in this study takes embedded atom and path features as
input. The atom features are atomic number, formal charge, and the number of bonded
atoms, which includes the number of hydrogens bonded implicitly and non-implicitly.
The path features for each bond in the path include: bond type, bond conjugation, the
shortest topological distance along the path, and whether the bond is in a ring. If a
particular bond is in a ring, the features include the size of the ring and whether or not
the ring is aromatic. The path features were truncated to a maximum allowed path
length.
The architecture hyperparameters included the number of heads, the number of layers,
the maximum path size, and the size of the hidden and query sublayers. Atoms did not
attend to themselves and attention was global. Attention for a particular layer was only
applied using the output from the previous layer. The output of the network was a
summation of the final hidden layer. The RI values used for the output were divided by
10,000. 32-bit precision was used throughout the network.
For training, we investigated the use of the Adam or AdamW optimizer methods to see if
either performed better. The training was performed with gradient clipping, a dropout of
0.2, and a learning rate of 5 x 10-4. An MAE loss was used. The batch size was 50. The
network contains approximately 2.6M parameters.
Software Libraries
The evaluation methods and PATGN were coded in Python using the PyTorch32,
Lightning33, Arrow, SciPy34, Pandas35, RDKit31, and Numpy36 libraries. Networks were
trained on NVIDIA DGX-1 nodes. The network code and documentation can be found at
https://github.com/usnistgov/masskit and https://github.com/usnistgov/masskit_ai,
including a description of how to predict RI values from the command line. While use of
the prediction network is more efficient using a GPU, our libraries can run on a CPU as
detailed in the documentation.
Results and Discussion
Hyperparameter search
To maximize the ability of our network to predict RI values, we performed a search over
a set of hyperparameters that determine the architecture of the network. The objective
of this manually directed search was to minimize the MAE of predictions done on the
validation set. This search was done over the following hyperparameters and ranges:
network depths of 4 to 10, one and two attention heads, maximum path lengths of 2 to
6, and query and hidden layer sizes of 120 to 400 in steps of 40. The optimal
hyperparameter settings were found to be a depth of 8, one attention head, a maximum
path length of 5, and a query and hidden layer size of 280. These settings improved the
MAE of the validation set by 6%.

Both Adam and AdamW optimizers were evaluated, with Adam providing marginally
better results.
Performance of the network
A standard method to improve the prediction accuracy of AI models is to average the
predictions of multiple independently trained versions of models with the same
architecture. For AIRI predictions, we created an ensemble of 8 networks, each
independently trained using the same hyperparameters and the same training set
randomized differently. In order to make a prediction, the same structure is fed into each
network, and the resulting predicted retention index is averaged from the outputs of all
of the models.
Using this approach, we generated predictions from the test set. The MAE of the test
set predictions was 15.1 with a correlation coefficient of 0.9987. Since some RI
prediction models perform differently on derivatized structures, we examined molecules
derivatized with trimethylsilane (TMS). These had a MAE of 15.4, which was essentially
the same as the MAE of underivatized molecules, 15.0. The MAE, the correlation
coefficients, and the mean of the percentile confidence limit values are shown in Table
2. In comparison, the absolute difference between repeated measurements of RI values
in our libraries has a median value of 3.8 and a 75th percentile value of 9.2.
Table 2: Differences between predicted and observed RI valuesa
MAE
50%
90%
95%
99% Correlation
All
15.1
8.0
30.2
46.5
135.7
0.9987
TMS
15.4
9.2
32.2
45.7
94.7
0.9987
no TMS
15.0
7.7
29.6
47.1
140.3
0.9987
a "MAE" is the mean absolute error. The percentages are the percentile absolute errors.
"Correlation" is the correlation coefficient. "All'' means all compounds, "TMS'' means the
compound is derivatized with trimethylsilane, and "no TMS" are compounds not
derivatized with trimethylsilane.
It is important to note that the MAE, the median absolute error, and correlation
coefficient can obscure the distribution of errors, particularly at the tails. Prediction
models for RI can have heavy tails5 so it is important to understand the entire
distribution of errors as models with a small MAE value can still generate poor
predictions for a large number of structures. To explore the distribution of errors at the
tail, we calculated the 90th and 95th percentile absolute errors, that is, the error values
where 90 or 95 percent of the absolute errors are less than or equal to the values. The
absolute error is the absolute value of the observed value minus the predicted value.
The 90th percentile absolute error was ±30.2 and the 95th percentile absolute error was
±46.5, indicating somewhat heavy-tailed but still useful predictions. The 99th percentile
absolute error of ±135.7 indicates that there are significant outliers for a small
percentage of the predictions, although some of these outliers may be due to errors in

the data. A histogram of the test set errors and the percentiles of the absolute errors are
shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1
Figure 1. Histogram of the errors of the predicted RI values compared to the observed
RI values in the test set. Shown in red are the percentiles of the absolute error.
Estimating the uncertainty of the predictions
Our use of an ensemble of eight networks allows us to estimate the systematic error of
the overall network itself, an approach being investigated in molecular property
prediction37,38. This is done by calculating the predicted standard deviation of the
multiple predictions given by our ensemble of networks for each predicted RI value.
Examining the validation set, the correlation coefficient of the predicted standard
deviation of the prediction to the prediction error was mildly correlated, with a value of
0.32. In Figure 2, we have plotted the observed and predicted RI values of a randomly
selected subset of the test data, with the predicted standard deviation as error bars.
These results indicate that the predicted standard deviation is a useful partial measure
of the systematic error of the AIRI model.

Figure 2
Figure 2. Plot of observed versus predicted RI values for 500 molecules randomly
selected from the test set. Error bars are the corrected predicted standard deviations.
For the sake of curiosity, the molecular structure of the furthest outlier is shown at the
bottom of the figure.
In an attempt to understand the sources of systematic error, we examined the
correlation between the error in the validation set and the 2D molecular descriptors
found in the RDKit cheminformatics library. Only weak correlations, with correlation
coefficients of order 0.2, were found. These correlations were to nitrogen related
descriptors, such as tertiary amines, and BertzCT, a topological measure of molecular
complexity. Performing linear regression of these descriptors in order to improve the RI

predictions did not yield significant results. However, these weak correlations may be
useful in improving or defining the architecture of future models.
Correcting the predicted standard deviation to improve the tails of the error
distribution
Since RI predictions tend to be heavy-tailed, we performed an analysis to reduce the
size of the tails of the error distribution when expressed as a Z score, which takes into
account per structure variation in the error. This is pragmatically important as an excess
of outliers makes these predictions less useful -- even if most predictions have minimal
error, the predictions with greater error will often determine whether results are to be
trusted for a particular application. Z scores have the form Z = (x-μ)/σ where x is the
observed RI value, μ is the mean predicted RI value of the network ensemble, and σ is
the predicted standard deviation. Since the Z score incorporates the predicted standard
deviation, it allows for an error that can be expressed per structure. A histogram of the Z
scores for the test set is shown in dotted outline in Figure 3. While the histogram does
appear similar to a standardized normal distribution with a standard distribution of 2.39,
it is heavy-tailed.
Figure 3
Figure 3. Histogram of the Z scores of the predicted RI values compared to the
observed RI values in the test set. For the original histogram shown in dotted outline,
the standard deviation used to calculate the Z score is the predicted standard deviation.
For the corrected histogram shown in blue, the standard deviation used to calculate the
Z score is the corrected predicted standard deviation.
Examination of the predicted standard deviation in comparison to the actual absolute
error between observed and predicted RI values shows that for small and large values

of the predicted standard deviation it is consistently smaller than the actual absolute
error. To quantify and correct for this issue, we examined the predicted standard
deviation by dividing the range of the predicted standard deviation into a set of bins
applied over the training set, where the bin size b was varied to find the optimal Z score
correction. For each bin, we calculated the ratio of the pth percentile of the absolute
error (observed RI values minus the predicted RI values) divided by the pth percentile of
the predicted standard deviation. p was also varied to find the optimal Z score
correction. To find the ideal values of p and b, we allowed p to range from 50% to 99%
in steps of 1% and b to range from 3 to 24. The resulting set of absolute error to
predicted standard deviation ratios was then used to correct each predicted standard
deviation in the validation set by multiplying each predicted standard deviation by the
value of the ratio for the corresponding bin. The corrected predicted standard deviation
then was used to calculate a corrected Z score. We computed the standard deviation of
the corrected Z score as well as the 95th percentile corrected Z scores, which were then
used to calculate a corresponding mean RI value. We selected a value of p and b that
minimized both the standard deviation of the corrected Z score and mean RI value of
the 95th percentile corrected Z scores. For the validation set, these values were p=78%
and b=2, with the corresponding correction ratio plotted in Figure 4. Note that the
predicted standard deviation is smaller than the absolute error for low and high values.
The correction was then applied to the test set and the resulting corrected Z scores are
shown as the blue histogram in Figure 3, showing that the resulting Z score distribution
is more normally distributed with a standard deviation of 1.51 and an 95th percentile
absolute Z score of 2.046. This 95th percentile absolute Z score corresponds to a mean
RI value of 42.6, which is improved from the uncorrected value.
Figure 4

Figure 4. Ratio of the 78th percentile absolute error divided by the 78th percentile
predicted RI standard deviation. The ratio is calculated for a range of predicted RI
standard deviations in bins of size 2 and used to correct the predicted standard
deviation.
Conclusions
To augment existing libraries of RI values and for quality control, we explored the use of
a PATGN deep neural network called AIRI for predicting RI values, performing a
comprehensive hyperparameter search to optimally structure the network. The resulting
network was ensembled and generated predictions with a MAE of 15.1 and, more
importantly as RI prediction models tend to have long tails, a 95th percentile absolute
error of 46.5. While a comparison to other models is not in the scope of this paper, Vrzal
et al.22 reported an MAE of 28.4 with a 95th percentile absolute error of 67.6 for
DeepRel and an MAE of 46.9 and 95th percentile absolute error of 136.2 for the
Matyushin et al.17 model. Anjum et al.18 reported an MAE of 16.57 for derivatized
compounds and an MAE of 29.55 for underivatized compounds for the RIpred model. In
the same study they evaluated the Qu et al.25 model to have an MAE of 16.84 for
underivatized compounds and 22.56 for derivatized compounds. Note that the Qu et al.
model has never been used for NIST spectral libraries as asserted by Anjum et al. They
did not report a long tail statistic, such as 95th percentile, for either model.
Effective use of retention index values requires a knowledge of their uncertainty. For
each predicted RI value we used the outputs of the network ensemble to calculate a
predicted standard deviation. This predicted standard deviation was then corrected to
more closely match the error of the prediction by the use of a correction coefficient that
varies with the value of the predicted standard deviation. To measure the quality of
these corrected predicted standard deviations, the Z scores from these standard
deviations improved from a standard deviation of 2.39 to 1.52 with a mean of the 95%
percentile absolute Z score that corresponds to a mean RI value of 42.6.
The predictions from the AIRI model have found multiple uses in building spectral
libraries and in searching them. For quality assurance, AIRI predictions are used to
check for errors in measured RI values and in RI values from the literature, as well as
deciding which derivatized structure of an analyte was injected into a mass
spectrometer or whether the original compound decomposed prior to detection. AIRI
predictions can improve the process of chemical identification, including improving the
order of hitlists from spectral library searches. Because the corrected prediction error is
within a few multiples of experimental error for almost all predicted RI values, histlists
can be winnowed by omitting or downweighting spectral matches to molecular spectra
whose corresponding RI measurements are poorly matched to predicted or observed RI
values in the spectral library. Because of all of these advantages, we have used
variations of this PAGTN network to predict RI values for the widely used 2020 and
2023 NIST EI-MS spectral libraries.
A command line program that predicts AIRI values from MOLfiles and SMILES has
been publicly released on GitHub, as described in the Methods. Future work on the AIRI

model includes the improvement of long tail predictions and the prediction of RI values
for other standard column types.
Associated Content
Data Availability Statement
The source code for this study can be found in two GitHub repositories:
https://github.com/usnistgov/masskit and https://github.com/usnistgov/masskit_ai. The
public distribution of the data for this study is described at
https://chemdata.nist.gov/dokuwiki/doku.php?id=chemdata:ridatabase.
Author Information
Corresponding Author
Lewis Y. Geer --- National Institute of Standards and Technology, 100 Bureau Dr.,
Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, United States; Phone: +1 301 975 6820;

Authors
William Gary Mallard --- National Institute of Standards and Technology, 100 Bureau
Dr., Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, United States;
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2158-5098
Douglas J. Slotta --- National Institute of Standards and Technology, 100 Bureau Dr.,
Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, United States; https://orcid.org/0009-0000-9085-4891
Stephen E. Stein --- National Institute of Standards and Technology, 100 Bureau Dr.,
Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, United States; https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9384-3450
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interests. All commercial instruments,
software, and materials used in the study are for experimental purposes only. Such
identification does not intend recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute
of Standards and Technology, nor does it intend that the materials, software, or
instruments used are necessarily the best available for the purpose. This work was
supported by the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
