A UNIFIED MULTICHANNEL FAR-FIELD SPEECH RECOGNITION SYSTEM: COMBINING
NEURAL BEAMFORMING WITH ATTENTION BASED END-TO-END MODEL
Dongdi Zhao⋆, Jianbo Ma⋆, Lu Lu, Jinke Li, Xuan Ji, Lei Zhu, Fuming Fang, Ming Liu, Feijun Jiang
Alibaba Group
ABSTRACT
Far-field speech recognition is a challenging task that con-
ventionally uses signal processing beamforming to attack
noise and interference problem.
But the performance has
been found usually limited due to heavy reliance on envi-
ronmental assumption. In this paper, we propose a unified
multichannel far-field speech recognition system that com-
bines the neural beamforming and transformer-based Listen,
Spell, Attend (LAS) speech recognition system, which ex-
tends the end-to-end speech recognition system further to
include speech enhancement. Such framework is then jointly
trained to optimize the final objective of interest. Specifically,
factored complex linear projection (fCLP) has been adopted
to form the neural beamforming. Several pooling strategies
to combine look directions are then compared in order to find
the optimal approach. Moreover, information of the source
direction is also integrated in the beamforming to explore the
usefulness of source direction as a prior, which is usually
available especially in multi-modality scenario. Experiments
on different microphone array geometry are conducted to
evaluate the robustness against spacing variance of micro-
phone array. Large in-house databases are used to evaluate
the effectiveness of the proposed framework and the proposed
method achieve 19.26% improvement when compared with a
strong baseline.
Index Terms— End-to-end, neural beamforming, far
field, multichannel, transformer, LAS, encoder-decoder
1. INTRODUCTION
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems are conven-
tionally composed of several components, such as deep neural
network (DNN) based acoustic model and n-gram language
models [1], which is referred as HMM/DNN. A limitation
of this hybrid system is that it lacks of an objective that is
shared by all the components in one system [2]. End-to-end
automatic speech recognition (ASR) system then emerges
as a competitor and enjoys popularity recent years mainly
due to its simplicity and decent training process [2] [3].
⋆are first authors in alphabetical order and contributed equally. Work
has been done in Alibaba Group.
Amongst those systems, Connectionist Temporal Classifica-
tion (CTC) [4][2][5][6] based and attention-based encoder-
decoder [3][7][8] are arguably the two most popular systems
that has gained widely acceptance.
Nevertheless, both of hybrids and end-to-end fashion sys-
tems, typically take spectrogram-based features (e.g. filter-
bank feature) as inputs. Before spectrogram, a signal process-
ing module is commonly served as the front-end processing
part as to perform the tasks such as speech enhancement [9].
This module is especially necessary when deal with far-field
scenarios, for example, smart speakers where multichannel
array techniques are usually employed. Several components,
including acoustic echo cancellation (AEC), direction of ar-
rival (DOA) and beamforming, are cascaded to form the en-
tire module with each one targeting a particular task. Specifi-
cally, the technique of beamforming is usually accomplished
by methods such as delay-and-sum, the Minimum Variance
Distortionless Response (MVDR) [10] [11], and global side-
lobe cancellation (GSC) [12], by exploiting signals from dif-
ferent microphones to find target speech source and suppress-
ing interference and noise.
However, in real-world scenarios, the performance of the
traditional beamforming techniques is often limited. This is
partly due to the fact that these methods often make assump-
tion of environments, such as stationary signal. As an al-
ternative, neural beamforming technology has been proposed
in conjunction with the traditional hybrid ASR system [13]
[14] with the possibility of making weaker assumption of the
environment. For example, in [15], spectral masks are gen-
erated by neural networks to estimate power spectral den-
sity matrices to compute the beamforming coefficients. But
it uses a separate objective like MVDR. In [13], multichan-
nel raw waveforms are trained directly on the convolutional,
long short-term memory, deep neural network (CLDNN) [16]
and find it has similar effect as delay-and-sum in traditional
beamforming, which drives the work in [14] to separate spa-
tial filtering and spectral filtering layer.
But they are per-
formed in time domain, which is computationally inefficient.
In order to solve this problem, as a subsequent work, the fac-
tored complex linear projection (fCLP) in [14][17] has shown
promising results with real-world smart speakers with much
less computational burden. But the factored system lacks of
an objective that is optimized by the entire system, while the
arXiv:2401.02673v1  [eess.AS]  5 Jan 2024

holistic optimization may be better than prior knowledge [4].
Moreover, audio-visual speech enhancement has shown
that visual information can offer extra source direction in-
formation [18] and complements audio information only sce-
nario. In [19], target DOA inferred by visual algorithms has
been merged into complex mask network, which is then fed
into a MVDR beamformer. The results has been shown that
this source direction information as a prior serves as an im-
portant feature for the beamformer. The source direction as
a prior for the fCLP based neural beamformer has not been
tested yet.
In order to tackle the aforementioned problem, in this
work, we aim to combine complementary components of two
different stages - neural beamforming and end-to-end speech
recognition sub-system together such that the system opti-
mizes a final objective. Several pooling strategies to combine
look directions are then compared in order to find the optimal
approach. Information of the source direction is also inte-
grated in the beamforming to explore the usefulness of source
direction as a prior. The attention based transformer LAS
framework has been adopted as the back-end part. During
the training phase, these two sub-systems are jointly trained.
Large in-house databases are used to evaluate effectiveness of
the proposed framework and the proposed method achieves
19.26% improvement when compared with a strong baseline.
2. CTC/ATTENTION SYSTEM
LAS model consists of two sub-modules, namely encoder
and decoder, as shown in Fig.1.
The key operation of
encoder is Listen which transforms acoustic features
x = (x1, · · · , xT ) into a high level representation h =
(h1, · · · , hU) with U≤T as if down-sampling is applied. The
key operation of decoder is AttendAndSpell. The atten-
tion mechanism integrates the encoder output h and produces
a context vector cu based on the previous decoder state hatt
u−1.
The Spell function emits characters or words conditioned
on cu and previous output labels y1:u−1:
P(y|x) =
Y
u
P(yu|x, y1:u−1).
(1)
Then the loss function of the model is computed as
θattention = −lnP(y∗|x) = −
X
u
lnP(y∗
u|x, y∗
1:u−1)
(2)
where y∗is the ground truth label.
Self-attention layer also has the advantage of parallel
computation at all positions and position encodings are added
to the acoustic features to inject relative position informa-
tion. The attention mechanism used in the Transformer is
multi-head attention, where each head computes Scaled Dot-
Product Attention as
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QKT
√dk
)V.
(3)
where K and V are the representations from all positions and
Q are the query vectors.
Fig. 1. Attention-based End-to-End Architecture.
As in [20], we add CTC loss function as an auxiliary task
for encoder. The auxiliary task enforces the encoder to learn
alignments between acoustic features and labels which results
in faster convergence speed. The final objective function of
the multi-task training framework is
θ = λθctc + (1 −λ)θattention
(4)
where λ is a tunable parameter.
3. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
The proposed architecture is shown as in Fig.2. This is a uni-
fied system that combines the neural beamforming and LAS
speech recognition system. The details are described in the
following sub-sections.
3.1. Neural Beamforming
Illustrated as in Fig.2, the neural beamforming block contains
two parts - the spatial filtering and spectral filtering compo-
nents. The spatial filtering part is similar as to form different
look directions, while spectral filtering is analog to find the
most informative direction and extract features for recogni-
tion task.
Specifically, the input of this block is the multichannel
waveforms, which are then transformed into frequency do-
main by short-time Fourier transform (STFT) with window
size as L. The outcome is denoted as Xc[t] ∈CK, where t
and c are time and channel indices, K = N/2+1, where N is
the number of fast Fourier transform (FFT). Suppose P look

Fig. 2. Architecture of proposed unified neural beamforming
end-to-end speech recognition system.
directions are applied, then P spatial filter Hp
c ∈CK will be
applied to beamform the frequency domain signals as
Yp[t] =
C
X
c=1
Xc[t] · Hp
c
(5)
where · denotes the matrices element-wise product.
As for the spectral filtering part, we use the factored Com-
plex Linear Projection (fCLP) [21] as it reduces computa-
tional complexity and results in similar performance com-
pared to a single channel system [22]. This is accomplished
by using complex filterbank Sp
f ∈CK to spatial filter’s out-
come as
Zp
f[t] = Yp[t] · Sp
f
(6)
The outputs of the filterbank is then summed and log com-
pressed for each direction and spectral filter as
Op
f[t] = log |
K
X
k=1
Zp
f[t, k]|
(7)
3.2. Neural Beamforming with ASR
The last step of the neural beamforming block serves as fea-
ture extraction when compared with the conventional way,
e.g.
filter-bank acoustic features.
As can be seen in (7),
although elements in one spectral filter has been summed,
there are P directions that may be redundant. In the conven-
tional signal processing module, there are usually Pdsp (e.g.
Pdsp = 5) look directions in the beamforming that is formed
by algorithms like GSC. DOA is then used to choose the best
(a) Max-pool
(b) Projection
(c) Attention
Fig. 3. Illustration of different pooling methods.
matching direction of the beamforming as the output. Sim-
ilarly, pooling layer over the look direction is then applied
on Op
f[t] before fed into the encoder. In the proposed frame-
work, we tried three different pooling strategies, as shown
in Fig.3. (1) Max-pool: the most significant features from
different look directions were integrated into a single feature
vector. (2) Projection: the features from all look directions
were concatenated, and a linear layer was then used to project
the concatenated feature into 40 dimension. (3) Attention:
features from all directions were integrated according to their
importance to recognition, the importance weight was com-
puted by a learnable matrix W and the output is the weighted
summation as
O[t] =
P
X
p
Op[t] · softmax(WOp[t]).
(8)
The rest of system is the same as described in section 2.
As the multiplication operation in (6-7) and the norm can be
represented by real matrix multiplication [22], gradients are
represented in real value and back-propagation can be used to
train the entire model.
When compared to the conventional method, another ad-
vantage of this unified framework also comes from the com-
putational complexity. In the conventional signal processing
module, beamforming algorithms may require matrix inver-
sion to get the solution. As there are Pdsp (e.g. Pdsp = 5)
look directions, multi-time matrix inversion needs to be pro-
cessed, which is computational intensive. In the proposed
framework, computations are mainly from (6-7), but the ma-
trices multiplication can be well parallelized by modern pro-
cessors.
3.3. Integrating source direction
As latest research indicates, incorporating source direction
in beamforming may improve the speech separation perfor-
mance [19]. The source direction as prior is usually avail-
able in scenario like multi-modality, in which source direc-
tion can be more accurately estimated by computer vision.
In this work, the source direction information is integrated

(a) Direction Aware Module(b) Direction Attentive Module
Fig. 4. Illustration of integrating source direction.
in aforementioned neural beamforming as illustrated in fig-
ure 4. Specifically, two different methods are explored. In
both methods, source direction is the angle of source, which is
then represented by angle embedding. Angle embeddings are
learnable variables. First method augments neural beamform-
ing as a direction aware module which concatenates angle
embedding with outputs of each spatial filter in neural beam-
forming before projection as illustrated by figure 4.a. Second
method applies a direction attentive module as illustrated by
4.b. This mechanism is similar as CLAS [23]. The output of
spatial filter is
Y [t] =
P
X
p
αp(t)Yp[t]
(9)
where
up(t) = vT tanh(W 0
p Yp + W e
p E)
(10)
αp(t) = softmax(up(t))
(11)
and W 0
p , W e
p , v are learnable variables. The idea is to use
source direction in order to select the most informative direc-
tion.
4. EXPERIMENTS
We evaluated the proposed framework with large in-house
databases. Specifically, speech recognition with conventional
beamforming using GSC algorithm and neural beamforming
were compared. Different strategies of pooling methods and
integration of source direction in neural beamforming were
evaluated. To assess the robustness, different spacing of mi-
crophone array are also included in the experiments.
4.1. Databases
To fully test the effectiveness of the proposed framework, two
different databases were used. The first one was collected
in a near-field cellphone setting, which includes around 3000
hours data. The second is an in-house database which con-
taining 2400 hours online audio data.
The near-field waveforms in the original databases were
artificially corrupted by a room simulator, and then processed
by adding different levels of noise and reverberation. Room
simulator described in [24] was used. We randomly chose dif-
ferent room dimensions and the position of microphone array
from a pools of samples. Room configurations with RT60s
range from 50 to 500 ms. In this simulation task, we used two
microphone arrays to generate two-channel recordings. The
spacing of the microphone array was set as 4cm for training
set. When adding noise, the level of noise is varying from
utterance to another, with SNR obey to normal distribution
from 0 to 20 dB. The distance between speech source and mi-
crophones varies in range of 0.5 to 7m. To test the robustness
against the varying angle between speech source and inter-
ference, azimuths of speech and noise were randomly cho-
sen from range of ±180 degrees and elevation of speech and
noise was constrained to be between [0.6m, 2.0m] and [0.4m,
3.0m]. We composed a evaluation set by randomly selecting
utterances from the full-sized database. It roughly contains
15K utterance and is around 15h hours. Same simulation pro-
cess was used as the training set.
For the in-house real data, online audio data are anonymiz-
ed and extracted from on-line service. Compared to simulated
data, real data is usually recorded in a less complicated en-
vironment with fewer noise sources and smaller room size
which results in a higher SNR and lower reverberation. On
the other hand, real data is more in-domain and has less
generalization.
4.2. System Configurations
The baseline system is a transformer based CTC/Attention
speech recognition system with conventional beamforming.
GSC with five look directions and DOA was used to obtain
the enhanced speech signal. Filter-bank features with 40 di-
mensions were then extracted before sent to the encoder. The
inputs were optionally processed by offline weighted predic-
tion error (WPE) for de-reverberation [25]. The number of
look direction P in neural beamforming was chosen as 10
and the number of filters in spectral filtering part is 40.
In the encode-decoder configuration, 7 transformer blocks
and 2 transformer block were used for encoder and decoder.
λ = 0.1 in (4) was used in the entire experiments. Adam opti-
mizer was used to train the networks with initial learning rate
as 0.001. The learning rate is decayed as in [26]. Similarly,
we also use warm up step which is set as 4000. The entire
networks were trained with 30 epochs for both conventional
and proposed framework. When decoding, beam search al-
gorithm was used. An external LSTM-based language model
was used to rescore the decoding paths in the manner of shal-
low fusion [27].
4.3. Results
First experiment was conducted to evaluate the proposed neu-
ral beamforming end-to-end ASR system (NBE2E) and com-
pared it with the baseline single-channel system (DSPE2E).

Word error rate (WER) of both systems on the evaluation set
with and without WPE processing were reported. To evaluate
different pooling methods in neural beamforming, we also re-
ported the performance of different pooling strategies (max-
pool/proj/attn) with or without WPE processing (w/o WPE
and w/ WPE).
Dataset
System
w/o WPE
w/ WPE
Simulated data
DSPE2E
31.62
30.89
NBE2E max-pool
26.58
26.32
NBE2E attn
28.20
26.52
NBE2E proj
26.28
24.94
Real data
DSPE2E
5.89
-
NBE2E
5.40
-
Table 1. Results (word error rate %) comparison of baseline
system and proposed unified multichannel end-to-end system
with different pooling strategies in neural beamforming and
with or without WPE.
The results are presented in table 1. Firstly, the proposed
system achived WER of 24.94%, while the one of baseline
is 30.89%, which accounts for 19.26% relative improvement
with the unified system. This supports the idea that extending
end-to-end ASR system to unify neural beamforming is bene-
ficial and suggests a better option for far-field scenarios. Fur-
thermore, amongst the three different pooling approaches, the
projection is the best and outperformed the attention method
by relative 6.31%. This is perhaps because the projection ap-
proach preserves more information. It is also observed that,
for both systems, when cascaded with WPE, better perfor-
mances can be obtained. Relative 5.10% and 2.31% improve-
ments are obtained for proposed system and baseline. This
suggests that de-reverberation is beneficial for both systems.
Further experiments on 2400h in-house data are used to
test the effectiveness of the proposed unified ASR system
in real world scenario and the results are presented in ta-
ble 1. As negligible reverberation can be observed from real
data, experiments on WPE were not conducted. The WER of
the conventional DSP with end-to-end ASR system is 5.89%,
while the unified ASR system achieved 5.40%, accounting for
8.32% relative improvement.
4.4. Performance on different microphone array spacing
To evaluate how the proposed system and the baseline system
designed for a specific microphone array geometry perform
when generalizing to other microphone array geometries, the
effects of different microphone array spacing was also evalu-
ated in this section. In this experiment, models are the same
as those of the previous section. The difference is that the ar-
ray geometry in the evaluation set is categorized as 4cm, 6cm,
8cm and 10cm. In particular, we used the projection pooling
method in the proposed method as it performs the best. The
results are presented in table 3.
Mic Spacing
DSPE2E
NBE2E
4cm
30.89
24.94
6cm
30.67
25.10
8cm
31.14
25.54
10cm
32.03
25.74
Table 2. Results (word error rate %) comparison of baseline
system and proposed unified multichannel end-to-end system
with different array geometry.
From table 3, it can be seen that the proposed system ob-
tained better performance in 4cm category. This is reasonable
as the models are trained with data from microphone array
with 4cm. But it is also observed that the baseline system
degrades more sharply and fluctuates more severely than the
one of the unified end-to-end system. For example, when the
distance of microphone array is 10cm, the baseline degraded
to 32.03%.
This may be because that algorithms in conventional DSP
module rely more on the prior knowledge and neural beam-
forming has better generalization ability for different micro-
phone array geometry.
4.5. Performance of integrating source direction
To test the effectiveness of integrating source direction as
prior in the proposed network, in this experiment, the 2400
hours real data was simulated as randomly choosing the
source direction in RIR. The source direction was recorded as
prior for the model training phase and evaluation phase. Note
that we did not add artificial noise in this setting. As usually
the DOA algorithms are not that accurate, we randomly add
a perturbation in the simulated source direction. It uniformly
distributed between −10 to 10 degrees.
System
WER
WER-reduction
NBE2E Base
10.90
–
NBE2E Dir-aware
6.90
36.70%
NBE2E Dir-atten
6.86
37.06%
Table 3. Results (word error rate %) comparison of with or
without integrating source direction.
The results are presented in table 4.5. The baseline is
the proposed vanilla unified ASR system (without source di-
rection), which achieved 10.90% WER in this task. NBE2E
Dir-aware and NBE2E Dir-atten represent the proposed sys-
tem augmented with a direction aware module and a direction
attentive module as described in Section 3.3 respectively.
6.90% and 6.86% WER were achieved by the augmented
models, accounting for 37.06% relative improvement. It can
be seen that both two integrating methods outperformed the

0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
1
The DOA error rate
0.34
0.35
0.36
0.37
0.38
0.39
0.4
Word error rate
WER varies with DOA error rate
DSPE2E
NBE2E
Fig. 5. WER varies with DOA error rate.
vanilla unified neural beamforming ASR system, indicating
the superiority of using source direction as prior in the pro-
posed unified ASR system. This finding is useful especially
for multi-modality scenario.
4.6. Performance against DOA resolution
The last experiment was conducted to compare the proposed
unified multichannel end-to-end system with the baseline in a
real-world scenario. It has been reported that the conventional
beamformer and DOA may results in incorrect direction esti-
mation of speech and interference source, as the resolution is
limited [28]. As for the neural beamforming method, there is
less reliance on the module functioning as estimating angle.
The angle information of multichannel recordings is jointly
learned and exploited by spatial and spectral filtering block.
Fig. 5 gives the experimental results as the rate of incor-
rect direction estimation enlarging. We artificially controlled
the incorrect rate as to give an idea how systems reacts to
this factor. To simulate the resolution limitation, the gpuRIR
toolkit is used to obtain evaluation data [29], which makes
it different with the one of previous sections. As can be seen
that the overall trend for conventional beamforming technique
tends to degrade from 37.92% to 39.25% when the incorrect
rate of angle estimate increases from 0 to 100%. But since
the proposed unified multichannel end-to-end system does not
require angle estimation, the performance is flat, which indi-
cates the proposed method could achieve more stable perfor-
mance in the real-world scenario.
5. CONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed a unified multichannel far-field
speech recognition system that combines the neural beam-
forming and end-to-end speech recognition system. It com-
bines the complementary components of two different stages
- fCLP based neural beamforming and end-to-end speech
recognition sub-system, together such that the system is ro-
bust against real-world scenarios with end-to-end fashion.
Under this technique, several pooling strategies to combine
looking directions are compared in order to find the optimal
strategy.
Information of the source direction is also inte-
grated in the beamforming to explore the usefulness of source
direction as a prior. The transformer LAS model has been
adopted as the back-end part.
These two sub-systems are
jointly trained to optimize the final objective of recognition
task. Large in-house databases are used to evaluate effective-
ness of the proposed framework and the proposed method
achieve 19.26% improvement when compared with a strong
baseline. We further augmented the proposed system with
a direction integrating module and explored two integrating
strategies. This brings significant gain and is especially use-
ful in multi-modality scenario when source direction may be
taken as prior.
6. REFERENCES
[1] Geoffrey Hinton, Li Deng, Dong Yu, George E Dahl,
Abdel-rahman Mohamed, Navdeep Jaitly, Andrew Se-
nior, Vincent Vanhoucke, Patrick Nguyen, Tara N
Sainath, et al., “Deep neural networks for acoustic mod-
eling in speech recognition: The shared views of four re-
search groups,” IEEE Signal processing magazine, vol.
29, no. 6, pp. 82–97, 2012.
[2] Alex Graves and Navdeep Jaitly, “Towards end-to-end
speech recognition with recurrent neural networks,” in
International conference on machine learning, 2014,
pp. 1764–1772.
[3] William Chan, Navdeep Jaitly, Quoc Le, and Oriol
Vinyals, “Listen, attend and spell: A neural network
for large vocabulary conversational speech recognition,”
in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2016,
pp. 4960–4964.
[4] Alex Graves, Santiago Fern´andez, Faustino Gomez, and
J¨urgen Schmidhuber,
“Connectionist temporal classi-
fication: labelling unsegmented sequence data with re-
current neural networks,” in Proceedings of the 23rd in-
ternational conference on Machine learning, 2006, pp.
369–376.
[5] Awni Hannun, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catan-
zaro, Greg Diamos, Erich Elsen, Ryan Prenger, San-
jeev Satheesh, Shubho Sengupta, Adam Coates, et al.,
“Deep speech: Scaling up end-to-end speech recogni-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.5567, 2014.
[6] Yajie Miao, Mohammad Gowayyed, and Florian Metze,
“Eesen: End-to-end speech recognition using deep rnn

models and wfst-based decoding,” in 2015 IEEE Work-
shop on Automatic Speech Recognition and Under-
standing (ASRU). IEEE, 2015, pp. 167–174.
[7] Jan Chorowski, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho,
and Yoshua Bengio,
“End-to-end continuous speech
recognition using attention-based recurrent nn: First re-
sults,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.1602, 2014.
[8] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Ben-
gio, “Neural machine translation by jointly learning to
align and translate,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473,
2014.
[9] Jacob Benesty, Shoji Makino, and Jingdong Chen,
Speech enhancement, Springer Science & Business Me-
dia, 2005.
[10] Harry L Van Trees, Optimum array processing: Part IV
of detection, estimation, and modulation theory, John
Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[11] Tsubasa Ochiai, Shinji Watanabe, Takaaki Hori, and
John R Hershey,
“Multichannel end-to-end speech
recognition,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 2017, pp. 2632–2641.
[12] K Buckley and L Griffiths, “An adaptive generalized
sidelobe canceller with derivative constraints,”
IEEE
Transactions on antennas and propagation, vol. 34, no.
3, pp. 311–319, 1986.
[13] Tara N Sainath, Ron J Weiss, Kevin W Wilson, Arun
Narayanan, Michiel Bacchiani, et al.,
“Speaker loca-
tion and microphone spacing invariant acoustic model-
ing from raw multichannel waveforms,” in 2015 IEEE
Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition and Under-
standing (ASRU). IEEE, 2015, pp. 30–36.
[14] Tara N Sainath, Ron J Weiss, Kevin W Wilson, Arun
Narayanan, and Michiel Bacchiani,
“Factored spa-
tial and spectral multichannel raw waveform cldnns,”
in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2016,
pp. 5075–5079.
[15] Jahn Heymann, Lukas Drude, and Reinhold Haeb-
Umbach,
“Neural network based spectral mask esti-
mation for acoustic beamforming,” in 2016 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2016, pp. 196–200.
[16] Tara N Sainath, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Senior, and
Has¸im Sak, “Convolutional, long short-term memory,
fully connected deep neural networks,” in 2015 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Sig-
nal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2015, pp. 4580–4584.
[17] He Weipeng, Lu Lu, Zhang Biqiao, Mahadeokar Jay,
Kalgaonkar Kaustubh, and Fuegen Christian,
“Spa-
tial attention for far-field speech recognitionn with deep
beamforming neural networks,” in 2020 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Pro-
cessing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2020.
[18] Daniel Michelsanti, Zheng-Hua Tan, Shi-Xiong Zhang,
Yong Xu, Meng Yu, Dong Yu, and Jesper Jensen, “An
overview of deep-learning-based audio-visual speech
enhancement and separation,” IEEE/ACM Transactions
on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 2021.
[19] Yong Xu, Meng Yu, Shi-Xiong Zhang, Lianwu Chen,
Chao Weng, Jianming Liu, and Dong Yu,
“Neural
spatio-temporal beamformer for target speech separa-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.03889, 2020.
[20] Suyoun Kim, Takaaki Hori, and Shinji Watanabe, “Joint
ctc-attention based end-to-end speech recognition us-
ing multi-task learning,”
in 2017 IEEE international
conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing
(ICASSP). IEEE, 2017, pp. 4835–4839.
[21] Tara N Sainath, Arun Narayanan, Ron J Weiss, Ehsan
Variani, Kevin W Wilson, Michiel Bacchiani, and Izhak
Shafran,
“Reducing the computational complexity of
multimicrophone acoustic models with integrated fea-
ture extraction,” 2016.
[22] Ehsan Variani, Tara N Sainath, Izhak Shafran, and
Michiel Bacchiani, “Complex linear projection (clp): A
discriminative approach to joint feature extraction and
acoustic modeling,” 2016.
[23] Golan Pundak, Tara N Sainath, Rohit Prabhavalkar, An-
juli Kannan, and Ding Zhao, “Deep context: end-to-end
contextual speech recognition,” in 2018 IEEE spoken
language technology workshop (SLT). IEEE, 2018, pp.
418–425.
[24] Robin Scheibler, Eric Bezzam, and Ivan Dokmani´c,
“Pyroomacoustics: A python package for audio room
simulation and array processing algorithms,” in 2018
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 2018, pp. 351–
355.
[25] Takuya Yoshioka and Tomohiro Nakatani, “Generaliza-
tion of multi-channel linear prediction methods for blind
mimo impulse response shortening,” IEEE Transactions
on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 20,
no. 10, pp. 2707–2720, 2012.
[26] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser,

and Illia Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, 2017,
pp. 5998–6008.
[27] Shubham Toshniwal, Anjuli Kannan, Chung-Cheng
Chiu, Yonghui Wu, Tara N Sainath, and Karen Livescu,
“A comparison of techniques for language model inte-
gration in encoder-decoder speech recognition,” in 2018
IEEE spoken language technology workshop (SLT).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 369–375.
[28] Md Mashud Hyder and Kaushik Mahata, “Direction-of-
arrival estimation using a mixed ℓ2,0 norm approxima-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on Signal processing, vol. 58,
no. 9, pp. 4646–4655, 2010.
[29] David Diaz-Guerra, Antonio Miguel, and Jose R Bel-
tran, “gpurir: A python library for room impulse re-
sponse simulation with gpu acceleration,” Multimedia
Tools and Applications, pp. 1–19, 2020.
