Generative time series models using Neural ODE in Variational Autoencoders
Marcus Lenler Garsdal, s174440, Valdemar Søgaard, s174431, and Simon Moe Sørensen, s174420
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
02456 Deep Learning Fall 21
(Dated: January 14, 2022)
In this paper we present an extension to the work done in [1] by implementing Neural Ordinary
Diﬀerential Equations in a Variational Autoencoder setting for generative time series modeling. An
object-oriented approach to the code was taken to allow for easier development and research and
all code used in the paper can be found in this Github link.
The results in [1] were initially recreated and the reconstructions compared to a baseline Long-
Short Term Memory AutoEncoder.
The model was then extended with a LSTM encoder and
challenged by more complex data consisting of time series in the form of spring oscillations. The
model showed promise, and was able to reconstruct true trajectories for all complexities of data with
a smaller RMSE than the baseline model. However, it was able to capture the dynamic behavior of
the time series for known data in the decoder but was not able to produce extrapolations following
the true trajectory very well for any of the complexities of spring data. A ﬁnal experiment was
carried out where the model was also presented with 68 days of solar power production data, and
was able to reconstruct just as well as the baseline, even when very little data is available.
Finally, the models training time was compared to the baseline.
It was found that for small
amounts of data the NODE method was signiﬁcantly slower at training than the baseline, while for
larger amounts of data the NODE method would be equal or faster at training.
The paper is ended with a future work section which describes the many natural extensions to
the work presented in this paper, with examples being investigating further the importance of input
data, including extrapolation in the baseline model or testing more speciﬁc model setups.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the recent years, deep learning has shown great ad-
vances due to increased computational power and avail-
ability of diﬀerent frameworks. As an example, it has
shown exceptional ability in image recognition tasks us-
ing the ResNet framework.
In 2019, as an extension
based on ResNet, a new framework was introduced which
uses Ordinary Diﬀerential Equations (ODEs) to repre-
sent hidden layers in continuous time rather than dis-
crete time, this type of neural net is named a NeuralODE
(NODE) [1]. Taking the NODE one step further, it can
be utilized in continuous time extra- and interpolation
for sequential data, by implementing the NODE as a de-
coder of a Variational Auto Encoder.
This paper will
investigate the robustness and possibilities of this tech-
nique.
A.
From ResNet to ODE’s
ResNet utilizes ’residual blocks’ as the core part of its
architecture.
These blocks are deﬁned at a ﬁnite and
discrete number of times and the output of each block
can be expressed as a function
ht+1 = ht + f(ht, θt)
(1)
With t belonging to a ﬁnite set ranging from 0 to a ﬁxed
amount of steps T, corresponding to the number of blocks
in the net. Going from this discrete setting to a contin-
uous one can be done by looking at what happens when
the step size becomes smaller. When the step size be-
comes small enough, at the limit when t →0 the change
to the hidden step ht+1 can be seen as a derivative with
respect to t instead [1].
dh
dt = f(h(t), t, θ)
(2)
This allows us to deﬁne the depth of the network in a
continuous manner. The function f represents the hid-
den dynamics and is parameterized as a neural network.
To solve the derivatives given in Equation (2) the NODE
uses a black box ordinary diﬀerential equation solver,
which takes as input an initial hidden state h(0) to solve
an initial value problem up to some given time T. This
way the ODE solver yields a representation of a continu-
ous hidden state trajectory, instead of a discrete amount
of hidden states. This also means that any speciﬁc hidden
state along the hidden trajectory can be evaluated, even
with uneven step sizes, which is one of the advantages
with this approach.
B.
Adjoint-state method
The training process of NODE is a bit diﬀerent com-
pared to usual Feed Neural Networks (FFNs) which needs
to store the operations of the forward pass in order to
compute the weights using the chain rule in a backprop-
agation algorithm.
In the NODE framework, no intermediate operations
are stored in the forward pass (when solving the ODE of
the hidden trajectory), which is what leads to the con-
stant memory property presented in [1]. Instead, when
backpropagating through the network f to update the
weights, θ, a second augmented ODE is solved, which
arXiv:2201.04630v1  [cs.LG]  12 Jan 2022

2
can return the gradient of the parameters with respect
to the loss function ∂L
∂θ . This augmented ODE is solved
backwards in time, starting from the ﬁnal time step t1
and going to the initial time step t0. This is what allows
the model not to store the operations in the forward pass.
The augmented ODE takes advantage of the adjoint sen-
sitivity method, which is a mathematical method that
can eﬃciently compute the gradients in an ODE. To ﬁnd
∂L
∂θ , a quantity called the adjoint a(t) =
∂L
∂z(t) is deﬁned,
which corresponds to the gradient of the loss function
with respect to the hidden state z(t). The derivative of
the adjoint can further be expressed as
da(t)
dt
= −a(t)⊤∂f(z(t), t, θ)
∂z
(3)
From here, the adjoint and the partial derivative of f
with respect to θ, can be used to ﬁnd the derivative of
the loss function with respect to θ.
dL
dθ = −
Z t0
t1
a(t)⊤∂f(z(t), t, θ)
∂θ
dt
(4)
This integral can be computed through a call to an ODE
solver, which takes as input the aforementioned aug-
mented function, comprising of the hidden trajectory z(t)
and the adjoint state a(t), as well as the initial states of
the augmented function (which are deﬁned at t1), namely
s0 =
h
z (t1) ,
∂¯L
∂z(t1), 0|θ|
i
. It is important to note that the
adjoint state depends directly on the hidden trajectory
z(t), but this can implicitly be computed, alongside the
adjoint state in the call to the ODE solver. If the loss
depends explicitly on previous states of the hidden tra-
jectories (observations) it important to adjust the adjoint
state accordingly, based on the direction of the derivative
of the loss with respect to the hidden trajectory at this
speciﬁc state,
∂L
∂z(ti). This is illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Reverse-mode diﬀerentation of an ODE solution[1]
C.
Using Neural ODE’s as VAE
NODE’s are intrinsically well suited for temporal data
and have many advantages due to the continuous aspect
of the underlying ODE. It can be used as a generative
model utilizing learned representations of a latent space.
In this setting it can be used to predict or extrapolate
data, as well as interpolate and impute missing data
within a time series. This also allows the data to be irreg-
ularly sampled when training and using the model. As a
generative model, the NODE works similarly to a VAE
where a latent space representation is learned through the
training of the model. A VAE has an encoding and de-
coding part, and connecting these is a ’bottleneck’ layer
containing the latent space distribution. Latent states
can then be sampled from the learned distribution and
given to the decoder part of the network, which then re-
constructs (maps) the latent states into the original space
as the input data.
Our work revolves around using the NODE framework
as a VAE, where it can learn the latent space distribu-
tion of a time series.
In this setting the latent space
corresponds to the initial state of the latent trajectory
z0, which an ODEsolver can take as input, in order to
compute the entire latent trajectory z(t).
The hidden
trajectory is then evaluated at speciﬁc time steps, and
these steps are then fed to a decoder that transforms it
back into the temporal space. The workﬂow of the model
is sketched in Figure 2. We will try the model on diﬀer-
ent toy examples, and on some real world solar data,
and evaluate its performance against a baseline ODE to
investigate the performance and limits.
Figure 2. Structure of the neural ODE latent variable gener-
ative model[1].
II.
METHODOLOGY AND DATA
In this section we will discuss the methodology for how
we have achieved the results in the paper. In addition,
the data used for the experiments will be presented along
with models and hyperparameters for reproducibility.
A.
Experiments
We have trained the NODE model on three diﬀerent
data sets to test the robustness and performance of the
method across multiple data sets and use cases.
The
ﬁrst data set consists of clockwise and counterclockwise
spirals, the second data set consists of three subcategories
of sine waves, also referred to as springs in the paper

3
and the third data set consists of real world solar power
curves. The data is represented as sequential data in a
matrix with size: [num data, sequence, features]. The
features are (x,y) coordinates for all data sets.
All
data
sets
are
split
into
a
60%/20%/20%
train/validation/test split. Due to diﬀerent complexities,
the total number of data points depend on the respective
data set.
1.
Spiral
The spiral data set is generated and consists of a total
of 500 counter- and clockwise spirals, with an even 50/50
split between each, meaning there are 250 counterclock-
wise spirals and 250 clockwise spirals.
For each spiral
(data point) we have a total of 300 time steps where we
train the models on a subsample of 200 time steps as seen
in Figure 5. Finally, to introduce some uncertainty to the
data, we introduced Gaussian noise to the subsample.
2.
Spring
The spring data set is generated and contains three dif-
ferent types of springs. A non-dampened sine wave (1), a
dampened sine wave (2) and an exponentially dampened
sine wave (3) as seen in Figure 3. The models are trained
Figure 3.
Diﬀerent spring examples included in the data:
(left) example 1, (mid) example 2 and (right) example 3.
on 7 diﬀerent combinations of the springs to investigate
how the model performs when increasing data complex-
ity, we refer to these combinations as mixed spring data.
The combinations are:
[1, 2, 3, 12, 13, 23, 123].
For all
spring data sets there are 5000 data points with 300 time
steps and trained on a subsample of 200 time steps. As
an uncertainty term, each new sampled oscillation would
be adjusted by noise from a normal distribution which
would change the amplitude and shift along the x-axis,
while the frequency of the oscillation was kept constant
to make it easier for the model.
3.
Solar power
The solar power data set comes from real life solar
power data where the power output of a solar cell is
measured at a 30 minute interval throughout the day.
This yields 48 time steps. Moreover, the total number of
data points is 68 and thus not a lot of data to train on
compared to the other data set.
B.
Code structure
Since this paper explores a wide range of options and
across multiple models and data sets, an object-oriented
approach was taken to organize code, enable faster de-
velopment and streamlined training. The code structure
is elaborated further in the GitHub README.md
C.
Models
The VAE NODE models follow the structure seen in
[1] and Figure 2 where time series data is encoded into
a latent state using a time variant neural net such as a
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), or in our case a Long-
Short Term Memory (LSTM) network. The latent state
is represented from zt0 to ensure that decoding happens
from the beginning of the time series. In order to enable
this we encode the time series in reverse thus ending up
in zt0. For the decoding process, an ODE layer is solved
using an ODE solver over a user-deﬁned time range to
compute the latent trajectory from z(0) to z(t).
This
is what enabled inter- and extrapolation in continuous
time. Finally this layer is passed to a standard FFNN
with one hidden layer to map back into the data domain.
For the baseline models, an LSTM Autoencoder is
used to compare and evaluate the reconstructions of the
NODE VAE.
The baseline consists of a two-cell LSTM with a hid-
den layer of size 45, tanh activation function and 2 fea-
tures in the encoded dimension. This is decoded with the
model architecture but in reverse. The NODE VAE mod-
els are diﬀerent for each data set. For the spiral data set
the model encodes using an RNN with 45 hidden states
and tanh activation function. It has 4 latent dimensions
which are decoded using an ODE layer of a FFNN with
3 hidden layers, 30 hidden states and an ELU activation
function. Finally, a FFNN of 1 hidden layer with 30 hid-
den states and ReLU activation function is used to map
back into the data domain. The spring model encodes
using a 1-layer LSTM with 60 hidden states and tanh
activation function. The decoding diﬀers from the spiral
example only in 40 hidden states instead of 30. The so-
lar power model has the same structure as the spring
model.
The baseline model used the RMSE loss and the NODE
VAE models used the ELBO loss.
It should be noted that ﬁnding the ﬁnal model ar-
chitectures was a highly iterative and exploratory pro-
cess as good results lead to new ideas and improvements
which in turn lead to better results and thus more ideas.
Mostly the learning rate, model width, replacing RNN
with LSTM, ODE solving method and noise in input data

4
was conﬁgured. There is still a lot of diﬀerent conﬁgura-
tions to try out. This will be discussed in Section V.
D.
Hyperparameters
The models are trained using an ADAM optimizer with
a learning rate of 0.001 for all models, and the ODE
Solver utilizes the ﬁxed-step Runge-Kutta method (rk4).
The spiral models are trained on 10k epochs, the spring
models are trained on 20k epochs and the solar power
models are trained on 25k epochs. It is also worth noting,
that all training was performed using the same settings
at DTU’s High Performance Computing (HPC) clusters,
to ensure that training time etc are comparable.
III.
RESULTS
The following section will discuss the results found
from the experiments described in the previous section.
In Section III A we compare the reconstructions and ex-
trapolations of the NODE qualitatively, in Section III B
we analyze the RMSE values and in Section III C we an-
alyze the training time per epoch across all models. Fi-
nally we visualize the latent space of one of the trained
models in Section III D.
A.
Reconstructions and extrapolation
1.
Spiral
It can be seen from Figure 4 how the model is able
to reconstruct the true trajectory when sampled data is
available, as well as extrapolate for both t < 0 and t > 0
and follow the true trajectory.
Figure 4. Reconstruction and extrapolation of a single spiral
sample using NODE.
We have adjusted the extrapolation by changing the
time t presented to the ODE solver, and if t is set much
larger or smaller than the time t which the model was
trained on, then the learned trajectories begin to deviate
drastically from the ground truth. Examples of this can
be seen in the reconstruction grids in the appendix, e.g
Figure 8, when both the learned backwards and forward
trajectories deviate from the true trajectory.
In some
model runs the learned trajectory was experienced to ex-
plode to a completely diﬀerent order of magnitude and
never follow the true trajectory. Comparing the spiral
results to [1] we ﬁnd that we were not able to extrapo-
late as far into the middle of the spiral as their results.
However, we show that we can extrapolate in both di-
rections equally well, which was not visually presented in
their paper.
2.
Springs
For visualizations of the spring data set, we present the
model trained on the Spring (1, 2, 3) data in Figure 5. It
becomes clear that the model is able to reconstruct the
original trajectory when sampled data is available, how-
ever compared to the spiral example, the extrapolation
has not captured the dynamic behavior of the oscillation
for both t < 0 and t > 0. In the appendix in Figure 9
it can be seen how for the simpler dynamics of exam-
ple 1 the extrapolation follows the initial direction of the
oscillation, but explodes for larger values of t.
Figure 5. Reconstruction and extrapolation of a single spring
sample with mixed examples 1 using NODE.
3.
Solar power
In Figure 6 we can see that the model is able to capture
the dynamics of the solar power data in the reconstruc-
tion and generate a sinusoidal shape which is represen-
tative of the daily power output. However, even for very
small values of t < 0 the extrapolation can be seen to
explode. It was not expected that the model was able

5
to extrapolate to nearby days power production, since it
was only given single-day sequences, however visually it
still shows how the extrapolation can sometimes explode
to diﬀerent order of magnitudes.
Figure 6. Reconstruction and extrapolation of a single solar
power sample using NODE.
B.
RMSE
Table I shows the RMSE values for both spiral and so-
lar power as well as increasing complexity of spring data.
For the spiral model it can be seen that the NODE VAE
model performs better than the baseline with a RMSE
of 0.1284 compared to 0.1513. In the appendix Figure 11
the baseline are visualized and it can be seen to follow
the true trajectory with only slight deviations in the be-
ginning of the trajectory.
It is interesting that for the increasing complexity of
spring data the RMSE values are found to increase grad-
ually from 0.0174 for Spring (1) to 0.0455 for Spring (1,
2, 3). For the baseline models the RMSE values remain
more constant around the 0.04-0.06 range across all com-
plexities of data performing worse than the NODE VAE.
It could be investigated further if this trend continues for
the NODE VAE, and if the model will begin to struggle if
presented for even more complex data than three mixed
spring examples.
For the solar data we ﬁnd the RMSE for the NODE
VAE and the baseline to be very similar with respectively
0.0077 and 0.0068. Both models capture the overall dy-
namic of the time-series and can reconstruct sinusoidal
power curves with the same order of magnitude as real
data.
None of the models are on the other hand able
to capture the intra-day variance in terms of cloud cover
and reduced power output. This might be a result of lim-
ited data availability and could possibly be improved by
including more than only 68 days of data in the analysis.
Table I. RMSE values for reconstruction for all model runs
and baselines.
Experiment
NODE Baseline
Spiral
0.1284 0.1513
Spring (1)
0.0174 0.0647
Spring (2)
0.0212 0.0582
Spring (3)
0.0162 0.0471
Spring (1, 2)
0.0261 0.0601
Spring (1, 3)
0.0303 0.0525
Spring (2, 3)
0.0363 0.0510
Spring (1, 2, 3) 0.0455 0.0562
Solar Data
0.0077 0.0068
C.
Training time
Table II shows the average time per epoch for all per-
formed experiments. The large diﬀerence in in the mag-
nitude of average time per epoch is due to the changing
amount of samples for training across spirals, springs and
solar data. We can see that generally the NODE is faster
than the baseline for all spring experiments, while for
the spiral example they are relatively close. For the so-
lar data we can see quite a large diﬀerence in the average
time per epoch with the baseline being faster. This might
indicate that for very little data the NODE method does
not perform so well in regards to training time, since
everything was kept constant between the spring and
solar experiments except the number of samples. It is
a possibility that the NODE VAE does not take prop-
erly advantage of its constant memory property for small
amounts of data, but this result is only an indication and
something which should be investigated further in future
work.
Table II. Average time pr. epoch for all experiments
Experiment
NODE
Baseline
Spiral
0.3885 s 0.3441 s
Spring (1)
4.9185 s 5.7555 s
Spring (2)
4.8733 s 5.8242 s
Spring (3)
4.7256 s 5.4650 s
Spring (1, 2)
4.7193 s 7.5129 s
Spring (1, 3)
4.8526 s 5.9382 s
Spring (2, 3)
4.9839 s 5.9377 s
Spring (1, 2, 3) 4.8614 s 5.9053 s
Solar Data
0.1467 s 0.0533 s
D.
Latent space
While evaluating the model trained on the Spring (1, 2,
3) data on its test set, the 4-dimensional latent state zt0
were sampled from the latent space distribution q(zt0|xt)
and have been projected in 2 dimensions using the ﬁrst
two principle components from a Principle Component
Analysis (PCA). The two principle components accounts

6
for 85% of the explained variance, which should give a
somewhat reliable interpretation of the projected latent
space. The 2D projections are shown in Figure 7. The
plot shows a clear distinction in the latent space between
the diﬀerent type of springs used as input in the model.
This is a clear indication that the model learns to dis-
tinguish diﬀerent kind of input by sampling from diﬀer-
ent places in the distribution. Interestingly enough, we
see that the spring type 2 data, which is a damped sine
wave, appears in two separate clusters in the latent space.
This is an indication that the noise we have used when
sampling the models most likely have made big enough
changes to the input data, that the model thinks spring
type 2 are two separate classes of springs. Spring type 1
has a very elongated distribution, most likely indicating
that the model has diﬃculties capturing the dynamics
accurately. From the RMSE of the reconstruction, it can
also be seen that the spring 1 model has a higher error
than the spring 3 model, which could be explained by the
model having an easier time reconstructing data that lies
closer together in the latent space. Latent space for the
other models can be seen in Figure 14.
Figure 7. 2D projection of z0 sampled from the latent space
distribution from the mixed spring 123 model.
IV.
CONCLUSION
To conclude on the work in this paper, we have imple-
mented and built upon the NODE framework presented
in [1] for generative time series modeling using a VAE
framework. Several models have been trained across dif-
ferent complexities of input data to test the robustness
and performance of the NODE methods. In general the
NODE VAE was able to capture the dynamics of the un-
derlying data. We were able to reproduce the results for
spirals and found that both forward and backward ex-
trapolation would follow the true trajectory. However,
we were not able to train the model to extrapolate for as
long times as presented in [1] (all the way to the center
of a spiral).
When we subjected the NODE VAE to increasing com-
plexity in the data, we found a tendency that the RMSE
steadily increased, while for the baseline it remained con-
stant.
This might indicate that for even more com-
plex data the NODE VAE will have decreasing perfor-
mance, which is an interesting hypothesis for the method
and should be investigated further in future work. The
NODE VAE was also tested in a real-life setting with
little data available, and was still able to capture gen-
eral dynamics in a similar fashion to the baseline. For
all generated data sets (spiral and spring) NODE VAE
outperformed the baseline but for the real life data, the
baseline performed slightly better, in regards to recon-
struction error.
Finally, when comparing the training time based on
the average time per epoch, it was found that the NODE
VAE was generally faster than the baseline for larger
numbers of data. For the solar data where only 68 days
of data of data was available the baseline outperformed
the NODE VAE signiﬁcantly in regards to training speed.
This is most likely because of the limited data, such that
the NODE VAE does not take properly advantage of its
constant memory property.
V.
FUTURE WORK
Natural extensions to the work performed in this paper
would include:
1. Investigate further the importance of the input data
for the NODE and how the sampling methods aﬀect
the results.
• Perform a similar analysis on samples with ir-
regular timestamps.
• Perform the analysis with Gaussian noise
added to the spring data points instead of
varying the constants of the three spring equa-
tions.
• Challenge the NODE model further with more
complex data.
2. Include extrapolation on the baseline to compare
the forecasting capabilities with existing methods.
3. Extend the scope of the research by testing more
speciﬁc NODE model setups.
• Perform an analysis varying the ODE topol-
ogy and investigating the impact on model
performance.
• Test the impact of diﬀerent ODE solvers.
• Test the impact of diﬀerent neural-net solvers
(Adam, SGD).
• Test how hyper-parameter tuning would im-
pact the performance.

7
[1] Chen, Ricky T. Q. and Rubanova, Yulia and Bettencourt,
Jesse and Duvenaud, David, (2019).

8
APPENDIX

9
Figure 8. Reconstruction grid for spirals visualizing multiple samples from the NODE.

10
Figure 9. Reconstruction grid for springs with mixed examples 1,2,3 visualizing multiple samples from the NODE.

11
Figure 10. Reconstruction grid for solar power visualizing multiple samples from the NODE.

12
Figure 11. Reconstruction grid for spirals visualizing multiple samples from the baseline.

13
Figure 12. Reconstruction grid for springs with mixed examples 1,2,3 visualizing multiple samples from the baseline.

14
Figure 13. Reconstruction grid for solar power visualizing multiple samples from the baseline.

15
Figure 14. Latent space of the models trained on the diﬀerent combination spring data.
