1 
 
Van der Waals Ferromagnetic Josephson Junctions 
Linfeng Ai1,2†, Enze Zhang1,2†, Ce Huang1,2†, Xiaoyi Xie1,2, Yunkun Yang1,2, Zehao 
Jia1,2, Yuda Zhang1,2, Shanshan Liu1,2, Zihan Li1,2, Pengliang Leng1,2, Xingdan Sun3, 
Xufeng Kou4, Zheng Han3, Faxian Xiu1,2,5,6* 
 
1 State Key Laboratory of Surface Physics and Department of Physics, Fudan 
University, Shanghai 200433, China 
2 Institute for Nanoelectronic Devices and Quantum Computing, Fudan University, 
Shanghai 200433, China 
3 Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang 110016, China 
4 School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 
201210, China  
5 Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing 210093, 
China 
6 Shanghai Research Center for Quantum Sciences, Shanghai 201315, China 
 
†These authors contributed equally to this work. 

 
 
 
 
 
Abstract:  
Superconductor-ferromagnet (S-F) interfaces in two-dimensional (2D) 
heterostructures present a unique opportunity to study the interplay between 
superconductivity and ferromagnetism. The realization of such nanoscale 
heterostructures in van der Waals (vdW) crystals remains largely unexplored 
due to the challenge of making an atomically-sharp interface from their layered 
structures. Here, we build a vdW ferromagnetic Josephson junction (JJ) by 
inserting a few-layer ferromagnetic insulator Cr2Ge2Te6 into two layers of 
superconductor NbSe2. Owing to the remanent magnetic moment of the barrier, 
the critical current and the corresponding junction resistance exhibit a hysteretic 
and oscillatory behavior against in-plane magnetic fields, manifesting itself as a 
strong Josephson coupling state. Through the control of this hysteresis, we can 
effectively trace the magnetic properties of atomic Cr2Ge2Te6 in response to the 
external magnetic field. Also, we observe a central minimum of critical current in 
some thick JJ devices, evidencing the coexistence of 0 and π phase coupling in the 
junction region. Our study paves the way to exploring the sensitive probes of 
weak magnetism and multifunctional building blocks for phase-related 
superconducting circuits with the use of vdW heterostructures.  
 
 
 

2 
 
Introduction 
Since the discovery of graphene1, two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) 
crystals have been widely investigated on their heterostructures2,3 by integrating 
disparate materials, promoting the exploration of unusual phenomena such as charge 
transfer4 and proximity effect5–7. By taking advantage of excluding the dangling 
bonds and lattice mismatch at surfaces, high-performance nanodevices have also been 
demonstrated in electronics8 and spintronics9. Among these, the discovery of intrinsic 
layered superconductors10 (S) and ferromagnets11–13 (F) whose properties vary in layer 
numbers paves the way to further exploiting such an incompatible order-parameter 
system. As such, the design of S-F heterostructures mainly focuses on the 
proximity-effect-dominant coupling like Josephson junctions (JJ) with ferromagnetic 
barriers. With atomically flat and magnetically sharp interfaces, this type of functional 
nanodevices may potentially serve as critical components for superconducting 
quantum circuits14 or memories15.  
In a ferromagnetic JJ, exchange energy (Eex) in magnets imposes a finite 
momentum to Cooper pairs, leading to a modulation of spatially-damped oscillations 
of superconducting order parameter when penetrating the ferromagnetic barrier over 
the decay length scale16. Depending on the JJ barrier thickness, the ground state can 
either be a 0-junction with equal superconducting phases on both sides or a π-junction 
where the phases differ by π. Consistent with theoretical predictions, experiments 
have shown the presence of 0-π transitions by tuning the F-layer thickness in metallic 
or alloyed magnets17,18, as well as 0-π JJ structures19 with a corporate area consisting 
of these two ground states, providing the potential for an arbitrary φ-phase control20 in 
superconducting electronics. Except for the mentioned above, magnetic insulators in 
JJs are also fascinating for their spin filtering tunnel behaviors21, in which a pure 
second-harmonic current phase relation22 and incomplete 0-π transitions23 have been 
realized. 
Also, 
inspired 
by 
the 
recent 
progress 
in 
the 
graphene-based 
micromagnetometry24, the JJ technique can be analogically developed to probe the 
weak magnetism of vdW magnetic insulator, because of its sensitivity to 
spin-dependent Josephson tunneling process when applied as a tunnel barrier.  
Here we report the construction of 2D-vdW JJs with ferromagnetic insulating 
barriers. Layered dichalcogenide 2H-NbSe2 is an excellent vdW superconductor for 
its robust superconductivity25, which has previously been selected to form highly 
transparent JJs26,27. For the other, we choose intrinsic ferromagnetic semiconductor 
Cr2Ge2Te6 with a bulk Curie temperature (TCurie) of ~ 61 K28 as an intermediate layer, 
whose easy axis points out of the cleaved plane. The JJ shows a typical Fraunhofer 
pattern manifesting a strong Josephson coupling state. Besides, the observed 
hysteresis of critical current (Ic) along with the corresponding junction resistance (R) 
against field sweep ascribes to the barrier’s magnetism. The measured hysteresis 
depends on the maximum applied field (Bmax), implying an evolutionary 
magnetization process of the barrier remanent magnetic moment. Meanwhile, the 
hysteretic behavior only appears when the JJs are in the superconducting state. We 
also find a central minimum of Ic patterns in some thick barrier devices as a typical 
0-π JJ signature, evidencing the coexistence of both 0 and π phase meditated coupling 

3 
 
in the whole junction region. Interestingly, the multidomain state in few-layer 
Cr2Ge2Te6 can introduce an asymmetric field-dependent in-plane magnetization, 
resulting in an asymmetric supercurrent distribution in the two halves of 0 and π phase 
segments.   
 
Results 
vdW JJs based on 2D S/F materials 
Ferromagnetic JJ devices were fabricated by a dry-transfer technique29 (see 
Methods), which produces a clean interface via vdW coupling between layers. Figure 
1a and 1b are top and side views of the layered structures of NbSe2 and Cr2Ge2Te6, 
respectively. Figure 1c is a schematic illustration of the device structure with a 
four-terminal measurement configuration, where 2H-NbSe2 flakes are placed on the 
top and bottom and few-layer Cr2Ge2Te6 acts as an insulating barrier. The whole stack 
is fabricated on a silicon substrate capping of 285 nm SiO2. We choose a laminated 
vertical junction structure which is suitable for a relatively small piece of exfoliated 
Cr2Ge2Te6. Figure 1d (left) displays a false-color scanning electron microscope (SEM) 
image of device #01 with trilayers labeled by the dashed lines, and the height profile 
of intermediate Cr2Ge2Te6 flake is around 6.5 ± 0.4 nm measured by the atomic force 
microscope (AFM), beneath a flat junction area of ~ 14.2 μm2. The entire fabrication 
process is performed in a glove box. A carefully controlled procedure assisted by the 
stepper motor is applied to eliminate the bubbles and surface oxidation, making it a 
high-quality vdW interface.  
The JJ characteristics were investigated below the superconducting critical 
temperature (Tc) of the NbSe2 crystals. Figure 1d (right) shows typical current-voltage 
(IV) curves of junction device #01 at 0.1 K under zero field, while tiny differences in 
the trap and retrap current situations reveal a weak-link type junction with small 
capacitance described by Resistively-Shunted-Junction (RSJ) model30. In Figure 1e, a 
contour plot of junction differential resistance (dV/dI) as a function of bias current (I) 
and in-plane field (B∥) is presented. Periodic oscillations of Ic from the Fraunhofer 
pattern correspond well to its in-plane R, as the positions of Ic minima are the same as 
those of R maxima. Also, clear second-order oscillations are seen at higher bias due to 
Fiske resonance31 when the a.c. Josephson frequency equals the eigenfrequency of 
electromagnetic oscillations in this cavity, proving a well-defined JJ through the vdW 
stacking. The periodicity of Ic oscillation ΔB ~ 4.2 mT is given by an integer flux 
quantum Φ0 in the effective area (Seff), from which we obtain the effective junction 
length Leff  = Seff / W = 79 nm (W ~ 6.2 μm is the junction width perpendicular to the 
field direction). The Josephson penetration depth λJ = [h/4πμ0eLeffJc]1/2 is estimated to 
be 30.6 μm at 0.1 K which is much larger than the junction width and length, where h 
is Planck’s constant, μ0 is the vacuum permeability, e is the electron charge and Jc (~ 
353.5 A/cm2) is the critical current density. Thus our devices should be treated as 
being in the short junction limit.  
For an unsaturated magnetic barrier, it is feasible to continuously reverse its 
orientations at a lower magnetic field. In Figure 2, we present a comparison of 
Fraunhofer oscillation patterns of device #01 (~ 6.5 nm) when the field starts from 

4 
 
different Bmax. Initially, it was magnetized to 9 mT at 0.1 K, then descended from 
positive to negative fields at -9 mT and eventually returned. The separated sweep 
branches in Figure 2a give the central maximal Ic offsets at -0.6 mT and 0.3 mT, 
respectively. The total flux enclosed in the junction is the sum of the external flux and 
additional flux generated by the barrier magnetic moment, the latter of which reverses 
smoothly at a low magnetic field, resulting in a hysteresis window of 0.9 mT. The 
shape of patterns is slightly distorted under the magnetized process, as the field widths 
of the first side-lobes of the pattern are not exactly the same as those at opposite field 
directions, consistent with the model of a field-dependent magnetic moment in a 
hysteresis loop. The hysteresis observed in zero-bias R is equivalent to Ic (shown in 
Figure 2b). Next, we magnetized the device to 15 mT and repeated the same 
measurement at the higher applied field. Figure 2c shows that the positions of 
zero-flux Ic shift to -2 mT and 0.8 mT, resulting in a larger window of 2.8 mT. 
Estimations from Ic and R measurements in Figure 2d show accordant sizes of 
hysteresis. Nevertheless, the values measured at the negative magnetic field are 
smaller than those at the positive field, suggesting an asymmetric supercurrent 
distribution from the two nonequivalent S/F hetero-interfaces vertically.  
To further understand the evolution of barrier magnetization, first, we obtain its 
hysteretic in-plane R with a Bmax of 100 mT at 0.1 K (a log-plot of Figure 3a (up) is 
used to clarify zero R), in which the flux-induced oscillations in R still persist when 
the supercurrent is unmeasurable at higher field. The coincidence over ±75 mT of 
these two sweep directions reveals a saturation field of barrier magnetization. 
Empirically, we can correspond each minimum/maximum of R to integer/half-integer 
flux quantum trapped in the junction32 (Figure 3a (down)). Therefore, the 
magnetization (M) of the barrier can be reconstructed from the equation Φ = 4πMSeff + 
ΦH, where Φ is the sum-up flux embedded in a JJ and ΦH is generated by the external 
field. Meanwhile, the largest hysteresis (ΔBmax), estimated from the central position of 
zero-order minimum R, can also be regarded as a quantitative index for this 
nanoflake’s in-plane coercivity (in device #01, ΔBmax is 9.3 mT when fully saturated 
to 100 mT). Next, we show the plot of ΔBmax varying with Bmax at 0.1 K in Figure 3b, 
from which we find that ΔBmax has a positive correlation with Bmax and nearly 
converges above 90 mT.  
We also investigated the hysteretic behavior with thermal excitation, conjointly 
resolving the features about how hysteresis vanishes above the superconducting Tc. 
Figure 3c depicts the hysteretic in-plane R of the same device compared between the 
superconducting state and normal state. The hysteresis shrinks in R amplitude and 
magnetic field range as temperature increases and finally disappears above Tc since it 
is non-superconducting, which seems contradictory to the fact that Cr2Ge2Te6 at 6.5 K 
is still in the ferromagnetic state as the hysteresis originates from its remanence. For 
detailed analyses, we measured the variation of ΔBmax as a function of temperature 
with a Bmax of 27 mT along with the normalized R under zero field (Figure 3d). The 
value of ΔBmax remains almost unchanged below 2 K and then gradually decreases 
when warming up to 5.5 K. Nevertheless, the discrepancies in the curves of 6 and 6.2 
K turn to become illegible around zero field causing a sudden drop of ΔBmax (see 

5 
 
Supplementary Figure S4). Therefore, we assume that ΔBmax here can denote the 
magnitude of Josephson interference. The reduction of ΔBmax is predominantly 
determined by thermal fluctuation above 2 K, suppressing the phase coherence 
between two separated superconductors. This assumption is further supported by the 
bias-dependent experiments. A set of hysteretic R loops at d.c. bias current varying 
from 0 to 200 μA is shown in Figure 3e, from which ΔBmax was obtained when the 
junction was driven into several superconducting states (qualitatively distinguished in 
the 0 mT dV/dI curve). We can observe an identical ΔBmax around 3.3 mT (within the 
error bar) below 100 μA, in line with our expectations that ΔBmax is only influenced 
by a specific Bmax before saturation at a specific temperature. Besides, the deviation 
between two directional sweeps is practically unidentifiable at a high bias of 200 μA 
and 400 μA (see Supplementary Figure S5) in good agreements with a relatively small 
ΔBmax measured above 6 K, as a consequence of the main contribution to the junction 
R from the normal state R of superconductor NbSe2. 
 
Evidences of π phase coupling  
For those spin-singlet pairing superconductors, the presence of a π-JJ requires a 
comparable F-layer thickness to the oscillation wavelength as the schematic views 
shown in Figure 4a and 4b. The Josephson phase is correlated through the whole 
junction even in the case that 0 and π phase supercurrents coexist in the same region, 
leading to a 0-π JJ structure. As the spontaneous flux penetrations into these two parts 
produce a counterproductive effect, they will conjointly result in a central minimum 
of Ic instead of a maximum value either in absolute 0-JJs or π-JJs. Here, we find 
similar signatures of 0-π JJs in thick barrier devices which may also be the evidence 
of a φ-phase state. Figure 4c is the Ic oscillation patterns of device #02 in the range of 
30 mT, whose barrier thickness is around 10.5 ± 0.3 nm. Extracted Ic values at a 
positive bias (Ic
+) are given in Figure 4d and the hysteresis with regard to the opposite 
sweeping direction is around 3 mT, acquired from the positions of central minimum of 
Ic. The pronounced characteristics also perform in another device #03 whose barrier 
thickness is of the same magnitude of around 11 ± 0.5 nm, giving the hysteresis of 
around 2 mT with a Bmax of 50 mT as shown in Figure 4e and 4f. Both two devices 
have a comparatively Ic background due to the finite-voltage criterion effect. Besides, 
the two sweeping branch curves of Ic coincide above 30 mT, implying a smaller 
in-plane coercivity of a thicker Cr2Ge2Te6 than that of a thinner one measured in 
device #01. It should be mentioned that the influence of Abrikosov vortex33 from 
superconductor electrodes trapped in the JJ also needs to be considered, for which it 
can introduce anomalous phase shifts leading to a similar shape of Ic patterns. There 
are two criteria to distinguish, one is the vortex-induced hysteresis that is opposite to 
remanent magnetization34,35, which is contradictory to our observations. The other can 
be inferred from the symmetry of its interference pattern. For a conventional JJ, Ic 
should be symmetric with respect to Ic
+(B) = Ic
-(B) and Ic(+B) = Ic(-B). Distorted Ic 
patterns by the vortex will naturally accord with the former formula, yet neither of 
them has been satisfied in our devices results. Therefore we can attribute this 0-π 
phase signature to be mediated by a magnetic layer.   

6 
 
Deviated from the symmetric 0-π junction model, we find remarkable 
asymmetries of the Ic patterns in our devices. First, non-zero central minimum of Ic 
can be originated from the asymmetry in 0 and π phase critical current densities. 
Besides, unequal Ic values and lobe widths of the two halves of subsequent peaks 
around the central valley should ascribe to different field-dependent flux penetration 
to 0 and π parts, introduced by the barrier in-plane magnetization19. Last, the 
non-standard periodic dependence of Ic oscillations compared between the positive 
and negative field applied halves indicates a strong modulation by inhomogeneous 
local magnetizations. The nature of a possible multi-domain state in few-layer 
Cr2Ge2Te6
36 is expected to generate such asymmetries in this ferromagnetic barrier. 
The pinning of the domains can be reconfigured under the external in-plane magnetic 
field in the two halves, therein resulting in the observed variations of the central 
minimum as well as successive maximum of Ic values with regard to the opposite 
field sweeping directions.  
                                                                                 
Discussion 
Our experiments on ferromagnetic JJs via vdW connection demonstrate a 
hysteretic supercurrent and resistance behavior, dominated by the barrier 
magnetization related to the Bmax and temperature. We would refocus on the validity 
of using the JJ structure to probe magnetism in atomic vdW materials. Few 
experiments have shown a direct study of ferromagnetic semiconductors or insulators 
via transport measurements, particularly limited at low temperatures. Like previously 
reported structures of tunneling magnetoresistance (TMR)37 or spin-orbit torque 
(SOT)38 devices for the same goal, the JJ is also a potential tool for its high sensitivity 
to minor variations in the response of external magnetic fields, because of a dramatic 
transition between the normal and superconducting states. The thought of employing 
the flux quantization as an in-situ magnetometer proves it to be a precise technique to 
trace the evolution process of its barrier magnetization.  
Since the unsaturated barrier moment can reverse smoothly at low fields, the 
supercurrent here follows a continuous modulation by the external flux shown in Ic 
measurements above. However, with progressive magnetization to a higher field, the 
Josephson tunneling process tends to become fragile, as the emergence of breakpoints 
in Ic causes a discontinuous pattern (see Supplementary Figure S7 and S8). In device 
#01, the discontinuity starts from 23 mT, with an evident signature of abrupt changes 
of Ic between two flanks of a breakpoint. Another feature is the irreversibility of the 
whole pattern as the breakpoints persist when the field sweeps back. Detailed 
characterizations are performed in the Supplementary Materials. This picture might be 
associated with the layered spin structures of Cr2Ge2Te6, accounting for its enhanced 
interlayer coupling at high fields, that the barrier magnetization will resist external 
changes, thus a larger step of the applied field is required to overcome such a potential. 
When the fully-aligned spins start to flip back, the spin interactions between separated 
layers prevent it from a smooth reverse leading to the observed irreversibility. Besides, 
pinned spins of the ferromagnetic layer adjacent to the superconducting layer may 
also be restricted due to their 2D circumstances, strongly modulated by impurities and 

7 
 
obstacles at two heterointerfaces.  
The multi-domain structure of the barrier is also expected to generate various 
effects in the diffusive JJs. For a thinner barrier, the temperature dependence of IcRn 
product (Vc) of device #01 (~ 6.5 nm) is a well fit to Ambegaokar-Baratoff (AB) 
relation39 for an insulating barrier in the dirty limit. The calculated zero temperature 
Vc0 ~ 0.51 mV is smaller than the theoretical maximum value of πΔ / 2e = 1.57 mV (Δ 
~ 1 meV is the gap value of bulk NbSe2), showing a strong suppression by the 
magnetic barrier on Josephson current for the phase differences acquired by spin-up 
or spin-down electrons. Compared to the suppression, we find an apparent excess 
supercurrent over the AB relation fit at low temperature (see Supplementary Figure S6) 
in a thicker Josephson device #03 (~ 11 nm). The IcRn product gained at 0.5 K 
exceeds the diffusive limit from the AB relation fit. The gradual deviation between 
the data and AB values below 4.6 K is similar to former studies in NbN/GdN/NbN JJs 
[ref. 21]. Considering our material systems, the equilibrium domain size of Cr2Ge2Te6 
is probably larger in ultrathin nanoflakes as mediated by a single-domain remanence, 
in contrast to the tendency of forming multi-domains when approaching a 3D bulk 
limit. Aware of the discrepancy in barrier thickness, the relative size of domain walls 
would introduce a notable magnetic inhomogeneity that implies the reduction of 
exchange energy seen by the Cooper pairs, therein promoting the enhancement of 
Josephson current in thicker samples40.  
To conclude, we report the realizations of Josephson junctions based on 2D van 
der Waals superconductor NbSe2 and ferromagnet Cr2Ge2Te6. We demonstrate that 
such hysteretic behaviors of supercurrent and magnetoresistance are predominantly 
induced by the magnetic barrier remanence. Moreover, we observe 0-π JJs signatures 
which are the evidence of π phase coupling in this crystalline vdW heterostructure. 
The layered structure of the barrier can generate an anomalous tunneling effect for its 
internal interlayer coupling. The stacked nanojunctions are of great potential to 
investigate vdW coupling in layers, and further expectations on dissipationless 
spin-active or switchable φ-phase JJs can be accomplished in the use of other 
insulating magnets like CrI3 or CrCl3 with intrinsic anisotropic magnetization. 
 
Note: During the preparation of this manuscript we became aware of a recent 
preprint41 with similar materials/device structures, and with thorough discussions and 
theoretical calculations to probe and engineer the JJ phase. Compared to their results, 
we mainly focus on thicker barriers in JJ devices and show the behavior of Fraunhofer 
patterns under magnetic fields while they demonstrate the Ising Cooper pairs 
tunneling through a multi-domain ultra-thin Cr2Ge2Te6 layer.    
 
Methods 
Crystal growth. High-quality crystal of bulk NbSe2 was grown via chemical vapor 
transport method with iodine as the transport agent. A stoichiometric ratio of Nb and 
Se powders (with 0.2 % excess of Se) were evacuated and sealed in a quartz tube with 
0.1 g iodine flakes, and then placed in a two-zone furnace in a temperature gradient 
from 730 ℃ to 770 ℃ for two weeks. Single-crystals of Cr2Ge2Te6 were synthesized 

8 
 
using the Te self-flux method. The raw powders of Cr, Ge and Te (with a ratio of 1 : 
4 : 20) were mixed and kept at 950 ℃ for 6 hours, and the mixture was then cooled at 
a rate of 2 ℃/h, followed by a centrifugation at 500 ℃ to get its bulk material.  
 
Device fabrication. The heterostructure devices were fabricated through a 
dry-transfer method in the glove box (H2O, O2 < 0.1 ppm). Few-layered NbSe2 and 
Cr2Ge2Te6 flakes were first mechanically exfoliated onto polydimethylsiloxane 
(PDMS) stamps with rough identifications of thickness by optical microscope, and 
next stacked onto a Si substrate capped with a 285 nm-thick SiO2 layer slowly, 
controlled by a stepper motor. The multi-terminal electrical contacts were patterned 
by a standard e-beam lithography technique and subsequently deposited of Cr/Au (5 / 
70 nm) via magnetron sputtering.   
  
Transport measurements. Four-terminal transport measurements were carried out in 
two Physical Property Measurement Systems (PPMS, Quantum Design), one 
equipped with a dilution refrigerator with the temperature down to 50 mK and the 
other without down to 1.9 K. The transport properties were acquired using lock-in 
amplifiers (SR 830) and Agilent 2912 meters. In differential resistance measurements, 
a small a.c. excitation was generated from the lock-in amplifier output voltage in 
combination with a larger d.c. bias applied by Agilent 2912 through a 100 kΩ resistor, 
and the differential voltage was measured at a low frequency (< 40 Hz). In 
magneto-transport measurements, the field direction was parallel to the substrate, 
therefore perpendicular to the current flowing across the barrier from top to bottom 
superconductors. 
 
Ambegaokar–Baratoff theory. AB theory39 is an exact result for the full temperature 
dependence of critical current, expressed as Ic(T)Rn = (πΔ(T)/2e)·tanh[Δ(T)/2kBT], 
where Δ(T) is the superconducting gap calculated from BCS theory.
