Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 1 
 
Cooperative Highway Work Zone Merge Control based on 
Reinforcement Learning in A Connected and Automated 
Environment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tianzhu Ren, Ph.D.  
Amazon 
 
Yuanchang Xie*, Ph.D., P.E. 
Associate Professor 
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering 
University of Massachusetts Lowell 
1 University Ave, Lowell, MA 01854 
Phone: (978) 934-3681 

 
Liming Jiang, Ph.D. Student 
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering 
University of Massachusetts Lowell 
1 University Ave, Lowell, MA 01854 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Corresponding Author 
 
 
Paper submitted for presentation at the Transportation Research Board 99th Annual Meeting and 
for publication in Transportation Research Record 
 
Word Count: 4,953 + 250*1 (6 Figures and 1 Table) = 5,203 Words 

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 2 
ABSTRACT 
Given the aging infrastructure and the anticipated growing number of highway work zones in the 
United States, it is important to investigate work zone merge control, which is critical for 
improving work zone safety and capacity.  This paper proposes and evaluates a novel highway 
work zone merge control strategy based on cooperative driving behavior enabled by artificial 
intelligence.  The proposed method assumes that all vehicles are fully automated, connected and 
cooperative.  It inserts two metering zones in the open lane to make space for merging vehicles 
in the closed lane.  In addition, each vehicle in the closed lane learns how to optimally adjust its 
longitudinal position to find a safe gap in the open lane using an off-policy soft actor critic 
(SAC) reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm, considering the traffic conditions in its 
surrounding.  The learning results are captured in convolutional neural networks and used to 
control individual vehicles in the testing phase.  By adding the metering zones and taking the 
locations, speeds, and accelerations of surrounding vehicles into account, cooperation among 
vehicles is implicitly considered.  This RL-based model is trained and evaluated using a 
microscopic traffic simulator.  The results show that this cooperative RL-based merge control 
significantly outperforms popular strategies such as late merge and early merge in terms of both 
mobility and safety measures. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Bottlenecks generated by work zones as well as traffic incidents are one of the most important 
contributors to non-recurrent congestion and secondary accidents.  Many previous work zone 
studies focused on merge control and proposed a variety of strategies such as early merge 
(EM)(2) and late merge (LM)(3) to improve work zone throughput.  EM typically uses a 
sequence of “DO NOT PASS” signs that can be activated/deactivated depending on traffic to 
create a no passing zone of varying length.  A traffic sensor is mounted on each sign to monitor 
traffic in the open lane.  The purpose of the no passing zone is to encourage drivers in the closed 
lane to switch to the open lane before reaching the end of the dynamically changing queue (or 
slow-moving traffic) to improve safety and efficiency.  EM often creates high-speed but low-
density flow at the merging point.  While for LM, drivers in both open and closed lanes are urged 
to stay in their respective lanes until the merging point, where they take turns to merge.  
Compared to EM, LM can effectively reduce the overall queue length, since both lanes are used 
for queue storage.  However, LM often generates low-speed but high-density flow at the merging 
point.  Ideally, the best merge control should result in high-speed and high-density flow. 
 
Some advanced driving assistant systems such as Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC)(4) enable 
vehicles to drive at a high speed while maintaining a small gap (i.e., high density).  Such a 
feature is only for improving vehicle longitudinal control and cannot address the challenging 
work zone merge problem.  Also, an ACC-equipped vehicle only considers its interactions with 
the vehicle immediately in front of it and in the same lane (including vehicles attempting to 
merge into its lane), trying to make optimal decisions locally.  To improve work zone traffic 
operations, it is important for individual vehicles to take global traffic conditions into 
consideration and cooperate with other vehicles in both the open and closed lanes. 
 

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 3 
To enable collaborative driving behavior among CAV, there are three main challenges: (a) how 
to effectively take the vast amount of unstructured traffic information into consideration; (b) how 
to choose an optimal control policy based on the dynamically changing surrounding traffic that 
maximizes the benefits of the subject vehicle in the long run instead of just the next few time 
steps; and (c) how to make the best decisions based on not only the subject merging vehicle’s 
state, but also its surrounding vehicles’ current states and possible moves in the future.  Some 
previous studies have attempted to address the collaborative merge problem.  Chen et al.(12) 
applied a gap acceptance algorithm and proposed several rules to decide a vehicle’s actions 
before merging into the target lane.  Urmson at al. (11) used a slot-based approach for 
cooperative merging control.  These rule-based methods depend heavily on specific situations 
which are pragmatically vulnerable due to their inability to adapt to unforeseen environment. 
 
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully applied to a variety of fields with the 
growing availability of cost-effective high-performance computing hardware.  RL together with 
deep neural networks can take large dimensions of state space into consideration, making it very 
appealing for work zone control.  Using RL, analysts do not need to explicitly specify how a 
work zone changes from one state into another (i.e., state transition probability matrix), which 
dramatically reduces the modeling effort needed, particularly the trouble associated with 
specifying the uncertain state transition probability matrix.  Vehicle agents can learn from a huge 
number of simulated scenarios about the complex nonlinear relationship between their next 
moves and work zone traffic operations, and find actions with the maximum long-term reward.   
 
Due to these desirable features, RL has been applied in self-driving vehicles such as NVIDIA 
(5), Tesla Autopilot (6) and Google Waymo.  Some researchers also applied RL in ramp 
metering (13,14).  Specifically, Fares et al. (13) developed a RL model to optimally control the 
density of freeway mainstream for maximizing traffic throughput and minimizing travel time. 
Their model was formulated as a Markov Decision Process (7) and solved by Q-learning (8). 
Yang et al. (14) proposed a Deep Q-Network (DQN)(9) control strategy to identify the optimal 
ramp metering rate. The DQN considered upstream and downstream traffic volumes as the input 
state and chose either green or red for the ramp meter traffic light as the action at each decision 
interval.  Yu et al. (15) applied deep Q-Learning to control a simulated car for turning and 
obstacle avoidance maneuvers.  These studies all considered a discrete action space due to its 
simplicity and fast convergence, although many vehicle control problems (e.g., (15)) very likely 
may benefit more from using a continuous action space.  Sallab et al. (16) compared a discrete 
action-space Deep Q-Network with a continuous action-space Deep Deterministic Actor Critic 
(DDAC)(10) for lane-keeping assistance based on an open source car simulator, and the results 
showed that the discrete DQN method led to abrupt steering maneuvers while the continuous 
DDAC method generated better performance and smoother control. 
 
This research proposes a deep neural network based RL control approach that guides AVs 
through work zones.  Specifically, a work zone is divided into two metering zones and a merging 
zone (see Figure 1).  In the metering zones, AVs are not allowed to change lanes and they focus 
on adjusting longitudinal positions using the proposed RL method.  By the time AVs reach the 
merging/lane reduction point, they will be able to maintain a sufficient front gap if all vehicles 
were projected onto a single lane.  In this way, they can merge safely and form a high-speed and 
high-density vehicle platoon.  The key to this proposed approach is how to adjust AVs’ 

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 4 
longitudinal positions properly in the metering zones.  In this research, each AV in the closed 
lane is considered as a RL agent.  It learns the best control strategy through its interactions with 
the simulated traffic environment using VISSIM.  At each time step, this agent takes an action 
(i.e., acceleration, deceleration).  At the next time step, the value for its previous action is 
updated based on a set of reward functions and the interactions between the agent and the 
environment.  To improve the control model’s generalization ability, a deep neural network is 
used to store the learning results.  The proposed RL approach is detailed in the next section.  
 
METHODOLOGY 
Overview 
As shown in Figure 1, a work zone is divided into two metering zones followed by a merging 
zone.  All vehicles approaching the work zone are instructed to increase their distance headways 
upon entering Metering Zone I.  Specifically, each vehicle needs to increase its front distance 
headway to twice the safe distance needed for the corresponding speed (assuming 70km/h).  
Metering Zone I is to provide sufficient distance (i.e., reaction time) for vehicles to double their 
front gaps and lane changing is prohibited in this zone.  In Metering Zone II, vehicles in the open 
lane (left lane in Figure 1) will adopt the same car-following behavior as in Metering Zone I, 
while vehicles in the closed lane (right lane in Figure 1) are required to adjust their longitudinal 
positions.  By the time vehicles reach the merging/lane reduction point, they will be able to 
maintain a sufficient front gap if all vehicles were projected onto a single lane.   Following this 
longitudinal control strategy, towards the end of Metering Zone II, if vehicles in both lanes are 
projected onto a single virtual lane, all the distance headways are expected to be close to but 
greater than the minimum safe distance gap.  In the Merging Zone, lane changes are allowed and 
vehicles in the two lanes take turns to merge.  In summary, the core of the RL-based method is 
the longitudinal control in the two metering zones, where lane changes are prohibited.  Before 
Metering Zone I, vehicles follow normal driving behavior. After Metering Zone II, vehicles also 
follow normal driving behavior other than being instructed to merge in the merging zone.  
 
 
Figure 1 Overview of RL-based Control. 
 
In this study, the deep neural network based RL strategy and other benchmark strategies are all 
evaluated using VISSIM microscopic traffic simulation.  In Metering Zone II, vehicles in the 
right lane are controlled by a convolutional neural network trained by RL, and left-lane vehicles 
are controlled by a modified VISSIM default driving behavior model.  The modification simply 
doubles the default time headway to create sufficient gaps for right-lane vehicles to merge in the 
Merging Zone.  
Metering Zone I
Metering Zone II 
800m
Merging
Zone
800m
200m

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 5 
 
Deep Reinforcement Learning 
In this section, a detailed description of the RL approach is provided, including reinforcement 
learning basics, state representation, neural network architecture and soft actor critic (SAC) (1) 
RL and reward shaping.  
 
In this research, the control of right-lane vehicles (see Figure 1) is formulated as a Markov 
Decision Process (MDP) consisting of numerous state 𝑠 primarily defined by the surrounding 
traffic.  Based on the learned policy 𝜋, an action 𝑎 is selected at each state and executed.  After 
the execution, the system (i.e., work zone traffic operations) will react to the action, from which 
a reward 𝑟 can be observed, and transit to a new state 𝑠’.  The reward and the current and new 
states are then used to update the policy.  To take each action’s long-term reward into 
consideration, the expected discounted cumulative reward ∑𝑅 is calculated along with the policy 
from the initial state (a vehicle enters the work zone) to the terminal state (a vehicle merges into 
the open lane in the merging zone).  
 
There are two types of widely used reinforcement learning methods.  The first type is model-free 
RL such as Q-learning and Sarsa. They try to find the optimal policy by updating a table that 
saves the long-term rewards for each state and action pair.  They then use this table directly for 
identifying the best actions.  The other type is model-based RL like DQN, Deep Deterministic 
Policy Gradient (DDPG) (10) and the proposed SAC, which learn a model to approximate the 
MDP and use this learned model to find the optimal control actions. 
 
State Representation 
In this study, the system state is defined by three components: network speed grid map, network 
acceleration grid map and an 8-element vector representing the traffic surrounding the subject 
vehicle being controlled by RL (e.g., the red vehicle in Figure 2).   
 
 
Figure 2 State representation 
 
As in Figure 2, the 800-meter Metering Zone II is divided into 2 x 800 cells for the network 
speed grid map and network acceleration grid map.  Each row is for a lane and each cell is for a 

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 6 
1-meter segment.  The numbers in each cell represent either the speed or the acceleration of the 
vehicle occupying that cell.  If a vehicle occupies multiple cells, the speed/acceleration values in 
the corresponding cells will be equal. 
 
The speed values illustrated in Figure 2 are normalized based on the actual vehicle speeds and 
are bounded by 0 and 1.  The normalization is done via dividing the original speed values by the 
maximum speed in the training and testing processes.  Similarly, the acceleration values in 
Figure 2 are normalized using the maximum absolute value and are bounded by -1 and 1.  
 
In addition to the speed and acceleration grid maps, an 8-element vector is included, which 
consists of: (a) the relative positions and relative speeds between the subject vehicle (e.g., the red 
vehicle in Figure 2) and some of its neighboring vehicles (blue vehicles in Figure 2), and (b) 
speed and position of the subject vehicle.  As can be seen in Figure 2, only the relative 
information from three neighboring vehicles are considered: the immediate lead and lag vehicles 
in the open lane and the immediate lead vehicle in the current lane. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Convolutional Neural Network Architecture 
 
The two grid maps give the subject vehicle a global view of the current traffic conditions in the 
work zone, while the 8-element vector is to provide the subject vehicle with more detailed local 
traffic information.  In total, the proposed RL method takes 3,208 state variables.  Given such a 
large input dimension, it is reasonable to use neural networks to capture the learned control 
policy. 
Input <40, 40> 
Conv. 3 x 3 stride 1 
Max 3 x 3 stride 2 
Residual Block 
Residual Block 
FC 32 
Input <40, 40> 
Conv. 3 x 3 stride 1 
Max 3 x 3 stride 2 
Residual Block 
Residual Block 
FC 32 
Input <8> 
FC 128 
Action (Normal Distribution) or Q value 
Conv. 3 x 3 stride 1 
Conv. 3 x 3 stride 1 
ReLU 
ReLU 
+ 
[16, 
32, 
32] 
Action 

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 7 
 
Neural Network Architecture 
When the state space is discrete and compact, the Q-function can be easily formulated as a table.  
However when state space is continuous and multi-dimensional, it is impossible to formulate the 
Q-function as a table or Monte Carlo Tree (17) such as in AlphaGo Zero (18).  In such a case, the 
Q-function is often approximated by a parameterized function of states and actions 𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎, 𝑤), 
and the learning process is to find the optimal parameter set 𝑤.  This study adopts a modified 
impala convolutional neural network (19) to approximate the Q-function as well as the policy 
(actor) function.  
 
As shown in Figure 3, the speed and acceleration grid maps are reshaped to two <40, 40> 
matrices and fed into a convolutional neural network (CNN).  The CNN includes three main 
blocks with filter sizes 16, 32 and 32, respectively.  The first two main blocks correspond to the 
speed and acceleration grid maps, and the last block is for the 8-element vector.  Each of the first 
two main blocks starts from a 3*3 convolutional layer, includes a 3*3 maxpooling layer down 
sampling with stride 2, and serves two residual blocks which have a similar architecture as 
ResNet (21).  The reason for adopting this CNN architecture is that as the network depth 
increases, accuracy gets saturated and degrades rapidly.  The two residual blocks are included to 
increase the data sample efficiency by reusing activations from a previous layer until the adjacent 
layer learns its weights.  This significantly simplifies the network and reduces the number of 
layers in it.   
 
Via each of the first two main blocks, the raw state input is converted to a 32-dimension 
embedding which saves nonlinear and highly correlated information of the input.  The two 
embeddings are concatenated with the 8-dimension vector as the input for the policy function, 
which output a final normal distribution with mean value and variance.  The same CNN 
architecture is used for the Q function 𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎) and value function 𝑉(𝑠).  For the Q function, the 
action set is also added to the above concatenated vector to generate Q values for each state and 
action pair. 
 
Soft Actor Critic (SAC) 
On-policy RL algorithms such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (23), Asynchronous Actor 
Critic Agents (A3C) (22) and Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) (24), although very 
popular, suffer from sample inefficiency because they need to generate new samples after each 
policy update and cannot utilize historical samples.  On the contrary, Q-learning based off-policy 
approaches such as DDPG and DQN are able to learn efficiently from past experience sampled 
from memory replay buffer.  However, these off-policy optimization algorithms are very 
sensitive to hyperparameters and require a lot of tuning to get the model converge.  To address 
this issue, this study uses a novel Soft Actor Critic (SAC) RL.  SAC is also an off-policy 
algorithm but includes new features to overcome the convergence brittleness problem. 
 
The main difference between SAC and other off-policy RL algorithms is that SAC seeks to 
maximize not only the long-term rewards, but also the entropy of policy.  It encourages policy 
exploration by assigning approximately the same probabilities to actions that have the same or 
similar Q-values.  This feature prevents the policy from repeatedly selecting a small set of 
actions with high Q-values in the training process, while missing the chance of exploring other 

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 8 
low Q-value actions that are potentially very rewarding in the long run.  By encouraging policy 
exploration, SAC is able to address other off-policy algorithms’ convergence problem. 
 
𝐽(θ) = ∑
E(23,43)∼6789r(s<, a<) + αℋAπC(. |s<)FG
H
<IJ
                            
(1) 
 
The policy function is obtained by maximizing the objective function in Equation (1), which 
consists of a reward term and an entropy term ℋ weighted by 𝛼.  SAC has three networks: a 
policy function 𝜋 parameterized by 𝛷, a soft Q-approximator function 𝑄 parameterized by 𝜃 
and a state value function 𝑉 parameterized by 𝜓.  The two separate approximators for 𝑉 and 𝑄 
functions are helpful for the learning process to converge.  
 
To train the three CNNs, a series of loss functions are defined.  The Policy network π is trained 
by minimizing the following loss function in Equation (2):  
 
πnew = arg min
UV∈X DKL \𝜋](⋅|s<)|
_`aAb7old(23,.)F
f7old(23)
g 
 
 
    
 
   
 
 
= arg min
UV∈X DKL A𝜋](. |s<)| expAQkold(s<, . ) −log Zkold (s<)FF  
 
(2) 
 
To update the policy network, SAC restricts the policy to a subset of policies Π which could be 
represented as a Gaussian distribution.  In Equation (2), SAC uses the information projection 
defined in terms of the Kullback-Leibler divergence (20) between the old policy distribution 
and exponential of the old Q approximator function divided by the partition function 𝑍 which 
normalizes the old Q distribution.  Function 𝑍 can be dropped since it is intractable in general 
and it does not affect the gradient with respect to the new policy. 
 
Based on the Bellman equation, the soft Q-value can be computed iteratively starting from any 
function 𝑄: 𝑆× 𝐴→𝑅 given by Equation (3). 
 
𝑄(𝑠u, 𝑎u) = 𝑟(𝑠u, 𝑎u) + 𝛾𝐸xyz𝟙∼|}(x)[𝑉(𝑠u•J)] 
 
 
       (3) 
 
where, 
 
𝑉(𝑠u) = 𝐸•y∼U[𝑄(𝑠u, 𝑎u) −𝛼log 𝜋(𝑎u|𝑠u)]  
 
 
  (4) 
 
𝑉(𝑆u) in Equation (4) is the soft state value function.  The soft state value function is trained by 
minimizing the squared residual error in Equation (5). 
 
Jƒ(ψ) = E23∼𝔻†
J
‡ AV‰(s<) −E[QC(s<, a<) −log πŠ (a<|s<)]F
‡‹ 
 
(5) 
 
with gradient, 
 
∇‰Jƒ(ψ) = ∇‰V‰(s<) \V‰(s<) −Q•(s<, a<) + log πC (a<|s<)g 
 
(6) 
 

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 9 
where 𝐷 is the distribution of previously sampled states and actions saved in the replay buffer. 
The soft Q function is trained by minimizing the soft Bellman residual (Equation (7)) using the 
stochastic gradient descent method. 
 
Jb(θ) = E(23,43)∼𝔻•
J
‡ •QC(s<, a<) −\r(s<, a<) + γE23z𝟙∼67(2) †V‰(s<•J)‹g’
‡
“        
(7) 
 
with gradient, 
 
∇•Jb(w) = ∇•Q•(s<, a<) •Q•(s<, a<) −r(s<, a<) −γV‰(s<•J)’ 
  
(8) 
 
The target state value network 𝑉”• weights is updated by an exponential moving average 
considering the current value state network weights.  
 
Reward Shaping 
The main goal of reward shaping is to avoid creating “stop and go” traffic when a vehicle merges 
from the closed lane into the open lane.  It requires the subject vehicle to keep a minimum safe 
distance with its lead vehicle and lag vehicle in the target/open lane when making a lane change.  
When the subject vehicle merges into the open lane, all vehicles surrounding it are supposed to 
continue smoothly without having to accelerate or decelerate. 
 
For vehicles in the closed lane trying to merge, they are either in a non-terminal state or the 
terminal state.  Non-terminal state represents when a vehicle is in Metering Zone II and adjusting 
its position, while terminal state is when a vehicle successfully merges into the open lane.  The 
terminal state reward is calculated by Equation (9). 
 
𝑅= −max(0, (70 −𝑎˜) ∗0.2) 
 
 
 
(9) 
 
where 𝑎˜ is the average speed of all vehicles currently in Metering Zone II.  The reward is 
negative if the subject vehicle is slower than 𝑎˜, since this may create a backward shockwave.  In 
addition, if 𝑑𝑥J > 𝑣J ∗𝑡ℎ¡¢£, 𝑑𝑥‡ > 𝑣‡ ∗𝑡ℎ¡¢£ and |(𝑣x −(𝑣J + 𝑣‡)/2)| < 2, 𝑅+= 10, where 
𝑡ℎ¡¢£ is the minimum time headway, 𝑣 is for speed, 𝑑𝑥J is the distance headway between the 
subject vehicle and the lag vehicle in the target lane, and 𝑑𝑥‡ is the distance headway between 
the subject vehicle and the lead vehicle in the target lane. 
 
For non-terminal states, the reward is determined based on the following equations: 
 
𝑅= −0.01 ∗𝑎𝑐𝑐‡ 
 
 
 
 
(10) 
𝑅−= 10  if a crash occurs 
 
 
 
(11) 
𝑅−= 2.5  if 𝑣x< 30km/h || 𝑣x> 100km/h || front headway < 2m 
 
(12) 
𝑅−= (𝑣x −80) ∗0.01  if 𝑣x> 80km/h 
 
 
(13) 
𝑅−= (60 −𝑣x) ∗0.01  if 𝑣x< 60km/h 
 
 
(14) 
 

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 10 
Equation (10) encourages the subject vehicle to drive smoothly with minimum 
acceleration/deceleration.  Equation (11) means that the simulation will be terminated and 
restarted if a crash occurs.  Equations (12), (13) and (14) aim to minimize the vehicle’s speed 
fluctuations around the speed limit (assuming 70km/h in this study).  The reward functions are 
carefully designed and help the subject vehicle learn how to follow the lead vehicle without 
crash, travel at a reasonable speed, and maintain a safe distance with both the lead and lag 
vehicles in the target lane. 
 
SIMULATION ANALYSIS 
Experiment Design 
This research adopts a microscopic simulation tool VISSIM to evaluate the performance of the 
proposed RL control strategy and to compare it with early merge (EM), late merge (LM) and no 
control (base case) under two input traffic volumes: 1,600 vph and 2,000 vph.  As shown in 
Figure 1, a work zone on a two-lane highway with the right lane closed is considered.  For all 
simulations conducted, the percentage of heavy vehicles is set to 3%, and the speed limit is set as 
70 km/h.  For each merge control and input volume combination, the simulation is run 10 times 
with different random seeds.  Each simulation run lasts 45 minutes with the first 15 minutes 
serving as the warm-up period. 
 
Overall Mobility Performance 
 
Table 1: Performance comparison of different control strategies 
Performance 
Measure 
Merge Control Strategy 
Base Case Early Merge (EM) 
Late Merge (LM) 
RL Control 
 
Volume Input 1,600 vph 
Average Delay (s) 
274.8 
121.9 (-55%) 
64.8 (-76%) 
4.2 (-97%) 
Throughput (vph) 
1343 
1424 (6%) 
1517 (13%) 
1596 (19%) 
Mean travel time (s) 
384.3 
231.4 (-40%) 
174.3 (-55%) 
116.5 (-70%) 
 
Volume Input 2,000 vph 
Average Delay (s) 
561.6 
374.6 (-33%) 
372.5 (-34%) 
28.4 (-94%) 
Throughput (vph) 
1341 
1436 (7%) 
1526 (14%) 
1979 (48%) 
Mean travel time (s) 
671.1 
484.0 (-28%) 
482.0 (-28%) 
140.8 (-79%) 
Note: numbers in parenthesis are relative differences, which are calculated as (control case – base case)/ 
(base case)*100% 
 
Table 1 shows the mobility performance for different control strategies. The typical capacity for 
a two-lane highway with one lane closed is about 1,340 vph (25).  When the input volume is 
1,600 vph (i.e., above the normal capacity), the RL control gives the best results for all 
performance measures, followed by LM and EM.  Compared to EM and LM, the delay from RL 
control in this case is much smaller.  The throughput generated by RL control is almost the same 
as the input, demonstrating its superior mobility performance.  Not surprisingly, no control yields 
the worst results.  The average throughput without any control is 1,343 vph, which is consistent 
with the capacity reported in (25).   

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 11 
 
When the input volume increases from 1,600 vph to 2,000 vph, even the average delay for RL 
control goes up significantly.  However, the trend observed under the 1,600 vph input volume 
level still holds.  For EM and LM, the percentage improvements in terms of average delay and 
mean travel time both drop significantly compared to at the 1,600 vph demand level, while the 
percentage improvements in terms of throughput stay approximately the same. 
 
Overall, the results in Table 1 suggest that RL control significantly improves work zone safety 
and mobility compared with traditional control strategies like EM and LM.  Under oversaturated 
condition (e.g., 2,000 vph), the performance differences between EM and LM become marginal, 
especially in terms of average delay and mean travel time.  On the other hand, RL control 
performs the best under both congested and oversaturated conditions.   
 
Vehicle Trajectory Diagram 
To illustrate how RL control adjusts the positions of individual vehicles and the benefits of doing 
so, the trajectories of vehicles in a randomly selected time frame are plotted in Figure 4, in which 
green lines are trajectories for vehicles in the right (closed) lane and red lines are for vehicles in 
the left (open) lane.  Under RL control all green lines eventually turn red in the merging zone, 
meaning vehicles in the closed lane are able to successfully merge into the open lane. While for 
no control, Figure 4 clearly shows that many vehicles in the closed lane have to stop and wait for 
an extended period of time before they can merge into the open lane.  
 
 
(a) RL control under 1,600 vph 
 
 
(b) No control under 1,600 vph 
 
 
(c) RL control under 2,000 vph 
 
 
(d) No control under 2,000 vph 
Figure 4 Vehicle Trajectory Diagrams. 

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 12 
 
Other than the mobility benefits of RL control clearly illustrated in Figure 4, the slopes of the 
trajectories show that RL control can help reduce rear-end crash risk, by avoiding sudden 
decelerations and stop-and-go traffic.  Additionally, the no control trajectories show that some 
drivers in the closed lane have to wait for an extended amount of time to be able to merge and 
may become increasingly impatient.  This intuitively may contribute to aggressive and unsafe 
behaviors such as forced merge, and increase the risk of angle crashes. 
 
Density 
To further investigate how RL control performs, a VISSIM tool is developed to visualize how 
traffic density in the work zone changes over time and distance.  The density maps for input 
volume = 1,600 vph under the RL control and LM strategies are presented in Figure 5, where the 
vertical axis is for time and the horizontal axis is for distance.  A distance of 0 refers to the point 
400 meters upstream of the metering zone.  Larger distance values are for locations downstream 
of the origin.  Also, red colors are for higher densities.  Figure 5 clearly shows that compared to 
LM the RL control can better reduce and equalize the traffic densities of the open and closed 
lanes.  Equal densities in both lanes can help reduce drivers’ desire for lane changes (e.g., 
seeking higher speeds) and consequently angle crash risk.  A smaller high-density area for RL 
control means the total vehicle time spent in stop-and-go traffic is less, suggesting that RL 
control is safer than LM at both input traffic volumes.  Also, Figure 5 shows that the queues from 
the RL control grow at a much slower speed (i.e., backward forming shockwave speed) than the 
LM control.  A slowly growing backward forming shockwave is likely to be less dangerous than 
a fast growing one. 
 

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 13 
Figure 5 RL control and LM Density Map Comparison  
 
Acceleration and Distance Headway 
 

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 14 
 
Figure 6 Acceleration Histogram. 
 
A majority of crashes in highway work zones are rear-end crashes, which are often caused by 
sudden decelerations and stop-and-go traffic.  Therefore, the stability of vehicle longitudinal 
acceleration behavior can be an important surrogate safety measure.  Figure 6 shows the 
longitudinal acceleration distributions of vehicles under RL control and no control. The 
acceleration distributions for no control clearly are more spread out than those for RL control, 
and RL control generates much less sudden decelerations (e.g., <= -5 m2/s).  This suggests that 
RL control is safer than no control and leads to smoother and more stable traffic flow. 
 

 
 
Ren et al.                                                                                                                                                                 15 
The distance headway distributions for RL control and no control are also compared.  Under both 
input flow conditions, overall RL control results in larger (safer) distance headways than no 
control in the merging zone. 
 
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
This study proposes a cooperative highway work zone merge control strategy based on Soft 
Actor-Critic (SAC) reinforcement learning.  This strategy is evaluated using VISSIM 
microscopic traffic simulation and compared with no control, late merge and early merge.  The 
RL-based control performs significantly better than no control, early merge, and late merge 
under congested to extremely heavy traffic conditions in terms of both safety and mobility 
measures.  Unlike other autonomous and connected vehicle control algorithms like CACC which 
increases the capacity of work zone by reducing vehicle time headway and reaction time, this 
RL-based control introduces two metering zones where vehicles adjust their positions relative to 
neighboring vehicles in the adjacent lane to achieve a collaborative and smooth merge and to 
maintain a safe time headway in the merging zone.  The results also suggest the importance for 
automated vehicles to collaborate with each other in order to improve the overall system 
operations. 
 
The proposed RL-based control strategy is applied to a two-lane highway work zone example. It 
can be further modified for multi-lane (more than two) highway work zones.  For future studies, 
it would be interesting to investigate how to improve the system so that it can work in an 
environment with both automated and human-driven vehicles. 
 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION STATEMENT 
The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: study conception and design: Tianzhu 
Ren, Yuanchang Xie; data collection: Tianzhu Ren; analysis and interpretation of results: 
Tianzhu Ren, Yuanchang Xie, Liming Jiang; draft manuscript preparation: Tianzhu Ren, 
Yuanchang Xie, Liming Jiang. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of 
the manuscript.
