FATE in AI: Towards Algorithmic Inclusivity and Accessibility
Isa Inuwa-Dutse
University of Huddersfield, UK

Abstract
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is at the forefront of modern technology, and its effects are felt in
many areas of society. To prevent algorithmic disparities, fairness, accountability, transparency,
and ethics (FATE) in AI are being implemented. However, the current discourse on these issues
is largely dominated by more economically developed countries (MEDC), leaving out local
knowledge, cultural pluralism, and global fairness. This study aims to address this gap by
examining FATE-related desiderata, particularly transparency and ethics, in areas of the global
South that are underserved by AI. A user study (n = 43) and a participatory session (n = 30)
were conducted to achieve this goal. The results showed that AI models can encode bias and
amplify stereotypes. To promote inclusivity, a community-led strategy is proposed to collect and
curate representative data for responsible AI design. This will enable the affected community or
individuals to monitor the increasing use of AI-powered systems. Additionally, recommendations
based on public input are provided to ensure that AI adheres to social values and context-specific
FATE needs.
Keywords: Algorithmic bias, algorithmic fairness, responsible AI, transparent and ethical AI,
underserved communities, AI and Society, Africa
1. Introduction
The increasing use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology in various domains has the
potential to cause individual and social harm. Examples of bias and discrimination in AI
applications include court decisions [1], job hiring [2], online ads [3], and many other areas
prone to bias [4]. These algorithmic decisions have economic and personal implications for
individuals. Therefore, Fairness, Accountability, Transparency and Ethics (FATE) in AI must
be properly regulated for responsible use cases [5, 6], particularly in high-stakes domains
[1, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. Studies have shown that machine learning models can discriminate
based on race and gender [13, 14, 15]. FATE in AI is intended to address the social issues
caused by digital systems, but the current discourse is largely shaped by more economically
developed countries (MEDC), raising concerns about neglecting local knowledge, cultural
pluralism, and global fairness [16]. As AI systems become more integrated into various products
[9, 10, 17, 12, 18, 19], they are a major driver of the fourth industrial revolution (4IR) and
transformation [20]. Therefore, it is essential to understand the FATE-related needs of different
communities, as AI affects a wide range of people. Ensuring effective transparency cannot be
a one-size-fits-all approach [21], as this could disproportionately affect different communities
[16, 22]. To this end, more contextualised and interdisciplinary research is needed to inform
algorithmic fairness and transparency [23, 24, 25]. Additionally, diversity and sociodemographics
arXiv:2301.01590v2  [cs.CY]  13 Nov 2023

must be taken into account when designing and governing algorithms that affect the public
[26]. The most effective approach is to involve the affected public and AI developers to
incorporate community-specific FATE needs. AI practitioners must adhere to social values
to ensure responsible AI for the public good [27], and focus on more representative values of the
community affected by AI [28]. Through cooperative, inclusive, and community-led design of
AI applications, algorithmic disparities can be effectively addressed, and relevant stakeholders
within the community can ensure better policing of AI operations.
This study aims to explore the areas of AI that are under-served in terms of responsibility
and accountability. It seeks to evaluate the effectiveness of transparency methods in relation to
FATE-related issues, as well as to explore ways in which local communities can be involved in
the design and development of AI systems that affect them. Additionally, it will provide useful
insights and recommendations to stimulate action towards representative and responsible AI.
To this end, a community of 73 online users in Nigeria from the Global South was chosen as a
case study to examine the public’s views on FATE in AI. Nigeria was selected due to its large
population and the increasing use of AI-powered products and services. In addition, the country
is ranked 8th in the world for Internet users [29], indicating a growing AI workforce in Africa.
The paper is divided into the following sections. Section 2 provides the background and
related studies. Section 3 outlines the method and details of user studies. Sections 4 and 5
present the results and a discussion, respectively. Finally, Section 6 concludes the study.
2. Background
This research draws from socio-technical fields to investigate FATE in AI matters. We will
start by looking at the application areas of AI, followed by an overview of pertinent literature
from the fields of responsible AI and human-computer interaction (HCI). The uniqueness of
our strategy is that it involves the communities affected by the development of responsible and
inclusive AI systems.
2.1. AI Application Areas
The utilisation of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Africa is becoming increasingly widespread,
with applications in a variety of areas such as governance, healthcare, agriculture, financial
institutions, transportation, education, journalism, public and private engagements. In healthcare,
AI is used for automated diagnostics (for example, minoHealth1), pharmacy management systems
(for example, RxAll2), and medical imaging [30? ]. AI is also used in journalism for newsgath-
ering, production, and distribution processes [31], and in public administrations to explore the
role and implications of AI [32]. Financial institutions are utilising AI tools such as Debtors3
and Nomba4 to reduce discrimination against black people in identity verification. In addition,
research has been conducted on the malicious use of AI in Sub-Saharan African countries [33]
and how AI could promote sustainability and tackle climate challenges in Africa [34]. Despite
the potential of AI to address various social issues, the development and deployment of AI
systems requires a significant amount of energy [35, 36].
1https://www.minohealth.ai/
2https://rxall.net/about/
3https://www.debtorsafrica.com/Home/AboutUs
4https://nomba.com/about-us
2

The use of AI in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) will have positive and negative
effects [37]. These tools and platforms often involve the collection and storage of sensitive
data about individuals, which raises ethical issues. Previous studies have shown that policy
responses to mitigate and prevent bias results are not keeping up with the rapid deployment of AI
technologies in Africa [38, 39, 40, 41, 42]. With the rapid development of AI, it is reasonable to
ask what would happen if Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) is achieved, giving AI powerful
reasoning and task-accomplishment capabilities. In the AGI era, will AI be able to determine
what is right and wrong if its intelligence surpasses that of the human user? What would be
the impact or risk of jobs being replaced by AI due to automation in areas with already high
unemployment and other social problems? Addressing current AI challenges in underserved
communities will help address the most pressing AI issues.
2.2. Algorithmic Experience and Fairness
Algorithmic decisions can lead to the reproduction or intensification of disparities for a
variety of reasons. For example, discrimination can be inherent due to the data used to train the
AI model, which may have been biased and discriminatory in the first place [43]. As mentioned
above, algorithms can also promote a form of discrimination and stereotyping. Examples of this
include the COMPAS system to predict recidivism [1], Amazon’s hiring process that favoured
male applicants over females [2], and Google’s job ad algorithm that showed jobs paid higher
for men than women [3]. Consequently, fairness, accountability, transparency, and ethics in
AI are aimed at developing and ensuring responsible AI that incorporates moral behaviour and
avoids encoding bias in AI decisions [44]. Ethics is about making choices based on concepts of
right and wrong, duty and obligation. Therefore, it is possible to create a hierarchy of goals that
embody ethical principles in digital systems [45].
Regulatory Frameworks. Legislation, relevant policies, and positive action are essential for
addressing ethical issues and algorithmic disparities [46]. The Equality Act 2010 in the UK 5
uses positive action to reduce the imbalance of opportunity for individuals from under-represented
communities. Algorithmic fairness is also seen through the lens of positive action to promote
equal representation [47]. Additionally, ethical frameworks such as UNESCO’s recommendation
on the Ethics of AI [48], the World Economic Forum’s blueprint for inclusive AI [49], and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) [50] have been proposed
to address the human rights implications of AI systems. Regulatory bodies such as the steering
group of the European AI Alliance [51] and the African Working Group on AI [52] are also in
place to monitor AI operations and protect human rights [53]. To ensure fairness, it is important
to consider how inclusive the AI design and development pipeline is in terms of demographics
and local context [54]. Data leverage [55] can be used to empower the public to influence the
implementation process and tackle algorithmic unfairness [11, 17, 44, 56].
Algorithmic Transparency and Fairness. The importance of transparency in Artificial Intelli-
gence (AI) systems is widely recognised as a necessary condition for upholding fundamental
human rights and ethical principles [35]. However, there is a wide range of interpretations,
justifications, applications, and methods for achieving transparency [16]. Explainable AI (XAI)
provides explanations to humans to help them better understand AI systems [7, 57], and can
5shorturl.at/cqr19
3

be used to identify and address fairness issues [43, 58, 59]. Explanations should be tailored to
the individual requesting them, and not necessarily be designed to make the decision process
understandable to the end-user [60]. This shift from developer-driven explanations [61] to those
that satisfy users’ curiosity and increase their knowledge about the technology [62] requires
a user-centric approach. Previous research has highlighted the need for contextualised and
interdisciplinary studies to identify best practices for AI [23, 24, 25]. This study emphasises the
importance of providing appropriate transparency to the public, so that they can be informed
about the basis of AI decisions, as they have the right to know.
2.3. Data and Community Voice
As the population of many countries in the Global South grows, they are generating a large
amount of data that is providing value and competitive advantage to numerous technology
companies. AI technologies are being used in new user groups, applications, datasets, and
regulations [63]. However, ethical, privacy, and data protection issues have been raised due
to the fact that AI systems require a great deal of data for training and functioning properly
[37, 64]. The dominance of Western viewpoints has been attributed to the prevalence of data,
measurement scales, legal and philosophical dimensions [22], which has led to AI being shaped
by its originating contexts in Western nations [63]. This has been seen as a new form of
dominance, with the commercialisation and weaponisation of data facilitated by local and
foreign AI models being referred to as data colonialism [65, 66, 67, 67]. Relying on foreign
data generation and processing tools has been criticised due to privacy and data protection
concerns [68]. Techno-colonialism has been argued to be a new way of transferring technology
and its values and norms from more economically developed countries to developing ones
[69]. To ensure responsible AI that is in line with the affected community’s values, access to
representative and quality data is essential. Therefore, creating transparent, trustworthy, and
human-centric AI that is in agreement with context-specific norms requires input from diverse
stakeholders, and high regard for diversity and sociodemographics should be taken into account
in the design and governance of algorithms that affect the public [26]. Not incorporating local
context or sociodemographic factors could lead to (in)advertent or (un)intended discrimination
and amplifying biases present in data [13]. Interdisciplinary approaches that are beneficial to
various stakeholders’ desiderata and for evaluation purposes should be incorporated [70, 71, 25].
Within the HCI research community, approaches have been put forward to find better ways of
improving the transparency of digital systems [72, 25, 73, 74]. Explanation interfaces that inform
users about the inner workings of the algorithm and interactivity are effective for algorithmic
intuitiveness and improved transparency [72]. To better improve inclusivity and leverage AI’s
capability, the involvement of various stakeholders to sketch out plans for AI applications that
recognise local context or needs is essential [75]. This study is focused on how the communities
can lend their voice and influence FATE in AI discourse, in line with existing initiatives that
support AI developers to factor in community-specific needs [76, 77].
2.4. AI and Policy Response
As Artificial Intelligence (AI) becomes increasingly pervasive in our lives, there is growing
concern about the potential negative impacts it may have on ethics and human rights. This
has led to calls for laws, policies and guidelines to regulate its development and application
[78, 37, 79, 39, 53, 80, 81]. Previous studies have noted the rapid deployment of AI technologies
in Africa, but policy responses to mitigate and prevent biased outcomes are lagging [38, 82,
4

39, 40, 41, 83, 84]. To this end, initiatives have been put in place to contain the technology
within the agreed parameters. For example, the OECD adopted the Recommendation on AI,
which is intended to promote innovation and trust in the technology [50]. In addition, many
African countries have established measures to govern AI. For instance, the African Working
Group on AI has been established [52]. Similarly, countries such as Tunisia [85], Mauritius [86],
and Botswana [87] have initiatives in place that incorporate strategies to meet national interests
and facilitate AI development. Moreover, organisations such as the African Development Bank
(ADB) offer AI-supported services across some countries in the continent [88]. While many
countries in the continent have enacted comprehensive data protection and privacy legislation
[82], practical efforts will be essential for a comprehensive policy response to the evolving AI
technology. We hope that the direction taken in this study will inform relevant AI policies and
stimulate discussions.
3. Methods
We are utilising both quantitative and qualitative methods to acquire a variety of perspectives
and insights. As illustrated in Figure 1, the research process is described. We engage with the
research participants through (1) an online user study with n = 73 and (2) interactive sessions.
Our main focus is on the following:
- exposure to AI: to examine to what extent the participants get exposed or interact with
AI-powered systems.
- explanation basis: central to XAI is the requirement to explain AI’s decision or how a
decision is reached [89]. According to the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
organisations deploying AI systems should provide meaningful information to affected
individuals about the performance of the systems [51]. In the context of this work, we will
examine the suitability and relevance of the explanations that are offered to users. This is
vital, especially in areas where accountability is mandated.
- concerns and needs: bias and discrimination are considered inherent in AI systems for
reasons such as the use of non-representative data. Concerns and needs are meant to
explore ways to mitigate algorithmic bias.
3.1. Online User Study
We conducted an online user study (n = 43) to investigate FATE-related issues. We
chose a common use case that would be easier for participants of diverse backgrounds and
digital literacy to engage with. We collect data from Facebook6, X7 (formerly Twitter) and
Instagram8, as these online platforms enable targeted marketing with the aid of AI models.
For transparency and privacy requirements, the platforms are required to provide explanations
for each recommendation or advertisement shown to their users. Figure 2 displays some of
the explanations provided by the chosen online social networks. The explanations used in the
user study were left unchanged to assess their relevance and to understand the participants’
perceptions of the transparency of the recommendation system.
6https://facebook.com/
7https://twitter.com/
8https://www.instagram.com/
5

Figure 1: An overview of our approach.
Table 1: Demographic information about the research participants involved with the online user study (n = 43).
Sec. Edu means the highest qualification is a secondary school leaving certificate and Higher Inst. refers to other
higher education institutions. Demographic information on participants (n = 30) for the participatory session is
preceded by PS.
Gender
Age
Digital Skill
Education
Employment
Female 27.9%
min. 18yrs
Satisfactory 12%
Sec. Edu 11.6%
Student 44.2%
Male 72.1%
max. 48yrs
Good 42%
Higher Inst. 11.6%
Self-employed 20.9%
—
–
Excellent 46%
BSc 62.8%
Full-time 25.6%
—
–
–
MSc 14%
Unspecified 9.3%
[PS] Female 22%
[PS] 18-25 47%
–
–
[PS] Student 78%
[PS] Male 75%
[PS] 26-35 43%
–
–
[PS] Full-time 16%
[PS] Unspecified 3%
[PS] 36-50 7%
–
–
[PS] Self-employed 3%
—
[PS] Unspecified 3%
–
–
[PS] Unspecified 3%
3.1.1. Procedures and Participants
The user study was designed using the Qualtrics platform9. To engage individuals with
varying digital literacy, we used the local platform Jinga to recruit 43 volunteers for the study.
Before beginning, participants were required to read and consent to the data collection and usage
outlined in the participant information document. To protect privacy, no personally identifiable
information was collected. To minimise potential bias, only one submission was allowed per
participant and the questions were kept short to avoid inattentive responses. Participants were
then presented with a brief introduction about the task and some examples to get started. The
activity took around 10-15 minutes to complete and each participant was rewarded with a thank
you voucher worth N500 upon completion. Table 1 provides relevant demographic information
about the research participants.
3.2. Interactive Sessions
Following the online user study, interactive sessions were held to engage with relevant
stakeholders and collect their feedback and opinions on FATE in AI. Immediately after the study,
a few participants10 volunteered to take part in further discussion about the user study. The
second part of the interactive session was a participatory session focusing on FATE in AI.
9https://www.qualtrics.com/uk/
10It is suggested that a reliable psychometric estimate requires 5-10 respondents [62].
6

3.2.1. Post-user Study
On completion of the online user study, some of the participants volunteered to engage in
further discussion centred around the following issues:
- how awareness of algorithmic deployments and FATE-related issues will enable us to
assess how inclusive and accessible AI models are to the public. The inclusion aspect
focuses on whether the explanations presented by the online platforms take into account
the local context.
- hindrance: what are the barriers to algorithmic awareness and what they considered to be
required or missing?
- context and sociodemographics: how best to harness perceptions from specific communi-
ties, often underserved by AI systems, to shape the field for positive societal impact?
3.2.2. Participatory Session
Noting that ethical AI deals with incorporating moral behaviour to avoid encoding bias
in AI’s decisions, the public can dictate norms, values and other ethical requirements to be
reflected in AI. The user engagement session was conducted as part of a workshop talk bias
against under-represented groups in AI, what can we do to help, to promote the participation of
underrepresented groups. Because algorithms could promote a form of stereotype, the session is
aimed at informing how best to incorporate representative and context-specific needs to avoid
encoding bias in AI’s decisions. Due to rising concerns over AI systems and the limited discourse
on FATE-related issues in areas deemed under-served, we run an interactive session involving 30
volunteers. Participation was optional and volunteers were explicitly informed about the data to
be collected. Table 1 shows the relevant demographic information on the participants. As a case
study, the participants respond to questions regarding the following common terms in Hausaland,
Nigeria:
- about the meaning and understanding of what boko and dan-boko are. The term boko
refers to Western education or formal education, and danboko is someone with formal
education.
- perception about transparency, trust, and data ownership vis-a-vis the online social net-
works that handle user data.
The research participants also contributed some comments on their opinions and experience
with AI-supported applications.
4. Results
In this section, we present and discuss the main results of the study.
4.1. Online User Study
Following each suggested advertisement, participants were asked to answer a series of
questions based on the metrics outlined in [62] to evaluate FATE-related issues. Table 2 displays
the constructs and sample queries that the participants responded to. Utilising a Likert scale (5
to 1 continuum, with 5 indicating strong agreement and 1 strong disagreement), the research
participants reported their level of agreement with each of the statements in Table 2.
7

Figure 2: Explanation types from (A) Twitter (B) Facebook and (C) Instagram social networks.
Figure 3: The aggregated ratings of the participants in response to questions about knowledge about the AI, relevance
of the AI’s recommendation, satisfaction with the explanation and trust in the AI system based on educational
qualification and self-reported digital skill.
8

4.1.1. Reliability Analysis
We use the following constructs based on the responses of the participants to examine the
following:
- recommendation relevance construct relates to the user’s perception of the relevance of the
recommendation to the user
- awareness of AI’s role construct includes questions about general knowledge about AI and
its role in recommendation services
- need for transparency construct deals with the openness or relatable the explanation is to
the user
- privacy concern construct includes privacy and willingness to share data for better recom-
mendation services
For the reliability analysis, the responses from the participants regarding the set of questions
under each construct should be correlated in some ways. The degree of such correlation is
captured using Cronbach’s alpha to measure the internal consistencies among the responses
under each construct [90]. As a measure of internal consistency, Cronbach’s alpha is given by:
α =
N¯c
¯v + (N −1)¯c
(1)
In equation 1, N is the number of items, ¯v is the average variance, and ¯c is the average inter-
item covariance between items. A value of α ≥0.7 suggests that each experimental construct
is reliable and consistent. Table 2 reports the reliability analysis for each of the constructs
applicable in the study. Except for the privacy-concern construct, all the constructs are reliable.
The questions for the privacy concern constructs seem not reliable or consistent, which could be
due to using two seemingly opposing questions (willingness to share data and trusting online
social networks with data).
4.1.2. Qualitative Analysis
In this section, we are interested in identifying the main relevant topics or issues raised by
the participants through their comments. Because there are not many comments, we manually
review the content and categorise them into the following groups: need for transparency, need for
relatable explanations, need for awareness and data protection concerns. For the participatory
session, Figure 5 shows the various (correct) definitions of the terms boko and dan-boko given
by the participants.
4.1.3. AI Awareness Rating
In Figure 3, those who rated their digital skills as ’excellent’ or ’good’ had a strong belief in
the relevance of knowledge about AI regardless of their educational qualifications. Additionally,
trust in AI and satisfaction with the explanation were relatively high. However, satisfaction with
the explanation was lower among those with an MSc than the other educational qualifications.
Similarly, Figure 4 reveals that those with ’satisfactory’ digital skills were more likely to share
data for a more personalised recommendation. All groups had a greater need for transparency
and privacy.
9

Table 2: Survey questions and reliability analysis for all constructs in the study using Cronbach’s alpha (α). The
alpha value for all aggregated constructs is 0.87.
Construct:
Recommendation Relevance
Measure:
1. The above ad is relevant to me
2. The explanation is convincing
3. I want to know that I understand this AI system correctly
α = 0.70
Construct:
Awareness of AI’s role
Measure:
1. I want to know what AI is
2. I want to know what the AI would have done if something had
been different
3. I now have better understanding of AI
α = 0.66
Construct:
Need for Transparency
Measure:
1. I want to understand how the AI works
2. I want to know why the AI did not make some other decision
α = 0.78
Construct:
Privacy Concern
Measure:
1. I want to know that my information is safe with the social media
platforms
2. I want to share more information in order to get personalised
recommendations
α = 0.17
Variation in Responses. We are interested in determining whether there is any statistically
significant difference in perception or rating of algorithmic transparency and other FATE-related
needs among the research participants based on the following:
- using the self-reported digital skill to determine if there is any difference in the ratings
provided by the participants
- using the educational qualification to determine whether there is any difference in the
ratings of FATE-related issues
10

Figure 4: The aggregated ratings of the participants in response to the perception of the AI’s robustness, willingness
to share data for personalised service, need for transparency and privacy concerns based on educational qualification
and self-reported digital skill.
- using the source of the recommendation, i.e. the online social networks, to determine if
there is any difference in the ratings provided by the participants.
To explore any variation according to the above categorisations, we leverage the Mann-Whitney-U
test to determine how the participants’ responses vary across self-reported digital skills, educa-
tional qualification, and the online social media platforms offering the ads and corresponding
explanations. Thus, we present the following hypotheses for investigation:
- H0: there is no difference in the ranking of the variables by the participants across digital
skill, education and the recommendation source and corresponding explanations.
- H1: there is a difference in the ranking of the variables by the participants across digital
skill, education and the recommendation source and the corresponding explanations.
Before proceeding to determine any difference between the relevant groups, we check for
normality in the data using the Shapiro-Wilk normality test. In Table 3, the p −value ≤0.001
for the individual variable indicates that the Mann-Whitney-U test can be applied since the data
are not normally distributed. For self-reported digital skill, we focus on the differences between
’excellent’ and ’good’ skills because the number of samples under the satisfactory self-reported
digital skill is quite low (9 out of 77 instances).
See Tables 5, 6 and 7 for details about the respective statistical results. Table 4 shows the
samples with significant differences according to the participants’ ratings. Digital skill plays
a role towards the participants’ rating of FATE in AI questions. High digital literacy means
the participants are accustomed to engaging with various AI-powered recommendations and
decisions compared to those with less exposure to digital systems. The difference is more
pronounced in the need for further transparency. Thus, we can conclude that there is a difference
11

Figure 5: The agreed definitions of boko and dan-boko among the participants.
Table 3: Reliability analysis for an individual item (n = 77 per variable) using Cronbach’s α without and with item
dropping.
Variable
Mean Value
α Without Item Dropping
α With Item Dropping
Normality Test
Relevance
3.3
0.61
0.87
W = 0.84, p −value = 0.001
Satisfaction
3.8
0.72
0.85
W = 0.83, p −value = 0.001
AI Knowledge
3.9
0.77
0.84
W = 0.82, p −value = 0.001
Transparency Need
4.0
0.80
0.84
W = 0.78, p −value = 0.001
Alternate Decision Need
3.8
0.70
0.85
W = 0.83, p −value = 0.001
Recommendation Correctness
4.0
0.75
0.85
W = 0.82, p −value = 0.001
Privacy Concern
4.3
0.65
0.85
W = 0.70, p −value = 0.001
To Share Data
3.5
0.49
0.86
W = 0.85, p −value = 0.001
AI Knowledge - Post
3.5
0.60
0.86
W = 0.90, p −value = 0.001
AI Robustness
3.7
0.67
0.85
W = 0.86, p −value = 0.001
Trust in AI
3.8
0.54
0.87
W = 0.80, p −value = 0.001
in the ranking of the transparency variables by the participants based on digital skills. However,
there is no significant difference based on educational qualification and the source of the ads and
corresponding explanations. There exists a significant difference in the ratings of satisfaction
about the recommendation and the need for alternate decisions based on educational qualification.
Similarly, there is a difference in the rating of the recommendation relevance with respect
to the source of the recommendations and corresponding explanations. On this basis, the
recommendation offered by Facebook and Twitter tends to be more relevant if compared with
Instagram.
12

Table 4: Mann-Whitney-U Test for samples with some differences according to self-reported digital skill, educational
qualification and online social network platforms.
Pair
Measure
Statistic
p −value
Group
good/excellent
need for transparency
269.5
0.001
digital skill
good/excellent
need for alternate explanation
291
0.003
digital skill
MSc/BSc
satisfaction about the recommendation
130
0.052
education
MSc/Higher Inst.
satisfaction about the recommendation
0
0.013
education
BSc/Higher Inst.
need for alternate explanation
24
0.048
education
Fabcebook/Instagram
recommendation relevance
176
0.017
online platform
Twitter/Instagram
recommendation relevance
194
0.045
online platform
Table 5: Mann-Whitney-U Test to compare samples based on the participants’ self-reported digital skills.
Pair
Measure
Statistic
p −value
Remark
good/excellent
need for transparency
269.5
0.001
Some difference
good/excellent
need for alternate explanation
291
0.003
Some difference
good/excellent
satisfaction about the recommendation
458.5
0.603
No difference
Table 6: Mann-Whitney-U Test to compare samples based on the participants’ educational qualifications
Pair
Variable
Statistic
p −value
Remark
MSc/BSc
satisfaction about the recommendation
130
0.052
Some difference
MSc/Higher Inst.
satisfaction about the recommendation
0
0.013
Some difference
BSc/Higher Inst.
satisfaction about the recommendation
31.5
0.089
Some difference
BSc/Sec. Edu.
satisfaction about the recommendation
281
0.910
Some difference
Higher Inst./Sec. Edu.
satisfaction about the recommendation
30
0.069
Some difference
MSc/BSc
need for transparency
196.5
0.657
Some difference
MSc/Higher Inst.
need for transparency
4.5
0.088
Some difference
MSc/Sec. Edu.
need for transparency
46.5
0.597
Some difference
BSc/Higher Inst.
need for transparency
36
0.121
Some difference
BSc/Sec. Edu.
need for transparency
285
0.961
Some difference
Higher Inst./Sec. Edu.
need for transparency
28.5
0.110
Some difference
MSc/BSc
need for alternate explanation
252
0.420
Some difference
MSc/Higher Inst.
need for alternate explanation
4.5
0.086
Some difference
MSc/Sec. Edu.
need for alternate explanation
49.5
0.760
Some difference
BSc/Higher Inst.
need for alternate explanation
24
0.048
Some difference
BSc/Sec. Edu.
need for alternate explanation
225
0.230
Some difference
Higher Inst./Sec. Edu.
need for alternate explanation
28.5
0.110
Some difference
4.2. Participatory Session
This part of the study aims to inform how best to improve FATE in AI and mitigate bias that
could be encoded in AI. For the interactive session, we focus on reporting the responses from the
participants on the issues.
Meaning Associated With Common Terms. During the session, we ask participants to respond to
the following questions:
- the meaning and understanding of what boko is: 78% and 22% agreed with western
education and formal education as the correct meaning of boko. None of the participants
reported a contrary opinion.
- meaning and understanding of what dan-boko is: 86% and 10% agreed with a person with
13

Table 7: Mann-Whitney test to compare samples based on the recommendation source and corresponding explana-
tions
Pair
Measure
Statistic
p −value
Remark
Facebook/Twitter
satisfaction about the recommendation
313
0.609
–
Facebook/Instagram
satisfaction about the recommendation
269.5
0.706
–
Twitter/Instagram
satisfaction about the recommendation
335.5
0.312
–
Facebook/Twitter
need for transparency
319
0.503
–
Facebook/Instagram
need for transparency
272
0.727
–
Twitter/Instagram
need for transparency
239
0.284
–
Facebook/Twitter
need for alternate explanation
278.5
0.847
–
Facebook/Instagram
need for alternate explanation
267
0.658
–
Twitter/Instagram
need for alternate explanation
273.5
0.762
–
Facebook/Twitter
recommendation relevance
288
1.000
–
Facebook/Instagram
recommendation relevance
176
0.017
some difference
Twitter/Instagram
recommendation relevance
194
0.045
some difference
western education and someone with formal education as the correct meaning of dan-boko;
4% where unspecified.
By comparison, there is a striking contrast between the above definitions and the meanings
attached to the terms found in the training data for the applicable AI models (see Figures 6a and
6b for some examples). We attributed such discrepancy and incorrect connotations attached to
terms similar to Figures 6c and 6d to the preference given to quantity over quality or correct
and representative data. This is so because for over a decade, the Northern region of Nigeria,
particularly the North Eastern part, has been suffering from insurgency perpetrated by the group
informally known as boko haram. This led to most of the content associated with the informal
name of the group dominating and overshadowing the real and correct meaning of the terms used
in the interactive session. The above responses from the participants and the examples shown
in Figures 6a and 6b indicate how easily some biased data could lead to potential harm and
unwarranted stereotypes.
Transparency, Trust and Data Ownership. We also asked participants during the interactive
session to respond to questions about data ownership and how transparent and trustworthy they
think online social networks are.
- transparency: 62% thinks that social media platforms are not transparent with the data
they collect, while 38% considers the platforms to be transparent.
- trust: 14% report no trust; 72% low trust, and 14% report high trust with online social
networks.
- ownership of data: about 73% reported that the data posted by users of online social
networks belong to the platforms; 18% reported that the data belonged to the users, and
9% were not specified.
Adherence to social values is a core requirement for AI practitioners to ensure algorithmic
fairness for the public good [27].
14

(a) what is wrong with this image associated with the term
boko?
(b) what is wrong with this image associated with the term
dan-boko?
(c) what is wrong with this search result associated with
the term boko?
(d) what is wrong with this text generation based on boko?
Figure 6: Some examples showing the incorrect meaning and connotations attached to the terms boko and dan-boko.
This is due to using unrepresentative training data that is biased towards incorrect popular meaning.
5. Discussion
In this section, we offer our discussion according to the participants’ perceptions about
FATE-related issues and how to overcome or improve community-specific AI challenges.
5.1. Algorithmic Awareness and AI Ethics
In this algorithmic age, people have the right to be informed when a decision is made based on
AI. It is widely accepted that algorithms are designed to provide relevant content and customised
services. Explanations are then given to convince the affected people about the decision-making
process. In the same vein, the explanation should be tailored to meet the individual or collective
needs of the affected individuals.
Explanation Style. In this study, we discovered that the style of explanation varies between social
networks online (see Figure 2). Although the explanations associated with ads on Facebook and
X (formerly Twitter) have similar explanation styles, Instagram provides a lengthy and generic
explanation. For example, one of the participants (#P3) commented that the explanation tends to
contain too much information, it could have been simplified [sic]. Focusing on contextualised
and value-driven explanations will be beneficial in promoting greater awareness and engagement
with AI technologies. Additionally, explainable AI should take into account the local context
and consider the various social strata that technology is reaching. The research participants
reported that the explanations of the decisions made by AI systems tend to be obscure and
uninformative. We opined that if most users rely on the local language for online engagements,
15

then good explanations should incorporate contextualised needs (e.g. demographics) that will
foster awareness and enable a better understanding of the technology they interact with. Creating
awareness and understanding of the best way to communicate with specific communities will
enhance algorithmic accessibility and inclusivity. The inclusiveness aspect of this work is
predicated on the need to ensure greater contextualised transparency. Our proposed initiative of
enabling a public repository for reporting AI-related concerns will help to create and improve
public awareness about the technology that permeates many aspects of their lives. Enabling the
common repository for public scrutiny will help reduce algorithmic bias and improve fairness
and trust in AI systems. This also helps to make the public aware of the value of the data that
they contribute to enable the development of AI systems. This community-led approach is in line
with UNESCO’s recommendation on ethics in AI to involve the public for oversight [35]. Similar
to the approach taken during the participatory session, civic engagement and sensitisation about
AI ethics will be instrumental in this regard. To further reinforce this strategy, including some
form of training/short courses on AI across schools, workplaces, government offices, etc. will be
crucial.
5.2. Improving Algorithmic Experience
As noted earlier, the lopsided viewpoints on ethical AI and FATE-related issues are posing
some challenges to inclusive AI [16, 22]. Using biased and discriminatory training data to develop
AI systems results in amplifying disparities [1, 43]. Consequently, there exist various regulations,
legislation, and policies at various levels geared towards fostering useful and responsible AI
development [48, 49]. Therefore ensuring accessible and inclusive AI technology will require
(1) sound and inclusive policies from governments to foster useful AI development and (2)
technology companies to implement AI systems that will operate within the remit of regulation,
sociodemographics, and other context-specific considerations. Ultimately, this will require input
from various stakeholders, which is consistent with the need to involve public actors to shape the
technologies that affect them [91, 75]. Although unequal access to data leverage puts a certain
section of society at a disadvantaged point [56], the public can exert some degree of influence
through data leverage to demand better services [55] and neutralise societal power imbalances
[11, 17, 44, 56, 54]. As demonstrated in this study, a viable approach will involve cooperative,
inclusive, and community-led design of AI applications to incorporate community-specific
FATE needs. The next section describes our initiative to involve the community in policing the
technology (AI) that serves them.
5.3. Local Context and Norms in AI Systems
Positive action promotes the practice of avoiding using protected attributes that include race,
gender, sexuality, age, religion and disability in coming up with AI’s decision. We surmise
that such a position needs to be revisited because, in some areas and contexts, the above-
mentioned attributes will be needed to prevent unfair decisions or put the affected individual in a
disadvantaged position. For instance, in Nigeria geolocation information is required to balance
or inform the decision to take Noting that ethical AI deals with incorporating moral behaviour to
avoid encoding bias to AI’s decisions, the public can dictate norms, values, and other ethical
requirements to be reflected in AI.
Community Involvement. In line with the theme of positive action [46, 47], the public can
dictate or help integrate local context and norms in the development of AI systems. Relevant
16

stakeholders within the community will ensure better policing of AI’s operations and dictate
norms, values, and other ethical requirements to be reflected in AI and its operation. At this
critical juncture, it is essential to explore ways by which the community’s voice and power can
inform how AI systems that affect them should be developed. Consequently, we proposed the
following community-led initiative11 as a way of engaging the public to contribute to responsible
AI:
- document of concerns: is a publicly available document to share concerns or unethical
issues
- document of values: is a publicly available document to share norms and values that will
inform and shape FATE in AI.
Based on the alignment or discrepancies between the perceived AI’s operations and community
values, the public or community can demand change through various means such as online
activism [92, 54]. The end goal is to collect as much data as possible from diverse individuals
within the community that can be used to inform the development of future AI models.
5.4. Explanation Style
It is widely accepted that algorithms are designed to provide tailored content and services.
To ensure that those affected by the recommendation process understand it, explanations should
be tailored to their individual or collective needs. The type of explanation used on online
social networks varies (see Figure 2). Although the explanations for Facebook and Twitter
ads are similar, Instagram’s are more lengthy and generic. For example, one participant (#P3)
commented that the explanation was too much information, it could have been simplified[sic].
To increase understanding of AI technologies, explanations should be contextualised and value-
driven. Additionally, they should take into account the local context and the various social strata
the technology is reaching. Research participants reported that explanations about decisions
made by AI systems are often vague and uninformative. Therefore, if most users rely on the local
language for online engagements, then good explanations should incorporate contextualised
needs (demographics) to promote awareness and help users comprehend the technology they
interact with. Creating awareness and understanding of the best way to communicate with
specific communities will improve algorithmic accessibility and inclusivity.
6. Conclusion
With the proliferation of AI-powered systems and applications in various domains, it is
still believed that the potential of this technology is far from being realised. This often comes
with mixed feelings about both the usefulness and unpredictable trajectory of technology. As
AI systems continue to be deployed across various domains, algorithmic decisions carry both
economic and personal implications for affected individuals or communities. Thus, failure to
incorporate sociodemographic factors and neglecting viewpoints from the affected communities
will result in promoting what is being set to be avoided, bias and discrimination. Motivated
by the need to offer complementary perspectives from the dominant West-centric viewpoints,
11see the project’s repository for updates https://github.com/ijdutse/fate-in-ai
17

this study proposed an operationalisation strategy of collecting and curating data for building
responsible AI. Essentially, our study contributes the following:
- the study examines the prevailing issues in AI applications and how FATE in AI might
better serve in places not traditionally served by AI systems.
- we offer some recommendations on how to promote inclusivity and broad public access in
addressing FATE-related challenges.
- operationalising community voice: representative data are considered to be one of the
first lines of defence against encoding bias. However, the operationalisation aspect is still
underdeveloped. We present a useful community-led strategy for collecting and curating
data that will inform ethical and responsible AI. To improve inclusion, we launched a
repository for the public to report concerns and recommendations that will inform discourse
(and implementation) in FATE in AI.
By utilising the previously mentioned contributions, we can bring AI discourse and research (in
both academia and industry) into the mainstream to guarantee an all-inclusive and available AI
environment that is satisfactory to everyone.
Future Work. Noting the limited sample size, future work will involve engagement with stake-
holders from various communities and disciplines to improve diversity and equity in using
AI technology. The effort will be instrumental in empowering the concerned community to
effectively probe and police the growing application of AI-powered systems within society.
Limitation. We note that the sample size (n = 73) is limited to generalisation. A further
improvement in terms of size and diversity will be more representative. The evaluation of digital
skills is based on subjective reporting from participants, and we believe that a more effective
approach should involve a set of objective metrics to determine digital skills of participants.
