This article is accepted for publication in Automation in Construction journal. 
© 2023. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license 
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/  
Digital Twin: Where do humans fit in? 
 
Ashwin Agrawal, M.S.1; Robert Thiel, M.S.2; Pooja Jain, M.S.3; 
Vishal Singh, Ph.D.4; Martin Fischer, Ph.D.5 
 
1Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 

4Associate Professor, Centre of Product Design and Manufacturing, Indian Institute of Science, 

 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Digital Twin (DT) technology is far from being comprehensive and mature, resulting in their 
piecemeal implementation in practice where some functions are automated by DTs, and others 
are still performed by humans. This piecemeal implementation of DTs often leaves practitioners 
wondering what roles (or functions) to allocate to DTs in a work system, and how might it 
impact humans. A lack of knowledge about the roles that humans and DTs play in a work system 
can result in significant costs, misallocation of resources, unrealistic expectations from DTs, and 
strategic misalignments. To alleviate this challenge, this paper answers the research question: 
When humans work with DTs, what types of roles can a DT play, and to what extent can those 
roles be automated? Specifically, we propose a two-dimensional conceptual framework, Levels 
of Digital Twin (LoDT). The framework is an integration of the types of roles a DT can play, 
broadly categorized under (1) Observer, (2) Analyst, (3) Decision Maker, and (4) Action 
Executor, and the extent of automation for each of these roles, divided into five different levels 
ranging from completely manual to fully automated. A particular DT can play any number of 
roles at varying levels. The framework can help practitioners systematically plan DT 
deployments, clearly communicate goals and deliverables, and lay out a strategic vision. A case 
study illustrates the usefulness of the framework. 
 
Keywords: Digital Twin, Levels of Digital Twin, Digital Strategy, Artificial Intelligence, 
Human in the loop digital twin, Cyber Physical Systems, Industry 4.0 
 

 
 
 
1 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
There is little doubt that the capabilities of Digital Twins (DTs) across different use cases 
continue to improve, especially with recent advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine 
Learning (ML). DTs are becoming more intelligent [1] and are capable of doing things only 
humans could do previously, such as representing and interpreting data (e.g., DT showing the 
health status of factory equipment) as well as making decisions and executing actions (e.g., DT 
generating “what-if” scenarios based on equipment’s health and contacting the maintenance team 
if required). 
 
With increased capabilities, DTs are not merely an expert-centric tool but proactively make 
decisions, complete tasks, and adapt to changing conditions [2], dramatically changing the roles 
of human operators. The operators will be expected to collaborate with DTs, monitor the 
performance of DTs while they perform certain roles (or functions) autonomously, and complete 
any roles (or functions) that DTs are unable to perform. This results in a piecemeal (semi-
autonomous) system in which some roles, which were traditionally performed manually by 
humans, are now automated by DTs, while others are still handled manually by humans. 
 
Due to this new way of working, new types of interactions will occur between humans and DTs 
[3], resulting in new coordination demands [4] and increasing the importance of an intelligent 
and efficient role allocation between DTs and their human operators [5]. As a part of the 
successful deployment of DTs in practice, it becomes vital that role allocation ensures that both 
DTs and humans are assigned tasks that they can do well. Performing incorrect role allocation 
can negatively affect human performance, as observed previously in aerospace and 
manufacturing [6,7,8]. It can result in unfavorable cost-benefit trade-offs, reduced human 
monitoring, over-reliance on DTs [9], and loss of situational awareness [10]. Therefore, a 
rigorous understanding of this joint human-DT system becomes critical [2]. In particular, DT’s 
roles (or functions) in a work system have to be delineated from those of humans 
[11,12,13,14,15,16]. 
 
However, research concerning human-DT interaction is lacking in the current literature [17,18]. 
[19] identifies this as one of the major research gaps in manufacturing and recommends 
significant research efforts to fill this gap. [2] states the need to investigate the boundaries 
between DT autonomy and human agency to ensure DTs have the most autonomy possible 
without sacrificing human agency. [20,21] review the DT literature and find a lack of research on 
human integration in DT deployment. [15,22] also note similar findings. [23] calls for a holistic 
understanding of how the roles and responsibilities of human workers have changed in designing 
work and work systems in Industry 4.0. Therefore, to address the gap in knowledge, this paper 
studies DT-human interaction and answers the research question: “When humans work with DTs, 
what types of roles can a DT play, and to what extent can those roles be automated?” 
 
Understanding how DTs can be integrated with humans is a prerequisite to harnessing the full 
potential of DTs and human operators [17]. A lack of knowledge about the roles that humans and 
DTs play in a work system can result in significant costs [24], misallocation of resources, 
unrealistic expectations from the technology [9,25], and strategic misalignments [26]. [4] also 

 
 
 
2 
emphasizes the importance of knowing what role humans and DTs play in a work system among 
system designers and thus states: “Examination of human performance issues is especially 
important because modern technical capabilities now force system designers to consider some 
hard choices regarding what to automate and to what extent, given that there is little that cannot 
be automated.”  
 
This paper thus proposes a two-dimensional conceptual framework, Levels of Digital Twin 
(LoDT). The framework is an integration of the types of roles a DT can play, broadly categorized 
under (1) Observer, (2) Analyst, (3) Decision Maker, and (4) Action Executor, and the extent of 
automation for each of these roles, divided into five different levels ranging from completely 
manual to fully automated. A particular DT can play any number of roles at varying levels. 
 
A real-life example is presented in Figure 1 to better demonstrate the research question and the 
need for two dimensions in the framework. The example is about Ryan, a manager on a 
construction project responsible for installing and maintaining wind turbines. To prevent crane 
tip overs caused by soil failure or unsuitable conditions, Ryan plans to create a DT of the turbine 
installation site that contains real-time data on soil characteristics, soil capacity, and topography. 
Figure 1 shows the roles required to complete the different facets of work on the project (the first 
dimension of our framework). Scenario 1 outlines the baseline case where no DT is used, and 
humans complete all the work. DT automates (partially) certain types of roles in scenario 2, thus 
changing the work humans used to perform within each role. Scenario 3 differs from scenario 2 
in terms of the extent of automation by DTs for different types of roles which is captured by the 
second dimension of our framework. More details on this case study are provided in Section 5. 
 
  
 
Figure 1: A real-life example of how DT can perform various roles and the extent to which 
automation can occur within each role and its impact on humans 
 
Section 2 reviews the background of DTs, and Section 3 details the research and validation 
method. The proposed LoDT framework is introduced in Section 4. This is followed by 

 
 
 
3 
showcasing the relevance of the LoDT framework in a real-life case study in Section 5. Section 6 
concludes the paper by stating the contributions and the implications for industry. 
 
2. BACKGROUND 
 
This section first reviews the research context for DT in sub-section 2.1 and presents definitions, 
applications, and perspectives existing around the DT concept in industries such as 
manufacturing, aerospace, and building construction. It then focuses on the studies most relevant 
to this work’s focus area, DT-human interaction and LoDT, in subsections 2.2 and 2.3. Finally, 
the gap in knowledge is summarized in sub-section 2.4. 
 
2.1 DT in literature 
 
This section reviews the history of DTs, different definitions of DTs, application areas for DTs, 
and the process of creating DTs. 
 
2.1.1 History of DT 
  
NASA’s Apollo program used a physical twin, a predecessor to DT, to simulate the precise 
conditions of an inflight test and train astronauts [27]. To construct a physical twin of every asset 
in the real world would be extremely costly and almost impossible. So, the idea of physical 
twinning was extended to create a twin digitally. The concept of digitally twinning an asset that 
mirrors actual operating conditions but is also practical and less costly is precisely the motivation 
for the DT concept [12].  
 
The term DT was first introduced as a “Mirrored space 
model” in 2003 as a part of a university course on Product 
Lifecycle Management [28]. It was originally described as a 
digital information construct of a physical system linked with 
the physical system in question. DT is considered to be 
consisting of three parts [29], as shown in Figure 2: (1) the 
physical entity, (2) the digital entity, and (3) the data flow 
between them. Any change in the state of the physical object leads to a change in the state of the 
digital object and vice-versa. The term DT was not yet coined and was only associated with the 
above concept of the “Mirrored space model” in 2011/12 by Vickers and Grieves [28]. After this, 
the first formal definition of DT was coined by NASA in 2012 as [30]: “an integrated multi-
physics, multi-scale, probabilistic simulation of a vehicle or system that uses the best available 
physical models, sensor updates, fleet history, etc., to mirror the life of its flying twin.”  
 
2.1.2 DT description in literature 
 
Despite the DT concept being in the industry for a long time, it remains ambiguous [31]. It could 
refer to a highly sophisticated predictive and prescriptive model for some [30,32]; for others, it 
can be a simple digital representation [33,34]. [35] states that “literature has referred to DT as a 

 
 
 
4 
virtual or digital model, layout, counterpart, doppelganger, clone, footprint, software analog, 
representation, information construct, or simulation of its physical counterpart.” 
 
In spite of these inconsistencies in DT definitions in the literature, there are a few core 
characteristics of DT that appear to be shared by all definitions, namely, DT should have the 
intelligence to sense and understand the environment (enabled by the data flow from a physical 
entity to a virtual model), and the agency to change the environment (enabled by the data flow 
from virtual model to physical entity) [36]. Similar observations have also been provided by 
[2,37], where the authors emphasize the importance of autonomy (delegating control) and bi-
directional data flow in a DT.  
 
Therefore, for the scope of this paper, we adopt a working definition of DT proposed by [38]: “A 
digital twin is a digital replica that imparts some form of intelligence and agency into the entities 
being twinned to achieve the desired function.” This definition has been adopted for the 
following reasons:  
 
1. It captures the core characteristics of DTs: intelligence and agency. Furthermore, intelligence 
and agency become intuitive and natural in analyzing the types of roles that DTs can play in 
a work system, which is the focus of the paper since, with changing roles, intelligence and 
agency must also change. 
2. The definition is broad and agnostic to industry sectors and applications, conforming to the 
suggestion by [39,40], who notes that a good definition of DT must not include objectives (or 
applications) of DTs as they are always emerging and potentially infinite.  
 
Our paper provides this working definition of DT for the purpose of answering the research 
question. We also acknowledge that the plethora of definitions of DT in the literature results in 
confusion among practitioners and researchers regarding different terminologies related to 
digitalization [35]. The LoDT framework, to some extent, helps alleviate this confusion. More 
discussion on this is provided in Section 6, where we argue that none of the proposed definitions 
of DT is incorrect. In their definitions, different researchers have partially proposed different 
roles that they envision a DT to play, and all of them unify when we consider the complete set of 
roles DTs can perform within the LoDT framework. 
 
2.1.3 Application areas of DT 
 
Owing to its usefulness, DT has spread to many industries and has emerged as a key concept for 
digital transformation in the construction [41,42,43,44], manufacturing [20,45,46], and aerospace 
[47,48] industries. It has shown a significant promise to increase productivity, reduce operational 
costs, improve safety, and optimize asset sustainability in these industries [49]. In the 
manufacturing industry, DT has been used for a variety of applications, including product 
lifecycle management [50], production planning and control [51], and process redesign [27]. In 
the construction industry, DT has been used in building operations and maintenance [52], 
fragility assessment [53], construction safety [54], performance-based smart contracts [55], and 
building energy simulations [56]. A recent survey by McKinsey estimates 70% of manufacturers 
to use DTs by 2022 [57]. 

 
 
 
5 
 
2.1.4 Design and creation of DT 
 
Current literature in manufacturing systems suggests that DT can be built in two ways [58]: (1) 
System-based and (2) Data-based.  
 
In system-based DTs, the goal is to represent the actual manufacturing system as close as 
possible so that it can act as a single source of truth containing all existing links between the 
components at logical, physical, and functional levels [59]. Therefore, to create a system-based 
DT, knowledge of all technical details and data sheets for the individual components of the 
manufacturing system is needed. Such a DT is especially helpful for simulations to understand 
why an object behaves in a certain way under certain circumstances, as well as understand a 
system’s behavior under different environmental conditions to which it is not yet exposed. In 
summary, a system-based DT is difficult and resource-intensive to construct but provides very 
comprehensive insights about the entity being twinned. [27,60] use system-based DTs for 
designing products and services in manufacturing and production engineering. [61] reviews the 
literature and finds that system-based DT has been used to design function-structure-behavior-
control-intelligence-performance of manufacturing systems.  
 
On the other hand, data-based DTs focus on creating a DT by collecting the data required to 
fulfill a specific function using sensors and therefore offers less insight into the interior of the 
manufacturing system. However, the advantage is that it is easier to create, and not all technical 
information of the system is required to create it. Due to the ease of use, data-based DTs are 
gaining more popularity and are being used to design many manufacturing systems, such as 
forecast models and models for predictive maintenance [62]. The first step to creating a data-
based DT is to ensure that all required data is accessible using the Internet of Things (IoT). In the 
second step, models, analyses, and functions are created using big data analytics and machine 
learning. The last step is the creation of user-specific applications, which provide important 
information to the user, contributing value to them [58].  
 
DTs can also be created with the combination of both approaches. The data model of the data-
based approach is combined with the system model of the system-based approach, thus retaining 
the advantages of both approaches. 
 
2.2 DTs working with humans 
 
When humans work with DTs, two steps are involved: Allocating work or tasks so that roles are 
defined, and there is a clear understanding of who will do what; and once the role definition is 
clear, ensuring a smooth human-DT interface so that both parties can successfully collaborate 
and complete the task they have been assigned [63]. 
 
The idea of role allocation, which is the focus of this work, is related to concepts like (1) work 
allocation between humans and computers (or machines), (2) work allocation between humans 
and robots, and (3) human integration with Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), human-in-the-loop 
CPS, and human-in-the-loop Industry 4.0. Therefore, the concepts discussed in these related 

 
 
 
6 
fields are relevant to our research. Hence, we provide a summary of the existing literature in 
these fields as a precursor to our framework. 
 
Fitts published one of the first works describing work/role allocation in 1951, listing “what men 
are better at” and “what machines are better at,” each entity being assigned the role that they are 
best at [64]. The list is, of course, not up to date because modern technology has outpaced 
humans in several categories. Several attempts have been made since then to create taxonomies 
that identify scenarios where humans and machines (or computers/robots) can collaborate in 
different ways. A popular example of such a taxonomy is by [3] in 1978, who proposed a 10-
level automation list, where humans do all the work in level-1 and computers do all the work in 
level-10. On similar lines, several authors [37, 38] have proposed levels of automation 
frameworks to allocate work between humans and computers. Though these studies have been 
criticized for not providing proper guidance on its use [67], they provide important insights into 
the roles that a DT can play when working with humans, as discussed in Section 4.1.  
 
[68,69,70] propose taxonomies of the human roles in human-in-the-loop Cyber Physical Systems 
(CPS). These taxonomies identify four roles: Data acquisition, State inference, System 
influencing, and Actuation. These taxonomies have three major shortcomings: (1) although the 
authors identify the roles, they do not indicate how much of the role is performed by humans and 
DTs (extent of automation) because, for example, the same role of data acquisition can be 
performed partially by both, (2) these taxonomies use a lot of technical jargon which makes them 
difficult for practitioners to understand, use, and communicate. [71] emphasizes the importance 
of jargon-free frameworks for more practical use, and (3) these taxonomies are less useful for 
practitioners as they do not indicate which roles or extent of automation might be easier to 
achieve in practice. This is particularly important in the AEC industry because the companies are 
more tentative about adapting new technologies. Therefore, role allocation and human-in-the-
loop in DT/CPS/Industry 4.0 continue to be active areas of research [72]. 
 
The next step after assigning roles to humans and DTs is to ensure that the human-DT interface 
is smooth. Therefore, it is necessary to define logical activities that support interaction with 
humans and user goals [73]. Of course, the type and amount of human-DT interaction (and, 
therefore, the activities supporting the interaction) will vary based on the task allocation between 
them. For example, a situation where humans are actively involved with DTs in completing a 
task would have much higher interaction than a situation in which they are just supervising DTs.  
 
This paper focuses on the work/role allocation between humans and DTs. Therefore, the human-
DT interface becomes an area for future research that can build on this work. We provide a brief 
overview of the existing literature on human-DT interfaces, but a full review is beyond the scope 
of the work. 
 
The idea of the human-DT interface is closely related to Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and 
Human-Machine Interaction (HMI), which are active areas of research in computer science and 
manufacturing. It focuses on the interfaces between humans and DTs and tries to ensure smooth 
communication, cooperation, and interaction between them [74]. There are three main areas of 
focus [69]: (1) engaging the human through a natural, understandable, and unobtrusive interface, 

 
 
 
7 
(2) the attentional resources required to perform a collaborative task, and (3) human factors such 
as fatigue, stress, demotivation, trust in automation, ergonomics, and optimal workload levels 
[75]. Some of the main technologies supporting the human-DT interface include virtual reality, 
augmented reality, haptic interactions, gesture recognition, and voice recognition [76]. General 
Electric has developed a graphical interface to display, control, and manage multiple digital 
models [77]. Siemens has developed a human-programming interface that enables DT to interact 
with humans and interpret their behavior [21]. Though these pilot applications of DT interactions 
are motivating, very few studies exist on the interaction and collaboration of DTs [21], making 
this a potential area for future research. 
 
2.3 Levels of Digital Twin (LoDT) 
 
To the best of our knowledge, no existing work focuses on holistically describing the different 
roles that DTs might play and the extent to which those roles can be automated when DTs work 
with humans. However, as role allocation is linked to the categorization of different types of 
technological capabilities found in DTs, we summarize existing approaches and frameworks in 
this area. 
 
Autodesk [78] defines the five levels of DT: (1) Descriptive twin, a visual replica of the asset, (2) 
Informative twin, captures and aggregates defined data, (3) Predictive twin, uses operational data 
to gain future insights, (4) Comprehensive twin, generates ‘what-if’ scenarios, and (5) 
Autonomous twin, acts on behalf of the users. On a similar line, [79,80] also provides levels of 
digital twin maturity. Although these categorizations provide the types of roles that a DT can 
play, they fail to capture the extent of automation for these roles. For example, a DT making 
predictions in an uncertain environment (e.g., Will the project finish on time?) is more context-
aware and autonomous than the one making predictions for routine tasks (e.g., Will the sun rise 
tomorrow?), although both perform the same role (or function) of prediction. 
 
 [81] provides a categorization based on levels of automation in a DT: Pre-Digital Twin, Digital 
Twin, Adaptive Digital Twin, and Intelligent Digital Twin, but does not capture the different 
types of roles. [37] describes three types of DT based on the level of data integration: (1) Digital 
Model, which is a digital representation of the physical object without any data exchange, (2) 
Digital Shadow, which includes one-way data flows from the physical object to the digital 
object, and (3) Digital Twin, which has bidirectional data flows. This categorization is based 
only on the data integration capabilities of a DT and thus does not identify the types of roles or 
the extent of automation.  
 
2.4 Gap in knowledge 
 
To harness the full potential of DTs and human operators, it is important to understand the types 
of roles a DT can play and to what extent the roles of the DT can be automated? A review of the 
existing literature indicates that there are no studies that provide this complete information. 
Moreover, most of the existing classifications which partially answer this question have been 
provided by different commercial firms, thus lacking the necessary validation and raising questions 
about rigor and comprehensiveness. 

 
 
 
8 
 
To alleviate this gap in knowledge, this work proposes the LoDT framework, which is an 
integration of the types of roles a DT can play and the extent of automation for each of these roles. 
The framework has been developed following the Design Science Research (DSR) methodology, 
and its usefulness is illustrated through a real-life case study. 
 
3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
 
The LoDT framework has been developed and validated over the course of 36 months by using 
the Design Science Research (DSR) methodology [82]. The DSR methodology is well suited to 
this context as it provides the following advantages: 
 
1. Enables solving “wicked” design problems: In many real-world scenarios, as in our case, the 
user (or client) is unsure of what they want. As a result, it is difficult to define the explicit 
requirements and constraints of the problem at the beginning of the project, making it 
difficult to find a satisfactory solution [83]. To alleviate this challenge, DSR supports 
developing and refining both the formulation of a problem and ideas for a solution together, 
termed co-evolution [84]. For our work, this is relevant because the client’s requirements 
were not well articulated at the start of the project, and those requirements evolved as we 
developed the solutions, further outlined in the research objectives section. 
 
2. Helps design practical solutions: DSR is applied in nature and thus not only describes and 
explains the problem but also helps design a solution (e.g., models, methods, or frameworks) 
to solve it [85]. It balances both theoretical (existing literature, frameworks, and models) and 
practical influences (business needs and practical deployment) [86] to make the solution 
conceptually rigorous and relevant in practice. This is not possible by other research methods 
such as surveys and questionnaires [87]. It uses an iterative, constructive, and pragmatic 
approach [83] to construct and evaluate the solution, enabling researchers to receive constant 
feedback from the end-users of the framework. Again, this makes DSR suitable for our 
research because we also intend to create a practical framework (see non-functional 
requirements of the framework described later in the paper). 
 
The research methodology is illustrated in Figure 3. As per the DSR methodology suggested by 
[88], the problem was identified and validated, and specific objectives for the research were 
defined. This was followed by the design and development of the framework. Iterative 
demonstrations and evaluations of the artifact were conducted through extensive presentations to 
11 experts (over 50 hours) and two public presentations, including over 40 experts in each 
presentation. The following paragraphs detail each of these steps. 
 

 
 
 
9 
 
 
Figure 3: Research Methodology 
 
Problem identification, problem validation, and definition of research objectives: Based on 
an ethnographic-action study conducted by [11], the problem of practitioners struggling to 
understand how DT fits into a work system was identified. A literature review of the application 
of DT in various industries further reinforced the gap in knowledge about human-DT integration, 
as summarized in Section 2.  
 
To set the specific objectives and requirements for this research [89], the authors met with four 
industry practitioners and two academic experts. In the first iteration, the requirements for the 
framework were defined as: “Logically explain the complexities of available DTs and the 
functions they support.” After initial prototyping, inspired by “five-levels of vehicle autonomy” 
[90], this transformed into: “Develop DT hierarchy for construction, similar to levels of 
autonomous driving.” After a few more rounds of framework prototyping, it became clear that 
DTs would not be working alone but with humans. Therefore, it became vital to consider the 
human perspective as well. Hence, the final functional and non-functional requirements 
(following [91]) for the LoDT framework were defined as follows: 
 
Functional requirements: (1) Provide a classification of the various types and levels of DT 
available in the industry and their impact on humans, (2) provide practitioners with an outline of 
the level of DT their company currently has and the level that they hope to achieve in the future, 
and (3) explain what each level offers, as well as what it takes to make it in terms of difficulty 
and resources. 
 
Non-Functional requirements: (1) Intuitive to understand, (2) quick and easy to use, (3) jargon-
free for quick recall and easy communication, (4) insightful in practice, and (5) “general enough” 
for different industries to adapt.  
 
Design and development: The research process described by [86] was followed for the 
framework development. Following the functional requirements, the intent of the initial design 
was to (1) describe and explain different types, ideas, and technologies that are commonly 
termed DT and (2) arrange them in the form of a hierarchy that relates to the way humans work. 

 
 
 
10 
Many other forms of taxonomies and hierarchies were studied in the contexts of level of 
automation [4,66], levels of autonomous driving [90], and types of intelligence [92] to inform the 
initial design.  
 
New constructs for representing the hierarchy were identified and described through a process of 
inductive inference, conceptual clustering, and reflective learning [93,94,95]. Specifically, the 
intention was to answer questions similar to: What are the fundamental elements and themes that 
characterize a DT? What are the specific functions, roles, and applications provided by DT? 
What type of intelligence capabilities should be present in a DT? These constructs were then 
assembled into a logical artifact (the framework) that could visually present a clear and concise 
picture of LoDT.  
 
The artifact was then demonstrated to experts (see Table 1), and multiple iterations of design and 
development were carried out. The demonstrations to the experts were semi-structured in nature, 
starting with the presentation of the latest iteration of the framework and noting down the 
specific feedback before turning to a broader discussion. This step was performed to ensure that 
researchers were able to gain first-hand reflection of the experts in an unbiased way. Specifically, 
keeping in mind the non-functional requirements, the experts were asked to comment on: (1) the 
elements of the framework that made sense to them (to understand the strong points of the 
framework), (2) the elements that need further research (to understand the weaker points of the 
framework), (3) whether they think the framework would help them in practice (to ensure that 
practitioners found value in the framework), and (4) whether they would be comfortable using 
the current version of the framework in practice (to ensure that the framework is simple enough 
to be used in practice). 
  
In the broader discussion, the experts were asked to describe a few of the success and failure 
anecdotes that they had experienced while deploying DT in their firms. The researchers then 
took a retroductive approach [96,97] and postulated if the framework captured the necessary 
details and provided insights to be helpful in the described situation by the expert, thus checking 
if the framework met the non-functional requirements. This step was performed in order to (1) 
ensure the framework is relevant in practice and (2) identify the gaps in the framework by 
working through specific scenarios. The latter helped improve the framework in future iterations. 
Some of the comments by the experts which were pivotal during the framework development are 
summarized in Table 2. 
 
Demonstrations and evaluations: The framework was evaluated by carrying out 
demonstrations to various practitioners and academic experts over the course of three years and 
in two ways: (1) major milestone presentations and (2) regular feedback sessions. The feedback 
from each demonstration was incorporated into the next iteration of the framework.  
 
A major milestone presentation was held on a yearly basis (for the years 2019 and 2020) and 
consisted of 40+ industry and academic experts as the audience. The state of the framework used 
in these presentations has been documented digitally and can be provided on request for 
understanding the trail of the research process. The major milestones acted as a good sanity 

 
 
 
11 
check for the progress of the framework and ensured that the broad-level story was well received 
by the experts.  
 
For more granular feedback, regular feedback sessions were conducted between 2019-2021 with 
11 experts (shown in Table 1) with expertise in technology, strategy, and the working of the 
industry. A total of 40+ meetings, clocking over 50 hours, were conducted to ensure the 
relevance and rigor of the framework. Multiple meetings were conducted with the experts to 
ensure they had sufficient time to understand, reflect, and comment on the framework and that 
their feedback was properly accommodated. The iterations were carried out until a ‘theoretical 
saturation’ [98] was reached, i.e., no new or relevant feedback emerged from the demonstrations. 
 
 
 
Table 1: Demonstration and Validation of the framework, profile of the participants  
 
 
 
Table 2: An excerpt of quotes from experts that led to consequential changes in the framework  
 
 
 

 
 
 
12 
4. LEVELS OF DIGITAL TWIN FRAMEWORK: AN INTRODUCTION 
 
This section introduces the LoDT framework. It is represented in two dimensions as shown in 
Figure 4: (1) types of roles that a DT can play (columns), and (2) extent of automation (rows). The 
two dimensions are respectively introduced in Sections 4.1 and Section 4.2. Section 4.3 provides 
suggestion for how to use the framework and lists frequently asked questions while using the 
framework. 
 
 
 
Figure 4:  Levels of Digital Twin framework. In the example shown with dotted lines, the DT 
would support data collection and observations in routine situations, perform routine data 
analysis and decision making autonomously, but not perform any actions. Humans would handle 
data collection, analysis, and decision making in non-routine situations. Actions in all situations 
would be performed by humans.    
 
4.1 Types of roles that a DT can play 
 
A role is defined by the Oxford dictionary as "the functions assumed, or the part played by a 
thing in a given situation."  
 
To identify the roles that DTs can play when working with humans, we took a two-step bottom-
up approach. We began by identifying the functions that one would expect (or envision) DTs to 
perform. Then we identified the roles by grouping those functions into higher-level categories.  
 
Therefore, in the first step, a list of expected functions from DTs was compiled based on a 
literature review and expert interviews. A total of 80+ distinct functions were identified in the 
first iteration. For example, DTs can fulfill functions like data representation, simulation, 
prediction, or automated monitoring.  
 

 
 
 
13 
Our next step was to group these functions into roles responsible for handling them. Initially, 
clustering revealed that some functions, such as visualization, description, and retrieval, are 
similar to basic cognitive functions in humans and are primarily used at the beginning of a task 
to understand the situation. Then there are others, such as prediction, simulation, and 
optimization, that are much more complex and are required toward the end of the task to make 
decisions and perform actions. From multiple rounds of clustering and speaking with experts, a 
common theme emerged that functions should be clustered according to the sequence in which 
they are needed to complete a task. 
 
Let us look at our original example to illustrate this further. Given two very different tasks that 
Ryan might encounter, such as constructing an airport versus walking a crane, the basic sequence 
of roles that would be needed to complete the task is the same: Collecting, representing, and 
handling the data (i.e., the role of an Observer), manipulating and comprehending the 
information from the data (i.e., the role of an Analyst), making decisions based on that 
information (i.e., the role of a Decision Maker), and finally implementing the decision in the 
form of an action (i.e., the role of an Action Executor).  
 
Our findings led us to adopt a four-stage view of the roles humans use to accomplish tasks. This 
view has been used by several authors, including [4,99]. These four categories can provide a 
higher level of abstraction of the roles that DTs can play: (1) Observer, (2) Analyst, (3) Decision 
Maker, and (4) Action Executor.  
 
We have grouped some of the DT functions as gathered from the experts into these four 
categories (roles) in Table 3. Of course, these four categories are almost certainly a gross 
simplification of the range of roles that DTs can provide. However, our goal here is not to debate 
the theoretical abilities of a DT but to provide a structure that is relevant in practice. In this 
respect, the conceptualization shown in Table 3 is a good starting point, and it is shown to be 
relevant through our case-study detailed in Section 5.  
 
 
 
Table 3: Example functions expected to be carried out by different roles 
 
Observer: The role involves obtaining, manipulating, and presenting the data of the physical 
world by perceiving the status, attributes, and dynamics of relevant elements in the environment. 
Therefore, sensing, acquiring, representing, digitizing, and communicating the data gathered 
from the physical world are the central functions of this role, analogous to the way humans sense 

 
 
 
14 
the environment through their eyes, nose, ears, and other senses. An example would be Ryan 
using sensors to acquire data about the soil conditions and the DT helping the human operator to 
perform basic pre-processing.  
 
Analyst: In this role, the raw data is analyzed and interpreted in light of the target goal and the 
preferences of the operator in order to make a judgment about the state of the physical world. 
Knowing what is good and what is bad is crucial.  
 
For example, after getting all the data about the soil conditions, Ryan’s DT needs to evaluate if 
the soil has enough bearing capacity or not. For this role, therefore, pattern recognition, 
monitoring, interpretation, and prediction (of missing information) are the key functions needed 
to be performed by DTs. Recent research in AI has focused on improving machine perception in 
areas such as image recognition, speech detection, and natural language processing. This allows 
machines to understand the information gathered from their surroundings more effectively. 
 
Decision Maker: This role takes as input the analyzed information and helps make decisions. In 
other words, DTs need to exhibit a ‘rational or utilitarian’ behavior and hence plan for the 
actions which help it to achieve the maximum utility. Sometimes the ‘rational’ decisions can be 
straightforward, like selecting a single or a set of actions to get the desired outcome. Sometimes 
it would be more tricky and might require searching and planning. The decisions involve 
consideration of the future: “how the world evolves?”, “what will happen if I do such and such?” 
and “what will give the maximum happiness?”.  
 
Therefore, simulation, forecasting, and optimization become critical functions for this role. 
Recent works in machine learning, automated decision support, and reinforcement learning have 
focused on improving practical decision-making capabilities for machines. As an example, 
suppose the DT helps Ryan to decide what to do when the soil capacity is not sufficient to walk 
the crane. As one might imagine, this is not a trivial question. There are several possible options, 
such as changing the path of the crane, using a different crane, or strengthening the soil. The DT 
would need to consider the least costly and quickest option. 
 
Action Executor: This role can sometimes involve moving away from the cognitive domain for 
a DT and entails implementing the actual action based on the decision taken. The action can 
involve interacting and acting upon the physical environment using actuators. Advancements in 
robotics have greatly aided the implementation of actions by machines. For example, DT could 
help Ryan remotely control the crane. 
 
It is important to note that a DT can perform one or many of these roles. Using Ryan’s example, 
if Ryan’s DT only handled data, humans would be responsible for the rest of the task (analyzing 
information, making decisions, and taking actions). In contrast, if Ryan’s DT is only able to 
make decisions and perform actions, humans would be required to observe and analyze data. 
Essentially, any role that a DT cannot perform needs to be done by humans. 
 
4.2 Extent of automation 
 

 
 
 
15 
To formulate the hierarchy for the extent of automation for each role of DTs, we start by asking: 
“to what extent can a given role be automated through a DT?”. The answer depends both upon 
(1) autonomy (DT’s level of independence in each role) and (2) learning ability (DT's ability to 
adapt to dynamic environments in each role).  
 
Naturally, the higher the automation, the more DTs will be able to complement human workers 
in a specific role by working independently and adapting to changing circumstances. Thus, two 
dimensions are identified: (1) Autonomy and (2) Learning, through which, to a large degree, the 
extent of automation for each role of DTs can be expressed and compared. [67] also identifies 
the importance of task entropy (which is correlated to learning ability) and autonomy for 
identifying long-term trends in the extent of automation for various tasks. [2] mentions the three 
important criteria for future DTs: autonomous, context-aware, and adaptive (like learning), all of 
which align with our formulation. 
 
In the following paragraphs, first, the dimensions are explained, and then the hierarchy for the 
extent of automation for DT roles is described. 
 
Autonomy: Autonomy determines how involved humans are with DTs to complete one or 
several of the functions for a specific role. A fully autonomous DT completes all the functions 
for a specific role without any human involvement. A partially autonomous DT assists the 
humans and thus reduces the workload associated with manually completing the role. Several 
taxonomies in the human-machine automation literature [65,100] have been proposed based on 
the level of autonomy (control), with higher levels representing increased autonomy of 
computers over human action and, thus, higher levels of automation. Based on autonomy, the 
LoDT framework differentiates the extent of automation as follows: with human support (partial 
autonomy) versus completely autonomous. 
 
Learning: Learning enables DTs to improve their performance on future tasks based on past 
performance and observations of the world, similar to the way humans learn and grow 
intellectually over time. Therefore, this increases the automation of each role for DTs since now 
the DT can perform functions that require cognitive flexibility and adaptability, as well as 
situations where rules are not completely understood beforehand or where no correct solution 
exists. Based on learning ability, the LoDT framework differentiates the extent of automation as 
follows: routine situations (well-defined, predictable situations that can be solved through 
explicitly programmed instructions) and non-routine situations (no explicit instructions are 
available or algorithms must adapt to some degree of dynamic change, thus requiring learning). 
[4,101,102,103] have also highlighted the importance of learning and differentiated between 
routine and non-routine tasks according to learning ability. 
 
As one might expect, DT’s highest level of automation would be for each role to work 
autonomously, handling non-routine situations, just like humans. While attempting to automate 
every role of DTs to the highest extent possible might be an envisioned benchmark, in most 
cases, it may not be necessary, practical, or even desirable due to a lack of technical capabilities, 
risk preferences of practitioners, legal requirements, or financial constraints. In these cases, 
intermediate levels of automation may be preferred so as to maximize the joint performance of 

 
 
 
16 
humans and DTs. Therefore, a five-level measure of automation for each role of DTs based on 
autonomy and learning abilities is proposed in Figure 5.  
 
 
 
Figure 5: Extent of automation for each role of DT 
 
1. No Automation (Manual): At this level, humans perform all the tasks without any kind of 
support from DT. This is the lowest form of automation that can be present in any role of DT, 
and it acts as default to the 2 x 2 matrix.  
 
2. Routine Support: DTs assist humans in completing routine tasks by following explicitly 
programmed rules. The human still remains in full control and can bypass DTs based on their 
own judgment. From our experience, we have found that these projects are often ‘quick-
wins’; they are the easiest to implement with the least amount of organizational changes. By 
automating routine tasks, DT relieves the workload of humans [65], allowing them to focus 
on more important tasks that require higher creativity and intelligence. 
 
3. Routine Autonomy: DTs are capable of completing routine tasks without human supervision. 
Autonomy in DTs creates a failure risk (such as in boundary cases), which sometimes defeats 
the purpose of autonomy, especially in routine situations where humans are almost perfect. 
Thus, from our experience, we have found that these are often ‘conditional’ projects. The use 
of routine autonomy must be justified based on the marginal benefits it provides above 
routine support. If the company decides to implement this level of automation, the humans 
act as a backup [65] to DT, performing the work in case something changes or goes wrong. 
 
4. Non-routine support: By utilizing the learning element, DTs assist humans in handling non-
routine tasks, i.e., situations that are dynamic or where rules are unclear. The learning 

 
 
 
17 
process requires data, so streamlined data collection and labeling become essential. This, in 
turn, necessitates significant changes to the ways project organizations usually operate. There 
is also a need for a dynamic shift in organizational mindset towards data-driven decisions, 
which sometimes even questions common practice because, in non-routine situations, the 
correct answer may not be known in advance. Therefore, we term these projects as 
‘Ambitious,’ requiring a significant change in the way work is performed. But on the 
counterpart, the benefits are also great, with human capabilities being extended [65]. 
 
5. Non-routine autonomy (full automation): This is the highest level of automation and that is 
why we term these as the ‘Dream’ projects for companies. DT can complete the task 
autonomously at the required level of performance, adapting to the task environment and 
improving its performance over time. We have not seen many suitable examples of a DT at 
this level across all roles but we are optimistic about the possibilities given the recent 
technological developments. 
 
4.3 Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) about the framework 
 
This section describes the FAQ’s that we got from different users of the framework during the 
empirical case studies conducted to validate the usefulness of the framework. These answers to 
the most common questions can address some of the questions that readers and new users of the 
framework might have, as well as provide a better understanding of how to use the framework. 
 
1. Is it necessary for DT to play all the defined roles, or can humans also play them? 
It is important to recognize that the roles are needed to be performed to complete the work, 
regardless of whether a DT performs them or not. Therefore, any role that is not performed 
by a DT would be performed by humans. Figure 6 illustrates the extremes of this role 
distribution. 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Examples showing extremes for role distribution between DTs and humans. (a) DT 
with no automation for any roles, (b) DT with full automation for one of the roles, and (c) DT 
with full automation for all the roles 
 
2. How can the same role be performed by DTs in some situations and by humans in other? 
Any role in the working world involves both simple (routine) and difficult (non-routine) 
situations. So, if DTs are capable of handling only simple situations due to technology or any 
other constraints, humans would step in when a complex situation arrives. This is what the 
“Extent of Automation” dimension represents. 
 

 
 
 
18 
3. How to decide what is a routine and a non-routine situation in a particular scenario? 
We suggest thinking of routine and non-routine situations for every role. For a particular role, 
consider the functions that a DT would need to perform. If the function can be described by a 
set of explicit rules or algorithms, then it is a routine situation. It should be noted that some 
situations that are routine for humans are not routine for the computer and vice versa. For 
example, identifying a cat is routine for humans, yet it is very difficult to write explicit rules 
for the computer to do the same, therefore making it a non-routine task for computers. On the 
other hand, finding patterns in one million data points is non-routine for humans but routine 
for computers because it can be described explicitly through algorithms such as clustering. In 
the framework, we represent routine and non-routine situations from the perspective of the 
DT. 
 
4. In some cases, how can a DT have a lower level of automation for basic roles like Observer 
or Analyst than for advanced roles like Decision Maker or Action executor? 
As we explained above in Question-1, it is not necessary that every role must be performed 
by DTs. Therefore, as long as the role is being performed and the final deliverable of that 
role is satisfactory, it does not matter who did it. For example, DT does not have to observe 
and collect the data to analyze it, as humans can collect and format it as necessary. The 
following example illustrates the different functions of a DT versus a human for the four 
roles.  
 
Task: A building’s temperature needs to be observed and analyzed whether it is comfortable 
for building occupants. Then a decision needs to be made on how much to change it based on 
the time of day, the number of occupants, and electricity consumption. Finally, the action to 
change the temperature needs to be executed. Figure 7 shows how these functions can be 
distributed in various ways between humans and DTs. 
 

 
 
 
19 
 
 
Figure 7: An example showing four scenarios of role distribution between DTs and humans in 
the context of controlling a building’s temperature using DTs  
 
 
5. Given that the framework has so many elements, how do you suggest using it? 
While there is no “right” way to use the framework, we found that the following method 
provides a good starting point, especially for first-time users: 
 
Step-1: Start by defining the functions for each role required to complete the task, 
irrespective of who does what, as explained in Question 1. First, define the function of the 
Action Executor since the other roles change drastically depending on the defined action, 
then define the functions of Decision Maker, Analyst, and finally, Observer. For example, in 
the case of building a DT to maintain highways, the final action can be to fix the defects on 
the road, or it can also just be to detect defects on the road, depending on the scope of work. 
When fixing the defects, the Decision Maker must decide whether to fix it, how and when. If 
detecting the defects, the Decision Maker needs to decide if it is a defect and what type of 
defect it is. Therefore, while defining the functions for each role, users should ask 
themselves, to perform the defined action, what decisions do I need to make? To make the 
decisions, what analysis do I need? And to make the required analysis, what do I need to 
observe? 
 

 
 
 
20 
Step-2: Define what routine and non-routine situations look like for each of the defined 
functions under every role. For example, in the case of building a DT to maintain highways, 
one of the functions of the Decision Maker can be to decide whether to fix the defect. A 
routine situation is when DTs handle simple situations like deciding to fix the defect if it is 
greater than 5 inches because the defect is very large, and fixing it is the only option. Now 
consider the situation when the defect is 1 inch. It is not clear whether to repair the defect or 
leave it for later. Many factors may now need to be considered, such as how fast the defect 
could get worse, the available budget, and the contractual requirements. These factors might 
make the repair decision a non-routine situation. The DT might need to use ML to learn 
patterns from past data to make such decisions. 
 
Step-3: Now that both the dimensions of the framework have been mapped out, the users can 
construct the level of DT that they currently have, as shown in Figure 5. 
 
Step-4: After mapping out the current level of DT, the user can now map out the envisioned 
level of DT that they would like to ideally have. 
 
Step-5: Finally, all the stakeholders can decide what would it take to advance the current 
level to the envisioned level of DT. 
 
5. CASE STUDY 
 
Using our original example, we will show how the LoDT framework helps Ryan, who wants to 
create a DT to prevent crane tip overs caused by soil failure or unsuitable conditions. Ryan 
primarily uses the LoDT framework in two ways: 
 
1.  As a tool to plan the deployment of DT: Ryan lacks a systematic method for exhaustively 
evaluating the wide range of roles of DTs and the extent to which each role can be 
automated. This inhibits him from selecting an appropriate DT. Therefore, Ryan uses the 
LoDT framework to conduct structured brainstorming and systematic role allocation between 
DTs and humans. 
 
2. To develop a strategic roadmap for DT deployment in the future: Implementing DTs in 
practice is a continuous process, and therefore Ryan needs to start small and gradually 
progress to a DT that can perform more roles at a higher level of automation. Ryan uses the 
LoDT framework to understand the DT level that the firm can currently create, given its 
technical capabilities, as well as establish a long-term vision for where the firm might want to 
go. 
 
The following paragraphs present details of how Ryan uses the LoDT framework. He starts by 
systematically analyzing each role and determining the extent of automation the firm will need 
within each role and whether they have the technical capabilities to perform it. 
  
A. Observer: Ability to acquire, process, and represent the data from the physical world 
  

 
 
 
21 
While brainstorming the various extents of automation that DTs can perform for the Observer 
role, the following options looked more promising: (1) no automation (manual level), the data is 
collected by sensors and manually processed by humans, (2) routine autonomy level, DT 
autonomously processes the data based on simple predefined rules while humans handle complex 
processing. For example, DT can identify a soil type from soil composition and moisture content 
based on empirical rules, and (3) non-routine autonomy level, DT works in non-routine 
situations independently. DT, for example, learns from historical soil data and prepares soil 
topography maps independently, as it is very difficult to explicitly write programming 
instructions to create soil topography maps. 
 
Even though the topographical data is important, Ryan feels that they can still work without it, 
especially since the crane operator will be handling the crane if anything goes wrong because of 
uneven terrain. Thus, he concludes that the routine support level of automation for the Observer 
role of DT will cover most of the common cases in practice and that other, less frequent cases 
can be handled by humans. 
 
B. Analyst: Data synthesis in light of the target goal to understand what is desirable 
 
As the goal of this task is to walk the crane safely (without tipping), the DT in this role should be 
able to assess whether walking the crane is safe based on soil data and topographical maps. Some 
options that came up during the brainstorming session included: (1) routine support level, DTs 
synthesize the data and perform low-level calculations, which humans would then use to 
determine if the soil is capable of supporting the crane, (2) routine autonomy level, DTs calculate 
the soil capacity based on empirical geotechnical models that have been explicitly programmed, 
and (3) non-routine autonomy level, DT predicts soil capacity from historical data and can 
therefore handle non-routine situations such as those that occur after rain and snow or when the 
empirical model fails. 
 
It is crucial to conduct a rigorous analysis of the soil capacity before walking the crane since the 
turbine, and its components are heavy, and a minor error in soil capacity estimation can lead to 
failure of the soil. Ryan notes that it takes approximately 8 weeks to manually perform the data 
pre-processing and calculations using finite element analysis, but the calculations are highly 
accurate and reliable, with a 99.999% accuracy rate. Furthermore, he stresses that even though 
calculation time needs to be reduced (make it almost real-time), it is extremely important to 
maintain these reliability standards, as any mistake could result in crane failures. Consequently, 
he selects the third option and sets up the target of calculating the soil capacity within 1 min of 
data collection, and with a reliability of at least 99.99% using ML. 
 
C. Decision Maker: Evaluating choices and making a rational decision 
 
If the bearing capacity of the soil exceeds the crane’s weight, Ryan can let the crane walk. 
However, if the soil is not strong enough, he must make a decision among several options, 
including: changing the path of the crane walk, treating the soil to make it stronger, or delaying 
the walk by a couple of days to let the soil settle. Some options that came up during the 
brainstorming session included: (1) routine support level, DT deterministically simulates all 

 
 
 
22 
options and Ryan selects the best one, (2) routine autonomy level, DT evaluates every option and 
takes a ‘rational’ decision independently, (3) non-routine autonomy level, DT simulates options 
based on the uncertainty that might arise like sudden weather changes and chooses the best 
option independently. 
 
Ryan feels that simulations are not necessary, at least in the short term. He, therefore, decides 
against it by explaining that decisions will still be made by humans. 
 
D. Action Executor: Executing the action 
 
Finally, Ryan needs to operate the crane and install the wind turbine. The crew can complete the 
job manually. He can also use DTs to control the crane remotely. Finally, DTs can even control 
cranes autonomously at the fully autonomous level. In the short run, Ryan believes this 
capability is not necessary and decides not to implement any automation for action. 
 
Compiling all the decisions, the final level of DT at the end of Iteration-1 is shown in Figure 8. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Multiple iterations to select the appropriate level of digital twin 
 
  
Iteration-2: While working through the details, the team realizes that they lacked data for non-
routine situations, such as the soil capacity data after heavy rains and snow or in uneven 
topographical conditions. However, the team realizes that they had a lot of data in routine 
situations and hence wondered if ML can be deployed in routine cases, and the human would 
take control in the non-routine cases. This is shown in iteration-2 in Figure 8, wherein the 
Analyst role, the non-routine autonomy level from iteration-1, was dropped to the routine 
autonomy level.  

 
 
 
23 
 
Iteration-3: The developers inform the team that the best performance that ML models can 
possibly achieve would be nowhere close to the required reliability of 99.99%. As this was a 
non-negotiable target due to the safety issues, the team had to drop this idea as well and finally 
decided to go with only using DT to observe and handle data for routine situations (See Figure 8, 
iteration-3). They found that the time to calculate the soil capacity decreased significantly from 
about 8 weeks to 2-3 days. Although this is not the desired target that Ryan had in mind, this was 
the best possible solution that the team would be able to achieve, given the resources in hand. 
 
In summary, Ryan uses the LoDT framework as a planning tool to conduct structured 
brainstorming sessions with the goal of comprehensively evaluating the role allocation between 
DTs and humans rather than coming up with unstructured suggestions. Additionally, he provides 
a roadmap on how DT can be deployed using the LoDT framework. In the short term, because of 
the lack of resources, DT should only be used for routine data observation and handling, even if 
it does not lead to the real-time calculations, they envisioned earlier. He continues that in the 
future, the company could develop a DT that analyzes non-routine situations by using ML 
models. To do that, the company should start collecting soil capacity data in uncertain 
conditions, like after rain and snow, and also start recruiting people who can drive the data-
driven effort of building the envisioned DT. 
 
6. CONCLUSION 
 
Even if the goal is often to create a DT that is autonomous and adaptive, the reality is that most 
DT systems in the present and the foreseeable future will still rely on both humans and 
computers. Therefore, it becomes necessary to assess how DTs can complement and work with 
humans. But since DT technology is still in its developmental stage, practitioners and researchers 
lack this understanding of how DTs integrate with humans. They wonder: “When humans work 
with DTs, what types of roles can a DT play, and to what extent can those roles be automated?” 
A lack of knowledge about the roles that humans and DTs play in a work system can result in 
significant costs, misallocation of resources, unrealistic expectations from DTs, and strategic 
misalignments. 
 
To alleviate this challenge, this paper contributes a two-dimensional conceptual framework, 
Levels of Digital Twin (LoDT). The framework is an integration of the types of roles a DT can 
play, broadly categorized under (1) Observer, (2) Analyst, (3) Decision Maker, and (4) Action 
Executor, and the extent of automation for each of these roles, divided into five different levels 
ranging from completely manual to fully automated. A particular DT can play any number of 
roles at varying levels. The framework has been developed and validated by following the DSR 
research methodology over a time frame of 36 months. The design iterations and the validation 
were carried out using the feedback from 11 experts over multiple meetings clocking over 50 
hours and demonstration sessions with 40+ experts. The framework has also been demonstrated 
for usefulness by applying it in a real-life case study. 
 
The LoDT framework is intended to be useful for both academia and practice. Educators and 
researchers could benefit from the new perspective on DTs that emphasizes the change in the 

 
 
 
24 
agency in a work system from humans to DTs, and therefore, DTs should be viewed as partners 
fulfilling certain roles and responsibilities and not simply as tools to ease a human’s workload. 
This perspective naturally raises many questions for future research, such as: “How to select the 
roles that should be delegated to a DT?” “What kind of situations should a DT handle?” and 
“Who is responsible if a DT makes mistakes?” It also opens many other opportunities for future 
researchers, including examining social dynamics when DTs work in teams in varied roles, 
developing models for work delegation between humans and DTs, and researching trust, privacy, 
and ethics when DTs assume critical roles. 
 
Additionally, the LoDT framework alleviates some of the existing confusion surrounding the DT 
concept, which is perceived by some researchers to be real-time, continuously updated digital 
models with predictive and prescriptive capabilities [30,32], while others perceive it as merely a 
digital representation [33,34]. We believe that none of these definitions are necessarily incorrect. 
In fact, different researchers have partially proposed different roles that they envision a DT to 
play; some are more biased towards Observer (therefore emphasizing representation), while 
others are biased towards Analyst and Decision Maker (emphasizing prediction and 
prescription). All these definitions unify and make sense when we consider the complete set of 
roles DTs can perform within the LoDT framework, thus alleviating the confusion surrounding 
the DT concept. The phenomenon of the importance of “levels” for effective communication and 
planning has been well documented in other bodies of literature, including the importance of 
technology readiness levels [104] and levels of autonomous driving [105]. 
 
As shown in the case study, practitioners can use the LoDT framework as a tool to (1) plan DT 
deployments and (2) prepare strategic roadmaps for its future development.  
 
Without a framework, planning DT deployments becomes more of an art than a science as 
people come up with their own unstructured suggestions about what roles DTs should play and 
how far they should be automated [4]. Lack of an exhaustive evaluation of all possible options 
can result in missed opportunities and biases towards a particular technology based on the vision 
and brilliance of individuals with authority. Through the LoDT framework, structured 
brainstorming and systematic role allocation between DTs and humans can be conducted to 
alleviate this issue. 
 
Implementing the most intelligent DT in practice is not a one-shot task. In fact, the creation of a 
DT is a continuous and evolving process [106]. The LoDT framework, as demonstrated in the 
case study, can act as a starting point for developing a technology roadmap that helps 
practitioners to determine the exact level where they currently stand with their DT and, at the 
same time, establish a long-term vision of where they might want to reach with the DT. 
 
One of the potential areas for future research, as mentioned earlier, is to explore how different 
role allocations between humans and DTs affect human-DT interfaces and human factors. For 
the practical deployment of these human-DT systems, it might also be interesting to explore the 
connected engineering factors such as reliability, robustness, and resilience because they have 
great implications for humans in terms of safety, health, and well-being [107]. Finally, future 

 
 
 
25 
researchers can also explore the generalizability of applying this framework in other industries 
and different technologies. 
 
Ultimately, the pursuit of digitalization and automation requires sustained technological 
leadership and a clearly articulated vision in the form of a digital strategy. Understanding the 
different roles that a DT can play, what it takes to achieve them, and the value they provide to 
the business are critical for developing any strategy. Thus, the LoDT framework should not be 
viewed as a way to prescribe a particular level of DT to practitioners but rather as a guide for 
discussing, comparing, communicating, and strategically prioritizing digital opportunities. 
Awareness of the factors discussed in the framework can help a company stake out a digital 
strategy that is more likely to succeed. 
 
 

 
 
 
26 
DECLARATION OF COMPETING INTERESTS  
 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
