Identifying Human Edited Images using a CNN 
 
Jordan Lee1, Willy Lin2, Konstantinos Ntalis2, Anirudh Shah2, William Tung2, and Maxwell Wulff2 
1Department of Computer Science, Cornell Tech 
2Department of Operations Research & Information Engineering, Cornell Tech 
Abstract 
Most non-professional photo manipulations are not made using propriety software like Adobe Photoshop, 
which is expensive and complicated to use for the average consumer selfie-taker or meme-maker. Instead, 
these individuals opt for user friendly mobile applications like FaceTune and Pixlr to make human face edits 
and alterations. Unfortunately, there is no existing dataset to train a model to classify these type of 
manipulations. In this paper, we present a generative model that approximates the distribution of human 
face edits and a method for detecting Facetune and Pixlr manipulations to human faces. 
1 Introduction 
In the current social media dominated times, there are enormous amounts of content and media being generated for social 
media consumption. This has led to concerns over the rise of manipulated content such as ’deepfakes’ and ’fake news’ and 
the dangers associated [1, 2]. However, these types of content often contain artifacts that are relatively easily identifiable to 
the human eye, and so in this report we will focus on more subtle image edits that are not perceivable to the human eye but 
can be identified accurately by a machine learning or deep learning algorithm [3]. These include those done using Adobe 
Photoshop and Facetune and whilst such editing techniques have allowed for creative exploration, they can also be 
associated with significant negative implications including body image issues and the spreading of misinformation [4]. We 
will focus our work on these types of edits. The majority of non-professional photo edits are not made using Adobe Photoshop 
but made using cheaper and easier-to-use apps such as Facetune and Pixlr. In this work, we generated a dataset of edited 
faces using a generative model, and then developed a classifier to determine if an input image was edited or not, using our 
generated images and a dataset of unedited faces as training data. Our investigation followed the framework of Wang et al. 
research, however we sought to develop a model with increased generalizability compared to their model and also explored 
other methods of data collection/generation [4]. All of the code associated with this project can be found on GitHub 1. 
2 Related Work 
2.1 
Identifying Human Edited Images 
There has been limited published work in this area as most research has been focused on machine generated edited images 
and videos. Wang et al. developed a binary classifier that was able to detect edited images with a 90% accuracy, however 
upon testing the model we were not able to replicate this level of accuracy with our dataset. It seems that this classifier did 
not generalize well as it was trained on Adobe Photoshop face aware liquify tool edited images and did not take into account 
other 
 
1 
https://github.com/JordanMLee/deeplearningproject 

2 
types of edits or other editing apps. In their work, Wang et al. also developed a model to identify the location of the edit on 
the image [4]. 
Manu et al. focused on spliced images and forgeries using classification of texture patterns on images and image quality 
artifacts generated during the tampering operation along with a support vector machine classifier to detect altered images 
[5]. Further work in this area involves taking a more targeted approach to feature extraction by using bilateral filtering 
followed by Gray Level Co-occurrence Matrices [6]. 
Zhou et al. proposed a two stream neural network technique in which one stream detects lower level irregularities between 
image patches and the other stream detects altered face images [7]. 
2.2 
Synthesizing Images using Generative Models 
Over the last few years there has been a significant amount of research in the area image generation using generative models. 
This is especially the case as annotated image data for computer vision tasks is hard to come by, and so researchers have 
focused on methods of augmenting datasets using generated images [8]. 
Zhou et al. propose a method to generate images using a GAN with relevance feedback which allows a user to give feedback 
to the model allowing the user to retrieve the generated images that are most similar to the target image [9]. He at al. 
hypothesized that the encoder-decoder architecture utilized in GANs means the editing of facial attributes is attained by 
decoding the latent representation of the source face given the wanted facial features, and that this can lead to loss of 
information. They suggested another technique - applying an attribute classification constraint to the generated image, 
rather than the typically applied attribute-independent constraint on the latent representation, and so only making user 
desired changes to the facial features. Furthermore, they proposed that the image reconstruction maintains attribute-
excluding details and achieved realistic to the human-eye edits, leading to the attGAN [10]. 
Another optimization in this field is the use of triple translation GAN (TTGAN) with a multi-layer sparse representation to 
improve on existing issues with GAN generated images including low quality facial features, unstable model optimization and 
changing of face identity [11]. Hsu et al. developed an improved implementation of Disentangled Representation-learning 
GAN by using Wasserstein loss in training the discriminator and they were able to achieve improved quality in synthesized 
facial images[12]. Bolluyt and Comaniciu introduced a new method of generating images containing multiple target classes 
by learning the interrelationships of the different desired classes, which could produce realistic synthesized images. They 
proposed a new Conditional Deep Convolutional GAN architecture that prevented mode collapse and self-corrected during 
training to prevent suboptimal results [13]. 
3 Methodology 
3.1 
Efficiency of the original model 
We started by studying how well the method proposed in [4] works for warping applied to human face images using tools 
other that Photoshop. Following the editing methods discussed later in this section and also in Section 4 - Data Collection, 
we discovered that the binary classifier in [4] performs poorly in this task. Specifically, for a validation set of 500 manually 
edited images, the classifier correctly predicted whether the image was edited or not with 60% accuracy. Such an example is 
provided Figure 1. By performing this experiment, we realized that the trained model is over-fitting the training data 
distribution and can only be reliable for professional edited photos using Photoshop. 
3.2 
Augmenting the training set 
We therefore attempted to use the framework proposed in [4] but develop a more diverse training set in order to be able to 
capture not only more types of edits but also, what we believe to be more common distributions of edited images, generated 
by tools other than Photoshop. Given the lack of existing datasets for this task, we decided to develop our own. We started 
by manually editing face images from different public datasets shown in Table 1. Then, using three different tools, Adobe 
Lightroom, Facetune and Pixelmator, we performed several face edits as shown in Table 1. As it 

3 
 
(a) Original image                   
(b) Edited image 
Figure 1: An example where the classifier developed in [4] fails to determine the edited image. 
would be impossible to manually generate enough to robustly train a classifier, we attempted to train a GAN in order to 
generate the classifier training set. Using non edited and the corresponding manually edited images, we generated 149230 
fake images using a pre-trained GAN (DCGAN) [14]. These generated images are either fake unedited or fake edited. In this 
way, we are asserting that we can approximate the distribution of edited images and thereby more efficiently train a binary 
classifier to detect more general edits. All of our GAN generated images passed the Haar Cascade face classifier algorithm 
and so we decided to proceed with using these images as our training data [15]. 
3.3 
Real-or-edited classification 
Having built the dataset with fake reals and fake edited images, we proceed with training the binary classifier. The original 
paper uses a Dilated Residual Network variant (DRN-C-26) [16] that was originally designed for segmentation analysis [4]. 
We used this as a baseline and experimented with other architectures such as ResNeXt [17] that improved our results. For 
both architectures we used pre-trained networks trained on similar tasks with only additional linear layers being trainable 
when needed. 
3.4 
Experimentation 
Except for fine tuning the networks and experimenting for the most appropriate architecture, we further experimented with 
the composition of the dataset. One important decision is resolution. As the authors of [4] note, high-resolution models 
enable preservation of low-level details, potentially useful for identifying fakes. On the other hand, a lower-resolution model 
potentially contains sufficient details to identify fakes and can be trained more efficiently. As our pipeline involved GAN 
generated images, the lower resolution option inevitably comes with less realistic fake images. 
Finally, we examined the option of including real unedited and real edited images in the training set of the final classifier 
too. Although promising we didn’t move forward with this choice as it is unclear what the binary classifier will eventually 
learn - distinguishing edited from unedited or real from fake images. 
4 Data Collection 
In order to properly train a model that had a wide use case, we collected unaltered images from a multitude of sources, and 
altered them through a variety of means. We began with the 500 Edited Validation Images from Wang et al. These were 
collected from the Flickr Faces HQ (FFHQ) Dataset and altered with Adobe software.[18] 103 images were collected from 
FFHQ and altered using Adobe Lightroom. These edits focused on smoothing features and enhancing lighting. 960 faces were 
collected from Real and Fake Face Detection dataset (RFFD). [19] These images are faces with some features swapped out 
for those features in different images. 218 images were taken from the Helen dataset and altered using Facetune. [20] 
Facetune is one of the most popular ’selfie’ editor applications. [21] These edits focused on feature smoothing, teeth 
whitening, and head reshaping. 100 faces were taken from the Helen Dataset and edited using Pixelmator. Pixelmator is a 
popular photo editing application. These edits focused on warping, bumping and/or pinching parts of the original image. 
Finally, 100 images were scraped off of Facebook, and edited using Facetune. In summary we gathered 2521 images from a 
variety of sources and altered them by varying means to get a more realistic sense of the scope of human edited images that 
are employed for social media. 

4 
Number 
Source 
Editing Software 
Edits Performed 
500 
FFHQ 
Adobe 
Reshape, Smoothing 
103 
FFHQ 
Adobe Lightroom 
Smoothing, Lighting Alteration 
960 
RFFD 
NA 
Feature Swapping 
218 
Helen 
Facetune 
Reshape, Smoothing, Teeth 
Whitening 
100 
Helen 
Pixelmator 
Warping, Bumping, Pinching 
100 
Facebook 
Facetune 
Reshape, Smoothing, Teeth 
Whitening 
Table 1: Edited Face Sources 
5 Model 
5.1 
Adapted DCGAN for Image Synthesis 
 
Figure 2: Architecture of generator from DCGAN [14] 
The model used for image generation was an adaptation of the DCGAN as proposed by Radford et al.[14], the architecture of 
the original DCGAN discriminator is shown in Figure 2. This consists of two CNNs with opposing optimization methods, 
however, in general the convolutional layers aggregate the features of the input image sequentially while reducing spatial 
dimensionality. Our adaptation to DCGAN was so that it outputted both 64×64 and 128×128 3-channel RGB images. 
The adapted DCGAN discriminator for the 64×64 images were as follows: update the feature maps in the first convolutional 
layer to 64, increase the feature maps by a factor of 2 for every subsequent convolutional layer and use 5 hidden layers. 
The adapted DCGAN discriminator for the 128×128 images were as follows: update the feature maps in the first 
convolutional layer to 16 to motivate convergence, increase the feature maps by a factor of 2 for every subsequent 
convolutional layer and use 6 hidden layers. The following parameters are common to both types of outputs: each hidden 
layer had a 4×4 convolutional keren with stride length 2, each hidden layer was followed by a batch normalization layer to 
constrain co-variate shift between mini batches and a Leaky ReLU activation layer, the learning rate was 0.0002. 
The adapted DCGAN generator architecture is as follows: 64 feature maps for the first transposeconvolutional layer, and 
upsample the image by a factor of 2 for every subsequent convolutional layer. In total there were 5 hidden layers 
transpose-convolutional layers for the 64×64 model and 6 such layers for the 128×128 model, each transpose-
convolutional layer was followed by batch normalization layer and a Leaky ReLU activation layer. The input to the generator 
was z-dimensional noise with the latent vector z serving as an arbitrarily low-dimensional starting point to generate new 
images. The learning rate was set as 0.0002. Both the Generator and Discriminator were optimized using Adaptive Moment 
Estimation (Adam). 
 
 

5 
5.2 
ResNeXt for Classification 
Our binary classifier utilized the ResNeXt50 classifier architecture which consists of 43 convolutional layers and was 
pretrained on the ImageNet-1k dataset [22, 23]. Our classifier utilized the pretrained weights and finetuned the model to 
our data by replacing the final fully connected layer with a binary classification layer to determine whether an image is 
edited or not. This model was trained with a learning rate of 0.01 and was also optimized using Adam. 
6 Results 
6.1 
Training framework 
We trained DCGAN and ResNeXt on one Amazon p3.8xlarge EC2 instance which had 4 GPUs. The DCGAN was trained on a 
dataset consisting of 2521 hand-edited and the classifier on the 14923 generated images. On Figure 3, we display the images 
that go into the DCGAN training and on Figure 5 the generated ones that are used for the classifier. 
 
Figure 3: GAN hand-edited training images 
6.2 
GAN training with early stopping 
We trained the GAN for 700 iterations on the training set to achieve a generator loss of < 1.0. Figure 
4 below shows the training loss as a function of epochs. We consistently conducted checkpoints of the model parameters to 
determine the optimal model weights for generating new training images, given when the generator loss reached < 1.0. 
We also used the GAN to generate unedited examples by training on the popular celebsA dataset. We trained the 200,000 
image dataset for 25 epochs. Training concluded once we visually verified that the GAN generated unedited faces matched 
the quality of the GAN generated edited faces. 
After creating these images, we produced a GAN generated image set containing 149,230 images as shown in Figure 5. This 
dataset is fully comprised of generated edited images and generated unedited images with random horizontal mirrors. We 
normalized the input dataset so that the three input channels had values between 0 and 1. 

6 
 
Figure 4: GAN training curves (with early stopping at 700 epochs) 
 
Figure 5: Example Images from Classifier Data set 
6.3 
Classifier training 
Finally, we trained the classifier for 50 epochs with a batch-size of 64. The validation loss of the binary classifier is shown in 
Figure 6. We reserved a subset of our hand-edited images to test the binary classifier and compare it the FALdetector global 
classifier from Wang et al [4]. The dataset consisted of 333 hand-edited images and 333 unedited images. The main 
experiments are summarized in Table 2. 
 
 

7 
Binary classifier 
Accuracy 
Precision 
GAN dataset 
 
 
ResNeXt 
0.6188 
0.7653 
ResNeXt & real images 
0.5871 
0.7032 
DRN-C-26 
0.5972 
0.7365 
Dataset from [4] 
 
 
ResNeXt 
0.5121 
0.5347 
DRN-C-26 
0.5045 
0.5011 
Table 2: Experimenting with different models and datasets for the binary classification problem. 
 
Figure 6: Validation Loss of binary classifier 
Note that except from the obvious experiments with different models and datasets, we also tried mixing some of the real 
photoshopped edited images from the development set of [4], without obtaining a significant increase in accuracy. 
7 Discussion 
Here we outline and discuss some of the challenges encountered throughout the course of our work. These challenges pertain 
to data collection and training the GAN/Classifiers models. 
7.1 
Data Challenges 
When building off the original work of Wang et al. [4], we had difficulty producing an improved classifier without a robust 
training set. Unfortunately, our main source, Wang et al. [4], does not include a training-set in their project GitHub repository. 
After conducting a thorough search, we were unable to find a dataset that contained a sufficient number of human-edited 
faces. The lack of edited images also seemed to trouble Wang et al. [4], as they commissioned photo-shopped edited images. 
This dilemma of lacking edited image data actually spurred a major directional change in our work with the goal to generate 
our own images to mimic human manually edited images through common platforms such as FaceTune and Pixlr. To this end, 
a smaller set of manually edited images was fed into the GAN model in order to mass produce a data-set to be used for the 
classification task. We chose the method of feeding manual edits into a GAN model because other methods to mass produce 
an edited dataset, such as scripting Adobe Photoshop, are not representative of how user edited face images. The generative 
approach seeks to approximate the distribution of commonly made edits to images of the human face using tools like 
FaceTune and Pixlr, which are two of the most widely-used image editing toolkit application. The FaceTune app is shown 
below in Figure 7. However, the quality of some of the generative images is fairly low. This is due to the variation in face 
orientations in the training set. In general, the Generator learns the where to place landmarks like eyes and mouth but has 
difficulty drawing the contours of the human face. Most GAN datasets are preprocessed so that the orientation of the objects 
is uniform. This produces good results at the cost of variety. 

8 
 
Figure 7: FaceTune 
7.2 
GAN Training 
Implementing a GAN model to generate ’fake’ edited images presented several challenges on its own. 
Firstly, considerable time and computational resources are required to train the GAN model. Such an approach required 
leveraging several GPU instances through services such as Amazon Web Services (AWS). Even then, several initial AWS setups 
proved to be too slow or computationally lacking to successfully train models. Aside from computational training limitations, 
homing in on an optimal GAN model proved challenging. In many instances the GAN model experience mode collapse and 
would converge on random best fit pixels, common after training for thousands of epochs. Other issues included a lack of 
convergence of the GAN model. These training issues are highlighted in Figure 8 and Figure 9. We attempted to rectify these 
issues using some well-known GAN "tricks" like unrolling the GAN and using a different loss function. One specific method 
we tried was Wasserstein Loss with Gradient Clipping, however the quality of the images was about the same as the DCGAN 
with Binary Cross Entropy Loss. Obviously, we hypothesize that with better quality generated images our classifier would also 
thus be better able to discern real non-edited images from fake edited images (GAN produced). This again circled back to our 
initial issue of creating a robust classifier without a solid dataset. 
 
Figure 8: Generator collapse after 2400 epochs 
 
Figure 9: GAN non-convergence and overfit examples 

9 
8 Conclusion 
By exploring the works of Wang et al. [4], we were able to better generalize the detection of manipulations from more 
mainstream and commonly used software than the originally explored Adobe Photoshop. In doing so, we can hopefully 
further mitigate the negative effects on body image associated with altered photos. We can seek to continue generalizing 
our classifier to accurately predict alterations with other software by increasing the training set to incorporate images from 
many different photo altering packages. 
Additionally, by supplementing our dataset with 149230 GAN-generated edited images, we were able to introduce a larger 
number of training examples which ultimately improved our accuracy and precision. This method of producing supplemental 
images produced relatively adequate results, which further suggests that GAN models may be used to improve training sets 
to improve the efficacy of classifiers or other models. With more pre-GAN training data, we may be able to improve the 
relative quality of the GAN generated altered images, and thus the generic classifier.
