Ravnest: Decentralized Asynchronous Training on
Heterogeneous Devices
Anirudh Rajiv Menon†
Unnikrishnan Menon†
Kailash Ahirwar†
†Raven Protocol
Abstract
Modern deep learning models, growing larger and more complex, have demonstrated excep-
tional generalization and accuracy due to training on huge datasets. This trend is expected
to continue.
However, the increasing size of these models poses challenges in training, as
traditional centralized methods are limited by memory constraints at such scales.
This pa-
per proposes an asynchronous decentralized training paradigm for large modern deep learning
models that harnesses the compute power of regular heterogeneous PCs with limited resources
connected across the internet to achieve favourable performance metrics. Ravnest facilitates
decentralized training by efficiently organizing compute nodes into clusters with similar data
transfer rates and compute capabilities, without necessitating that each node hosts the en-
tire model. These clusters engage in Zero-Bubble Asynchronous Model Parallel training, and
a Parallel Multi-Ring All-Reduce method is employed to effectively execute global parameter
averaging across all clusters. We have framed our asynchronous SGD loss function as a block
structured optimization problem with delayed updates and derived an optimal convergence rate
of O

1
√
K

.
We further discuss linear speedup with respect to the number of participating
clusters and the bound on the staleness parameter.
1
Introduction
Large Language Models, Diffusion based models and various large scale multi modal architectures
[46, 3, 1, 49, 5, 53] becoming the zeitgeist in recent years have created growing requirements for
hardware than can handle their training. With the number of model parameters going into the
billions and data-sets ranging in terabytes of space [45, 39], it has become infeasible for an individual
system to conduct the entire training process [26].
Towards distributing the training process across multiple systems, Data Parallelism has been
a very effective mechanism in which each system is responsible for a portion of the training data
batch [54, 15].
In Synchronous Data Parallelism, the workers have to wait for gradients to be
computed across all peers so that parameter updates can take place and the next data batch can
be processed. However, the presence of workers that are much slower than others will significantly
impede efficiency. To overcome this, asynchronous mechanisms were introduced where peers don’t
have to wait for each other to make parameter updates [51]. Though asynchronous mechanisms may
give rise to updates with stale gradients, they have been observed to converge efficiently under certain
constraints [11]. In distributed training setups, communication-efficient All-Reduce mechanisms,
such as the widely-used Nvidia Collective Communications Library (NCCL) [29, 41], are preferred
1
arXiv:2401.01728v2  [cs.LG]  23 May 2024

for data transmission between peers. This approach is favored over a common parameter server,
which can become a bottleneck when the number of communicating peers is significantly large.
Despite its advantages, data parallelism still requires each system to host the entire model which
may not always be practicable. Model parallelism helps alleviate this by dividing the model across
multiple workers which communicate with each other to conduct forward and backward passes
[2, 59, 19]. Traditional model parallelism requires each worker to wait for data from its preceding
or succeeding peers in the computation graph before proceeding with a forward or backward pass
respectively. This not only leads to bubbles during which multiple workers remain idle but is also
vulnerable to stragglers that can hold up the training process.
This paper details an asynchronous decentralized parallel training approach that utilizes both
data and model parallelism, allowing weaker systems to participate in distributed training while
minimizing idle time bubble. The proposed method eliminates the need for workers to host entire
models and mitigates the reduction in efficiency due to stragglers by grouping workers into clusters
within which Zero-Bubble Asynchronous Model Parallelism is executed. Periodic parameter synchro-
nisation across clusters is conducted via a communication efficient Parallel Multi-Ring All-Reduce
mechanism. Theoretical analysis and derivations for convergence rate in terms of the number of
updates (K) show consistencies with local SGD. We also discuss linear speedup with respect to
the number of participating clusters and constraints on the delay parameter under which this can
be achieved. This mechanism can efficiently train large state of the art models while significantly
reducing hardware requirements and training costs, opening up new possibilities for groundbreaking
research and real-world applications.
The main contributions of this paper are summarised as follows:
• Ravnest, a novel asynchronous parallel training approach that amalgamates the best features
of data and model parallelism to facilitate the distributed training of complex deep learning
models over large datasets on clusters of heterogeneous consumer grade PCs over the internet,
is introduced.
• A Parallel Multi-Ring approach which improves on single Ring All-Reduce has been utilized
for parameter averaging.
• Under realistic assumptions, the proposed algorithm is outlined and and a theoretical analysis
which includes derivations for convergence rate of O

1
√
K

, which is consistent with local SGD,
is provided. Constraints under which the algorithm can observe linear speedup are detailed.
• Our experiments show significant memory reductions and competitive convergence rates with
conventional synchronous training, complementing the theoretical analysis.
2
Related Works
2.1
Data and Model Parallelism
Due to exponential growth in dataset and model sizes, the need for parallelization and memory usage
reduction led to the development of data parallelism. This technique involves using multiple systems,
each hosting copies of the entire model, to process portions of a larger data batch in parallel followed
by gradient aggregation and parameter updates [38, 44, 23]. This approach presents some advantages
such as smaller batch sizes per system, full utilization of compute resources, faster training times
[57], scalable infrastructures and support for synchronous and asynchronous updates based on the
2

problem requirements. However, it is evident that on weaker systems with limited memory resources,
hosting the entire model may not necessarily be feasible.
(a) Model Parallelism
(b) Pipeline Parallelism
Figure 1: Illustration of how pipeline parallelism reduces idle time bubble [19]
.
Recent research has introduced model parallelism, a decentralized training paradigm enabling
large model training across multiple devices, with each device holding only a portion of the main
model it can store [52, 28, 16]. A pipeline of GPU devices is created with each device hosting a
submodel processing data batches and passing results to the next device for further operations.
Network traffic and compute demand are key factors for scalability. However, this sequential nature
leads to under-utilization of compute resources since there occurs an idle bubble of timesteps as can
be observed in Figure 1a. To address the issue, pipeline parallelism divides mini-batches into smaller
micro-batches, processing them simultaneously across multiple devices (as shown in Figure 1b),
thereby reducing the idle time bubble and resulting in almost linear speedup [19]. Pipeline parallelism
inherently requires the participating devices to regularly communicate micro-batch results with each
other. Recent works have improved communication efficiency by overlapping an optimized cross-
mesh resharding technique with the computations on the workers, thereby reducing latency [59].
Asynchronously performing the forward and backward jobs at each pipeline stage while maintaining
a balance between communication and computation can significantly reduce communication overhead
and idle bubble time [17]. This has been achieved by scheduling the forward and backward passes
in a round robin fashion. Significant reduction in idle time bubble has been successfully achieved in
CNN architectures by considering varying degrees of staleness for each layer [50].
2.2
Asynchronous Stochastic Gradient Descent
Initially, data parallelism relied on Synchronous Stochastic Gradient Descent (SSGD), which peri-
odically synchronized all workers’ gradients before each parameter update. However, this caused
delays as workers waited for each other, slowing training and increasing idle time [4]. Asynchronous
Stochastic Gradient Descent (ASGD) lets workers train independently by accepting updates with
outdated gradients while minimizing wait times caused by straggling peers. Enhanced versions in-
clude adjusted averaging mechanisms and approximation functions to handle staleness, enabling
ASGD to rival synchronous methods in non-convex optimization problems [58, 17, 50]. Distributed
training traditionally relied on workers communicating with a dedicated parameter server for gradi-
ent aggregation and weight updates [22, 33, 55, 56]. However, bottleneck and scalability issues arise
since the parameter server has to transmit large model-sized payloads to all workers regularly [12].
Workers update their local models by communicating with peers, often using all-reduce mechanisms
for efficient averaging, which are preferred over gossip-based methods due to their efficiency with
3

more peers [7, 36, 43]. Reduction mechanisms are also employed to limit worker communication,
spanning multiple rounds to minimize network traffic [6, 34, 42].
2.3
Reduction Techniques
In parallel computing, all-reduce algorithms are responsible for combining and redistributing the
results originating from multiple processes. One of the most popular approach to achieve this has
been the Butterfly All-Reduce algorithm [32, 31]. This technique primarily uses a recursively halving
all-scatter operation followed by a recursively doubling all-gather operation [47]. This technique is
well suited in scenarios where network contention issues don’t generally arise.
It minimises the
number of communication rounds while ensuring each node only shares the minimum amount of
data required for reduction. However, in widely deployed clusters, the butterfly all-reduce algorithm
bottlenecks due to high network contention. These issues led to more research on alternate reduction
techniques like Ring All-Reduce algorithm which requires comparatively lower working memory and
has significantly outperformed other algorithms for sufficiently large sizes of data [31]. One of the
most popular implementations of the Ring All-Reduce algorithm is Uber’s Horovord framework,
which adds a layer of All-Reduce based MPI training to Tensorflow. [37]. Figure 2 illustrates how
3 nodes can perform 4 rounds (1 cycle) of Ring All-Reduce to aggregate their weights.
Figure 2: One cycle of Ring All-Reduce across 3 nodes
Consider a system of N devices that are connected under a ring topology. Let i ∈[1, 2, ..., N]
represent the ID assigned to each worker in this system increasing in clockwise direction.
The
main dataset (of size D) is first split into N chunks, each of which are distributed evenly across all
4

devices. This means each device holds a mini dataset of size D/N. One cycle of Ring All-Reduce
comprises 2 ∗(N −1) rounds of sharing among these devices. In each of these rounds, device i sends
its parameters to device (i + 1) mod N. As and when a device receives the parameters from the
preceding device, they apply the reduce operator on it and a new set of averaged parameters are
calculated and shared with the subsequent device in the ring. These new averaged parameters keep
getting propagated in clockwise direction 2 ∗(N −1) times, after which all N devices will be having
a common set of averaged parameters. Each device reduces O(D/N) data at a time but has to
communicate with only its immediate left and right neighbours. While Ring All-Reduce beats most
approaches in terms of communication cost, latency issues arise when the number of participating
nodes is very large.
2.4
Training over the Internet
Advancements in Natural Language Processing, Computer Vision and other domains of artificial in-
telligence have shown us that training models with an increasingly larger number of parameters with
all the more complex architectures on gigantic datasets yields systems that can make extremely ac-
curate predictions. The caveat is that efficiently training these massive models requires the spending
of millions of dollars in setting up high-end GPU server pods (each containing thousands of GPUs)
that are interconnected with low latency links in specialized environments.
This hinders breakthroughs in the field as researchers without access to such high-computing
systems are left with no other options. This restricts competitive research and making breakthroughs
in the field of AI exclusively to organizations with massive funds and hardware resources [10]. In the
future, as models get more and more complex, this approach might not be scalable and sustainable.
Combating these constraints led to more extensive research on how regular desktop systems and
laptops with varying specifications can be pooled together to train large models over the internet
[35]. Compared to the high-performance computing accelerators, these individual PCs are slow and
unreliable. However, paradigms that make use of these PCs can lay the foundation for the future
of AI training as it democratizes research among those with limited resources at the cost of higher
training times. An interesting application of this approach of pooling compute nodes across the
internet can be seen in the project Leela Chess Zero [30]. It relies on volunteer compute power to
generate self play data for chess games and uses it to train reinforcement learning agents.
3
Proposed Method
We present a communication efficient method for asynchronous decentralised model parallel SGD.
The proposed algorithm aims to facilitate distributed learning across a network of nodes without
depending on a parameter server setup and each node having to operate on only a portion of the
entire model.
We aim to solve the following block structured optimization problem of minimizing the loss
function:
min
x f(x) = 1
C
C
X
i=1
fi(x)
(1)
where C is the number of clusters, fi is the loss function associated with the ith cluster having
ni disjoint blocks such that x = (xi,1, xi,2, ...., xi,ni) on the ith cluster, where xi,j represents the
parameters of submodel j.
5

The algorithm involves assigning participating nodes into clusters within which they will fur-
ther be assigned a submodel to participate in Zero-Bubble Asynchronous Model Parallel training.
The clusters will also periodically communicate with each other to conduct a global averaging of
parameters. The following sections detail the various procedures involved.
3.1
Zero-Bubble Asynchronous Model Parallel Training
Within each cluster, an Asynchronous Model Parallel procedure is used which eliminates the idle
time bubble observed in traditional Model Parallel techniques.
We can view each cluster as a computation graph where each peer (containing a submodel) forms
a node and communicates with a subset of peers in order to perform forward and backward passes.
The submodel on each peer asynchronously conducts forward and backward passes as and when it
receives data from its preceding or succeeding peers in the computation graph as seen in Algorithm
1.
Algorithm 1 Zero-Bubble Asynchronous Model Parallelism Within A Cluster
Require: cluster id: c, cluster model parameters: xc, learning rate: η
1: while training is not terminated do:
2:
for each peer p in cluster running parallelly do
3:
if gradients received in backward-buffer then
4:
Pop gradients from backward-buffer
5:
Calculate update using gradients from backward-buffer: xc,p ←xc,p −ηˆgc,p
6:
Propagate required gradients to preceding peers in Cluster Graph
7:
end if
8:
if activations received in forward-buffer then
9:
Pop activations from forward-buffer
10:
O = forward pass(xc,p, forward-buffer values)
11:
Forward activations O to succeeding peers in Cluster Graph
12:
end if
13:
end for
14: end while
▷Blocks 3-7 and 8-12 can be run in parallel with the communication process using Process Locks.
More details are available in the Implementation Details section
The submodels don’t wait for gradients of the current data mini-batch from the succeeding
peer before proceeding with the forward pass for the next one. When a submodel receives back-
propagated gradients from its succeeding nodes, it conducts the update step with respect to its
parameters immediately as per the following equation:
xk+1
c,p = xk
c,p −ηˆgk
c,p
(2)
where ˆgk
c,p = gk−τk
c,p
= ∇pF(xk−τk
c
, bk
c), where F denotes the loss function utilized in the training
process, and xk−τk
c
is used to denote the state of the model parameters when the forward pass of
batch bt
c was being conducted, depicting that the gradient being used for the update is stale as the
submodel may have undergone updates during the intermediate time-steps.
It can be seen from Figure 3 that the degree of staleness τk increases as we move towards peers
containing the initial parameters of the model. Once backward pass and parameter updates have
6

Figure 3: Zero-Bubble Asynchronous Model Parallelism within one cluster
been conducted the required gradients are then propagated to the preceding node.
Due to the
asynchronous nature of the forward and backward passes, the idle time bubble is reduced to zero.
Note that the degree of staleness decreases in the latter nodes, reducing to zero in the final edge
node.
3.2
Parallel Multi-Ring All-Reduce Mechanism for Parameter Averaging
Ravnest runs multiple Ring All-Reduces simultaneously to parallelize the averaging of model pa-
rameters across all clusters.
Figure 4: One round of Parallel Multi-Ring All-Reduce, with 5 parallel rings, during global parameter
averaging.
As discussed in section 2.3, one cycle of ring all-reduce comprises of 2 ∗(C −1) rounds for C
clusters. Figure 4 illustrates one round of this parallel reduction procedure across 4 heterogeneous
clusters, each containing a different number of peers. Note that the area of each node (N1, N2, ...) is
proportional to the size of the submodel hosted on it. For instance, size(Cluster2 : N1) is equivalent
to size(Cluster1 : N1) + size(Cluster1 : N2).
Before training commences, our cluster formation approach (discussed in section 3.5.2) optimally
groups together nodes into clusters. Each peer is also provided necessary information for the reduc-
tion procedure in the form of mappings that indicate the corresponding workers from other clusters
that it needs to form a ring with so that its submodel parameters can participate in averaging.
Within a cluster, since peers contain submodels of varying sizes, a node may have to be a part of
multiple rings and share/receive the required submodel parameters with one or more peers of the
7

neighbouring clusters. This also implies that the number of rings that will be formed is equivalent
to the number of maximum nodes across all clusters.
All peers of a cluster can now simultaneously send over their respective chunks of model param-
eters for aggregation to the responsible peers in the successor cluster. This marks one round of our
Parallelized Multi Ring All-Reduce. Once received, each peer aggregates their existing parameters
with the received parameters and keeps it ready for the next round. 2∗(C −1) such rounds make up
one cycle of parameter aggregation post which, all clusters effectively should be having the averaged
model parameters.
The complexity of each parallel ring is O

2 ∗(C −1) ∗S
C

, S being the size of the parameters
being averaged in that ring. The complexity for one entire all-reduce process can thus be represented
as O

2 ∗(C −1) ∗Smax
C

where Smax is the maximum data size being averaged across all the rings.
Since this value will be a fraction of the entire model’s size and each peer is averaging only a portion
of a submodel at a time, this mechanism performs favourably compared to having a single ring for
the entire model which would face either high latency issues or large bandwidth usage depending on
the number of participating workers.
3.3
Ravnest Algorithm
The participating nodes in a training session are first grouped together into clusters based on their
individual RAM and bandwidth specifications such that no cluster is significantly more capable than
the others as shown in section 3.5.2, following which each node is assigned a submodel that it is
capable of training.
Algorithm 2 Ravnest Algorithm
Require: common initial weight for all clusters: x0, learning rate: η, communication period κ
1: for t = 0, 1, ... do
2:
Randomly Sample a cluster it from [C]
3:
Randomly Sample a peer pit,t ∈cluster it
4:
if t + 1 mod κ = 0 then
5:
xt+1
i
= Parallel Multi-Ring All-Reduce(xt
1, xt
2, ..., xt
it −ηSpit,tˆgt
it, ..., xt
C)
∀i ∈[C]
6:
else
7:
xt+1
it,pit,t = xt
it,pit,t −ηˆgt
it,pit,t
8:
end if
9: end for
▷Here each peer participates in Zero-Bubble Asynchronous Model Parallelism within their cluster
and conducts updates as shown in Algorithm 1
Each cluster can effectively be viewed as a graph of interconnected nodes wherein each individual
node is responsible for a portion of the model, i.e. the parameters on the ith cluster can be represented
as xi = (xi,1, xi,2, ...xi,Pi) where Pi is the number of submodels/nodes on the ith cluster. Note that
the minimum number of submodels that a cluster can have is denoted by Nm.
In Algorithm 2, all workers across all clusters run parallelly in an asynchronous fashion and
Zero-Bubble Asynchronous Model Parallelism is used within each cluster as shown in Algorithm 1
and updates are made as and when Gradients are received by a peer pi in cluster i:
8

xt+1
i,pi = xt
i,pi −ηˆgt
i,pi
(3)
where xt+1
i,pi represents the parameters of peer pi on cluster i and ˆgt
i,pi = ∇piF(xt−τt
i
, bt
i)
Model parameters are also averaged periodically across clusters using the reduction mechanism
detailed in section 3.2. Since at any given time-step a submodel on a peer updates its weights, we
represent these updates in terms of the parameters at the cluster level as follows:
xt+1
i
= xt
i −ηSpiˆgt
i
(4)
xi being the model parameters on cluster i, ˆgt
i = ∇F(xt−τt
i
, bt
i) and Spi is a sampling matrix
such that for a vector v with vi as its ith block, Siv has vi in its ith block and 0 in the others.
Note that t is a global iteration counter and increments whenever an update is performed by any
peer on any cluster. This can be interpreted such that at any time-step t a peer pit,t on cluster it
updates its parameters and increments t.
The convergence rate of the proposed mechanism has been explored in section 3.4.
3.4
Theoretical Analysis
We explore the convergence of the proposed method in this section.
Towards this, we use the
following assumptions in our theoretical analysis, proofs and derivations.
Assumption 1
1. Unbiased Gradient: We assume that the data has been distributed appropriately allowing for
the stochastic gradients to be unbiased:
Ebi [∇F(x, bi)] = ∇fi(x)
(5)
where bi is a data minibatch from the data belonging to ith cluster, and
Ei [fi(x)] = f(x)
(6)
2. Lipschitz condition: All fi’s are L −smooth and their gradients are Lipschitzian, i.e.
∥∇fi(y) −∇fi(x)∥≤L ∥y −x∥
(7)
and
f(y) ≤f(x) + ⟨∇f(x), y −x⟩+ L
2 ∥y −x∥2
(8)
3. Bounded Variance: The variance of the stochastic gradient is bounded for all i’s:
Ebi
h
∥∇F(x, bi) −∇fi(x)∥2i
≤σ2, ∀x
(9)
The gradient of all fi’s is bounded:
Ei
h
∥∇fi(x) −∇f(x)∥2i
≤s2, ∀x
(10)
9

4. Bound for Parameters during Averaging: (Based on Assumption 3.2 of [34]) The average
difference between the ith cluster’s parameters and the global average of the parameters at the time
of averaging is bounded i.e., for any integer a ≥0 there exists a value ∆a ≥0 such that
E
"
1
C
C
X
i=1
∥xaκ
i
−xaκ∥2
#
≤η2∆2
a
(11)
where κ is the communication period and xt = 1
C
PC
i=1 xt
i.
5. Bound for Delay Values: All staleness values are bounded i.e. maxt τt ≤T
6. Independence: The random variables in [bi,t]t=0,1,2,... and [it]t=0,1,2,... are independent of each
other.
Under the aforementioned assumptions we detail the following theorem and corollary that de-
scribe the convergence rate of the defined optimisation problem, the full derivations of which are
shown in Appendix A and B.
3.4.1
Notations and Definitions Used
We define the following constants for concision:
A1 =1 −24η2L2e(κ −1)2
C2Nm
A2 = η2L
C2Nm
−
η
2CNm
+ 2η3L2T 2
C3N 2m
+ 4η2e(κ −1)2
A1C2Nm
 6η2L3
C2Nm
+ ηL2
CNm
+ 12η3L4T 2
C3N 2m

A3 = 1
A1
12η2L3
C2Nm
+ ηL2
CNm
 
∆2
a + 8es2(κ −1)2
CNm
+ eσ2(κ −1)
CNm

Theorem 1 Under Assumptions 1-6 and while η satisfies the constraints set by A1 > 0, A2 ≤0,
A3 ≤1 and 2ηLT 2
CNm ≤1, the proposed algorithm satisfies:
1
K
K−1
X
t=0
E
h

∇f(xt)

2i
≤2CNm
ηK
(f(x0) −f(x∗)) + 2η
C (2Nm + L(σ2 + 8s2))
(12)
Corollary 1.1 In accordance with Theorem 1, by setting
η =
C√Nm
p
K [2Nm + L(σ2 + 8s2)]
(13)
and making the number of iterations, K, large enough
K ≥
4L2
2Nm + L(σ2 + 8s2) max



















5T 4, 25Nm, 20e(κ −1)2N
1
3
m,
9T√e(κ −1), 24L∆2
aC,
24Le(κ −1)(σ2 + 8s2(κ −1))
Nm
, 16L2∆2
aC2
Nm
,
16L2e2(κ −1)2(σ2 + 8s2(κ −1))2
N 3m



















(14)
10

we get the following convergence rate:
1
K
K−1
X
t=0
E
h

∇f(xt)

2i
≤2(f(x0) −f(x∗))
√
K
p
2N 2m + LNm(σ2 + 8s2)
(15)
It can be observed that for values of K that are large enough, the convergence rate of the proposed
algorithm is O

1
√
K

which is consistent with the convergence rate of Local-SGD for convex and
non-convex optimizations [24, 8, 13].
We can see that if the staleness parameter T is bounded by O

K
1
4

, linear speedup is achieved.
Note that in case κ −1 > T 3, the bound for staleness is O (K) allowing for convergence with the
same iteration complexity for larger number of workers and hence larger magnitudes of staleness
compared to [25].
In the proposed system, each update on any of the clusters is considered an increment in time-
step. Consequently the greater the number of clusters, the greater is the number of update iterations
that can be achieved within the same time period allowing for a linear speed up with respect to
the number of participating clusters. Thus, we can even allow for clusters to join dynamically in
the global averaging graph after downloading the latest global average of model parameters and
participate in subsequent averaging rounds leading to an increase in convergence efficiency.
3.5
Implementation Details
3.5.1
Parallel Communication and Training
On every peer we maintain separate buffers for forward and backward passes that are responsible
for receiving and storing the activations and gradients from the neighbouring peers in the cluster’s
computation graph. The communication thread responsible for populating the buffers and sending
data to other peers is run on a separate process parallel to the training process.
The training
process is responsible for conducting forward and backward passes along with gradient updates
as and when the respective buffers are populated. To avoid race conditions during additions or
deletions in the buffers, both processes use Blocking Locks to prevent simultaneous modifications.
Once computations are done by the training process, the communication process sends the required
data to the appropriate peers only when the respective buffer of the receiving worker is empty, i.e.
the training process on that peer has popped values from it’s buffer for computation.
3.5.2
Cluster Formation Methodology
The peak memory usage of a model constitutes of the forward/backward pass size and memory
taken up by the parameters. The forward/backward size can serve as a good approximation for the
memory required to process one batch of data. Let the peak memory usage of the entire model
(which comprises of the above components) be:
M = size(data batch) × size(forward/backward pass) + size(parameters)
(16)
We define a pool of tuples containing usable RAM and bandwidth values for N nodes:
P = [(r1, b1), (r2, b2), ..., (ri, bi)]
∀i ∈[1, 2, ..., N]
where ri and bi represents the RAM and steady bandwidth of the ith compute node. Let’s say
we form Q optimal clusters. Our aim is to find a new set C = [ci] where ci can take discrete values
11

in [1, 2, ..., Q]. In other words, every (ri, bi) is mapped to a corresponding discrete valued ci which
represents the ID of the cluster that (ri, bi) belongs to. Note that P and C have the same number
of elements. Since we need to effectively fit the entire model of size M on each cluster, the first
constraint in our optimization problem is that the sum of all peer’s RAM values need to be greater
than M. Across all clusters in a training session, the sum of individual times to transfer data taken
by each node in a cluster should be comparable. This is equivalent to saying that the maximum
difference in sums of data transfer times across any 2 clusters needs to be minimized.This forms our
second constraint.
This is an NP-hard problem(meaning there’s no polynomial time solution), a heuristic/greedy
approach might be better suited for finding optimal solutions.
This optimization problem can
be solved using a Meta-Heuristic Genetic Algorithm [14].
We initialize a random population of
individual chromosomes, iteratively evolve them across generations while introducing mutations and
select the best performing ones based on a fitness function to create new successor generations [20].
The aforementioned set C serves as a representation for an individual chromosome, which are
assigned random values initially. A collection of such chromosomes are spawned to form a population,
which are together evolved across generations.
A penalty based fitness function (that uses the
problem constraints) is then used to evaluate all individuals in a population out of which, the best
ones are selected for crossover, resulting in offsprings that make up the next generation’s population.
The individual with the best fitness value observed is tracked across all generations and returned.
Since each cluster formed will typically contain a mix of nodes with varying RAM values, the main
model parameters will undergo a proportionate non-uniform split such that each peer can accomodate
the largest chunk possible.
For a communication infrastructure orchestrated over the internet, fault tolerance plays a crucial
role in ensuring successful model training. Ravnest allows new peers to join any ongoing distributed
training sessions. Based on the session’s fault tolerance requirements, they can either join a pre-
existing cluster and participate as backups nodes or wait till enough new peers are available to form
an entirely new cluster that, once formed, will fetch the latest set of aggregated parameters and
join the ring topology. The latter case provides an advantage, since having more clusters improves
the efficiency of the training process as was shown in Corollary 1.1. In the former scenario, the
new peer will be mapped as a backup for the most unreliable node in the cluster. An extra pair of
communication channels will be spawned that shares a copy of forward/backward pass results with
the backup node so that it can take over in case the primary node disconnects.
4
Experiments
This section elucidates upon a series of experimental training sessions conducted to evaluate the
performance and efficiency of our proposed methodology across both single and multi-cluster setups
with comparisons to baseline synchronous training.
4.1
Single Cluster Experiments with Homogeneous Nodes
We trained a ResNet-50 network [18] on the Tiny ImageNet dataset [48] for 50 epochs with a batch
size of 100. SGD was utilized with a momentum of 0.9, weight decay of 0.0005 and learning rate
of 0.01 which was reduced by a factor of 10 every 30 epochs. Images were pre-processed by scaling
to 224x224x3, then normalized to [0,1], with a mean of [0.485, 0.456, 0.406] and standard deviation
of [0.229, 0.224, 0.225]. We also trained an Inception-V3 model [40] on the CIFAR-10 dataset [21]
for 50 epochs with a batch size of 64 and SGD with a momentum of 0.9, weight decay of 0.0005
12

and learning rate of 0.01, reducing by a factor of 10 every 30 epochs. Images were pre-processed
by normalization (mean: [0.4914, 0.4822, 0.4465], standard deviation: [0.2023, 0.1994, 0.2010]).
Augmentation techniques including random flipping, cropping and padding were applied for both
datasets. While these settings provide a robust starting point, it is important to note that further
fine-tuning of hyperparameters could potentially lead to improved performance.
(a) ResNet-50 model trained on Tiny ImageNet
(b) Inception-V3 model trained on CIFAR-10
Figure 5: Comparison of validation accuracies over epochs
.
For both models, conventional synchronous training was performed as a baseline, followed by
decentralized training using proposed approach across 2 and 3 homogeneous nodes (within a single
cluster), all hosted on Nvidia A10G GPUs with 24 GB VRAM. From Figures 5a and 5b, it is evident
that as the number of nodes within the single cluster grows, initial validation accuracy registers lower
values compared to scenarios with fewer nodes. This can be ascribed to the accumulation of more
stagnant gradients as the size of the cluster increases. However, as training advances, the rates of
convergence are at par with those of the baselines. We also observed that the average memory usage
per node reduced by around 56% (3 nodes case) and by 42% (2 nodes case) for both models when
compared to conventional training on a single GPU instance with the same batch sizes.
4.2
Multi-Cluster Experiments with Heterogeneous Nodes
We evaluated a multi-cluster setup using the proposed method on the BERT model following the
BERT base (uncased) architecture [9].
Pretraining was done on Masked LM (MLM) and Next
Sentence Prediction (NSP) tasks using the LAMB optimizer [54] with a learning rate of 0.00176
and weight decay of 0.01, on the WikiText-103 dataset [27]. A linear scheduler with 5000 warmup
steps was also utilized. The sum of the losses for these 2 tasks was used as the convergence metric.
The multi-cluster setup consisted of 10 nodes across A10G, V100 and T4 GPUs hosted on cloud
instances. They were grouped into 4 clusters by the cluster formation genetic algorithm in order to
ensure that the total compute times were similar across all clusters.
Each cluster consisted of either 2 or 3 nodes, allowing for varying degrees of staleness, and
gradients were accumulated over 32 batches of 8 samples before performing updates. Parameter
averaging was done whenever each cluster completed 1400 update iterations. Conventional syn-
chronous baseline training was done with the same hyperparameters. Figure 6 shows that in 11797
13

Figure 6: BERT pre-training on multi-cluster setup
update iterations, the proposed algorithm achieves a learning curve comparable to that of the base-
line. Training for more iterations or increasing the number of clusters can lead to even better results.
Additionally, we noted that the average GPU memory usage across all nodes was approximately 67%
less than that seen during training on a single GPU instance with the same batch size of 8.
5
Conclusion
This research paper proposes an novel asynchronous parallel decentralised training paradigm that
leverages the strengths of both data and model parallelism techniques.
It incorporates Parallel
Multi-Ring All-Reduce for efficient parameter averaging across clusters, to train contemporary deep
learning models across heterogeneous consumer grade PCs. Zero-bubble Asynchronous Model Par-
allelism within each cluster further minimizes the idle time bubble on every node. Comprehensive
theoretical analysis was performed to validate the convergence and linear speedup characteristics of
the approach.
