—  87  —
Towards a framework for understanding societal 
and ethical implications of Artificial Intelligence
Hacia un marco para comprender las implicaciones sociales 
y éticas de la Inteligencia Artificia
Dr. V. Richard Benjamins
Telefónica
ORCID ID: 0000-0002-9412-7082
Dra. Idoia Salazar García 
Universidad CEU San Pablo
ORCID ID: 0000-0002-9540-8740
Resumen
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is one of the most discussed technologies today. There 
are many innovative applications such as the diagnosis and treatment of cancer, 
customer experience, new business, education, contagious diseases propagation and 
optimization of the management of humanitarian catastrophes. However, with all those 
opportunities also comes great responsibility to ensure good and fair practice of AI. The 
objective of this paper is to identify the main societal and ethical challenges implied by a 
massive uptake of AI. We have surveyed the literature for the most common challenges 
and classified them in seven groups: 1) Non-desired effects, 2) Liability, 3) Unknown 
consequences, 4) Relation people-robots, 5) Concentration of power and wealth, 
6) Intentional bad uses, and 7) AI for weapons and warfare. The challenges should 
be dealt with in different ways depending on their origin; some have technological 
solutions, while other require ethical, societal, or political answers. Depending on the 
origin, different stakeholders might need to act. Whatever the identified stakeholder, 
not treating those issues will lead to uncertainty and unforeseen consequences with 
potentially large negative societal impact, hurting especially the most vulnerable groups 
of societies. Technology is helping to take better decisions, and AI is promoting data-
driven decisions in addition to experience- and intuition-based discussion, with many 
improvements happening. However, the negative side effects of this technology need to 
be well understood and acted upon before we launch them massively into the world.
Keywords:  Artificial Intelligence, ethics, technology, robots.
Abstract
La inteligencia artificial (IA) es una de las tecnologías más discutidas en la 
actualidad. Existen muchas aplicaciones innovadoras como el diagnóstico y tratamiento 
del cáncer, la experiencia del cliente, los nuevos negocios, la educación, la propagación de 
enfermedades contagiosas y la optimización de la gestión de catástrofes humanitarias. 
Sin embargo, con todas esas oportunidades también viene una gran responsabilidad 
para garantizar una buena práctica justa de AI. El objetivo de este documento es 
identificar los principales desafíos sociales y éticos implicados por una aceptación 
masiva de la IA. Hemos examinado la literatura para los desafíos más comunes y los

Richard Benjamins - Idoia Salazar García
—  88  —
hemos clasificado en siete grupos: 1) Efectos no deseados, 2) Responsabilidad, 3) 
Consecuencias desconocidas, 4) Relaciones personas-robots, 5) Concentración de poder 
y riqueza, 6) Mal uso intencional, y 7) IA para armas y guerra. Los desafíos deben ser 
tratados de diferentes maneras dependiendo de su origen; algunos tienen soluciones 
tecnológicas, mientras que otros requieren respuestas éticas, sociales o políticas. 
Dependiendo del origen, diferentes actores podrían necesitar actuar. Cualquiera que sea 
la parte interesada identificada, el no tratar esos problemas dará lugar a incertidumbres 
y consecuencias imprevistas con un impacto social negativo potencialmente grande, 
afectando especialmente a los grupos más vulnerables de las sociedades. La tecnología 
está ayudando a tomar mejores decisiones, y AI está promoviendo decisiones basadas 
en datos, además de discusiones basadas en la experiencia y la intuición, con muchas 
mejoras en marcha. Sin embargo, los efectos secundarios negativos de esta tecnología 
deben entenderse bien y actuar antes de lanzarlos masivamente al mundo.
Palabras clave:  Inteligencia Artificial, ética, robots, tecnología.
1.	
INTRODUCTION
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is on the rise. There are so many innovative 
applications of AI that everybody is speaking about it. It improves the diagnosis 
and treatment of cancer, improves customer experience, creates new business, 
improves education, predicts how contagious diseases propagate and optimizes 
the management of humanitarian catastrophes, to name just a few. 
Artificial Intelligence already exists since the mid-fifties when John 
McCarthy first coined the term. Marvin Minsky’s definition of AI was: “The 
science of making machines do things that would require intelligence if done 
by humans” (Dennis, 2016). AI has had its ups and downs previously (e.g. AI 
Winters). In a white paper published earlier by author of this paper Richard 
Benjamins (LUCA-Telefónica, 2016), was explained basic concepts of AI to 
provide some background information to better understand the many articles 
about AI appearing in the press and Internet. AI’s current popularity is mostly 
due to the enormous progress in one of AI’s subfields: Machine Learning (ML). 
There are three main reasons for this progress:
•  The abundance of data. ML analyses data, and today there is so much 
more data available than decades ago.
•  Increase in computational power. Moore’s Law is still valid, and 
machines can process orders of magnitude faster and more than before.
•  Deep Learning. An extended version of Neural Networks that, thanks to 
the two previous points, has increased enormously the performance of 
all kinds of classification and prediction tasks. 

Towards a framework for understanding societal and ethical implications of Artificial Intelligence
—  89  —
However, with all those opportunities also comes great responsibility to 
ensure good and fair practice of AI. We identified seven societal and ethical 
challenges for Artificial Intelligence that should be dealt with before AI is 
massively applied. Not treating those issues will lead to uncertainty and 
unforeseen consequences with potentially large negative societal impact. It is 
therefore no surprise that many governments currently have set up national 
initiatives to discuss many of those issues (e.g. in the UK (Committee on AI, 
2018) and France (Le Gouvernement Republique Française, 2017).
2.	
OBJECTIVES
The study and understanding of the societal and ethical aspects of Artificial 
Intelligence is a new, yet fast-growing area, where not much scientific literature 
exists. However, many informal articles and publications discuss the topic on 
the Internet, in the press and as outcomes of closed workshops with experts. 
The objective of this paper is to help shape the area by proposing a framework 
to classify the different types of societal and ethical challenges such that each 
can be properly studied and addressed through research and experiments.
Specific objectives:
1.  Analyse the social impact that the development of Artificial Intelligence 
is having, through the study of current real cases.
2.  Identify the advantages and disadvantages of the massive implementation 
of this technology.
3.  Identify old ethical dilemmas and compare them with the current ones 
derived from the implementation of these technologies.
4.  Offer a theoretical frame of reference for further studies related to the 
social impact of Artificial Intelligence.
5.  Determine future prospects, in the medium term, of this technology, 
once the seven major challenges are analysed.
3.	
METHODOLOGY
The study and understanding of the societal and ethical aspects of Artificial 
Intelligence is a new, yet fast-growing, area, where not much scientific literature 

Richard Benjamins - Idoia Salazar García
—  90  —
exists. However, many white papers from different governments and organizations 
discuss the topic, knowing its relevance and high impact in the next future. In this 
paper we have analyse several white papers, defining white paper as: authoritative 
report or guide, made up by high qualified experts, that informs readers concisely 
about a complex issue and presents the issuing body’s philosophy on the matter 
(Gordon and Graham, 2003). We also analyse different reports published in some 
of the most worldwide prestigious magazines specialized in technology as Wired.
We also have consulted some scientific articles from databases accessible 
through the Internet, as Scopus bibliographic database which supports the 
quality of these publications (De Granda-Orive et al., 2013). This is the largest 
database of abstracts and literature reviewed by peers and has intelligent tools 
that allow to control, analyse and visualize academic research. Given its wide 
coverage, both geographical and thematic, it is considered ideal to be used 
for bibliographic reviews (Codina, 2018). The main search criteria have been 
delimited by keywords including Boolean inclusion (AND) or exclusion (NOT) 
operators. Date range filters have also been used. Likewise, these same search 
criteria have been applied in the database Web of Science, where the references 
of the main scientific publications of any discipline of knowledge, both scientific 
and technological, humanistic and sociological since 1945 are detailed. 
In addition, it has been of great help for the acquisition of the necessary 
knowledge for this research, the collaboration of the authors of this article in the 
online forum International Ethically Aligned Design (EAD), in which professionals 
of international relevance expose their point of view on how to create the best 
ethical code of Artificial Intelligence, taking into account the social impact of this 
technology. As well as in the discussion forums of the European AI Alliance, a body 
dependent on the European Commission, of which the authors are also a member.
Also, the knowledge of the authors necessary for the realization of this 
paper derives from several investigations related to other areas of the social 
impact of Artificial Intelligence, acquired as researchers of the SIMPAIR group 
(Social Impact of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics).
4.	
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS OF THE INVESTIGATION
4.1.	
Seven societal and ethical challenges for Data and AI
The challenges that AI, and therefore Data as well, face include non-desired 
side effects, liability questions, yet unknown consequences, the relation human-
robots, increasing concentration of power and wealth, intentional bad uses, and 
AI for weapons and warfare. Below, we explain each of them.

Towards a framework for understanding societal and ethical implications of Artificial Intelligence
—  91  —
1.  Non-desired side effects
a)  While Machine Learning is able to solve complex tasks with high 
performance, it might use information that from a society or humanity 
perspective is undesired. For example, deciding whether to provide a 
loan to people based on race or religion is not something our societies 
accept. While it is possible to remove those “undesired” attributes 
from data sets, there are other less obvious attributes that highly 
correlate with those “undesired” attributes whose removal is less 
straightforward. Machine Learning is objective and finds whatever 
relation there is in the data regardless of specific norms and values.
b)  A related issue is so-called bias of data sets. Machine Learning bases 
its conclusions on data. However, the data itself might be biased by 
not being representative for the group of people to which the results 
are applied. For instance, finding trends on school performance using 
mostly white schools will not provide insights applicable to all schools. 
Research has shown that ML takes over any bias from humans (Burgess, 
2017). What we need is so-called “Fair” Machine Learning, addressing 
the issues in point a) and b). (World Economic Forum, 2018).
c)  Apart from bias in the training data, bias can also come from the algorithm. 
A Machine Learning algorithm tries to be as accurate as possible when 
fitting the model to the training data. Accuracy can be defined in terms of 
so-called “false positives” and “false negatives”, often through a so-called 
confusion matrix. But the definition of this “accuracy” measure, whether 
it tries to optimize only false positives or only false negatives, or both, has 
an important impact on the outcome of the algorithm, and therefore on 
the groups of people affected by the AI program. In safety-critical domains 
such as health, justice, and transport defining “accuracy” is not a technical 
decision, but a domain or even a political decision.
d)  Deep learning algorithms can be highly successful but have a hard time 
to explain why they have come to a decision. For some applications, 
the explanation of decisions is an essential part of the decision itself, 
and lack of that makes the decision unacceptable. For example, a 
“robo-judge” deciding on a dispute between a customer and a health 
insurer is unacceptable without the explanation of the decision. This 
is referred to as the “Interpretability” problem. The book “Weapons of 
math destruction” gives many interesting examples of this. 
e)  Data privacy, transparency and control. All data and AI system exploit 
data, and many times this is personal data. Using all this personal 

Richard Benjamins - Idoia Salazar García
—  92  —
data has as side effect that privacy may be compromised, even if it is 
unintentionally. The recent scandal of Cambridge Analytica / Facebook 
shows that this is a bigger issue than we might have thought.
To avoid those effects, people sometimes refer to the need for FATE AI (Fair, 
Accountable, Transparent and Explainable Artificial Intelligence).
2.  Liability. When systems become autonomous and self-learning, 
accountability of behaviour and actions of those systems becomes less obvious. 
In the pre-AI world, incorrect usage of a device is the accountability of the user, 
while device failure is accountability of the manufacturer. When systems become 
autonomous and learn over time, some behaviour might not be foreseen by the 
manufacturer. It is therefore unclear who would be liable in case something 
goes wrong. A clear example of this are driverless cars. Discussions are ongoing 
whether a new legal person needs to be introduced for self-learning, autonomous 
systems, such as a legal status for robots, but it is generating some controversy.
3.  Unknown consequences of AI. The positive aspects of AI may have some 
consequences of which we don’t know yet how they will work out. 
a)  AI can take over many boring, repetitive or dangerous tasks. But if this 
happens at a massive scale, maybe many jobs might disappear, and 
unemployment will skyrocket? 
b)  If less and less people work, then the government will receive less income tax, 
while costs of social benefits will increase due to increased unemployment. 
How can this be made sustainable? Should there be a “robot tax”? How to be 
able to pay pensions when increasingly less people work?
c)  Is there a need for a universal basic income (UBI) for everybody? If AI takes 
most of the current jobs, what do all unemployed people then live from?
4.  How should people relate to robots? If Robots become more autonomous 
and learn during their “lifetime”, then what should be the (allowed) relationship 
between robots and people? Could one’s boss be a robot, or AI system? In Asia, 
robots are already taking care of elderly people, accompanying them in their 
loneliness. And, could people get married to a robot?
An initial overview of possible interactions between humans and robots 
includes (Dautenhahn, 2017):
a)  Long-term interactions: in which robots cohabitate with humans in 
their homes, and work places.
b)  Robots in therapy, rehabilitation and supporting the elderly: Assistive 
robotics is a growing application domain for service robots. It involves 

Towards a framework for understanding societal and ethical implications of Artificial Intelligence
—  93  —
critical safety and ethical issues, for example when robots take the 
role of assisting vulnerable people or people with special needs. It is 
a fact that today, approximately 10 percent of the world’s population 
is over 60 years old and by 2050 this proportion will have more than 
doubled. We need to incorporate artificial intelligence techniques to 
support older adults and help them cope with the changes of aging, in 
particular with cognitive decline (Pollack, 2005)
c)  Multimodal interactions, expressiveness, and conversational skills in 
interactions: Research aiming at providing robots with human-like 
features and qualities is expanding. We are trying to create robots 
with a similar appearance to us. And not only this. We are also trying 
to provide “their faces” with natural expressions that normally would 
only correspond to humans.
d)  Social learning and skill acquisition via teaching and imitation: 
This theme involves research on robots that can adapt to changing 
environments and requirements, that can ‘grow’ with increasing levels 
of skills and knowledge they acquire, and that can be programmed 
indirectly by demonstrating tasks. Once acquired, the robot could also 
transfer the newly learnt skills to other robots. If this turns out a real 
possibility, it could lead to an ethical problem.
e)  Cooperation and collaboration in human-robot teams: Robots and 
humans will not only live side by side, but they also need to work hand 
in hand, each one of them performing specific tasks, but helping each 
other. This interaction, mostly at the beginning, might be quite difficult 
taking into account the concept of ‘machine’, and all its implications, 
that humanity has nowadays.
f)  Detecting and understanding human activity: This will be also a 
problem in the near future for this interaction. Many times, humans do 
things for reasons that could be out of logic for a machine. 
These are just some of the possible interactions in the relationship between 
human and robots. Each one of them will probably need further study to get to 
relevant conclusions. 
5.  Concentration of power and wealth in a few very large companies. 
Currently, AI is dominated by a few large digital companies, including GAFAM 
(Google, Amazon, Facebook, Apple, Microsoft) and some Chinese mega compa­
nies (BAT - Baidu, Alibaba and Tencent). This is mostly due to those companies 
having access to massive amounts of propriety data. This might lead to an oligo­
poly. Apart from the lack of competition, there is a danger that those companies 

Richard Benjamins - Idoia Salazar García
—  94  —
keep AI as proprietary knowledge, not sharing anything with the larger society 
other than for the highest price possible. Another concern of this concentration 
is that those companies can offer high-quality AI as a service, based on their 
data and propriety algorithms (black box). When those AI services are used for 
public services, the fact that it is a black box (bias, undesired attributes, perfor­
mance, etc.), raises serious concerns, like when the LA Police Department an­
nounced that it uses Amazon’s face recognition solution (Rekognition) for po­
licing. The Open Data Institute in London has started an interesting debate on 
whether AI algorithms and Data should be closed, shared or open. 
6.  Intentional bad uses. All the points mentioned above are issues because AI 
and Data are applied with the intention to improve or optimize our lives. However, 
like any technology, AI and Data can also be used with bad intentions1. Think of AI-
based cyberattacks2, terrorism, influencing important events with fake news3, etc.
7.  The last challenge is related to the application of AI for warfare and 
weapons, especially for lethal autonomous weapons systems (LAWS). This 
usually implies an explicit, political decision, that some will consider “good use”, 
while other might call it bad use of AI. Some organizations are working on an 
international treaty to ban “killer robots”. The issue recently attracted attention 
due to Google employees sending a letter to their CEO questioning Google’s 
participation in defence projects.
4.2.	
Stakeholders and potential actions
While there is ample debate ongoing about many of those issues (e.g. AI 
and the future of work), today it is unclear what solutions there will be for some 
of the challenges. What we can define, however, are relevant actions to work 
on as an approach for dealing with those challenges. Each of the actions might 
involve different stakeholders. While executing the approach, because of the 
uncertainty involved, adaptions need to be made in a learning by doing process. 
•  Governments and institutions need to think about strategies and approaches 
to identify the issues along with their solution directions. The GDPR is a 
small, but important step into that direction. Several national governments 
1	
(2018, 02). The Malicious Use of Artificial Intelligence: Forecasting, Prevention, and 
Mitigation. Open Data Institute. 05, 2018, https://img1.wsimg.com/blobby/go/3d82daa4-97fe-
4096-9c6b-376b92c619de/downloads/1c6q2kc4v_50335.pdf
2	
(2018, 02). Artificial intelligence poses risks of misuse by hackers, researchers say. 
Reuters. 05, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-cyber-tech/artificial-intelligence-poses-
risks-of-misuse-by-hackers-researchers-say-idUSKCN1G503V
3	
(2018, 04). Artificial intelligence is making fake news worse. Business Insiders. 05, 
2018, http://uk.businessinsider.com/artificial-intelligence-is-making-fake-news-worse-2018-4

Towards a framework for understanding societal and ethical implications of Artificial Intelligence
—  95  —
are already working on this through multidisciplinary committees of 
experts (Committee on AI, 2018, Le Gouvernement Republique Française, 
2017). Maybe governments should ensure the availability of rich and 
sufficiently varied open datasets to minimize unfair bias. 
•  Private enterprises need to start thinking about self-regulation and 
about where they stand. They should be clear on how responsible they 
want to act and become.
•  Probably a one-size-fits-all approach will not work, as some AI and Big 
Data applications have less potential negative side effect than others. 
E.g., decisions in marketing have probably less negative side effects than 
decisions about insurance premiums or medical diagnosis. Decisions 
made for so-called “safety-critical” systems may need to be validated 
and verified by formal mathematical procedures to ensure their correct 
functioning under all possible circumstances. 
•  GDPR (Europe’s General Data Protection Regulation) is a step forward 
regarding protection of personal data. A clear distinction needs to be 
made between Data & AI applications using personal data versus those 
using aggregated, anonymized data. Applications using personal data 
will need an explicit and transparent user consent (as provisioned in the 
GDPR). This is not needed when aggregated, anonymized data is used, but, 
as a matter of transparency, one might argue for the “right to be informed” 
when users’ (aggregated, anonymized) data is used for applications. 
•  AI and Data should not only be used for commercial opportunities, but 
also for social opportunities, such as Data for Good and AI for Good, 
initiatives whose aims are to support achieving the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
•  The Open Data approach should be extended to Open Algorithms, to 
enable the benefits of private data, while not increasing the privacy and 
commercial risks of private enterprises. In this approach, algorithms 
are sent to the data, so data remains in its original premises, rather than 
the usual other way around, where data is stored centrally and then 
algorithms are run on the data. 
•  Code of conducts should be in place for all professional families that 
contribute to Data and AI applications. This should reduce the likelihood 
of bad uses and unintended negative side effects. 
•  International, multidisciplinary committees should be put in place to 
oversee and monitor the uses of Data and AI across the world and raise 
alerts when needed. Something like the Civil Aviation Authority for 
airplane crashes. 

Richard Benjamins - Idoia Salazar García
—  96  —
The following table relates the identified concerns with potential actions of relevant stakeholders.
Challenge category
Concern
Stakeholder to act
Type of action
Potential action
Non-desired 
side effects 
Non-desired side effects
Companies and 
organizations
Policy
Code of conducts to raise awareness of non-desired 
consequences to designers, developers and users of AI
Undesired attributes
Companies and 
organizations
Technical
Find correlations between sensitive data and other 
variables
Bias
Companies and 
organizations
Technical
Develop or use tool that checks bias of data set w.r.t. 
target group
Governments
Policy
Publish bias-free Open Data sets 
Interpretability
Companies and 
organizations
Technical
Perform and use research on explainable algorithms
Governments
Ethical
Discussions on in what areas AI needs to be explainable
Privacy
Companies and 
organizations
Policy
Privacy by design, and transparent privacy policies
Companies and 
organizations
Technical
Send algorithms to data rather than transferring data 
out of organizations increasing data breach risk
Liability
Liability
Governments
Policy
Discussion on liability of self-learning, autonomous 
systems
Unknown 
consequences of AI
Work and jobs
Companies and 
organizations
Policy
Training and up-skilling of employees to the digital 
world
Governments
Policy
Adapt educational system for AI future.
Governments and 
institutions
Policy
Evaluate impact of Universal Basic Income and 
sustainability of welfare system
Relation 
people-robots
Relation people-robots
Governments
Ethical
Study the possible ways in which people can relate to 
robots, from collaboration to medical assistance to 
marriage
Data & wealth 
concentration
Data concentration
Governments
Policy
Evaluate what can be done to reduce dependency on a 
few technological giants with disproportional amount 
of data
Intentional bad uses
Intentional bad uses
Governments
Policy
Strengthen cybersecurity units with AI and data 
expertise 
AI and warfare
AI and warfare
Governments
Ethical
Discuss explicitly how far we should go with so-called 
“killer robots”
General world-wide 
impact of AI 
General world-wide impact 
of AI 
Governments
Policy
Create international organizations with authority over 
important AI developments and projects in the world
Companies, organizations 
and Governments
Technical
Use AI for social purposes to help achieve the UN’s 
Sustainable Development Goals. 
Source:  Prepared by the authors

Towards a framework for understanding societal and ethical implications of Artificial Intelligence
—  97  —
5.	
CONCLUSIONS
With AI become increasingly more widespread, it is important that we 
are prepared to ensure that our societies and economies continue to function 
well with the expected massive uptake of Data & AI applications. In this paper, 
we have identified seven types of challenges to be dealt with before massively 
using AI and Big Data in our societies. We then looked at what type of actions 
are required by the different stakeholders to maximize the likelihood of the 
issues to be tackled. While some of the required actions are already in progress, 
several others are only starting. In general, we expect that significant debate is 
needed to take final decisions and there is no guarantee that different nations in 
the world will come to the same conclusions. 
However, while much work still needs to be done, we should neither forget 
that today, without massive uptake of AI, we don’t live, and have never lived, in 
an ideal world. Think of the large number of humans that have taken, are taking 
and will take extremely wrong decisions, with hugely negative consequences 
for humanity. People are “human” and therefore decisions inevitably are biased 
by personal experiences and opinions. And many decision makers have taken 
–with good intent– important measures that have had serious negative side 
effects. So, while there are risks associated with the massive uptake of AI & Data, 
there is probably more to win than to lose with those technologies. Moreover, 
humanity has ample experience in how to manage or recover from negative 
consequences of (wrong) decisions. 
If there is a final deadline before we would need to have solved the seven 
challenges, it will probably be the Singularity, the point in time when Artificial 
Intelligence will lead to machines that are smarter than human beings. However, 
even if this point may never arrive, it is good that societies start discussing the 
issues now, through a common vocabulary and framework, rather than waiting 
until it is (too) late.
