Reinforcement Learning based Collective Entity Alignment
with Adaptive Features
WEIXIN ZENG, XIANG ZHAO∗, and JIUYANG TANG, Science and Technology on Information
Systems Engineering Laboratory, National University of Defense Technology, China
XUEMIN LIN, The University of New South Wales, Australia
PAUL GROTH, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Entity alignment (EA) is the task of identifying the entities that refer to the same real-world object but are
located in different knowledge graphs (KGs). For entities to be aligned, existing EA solutions treat them
separately and generate alignment results as ranked lists of entities on the other side. Nevertheless, this
decision-making paradigm fails to take into account the interdependence among entities. Although some
recent efforts mitigate this issue by imposing the 1-to-1 constraint on the alignment process, they still cannot
adequately model the underlying interdependence and the results tend to be sub-optimal.
To fill in this gap, in this work, we delve into the dynamics of the decision-making process, and offer a
reinforcement learning (RL) based model to align entities collectively. Under the RL framework, we devise the
coherence and exclusiveness constraints to characterize the interdependence and restrict collective alignment.
Additionally, to generate more precise inputs to the RL framework, we employ representative features to
capture different aspects of the similarity between entities in heterogeneous KGs, which are integrated by
an adaptive feature fusion strategy. Our proposal is evaluated on both cross-lingual and mono-lingual EA
benchmarks and compared against state-of-the-art solutions. The empirical results verify its effectiveness and
superiority.
CCS Concepts: • Information systems →Information integration; Data extraction and integration.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Entity alignment, Reinforcement learning, Adaptive feature fusion
ACM Reference Format:
Weixin Zeng, Xiang Zhao, Jiuyang Tang, Xuemin Lin, and Paul Groth. 2021. Reinforcement Learning based
Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features. 1, 1 (January 2021), 33 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1122445.1122456
1
INTRODUCTION
Knowledge graphs (KGs) play a pivotal role in tasks such as information retrieval [54], question
answering [24] and recommendation systems [11]. Although many KGs have been constructed
∗Corresponding author.
This work was partially supported by Ministry of Science and Technology of China under grant No. 2020AAA0108800,
NSFC under grants Nos. 61872446 and 71971212, NSF of Hunan Province under grant No. 2019JJ20024, and Postgraduate
Scientific Research Innovation Project of Hunan Province under grant No. CX20190033. All content represents the opinion
of the authors, which is not necessarily shared or endorsed by their respective employers and/or sponsors.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires

© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2021/1-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.
arXiv:2101.01353v1  [cs.CL]  5 Jan 2021

2
W. Zeng et al.
over recent years, none of them can guarantee full coverage [37]. Indeed, KGs often contain
complementary information, which motivates the task of merging KGs.
To incorporate the knowledge from a target KG into a source KG, an important step is to align
entities between them. To this end, the task of entity alignment (EA) is proposed, which aims to
discover entities that have the same meaning but belong to different original KGs. To handle the
task, state-of-the-art EA methods [10, 38, 45, 63] assume that equivalent entities in different KGs
have similar neighborhood structures. As a consequence, they first use representation learning
technologies (e.g., TransE [13] and graph convolutional network (GCN) [50]) to capture structural
features of KGs; that is, they map entities into data points in a low-dimensional feature space,
where pair-wise similarity can be easily evaluated between the data points. Then, to determine the
alignment result, they treat entities independently and retrieve a ranked list of target entities for
each source entity according to the pair-wise similarities, where the top-ranked target entity is
selected as the predicted match to the source entity in question.
Nevertheless, merely using the KG structure, in most cases, cannot guarantee satisfactory
alignment results [12]. Consequently, recent methods exploit multiple types of features, e.g., at-
tributes [48, 50], entity description [12, 57], entity names [52, 53], to provide a more comprehensive
view for alignment. To fuse different features, these methods first calculate pair-wise similarity
scores within each feature-specific space, and then combine these scores to generate the final
similarity score. However, they manually assign the weights of features, which can be impractical
when the number of features increases, or the importance of certain features varies greatly under
different settings.
In response, we first exploit the structural, semantic, string-level features to capture different
aspects of the similarity between the entities in source and target KGs. Then, to effectively aggre-
gate different features, we devise an adaptive feature fusion strategy to fuse the feature-specific
similarity matrices. The similarity matrices are calculated using the nature-inspired Bray-Curtis
dissimilarity [8], a widely used measure to quantify the compositional difference between two
coenoses, which can better capture the similarity between entities than commonly used distance
measures, e.g., Manhattan distance [50, 52, 53], Euclidean distance [13, 57, 62], and cosine similar-
ity [44–46]. After obtaining the similarity matrix that encodes alignment signals from different
features, the next crucial step is to make alignment decisions based on this matrix. As mentioned
above, current methods adopt the independent decision-making strategy to generate alignment
results, which is illustrated in Example 1.
Example 1. In Figure 1(a) are two KGs (𝐾𝐺1 and 𝐾𝐺2), where the dashed lines indicate known
alignment (i.e., seeds). The target entities 𝑣1, 𝑣2, 𝑣3, and 𝑣4 in 𝐾𝐺2 are to be aligned, respectively,
to the source entities 𝑢1, 𝑢2, 𝑢3, and 𝑢4 in 𝐾𝐺1 (i.e., ground truth). Assume that we now arrive at
some similarity matrix in Figure 1(b) for the entities in question, where greater values indicate higher
similarities. Following the aforementioned independent decision-making paradigm, for the source
entity 𝑢1, as the target entity 𝑣1 is of the highest similarity score, (𝑢1, 𝑣1) is predicted as a match;
similarly, (𝑢2, 𝑣1), (𝑢3, 𝑣2) and (𝑢4, 𝑣2) are predicted to be equivalent. Compared with the ground truth,
the former is correct, and yet the latter three are erroneous.
Example 1 shows that the independent decision-making strategy fails to produce satisfactory
alignment results, as it neglects the interdependence among the decision-making for each source
entity. Hence, a few very recent methods [55, 58] incorporate the 1-to-1 constraint to coordinate
the alignment process and align entities collectively. This constraint requires that each source
entity is matched to exactly one target entity, and vice versa, which has been shown to improve the
alignment results. However, we find that the decision-making paradigm incorporating the 1-to-1
constraint might not suffice to produce a satisfying alignment, which is shown in Example 2. This
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

RL-based Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features
3
u2
u3
u1
v3
v2
v1
KG1
KG2
u4
v4
(a) Input KGs
0.9 0.2 0.1
0.7 0.5 0.4
0.2 0.9 0.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2 0.4 0.2 0.3
v1 v2
v3 v4
u1
u2
u3
u4
(b) Similarity Matrix
u1
u2
u3
v1
v2
v3
u4
v4
(c) Independent
u1
u2
u3
v1
v2
v3
u4
v4
(d) 1-to-1 Constrained
u1
u2
u3
v1
v2
v3
u4
v4
(e) Coherent + Exclusive
Fig. 1. An example of EA and different strategies. (a): Input KGs, where the nodes (resp. lines) depict entities
(resp. relations); (b): Similarity matrix of all-pair entities; (c)—(e): Alignment produced by different strategies,
where the entities connected by solid lines are correct matches, whereas those connected by dashed lines are
erroneous matches, and the colored lines denote related entities in the same KG.
motivates us to find a better characterization of the interdependence. Therefore, we propose a new
coordination strategy, which is comprised of the coherence and exclusiveness constraints, to restrict
the collective alignment. Specifically, coherence aims to keep the EA decisions coherent for closely-
related entities. Suppose a source entity 𝑢is matched with the target entity 𝑣; coherence requires
that, for the source entities that are closely related to 𝑢, their corresponding target entities should
also be closely related to the target entity 𝑣. Meanwhile, exclusiveness aims to avoid assigning the
same target entity to multiple source entities, which requires that, if an entity is already matched, it
is less likely to be matched to other entities. In essence, exclusiveness relaxes the 1-to-1 constraint
by allowing some extreme cases, e.g., two source entities both have very high confidence to align
the same target entity, and produces a pairing that does not necessarily follow the 1-to-1 constraint.
Example 2. Further to Example 1, by imposing the 1-to-1 constraint, one would arrive at the solution
that aligns 𝑢3 to 𝑣2, since 𝑢3 has a higher similarity score with 𝑣2 than 𝑢2, and hence 𝑢2 is compelled to
match 𝑣3, 𝑢4 is compelled to match 𝑣4. In this case, although 𝑢4 finds the correct match, 𝑢2 and 𝑢3 still
deviate from their correct counterparts.
As for our proposed coordination strategy, the exclusiveness constraint would help prevent 𝑢2 from
matching 𝑣1, since 𝑣1 has been confidently aligned to 𝑢1; it would also encourage 𝑢4 to align 𝑣4 rather
than 𝑣2, since 𝑣2 has higher similarity scores with other entities. The coherence constraint would
suggest matching 𝑢2 with 𝑣2, as both 𝑢2 and 𝑣2 are related with the previously matched pair (𝑢1, 𝑣1).
However, the local similarity score between (𝑢3, 𝑣2) is much higher than (𝑢2, 𝑣2). In this case, the
exclusiveness would allow both 𝑢2 and 𝑢3 to match entity 𝑣2. In comparison with the cases mentioned
above, practicing the new coordination strategy reduces the number of incorrect matches.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

4
W. Zeng et al.
To implement the new coordination strategy, we cast the alignment process to the classic sequence
decision problem. Given a sequence of source entities, the goal of the sequence decision problem
is to decide to which target entity each source entity aligns. We approach the problem with a
reinforcement learning (RL) based framework, which learns to optimize the decision-making for all
entities, rather than optimize every single decision separately. More specifically, to implement the
coherence and exclusiveness constraints under the RL-based framework, we propose the following
design. When making the alignment decision for each source entity, the model takes as input not
only local similarity scores, but also coherence and exclusiveness signals generated by previously
aligned entities. Further, we incorporate the coherence and exclusiveness information into the
reward shaping. Thus, the interdependence between EA decisions can be adequately captured.
Contributions.
This article is an extended version of our previous work [58]. In this extension,
we make substantial improvement:
• We extend the idea of resolving EA jointly by offering an RL-based collective EA framework
(CEAFF) that can model both the coherence and exclusiveness of EA decisions.
• We introduce an adaptive feature fusion strategy to better integrate different features without
the need of training data or manual intervention.
• We adopt the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity to measure the similarity between entity embeddings,
which applies normalization over the calculated distance and leads to better results compared
with the commonly used distance measures such as Manhattan distance and cosine similarity.
• We add some very recent methods for comparison and conduct a more comprehensive
analysis.
The main contributions of the article can be summarized as follows:
• We identify the deficiency of existing EA methods in making alignment decisions, and propose
a novel solution CEAFF to boost the overall EA performance. This is done by (1) casting
the alignment process into the sequence decision problem, and offering a reinforcement
learning (RL) based model to align entities collectively; and (2) exploiting representative
features to capture different aspects of the similarity between entities, and integrating them
with adaptively assigned features.
• We empirically evaluate our proposal on both cross-lingual and mono-lingual EA tasks
against 19 state-of-the-art methods, and the comparative results demonstrate the superiority
of CEAFF.
Organization.
In Section 2, we formally define the task of EA and introduce related work. In
Section 3, we present the outline of CEAFF. In Section 4, we introduce the feature generation
process. In Section 5, we introduce the adaptive feature fusion strategy. In Section 6, we elaborate the
RL-based collective EA strategy. In Section 7, we introduce the experimental settings. In Section 8,
we report and analyze the results. In Section 9, we present the conclusion and future works.
2
PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we first formally define the task of EA, and then introduce the related work.
2.1
Task Definition
The task of EA aims to align entities in different KGs. A KG 𝐺= (𝐸, 𝑅,𝑇) is a directed graph
comprising a set of entities 𝐸, relations 𝑅, and triples 𝑇. A triple 𝑡= (𝑒𝑖,𝑟𝑖𝑗,𝑒𝑗) ∈𝑇represents that
a head entity 𝑒𝑖is connected to a tail entity 𝑒𝑗via a relation 𝑟𝑖𝑗.
The inputs to EA are a source KG 𝐺1 = (𝐸1, 𝑅1,𝑇1), a target KG 𝐺2 = (𝐸2, 𝑅2,𝑇2), a set of seed
entity pairs 𝑆= {(𝑢𝑠, 𝑣𝑠)|𝑢𝑠∈𝐸𝑠
1, 𝑣𝑠∈𝐸𝑠
2,𝑢𝑠↔𝑣𝑠}, where 𝐸𝑠
1 and 𝐸𝑠
2 denote the source and target
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

RL-based Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features
5
entities in the training set, respectively, 𝑢𝑠↔𝑣𝑠indicates the source entity 𝑢𝑠and the target entity
𝑣𝑠are equivalent, i.e., 𝑢𝑠and 𝑣𝑠refer to the same real-world object. The task of EA is defined as
finding a target entity 𝑣∗for each source entity 𝑢in the test set, i.e., Ψ = {(𝑢, 𝑣∗)|𝑢∈𝐸𝑡
1, 𝑣∗∈𝐸𝑡
2},
where 𝐸𝑡
1 and 𝐸𝑡
2 represent the source and target entities in the test set, respectively. A pair of aligned
entities 𝜙∈Ψ is also called a correspondence. If the source and target entities in the correspondence
are equivalent, we call it a correct correspondence.
2.2
Related Work
Entity Resolution and Instance Matching.
While the problem of EA was introduced a few
years ago, the more generic version of the problem—identifying entity records referring to the
same real-world entity from different data sources—has been investigated from various angles
by different communities [61]. It is mainly referred to as entity resolution (ER) [20, 35], entity
matching [16, 34] or record linkage [14]. These tasks assume the inputs are relational data, and
each data object usually has a large amount of textual information described in multiple attributes.
Since EA pursues the same goal as ER, it can be deemed a special but non-trivial case of ER, which
aims to handle KGs and deal exclusively with binary relationships, i.e., graph-shaped data [61].
We are aware that there are some collective ER approaches targeted at graph-structured data [4],
represented by PARIS [42] and SiGMa [28]. To model the relations among entity records, they
adopt collective alignment algorithms such as similarity propagation [1], the LDA model [3], the
conditional random fields model [32], Markov logic network models [41], or probabilistic soft
logic [26]. These approaches are frequently related to instance matching (or A-Box matching),
which aims to find correspondences between entities in different ontologies. Since these methods
are established in a setting similar to EA, we include them in the experimental study, and use
collective ER approaches as the general reference to them. Note that different from these methods,
EA solutions build on the recent advances in deep learning and mainly rely on graph representation
learning technologies to model the KG structure and generate entity embeddings for alignment [61].
Entity Alignment.
A shared pattern can be observed from current EA approaches. First, they
generate for each feature a unified embedding space where the entities from different KGs are
directly comparable. A frequently used feature is the KG structure, as the equivalent entities in
different KGs tend to possess very similar neighboring information. To generate structural entity
embeddings, structure encoders are devised, including KG representation based models [12, 13, 44, 45,
48, 62, 63], e.g., TransE [7], and graph neural network (GNN) based models [10, 30, 50, 52, 56], e.g.,
GCN [25]. Other available features include attributes [44, 48, 50, 57, 60], entity names [52, 56, 60]
and entity descriptions [12, 57]. Correspondingly, additional information encoders are designed to
embed these features into vector representations. To project the feature-specific embeddings from
different KGs into a unified space, they devise unification functions, e.g., the margin-based loss
function [10, 30, 50, 52, 53, 57] and the transition function [12, 13, 62], or exploit the corpus fusion
strategy [23, 45, 63].
Then, they determine the most likely target entity for each source entity, given the feature-
specific unified embeddings. The most common approach is to return a ranked list of target entities
for each source entity according to a specific distance measure between embeddings, among which
the top ranked entity is regarded as the match. Frequently used distance measures include the
Euclidean distance [13, 57, 62], the Manhattan distance [50, 52, 53] and the cosine similarity [44–
46] 1. If multiple features are adopted, it is of necessity to aggregate these features. Some feature
fusion methods to this end are representation-level, which directly combine the feature-specific
1Note that the distance score between entities can be easily converted to the similarity score by subtracting the distance
score from 1. Therefore, in this paper, we may use distance and similarity interchangeably.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

6
W. Zeng et al.
embeddings and generate an aggregated entity embedding for each entity [52, 53, 56, 60]. Then the
similarity between the aggregated entity embeddings is used to characterize the similarity between
entities. Other approaches are outcome-level, which combine the feature-specific similarity scores
with hand-tuned weights [36, 50]. Notably, some very recent works [55, 58] propose to exert the
1-to-1 constraint into the alignment process, which can align entities jointly and generate more
accurate results. Specifically, CEA [58] formulates EA as a stable matching problem [21], and uses
the deferred acceptance algorithm [39] to produce the results, i.e., no pair of two entities from the
opposite side would prefer to be matched to each other rather than their assigned partners [17]. GM-
EHD-JEA [55] views EA as a task assignment problem, and employs the Hungarian algorithm [27]
to find a set of 1-to-1 alignments that maximize the total pair-wise similarity.
There are some recent studies that improve EA results with the bootstrapping strategy [45, 62]
or relation modeling [31, 47, 53].
Reinforcement Learning.
Over recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) has been frequently
used in many sequence decision problems [18]. Clark and Manning apply RL on coreference resolu-
tion to directly optimize a neural mention-ranking model for coreference evaluation metrics, which
avoids the need for carefully tuned hyper-parameters [15]. Fang et al. convert entity linking into a
sequence decision problem and use an RL model to make decisions from a global prospective [18].
Feng et al. propose an RL-based model for sentence-level relation classification from noisy data,
where a selection decision is made for each sentence in the sentence sequence using a policy
network [19]. Inspired by these efforts, we also consider EA as the sequence decision process and
harness RL to make alignment decisions.
3
THE FRAMEWORK OF OUR PROPOSED MODEL
As shown in Figure 2, there are three stages in our proposed framework:
• Feature Generation. This stage generates representative features for EA, including the struc-
tural embeddings learned by GCN, the semantic embeddings represented as averaged word
embeddings, and the string similarity matrix calculated using the Levenshtein distance [29].
• Adaptive Feature Fusion. This stage fuses various features with adaptively generated weights.
We first convert the structural and semantic representations into corresponding similar-
ity matrices using the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity. Then, we combine different features with
adaptively assigned weights and generate a fused similarity matrix.
• Collective EA. This stage takes the fused similarity matrix as input and generates alignment
results by capturing the interdependence between decisions for different entities. Concretely,
we convert EA into the sequence decision problem and adopt a deep RL network to model
both the coherence and exclusiveness of EA decisions.
Next, we elaborate the modules of CEAFF.
4
FEATURE GENERATION
In this section, we introduce the features employed in CEAFF.
4.1
Structural Information
We harness the graph convolutional network (GCN) [25] to encode the neighborhood information
of entities as real-valued vectors.2 Then, we briefly introduce the configuration of GCN for the EA
task, and leave out the GCN fundamentals in the interest of space.
2We reckon that there are more advanced frameworks, e.g., the dual-graph convolutional network [52] and the recurrent
skipping network [23], for learning the structural representation. They can also be easily plugged into our overall framework
after parameter tuning. We will explore these options in the future, as they are not the focus of this article.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

RL-based Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features
7
  
  
  
  
M1
KGs 
Fused Matrix M
state
Actor
action
state'
reward
Critic
TD error
M2
Mp
···
···
RL Network
Alignment Results
Fig. 2. The framework of CEAFF. The dashed lines in the RL Network represent the update operation.
Model Configuration and Training.
GCN is harnessed to generate structural representations
of entities. We build two 2-layer GCNs, and each GCN processes one KG to generate the embeddings
of entities. The initial feature matrix, 𝑿, is sampled from the truncated normal distribution with
L2-normalization on rows.3 It gets updated by the GCN layers, and thus the final output matrix
𝒁can encode the neighboring information of entities. The adjacency matrix 𝑨is constructed
according to [50]. Note that the dimensionality of the feature vectors is fixed at 𝑑𝑠and kept the
same for all layers. The two GCNs share the same weight matrix in each layer.
Then, we project the entity embeddings generated by two GCNs into a unified embedding space
using pre-aligned EA pairs 𝑆. Specifically, the training objective is to minimize the margin-based
ranking loss function:
𝐿=
∑︁
(𝑢𝑠,𝑣𝑠) ∈𝑆
∑︁
(𝑢′𝑠,𝑣′𝑠) ∈𝑆′
(𝑢𝑠,𝑣𝑠)
[∥𝒖𝑠−𝒗𝑠∥𝑙1 −∥𝒖′
𝒔−𝒗′
𝒔∥𝑙1 +𝜖]+,
(1)
where [𝑥]+ = 𝑚𝑎𝑥{0,𝑥}, 𝑆′
(𝑢𝑠,𝑣𝑠) denotes the set of negative EA pairs obtained by corrupting (𝑢𝑠, 𝑣𝑠),
i.e., substituting 𝑢𝑠or 𝑣𝑠with a randomly sampled entity from its corresponding KG. 𝒖𝑠and 𝒗𝑠
denotes the (structural) embedding of entity 𝑢𝑠and 𝑣𝑠, respectively. 𝜖is a positive margin that
separates the positive and negative EA pairs. Stochastic gradient descent is harnessed to minimize
the loss function.
4.2
Semantic Information
For each entity, there is textual information associated with it, ranging from its name, its description,
to its attribute values. This information can help match entities in different KGs, since equivalent
entities share the same meaning. Among this information, the entity name, which identifies an
entity, is the most universal textual form. Also, given two entities, comparing their names is the
easiest approach to judge whether they are the same. Therefore, in this work, we propose to utilize
entity names as the source of textual information.
Entity names can be exploited from the semantic- and string-level. We first introduce the semantic
similarity. More specifically, we use the averaged word embeddings to capture the semantic meaning
of entity names. For a KG, the name embeddings of all entities are denoted in matrix form as 𝑵. Like
word embeddings, similar entity names will be placed adjacently in the entity name representation
space.
3Other methods of initialization are also viable. We stick to the random initialization in order to capture the “pure” structural
signal.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

8
W. Zeng et al.
4.3
String Information
Current methods mainly capture the semantic information of entities. In this work, we contend
that, the string information, which has been largely overlooked by current EA literature, is also a
contributive feature, since: (1) string similarity is especially useful in tackling the mono-lingual EA
task or the cross-lingual EA task where the languages of the KG pair are closely-related (e.g., English
and German); and (2) string similarity does not rely on external resources, e.g., pre-trained word
embeddings. In particular, we adopt the Levenshtein distance [29], a string metric for measuring
the difference between two sequences. We denote the string similarity matrix calculated by the
Levenshtein ratio as 𝑴𝒍.
5
ADAPTIVE FEATURE FUSION
In this section, we first introduce a new measure to capture the similarity between entity embeddings.
Then we point out the limitations of current fusion methods. Finally, we elaborate our proposed
adaptive feature fusion strategy.
5.1
Distance Measures
Existing solutions characterize the similarity between entity embeddings by the Manhattan dis-
tance [50, 52, 53], the Euclidean distance [13, 57, 62], and the cosine similarity [44–46]. Given two
entities 𝑢and 𝑣with embeddings 𝒖= (𝑢1,𝑢2, ...,𝑢𝑛) and 𝒗= (𝑣1, 𝑣2, ..., 𝑣𝑛), the Manhattan distance
is formalized as:
𝐷𝑚(𝑢, 𝑣) =
𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
|𝑢𝑖−𝑣𝑖| ,
(2)
and the corresponding similarity score is 1 −𝐷𝑚(𝑢, 𝑣). Similarly, the Euclidean distance is:
𝐷𝑒(𝑢, 𝑣) =
𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
∥𝑢𝑖−𝑣𝑖∥2 ,
(3)
and the corresponding similarity score is 1 −𝐷𝑒(𝑢, 𝑣). Nevertheless, these measures fail to apply
normalization over the calculated distance. As a remedy, we use the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity to
measure the distance between entity embeddings:
𝐷𝑏(𝑢, 𝑣) =
𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=1
|𝑢𝑖−𝑣𝑖|
|𝑢𝑖+ 𝑣𝑖| ,
(4)
and accordingly, the similarity score is 1 −𝐷𝑏(𝑢, 𝑣).
Admittedly, the cosine similarity also applies normalization to obtain the similarity score between
two embeddings:
𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑐(𝑢, 𝑣) =
𝒖· 𝒗
∥𝒖∥2 ∥𝒗∥2
.
(5)
However, unlike the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity that performs normalization for each pair of
elements in the vectors, the cosine similarity directly normalizes the dot product of two vectors. We
empirically evaluate these distance measures, and demonstrate the superiority of the Bray-Curtis
dissimilarity in Section 8.3.
Given the learned structural embedding matrix 𝒁and the entity name embedding matrix 𝑵
from Section 4.1 and 4.2, respectively, we use the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity to generate pair-wise
similarity scores between entities. We denote the resultant structural similarity matrix as 𝑴𝒔, where
rows represent the source entities in the test set, columns denote the target entities in the test set,
and each element in the matrix denotes the structural similarity score between a pair of source and
target entities. Similarly, the resultant semantic similarity matrix is represented as 𝑴𝒏.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

RL-based Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features
9
Feature 1
Feature 2
Feature 1
Feature 2
Feature 1
Feature 1
Similarity
Sim 1
Feature 2
Feature 2
Sim 2
Similarity
Representation-level feature fusion
Outcome-level feature fusion
Fig. 3. Different strategies of feature fusion. The operations for different entities are represented in different
colors. Dashed lines denote generating vector representations of features. Solid lines without arrows represent
calculating the similarity between embeddings, while solid lines with arrows represent the feature fusion
process.
5.2
Feature Fusion
Different Strategies of Feature Fusion.
To fuse different features, the state of the art directly
combines feature-specific embeddings and generates an aggregated embedding for each entity,
which is then used to calculate pair-wise similarity between entities (shown in the left of Fig-
ure 3). Specifically, some design aggregation strategies to integrate multiple view-specific entity
embeddings [60], while some treat certain features as inputs for learning representations of other
features [52, 56]. Nevertheless, these representation-level fusion techniques might fail to main-
tain the characteristics of the original features, e.g., two entities might be extremely similar in
feature-specific embedding spaces, while placed distantly in the unified representation space.
In this work, we resort to the outcome-level feature fusion, which operates on the intermediate
outcomes—feature-specific similarity matrices. Current approaches to this end first calculate pair-
wise similarity scores within each feature-specific space, and then combine these scores to generate
the final similarity score [44, 50, 58] (shown in the right of Figure 3). However, they manually assign
the weights of features, which can be inapplicable when the number of features increases, or the
importance of certain features varies greatly under different settings. Therefore, it is of significance
to dynamically determine the weight of each feature.
Adaptive Feature Fusion Strategy.
In this work, we offer an adaptive feature fusion strategy
that can dynamically determine the weights of features without the training data. It consists of the
following stages:
Confident Correspondence Generation. The inputs to this stage are 𝑝features and their correspond-
ing similarity matrices—𝑴1, 𝑴2, ..., 𝑴𝒑. 𝑴𝑝
𝑖𝑗denotes the similarity between the source entity 𝑢𝑖
and the target entity 𝑣𝑗, measured by the feature 𝑝. If 𝑴𝑝
𝑖𝑗is the largest both along the row and the
column, we consider (𝑢𝑖, 𝑣𝑗) to be a confident correspondence generated by the feature 𝑝. This is a
relatively strong constraint, and the resulting correspondences are very likely to be correct. As
thus, we assume that the confident correspondences generated by a specific feature can reflect its
importance. The concrete correlation is formulated later.
As shown in Figure 4, there are three feature matrices, 𝑴𝒔, 𝑴𝒏, 𝑴𝒍, each of which generates two
confident correspondences with similarity scores.
Correspondence Weight Calculation. Then, we determine the weight of each confident correspon-
dence. Instead of assigning equal weights, we assume that the importance of a correspondence
is inversely proportional to the number of its occurrences. Specifically, if a correspondence is
generated by 𝑞features, its weight is set to 1/𝑞, as it is believed that the frequently occurring
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

10
W. Zeng et al.
u1
u2
u3
v1
v2
v3
0.6
0.8
0.2
1.0
0.3
0.7
0.1
0.2
0.4
u1
u2
u3
v1
v2
v3
1.0
0.5
0.1
1.0
0.5
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.3
u1
u2
u3
v1
v2
v3
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.3
(u2 ,v2), 1.0
(u3 ,v3), 0.4
(u2 ,v2), 1.0
(u1 ,v1), 1.0
(u2 ,v3), 0.6
(u1 ,v1), 0.6
Confident 
Correspondences
Weight scores & 
Weights
Correspondence
Weights
1/2=0.5
Ms
Mn
Ml
1/1=1.0
θ2
1/2=0.5
1/2=0.5
θ2
θ2
1/1=1.0
1/2=0.5
2
2
1+
/2
2.5+3
/2


（
）
（
）
2
2
2
/2
2.5+3
/2


（
）
2
1.5/2
2.5+3
/2

（
）
Fig. 4. The framework of adaptive weight assignment.
correspondence brings less new information in comparison with a correspondence that has the
quality of being detected by only one single feature matrix [22].
Additionally, for a correspondence with very large similarity score 𝑴𝑝
𝑖𝑗> 𝜃1, we set its weight
to a small value 𝜃2. With this setting, the features that are very effective would not be assigned
with extremely large weights, and the less effective features can still contribute to the alignment.
We empirically validate the usefulness of this strategy in Section 8.4.
As shown in Figure 4, regarding the two correspondences generated by 𝑴𝒔, (𝑢3, 𝑣3) is assigned
with weight 1/1 = 1, as it is only produced by 𝑴𝒔, while (𝑢2, 𝑣2) is detected by both 𝑴𝒔and 𝑴𝒏,
and hence endowed with the weight 1/2 = 0.5. Moreover, the weight of (𝑢2, 𝑣2) is reset to 𝜃2, since
its similarity score exceeds 𝜃1 = 0.95.
Feature Weight Calculation. After obtaining the weight of each confident correspondence, the
weight score of feature 𝑝is defined as the sum of the weights of its confident correspondences,
divided by the number of these correspondences. The weight of feature 𝑝is the ratio between its
weight score and the total weight score of all features.
Feature Fusion with Adaptive Weight. We combine the feature-specific similarity matrices with their
adaptively assigned weights to generate the fused similarity matrix 𝑴. Particularly, in this work,
we utilize three representative features—structural-, semantic- and string-level features, which are
elaborated in Section 4.
Remark.
One possible solution to determine the weight of each feature is using machine learning
techniques to learn the weights. Nevertheless, for each source entity, the number of negative target
entities is much larger than the positive ones. Besides, the amount of training data is very limited.
Such restraints make it difficult to generate high-quality training corpus, and hence might hamper
learning appropriate weights. We will report the performance of the learning-based approach in
Section 8.4.
6
RL-BASED COLLECTIVE EA STRATEGY
After obtaining the fused similarity matrix 𝑴, we proceed to the alignment decision-making stage,
which is the core step of the EA task and can be regarded as a matching process, i.e., matching a
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

RL-based Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features
11
source entity with a target entity. The majority of existing works choose the optimal local match
for each source entity while neglecting the influence between matching decisions. To capture
the interdependence among alignment decisions, CEA [58] and GM-EHD-JEA [55] exert the 1-
to-1 constraint on the matching process. More specifically, CEA adopts the deferred acceptance
algorithm to find a stable matching result, which has the worst runtime complexity of 𝑂(𝑛2). The
resulting matching is locally optimal, i.e., a man-optimal assignment (the man refers to the source
entity in our case). Meanwhile, GM-EHD-JEA frames the matching process as the task assignment
problem (maximizing the local similarity scores under the 1-to-1 constraint), which is essentially
a fundamental combinatorial optimization problem whose exact solution can be found by the
Hungarian algorithm. The Hungarian algorithm has the worst runtime complexity of 𝑂(𝑛3), and
GM-EHD-JEA employs a search space separation strategy to reduce the time cost (which also hurts
the performance).
There are several main drawbacks of framing the alignment process as the matching problem:
(1) High worst time complexity: 𝑂(𝑛2) for the deferred acceptance algorithm and 𝑂(𝑛3) for the
Hungarian algorithm; and (2) Difficulty of including other constraints. As stated in the introduction,
the coherence constraint is also of importance. Nevertheless, it is hard to incorporate such constraint
into the stable matching process. For the combinatorial optimization problem, although we can
consider the coherence and define the goal as maximizing the local similarity scores and the overall
coherence, the resulting optimization problem becomes NP-hard (similar to the global optimization
in Entity Linking task [40]). Besides, there is no straightforward approach to replace the 1-to-1
constraint in the matching process with the exclusiveness constraint.
6.1
EA as a Sequence Decision Problem
In this work, we cast EA to the classic sequence decision problem; that is, given a sequence of
source entities, EA generates for each source entity a target entity. This problem can be solved by a
reinforcement learning (RL) based model. In this model, source entities are aligned in a sequential
but collective manner, which allows every decision to be made based on current state and previous
ones, such that the interdependence among the decisions is captured. Particularly, we characterize
the interdependence by a novel coordination strategy, which comprises the exclusiveness constraint—
a previously chosen target entity is less likely to be assigned to the rest of the source entities, and
the coherence constraint—the relevance between entities can assist the decision-making.
As for the RL framework, we adopt the Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) [33] model, where the
Actor conducts actions in an environment and the Critic computes the value functions to help the
actor in learning. These two agents participate in a game where they both get better in their own
roles as the learning gets further. As shown in Figure 2, at each step, the RL network takes the
current state as input, outputs an action (a target entity), which influences the following state and
generates a reward. Taking the current state, the next state, and the reward as input, the Critic
calculates the Temporal-Difference (TD) error and updates its network. The TD error is then fed to
the Actor for the parameter updates.
Next, we introduce the basic components of the RL model, as well as the optimization and
learning process.
6.2
RL-based Collective EA Model
Environment.
The environment includes the source and target entities in the test set, the
adjacency matrices of KGs, as well as the fused similarity matrix 𝑴.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

12
W. Zeng et al.
State.
The state vector 𝒔is expressed as 𝒔1 ◦𝒔2 + 𝒔3, where ◦represents element-wise product,
and 𝒔1, 𝒔2, 𝒔3 refer to the local similarity vector, the exclusiveness vector and the coherence vector,
respectively. More specifically,
• The local similarity vector is obtained from the fused similarity matrix 𝑴, which characterizes
the similarity between the current source entity and the candidate target entities.
• The exclusiveness vector indicates the target entities that have been chosen. Each element in
the vector corresponds to a target entity, and the value can be chosen between “1” and “-1”.
While “1” denotes that the corresponding target entity has not been chosen yet, “-1” denotes
that the corresponding target entity has been chosen. The exclusiveness vector is initialized
with “1”s; then if a target entity is chosen, the value in the corresponding position is replaced
with “-1”.
• The coherence vector characterizes the relevance between current candidate target entities
and previously chosen target entities. Concretely, given the current source entity, we first
retrieve its related source entities that have been matched according to the adjacency matrix
in the source KG. We consider the target entities chosen by these source entities as the
contextual entities for aligning the current source entity. For each candidate target entity, we
define its coherence score as the number of contextual entities it is directly connected with in
the KG. The coherence scores of all candidate target entities constitute the coherence vector.
Action.
An action denotes the Actor choosing a target entity for a source entity given a particular
state. The Actor takes the current state as input, and chooses a target entity from the candidate
target entities according to the probabilities calculated by a neural model. The neural network
(parameterized by 𝜃) consists of a fully connected layer and a softmax layer. More specifically, the
input state at step 𝑖is fed into the fully connected layer, which generates a hidden state:
𝒉(𝑠𝑖) = 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑢(𝑾1𝒔𝒊+ 𝒃1),
(6)
where 𝑾1 and 𝒃1 are the parameters of this layer. The hidden state is then fed to the softmax layer,
which generates the probability distribution of actions:
𝜋𝜃(𝑎|𝑠𝑖) = 𝑆𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑾2𝒉(𝑠𝑖) + 𝒃2),
(7)
where 𝑾2 and 𝒃2 are the parameters of the softmax layer. Then, the target entity is sampled from the
candidate target entities, according to 𝜋𝜃(𝑎|𝑠𝑖). Notably, in order to reduce the model complexity
and increase the efficiency, for each source entity, we merely consider the top-𝜏ranked target
entities as the candidate entities according to the fused similarity scores.
Reward.
The reward is a feedback indicating the influence caused by the action. Particularly,
we want to stimulate the action that maximizes the local similarity and global coherence, and
discourage the action that has been taken previously. As thus, we define the reward at step 𝑖as
𝑟𝑖+1 = 𝒔1(𝑎𝑖) · 𝒔2(𝑎𝑖) + 𝒔3(𝑎𝑖), where 𝑎𝑖represents the chosen action at step 𝑖.
With these components, a viable solution is to apply the REINFORCE algorithm [51] with policy
gradients to maximize the total reward and determine the parameters of the neural network.
Nevertheless, the drawback of this approach is that the reward can only be calculated after the
whole episode is finished, while the situation in each step cannot be well characterized. To address
this issue, we design a Critic model that approximates the value function of each state and makes
an update at each step.
Critic Network.
The Critic network comprises two fully connected layers (parameterized by 𝜂).
At step 𝑖, the first layer takes as input the state vector, and outputs a hidden vector:
𝒉𝒄(𝑠𝑖) = 𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑢(𝑾3𝒔𝒊+ 𝒃3).
(8)
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

RL-based Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features
13
Then, the next layer converts the hidden vector into an estimated value:
𝑉𝜂(𝑠𝑖) = 𝑾4𝒉𝒄(𝑠𝑖) + 𝒃4,
(9)
where 𝑾3,𝑾4, 𝒃3, 𝒃4 are the learnable parameters.
Optimization and Learning Procedure.
The training of the Actor and Critic networks are
performed separately. Regarding the Actor, the objective is to obtain the highest total reward, which
can be formally defined as:
𝐽(𝜃) = E[
𝑛−1
∑︁
𝑖=0
𝑟𝑖+1|𝜋𝜃] =
𝑛−1
∑︁
𝑖=0
𝑃(𝑠𝑖,𝑎𝑖)𝑟𝑖+1,
(10)
where 𝑃(𝑠𝑖,𝑎𝑖) denotes the probability of (𝑠𝑖,𝑎𝑖), i.e., choosing action 𝑎𝑖for the state 𝑠𝑖. To optimize
the objective, following [33], the update of parameter 𝜃can be written as:
Δ𝜃= 𝛼∇𝜃log 𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑖|𝑠𝑖)(𝑟𝑖+1 + 𝛾𝑉𝜂(𝑠𝑖+1) −𝑉𝜂(𝑠𝑖)),
(11)
where𝑉𝜂(𝑠𝑖),𝑉𝜂(𝑠𝑖+1) correspond to the estimated values generated by the Critic network,𝛾denotes
the decay factor, and 𝑟𝑖+1 + 𝛾𝑉𝜂(𝑠𝑖+1) −𝑉𝜂(𝑠𝑖) is the Temporal-Difference (TD) error, which can be
regarded as a good estimator of the reward at each step. 𝛼denotes the learning rate.
As for the Critic, we aim to minimize the mean squared TD error. To achieve the objective, the
update of parameter 𝜂can be written as:
Δ𝜂= 𝛽∇𝜂𝑉𝜂(𝑠𝑖)(𝑟𝑖+1 + 𝛾𝑉𝜂(𝑠𝑖+1) −𝑉𝜂(𝑠𝑖)),
(12)
where 𝛽denotes the learning rate.
We illustrate the whole learning procedure in Algorithm 1 and Figure 2. The RL network takes
the current state 𝑠𝑢as input, outputs an action 𝑎𝑢, which in turn affects the following state 𝑠𝑢′ and
generates a reward 𝑟𝑢. Taking the current state 𝑠𝑢, the next state 𝑠𝑢′, and the reward 𝑟𝑢as input, the
Critic calculates the TD error and updates its network. The TD error is then fed to the Actor for
the network update. This procedure continues until it reaches the final state. Notably, the learning
sequence is determined according to the highest local similarity score of each source entity. The
source entities with higher maximum similarity scores are dealt first.
ALGORITHM 1: The learning procedure of the A2C network.
Input
:𝐸1
𝑡:source entities; 𝐸2
𝑡: target entities; Adjacency matrices; 𝑴: similarity matrix
Output :A target entity for each source entity
1 Initialize the network parameters;
2 foreach epoch do
3
foreach 𝑢∈𝐸1
𝑡do
4
Generate the state vector 𝑠𝑢, forward it to the Actor;
5
Sample an action 𝑎𝑢from 𝜋𝜃;
6
Take the action 𝑎𝑢(target entity 𝑣𝑢), get the reward 𝑟𝑢and next state 𝑠𝑢′, forward them to Critic;
7
Compute the TD error 𝛿= 𝑟𝑢+ 𝛾𝑉𝜂(𝑠𝑢′) −𝑉𝜂(𝑠𝑢);
8
Update the Critic, 𝜂←𝜂+ 𝛽𝛿∇𝜂𝑉𝜂(𝑠𝑢);
9
Update the Actor, 𝜃←𝜃+ 𝛼𝛿∇𝜃log 𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑢|𝑠𝑢);
Preliminary Treatment.
Due to the large number of entities to be aligned, we propose to filter
out the source entities that have a high probability of being correctly aligned by merely using the
fused similarity matrix 𝑴. Concretely, for each source entity, if its top-ranked target entity also
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

14
W. Zeng et al.
considers it as the top-ranked source entity, we assume that this entity pair is highly likely to be
correct. Then, we use the rest of the source/target entities as the input to the RL process.
Remark.
Different from the current collective strategies, which explicitly exert the 1-to-1 con-
straint into the alignment process, the RL framework implicitly models the exclusiveness as a
component of the state and the reward. In this way, although the Actor learns to avoid selecting
the already chosen target entities, it still takes into account the other aspects of the current state,
i.e., the coherence and local similarity, when making the alignment decision. Consequently, the
resultant pairing does not strictly follow the 1-to-1 constraint.
7
EXPERIMENTAL SETTING
In this section, we describe the experimental settings, including the research questions (Section 7.1),
datasets (Section 7.2), parameter settings (Section 7.3), evaluation metrics (Section 7.4), and methods
to compare (Section 7.5). The code of CEAFF and the dataset splits can be accessed via https:
//github.com/DexterZeng/CEAFF.
7.1
Research Questions
We attempt to answer the following research questions:
(RQ1) Can CEAFF outperform the state-of-the-art approaches on the EA task? (Section 8.1)
(RQ2) Are the features useful? (Section 8.2)
(RQ3) Is the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity a better distance measure than the commonly used measures,
i.e., cosine similarity, Manhattan distance and Euclidean distance? (Section 8.3)
(RQ4) Can the adaptive feature fusion strategy effectively integrate features? (Section 8.4)
(RQ5) Does the RL-based collective alignment strategy contribute to the performance of CEAFF?
(Section 8.5)
(RQ6) In which cases does CEAFF fail? and why? (Section 8.6)
7.2
Datasets
Three datasets, including eight KG pairs, are used for evaluation:
DBP15K. Guo et al. [45] established the DBP15K dataset. They extracted 15 thousand inter-language
links (ILLs) in DBpedia [2] with popular entities from English to Chinese, Japanese and French,
respectively. These ILLs are also considered as gold standards.
SRPRS. Guo et al. [23] pointed out that KGs in DBP15K are too dense and the degree distributions
of entities deviate from real-life KGs. Therefore, they established a new EA benchmark that follows
real-life distribution by using ILLs in DBpedia and reference links among DBpedia, YAGO [43] and
Wikidata [49]. They first divided the entities in a KG into several groups by their degrees, and then
separately performed random PageRank sampling for each group. To guarantee the distributions
of the sampled datasets following the original KGs, they used the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S)
test to control the difference. The final evaluation benchmark consists of both cross-lingual and
mono-lingual datasets.
DBP-FB. Zhao et al. [61] noticed that in existing mono-lingual datasets, equivalent entities in
different KGs possess identical names from the entity identifiers, which means that a simple
comparison of these names can achieve reasonably accurate results. Therefore, they established a
new dataset DBP-FB (extracted from DBpedia and Freebase [6]) to mirror the real-life difficulties.
A concise summary of the statistics of the datasets can be found in Table 1. Note that previous
works do not set aside part of the gold standards as the validation set. They use 70% of the gold data
as the test set and 30% as the training set. In order to follow a more standard evaluation paradigm,
in this work, we use 20% of the original training set as the validation set for hyper-parameter tuning
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

RL-based Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features
15
and used the rest for training. The statistics of the new dataset splits are reported in Table 1. The
experiments in this work are all conducted on the new dataset splits.
Table 1. The statistics of the evaluation benchmarks. The #Triples, #Entities and #Relations columns indicate
the number of triples, entities and relations in each KG, respectively. The #Align column indicates the total
number of gold entity pairs (reference links). The #Test, #Val and #Train columns indicate the number of
testing, validation, and training entity pairs, respectively.
Dataset
KG pairs
#Triples
#Entities
#Relations
#Align.
#Test
#Val
#Train
DBP15KZH-EN
DBpedia(Chinese)
70,414
19,388
1,701
15,000
10,500
900
3,600
DBpedia(English)
95,142
19,572
1,323
DBP15KJA-EN
DBpedia(Japanese)
77,214
19,814
1,299
15,000
10,500
900
3,600
DBpedia(English)
93,484
19,780
1,153
DBP15KFR-EN
DBpedia(French)
105,998
19,661
903
15,000
10,500
900
3,600
DBpedia(English)
115,722
19,993
1,208
SRPRSEN-FR
DBpedia(English)
36,508
15,000
221
15,000
10,500
900
3,600
DBpedia(French)
33,532
15,000
177
SRPRSEN-DE
DBpedia(English)
38,281
15,000
222
15,000
10,500
900
3,600
DBpedia(German)
37,069
15,000
120
SRPRSDBP-WD
DBpedia
38,421
15,000
253
15,000
10,500
900
3,600
Wikidata
40,159
15,000
144
SRPRSDBP-YG
DBpedia
33,571
15,000
223
15,000
10,500
900
3,600
YAGO3
34,660
15,000
30
DBP-FB
DBpedia
96,414
29,861
407
25,542
17,880
1,532
6,130
Freebase
111,974
25,542
882
7.3
Parameter Settings
For learning the structural representation, as it is not the focus of this article, we use the popular
parameter settings in existing works [50, 52, 58] and set 𝑑𝑠to 300, 𝜖to 3, the number of training
epochs to 300. Five negative examples are generated for each positive pair. Regarding the entity name
representation, we utilize the pre-trained fastText word embeddings with subword information [5]
as word embeddings and obtain the multilingual word embeddings from MUSE4. As for the adaptive
feature fusion, we set 𝜃1 to 0.99, 𝜃2 to 0.48, which are tuned on the validation set. Regarding the
deep RL model, we set 𝛾to 0.9, 𝛼to 0.001, 𝛽to 0.01, 𝜏to 10, the dimensionality of the hidden state in
Equation 6 to 10, the dimensionality of the hidden state in Equation 8 to 10. We perform 2 rounds of
the preliminary treatment, which will be further discussed in Section 8.5. These hyper-parameters
are tuned on the validation set.
7.4
Evaluation Metrics
We use precision, recall and F1 score as the evaluation metrics. Precision is computed as the number
of correct matches produced by a method divided by the number of matches produced by a method.
Recall is computed as the number of correct matches produced by a method divided by the total
number of correct matches (i.e., gold matches). F1 score is computed as the harmonic mean between
precision and recall. Note that in existing EA datasets, all of the entities in a KG are matchable (i.e, for
4https://github.com/facebookresearch/MUSE
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

16
W. Zeng et al.
each entity, there exists an equivalent entity in the other KG), and thus the total number of correct
matches equals to the number of entities in a KG. Besides, state-of-the-art EA methods [31, 47]
generate matches for all the entities in a KG. Therefore, the number of matches produced by these
methods is equal to the number of gold matches, and the values of precision, recall, and F1 score
are equal for all current EA methods. In the following, unless otherwise specified, we only report
the values of precision for these EA methods.

(MRR) as the evaluation metrics. For each source entity, they rank the target entities according to

whose equivalent target entity is ranked in the top-𝑘results divided by the total number of source

of correctly aligned source entities among all the aligned source entities, and for state-of-the-art EA

for all source entities.
7.5
Methods to Compare
The following state-of-the-art EA methods are used for comparison, which can be divided into two
groups—methods merely using structural information, and methods using multi-type information.
Specifically, the first group consists of :
• MTransE (2017) [13]: This work uses TransE to learning entity embeddings.
• RSNs (2019) [23]: This work integrates recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with residual
learning to capture the long-term relational dependencies within and between KGs.
• MuGNN (2019) [10]: A novel multi-channel graph neural network model is put forward
to learn alignment-oriented KG embeddings by robustly encoding two KGs via multiple
channels.
• AliNet (2020) [47]: This work proposes an EA network which aggregates both direct and
distant neighborhood information via attention and gating mechanism.
• KECG (2019) [30]: This paper proposes to jointly learn knowledge embedding model that
encodes inner-graph relationships, and cross-graph model that enhances entity embeddings
with their neighbors’ information.
• ITransE (2017) [62]: An iterative training process is used to improve the alignment results.
• BootEA (2018) [45]: This work devises an alignment-oriented KG embedding framework and
a bootstrapping strategy.
• NAEA (2019) [63]: This work proposes a neighborhood-aware attentional representation
method to learn neighbor-level representation.
• TransEdge (2019) [46]: A novel edge-centric embedding model is put forward for EA, which
contextualizes relation representations in terms of specific head-tail entity pairs.
• MRAEA (2020) [31]: This solution directly models cross-lingual entity embeddings by at-
tending over the node’s incoming and outgoing neighbors and its connected relations’ meta
semantics. A bi-directional iterative strategy is used to add newly aligned seeds during
training.
The second group includes:
• GCN-Align (2018) [50]: This work utilizes GCN to generate entity embeddings and combines
them with attribute embeddings to align entities in different KGs.
• JAPE (2017) [44]: In this work, the attributes of entities are harnessed to refine the structural
information for alignment.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

RL-based Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features
17
• RDGCN (2019) [52]: A relation-aware dual-graph convolutional network is proposed to
incorporate relation information via attentive interactions between KG and its dual relation
counterpart.
• HGCN (2019) [53]: This work proposes to jointly learn entity and relation representations
for EA.
• GM-Align (2019) [56]: A local sub-graph of an entity is constructed to represent the entity.
Entity name information is harnessed for initializing the overall framework.
• GM-EHD-JEA (2020) [55]: This work introduces two coordinated reasoning methods to solve
the many-to-one problem during the decoding process of EA.
• HMAN (2019) [57]: This work combines multi-aspect information to learn entity embeddings.
• CEA (2020) [58]: This work proposes a collective framework that formulates EA as the classic
stable matching problem, and solves it with the deferred acceptance algorithm.
• DAT (2020) [59]: This work conceives a degree-aware co-attention network to effectively
fuse available features, so as to improve the performance of entities in tail.
We obtain the results of these methods on the new dataset splits by using the source codes
and parameter settings provided by the authors. However, the source codes of GM-EHD-JEA are
not available and we adopt its results on DBP15K from its original paper, where 30% of the gold
standards are used for training (which equals to the combination of training and validation sets in
this work) 5.
We include a string-based heuristic Lev for comparison, which uses Levenshtein distance to
measure the distance between entity names and selects for each source entity the closest target
entity as the alignment result.
We also report the performance of some variants of CEAFF:
• CEAFF-SM: Built on the basic components, this approach replaces the RL-based collective
strategy with 1-to-1 constrained stable matching.
• CEAFF-Coh: This approach merely models the coherence during the RL process.
• CEAFF-Excl: This approach merely models the exclusiveness during the RL process.
The best results on each dataset are denoted in bold. AVG represents the averaged results. We
use the two-tailed t-test to measure the statistical significance. Significant improvements over CEA
are marked with ▲(𝛼= 0.05), significant improvements over GM-EHD-JEA are marked with △
(𝛼= 0.05), and significant improvements over CEAFF-SM are marked with ♦(𝛼= 0.05).
8
RESULTS AND ANALYSES
This section reports the experimental results. We first address RQ1 by comparing CEAFF with
state-of-the-art EA and ER solutions on the EA datasets (Section 8.1). Then, by conducting the
ablation study and detailed analysis of the components in CEAFF, we answer RQ2, RQ3, RQ4 and
RQ5 in Section 8.2, Section 8.3, Section 8.4 and Section 8.5, respectively. Finally, we perform detailed
case study and error analysis to answer RQ6 (Section 8.6).
8.1
Performance Comparison
In this subsection, we answer RQ1. We first report and discuss the experimental results of state-of-
the-art EA solutions.
Results in the First Group.
Solutions in the first group use the structural information for
alignment. They can be further divided into two categories depending on the use of iterative training
strategy. The first category includes methods that do not employ the bootstrapping strategy, i.e.,
5Theoretically, these results should be higher than its actual results on the new splits (where there are less training data) [31].
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

18
W. Zeng et al.
Table 2. The precision results on DBP15K and DBP-FB.
DBP15K
DBP-FB
ZH-EN
JA-EN
FR-EN
AVG
MTransE
0.172
0.194
0.185
0.184
0.059
RSNs
0.519
0.520
0.565
0.535
0.241
MuGNN
0.361
0.306
0.355
0.341
0.202
AliNet
0.411
0.440
0.433
0.428
0.180
KECG
0.439
0.455
0.453
0.449
0.210
ITransE
0.149
0.197
0.169
0.172
0.018
BootEA
0.574
0.555
0.592
0.574
0.223
NAEA
0.303
0.282
0.297
0.294
/
TransEdge
0.580
0.542
0.573
0.565
0.253
MRAEA
0.617
0.629
0.636
0.627
0.294
GCN-Align
0.401
0.390
0.375
0.389
0.178
JAPE
0.368
0.327
0.273
0.323
0.065
HMAN
0.556
0.555
0.542
0.551
0.274
RDGCN
0.692
0.751
0.876
0.773
0.660
HGCN
0.707
0.746
0.871
0.775
0.789
GM-Align
0.552
0.611
0.768
0.644
0.702
GM-EHD-JEA
0.736
0.792
0.924
0.817
/
CEA
0.776△
0.853△
0.967△
0.865△
0.960
Lev
0.070
0.066
0.781
0.306
0.578
CEAFF-SM
0.806△▲
0.866△▲
0.971△▲
0.881△▲
0.962▲
CEAFF-Excl
0.789△▲
0.857△▲
0.967△
0.871△▲
0.957
CEAFF-Coh
0.807△▲
0.864△▲
0.969△▲
0.880△▲
0.955
CEAFF
0.811△▲♦
0.868△▲♦
0.972△▲♦
0.884△▲♦
0.963▲♦
1 We fail to obtain the result of NAEA on DBP-FB under our experimental environment, as it requires extremely
large amount of memory space. We also fail to obtain the result of GM-EHD-JEA on DBP-FB since its source
code is not available and our implementation cannot reproduce the claimed performance.
MTransE, RSNs, MuGNN, AliNet and KECG. MTransE obtains unsatisfactory results as it learns
the embeddings in different vector spaces, and suffers from information loss when modeling the
transition between different embedding spaces [52]. RSNs enhances the performance by taking into
account the long-term relational dependencies between entities, which can capture more structural
signals for alignment. On DBP15K, MuGNN, AliNet and KECG achieve much better results than
MTransE, since they exploit more neighboring information for alignment. Concretely, MuGNN
uses a multi-channel graph neural network that captures different levels of structural information.
KECG adopts a similar idea by jointly learning entity embeddings that encode both inner-graph
relationships and neighboring information. AliNet aggregates both direct and distant neighborhood
information via attention and gating mechanism. However, they are still outperformed by RSNs.
Additionally, MuGNN attains worse performance than MTransE on SRPRS, since there are no
aligned relations on SRPRS, where the rule transferring of MuGNN fails to work.
Methods in the second category employ bootstrapping strategy to enhance the alignment per-
formance, including ITransE, BootEA, NAEA, TransEdge and MRAEA. BootEA achieves better
performance than ITransE, since it devises an alignment-oriented KG embedding framework with
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

RL-based Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features
19
one-to-one constrained bootstrapping strategy. On top of BootEA, NAEA uses a neighborhood-
aware attentional representation model to make better use of the KG structure and learn more
comprehensive structural representations. Nevertheless, using the codes provided by the authors
cannot reproduce the results reported in the original paper. TransEdge attains promising results, as
it employs an edge-centric embedding model to capture structural information, which generates
more precise entity embeddings and hence better alignment results. Similarly, MRAEA proposes to
improve EA performance by modeling relation semantics and employing the bi-directional iterative
training strategy, and it attains the best results among the methods that merely use the structural
information.
Noteworthily, the overall results on SRPRS and DBP-FB are worse than DBP15K, as the KGs in
DBP15K are much denser than those in SRPRS and DBP-FB [23, 61].
Table 3. The precision results on SRPRS.
SRPRSEN-FR
SRPRSEN-DE
SRPRSDBP-WD
SRPRSDBP-YG
AVG
MTransE
0.166
0.125
0.186
0.158
0.159
RSNs
0.315
0.455
0.380
0.344
0.374
MuGNN
0.114
0.225
0.130
0.159
0.157
AliNet
0.228
0.352
0.258
0.273
0.278
KECG
0.277
0.414
0.306
0.333
0.333
ITransE
0.084
0.088
0.069
0.064
0.076
BootEA
0.351
0.493
0.387
0.379
0.403
NAEA
0.178
0.306
0.187
0.200
0.218
TransEdge
0.355
0.501
0.388
0.379
0.406
MRAEA
0.380
0.531
0.428
0.450
0.447
GCN-Align
0.264
0.395
0.299
0.331
0.322
JAPE
0.236
0.263
0.217
0.189
0.226
HMAN
0.400
0.532
0.431
0.446
0.452
RDGCN
0.580
0.676
0.989
0.993
0.810
HGCN
0.563
0.634
0.988
0.988
0.793
GM-Align
0.570
0.678
0.799
0.764
0.703
DAT
0.765
0.862
0.921
0.931
0.870
CEA
0.966
0.977
1.000
1.000
0.986
Lev
0.851
0.862
1.000
1.000
0.928
CEAFF-SM
0.966
0.979▲
1.000
1.000
0.986
CEAFF-Excl
0.964
0.979▲
1.000
1.000
0.986
CEAFF-Coh
0.964
0.979▲
1.000
1.000
0.986
CEAFF
0.968▲♦
0.981▲♦
1.000
1.000
0.987▲♦
Results in the Second Group.
Taking advantage of the attribute information, GCN-Align,
JAPE and HMAN outperform MTransE. HMAN achieves better performance than JAPE and GCN-
Align, since (1) it explicitly regards the relation type features as model input; and (2) it employs
feedforward neural networks to obtain the embeddings of relations and attributes [57].
The other methods all exploit the entity name information for alignment, and their results exceed
the attribute-enhanced methods. This verifies the significance of entity names for aligning entities.
Among them, the performance of RDGCN and HGCN are close, surpassing GM-Align. This is
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

20
W. Zeng et al.
because they employ relations to improve entity embeddings, which has been largely neglected in
previous GNN-based EA models. DAT also attains promising results by improving the alignment
performance of long-tail entities. Both CEA and GM-EHD-JEA focus on the collective alignment
process. While GM-EHD-JEA views EA as the task assignment problem and employs the Hungarian
algorithm, CEA outperforms GM-EHD-JEA by modeling EA as the stable matching problem and
solving it with the deferred acceptance algorithm.
Notably, it can be observed from Table 2 that the methods using entity names achieve much
better results on the datasets with closely-related language pairs (e.g., FR-EN) than those with
distantly-related language pairs (e.g., ZH-EN). This shows that the language pairs can influence the
use of entity name information and in turn affect the overall alignment performance.
Results of Our Proposal.
As can be observed from Table 2 and Table 3, our proposal consistently
outperforms all other methods on all datasets. We attribute the superiority of our model to its four
advantages: (1) we leverage three representative sources of information, i.e., structural, semantic
and string-level features, to offer more comprehensive signals for EA; and (2) we adopt the Bray-
Curtis dissimilarity to better measure the similarity between entity embeddings; and (3) we fuse the
features with adaptively assigned weights, which can fully take into consideration the strength of
each feature; and (4) we align the source entities collectively via reinforcement learning, which can
adequately capture the interdependence between EA decisions. Particularly, CEAFF achieves better
results than the collective alignment methods CEA and GM-EHD-JEA, and the improvements are
statistically significant.
Moreover, CEAFF achieves superior results than CEAFF-SM on most datasets, as it simultaneously
models the exclusiveness and coherence of EA decisions. This is also validated by the fact that CEAFF
outperforms CEAFF-Excl and CEAFF-Coh, which merely models the exclusiveness and coherence
during the RL process, respectively. Notably, CEAFF advances the precision to 1 on SRPRSDBP-WD
and SRPRSDBP-YG. This is because the entity names in DBpedia, YAGO and Wikidata are nearly
identical, where the string-level feature is extremely effective. In fact, merely using the Levenshtein
distance between entity names (Lev) can already attain ground-truth results on these two datasets.
In comparison, on DBP-FB, Lev merely attains the precision at 0.578. CEAFF further improves the
performance by incorporating the structural and semantic information for alignment.
Evaluation as the Ranking Problem.
For the comprehensiveness of the experiment, following
previous works, we consider the EA results in the form of ranked target entity lists, and report

CEAFF and GM-EHD-JEA, they directly generate the matches rather than the ranked entity lists,

Therefore, we do not include them in Table 4. Instead, we report the results of CEAFF w/o C where
the collective alignment component is removed. We leave out the evaluation performance on SRPRS
and DBP-FB in the interest of space. It reads from Table 4 that, CEAFF w/o C attains the best overall
results.
Comparison with the Collective ER Approach.
As mentioned in Section 2, some collective
ER approaches design algorithms to handle graph-structured data. Hence, we compare with a
representative collective ER approach, PARIS [42]. Built on the similarity comparison between
literals, PARIS devises a probabilistic algorithm to jointly align entities by leveraging the KG
structure and attributes 6.
6PARIS can also align relations and deal with unmatchable entities, while these are not the focus of EA task.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

RL-based Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features
21
Table 4. Evaluation as the ranking problem on DBP15K.
DBP15KZH-EN
DBP15KJA-EN
DBP15KFR-EN

MRR

MRR

MRR
MTransE
17.2
48.4
0.274
19.4
52.8
0.304
18.5
52.7
0.297
RSNs
51.9
76.4
0.606
52.0
76.1
0.605
56.5
81.8
0.653
MuGNN
36.1
72.6
0.478
30.6
69.4
0.431
35.5
74.8
0.483
AliNet
41.1
67.6
0.507
44.0
69.6
0.532
43.3
72.3
0.536
KECG
43.9
80.4
0.560
45.5
82.1
0.577
45.3
82.3
0.577
ITransE
14.9
41.2
0.236
19.7
47.7
0.290
16.9
45.5
0.264
BootEA
57.4
81.7
0.657
55.5
81.4
0.641
59.2
84.6
0.678
NAEA
30.3
55.7
0.390
28.2
54.8
0.370
29.7
56.7
0.388
TransEdge
58.0
84.9
0.676
54.2
82.3
0.642
57.3
87.5
0.682
MRAEA
61.7
88.1
0.711
62.9
89.1
0.722
63.6
90.7
0.738
GCN-Align
40.1
73.7
0.516
39.0
73.3
0.507
37.5
74.7
0.500
JAPE
36.8
70.1
0.481
32.7
65.0
0.435
27.3
62.1
0.390
HMAN
55.6
85.0
0.659
55.5
86.0
0.662
54.2
87.2
0.658
RDGCN
69.2
83.5
0.743
75.1
87.5
0.795
87.6
95.0
0.903
HGCN
70.7
85.3
0.759
74.6
88.0
0.794
87.1
95.3
0.901
GM-Align
55.2
76.2
0.630
61.1
81.2
0.686
76.8
92.5
0.829
CEAFF w/o C
73.6
86.9
0.785
80.3
91.1
0.842
93.3
98.1
0.951

We use precision, recall and F1 score as the evaluation metrics. Different from state-of-the-art
EA methods, PARIS does not necessarily generate a target entity for each source entity, and hence
its precision, recall, and F1 score values could be different.
Table 5. Results of CEAFF and PARIS on EA datasets. P, R represent precision and recall, respectively.
DBP15KZH-EN
DBP15KJA-EN
DBP15KFR-EN
SRPRSEN-FR
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
CEAFF
0.81
0.81
0.81
0.87
0.87
0.87
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
PARIS
0.88
0.87
0.88
0.98
0.84
0.90
0.99
0.93
0.96
0.99
0.87
0.93
SRPRSEN-DE
SRPRSDBP-WD
SRPRSDBP-YG
DBP-FB
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
P
R
F1
CEAFF
0.98
0.98
0.98
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.96
0.96
0.96
PARIS
0.99
0.93
0.96
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.98
0.56
0.71
As shown in Table 5, overall speaking, PARIS achieves high precision while relatively low recall,
since it merely generates matches that it believes to be highly confident. In terms of F1 score, CEAFF
outperforms PARIS on most datasets. On DBP15KZH-EN and DBP15KJA-EN, PARIS attains better results,
as the additional attribute information it considers can provide more useful signals for alignment.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

22
W. Zeng et al.
Running Time Comparison.
We compared the time cost of CEAFF and CEA. Since there is
randomness in each run of CEAFF, we conducted the experiments on the same dataset split for
ten times and reported the averaged time cost, as well as the median and percentile 95 value of
the time cost distribution. It reads from Table 6 that CEA is more efficient than our proposed RL
model on most datasets. This is because: (1) Although CEA has the worst time complexity of 𝑂(𝑛2),
empirically, most source entities can find the match in a few rounds given the reasonably accurate
similarity matrix; (2) The time cost of CEAFF is influenced by the number of epochs. A larger
number of epochs leads to a more stable alignment result, but it also costs more time. Notably, CEA
is slower than CEAFF on the lager dataset DBP-FB, which suggests that the runtime of CEA grows
quickly when the scale of dataset increases. Besides, it should be noted that CEAFF is more efficient
than most of the other state-of-the-art methods (whose runtime costs are shown in Table 6 in [61]).
Table 6. Time costs of CEA and CEAFF (in seconds).
Method
Metric
DBP15K
SRPRS
DBP-FB
ZH-EN
JA-EN
FR-EN
EN-FR
EN-DE
DBP-WD
DBP-YG
CEA
/
285.7
187.5
109.9
102.7
110.0
112.6
94.6
615.3
CEAFF
Mean
3757.1
3064.1
759.0
832.8
532.6
164.9
132.9
506.6
Median
3828.0
3059.2
761.0
833.6
539.6
166.3
137.0
503.9
Percentile 95
3837.1
3079.8
762.8
847.4
540.2
172.2
138.1
512.3
8.2
Usefulness of Proposed Features
We conduct an ablation study to gain insight into the components of CEAFF, and the results are
presented in Table 7. C represents the collective alignment strategy, AFF denotes the adaptive feature
fusion strategy, 𝑴𝒔, 𝑴𝒏, 𝑴𝒍represent the structural, semantic and string-level features, respectively.
CEAFF-cosine, CEAFF-Manh, CEAFF-Euc denote replacing the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity with the
cosine similarity, Manhattan distance and Euclidean distance, respectively. Notably, on SRPRSDBP-WD
and SRPRSDBP-YG, merely using semantic or string-level information can already achieve the precision
of 1. Therefore, removing most components does not hurt the performance on these two datasets.
In the following analysis, unless otherwise specified, we do not discuss the ablation results on
SRPRSDBP-WD and SRPRSDBP-YG.
To address RQ2, in this subsection, we examine the usefulness of our proposed features (CEAFF
vs. CEAFF -𝑴𝒔, 𝑴𝒏, 𝑴𝒍). As shown in Table 7, removing the structural information leads to lower
alignment results. Besides, the semantic information plays a more important role on KGs with
distantly-related language pairs, e.g., DBP15KZH-EN, while the string-level feature is significant for
aligning KGs with closely-related language pairs, e.g., SRPRSEN-FR.
8.3
Influence of Distance Measures
In this subsection, we address RQ3. As can be observed from Table 7, replacing the Bray-Curtis
dissimilarity with other distance measures brings down the performance (CEAFF vs. CEAFF-cosine,
CEAFF-Manh, CEAFF-Euc), which validates that an appropriate distance measure can better capture
the similarity between entities.
Then, we remove the influence of the collective alignment and adaptive feature fusion strategies,
and directly compare the performance of these four distance measures. As depicted in Table 8,
Structure denotes merely using structural embeddings for alignment, Name denotes merely using
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

RL-based Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features
23
Table 7. The precision results of ablation study and feature analysis.
DBP15K
SRPRS
DBP-FB
AVG
ZH-EN
JA-EN
FR-EN
EN-FR
EN-DE
DBP-WD
DBP-YG
CEAFF
0.811
0.868
0.972
0.968
0.981
1.000
1.000
0.963
0.945
w/o C
0.736
0.803
0.933
0.931
0.946
1.000
1.000
0.814
0.895
w/o AFF
0.800
0.868
0.971
0.966
0.980
1.000
1.000
0.957
0.943
w/o 𝑴𝒔
0.657
0.748
0.938
0.935
0.955
1.000
1.000
0.751
0.873
w/o 𝑴𝒏
0.471
0.507
0.950
0.957
0.972
1.000
1.000
0.913
0.846
w/o 𝑴𝒍
0.801
0.860
0.939
0.742
0.839
1.000
1.000
0.901
0.885
w/o 𝜃1,𝜃2
0.799
0.863
0.972
0.967
0.981
1.000
1.000
0.958
0.943
CEAFF-cosine
0.784
0.854
0.966
0.967
0.978
1.000
1.000
0.956
0.938
CEAFF-Manh
0.733
0.794
0.953
0.941
0.962
1.000
1.000
0.919
0.907
CEAFF-Euc
0.787
0.850
0.965
0.963
0.972
1.000
1.000
0.939
0.934
AFF
0.736
0.803
0.933
0.931
0.946
1.000
1.000
0.814
0.895
LR
0.738
0.801
0.937
0.919
0.934
1.000
1.000
0.812
0.893
LM
0.665
0.727
0.915
0.909
0.932
1.000
1.000
0.798
0.868
entity name embeddings for alignment, while Comb. refers to fusing structural, semantic and
string information with equal weights. The performance of solely using string similarity is omitted,
since it is not influenced by distance measures.
Table 8. The precision results of alignment by using different distance measures. The results on SRPRSDBP-YG
and SRPRSEN-DE are omitted in the interest of space, which are similar to SRPRSDBP-WD and SRPRSEN-FR, respec-
tively.
Structure
Name
Comb.
Structure
Name
Comb.
Structure
Name
Comb.
ZH-EN
JA-EN
FR-EN
BC
0.369
0.597
0.730
0.381
0.669
0.801
0.369
0.822
0.930
Cosine
0.333
0.584
0.707
0.343
0.656
0.778
0.325
0.811
0.927
Manhattan
0.355
0.596
0.680
0.356
0.664
0.740
0.355
0.821
0.911
Euclidean
0.354
0.584
0.719
0.353
0.656
0.781
0.346
0.811
0.928
EN-FR
DBP-WD
DBP-FB
BC
0.242
0.524
0.930
0.270
1.000
1.000
0.171
0.568
0.810
Cosine
0.196
0.530
0.930
0.264
1.000
1.000
0.149
0.583
0.775
Manhattan
0.224
0.515
0.904
0.253
1.000
1.000
0.158
0.583
0.752
Euclidean
0.222
0.426
0.920
0.252
1.000
1.000
0.156
0.583
0.807
It shows in Table 8 that, using the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity (BC) brings the best performance
on all datasets in terms of Structure and Comb.. Regarding the Name category, the Bray-Curtis
dissimilarity also attains the best results on most datasets. This further verifies the effectiveness of
this distance measure.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

24
W. Zeng et al.
8.4
Effectiveness of the Adaptive Feature Fusion Strategy
In this subsection, we proceed to answer RQ4 and examine the contribution of the adaptive feature
fusion strategy (CEAFF vs. CEAFF w/o AFF in Table 7). Specifically, we replace the dynamic weight
assignment with fixed weights, i.e., the same weight for each feature. As can be observed from
Table 7, overall speaking, using the adaptive feature fusion strategy improves the results of using the
fixed weighting, validating its usefulness. It is also noted that the increment is not very significant.
This is because, by treating different features equally, the averaged weighting is the safest and the
most common approach for feature fusion. Although our proposed adaptive feature fusion strategy
can optimize the assignment of weights adaptively, it cannot change the input features, and hence
cannot bring substantial improvement.
Thresholds 𝜃1,𝜃2 in Adaptive Feature Fusion.
As mentioned in Section 5, for a correspon-
dence with very large similarity score, i.e., exceeding 𝜃1, we set its weight to a small value 𝜃2. To
examine the usefulness of this strategy, we report the results after removing this setting in Table 7.
Without this setting, the performance drops on most datasets, verifying its effectiveness.
The Learning-based Fusion Strategy.
Our adaptive feature fusion strategy (AFF) can dynami-
cally determine the weights of features without training data. For the comprehensiveness of the
experiment, we compare with stronger baselines with learnable parameters in terms of aggregating
features for alignment. We first adopt the Logistic Regression algorithm (LR) to determine the
weights of features by casting the alignment to the classification problem, i.e., labeling correct
EA pairs with “1”s and false pairs with “0”s. We use the learned weights to combine features and
rank the target entities according to the fused similarity matrix. Note that we do not employ the
collective alignment strategy so as to exclude its influence on the results. Besides, we also adopt a
learning-to-rank algorithm, LambdaMART (LM) [9], to learn how to directly aggregate features
and rank the target entities without generating the weights of features.
To construct a more useful training set, for each positive pair, we generate the negative samples
by replacing the gold target entity with an incorrect target entity from the set of top-10 ranked
target entities produced by solely using the structural, semantic or string-level feature, respectively.
In this way, the learned models can be more discriminative compared with using randomly selected
negative samples. Notably, since the original training set is used as the seed to unify the individual
structural embedding spaces, the entities in the entity pairs of the training set have very high
structural similarity. Therefore, it is inappropriate to still use the original training set to learn how
to combine the features and rank the target entities (in which case the structural feature would be
“favored” and considered as extremely useful). Instead, we use the validation set to train the models.
We use the default hyper-parameters of these two models since there is no extra data for parameter

The results are reported in Table 7. It reads that, the performance of LM is not promising, which,
to a large extent, can be attributed to the lack of training data (i.e., only 900 pairs are used for
training, while 10,500 for testing). The effectiveness of LR is also constrained by the lack of training
data. Nevertheless, it achieves better results than LM and even outperforms AFF on DBP15KZH-EN
and DBP15KFR-EN. Overall speaking, the performance of AFF is better than LR and LM, and it does
not need training data.
8.5
Effectiveness of the RL-based Collective Strategy
In this subsection, we seek to answer RQ5. After removing the collective strategy (CEAFF vs.
CEAFF w/o C), the performance drops on all cross-lingual datasets and DBP-FB, revealing the
significance of considering the interdependence between EA decisions. Moreover, it observes from
Table 2 and Table 3 that, simultaneously modeling the exclusiveness and coherence under the RL
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

RL-based Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features
25
framework consistently outperforms the alternative strategies (CEAFF vs. CEAFF-SM, CEAFF-Excl,
CEAFF-Coh).
Table 9. Analysis of the collective alignment constraints. # MulSE denotes the number of source entities that
are matched to the same target entities. # MulTE denotes the number of target entities that are assigned
multiple times. The analysis on SRPRSDBP-WD and SRPRSDBP-YG are omitted as the precision is 1 for all methods.
Metric
Method
DBP15K
SRPRS
DBP-FB
ZH-EN
JA-EN
FR-EN
EN-FR
EN-DE
Precision
CEAFF
0.811
0.868
0.972
0.968
0.981
0.963
CEAFF-SM
0.806
0.866
0.971
0.966
0.979
0.962
CEAFF w/o C
0.736
0.803
0.933
0.931
0.946
0.814
# MulSE
CEAFF
1116
768
176
173
97
307
CEAFF-SM
0
0
0
0
0
0
CEAFF w/o C
3778
3061
1142
1157
983
4308
# MulTE
CEAFF
423
307
87
77
43
134
CEAFF-SM
0
0
0
0
0
0
CEAFF w/o C
1441
1272
483
490
437
1130
Analysis of Collective Alignment Constraints.
We make a detailed analysis of the collective
alignment constraints. It can be seen from Table 9 that, without exerting any constraint on the
alignment results, the performance of CEAFF w/o C is much worse than that of the collective
alignment methods CEAFF and CEAFF-SM. Besides, in its matching results, there are many source
entities that are aligned to the same target entities, e.g., around 30% of the source entities on
DBP15KZH-EN and DBP15KJA-EN. This could restrain its performance since the ground-truth results in
current EA benchmarks are 1-to-1 mappings.
By exerting the 1-to-1 constraint, CEAFF-SM improves the performance, and produces a 1-to-1
mapping result (there are no MulSE and MulTE). Nevertheless, as illustrated in Example 2, the
1-to-1 constraint could cause the error propagation issue. In this work, we use the exclusiveness
constraint to relax the 1-to-1 constraint and use the coherence constraint to keep the alignment
decisions coherent. The resulting model CEAFF attains better performance than CEAFF-SM and
CEAFF w/o C. Additionally, as shown in Table 9, employing the exclusiveness constraint allows a
small number of source entities to match with the same target entities, which can partially mitigate
the error propagation issue.
Influence of Preliminary Treatment.
We further analyze the effectiveness of the preliminary
treatment of the RL model, i.e., filtering out the source entities that can be correctly aligned by
merely using the fused similarity scores. We first report the number of source entities that are
matched by the preliminary treatment, as well as the percentage of the correctly aligned ones, in
Table 10. The results prove that our preliminary treatment strategy can filter out many source
entities, among which most are correctly aligned.
Then, we examine: (1) whether the preliminary treatment contributes to the performance of the
RL-based alignment model; and (2) the appropriate rounds for conducting the filtering process.
Figure 5 indicates that, this filtering process does improve the alignment performance, because:
(1) it prevents the source entities that can already be confidently aligned using similarity scores
from being misled by the inaccurate signals during the RL process; and (2) it reduces the learning
steps in each episode and leads to faster convergence; and (3) the confident matches detected by
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

26
W. Zeng et al.
Table 10. The number of source entities that are matched by the preliminary treatment (two rounds) and the
percentage of correctly aligned entities (PoC).
DBP15K
SRPRS
DBP-FB
ZH-EN
JA-EN
FR-EN
EN-FR
EN-DE
DBP-WD
DBP-YG
Number
8013
8783
10076
10017
10198
10500
10500
16781
PoC
94.4%
96.0%
99.1%
99.2%
99.4%
100.0%
100.0%
98.3%
the preliminary treatment can provide more accurate coherence information for aligning the rest of
the source entities. Additionally, applying this treatment for 2 rounds is enough, since the filtering
process cannot generate 100% correct confident matches on most datasets. More rounds of the
preliminary treatment increase the errors, which in turn could hurt the overall performance.





$" ! "!$ #

	


"#! 












Fig. 5. Precision of CEAFF with different rounds of the preliminary treatment.
8.6
Error Analysis and Case Study
Finally, we turn to RQ6. We perform error analysis and case study to examine the cases where
CEAFF falls short.
Firstly, we analyze the change of the error rate after adding our proposed components. Take
DBP15KZH-EN for example. Solely using structural information leads to 63.1% error rate of the
precision. Incorporating the entity name to complement the structural information reduces the
overall error rate to 27%. After applying the adaptive feature fusion strategy, the error rate drops to
26.4%. On top of it, using the RL framework to collectively align entities leads to an error rate of
18.9%. This implies that, all the components in our model contribute to the alignment performance.
Nevertheless, we note that CEAFF still fails to generate correct target entities for some source
entities, especially on DBP15KZH-EN and DBP15KJA-EN. Therefore, we carefully analyze the erroneous
matches and broadly divide them into five categories:
Category 1.
This group of cases are misled by the structural information, e.g., the match (Saison
26 des Simpson, The Simpsons (season 23)). Using the entity name information, it is easy to align the
correct target entity The Simpsons (season 26) to the source entity. Nevertheless, the target entity
The Simpsons (season 23) shares more common neighboring entities with the source entity Saison
26 des Simpson, and hence is falsely considered as the corresponding target entity.
Category 2.
This group of cases are misled by the textual information, e.g., the match (Sion
(Valais), Valais). By merely using the structural information, the correct target entity Sion,_Switzerland
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

RL-based Collective Entity Alignment with Adaptive Features
27
can be aligned to Sion (Valais). However, the high textual similarity between (Sion (Valais), Valais)
leads to the wrong match, despite of their structural disparity.
Category 3.
Cases in this group are misled by the feature fusion strategy, e.g., the match
(Hérouxville, Hérault). It is noted that using structural information or entity name information
can find the correct target entity Hérouxville,_Quebec, while combining these features leads to the
wrong result.
Category 4.
The collective alignment strategy is responsible for this category of errors, e.g.,
the match (Grande Ourse, Landrienne,_Quebec). Based on the fused similarity matrix, generating
the results independently can find the correct target entity Ursa Major for the source entity.
Nevertheless, the target entity Ursa Major has a higher similarity score with another source entity
Bouvier (constellation). As thus, when aligning entities collectively, the exclusiveness constraint
prevents Grande Ourse from aligning Ursa Major.
Category 5.
Cases in this group cannot be tackled by any module in our model, e.g., the match
(Yolande de Hongrie (reine d’Aragon), Constance of Sicily,_Queen of Aragon). This might be ascribed
to the fact that the correct target entity Violant of Hungary neither has a similar name, nor shares
similar structural information, with the source entity.
Table 11. The percentages of different types of errors made by CEAFF.
DBP15K
SRPRS
DBP-FB
AVG
ZH-EN
JA-EN
FR-EN
EN-FR
EN-DE
Error Rate
18.9%
13.2%
2.8%
3.2%
1.9%
3.7%
7.3%
Category 1
2.7%
4.7%
15.6%
14.8%
12.8%
11.4%
10.3%
Category 2
17.8%
16.4%
15.6%
8.3%
10.7%
3.2%
12.0%
Category 3
0.1%
0.1%
6.3%
0.6%
0.0%
0.0%
1.2%
Category 4
11.1%
14.1%
18.9%
15.1%
17.3%
15.6%
15.4%
Category 5
68.3%
64.7%
43.6%
61.2%
59.2%
69.8%
61.1%
We report the percentages of these categories of errors in Table 11 7. Next, we analyze the errors
and suggest some possible research directions in the future.
It can be observed from Table 11 that, Category 1 and Category 2 account for 10.3% and 12%
on average, respectively. This shows that there is still room for improving the feature encoders
to learn better representations. The feature fusion strategy (Category 3), however, brings few
errors. 15.4% of the incorrect matches are caused by the collective alignment strategy (Category 4).
Admittedly, aligning entities jointly can better model the correlations between EA decisions, and
hence significantly improves the alignment results. Nevertheless, an erroneous match can trigger
error propagation and leads to more erroneous matches, as shown in the example of Category 4.
Therefore, more advanced collective alignment strategies could be devised to further mitigate this
issue. Notably, Category 5 takes the largest share, revealing that the majority of errors are not
generated by the components of our model. However, these errors might be avoided by mining
more useful features or designing more advanced approaches to exploit available features.
7The results on SRPRSDBP-WD and SRPRSDBP-YG are omitted since they do not generate erroneous matches.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2021.

28
W. Zeng et al.
9
CONCLUSION
When making EA decisions, current EA solutions treat entities separately, or fail to adequately
model the interdependence among entities. To fill in this gap, we frame EA as the sequence decision
process and devise a deep RL model to capture both the exclusiveness and coherence of EA decisions.
Besides, we put forward an adaptive feature fusion strategy to aggregate multiple features and
provide more accurate inputs to the RL framework. Compared with state-of-the art approaches,
our proposal achieves consistently better results, and the ablation study also verifies the usefulness
of each component. More concretely, the results show that: (1) aligning entities collectively using
reinforcement learning can sufficiently capture the interdependence between EA decisions; and (2)
dynamically fusing the features with adaptively assigned weights can better take into consideration
the strength of each feature compared with equal weights; and (3) compared with existing distance
measures, the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity is a better measure to characterize the distance between
entity embeddings.
We will explore the following directions in the future: (1) devising more advanced feature
encoders that can better exploit available features for alignment; and (2) designing collective
alignment algorithms that can further mitigate the error propagation caused by the erroneous
matches; and (3) establishing a more challenging (mono-lingual) EA benchmark.
