International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.1, January 2012 
 
DOI : 10.5121/ijaia.2012.3110                                                                                                                     125 
 
 
A FRAMEWORK: CLUSTER DETECTION 
AND MULTIDIMENSIONAL 
VISUALIZATION OF AUTOMATED DATA 
MINING USING INTELLIGENT AGENTS 
 
 
 R. Jayabrabu1, Dr. V. Saravanan2, Prof. K. Vivekanandan3 
1PhD Research Scholar, Department of Computer Applications, Bharathiar University 
2Professor & Director, Department of Computer Applications, Sri Venkateswara College 
of Computer Applications and Management 
3Professor, School of Management, Bharathiar University 

ABSTRACT: 
Data Mining techniques plays a vital role like extraction of required knowledge, finding unsuspected 
information to make strategic decision in a novel way which in term understandable by domain experts.  A 
generalized frame work is proposed by considering non – domain experts during mining process for better 
understanding, making better decision and better finding new patters in case of selecting suitable data 
mining techniques based on the user profile by means of intelligent agents. 
 
KEYWORDS:  
Data Mining Techniques, Intelligent Agents, User Profile, Multidimensional Visualization, Knowledge 
Discovery. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Past decades has seen a dramatic increase in the amount of information of data being stored in 
different electronic format.  The problem is how to maintain these data and also extraction of 
required knowledge.  Data mining techniques can be viewed as a result of the natural evaluation 
of information technology [4] [16]. The process of analyzing the observational data sets to find 
unsuspected relationships and to summarize the data in novel ways those are both understandable 
and useful to the data user called as data mining.[16] [12] It is the achievement of relevant 
knowledge that can allow you to make strategic decisions which will allow you to proceed 
further. The techniques used in data mining are more difficult to understand by general user [1].  
A system which performs the process autonomously needs more user interaction by way of 
selecting the appropriate attribute. Automated data mining, minimizes this problem by selecting 
the attributes based on the user specified objective. It also chooses the best data mining technique 
for knowledge extraction [9]. The level of automation incorporated in this mining system is an 
important issue. Detecting the interesting patterns and finding out the appropriate knowledge 
from the output is also an interesting issue in data mining. This research work addresses this issue 
with the help of software agents. [7] The software agents help in detecting the clusters 
automatically.  It also assists in viewing the cluster results graphically. Multidimensional 
visualization is used to view the results in a more meaningful way. 
 
 

 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.1, January 2012 
126 
 
2.OBJECTIVE  
To develop a user friendly data mining system using intelligent agent through automated 
approach is the objective function of this research work.  It mainly deals about, developing a 
neutral system by using well known data mining techniques. Intelligent agents are also used in the 
above mentioned techniques to implement the automated process [1]. The developed automated 
system gets the input values form the user and chooses the appropriate data mining techniques 
with required parameters by using intelligent agents [7] [3].  The system also detects the quality 
of clusters with respect to user profile. Finally, the system displays the newly gained knowledge 
after clustering by choosing appropriate visualization technique.  The user agent is used to 
navigate user activates [4]. While user using system frequently, the previous history or activities 
of the particular user will be prompted once the particular user logged in the system after some 
time.  The data mining agent is used to perform different types of data analysis by selecting 
different mining algorithms based on the user navigation for better results in a shorter time [5].  
Intelligent agents are also used to select the required parameter for the given problem domain 
within the autonomous system for better visualization [13] [14]. 
3.RELATED WORK 
Berry and Linoff [4] proposed automated data mining by taking a picture with an automatic 
camera. The quality of results is not always as good as what can be achieved by an expert; 
however the ease of use empowers non- expert users to achieve reasonable results with minimum 
effort. This method is considered in this research work to automate the selection process of user 
required attributes and mining algorithms for better decision making process.  By considering this 
approach, the time taken to select the attributes and mining algorithm is reduced while compared 
with manually process is being considered.   
 
Saravanan and Vivekanandan[35]  proposed an automated data mining system which 
encompasses familiar data mining algorithms. According to author the system will automatically 
select the appropriate data mining technique and select the necessary field needed from the 
database at the appropriate time without expecting the users to specify the specific techniques and 
the parameters. Association and Classification rule mining is incorporated in this approach with 
the help of software agents. The system also has multiple association and classification 
techniques and selects the appropriate techniques based on user interest / data type / data size. 
Automatic detection of clusters and multi-dimensional visualization is not being considered by 
this author. 
Ayse Yasemin SEYDIM’s [1] explained more on agents, the special types of software 
applications, has become a very popular paradigm in computing in recent years.  The author 
states that, the agent based studies can be implemented for clustering, classification, and 
summarization. Some of the reasons where agents are more flexibility, modularity and general 
applicability to a wide range of problems. Recent increase in agent-based applications is also 
because of the technological developments in distributed computing, robotics and the emergence 
of object-oriented programming paradigms. Advances in distributed computing technologies have 
given rise to use of agents that can model distributed problem solving. 
 
Vuda Sreenivasa Rao [40] explained communications among the agents with in multi-agent 
system. According to the author, multi-agent system often deals with complex applications that 
required to solve the existing problem during data mining process in distributed system with 
individual and collective behaviors of the agents depends on the observed data from distributed 
system.  Based on this concept, an integration of multi-agent system with data mining is 
incorporated and it also defines how multiple agents are communicated with respect to specific 
applications.  Declaration of different agents with respect to specific task and communication 
behavior among agents is considered in this research work to meet the user requirements.  

 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.1, January 2012 
127 
 
Marcos M. Campos, Peter J. Stengard  and Boriana L. Milenova [22] proposes a new approach to 
the design of data mining applications platform to targeted user communities. This approach uses 
a data-centric focus where information are stored in a location and by implementing automated 
methodologies to make data mining process more accessible to non-experts. The automated 
methodologies are exposed through high-level interfaces. This frame work hides the data mining 
concepts away from the users, helping to bridge the conceptual gap generally associated with data 
mining. Automated mining algorithm used in this approach is classification and regression 
techniques.   Clustering techniques is being used in this research work with the help of automated 
data mining system to create new cluster for user community. 
Faraz Zaidi, Daniel Archambault and Guy Melancon [FDG, 41] proposed a metric to evaluate the 
quality of a cluster based on the path length of the elements of a cluster. Generally, metrics based 
on density and cut size prove to be adequate for networks having densely connected nodes or 
cliques. The author proposed a very simple and intuitive metric in which instead of considering 
density and cut size as fundamental component to evaluate the quality of the clustering algorithm, 
they suggested the mutuality and compactness of a cluster that can also be easily evaluated using 
a single quantities measure: the average path length between all the nodes of a cluster.  The 
average path length determines the closeness of the elements of a cluster which represent how far 
apart any two nodes lie to each other.  The author concentrated only on internal quality metrics. 
As a part of future work, an extended study on algorithms that can generate a benchmark cluster 
for given data sets with varying properties in multidimensional dataset is proposed and it is 
addressed with some extent in this research work. 
David Meunier and Helene Paugam-Moisy [DH, 42] focused on Girvan & Newman      (GN) 
method which was created by Girvan & Newman to determine the clusters in a given undirected 
graph, without any restriction on the data size and number of clusters. GN method is based two-
pass algorithm where the first pass removes the edges with highest edge – betweenness centrality 
and cluster building in the second pass. Author proposed an another method based on GN method 
instead of undirected graph to directed graph in the name of arc-linked cluster detection method 
with neural networks concepts to  achieves a narrower and higher modularity peak than GN 
method. The resultant value is more pertinent optimal set of clusters. The time complexity of Arc-
linked based is higher than GN method. The concept discussed by these authors is considered in 
this research work during cluster detection phases after cluster formation to detect the quality of 
cluster by means of attribute selection from the given database. 
Eleni Mangina [9] discusses real world monitoring engineering applications and specifies the role 
of knowledge engineers in complexity and diversity of tasks associated with specific problem 
domain. This paper also deals about tackling simultaneously different types of knowledge 
(inaccurate, incorrect or redundant) from different data sources that require being processed using 
different reasoning mechanisms. Within this paper, an intelligent agent-based platform is being 
considered for implementation, where the approach of integrating the use of two or more 
techniques is taken, in order to combine their different strengths and overcome each other's 
weaknesses and generate hybrid solutions. Different types of knowledge are discovered using 
different data mining techniques based on the user is considered to implement in this research.   
Wout Dullaert, Tijs Neutens, Greet Vanden Berghe [WTG, 43] implements an intelligent agent-
based communication for particular platform.  Intelligent agents are used in the form of high 
potential output such as increase cost efficiency, better service and safety communication among 
the agents.  They are also autonomous, communicative and intelligent.  Author also proposed 
real-time decision is also possible with the presence of intelligent agent.  Agents are used to 
overcome the quality, reliable service, trust concerns and confidentiality during the exchange 
process. Agent technology is used for automated transport process.  In this research work, 
intelligent agent-based concept is considered for cluster formation and cluster visualizations.  

 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.1, January 2012 
128 
 
Nigel Robinson, Mary Shapcott [26] proposed a visualization aids (beyond charts and graphs) by 
consider virtual data mining environment and data set as liquid data.  The author focused was 
based on limitations of the existing visualization methods and problems faced by the user while 
visualization.  As innovation, the modified visualization result is in the form of 3D game 
representation so that all users can easy to understand without having domain knowledge.  The 
minimization of user difficulties is taken into account in our research process during 
visualization.  In this paper, automation of the process is not yet considered for result oriented. 
Because of this, it is difficult to find the results by rare user.  From the above procedure, concept 
of visualization is taken into account as a part of this research work in which an automated data 
mining system  is implemented to  sense the user behavior for visualization so as to minimize the 
difficulties faced by the user during graphical representation of the results.  
Dr. Ping Chen, Dr. Chenyi Hu, Dr. Heloise Lynn, and Yves Simon [28] discuss about 
visualization of high dimensional data which is very important in data analysts due to its visual 
nature. They also proposed a method to visualize large amount of high dimensional data in a 3-D 
space by dividing the high dimension data into several groups of lower dimensional data first. 
Then, different icons are used to represent different groups. A glyph-based technique is used to 
represent different set of data in the form of various color icons like line, point, polygon, etc. The 
visualization of high dimensional data using Glyphs – based techniques is considered in this 
research work for visualization of multi-dimensional data based on user expectation. 
3.1 Need of the Approach for the Proposed Framework 
To develop a user friendly data mining system using intelligent agent through automated 
approach is the objective function of this research work.  It mainly deals about, developing a 
neutral system by using well known data mining techniques. Intelligent agents are also used in the 
above mentioned techniques to implement the automated process [35]. The developed automated 
system gets the input values form the user and chooses the appropriate data mining techniques 
with required parameters by using intelligent agents.  [30]The system also detects the quality of 
clusters with respect to user profile. Finally, the system displays the newly gained knowledge 
after clustering by choosing appropriate visualization technique.  The user agent is used to 
navigate user activates. When the user using the system frequently, the previous history or 
activities of the particular user will be prompted once the particular user logged in the system 
after some time.  The data mining agent is used to perform different types of data analysis by 
selecting different mining algorithms based on the user navigation for better results in a shorter 
time. Intelligent agents are also used to select the required parameter for the given problem 
domain within the autonomous system for better visualization [36]. 
4.METHODOLOGY 
To develop an approach which performs the process autonomously that needs more user 
interaction by way of selecting the appropriate user specifies objectives are the primary goal of 
this research [35] [36]. The developed system also chooses the best data mining technique for 
knowledge extraction and also for better understanding. Thus, level of automation incorporated in 
this system is an important issue. The automated system performs the process based on user 
interface agent, data mining agent and visualization agent. [26] [25] User interface agent is used 
to navigate the history of the user profile among the frequent user to mine the related data [27].  
Data mining agent is used in this system to perform different types of data analysis by selecting 
different data mining algorithm based on the user profile. The profile selected by the agent is then 
inputted to the automated data mining systems where the clustering technique is used to find new 
patterns. [32] Various clustering techniques such as k-means, CLARA, CLARNS, k- prototype, 
k-mode, etc is being used to perform cluster analysis[31] [34]. The automated data mining system 
chooses any one of the mining algorithm based upon the data types, size of the data, and user 
profile.  Attribute selection (prioritization, ranking) techniques are used to select the appropriate 
attributed to complete the mining process by means of intelligent agent. The intelligent agents 

 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.1, January 2012 
129 
 
used in this automated system, [21] analyses the quality of cluster among the clusters produced by 
different data mining techniques with respect to the history of profile[17] [18]. In this automated 
system, agent selects the appropriate visualization tool (1D (raw format), 2D (x-axis, y-axis) and 
3D(x, y, z-axis)) for better decision making [26] [28] [32].  From these aspects, a framework is 
developed to analyze the cluster, detect the cluster and visualization by means of automated 
system and intelligent agent technology [25]. The methodology adopted in this research work is 
given below. 
Proposed Methodology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure4a. Procedure for Proposed Methods 
5.Intelligent Agent 
 
Artificial intelligence and agent systems have been closely inter-linked with each other over few 
decades [15] [17] [6] [37]. The artificial intelligence is the study of components intelligence, but 
agent deals with integration of those components. Thus, agent is defined as an entity that vaguely 
a software using techniques from artificial intelligence to assist a human user of a specific 
application [11] [30] [8] [27] [33]. According to the definition of agents have the following 
properties: 
1. 
Agents are autonomous in nature: operates without direct control with user and other 
agents. 
2. 
Agents are also called as social communicator among the agents. 
3. 
Agents by itself move towards its defined goal. 
5.1 User Interface Agent 
The user interface agent interacts with the user in assisting him / her to perform data analysis and 
data mining activities [35] [10] [15] [24]. The user can provide a general description of the 
problem at hand in terms of high level goals and objectives, or provide specific details about the 
data analysis or mining task to be performed. 
Step 1: Start 
Step 2: Navigation of User Profile. 
Step 3: Design of a suitable procedure for the 
 
intelligent agents to Interact with User Profile 
and  Clustering Techniques. 
Step 4: Selection of appropriate Clustering 
 
Techniques. 
Algorithm Selection. 
Attributes Selection. (Priority, Ranking) 
Step 5: Design a suitable procedure for cluster 
 
detection 
Step 5: Design a suitable procedure for the 
 
Software Agent to select the appropriate 
 
Visualization tool. 
Step 6: Multi Dimensional Visualization of 
 
Results. 
Step 7:Stop 

 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.1, January 2012 
130 
 
 
Developed Procedure for User Interface Agent 
 
Step 1: Start 
Step 2: Input the user objectives 
Step 3: Check user history 
Step 4: If new users go to step 6 
Step 5: If user already exists 
5.1
Retrieve the possible interested patterns. 
5.2 Wait for the user response  
5.3 Capture user navigation and store it in user 
 
history 
5.4 Go to step 7  
Step 6: Retrieve similar interested patterns,  
 
Capture user navigation and store it in  
 
user history 
Step 7: Transfer control to “Data mining Agent” 
Step 8: End 
Figure 5.1a: Procedure for User Interface Agent 
5.2 Ranking Agent 
Once the user preference is identified the ranking agent helps in ranking the attributes. Ranking is 
done by number of factors such as query weight, memory space, properties of the attribute type 
and similarity between the objects [29]. The highest ranked attributes are taken for clustering. 
Developed Procedure for Ranking Agent 
Step 1: Start 
Step2: Calculate the scoring function for each attribute 
 
   Step 2.1: Classify the types of  
 
              attributes 
     
Step 2.2: Assign Score Value  
 
 
for each attributes 
Step 3: Calculate Query Weight 
     
Step 3.1: Usage of attributes 
     
Step3.2:Assigning of weightage 
Step4:Identify the relationship and importance of the 
 
ranked  attributes 
Step 5: End
Figure 5.2 a: Procedure for Ranking Agent 
5.3 Data Mining Agent 
The data-mining agent implements specific data mining methods and algorithms. The data mining 
agent contains specific clustering algorithms implemented in house, that may have been installed 
within the environment [2] [23][36]. Thus, the data mining agent is responsible for performing 
the actual data mining activity and generating the results. 
 
 
 

 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.1, January 2012 
131 
 
Developed Procedure for Data Mining Agent 
Step 1: Start 
Step 2: Identify and Select the ranked attributes (by calling 
 
Ranking  agents) 
Step 3: Categorize the appropriate clustering algorithm 
 
suitable  for the attributes 
Step 4: Cluster data based on the suitable algorithms, k-means, 
 
k- medoids, k-modes, CLARA and CLARANS. 
Step 5: Transfer the control to ‘Visualization Agent’ 
Step 6: End 
Figure 5.3a: Developed Procedure for Data Mining Agent 
5.4 Visualization Agent 
To evaluate the effectiveness of visualization techniques, the way in which they assist and 
complement the data mining process need to be understood. [23][36]The relationship between 
data mining and visualization process can be explained with few conditions visualization of data 
set can be defined as combination of various methods or user priority to a approach of selecting 
and indicating what patterns should be displayed.  It is one of the interesting techniques to 
establish which patters are better than the one to enhance visualization techniques. Visualization 
will provides more added advantage to the user for easy understanding and also increases the 
power of understanding the end results [19].  
Developed Procedure for Visualization Agent 
 
 
 
Step 1: Start 
 
 
 
Step 2: Analyze the cluster data types 
 
  
 
Step 3: Choose the visualization tool based  on the   cluster  Data 
 
 
 
Step 4: Classify the attributes value based on 1D or 2D or3D 
 
 
 
Step 5: Choose the appropriate visualization technique based 
 
 
 
 
Step4 
 
 
 
Step 6: Repeat the process until Step 5 
 
 
 
Step 7: Visualize the data successfully 
 
 
 
Step 4:  End 
Figure 5.4a: Developed Procedure for Visualization Agent 
6. PROPOSED FRAME WORK FOR AUTOMATED DATA MINING USING 
INTELLIGENT AGENTS 
 
Figure 6a: Proposed Framework for Automated Data Mining Using Intelligent Agents 
The newly developed framework is represented diagrammatically. From this framework, the 
automated data mining system gets the necessary data from the given database. Apart from 
getting data from the given database, it also gets the user information (new user or old user).  The 

 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.1, January 2012 
132 
 
developed system chooses the appropriate data mining techniques which are made available 
based on the objective functions. The algorithm considered in this developed system is 
partitioning algorithms.  At the same time if the user already used the automated data mining 
system, the results are captured by the intelligent agent and stored in the database.  The end result 
is also referred by the intelligent agent to the next user.  Thus, this makes the agent technology 
more users friendly.  The intelligent agents are used in automated process of attribute selection, 
ranking process, cluster formation, cluster detection and visualization.  
 
 The user interface agent is responsible for receiving user specifications and delivering results to 
the data mining agent. it also keeps track of user profile based on the user interactions.  The data 
mining agent mine the result based on the parameters given by user interface agent to perform 
cluster formation and cluster detection. Clustering algorithms are used to formulate a new cluster, 
based on the user interface agent with respect to specific user profile. Then cluster detection 
techniques are used to detect the cluster quality for further process.  The quality of cluster is 
identified by various parameters with help of intelligent agent. As result, the best cluster will be 
discovered from the known knowledge. The visual agent is used to visualize the identified cluster 
depends on the nature of data within the detected cluster. After completion of cluster formation 
and cluster detection, it transfers the result to decision system where the visual agent find suitable 
representation tools based on the cluster nature.  Finally, the end result is visualized in terms of 
1D, 2D or 3D by visual agent.  Thus, the entire process is monitored as well as executed by 
automated intelligent system based on the user profile.  This makes the less domain knowledge 
users more convenient and understandability. 
In this research work different types of agents are used to perform the operations on behalf of 
user so that, the data mining result will be productive and knowledgeable for less domain 
knowledge user.  Agents used in this framework are for reliable communication, cooperation 
among the agents, and finally coordination among the other agents within the system to perform 
some specific tasks. The overall processes are carried out by different agents with in the 
automated intelligent system.  
6.1 User Interface Agent 
The automated system is executed by navigating and analyzing the user profile [38].  Based on 
the user behavior with the data mining system and also by find the user profile (new or existing).  
After finding the nature of the user profile, the productive attributes are mined from user agent by 
data mining agent where the actual mining process takes place.  The identification of users are 
based on the selection of data set like number of records, number of attributes, data types, etc., 
User interface agent analyses all the information with respect to the user behaviors and transfer 
the control to data mining agent for further process. 
6.2 Data Mining Agent 
 
Data mining agent has two major roles.  They are cluster formation and cluster detection based on 
the parameter of user profile agent.  
6.2a Cluster Formations 
 Cluster formation is defined as grouping of objects that are similar to one another within the 
same cluster and are dissimilar to the objects with other clusters.  Partitioning approach is 
considered to cluster different types of attributes, numeric and categorical data. Clustering are 
also done depends upon data set, data size, and data types. Data mining agent will choose the 
appropriate clustering algorithm for better cluster formations. 
 
 
 

 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.1, January 2012 
133 
 
6.2b Cluster Detections 
Data mining agent is used here to analyze the formulated clusters quality based on quality 
parameters.  Generally, clustering algorithms will produce clusters, based upon input data.  But, 
all clusters are not good cluster. Intelligent agent in automated system is used to find the good 
clusters among various clusters.   
6.3 Visualization Agent 
The visualization agent is uses to generate various reports based on the cluster results.[39]  The 
visualization might be 1D, 2D or 3D based on the type of cluster nature (numerical or 
categorical).  Generally, major difficult task in data mining is report generation, that to it should 
be understand able by all the users.  Manually it is possible to create reports but it is hard to 
justify the report at all times.  In these aspects, an automated system is used to generate report 
based on the cluster nature irrespective of time and data.  In this work, visualization agent will 
coordinate with data mining agent, based on that it will identify suitable visual method for each 
specific cluster. 
 
7. DATA BASED CONSIDERED  
Data set used in this research work is student database, which contains 50,000 records with 
different data types.  The data types considered in this work are numerical data and categorical 
data.  It contains nearly 40 attributes of different data types. Some of the attributes are as follows 
which is used in our research work are REG_NO, NAME, YEAR, SEMESTER, 
ASSIG_PARAMETER, 
MAX_MARK, 
MIN_MARK, 
LIB_ACCNO, 
ISSUE_DATE, 
RETURN_DATA, ACC_NO, SPECIALIZATION, STREET_NO, STREET_NO, PLACE, 

PASS_PERCENTAGE, AVG_INT, AVG_EXT, AVG_TOT.    
The main objective of this research work is to analyze student performance based some 
parameters depends on the user level.  In our education systems, different types of evaluation 
techniques are emerged in the world to evaluate student performance by means of semester wise, 
class room wise, location wise, subject wise and gender wise, etc., All these evaluation patters 
and a technique is to improve the education level among student’s community. The theme of this 
work is to analyze based on the user profile among domain experts and non - domain experts 
previous history not with students side.  The domain expert will always starts from starch for their 
analysis purpose while compared to non – domain experts.  The major problems identified with 
non-domain experts are: 
a. 
Difficult to find the suitable data mining techniques 
b. 
Difficult in selection appropriate attribute in the given data base  
c. 
Difficult to find the interested patterns 
d. 
Difficult to understand  the interested pattern 
e. 
Difficult in selecting an appropriate tool for visualization 
The difficulties faced by the non-expert user is minimized with the help of this automated system.  
An automated system will perform task on behalf of users based on the previous user profile 
called as user history.  From these, major parts of the tasks are inherited from the existing 
performance which was generated already by the existing users instead of creating new manual 
procedure with the help of domain experts. This leads to minimize the user difficulties with help 
of old historical data.  The results along with screen shorts are show below with the help of 
automated system. 
 

 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.1, January 2012 
134 
 
8.RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
The developed prototype uses the chosen data set for mining. The software agents are used to 
detect the clusters automatically and provides the best quality clusters. It is observed that the 
clusters given good knowledge and found to be useful for better decision making. 
                                                              
Figure 8a: Students performance across semesters 
In figure 8a, student performance is analyzed with respect to number of students and academic 
year.  The academic year is scheduled as three semesters namely semester_ spring, semester_ fall and 
semester_summer in which, student who are all studying semester_spring are really good in their studies 
when compared with other two semesters with irrespective to the students.  In this scenario, the system 
chooses the attribute ‘Semester’ and performed cluster analysis with the help of software agents. Further 
mining of this results are provided in figure 8b. 
 
Figure 8b: Performance of students by distribution of percentage across semesters 
In figure 8b, the student performance is analyzed based on student ratio.  In this research work, 
rapid changes are found in semester_spring and semester_fall while compared with 
semester_summer.  This is because of the student who are all belongs to semester_summer have 
less number of laboratory mark compared to both semester_spring and semester_fall. In this 
scenario, the system chooses the attribute ‘Semester & Percentage of marks’ and performed 
cluster analysis with the help of software agents. Further mining of this results are provided in 
figure 8c. 

 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.1, January 2012 
135 
 
 
Figure 8c: Link chart represents the relation between Percentage and Assessment Component (Correlation Value: 
1.03e+003 and only positive links) 
In figure 8c, the multidimensional visualization is one of the major events in this research work 
with respect to user constrain for better understanding and meaningful knowledge discovery in 
different manner so that, the domain knowledge is not all necessary to analyze the visual reports. 
The visualization is based on the data types so that, the decision agent will select the appropriate 
visual tool with respect to dimensionality.  ie 1D, 2D, 3D and etc such that, the clusters after 
cluster quality detection are made visualize by means of decision agent.  The chart shown is one 
of the results after cluster detected by the user, in which the thick red line shows stronger cluster 
in which more attributes are involved to produce the final result which is also meaning full and 
easy to identify knowledge.  These processes are carried out by intelligent agent in the name of 
decision agent with lesser time when compared to manual process. This is one the major 
advantage while compared with other frame work.  The chart shown here is link chart in which 
different attributed are linked together to identify group of students, who are all secured more 
mark with respect to different parameters based on assessments. In this scenario, the system 
chooses the attribute ‘Semester, Percentage of marks & Assessment parameter’ and performed 
cluster analysis with the help of software agents. Further mining of this results are provided in 
figure 8d. 
 
 
Figure 8d: Group4 students (Percentage greater than 90) performance in Lab Exam across semesters 
From the above figure 8d, analysis takes place on semester wise on overall percentage of marks 
vs total number of students and years.  According to this research work, students who belong to 
spring_semester and fall_semester obtain more marks in the entire subject with corresponding 
year.  As per our research work, this much deviation is due to laboratory marks are also counted 
in both spring_semester and fall_semester but not in summer_semester. 
 

 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol.3, No.1, January 2012 
136 
 
9.CONCLUSION 
 
Automated data mining is an emerging concept in data processing.  In this research work, entire 
mining process is carried out by different intelligent agents with the help of automated system 
based on the user history. The major aim is to satisfy the user expectation and interest.  This 
research work mainly focused on automated mining process from which the suitable mining 
techniques are analyzed based on the data set and attribute nature.  Clusters are formulated and 
also a detection technique is used to analyze the quality of the cluster with respect to data base 
selected by the user.  Thus, intelligent agent identifies whether new cluster is of good quality or 
not based on the user navigation, which is referred as cluster detection for visualization. 
Visualization is based on the nature of the elements within the selected cluster. This is because; 
clusters will never give meaning results because of non domain experts when compared with 
domain experts.  The domain experts will have more knowledge and easily understand the 
system within a short span of time.  The solutions discussed in this research work is more 
scalable and compatible when compared to the present existing systems by means of less 
attentions and more user friendly approach to a focused results.
