Texture Classification Approach Based on Combination of
Edge & Co-occurrence and Local Binary Pattern
Shervan Fekri Ershad
Department of computer science, engineering and IT, University of Shiraz, Shiraz, Iran

Abstract – Texture classification is one of the problems
which has been paid much attention on by computer
scientists since late 90s. If texture classification is done
correctly and accurately, it can be used in many cases
such as Pattern recognition, object tracking, and shape
recognition. So far, there have been so many methods
offered to solve this problem. Near all these methods
have tried to extract and define features to separate
different labels of textures really well. This article has
offered an approach which has an overall process on the
images of textures based on Local binary pattern and
Gray Level Co-occurrence matrix and then by edge
detection, and finally, extracting the statistical features
from the images would classify them. Although, this
approach is a general one and is could be used in
different applications, the method has been tested on the
stone texture and the results have been compared with
some of the previous approaches to prove the quality of
proposed approach.
Keywords-Texture 
Classification, 
Gray 
level 
Co
occurrence, Local Binary Pattern, Statistical Features
1 Introduction
Since 1990s, and with the progress of the computer
vision and image processing, texture classification turned
out to be one of the main subjects in the literature of
these sciences. As texture classification has a close
relationship with the sciences such as machine learning,
it functions in areas like pattern recognition, object
tracking, defect detection, face tracking and etc. The
main problem in texture classification relates to two
topics: 1.finding and introducing the best features for
texture description 2.selecting the best and the most
corresponding kinds of classifiers with selected features.
Regarding these two topics, we have witnessed different
kinds of discussions. Some of these methods directly
work on the taken images of the textures, such as Texture
Classification Based on Random Threshold Vector
Technique [1], and Texture Classification Based on
Primitive Pattern Units [3]. Another group of methods,
first do some process on the images and then search for
suitable features related to the class labels, such as
texture classification by using advanced local binary
patterns, and spatial distribution of dominant patterns
[10] and A New Color-Texture Approach for Industrial
Products Inspection [4]. Since the methods which have
been offered up to now are applicative, and are
appropriate per cases, therefore, they are not guaranteed
to work effectively on other applications. For this reason,
the researcher’s main purpose is to define the new
methods and features.
In this article, too, there has been a new method offered
which is functioning as a general one. It can use for
different applications, but works well on stone texture
classification problem and can classify kinds of stone
textures accurately by using a train step. In this method,
first, the image is processed using LBP and GLCM
algorithms. Then the edge detection has been done on the
image by using edge filters. We can make a suitable data
set by extracting famous statistical features like energy,
entropy and contrast. Finally, we can classify the test
data highly accurately by using classifiers.
In the result part, by using this approach, we have made
suitable dataset for three different stone models called
Granite, Travertine, and hatchet stone. Then by using
some classifiers like NaiveBayes, KNN, and LADTree,
we compute the misclassification error rate of this
dataset. Also, we have compared it with some of the
previous methods like LBP and GLCM regarding their
accuracy rate. One of the main advantages of this
approach is its high correspondence with the most
classifiers which have been clearly stated in the results
part.
1.1 Paper Organization
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows:
Section two is related to the description of Local binary
pattern (LBP) algorithm and the way of this estimation.
Section three is related to the description of Gray level
Co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) algorithm. Section four
has a brief description about the different aspects of the
edge detection filters. Section five describes the main
method of this paper and finally, the results and
conclusion included.
626
Int'l Conf. IP, Comp. Vision, and Pattern Recognition |  IPCV'11  |

2 Local Binary Pattern 
One of the most popular texture analysis operators is 
Local Binary pattern (LBP) that was introduced in [7]. It 
is a gray-scale invariant texture measure computed from 
the analysis of a 3x3 local neighborhood over a central 
pixel. The LBP is based on a binary code describing the 
local texture pattern. This code is built by thresholding a 
local neighborhood by the gray value of its center. 
The eight neighbors are labeled using a binary code {O, 
I} obtained by comparing their values to the central 
pixel value. If the tested gray value is below the gray 
value of the central pixel, then it is labeled 0, otherwise it 
is assigned the value I: 
(1) 
d;' is the obtained binary code, d; is the original pixel 
value at position i and do is the central pixel value. With 
this technique there is 256 (28) possible patterns (or 
texture units). 
The obtained value is then multiplied by weights given to 
the corresponding pixels. The weight is given by the 
value 2;-1. Summing the obtained values gives the 
measure of the LBP: 
/ 
- "a d'Zi-l 
(2)
I.BP - Li=li 
Fig I shows an example on how to compute LBP. The 
original 3x3 neighborhood is given in Fig I (a). The 
central pixel value is used as a threshold in order to 
assign a binary value to its neighbors. Fig 1 (b) shows 
the result of thresholding the 3x3 neighborhood. 
:_:~:-:J 
---0-1 
:~..:L;?:.:...:~ .. 
Lf:3F" 
t +:3-" 128 ·CC· 13 
Figure!. Computation LBP 
The 
obtained 
values 
are 
multiplied 
by 
their 
corresponding weights. The weights kernel is given by 
Fig I (c). The result is given in Fig 1 (d). The sum of the 
resulting values gives the LBP measure (137). The 
central pixel is replaced by the obtained value. A new 
LBP image is constructed by processing each pixel and 
its 3x3 neighbors in the original image. Fig 2 shows an 
example of the resulting LBP images. 
3 Gray Level Co-occurrence Matrix 
Gray 
Level 
Co-occurrence 
Matrix 
(GLCM) 
was 
proposed in [6] by Haralick and Shanmugam. It is very 
useful in texture analysis. It calculates the second order 
statistics related to image properties by considering the 
spatial relationship of pixels. GLCM depicts how often 
different combinations of gray levels co-occur in an 
image. The GLCM is created by calculating how often a 
pixel with the intensity value i occurs in a specific spatial 
relationship to a pixel with the value j. The spatial 
Relationship can be specified in different ways, the 
default one is between a pixel and its immediate 
neighbor to its right. However we can specify this 
relationship with different offsets and angles. The pixel 
at position (i,j) in GLCM is the sum of the number of 
times the (i ,j) relationship occurs in the image. 
Fig 3 describes how to compute the GLCM. It shows an 
image and its corresponding co-occurrence matrix using 
the default pixels spatial relationship (offset = +1 in x 
direction). For the pair (2,1) (pixel 2 followed at its right 
by pixel 1), it is found 2 times in the image, then the 
GLCM image will have 2 as a value in the position 
corresponding to Ii =1 and Ij =2. The GLCM matrix is a 
256x256 matrix; Ii and Ij are the intensity values for an 
8bit image. The GLCM can be computed for the eight 
directions around the pixel of interest (Fig 4). Summing 
results from different directions lead to the isotropic 
GLCM and help achieve a rotation invariant GLCM (Fig 
5). More details are in [4]. 
Int'l Conf. IP, Comp. Vision, and Pattern Recognition |  IPCV'11  |
627

y 
Figure3. Description of the Gray Level CO-occuITence Matrix. 
FigureS. Processing GLCM of Original Image of Travertine stone in 0' 
4 Edge Detection 
Edge detection is the process of localizing pixel intensity 
transitions. The edge detection has been used by object 
recognition, target tracking, segmentation, and etc. 
Therefore, the edge detection is one of the most 
important parts of image processing. There mainly exist 
several edge detection methods (Sobel [11J, PrewItt [12], 
Roberts [13]). These methods have been proposed for 
detecting 
transitions 
in 
images. 
Early 
methods 
determined the best gradient operator to detect sharp 
intensity variations [14]. Commonly used method for 
detecting edges is to apply derivative operators on 
images. Derivative based approaches can be categorized 
into two groups, namely first and second order derivative 
methods. First order derivative based techniques depend 
on computing the gradient several directions and 
combining the result of each gradient. The value of the 
gradient magnitude and orientation is estimated using 
two differentiation masks [15]. 
In this work, Sobel which is an edge detection method is 
considered. This method is preferred will use in this 
work. The Sobel edge detector uses two masks, one 
vertical and one horizontal. These masks are generally 
used 3x3 matrices. Especially, the matrices which have 
3x3 dimensions are used in matlab (see, edge.m). 
5 Proposed method 
. 
The approach, which has been proposed in this article, .IS 
in a main box consisting of three sub-boxes shown m Fig 
6. In this approach, first of all, according to the algorithm 
described in section 2, the LBP image would be 
estimated for the input image. The LBP's image is then 
would be sent to the second sub-box. In this sub-box, 
according to the algorithm mentioned in section 3, the 
second order statistics which is called GLCM, would be 
estimated for the second sub-box's input. GLCM can be 
estimated in 8 directions and achieve one image in every 
direction. Afterward, the GLCM images would be sent 
into the third sub-box. In the last sub-box using Sobel 
filter, the edges of entering images would be recognized. 
The edge detected images then would be sent out from 
the main box. In this point, every image which is out of 
the main box has statistical features by using the 
following formulas: 
Entropy: 1'1 = Irj~}) -Ln(Pi,j)Pi,j 
(3) 
- - "N-l (P )2
Energy: 12 -
Lti,j=O 
i,j 
(4) 
,\'N-l P C' 
')2
Contrast: 15 = LJi.j=O 
Ij I - J 
(5) 
'F _ ,\'N-l Pij /
HomogeneIty: J4 -
LJi,j=O /1 + (i _ j)2 
(6) 
. 
_ 
N-l 
(i-rl)(j-j.I)
CorrelatIOn: 15 - Li,j=O Pij 
cr2 
(7) 
"N-l 'P
F 
(8)
Mean: J6 = Lti,j=61. ij 
. 
"">N-l" 
,)2
VarIance: 17 = Li,j=O PLj(1 -
f..l. 
(9) 
Where Pij is the pixel value in position (iJ) in the output 
image and N is the number of gray levels in the output 
image. Now, for every entering image in the main box, 
features vector could be computed in every direction as 
follows: F = (f1, f2, f3, f4, f5, f6, f7). 
Note that for every entering image into the main-box, 
there is 8 features vector, because for every images that 
entering into the second sub-box, GLCM's image can 
estimate in 8 directions. So for every image there are 56 
computable features. Ffina1 = (fll , fl.2...f2.J, f2.2... f77). 
In the results part, it has been shown that by using these  
features, stone textures classification could be done by  
high accuracy. From now on, the word "SEGL" would  
be use to name the approach offered in this article, which  
is the abbreviation of this words: "Statistical, Edge,  
GLCM and LBP". 
-----., 
Main Box
Input Image 
Output Image 
Figure6. Main box of proposed approach 
628
Int'l Conf. IP, Comp. Vision, and Pattern Recognition |  IPCV'11  |

6  Results
As it was mentioned in the introduction part, the main
aim of this article is to offer a new approach for stone
texture classification. Thus, to get results and observe the
efficiency of proposed approach three kinds of stones
named granite, travertine and hatchet, 60 images were
taken by digital camera. It means 20 images of every
model of stones. The images have been processed by the
approach offered in this article, and the statistical
features where computed for them according to section 5.
To reduce the complexity and dataset’s dimensions only
GLCM was estimated in the 0’. Then there has been a
dataset made consisting 60 instances, and 7 attributes.
Every instance has a label which is the model of that
stone. Finally, by using some of the classifiers such as
KNN, NaiveBayes ,and LADTree, and by using N.Fold
method, the accuracy of the dataset that has been made
for stone textures is computed, which is shown in the
table1. In second and third rows of the table1, the stone
textures were classified just based on LBP and GLCM
images to compare the proposed approach with some of
the previous approaches in term of accuracy. As it is
shown in table1, the accuracy of the new approach is
much higher than other previous approaches.  The main
advantages of the proposed approach in this article can
be mentioned in two points. 1-corresponding with near
all of the classifiers, 2-Introducing a series of new
features which are able to be computed for different
applications.
Classifier
Approach
3NN
5NN
Naive
Bayes
LAD
Tree
SEGL
93.3 ± 0.8
93.6 ± 0.2
92 ± 0.2
90 ± 0.3
LBP
88.4 ± 0.8
82.6 ± 0.6
87.5± 0.5
81.4±0.8
GLCM
86.3 ± 0.6
85 ± 0.70
80.2± 0.4
79.8±0.7
Table1. Performance of Stone texture classification
7  Conclusion
The main purpose of this article was to offer an approach
for stone texture classification. In this respect, the
sections 2, 3 and 4 have algorithms of LBP, GLCM and
edge estimations for the images and in section 5 the
SEGL approach has been offered and described
thoroughly. As it was described in SEGL method, first
the input images were processed based on the main box,
shown in Fig6, then, the statistical features were
computed for the exiting images. In continuation, by
using the exiting features in every image, we have made
a dataset for three kinds of stones. Finally by using some
classifiers and the N,Fold method we have classified all
the items. So we see that all features which have
computed by SEGL approach can use for classifying all
kinds of stones by great accuracy.
8 Acknowledgment
The Author would likes to say thanks to Mr. Mohammad
Abdollahi (Department of civil engineering) for his
guidance to collate the database.
9  References
[1] B.V. Ramana Reddy, M.Radhika Mani, B.Sujatha, and
Dr.V.Vijaya Kumar, “Texture Classification Based on Random
Threshold Vector
Technique” ,
International Journal of
Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering,Vol. 5, No. 1, January,
2010
[2] A. Cord, F. Bach & D. Jeulin, “Texture classification by
statistical learning from morphological image processing:
application to metallic surfaces”, Journal of Microscopy, Vol.
239, Pt 2 2010, pp. 159–166, Received 1 July 2008; accepted
17 December 2009
[3] A. Suresh, U.S.N. Raju, V. Vijaya Kumar, “An Innovative
Technique of Stone Texture Classification Based on Primitive
Pattern Units”, International Journal of Signal and Image
Processing (Vol.1-2010/Iss.1) Suresh et al. / An Innovative
Technique of Stone Texture Classification … / pp. 40-45
[4] Moulay A. Akhloufi, Xavier Maldague and Wael Ben
Larbi, “A New Color-Texture Approach for Industrial Products
Inspection”, Journal of multimedia, vol. 3, NO. 3, JULY 2008
[5] Basavaraj S. Anami , Suvarna S. Nandyal and A.
Govardhan,” A Combined Color, Texture and Edge Features
Based Approach for Identification and Classification of Indian
Medicinal 
Plants”,
International 
Journal 
of 
Computer
Applications (0975 – 8887) Volume 6– No.12, September 2010
[6] R.M. Haralick, K.Shanmugam, and I. Dinstein, “Textural
Features for Image Classification” , IEEE Trans. On Systems,
Man and Cybernetics, 1973, pp.610-621.
[7] T. Ojala, M Pietikainen., and D. Harwood. “ A comparative
study of texture measures with classification based on feature
distributions”, Pattern Recognition 29 (1), 1996, pp. 51-59.
[8] Image Toolbox (for use with Matlab) User’s Guide, The
MathWorks Inc., 2000.
[9] Shigeru, A., Consistent Gradient Operators, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 22
(3), 2000.
[10] Shu Liao and Albert C. S. Chung, “Texture classification
by using advanced local binary patterns and spatial distribution
of dominant patterns”, 1424407281/07/$20.00 ©2007 IEEE,
ICASSP 2007
[11] Sobel, I., An Isotropic 3×3 Gradient Operator, Machine
Vision for Three
–
Dimensional
Scenes, Freeman, H.,
Academic Pres, NY, 376-379, 1990.
[12] Prewitt, J., Object Enhancemet And Extraction, Picture
Processing and Psychopictorics ( B. Lipkin and A. Rosenfeld,
Ed.), NY, Academic Pres, 1970.
[13] Roberts, L. G., Machine Perception of Three-Dimensional
Solids, in optical and Electro-Optical Information Processing (
J. Tippett, Ed.), 159-197, MIT Press , 1965.
[14] Ziou, D. and Tabbone, S., Edge Detection Techniques -
An Overview, Technical Report, No. 195, Dept. Math &
Informatique, Universit de Sherbrooke, 1997.
[15] Shigeru, A.,
Consistent Gradient
Operators,
IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,22
Int'l Conf. IP, Comp. Vision, and Pattern Recognition |  IPCV'11  |
629
