Data Augmentation Techniques for Cross-Domain
WiFi CSI-based Human Activity Recognition
Julian Strohmayer and Martin Kampel
Computer Vision Lab, TU Wien
Favoritenstr. 9/193-1, 1040 Vienna, Austria

Abstract—The recognition of human activities based on WiFi
Channel State Information (CSI) enables contactless and visual
privacy-preserving sensing in indoor environments. However,
poor model generalization, due to varying environmental con-
ditions and sensing hardware, is a well-known problem in this
space. To address this issue, in this work, data augmentation
techniques commonly used in image-based learning are applied
to WiFi CSI to investigate their effects on model generalization
performance in cross-scenario and cross-system settings. In
particular, we focus on the generalization between line-of-sight
(LOS) and non-line-of-sight (NLOS) through-wall scenarios, as
well as on the generalization between different antenna systems,
which remains under-explored. We collect and make publicly
available a dataset of CSI amplitude spectrograms of human
activities. Utilizing this data, an ablation study is conducted in
which activity recognition models based on the EfficientNetV2
architecture are trained, allowing us to assess the effects of
each augmentation on model generalization performance. The
gathered results show that specific combinations of simple data
augmentation techniques applied to CSI amplitude data can sig-
nificantly improve cross-scenario and cross-system generalization.
Index Terms—Data Augmentation, Model Generalization, Hu-
man Activity Recognition, WiFi, Channel State Information
I. INTRODUCTION
WiFi Channel State Information (CSI)-based Human Activ-
ity Recognition (HAR) has garnered significant attention due
to its advantages over optical modalities, such as preserving
visual privacy, being unobtrusive, and having wall-penetration
capabilities that enable monitoring of large areas with a single
system [1]. In indoor settings, the propagation paths of WiFi
signals are influenced by both static and dynamic objects that
constitute the environment [2]. Static objects, such as walls,
floors, or furniture, primarily contribute to the background
signal. On the other hand, the motion of dynamic objects, such
as the human body, can significantly alter signal propagation
paths within short periods of time. Consequently, characteristic
patterns in CSI emerge, enabling the distinction between
various activities, as illustrated in Figure 1. This forms the
foundation of CSI-based HAR. However, a consequence of
this inherent sensitivity to variations in the environment,
sensing hardware, or the physiology of monitored individuals,
all of which contribute to CSI characteristics, make model
generalization to new domains an open problem [3] often
resulting in a decline in performance due to an underlying
domain gap [4].
CSI packets (time)
subcarrier 
amplitude
CSI packets (time)
walking
walking + arm-waving
subcarrier 
amplitude
Fig. 1: CSI spectrograms of a person walking and a person
walking while simultaneously waving their arms, showing the
characteristic patterns in WiFi subcarrier amplitudes caused by
these activities.
To address this problem, in this work, we investigate
methods to enhance both cross-scenario and cross-system
generalization performance of WiFi CSI-based HAR models.
Cross-scenario generalization pertains to a model’s ability
to perform well on CSI from a scenario it was not trained
on, without encountering samples from the target domain
during training. Similarly, cross-system generalization involves
a model’s capability to perform well when tested on CSI from
a different system than the one it was trained on. Developing
methodologies to improve cross-scenario and cross-system
generalization could enable knowledge transfer between do-
mains and enhance a model’s robustness against variations
in environmental conditions and sensing hardware, frequently
encountered in practical deployments. Furthermore, it could
address the limited availability of data in the field of WiFi-
based HAR by enabling transfer learning [5].
II. RELATED WORK
A comprehensive survey on the state of cross-domain WiFi
sensing is presented by Chen et al. [3], discussing domain-
invariant feature extraction, virtual sample generation, transfer
learning, few-shot learning, and big data approaches, as well
as open challenges limiting practical applicability. According
to this classification scheme, this work falls into the category
of virtual sample generation, using data augmentation to
facilitate generalization. Only a few works investigate data
augmentation techniques, with a primary focus on RSSI data
arXiv:2401.00964v1  [cs.CV]  1 Jan 2024

(a)
(b)
Fig. 2: Systems overview, showing (a) the PIFA with a plane
reflector system, and (b) the BQ antenna system.
augmentation [6]–[8]. In [9], a data augmentation technique
based on noise injection into CSI data is proposed. Lee
et al. [2] are among the first to address the problem of
long-term generalization in CSI-based HAR and propose a
temporal-invariant feature extraction approach using MixUp
[10] augmentation to generalize their model. Key findings of
this work include that CSI temporal variation can occur even
in static environments, movements of small reflective objects
can significantly alter CSI, and that CSI temporal variation
occurs differently depending on the subcarrier index and
receiver location, highlighting the difficulty of the underlying
domain generalization problem. Moreover, in a recent work
[11], simple data augmentation techniques for CSI phase and
amplitude data are proposed.
Building on this work, we extend the investigated domains
to cross-scenario (LOS and through-wall (NLOS)) and cross-
system settings, utilizing two different antenna configurations,
which remain under-explored.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We will now describe the experimental setup, including the
hardware components of our systems, the characteristics of the
test environment, and the protocol for gathering CSI amplitude
activity spectrograms used for training CNN-based activity
recognition models.
A. Hardware
We consider the two systems shown in Figure 2, which
are built upon the ESP32-S3-DevKitC-11 development board,
featuring an ESP32-S3-WROOM-12 module for WiFi connec-
tivity. The systems are deployed in a point-to-point transmitter-
receiver configuration, where one of the two identical de-
vices serves as a transmitter, sending CSI packets at a fixed
frequency of 100Hz, while the other device functions as a
receiver, continually listening for CSI packets. A WiFi connec-
tion between the transmitter and receiver is established using
Espressif’s wireless communication protocol, ESP-NOW3, and
1ESP32-S3-DevKit-1, https://docs.espressif.com, accessed: 10-09-2023
2ESP32-S3-WROOM-1, https://docs.espressif.com, accessed: 10-09-2023
3ESP-NOW, https://docs.espressif.com, accessed: 10-09-2023
LOS (18m)
room 1
room 2
room 3
room 4
room 5
Transmitter
Receiver
Activity Zone
1.8m
5.4m
9.4m
13.0m
16.6m
NLOS (18m)
Camera
Fig. 3: Floor plan of the test environment, showing the trans-
mitter and receiver placement in LOS and NLOS scenarios.
CSI packets are captured using Espressif’s IoT Development
Framework, ESP-IDF4.
PIFA system. The system depicted in Figure 2a utilizes
the built-in meandered printed inverted-F antenna (PIFA)5
[12] of the ESP32-S3-WROOM-1 module. The PIFA alone
can provide basic WiFi connectivity in most traditional sce-
narios, however, it is not ideal for HAR applications. Its
omnidirectionality not only prevents the constraining of the
recording environment but also makes it susceptible to noise
from outside the recording environment (e.g., a person walking
behind the system or on the floor below) [13]. Moreover,
its low gain of 2 dBi could hinder the establishment of a
stable connection in long-range through-wall HAR scenarios.
To address these shortcomings without replacing the PIFA,
we employ a plane reflector made from a 123×123 mm,
0.2 mm thick copper sheet. Both the ESP32-S3-DevKitC-1
development board and the reflector are rigidly mounted to a
3D-printed frame, creating a 1/8-wavelength spacing of 15mm
(2.4GHz carrier frequency) between the PIFA and the reflector.
The added plane reflector eliminates noise originating from the
backside of the PIFA and simultaneously increases its forward
gain.
BQ system. Our second system, shown in Figure 2b,
replaces the PIFA with an external antenna. We chose a
directional biquad (BQ) antenna design with a gain of 10-12
dBi and a beamwidth of 70◦[14]. This choice strikes a balance
between gain, compactness, and ease of construction using
common materials. Moreover, while antennas with higher
gain and extremely narrow beam widths exist for establishing
long-range point-to-point connections, we favor a beamwidth
around 70◦for HAR applications, as it facilitates compre-
hensive room coverage in most scenarios while maintaining
constraints on the recording environment. Additionally, its
similarity to the field of view (FOV) of typical cameras allows
easy integration with a camera having a corresponding FOV,
providing a sense of the antenna beam’s coverage area.
4ESP-IDF, https://docs.espressif.com, accessed: 10-09-2023
5PIFA, https://www.ti.com, accessed: 10-09-2023

no presence
walking
walking+arm-waving
PIFA
biquad
PIFA
biquad
PIFA
biquad
(a) LOS CSI activity spectrograms from W1.8k.
no presence
walking
walking+arm-waving
PIFA
biquad
PIFA
biquad
PIFA
biquad
(b) NLOS CSI activity spectrograms from W1.8k.
Fig. 4: (a) LOS and (b) NLOS CSI amplitude spectrograms of the classes no presence, walking, and walking + arm-waving,
captured with BQ antenna and PIFA with plane reflector systems at a distance of 9.4m (room 3 in the NLOS scenario). The
spectrograms show the amplitudes of 52 L-LTF subcarriers over a time interval of 4 seconds (∼400 packets).
B. Environment
The test environment for our evaluation is depicted in
Figure 3. This environment comprises an 18m-long hallway
connected to five adjacent rooms containing office furniture.
These rooms, separated by 25cm thick brick walls, present a
challenging long-range NLOS scenario. Moreover, the rooms
are of uniform size (approximately 3.5m × 6.0m) and arranged
in a manner that facilitates a direct comparison of LOS and
NLOS HAR performance at various distances between the
transmitter and receiver.
For the LOS scenario (red line), the transmitter and receiver
are positioned at opposite ends of the hallway, facing each
other. To capture activity images required for the annotation
of raw CSI data, an additional ESP32-S3-based camera board
is placed next to the transmitter, aligned in its direction.
In the NLOS scenario (green line), the transmitter and
receiver once again face each other but are placed at the
outer walls of rooms 5 and 1, respectively. The alignment of
antennas is achieved by fine-adjusting the receiver’s horizontal
position in the room based on the RSSI at the receiver’s
end. As in the LOS scenario, activity images are captured in
the NLOS scenario using an ESP32-S3-based camera board
placed in the room where the activity occurs. A constant
transmitter-receiver spacing of 18m is maintained throughout
all experiments for both LOS and NLOS scenarios.
C. Data
To assess cross-scenario (LOS⇆NLOS) and cross-system
(PIFA⇆BQ) HAR performance, we collect and publicly make
available the Wallhack1.8k dataset6, which comprises 1806
CSI amplitude spectrograms of human activities collected
in the test environment. We utilize this dataset for training
CNN-based HAR models. The objective is to distinguish
between coarse and fine body movements (e.g., walking vs.
arm movements). In the data collection process, activities are
conducted within five circular activity zones (1.5m radius)
6Wallhack1.8k, https://zenodo.org/record/8188999
TABLE I: Distribution of samples across subsets of the Wall-
hack1.8k dataset.
Subset
Scenario
System
Rooms
Activities
Samples
W1.8kLB
LOS
BQ
1
3
458
W1.8kLP
LOS
PIFA
1
3
461
W1.8kNB
NLOS
BQ
5
3
450
W1.8kNP
NLOS
PIFA
5
3
437
Total:
1806
TABLE II: Distribution of activity classes within the subsets
of Wallhack1.8k.
Subset
no presence
walking
walking + arm-waving
W1.8kLB
149
154
155
W1.8kLP
149
160
152
W1.8kNB
148
150
152
W1.8kNP
143
147
147
Total:
589
611
606
along the LOS and NLOS transmission paths, as shown in
Figure 3. These zones are located at distances of {1.8, 5.4,
9.4, 13.0, 16.6}m from the receiver, corresponding to room
centers in the NLOS scenario. For both systems, we record
two minutes of continuous walking and walking + arm-waving
activities in each activity zone, as well as five minutes of no
presence (no person in the recording environment) for each
scenario.
As a pre-processing step, the recorded CSI time series data
is trimmed using the corresponding RGB images to remove
any CSI packets that do not correspond to the target activity.
The trimmed CSI time series data is then transformed into
time-frequency plots of subcarrier amplitudes over time, creat-
ing spectrograms. To achieve this, the trimmed CSI time series
data is divided into segments of 400 CSI packets (equivalent
to 4-second time intervals at a sending frequency of 100Hz),
and the amplitudes of 52 Legacy Long Training Field (L-LTF)
subcarriers are plotted. This results in a spectrogram size of
400×52.

TABLE III: Cross-scenario generalization performance of ac-
tivity recognition models, trained on spectrograms collected
with the PIFA system. X→Y indicates model training on data
from scenario X and testing on data from scenario Y.
Augmentation
LOS→NLOS
NLOS→LOS
none
37.5±5.3
65.0±5.5
randomCircularRotation
43.6±9.8
↑6.1
61.3±6.4
↓3.7
randomResizedCrop
49.5±11.4
↑12.0
54.8±8.4
↓10.2
randomAmplitude
34.1±7.5
↓3.4
66.1±4.8
↑1.1
randomContrast
32.5±3.2
↓5.0
63.9±5.9
↓1.1
combined
36.4±7.1
↓1.1
66.1±4.8
↑1.1
For the supervised training of activity recognition models,
spectrograms are assigned the labels {0, 1, 2}, corresponding
to the classes no presence, walking, and walking+arm-waving.
This data collection process for both systems in both LOS
and NLOS scenarios leads to four subsets constituting the
Wallhack1.8k dataset. We adopt the subset naming conven-
tion W1.8kXY , where X represents the scenario (L=LOS or
N=NLOS) and Y represents the system (B=BQ or P=PIFA).
The detailed distributions of the 1806 spectrograms in Wall-
hack1.8k across subsets and classes are provided in Tables I
and II, respectively. Moreover, Figure 4 shows characteristic
spectrogram examples for all systems, scenarios, and classes.
Upon visually examining the LOS spectrograms in Figure 4a,
the pronounced amplitude patterns in spectrograms collected
by the BQ system are evident. In comparison, the amplitude
patterns in spectrograms collected by the PIFA system are hard
to discern from the WiFi background. This suggests that the
BQ system exhibits higher sensitivity to human activities. In
the NLOS scenario, depicted in Figure 4b, no activity-specific
amplitude patterns are visible in the spectrograms of either
system. These observations show the high sensitivity of CSI
to environmental conditions and sensing hardware, resulting
in drastically different data characteristics.
D. Augmentations
The four investigated data augmentations in our ablation
study are randomCircularRotation, randomResizedCrop, ran-
domAmplitude, and randomContrast, which are applied to CSI
amplitude spectrograms with a probability of p = 0.5.
randomCircularRotation. Treating the spectrogram as a 2D
time-frequency array, circular rotations along the time axis
shift the array elements along the positive time direction, with
elements going beyond the array’s boundary wrapping around
to the opposite side, becoming the first element. A random
number of circular rotations n ∼U(1, w), with w = 400
being the spectrogram width, is applied to the spectrogram.
randomResizedCrop. For this augmentation, the spectro-
gram is either cropped along the time axis and stretched back
to its original width w or compressed along the time axis
and re-scaled to w. Both the crop and the compression factor
are randomly sampled from U( w
2 , w). The cropping and re-
scaling of the spectrogram correspond to a slowdown in time,
while the compression and re-scaling correspond to a speed-
TABLE IV: Cross-scenario generalization performance of ac-
tivity recognition models, trained on spectrograms collected
with the BQ system. X→Y indicates model training on data
from scenario X and testing on data from scenario Y.
Augmentation
LOS→NLOS
NLOS→LOS
none
36.4±5.1
53.0±10.1
randomCircularRotation
39.6±9.6
↑3.2
69.6±3.2
↑16.6
randomResizedCrop
41.8±7.4
↑5.4
63.3±6.9
↑10.3
randomAmplitude
41.1±5.2
↑4.7
61.7±6.2
↑8.7
randomContrast
40.2±5.3
↑3.8
57.0±8.1
↑4.0
combined
58.9±7.7
↑22.5
68.7±2.9
↑15.7
up, resulting in new samples with activities being carried out
at varying speeds.
randomAmplitude. As observed in [2], CSI amplitude can
vary significantly even in static environments and system
settings. To replicate this behavior, we randomly scale the
amplitude of spectrograms on a per-channel basis. The mag-
nitude of the augmentation factor is randomly sampled from
U(0.75, 1.25).
randomContrast. Furthermore, it is also found that CSI am-
plitude variation occurs differently depending on the subcarrier
index [2]. Following the approach of the randomContrast
augmentation, this behavior is replicated by randomly scaling
the contrast of spectrograms on a per-channel basis. The
magnitude of the augmentation factor is randomly sampled
from U(0.75, 1.25).
E. Model Training
As a platform for evaluating cross-scenario and cross-
system generalization, we use the EfficientNetV2 architec-
ture [15], utilizing the standard implementation from torchvi-
sion.models7. EfficientNetV2 small is a lightweight feature
extractor commonly employed as a backbone. All models
are trained from scratch to eliminate any prior knowledge
derived from pre-training on (ImageNet) RGB images that
could influence the results. The models undergo 400 epochs
of training using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of
0.0001 and a batch size of 16. Additionally, a balanced sampler
is used to mitigate class imbalances in the training dataset. For
each model, we conduct ten independent training runs and
select the model instance with the highest validation accuracy
from each run. To acquire representative results, the mean and
standard deviation of classification accuracies across ten runs
are employed as evaluation metrics.
IV. ABLATION STUDY
To assess the effects of data augmentations on cross-
scenario (LOS⇆NLOS) and cross-system (PIFA⇆BQ) gen-
eralization performance of our models, an ablation study is
conducted. Starting with a baseline model trained without
data augmentation, we train separate models with each data
augmentation and measure the change in activity recognition
7EfficientnetV2s, https://pytorch.org/, accessed: 10-09-2023

TABLE V: Cross-system generalization performance of activ-
ity recognition models, trained on LOS spectrograms. X→Y
indicates model training on data from system X and testing
on data from system Y.
Augmentation
PIFA→BQ
BQ→PIFA
none
36.1±6.0
35.2±4.7
randomCircularRotation
48.7±13.5
↑12.6
38.9±2.5
↑3.7
randomResizedCrop
38.7±6.7
↑2.6
36.5±3.0
↑1.3
randomAmplitude
36.5±4.1
↑0.4
35.2±4.9
∼0.0
randomContrast
36.5±4.8
↑0.4
32.4±3.9
↓2.8
combined
57.2±15.7
↑21.1
50.7±11.8
↑18.5
accuracy. Beneficial data augmentations that lead to an in-
crease in accuracy are combined for the training of a final
model, being also compared against the baseline.
A. Cross-scenario Generalization
PIFA system. The ablation study results, utilizing data
captured by the PIFA system, are presented in Table III. When
considering generalization from the LOS to the NLOS scenario
(LOS→NLOS), we see improvements over the baseline perfor-
mance of 37.5±5.3 by employing the randomCircularRotation
and randomResizedCrop augmentations. These augmentations
result in an increase in model accuracy by 6.1 and 12.0
percentage points, respectively. Interestingly, when combining
both augmentations, a decrease in model accuracy by 1.1
percentage points is observed, suggesting a complex relation-
ship between these augmentations. In the reverse scenario
(NLOS→LOS), we see a notably higher baseline performance
of 65.0±5.5, indicative of asymmetric generalization between
scenarios. Furthermore, the augmentation that demonstrates
an improvement of 1.1 percentage points over the baseline
is solely the randomAmplitude augmentation.
BQ system. The ablation study results based on data
captured by the BQ system are presented in Table IV. For
the generalization from the LOS to the NLOS scenario
(LOS→NLOS), we observe moderate improvements over the
baseline performance of 36.4±5.1 for all data augmentations.
Furthermore, training with all data augmentations leads to a
significant improvement in model accuracy of 22.5 percentage
points. Also, for the inverse direction (NLOS→LOS), all
data augmentations have a positive effect on model accuracy.
Especially the randomCircularRotation augmentation leads to
a significant improvement of 16.6 percentage points. Inter-
estingly, although individual data augmentations all improve
model accuracy, training with a combination of all augmenta-
tions slightly reduces model performance, leading to a smaller
improvement over baseline accuracy of 15.7 percentage points.
B. Cross-system Generalization
LOS scenario. We provide ablation study results for
cross-system generalization based on LOS data in Table V.
When transitioning from the PIFA system to the BQ system
(PIFA→BQ), we observe improvements over the baseline
performance of 36.1±6.0 across all data augmentations. No-
tably, the randomCircularRotation augmentation significantly
TABLE VI: Cross-system generalization performance of activ-
ity recognition models, trained on NLOS spectrograms. X→Y
indicates model training on data from system X and testing
on data from system Y.
Augmentation
PIFA→BQ
BQ→PIFA
none
34.7±6.5
30.0±3.9
randomCircularRotation
39.6±6.8
↑4.9
34.5±5.7
↑4.5
randomResizedCrop
39.3±3.2
↑4.3
31.4±10.5
↑1.4
randomAmplitude
36.4±6.1
↑1.7
33.0±4.8
↑3.0
randomContrast
33.8±6.6
↓0.9
33.6±4.4
↑3.6
combined
39.6±8.2
↑4.9
52.3±13.8
↑22.3
enhances model accuracy by 12.6 percentage points. Further-
more, combining all data augmentations results in a 21.1
percentage point improvement compared to the baseline. In
the reverse scenario (BQ→PIFA), we observe a similar trend.
While individual data augmentations yield moderate improve-
ments, training with all augmentations leads to a significant
model accuracy improvement, surpassing the baseline by 18.5
percentage points.
NLOS scenario. Ablation study results for cross-system
generalization based on NLOS data are presented in Table VI.
When transitioning from the PIFA system to the BQ system
(PIFA→BQ), improvements over the baseline performance of
34.7±6.5 are observed with all data augmentations except
randomContrast. Combining all augmentations with a positive
effect on model accuracy does not yield additional improve-
ments, achieving a 4.9 percentage point gain over the baseline
(the same as with randomCircularRotation). A clearer trend is
observable when transitioning from the BQ system to the PIFA
system (BQ→PIFA), where all data augmentations result in a
moderate improvement in model accuracy over the baseline of
30.0±3.9. Furthermore, the combination of all augmentations
results in a significant improvement of 22.3 percentage points
over the baseline.
V. DISCUSSION
The results in Tables III and IV reveal an asymmetric
relationship in cross-scenario generalization. For both systems,
models generalize better from NLOS to LOS scenarios than
the other way around. This is indicated by the relatively high
baseline accuracies, which are well above random guessing
performance ( 1
3).
Another observation, as indicated by the results in Table IV,
is that the BQ system is more receptive to data augmentations,
indicating that the domain gap between scenarios is narrower
for this system. A possible explanation is that the higher gain
and directionality make the system less susceptible to environ-
mental obstructions in the transmission path, and consequently,
the data characteristics of both scenarios are more similar.
Furthermore, the results in Tables V and VI show a smaller
domain gap between systems in the LOS scenario, as indicated
by the similar baseline accuracies and high receptiveness
to data augmentation in the LOS scenario. For the NLOS
scenario, we see an asymmetric relationship, with models

generalizing better from the BQ system to the PIFA system
than the other way around (22.3 vs. 4.9 percentage points).
Finally, our ablation study shows that cross-scenario and
cross-system generalization via data augmentation do require
careful selection of data augmentation techniques, as for each
case, the individual and combined effects of data augmentation
can vary significantly.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, we investigated the effectiveness of four
data augmentation techniques commonly applied to images
on cross-scenario and cross-system model performance in
WiFi CSI-based HAR. We collected a dataset of LOS and
NLOS CSI spectrograms captured by two different WiFi
systems and used it to train HAR models in an ablation study,
examining the effects on model performance. The gathered
results show that specific combinations of the investigated data
augmentation techniques can significantly improve both cross-
scenario and cross-system performance.
