arXiv:1104.3345v1  [cs.AI]  17 Apr 2011
Quantum Interaction Approach in Cognition,
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics
Diederik Aerts1, Marek Czachor1,2 and Sandro Sozzo1
1 Center Leo Apostel for Interdisciplinary Studies
Brussels Free University, Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium

2 Department of Physics, Politechnika Gdanska,
Narutowicza 11/12, 90-952 Gdansk, Poland

Abstract
The mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics has been successfully employed in the last years
to model situations in which the use of classical structures gives rise to problematical situations, and
where typically quantum eﬀects, such as contextuality and entanglement, have been recognized. This
Quantum Interaction Approach is brieﬂy reviewed in this paper focusing, in particular, on the quantum
models that have been elaborated to describe how concepts combine in cognitive science, and on the
ensuing identiﬁcation of a quantum structure in human thought. We point out that these results provide
interesting insights toward the development of a uniﬁed theory for meaning and knowledge formaliza-
tion and representation. Then, we analyze the technological aspects and implications of our approach,
and a particular attention is devoted to the connections with symbolic artiﬁcial intelligence, quantum
computation and robotics.
Keywords: quantum mechanics, quantum cognition, artiﬁcial intelligence, robotics
1
Introduction
The use of the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics as a modeling instrument in disciplines
diﬀerent from physics is now a well established practice and has historically been motivated by diﬀerent
reasons. Firstly, this is due to the ﬂexibility and richness of quantum structures (vector spaces, inner
products, quantum probability, quantum logic connectives, etc.).
Secondly, there are two aspects that
are seemingly characteristic of quantum entities, i.e.
contextuality and entanglement, and that appear
instead independently of the microscopic nature of these entities. Thirdly, the fact that since the ﬁfties
and sixties several eﬀects have been recognized in a variety of areas, such as, economics, biology, psychology
. . . in which the application of classical structures (set theory, classical logic, Kolmogorovian probability,
etc.) is problematical and generates paradoxes. The Allais [1] and Ellsberg [2] paradoxes in economics,
the conjunction fallacy [3] and disjunction eﬀect [4] in decision theory, the representation of concepts
and the formalization of meaning in cognitive science [5], are the most important examples of situations
in which classical structures do not provide satisfactory results, but more general structures are needed.
In particular, the impossibility of formalizing and structuring human and artiﬁcial knowledge slackened,
notwithstanding the impressive technological success, in the development of some applied research ﬁelds,
such as artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics.
1

The above diﬃculties led scholars to look for alternative approaches. Quantum mechanics then pro-
vided a fresch conceptual framework to address these problems in a totally new light. Hence, a Quantum
Interaction Approach was born as an interdisciplinary perspective in which the formalism of quantum
mechanics was used to model speciﬁc situations in domains diﬀerent from the microscopic world. In partic-
ular, the new emerging ﬁeld of Quantum Interaction focusing on the application of quantum structures to
cognition has been named Quantum Cognition [6]. It is interesting, in our opinion, to dwell upon the main
results obtained by the scholars involved in this Quantum Interaction Approach. We stress, however, that
the following presentation does not pretend to be either historically complete or exhaustive of the various
subjects and approaches that have been put forward, but it just aims to provide an overall conceptual
background in which the approach on quantum cognition in which the authors of the present article and
their collaborators are themselves intensively involved can be situated.
The ﬁrst insights came from psychology. In 1994 one of the authors and his collaborators proved that
classical probability cannot be used to study a class of psychological situations of decision processes, but a
more general probabilistic framework is needed [7]. In 2002 a contextual formalism generalizing quantum
mechanics was worked out to model concept combinations [8].
The SCoP formalism was successively
improved and extended to provide a solution of the Pet-Fish problem [9, 10]. Since 2007 explicit quantum
models in Hilbert and Fock spaces have been elaborated to describe experimental membership weights of
concept disjunctions and conjunctions [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. These models were then applied to study
the Ellsberg paradox, the conjunction fallacy and disjunction eﬀect in decision theory [12, 14, 17], and a
number of quantum eﬀects, e.g., superoposition, interference, entanglement, contextual emergence, have
been recognized in these eﬀects.
This fact led the authors to put forward the hypothesis that human
thought presents two intertwined modes, one modeled by classical logic and the other mostly modeled by
quantum mechanics [14].
Concerning cognitive models of knowledge representation, it was shown that modern approaches to
semantic analysis, if reformulated as Hilbert space problems, reveal quantum structures similar to those
employed in concept representation. In 2004 two of the authors recognized quantum structures in latent
semantic analysis and in distributed representations of cognitive structures developed for the purposes of
neural networks [18].
Interesting ideas came from information retrieval. In 2003 Dominic Widdows proved that the use of
quantum logic connective for negation, i.e. orthogonality, provided a more eﬃcient algorithm than the
corresponding Boolean ‘not’ of classical logic for exploring and analyzing word and meaning [19, 20, 21].
In 2004 Keith van Rijsbergen claimed in his book that the Hilbert space formalism was more eﬀective
than an unstructures vector space to supply theoretical models in information retrieval [22]. Since then,
several quantum eﬀects have been recognized in information retrieval and natural language processing, e.g.,
superposition, uncertainty, entanglement [23].
In 2006 Peter Bruza and his collaborators applied quantum structures to model semantic spaces and
cognitive structures. More speciﬁcally, they undertook studies on the formalization of context eﬀects in
relation to concepts [24], and investigated the role of quantum structures in language, i.e. the entanglement
of words in human semantic space resulting from violations of Bell’s inequalities [25, 26].
In decision making important contributes were given by Jerome Busemeyer, Andrei Khrennikov and
their collaborators. More speciﬁcally, in 2006 Busemeyer modeled the game theoretic variant of the disjunc-
tion eﬀect on a quantum game theoretic model and used the Sch¨odinger equation to describe the dynamics
of the decision process [27]. The proposed model is a part of a general operational approach of comparing
classical stochastic models with quantum dynamic models, and deciding by comparison with experimental
data which of both them has most predictive power [28]. In 2008 Khrennikov presented a quantum model
for decision making: he found an algorithm to represent probabilistic data by means of complex probability
amplitudes, and used the algorithm to model the Prisoners Dilemma and the disjunction eﬀect [29].
2

Quantum structures were hypothesized in the studies of holographic models of memory, which is an old
research ﬁeld in the psychology of memory. The metaphor which originally started this ﬁeld is holography,
that is, the observed fact that the human brain seems to have not really ‘places’ for diﬀerent functions
(holonomic brain theory) [30]. But, holography is a ‘wave eﬀect related to electromagnetism’, as is well
known from physics [31].
For this reason, some authors suggested that the results obtained in these
holographic models of memory are due to an underlying quantum structure [32, 33, 34].
We will discuss the presence of quantum structures and their role in cognition, knowledge representation
and information retrieval in a forthcoming paper [35].
In the present paper we instead focus on the
application of quantum structures to semantic analysis, artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics. More speciﬁcally,
we resume in Sec. 2 the main results that have been obtained by one of us in quantum cognition, including
the hypothesis about the existence of a quantum layer in human mind. In Sec. 3 we instead explore how
quantum structures can be successfully used to construct models in semantic analysis and symbolic artiﬁcial
intelligence.
Finally, in Sec.
4 we investigate the links between our quantum cognition approach and
quantum robotics, which is an emerging ﬁeld that connects robot technology with quantum computation.
We suggest, in particular, that macroscopic devices can be constructed which eﬃciently simulate quantum
computers, thus avoiding the diﬃculties arising from the utilization of microscopic entities in quantum
computation and robotics.
To conclude this section, we remind that the Quantum Interaction Group organizes each year an
international conference on the Quantum Interaction Approach (see, http://ir.dcs.gla.ac.uk/qi2007/
,http://ir.dcs.gla.ac.uk/qi2008/,http://www-ags.dfki.uni-sb.de/~klusch/qi2009/ and http:
//www.rgu.ac.uk/qi2011) in which physicists, mathematicians, philosophers, psychologists, computer
scientists meet to present and discuss the new results obtained in applying quantum structures to social,
cognitive, semantic processes.
2
Quantum structure in human thought
The proposal of using non-classical logical and probabilistic structures outside physics came primarily from
an accurate analysis of the nature of the quantum mechanical probability model and of the diﬀerence
between classical and quantum probabilities [36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41]. This critical comparison led us to
conclude that classical probabilistic structures formalize the subjective ignorance about what actually
happens, hence they model only situations that admit an underlying deterministic process. However, it is
well known that situations exist in quantum mechanics which are fundamentally indeterministic and cannot
be explained in terms of lack of knowledge. Whenever this reasoning is applied to decision processes, one
can see that human decision models are quantum in essence, because opinions are not always determined.
This result has been shown by one of us by working out a quantum model for the decision process in an
opinion poll [7]. But, the domain where classical set-theoretical based structures most maniﬂestly failed
was concept theory and, speciﬁcally, the study of ‘how concepts combine’.
This failure was explicitly
revealed by Hampton’s experiments [42, 43] which measured the deviation from classical set-theoretic
membership weights of exemplars with respect to pairs of concepts and their conjunction or disjunction.
Hampton’s investigation was motivated by the so-called Guppy eﬀect in concept conjunction found by
Osherson and Smith [5]. These authors considered the concepts Pet and Fish and their conjunction Pet-
Fish, and observed that, while an exemplar such as Guppy was a very typical example of Pet-Fish, it was
neither a very typical example of Pet nor of Fish. Therefore, the typicality of a speciﬁc exemplar with
respect to the conjunction of concepts shows a classically unexpected behavior. Since the work of Osherson
and Smith, the problem has been referred to as the Pet-Fish problem and the eﬀect has been called the
Guppy eﬀect. It can be shown that fuzzy set based theories [44, 45, 46] cannot model this ‘typicality eﬀect’.
Hampton identiﬁed a Guppy-like eﬀect for the membership weights of exemplars with respect to both the
3

conjunction [42] and the disjunction [43] of pairs of concepts. Several experiments have been performed
(see, e.g., [47]) and many approaches have been propounded to provide a satisfactory mathematical model
of concept combinations, but none of them provides a satisfactory description or explanation of such eﬀects.
Trying to cope with these diﬃculties one of the authors has proposed, together with some co-workers, a
SCoP formalism which is a generalization of the quantum formalism [8, 9, 10, 48]. In the SCoP formalism
each concept is associated with well deﬁned sets of states, contexts and properties.
Concepts change
continuously under the inﬂuence of a context and this change is described by a change of the state of the
concept. For each exemplar of a concept, the typicality varies with respect to the context that inﬂuences it,
which implies the presence of both a contextual typicality and an applicability eﬀect. The Pet-Fish problem
is solved in the SCoP formalism because in diﬀerent combinations the concepts are in diﬀerent states. In
particular, in the combination Pet-Fish the concept Pet is in a state under the context The Pet is a Fish.
The state of Pet under the context The Pet is a Fish has diﬀerent typicalities, which explains the guppy
eﬀect. Inspired by the SCoP formalism, a mathematical model using the formalism of quantum mechanics,
both the quantum probability and Hilbert space structures, has been worked out which allows one to
reproduce the experimental results obtained by Hampton on conjunctions and disjunctions of concepts.
This formulation identiﬁes the presence of typically quantum eﬀects in the mechanism of combination of
concepts, e.g., contextual inﬂuence, superposition, interference and entanglement [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 49].
Quantum models have also been elaborated to describe the disjunction eﬀect and the Ellsberg paradox,
which accord with the experimental data collected in the literature [12, 14, 17].
The analysis above allowed the authors to put forward the hypothesis that two structured and super-
posed layers can be identiﬁed in human thought: a classical logical layer, that can be modeled by using
a classical Kolmogorovian probablity framework, and a quantum conceptual layer, that does not admit a
Kolmogorovian probabilistic model. The latter mode can instead be modeled by using the probabilistic
formalism of quantum mechanics. We stress, to conclude this section, that the thought process in the
quantum conceptual layer is strongly inﬂuenced by the overall conceptual landscape, hence context eﬀects
become fundamental.
3
Quantum structure in artiﬁcial intelligence
Cognitive models of knowledge representation are relevant also from a technological point of view, for the
representation of objects, categories, relations between objects, etc., play a central role in the develop-
ment of artiﬁcial intelligence. In the last years techniques coming from quantum information theory have
been implemented in the studies on semantic analysis and neural networks. In 2004 two of the authors
proved that modern approaches to quantitative linguistics and semantic analysis, when reformulated as
Hilbert space problems, reveal formal structures that are similar to those known in quantum mechanics
and quantum information theory, hence in the quantum models on concept representation [18]. Similar
situations are recurring in distributed representation of cognitive structures developed for the purpose of
neural networks. Let us discuss two interesting aspects of these quantum approaches.
Modern approaches to semantic analysis typically model words and their meanings by vectors from
ﬁnite-dimensional vector spaces (see, e.g., latent semantic analysis [50]). Semantic analysis is mainly based
on text co-occurence matrices and data-analysis technique employing singular value decomposition. Various
models of semantic analysis provide powerful methods of determining similarity of meaning of words and
passages by analysis of large text corpora. The procedures are fully automatic and allow to analyze texts
by computers without an involvment of any human understanding. The interesting thing is that there are
strong similarities between latent semantic analysis and formal structures of quantum information theory.
Latent semantic analysis is essentially a Hilbert space formalism. One represents words by vectors spanning
a ﬁnite-dimensional space and text passages are represented by linear combinations of such words, with
4

appropriate weights related to frequency of occurence of the words in the text. Similarity of meaning is
represented by scalar products between certain word-vectors (beloging to the so-called semantic space). In
quantum information theory words, also treated as vectors, are being processed by quantum algorithms or
encoded/decoded by means of quantum cryptographic protocols. Although one starts to think of quantum
programming languages, the semantic issues of quantum texts are diﬃcult to formulate. Latent semantic
analysis is in this context a natural candidate as a starting point for “quantum linguistics”. Still, latent
semantic analysis has certain conceptual problems of its own. As stressed by many authors, the greatest
diﬃculty of this theory is that it treats a text passage as a “bag of words”, a set where order is irrelevant.
The diﬃculty is a serious one since it is intuitively clear that syntax is important for evaluation of text
meaning. The sentences “Mary hit John” and “John hit Mary” cannot be distinguished by latent semantic
analysis; “Mary did hit John” and “John did not hit Mary” have practically identical representations in
this theory because ‘not’ is in latent semantic analysis a very short vector. What latent semantic analysis
can capture is that the sentences are about violence. We think that experience from quantum information
theory may prove useful here. A basic object in quantum information theory is not a word but a letter.
Typically one works with the binary alphabet consisting of 0 and 1 and qubits. Ordering of qubits is
obtained by means of the tensor product: we maintain that ordering of words can be obtained in the same
way.
In 1990 Smolensky [51] proposed the introduction of tensor products of vectors to solve the so-called
binding problem, i.e. how keeping track of which features belong to which objects in a formal connectionist
model of coding. In the linguistic framework of semantic analysis the binding problem is equivalent to
the problem of representing syntax. More speciﬁcally, one represents an activity state of a network by a
vector (in a ﬁxed basis), then a predicate p(a, b), such as eat(John, fish), is represented by the vector
r1 ⊗a + r2 ⊗b, where the vectors rk represent roles and a, b are ﬁllers.
A predicate is, accordingly,
represented by an entangled activity state. It is important to note that tensor products are more ‘economic’
than Cartesian products, because of the identiﬁcations (α|ψ⟩) ⊗|φ⟩= |ψ⟩⊗(α|φ⟩) = α(|ψ⟩⊗|φ⟩), thus
Hilbert (or Fock) spaces automatically perform a kind of dimensional reduction, which is the main idea of
both latent semantic analysis and distributed representation. Furthermore, if one is interested in binding,
more than ordering, words, then further compression is possible by employing bosonic or fermionic Fock
spaces.
The above proposals on the advantages of using the quantum formalism in theories as semantic analysis
and symbolic artiﬁcial intelligence ﬁnd a straightforward theoretical support in our approach in cognitive
science followed in [9, 10] and resumed in Sec. 2. Indeed, if the conceptual mode of human thought has
a formal quantum structure, then it is natural to assume that the quantum formalism should be more
successfully employed in cognitive disciplines. The same conclusion can be drawn if one assumes that the
brain is a quantum device, as done in [52]. But we stress that such an assumption is not needed in our
approach (a similar remark will be made in Sec. 4 with respect to quantum robotics).
4
Quantum structure in robotics
The idea of a quantum robot meant as a complex quantum system interacting with an external environment
through quantum computers was introduced by Paul Benioﬀin 1998 [53]. Benioﬀundertook the study of
quantum robots from a physical perspective. The ﬁrst applications of Benioﬀ’s proposal to robot technology
are due to Daoyi Dong et al. [54]. The model of a quantum robot suggested by these authors is made
up of multi-quantum computing units, a quantum controller/actuator and information acquisition units.
A quantum robot has also several learning control algorithms, including quantum searching aglorithms
and quantum reinforcement learning algorithms. The standard problems aﬄicting classical robotics, i.e.
robots’ intelligence, sensor performance, speed of learning and decision making, are solved by using quantum
5

sensors, parallel computing, fast searching and eﬃcient learning from quantum algorithms. In particular,
the authors point out the advantages in using Grover’s search algorithm, which reduces the complexity of
the search algorithm with respect to classical robots.
We observe that the above insights and ideas rest on the possibility of constructing real quantum com-
puters, implementing quantum operations on microscopic entities, and thus exploiting the computational
advantages that quantum computation should guarantee over classical computation. It is however well
known that several technical diﬃculties, besides conceptual hindrances, occur whenever one accepts to
consider seriously the possibility of constructing a concrete quantum computer. The control and manipula-
tion of individual quantum systems, the necessity of robustly representing quantum information, the actual
feasibility in performing quantum algorithms, are examples of such diﬃculties. Hence, also the realizability
of an eﬃcient quantum robot strongly depends on these technological obstacles.
Let us now come to our quantum cognition approach resumed in Sec.
2.
Here, the fact that the
formalism of quantum mechanics can be successfully employed to model concept representation, decision
making and cognitive processes suggests that, conversely, the processes working in human mind have
structurally a quantum nature. And this fact does not necessarily entail the compelling requirement that
microscopic quantum processes occur in human mind. Indeed, following the quantum cognition approach,
the hypothesis is rather that macroscopic processes can entail quantum structure without the necessity of
the presence of microscopic quantum processes giving rise to these macroscopic processes. As a consequence
of this hypothesis, one could maintain that human mind itself works as a system which is closer to a
quantum computer than it is to a classical computer. It does not necessarily has to be equivalent with a
quantum computer – we believe it is not –, but entailing quantum structure gives it similar advantages in
computing power than the one that quantum computers have over classical computers. This insight could
explain, in particular, why artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics are still facing some fundamental problems,
notwithstanding their impressive technological success: this is due to the fact that they use the paradigm of
classical computation which is not powerful enough to perform the operations that the human mind is able
to do. Let us ﬁnally remind that some of us have worked out macroscopic models (connected vessels of water,
quantum machine, . . . ) which show a quantum behavior and exhibit typical features of quantum mechanical
entities, i.e. contextuality, entanglement, violation of Bell’s inequalitities, etc. [38, 39, 40, 48]. This result
is relevant in the perspective of quantum robotics because it opens up the possibility that the resources of
quantum computation can be sought in other types of realizations than microscopic quantum entities and
qubits. One could indeed envisage the possibility of elaborating (eventually complex) macroscopic devices
which perform quantum algorithms, thus simulating quantum computers and exploiting the enormous extra
power coming from quantum computation. In this way, the foregoing problems connected with the control
of microscopic entities would be avoided and, better, the possibility of performing quantum computation by
using only classical physics could potentially allow one to increase the resources of quantum computation
itself.
Acknowledgment
This research was supported by Grants G.0405.08 and G.0234.08 of the Flemish Fund for Scientiﬁc Re-
search.
