Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 46 (2013) 413-447
Submitted 12/12; published 03/13
Qualitative Order of Magnitude Energy-Flow-Based Failure
Modes and Eﬀects Analysis
Neal Snooke

Department of Computer Science, Aberystwyth University,
Penglais, Aberystwyth, Ceredigion, SY23 3DB, U.K.
Mark Lee

Department of Computer Science, Aberystwyth University.
Abstract
This paper presents a structured power and energy-ﬂow-based qualitative modelling ap-
proach that is applicable to a variety of system types including electrical and ﬂuid ﬂow. The
modelling is split into two parts. Power ﬂow is a global phenomenon and is therefore natu-
rally represented and analysed by a network comprised of the relevant structural elements
from the components of a system. The power ﬂow analysis is a platform for higher-level
behaviour prediction of energy related aspects using local component behaviour models
to capture a state-based representation with a global time. The primary application is
Failure Modes and Eﬀects Analysis (FMEA) and a form of exaggeration reasoning is used,
combined with an order of magnitude representation to derive the worst case failure modes.
The novel aspects of the work are an order of magnitude(OM) qualitative network
analyser to represent any power domain and topology, including multiple power sources,
a feature that was not required for earlier specialised electrical versions of the approach.
Secondly, the representation of generalised energy related behaviour as state-based local
models is presented as a modelling strategy that can be more vivid and intuitive for a range
of topologically complex applications than qualitative equation-based representations. The
two-level modelling strategy allows the broad system behaviour coverage of qualitative
simulation to be exploited for the FMEA task, while limiting the diﬃculties of qualitative
ambiguity explanation that can arise from abstracted numerical models. We have used the
method to support an automated FMEA system with examples of an aircraft fuel system
and domestic a heating system discussed in this paper.
1. Introduction
Qualitative representations (QR) and reasoning have a number of well documented advan-
tages for Failure Modes and Eﬀects Analysis. Three of the most important are that analysis
can be performed early in the design life cycle, that there is broad coverage of system be-
haviour and faults, and that the results are at a level of abstraction which readily maps to
system functional states.
QR has been widely applied to electrical systems (de Kleer, 1984; Mauss & Neumann,
1996; Price, Snooke, & Lewis, 2006; Flores & Farley, 1999) and used for a variety of design
analysis applications including design concept analysis (gaining an overview of system be-
haviour), diagnosis, FMEA safety analysis, incremental and multiple fault FMEA analysis
(Price & Taylor, 1997), fault tree analysis (FTA) (Price, Wilson, Timmis, & Cain, 1996),
and sneak circuit analysis (Price, Snooke, & Landry, 1996; Savakoor, Bowles, & Bonnell,
©2013 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Snooke & Lee
1993).
The qualitative information is an enabling technique allowing signiﬁcant system
nominal and failure states to be identiﬁed and distinguished easily and eﬃciently.
The qualitative results have limitations, the most signiﬁcant being behavioural ambi-
guity where alternative behaviours are predicated by the simulation. While often seen as
a problem of qualitative techniques, such ambiguity can be turned into an advantage, pro-
vided they predict real physical behaviours since they indicate where key design parameters
exist. One of the beneﬁts of the modelling structure developed in this paper is that many
such ambiguities are constrained and therefore enhance design knowledge rather than being
an analysis limitation.
The typical approaches to qualitative modelling and reasoning use qualitative versions
of numerical equations derived from component models. While this forms a sound platform,
it can be burdensome to extract the relevant from the unimportant with standard equations
(e.g ﬂuid ﬂow), and deal with landmarks, integrals or deviations etc. Given the appeal of
QR for abstracted explanation and its ability to provide broad analysis of system state, we
propose a more specialised view that can be applied to a wide range of engineering domains
based on the relationships between generalised physical variables shown in Figure 1.
effort
displacement
ﬂow
momentum
power 
network
EMF, voltage (electrical)
pressure (hydraulic)
force (mechanical)
charge
volume
displacement
current
volumetric ﬂow rate
velocity
ﬂux linkage
pressure momentum
momentum
resistance
capacitance
(energy)
inertia 
(energy)
Figure 1: Tetrahedron of state
This paper provides a consistent framework for several earlier implementations, and de-
velops a supporting qualitative order of magnitude (OM) capability (Section 2.1) throughout
the models and simulation. The OM representation is derived from a many valued resistance
representation (Lee, 2000b) and although the many valued concept and its modelling and
reasoning beneﬁts are completely applicable to the OM representation, the actual technique
for solving the circuits in that work was based on path labelling (Lee, 1999), and was not a
general solution applicable to any network topology. The present paper provides a general
solution and extends the technique from purely electrical systems into other domains. As
a necessary part of this eﬀort an energy-ﬂow-based formalisation is adopted, comprising a
global instantaneous power network (Section 2) and local component models that include
the notions of energy and time (Section 3).
414

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
Previous work by the authors (Snooke, 2007) on the modelling of ﬂuid ﬂow systems was
based on an electrical network analyser (Lee, 1999) but could only deal with series parallel
reducible circuits, and this becomes a limitation for topologically complex systems. The
incorporation of equivalent resistance reduction using star–delta (Y-∆) transforms (Mauss &
Neumann, 1996) into the OM representation (Section 2.2) allows eﬀort and ﬂow variables for
resistive networks of any topology to be solved by reduction and ﬂow assignment expansion
(Section 2.3), and completes the work started by Lee. Complex network topologies are due
in part to the need to represent concepts such as the ‘atmosphere’ in ﬂuid ﬂow systems,
to allow failure modes such as leaks in closed systems, as well as vented elements in other
systems. This unique ‘zero’ node is common to several domains and is generalised in the
present work in Section 2.4.
Applying the techniques derived by Lee (1999) to non electrical systems reveals two
limitations. Firstly, the analysis supports only a single eﬀort source in the network, and
secondly there is no concept of the substance ﬂowing in the network. Section 2.5 extends the
analysis to include multiple power sources by applying the principle of superposition to allow
any system to be decomposed into multiple resistive networks. Section 2.6 considers the
representation of substances for networks where behaviour is dependent upon the substance
carrying the eﬀort and ﬂow. The ﬁnal part of section 2 deals with some common special
cases that can simplify the analysis and maintain vividness of the representation by avoiding
unnecessary (Y-∆) transforms.
Section 3 of the paper is devoted to the local component concept that captures temporal
information and thus models the displacement and momentum aspects of Figure 1. The
OM modelling of time is the subject of section 3.1 and underlies a Finite State Machine
(FSM) based modelling approach. This representation is an improvement on a more re-
stricted predecessor used for electrical component behaviour (Snooke, 1999), which was the
foundation for a variety of automated electrical design analysis techniques. Sections 3.2 and
3.3 provide concrete examples of component modelling and system modelling respectively.
Section 4 considers the use of the OM representation to perform exaggeration reasoning
for failure analysis and section 5 provides a brief overview of the strategy (Price, 1998; Lee,
Bell, & Coghill, 2001) used to process multiple simulation results into an FMEA output.
We provide two case study examples in sections 6 and 7. The ﬁrst case study illustrates the
behaviour simulation for a ﬂuid ﬂow system with interesting characteristics, and the second
outlines the use of the simulation results to automatically produce a completed FMEA
report for an industrial system supplied by the sponsors of the work.
In this paper we utilise a two-level modelling strategy. The lower level (centre section
of Figure 1) provides a network-based global qualitative solver for linear resistive networks
using graph-based methods that determine instantaneous power (eﬀort and ﬂow) in a net-
work. The higher level utilises the results of the lower level network analysis to decide
localized component behaviour from state-based models with a qualitative representation
of time as the only global parameter.
This two-level strategy gives signiﬁcant beneﬁts over other approaches to modelling the
kinds of electrical and hydraulic systems dealt with here. The two-level modelling allows
separation of the inherently global, instantaneous (single state) power variables, and the
local energy-based behaviour of components. This separation is particularly suitable for
qualitative representation because qualitative behaviour is fundamentally state-based; any
415

Snooke & Lee
qualitative simulation will produce a sequence of states of the power ﬂows in a system’s
components. Power ﬂow is a global phenomenon where cause and eﬀect is undetermined
and can be very eﬃciently analysed as a network, avoiding problems of causal instability and
ambiguity arising from systems of equations generated from interacting components with
local behaviours (Skorstad, 1992a). Many QR approaches use a local propagation method
connecting the behaviours of components and have the appeal of generality, however, they
often require some way of including additional global information such as equivalent cir-
cuits (Sussman & Steele Jr, 1980), or mechanisms for propagating connectivity information
(Struss, Malik, & Sachenbacher, 1995). Our approach allows users to build reusable models
of components that can be placed in a library and used just by describing how components
are linked together.
Bond graphs share the same underlying energy-ﬂow-based concept as the lower level
of our approach, and are a popular domain-independent graphical method for describing
a system ﬁrst described by Paynter (1961) and developed by numerous others. They are
an excellent way of generating the systems of diﬀerential equations that describe system
behaviour. Qualitative versions of bond graphs can be produced (Ghiaus, 1999), however
these are qualitative versions of the standard numerical equations and therefore suﬀer the
same diﬃculties as any of the general equation-based constraint methods. A qualitative
version of bond graphs is successfully used to model energy ﬂows associated with people in
a building (Tsai & Gero, 2010), where the movement of people is not determined by any
speciﬁc physical laws and thus there is no choice but to provide an ad-hoc model based on
high-level knowledge about the building use. It has been observed that qualitative models
often result in too many fault candidates, and a reasoning scheme based on past experi-
ence and ad-hoc system dynamics where it can be diﬃcult to obtain the proper models
for quantitative methods (Samantaray & Ould, 2011). The most widely-used qualitative
equation-based constraint method has been QSIM (Kuipers, 1986). Kuipers has acknowl-
edged the problems with QSIM for many applications - chattering, uncontrolled branching
of possibilities, asymptotic behaviours (Fouch´e & Kuipers, 1990). While some techniques
have been developed for minimising the problems (Clancy & Kuipers, 1997), the problems
with the approach remain for practical systems. As observed (Mosterman & Biswas, 2000),
reducing model complexity by eliminating higher-order derivatives and non-linear eﬀects
leads to discontinuities in the system (i.e. state changes) and careful analysis of the under-
lying physical nature of the system is required when constructing models in order to ensure
that the simpliﬁed models correspond to real behaviour. That kind of careful analysis is not
possible when linking QSIM-style qualitative equation-based constraint methods to physical
components, and certainly not when wanting to be able to simulate faulty components.
Our two-level approach has achieved practical success even in less sophisticated ver-
sions than the present approach (Price & Struss, 2004) by avoiding direct translation of
diﬀerential equations to their qualitative versions, and rather representing phenomena ex-
plicitly as state-based representations at the local component behaviour level and providing
a constrained global representation. This does not limit the applicability because it is the
property of the model that is discrete or continuous rather than any inherent property of
the system (Struss, 2003), and the real question is what kind of model is appropriate for the
reasoning task at hand. The modelling in this paper requires minimal algebraic eﬀort, by
representing component behaviour at an abstract level such that qualitative behaviour can
416

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
Eﬀort, E
Resistance, R
Flow, F
0
0
?
0
r
0
0
∞
0
u
0
⊔
u
r
f
u
∞
0
Table 1: Qualitative electrical current assignment
be predicted for nominal and failure modes for topologically complex systems with many
component states.
2. The Qualitative Power Network
The power network (system circuit) is represented using resistances, R, as the structural
component. The simulation task is to derive the eﬀort across each resistance and the ﬂow
through each resistance given a power (eﬀort or ﬂow) source in the network. A minimal
useful qualitative quantity space uses [0, r, ∞] to represent resistance and [0, u] to represent
eﬀort, E, at the supply terminals (Lee, 1999). A linear network uses the generalised ver-
sion of Ohm’s Law for eﬀort, ﬂow, and resistance, E = F × R, and provides the current
assignment in Table 1. The ﬁrst row is qualitatively ambiguous because any ﬂow through
a zero resistance produces no eﬀort loss. It is not physically possible to have an eﬀort drop
across a zero resistance and hence the ﬂow in the fourth row is shown as ⊔to indicate an
impossible case.
A power network is considered as a graph G(T, A) containing nodes T and edges A that
connect exactly two nodes, and represent the circuit resistances. Each edge e ∈A has a
resistance value R(e) and connects a pair of nodes e = ⟨t1 ∈T, t2 ∈T⟩. Eﬀort is measured
between two nodes E(t1, t2) and ﬂow is measured through an edge F(e). The degree of a
node is the number of connections to that node. Looped edges with both ends connected
to the same node therefore increase the degree of the node by two.
2.1 Order of Magnitude Representation
An order of magnitude representation for R allows more detailed modelling without in-
troducing qualitative ambiguity by separating artefacts with signiﬁcantly diﬀerent charac-
teristics (Raiman, 1991; Lee, 2000a). This enhancement improves the ability to represent
nominal behaviour such as distinguishing signal level power from actuator power in elec-
trical circuits, and gravitational ‘head’ pressure from the system pump in selected ﬂuid
transfer systems. The modelling of faults is also improved by allowing exaggerated faults to
be modelled, thus producing eﬀects for faults where eﬀects would otherwise be qualitatively
indistinguishable from nominal operation.
We deﬁne O(M) qualitative resistance values R = [r1 = 0, r2, . . . , ri−1, rm = ∞] such
that ri+1 ≫ri for any i. In addition ri/ri+1 = rj/rj+1 for any i, j ∈N. Physically we
interpret this to mean that any number of rm valued resistors in series will be dominated
417

Snooke & Lee
a
b
a × b
0
0
0
0
r 3n
0
0
∞
?
r 3n
r 3m
r 3(n+m)
r 3n
∞
∞
∞
∞
∞
Table 2: OM Multiplication
by a single rm+1 valued resistor in the same series segment, and that in addition, the
magnitudes of the resistances are qualitatively of equal spacing. The OM representation
proposed has the beneﬁt that it does not generate additional qualitative landmarks that
lead to potential ambiguity in the model, indeed its purpose is to allow qualitative distinc-
tions for characteristics that are known to be of a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent magnitude. The
qualitative OM approach is somewhat analogous to the base 10 logarithmic scale used for
magnitude approximation in numerical reasoning, with two diﬀerences. For the qualitative
≫assumption above to hold generally when mapping from numerical speciﬁcations to qual-
itative ones in practical systems, a coarser magnitude scale than 10 is required. Therefore,
models that distinguish values based on the numerical equivalent of three order of magni-
tude preﬁx ranges, such as A, mA, µA for electrical current, work well. Secondly, ≫may
be interpreted for a speciﬁc application type or domain. For example if we can assume in
some ﬂuid system that the pressure in a system created by gravitational ‘head’ in a vertical
pipe is always dominated by the pump(s) working against it, regardless of the number of
pipe sections in the system, we can consider these at diﬀerent qualitative magnitudes, even
though numerically this clearly is not the case. In this case a consistent set of qualitative
magnitudes, models, and interpretations is required for each application or domain that
separates phenomena considered to satisfy ≫for target systems.
The qualitative magnitude notation for q3n is introduced as a convenience for lower
magnitudes to indicate a quantity n orders of magnitude below q. Similarly, for convie-
nience, q2n indicates a quantity n orders of magnitude above q and therefore q3n = q2(−n).
The OM calculations follow the usual rules of sign algebra (Trav´e-Massuy`es, Ironi, & Dague,
2004) but allows the domination of one magnitude by another as shown in Tables 2 and 3
for positive multiplication and addition respectively. Table 1 can now have u replaced by
u3n and r replaced by r 3m resulting in f 3(n−m) for the ﬂow result in row 5.
2.2 Network Reduction
The OM representation is utilised for each of the resistance, eﬀort, and ﬂow variables of a
power network. The aim is to derive ﬂow and eﬀort values throughout the entire circuit, and
this is achieved by reducing the circuit to a single equivalent resistance, assigning the ﬂow
value and expanding the network assigning eﬀort and ﬂow values at each level of expansion
according to the qualitative structures present. The network reduction is performed by
series and parallel (SP) circuit simpliﬁcation with an OM version of the qualitative star–
delta (Y-∆) transformation (Mauss & Neumann, 1996) for non SP cases as follows.
418

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
+
0
+p3n
−p3n
∞
?
0
0
+p3n
−p3n
∞
?
+p3m
+p3m
+p3min(m,n)
−p3n if n < m
∞
?
+p3m if m < n
? if n = m
−p3m
−p3m
+p3n if n < m
−p3min(m,n)
∞
?
−p3m if m < n
? if n = m
∞
∞
∞
∞
∞
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
Table 3: OM addition
Within a network graph G, any nodes of degree two can be removed and have both
connected edges e1, e2 replaced with an equivalent series edge of resistance:
R(e1 ¦ e2) = max(R(e1), R(e2))
(1)
Any edges e1, e2, . . . , en that share the same pair of nodes can be replaced by a single
equivalent parallel edge with the resistance:
R(e1||e2|| . . . ||en) = min(R(e1), R(e2), . . . , R(ei))
(2)
To facilitate vividness of the derived model we use the convention e1||e2 to label edges
representing a parallel combination of edges and e1 ¦ e2 to indicate a series combination.
Iterative application will produce a tree of equivalent resistances and will result either in
a single resistance R′ between the supply nodes t⊕and t⊙or a non-SP reducible circuit
fragment.
The majority of circuits are SP reducible, particularly if we consider that zero resistance
edges can be removed from the network to simplify the topology (Section 2.7). For the
remainder a Y-∆transformation can be applied as shown in Figure 2. The introduction
of Y-∆resistances unfortunately reduces the vividness of the representation since they are
not directly related to the original component structure; however, it provides a general
solution and can assign ﬂow direction for any network, unlike earlier work (Lee, 2000a).
A qualitative signs version of this transformation was utilised before (Mauss & Neumann,
1996), however, an OM representation introduces the possibility of additional levels of
resistance for the transformed node and requires a more detailed analysis.
Edges e1 . . . en connected to a non SP reducible degree n star node are replaced by new
edges ejk that form an equivalent network where 1 ≤j ≤n, 1 ≤k ≤n, k > j. Using
RR(e) to notate the numerical resistance of edge e, a 3 node Y-∆transformation is deﬁned
(symmetrically for other edges) as:
RR(e12) = RR(e1)RR(e2) + RR(e1)R(e3) + RR(e2)RR(e3)
RR(e3)
(3)
Equation 3 is generalised as a star mesh transform deﬁned for star nodes of any order as:
RR(ejk) = RR(ej)RR(ek)
n
X
m=1
1/RR(em)
(4)
419

Snooke & Lee
Noting that for the OM qualitative values:
max
1
a, 1
b, ...

=
1
min(a, b, ...)
(5)
the qualitative version of equation 4 for 1 ≤m ≤n is:
R(ejk) = R(ej)R(ek)
min(R(em))
(6)
If the denominator is ∞, then all of the resistances must be ∞and R(ejk) = ∞. If any
of the star resistances, R(em) = 0, then the result is undeﬁned. Hence, for eﬃciency, zero
resistance edges are removed by combining the associated nodes into a super node which
will be discussed in the next subsection. If the numerator contains 0 or ∞, that value is the
result. For all other cases the result is determined by the magnitude indices of the values.
If min(R(em)) = r2c
m and R(ej) = r2a
j
and R(ek) = r2b
j ,
r2(a+b−c)
jk
=
r2a
j r2b
k
r2c
m
(7)
e1
e2
e3
e12
e13
e23
Figure 2: ∆-Y transformation for 3, 4 and 5 nodes
2.3 Flow and Eﬀort Assignment
The reduced network can have a ﬂow (or eﬀort for ﬂow sources) assigned for its source
directly from the OM extended version of Table 1. The R = 0 case ⊔is reported immediately
since it has a speciﬁc physical interpretation in most circumstances, such as an electrical
short circuit.
When R = 0 contains another source (Section 2.5) not presently under
consideration, that edge is ignored. To determine the ﬂow in a speciﬁc circuit component,
the edge hierarchy is expanded for the required edge. The sign of a ﬂow determines its
420

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
direction relative to an arbitrary terminal order for each resistor, using a convention t1  t2
is f and t2  t1 is -f.
For edges e1, e2 that are part of a series pair the ﬂow through each is simply the ﬂow
through the pair: F(e1) = F(e2) = F(e1 ¦ e2) and the eﬀort across the edge is E(e1) =
F(e1)R(e1) (noting that f 3nr 3m = u3(m+n)).
If R(e) = ∞, then F(e) = 0 and E(e)
is undetermined from the eﬀort equation (see rows 3 and 6 in Table 1); however, unless
R(e1) = R(e2) = 0, E(e) = E(e1 ¦ e2).
For edges in parallel, E(e1) = E(e2) = E(e1||e2) and the ﬂow is F(e) = E(e)/R(e).
When R = 0 it is physically impossible that E ̸= 0, unless there is a short circuit at the
supply, which is treated as a special situation. If R = ∞then F = 0 as in Table 1.
For Y-∆edges we have a sum of ﬂows,
Fek =
k−1
X
m=1
F(emk) −
n
X
m=k+1
F(ekm)
(8)
The addition of mixed signs leads to the possibility of an ambiguous ﬂow (Table 3), as would
be caused by a balanced bridge conﬁguration. This indicates that the qualitative behaviour,
and possibly, future state of the system depends on the numerical values of the resistances
within one order of magnitude, signalling the analysis to try and obtain more detailed
information. At the level of resistances, an ambiguous ﬂow value does not necessarily lead
to a reasoning impasse at the higher-level tasks such as FMEA if a higher-level behaviour
is not dependent on the value and the analysis tool reporting does not require it. Finally,
E(eek) = F(eek)R(eek).
Figure 3 exempliﬁes a number of the concepts in the preceding subsections. The notation
⊕and ⊙is used to identify positive and negative supply nodes, using a subscript to identify
the source when necessary for systems with multiple power sources. Working from left to
right in the Figure, a sequence of circuit reductions is performed to obtain a ﬁnal single
equivalent resistance value. An overall ﬂow value is then computed and distributed amongst
the circuit elements from right to left in the Figure as described above. Finally the ﬂows
in the Y are calculated from the ∆ﬂows using equation 8, noting that the positive ﬂow
directions are deﬁned as away from the star centre node.
F(e1)
=
−F(e14) −F(e13) = −f 31 −f 34 = −f 31
F(e4)
=
−F(e14) −F(e43) = f 31 −f 33 = f 31
F(e3)
=
−F(e13) −F(e43) = f 34 + f 33 = f 33
2.4 Distinguished Node
Eﬀort values are measured between two nodes and for convenience it is common practice
to identify one distinguished node in a network and make measurements relative to that
node. This then allows eﬀort to be measured ‘at’ a node with the implicit assumption that
the second node is the distinguished node. This is commonly the case in electrical systems
where the distinguished node is called ground or earth and provides a reference node for
voltage measurement and is often deﬁned to be the negative supply terminal in a single
source system.
421

Snooke & Lee
t1
t2
t3
e1
e2
e3
e4
e5
e0
parallel reduction
series reduction
parallel reduction
non SP-reducible
star delta reduction
f>1
r<1
r
r<1
r<1
t1
t3
e13
e2
e34
e14
e5
e0
r<2
r<1
r<3
r<1
r<1
r<1
r<3
r<3
t1
t3
e2 || e13
e14
e0
r<2
r<1
r<1
r<1
e5 || e34
t1
e2
|| e13 
: e5 || e34
e14
e0
r<2
r<1
r<1
t1
e0
r<1
r<1
e0 : e14 
|| ((e2 || e13) 
: (e5 || e34))
r<1
e14 
|| ((e2 || e13) 
: (e5 || e34))
u
0
f>1
f>2
f>1
f>1
f>2
f>2
f>2
f>4
f>3
f>2
f>1
f>1
f>3
f>2
f>2
Figure 3: Operation of the qualitative circuit solver showing reduction and ﬂow assignment
For generality we deﬁne the symbol Z as the distinguished zero node for a network of
any type with speciﬁc instances, such as A to represent ‘atmosphere’ for ﬂuid ﬂow systems.
Notice that Z does not provide another landmark value in the qualitative eﬀort space; it
provides a structural reference point in the resistive network.
The identiﬁcation of Z allows the deﬁnition of ‘absolute’ eﬀort relative to this point.
The qualitative eﬀort levels [0, u] are supplemented – as for voltage (Lee, 1999) – with
two additional symbols that represent structural features of the circuit that emerge during
simulation.
These additions are useful for interpretation of the simulation, but do not
change the quantity space itself. ∅is used to indicate a ﬂoating eﬀort present in circuit
fragments disconnected from any source and ∼is used to indicate an eﬀort that is between
the supply terminal’s voltage, i.e. E(⊕, ∼) = E(∼, ⊙) within the same magnitude. ∼is
associated to each source and is less useful for systems with multiple active eﬀort sources.
It is always useful to distinguish ∅from 0 and ? because ∅is generally undeﬁned and would
not provide a meaningful measurement, although it may read 0 if measured. The qualitative
value ? is diﬀerent from ∅because ? is qualitatively undetermined but has a value within
the scope of the modelled system, whereas ∅has no value within the modelled system.
2.5 Multiple Eﬀort Sources
The network solver calculates power consumed (P = E ×F) for a single source. For a linear
resistive network we can use a qualitative version of the principle of superposition where
more than one source is connected to a single network (noting a single system schematic
may, at any instant, actually comprise many isolated networks, possibly in diﬀerent domains,
even though all components on the schematic appear connected). Each network is analysed
separately for each source by inhibiting all other eﬀort sources and summing the results.
For sources s1 . . . sn, the qualitative ﬂow through an edge e is given by Psn
s1 F(e) =
max(Fs1(e) . . . Fsn(e)). Clearly where two opposing ﬂows of the same magnitude exist, the
422

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
edge suﬀers from qualitative ambiguity. For failure conﬁgurations, the ambiguous result is
useful in highlighting to an engineer that a range of possible failure behaviour can occur.
Simple relational constraints may be used to resolve an ambiguity for the common special
case when there is a zero resistance between one of the supply nodes ⊕s1, ⊙s1 and one of
⊕s2, ⊙s2. For example a statement of the relative power of two pumps will allow the direction
of ﬂow in the reduced circuit to be derived, thereby allowing ﬂows in the expanded network
resistances to be calculated.
Figure 4 illustrates a circuit schematic for an electrical system with two eﬀort sources
and resistances of magnitude r31 and r. The individual ﬂow contributions calculated for
source s1 are shown with a coarse broken line, and the ﬂows for s2 with a ﬁne broken line and
are annotated with the ﬂow magnitudes. The ﬂow sum is shown for each resistor. There is
partial ﬂow ambiguity in the circuit, shown by the double-headed arrows next to resistors
in the centre section where opposing ﬂow contributions occur at the same magnitude. If the
state-based or functional simulation requires the ﬂow (direction), power or eﬀort at these
resistors, then it is necessary to know the values of the resistors.
r>1
+
-
0z
+
-
r>1
r
s1
s2
s2 ﬂow
s1 ﬂow
r>1
u>0
u>0
f<1
f<1
f<0
f<0
f<0
f<0
f<0
f<0
f<0
f<0
f<1
f<1
Figure 4: Multiple Source Example
2.6 Representation of Substance Within the System
The discussion so far has not considered the nature of the ﬂow. For some domains the ﬂow,
such as electrical current, is implicit in the component models. In the thermal domain E is
a temperature diﬀerence and entropy ﬂow is F. The product of these is ‘heat’ or thermal
power, P, and the resistance of each component is selected to represent the reciprocal of
thermal conductivity. Fluid transfer and hydraulic systems include the possibility that more
than one substance can be associated with a network, particularly when faults are present.
A concrete example is given by a fuel distribution system. If the supply tank becomes
empty, air will enter the system and the behaviour of pumps and other component may
change.
The substance-dependent behaviour is represented at the component level. The power
network provides an instantaneous view of eﬀort and ﬂow, so it cannot participate in propa-
423

Snooke & Lee
gation of ﬂowing substance, it is, however, necessary for the components to be able to obtain
knowledge of the substance at the interface with other components. The network nodes are
considered as zero volume points of connection that instantly propagate substances from
component outﬂows to inﬂows. The local component behaviour provides substance infor-
mation to the nodes in an appropriate qualitative timeframe according to the substance
present at inﬂows, capacitance and other behaviour. There can be several connections to a
node and ﬂow direction may change during simulation. For these reasons a new concept is
included in the circuit solver; a list of substances is maintained at each node that contains
the output substances of each resistance connected to it at any instant of the simulation.
Figure 5 depicts a node connected to three resistances. The ﬂow directions are likely to
cause e1 and e2 to modify the associated SUBSTANCE lists in t1. If e3 then requests the
substance from t1 using S(t1), then {S0, S1, S3} will be obtained.
e2
e3
e1
t1
assign
S(e1.t1) = {S0,S1}
S(e2.t1) = {S3,S0}
evaluate
S(t1)
result {S0, S1, S3}
t1 SUBSTANCE list
e1 {S0, S1}
e2 {S3, S0}
Figure 5: Node substance representation
The presence of more than one substance at a node will result in substance ‘mixing’
by virtue that all substances present are provided to any component that uses the node as
an input. We might consider using the ﬂow magnitude information to indicate the ratio of
substance present, however, the reality will usually be that many other factors are involved,
leading to a process of diminishing returns for the modelling eﬀort required.
The modelling of substance in this work is deliberately simple and provides qualitative
capabilities to match conventional bond graphs which address systems with free energy (me-
chanical, electrical, magnetic, incompressible ﬂuid) in which all elements are conservative
except the resistance, where energy is dissipated. Sophisticated techniques have been added
to the Bond graph methodology (Brown, 2010), which allow numerical models of thermoﬂu-
idic phenomena to be constructed; however, the complexity required of these models is such
that the beneﬁts of the broad-based qualitative modelling for system engineering analysis
such as FMEA is lost. Some alternative approaches to qualitative reasoning have considered
changes of material state for example a ‘plug-based’ ontology (Skorstad, 1992b) which is
able to model the phase transitions in a steam boiler tube, however, the modelling required
is necessarily detailed and the 13 state envisionment produced illustrates the complexity
of the phenomena. Another approach to avoid complexity is used by Ghiaus who provides
a qualitative model for the Carnot refrigeration cycle (Ghiaus, 1999) based on equations
derived from a thermal bond graph and thus does not include substance properties as the
system is assumed to be in equilibrium, precluding analysis of many failure modes.
Within our proposed ontology, compressible ﬂuids require representation of the state of
the substance and would require that the substance state is parameterised in the models.
424

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
Enthalpy ﬂow could potentially be modelled by providing multiple forms of a substance (in-
cluding phase changes) which are related to changes in containing volumes and pressures,
providing eﬀort to a thermal circuit. In any modelling enterprise, a choice has to be made
as to the range of phenomena that are worth modelling, based on the required analysis.
Complex thermodynamic aspects are one area where we have not considered automated
analysis – at the overall system engineering level – to be worth the modelling eﬀort because
it is not clear that there is suﬃcient range of faults supported by models that can pro-
vide qualitatively distinct useful behaviour predictions. This is possibly an area for future
research and may indeed provide fruitful results, but we make no claims at the current time.
2.7 Computational Enhancements
The network reduction and ﬂow assignment detailed in the previous sections is suﬃcient
to solve the OM eﬀort and ﬂow parameters for any network topology. There are, however,
several additional concepts (Lee, 1999; Lee et al., 2001) that remain applicable using the
SPS technique, and can provide additional vividness in the representation as well as com-
putational beneﬁt. These enhancements deal with very common special cases to avoid the
need to use the Y-∆transformation, which produces resistances that are not associated
with the original circuit components in a straightforward way.
Any nodes connected by 0 valued resistances can be aggregated as a single supernode,
with E(e) = 0 across any edges subsumed by the supernode.
For an edge e = ⟨ti, tj⟩,
where ti, tj ∈T, and R(e) = 0 a supernode tij is created with the label ti.tj, and the
edge is removed from the active graph. Once generated a supernode can participate in
further SP Star (SPS) reduction, however, upon expansion of the circuit it is not possible
to directly allocate ﬂow to the edges represented by the subsumed edges as is done with
SPS expansions.
The ﬂow within supernode edges can be deduced for unambiguous (non-ladder network)
cases using a qualitative version of the Kirchoﬀ’s current law. With the exception of the
source nodes, for a node t and connected edges with ﬂow F(e):
X
{e∈A:e=⟨t,x⟩∨e=⟨x,t⟩}
F(e) = 0
For supernode edge ﬂow values, f1 3m1... fn 3mn, ﬂows F ′ = {fx 3mx : mx = max(m1...m2)}
dominate. For a node with |F| −1 edges ﬂowing into the node the unassigned ﬂow edge
must be out of the node with a ﬂow equal to the ﬂow magnitude in F ′ towards the node.
The dual exists for ﬂows in the other direction.
Two additional enhancements may be used to improve implementation performance of
the network analyser. Edges e = ⟨ti, ti⟩, ti ∈T are a loop and can be removed from the
active graph since the loop is by-passed by a zero resistance path, hence is assigned zero
ﬂow upon expansion. Loops typically represent shorted out parts of an electrical circuit for
example.
Degree one nodes, e ∈{⟨t, ∅⟩, ⟨∅, t⟩}, t ∈T, are known as dangling edges and are also
removed from the graph together with the connected edge as and when they occur as a
result of other reductions.
425

Snooke & Lee
3. Local Component Models and OM Time
The resistive network calculates power consumption, P, but cannot model any component
that stores energy, En, since En = P ×T for time T. Displacement and momentum are the
two domain independent characteristics resulting from the inclusion of time into the model
(Figure 1). Energy, displacement and momentum are fundamentally local characteristics of
components derived from the power variables and time. The representation of time follows
the OM approach described in Section 2.1. For a time t3n and ﬂow f3n, d3(n+m) = f3nt3n
deﬁnes a displacement d such as quantity of substance.
A FSM representation of local component behaviour has proved suﬃcient for abstract
behaviours for the failure analysis task. Time is represented by state changes and is explic-
itly represented by state transitions that capture the qualitative integration of eﬀort or ﬂow
variables. The state of the power network is used to trigger transitions, as are input events
from outside the system (external interactions). The change of state of a component may
cause the structure or resistive parameters of the power network to change, thus triggering
a power network simulation and a sequence of events in other components. This results in
a system of interacting state machines, sharing time as a common variable that sequences
events.
We use a specialised subset of the UML language state chart notation (OMG, 2012)
to describe the FSM models. The model is comprised of a set of states S, events Σ, and
transitions δ = S × Σ →S. In addition s0 ∈S deﬁnes the initial (default) state of the
component. Output actions A may be associated both with e ∈Σ and also as entry actions
associated with s ∈S. The UML provides for guard conditions on events and we reﬁne
these conditions to produce e = (t, Tc, Dc, Fc, A). t represents a temporal condition for
the transition as a qualitative OM duration after which the transition can occur once Tc is
satisﬁed, provided Fc is true after this time. i.e. Tc triggers a transition and Fc and allows
it to complete (ﬁre). Dc is a condition that must be satisﬁed during the transition, between
the satisfaction of Tc and Fc. All conditions may appeal to values from the network model,
and A may change the resistance values of the network model. States are used to represent
the qualitatively signiﬁcant values of variables that are derived from the integration of
eﬀorts and ﬂows over time or higher-level states of components. For example capacitor
charged/discharged, or relay activated/deactivated.
The following sections describe the
component level simulation and the component model syntax.
3.1 Component Level Simulation
The presence of multiple components in a system results in a set of independent interacting
FSMs. The only global variable at this level is time, and the OM representation provides for
sequencing of component behaviour at diﬀerent timescales. The deﬁnition of OM applied
to time requires that a sequence of (non-cyclic) events in t3(n−1) occur before an event in
t3n.
The processing of events is carried out by maintaining a time-ordered priority list of
all component events with satisﬁed conditions.
All events are ranked by their order of
magnitude time delay periods (referred to as time-slots subsequently) in the following way:
• All events e where Tc is satisﬁed are added to the end of Q for the priority speciﬁed
by t in the event or 0 if unspeciﬁed.
426

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
• Candidate events to ﬁre are n ∈N where N ⊆Q and t(n) = t3x such that min(x) ∧
N ̸= ∅, i.e all the events in the lowest order non-empty timeslot.
• All events n where Fc(n) is satisﬁed are ﬁred, and events where ¬Fc(n) are removed
from the queue.
• Any events where Dc if not satisﬁed are removed from the queue.
When |n| = 0 the system has reached a steady state and there are no further changes of
state. When |n| > 1 there is non-determinism in the system. The important question for
FMEA is the longer term impact of the alternative behaviours on the potential worst case
faults and this usually depends on whether the alternative behaviours diverge to signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent functional (external) eﬀects or are alternate paths through internal states that
converge on a common state. Very often it is the latter case. For example two relays wired
in parallel may not switch at exactly the same moment, resulting in two possible behaviour
paths and two intermediate states, neither of which is signiﬁcant in most cases.
In some systems it is possible to make a concurrency assumption that speciﬁes that the
ﬁnal state reached at the end of time period t3x is independent of the ordering of the events
in the time period. The presence of race conditions or feedback loops between mutually
interacting components does not allow the concurrency assumption, allowing the system to
reach a qualitatively distinct state dependent on the detailed numerical timing of the events.
This is a case where the qualitative representation of time lacks enough detail, and this
qualitative ambiguity will not be detected if the concurrency assumption is falsely applied.
In most systems it is certainly reasonable to assume that all t = 0 events are concurrent,
provided only events associated with the power network have t = 0 because these rarely
have causal cycles, unless speciﬁc examples such as bistable logic gate conﬁgurations are
created. Usually such ‘memory’ features would be represented at a higher-level as the state
variables (e.g. electronic control unit), leaving the domain-based modelling with non cyclic
causality.
Generally, each possible ordering of the events in each time-slot must be considered
to determine if all branches (eventually) reach the same state and, if this is not the case,
generate a number of alternative behaviour paths.
This is achieved by a breadth-ﬁrst
search to determine converging or cyclic behaviours when the system reaches a state that
is identical to a previously encountered state. There is no assumption made about such
behaviour; it is necessary for the simulation to detect cyclic behaviour to allow termination
and appropriate reporting. Alternatively the simulation must seek additional information
or advice from the engineer, if, for example, no converging state is found within a reasonable
length behaviour path.
3.2 Component Modelling Examples
A graphical notation is used to describe component models, for example Figure 6. State
entry actions are placed inside the rectangle representing the state, and an event syntax
‘[if Tc [during]] event name [after t [Fc]][/A]’ is used where [x] represents an optional element
x. The keyword during is used to specify that Dc = Tc, and also that Fc = Tc if Fc is
unspeciﬁed. If during is omitted then Dc = ⊤. If Fc is omitted then Fc = ⊤. The keyword
427

Snooke & Lee
after is used to specify t. If no after is speciﬁed, then the event is at t = 0, i.e. immediate
occurrence.
As an example assume we have the following OM time values F = {mS, Sec, hour, day}
and ﬂow levels T = {low, normal, high}, where Sec and normal are given the OM index of zero.
A tank of a given volume may be deﬁned by an event that changes from the ‘empty’ to ‘full’
state in a given time, e.g. ‘if F(tank inlet)==normal during ﬁlling after hour’ provides an implicit
volume of 21, or one order of magnitude bigger than a nominal volume, given the chosen
ﬂow and time qualitative space. By explicitly including the volume in the event conditions
it can be made to represent a number of possible transitions after diﬀerent durations, for
example, ‘if F(tank inlet)>0 during ﬁlling after tank volume/F(tank inlet)’, where tank volume is
deﬁned by the component to have the qualitative volume value with magnitude 21. The
ﬂow condition prevents an event that requires an inﬁnite amount of time to ﬁll the tank (0
is eﬀectively normal2∞)
Figure 6 shows the two-part model for a tank. The two levels of the model are shown
on the left, with graphic icons on the right that can be used to display simulation results
on any schematic containing an instance of this component. The structure is a single zero
resistance because the tank dissipates no energy during ﬁlling. The capacity of the tank is
deﬁned by a local component variable volume, used in combination with the ﬂow, F(tk), to
control the change of state, allowing several diﬀerent capacity instances of the tank to be
created by parameterising the model.
inlet
R=0
tk
if F(tk) > 0 and 
S(inlet)=="ﬂuid"during 
ﬁlling after volume/F(tk)
Tank
S(inlet.tk) =S(vent)
S(vent.tk) = S(inlet)
Tank
tk.level = 0
tk.level = MAX
empty
full
A
OM parameters:
volume
if -F(tk) > 0 and 
emptying after volume/F(tk)
Behaviour model - (energy)
Structure model - (power)
Component 
schematic graphics
vent
vent
inlet
Figure 6: Basic 3 tank, with no energy storage
The tank in Figure 6 does not store any energy because the eﬀects of gravity are ignored
and hence there is no increase in potential energy as the tank ﬁlls. This aspect could be
included in the modelling by making the tank into a small magnitude eﬀort source when its
level is non-zero. It will then include capacitance as well as displacement (zero stored energy
volume) provided by the duration the ﬂow continues prior to change of state. Atmospheric
pressure is often a signiﬁcant qualitative value in ﬂuid ﬂow systems and the behaviour of a
system may depend upon the pressure diﬀerence between atmospheric pressure and some
428

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
other point. A is deﬁned as the ﬂuid ﬂow domain specialisation of Z and provides a global
node accessible from any component model that represents a connection to the atmosphere.
Examples include a vented tank or leaking pipe.
A diﬀerent component is used to illustrate a component containing a dependent eﬀort
source. Figure 7 shows a model for a (non-horizontal) pipe that contains either liquid or
a gas (air). A resistance of R(pipe) limits the ﬂow in the pipe and represents a combined
measure of smoothness, length, Reynolds number etc. The pipe model is parameterised; an
ideal pipe is produced if length = 0. A pipe blockage fault model could set R(pipe) = ∞.
The ﬁlled pipe represents a small magnitude eﬀort source. The pipe has an additional
resistance to represent the ‘pipe wall’ to facilitate fault modelling by providing a possible
connection to A. The event conditions cause the pipe to ﬁll at a rate inversely proportional
to the ﬂow through it. The rightmost event speciﬁes that the pipe can prime itself, ie. if
ﬂuid is present at the top inlet (only), it will ﬁll without externally imposed ﬂow.
lower
upper
S(lower.pipe) = "air"
If F(pipe) > 0 
and "ﬂuid" in S(lower) during 
lower_ﬁlling 
after length*width/F(tk)
empty
full
8
8
A
upper
leak
lower 
leak
S(upper.pipe) = "air"
E(gravity) = 0
gravity
E(gravity) = e>1
If -F(pipe) > 0 
and "ﬂuid" in S(upper) during 
upper_ﬁlling 
after length*width/F(tk)
S(lower.pipe) = "ﬂuid"
S(upper.pipe) = "ﬂuid"
If F(pipe) == 0 and
"ﬂuid" in S(upper) during 
prime 
after length*width/F(tk)
pipe
OM parameters
length; width
R(pipe) = length/width
Structure model - (power)
Behaviour model - (energy)
Figure 7: Partial model for an vertical pipe
Figure 8 illustrates some general ways a component local behaviour may interact with
the structure for several common component types.
Real component models will have
additional relationships and constraints associated with qualitative values and device states,
dependent on the details of the behaviour required.
3.3 System Modelling and Circuit Topology
Figure 9 is an artiﬁcial system of components similar to those described in the previous
section and will be used to illustrate topological aspects of the modelling and simulation.
In addition a valve with closed (R = ∞) and open (R = 0) states related to an external
position input is included, together with a simple pump that may be activated via ‘activate’
and ‘deactivate’ external events. If the electrical aspects of the system were included then
429

Snooke & Lee
r
0/∞
Relay (power controller)
coil 
switch 
F(coil)
structure
behaviour 
relationship
r
Transformer
primary 
secondary 
(Gyrator)
E(coil)
r
Pump
motor 
output 
input 
F(motor) 
pump 
R(switch)
 E(secondary)
 E(pump)
maintain P(coil) = P(secondary)
Figure 8: Local/global relationships for several types of component
the pump model would include an electrical resistance and the events would be triggered
by the level of power (or current ﬂow) in the electrical resistance, thus setting the eﬀort
level of the pump appropriately.
Other qualitative aspects of the pump can easily be included in the model to create
diﬀerent types of pump. The details of the design of the pump may allow ﬂow when it
is inactive as is the case here, however, it is easy to include a state-controlled resistance
set to ∞for a pump that does not allow ﬂow when inactive. Similarly, with an additional
condition on the events, the pump can be made non-self priming if no ﬂuid is present at the
input. A bi-directional pump type requires an additional state and selection of the correct
substance input.
Tank A
Tank B
Pipe A
Pipe B
Pipe C
Tank C
Pipe D
0
Pipe A
Pipe C
Pipe B
Tank A
Pipe D
Tank B
Tank C
>1
0
>1
>1
0
>0
Valve
0/
8
Valve
P
Pump
Pump
A
c=0 
c=1 
c=0 
Figure 9: Pumped System
Consider the simulation of the system in Figure 9 from the state at the top of Table
4 with the pump oﬀ. The table summarises the changes of state of each component with
430

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
Tank A
Tank B
Tank C
Pipe A
Pipe B
Pipe C
full
empty
empty
empty
empty
empty
→prime, t32
full, ⊕= u31
→start emptying
part ﬁlled
[→emptying, t31]
→prime, t32
full
→prime, t32
full, ⊕= u31
→start ﬁlling
part ﬁlled
[→ﬁlling, t31]
Chronological non-determinism in time t31: 1 Tank A →emptying; 2 Tank B →ﬁlling
Choose > 1
[→emptying, t31]
empty
→drain, t32
empty, ⊕= 0
→drain, t32
→drain, t32
empty, ⊕= 0
delete [→ﬁlling, t31]
¬(S(inlet)==“ﬂuid”)
Choose > 2
[→ﬁlling, t31]
full
Fluid present at A
[→emptying, t31]
continues as for 1
Table 4: Simulation sequence for system in Figure 9
horizontal lines at the points where the network simulation takes place. The Pump Valve
Pipe D, do not change state maintaining the states oﬀ, closed and empty respectively. In
this example there are no resistance changes, only changes to eﬀort sources. Initially the
vertical pipes prime and ﬁll in sequence as ﬂuid is propagated from inﬂow nodes to outﬂow
nodes, creating two pressure sources that cause a ﬂow from the upper to lower tank and a
ﬂow of air out of the vent of the lower tank and into the upper tank.
A qualitative ambiguity then results between two events of the same duration, raising
a question which could not be answered without knowing the numerical sizes of the tanks
(and the quantity in each if not full and empty at the start). In this case the simulation was
allowed to try the alternative behaviours. The ﬁrst is that Tank A becomes empty before
Tank B ﬁlls and a steady state is reached with Tank A empty and Tank B is part ﬁlled. The
second possibility is that the lower tank becomes ﬁlled before the upper one empties. This
causes ﬂuid to reach the A node, and this is built into a model of the atmosphere that
reports an abnormal condition because a substance other than ‘air’ is present. Finally a
steady state is reached where Tank A is empty and Tank B is full.
431

Snooke & Lee
If the pump is switched on and the valve opened, the pump eﬀort source causes ﬂow
up to both top tanks because the pump is a larger magnitude of eﬀort than gravity in the
pipes, however Tank C is an order of size larger and the simulation is essentially the reverse
of previous example. Tank A overﬁlling is a spurious prediction because the simulation is
not able to reason that all of the ﬂuid originally came from Tank A.
An illustration of ﬂow ambiguity occurs if only Tank A is full and the valve is open
and pump oﬀ. The simulation starts as before until Pipe B is ﬁlled, then Pipe D becomes
ﬁlled from the bottom due to the eﬀort from Pipe A. Pipe D then becomes a pressure source
and is ambiguous with the opposing eﬀort from Pipe A. The ⊕PipeA and ⊕PipeB supply
nodes are both connected to a supernode allowing speciﬁcation that E(Pipe D.gravity) <
E(Pipe A.gravity) to establish ﬂow direction; Pipe D will ﬁll and there will be a ﬂow into Tank
C, as would occur if Tank C was lower than Tank A. It is large so never becomes full, and
subsequently drains through PipeD.
If E(Pipe D.gravity) > E(Pipe A.gravity), then Pipe D drains itself (producing air at the
valve) whereupon the cycle repeats. The simulation concludes that the pipe is oscillating
between the full and the empty state and its state is undetermined at this modelling reso-
lution. There may be physical oscillation, however, usually this indicates that the system
is in a state that cannot be represented at the level of abstraction being used.
The ﬁnal possibility is that E(Pipe D.gravity) = E(Pipe A.gravity), (it has ﬁlled to the
same height as Tank A) then there is no ﬂow in Pipe D. In all cases there is ﬂow to Tank C
which is either full or part ﬁlled at steady state.
These last examples were deliberately chosen to be at the limit of the representation,
if they occur during an FMEA during nominal operation, there is a clear indication that a
more detailed numerical model is required for the state or behaviour; if they occur during
a component fault then there is a signal that a failure mode has been encountered that
requires further detailed investigation.
An equation-based qualitative model of a system of tanks (Dressler, B¨ottcher, Montag,
& Brinkop, 1993) allows some comparisons to be drawn with our approach. Firstly, the
authors note an important feature also relevant to our approach; for diagnosis (and also
FMEA) a complete behaviour description is not necessary. In fact, a model containing too
much detail is likely to produce many qualitative ambiguities (or branching behaviour) on
unimportant behaviour aspects.
These problems have been described in detail (Clancy,
Brajnik, & Kay, 1997) and strategies to avoid the problem such as model revision proposed,
with various tools used to support the revision of (QSIM) models. While this may eventually
result is a desired simulation result, such strategies prove problematic for FMEA due to
the range of behaviour likely to be encountered by the automatic insertion of component
failure models into the system; we need abstracted models that are nevertheless grounded
in the basic physics and are fully compositional.
To avoid such diﬃculties a simpliﬁed numerical model containing the relevant be-
havioural phenomena, can be used (Dressler et al., 1993) and subsequently reﬁned this
into a qualitative one. During this reﬁnement process, variables and values were mapped
onto qualitative values (0, +, ∞); however, some values were required to be treated dif-
ferently with various landmarks being identiﬁed –namely the height of liquid in the tanks
and the atmospheric pressure. This illustrates the problem using the general equations,
since a numerical equation does not provide landmarks that represent states such as the
432

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
volume of a tank, and global features such as A. We suggest that explicit state identi-
ﬁcation, with temporal state changes, provides a more vivid qualitative model, within a
broadly applicable domain-independent generalised framework. Other components used by
Dressler, such as a valve, require mappings between an input command and the ﬂow in the
valve, using an expression to set the valve ﬂows (denoted i) at input and output as follows:
valve.status = :close →valve.i1 = valve.i2 = 0. We also note from the model that an open valve
is deﬁned as valve.i1 = −valve.i2 and therefore propagates the ﬂow locally when the valve
is open. This requires a predetermination of cause and eﬀect in the power network, unlike
our global network model. In our approach a state description of the valve (relay in Figure
8 is analogous to an electric valve) that controls the qualitative resistance is more vivid
(and physically correct) than controlling the ﬂow, since the ﬂow depends on pressure, and
pressure cannot be determined locally. If an OM model is used, a partly blocked valve can
be represented by an OM higher resistance than normal. In this situation it is not feasible
to set the ﬂow value based on valve control state, because it depends on the external system.
The A node is important to the circuit-based representation in the pumped system
example, however in general the Z node may also lead to power network ambiguity unless
the following condition is satisﬁed. The zero node must partition the graph into two disjoint
sets of edges sharing only Z and supply nodes. This topology naturally exists in many
practical ﬂuid ﬂow circuits, because the only connection between the negative (suction)
and positive (pressure) parts of the system are the pump itself and the atmosphere. For
others such as the contrived example in Figure 10, analysis is inherently limited since it
is impossible to determine qualitatively that a leak in Pipe E would cause liquid egress
or air ingress. The ambiguity is indicated because the direction of ﬂow through the leak
(represented by the dashed resistances on the right of the ﬁgure) at either end of the pipe
is diﬀerent with respect to the atmosphere, as shown by the arrows.
The example also illustrates two additional resistances used to represent a ‘leak’ failure
mode because of the qualitative diﬀerence in behaviour dependent upon leak position. The
resistance magnitude is used to indicate the severity of the leak where zero would produce
a complete fracture. The arrows on the leaks from PipeC and PipeD demonstrate an unam-
biguous qualitative behaviour, however PipeE shows conﬂicting leak ﬂows with respect to A.
This qualitative result is exactly what we would expect in the absence of numerical infor-
mation, and explicitly signals the limit of the behaviour predictions possible with limited
information about the system. Circuits that have resistances that bridge the Z node also
cannot have eﬀort values assigned relative to Z.
4. Faults and Exaggeration Reasoning
Exaggeration reasoning (Weld, 1988b, 1990, 1988a) provides an alternative qualitative tech-
nique for explanation of the worst case eﬀects without the need for diﬀerential qualitative
calculus. This form of reasoning is therefore suitable when we do not have detailed sys-
tem equations, or, as for the global power network, reasoning about the causality is not
performed. A secondary advantage for our purpose is that exaggeration reasoning often
produces more concise explanations. The drawback, however, is that qualitative deviation
analysis is guaranteed sound, whereas exaggeration reasoning can lead to false predictions.
433

Snooke & Lee
A
?
0
P
med
l
Pipe B
l
Pipe A
0
Pipe E
0
Tank A 
0
Tank B
A
m
m
l1 l2
l
Pipe C
l
Pipe D
m
m
m
m
Tank A
Tank B
Pipe A
Pipe B
P
Pipe C
Pipe D
Pipe E
Figure 10: A not forming disjoint graphs
For the purpose of FMEA there are two reasons why exaggerating faults is a reasonable
strategy: ﬁrstly, the worst case eﬀects are required, which results in fault models at the
extremes of behaviour; secondly, the FMEA is intended as an aid to the engineer and is
therefore externally veriﬁed.
Using a simple electrical torch as an example, a corroded battery contact fault may raise
the contact resistance and the torch may dim, however, this resistance increase does not
change the qualitative behaviour. An exaggerated fault would be an OM increase in the
battery contact and the simulation predicts an OM reduction in light output. Of course
a OM reduction of light would likely not be visible, but for the FMEA the eﬀect that
corrosion leads to a reduction in light is reasonable and provides a signiﬁcant distinction
from a fracture eﬀect where no light or circuit activity is present.
The OM representation provides for exaggerated forms of faults that model signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in behaviour. For example a small leak in a ﬂuid system pipe may allow air to be
sucked in, causing a mixture of ﬂuid and air at the output; a fracture in the same position
may result in no output because the pump fails to operate with only air.
A common approach to reasoning about this qualitatively is to use a qualitative con-
straint-based deviation model and propagate the deviation through the system. Reasoning
about deviation works well for parameter value changes, but is less good where structure
or state changes occur, such as the air ingress example above where a new system state
occurs due to air in the pump.
Each approach has its strengths, and so we might use
absolute/exaggeration reasoning to determine the impact of faults on major states and
operating modes (or regions of linear behaviour), followed by deviations to isolate ﬁner
grained eﬀects such as expected direction of value drift due to a fault.
434

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
5. Generating an FMEA
An automated FMEA is typically based on behaviour simulation for many component faults
and operational scenarios. Producing the FMEA has been previously described in detail
elsewhere (Price, 1998), however, since it is the end goal of the modelling and simulation
eﬀort, we summarise the main steps as follows:
• The system is simulated with no failed components over the expected operating con-
ditions.
• The system is simulated for each of the component failure modes contained in the com-
ponent type models for every component instance, over the same operating conditions.
Multiple faults may also be considered for high failure rate component combinations.
• The output of the simulation is the qualitative value of all system variables for each
step (state) of the simulation. These are used by a completely separate functional
model that identiﬁes speciﬁc (output) behaviour with the state of identiﬁed system
functions.
Functions can be in one of four states (Achieved, Failed, Unexpected
Behaviour, Inoperative) based on the truth of Boolean trigger and eﬀect expressions
that evaluate simulation output variables. The functional model is lightweight, but
can capture a hierarchy of system functions, including temporal aspects. Full details
of the functional model have been previously presented (Bell, Snooke, & Price, 2007).
• The nominal and failure functional states are compared, and used to indicate at a high
level of abstraction, the highest risk failed system functions and unexpected function
eﬀects associated with each component fault.
• Further presentation, selection, ranking of the function states and risk factors com-
puted from information associated with the function states and component reliability
allows an FMEA to be produced. The structure of a typical automatically generated
FMEA is shown in Figure 17 for our second example, discussed in Section 7.
It is the simulation step of this process that is of interest in this paper and the following
sections provide two example systems as illustrations.
6. Case Study Example: Domestic Heating System
Figure 12 shows a schematic for part of a simple domestic central heating system. The
complete model includes an electrical microcontroller that controls voltage to the pumps
and activators, in addition to a thermal system, we however focus on the ﬂuid ﬂow aspect.
The gas boiler and three way valve had been retroﬁtted some years after initial installation.
Either the gas boiler or wood burning stove can supply hot water.
The radiators are
modelled as R = r, the pipes are ideal (length=0) and the boilers and hot water cylinder as
R = r31 because they are much larger diameter than the radiators. The components also
include a thermal element where ﬂow is considered as the entropy ﬂow rate and temperature
as eﬀort. The connection between these components is a compound connection including the
ﬂuid and thermal circuits. There is not space to detail the complete set of models, however,
Figure 13 shows the horizontal pipe model that includes both the ﬂuid and thermal aspects.
435

Snooke & Lee
The ﬂuid ﬂow element is resistive and propagates the ﬂuid based on ﬂow direction. The
thermal element is represented by a further resistance. The length of the pipe determines
the thermal resistance of the pipe by conduction when there is no ﬂow, and when there is
ﬂow, there is no thermal resistance because the heated substance is transported. Thermal
power is provided by the boiler (by combustion) to create a temperature diﬀerence (eﬀort)
between inlet and outlet. This thermal eﬀort is then applied across the radiators which
provide power (heat) to the surrounding air.
A further aspect of the heating system is the interaction between the ﬂuid ﬂow and
temperature networks. For a ﬂow rate such that the returning temperature of the ﬂuid is
substantially higher than the ambient air, series connected radiators each consume a ratio
of the thermal power based on their dimensions. For low ﬂow rates this assumption may
not hold. For example, to represent the situation that a low ﬂuid ﬂow will allow more
thermal power to dissipate, an additional resistance is included in the thermal radiator and
pipe models that allows direct speciﬁcation based on the low ﬂow rate, such that the outlet
temperature is at or close to the inlet temperature of the boiler (or atmosphere). In Figure
13 this is the low ﬂow resistance, controlled by the ﬂow. Figure 11 shows the eﬀect of a low
ﬂuid ﬂow rate, on a series of radiators. The low ﬂow elements have changed from ∞to r31.
The power decreases by OM from the source. The ﬁrst radiator is hot (if the eﬀort source
is higher because the ﬂow is lower), the next one is an OM cooler, and so on.
Gas 
Boiler
pipe
/0
8
/0
8
valve
pipe
r
0
0
T
low_ﬂow
partial blockage directly limits 
ﬂuid ﬂow (not thermal ﬂow) of 
pipe 
E=u
pipe
r
0
low_ﬂow
pipe
r
0
low_ﬂow
pipe
0
r>1
r>1
f>1
f>2
r>1
f>2
radiator
radiator
radiator
Figure 11: Thermal ﬂow circuit in a low ﬂuid ﬂow situation
Consider a small leak in vpipe0 directly below the pump + output. In Figure 12 during
operation of the gas boiler with the valve in the heating position, ﬂuid ﬂows through the
radiators and heat is transferred to the radiators. A small amount of ﬂuid enters the atmo-
sphere, causing a small ﬂow of ﬂuid from the header tank which is replaced by water from
the external water supply.
Now we try a holiday scenario with the simulation results summarised in Table 5. The
external water supply is isolated (in case of freezing). The ﬂow model with the pump oﬀ,
derived from the component models and their connections, is in Figure 14. There is an
ambiguity concerning the gravity sources in the pipes p1, p7, p11(names abbreviated) which
oppose p0, p3, p6, p12, p13 at the same ﬂow magnitude. The user can provide that the
436

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
P
+
-
Gas Boiler
Hot Water
Storage
In
Out
Synchron 
motorised 
3 way valve
Header tank
Out
Air Bleed
Valve
Vertical pipe
Radiator
Radiator
+
-
Wood Burning 
Stove
P
In
Manual 
valve
+
-
Out
water
heating
vpipe1
vpipe3
hpipe2
hpipe4
vpipe6
vpipe7
hpipe8
hpipe9
vpipe11
vpipe12
vpipe14
vpipe15
vpipe0
tank level
loft level
boiler 
upper
room level
vpipe
13
boiler 
lower
vpipe16
Figure 12: Domestic heating system
in
inactive
active
8
A
leak
8
/0
thermal
out
temperature_in
temperature_out
OM parameters
length; width
R(pipe) = length/width
pipe
If F(pipe) > 0 
and "ﬂuid" in S(in)
ﬂow_normal
actions
S(out) = S(out);
If F(pipe) < 0 
and "ﬂuid" in S(out)
ﬂow_reverse
actions
S(in) = S(out);
If F(pipe) == 0 
or not  "ﬂuid" in S(out) 
or not  "ﬂuid" in S(in)
no_ﬂow
R(thermal) = 0;
R(thermal) =    ;
8
T
low_ﬂow
8
if F(pipe) < f<2 actions R(low_ﬂow) = F(pipe);
Figure 13: Horizontal pipe with thermal aspect
437

Snooke & Lee
relationship between E(vpipe3.gravity) and E(vpipe11.gravity), is “=” and similarly for the
other two sets (p6=p7, p3=p11, p1=p0+p13+p12). The result is a ﬂow from the header tank
to the leak via p16, p12 and p13. Air then enters p16 and it is no longer an eﬀort source
(Table 5, row 3). In addition a secondary low ﬂow exists via p1 and p0, these ﬂows are in
opposition to each other, however the constraint above allows the p1 source to predominate.
Now there are four sources (p0, p1, p12, p13) and it turns out there are three ﬂow patterns.
Figure 15 shows the ﬂow system with all zero resistances and all dead branches removed,
using a diﬀerent style arrow to show the contributing ﬂow patterns. The radiator section
has higher resistance and therefore the main ﬂow is due to eﬀort from p12 and p13, drawing
air from A through the boiler, p13, and pump to the leak until air reaches p12 and its eﬀort
becomes zero. The secondary ﬂow pulls air toward the radiators until the cold side pipe
(p11) becomes empty, whereupon there is an ambiguity between eﬀort from p3 and p0. By
specifying that the gravity sources p3>p1, the ﬂow direction reverses and p0 and p1 ﬁll with
air, p11 ﬁlls with ﬂuid from p3. Since the pipes all have the same length and diameter there
are several possible behaviours; in the table we provide additional information rather than
generate the alternative behaviours – which would lead to uncertainty as to the ﬁll state of
p0, p1, p2. Now p0, p1, p2, p12, p13 contain air. p3, p11, p6, p7 contain ﬂuid and are opposing
equal sources and the system is stable.
Returning home and turning on the water causes the header tank to reﬁll, however, the
pump does not produce ﬂow because it does not self prime. p16 will prime and create a low
ﬂow from the header tank but will take t31 to propagate to the pump. Hopefully it is not
winter.
In a subsequent step in the FMEA scenario the wood burning stove pump is started and
valve opened. A large ﬂow of water is pulled from the header tank through the three way
valve the ‘wrong way’, air and water mix in the return pipe and are pumped past the air
bleed valve, where the air is removed. The gas boiler and pump can be restarted and the
heating system works correctly - other than a small ﬂow from the header tank to the leak.
The resulting FMEA report will highlight the eﬀect of the failure – no heat output at
any radiator after the holiday scenario step and that this is not as severe as other faults (a
burner fault for example) because it is not permanent.
7. Case Study Example: Aircraft Fuel System
This section describes a fuel system provided by the sponsor of the work. The modelling and
simulation described forms part of a wider objective to automate manually created FMEA
reports used to generate fault eﬀect relationships as input to a Bayesian network based
diagnostic system. This eﬀort is, in turn, part of a recent 32m UK government sponsored
programme seeking to research, develop and validate the necessary technologies for use in
unmanned aerial systems (ASTRAEA, 2009).
The system considered is a fuel system for a twin engine light aircraft shown in Figure 16
and was also available as a physical laboratory simulation on a conﬁgurable rig that allowed
validation of the results using fault insertion via additional components such as valves to
represent leaks.
The requirements for this system did not include any thermal aspects
and due to the orientation changes of the system only pressure created by the pumps was
required, resulting in very little qualitative ambiguity, other than when valves are placed in
438

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
Gas Boiler
Hot Water
Storage
3 way valve
Header tank
Air Bleed
Valve
Radiator
water
heating
boiler
vpipe1
vpipe3
hpipe2
hpipe4
vpipe6
vpipe7
vpipe11
vpipe12
vpipe14
vpipe15
vpipe16
r
0
0
0
Pump
0
r<1
r<1
8
0/
8
0/
8
0
0
r<1
0
0
0
A
vpipe1_leak
A
r>1
8
0
A
0
Radiator
r
0
u>1
u
u>1
u>1
u>1
u>1
u>1
u>1
u>1
u>1
Pump
u
hpipe8
0
hpipe9
hpipe10
0
0
0
vpipe0
0
u>1
vpipe13
0
u>1
Figure 14: Flow model derived from Figure 12 (joints omitted)
very abnormal conﬁgurations. We created the qualitative simulation to model the physical
laboratory model, resulting in the aircraft engines being represented as tanks for example.
The system involves a number of tanks, valves and pumps that allow fuel to be stored and
transferred around the aircraft both to supply engines and to maintain aircraft trim during
ﬂight.
The system is comprised of left and right fuel tanks situated in the aircraft wings (e.g.
OC WT LH) and left and right auxiliary tanks (e.g. TK AT LH). The engines were represented
in the physical test rig that was used for convenience, as tanks EH LH and EH RH. The wing
tanks are connected to the engines via pumps (e.g. CP FL LH) and pressure sensors (e.g.
439

Snooke & Lee
Gas Boiler
Radiator
vpipe0
vpipe1
vpipe12
r
r<1
vpipe1_leak
r>1
A
Radiator
r
u>1
u>1
u>1
Pump
Header 
tank
f>2
f>2
f>3
f>2
f>2
f>2
f>2
f>2
f>2
f>2
f>2
u>1
vpipe13
f>2
f>2
Figure 15: Simpliﬁed heating system with leak
PT FL LH) and ﬂow metres (e.g. FT FL LH), which are also modelled as a tank to mimic the
hardware test rig that was used, with excess fuel being returned to the tank from which it
was drawn. Control of the fuel distribution is provided by four three-position valves (e.g.
TVL FL...), which are slaved in pairs for the left and right subsystems. The basic operation
of the system is to supply fuel from the wing tanks to the corresponding engine by setting
all the valves in the normal position.
These valves also allow fuel to be supplied from
the left tank to the right engine allowing both engines to be fed from one tank (crossover
operation). It is possible to feed both engines from opposite tanks if desired, although this
is not a normal operating mode. In addition fuel can be transferred between the wing tanks
and from the auxiliary tanks to the wing tanks, although it is not possible to return fuel to
the auxiliary tanks. Failure modes were provided for most component categories including
pipe and tank leaks, pump failures and stuck or leaking valve failures for every component
instance.
A portion of the resulting FMEA output is shown in Figure 17. The textual descrip-
tions are derived from the functional model (Bell et al., 2007; Price, 1998) and provide an
easily understood explanation of the fault eﬀects and risk priority. Functions also inter-
pret exaggerated behaviours into human-friendly phrases, for example if the return line to
a tank has OM lower ﬂow than nominal and the outﬂow is nominal, the virtual ‘relative
level sensor’ has a value lower than expected. Of course other faults may provide an absolute
qualitative value to the tank level sensor if it for example becomes empty (0) when part
ﬁlled (l 30) was expected. The consistency of the fully automated FMEA analysis allows
other automated tasks to be performed such as a diagnosability analysis (Snooke, 2009;
Snooke & Price, 2012). The qualitative analysis allows the entire FMEA to be regenerated
following system modiﬁcation in a matter of seconds and only the diﬀerences to the system
eﬀects are presented to the engineer as an incremental FMEA. This allows any unforeseen
implications of design changes to be easily detected.
The ﬁrst row of Figure 17 describes the eﬀects of a blocked fuel return pipe near the RH
engine in diﬀerent operating modes of the system called ‘steps’ in the output. The main
440

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
Boiler Radiator1
Pipe0
Pipe1
Pipe3
Pipe11
Pipe12
Pipe13
Pipe16
vpipe1 leak
Pump
on
full
full
full
full
full
full
full
F = f
F = f
F = −f
F = −f
F = f
F = f
F = f
F = f 22
F = f 22
⊕= u
⊕= u31
⊕= u31
⊕= u31
⊕= u31
⊕= u31 ⊕= u31 ⊕= u31
⊕= u31
Close supply to header tank, and switch oﬀboiler and pump.
Flow non-determinism: F = f because E(Pipe3)↔E(Pipe11); F = f because E(Pipe6)↔E(Pipe7);
Flow non-determinism: F = f in E(Pipe1) ↔E(Pipe0), E(Pipe12), E(Pipe13);
Resolve> Pipe3=Pipe11; Pipe6=Pipe7; Pipe1=Pipe0+Pipe13+Pipe12
oﬀ
empty
F = −f 23
F = f 23
F = −f 23
F = f 23
F = f 22 F = f 22 →empty
⊕= 0
→empty
⊕= 0
→empty
⊕= 0
→empty
F = 0
F = 0
F = f 23
⊕= 0
Flow non-determinism: F = −f 23 because E(Pipe3)↔E(Pipe0);
Resolve> Pipe3>Pipe1;
F = f 23
F = −f 23
F = f 23
F = −f 23
F = −f 23
Event non-determinism: Pipe0→empty ↔Pipe11→full
Resolve> Pipe0;
→empty
⊕= 0
Event non-determinism: Pipe1→empty ↔Pipe11→full
Resolve> Pipe11;
F = f 23
→full
⊕= u31
full
empty
full
full
full
empty
empty
empty
Table 5: Extract of simulation for leak fault in heating system 15
functional eﬀect is a RH engine supply malfunction (too much fuel), and the eﬀect that
excess fuel is not returned to the tank. There is also an indication that the RH wing tank
level might be lower than expected; of course this is a theoretical qualitative worst case.
The second row deals with a fracture in the pipe just above the RH pump. The function
eﬀect is again that the engine supply failes in normal operating mode, but additionally we
see that there is no ﬂow at the ﬂow transducer, and the RH wing tank level is higher than
expected, although this is probably not the primary consideration, but could be used to
indicate that fuel could be diverted to the remaining engine. This fault has a diﬀerent eﬀect
in cross feed mode (fuel taken from the opposite wing tank), as in this case it is the LH
tank level that is higher than expected due to the potential lack of returned fuel. Part of a
RH valve fault is shown and we see that fuel is returned to the wrong tank when the LH
engine is run.
The qualitative simulation has also been used to generate sets of symptoms that relate
qualitative measurements, symptoms and failures (Snooke, 2009) in order to allow a diag-
nosability analysis to be performed with the aim of assisting sensor selection. The structure
of the system has the greatest inﬂuence in these tasks and is exploited in a purely structural
441

Snooke & Lee
approach in related work (Rosich, 2012; Krysander & Frisk, 2008). For complex models
using high order diﬀerential equations, dealing with sensing of individual components such
as the valve example (Krysander & Frisk, 2008) the structure approach provides tractabil-
ity. The system or product wide sensor placement analysis in early design investigation
beneﬁts in addition from the (abnormal) behaviour response between multiple interacting
components in the presence of a fault, and is especially pertinent when only indirect sensing
is possible. The less detailed qualitative approach allows both aspects to be used, while
maintaining tractability. The comprehensive coverage of the system behaviour when linked
with the functional states of the system allows automated fault isolation activities and this
is the subject of another paper by one of the authors (Snooke & Price, 2012). The qualita-
tive analysis is important for such tasks because it captures broad regions of similar system
behaviour at a meaningful level of abstraction.
Multiple faults can be used in the simulation noting that some combinations of fault
may produce qualitative ambiguity, representing critical tipping points of the system. For
example in the fuel system each pump normally operates segments of the system partitioned
by the valves. Multiple valve faults can result in the pumps working in opposition through
a complex pipe topology and it is almost certain that numerical information is required
to determine the actual ﬂows because of the non-linearity abstracted into the qualitative
component states. For an FMEA the resulting answer predicting several possible behaviours
is reasonable, since if the highest risk eﬀects are signiﬁcant enough, they will be highlighted
to the engineer for detailed analysis.
Single fault FMEA is the norm because of the eﬀort involved in multiple fault eﬀect
determination.
For the automated FMEA combinations of faults are feasible, although
some selection of fault combinations is still usually necessary to alleviate the computational
complexity O(Nm) associated with exploring m concurrent faults as has been previously
discussed (Price & Taylor, 1997).
8. Conclusions
Qualitative simulation is a powerful modelling concept that can support a wide range of
reasoning tasks. A range of electrical circuit design analysis tools have been based on this
approach and the authors’ electrical qualitative simulator known as mcirq is now in regular
industrial use.
The structural and behavioural models are compositional and do not encode system
functional information or make assumptions about their use. It is of course necessary to
decide on the range and phenomena to be included in the modelling, and so a library of
models is typically created for a speciﬁc application area (e.g. automotive electrical, aircraft
fuel system, general plumbing etc), and this will include the set of qualitative variables of
interest, their (suitably labelled) magnitudes and relevant component failure modes. The
models are then reusable components available for other systems within the application
area. The qualitative nature of the components makes them far less complex than numerical
equivalents and this also makes them reusable within an application area – and possibly
also to other application areas. The models should provide the major behaviours relevant
to the objective of high-level reasoning about potential eﬀects, and not detailed analysis of
system performance, as has been demonstrated in the examples.
442

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
CP-AT-LH
DV-WT-LH
TJ-AT-LH
RP1-RL-LH
TP3-AT-LH
TP1-AT-LH
TP2-WT-LH
TP1-WT-LH
OC-WT-LH
FL1-1-FS-LH
TJ-FL-FS-LH
FL1-2-FS-LH
FL1-3-FS-LH
TP1-FL-LH
TJ-FL-LH
TP3-FL-LH
TP4-FL-LH
CP-FL-LH
TP5-FL-LH
FT-FL-LH
PT-FL-LH
TP6-FL-LH
TP7-FL-LH
IV_FL_LH
TP8-FL-LH
RP2-1-RL-LH
RP2-3-RL-LH
RP2-4-RL-LH
TJ-RL-LH
RL-FS-LH
RL2-2-RL-LH
CP-AT-RH
DV-WT-RH
TJ-AT-RH
RP1-RL-RH
TP3-AT-RH
TP1-AT-RH
TP2-WT-RH
TP1-WT-RH
OC-WT-RH
FL1-1-FS-RH
TJ-FL-FS-RH
FL1-2-FS-RH
FL1-3-FS-RH
TP1-FL-RH
TJ-FL-RH
TP3-FL-RH
TP4-FL-RH
CP-FL-RH
TP2-FL-RH
TP5-FL-RH
FT-FL-RH
PT-FL-RH
TP6-FL-RH
TP7-FL-RH
IV_FL_RH
TP8-FL-RH
RP2-1-RL-RH
RP2-3-RL-RH
RP2-4-RL-RH
TJ-RL-RH
RL-FS-RH
RP2-2-RL-RH
Name
BravoFuelSystem.vdx
Rev
4
History nst - original version 7/1/2008
nst - name changes 11/1/2008
nst - changed engines 25/1/2008
nst - changed engine return. 8/4/2008
TVL-RL-LH
TVL-RL-RH
TVL-FL-LH
TVL-FL-RH
TVL-TR-LH
TVL-TR-RH
CP-TR
FL5-TR
FL7-TR
FL3-TR
FL1-TR
FL2-TR
FL4-TR
TJ-TR-LH
TJ-TR-RH
FL-TR-LH
FL-TR-RH
TP2-AT-LH
DV-AT-LH
TP2-AT-RH
DV-AT-RH
FL6-TR
CK-TR
TK-AT-LH
TK-AT-RH
F-WT-RH
F-WT-LH
TP2-FL-LH
F-FL-LH
F-FL-RH
FC-RL-LH
FC-RL-RH
EH_LH
EH_RH
Figure 16: Example fuel system
443

Snooke & Lee
Figure 17: Portion of FMEA output for fuel system
This paper makes two notable contributions. Firstly, it provides an improved circuit
reasoning algorithm that gives a complete solution for all possible circuit topologies. This is
achieved by solving the problem of non series/parallel reducible circuits. Also the restriction
on single sources is removed and the resultant simulator is called (m2cirq), for Multiple
source mcirq.
Secondly, the qualitative network modelling method is placed in the context of a mod-
elling ontology based on separating global and local behaviour based on power ﬂow. The
component models for ﬂuid systems involve more aspects than electrical circuits and the
paper introduces several additional fundamental concepts necessary at the global level for
ﬂuid ﬂow modelling, including a distinguished zero node and propagation of substances
through a network. These techniques are illustrated by modelling a range of common ﬂuid
ﬂow components for simulation.
The ability of the QR to make predictions across multiple system states and operating
modes is complementary to other techniques. For example fault tree analysis for diagnosis of
a very similar fuel system to the example presented in Section 7 has been performed (Hurdle,
Bartletta, & Andrews, 2009) and uses pattern recognition to deal with multiple states. The
production of the fault trees and scenario (state) identiﬁcation is a labour intensive manually
performed process and is described in exactly the same qualitative terms as produced by QR
behaviour prediction such as ‘high ﬂow’. It is therefore likely that accuracy and coverage of
the FTA might be improved with a reduction in eﬀort by using the QR behaviour predictions
instead of manual eﬀort.
444

Qualitative Energy-Flow-Based FMEA
Many software tools have been developed to perform a variety of design analysis for
electrical systems, as mentioned in the introduction to this paper.
By substituting the
enhanced simulator into these tools the same analyses can now be performed on other types
of complex topology systems and multiple domain systems where qualitative behaviours
can be used to answer failure mode questions.
8.1 Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Aberystwyth University, the Welsh Assembly Government,
BAE Systems and the DTI ASTRAEA Programme. We also thank the anonymous reviewers
for their helpful comments.
