Null Space Properties of Neural Networks with
Applications to Image Steganography
Xiang Li1 and Kevin M. Short1
1Integrated Applied Mathematics Program, Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
University of New Hampshire, Durham, New Hampshire 03824, USA
Abstract
This paper explores the null space properties of neural networks. We extend the null space definition from
linear to nonlinear maps and discuss the presence of a null space in neural networks. The null space of a given
neural network can tell us the part of the input data that makes no contribution to the final prediction so that
we can use it to trick the neural network. This reveals an inherent weakness in neural networks that can be
exploited. One application described here leads to a method of image steganography. Through experiments on
image datasets such as MNIST, we show that we can use null space components to force the neural network
to choose a selected hidden image class, even though the overall image can be made to look like a completely
different image. We conclude by showing comparisons between what a human viewer would see, and the part of
the image that the neural network is actually using to make predictions and, hence, show that what the neural
network “sees” is completely different than what we would expect.
1
Introduction
Neural networks are powerful learning methods in use for various tasks today. This is especially true in the domain
of image recognition, where neural networks can achieve even human-competitive results[13]. However, a number
of studies have revealed that neural networks for image classification can be easily influenced to misclassify by
modifying images[1].
In 2014, Szegedy et al.
first discovered an intriguing weakness of deep neural networks[15].
They showed
that neural networks for image classification can be easily fooled by small perturbations, and they called these
intentionally modified images adversarial examples. Following this observation, numerous studies have been carried
out to find different ways to generate adversarial examples[7, 11, 13]. The main idea is to find a subtle perturbation
that can drastically change the output of a neural network by adding it to the data. It is observed that adversarial
examples have good transferability across models, which suggests that the existence of adversarial examples is also
a property of datasets[8], thus adversarial examples are not restricted only to the given model. In our study, we aim
to find a model-based method to fool the neural networks. In a manner different from the adversarial examples,
1
arXiv:2401.10262v1  [cs.CV]  1 Jan 2024

we take advantage of certain null space properties of the neural network, and generate examples to fool the neural
network by adding a large difference to images without changing the predictions. More importantly, to the naked
eye, the large differences will look like completely different objects than those that will be recognized by the neural
network, in a form of image steganography.
A null space is an important concept defined for linear transformations. Since neural networks are nonlinear
maps, few studies have focused on the null space of neural networks. Cook et al. integrated the null space analysis
on weight matrices with the loss function, and proposed an outlier detection method directly into a neural network
for classification tasks[5]. Rezaei et al. analyzed the null space of the last layer weight matrix of neural networks,
and used it to quantify overfitting without access to training data or knowledge of the accuracy of those data[12].
However, there is still a lack of understanding of the global effects of null space properties for neural networks. In
this study, inspired by the null space of linear maps, we introduce the concept of a null space for nonlinear maps,
and discuss how the null space applies to neural networks. We show how the null space is generally an intrinsic
property of neural networks. Further, once the neural network’s architecture is determined, the dimension of the
null space of the neural network is also determined in most cases. To illustrate this in concrete terms, we use null
space-based methods to fool an image recognition neural network as an application of image steganography.
Image steganography is a technique to hide an image inside another image[14]. In addition to traditional-based
steganography methods, neural networks are also widely used for image steganography. Neural networks have been
employed for image steganography using various different approaches [3, 6, 16]. Though conceptually similar to
other steganographic methods, the null space-based method presented here gives new degrees of freedom and a clear
process for creating steganographic images for neural nets. The main goal of this method is to hide an image and
recognize the correct class of the hidden image, while presenting to the (human) viewer an image that is completely
different than the hidden image that will be recognized by the neural network.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the null space of neural networks. Inspired by the
null space analysis, we propose an image steganography method based on the null space of fully connected neural
networks in Section 3. In Section 4, we perform a number of experiments on different image datasets. In Section
5, we offer some discussion and some conclusions about the advantages and limitations of the null space method,
and the differences between the null space image steganography method and adversarial examples. We also present
some images showing that what the NN is seeing is not what we humans might think it is seeing.
2
Methodology
In this section, we introduce the null space of nonlinear maps and discuss the null space of neural networks. As an
application of the null space for neural networks, we propose a new method for image steganography.
2.1
Null space of linear and nonlinear maps
In linear algebra, the null space of an m × n matrix A is Null(A) = {⃗x ∈Rn : A⃗x = ⃗0}; Null(A) is a subspace of
Rn. Consider a linear map T : Rn →Rm, T(⃗x) = A⃗x with Null(A) nontrivial. By the definition of a null space, it
2

is not difficult to see that for any ⃗x ∈Rn and ⃗xnull ∈Null(A), T(⃗x + ⃗xnull) = T⃗x. That is, adding any vector in
Null(A) to any input ⃗x won’t change the output since the transformation is a linear map.
In most cases, nonlinear maps do not have the definition of null space as described above. The set {⃗x : f(⃗x) = 0}
for a nonlinear map f : Rn →Rm is not a subspace of Rn. Moreover, the property of linearity f(⃗x+⃗y) = f(⃗x)+f(⃗y)
does not hold for the nonlinear map f.
Although we can still find the set {⃗xα : f(⃗xα) = 0}, the property
f(⃗x+⃗xα) = f(⃗x) is no longer true for all ⃗x ∈Rn. To preserve this useful property, the concept of the null space can
be adapted to nonlinear maps by identifying a set of vectors ⃗xnull that satisfy the condition f(⃗x + a⃗xnull) = f(⃗x)
for any ⃗x ∈Rn, a ∈R:
Definition 2.1 (Null space of a nonlinear map). The null space of a nonlinear map f : Rn →Rm, denoted as
N(f), is the set of all vectors that by adding these vectors to any input, the image under the map, or output, will
not change:
N(f) := {⃗v ∈Rn : f(⃗x) = f(⃗x + a⃗v) for all ⃗x ∈Rn, a ∈R}.
(1)
When this definition is applied to linear maps, it is equivalent to the null space concept in linear algebra. However,
for the purposes of this paper, we will use the term “null space” in a broader sense, extending its application to
include affine maps, nonlinear maps, etc. Similar to the null space in linear algebra, N(f) is a subspace of Rn
(Proposition A.1). Furthermore, as demonstrated in Proposition A.2, all the vectors in N(f) are mapped to a
single point by f. More specifically, for any ⃗x, ⃗y ∈N(f), f(⃗x) = f(⃗y). Further properties about null spaces of
nonlinear maps are provided in Appendix A. One difference between null spaces of linear and nonlinear maps is
that a nonlinear map will not always map null space vectors to zeros.
The definition of the null space for nonlinear maps is straightforward. However, in practice, it is difficult to find
a null space explicitly by following this definition. Next, we will introduce an alternative, yet equivalent definition
for the null space of nonlinear maps, which provides a more accessible way to find a null space of a nonlinear map.
To begin with, given a nonlinear map f : Rn →Rm, let’s consider the subspaces of N(f) first. Suppose f has
a decomposition, that is, f can be expressed as the composition of two functions f = f2 ◦f1, and f1 is linear. It
follows that Null(f1) is a subspace of N(f). This is straightforward to see, since for any ⃗xnull ∈Null(f1), we have
that, f1(⃗x) = f1(⃗x + ⃗xnull) holds for every ⃗x ∈Rn, and so f(⃗x + ⃗xnull) = f2 ◦f1(⃗x + ⃗xnull) = f2 ◦f1(⃗x) = f(⃗x).
Therefore, now we have a way to find a subspace of N(f). Hence, we define a partial null space.
Definition 2.2 (Partial null space of a map). Given a nonlinear map f : Rn →Rm. If f has a decomposition
f = f2 ◦f1, where f1 : Rn →Rd is a linear map, then the null space of f1 is defined as a partial null space of f
(given by f1). We denote it as PNf1(f).
Then, a natural question is how to find the null space with partial null spaces and the decomposition of maps.
In the following lemmas, we present some results between partial null spaces and the null space of a nonlinear map.
Detailed proofs are provided in Appendix A.
Lemma 2.3. Let f : Rn →Rm be a nonlinear map. Every partial null space PN(f) is a subspace of N(f),
dim PN(f) ≤dim N(f).
3

Lemma 2.4. For every nonlinear map f : Rn →Rm, there exists a decomposition f = f2 ◦f1 with f1 being a linear
map such that PNf1(f) = Null(f1) = N(f), i.e., the partial null space given by f1 is equal to N(f).
Note that PNf1(f) = Null(f1) = N(f) is not always true for any arbitrary decomposition f = f2 ◦f1. In the
following corollary, we further discuss the conditions under which this equation holds.
Corollary 2.5. Let f : Rn →Rm be a nonlinear map. The null space of f is the largest partial null space of f.
That is, N(f) = PNf1(f) if f = f2 ◦f1, f1 is a linear map and PNf1(f) has the largest dimension among all
decompositions of f.
Directly from Lemma 2.3 and 2.4, Corollary 2.5 gives an equivalent definition of N(f) in terms of its partial
null space. Consequently, instead of searching for all possible vectors that satisfy equation (1), we have turned the
null space problem into the problem of finding a decomposition of f that yields the largest partial null space.
2.2
Null space of fully connected neural networks
Definition 2.6. Consider a fully connected neural network f : Rn0 →RnK+1, where K ∈N denotes the number
of hidden layers of f, with n1, n2, . . . , nK ∈N representing widths of the hidden layers. n0, nK+1 ∈N are
input and output dimensions, respectively. f is called a (K + 1)−layer Fully Connected Neural Network (FCNN).
In this paper, we refer to this FCNN architecture as a (n0, n1, . . . , nK)−FCNN.
The network f consists of K + 1 paired linear and affine transformations, each defined as Ti(⃗x) = Wi⃗x, Ai(⃗x) =
⃗x + ⃗bi, respectively.
Here, Wi represents the weight matrix and ⃗bi represents the bias vector in the ith layer,
for i = 1, . . . , K + 1. The activation functions are denoted by σ. Common activation functions include sigmoid
activation function and Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU).
The function f then can be represented by a composition of maps:
f = AK+1 ◦TK+1 ◦σ ◦TK ◦· · · ◦A2 ◦T2 ◦σ ◦A1 ◦T1
(2)
For more introduction to the neural networks, see Appendix C.
According to Corollary 2.5, we can do null space analysis on FCNNs using the composite function form (2). An
FCNN can be naturally decomposed into two parts, (AK+1 ◦TK+1 ◦σ ◦TK ◦· · · ◦A2 ◦T2 ◦σ ◦A1) and T1, where T1
is linear. Thus, Null(T1) is a partial null space of FCNN f which, in most cases, is also the null space N(f). Here
is an example.
Example 1 (ReLU neural networks (ReLU NNs) and null space). A ReLU NN is an FCNN with activation function
σR(x) = max(x, 0). Consider a (n0, n1, . . . , nK)−ReLU NN defined as f = AK+1 ◦TK+1 ◦σR ◦TK ◦· · · ◦A2 ◦T2 ◦
σR ◦A1 ◦T1, where Ai and Ti denote affine transformations and linear maps, respectively. f can be decomposed
into two maps f = (AK+1 ◦TK+1 ◦σR ◦TK ◦· · · ◦A2 ◦T2 ◦σR ◦A1) ◦T1. Thus, we know that a partial null space
of f is PNT1(f) = Null(T1). In most cases, this is also the null space of f, N(f) = PNT1(f). Further, assume the
first hidden layer weight matrix is W1, N(f) = Null(W1).
To visualize the null space of a ReLU NN, Figure 1 shows the surface of a (2, 1, 3, 1)−ReLU NN combined
with a contour plot beneath the surface plot for clearer interpretation. The figure shows that this ReLU NN has
4

a one-dimensional null space, represented by the parallel lines running back and into the page on the contour
plot. Notably, along the null space direction, all points on the surface are marked with the same color, which
means they have the same output value. This implies that regardless of the distance traversed in the null space
direction, the output of the ReLU NN remains constant. Similarly, in higher-dimensional cases, a ReLU NN with
a higher-dimensional null space would also have the same values along the high-dimensional null space plane or
hyperplane.
Null space direction ⃗v
Figure 1: The surface plot of a (2,1,3,1)-ReLU NN.
□
2.3
Null space of convolutional neural network
Similarly, a convolutional neural network (CNN) can also be represented by the composition of maps. Instead of
having only affine transformations and activation functions, the early layers of a CNN allow two additional types of
computation: convolution, denoted as C, and pooling, denoted as S. To determine the null space of a CNN f, we
can first decompose f into the composition of maps f = Tk+1 ◦σ ◦· · ·◦σ ◦C. So, in most cases, the first convolution
operation C is the maximum linear map of f, and N(f) = Null(C).
The null space of a CNN is significantly more complex than an FCNN. In this paper, we will only give an
overview of the null space analysis for CNN in a simple case. Consider the case when the input image of a CNN
only has one channel, for example, the MNIST dataset.
A typical convolutional layer in a CNN comprises multiple kernels. To find the null space of the entire convo-
lutional layer Null(C), we can initially determine the null space of a single kernel Null(K) corresponding to one
convolution operation. As shown in Appendix B, given one kernel, if the convolution operation keeps the output
image with the same dimensions as the input image (same padding), then N(f) = {0} in most cases. If the output
image of the first convolution operation has fewer dimensions than the input image (valid padding), N(f) can be
nontrivial. According to the Lemma B.1, under most cases, the null space of a given kernel has a dimension that
is equal to the difference between the dimensions of input and output image. For example, given a 28 × 28 image
and a 3 × 3 kernel, the dimension of the null space of this convolution operation is 28 × 28 −26 × 26 = 108 in most
5

cases.
Assume the first convolutional layer C has n kernels K1, · · · , Kn, then N(f) = N(C) =
nT
i=1
Null(Ki). For
instance, if the input is a 28×28 image, and the first convolutional layer has six 3×3 kernels, then the null space of
the CNN is the intersection of six 109−dimensional subspaces of R784. The likelihood of there being a non-trivial
intersection between 109-dimensional subspaces of a 784-dimensional space is low, but care must be taken when
designing the kernels. Compared to FCNNs, CNNs can achieve a trivial null space with fewer unknown parameters
in the first weight matrix and perhaps greater robustness.
3
Photo steganography based on the null space of a neural network
In considering the task of hiding secret information inside another image, a natural idea emerges from our previous
discussions on the null space properties of FCNNs.
Let us denote by f an FCNN designed and trained for image classification. For an image X, f(x) predicts the
class of image X. Assume the null space of this FCNN f is non-trivial (i.e., N(f) ̸= {0}). Using the null space of
f, any image X can be decomposed into two components: the orthogonal projection onto the null space ˆX and its
orthogonal complement X⊥. Provided that the dimension of N(f) is sufficiently large, ˆX ∈N(f) can retain most
of the visual features while having no contribution to the final prediction (with f); X⊥extracts all the important
information for prediction with f, but it would have an entirely different visual appearance from the original image
X.
Moreover, we can choose any Xnull ∈N(f) to construct a modified image ˜X = X+Xnull. Visually, this modified
image can be designed to appear significantly different from the original image X, while it preserves the original
class prediction with f, that is, f( ˜X) = f(X). Further, if we form combinations using the orthogonal complement,
such as if Y = Ynull + Y⊥, then a combination Z = Xnull + Y⊥would be classified based only on Y⊥.
Following the ideas above, we propose a method for crafting steganographic images, referred to as “stego images”
in this paper, to fool FCNNs and pass on secret classification information. Consider two images H and C. H is
the hidden image containing the information that we intend to transmit secretly. C is the cover image used to
conceal the hidden information. Suppose our goal is to pass an image S that looks like C but secretly hides the
classification information of H. This can be achieved by decomposing each image into two components based on
the null space N(f), and combining the null space component of C with the predictable component of H (i.e., the
orthogonal projection H⊥). Consequently, the resulting stego image S will visually be close to the appearance of
C while being classified under the same category as H by the neural network f.
Let us use the MNIST dataset to provide a more specific description of the entire image steganography algorithm.
Given the MNIST dataset (Xi, yi)N
i=1, where Xi are grayscale images with 28 × 28 pixels, normalized to fall within
the range [−1, 1]; yi are labels. A pre-trained FCNN f is needed beforehand. The neural network should be trained
using both the original images Xi and their rescaled images αXi, α ∈(0, 1). This provides “headroom” when
combining images, but has no significant impact on the accuracy of the predictions. The initial step is to find the
null space N(f) of FCNN, which can be done by applying singular value decomposition to the first hidden layer
weight matrix W1 = USV T and the columns of V corresponding to zero singular values form a basis of N(f). Then,
6

given the cover image C and hidden image H, using the null space N(f), create a steganographic image S, which
looks like the cover image C but has the same classification as the hidden image H. Specifically, to do this, we
find the orthogonal projection ˆC of C onto N(f) and orthogonal complement H⊥of H. Then, we create the stego
image S with the linear combination α1H⊥+ α2 ˆC, α1, α2 ∈(0, 1) such that S ∈[−1, 1]n. The aim of this step is
to guarantee that S is in the domain of f and f(S) = f(α2 ˆC) = f(α2C) can pass the correct prediction for the
hidden image. A visualization of the whole process is given in figure 2. This algorithm is also applicable to other
datasets. In the next section, we will show the experiments with MNIST, the Fashion-MNIST (FMNIST), and
Extended MNIST (EMNIST) datasets. For simplification, we will only present experiment results with α1 = 0.2.
Hidden Image 
Cover Image 
Stego Image 
 = 0.51 
 + 0.22 

Orthogonal projection onto 
the null space (
)
Orthogonal projection onto 
the null space ()
Image plotted with  rescaled to [-1,1]
Orthogonal complement

 =  −
Image plotted with 
 rescaled to [-1,1]
Image plotted with 
 rescaled to [-1,1]
Figure 2: An example of creating a steganographic image with null space of a ReLU NN.
For the example in Figure 2, and any other examples created with the algorithm, the NN will classify the image
as the category of the hidden image and will completely ignore the cover image.
4
Experimental results
All experiments presented in this section were implemented in TensorFlow.
The datasets employed for these
experiments include MNIST[10], Fahion-MNIST[17], Extended MNIST (EMNIST)[4], and CIFAR-10[9].
4.1
Hide the digits
In this section, we use the MNIST dataset to conduct experiments in image steganography. For these experiments,
we trained a (784, 32, 16, 10)−ReLU NN based on an expanded image training data set that included the original
and rescaled with α1 = 0.2 datasets with the prediction accuracy of 99.79% on the original training data. For the
original training data it correctly predicted, the average confidence level is 99.98%. When evaluated on the rescaled
training data, this ReLU NN maintained a high prediction accuracy of 99.78% with an average confidence of 99.77%
on correctly predicted data. Notably, this ReLU NN has a 752-dimensional null space. This large null space plays
7

a crucial role in the steganographic capabilities of the network.
We then filter out only the correctly predicted images to create a new dataset. This dataset comprises a total
of 50000 images, with each class having 5,000 examples. The (784, 32, 16, 10)−ReLU NN can predict correctly on
both original and rescaled data from this new dataset. The main purpose of this process is to ensure that for
any chosen hidden image H from the new dataset, feeding 0.2H into the ReLU NN does not create scaling issues,
and yields a correct classification. Next, we will show some representative results with stego images produced by
S = 0.2H⊥+ α2 ˆC.
Figure 3 and 4 present stego images generated using the images from the new dataset. For each set of three
images, the first is the cover image, the second is the hidden image, and the third, the stego image, combines parts
of the cover and the hidden image. Additionally, Figure 3 annotates the combination weights α1, α2 of stego images,
as well as the predictions and their corresponding confidence levels. In each case, the ReLU NN predicts the hidden
digit with high confidence.
(a) The cover image is predicted as 7 with a confidence of
nearly 100%.
The hidden image is predicted as 2 with a
confidence of nearly 100%. The stego image, S = 0.2H⊥+
0.51 ˆC, is predicted as 2 with a confidence level 99.9%.
(b) The cover image is predicted as 3 with a confidence of
nearly 100%.
The hidden image is predicted as 5 with a
confidence of nearly 100%. The stego image, S = 0.2H⊥+
0.49 ˆC, is predicted as 5 with a confidence level 99.9%.
Figure 3: Examples of steganographic images with MNIST dataset.
Figure 4: More examples on MNIST dataset.
As shown in the figures, we can barely see the hidden digits in the stego images, which have patterns extremely
similar to the cover images, even if the cover image is from another dataset. However, these stego images are not
predicted to be in the same classes as the cover images, rather, they are identified as the hidden images with high
confidence. The cover image’s portion within the stego image falls entirely in the null space of the ReLU NN,
giving the stego image a visible pattern resembling the cover image (plus some noise-like structure) but makes no
contribution to the prediction with the ReLU NN. On the other hand, the part of the hidden image included in
the stego image appears like noise (as shown in figure 2), but it is this portion that carries the most important
8

information for prediction with ReLU NN.
4.2
Results on other datasets
In addition to the MNIST dataset, We applied our method to another grayscale image dataset, FMNIST.
For the FMNIST dataset, we trained a (784, 32, 16, 10)−ReLU NN with a 752-dimensional null space.
To
generate stego images, we first created a new dataset comprising both the original and rescaled images (also scaled
by a factor of 0.2) that are predicted correctly. This new dataset has an average confidence of 99.74% for original
images and 97.22% for the rescaled images. Examples of stego images created from the new dataset are shown in
figure 5 and 6.
(a) The cover image is predicted as “Trouser” with a con-
fidence of nearly 100%. The hidden image is predicted as
“Shirt” with a confidence of nearly 100%. The stego image,
S = 0.2H⊥+ 0.68 ˆC, is predicted as “Shirt” with a confi-
dence level 86.4%.
(b) The cover image is predicted as “Dress” with a confi-
dence of nearly 100%.
The hidden image is predicted as
“Sandal” with a confidence of nearly 100%. The stego im-
age, S = 0.2H⊥+ 0.49 ˆC, is predicted as “Sandal” with con-
fidence of nearly 100%.
Figure 5: Examples of steganographic images with FMNIST dataset.
Figure 6: More examples on FMNIST dataset.
Similarly, as expected, the stego images have the look of cover images (as seen in the first column) but are
recognized as the same categories as their corresponding hidden images (shown in the second column) with high
confidence.
It is noteworthy that in Figure 5a, there is a decrease in confidence when predicting it as the hidden category.
While the original hidden image H is predicted as a “shirt” with confidence close to 1, the stego image S =
0.2H⊥+ 0.68 ˆC is predicted as a “shirt” with lower confidence 86.4%. The reduced confidence level is caused by the
rescaled hidden image. According to the null space method, the prediction and confidence level for the stego image
S should align with those for 0.2H⊥and, consequently, 0.2H. In this case, if we input just the rescaled image to
the NN, the rescaled hidden image 0.2H is also predicted as “shirt” with a confidence of 86.4%, which is consistent
with our analysis. Therefore, in the null space method, the prediction and confidence are only related to the hidden
image component of the stego image, i.e., if the stego image S = α1H⊥+ α2 ˆC, as long as α1H⊥can be predicted
correctly with high confidence, the stego image will also be identified as the hidden category with same confidence.
9

Unlike the experiment with the MNIST dataset, it is more common to see lower confidence stego image examples
in the experiment with the FMNIST dataset. In figure 7, we compare the original hidden image H and rescaled
hidden image 0.2H in Figure 5a. Except for the prediction as “shirt” with the confidence of 86.4%, the rescaled
image 0.2H is also predicted as “T-shirt/Top” with a confidence of 13.4%. As shown in the figure 7, the rescaled
image 0.2H has lower contrast. The rescaling operation seems to lead to the loss of some visual details, which
causes lower confidence in the rescaled images. For instance, the buttons and the collar can not be clearly observed
in the rescaled image, so it is also more possible to be identified as “T-shirt/Top”.
Therefore, the achievement of high confidence in steganographic images depends on having “good” hidden images
with high confidence on both original and rescaled data. Essentially, the prediction confidence level of the hidden
images will be no better than the prediction confidence of the original images, after rescaling has been applied.
Figure 7: Original and rescaled images.
To continue this investigation, we also perform experiments on the EMNIST Balanced dataset (Figure 8) and
CIFAR-10 dataset (Figure 9). The figures suggest that the null space-based image steganography method is also
applicable to more complicated and colorful images. To guarantee the capability of concealing an image within any
chosen cover image, we can train a neural network model with a large null space.
Figure 8: More examples on EMNIST dataset.
Figure 9: More examples on CIFAR-10 dataset.
5
Discussions and conclusions
What we see and what NN sees:
From the analysis and experimental results presented above, it is evident
that NNs do not perceive visual information in the same way as humans. Figure 10 compares what we see and
what the NN “sees”. After removing null space components, the remaining crucial parts for prediction have fewer
visual patterns than their initial appearance. Except for that, distinct neural networks would see the same image
differently, even when they have null spaces of the same dimensions, as illustrated in Figure 11.
10

(a) What we see.
(b) What NN sees.
Figure 10: Comparison of what is visualized by humans and NNs.
Figure 11: What another NN sees given the same set of images in Figure 10.
Null space of NNs and reliability issue:
Ball pointed out that there are reproducibility and reliability issues
with AI [2]. Previously, studies have found that neural network models could pick up on irrelevant features to
succeed in the classification task, raising questions about their reliability. In this paper, the null space analysis on
neural networks provides additional insights into these reliability concerns, and shows that the NN may pick up on
hidden features that are not just irrelevant, but crafted to confuse the NN. In addition to being too closely focused
on aligning to the particular patterns in the training data, the design of neural network architectures may also raise
risks that cannot be solved by merely increasing the dataset size. Importantly, it is the architecture that leads to
the null space weaknesses shown in this paper.
In addition, stego images created by null space methods cannot be used to improve the training. As described
in [1], the adversarial example/image is a modified version of a clean image that is intentionally perturbed to
mislead machine learning models, such as deep neural networks. Some studies have shown that it may be possible
to harden NN against adversarial attacks. Further, it was observed by Szegedy et al.[15] that the robustness of
deep neural networks against adversarial examples could be improved by adversarial training, where the idea is
to include adversarial examples in the training data. It is crucial to note that while adversarial examples using
previous techniques may improve the training, they cannot solve the problem caused by the null space of a neural
network.
The null space analysis of NNs is not limited to the NNs in image classification tasks. In this study, we select
image steganography as an application to better visualize the impact of the null space. The existence of the null
11

space, inherent in the neural network’s architecture, implies that one can always use the null space vectors to fool
a neural network or the user of a neural network, at least when the image projected onto the null space is close
enough to the original to fool a human viewer.
