IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 
82
 
Establishment of Relationships between Material Design and 
Product Design Domains by Hybrid FEM-ANN Technique 
K. Soorya Prakash 1 , S. S. Mohamed Nazirudeen 2 and  M. Joseph Malvin Raj 3
     
 
1,3 Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
 Anna University Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India 
 
 
      2 Department of Metallurgical Engineering,  
PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India. 
  
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, research on AI based modeling technique to 
optimize development of new alloys with necessitated 
improvements in properties and chemical mixture over 
existing alloys as per functional requirements of product is 
done. The current research work novels AI in lieu of 
predictions to establish association between material and 
product customary. Advanced computational simulation 
techniques like CFD, FEA interrogations are made viable 
to 
authenticate 
product 
dynamics 
in 
context 
to 
experimental investigations. Accordingly, the current 
research is focused towards binding relationships between 
material design and product design domains. The input to 
feed forward back propagation prediction network model 
constitutes of material design features. Parameters relevant 
to product design strategies are furnished as target outputs. 
The outcomes of ANN shows good sign of correlation 
between material and product design domains. The study 
enriches a new path to illustrate material factors at the time 
of new product development. 
 
Key words: 
Material design, product design, integration, composition, 
mechanical properties, Artificial Neural Network 
1. Introduction 
Products designed for recognized applications with 
problem-solving design, expected quality, believable life is 
of high demand and has become a mortal of human living. 
Purchasing a material with a restricted chemical 
composition and defined mechanical properties and 
utilizing at conceptual stage of product development is the 
present scenario. For the selected material, the required 
shape (casting, forging, plate, and pipe) and the possible 
manufacturing processes should be considered first. Then 
in accordance with the design code (e.g., ASTM, ANSI, 
BIS) adopted, the specification for the material to be 
applied is selected and the allowable design stresses at the 
operation temperature, are determined. In correlation with 
design procedure, the proved uneconomical process in 
terms of cost and time namely physical model or prototype 
forms the basis for better understanding of a particular 
process. Furthermore, it is very difficult to develop 
prototypes for complex and multi dimensional products 
and then subjecting the same for property and functionality 
testing [5]. In times of yore, development of new material 
right from concept to the entire type of application 
including low intensity services and sky-scraping services 
like aero space applications, missiles, gas turbines, high 
pressure areas etc., has taken typically more than ten years 
for complete development.  
A designed component is a unique part or subassembly 
that must be specifically designed and fabricated as part of 
the design being developed. Choosing between designed 
and 
standard 
components 
can 
be 
an 
important 
consideration. The choice between designing a special 
purpose component, optimized for performance and weight, 
or purchasing a standard, “off-the-shelf” component from a 
supplier, can have far reaching performance, cost, quality 
and timing consequences. Market availability is lofty for 
multiple design build test cycles involved in the creation of 
a design. The product life depends highly upon the type 
and property of the material and in turn the properties are 
forbidden for the effective functionality.  
It is obvious that chemistry of the alloy plays a vital role in 
determination of material parameters. As of functionality 
of the product is concerned, material characterization 
attributes involves the complex interrelation of a number 
of 
variables 
associated 
with 
product 
design, 
its 
 
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
www.IJCSI.org 
 
 
   
83
 
manufacturing process and service conditions. In cases 
where design is typically too risky to develop , a first 
round of planning, material selection, functional design, 
manufacture and assembly is undertaken to produce a 
model, which when tested may indicate ways of improving 
the product design. 
The current study is focused on imparting this information 
in conjunction with possibly extensive computer aided 
analysis and optimization either to manufacture an 
improved model for tests or to manufacture a prototype or 
the product itself. On thorough review over various 
literatures it is proved to be worthwhile to blend 
relationships between the domains of material design and 
product design inspite of various other considerable 
governing factors of design. 
 
Table1: Set of sample data used for model development 
           
 
2. Scope of Research 
For this purpose artificial neural network has evolved as an 
efficient tool for developing models which costs less 
compared to traditional process [15]. To generate a new 
material with multiplicity in composition is too tedious and 
this proves to be a barrier for the development of many 
new products. As a remedy for this deficient and headed 
for the formulation of innovative materials, survival of 
ground-breaking procedures is a must. The properties used 
are those involved in the basic formulas of mechanical 
design and those typically used to characterize material 
properties 
provided 
in 
engineering 
handbooks, 
specifications and supplier catalogs. Designers are 
typically interested in strength, ductility, toughness, 
Young’s modulus and fatigue strength. These models 
states that the combination of certain properties may 
impose performance limitations in addition to those 
constraints imposed by individual properties.  
The scope of this research on artificial intelligence based 
modeling technique is to optimize the ASTM A487 Gr 4C 
high pressure application material with necessitated 
improvements in properties and chemical mixture of the 
existing alloys as per the functional requirements of the 
valves as shown in figure 1.  
3. Experimental Schema 
Experiments are conducted in a foundry for the ASTM 
A487 Gr 4C: 0.2 to 0.3 % Carbon; 0.4 to 0.8 % Silicon; 
0.8 to 1.0 % Manganese; 0 to 0.03 % Sulphur; 0 to 0.03 % 
Phosphorus; 0.4 to 0.8 % Chromium; 0.4 to 0.8 % Nickel; 
0.15 to 0.3 % Molybdenum; maximum 0.5% Copper;    0 
to 0.03 % Vanadium; 0 to 0.1 % Tungsten and a maximum 
of 0.60% of unspecified alloying elements. The melting 
range of the specified steel is about 2740-28000F. The test 
castings were poured in CO2 – sodium silicide moulds, 
knocked out, risers were removed and then subjected to 
normalising, tempering sort of heat treatments. A sample 
of the data set is made available in table 1.  
 
 
 
 
 
Chemical Composition    ( in % ) 
Mechanical Properties 
 
Sl 
No 
 
C 
Si 
Mn 
S 
P 
Cr 
Ni Mo
Cu
V 
W 
TS
YS
El 
 RA 
IS 
Test 
temp 
°C 
1 0.26 0.51 0.81 0.011 0.014 0.54 0.54 0.24 0.03 0.002 0.005 639 489
23.0 
45.8 
42 
-46 
2 0.23 0.55 0.84 0.010 0.015 0.50 0.45 0.18 0.03 0.003 0.008 635 509
22.6 
36.0 
58 
-46 
3 0.24 0.63 0.91 0.021 0.022 0.51 0.46 0.19 0.04 0.003 0.010 646 451
20.0 
45.0 
34 
-46 
 
Behavior of material depends on percentage composition 
of alloying elements and so the same is projected out for 
250 tests wherin odd experimental observations with 
missing or contradictory interpretations and of abnormal 
strength values were omitted from the training data set.  
The material attributes like Yield Strength (YS) in Mpa 
Tensile Strength (TS) in Mpa, Percentage Elongation (El), 
Percentage Reduction in Area (RA), and Impact Strength 
(IS) of the specimens were experimented. In routine, 
utmost care is taken to maintain the test temp at -46°C (for 
impact testing). Equipped with the CHARPY Impact 
testing machine for test specimens prepared as per the 
standard (ISO CVN 2 mm SIZE - 10 x 10 x 55 mm) the 
impact tests are accomplished.  
 
    
 
Fig.  1(a) & 1(b) shows the solid model geometry for Gate & Ball Valve 
respectively 
3.1 Computational Fluid Dynamic Analysis 
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 
84
 
 
In order to understand and identify the thrust areas of high 
pressure distribution, the modeled components are 
imported to Fluent, software known for Computational 
Fluid Dynamics analysis [9]. In analysis the pressure 
distribution across the required area is analyzed by 
gratifying the boundary condition applied. Table 2 clearly 
pictures that two types of valves viz Ball valve and gate 
valve are subjected to 3 type of fluids.  
Table 2: Inlet boundary conditions for CFD 
 
 
The CFD code of fluent 6.0 for finite volume method has 
been utilized to solve the discretization of continuity 
equation and Navier stokes equation. The CFD code is 
commonly used to solve since it has high capability of 
solving the transient, compressible, turbulent and reacting 
flows in the finite volume grid with boundary condition 
and meshes [2]. 
Fig.  2(a) & 2(b) shows sample velocity vector figures of Gate valve for 
10mm and 70 mm opens respectively 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  3(a) & 3(b) shows sample fluid flow regions of Ball valve for 30 
degree and 45 degree opens respectively 
On thorough analysis it is found that the maximum 
pressure is attained in the fluid flow viz. Water for both 
valves. The same is attained since the viscosity of water is 
on the lower side when compared to any other fluid 
considered in this study. The valve body manufactured by 
this particular ASTM Grade A487 material has the ability 
to withstand a maximum dynamic pressure of 330 bar 
approximately. The results obtained through computational 
fluid dynamics performed over ball and gate valve is 
shown clearly in figures 1 & 2. 
                    Fluid 
Parameters 
Water
Lubricant       Diesel
Density (kg/m3) 
951
875 
834
Viscosity (cp) 
1
22.2 
4 
 Inlet pressure (bar) 
350
280 
180
Temperature (0C) 
110
100 
15.6
Valve1
87
87 
87
Diain 
(mm) Valve2
51
51 
51
Valve1
54
54 
54
Diaout 
(mm) Valve2
75
75 
75
 
3.2 Finite Element Analysis 
 
As future prospects, the ability of the proposed valve 
material in relation to fatigue characteristics [12] is 
identified using Finite Element Analysis by applying the 
observed results as input parameters in adoption to 
variation in thickness of ball valve and outer diameter of 
gate valve. The same is carried over to assess the stress 
concentration and to verify the contact status between the 
ball and the valve body finite element method is used. 
Assessments of the stress concentration, strain distribution, 
total deformation acting on the ball and gate valves for its 
different valve position is carried out. The output results 
for both valve types credited through finite element 
analysis are illustrated in figures 4 & 5. 
 
       
       
Fig 4 (a) & 4(b) shows sample analysis results for Ball Valve of 21 mm 
thickness 30 & 45 degree opening modes respectively 
        
        
Fig 5 (a) & 5 (b) shows sample analysis results for Gate valve of 90 mm 
OD for 10 mm and 70 mm openings respectively  
 
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
www.IJCSI.org 
 
 
   
85
 
It is found that the maximum stress is achieved over 
minimum thickness valve geometry. The maximum stress 
in the regions around the inner walls is approximately 
4.3302*108 Pascal; maximum strain is 0.002165 m/m, 
minimum life of 2116.1 cycles and total deformation of 
5.92 *10-5 was found to be allowable in this present study. 
In view of the fact that this research [13,14] is highly 
oriented towards the prediction of life for the optimum 
geometry of a selected product, graphs for life and poisons 
ratio is figured out and is as shown in fig 6. 
 
Fig.  6 shows the graph of Life vs. Poisson ratio for (a) Ball Valve of 30 & 
45 degree opening  (b) Gate valve of 10 & 70 mm opening heights 
Henceforth on effective supplementation of specified input 
parameters, the allowable thickness, the acceptable 
compositions   and permissible life of the casting design 
can be achieved with integration of experiential results 
with Artificial Intelligence. 
4. Modeling Technique  
Neural networks are parameterized non-linear models used 
for empirical regression and classification modeling. Their 
inherent flexibility enables them to discover more complex 
relationships in data than traditional models. The structure 
of the network, as shown in Fig. 1, consists of 16 numbers 
of inputs (experimental variables), 5 outputs and an 
intermediate hidden layer. The specification of the network 
structure together with the set of weights, gives a complete 
description of the formula relating the inputs to the output 
[8]. The weights are a set of coefficients determined by 
‘training’ the neural network on a set of input and output 
data. The training process involves the minimization of a 
regularized sum of square errors, which leads to the 
optimum non-linear relationship between inputs and 
outputs. This process is quite computer intensive. But, 
once the network is trained, the estimation of outputs for 
any given set of inputs is very rapid. For the proposed 
study the network as shown in figure 8, all 11 elements of 
composition and their relative 4 mechanical properties 
along with the thickness of the valve body are considered 
to be the inputs. Strictly speaking the necessitated 
parameters of material design are considered to be the 
inputs for the network developed through artificial 
intelligence procedure. As specified the scope of the 
proposed study was to blend a relationship between 
material design and product design domains. Hence the 
outputs specified were highly based on the product design 
parameters [17]. In total, 5 outputs namely stress, strain, 
total deformation, life and years of service are considered. 
The number of hidden units decides the complexity of a 
model. Bearing this concept of ANN, various no of hidden 
layers and respective number of neurons are tried over. On 
careful observation over theories and on practical test 
conducted for the given set of data’s, optimal number of 
hidden  
 
 
Fig. 8  Illustrates typical network structure used in the analysis. 
 
layers subjected for training this ANN network was found 
to be 2. On thorough review over cluster of literatures in 
relation to ANN based material design, it was concluded 
that among the various types of networks available, feed 
forward back propagation type of network was supposed to 
be the best suitable for this application. A feed-forward 
back propagation network as shown in Figure 8 has been 
used here as a simulator to find an optimum mapping 
between inputs and outputs. The theory behind back 
propagation rule has been well documented in many 
publications. Despite the fact that the same dependent and 
independent variables are used in this research, different 
ANN models were developed and have been estimated for 
carbon and low alloy standard specified steel castings 
suitable for pressure service [3]. 
On having decided the network type, the network was 
trained over combination of various other paradigms of 
artificial intelligence network like training function, 
adaption learning function and performance function on 
trial and error basis. After periodical observations over 
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 
86
 
these paradigms when subjected to training, the following 
was selected to be optimum for this particular application 
of 16 material design inputs and 5 product design outputs: 
Training function 
traingdm 
Adaption learning function 
learngdm 
Performance function 
MSREG 
Above 
all, 
maximum 
possible 
permutation 
and 
combinations of the above said paradigms was tried out 
and the same was generalized to be the best functions. The 
number of hidden layers was projected to be 2. Wherein 
for the finalized network the number of hidden neurons 
was predetermined to be 10 for layer 1. To have a better 
report on the overall network performance, the ANN 
network was trained for tansig & log sig modes of transfer 
functions as far as layer 1 is concerned. Whereas the 
number of hidden neurons for layer 2 was specified as 5 
and permanently transfer function purelin was imposed for 
both type of analysis. This adhesion step of different 
transfer functions for hidden layers was again constituted 
by conducting real time training of network for all possible 
considerations.    
However, an overly complex model generalizes poorly and 
fits even the noise in the data rather than the underlying 
trend. This phenomenon is known as ‘over fitting’ and can 
be avoided by dividing the database into a training set and 
a test set. The network is first trained on the training set 
and then its performance is tested using the test set to 
confirm the robustness of trained ANN. Networks that 
produce curves adequately fitting both the training and the 
test set are generally chosen for making predictions on 
unseen data. 
Records associated with materials, which exhibit unusual 
property values were removed from the dataset. When 
network training was restarted, the performance of the 
network 
improved 
considerably, 
allowing 
accurate 
generalized predictions of the relative domains. The 
experimental data were segregated into three different 
categories. First set of 95 experimental data was used for 
training the network model so as to adapt to the present 
work on new material design i.e. to predict the property for 
a given set of new composition values. The second set of 
40 experimental data’s was used for testing the network 
model developed. And the third set of 11 experimental 
data’s was utilized for validation purpose. 
The trained neural networks have been used to predict the 
properties of the materials in the test datasets which have 
then been compared to the experimental results.  
The network topology (i.e., the number of the input 
variables, the number and size of the hidden layers), was a 
critical parameter affecting the performance of the model. 
The topology of the developed ANNs were determined 
with repetitive trials, keeping the architectures as simple as 
possible to avoid overtraining due to the limited number of 
samples available in both training and test sets. The model 
with the smallest prediction error on the test data set after 
training was used to predict the test set and to verify the 
accuracy of the model for all ranges of thicknesses. 
5. Results and discussion 
The software MATLAB is used to develop the ANN 
model to suit the research requirement of material design 
and product design integration, algorithms were developed.  
In property prediction researches, the training algorithm is 
used to iteratively adjust the network’s interconnection 
weights so that the error in prediction of the training 
dataset records is minimized and the network reaches a 
specified level of accuracy. The network can then be used 
to predict output values for new input data and is said to 
generalize well if such predictions are found to be accurate. 
On a trial and error basis various epoch levels and goals 
has been set initially for predicting the specified 
mechanical property. Also for effective validation of the 
results, the input-output patterns are normalized before 
training. By the use of these normalized data’s, the 
network is been triggered for different mechanical 
properties specified under various combinations of training 
functions in order to attain a stabilized network [8].  
 
 
6.1 Prediction Performance of the Network Trained 
for 15 mm Dataset  
 
The prediction performance of the developed network was 
subjected to training for 15 mm thickness data sets. The 
performance goal for the network was set to zero. As 
prescribed earlier, the network was trained for tansig and 
logsig type of transfer functions. The same was carried out 
as better results were yielded during the initial validation 
of network. The figure numbered 9 and 10 clearly 
illustrates the initial performance of the model. Similarly 
the figure 11 and 12 exemplifies the final outcomes of both 
transfer functions. On thorough consideration of both these 
cases, it was identified that in case of tansig initial peaks 
was observed. But the final results for both the transfer 
functions did not yield much difference. Also from final 
performance figures 11 & 12 it can be clearly witnessed 
that performance level becomes constant before reaching 
zero value. This strategy means that the network has been 
fully trained and further training is not possible. The Y-
axis representation in Figures defines the performance 
value. Performance ratio was distorted with change in 
values and by iterations, 0.1 fits best to this particular 
application.  
 
 
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
www.IJCSI.org 
 
 
   
87
 
          
  
Fig 9 Initial Network performances at 100 epochs for 15 mm thickness 
using logsig & tansig as transfer functions respectively. 
          
 
Fig. 10 Final Network performances at 879300 & 500050 epochs for 15 
mm thickness using logsig& tansig as transfer functions respectively. 
  
The number of epochs taken to reach saturation upon 
training was more in case of logsig transfer function when 
compared with tansig transfer function. The performance 
level was considerably more in case of logsig when 
performed for 15 mm thickness of the valve body. 
 
6.1 Prediction Performance of the Network Trained for 17 
mm Dataset  
 
The developed ANN network was constituted to training 
for 17 mm thickness data sets. Prearranged datas for 
composition and property along with 17 mm constant 
thickness was given as input. The performance goal for the 
network was set to zero. As prescribed earlier, the network 
was trained for tansig and logsig type of transfer functions.. 
Figures 13 and 14 demonstrate the initial performance of 
the network model for logsig and tansig mode of transfer 
function. Likewise figure 15 typify the final Network 
performances at 1268951epochs for 17 mm thickness 
using logsig as transfer function and figure 16 represent 
the final outcomes at 1280176 epochs for 17 mm thickness 
using tansig as transfer function. As in previous case the 
network has been fully trained before reaching the goal 
and further training was stopped.  
 
            
 
Fig. 11 Initial Network performances at 100 epochs for 17 mm thickness 
using logsig & tansig as transfer functions respectively. 
           
 
Fig. 12 Final Network performances at 1268951 & 1280176 epochs for 17 
mm thickness using logsig & tansig as transfer functions respectively. 
The number of epochs taken to reach saturation upon 
training was almost equal in both the cases of transfer 
function when performed for 17 mm thickness of the valve 
body. 
 
6.1 Prediction Performance of the Network Trained 
for 19 mm Dataset  
 
The network was reinitialized for training for 19 mm 
thickness data sets. The performance goal for the network 
was set to zero. As given earlier, the adopted network was 
trained for tansig and logsig transfer functions. The 
performance of the developed model for these data sets on 
initial training could not yield good results. The figures 17 
and 18 picture the initial performance of the model at 100 
epoch level. Upon further rigorous training of the network 
model, for being the goal set to zero, remarkable variations 
in training was observed. Unaltered performance could be 
observed at the early stage of the training. But training was 
continued until a maximum epoch of approximately 
1100000 was reached. Very minimal down fall of curve, if 
not improvement in network performance as depicted in 
figure 19 and 20 was visualized at the time of stopping the 
network for the specified goal and epochs. The network 
performance rate was better in case of tansig transfer 
function in this case.  
 
       
 
Fig. 13 Initial Network performances at 100 epochs for 19 mm thickness 
using logsig & tansig as transfer functions respectively. 
       
 
Fig. 14 Final Network performances at 1167275 & 1143960epochs for 19 
mm thickness using logsig & tansig as transfer functions respectively.  
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 
88
 
6.1 Prediction Performance of the Network Trained 
for 21 mm Dataset  
 
Initial training for 21 mm thickness data sets was made 
through for goal being set to zero and the epoch level 100. 
Clear examination on the training flow intimates that for 
logsig transfer function, steady declination in curve to 
reach the goal was targeted from initial state. Figure 21 and 
22 point up the theory of network performance. But when 
the same network was trained for higher epoch levels and 
for 21 mm data sets, finer results were attained for tansig 
transfer functions. Deep and steady flow of graph can be 
envisaged through figure 24. For this particular data sets 
stabilized training outcomes was obtained at 700000 
epochs approximately. Upon further training of the 
network, considerable change performance could not be 
seen and hence the network was ended at these early epoch 
levels for 21 mm thickness of the valve body.. 
 
        
 
Fig. 15 Initial Network performances at 100 epochs for 21 mm thickness 
using logsig & tansig as transfer functions respectively. 
 
      
 
Fig. 16 Final Network performances at 696300 & 741925 epochs for 21 
mm thickness using logsig &  tansig as transfer functions respectively. 
7. Testing and Validation 
The theory of artificial intelligence utters an inevitable fact 
that the data used for testing and validation should not be 
included in training circumstances. As a first step the 
network has to be triggered for training the data sets by 
comparing experimental results and predicted outcomes. 
The next step in evaluation is, to test the Back-Propagation 
network performance with the other test samples that were 
never applied to network before [5]. Hence the network 
models developed by ANN were subjected to testing with 
40 newer data sets collected for this purpose and their 
results are to be predicted. The weights obtained through 
training process were supplied as initial weights for 
validation purpose. Even though the desired goal set to 
zero was not reached, the network model developed 
yielded better results.  
Upon the effective completion of validation, the initial 
weights were reverted with weights observed through 
training of the network model developed for testing 
purpose also. In order to check the robustness of the  Back-
Propagation network controller 11 input data sets were fed 
into the trained network.  A detailed analysis on the tested 
data as per the theory of ANN [3,6,8] the obtained results 
are well within the predictable ranges.  
 
After training the network successfully,it has been tested 
by using the known test data. Statistical methods were used 
to compare the results produced by the network. Errors 
occurring at the learning and testing stages are called the 
root-mean squared (RMS), absolute fraction of variance 
(R2), and mean error percentage values. These are defined 
in many literatures [6,17,18] and are as follows, 
respectively: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The prediction errors were achieved on calculations using 
the equations 1, 2, 3 to account the performance of the 
ANN network developed for blending design domains.             
There is no definite rule as how the training and prediction 
errors correlate [17, 18]. The RMS error for the training 
data is reduced as the training continues though the 
improvement of some iteration becomes very small and 
sometimes RMS error may begin to increase. 
8. Conclusion 
In this study, finite-element modeling (FEM) and artificial 
neural networks (ANN) analysis were combined to 
establish relationship between material design and product 
design domains. As a result of this study, it was possible to 
 
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
www.IJCSI.org 
 
 
   
89
 
determine the optimal parameter settings for training the 
given network. On the other hand, the network developed 
through artificial intelligence approach detects the 
relationships of the presented data during its training phase 
and updates itself in such way as to map best the properties 
of the phenomenon presented to it.  
In this present work, different transfer functions have been 
investigated to get accurate results. Different combinations 
of governing parameters like performance ratio, number of 
epochs etc. were tried over a range of accepted values. The 
basic phenomenon of the prediction model developed is to 
give information on the properties for the specified 
material and to continue with the process to go ahead with 
next phases as usually. Hence the study ascertains a robust 
affiliation between the design variables of material design 
domain and product design domain. 
Finally it is been ensured that the algorithm developed for 
has the ability to produce all necessary appropriate results 
well within the prescribed RMS error. The neural network 
approach appears to be a very powerful tool in materials 
engineering. Study on the error results enables that the 
prediction of the product variables in context to material 
variables of the considered steel is in a good agreement 
with the experimental data.  
 
 
9. References 
[1] Bora Eryilmaz, Bruce H. Wilson, “Unified modeling and 
analysis of a proportional valve”, Journal of the Franklin 
Institute, Volume 343, Issue 1, January 2006, pp. 48-68 . 
[2] Cody 
McKinley 
and 
John 
Lumkes 
(2009) 
‘Using 
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) to Simulate a Cylinder 
Head Flow Test’, Fluid Power Journal, Systems Integrator 
Directory, pp.40-43. 
[3] Col, M., Ertunc, H.M., Yılmaz, M . ‘An artificial neural 
network model for toughness  properties in  microalloyed  
steel in consideration of  industrial   production conditions’ 
Journals of Materials and design, Vol. 28, p .488 – 495,2007. 
[4] Del 
Vescovo, 
G., 
and 
Lippolis, 
A.,(2003), 
‘Three-
dimensional Analysis of Flow Forces on Directional Control 
Valves’, International Journal of  Fluid Power, Vol.4, No. 2, 
pp. 15–24. 
[5] Dobrza´nski, 
L.A., 
Kowalski, 
M. 
and 
Madejski, 
J. 
‘Methodology  of  the  mechanical   properties  prediction for 
the metallurgical products from the engineering steels using 
the  Artificial Intelligence methods’, Journal of  Material 
Processing technology,Vol 26, p.1500-1509, 2005. 
[6]  Fausett, I ’Fundamentals of neural networks’ Prentice 
hall,1994. 
[7] Forouzan, S. A., and Akbarzadeh.’Prediction of effect of 
thermo mechanical parameters on mechanical properties and 
anisotropy of aluminium alloy AA3004 using artificial neural 
networks’ , Journal of materials and design,  Vol. 28, p.1678-
1684,200).  
[8] Hakan Ates ‘ Prediction of gas metal arc welding parameters 
based on artificial neural networks’ , Journal of Materials and 
Design, Vol. 28, p. 2015-202,2007. 
[9] Jan Forsberg , Tommy Persson (2005) ‘CFD-tools in Valve 
Design Validation of Simulated 3-D Flow through a Butterfly 
Valve’, Report.  
[10] Jung M.E Park, Hong. and Tae Kang. ‘Prediction of fatigue 
life for spot welds  using back propagation neural network’, 
Journal of materials and design,Vol. 28, p.2577-2584,2006  . 
[11] Mookherjee, S., Acharyya, S., Majumdar, K., and Sanyal, 
D., (2001), ‘Static-Performance Based Computer-aided 
Design of a DDV and its Sensitivity Analysis’, International 
Journal of. Fluid Power, Vol.2, No.2, pp. 47–63. 
[12] M. Grujicic, G. Cao, B. Pandurangan, W.N. Roy, “Finite 
element analysis-based design of a fluid-flow control nano-
valve”, Materials Science and Engineering B, Volume 117, 
Issue 1, 25 February 2005, pp. 53-61. 
[13] Ming-Jyh Chern, Chin-Cheng Wang, Chen-Hsuan Ma, “ 
Performance test and flow visualization of ball valve”, 
Experimental Thermal Science, Volume 31, Issue 6, May 
2007, pp. 505-512 .  
[14] M. R. Mokhtarzadeh-Dehghan, N. Ladommatos, T. J. 
Brennan “Finite element analysis of flow in a hydraulic 
pressure valve”, Applied Mathematical Modelling, Volume 
21, Issue 7, July 1997, pp.437-445. 
[15] Myilykoski, P., Larkiola, J. and Nylander, J. ‘Development 
of prediction model for  mechanical properties of batch 
annealed thin steel strip by using artificial  neural network   
modeling’, Journals of material processing technology,Vol. 
60,  p.399 – 404,1996. 
[16] R. Amirante, G. Del Vescovo, A. Lippolis, “ Evaluation of 
the flow forces on an open directional control valve by means 
of a computational fluid dynamic analysis”, Energy 
Conversion and Management, Volume 47, Issues 13-14, 
August 2006, pp. 1748-1760. 
[17] R. Amirante, P.G. Moscatelli, L.A. Catalano, “Evaluation 
of the flow forces on a direct (single stage) proportional valve 
by means of a computational fluid dynamic analysis”, Energy 
Conversion and Management, Volume 48, Issue 3, March 
2007, pp. 942-953. 
[18] Scott , D. J., Coveney, P. V., Kilner b, J. A., Rossiny b, J. C. 
H. and Alford, N. Mc N., c ‘Prediction of the functional 
properties of ceramic materials from composition using  
artificial neural networks’ ,Journal of European Ceramic 
society,Vol .27, p.4425-4435,2007. 
[19] Sha, W., Edwards, K.L ‘The Use of artificial Neural 
Networks in Material science  based   research’ Journal of 
Materials and design , Vol 28, p. 1225-1232,2007.  
[20] Yansheng Jiang, Antonio Carlos Valdiero, Pedro Luís 
Andrighetto, Wang Chong, Luís Antonio Bortolaia,(2008) 
‘Analysis of pneumatic directional proportional valve with 
CFX mesh motion technique’, ABCM Symposium Series in 
Mechatronics, Vol. 3, pp.510-518. 
 
K.Soorya Prakash is currently working as faculty in the Department 
of Mechanical Engineering at Anna University, Coimbatore. He has 
 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Vol. 7, Issue 1, No. 1, January 2010 
ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 
ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 
90
 
completed his post graduation in Production engineering and 
pursing his doctoral degree. His research interest is mainly focused 
on identification and analysis of materials for newer products and 
emerging processes. He has to his credit many national and 
international Publications. 
 
Dr. 
S.S. 
Mohamed 
Nazirudeen 
Professor, 
Department of 
Metallurgical Engineering, is currently working as Dean (Student 
affairs) at PSG College of Technology. He has obtained his PhD 
from Anna University, Chennai. His research area includes failure 
analysis design, Metallurgical property analysis and always do 
have thrust for newer inventions on material and metallurgical 
concepts. He has to his credit many national and international 
Publications. He is an active member IIF, IWS and many other 
reputed associations in India and abroad. 
 
M. Joseph Malvin Raj is currently pursuing his Post graduation in 
Engineering Design at Anna University, Coimbatore. His research 
area includes Alloy development, Processing, Testing, and 
Characterization of materials and FEA.
