FROM 3D POINT CLOUDS TO SEMANTIC OBJECTS 
An Ontology-Based Detection Approach 
Helmi Ben Hmida1,2, Christophe Cruz2, Frank Boochs1, Christophe Nicolle2
1 Institut i3mainz, am Fachbereich 1 - Geoinformatik und Vermessung  
Fachhochschule Mainz, Lucy-Hillebrand-Str. 2, 55128 Mainz 

 
 2 Laboratoire Le2i, UMR-5158 CNRS,  
Dep. Informatique IUT Dijon, 7, Boulevard Docteur Petitjean 
BP 17867, 21078 Dijon CEDEX, France 

Keywords: 
Geometric analysis, topologic analysis, 3D processing algorithm, semantic web, knowledge modelling, 
ontology, 3D scene reconstruction, object identification. 
Abstract: 
This paper presents a knowledge-based detection of objects approach using the OWL ontology language, 
the Semantic Web Rule Language, and 3D processing built-ins aiming at combining geometrical analysis of 
3D point clouds and specialist’s knowledge. This combination allows the detection and the annotation of 
objects contained in point clouds. The context of the study is the detection of railway objects such as 
signals, technical cupboards, electric poles, etc. Thus, the resulting enriched and populated ontology, that 
contains the annotations of objects in the point clouds, is used to feed a GIS systems or an IFC file for 
architecture purposes.    
1 INTRODUCTION 
With every new scanner model on the market, phase-
shift scanners in particular, the instruments become 
faster, more accurate and can scan objects at longer 
distances. Laser scanners tests which have been 
carried out at the i3mainz institute for eight years 
now, prove this observation (Boehler, Bordas 
Vicent, & Marbs, 2003). Surveying with 3D 
scanners is spreading all domains during the past 
decade. Terrestrial laser scanners have been 
established as a workhorse for topographic and 
building survey from the archaeology (Balzani, 
Santopuoli, Grieco, & Zaltron, 2004) to the 
architecture (Hammoudi, 2009). Actually, such 
technology presents a powerful tool for many 
applications and has partially replaced traditional 
surveying methods since it can speed up field work 
significantly. Actually, this powerful method allows 
the creation of 3D point clouds from objects or 
landscapes. However, the huge amount of data 
generated during the process proved to be costly in 
post-processing. The field time is very height since 
in most cases; processing techniques are still mainly 
affected by manual interaction of the user. Typical 
operations consists to clean point clouds, to delete 
unnecessary areas, to navigate in an often huge and 
complicated 3D structure, to select set of points, to 
extract and model geometries and objects. At the 
same time it would be much more effective, to 
process the data automatically, which has already 
been recorded in a very fast and effective way.  
As object reconstruction is an important task for 
many applications, considerable effort has already 
been invested to reduce the impact of time 
consuming, manual activities and to substitute them 
by numerical algorithms. Actually, the automatic 
processing of 3D point clouds can be very fast and 
efficient, but often relies on significant interaction of 
the user for controlling algorithms and verifying the 
results. Alternatively, the manual processing is 
intelligent and very precise since a human person 
uses its own knowledge for detecting and identifying 
objects in point clouds, but it is very time-consuming 
and consequently inefficient and expensive. In this 
context, we aim at inserting business knowledge in 
automatic detection and reconstruction algorithms in 
order to make the point cloud processing more 
efficient and reliable.  

 
Consequently, the WiDOP project (knowledge 
based detection of objects in point clouds) aims at 
making a step forward. The goal is to develop 
efficient and intelligent methods for an automated 
processing of terrestrial laser scanner data. In 
contrast to existing approaches, the project consists 
in using prior knowledge about the context and the 
objects. This knowledge is extracted from databases, 
CAD plans, Geographic Information Systems (GIS), 
or domain experts. Therefore, this knowledge is the 
basis for a selective knowledge-oriented detection.  
The project WiDOP is Funded by the German 
government. However, the partners are the German 
railway company (Deutsche Bahn), the Fraport 
company (Frankfurt Airport manager), and the 
Metronom company which is specialized in 3D point 
cloud processing. The Fraport company main 
concerns are building and furniture management of 
the airport. The furniture’s position relative to the 
security gates is constantly moving. In addition, 
updates are done on buildings such as new walls, 
destruction of walls, new holes in a wall, new 
windows, etc. This could be undertaken by the 
director of a new shop or by the technical employers 
in order to reorganize storerooms for instance. As a 
matter of fact, it is very difficult to keep up to date 
the plans of the airport. The Deutsche Bahn main 
concerns are the management of the railway 
furniture. Actually, the environment of the railway is 
constantly changing. And the cost of keeping these 
plans up to date is increasing. The present-time 
solution adopted by the Deutsche Bahn (DB) 
consists on fixing a 3D terrestrial laser scanner on 
the train and to survey the surrounding landscape 
(Railway, signals and green trees on the borders). 
Metronom automation is a DB subcontractor 
specialized in 3D data processing. This partner takes 
the survey point clouds as input and detects the 
different existent elements manually helped with 
some 3D process like spike detection. The main 
objective of Deutsch Bahn project consists in 
detecting automatically the objects in the 3D point 
clouds in order to feed the position and the semantic 
definition of objects into a GIS system.  
The following paper is structured into section 2 
which gives an overview of actual existing strategies 
for reconstruction processes, section 3 explains the 
general adopted architecture and the related ontology 
structure, section 4 describe the domain knowledge 
modelling, section 5 highlight the annotation 
process, section 6 gives first results for a real 
example and section 7 concludes and shows next 
planned steps. 
2 BACKGROUND 
This section is composed of two parts. This first part 
deals with the detection strategies described in the 
literature for geometric modelling and object 
recognition. The second part presents the knowledge 
modelling which of value for our strategy.  
 
2.1 
Detection strategies 
Today, scene model creation process is largely a 
manual procedure, which is time-consuming and 
subjective. While there is a clear need for automated, 
or even semi-automated methods to ease the creation 
of as-built scene, research on the subject is still in 
the very early stages. This survey shows that many 
of the existing methods for geometric modelling and 
object recognition can be important for the process 
automation. Within the literature, three main 
strategies are described where the first one is based 
on human interaction with provided software’s for 
point clouds classifications and annotations. While 
the second strategy relies more on the automatic data 
processing without any human interaction by using 
different segmentation techniques for features 
extraction. Finally, new techniques present an 
improvement compared with the cited ones by 
integrating 
semantic 
networks 
to 
guide 
the 
reconstruction process. 
2.1.1 Manual Supported strategy 
Actually, tools used for 3D reconstruction of objects 
are still largely relying on human interaction. Here 
the user might be supported in his construction 
activity, but object interpretation, selection and 
extraction of measurements has to be done manually. 
That's why this processing is the most time 
consuming way to come from a data set to extracted 
objects (Leica Cyclone: 3D Point Cloud Processing 
Software). 
2.1.2 Semi-automatic and automatic strategy 
These methods present a real optimization within the 
process compared of the manual ones. Within the 
current section, we will not expose the problematic 
from the automatism point of view, but these 
methods are based on two main parts, geometry 
extraction and annotation. 
Basically, geometry extraction presents the 
process of constructing a simplified representation of 
a 3D shape such as a Signal or an Electric born like 
in our case. The representation of geometric shapes 
has been studied extensively, (Campbell & Flynn, 

 
2001). In our context, shape representations can be 
classified along three independent dimensions: 
parametric versus nonparametric, global versus 
local, and explicit versus implicit. Parametric 
representations describe a shape using a model with 
a small number of parameters. Non-parametric 
representations do not have any parameters. A 
cylinder in this case can be represented using a 
triangle mesh. In this area, the output can be a 
surface based like a boundary based representation, 
or a volumetric representation, (Curless & Levoy, 
1996)  like the case of CSG representation. The 
model can be represented by combining some fixed 
primitives with Boolean operators (union, difference, 
and intersection). Global representations describe the 
shape of an entire object, while local representations 
may characterize only a portion. The dimension of 
explicit versus implicit representations is perhaps the 
most significant axis for distinguishing shape 
representations. Explicit representations directly 
encode the shape of an object (e.g., a triangle mesh), 
while implicit representations indirectly encode 
object shape using an intermediate representation. 
Explicit representations are well suited for modelling 
3D objects, whereas implicit representations are 
most often used for 3D object recognition and 
classification. In this field, there has been some work 
on detecting and modelling more complex structures. 
These methods often include some aspects of object 
recognition or depend on a prior knowledge of object 
class (Faber & Fisher, 2002), and a genetic algorithm 
to fit parametric models of doors point clouds for 
instance. Pu and Vosselman used a triangulation-
based method to detect the boundaries of sparse 
regions within a building façade and then fit 
rectangles 
to 
the 
resulting 
regions 
(Pu 
& 
Vosselman). Böhm et al. use density-based edge 
detection to find vertical and horizontal lines in the 
depth map of a building façade.  
Once geometric elements are detected and stored 
via a specific presentation, the second core of the 
object detection and scene reconstruction is object 
recognition, In fact, it presents the process of 
labelling a set of data points or geometric primitives 
extracted from the data with a named object or 
object class. Whereas the geometry modelling task 
would find a set of points to be a vertical Bounding 
Box, the recognition task would label that Box as a 
Signal. Object recognition algorithms may label 
object instances of an exact shape, or they may 
recognize classes of objects. Research on recognition 
of specific building components is still in its early 
stages. Methods in this category are typically shape-
based ones. They aim at segmenting a scene into 
planar regions, for example, and then use features 
derived from the segments to recognize objects. This 
approach was carried out by Rusu et al. by using 
heuristics to detect walls, floors, ceilings, and 
cabinets in a kitchen environment, (Rusu, 2008). A 
similar approach was 
proposed 
by Pu and 
Vosselman to model building façades, (Pu S. a., 
2009). One of the challenges of recognition in the 
building context is that many of the objects to be 
recognized are very similar to objects of little 
relevance. 
Some 
researchers 
have 
proposed 
qualifying the spatial relationships between objects 
or geometric primitives to reduce the ambiguity of 
recognition results. Such approaches generate 
semantic labels of geometric primitives, and test the 
validities of these labels with a spatial relationship 
knowledge base. Usually, such a knowledge model 
is represented by a semantic network, (Nuchter, 
2008). For instance, a semantic net may specify the 
relationships between entities such as “floors are 
orthogonal to walls and doors, and parallel with 
ceilings”. Such validity checking approaches provide 
ways to integrate domain knowledge into the object 
recognition 
process. 
Another 
approach 
for 
recognition is to first detect objects that are easily 
recognizable, and then use the context of these initial 
detections 
to 
facilitate 
recognition 
of 
more 
challenging structures. For example, Pu and 
Vosselman use characteristic features, such as size, 
orientation, and relationships to other prominent 
objects, to detect walls and roofs (Pu S. a., 2009). 
Then, a second stage detects windows within each of 
the detected walls.  
One strategy for reducing the search space of 
object recognition algorithms is to utilize knowledge 
about a specific facility, such as a CAD model or 
floor plan of the original design. For instance, Yue et 
al. overlay a design model of a facility with the as-
built point cloud to guide the process of identifying 
which data points belong to specific objects and to 
detect differences between the as-built and as-
designed condition (Yue, 2006). In such cases, 
object recognition problem is simplified to be a 
matching problem between the scene model entities 
and the data points. Another similar approach is 
presented in (Osche, 2008). 
From the above mentioned works, we can deduce 
that the problematic of 3D object detections and 
scene reconstructions including standard algorithm 
and semantic networks can produce first results. 
Moreover such strategies suffer from the lack of 
flexibility, efficiency and are in general hard coded. 
Thus, the context and the algorithm which are part of 
knowledge that are required to be used in recognition 
process have to be modelled.  

 
 
2.2 
Knowledge modelling 
In recent years, formal ontology has been suggested 
as a solution to the problem of 3D objects 
reconstruction from 3D point clouds (Cruz, Marzani, 
& Boochs, 2007). In this area, ontology structure 
was defined as a formal representation of knowledge 
by a set of concepts within a domain, and the 
relationships between those concepts. It is used to 
reason about the entities within that domain, and 
may be used to describe the domain. Conventionally, 
ontology presents a "formal, explicit specification of 
a 
shared 
conceptualization" 
(Gruber, 
2005). 
Ontology provides a shared vocabulary, which can 
be used to model a domain. Well-made ontology 
own a number of positive aspects like the ability to 
define a precise vocabulary of terms, the ability to 
inherit and extends exiting ones, the ability to 
declare relations ship between defined concepts and 
finally the ability to infer new relationship by 
reasoning on existing ones. Through technologies 
known as Semantic Web, most precisely the 
Ontology Web Language (OWL) (McGuinness & 
Harmelen, 2004), researcher are able to share and 
extends 
knowledge 
through 
the 
scientific 
community. The basic strength of formal ontology is 
their ability to reason in a logical way based on 
Description Logics DL. The last one presents a form 
of logic to reason on objects. Lots of reasoners exist 
nowadays like Pellet (Sirin, Parsia, Grau, Kalyanpur, 
& Katz, 2007), (Tsarkov & Horrocks, 2006) and 
KAON (U. Hustadt, 2010). Despite the richness of 
OWL's set of relational properties, the axioms does 
not cover the full range of expressive possibilities for 
object relationships that we might find, since it is 
useful to declare relationship in term of conditions or 
even rules. These rules are used through different 
rules languages to enhance the knowledge possess in 
an ontology. In the last few years, lots of rules 
languages have been emerged. Some of the evolved 
languages are related to the semantic web rule 
language (SWRL) and advanced Jena rules (Carroll, 
Dickinson, 
Dollin, 
Reynolds, 
Seaborne, 
& 
Wilkinson, 2004). SWRL is a proposal as a Semantic 
Web rules language, combining sublanguages of 
the OWL Web Ontology Language with the Rule 
Markup 
Language 
(Horrocks, 
Patel-Schneider, 
Boley, Tabet, Grosof, & Dean, 2004). A famous 
example rules would be to assert that the 
combination 
of 
the hasParent and 
hasBrother properties implies the hasUncle one. 
This rule could be written as:  
 
hasParent(?x1,?x2)^hasBrother(?x2,?x3)→ 
hasUncle(?x1,?x3) 
 
Where x1, x2 and x3 represent the individuals of 
the class Person defined in the ontology and 
hasParent, 
hasBrother, 
and 
hasUncle 
presents 
data 
property 
or 
relations 
between 
individuals in the same cited class. As seen in the 
above example, rules are divided in two parts, 
antecedent and consequent separated by the symbol 
“→”. If all the statement in the antecedent clause is 
determined to be true, then all the statement in the 
consequent clause is applied. In this way, new 
properties like hasUncle in our example can be 
assigned to individuals in the ontology. In addition, 
SWRL language specifies also a library for 
mathematical built-ins functions which can be 
applied to individuals. It includes numerical 
comparison, 
simple 
arithmetic 
and 
string 
manipulation.  
In this project, domain ontologies are used to 
define the concepts, and the necessary and sufficient 
conditions that define the concepts. These conditions 
are of value, because they are used to populate new 
concepts. 
For 
instance, 
the 
concept 
“Horizontal_BoudinBox” can be specialized into 
“Wall” if it contains a “Window”. Consequently, the 
concept “Wall” will be populated with all 
“Horizontal_BoudinBox” if they are linked to a 
“Window” or “OpeningElement” object (Vanlande, 
2008). In addition, the rules are used to compute 
more complex results such as the topological 
relationships between objects. For instance, the 
intersection of two objects is used to determine if a 
part of an object is inside of another object. The 
ontology is than enriched with this new relationship. 
The topological relation built-ins are not defined in 
the SWRL language. Consequently, the language 
was extended.  
3 APPROACH OVERVIEW 
This paper presents a knowledge based detection 
approach using the OWL ontology language, the 
Semantic Web Rule Language, and 3D processing 
built-ins aiming at combining geometrical analysis 
of 3D point clouds and specialist’s knowledge. This 
combination allows the detection and the annotation 
of objects contained in point clouds. The field of the 
Deutsch Bahn railway scene is treated for object 
detection. The objective of the system consists in 
creating, from a set of point cloud files, from an 
ontology that contains knowledge about the DB 

 
railway objects, and from the knowledge about 3D 
processing algorithms, an automatic process that 
produces as output a set of tagged elements 
contained in the point clouds. The following picture 
shows elements that can be found those cloud points. 
Figure 1: Deutsche Bahn scene point clouds 
The process enriches and populates the ontology 
with individuals and relationships between these new 
individuals. In order to graphically represent these 
objects, a VRML file (VRML Virtual Reality 
Modeling Language, 1995) is generated. In addition, 
the colour of objects in the VRML file represents its 
semantic definition. The resulting ontology contains 
enough knowledge to feed a GIS system, and to 
generate IFC file (IFC Model, 2008) for CAD 
software, but this is out of the scope the paper.  
 
The processing steps can be detailed within the 
schema of Figure 2, where three main steps aim at 
detecting and identifying objects. 
(3) From 3D point clouds to geometric elements. 
(4) From geometry to topologic relations. 
(5) From geometric and/or topologic relations to 
semantic elements annotation. 
 
 
Figure 2. Sequence of the object detection application 
As intermediate steps, the different geometries 
within a specific 3D point clouds are detected and 
stored within the ontology structure. Once done, the 
existent topological relations between the detected 
geometries are qualified and then stored within the 
same knowledge base. Finally, detected geometries 
are annotated semantically, based on existing 
knowledge’s related to the geometric characteristics 
and topologic relations. The input ontology contains 
knowledge about the DB railway objects and 
knowledge 
about 
3D 
processing 
algorithms. 
Consequently, the knowledge base is divided into 
two layers, the layer of DB object description and 
the layer of the algorithmic description.  
The object description into the ontology is 
classified in three sub-layers: geometric, topologic 
and scene knowledge. The sub-layer of scene 
knowledge is composed by three main classes which 
are the Scene, the domain concepts and the 
characteristics. The second one can be considered as 
the main class since it presents the target semantic 
elements and contains all relevant object elements 
which might be found within that scene. In case of 
Deutsche Bahn scene, this might comprise a list such 
as: {Signals, Mast, Schalanlage, etc.}. Besides, the 
importance of the other classes cannot be ignored. 
They are used to fix either the main scene within its 
point clouds file and its size through attributes 
related to the scene class, or even to characterize 
detected element with different semantic and 
geometric characteristics.  
The sub-layer of the geometrical knowledge 
formulates the basic geometrical elements used 
within the prototype. Actually, the annotation 
elements step processes bounding boxes. Other 
geometries especially lines and planes are more used 
to characterize domain concepts elements by a list of 
geometries. This information is used to create useful 
descriptions that facilitate the object detection 
process. For instance, an electric pole (Mast) is 
composed by vertical lines connected to horizontal 
ones.  
The sub-layer of the topologic knowledge 
represents topological relationships between scene 
elements. For instance, a topological relation 
between a distant signal and a main one can be 
defined, as both have to be distant of 1 Km. The 
qualification of topologic relations into the semantic 
framework is done by means of topological Built-Ins 
called 
“3DSWRL_Topologic_Built-Ins”. 
The 
connections of domain concept to the geometries and 
the characteristic classes or others are carried out 
through the object properties.  Further, the object 
properties are also used to link an object to others by 
a topologic relation. In general there are a set of 
object properties in the ontology which have their 
specialized properties for the specialized activities.  
The 3D processing algorithmic layer contains all 
relevant aspects related to the 3D processing 
algorithms. It´s integration into the semantic 
framework is done by means of special Built-Ins 

 
called “Processing Built-Ins”. They manage the 
interaction between above mentioned layers. In 
addition, it contains algorithm definitions, properties, 
and geometries related to the each defined 
algorithms. An importance achievement is the 
detection and the identification of objects which has 
linear structure such as signal, indicator column, and 
electric pole, etc., through utilizing their geometric 
properties. Since the information in point cloud data 
sometimes is unclear and insufficient, thus the 
various methods to RANSAC, (Tarsha-Kurdi, 
Landes, & Grussenmeyer, 2007) are combined and 
upgraded. This combination is able to robustly detect 
the best fitting lines in 3D point clouds for example. 
 
Figure 3: Mast detection 
Figure 3 contains the Mast object constructed by 
linear elements, ambiguously represented in point 
cloud as blue points. Green lines are results of 
possible fitting lines and clearly show the shape of 
the object that is defined in the ontology. The object 
generated from this part is a bounding box that 
includes all inside geometries of the object and a 
concept label. The description of this layer is out of 
the scope of the paper, since we focus here on the 
knowledge modelling part.  
3.1 Ontology schema 
This section discusses the different aspects related to 
the ontology structure installed behind the WiDOP 
prototype to respond to the different cited purposes. 
The domain ontology presents the core of WiDOP 
project and provides a knowledge base to the created 
application. The global schema of the modelled 
ontology structure offers a suitable framework to 
characterize the different Deutsche Bahn elements 
from the 3D processing point of view. The created 
ontology is used basically for two purposes: 
 
To guide the processing algorithm sequence 
creation 
based 
on 
the 
target 
object 
characteristics. 
 
To facilitate the semantic annotation of the 
different detected objects inside the target 
scene. 
 
The current ontology is divided onto three main 
parts: the Deutsche Bahn concepts, the algorithm 
concepts and the geometry concepts. However, they 
will be used with others to facilitate the object 
detection based on SWRL and the automatic 
annotation of Bounding Box geometry based on 
inference engine tools. At this level, no real 
interaction between human and the knowledge base 
in taken in consideration, since the 3D detection 
process algorithm and parameters are alimented 
directly from the knowledge base and then 
interpreted by the SWRL rules and Description 
Logics tools. The ontology is managed through 
different components of Description Logics. There 
are five main classes within other data and objects 
properties able to characterize the scene in question. 
 
Algorithm 
 
Geometry 
 
DomainConcept 
 
Characteristics 
 
Scene 
 
The class DomainConcept can be considered the 
main class in this ontology as it is the class where 
the different elements within a 3D scene are defined. 
It was designed after the DB scene observation. It 
contains all kinds of elements, which have to be 
detected and is divided in two general classes, one 
for the Furniture and one for the Facility Element. 
However, the importance of other classes cannot be 
ignored. They are used to either describe the domain 
concept geometry and characteristics or to define the 
3D 
processing 
algorithms 
within 
the 
target 
geometry. The subclasses of the Algorithm class 
represent the different developed algorithms. They 
are related to several properties which they are able 
to detect. These properties (Geometric and semantic) 
are shared with the DomainConcept and the 
Geometry classes. By this way, a created sequence 
of algorithms can detect all the characteristics of an 
element while the Geometry class represents every 
kind of geometry, which can be detected in the point 
cloud scene.  
The connection between the basic mentioned 
classes is carried out through object and data 
properties. There exist object properties for each 

 
mentioned activities. Besides, the object properties 
are also used to relate an object to other objects via 
topological relations. In general, there are five 
general object properties in the ontology which have 
their specialized properties for the specialized 
activities. They are 
 
hasTopologicRelation 
 
IsDeseignedFor 
 
hasGeometry 
 
hasCharacteristics, 
 
Figure 4 demonstrates the general layout schema 
of the application. 
 
 
Figure 4. Ontology general schema overview 
 
4 DOMAIN KNOWLEDGE 
MODELLING 
The created knowledge base related to the Deutsche 
Bahn scene has been inspired next to our discussion 
with the domain expert and next to our study based 
on the official Web site for the German rail way 
specification ”http://stellwerke.de”. Once done, new 
knowledge related to the different element´s 
geometry and metrological relations between them is 
synthetized. An overview of the targeted elements, 
the most useful and discriminant characteristics to 
detect it and their inter-relationship is presented. 
 
Basically, a railway signal is one of the most 
important elements within the Deutsche Bahn scene 
where we find main signals and secondary ones. The 
main signals are classified onto primary signal and 
the distant ones. In fact, the primary signal is a 
railway signal. It indicates whether the subsequent 
section of track may be driven on. A primary signal 
is usually announced through a distant signal. The 
last one indicates which image signal to be expected 
will be associated to the main signal in a distance of 
1 km. Big variety of secondary signals exists like the 
Vorsignalbake, the Haltepunkt and others. From the 
other side, the other discriminant elements within the 
same scene are the Masts presenting electricity born 
for the energy alimentation. Usually, masts are 
distant of 50 m from each other’s. Finally, the 
Schaltanlage elements presents small electric born 
connected to the ground. 
 
4.1 
Geometric characteristics 
Geometric characteristics can present a discriminant 
feature able to improve the automatic annotation 
process. For this reason, we opt to study the different 
geometric features related to the cited elements, 
then, use only the discriminant one as a basic 
features for a given object. As a first step, bounding 
boxes are used in order to focus on topological 
relationships. The following table groups the object 
characteristics together regarding the properties of a 
bounding box (Figure 5). This table is extended with 
algorithm characteristics, but it is not presented here. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Geometric characteristics overview 
4.2 
Topologic characteristics 
While exploring the railway domain, lots of standard 
rules are imposed; such rules are used to help the 
driver and to ensure the passengers security. From 
our point of view, these are helpful also to verify and 
to guide the annotation process. For instance, the 
distance between the distant signal and the main one 
corresponds to the stopping distance that the trains 
require. The stopping distance shall be set on 
specific route and is in the main lines often 1000 m 
or in rare case 700 m. Add to that, three to five 
Vorsignalbake are distant around 75m while then the 
last one is distant of 100m to the distant signal, 
Figure 6. 

 
Figure 6: Topologic rules 
 
Same thing related to the mast elements, since 
usually, they are distant of 50 m from each other’s in 
the normal cases. In addition, an important other 
information able to discriminate the masts from the 
signal is related to the small electricity box always 
connected to the signal bottom. 
The next section introduces an overview of the 
approach undertaken in the WiDOP project to detect 
and annotate semantically the different Deutsch 
Bahn objects. 
5 SEMANTIC ANNOTATION 
PROCESS 
The process that consists to qualify the topological 
relationships between geometries is based on SWRL 
rules.  
5.1 
Point cloud to geometry 
The first step aims at the geometric elements 
detection. Thus, Semantic Web Rule Language 
within extended built-ins for complex 3D processing 
are used in order to detect geometry (e.g. Table 1). 
Once done, the detected elements are used to 
populate the ontology. 
The “3Dswrlb:VerticalElementDetection” built-
ins aims at the detection of vertical elements. 
The prototype of the designed Built-in is: 
 
3D_swrlb_Processing: 
VerticalElementDetection(?Vert, ?Dir) 
 
where the first parameter presents the target object 
class, and the last one presents the point clouds 
directory defined within the created scene. At the 
moment, the detection process will result bounding 
boxes, representing a rough position and orientation 
of the detected object. Table 1 show the mapping 
between the 3D processing built-ins, which are 
computer and translated to predicate, and the 
corresponding class.  
  Table 1. 3D processing built-Ins mapping process 
Processing Built-Ins 
Correspondent class 
3D_swrlb_Processing: 
VerticalElementDetectio
n(?Vert,?Dir) 
Vertical_BoundingBox(?x) 
3D_swrlb_Processing: 
HorizentalElementDetect
ion(?Vert,?Dir) 
Horizental_BoundingBox(?y) 
5.2 
Geometries to topology 
Once geometries are detected, the second step, aims 
at verifying certain topology properties between 
detected geometries. Thus, 3D_Topologic built-ins 
have been added in order to extend the SWRL 
language. Topological rules are used to define 
constrains between different elements. After parsing 
the topologic built-ins and its execution, the result is 
used to enrich the ontology with relationships 
between individuals that verify the rules. Similarly to 
the 3D processing built-ins, our engine translates the 
rules with topological built-ins to standard rules, 
Table 2. 
Table 2. Example of topologic built-ins  
Processing Built-Ins 
Correspondent object 
property 
3D_swrlb_Topology:Upper
(?x, ?y) 
Upper(?x,?y) 
3D_swrlb_Topology:Inters
ect(?x, ?y) 
Intersect (?x,?y) 
5.3 
Geometry to semantic  
After the geometry and the topological relation 
detection, rules aim at qualifying and annotating the 
different detected geometries. These rules control 
and manage the annotation process. The following 
example shows how a rule specifies the class of a 
VerticalElement which is of type Mast regarding its 
altitude. The altitude is highly relevant only for this 
element. 
 
3DProcessing_swrlb:VerticalElementDetec
tion(?Vert, ?dir) ^ altitude (?x, ?alt) 
^swrlb:moreThan 
(?alt, 
6) 
→ 
Mast 
(?Vert) 
5.4 
Topology to semantic 
In other cases, geometric knowledge is not sufficient 
for the previous process. The topologic relationships 
between detected geometries are helpful to manage 
the annotation process. The following example 

 
shows how semantic information about existing 
objects 
is 
used 
conjunctly 
with 
topological 
relationships in order to define the class of another 
object. 
Mast (?vert1) ^ VerticalBB (?Vert2) ^ 
hasDistanceFrom (?vert1,?vert2, 50) → 
Mast(?vert2) 
6 CASE STUDY 
For the demonstration of our system, 500 m from the 
scanned point clouds related to Deutsch Bahn scene 
in the city of Nürnberg was extracted. It contains a 
variety of the target objects. The whole scene has 
been scanned using a terrestrial laser scanner fixed 
within a train, resulting in a large point cloud 
representing the surfaces of the scene objects.  
Different rules are processed. First, all vertical 
elements will be searched in the area of interest, and 
then 
topological 
relations 
between 
detected 
geometries are qualified. Subsequently further 
annotation may be relayed on aspects expressing 
facts to orientation or size of elements, which may 
be sufficient to finalize a decision upon the semantic 
of an object or on fact expressing topologic 
relationship or both of them. 
This second step within our approach aims to 
identify existing topologies between the detected 
geometries. To do, useful topologies for geometry 
annotation are tested. Topologic Built-Ins like 
isConnected, 
touch, 
Perpendicular, 
isDistantfrom are created. As result, relations 
found between geometric elements are propagated 
into the ontology, serving as an improved knowledge 
base for further processing and decision steps. 
The last step consists in annotating the different 
geometries. 
Vertical 
elements 
of 
certain 
characteristics can be annotated directly.  
In more sophisticated cases, the combination of 
semantic information and topologic ones can deduce 
more robust results by minimizing the false 
acceptation rate. Finally, based on a list of SWRL 
rules, most of detected geometries are annotated. In 
this example, among 67 elements are classified as 
Masts, 21 SchaltAnlage, 34 basic signals and finally, 
155 secondary signals.  
The created platform offer the opportunity to 
materialize the annotation process by the generation 
and the visualization on a VRML structure alimented 
from the knowledge base. It ensures an interactive 
visualization of the resulted annotation elements 
beginning from the initial state, to a set of 
intermediate states coming finally to an ending state,  
Figure 7 where the set of rules are totally executed. 
 
Figure 7. Detected and annotated elements visaliazation within 
VRML language 
 
7 
CONCLUSIONS 
We have proposed a new solution to perform the 
detection of objects from technical survey within the 
laser scanner technology. The solution performs the 
detection of objects in 3D point clouds by using 
available knowledge about a specific domain (DB). 
This prior knowledge modelled within ontology 
SWRL rules are used to control the 3D processing 
execution, the topologic qualification and finally to 
annotate the detected elements in order to enrich the 
ontology and to drive the detection of new objects. 
Future work will include the integration of new 
knowledge’s that can intervene within the annotation 
process like the number of detected lines within each 
bounding box and the update of the general platform 
architecture, 
by 
ensure 
more 
communication 
between the scene knowledge within the 3D 
processing.
