TraceCaps: A Capsule-based Neural Network for
Semantic Segmentation
Tao Suna, Zhewei Wanga, Charles D. Smithb, Jundong Liua,∗, For the
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative∗∗
aSchool of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Ohio University, Athens OH 45703
bDepartment of Neurology
University of Kentucky, Lexington KY 40503
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a capsule-based neural network model to solve
the semantic segmentation problem. By taking advantage of the extractable
part-whole dependencies available in capsule layers, we derive the probabilities
of the class labels for individual capsules through a recursive, layer-by-layer
procedure. We model this procedure as a traceback pipeline and take it as
a central piece to build an end-to-end segmentation network. Under the
proposed framework, image-level class labels and object boundaries are jointly
sought in an explicit manner, which poses a signiﬁcant advantage over the
state-of-the-art fully convolutional network (FCN) solutions. With the capabil-
ity to extracted part-whole information, our traceback pipeline can potentially
be utilized as the building blocks to design interpretable neural networks.
Experiments conducted on modiﬁed MNIST and neuroimages demonstrate
that our model considerably enhance the segmentation performance compared
to the leading FCN variants.
Keywords:
semantic segmentation, capsule networks, Hippocampus

∗∗Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators
within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided
data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of
ADNI investigators can be found at: http://adni.loni.usc.edu/wp-content/uploads/
how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List.pdf
Preprint submitted to Neural Networks
July 17, 2020
arXiv:1901.02920v2  [cs.CV]  15 Jul 2020

1. Introduction
An eﬀective segmentation solution should have a well-equipped mechanism
to capture both semantic (i.e., what) and location (i.e., where) information.
The fully convolutional network (FCN) (Long et al., 2015) and its variants
(Ronneberger et al., 2015; Noh et al., 2015; Badrinarayanan et al., 2017)
constitute a popular class of solutions for this task, producing state-of-the-
art results in a variety of applications. FCN and its variants (FCNs) are
commonly constructed with an encoder-decoder architecture. In the encoding
path, input images are processed through a number of “convolution + pooling”
layers to generate high-level latent features, which are then progressively
upsampled in the decoder to reconstruct the target pixel labels. The feature
maps produced in higher (coarser) layers and those in lower (ﬁner) layers
contain complementary information: the former is richer in semantics, while
the latter carries more spatial details that deﬁne class boundaries.
Originated from and constructed upon convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014), FCNs’
encoders inherit some common drawbacks of CNNs, one of which is the
lack of an internal mechanism in achieving viewpoint-invariant recognition.
Traditional CNNs, as well as FCNs, rely on convolution operations to capture
various visual patterns, and utilize poolings to enable multi-scale processing
of the input images. Rotation invariance, however, is not readily available in
both models. As a result, more data samples or additional network setups
(Cohen and Welling, 2016; Cohen et al., 2018) would be required for objects
from diﬀerent viewpoints to be correctly recognized. The absence of explicit
part-whole relationships among objects imposes another limitation for FCNs
– without such a mechanism, the rich semantic information residing in the
higher layers and the precise boundary information in the lower layers can
only be integrated in an implicit manner (Zhang et al., 2018b).
Capsule nets (Sabour et al., 2017; Hinton et al., 2018; Kosiorek et al.,
2019), operating on a diﬀerent paradigm, can provide a remedy. Capsule
nets are built on capsules, each of which is a group of neurons representing
one instance of a visual entity, i.e., an object or one of its parts (Hinton
et al., 2011). Capsules output both activation probabilities of their presence
and the instantiation parameters that describe their properties, such as pose,
deformation and texture, relative to a viewer (Hinton et al., 2011). So far,
two types of capsule nets have been proposed, following supervised learning
(Sabour et al., 2017; Hinton et al., 2018) and unsupervised learning (Kosiorek
2

et al., 2019) paradigms, respectively. Our proposed model in this work is
developed along the line of supervised models, and therefore we will base our
discussion mostly on supervised capsule nets, unless we point out otherwise.
During inference propagation, capsule nets (Sabour et al., 2017; Hinton
et al., 2018) rely on the principle of coincidence ﬁltering to activate higher-
level capsules and set up part-whole relationships among capsule entities.
Such part-whole hierarchy equips capsule nets with a solid foundation for
viewpoint-invariant recognition, which can be implemented through dynamic
routing (Sabour et al., 2017) or EM routing (Hinton et al., 2018). The same
hierarchy, if properly embedded into a segmentation network, would provide
a well-grounded platform to specify contextual constraints and enforce label
consistency.
With this thought, we develop a capsule-based semantic segmentation
solution in this paper. Our model is built upon supervised capsule nets and
treat them as probabilistic graphical models capable of inferring probabilistic
dependences among visual entities, through which part-whole relationships
can be explicitly constructed. As a concrete implementation, we propose a
new operation sequence, which we call traceback pipeline, to capture such
part-whole information through a recursive procedure to derive the class
memberships for individual pixels. We term our model TraceCaps.
The contributions of our TraceCaps can be summarized as:
1. In TraceCaps, the class labels for individual spatial coordinates within
each capsule layer are analytically derived. The traceback pipeline in
our model, taking advantage of the graphical properties of capsule nets,
is mathematically rigorous. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
work to explore a capsule traceback approach for image segmentation.
In addition, probability maps at each capsule layer are readily available,
which makes it convenient to conduct feature visualization and layer
interpretation.
2. In parallel with segmentation, TraceCaps carries out explicit class recog-
nition at the same time. Such explicitness poses a powerful practical
advantage over FCNs.
3. The traceback pipeline is designed under a general context, making it
applicable to many other potential tasks, including object localization
and detection, action localization and network interpretation.
3

Figure 1: Left diagram: spatial relationships between two contiguous capsule layers (shown
in 1D for clarity). If a position is in the receptive ﬁeld of another position in the higher layer,
the two positions are connected with an arrow pointing to the higher layer. Each capsule
at the higher-layer position is a possible parent of capsules at its connected lower-layer
position. Right diagram: the assignment probabilities and its normalization requirement.
Refer to text for more details.
2. Background
A capsule is aimed to represent an instance of a visual entity, and its
outputs include two parts: 1) the probability of the existence of this instance
and 2) instantiation parameters, which carries certain visual properties of
the instance. Built on capsules, capsule nets are designed to overcome the
drawbacks of CNNs, in particular, the inability of handling viewpoint changes
and the absence of part-whole relationships among visual entities.
Unlike CNNs, where image patterns are captured through convolution
(correlation) operations, capsule nets (Sabour et al., 2017; Hinton et al., 2018)
rely on high-dimensional coincidence ﬁltering (HDCF) to detect objects that
attract concentrated votes from their parts/children. The HDCF mechanism
is carried out based on the computation of two network parameter sets:
weights and coupling coeﬃcients, of the connected capsules in consecutive
layers (Fig. 1).
In CNNs, the weights between neurons represent convolution ﬁlters, which
are to be learned in training. In capsule nets, each weight matrix W, however,
represents a linear transformation that would map the parts of an object into
a cluster for the same whole. Similar to CNN, weight matrices in capsule nets
are globally learned in training through labeled samples. As viewpoint changes
do not alter the relative orientation between parts and whole, maintaining the
4

same W would be suﬃcient to handle inputs from diﬀerent angles, leading
a viewpoint-invariant system. The coupling coeﬃcients cij are assignment
probabilities between a pair of whole-part capsules. Diﬀerent from the weights,
cij is dynamically determined solely in inference time. The cijs between each
capsule i and all its potential parent capsules are summed to 1, and thus have
a similar eﬀect of average pooling in CNNs.
While the two versions of capsule nets (Sabour et al., 2017; Hinton et al.,
2018) follow the same HDCF general principle for object recognition, they
diﬀer in several aspects, primarily the setup of the instantiation parameter
u and the routing process to estimate cij. In (Sabour et al., 2017), u is
set as a one-dimensional vector, whose length represents the probability of
the capsule’s presence. The routing algorithm, dynamic routing, updates
cij indirectly by the scalar product of votes and outputs of possible parents.
Meanwhile, Hinton et al. (2018) uses a 4 × 4 matrix to represent instantiation
parameters of a capsule, and formulates the routing procedure as a mixture
of Gaussians problem, which is then solved with a modiﬁed Expectation-
Maximization algorithm.
In this work, we take advantage of the part-whole relationships available
in capsule nets to produce the labels for the pixels at the input image space.
To facilitate the derivation of our solution, we would ﬁrst summarize the
related concepts under a probabilistic framework.
Capsules can be categorized into diﬀerent types (e.g. cat, bicycle, or
sofa). Each capsule layer l is associated with a set of capsule types T l =
{tl
1, tl
2, ..., tl
m, ...}. At each spatial coordinate (position) of certain layer l, there
exists exactly one capsule of every type in T l. The probability of a capsule i
existing/activated in the network is denoted as P(i). If capsule i on layer l is
within the receptive ﬁeld of the capsule j of layer l + 1, we call j a possible
parent of i. The assignment probability of i being a part of j is denoted
as P(j|i) = cij. The assignment probabilities between capsule i and the
capsules co-located with j are forced to meet the normalization requirements
of P
j∈T l+1 cij = 1.
Three types of capsule layers were introduced in (Sabour et al., 2017;
Hinton et al., 2018), which will also be used as building blocks in our TraceCaps.
Therefore, we brieﬂy describe them as follows,
• Primary capsule layer is the ﬁrst capsules layer, where features from
previous convolution layer are processed and transitioned into capsules
via convolution ﬁltering.
5

• Convolutional capsule layer(s) function similarly to CNN convolutional
layers in many aspects. However, they take capsules as inputs and utilize
certain routing algorithm to infer outputs, which are also capsules.
• Class capsule layer L is a degenerated layer with one capsule for each
predeﬁned class label Ck ∈C = {C1, C2, ..., Ck, ...}. Each capsule in the
previous layer is fully connected to the capsules in this layer.
Capsule nets are designed for object classiﬁcation. In this work, we aim
to take advantage of the notion and structure of capsule nets to design a
semantic segmentation solution, hoping the viewpoint invariance and network
interoperability mechanism can lead to improved segmentation performance.
We present the description of our model in next section.
3. The Architecture of Our TraceCaps
The general structure of our TraceCaps, which consists of three compo-
nents, is shown in Fig. 2. It starts with a feature extraction module that
capture the discriminative features of the input data to be fed into the later
modules. For this purpose, a sequence of convolution layers as in CNNs would
be a good choice (Sabour et al., 2017; Hinton et al., 2018). A capsule &
traceback module comes next. It consists of a sequence of capsule layers and a
traceback pipeline, followed by a convolution layer. The lineup of the capsule
layers, shown as orange and brown arrows in Fig. 2, can be a combination
of one primary capsule layer, optionally one or more convolutional capsule
layers, and a class capsule layer at the end. The traceback pipeline, shown as
red arrows in Fig. 2, is the major innovation of this paper. It produces class
maps of the same size as the primary capsule layer, which are then taken
as inputs to a convolution layer. This pipeline is speciﬁcally designed for
segmentation purpose, and its details will be presented in next subsection.
The third component of our model, a upsampling module, restores the original
resolution by upsampling the label map computed in the capsule & trackback
module. This module is implemented based on the deconvolution scheme in
(Long et al., 2015), but it can also be implemented through atrous convolution
(Chen et al., 2018), unpooling (Badrinarayanan et al., 2017), or simply bilinear
interpolation. It should be noted that the feature extraction and upsampling
layers can be regarded as somewhat symmetric in terms dimensionality, where
the latter can be optional if no dimensionality reduction occurs in feature
extraction layers.
6

Figure 2: Overall architecture of our TraceCaps. The traceback pipeline, shown as red
arrows, is the major innovation of this paper. GT stands for ground-truth. Refer to text
for details.
3.1. Traceback pipeline: design and derivations
The ultimate goal of image segmentation is to compute the probability of
each pixel belonging to certain class type, hopefully in great accuracy. The
traceback pipeline is designed to serve this purpose. It should be noted that,
over the inference procedure of capsule nets, the probability of each capsule
P(i) and the assignment probabilities between contiguous layers of capsules
cij are calculated and become available. With that, P(Ck), the probability
of a class label for each location in the capsule layers, can be potentially
inferred through repeated applications of the product rule and the sum rule
in probability theory. If this process is carried out, it would essentially trace
the class labels in the class capsule layer in a backward-propagation manner,
layer by layer until it reaches the ﬁrst capsule layer. We name this recursive,
layer-by-layer process traceback pipeline. Hinton et al. (2000) takes a similar
approach, which interprets an image as a parse tree to perform recognition
and segmentation simultaneously. Their model was constructed based on
graphical models though, with no capsule or other neural network involved.
The detailed traceback procedure is explained as follows. The feature
7

extraction layers and the capsules layers of TraceCaps are adopted from the
capsule nets. Therefore, same as in the latter, P(i) and cij are available
during the inference procedure of TraceCaps. With that, the probability of a
position belonging to certain class P(Ck), in layer l, can be calculated as
P(Ck) =
X
i∈T l
P(Ck, i) =
X
i∈T l
P(i)P(Ck|i),
(1)
where i is a capsule type associated with layer l and P(Ck|i) shows the
likelihood of certain position taking Ck as its class label, given that a capsule
with type i is located on it. With P(i) of layer l being available over the
inference procedure, P(Ck|i) is the only term to be estimated.
Let L be the index of the class capsule layer. The P(Ck|i) at its immediately
previous layer, L−1, would be the assignment probability between the capsule
i of the layer L −1 and the class capsule Ck on layer L. Again, P(Ck|i) is
available after inference reaches layer L.
The P(Ck|i) on other layers, however, needs to be solved. After some
simple mathematical derivations, we found that the estimation of P(Ck|i)
could be written into a recursive equation w.r.t. the upper layer, if we assume
that each lower-layer capsule only takes capsules in one particular position
of the higher-layer as its possible parents. Let capsule j of layer l + 1 and
capsule i of layer l form a possible parent-child pair. Then the conditional
probability P(Ck|i) can be computed as
P(Ck|i) =
X
j∈T l+1
P(Ck, j|i)
(i is assigned to the parent j.)
=
X
j∈T l+1
P(j|i)P(Ck|j, i)
=
X
j∈T l+1
cijP(Ck|j)
(i has the same class as its parent j.)
(2)
The recurrence in Eqn. (2) indicates that the estimation of P(Ck|i) requires
the conditional probabilities P(Ck|j) from the parent layer.
We should note that when the inference propagation reaches layer L, all
cij are available. In addition, the P(Ck|j) are also available for layer L −1.
With this combination, the P(Ck|i) on other layers can be computed through
a traceback process. More specially, P(Ck|i) can be estimated with a layer-
by-layer backward propagation procedure – starting at the layer L −1, and
8

Figure 3: Illustration of a parents-at-multi-positions scenario. Left: a capsule layer, where
each cell represents a capsule. Right: four capsules in the next layer, generated from
the previous layer (left) through a 3×3 convolution with stride 1. The capsules in the
overlapping area of the two frames (left) take both the red and blue capsules in the
higher-level layer (right) as parents.
repeatedly applying Eqn. (2) to compute the conditional probabilities for the
lower layers. We use a term traceback-depth to indicate the number of capsule
layers to be traced along the pipeline. The size of the last capsule layer, of
which the conditional probabilities are calculated, is termed traceback-size.
Eqn. (2) is for a simple case where each lower-layer capsule only takes
same-position capsules of the higher-layer as its possible parents. For the
convolutional capsule layers, however, capsules in two or more positions might
be the parents of a lower-layer capsule. Fig. 3 shows an example where a
number of capsules take capsules at diﬀerent positions in next layer (blue
and red) as their parents. For these cases, the traceback procedure remains
eﬀective, but the computation of P(Ck|i) needs to be modiﬁed. One possible
approach is to stipulate P(Ck|i) = P
n Pn(Ck|i)/N, where n represents n-th
location for possible parents of the capsule i and N is total location number.
This summation bears some resemblance to the summation in deconvolution
operation (Long et al., 2015) that adds two overlapping ﬁlter responses.
3.2. Loss Function
The loss function of our model, L = λ1Lmargin + λ2Lce, is a weighted sum
of a margin loss term Lmargin over the class capsules and a pixel-wise softmax
cross-entropy Lce over the ﬁnal feature map. λ1 and λ2 are the weighting
parameters.
The margin loss, adopted from (Sabour et al., 2017), is for recognition,
which strives to increase the probabilities of class capsules for the correspond-
9

ing objects existing in the input image. Let P(Ck) denote the probability of
the class capsule k. For each predeﬁned class, there is a contributing term Lk
in the margin loss
Lk = Tk max(0, m+ −P(Ck))2 + λmargin(1 −Tk) max(0, P(Ck) −m−)2 (3)
where m+ = 0.9, m−= 0.1, and λmargin = 0.5. Tk = 1 when a class k is
present in the mask and Tk = 0 otherwise. The margin loss is the summation
of all Lk, i.e. Lmargin = P
k Lk.
The margin loss plays a key role in training the model because it is the
driving force for the initiation and convergence of the capsule layers in the
model. While the cross-entropy loss handles the boundary localization in
semantic segmentation, the margin loss is responsible for the object recognition.
As a result, the ratio λ1
λ2 in the total loss equation is an important hyper-
parameter to tune the performance of our models, which we will discuss in
next section.
4. Experimental Results
Datasets. The eﬀectiveness of our model is evaluated with two datasets:
modiﬁed MNIST and Hippocampus dataset from the Alzheimer’s Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) project.
The MNIST (LeCun and Cortes, 1998) dataset contains 28×28 images
of handwritten digits. In our experiments, random noise is added to each
image to broaden the intensity spectrum and increase the numerical stability.
Ground-truth segmentations are generated by ﬁltering original foreground
digit pixels of each image with an intensity threshold. Two experiments are
conducted on this noise-added MNIST dataset. The ﬁrst one is a multi-
digit segmentation test, in which competing methods are evaluated based on
their performance in segmenting all ten digits. The second experiment is a
robustness test to assess the models under various occlusion scenarios.
The second dataset contains brain images and the corresponding Hip-
pocampus masks of 108 subjects, both downloaded from ADNI website
(adni.loni.usc.edu). The images to be segmented are T1-weighted whole
brain Magnetic resonance (MR) images (Fig. 4, left), and the ground-truth
segmentations were generated through semi-manual boundary delineation by
human raters. In order to alleviate the data imbalance problem, we roughly
aligned all brain MRIs, and cropped them with a common region that en-
closes the right hippocampi of all subjects, which led to subvolumes of size
10

Figure 4: Left: Hippocampi in a brain MR scan. Right: zoom-in view of two cropped
slices, superimposed with contours of the ground-truth Hippocampus masks.
24×56×48. Two-dimensional slices, sized 24×56, along the axial view of all
the three-dimensional volumes are taken as inputs in our experiments (Fig. 4,
right). The resulted binary segmentations of each subject are then stacked to
constitute the ﬁnal 3D segmentations for evaluation. Ten-fold cross-validation
is used to train and evaluate the performance of the competing models.
As partially observable from Fig. 4, human Hippocampi have rather
complicated 3D shapes, surrounded by tissues of similar intensity proﬁles. The
image contrasts in many boundary areas are very vague or even nonexistent,
which makes accurate and reproducible delineations very diﬃcult, even for
human experts. In addition, the Hippocampus masks in ADNI were generated
with a 3D surface ﬁtting solution on 42 salient surface points identiﬁed by
human raters. This ﬁtting procedure inevitably brings noise to the ground-
truth, imposing extra diﬃculty for the segmentation task.
(Tong et al.,
2013) (based on sparse coding & dictionary learning), (Song et al., 2015;
Wu et al., 2015) (both based on sparse coding) and (Chen et al., 2017)
(based on multiview U-Net) are some of the recently published Hippocampus
segmentation works that also used ADNI data. It should be noted that
direct comparisons of the solutions are often not feasible, as diﬀerent datasets,
subjects and ground-truth setups have been used in the studies.
Evaluation metrics. Totally four metrics are adopted for performance evalua-
tions. Pixel accuracy (PA), mean class accuracy (MCA) and Dice ratio are
calculated in our experiments to evaluate the segmentation accuracies in a
general sense. In the occlusion tests, we use an additional metric, number
of added holes (AH), to assess the segmentation consistency of each model,
11

in terms of topology preservation. An added hole is a connected, wrongly
labeled area that completely resides within a correctly labeled segment. The
AH (or more accurately, the absence of AH) provides a discrete metric to
measure the segmentation consistency within a whole object.
Baselines. Modiﬁed U-Nets (Ronneberger et al., 2015) are used as the baseline
models for comparison. In the MNIST experiment, the U-Net was altered to
have 5 convolution layers along the encoder path and 5 deconvolution layers
along the decoder path. Pooling layers are discarded, and we replace them with
strides to reduce the feature-map dimensions along the encoding path. In the
Hippocampus experiment, padding is added to the original U-Net to maintain
the spatial dimension of the output of each convolution/deconvolution layer
(Table 7 in Appendix A). We only keep one convolutional layers prior to each
pooling layer. Explicit data augmentation step in U-Net is replaced with
dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) to reduce overﬁtting. To explore the eﬀect
of receptive ﬁelds sizes, we implement four modiﬁed U-Nets with diﬀerent
pooling schemes to assign the bottom layers with various scales of feature
maps. In reporting the performance of diﬀerent versions, we add a digit at
the end of U-Net to indicate the dimension of the smallest feature map (e.g.,
U-Net-6 means the dimension of the feature map at the coarsest layer is 6×6).
Implementation details. For the 10-digit experiment, we take a regular con-
volution layer as the feature extraction layer for our TraceCaps. We feed 24
types of capsules associated with the following primary capsule layer and
each capsule outputs a 8D vector. The primary capsule layer is followed
by the class capsule layer. The traceback pipeline is applied between the
class capsule layer and primary capsule layer. We trained three versions of
TraceCaps, with diﬀerent sizes of label maps (or dimensions of the positions)
maintained in the primary capsule layer. More specially, we use 7×7, 9×9 and
11×11 positions, and the corresponding models are named as TraceCaps-7,
TraceCaps-9 and TraceCaps-11.
In the Hippocampus experiment, the feature extraction layers are adopted
from ﬁrst layers of the encoder in the baseline U-Net models. For the capsule
& traceback module, traceback-depth 1 and 2 are implemented. In the models
with traceback depth 1, there are 32 capsule types in the primary capsule
layers, outputting 8D vectors. The class capsule layer in these models has
one 16D vector for the 2 class capsules (Hippocampus and background). The
traceback pipeline is between the class capsule layer and primary capsule
12

layer. In the model with traceback-depth 2, one convolution capsule layer is
inserted between the primary capsule layer and the class capsule layer. For
this model, we set 64 capsules types in the primary layers with 3D vectors,
24 capsule types in the convolution layer with 8D vectors, and followed by
the class capsule layer. The traceback pipeline in this model is along these
three capsule layers.
In TraceCaps, the ratio of the two hyper-parameters (λ1
λ2) in the loss
function need to be tuned. In the MNIST experiment, the ratio is selected
from the range of {1 ∼5} with an interval of 1.
In the Hippocampus
experiment, we observed that the recognition task was far more diﬃcult,
largely due to the greater complexity of the dataset. Accordingly, we selected
the ratio from a larger range, {1 ∼20} with an interval of 1. A large weight
on recognition term is presumed to force the network to build more accurate
part-whole relationships, which lays a solid foundation to produce more
accurate overall segmentations.
The dynamic routing algorithm in (Sabour et al., 2017) is adopted in all
experiments to estimate coupling coeﬃcients. All networks are implemented
in TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016) and trained with the Adam optimizer
(Kingma and Ba, 2014). All experiments are run on a single Nvidia GTX
TITIAN X GPU with 12GB memory.
4.1. Results on modiﬁed MNIST
In this experiment, we tried diﬀerent weight ratios between margin loss and
cross-entropy to evaluate the importance of the individual loss components.
We also explored setups of U-Nets with diﬀerent receptive scales. The results
are summarized in Table 1. The number of parameters for each model is
listed. Among the baseline U-Nets, U-Net-6 (6 stands for the dimension of
the smallest feature map at the bottom layer) gets the best results, so we
only include it in the table. From the table, it is evident that our TraceCaps
outperform the best U-Net model in all metrics for this dataset. We can also
tell that two factors, dimension of primary capsule layer (7/9/11) and weights
for loss terms, aﬀect the performance of our TraceCaps.
Method
Loss Weights
(λ1, λ2)
Number of
Training Parameters
PA
Mean Accuracy
Dice Ratio
TraceCaps-7
1, 1
5.09M
99.06
99.07
99.19 ± 5.81
TraceCaps-9
2, 1
3.40M
99.01
99.02
99.23 ± 5.22
TraceCaps-9
1, 1
3.40M
99.04
99.05
99.27 ± 5.05
TraceCaps-11
1, 1
2.24M
98.31
98.31
98.89 ± 5.34
U-Net-6
-
3.14M
98.04
98.03
95.63 ± 6.13
13

Table 1: Results on the 10-digit experiment. Refer to text for details.
4.2. Results on Hippocampus dataset
Eﬀects of size of the primary capsule layer. In order to explore how the dimen-
sion of primary layer (number of positions) plays a role in the segmentation
procedure, we train diﬀerent versions of TraceCaps, as we do for MNIST
experiments. The results on one particular split of the cross-validation test is
shown in Table 2. In column 3, we list the traceback-size and traceback-depth
of each model. From the results, it appears that the size of primary layer size
and the weights of the loss terms both aﬀect the results to certain extent.
Method
Number of
Training Parameters
Traceback-size
and Depth
Loss Weights
(λ1, λ2)
Dice Ratio
TraceCaps
1.50M
2×6, 1
(7, 1)
87.51 ± 2.378
TraceCaps
1.57M
4×12, 1
(10, 1)
88.05 ± 2.541
TraceCaps
1.90M
4×12, 2
(10, 1)
88.19 ± 1.874
TraceCaps
3.02M
4×20, 1
(15, 1)
88.86 ± 1.628
Table 2: Eﬀect of the traceback pipeline on performance of TraceCaps models. Note that
the results are reported based on one particular split of the dataset. Refer to text for
details.
For our TraceCaps, when the primary capsule size set to 4×20 and loss
weights set to 15:1, we obtain the most accurate segmentation results. Re-
ducing the dimension of primary layer, as well as decreasing the contribution
of margin-loss, seems worsening the model performance. One possible expla-
nation is that when the the dimension of primary layer is set to a very small
number, the positions of the primary capsules may not be precise enough to
represent the visual entities at the input image level.
For the contribution of margin loss increasing it should make the network
strive to obtain more accurate overall recognition. With our mathematically
rigorous traceback, higher recognition accuracy would translate into more
precise membership labelling at individual pixels.
For U-Nets, with a ﬁxed input size, the feature map size of the bottom
layer is the reciprocal of the size of the receptive ﬁeld of this layer. Setting
the feature map size to a small number would allow the information of pixels
from a broader range to be integrated, leading to improved class decision and
boundary localization. We test the U-Nets using the same data as in Table 2,
and this trend can be observed in Table 3 from U-Net-3×7 to U-Net-4×20.
14

Method
Number of
Training Parameters
Smallest
Feature Map
Dice Ratio
U-Net
1.14M
3×7
88.41 ± 1.707
U-Net
0.95M
4×12
88.27 ± 1.778
U-Net
2.19M
4×20
87.68 ± 2.219
Table 3: Eﬀect of the smallest feature map on performance of baseline U-Net models. Refer
to text for details.
Overall average performance. Through the one-split validation, we identiﬁed
the potentially best setups for both TraceCaps and modiﬁed U-Net, which are
TraceCaps- 4×20 and U-Net-3×7, respectively (refer to Table 8 in Appendix
A for detailed layer conﬁgurations). We then carried out a nine-fold cross-
validation on the entire 108 data points. Table 4 shows the segmentation
accuracies of TraceCaps and U-Net in all the nine folds, followed by the
averages. As evident, TraceCaps obtain a higher Dice ratio in each fold. On
average, the Dice ratio for TraceCaps- 4×20 is 87.25 with a standard deviation
5.05, while U-Net-3×7 obtaines 86.23 with a standard deviation 2.19. model
outperforms the best U-Net model.
Fold
TraceCaps
U-Net
1
88.86 ± 1.628
88.41 ± 1.707
2
87.84 ± 5.674
86.03 ± 3.347
3
86.53 ±4.678
85.42 ± 3.005
4
85.73± 7.352
85.21 ± 2.301
5
87.09± 4.190
86.53 ± 2.159
6
83.56 ± 1.257
82.34± 1.369
7
88.57 ± 1.783
87.14 ± 1.374
8
88.23± 4.506
86.96 ± 2.071
9
88.82± 3.005
88.03 ± 2.333
Average
87.25 ± 3.786
86.23 ± 2.193
Table 4: Hippocampus segmentation accuracies on 9-fold cross-validaton.
4.3. Occlusion test
One of the fundamental diﬀerences between our TraceCaps model and
FCNs lies in the fact that TraceCaps does segmentation and recognition
simultaneously. The recognition subtask, if conducted well in practice, would
15

equip TraceCaps with an additional power in dealing with adversarial situa-
tions, which include input images with occlusions. In order to evaluate and
demonstrate the eﬀect, we design an occlusion test as follows.
We train our model on images of two easily confused digits (e.g. 0 and 8)
with the modiﬁed MNIST samples. For the test samples, however, we generate
occlusions in each image by setting the intensities of several horizontal lines
around the image centers to black. The segmentation results are shown in
Table 5. It is evident that TraceCaps achieve signiﬁcantly higher accuracies
than the best baseline model.
Method
Loss Weights
(λ1, λ2)
PA
Dice
AH
0
8
Dice
AH
Dice
AH
TraceCaps-9
(2, 1)
93.49
95.44
264
93.89
185
96.99
79
TraceCaps-9
(3, 1)
92.73
95.05
270
95.36
123
94.74
147
U-Net-6
-
91.17
91.20
300
92.59
123
89.82
177
Table 5: Results on occluded test. Refer to text for details.
Table 6 shows several representative prediction images from the occlusion
test. Pixels classiﬁed into digit 8 are shown in green color and red color
pixels have been classiﬁed as digit 0. In the ﬁrst column, U-Net-6 generates
rather precise boundary localization but makes totally wrong labellings for all
pixels. Our TraceCaps gets both aspects, overall classiﬁcation and boundary
localization, very well worked out. In column 2, U-Net-6 makes the same
mistake for the entire digit, while TraceCaps put correct labels for vast
majority of the pixels. U-Net-6 performs correctly for the input in column
3.
Overall, TraceCaps appears to be able to generate more robust and
consistent segmentation results, and this capability should be attributed to
the recognition component and the part-whole mechanism built in our model.
16

8
8
0
Ground-truth
TraceCaps-9
U-Net-6
Table 6: Prediction results from the occlusion test. Refer to text for details.
5. Discussion and Related Work
Since the inception of the ﬁrst FCN model, FCN variants have become the
most popular solutions for semantic segmentation. Compared with traditional
non-deep learning techniques as well as patch-based CNN solutions, the
eﬃcacy of FCNs should be attributed, in large part, to their capability to
process information from various spatial scales.
FCN models. While powerful, FCNs also have some inherent limitations.
Originated from CNNs, FCNs tend to lose precise spatial information along
the pooling operations/layers, and inconsistent pixel labelings can be resulted
from the limited receptive ﬁeld at each neuron. A number of approaches have
explored to add the contextual information back to the CNN component.
Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) based solutions (Chen et al., 2014, 2018)
reﬁne the ﬁnal segmentation results with a post-processing stage to boost its
ability to capture ﬁne-grained details. Dilated convolutions (Yu and Koltun,
2015; Yu et al., 2017) are utilized to take advantage of the fact that the
receptive ﬁelds of systematic dilation can be expanded exponentially without
losing resolution. Fusion of global features extracted at lower layers and
local features from higher layers through skip connections have also been well
studied (Long et al., 2015; Ronneberger et al., 2015). To produce segmentation
results with certain shape constraints, (Ravishankar et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2013) integrate shape priors into existing deep learning framework with shape-
based loss terms. New models have emerged in the past two years or so, such
17

as multi-resolution fusion by ReﬁneNet (Lin et al., 2017), pyramid pooling
module in PSPNet (Zhao et al., 2017), Clusternet (LaLonde et al., 2018),
atrous convolution and fully connected CRFs (Zhang et al., 2018b), Y-Net
(Mehta et al., 2018), HRNet (Sun et al., 2019), Panoptic-deeplab (Cheng
et al., 2020), and models trained with self-training (Zoph et al., 2020).
Capsules and capsule nets. The history of the notion of capsules can be dated
back to (Hinton, 1981), in which the author proposed to describe an object
over the viewpoint-invariant spatial relationships between the object and its
parts. This model should be regarded as the ﬁrst theoretical prototype of
the recent capsule nets (Sabour et al., 2017; Hinton et al., 2018; Kosiorek
et al., 2019). Zemel et al. (1990) added probability components into this
prototype and encoded both probabilities and viewpoint-invariance in a fully-
connected neural network. The instantiation parameters of Zemel’s model
were hand-crafted from input data.
The issue of how to initialize instantiation parameters was partially ad-
dressed in (Hinton et al., 2011), but their model requires transformation
matrices to be input externally. Regarding the routing algorithms, Zemel
et al. (1990) introduced the notion that an object can be activated by com-
bining the predictions from its parts, which was materialized as an averaging
operation in (Hinton et al., 2011). Sabour et al. (2017); Hinton et al. (2018)
took a step forward and resorted to routing-by-agreement algorithms to
simultaneously activate objects and set up part-whole relationships.
Recently, more routing schemes have been proposed, including new mech-
anisms based on attention (Choi et al., 2019; Duarte et al., 2019), distance
measures (Lenssen et al., 2018) and weighted kernel density estimation (Zhang
et al., 2018a). In (McIntosh et al., 2020) and (LaLonde et al., 2019), visual-text
coupling has also been explored to design multi-modality routing mechanisms
for video segmentation and lung cancer predictions, respectively.
On top of supervised capsule nets, Kosiorek et al. (2019) introduced
unsupervised capsule nets in 2019, which adopted the approachs of capsule
initiation in (Hinton et al., 2011) and routing mechanism in (Hinton et al.,
2018), but relies on set transformer (Lee et al., 2019) to infer whole-part
relationships. Application wise, capsule nets have been explored in tasks
including text classiﬁcation (Zhao et al., 2018), action detection (Duarte
et al., 2018), visual question answering (Zhou et al., 2019) and medical image
analysis (LaLonde et al., 2020; Afshar et al., 2018; Iesmantas and Alzbutas,
2018; Mobiny et al., 2019; Pal et al., 2018), among others.
18

Capsule-based segmentation solutions. (LaLonde and Bagci, 2018) and (Bon-
heur et al., 2019) are two capsule-based models proposed for the segmentation
task. In their network called SegCaps, LaLonde and Bagci (2018) made two
modiﬁcations to the original dynamic routing algorithm, such that the number
of parameters is greatly reduced, which enables the model to operate on large
images sizes. Deconvolutional capsule layers were devised and appended
directly to convolutional capsule layers to restore the original resolution.
Similar to FCNs, this model utilizes skip connections to integrate contextual
information from diﬀerent spatial scales. Bonheur et al. (2019) introduced
Matwo-CapsNet, which is a U-shaped (similar to U-Net) network enabled by
a new type of capsules that encode pose and appearance information and a
dual routing scheme to integrate such information.
Our TraceCaps, however, is designed under a diﬀerent paradigm. Taking
the extractable part-whole information as the foundation, label assignments
in TraceCaps are explicit, interpretable, and mathematically well-grounded.
The decoder of our model is much simpler than that of (LaLonde and Bagci,
2018) model, with no trainable parameters (up to deconvolution layers)
and no capsule-wise routing needed. Because of the analytical derivations,
our model has great potential to be applied to many other applications,
including object localization, detection and visualization of heap maps. While
Matwo-CapsNet (Bonheur et al., 2019) was designed to improve SegCaps,
the performance of both models was reported to be mostly on par with
the state-of-the-art solutions (i.e. diﬀerent variants of the U-Net). As a
contrast, our TraceCaps signiﬁcantly outperforms U-Net in a rather consistent
fashion throughout our experiments. Please note that we do not intend to
make a head-to-head comparison among these models, as the studies were
conducted and reported based on diﬀerent datasets and setups. Nevertheless,
the consistent performance improvements made by our model over U-Net
should be considered as a strong evidence of its technical merits.
From capsule-based recognition to capsule-based segmentation and beyond.
Capsule nets have an assumption in their constructions: “at each location
in the image, there is at most one instance of the type of entity that a
capsule represents.”(Sabour et al., 2017). Essentially, capsule nets, including
the internal part-whole relationships, are built on concrete, physical object
instances. With this assumption, capsule nets perform well when there is
at most one instance of a category in the image, such as on MNIST and
smallNORB (LeCun et al., 2004). For the image data that have multiple
19

instances of same classes, capsule nets have no guarantee to outperform CNNs
in recognition accuracy.
The traceback pipeline in our TraceCaps does not rely on the this one-
instance assumption. However, the current version TraceCaps is designed
based on the capsule nets, where the margin loss is speciﬁed with outputs of
the class capsule layer. The inability of capsule nets in handling multi-instance-
same-class cases also limits the capacity of our segmentation model, for certain
type of dataset. Regarding the remedies, we believe eﬀorts can be push forward
along three fronts. The ﬁrst one would rely on the continued development of
capsule and capsule nets to overcome their limitations. The second possibility
would be designing traceback solutions that can circumvent the multi-instance
constraint. For example, if the class capsule layer can somehow be removed
from the traceback pipeline, potentially we could accommodate multiple
instances of the same category, starting at a convolutional capsule layer. The
third group of remedies could be developed along pre-processing direction.
For example, object detection can be carried out ﬁrst, followed by TraceCaps
to generate accuracy segmentations within individual regions.
6. Acknowledgments
This study was ﬁnancially supported by grants by Stocker Endowment,
Charles River Labortories, Moores Alzheimer Research Endowment, Sanders-
Brown Center on Aging and University of Kentucky College of Medicine.
Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by the Alzheimer’s
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (National Institutes of Health Grant
U01 AG024904) and DOD ADNI (Department of Defense award number
W81XWH-12-2-0012). ADNI is funded by the National Institute on Aging,
the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, and through
generous contributions from the following: AbbVie, Alzheimer’s Association;
Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation; Araclon Biotech; BioClinica, Inc.;
Biogen; Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; CereSpir, Inc.; Eisai Inc.; Elan Phar-
maceuticals, Inc.; Eli Lilly and Company; EuroImmun; F. Hoﬀmann-La Roche
Ltd and its aﬃliated company Genentech, Inc.; Fujirebio; GE Healthcare;
IXICO Ltd.; Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy Research & Development,
LLC.; Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research & Development LLC.; Lu-
mosity; Lundbeck; Merck & Co., Inc.; Meso Scale Diagnostics, LLC.; NeuroRx
Research; Neurotrack Technologies; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation;
20

Pﬁzer Inc.; Piramal Imaging; Servier; Takeda Pharmaceutical Company; and
Transition Therapeutics. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is
providing funds to support ADNI clinical sites in Canada. Private sector
contributions are facilitated by the Foundation for the National Institutes of
Health (www.fnih.org). The grantee organization is the Northern California
Institute for Research and Education, and the study is coordinated by the
Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study at the University of California, San
Diego. ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory for Neuro Imaging at
the University of Southern California.
