arXiv:1005.1567v2  [cs.AI]  30 Jun 2010
On The Power of Tree Projections:
Structural Tractability of Enumerating CSP Solutions
Gianluigi Greco1 and Francesco Scarcello2
Dept. of Mathematics1 and DEIS2, University of Calabria, 87036, Rende, Italy

Abstract. The problem of deciding whether CSP instances admit solutions has been deeply stud-
ied in the literature, and several structural tractability results have been derived so far. However,
constraint satisfaction comes in practice as a computation problem where the focus is either on
ﬁnding one solution, or on enumerating all solutions, possibly projected to some given set of output
variables. The paper investigates the structural tractability of the problem of enumerating (possi-
bly projected) solutions, where tractability means here computable with polynomial delay (WPD),
since in general exponentially many solutions may be computed. A general framework based on the
notion of tree projection of hypergraphs is considered, which generalizes all known decomposition
methods. Tractability results have been obtained both for classes of structures where output vari-
ables are part of their speciﬁcation, and for classes of structures where computability WPD must
be ensured for any possible set of output variables. These results are shown to be tight, by exhibit-
ing dichotomies for classes of structures having bounded arity and where the tree decomposition
method is considered.
1
Introduction
1.1
Constraint Satisfaction and Decomposition Methods
Constraint satisfaction is often formalized as a homomorphism problem that takes as input two ﬁnite
relational structures A (modeling variables and scopes of the constraints) and B (modeling the relations
associated with constraints), and asks whether there is a homomorphism from A to B. Since the general
problem is NP-hard, many restrictions have been considered in the literature, where the given structures
have to satisfy additional conditions. In this paper, we are interested in restrictions imposed on the
(usually said) left-hand structure, i.e., A must be taken from some suitably deﬁned class A of structures,
while B is any arbitrary structure from the class “−” of all ﬁnite structures.1 Thus, we face the so-called
uniform constraint satisfaction problem, shortly denoted as CSP(A, −), where both structures are part
of the input (nothing is ﬁxed).
The decision problem CSP(A, −) has intensively been studied in the literature, and various classes
of structures over which it can be solved in polynomial time have already been singled out (see [6,
11, 18,1], and the references therein). These approaches, called decomposition methods, are based on
properties of the hypergraph HA associated with each structure A ∈A. In fact, it is well-known that,
for the class Aa of all structures whose associated hypergraphs are acyclic, CSP(Aa, −) is efﬁciently
solvable by just enforcing generalized arc consistency (GAC)—roughly, by ﬁltering constraint relations
until every pair of constraints having some variables ¯X in common agree on ¯X (that is, they have
precisely the same set of allowed tuples of values on these variables ¯X).
Larger “islands of tractability” are then identiﬁed by generalizing hypergraph acyclicity. To this
end, every decomposition method DM associates with any hypergraph HA some measure w of its cyclic-
ity, called the DM-width of HA. The tractable classes A of instances (according to DM) are those (with
1 Note that the ﬁnite property is a feature of this framework, and not a simplifying assumption. E.g., on structures
with possibly inﬁnite domains, the open question in [10] (just recently answered by [15] on ﬁnite structures)
would have been solved in 1993 [23].

hypergraphs) having bounded width, that is, whose degree of cyclicity is below some ﬁxed threshold.
For every instance A in such a class A and every structure B, the instance (A, B) can be solved in
polynomial-time by exploiting the solutions of a set of suitable subproblems, that we call views, each
one solvable in polynomial-time (in fact, exponential in the—ﬁxed—width, for all known methods). In
particular, the idea is to arrange some of these views in a tree, called decomposition, in order to ex-
ploit the known algorithms for acyclic instances. In fact, whenever such a tree exists, instances can be
solved by just enforcing GAC on the available views, even without computing explicitly any decomposi-
tion. This very general approach traces back to the seminal database paper [10], and it is based on the
graph-theoretic notion of tree-projection of the pair of hypergraphs (HA, HV), associated with the input
structure A and with the structure V of the available views, respectively (tree projections are formally
deﬁned in Section 2).
For instance, assume that the ﬁxed threshold on the width is k: in the generalized hypertree-width
method [13], the available views are all subproblems involving at most k constraints from the given CSP
instance; in the case of treewidth [21], the views are all subproblems involving at most k variables; for
fractional hypertree-width, the views are all subproblems having fractional cover-width at most k (in
fact, if we require that they are computable in polynomial-time, we may instead use those subproblems
deﬁned in [19] to compute a O(k3) approximation of this notion).
Note that, for the special case of generalized hypertree-width, the fact that enforcing GAC on all
clusters of k constraints is sufﬁcient to solve the given instance, without computing a decomposition,
has been re-derived in [5] (with proof techniques different from those in [10]). Moreover, [5] actually
provided a stronger result, as it is proved that this property holds even if there is some homomorphically
equivalent subproblem having generalized hypertree-width at most k. However, the corresponding only
if result is missing in that paper, and characterizing the precise power of this GAC procedure for the views
obtained from all clusters of k constraints (short: k-GAC) remained an open question. For any class A of
instances having bounded arity (i.e., with a ﬁxed maximum number of variables in any constraint scope
of every instance of the class), the question has been answered in [2]: ∀A ∈A, k-GAC is correct for every
right-hand structure B if, and only if, the core of A has tree width at most k (recall that treewidth and
generalized hypertree-width identify the same set of bounded-arity tractable classes). In its full version,
the answer to this open question follows from a recent result in [15] (see Theorem 2-bis).
In fact, for any recursively enumerable class of bounded-arity structures A, it is known that this
method is essentially optimal: CSP(A, −) is solvable in polynomial time if, and only if, the cores of
the structures in A have bounded treewidth (under standard complexity theoretic assumptions) [17].
Note that the latter condition may be equivalently stated as follows: for every A ∈A there is some A′
homomorphically equivalent to A and such that its treewidth is below the required ﬁxed threshold. For
short, we say that such a class has bounded treewidth modulo homomorphic equivalence.
Things with unbounded-arity classes are not that clear. Generalized hypertree-width does not char-
acterize all classes of (arbitrary) structures where CSP(A, −) is solvable in polynomial time [18]. It
seems that a useful characterization may be obtained by relaxing the typical requirement that views are
computable in polynomial time, and by requiring instead that such tasks are ﬁxed-parameter tractable
(FPT) [9]. In fact, towards establishing such characterization, it was recently shown in [20] that (un-
der some reasonable technical assumptions) the problem CSP(H), i.e., CSP(A, −) restricted to the
instances whose associated hypergraphs belong to the class H, is FPT if, and only if, hypergraphs in H
have bounded submodular width—a new hypergraph measure more general than fractional hypertree-
width and, hence, than generalized hypertree-width.
It is worthwhile noting that the above mentioned tractability results for classes of instances deﬁned
modulo homomorphically equivalence are actually tractability results for the promise version of the
problem. In fact, unless P = NP, there is no polynomial-time algorithm that may check whether a given
instance A actually belongs to such a class A. In particular, it has been observed by different authors [24,
4] that there are classes of instances having bounded treewidth modulo homomorphically equivalence
2

for which answers computable in polynomial time cannot be trusted. That is, unless P = NP, there is no
efﬁcient way to distinguish whether a “yes” answer means that there is some solution of the problem,
or that A ̸∈A.
In this paper, besides promise problems, we also consider the so-called no-promise problems, which
seem more appealing for practical applications. In this case, either certiﬁed solutions are computed, or
the promise A ∈A is correctly disproved. For instance, the algorithm in [5] solves the no-promise
search-problem of computing a homomorphism for a given CSP instance (A, B). This algorithm either
computes such a homomorphism or concludes that HA has generalized hypertree-width greater than k.
1.2
Enumeration Problems
While the structural tractability of deciding whether CSP instances admit solutions has been deeply
studied in the literature, the structural tractability of the corresponding computation problem received
considerably less attention so far [4], though this is certainly a more appealing problem for practical
applications. In particular, it is well-known that for classes of CSPs where the decision problem is
tractable and a self-reduction argument applies the enumeration problem is tractable too [8, 7]. Roughly,
these classes have a suitable closure property such that one may ﬁx values for the variables without going
out of the class, and thus may solve the computation problem by using the (polynomial-time) algorithm
for the decision problem as an oracle. In fact, for the non-uniform CSP problem, the tractability of the
decision problem always entails the tractability of the search problem [7]. As observed above, this is
rather different from what happens in the uniform CSP problem that we study in this paper, where this
property does not hold (see [24,4], and Proposition 1), and thus a speciﬁc study for the computation
problem is meaningful and necessary.
In this paper, we embark on this study, by focusing on the problem ECSP of enumerating (possibly
projected) solutions. Since even easy instances may have an exponential number of solutions, tractability
means here having algorithms that compute solutions with polynomial delay (WPD): An algorithm M
solves WPD a computation problem P if there is a polynomial p(·) such that, for every instance of P of
size n, M discovers if there are no solutions in time O(p(n)); otherwise, it outputs all solutions in such
a way that a new solution is computed within O(p(n)) time from the previous one.
Before stating our contribution, it is worthwhile noting that there are different facets of the enumer-
ation problem, and thus different research directions to be explored:
(Which Decomposition Methods?) We considered the more general framework of the tree projec-
tions, where subproblems (views) may be completely arbitrary, so that our results are smoothly inher-
ited by all (known) decomposition methods. We remark that this choice posed interesting technical
challenges to our analysis, and called for solution approaches that were not explored in the earlier liter-
ature on traditional methods, such as treewidth. For instance, in this general context, we cannot speak
anymore of “the core” of a structure, because different isomorphic cores may have different structural
properties with respect to the available views.
(Only full solutions or possibly projected solutions?) In this paper, an ECSP instance is a triple
(A, B, O), for which we have to compute all solutions (homomorphisms) projected to a set of desired
output variables O, denoted by AB[O]. We believe this is the more natural approach. Indeed, modeling
real-world applications through CSP instances typically requires the use of “auxiliary” variables, whose
precise values in the solutions are not relevant for the user, and that are (usually) ﬁltered-out from the
output. In these cases, computing all combinations of their values occurring in solutions means wasting
time, possibly exponential time. Of course, this aspect is irrelevant for the problem of computing just
one solution, but is crucial for the enumeration problem.
(Should classes of structures be aware of output variables?) This is an important technical ques-
tion. We are interested in identifying classes of tractable instances based on properties of their left-hand
structures, while right-hand structures have no restrictions. What about output variables? In principle,
3

structural properties may or may not consider the possible output variables, and in fact both approaches
have been explored in the literature (see, e.g., [17]), and both approaches are dealt with in this paper.
In the former output-aware case, possible output variables are suitably described in the instance struc-
ture. Unlike previous approaches that considered additional “virtual” constraints covering together all
possible output variables [17], in this paper possible output variables are described as those variables
X having a domain constraint dom(X), that is, a distinguished unary constraint specifying the domain
of this variable. Such variables are said domain restricted. In fact, this choice reﬂects the classical ap-
proach in constraint satisfaction systems, where variables are typically associated with domains, which
are heavily exploited by constraint propagation algorithms. Note that this approach does not limit the
number of solutions, while in the tractable classes considered in [17] only instances with a polynomial
number of (projected) solutions may be dealt with. As far as the latter case of arbitrary sets of out-
put variables is considered, observe that in general stronger conditions are expected to be needed for
tractability. Intuitively, since we may focus on any desired substructure, no strange situations may occur,
and the full instance should be really tractable.
1.3
Contribution
Output-aware classes of ECSPs:
(1) We deﬁne a property for pairs (A, O), where A is a structure and O ⊆A is a set of variables,
that allows us to characterize the classes of tractable instances. Roughly, we say that (A, O) is
tp-covered through the decomposition method DM if variables in O occur in a tree projection of a
certain hypergraph w.r.t. to the (hypergraph associated with the) views deﬁned according to DM.
(2) We describe an algorithm that solves the promise enumeration problem, by computing with poly-
nomial delay all solutions of a given instance (A, B, O), whenever (A, O) is tp-covered through
DM.
(3) For the special case of (generalized hyper)tree width, we show that the above condition is also
necessary for the correctness of the proposed algorithm (for every B). In fact, for these traditional
decomposition methods we now have a complete characterization of the power of the k-GAC ap-
proach.
(4) For recursively enumerable classes of structures having bounded arity, we exhibit a dichotomy
showing that the above tractability result is tight, for DM = treewidth (and assuming FPT ̸= W[1]).
ECSP instances over arbitrary output variables:
(1) We describe an algorithm that, on input (A, B, O), solves the no-promise enumeration problem. In
particular, either all solutions are computed, or it infers that there exists no tree projection of HA
w.r.t. HV (the hypergraph associated with the views deﬁned according to DM). This algorithm gen-
eralizes to the tree projection framework the enumeration algorithm of projected solutions recently
proposed for the special case of treewidth [4].
(2) Finally, we give some evidence that, for bounded arity classes of instances, we cannot do better
than this. In particular, having bounded width tree-decompositions of the full structure seems a
necessary condition for enumerating WPD. We speak of “evidence,” instead of saying that our
result completely answers the open question in [17, 4], because our dichotomy theorem focuses on
classes of structures satisfying the technical property of being closed under taking minors (in fact,
the same property assumed in the ﬁrst dichotomy result on the complexity of the decision problem
on classes of graphs [16]).
4

2
Preliminaries: Relational Structures and Homomorphisms
A constraint satisfaction problem may be formalized as a relational homomorphism problem. A vocab-
ulary τ is a ﬁnite set of relation symbols of speciﬁed arities. A relational structure A over τ consists of
a universe A and an r-ary relation RA ⊆Ar, for each relation symbol R in τ.
If A and A′ are two relational structures over disjoint vocabularies, we denote by A⊎A′ the relational
structure over the (disjoint) union of their vocabularies, whose domain (resp., set of relations) is the
union of those of A and A′.
A homomorphism from a relational structure A to a relational structure B is a mapping h : A 7→B
such that, for every relation symbol R ∈A, and for every tuple ⟨a1, . . . , ar⟩∈RA, it holds that
⟨h(a1), . . . , h(ar)⟩∈RB. For any set X ⊆A, denote by h[X] the restriction of h to X. The set
of all possible homomorphisms from A to B is denoted by AB, while AB[X] denotes the set of their
restrictions to X.
An instance of the constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) is a pair (A, B) where A is called a left-
hand structure (short: ℓ-structure) and B is called a right-hand structure (short: r-structure). In the
classical decision problem, we have to decide whether there is a homomorphism from A to B, i.e.,
whether AB ̸= ∅. In an instance of the corresponding enumeration problem (denoted by ECSP) we are
additionally given a set of output elements O ⊆A; thus, an instance has the form (A, B, O). The goal is
to compute the restrictions to O of all possible homomorphisms from A to B, i.e., AB[O]. If O = ∅, the
computation problem degenerates to the decision one. Formally, let hφ : ∅7→true denote (the constant
mapping to) the Boolean value true; then, deﬁne AB[∅] = {hφ} (resp., AB[∅] = ∅) if there is some
(resp., there is no) homomorphism from A to B.
In the constraint satisfaction jargon, the elements of A (the domain of the ℓ-structure A) are the
variables, and there is a constraint C = (⟨a1 . . . , ar⟩, RB) for every tuple ⟨a1 . . . , ar⟩∈RA and every
relation symbol R ∈τ. The tuple of variables is usually called the scope of C, while RB is called
the relation of C. Any homomorphism from A to B is thus a mapping from the variables in A to the
elements in B (often called domain values) that satisﬁes all constraints, and it is also called a solution
(or a projected solution, if it is restricted to a subset of the variables).
Two relational structures A and A′ are homomorphically equivalent if there is a homomorphism
from A to A′ and vice-versa. A structure A′ is a substructure of A if A′ ⊆A and RA′ ⊆RA, for
each symbol R ∈τ. Moreover, A′ is a core of A if it is a substructure of A such that: (1) there is a
homomorphism from A to A′, and (2) there is no substructure A′′ of A′, with A′′ ̸= A′, satisfying (1).
3
Decomposition Methods, Views, and Tree Projections
Throughout the following sections we assume that (A, B) is a given connected CSP instance, and we
shall we shall seek to compute its solutions (possibly restricted to a desired set of output variables) by
combining the solutions of suitable sets of subproblems, available as additional distinguished constraints
called views.
Let AV be an ℓ-structure with the same domain as A. We say that AV is a view structure (short:
v-structure) if
– its vocabulary τV is disjoint from the vocabulary τ of A;
– every relation RAV contains a single tuple whose variables will be denoted by var(RAV). That is,
there is a one-to-one correspondence between views and relation symbols in τV, so that we shall
often use the two terms interchangeably;
– for every relation R ∈τ and every tuple t ∈RA, there is some relation Rt ∈τV, called base view,
such that {t} = RAV
t
, i.e., for every constraint in A there is a corresponding view in AV.
Let BV be an r-structure. We say that BV is legal (w.r.t. AV and (A, B)) if
– its vocabulary is τV;
5

Fig. 1. A structure A. A hypergraph HAV such that (HA, HAV ) has no tree projections. Two hypergraphs HA′ and
HA′′, where A′ and A′′ are cores of A. A tree projection Ha of (HA′, HAV ).
– For every view R ∈τV, RBV ⊇AB[w] holds, where w = var(RAV). That is, every subproblem is
not more restrictive than the full problem.
– For every base view Rt ∈τV, RBV
t
⊆RB. That is, any base view is at least as restrictive as the
“original” constraint associated with it.
The following fact immediately follows from the above properties.
Fact 1 Let BV be any r-structure that is legal w.r.t. AV and (A, B). Then, ∀O ⊆A, the ECSP instance
(AV, BV, O) has the same set of solutions as (A, B, O).
In fact, all structural decomposition methods deﬁne some way to build the views to be exploited for
solving the given CSP instance. In our framework, we associate with any decomposition method DM
a pair of polynomial-time computable functions ℓ-DM and r-DM that, given any CSP instance (A, B),
compute the pair (AV, BV), where AV = ℓ-DM(A) is a v-structure, and BV = r-DM(A, B) is a legal
r-structure.2
For instance, for any ﬁxed natural number k, the generalized hypertree decomposition method [12]
(short: hwk) is associated with the functions ℓ-hwk and r-hwk that, given a CSP instance (A, B), build
the pair (ℓ-hwk(A), r-hwk(A, B)) where, for each subset C of at most k constraints from (A, B), there
is a view RC such that: (1) var(Rℓ-hwk (A)
C
) is the set of all variables occurring in C, and (2) the tuples
in Rr-hwk (A,B)
C
are the solutions of the subproblem encoded by C. Similarly, the tree decomposition
method [21] (twk) is deﬁned as above, but we consider each subset of at most k variables in A instead
of each subset of at most k constraints.
3.1
Tree Projections for CSP Instances
In this paper we are interested in restrictions imposed on left-hand structures of CSP instances, based
on some decomposition method DM. To this end, we associate with any ℓ-structure A a hypergraph
HA = (A, H), whose set of nodes is equal to the set of variables A and where, for each constraint scope
in RA, the set H of hyperedges contains a hyperedge including all its variables (no further hyperedge
is in H). In particular, the v-structure AV = ℓ-DM(A) is associated with a hypergraph HAV = (A, H),
whose set of nodes is the set of variables A and where, for each view R ∈τV, the set H contains
2 A natural extension of this notion we may be to consider FPT decomposition methods, where functions ℓ-DM
and r-DM are computable in ﬁxed-parameter polynomial-time. For the sake of presentation and of space, we do
not consider FPT decomposition methods in this paper, but our results can be extended to them rather easily.
6

the hyperedge var(RAV). In the following, for any hypergraph H, we denote its nodes and edges by
nodes(H) and edges(H), respectively.
Example 1. Consider the ℓ-structure A whose vocabulary just contains the binary relation symbol R,
and such that RA = {⟨F, E⟩, ⟨A, E⟩, ⟨A, C⟩, ⟨A, B⟩, ⟨B, C⟩, ⟨D, B⟩, ⟨D, C⟩}. Such a simple one-
binary-relation structure may be easily represented by the directed graph in the left part of Figure 1,
where edge orientation reﬂects the position of the variables in R. In this example, the associated hyper-
graph HA is just the undirected version of this graph. Let DM be a method that, on input A, builds the
v-structure AV = ℓ-DM(A) consisting of the seven base views of the form Rt, for each tuple t ∈RA,
plus the three relations R1, R2, and R3 such that RAV
1
= {⟨A, E, F⟩}, RAV
2
= {⟨A, B, C, F⟩}, and
RAV
3
= {⟨C, D, F⟩}. Figure 1 also reports HAV.
⊳
A hypergraph H is acyclic iff it has a join tree [3], i.e., a tree JT (H), whose vertices are the hy-
peredges of H, such that if a node X occurs in two hyperedges h1 and h2 of H, then h1 and h2 are
connected in JT (H), and X occurs in each vertex on the unique path linking h1 and h2 in JT (H).
For two hypergraphs H1 and H2, we write H1 ≤H2 iff each hyperedge of H1 is contained in at
least one hyperedge of H2. Let H1 ≤H2. Then, a tree projection of H1 with respect to H2 is an acyclic
hypergraph Ha such that H1 ≤Ha ≤H2. Whenever such a hypergraph Ha exists, we say that the pair
(H1, H2) has a tree projection (also, we say that H1 has a tree projection w.r.t. H2). The problem of
deciding whether a pair of hypergraphs has a tree projection is called the tree projection problem, and it
has recently been proven to be NP-complete [14].
Example 2. Consider again the setting of Example 1. It is immediate to check that the pair of hyper-
graphs (HA, HAV) does not have any tree projection. Consider instead the (hyper)graph HA′ reported
on the right of Figure 1. The acyclic hypergraph Ha is a tree projection of HA′ w.r.t. HAV . In particular,
note that the hyperedge {A, B, C} ∈edges(Ha) “absorbs” the cycle in HA′, and that {A, B, C} is in
its turn contained in the hyperedge {A, B, C, F} ∈edges(HAV).
⊳
Note that all the (known) structural decomposition methods can be recast as special cases of tree
projections, since they just differ in how they deﬁne the set of views to be built for evaluating the CSP
instance. For instance, a hypergraph HA has generalized hypertree width (resp., treewidth) at most k if
and only if there is a tree projection of HA w.r.t. Hℓ-hwk(A) (resp., w.r.t. Hℓ-twk(A)).
However, the setting of tree projections is more general than such traditional decomposition ap-
proaches, as it allows us to consider arbitrary sets of views, which often require more care and different
techniques. As an example, we shall illustrate below that in the setting of tree projections it does not
make sense to talk about “the” core of an ℓ-structure, because different isomorphic cores may differ-
ently behave with respect to the available views. This phenomenon does not occur, e.g., for generalized
hypertree decompositions, where all combinations of k constraints are available as views.
Example 3. Consider the structure A illustrated in Example 1, and the structures A′ and A′′ over the
same vocabulary as A, and such that RA′ = {⟨A, C⟩, ⟨A, B⟩, ⟨B, C⟩} and RA′′ = {⟨B, C⟩, ⟨D, B⟩,
⟨D, C⟩}. The hypergraphs HA′ and HA′′ are reported in Figure 1. Note that A′ and A′′ are two (isomor-
phic) cores of A, but they have completely different structural properties. Indeed, (HA′, HAV) admits a
tree projection (recall Example 2), while (HA′′, HAV ) does not.
⊳
3.2
CSP Instances and tp-Coverings
We complete the picture of our unifying framework to deal with decomposition methods for constraint
satisfaction problems, by illustrating some recent results in [15], which will be useful to our ends. Let
us start by stating some preliminary deﬁnitions.
For a set of variables O = {X1, . . . , Xr}, let SO denote the structure with a fresh r-ary relation
symbol RO and domain O, such that RAO
O
= {⟨X1, . . . , Xr⟩}.
7

Deﬁnition 1. Let AV be a v-structure. A set of variables O ⊆A is tp-covered in AV if there exists a
core A′ of A ⊎SO such that (HA′, HAV) has a tree projection.3
□
For instance, it is easily seen that the variables {A, B, C} are tp-covered in the v-structure AV
discussed in Example 1. In particular, note that the structure A ⊎S{A,B,C} is associated with the same
hypergraph HA′ that has a tree projection w.r.t. HAV (cf. Example 3). Instead, the variables {B, C, D}
are not tp-covered in AV.
Given a CSP instance (AV, BV), we denote by GAC(AV, BV) the r-structure that is obtained by
enforcing generalized arc consistency on (AV, BV).
The following result, proved in [15] for a different setting, states the precise relationship between
generalized-arc-consistent views and tp-covered sets of variables.
Theorem 2. Let A be an ℓ-structure, and let AV be a v-structure. The following are equivalent:
(1) A set of variables O ⊆A is tp-covered in AV;
(2) For every r-structure B, for every r-structure BV that is legal w.r.t. AV and (A, B), and for every
relation R ∈τV with O ⊆var(RAV ), RGAC(AV,BV)[O] = AB[O].
Note that the result answered a long standing open question [10, 23] about the relationship between
the existence of tree projections and (local and global) consistency properties in databases [15]. In
words, the result states that just enforcing generalized arc consistency on the available views is a sound
and complete procedure to solve ECSP instances if, and only if, we are interested in (projected) solutions
over output variables that are tp-covered and occur together in some available view. Thus, in these cases,
all solutions can be computed in polynomial time. The more general case where output variables are
arbitrary (i.e., not necessarily included in some available view) is explored in the rest of this paper.
We now leave the section by noticing that as a consequence of Theorem 2, we can characterize
the power of local-consistency for any decomposition method DM such that, for each pair (A, B), each
view in BV = r-DM(A, B) contains the solutions of the subproblem encoded by the constraints over
which it is deﬁned. For the sake of simplicity, we state below the result specialized to the well-known
decomposition methods twk and hwk.
Theorem 2-bis. Let DM be a decomposition method in {twk, hwk}, let A be an ℓ-structure, and let
AV = ℓ-DM(A). The following are equivalent:
(1) A set of variables O ⊆A is tp-covered in AV;
(2) For every r-structure B, and for every relation R ∈τV with O ⊆var(RAV), RGAC(AV,BV)[O] =
AB[O], where BV = r-DM(A, B).
Proof (Sketch). Preliminarily, it is easy to see that (2) in Theorem 2 may be equivalently stated as
follows:
(2’) For every r-structure B, for every r-structure BV that is legal w.r.t. AV and (A, B) and such that
BV = GAC(AV, BV), and for every relation R ∈τV with O ⊆var(RAV), RBV[O] = AB[O].
The fact that (1) ⇒(2) trivially follows from Theorem 2. We have to show that (2) ⇒(1) holds as
well. To this end, observe that if O is not tp-covered in ℓ-DM(A), by Theorem 2 (actually, (1) ⇒(2′)),
we can conclude the existence of: (1) an r-structure B, (2) an r-structure BV that is legal w.r.t. AV and
(A, B) and such that BV = GAC(AV, BV), and (3) a relation R ∈τV with O ⊆var(RAV) such that
RBV[O] ̸= AB[O] (of course, RBV[O] ⊃AB[O] by the legality of BV). Consider now the r-structure
3 For the sake of completeness, note that we use here a core A′ because we found it more convenient for the
presentation and the proofs. However, it is straightforward to check that this notion can be equivalently stated in
terms of any structure homomorphically equivalent to A ⊎SO. The same holds for the related Deﬁnition 3.
8

B′
V = r-hwk(A, B). Recall that each view in B′
V contains all the solutions of the subproblem encoded
by the constraints over which it is deﬁned. Since BV = GAC(AV, BV), it can be shown that each view
in BV contains only solutions of the subproblem encoded by the constraints over which it is deﬁned.
Thus, for each relation R ∈τV, RB′
V ⊇RBV holds, which implies RB′
V[O] ⊃AB[O]. The same line of
reasoning applies to the tree decomposition method.
⊳
Note that if we consider decision problem instances (O = ∅) and the treewidth method (AV =
ℓ-twk(A)), from Theorem 2-bis, we (re-)obtain the nice characterization of [2] about the relationship
between k-local consistency and treewidth modulo homomorphic equivalence. If we consider gener-
alized hypertree-width (AV = ℓ-hwk(A)), we get the answer to the corresponding open question for
the unbounded arity case, that is, the precise power of the procedure enforcing k-union (of constraints)
consistency (i.e., the power of the algorithm for the decision problem described in [5]).
4
Enumerating Solutions of Output-Aware CSP Instances
The goal of this section is to study the problem of enumerating CSP solutions for classes of instances
where possible output variables are part of the structure of the given instance. This is formalized by
assuming that the relational structure contains domain constraints that specify the domains for such
variables.
Deﬁnition 2. A variable X ∈A is domain restricted in the ℓ-structure A if there exists a unary distin-
guished (domain) relation symbol dom(X) ∈τ such that {⟨X⟩} = dom(X)A. The set of all domain
restricted variables is denoted by drv(A).
□
We say that an ECSP instance (A, B, O) is domain restricted if O ⊆drv(A). Of course, if it is
not, then one may easily build in linear time an equivalent domain-restricted ECSP instance where
an additional fresh unary constraint is added for every output variable, whose values are taken from
any constraint relation where that variable occurs. We say that such an instance is a domain-restricted
version of (A, B, O).
Figure 2 shows an algorithm, named ComputeAllSolutionsDM, that computes the solutions of
a given ECSP instance. The algorithm is parametric w.r.t. any chosen decomposition method DM, and
works as follows. Firstly, ComputeAllSolutionsDM starts by transforming the instance (A, B, O) into a
domain restricted one, and by constructing the views in (AV, BV) via DM. Then, it invokes the procedure
Propagate. This procedure backtracks over the output variables {X1, . . . , Xm}: At each step i, it tries
to assign a value to Xi from its domain view,4 and deﬁnes this value as the unique one available in
that domain, in order to “propagate” such an assignment over all other views. This is accomplished
by enforcing generalized arc-consistency each time the procedure is invoked. Eventually, whenever an
assignment is computed for all the variables in O, this solution is returned in output, and the algorithm
proceeds by backtracking again trying different values.
4.1
Tight Characterizations for the Correctness of ComputeAllSolutionsDM
To characterize the correctness of ComputeAllSolutionsDM, we need to deﬁne a structural property
that is related to the one stated in Deﬁnition 1. Below, differently from Deﬁnition 1 where the set of
output variables O is treated as a whole, each variable in O has to be tp-covered as a singleton set.
Deﬁnition 3. Let (A, B, O) be an ECSP instance. We say that (A, O) is tp-covered through DM if there
is a core A′ of A ⊎U
X∈O S{X} such that (HA′, Hℓ-DM(A)) has a tree projection.
□
4 With an abuse of notation, in the algorithm we denote by dom(X) the base view in τV associated with the input
constraint dom(X) ∈τ (in fact, no confusion may arise because the algorithm only works on views).
9

Input: An ECSP instance (A, B, O), where O = {X1, . . . , Xm};
Output: AB[O];
Method: update (A, B, O) with any of its domain-restricted versions;
let AV := ℓ-DM(A), BV := r-DM(A, B);
invoke Propagate(1, (AV, BV), m, ⟨⟩);
Procedure Propagate(i: integer, (AV, BV): pair of structures, m: integer,
⟨a1, ..., ai−1⟩: tuple of values in Ai);
begin
1. let B′
V := GAC(AV, BV);
2. let activeValues := dom(Xi)B′
V ;
3. for each element ⟨ai⟩∈activeValues do
4. |
if i = m then
5. |
|
output ⟨a1, ..., am−1, am⟩;
6. |
else
7. |
|
update dom(Xi)B′
V with {⟨ai⟩};
/∗Xi is ﬁxed to value ai ∗/
8. ⌊
⌊
Propagate(i + 1, (AV, B′
V), m, ⟨a1, ..., ai−1, ai⟩);
end.
Fig. 2. Algorithm ComputeAllSolutionsDM.
Note that the above deﬁnition is purely structural, because (the right-hand structure) B plays
no role there. In fact, we next show that this deﬁnition captures classes of instances where
ComputeAllSolutionsDM is correct.
Theorem 3. Let DM be a decomposition method, let A be an ℓ-structure, and let O
⊆A be
a set of variables. Assume that (A, O) is tp-covered through DM. Then, for every r-structure B,
ComputeAllSolutionsDM computes the set AB[O].
Proof (Sketch). Let Bin be any r-structure. Preliminarily observe that if the original input instance, say
Iin = (Ain, Bin, O), is tp-covered through DM, the same property is enjoyed by its equivalent domain-
restricted version, say I0 = (A, B0, O), computed in the starting phase of the algorithm. Thus, there is
a core A′ of A ⊎U
X∈O S{X} such that (HA′, HAV) has a tree projection, where AV = ℓ-DM(A). This
entails that, ∀X ∈O, {X} is tp-covered in HAV. It is sufﬁcient to show that, if AB
0 ̸= ∅, at the generic
call of Propagate with i as its ﬁrst argument, activeValues is initialized at Step 2 with a non-empty
set that contains all those values that Xi ∈O may take, in any solution of (A, B0) extending the current
partial solution ⟨a1, ..., ai−1⟩; otherwise (AB0 = ∅), activeValues = ∅, and the algorithm correctly
terminates with an empty output without ever entering the for cycle. For the sake of presentation, we
just prove what happens in the ﬁrst call.The generalization to the generic case is then straightforward.
Let i = 1 and assume that B′
V := GAC(AV, BV) has been computed. From the tp-covered property
of variables in O and Theorem 2, it follows that ∀X ∈O, its domain view dom(X) is such that
dom(X)B′
V = AB0[{X}]. Thus, all values in the domain views associated with output variables occur
in some solutions. This holds in particular for dom(X1) that is empty if, and only if, AB0 = ∅, in which
case the cycle is skipped and the algorithm immediately halts with an empty output. Assume now that
this is not the case, so that activeValues = AB0[{X1}] ̸= ∅, and let a1 be the chosen value at Step 3.
Consider a new instance I1 = (A, B1, O) where the domain constraint for X1 contains the one value a1.
From the above discussion it follows that AB1 ̸= ∅, and clearly the solutions of I1 are all and only those
of I0 that extend the partial solution ⟨a1⟩. Moreover, it is easy to check that the r-structure B′
V obtained
after the execution of Step 7 is legal w.r.t. (A, B1), and recall that nothing is changed in the pair (A, O),
which is (still) tp-covered through DM. Therefore, when we call recursively call Propagate at Step 8
with i = 2, we are in the same situation as in the ﬁrst call, but going to enumerate the solutions of I1.
10

At the end of this call, we just repeat this procedure with the next available value for X1, say a2, until
all elements in activeValues = AB
0[{X1}] have been considered (and propagated).
⊳
We now complete the picture by observing that Deﬁnition 3 also provides the necessary conditions
for the correctness of ComputeAllSolutionsDM. As in Theorem 2-bis, we state below the result spe-
cialized to the methods twk and hwk.
Theorem 4. Let DM be a decomposition method in {twk, hwk}, let A be an ℓ-structure, and let O ⊆A
be a set of variables. Assume that, for every r-structure B, ComputeAllSolutionsDM computes AB[O].
Then, (A, O) is tp-covered through DM.
Proof (Sketch). Assume that (A, O) is not tp-covered through DM, and let O′ ⊆O be a maximal set of
output variables such that (A, O′) is tp-covered through DM. In the case where O′ = ∅, there is no core A′
of A such that (HA′, Hℓ-DM(A)) has a tree projection. Thus, we can apply Theorem 2-bis and conclude
that there are an r-structure B, and a relation R ∈τV such that AB has a solution while RGAC(ℓ-DM(A),BV)
is empty, with BV = r-DM(A, B). It follows that ComputeAllSolutionsDM will not produce any output.
Consider now the case where O′ ̸= ∅, and where any X ∈O \ O′ is a variable such that (A, O′ ∪{X})
is not tp-covered through DM. Let ¯A be the relational structure A ⊎U
Y ∈O′ S{Y }, which is such that
(H¯A, Hℓ-DM(A)) has a tree projection. Then, {X} is not tp-covered in ℓ-DM(¯A). By Theorem 2-bis, there
are an r-structure B, and a relation R ∈τV with {X} ⊆var(R¯AV) such that RGAC(¯AV,BV)[{X}] ⊃
¯AB[{X}], where BV = r-DM(¯A, B). In fact, we can show that such a “counterexample” structure B can
be chosen in such a way that there are (full) solutions h for the problem having the following property:
some values in RGAC(¯AV,BV)[{X}] \ ¯AB[{X}] belongs to the generalized arc consistent structure B′
where variables in O′ are ﬁxed according to h[O′]. Thus while enumerating such a solution h[O′],
ComputeAllSolutionsDM generates wrong extensions of this solution to the variable X.
⊳
4.2
Tight Characterizations for Enumerating Solutions with Polynomial Delay
We next analyze the complexity of ComputeAllSolutionsDM.
Theorem 5. Let A be an ℓ-structure, and O ⊆A be a set of variables. If (A, O) is tp-covered through
DM, then ComputeAllSolutionsDM runs WPD.
Proof. Assume
that
(A, O)
is
tp-covered
through
DM.
By
Theorem
3,
we
know
that
ComputeAllSolutionsDM computes the set AB[O]. Thus, if the algorithm does not output any
tuple, we can immediately conclude that the ECSP instance does not have solutions. Concerning the
running time, we preliminary notice that the initialization steps are feasible in polynomial time. In
particular, computing AV and BV is feasible in polynomial time, by the properties of the decomposition
method DM (see Section 3). To characterize the complexity of the recursive invocations of Propagate,
we have to consider instead two cases.
In the case where there is no solution, we claim that the r-structure B′
V obtained by enforcing
generalized arc consistency in the ﬁrst invocation of Propagate (i.e., for i = 1) is empty. Indeed,
since (A, O) is tp-covered through DM, then {X1} is tp-covered in AV—just compare Deﬁnition 1 and
Deﬁnition 3. It follows that we can apply Theorem 2 on the set {X1} in order to conclude that, for
every relation R ∈τV with X1 ∈var(RAV ), RGAC(AV,BV)[{X1}] = AB[{X1}]. Since, AB[O] is empty,
the above implies that GAC(AV, BV) is empty too. Thus, ComputeAllSolutionsDM invokes just once
Propagate, where the only operation carried out is to enforce generalized arc consistency, which is
feasible in polynomial time.
Consider now the case where AB[O] is not empty. Then, the ﬁrst solution is computed after m
recursive calls of the procedure Propagate, where the dominant operation is to enforce generalized arc
11

consistency on the current pair (AV, BV). In particular, by the arguments in the proof of Theorem 3, it
follows that Propagate does not have to backtrack to ﬁnd this solution: after enforcing generalized arc
consistency at step i, any active value for Xi is guaranteed to occur in a solution with the current ﬁxed
values for the previous variables Xj, 1 ≤j < i. Since GAC can be enforced in polynomial time, this
solution can be computed in polynomial time as well.
To complete the proof, observe now that any solution is provided in output when Propagate is
invoked for i = m. After returning a tuple of values ⟨a1, ..., am⟩, Propagate may need to backtrack to
a certain index i′ ≥1 having some further (different) value ai′ to be processed, ﬁx Xi′ with this value,
propagate this assignment, and continue by processing variable Xi′+1. Thus, at most m invocations of
Propagate are needed to compute the next solution, and no backtracking step may occur before we
found it. Therefore, ComputeAllSolutionsDM runs WPD.
⊳
By the above theorem and the deﬁnition of domain restricted variables, the following can easily be
established.
Corollary 1. Let A be any class of ℓ-structures such that, for each A ∈A, (A, drv(A)) is tp-covered
through DM. Then, for every r-structure B, and for every set of variables O ⊆drv(A), the ECSP
instance (A, B, O) is solvable WPD.
In the case of bounded arity structures and if the (hyper)tree width is the chosen decomposition
method, it is not hard to see that the result in Corollary 1 is essentially tight. Indeed, the implication
(2) ⇒(1) in the theorem below easily follows from the well-known dichotomy for the decision ver-
sion [17], which is obtained in the special case of ECSP instances without output variables (O = ∅).
Theorem 6. Assume FPT ̸= W[1]. Let A be any class of ℓ-structures of bounded arity. Then, the
following are equivalent:
(1) A has bounded treewdith modulo homomorphic equivalence;
(2) For every A ∈A, for every r-structure B, and for every set of variables O ⊆drv(A), the ECSP
instance (A, B, O) is solvable WPD.
Actually, from an application perspective of this result, we observe that there is no efﬁcient algo-
rithm for the no-promise problem for such classes. In fact, the following proposition formalizes and
generalizes previous observations from different authors about the impossibility of actually trusting
positive answers in the (promise) decision problem [24,4].
We say that a pair (h, c) is a certiﬁed projected solution of (A, B, O) if, by using the certiﬁcate c, one
may check in polynomial-time (w.r.t. the size of (A, B, O)) whether h ∈AB[O]. E.g., any full solution
extending h is clearly such a certiﬁcate. If O = ∅, h is also empty, and c is intended to be a certiﬁcate
that (A, B) is a “Yes” instance of the decision CSP. Finally, we assume that the empty output is always
a certiﬁed answer, in that it entails that the input is a “No” instance, without the need for an explicit
certiﬁcate of this property.
Proposition 1. The following problem is NP-hard: Given any ECSP instance (A, B, O), compute a
certiﬁed solution in AB[O], whenever (A, O) is tp-covered through DM; otherwise, there are no require-
ments and any output is acceptable. Hardness holds even if DM is the treewidth method with k = 2, the
vocabulary contains just one binary relation symbol, and O = ∅.
Proof. We show a polynomial-time Turing reduction from the NP-hard 3-colorability problem. Let M
be a Turing transducer that solves the problem, that is, whenever (A, O) is tp-covered through DM, at the
end of a computation on a given input (A, B, O) its output tape contains a certiﬁed solution in AB[O],
otherwise, everything is acceptable. In particular, we do not pretend that M recognizes whether the
above condition is fulﬁlled.
12

Then, we use M as an oracle procedure within a polynomial time algorithm that solves the 3-
colorability problem. Let G = (N, E) be any given graph, and assume w.l.o.g. that it contains a triangle
{n1, n2}, {n2, n3}, and {n3, n1}. (Otherwise, select any arbitrary vertex n1 of G and connect it to
two fresh vertices n2 and n3, also connected to each other. It is easy to check that this new graph
is 3-colorable if, and only if, the original graph G is 3-colorable, as the two fresh vertices have no
connections with the rest of the graph.) Build the (classical) binary CSP (AG, B3c) where the vocabulary
contains one relation symbol RE, and the set of variables is AG = N. Moreover, RAG
E
= {⟨ni, nj⟩|
{ni, nj} ∈E}, and RB3c
E
= {⟨c, c′⟩| c ̸= c′, {c, c′} ⊆{1, 2, 3}}. Consider the treewidth method
for k = 2, and compute in polynomial time the pair (AV, BV) where AV = ℓ-tw2(AG) and BV =
r-tw2(B3c). In particular, observe that the hypergraph HAV contains a hyperedge {ni, nj, nl} for every
triple of vertices of G.
It is well-known and easy to see that G is 3-colorable if, and only if, AB3c
G
̸= ∅, that is, if there is
a homomorphism from AG to a triangle (indeed, B3c is a triangle). Therefore, if G is 3-colorable, the
triangle substructure A′ such that RA′
E = {⟨ni, nj⟩| {i, j} ⊂{1, 2, 3} | i ̸= j} is homomorphically
equivalent to AG. Moreover, in this case the hypergraph consisting of the single hyperedge {n1, n2, n3}
is a tree projection of HA′ w.r.t. HAV , or, equivalently, the treewidth of A′ is 2.
Now, run M on input (AG, B3c, ∅) and consider its ﬁrst output certiﬁcate c—say, for the sake
of presentation, a full solution for the problem. Then check in polynomial time whether c is a legal
certiﬁcate—in our exempliﬁcation, whether it encodes a solution of the given instance. If this is the
case, we know that G is 3-colorable; otherwise, we conclude that G is not 3-colorable. Indeed, M must
be correct on 3-colorable graphs, because there exists a tree projection of HA′ (and thus of any core
of AG—note that O = ∅and thus there is no further requirement) w.r.t. HAV. Since all these steps are
feasible in polynomial-time, we are done.
⊳
5
Enumerating Solutions over Arbitrary Output Variables
In this section we consider structural properties that are independent of output variables, so that tractabil-
ity must hold for any desired sets of output variables. For this case, we are able to provide certiﬁed
solutions WPD, which seems the more interesting notion of tractability for actual applications.
Figure 3 shows the ComputeCertifiedSolutionsDM algorithm computing all solutions of an
ECSP instance, with a certiﬁcate for each of them. The algorithm is parametric w.r.t. any chosen
decomposition method DM, and resembles in its structure the ComputeAllSolutionsDM algorithm.
The main difference is that, after having found an assignment ⟨a1, ..., am⟩for the variables in O,
ComputeCertifiedSolutionsDM still iterates over the remaining variables in order to ﬁnd a certiﬁcate
for that projected solution. Of course, ComputeCertifiedSolutionsDM does not backtrack over the
possible values to be assigned to the variables in {Xm+1, ..., Xn}, since just one extension sufﬁces to
certify that this partial solution can be extended to a full one. Thus, we break the cycle after an element
⟨ai⟩is picked from its domain and correctly propagated, for each i > m, so that in these cases we
eventually backtrack directly to i = m (to look for a new projected solution).
Note that ComputeCertifiedSolutionsDM incrementally outputs various solutions, but it halts
the computation if the current r-structure B′
V becomes empty. As an important property of the algo-
rithm, even when this abnormal exit condition occurs, we are guaranteed that all the elements provided
as output until this event are indeed solutions. Moreover, if no abnormal termination occurs, then we
are guaranteed that all solutions will actually be computed. Correctness follows easily from the same
arguments used for ComputeAllSolutionsDM, by observing that, whenever (HA, Hℓ-DM(A)) has a tree
projection, the full set of variables A is tp-covered through DM.
Theorem 7. Let A be an ℓ-structure, and O ⊆A be a set of variables. Then, for every r-structure B,
ComputeCertifiedSolutionsDM computes WPD a subset of the solutions in AB[O], with a certiﬁcate
for each of them. Moreover,
13

Input: An ECSP instance (A, B, O), where O = {X1, . . . , Xm};
Output: for each solution h ∈AB[O], a certiﬁed solution (h, h′);
Method: let A = {X1, ..., Xm, Xm+1, ..., Xn} be the variables of A;
update (A, B, A) with any of its domain restricted versions;
let AV := ℓ-DM(A), BV := r-DM(A, B);
invoke CPropagate(1, (AV, BV), m, ⟨⟩);
Procedure CPropagate(i: integer, (AV, BV): pair of structures, m: integer,
⟨a1, ..., ai−1⟩: tuple of values in Ai);
begin
1. let B′
V := GAC(AV, BV);
2. if i > 1 and B′
V is empty then output “DM failure” and HALT;
3. let activeValues := dom(Xi)B′
V ;
4. for each element ⟨ai⟩∈activeValues do
5. |
if i = n then
6. |
|
output the certiﬁed solution (⟨a1, ..., am⟩, ⟨am+1, ..., an⟩);
7. |
else
8. |
|
update dom(Xi)B′
V with {⟨ai⟩};
/∗Xi is ﬁxed to value ai ∗/
9. |
|
CPropagate(i + 1, (AV, B′
V), m, ⟨a1, ..., ai−1, ai⟩);
10. ⌊
⌊
if i > m then BREAK;
end.
Fig. 3. Algorithm ComputeCertifiedSolutionsDM.
Fig. 4. The undirected-grid structure Au, and a mapping to one of its cores.
– If ComputeCertifiedSolutionsDM outputs “DM failure”, then (HA, Hℓ-DM(A)) does not have a
tree projection;
– otherwise, ComputeCertifiedSolutionsDM computes WPD AB[O].
Moreover, we next give some evidence that, for bounded arity classes of instances, we cannot do
better than this. In particular, having bounded width tree-decompositions of the full structure seems a
necessary condition for the tractability of the enumeration problem WPD w.r.t. arbitrary sets of output
variables (and for every r-structure).
The main gadget of the proof that tree-decompositions are necessary for tractability is based on a
nice feature of grids. Figure 4 shows the basic idea for the simplest case of a relational structure Au
with only one relation symbol Ru such that RAu
u
is (the edge set of) an undirected grid. Then, any
substructure A1 of Au where RA1
u contains just one tuple is a core of Au. However, if we consider the
variant of Au where there is a domain constraint dom(X) for every corner X of the grid (depicted with
the circles in the ﬁgure), then the unique core is the whole structure. In fact, we next prove that this
property holds for any relational structure whose Gaifman graph is a grid.
Lemma 1. Let A be an ℓ-structure whose Gaifman graph is a grid G. Moreover, let O ⊆A be the set
of its four corners, and assume they are domain restricted, i.e., O ⊆drv(A). Then, A is a core.
Proof. Let G be such a k1 × k2 grid, and consider any homomorphism h that maps A to any of its
substructures A′. Since the four corners v1,1, v1,k2, vk1,1, vk1,k2 are domain restricted, h(X) = X must
hold for each of them (as ⟨X⟩is the one tuple of its domain constraint dom(X)A). We say that such
elements are ﬁxed.
14

Consider the ﬁrst row r1 = (v1,1, v1,2, . . . , v1,k2) of G. We have seen that its endpoints, which are
grid-corners, are ﬁxed. It is easy to check that h cannot map the path r1 to any path that is longer than
r1. However, r1 is the shortest path connecting the ﬁxed endpoints v1,1 and v1,k2, and hence it must
be mapped to itself. That is, h(X) = X for every element X occurring in r1, and thus, by the same
reasoning, for every element X occurring in the last row, and in the ﬁrst and the last columns of the grid.
It follows that the endpoints v2,1 and v2,k2 of the second row r2 are ﬁxed as well, and we may apply the
same argument to show that all elements occurring in r2 are ﬁxed, too. Eventually, row after row, we
get that all elements of A are ﬁxed, and thus the identity mapping is the only possible endomorphism
for A, which entails that A is a core.
⊳
We also exploit the grid-based construction from [17], whose properties relevant to this paper may
be summarized as follows.
Proposition 2 ([17]). Let k ≥2 and K =
 k
2

, and let A be any τ-structure such that the (k × K)-
grid is a minor of the Gaifman graph of a core of A. For any given graph G, one can compute in
polynomial time (w.r.t. ∥G∥) a τ-structure BA,G such that G contains a k-clique if, and only if, there is
a homomorphism from A to BA,G.
We can now prove the necessity of bounded treewidth for tractability WPD.
Theorem 8. Assume FPT ̸= W[1]. Let A be any bounded-arity recursively-enumerable class of ℓ-
structures closed under taking minors. Then, the following are equivalent:
(1) A has bounded treewdith;
(2) For every A ∈A, for every r-structure B, and for every set of variables O ⊆A, the ECSP instance
(A, B, O) is solvable WPD.
Proof. The fact that (1) ⇒(2) holds follows by specializing Theorem 7 to the tree decomposition
method. We next focus on showing that (2) ⇒(1) also holds.
Let A be such a bounded-arity class of ℓ-structures closed under taking minors, and having un-
bounded treewidth. From this latter property, by the Excluded Grid Theorem [22] it follows that every
grid is a minor of the Gaifman graph of some ℓ-structure in A. Moreover, because this class is closed
under taking minors, every grid is actually the Gaifman graph of some ℓ-structure in A.
Assume there is a deterministic Turing machine M that is able to solve with polynomial delay any
ECSP instance (A, B, O) such that A ∈A. We show that this entails the existence of an FPT algorithm
to solve the W[1]-hard problem p-CLIQUE, which of course implies FPT = W[1].
Let G be a graph instance of the p-CLIQUE problem, with the ﬁxed parameter k ≥2. We have
to decide whether G has a clique of cardinality k. We enumerate the recursively enumerable class
A until we eventually ﬁnd an ℓ-structure A whose Gaifman graph is the (k × K)-grid. Let τ be its
vocabulary. Note that searching for this structure A depends on the ﬁxed parameter k only (in particular,
it is independent of G).
Let O ⊆A be the variables at the four corners of this grid, and let A′ be the extension of A such that,
for every variable X ∈O, the vocabulary τ′ of A′ contains the domain relation-symbol dom(X). Thus,
the Gaifman graph of A′ is the same (k × K)-grid as for A, but its four corners are domain-restricted in
A′ (O ⊆drv(A′)). From Lemma 1, A′ is a core.
Recall now the grid-based construction in Proposition 2: We can build in polynomial time (w.r.t.
∥G∥) a structure B′
A′,G such that there is a homomorphism from A′ to B′
A′,G if, and only if, G has a
clique of cardinality k.
Consider the ECSP instance (A, B, O) where A ∈A by construction, and B is the restriction of
B′
A′,G to the vocabulary τ. Thus, compared with B′
A′,G, the r-structure B may miss the domain constraint
dom(X) for some output variable X ∈O. It is easy to see that h is a homomorphism from A′ to B′
A′,G
15

if, and only if, h is a homomorphism from A to B such that, for every X ∈O, h(X) ∈dom(X)B′
A′,G.
Therefore, to decide whether such a homomorphism exists (and hence to solve the clique problem), we
can just enumerate WPD the set of solutions AB[O] and check whether the four domain constraints on
the corners of A′ are satisﬁed by any of these solutions. Now, recall that B′
A′,G is built in polynomial
time from G, and thus every variable may take only a polynomial number of values, and of course
all combinations of four values from dom(X)B′
A′,G, X ∈O, are polynomially many. It follows that
M actually takes polynomial time for computing AB[O], and one may then check in polynomial time
whether the additional domain constraints in A′ are satisﬁed or not by some solution in AB[O].
By combining the above ingredients, we got an FPT algorithm to decide whether G has a clique of
cardinality k.
⊳
