arXiv:1901.00188v2  [cs.LG]  24 Jan 2019
COMPLEMENTARY REINFORCEMENT LEARNING TOWARDS
EXPLAINABLE AGENTS
A PREPRINT
Jung Hoon Lee
Allen Institute for Brain Science
Seattle, WA 98109

January 25, 2019
ABSTRACT
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms allow agents to learn skills and strategies to perform com-
plex tasks without detailed instructions or expensive labelled training examples. That is, RL agents
can learn, as we learn. Given the importance of learning in our intelligence, RL has been thought
to be one of the key components to general artiﬁcial intelligence, and recent breakthroughs in deep
reinforcement learning suggest that neural networks (NN) are natural platforms for RL agents. How-
ever, despite the efﬁciency and versatility of NN-based RL agents, their decision-making remains
incomprehensible, reducing their utilities. To deploy RL into a wider range of applications, it is
imperative to develop explainable NN-based RL agents. Here, we propose a method to derive a
secondary comprehensible agent from a NN-based RL agent, whose decision-makings are based on
simple rules. Our empirical evaluation of this secondary agent’s performance supports the possibility
of building a comprehensible and transparent agent using a NN-based RL agent.
1
Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL), inspired by our brain’s reward-based learning, allows artiﬁcial agents to learn a wide
range of tasks without detailed instructions or labeled training sets which are necessary for supervised learning [1, 2].
Given that RL agents’ learning resembles our process of learning and that learning is essential to our intelligence,
it seems natural to assume that RL is one of the key components to brain-like intelligent agents or general artiﬁcial
intelligence. Recent breakthroughs [3, 4] from DeepMind team showed that RL could train neural network (NN)-
based agents to outperform humans in video-games and even ’Go’, reigniting interests in RL and its applications in
NN-based agents, and noticeable developments in NN-based RL agents have been reported since then; see [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]
for examples.
However, despite rapid improvements in RL, NN-based RL agents’ decision-making process remains incomprehen-
sible to us. For instance, the AlphaGo’s strategies employed during the match with Sedol Lee exhibited efﬁciency
leading to victories, but the exact reasons behind its moves are unknown. AlphaGo demonstrated that incomprehensi-
ble decision-making can still be effective, but its effectiveness does not mean that it cannot be faulty. In ‘high stake
problems’ [10], any mistakes can be critical and need to be avoided. A loss in one Go match out of 100 matches
is insigniﬁcant, but crashing a car once out of 100 drives is perilous and unacceptable. If we comprehend the exact
internal mechanisms of RL agents, we can correct their mistakes without negative impact on their performance. That
is, ’transparent’ agents with comprehensible internal decision-making processes [11] are necessary to safely deploy
RL agents into high stake problems.
Two earlier studies [12, 13] showed that the decision-making processes of RL agents can be translated into human-
readable descriptions. Their proposed algorithms, which fall into the ’post-hoc’ interpretation approach [10], do
provide some insights into RL agents’ decision-making process, but they do not address how we correct (or ﬁx) RL
agents’ actions. Then, how do we build transparent RL agents? We propose a secondary agent as a potential solution,
which utilizes simple rules to choose the best action. This proposal is based on two ideas. First, the secondary agent’s

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
action can be analyzed because it utilizes simple rules. Second, the secondary agent can perform general tasks, if it
takes advantage of trained RL agents.
In this study, we propose a quasi-symbolic (QS) agent as a secondary agent and compare its performance to RL agents’
performance. Speciﬁcally, QS agents learn, from RL agents’ behaviors, the values of transitions of states. After
learning the values of transitions, QS agents identify the most valuable state-transitions (‘hub states’) and search for a
sequence of actions (action plans) to reach one of the hub states. If QS agent cannot ﬁnd a proper action plan to reach
a hub state, they choose the best action by comparing the values of immediate transitions. In this study, we tested
QS agents’ performance using the ’lunar-lander’ benchmark problem available in ’OpenAI Gym’ environments [14].
Our results show that QS agents’ performance is comparable to RL agents’ performance. While our experiments are
conducted in a simple environment, the results indicate that comprehensible agents with transparent decision-making
process can be derived from RL agents.
2
Related work
While deep learning (DL) spreads its inﬂuence, it remains unclear whether DL can safely be applied to high stake deci-
sion problems (e.g., medicine and criminal justice) [10]. DL agents rely on cascades of nonlinear interactions among
computing nodes (i.e., neurons), but the interactions are too complex to be analyzed, which limits our mechanistic
understanding of DL agents’ decision-making. This means that despite extensive testings we cannot fully predict their
actions. Thus, deploying DL agents to high stake problems may lead to critical failures; such failures have already
been reported [10].
To deploy DL agents into high stake decisions, it is imperative to understand the exact process of their decisions.
If reasoning behind their decisions become clear, developers could improve DL agents’ reliability, policy-makers
could introduce regulations to ensure fairness of DL agents, and users could use DL agents more effectively [15].
While we note the diverse aspects of DL explainability [15], Lipton [11] pointed out that explainable intelligent
agents can be obtained by analyzing the internal mechanisms or the agents’ behaviors, which were referred to as
transparency and post-hoc interpretability, respectively. If we could understand the internal mechanisms, we will
be able to fully understand DL agents’ decision-making process; that is, their decisions will become ’transparent’.
Several methods have been proposed to analyze the internal mechanisms of DL agents [16, 17, 18, 19, 20], and Olah et
al.[21] presented an intriguing way to synergistically use them to gain insights into DL agents’ decision-making. Also,
multiple studies sought the post-hoc interpretability of DL agents, which we could use to predict and prevent potential
failures. Speciﬁcally, human interpretable descriptions can be automatically generated by secondary agents [22, 11],
and representative examples or image parts can be identiﬁed by algorithms such as sensitivity analysis [23, 24].
The majority of studies have focused on feedforward DL, but a few studies pursued the explainability of RL. Speciﬁ-
cally, Hayes and Shah [12] showed that a secondary network could be trained to provide user-interpretable descriptions,
and Waa et al. [13] further showed that user-interpretable descriptions could be contrasive; that is, their methods can
explain why RL agents would prefer one option to another [25, 26]. Although such post-hoc interpretability can be
used to evaluate the quality/reliability of RL agents, it does not provide a way to ﬁx RL agents’ mistakes. However,
with transparent agents, we can correct their mistakes selectively. In our study, we propose a potential approach, which
can help us obtain transparent RL agents.
3
Network Structure
QS agents interact with RL agents and make plans for future actions by utilizing the model of environment (Env
network). All these three networks/agents are constructed using the ’Pytorch’, an open-source machine learning
toolkit [27]. Below, we discuss QS, RL and Env network in details.
3.1
The structure of reference RL agent
We used an actor-critic model as a reference RL agent [28, 29]. The implementation was adopted from the ofﬁcial
pytorch github repository [30], which maximizes the expected discounted reward Eπθ[R], where R = PT
t=0 γtrt,
given policy πθ; where T and θ represent a trajectory and parameters of the policy. The gradient ascent of E is
estimated as shown in eq. (1).
2

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
▽θ [R] = E

T
X
t=0
▽θ log πθ(a|s){r′(t) −V (s, t)}

r′(t) = R(t)−< R >
σR
(1)
, where a, θ, s, V = V (s, t) represent action, parameters, state and value function, respectively; where < R > and σR
represent the mean and standard deviation of R in episodes.
The actor consists of 8 input, 100 hidden and 4 output nodes, and the critic, 8 input, 100 hidden and 1 output nodes.
The initial learning rate is 0.003 and is decreased by 10 times at every 1000 episode.
3.2
The structure of quasi-symbolic (QS) agent
QS agent consists of matching and value networks, which are both single (synaptic) layer networks. The matching
and value networks are sequentially connected (Fig. 1A). That is, the output node of matching network is directly
connected to the output node of value network. The number of matching nodes (output nodes in the matching network)
is identical to the number of value nodes (output nodes in the value network), and the connections between matching
and value networks are one-to-one. The matching network memorizes input vectors by imprinting normalized inputs
to synaptic weights converging onto the output node Oi, as shown in Eq. 2; hi the synaptic input to Oi.
hk
i =
X
j
wij
sk
j
∥⃗sk∥2 , where wmn =
sm
n
∥⃗sm∥2
(2)
, where superscript indices represent the inputs (state-transition vectors in this study; see below), and subscript indices
represent the components of inputs. With normalized inputs stored in synaptic weights wij, the outputs of matching
nodes represent cosine similarities between the current input and stored inputs. If all synaptic inputs hi to all output
nodes Oi are smaller than the threshold value θ, the input is considered novel and stored into the matching network
by adding a new output node into the matching network; the default threshold is θ = 0.97, unless stated otherwise.
Once a new node is added to the matching network, a new node is also added to the value network, to keep one-to-one
mapping (Fig. 1A). The strength of the connection between these two newly established units is determined by the
reward obtained by RL agents with the selected action. When the current input is one of the previously stored ones
(i.e., one of synaptic input to output nodes is higher than the threshold θ), the maximally activated node is identiﬁed,
and the connection to the corresponding value network node is updated by adding the reward induced by the input
vector (Eq. 3). It should be noted that only one matching node, which receives maximum synaptic input h, is allowed
to be active one at a time, which makes the matching network operate in linear regimes.
Wk ←Wk + rt
(3)
, where Wk is the connection between the matching node mk and value node vk, and rt is the reward the RL agent
obtain at time t.
In this study, the matching network is designed to memorize the transitions between states S and S′. That is, the input
to the network is ∆S = S′ −S. Since there are 8 state variables in the lunar-lander benchmark problem, the number
of input nodes of the matching network is 8. The sizes of the matching and value networks are not ﬁxed. Instead, they
are determined during the training of QS agents. The more diverse inputs are, the bigger matching networks become.
For instance, if all inputs are identical, there is only one matching node.
3.3
Env network
The Env network models the environment. Thus, it receives the state vector S and action a as inputs and returns the
next state (Fig. 1B). The inputs layer includes 12 nodes which represent 8 state variables and 4 possible actions in
the lunar lander environment, and the output layers include 8 nodes (due to 8 state variables). In our experiments, we
set the hidden layer of the Env network to have 300 nodes. The Env network is trained using the mean squared error
(squared L2 norm). In each episode of RL training, the error is accumulated. After each episode, the Env network is
updated using the accumulated error; that is, 1 episode is a single batch of backpropagation. The initial learning rate
is 0.05 and is decreased to 10 percent at every 1000 episode.
3

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
4
Results
In this section, we discuss the operating principles of QS agents including the interplay between QS and RL agents.
Then, we present our experiments which were conducted to evaluate QS agents’ performance in solving lunar-lander
problem compared to RL agents.
4.1
Training and operating rules of Quasi-Symbolic (QS) agents
Unlike RL agents, QS agents do not work alone. Instead, their operations depend on RL agents in both learning and
inference modes; that is, RL and QS agents are complementary with each other. The matching and value networks in
QS agents are updated by using RL agents’ behaviors during training. Speciﬁcally, in each time step in the training
period, the previous state S and the current state S′ are used to generate the state transition vectors ∆S = S′ −S, and
this transition vector is fed into the matching network as inputs. The matching network ﬁrst determines the novelty of
the current transition vector; this novelty detection is done by inspecting synaptic inputs to matching nodes (see section
3 and Eq. 2 for details). When a novel transition vector is introduced, a new output node is added to the matching
and value networks (Fig. 1A), and the connection between matching and value networks (one-to-one connection wk
between newly added nodes, mk and vk) is established (section 3). The strength of the connection wk is determined
by the reward given to the RL agent after the transition from S to S′. When the earlier input is introduced again, the
maximally activated matching node is identiﬁed, and the connection between the identiﬁed matching node and the
value node, which is exclusive and one-to-one (Fig. 1A), is updated by adding the reward obtained to the previous
strength (Eq. 3). It should be noted that only one matching node is allowed to be active and used to assess the value
of the transition. In brief, the matching network memorizes transition vectors observed during training, and the value
network stores the amount of rewards induced by the observed transitions.
In the inference mode, in which QS agents choose the best action, QS agents utilize both the trained RL agents and
Env networks to make action plans, whose lengths are variable. In doing so, QS agents identify the most valuable
transition vectors ∆Sk by inspecting connections’ strength between matching and value networks. In this study, we
identiﬁed synaptic weights higher than θhub deﬁned in Eq. 4.
θhub =< wk > +α × σ(wk)
(4)
, where < wk > and σ(wk) are mean and standard deviations of synaptic weights, and α is the scale constant which
determines the magnitude of θhub. The default value of α is 0.1. Due to the one-to-one connections between matching
and value networks, the synaptic weights allow us to identify the most valuable transitions observed during the training
period, which are referred to as hub states hereafter.
After identifying the hub states, QS agents search for an action plan to reach one of the hub states. In doing so, QS
agents utilize the Env network and the trained RL agent to predict future states (and thus transitions as well) to make
an action plan. At each state, RL agent provides a possible action, and Env network returns the next state in response
to the suggested action. Employing them recursively (Fig. 1B), QS agents can predict the future states. During this
planning, at each time step, QS agents examine whether a transition vector is one of the hub states (i.e., the most
valuable transitions) or not. If QS agents do expect to reach one of the hub states, they stop planning and execute the
current plan. The maximum length of the action plan is 10 time-step, unless stated otherwise. If no hub state cannot
be reached within the predeﬁned maximal time-step, QS agents start over and make a new plan. For each state, QS
agents are allowed to make a total of 5 different plans. If they cannot ﬁnd a path to the hub states in all ﬁve plans,
they inspect the values of the ﬁrst transition in the ﬁve plans and choose the best immediate action according to the
reward estimated by the value network. In this case, rather than taking a sequence of actions, QS agents execute a
single action (i.e., the ﬁrst action in the plan) only.
4.2
QS agents’ performance compared to RL agents
To evaluate QS agents’ performance, we compared their performance to that of RL agents by using the lunar-lander
benchmark task included in the OpenAI gym environment [14]. In this study, we constructed RL agents (actor-critic
model), QS agents and Env network using Pytorch, an open-source machine learning library [27]; their schematics
are illustrated in Fig. 1. We trained RL, QS agents and Env network during 5000 episodes; see section 3 for training
details. Figures 2A and B show the total amount of rewards given to the RL agent and the error function of the Env
network during 5000 episodes. As shown in the ﬁgure, while the reward in each trial ﬂuctuates from one trial to
another, the amount of rewards, on average, increases rapidly until 1000 episodes. After 1000 episodes, the speed of
improvement is reduced. Similarly, the error of Env network is reduced most rapidly in the ﬁrst 1000 episodes, and
then the speed of error-reduction slows down.
4

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
At every 1000 episode, we froze the learning and tested both QS and RL agents using the same 100 environments of
lunar lander; that is, the environments are instantiated with the same random seeds. The RL agent in this study uses
stochastic policy to choose actions (eq. 1), and thus its behaviors depend on the random seed forwarded to the Pytorch.
Moreover, QS agents’ behaviors are also stochastic, as they rely on RL agents for their decisions. To avoid potential
biases based on their stochastic behaviors, we constructed 10 independent QS and RL agents by forwarding distinct
random seeds to pytorch and calculated the average reward for both agents. Figures 3A and B show the average amount
of QS and RL agents for all 100 instantiations of environment. x-axis represents the identity of environment, and y-
axis represents the reward averaged over 10 independently constructed agents. Rewards are estimated after training
the RL agent in 1000 episodes (Fig. 3A) and 5000 episodes (Fig. 3B). As shown in the ﬁgure, the performance of
QS agents (shown in red) with 10 time-step action plan are comparable to that of RL agents (shown in blue). Figure
3C shows the average reward calculated using 10 independent agents in 100 environments, after training the RL agent
in 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000 and 5000 episodes, respectively; that is, the mean values and standard errors are estimated
from 1000 individual experiments (10 independent agents × 100 environments).
Then, we varied the parameters to examine how they affect QS agents’ performance. First, we tested the effects of
action plans’ lengths. As shown in Fig. 4A, QS agents’ performance improves, as the maximal length of action
plans increases. Second, we increased the number of hub states by lowering θhub. Speciﬁcally, we set α = 0.05 and
estimated the amount of rewards. As shown in Fig. 4B, QS agents’ performance improved. We also increased θhub to
further examine the effects of the number of hub states on QS agents’ performance and found that QS performance is
negatively correlated with θhub (Fig. 5A). Finally, we perturbed the threshold value θ for the novelty detection (used
in matching networks) to see how it affects QS agents’ performance. As shown in Fig. 5B, QS agents obtained less
rewards. This may be explained by the fact that the accuracy of predictions on QS agents’ future states decreases, as
the threshold θ becomes lower,
5
Discussion
In this study, we propose QS agents to develop transparent RL agents. The newly proposed QS agents have two
operating units, matching and value networks. With these two units, QS agents evaluate actions suggested by RL
agents and choose the most probable choice. To select the most probable action, QS agents search for a path to reach
one of the hub states by utilizing the Env network which models the environment. Our results (Fig. 4) suggest that
this future plan ensures QS agents’ good performance.
Then, do QS agents have transparent decision processes? QS agents’ decisions are transparent for two reasons. First,
the two operating units of QS agents have simple structures, which can be analyzed easily. The value network simply
accumulates rewards given after the transition of states into synaptic weights, and it returns these stored values depend-
ing on inputs (∆S). That is, the value network is, in principle, equivalent to conventional memory units. The matching
network identiﬁes the old input (∆S), which is the closest to the current input by using the cosine similarity (eq. 2).
In addition, as only a single matching node is allowed to be active, it is clear that the matching network’s operation
can be easily analyzed. Second, QS agents rely on a simple set of rules to select the best actions based on suggestions
made by RL. With both simple inner mechanisms and operating rules, QS agents have transparent decision-making
process.
Moreover, it should be noted that the output nodes of the matching network are working independently from each other.
That is, the matching nodes can be removed and added without interfering with other matching nodes’ operations. This
property makes manual modiﬁcation of QS agents’ actions possible. If a new piece of evidence ﬁnds a particular state-
transition to be unacceptable, it can be removed. On the other hand, if some state-transitions ∆S, which have not
been previously observed, are considered valuable, they can be added to QS agents. Similarly, the synaptic weights
of value networks and hub states can also be changed, if necessary. Therefore, QS agents can be continuously and
incrementally improved (or repaired) to avoid mistakes.
5.1
Potential variations of QS agents
To address the possibility of deriving a comprehensible secondary agent from RL agents, we sought generic algorithms
to be applied to general RL problems, but QS agents and their operations can be customized in domain-speciﬁc ways.
Below, we list a few potential variations of our generic QS agents.
First, current QS agents evaluate individual transitions ∆S using the rewards RL agents obtain immediately after
completing the transition. However, the actual values of transitions can be estimated differently. For instance, instead
of using the immediately obtained reward, we can use the total rewards from the transition to the end of an episode for
evaluating state transitions.
5

A PREPRINT - JANUARY 25, 2019
Second, in this study, QS agents treat all state variables equally and rely on a single-state vector ∆S. However, state
variables do not have equivalent values in agents’ behaviors. For example, the coordinates and velocities included in
the state vectors of lunar-lander do have different importance in terms of agents dynamics. If we deal with coordinates
and velocities distinctively, QS agents may evaluate the state-transitions more effectively. In this case, there will be two
state vectors; S →S ˙x, Sx. Similarly, a single state-transition vector can be split into multiple ones; S →S1, S2, ..., Sn.
In doing so, QS agents need to utilize multiple matching and value networks, and the actual value can be estimated
with a linear summation of outputs of multiple value nodes.
Third, the state transition vectors ∆S can be coupled with state vectors S to estimate the values of actions more
precisely. For instance, an agent’s horizontal move can be either bad or good depending on the current state. If both
state and transition vectors are used, QS agent may have better estimation of agents’ actions.
5.2
Implications for the brain’ complementary system
Prefrontal cortex (PFC) has been thought to be a hub for high-level cognitive functions such as decision-making,
learning and working memory [31, 32, 33, 34]. However, PFC does not work alone and is known to be connected to
other brain areas. The two main areas that have strong interactions with PFC are hippocampus [35, 36] and anterior
cingulate cortex (ACC) [37, 38]. Notably, complementary learning system theory suggests central roles of the interplay
between PFC and hippocampus in our ability to learn continuously [39]. Then, why does PFC need to interact with
ACC which has been postulated to be associated with multiple functions such as error likelihood [40] and prediction
of expected outcomes [41]? We note that QS agents can predict the future outcomes, consistent with one of ACC’s
hypothetical functions. Based on our results that QS agents can evaluate RL agents’ decisions, we propose that one of
ACC functions is to evaluate possible actions suggested by PFC and choose the best one depending on context.
