Inducing Sparse Coding and And-Or Grammar from Generator Network
Xianglei Xing1,2, Song-Chun Zhu2, Ying Nian Wu2
1College of Automation, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China
2Department of statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095

Abstract
We introduce an explainable generative model by applying
sparse operation on the feature maps of the generator net-
work. Meaningful hierarchical representations are obtained
using the proposed generative model with sparse activations.
The convolutional kernels from the bottom layer to the top
layer of the generator network can learn primitives such as
edges and colors, object parts, and whole objects layer by lay-
er. From the perspective of the generator network, we propose
a method for inducing both sparse coding and the AND-OR
grammar for images. Experiments show that our method is
capable of learning meaningful and explainable hierarchical
representations.
1
Introduction
The sparsity principle has played a fundamental role in high-
dimensional statistics, machine learning, and signal process-
ing. In particular, sparse coding (Olshausen and Field 1996)
is an important principle for understanding the visual cor-
tex. By imposing sparsity constraints on the coefﬁcients of
a linear generative model, (Olshausen and Field 1997) learn
Gabor-like wavelets that resemble the neurons in the prima-
ry visual cortex (V1) from natural image patches.
However, developing a top-down sparse coding model
that can generate (in addition to merely reconstruct) real-
istic natural image patterns has proven to be a difﬁcult task.
The model of (Olshausen and Field 1997) assumes that the
coefﬁcients of the linear model follow a sparse distribution.
However, it is difﬁcult to develop a realistic model for the so-
phisticate sparse patterns, which involves a selection process
that selects which coefﬁcients are active, in addition to gen-
erating the values of the active coefﬁcients. The commonly
used independent spike and slab model (Ishwaran and Rao
2005) can hardly generate realistic images. Moreover, even
if we do have such a selection model as a prior model for
the coefﬁcients, ﬁtting the model to each training example
involves a non-trivial inference process to identify the active
coefﬁcients and estimate their values. Because of the model-
ing and computing difﬁculties, we still do not have a realistic
Copyright c 2019, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org) Workshop on Network Interpretability
for Deep Learning.All rights reserved.
 This work has been done when author working as visiting
scholar in UCLA.
top-down generative model that has the linear sparse coding
model at the lowest layer or incorporates the sparse coding
principle across its layers.
Recently, the generator network (Goodfellow et al. 2014;
Higgins et al. 2016; Xing et al. 2018) has proven to be a sur-
prisingly powerful top-down model for natural images (as
well as other types of signals). This model can also be con-
sidered a generalization of the factor analysis model. While
the sparse coding model generalizes the prior distribution
of the coefﬁcients from a Gaussian noise vector to a sparse
vector, the generator network retains the prior distribution of
the coefﬁcients as a Gaussian noise vector, but it generalizes
the linear mapping from the coefﬁcient vector to the signal
in factor analysis to a non-linear mapping parametrized by
a top-down convolutional neural network (or a so-called de-
convolutional network).
However, unlike the sparse coding model, the generator
network is a dense model without sparsity. In this paper,
we try to fuse the sparse coding model and the generator
network, or more speciﬁcally, we try to induce the sparse
coding model from the generator network. To accomplish
this, we use a simple mechanism where at each layer of the
top-down generator network, we only select the top k coef-
ﬁcients to be active and force all the other coefﬁcients to be
zeros. This leads to a top-down sparse coding generator net-
work. The fusion leads to the following advantages. (1) The
model can still be learned and inferred efﬁciently as in the
original generator network. (2) The model can still generate
realistic images. (3) The model incorporates the sparse cod-
ing principle and learns meaningful basis functions. Thus the
proposed model naturally fuses the generator network and s-
parse coding model while maintaining their advantages.
Furthermore, the proposed model connects the sparsity
principle to the compositionality principle. The model is ex-
plainable since visual patterns are hierarchical compositions
of basis functions. In the language of AND-OR grammars
(Zhu and Mumford 2007), the dictionary of the basis func-
tions can be considered a large OR node, where each basis is
a child node of this OR node and each generated image is it-
self an AND-OR structure, where AND means composition
of the constituent basis functions and OR means different
choices and conﬁgurations of the basis functions as well as
variations of their coefﬁcients.

2
Generative Model with Sparse Activations
A typical generator has a top-down structure as illustrat-
ed in Figure 1. The input latent vector Z ∈Rd is fed
into a fully connected layer and through a Relu oper-
ation to produce featuremap1, or fm1
∈Rn1
w×n1
h×n1
c,
with non-linear activations. Then, featuremap1 is sen-
t through the ﬁrst deconvolutional layer with kernels ker1 ∈
Rn1
c×h1×h1×n2
c and then through a Relu to produce fea-
turemap2, fm2 ∈Rn2
w×n2
h×n2
c. The produced featuremap2
continues through deconvolutional layers with correspond-
ing kernels keri ∈Rni
c×hi×hi×ni+1
c
after which the output
image Y ∈Rno
w×no
h×3 is generated with the non-linear sig-
moid or tanh function. To introduce an explainable gener-
ative model, we apply the sparse operation on each layer’s
feature map such that the activations within the feature map
are very sparse.
Figure 1: An illustration of the generator with sparse activa-
tions.
The sparse operation on the ith layer’s feature map is de-
ﬁned as the TopK(·, K) operation which selects and keeps
the K maximum elements within the tensor fmi and sets all
other elements to zero, fmi
s = TopK(fmi, K).
2.1
Inducing And-Or-Graphs
After the sparse operation, most of the elements of the fea-
ture map become zeros, and very sparse activations sur-
vive. These sparse activations are located at different spa-
tial directions and channels. (e.g.) For a feature map of size
nw × nh × nc along the spatial directions, at most nw × nh
activations survive. At a particular (xi, yi) of these nw × nh
locations, suppose ci activations survive along the channel
direction, then we have, K = nw×nh
i=1
ci, where K is the
number of overall sparse activations within the feature map.
At each location (xi, yi), we can deﬁne an ‘AND’ node, s-
ince a full image must consist of contents (activations) at all
the spatial locations. For a particular spatial location (xi, yi),
we name the surviving activations along the channel direc-
tion as the ‘OR’ nodes, since at each location, we have dif-
ferent choices to utilize the kernels from the ci channels to
construct the next layer’s feature map or the ﬁnal output im-
age. Thus, these sparse activations form the And-Or Parsing
Graph. The sparse activations are determined by the input
latent vector and the learned parameters (weights and bias)
of the generator. A different latent vector will generate a d-
ifferent parsing graph.
2.2
Inducing sparse coding
For the ith layer, the value of the Ki sparse activation-
s can be interpreted as the sparse coefﬁcients, si
j, j
∈
{1, . . . , Ki}. Suppose the corresponding K basis func-
tions are denoted as Hi
j, j
∈
{1, . . . , Ki}, Hi
j
∈
Rni+1
w
×ni+1
h
×ni+1
c
, the sparse activations in the (i + 1)th lay-
er can be obtained as
fmi+1
s
=
ReLU(TopK(fmi+1, Ki+1))
=
ReLU(TopK(
Ki

j=1
si
j × Hi
j, Ki+1)) (1)
It is worth to note that both ReLU and the TopK opera-
tions are non-linear and can be seen as switches or masks
that partitioning the space. However, after we obtain the
parsing graph of a particular input latent vector Z, we can
remember these masks of the chosen elements of both the
TopK and ReLU operations. Then, these non-linear opera-
tions will be changed to linear operations. Therefore, we can
rewrite the sparse activations in the (i + 1)th layer as
fmi+1
s
=
(fmi+1  maski+1
T
)  maski+1
R
=
(
Ki

j=1
si
j × Hi
j  maski+1
T
)  maski+1
R
(2)
where  denotes the dot product between two matrices.
maskT and maskR are the masks of the TopK and the
ReLU results on the parsing graph, and both of them have
the same size of ni+1
w
× ni+1
h
× ni+1
c
. The basis Hi
j can be
computed by setting the other sparse coefﬁcients to be zeros,
si
k = 0, k = j. Then we have
si
j × Hi
j = fmi
sj ⊗keri + 1
Ki biasi
(3)
where ⊗denotes the deconvolutional operation, keri and
biasi denote the kernels and bias at the ith layer, and fmi
sj
denotes the feature map at the ith layer with only one acti-
vation whose value is si
j. In other words, the feature map of
each sparse activation at the ith layer, can be written as,
fmi
sj
=
(fmi  maski,j
T )  maski
R
=
(
Ki−1

j=1
si−1
j
× Hi−1
j
 maski,j
T )  maski
R(4)
where maski,j
T
denotes the mask that only chooses the jth
largest elements from the top Ki activations at layer i.
Moreover, the ﬁnal generated image Y can also be pre-
sented in the uniﬁed sparse coding framework as
Y = tanh(
Ki

j=1
si
jBi
j)
(5)
where Bi
j ∈Rno
w×no
h×3 is the synthesis basis correspond-
ing to the jth sparse activation in the ith layer, and can be

computed as
Bi
j
=
fmL  maskL
T
=
fmL−1
s
⊗kerL−1 +
1
KL−1 biasL−1
(6)
where L is number of the bottom layer, and fmL−1
s
can be
computed by Eq. (2) and (3) with recursion.
2.3
Learning and Inference
The generator model with sparse activations can be ex-
pressed as
Z ∼N(0, Id),
Y = g(Z; θ, tk) + !, ! ∼N(0, σ2ID).
(7)
g(Z; θ, tk) is a top-down sparse ConvNet deﬁned by both
the parameters θ which includes the weight and bias pa-
rameters and tk which includes the number of each lay-
er’s maximum surviving activations. The latent vector Z is
mapped to the signal Y by the sparse ConvNet g. To learn
this generator model, we introduce a learning and inference
algorithm, without designing and learning extra inference
networks. Speciﬁcally, the proposed model can be trained
by maximizing the log-likelihood on the training dataset
{Yi, i = 1, . . . , N},
L(θ)
=
1
N
N

i=1
log P(Yi; θ, tk)
=
1
N
N

i=1
log

P(Yi, Z; θ, tk)dZ.
(8)
The uncertainty in inferring Z is taken into account by the
above observed-data log-likelihood. We can compute θ by
minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence KL(Pdata|Pθ)
from the data distribution Pdata to the model distribution Pθ.
The gradient of L(θ) is obtained according to the follow-
ing equation which is related to the EM algorithm
∂
∂θ log P(Y ; θ, tk)
=
1
P(Y ; θ, tk)
∂
∂θ

P(Y, Z; θ, tk)dZ
=
EP (Z|Y ;θ,tk)
 ∂
∂θ log P(Y, Z; θ, tk)

.
(9)
In general, the expectation in (9) is analytically intractable,
and needs to be approximated by an MCMC method that
samples from the posterior P(Z|Y ; θ, tk) ∝p(Y, Z; θ, tk),
such as the Langevin dynamic inference, which iterates
Zτ+1 = Zτ + δ2
2
∂
∂Z log P(Zτ, Y ; θ, tk) + δEτ,
(10)
where τ indexes the time step, δ is the step size, and Eτ
denotes the noise term,Eτ ∼N(0, Id). The log of the joint
density in Eq.(10) can be evaluated by
log p(Y, Z; θ, tk) = log [p(Z)p(Y |Z; θ, tk)]
= −1
2σ2 Y −g(Z; θ, tk)2 −1
2Z2 + C
(11)
where C is the constant term, and is independent of Z and Y .
It can be shown that, given sufﬁcient transition steps, the Z
obtained from this procedure follows the joint posterior dis-
tribution. For each training example Yi, we run the Langevin
dynamics in Eq.(10) to get the corresponding posterior sam-
ple Z. The sample is then used for gradient computation in
Eq.(9). More precisely, the parameter θ is learned through
Monte Carlo approximation:
∂
∂θL(θ) ≈1
N
N

i=1
∂
∂θ log p(Yi, Zi; θ, tk)
= 1
N
N

i=1
1
σ2 (Yi −g(Zi; θ, tk)) ∂
∂θg(Zi; θ, tk).
(12)
2.4
Extension with Energy Based Model
It is well known that using squared Euclidean distance alone
to train generator networks often yields blurry reconstruc-
tion results, since the precise location information of details
may not be preserved, and the L2 loss in the image space
leads to averaging all likely locations. In order to improve
the generative performance, we employ a descriptor to de-
scribe the distribution and the context information to help
the generator produce better results. A descriptor model is
also a kind of energy-based model, and is in the form of ex-
ponential tilting of a reference distribution
P(Y ; φ) =
1
Z(φ) exp [f(Y ; φ)] q(Y ).
(13)
q(Y ) is the reference distribution such as Gaussian white
noise. f(Y ; φ) is a bottom-up ConvNet which maps the im-
age Y to the feature statistics. f(Y ; φ) is also known as
the energy function. Z(φ) =

exp [f(Y ; φ)] q(Y )dY =
Eq{exp[f(Y ; φ)]} is the normalizing constant. The descrip-
tor can capture the distribution and context of the training
images by maximizing the log-likelihood function. To im-
prove the generator’s performance, we feed ˜Yi which is sam-
pled from the descriptor into Eq. (12) to replace Yi. Since ˜Yi
contains meaningful distribution and context information of
the training data learned from the energy-based model, it is
easier for the generator to learn from ˜Yi than directly learn
from Yi. Learning from Yi directly is difﬁcult and the gener-
ated image may look blurry, since it requires per pixel recon-
struction. The model can also be learned by VAE and GAN,
except that VAE requires an extra inference model and does
not have strong synthesis power, while GAN cannot do in-
ference and has mode collapsing issue.
3
Experimental Results
To demonstrate the meaningful hierarchical representation
power of the proposed model, we show the hierarchical rep-
resentation results of the generator. The generator network
contains one fully-connected layer and two convolutional
layers. We train the sparse generator on 5k images from
CelebA benchmark dataset.
Figure 2 shows the learned kernels of the sparse gener-
ator with two convolutional layers. When the visual ﬁelds

(a) Convolutional kernels in the second (bottom) layer.
(b) Hierarchical representation of the kernels in the ﬁrst layer.
Figure 2: Hierarchical representation of the kernels learned
by the sparse generator with two convolutional layers in the
(a) bottom layer (b) top layer.
of the bottom layer is relatively large, the bottom convolu-
tional kernels can learn different facial parts, such as eyes,
noses, mouths, chins and nasolabial folds, which are shown
in Figure 2 (a). As we can observe from Figure 2 (b), the top
layer’s kernels have learned some trends to combine the fa-
cial parts in the bottom layer’s kernels into a whole face. It is
worth to note that without the proposed sparse-K operation
on the activations (or feature maps), we cannot obtain these
meaningful results in both layer’s kernel. With the sparse-
K operation, the energies are forced to be collected into very
few activation, which makes the corresponding kernels’ con-
tent meaningful.
To understand the sparse generator’s working principle,
we further explain the images’ generating process as a hier-
archical And-Or Parsing Graph as shown in Figure 3. Specif-
ically, as we can observe from the left part of Figure 3, at
the bottom convolutional layer, the basis functions are the
convolutional kernels themselves. A generated image is par-
titioned by 4 × 4 = 16 ‘AND’ nodes, and each ‘AND’ n-
ode contains several ‘OR’ nodes along the channel direction.
The ‘AND’ node at each location (e.g. eyes, nose, or mouth)
of the face contains the ‘OR’ nodes consisting of the cor-
responding colors and shapes from the same category. For
different faces, the conﬁguration of the ‘OR’ nodes are d-
ifferent, although they share the same dictionaries of bases.
Due to these different conﬁgurations, we can generate dif-
ferent kinds of facial parts and different faces.
The generated face can also be described by the coefﬁ-
cients of the sparse activations from any layer multiplied
by the corresponding basis functions according to Eq. (5).
Speciﬁcally, as we can observe from the right part of Figure
3, at the top layer, a face image is partitioned into 2 × 2 = 4
‘AND’ nodes, and each ‘AND’ node contains several ‘OR’
nodes. These ‘OR’ nodes (the basis functions at the top lay-
er) reveal high-level semantics, and are the combinations of
the basis functions at the bottom later.
The proposed model can learn both other objects and tex-
Figure 3: Analyzing generated face of sparse generator with
two convolutional layers using AND-OR Parsing Graph.
Figure 4: Learned bottom kernels from generator with two
convolutional layers on the cars and brickwall images.
ture patterns. Figure 4 shows some basis functions from the
bottom layer of the generator with two convolutional layers.
4
Conclusion
In this study, we introduce a sparse generative model which
naturally combines the generator network and sparse coding
model while maintaining their advantages. Our experiments
show that the model can learn meaningful dictionaries at d-
ifferent layers.
