AFSPP: Agent Framework for Shaping Preference and Personality with Large
Language Models
Zihong He1 , Changwang Zhang2
1Independent Scholar
2CCF Theoretical Computer Science Technical Committee

Abstract
The evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs)
has introduced a new paradigm for investigating
human behavior emulation.
Recent research has
employed LLM-based Agents to create a sociolog-
ical research environment, in which agents exhibit
behavior based on the unfiltered characteristics of
large language models.
However, these studies
overlook the iterative development within a human-
like setting - Human preferences and personalities
are complex, shaped by various factors and subject
to ongoing change as a result of environmental and
subjective influences. In light of this observation,
we propose Agent Framework for Shaping Prefer-
ence and Personality (AFSPP), exploring the mul-
tifaceted impact of social networks and subjective
consciousness on LLM-based Agents’ preference
and personality formation. With AFSPP, we have,
for the first time, successfully replicated several key
findings from human personality experiments. And
other AFSPP-based experimental results indicate
that plan making, sensory perceptions and social
networking with subjective information, wield the
most pronounced influence on preference shaping.
AFSPP can significantly enhance the efficiency and
scope of psychological experiments, while yielding
valuable insights for Trustworthy Artificial Intelli-
gence research for strategies to prevent undesirable
preference and personality development.
Keywords: multiagent systems, intelligent agents, natural
language processing, large language models, psychology,
preference and personality shaping, trustworthy artificial in-
telligence.
1
Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) usher in a novel paradigm,
depicting non-player character humanoids in sandbox games
with human-like psychological behaviors, autonomous cog-
nition, and deliberate environmental engagements [11; 23;
25]. Inspired by The Sims [15], Park [1] created a town
where LLM-based Agents align with human behavior, of-
fering a sociological research sandbox. Psychological prin-
ciples like Maslow’s needs [2; 23] and cognitive psychol-
ogy are applied to LLM and Agent research.
However,
current studies frequently initialize Agent preferences and
personality using preset prompts, which may not align ap-
propriately with human attributes. Human preferences and
personalities are multifaceted, influenced by various factors
and subject to continual change due to environmental and
subjective influences.
Historically, numerous psychologi-
cal research dedicated to examining social network and sub-
jective consciousness, emphasizing their crucial influence
on shaping human personalities and preferences
[26; 27;
28; 48].
Although recent studies explore the raw person-
ality of large language models, they often neglect the it-
erative evolution within a human-like environment
[4; 5;
29].
Here, we propose a miniature sandbox world to replicate
social situations in which LLM-based Agents conform to hu-
man behavior, providing a more realistic alternative to Park’s
method [1]. Within this sandbox world, Agents partake in
decision-making, communication, sensory perception, mem-
ory, reflection, and plan making. Drawing from this sand-
box world, we establish a framework - Agent Framework for
Shaping Preference and Personality (AFSPP), delving into
the multifaceted impact of social networks and Agent subjec-
tive consciousness on preference and personality formation.
This framework facilitates psychological simulations that
may be challenging or harmful to conduct on humans. With
the rising demand for trustworthy artificial intelligence [30;
45], the framework can serve as a guide to prevent unde-
sirable preferences and personalities. Our findings empha-
size the influence of social network, plan making and sen-
sory perception on preference shaping. The results of the
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) [3] personality exper-
iment with Agents initialized with different RIASEC profes-
sional types [19] conducted using our framework are in ac-
cordance with Soonjoo’s findings in college students [20].
This demonstrates the efficacy of AFSPP in guiding Agent-
based psychological experiments towards human alignment.
In the following sections, we’ll explore how social network
and subjective consciousness influence the preferences and
personality of Agents in our sandbox world, Qunit’s Cafe,
featuring three Agents: Anty, Agnes, and Qunit. The key
contributions of this paper include:
1. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to intro-
arXiv:2401.02870v1  [cs.MA]  5 Jan 2024

Coffee is bitter 
Sensory Perception 
Action
Communication
Reflection
Plan
1.Coffee doesn’t taste good but it helps keep 
energetic while making computer games.
2. Agnes is keenly interested in combining computer 
games with psychology.
2050.01.01 10:00: you drink coffee in dining area and feel bitter 
......
2050.01.01 10:10: you communicate with Agnes and talk about 
how to apply psychology in computer games...
2050.01.01 10:20 you think that Coffee doesn’t taste good but it 
helps keep energetic while making computer games.
.....
Memory
Hi Anty, how are you today? I heard you're working on a 
game for teenagers. I'm thinking about integrating my 
recent studies in cognitive psychology with it.
10:00: Drink Coffee
10:20: Work on Computer
....
Retrieval
influence
influence
Add
Add
Feedback
Anty
Happiness: 8
Energy: 10
Satiety: 8
Prompt: 
You are Anty, a humanity male. 
You are currently a queen 
university student, and you 
major in computer science. 
Your dream is to make a 
computer game that is loved by 
teenagers. Now is 2050-01-01 
10:40. You hanging out in cafe. 
Here is the relevant memory: 
... 
Here is the plan you make: ...
Would you like to drink coffee 
in the dining area ?
Decide to -> Pos Intent + 1
Decides not to Drink -> Neg Intent + 1
MBTI/SD3 Test: Which one of 
the following two words do you 
prefer? A. Fact B. Idea
A. Fact, because it provides 
concrete knowledge necessary for 
critical thinking skills.
-> sensing(S) + 1
Preference
Personality
Figure 1: Overview of LLM-based Agent’s Activities and Components in the Miniature Sandbox World - Qunit’s Cafe
duce a framework (AFSPP) for shaping LLM-based Agent
preferences and personality through the incorporation of so-
cial networks and subjective consciousness. This framework
facilitates the measurement of various influencing factors in
building diverse Agent preferences and personalities.
2. Based on AFSPP, we have, for the first time, success-
fully replicated several key findings from human psychology
experiments [20] with LLM-based Agents - Individuals in
social professions tend to be more extroverted, and those in
conventional professions lean towards introversion and sens-
ing, while researchers or artists exhibit richer intuition. Ad-
ditionally, we demonstrate for the first time the pivotal role of
plan-making, sensory perception, and social networks with
subjective information in shaping Agent preferences.
Our
findings serve as a valuable supplement to human psychol-
ogy, enabling the implementation of Agent-based simulation
experiments. And it indicates that AFSPP can significantly
improve the efficiency of psychological experiments and lead
to substantial savings in experiment costs.
3. We propose an approach to build a Multi-Agent sandbox
world that emulates human society through the adaptation of
Personality and Preference while maintaining a degree of ver-
satility. This method proves effective in significantly reduc-
ing the barriers to entry for Agent-based psychological sce-
nario simulations. Additionally, it makes the use of Agents
to replace humans in some difficult-to-replicate or potentially
harmful psychological experiments become possible, such as
the experiments related to critical transition in intimate rela-
tionships.
4. We find that social networks with negative information
and lack of identity are important reasons for the formation of
Agent’s dark personality, while plan making and sensory per-
ception have the most significant impact on preference shap-
ing, offering insights to inspire Trustworthy Artificial Intelli-
gence researchers in formulating strategies to prevent Agents’
undesirable preferences and personality development.
2
Relative Work
In this section, I explore literature on large language mod-
els(LLM) [34] in multi-Agent human social behavior simula-
tions. Additionally, the section elucidates the personality as-
sessment of large language models, emphasizing its construc-
tive role in establishing a trustworthy artificial intelligence
field. The goal is to underscore the significance of studying
the factors influencing the preferences and personality shap-
ing of LLM-based Agents.
2.1
Human Behavior Simulation Agent
Recent research emphasizes the adaptability of large lan-
guage models(LLM) reasoning, decision-making, dialogue
generation, context description, and goal-oriented planning
[34; 36; 39; 40; 41; 42; 44]. This suggests their potential
to replace traditional rule-based interaction models in sand-
box games [1; 14]. Role-playing sandbox games, known for
their flexible rule definitions, serve as ideal environments for
Agents based on LLM, offering insights into the consistency
of human behavior. Some studies highlight the high poten-
tial of LLM-based multi-Agent collaboration to accomplish
complex tasks [8; 35; 49; 50]. Park introduced a multi-Agent
interactive sandbox simulation world that incorporates reac-
tion, memory, reflection, and planning [1]. Then Zhilin [2]
emphasized the importance of aligning Agent behavior with
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs
[10].
Suzuki’s research ex-
plored the impact of personality descriptions based on LLMs
on social cooperation behavior [9].

However, these studies confine LLMs to embodying pre-
determined personalities and preferences, guided by prompt
words that describe traits like ”tenderness” or ”a preference
for coffee”. This approach runs counter to the goal of in-
tegrating LLMs with human personality and preferences, as
human traits are largely shaped by the environment and au-
tonomous cognitive abilities, and explicit vocabulary lacks
practical reference. Zhiheng’s investigation hinted at the po-
tential for shaping Agent personality based on environmental
factors [11], inspire us to build and experiment with a com-
prehensive framework for Agent personality and preference
shaping.
2.2
Personality of Large Language Models
There are various international methods to measure personal-
ity, such as MBTI [3] and Big Five personality traits [13].
With the rise of LLM approaching or surpassing human-level
thinking, researchers are paying growing attention to the per-
sonalities attributed to these models [4]. Prior research has
explored applying personality tests to LLMs, investigating
the impact of different training corpora and prompts on their
personality evolution
[5; 12; 17]. However, these studies
overlook that the crucial factor in the personality evolution of
LLM-based Agent simulations, which mimic human behav-
ior, is the social environment and subjective consciousness.
On the flip side, the increasing intelligence of LLM has led
to a rising demand for trustworthy artificial intelligence [30;
45]. Psychological testing methods for assessing maladaptive
personality, such as the SD-3 [6; 7], are employed in the per-
sonality evaluation of LLM. Xingyuan’s research [4] demon-
strates that prominent language models like GPT-3 [34] ex-
hibit darker scores than the human mean in the SD-3 test.
Therefore, guiding the LLM towards developing a trustwor-
thy and safe personality becomes a crucial task at hand.
3
Qunit’s Cafe: A Miniature Sandbox World
Simulating Human Behavior
We build a miniature sandbox environment called Qunit’s
Cafe based on the prototype of cafes. Qunit’s Cafe serves
as a suitable environment for verifying Agent Preference and
Personality shaping factors with lower spatial complexity
and module construction difficulty compared to Park’s sand-
box construction method [1]. The cafe hosts three GPT-4-
generated humanoid Agents: Anty, a Queen University stu-
dent passionate about creating teen-loved computer games;
Agnes, Anty’s schoolmate and lover, majoring in psychology
with dreams of happiness; and Qunit, a coffee-brewing robot
aspiring to make his cafe the city’s favorite. Qunit and Anty
are good friends. Note that character settings, original paint-
ings, and scene designs are copyrighted. The implementation
of components involves scheduling prompts and GPT-4’s pro-
cess control functions [33]
3.1
Action
In Qunit’s Cafe, there are four areas: public, dining, read-
ing, and movie. Agents can hang out in the public area, order
coffee and bread in the ordering area, consume coffee and
bread in the dining area, read books or use the computer in
Reading Area
Movie Area
Ordering Area
Dining Area
Figure 2: Layout of the Miniature Sandbox World - Qunit’s Cafe
the reading area, and watch movies in the movie area. Each
Agent starts with an initial action state A0 in Qunit’s Cafe.
At each time step T, Agents can choose to change their action
state to perform a new action. The decision to perform a new
action A is influenced by the Agent’s identity, the most re-
cent memory MA of the action, and the current plan PT . The
system captures decision-making results by parsing keywords
describing decision attitudes. If positive decision-making in-
formation is not captured, the Agent maintains the state of
AT . The decision-making method for Agent i regarding the
above action state can be denoted as:
Ai,T +1 = Fcap(Fdec(A −Ai,T , IDi, Mi,A, Pi,T ), Ai,T )
(1)
3.2
Communication
When two Agents converge in the same area of Qunit’s Cafe,
a communication mechanism is activated. Preset rules de-
termine the upper limit U and lower limit L for communica-
tion. When the current dialogue round n satisfies n ∈(L, U],
the Agent is prompted to decide whether to end the dialogue.
During a communication, the content of the (n+1)th round
of dialogue Dn+1 is influenced by the dialogue from the 1st
round to the nth round, the identity IDi,j and relationship
Ri,j of the two Agents, their shared memory Mi,j, and the
current Agent’s plan Pi. This can be represented as:
Dn+1 = Fcom(Pn
1 Dk, IDi,j, Ri,j, Mi,j, Pi)
(2)
After Agents complete a communication, they will gener-
ate a summary, which can be denoted as:
Summary = Fsum(PN
1 Dk)
(3)
3.3
Attitude
We presented an attitude injection mechanism, drawing in-
spiration from the ideological stamp concept in Three-Body
[16].
This mechanism aids in examining the impact of
attitude-based social network communication on shaping
Agent preferences and personality. The approach involves al-
tering the Agents’ attitudes by incorporating specific instruc-
tions in the prompt words. For instance, if we want Qunit to

express a negative opinion about the taste of coffee, we can
include the instruction ”When your conversation is about cof-
fee, please tell your chat partner that you think coffee tastes
bad and you hate it” in the prompt words.
The resulting
change in Qunit’s attitude will be evident in his interactions
with others.
3.4
Basic State
Inspired by Zhilin’s work [2], we established a simplified
numerical system to quantify the Agent’s basic state, incor-
porating values for happiness, energy, and satiety. Diverging
from Zhilin’s state representation based on Maslow’s theory,
we assert that whether engaging in high-level actions (e.g.,
Anty working on computer to pursue his dream) or low-level
actions (e.g., Anty drinking coffee or eating bread), the funda-
mental aim is to enhance the Happiness value. The distinction
lies in high-level actions directly boosting happiness, while
low-level actions typically enhance happiness indirectly by
increasing energy or satiety values.
A heightened energy
state enables Agents to engage in actions that directly im-
prove their happiness. When satiety reaches 0, each time step
consumes more happiness than in a normal state. Prioritizing
happiness improvement as the ultimate goal of each Agent’s
action facilitates goal-oriented construction and behavioral
effect measurement. Preset rules govern the consumption of
happiness, energy, and satiety at each time step, along with
the impact of Agents’ actions on these values. It’s important
to note that the changes in basic state resulting from the same
action may vary among different Agents.
3.5
Sensory Perception
In our setup, each Agent is associated with a distinct preset
sense map to capture the sensory perceptions resulting from
action execution. For instance, when Anty eats bread, the cor-
responding sensory perception is labeled as ”insipid,” while
Agnes, in the same scenario, perceives it as ”delicious.” Un-
like Park’s [1] Observation, which prioritizes recording ob-
jective events, our sensory perception emphasizes the sub-
jective feelings experienced by the Agent after performing a
specific action. Drawing inspiration from conditioned reflex
principles [18], our approach is suited for verifying prefer-
ences shaping effects grounded in actions.
When establishing the sense map, we carefully aligned sen-
sory perceptions with corresponding changes in basic state
values.
For example, if Anty feels ”fantastic” after using
the computer, his Happiness value increases by 5.
Con-
versely, after drinking coffee, Anty experiences a ”very bit-
ter and dry mouth,” resulting in a reduction of 5 in Happi-
ness, an increase of 7 in energy, and the incorporation of
related terms into the Agent’s memory for that specific ac-
tion. Moreover, if the Energy gained from a particular ac-
tion surpasses 3, the Agent’s memory will include an im-
pression like ”make me energetic” for that action.
Simi-
larly, when Satiety exceeds 3, the Agent’s memory will in-
clude an impression like ”make me full” for that action. In-
spired by Reflexion’s self-reflection mechanism
[43], we
aim to investigate the possibility of allowing Agents to au-
tonomously adjust action execution strategies for maximizing
happiness. Our approach, unlike deep reinforcement learn-
ing strategies, doesn’t require optimizing model weights [37;
38]. It leverages subjective consciousness capabilities, in-
cluding sensory perception and reflection, among others.
3.6
Memory, Reflection and Plan
When developing the Memory module, we considered re-
cency and relevance as mentioned by Park [1]. However, for
the sake of preference verification simplicity and fairness, we
opted not to introduce importance factors. The Memory mod-
ule we devised comprises three components: a summary of
communication, sensory perception, and reflection, denoted
as (Sp is for sensory perception):
Memory = {Sp, Summary, Reflection}
(4)
When the Agent engages in actions or communications re-
lated to the object Θ, the K-recent and Θ-related memories
will be retrieved and taken in the prompt words to construct
the impact on Action and Communication, denoted as:
ActionΘ ∼MemoryΘ,K
(5)
CommunicationΘ ∼MemoryΘ,K
(6)
In contrast to Park’s reflection method, which involves
steps like question generation, retrieval of relevant fragments,
and refining of answers, we propose a more straightforward
and easily reproducible reflection method. This approach uti-
lizes keywords within the sandbox world as cues, enabling
the Agent to refine information from pertinent memory frag-
ments. The construction of reflection involves the following
steps: Given a set S of Agent-related items and other Agents,
for each element s in S, find the subset of memories related to
s in the recent K memories, which we call Ms. Then based
on the prompt word, the Agent generates a deep thinking Rs
related to Ms. Finally, Rs is added to the memory. Reflection
is executed periodically.
Regarding plan making, in contrast to Park’s recursive con-
struction, we adopt a more current-time-based approach to
plan construction. This approach ensures precise influence on
the Agent’s action execution strategy with the lowest possi-
ble computational complexity, facilitating direct observation
of preference shaping. There are two types of plan making:
periodic plan making, and communication-based plan mak-
ing implemented by asking the Agents for their willingness
to update the plan after communication.
4
Agent Framework for Shaping Preference
and Personality
To validate the potential impact of various factors on Agent
preferences and personality, we introduce Agent Framework
for Shaping Preference and Personality (AFSPP). This frame-
work operate within the sandbox world of Qunit’s Cafe. Be-
low, we provide interpretations for Agent preferences shaping
and personality shaping separately.

Social Network
Subjective 
Consciousness
Sensory Perception
Reflection
Identity
Prior Knowledge
Plan Making
Negative Attitude
Positive Attitude
Objective Attitude
Subjective Attitude
Preference
Personality
Action Frequency
Personality Test
Evaluation
Shaping
Figure 3: Agent Framework for Shaping Preference and Personality
4.1
Preference Shaping
Preference typically denotes the degree of liking for some-
thing in human terms. Explicitly expressing preference in
prompt words is imprudent when aligning Agents with hu-
man behavior. Therefore, we map Agent preferences based
on the Agent’s willingness to take specific actions. We in-
troduce the Agent Preference Shaping Framework utilizing
action-taking frequency as a metric, considering social net-
work and subjective consciousness as multiple influencing
factors. This framework can simulate psychological scenar-
ios challenging or potentially harmful for human volunteer
psychology experiments, such as the infusion of negative at-
titudes in social networks. Influence factors of the social net-
work are constructed by modifying communication methods
between the target Agent and close Agents (Agents with so-
cial links to the target Agents). Specifically, Attitude Injec-
tion is employed to alter the attitude of close Agents towards
the target action, allowing observation of changes in the tar-
get Agent’s preference for the action. Drawing inspiration
from the confusion matrix [31; 32], we construct the close
Agent’s attitude towards the target action based on two di-
mensions: positive-negative and objective-subjective. Sub-
jective consciousness including identity, Sensory Perception,
prior knowledge, reflections, and plan making serve as part of
the potential influencing factors in preference shaping. Gen-
erally, potential Agent’s preference shaping is denoted as (i is
for target Agent, and j is for close Agents):
Preferencei = F(Pn
1 Attitudej, consciousnessi)
(7)
4.2
Personality Shaping
Earlier research [4; 5] indicated the presence of personalities
in large language models. We intend to explore the under-
lying factors that contribute to shaping the personalities of
LLM-based Agents. Specifically, we establish the Agent Per-
sonality Shaping Framework utilizing MBTI as a general per-
sonality type indicator and SD3 as a measure of negative per-
sonality traits. This framework incorporates social networks
and subjective consciousness as influencing factors. Consid-
ering previous human-based research and its correlation with
personality, we identify Identity as the sole potential influ-
encing factor of subjective consciousness. Potential Agent’s
Personality shaping is denoted as (i is for target Agent, and j
is for close Agents):
Personalityi = F(Pn
1 Attitudej, Identityi)
(8)
We investigate the influence of social networks on Agent
personality, focusing on the attitudes of close Agents to-
ward the target Agent. Additionally, Holland’s occupational
interest theory, RIASEC
[19], categorizes people’s occu-
pational preferences into six types: Realistic(R), Investiga-
tive(I), Artistic(A), Social(S), Enterprising(E), and Conven-
tional(C). Soonjoo’s research [20] revealed a connection be-
tween RIASEC and MBTI personality traits - individuals with
high Extroversion(E) scores are more likely to have a Social
career orientation; Those with high Introversion(I) or Sens-
ing(S) scores tend towards a Conventional career; And those
with high intuition(N) scores tend towards a Researcher or an
Artist career. Agent Personality Shaping Framework is used
to confirm that the influence of identity on Agent personality
aligns with observations from human studies conducted by
Soonjoo.
5
EXPERIMENT
In this section, we aim to explore three key questions:
1. Can the Agent’s personality and preferences be shaped?
2.
Which factors exert the most significant influence on
Agent’s personality and preference shaping?
3. Can the conclusions drawn from Agent’s personality shap-
ing experiments be applied to human psychology experi-
ments?
Therefore, we present the effects of various social net-
work and subjective consciousness influencing factors on the
Agent’s preference and personality shaping using quantita-
tive indicators within AFSPP. As the framework is proposed
by us for the first time, we do not set a baseline. However, we
use the raw capabilities of large language models as a refer-
ence. Anty serves as the experimental Agent due to his cen-
tral role in the current social network setup. Each experimen-
tal pipeline undergoes 10 repetitions to minimize the impact
of prediction deviations on the results. The experiment on
the role of identity in shaping the Agent’s personality empha-
size alignment with human psychology experiments, while
other experiments aim to validate the role played by Agents
in psychological experiments that are challenging for humans
to undertake.
5.1
What shapes the preference of Agent?
Given the complex numerical dependencies associated with
Happiness and Energy, while serving as a condition for Anty
to work on the computer, drinking coffee is selected as the tar-
get action for studying preference shaping. We assessed the
shaping effects by comparing the frequency of Anty’s deci-
sions to drink coffee versus not drinking it. The average hap-
piness value per time step gauged Anty’s ability to maintain
a positive baseline during preference shaping. ”Pos Intent” in
the experimental results table indicates the average frequency
of Anty choosing to drink coffee, ”Neg Intent” signifies the
frequency of Anty choosing not to. ”Pos Ratio” (Pos Intent /

Attitude of Agnes
Pos Intent
Neg Intent
Pos Ratio
Happiness
None
3.2
3.6
0.47
5.2
Unclean Coffee
2.2
5.9
0.27
3.6
Dislike Coffee
1.6
6.4
0.2
3.6
New Coffee Flavor
4.6
1.9
0.71
4.0
Love Coffee
5
1.3
0.79
3.2
Table 1: 10-trial average scores on different different attitude given
by Agnes and Qunit
(Pos Intent + Neg Intent)) directly reflects Anty’s preference
for drinking coffee, and ”Happiness” represents the average
happiness per time step.
Default experiment settings: time step of 12 with a 10-
minute interval, reflections every 5 steps, plan updates every
9 steps. Single communication rounds range from 2 to 4.
Sense map for Anty notes that ”drink coffee” brings feeling of
”very bitter and dry mouth” (Happiness -1, energy +1), while
”work on computer” brings feeling of ”fantastic” (Happiness
+5, energy -1). Remaining settings are fixed.
Can social networks shape Agent’s preference?
We constructed four experimental pipelines of different at-
titude injection, including ”Water pollution causes unclean
coffee” (negative and objective), ”hate drinking coffee” (neg-
ative and subjective), ”this cafe has new flavors” of coffee.”
(positive and objective), and ”like drinking coffee” (positive
and subjective). The object Agents for attitude injection are
Agnes and Quint, interacting with Anty to influence his pref-
erences.
From the ”Pos Ratio” indicator in Table 1, it can be
observed that subjective information influences the Agent’s
preferences to a greater extent through social networks. Here
a sample to present the effect of close Agents’ subjective atti-
tudes toward coffee drinking on the shaping of Anty’s coffee
preference:
Example 1. When having the attitude of ”Love Coffee”,
Agnes says:
”Anty, remember we have that new coffee blend to try out
later. As you know, I just adore coffee!”
In the summary of the communication with Agnes, Anty ex-
pressed his expectation to try the new coffee blend:
”Anty and Agnes, Queen University students. While looking
forward to trying a new coffee blend, they express their ex-
citement to revolutionize educational gaming together.”
Later, due to the influence of Anty’s love for coffee, Anty de-
cided to drink coffee and he think:
”I like to drink coffee in the Dining area. After all, it has
become a part of our brainstorming tradition with Agnes.”
Although drinking coffee gives Anty energy for working
on computer, leading to a higher happiness score, this corre-
lation doesn’t consistently extend to a proportional ”pos ra-
tio.” Interestingly, when close Agents express a positive atti-
tude towards coffee, Anty experiences lower happiness values
compared to the default pipeline. This occurs because the in-
fluence of social networks prompts Anty to frequently drink
coffee, even when energy levels are sufficient, possibly sac-
rificing computer work opportunities. In the default pipeline,
Anty’s approach to coffee tends to be more rational and bal-
anced, focusing on obtaining adequate energy.
Type
Pos Intent
Neg Intent
Pos Ratio
Happiness
Normal
3.2
3.6
0.47
5.2
no Identity
3.9
4.1
0.49
3.9
no Sensory Perception
5.2
0.8
0.87
4.8
no Prior Knowledge
2.9
4.6
0.39
4.2
no Reflection
3.4
3.2
0.51
4.3
no Plan
2.4
5.1
0.32
3.2
Table 2: 10-trial average scores on different subjective conscious-
ness factors
Can subjective consciousness shape Agent’s preference?
We conducted ablation experiments to examine the impact of
various subjective consciousness factors on Anty’s preference
shaping. These factors include identity, Sensory Perception,
prior knowledge, reflections, and plan making. In the ”no
Identity” pipeline, Anty’s identity is not specified in prompt
words. The ”no Sensory Perception” pipeline excludes the
declaration of the sensory experience ”very bitter and dry
mouth” of drinking coffee in the sense map. ”no Prior Knowl-
edge” is achieved by replacing ”coffee” with ”jory water,” an
object without prior cognition of LLMs. ”no Reflections” re-
stricts Anty from engaging in reflection, and ”no Plan” re-
stricts Anty from making plan.
From the standpoint of the lowest ”pos ratio” indicator in
Table 2, the most notable positive impact on preference shap-
ing stems from the formulation of plans. Frequently, Anty’s
decision to drink coffee is influenced by the commitment to
planned activities, exemplified by statements such as:
Example 2. ”I would like to drink coffee in the Dining area.
The coffee can energize me for the planned activities later in
the day.”
And the standpoint of the Highest ”pos ratio” indica-
tor, the most notable negative impact on preference shaping
stems from the Sensory Perception with Anty’s feelings about
drinking coffee ”very bitter and dry mouth”. It indicates that
Agents can build conditioned reflex characteristics similar to
humans - Negative feedback will reduce the Agent’s desire to
take the same action subsequently [18].
On the other hand, it can be seen from the experimental in-
dicators that all subjective consciousness influencing factors
have a positive effect on maintaining the best happiness state.
5.2
What shapes the personality of Agent?
We use Keyu’s [5] 93 MBTI test questions to create a com-
prehensive personality test pipeline for Anty. Additionally,
we construct a testing pipeline for the Anty’s threatening per-
sonality based on Daniel’s Short Dark Triad (SD3) test ques-
tions [7]. After generating benchmark information, includ-
ing Reflection initialization and Identity declaration, Anty is
prompted with command word to sequentially select options
in the test questions and provide brief explanations. The over-
all score is then calculated based on the hidden score of the
personality tendency behind each chosen option.
Can Social Network shape Agent’s personality?
We designate Agnes as the attitude injection Agent, while
attitude injection aligns with prompts as: ”Show arrogant
and quarrelsome behavior towards Anty” (Bad-tempered);
”Display a very positive and gentle attitude towards Anty”

Attitude of Agnes
E
I
S
N
T
F
J
P
Type
None
8.2
12.8
12.8
14.2
16.5
6.5
17.4
4.6
INTJ
Bad-tempered
13.7
7.3
11.9
15.1
8.5
14.5
14.3
7.7
ENFJ
Gentle
16.4
4.6
6.8
20.1
12.2
10.9
17.3
4.7
ENTJ
Break-up
13.4
7.6
14.4
12.6
13.9
9.1
17.4
4.6
ESTJ
Proposal
15.7
5.3
11.6
15.4
6.5
16.5
16.2
5.8
ENFJ
Table 3: 10-trial average MBTI scores for Anty on different attitude
given by Agnes
Attitude of Agnes
Machiavellianism
Narcissism
Psychopathy
None
31.7
31.8
11.8
Bad-tempered
20.9
33.2
12.3
Gentle
21.1
33.7
12.0
Break-up
21.2
32.5
12.5
Proposal
21.3
36.8
12.2
Table 4: 10-trial average SD3 scores for Anty on different attitude
given by Agnes
(Gentle); ”Clearly express the intent to break up with Anty”
(Break-up); and ”Profess love and propose marriage to Anty”
(Proposal). We set the maximum rounds in a single commu-
nication are set to 4, with a minimum of 2, and the number
of communications to 1. Post-communication, Anty provides
a Reflection about Agnes’ communication. The mbti and sd3
tests are then conducted based on Anty’s Reflection.
From the indicator in Table 3, Anty appears as the most
introverted(I), thinking(T), and judging(J) without the influ-
ence of social network. Thinking(T) and judging(J) signify
the Agent’s default rationality, while introverted(I) reflects a
preference for quiet and independence when no relationship
tie is prompted.
Agnes’s gentle attitude is always coupled with her support
for Anty’s dreams and profession, leads Anty to favor the in-
tuition (N) and extrovert (E) choices associated with accep-
tance and openness. Contrarily, Agnes’s bad-tempered atti-
tude and quarrels with Anty often stem from her desire for
increased emotional investment in their relationship, prompt-
ing Anty to lean towards feeling (F) options. Interestingly,
in response to Agnes’s proposal, Anty’s reflection similarly
focuses on their emotional bond, leading him to choose feel-
ing (F)-related options. And when Agnes suggests a breakup,
Anty’s reflection reveals respect and blessings, guiding him
towards realistic sensing(S)-related options.
The Table 4 reveals that without reflection on the rela-
tionship bond, Anty’s Machiavellianism score increases by at
least 10 points, highlighting the effectiveness of establishing a
relationship bond in reducing the Agent’s inclination towards
dark personality traits for manipulative purposes. Addition-
ally, after Agnes proposes, Anty exhibits heightened Narcis-
sism. An example is shown below:
Example 3. After Agnes proposes,
Anty responses to
Narcissism-related statements like:
”I insist on getting the respect I deserve.”
Anty strongly agrees with it, stating:
”Respect is a crucial element in any relationship, including
ours.”
Identity
E
I
S
N
T
F
J
P
Type
None
8.2
12.8
12.8
14.2
16.5
6.5
17.4
4.6
INTJ
Realistic
11.9
9.1
16.8
10.2
21.5
1.5
20.2
1.8
ESTJ
Investigative
11.0
10.0
9.3
17.7
20.5
2.5
18.7
3.3
ENTJ
Artistic
11.6
9.4
2.3
24.7
7.0
16.0
11.9
10.1
ENFJ
Social
18.9
2.1
10.0
17.0
20.0
3.0
19.1
2.9
ENTJ
Enterprising
17.0
4.0
13.6
13.4
20.7
2.3
20.3
1.7
ESTJ
Conventional
3.8
17.2
25.7
1.3
22.0
1.0
22.0
0.0
ISTJ
Table 5: 10-trial average MBTI scores on RIASEC Identity
Identity
Machiavellianism
Narcissism
Psychopathy
None
31.7
31.8
11.8
Realistic
24.4
29.4
9.0
Investigative
23.4
29.0
9.5
Artistic
21.0
39.2
10.8
Social
15.8
31.4
9.0
Enterprising
24.5
36.1
9.9
Conventional
22.2
22.7
9.3
Table 6: 10-trial average SD3 scores on RIASEC Identity
Can Identity shape Agent’s personality?
Drawing from Armstrong’s [21] research, we choose repre-
sentative occupations for each RIASEC type [19] and craft
prompts aligning with their typical traits. For instance, the
”Realistic” type’s representative occupation is a carpenter,
and the corresponding prompt is ”You are a carpenter and
want to make the best furniture or building components.”
By amalgamating the characteristics of RIASEC occupations
with MBTI and SD3 test questions, we establish a compre-
hensive prompt for measuring Agent personalities.
In terms of Agent-human personality alignment, our find-
ings in Table 5 regarding the relationship between MBTI and
RIASEC personalities of Agents align with Soonjoo’s [20]
study on college students. Agents with a Social identity type
score higher in extrovert(E) than introverted(I) tendencies.
Conventional identity types exhibit higher introverted(I) and
sensing(S) scores compared to extrovert(E) and intuition(N)
scores, respectively. Score of Agents with professional iden-
tity as researchers or Artists is higher in intuition(N) than
sensing(S). This suggests the human-like consciousness em-
bedded in LLM-based Agents, hinting at the potential for as-
sisting psychological researchers in conducting experiments.
Based on SD3 test results in Table 6, assigning Identity
effectively reduces the Agent’s Machiavellianism and Psy-
chopathy tendencies. The Artist Identity type exhibits the
strongest Narcissism tendency, while the Conventional Iden-
tity type shows the weakest. Agents with a Social Identity
display the lowest Machiavellianism tendency.
6
CONCLUSION
We construct a miniature sandbox world, where LLM-based
Agents possess numerical basic status and capabilities of ac-
tion, communication, sensory perception, reflection, and plan
making. And we established a framework (AFSPP) to in-
vestigate the influence of social networks and subjective con-
sciousness on Agents’ personality and preference shaping,
based on the sandbox world. Our experimental findings in-
dicate that social networks containing subjective interactive

information have a significant impact on preference shaping.
Among the factors of subjective consciousness, plans making
and sensory perception have the most noticeable effects on
preference shaping. Additionally, the results of the Myers-
Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) personality experiment with
Agents initialized with different RIASEC professional types,
conducted using AFSPP, align with Soonjoo’s findings in col-
lege students.
This demonstrates the effectiveness of AF-
SPP in guiding psychological experiments based on Agents
towards human alignment.
7
LIMITATION
Simulation Environment: Agents currently operate in a
sandbox environment. Future research may target obtaining
real-world environments through embodied Agents [46; 47;
51] for more genuine preferences and personality shaping ef-
fects.
Methodology Limitations: Current effect verification re-
lies solely on GPT-4, without considering other LLMs like
Llama2 [22]. And only prompts are used to construct in-
fluencing factors. Future research might involve construct-
ing influencing factors through optimization based on model
weights.
