(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 2, 2010 
Integration of Rule Based Expert Systems and Case 
Based Reasoning in an Acute Bacterial Meningitis 
Clinical Decision Support System 
 
Mariana Maceiras Cabrera 
Departamento de Informática y Ciencias de la 
Computación 
Universidad Católica del Uruguay 
Montevideo, Uruguay 
.  
Ernesto Ocampo Edye 
Departamento de Informática y Ciencias de la 
Computación 
Universidad Católica del Uruguay 
Montevideo, Uruguay 
 
 
 
Abstract—This article presents the results of the research carried 
out on the development of a medical diagnostic system applied to 
the Acute Bacterial Meningitis, using the Case Based Reasoning 
methodology. The research was focused on the implementation of 
the adaptation stage, from the integration of Case Based 
Reasoning and Rule Based Expert Systems. In this adaptation 
stage we use a higher level RBC that stores and allows reutilizing 
change experiences, combined with a classic rule-based inference 
engine. In order to take into account the most evident clinical 
situation, a pre-diagnosis stage is implemented using a rule 
engine that, given an evident situation, emits the corresponding 
diagnosis and avoids the complete process. 
Keywords-Case-Based Reasoning; Medical Diagnosis; Expert 
Systems; Acute Bacterial Meningitis 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Clinical Decision Support Systems (hereafter CDSSs) have 
become paramount in the medical environment, providing 
support to the clinical expert in the diagnosing process, mainly 
assisting the analysis and synthesis of bulk information in little 
time. These systems enable the reduction of the intrinsic degree 
of uncertainty that any decision-making process in the medical 
environment entails. [1], [2] 
Several aspects related to a specific kind of CDSS, Medical 
Diagnostic Systems (hereafter MDSs), will be addressed 
throughout this document. From a set of symptoms and signs 
shown by the patient, the MDS are capable of suggesting a set 
of differential diagnoses, possibly with a certainty degree 
associated to each of them. [1], [3] 
While developing MDSs, either in their construction and 
application, several problems arise: 1) Representation of the 
domain knowledge; 2) Processing of such knowledge; 3) 
Obtaining results that are accurate enough and 4) Presentation 
of the results to the user, and their explanation. Each of these 
problems is solved in a particular way, depending on the 
method applied to the development of the system. In this 
document is presented an alternative way to solve these 
problems using Case Based Reasoning. [1], [4]  
This research is focused on the development of an Acute 
Bacterial Meningitis MDS integrating Case Based Reasoning 
(hereafter CBR) with Rule Based Expert Systems (hereafter 
RBR). 
This document is organized in the following way: in 
Section 2 is presented the case study used in the research: 
Diagnosis of Acute Bacterial Meningitis, followed in section 3 
by the presentation of the addressed problem. Section 4 
presents a brief summary of state-of-the-art techniques and 
referred applications. Afterwards, section 5 describes the 
proposed computer solution in detail, while in section 6 is 
described the composition of the knowledge base, which 
represents reality and is used in simulations, and the way it 
was built. Section 7 presents the results of the system’s 
performance assessment and section 8 outlines the conclusions 
of this work. 
II. 
CASE STUDY: DIAGNOSIS OF ACUTE BACTERIAL 
MENINGITIS 
The medical diagnosing task consists in “translating” the 
relation between a set of signs and symptoms found in a 
patient, and the possible pathologies she or he might suffer 
from.  [3], [1] This work addresses the medical diagnosis of 
the disease known as Acute Bacterial Meningitis (hereafter 
ABM).  
ABM is an infectious disease caused by bacteria that attack 
the meninges (a membrane system that covers the Central 
Nervous System – brain and spinal cord). The meningitis is an 
inflammatory process of the leptomeninges (pia mater and 
arachnoid mater), and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) contained 
inside them [5]. The Meningitis poses a great threat to optical, 
facial and auditory nerves, and other kinds of neurologic 
sequels.  
In this research we have taken as a reference a subset of the 
typical signs and symptoms of this disease – a total of 81 
symptoms have been considered - which are: convulsions, 
depression, fever, hypertense fontanelle, nape stiffness, trunk 
stiffness, skin purpuric syndrome, vomits, somnolence, 
112
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 2, 2010 
irritability, 
facial 
paralysis, 
cervical 
adenopathies, 
haemocultivation with bacteria, bacteria in CSF, muscular 
hypotonicity, 
cloudy 
aspect 
CSF, 
clear 
aspect 
CSF, 
hydrocephaly in ecography, tumors in tomography, among 
many others. [6], [7] 
The combination of the presence of several of these 
symptoms allows identifying the disease under study, but it 
could also be indicative, to a greater or lesser extent, of other 
diseases identified as “differential diagnoses”. The relevant 
differential diagnoses in the case of ABM are: Acute Viral 
Meningitis, Tuberculous Meningitis, Encephalitis, Brain 
Abscess, 
Meningism, 
Meningeal 
reaction 
to 
nearby 
inflammation, Meningeal Haemorrhage and Brain Tumor. [7]. 
The task of the doctor is to diagnose accurately the disease 
within these alternatives. 
III. 
PROBLEM OUTLINE 
This research focuses on the development of an MDS for 
the disease known as ABM, integrating the CBR and RBR 
methods, making special emphasis on the implementation of 
the adaptation of the CBR cycle stage. This stage is 
fundamental in a case-based MDS, given that once recovered 
the most similar case, it is highly probable to find differences in 
the descriptions of the problems. This could then indicate 
differences in the solutions, which entails a possible error in the 
diagnosis. 
On the other hand, the adaptation capabilities of a CBR 
system applied to a CDSS allow its usage by not so 
experienced physicians. This fosters its utility as a support tool 
also in the medical learning and practice. 
IV. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
A. Clinical Decision Support Systems 
A Clinical Decision Support System (CDSS) is an expert 
system that provides support to certain reasoning tasks, in the 
context of a clinical decision. [1] 
A medical diagnostic decision support system – MDS - is 
defined as a computer algorithm aimed at assisting the doctor 
in one or more stages that comprise the medical diagnostic 
process.  [1]   
One of the first CDSS that appeared in the marketplace is 
MYCIN, a system developed at Stanford University. This 
system was designed to diagnose and recommend treatments 
for blood infections. [8], [9] 
Other systems of interest are: IMAGECREEK – image 
analysis - [10], CADI – medicine students’ tutorial -  [11], 
SCINA – diagnosis of cardiac diseases - [12], CARE-
PARTNER – diagnosis and treatment scheduling of stem cells 
transplant - [13], AUGUSTE – diagnosis and scheduling of 
Alzheimer treatment - [14], T-IDDM – treatment scheduling of 
diabetes - [15].  
There are many computer techniques and methods – 
especially in the Artificial Intelligence field – that have been 
applied in the last 30 years or more in the development of 
systems of this nature: pattern analysis, neural networks, expert 
systems and Bayesian networks, among others.  
The rule based reasoning is one of the most used techniques 
[16], [17], and in recent years case-based reasoning has gained 
much importance in this field [18], [19], [20], [4]. 
B. Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) 
Case Based Reasoning is a methodology for problem 
solving that focuses on the reutilization of past experience. It is 
based on solutions, information and knowledge available in 
similar problems previously solved. The implementation of this 
method requires the existence of a knowledge base that 
contains the cases that contain previous experience. It is also 
necessary to count with a mechanism that allows us to infer, for 
a new case, the solution based on foregoing cases. CBR’s basic 
principle is that similar problems will have similar solutions. 
[19],  [20], [21], [4], [18] 
In CBR the structures handled are known as cases. A case 
represents a problem situation. It could be more formally 
defined as contextualized knowledge that represents past 
experience, and implies an important teaching to accomplish 
the objectives of a rational agent. [19], [20], [18], [22] 
In Figure 1 is presented the CBR cycle. It can be observed 
the presence of 4 sub-processes or stages (“Retrieve”, “Reuse”, 
“Revise” and “Retain”) that explicate the operation of this 
methodology. 
 
Figure 1.  CBR Cycle 
First, when a new problem is posed to the system, it 
proceeds to identify correctly the current case, and retrieve the 
most similar cases from the knowledge base.  
Once the cases have been obtained, the information and 
knowledge contained in them is reused to solve the new 
problem, from which a solution to propose to the user is 
reached. This stage might possibly entail an adaptation process 
of the solution of the retrieved case, considering the differences 
between both problematic situations.  
Also, these systems include a stage of proposed solution 
assessment, and a later learning from this case. Then, after the 
reusage stage it proceeds to the proposed solution revision 
process, which is assessed and repaired if it fails, obtaining a 
confirmed or revised solution.  
113
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 2, 2010 
After that, the learning stage takes place. In this stage the 
information and knowledge obtained with the solution of the 
new case is retained, so as to be useful to solve future 
problems. This stage implicates a modification of the 
knowledge base, or of the methods to retrieve and reuse cases 
from such base. 
These systems progressively enlarge their knowledge bases 
with new cases while new problems are solved, gradually 
widening the range of situations in which the system is 
applicable and the accuracy of the proposed solutions. Once 
finalized the retention the cycle can start all over again. [19], 
[20] 
Regarding the reutilization or adaptation methods – main  
objectives of this research -, it is necessary to consider [19]: 
 
Determine the differences between the new case and 
the previous case recovered. 
 
Determine the aspects of previous cases that can be 
reutilized without changes.  
 
Determine how to adapt a solution of a previous case 
based on the differences observed with the new case. 
The adaptation arises from: 1) the description of the new 
problem, 2) the solution provided for a similar problem, and 
optionally 3) the description of the corresponding similar 
problem. [18] 
The adaptation process must take into account two key 
issues: 1) How to identify what has to be adapted (identifying 
the adaptation need) and 2) how to choose an appropriate 
method to carry out a required adaptation. This last issue also 
implicates: identifying what must be changed, finding an 
appropriate adaptation technique or strategy, and choosing 
among a set of adequate strategies. [18], [4].  
The most relevant adaptation techniques can be classified in 
three main groups: a) Substitution methods: null adaptation, 
re-instantiation, parameter adjustment, adjustment based on a 
fuzzy decision structure, local search, query memory, 
specialized search, case based substitution, restriction based 
substitution, 
user 
feedback 
based 
substitution; 
b) 
Transformation methods: common-sense transformation, 
model guided transformation and c) Other methods: 
adaptation and repairment with specific purposes, derivational 
replay, general framework for adaptations through substitution, 
case 
based 
adaptation, 
hierarchy 
based 
adaptation, 
compositional adaptation. [18], [20], [23], [22], [21], [24], [4], 
[25].  
Each of these techniques or methods differ in complexity 
taking into account two issues: what is to be changed in the 
previous solution, and how will that change be achieved [21], 
[26] 
C. CBR Systems Examples 
 
DIAL [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], is a planning system 
for the recovery from disasters that stands out for its 
adaptation stage, that uses a combination of CBR  and 
rules. It also implements the adaptation guided 
retrieval. 
 
Deja Vu [32], is a system dedicated to the automatic 
programming of machinery in a control plant. In this 
system, its adaptation guided retrieval approach is 
fundamental. 
D. Rule Based Expert Systems (RBR) 
An RBR system has an inference engine that uses rules to 
reach conclusions based on premises and a certain context 
state. These systems are comprised of three main parts: 
inference engine, rule base, and working memory (auxiliary 
space in the memory to be used during the reasoning). [16], 
[17] 
An example of a rule based CDSS is MYCIN, one of the 
first systems to appear in the marketplace. This system counts 
with a knowledge base composed by IF-THEN rules, which are 
associated a certainty factor. Through these factors it can be 
given each rule different weights so as to determine their 
influence. [8], [9] 
Another example of a rule based CDSS is CASEY, which 
is an hybrid system that combines CBR and RBR. CASEY is a 
medical diagnostic system that offers a causal explanation of 
the patient’s pathology. It is applied to heart failures diagnose. 
This system outstands by its use of rules, in both retrieving and 
reusing steps. [33] 
V. 
PROPOSED SOLUTION 
A hybrid system has been developed, that combines CBR 
and RBR methodologies: SEDMAS-RBC-Adapt, whose 
operation is depicted in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2.  Explanatory image of the developed system 
114
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 2, 2010 
This system receives as input the symptoms shown by the 
patient. This framework is initially applied to the pre-diagnosis 
stage. This stage uses a set of basic diagnostic rules so as to 
identify situations in which a certain set of symptoms indicate 
the presence of a disease without a shadow of a doubt.  
The aim of this stage is to increase the system’s 
performance – it by-passes the complete inference process. 
Moreover, this is a key stage when the knowledge base is 
incipient – extremely small – and there is no representative 
evidence of any of the differential diagnoses in it. 
The pre-diagnosis rules have the following structure, 
IF CSF presents Cloudy aspect THEN ABM 
in which it is stated that, if the patient presents “cloudy 
aspect in the cerebrospinal fluid”, then the unquestionable 
existence of Acute Bacterial Meningitis can be affirmed. 
The pre-diagnostic rules, as well as the adaptation rules 
presented later, were developed based on a knowledge 
engineering work carried out with a physician experienced in 
the diagnosis of these kinds of diseases. 
If the pre-diagnosis stage is successful, then there is a 
solution to the problem which is presented to the user, offering 
the possibility of repairing the new case.  
Once repaired, successful or not, the possibility of retaining 
the solved problematic situation as a new case in the system is 
offered. In this way is implemented the learning process of the 
diagnostic experience. 
If the case is not obvious or simple, the pre-diagnosis is not 
applicable and the system proceeds to process the case using 
the CBR method. 
A new query is built from the symptoms of the new case, 
and the most similar cases are retrieved from the case base – 
the system retrieves the three most similar cases, and the user 
can select the one she or he believes more adequate to be 
reutilized-. 
The case representation used consists of three components: 
a description of the problematic situation, the solution to such 
situation, and an indicator of success of the solution. The 
description is comprised of logical attributes (true or false), that 
indicate the presence or absence of each of the symptoms 
considered for the diagnosis. The solution is represented by a 
group of three diagnoses: a primary one and two differential 
ones.  
The retrieval is implemented by the nearest neighbor 
method using the 81 considered symptoms. The local similarity 
between symptoms is determined by equality. 
After the retrieval, the system evaluates how similar the 
current case and the selected one are; if the similarity degree 
exceeds a certain threshold, then the solution to the retrieved 
case can be reused directly. Otherwise, an adaptation process 
that integrates CBR with RBR has to be applied. 
This process consists of a set of rules that allow carrying 
out transformations to the solutions. Also, using CBR it is 
possible to store and reuse change experiences. The process 
receives as input the differences between the present symptoms 
in the retrieved case and the current one, as well as the solution 
offered by the recovered case. From this input, this process 
offers an adapted solution to the new problem. This solution is 
the same as the one of the retrieved case, to which some 
changes were made according to the differences between the 
problematic situations. 
Firstly, a CBR process is carried out to obtain the desired 
solution, reusing previous change knowledge. For this purpose 
adaptation cases are used. These consist of two components: 
description of the case and its solution. 
As shown in Figure 3, the difference between the 
descriptions of the problematic situation, applied to an S1 
solution produces an S2 solution. This solution is the product 
of adapting S1 according to difference ΔP. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Adaptation cases structure 
The adaptation case description consists of two parts:  
a) a set of attributes that represent the differences between 
the problem descriptions (ΔP). There is one attribute for each 
considered symptom, which will indicate the following 
situations: 1) equality between the occurrence of symptoms – 
with respect to the presence or absence of the symptom in the 
current and the retrieved case (present or absent in both cases) -
; 2) presence of the symptom in the current case and absence in 
the previous; and finally, 3) absence of the symptom in the 
current case and presence in the retrieved one. 
b) the solution to the retrieved case, consisting of three 
possible diagnoses (S1). 
The solution (S2) to the adaptation case consists of the three 
diagnoses to which the system arrived once made the pertinent 
changes to the original solution. 
Following a CBR standard process, the first step in the 
adaptation process consists in the retrieval of the most similar 
adaptation case. For this purpose is used the nearest neighbor 
method, with equality functions for the calculation of local 
similarity. This similarity function only considers those 
symptoms that, through the process of adaptation knowledge 
survey carried out with the physicians, were considered as 
more influential or important to the adaptation process. The 
115
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 2, 2010 
symptoms that were not considered for this process are not 
relevant enough to have an impact in the diagnosis. 
Once the most similar adaptation case has been selected, 
the associated similarity degree is assessed, once again, based 
on a set threshold. If this threshold is exceeded, the reutilization 
of the adaptation case is made directly – a null adaptation is 
done – the adapted solution coincides with the solution of the 
retrieved case. This is due to the fact that the application 
context of the retrieved experience and the current context are 
virtually identical. If the retrieved adaptation case is not similar 
enough, the system proceeds to adapt based in rules contained 
in the knowledge base. As well as in the case of the pre-
diagnosis stage rules, the domain problem was investigated 
with the collaboration of an expert doctor. Two main categories 
of situations have been determined:  
 
a) Situations in which the differential presence of a 
symptom allows excluding a certain differential 
diagnosis. For instance,  
IF Koch’s Bacillus THEN Discard ABM 
This rule indicates that if the current case (P2) shows 
“Koch’s Bacillus”, but the retrieved case (P1) did not, 
the 
differential 
diagnosis 
of 
Acute 
Bacterial 
Meningitis is discarded. If such diagnosis was given 
in the solution of the previous case (S1) then it can be 
removed, and it will not be contained in the solution 
of the current case. (S2). 
 
b) Situations in which, under the intuition of a given 
diagnosis and given a difference in the present 
symptoms another diagnosis is sensed; or its certainty 
level is modified. For example,  
IF ABM primary AND Crystalline aspect THEN 
ABM Differential  
This rule indicates that if the solution to the previous 
case (S1) presents ABM as a primary diagnosis, but the 
cases differ in that the current (P2) presents 
“Crystalline aspect in the cerebrospinal fluid” and the 
previous case (P1) does not, then in the current 
solution (S2) such disease has to be considered as a 
differential diagnosis, not primary. 
The different rules modify the facts in the working memory 
of the inference engine in such way that at the end of the 
processing the set of resulting diagnoses is retained in it. 
The successive application of rules has a correspondence to 
each of the transformations or adaptations carried out on the 
original solution, when there is a difference between 
symptoms. 
Once the solution has been obtained (either by the 
reutilization of the diagnostic case or by its adaptation), it is 
presented to the user and the system requires her judgment or 
assessment – success or failure – as for the correction of the 
suggested diagnosis. If the case fails, the system offers the user 
the possibility of repairing it, setting the appropriate diagnosis 
(primary and differentials) – the case is then assumed as 
successful-. 
The next step is the retention stage, in which the user is 
asked if she or he wishes to retain the new case. Moreover, if 
an adaptation process has been performed, then the user is 
given the option of storing the adaptation knowledge, which 
will be available after the new experience. A new adaptation 
case can be learned either from the reutilization of a previous 
adaptation case or from the successive application of rules. 
This type of adaptation process allows, at the beginning, the 
adaptation to be mostly based in the set of surveyed rules. 
However, when the system gains experience the reusability of 
adaptation cases increases, and the system turns less dependent 
on the rule set. 
If the system makes any mistakes when adapting, the user 
has the possibility of indicating such situation and specifying 
the correct solution. In this way, the system is able to learn a 
new adaptation case from the user himself. If this user is a 
physician with vast experience in this field, this feature is key 
to the learning of new experiences. 
VI. 
GENERATION OF THE DIAGNOSIS CASE BASE 
One of the main points in the construction of the system 
consists in obtaining a set of diagnoses large enough – to test 
the performance of the system – relevant, and representative of 
real world population. 
In previous works of the research group (development of a 
diagnostic expert system of Acute Bacterial Meningitis based 
on a Bayesian inference engine [7]), a database of occurrence 
probabilities of the disease under study (ABM) and its 
differential diagnoses, based on 10000 medical visits, was 
available. Likewise, for each disease the corresponding 
probability of presenting the symptoms under study is 
available.  
Based on these diseases and symptoms probabilities and 
using the Montecarlo method (assuming normal and uniform 
distributions in each case) several simulations were performed 
to obtain a set of virtual “cases”. 
This initial set was subject to several steps of revision: in 
first place, the cases with clearly abnormal or extremely 
improbable situations were removed; and then each of the cases 
was validated by medical experts. The result is an initial 
“cured” database that is representative of the real population – 
it is based on probabilities extracted from the population, and 
the combinations obtained have been validated by field experts. 
Besides the validation process, the expert provided the real 
diagnosis for each of the cases in the base, for which it can be 
considered as a set of real cases. 
VII. ASSESSMENT OF THE SYSTEM’S PERFORMANCE 
The system’s performance has been assessed considering 
three 
indicators: 
accuracy, 
robustness 
before 
partial 
information, and learning capacity. 
A. Accuracy 
In the context of this research, accuracy has been defined as 
the amount of successful hits the system reached. For this 
experiment, a 30-case sample extraction was made (size of the 
sample calculated according to the population size, based on 
116
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security,  
Vol. 7, No. 2, 2010 
traditional statistic methods of experiment design). Each case 
was then presented to the system to obtain the corresponding 
diagnosis. This diagnosis was later compared to the one 
provided by the expert to determine whether the system hit or 
failed. This experiment shown an accuracy of 97%. 
B. Robustness in presence of  partial information 
This metric intends to assess the system’s flexibility when 
faced to the heterogeneity of the expert users. The potential 
users of systems of this kind (physicians, students, other 
specialists in the field of human health) use to have different 
levels of experience, which implies different capacities in the 
detection of the symptoms involved. Some symptoms are more 
difficult to identify than others, and this identification is often 
related with the experience of the physician. That is to say, in 
some cases it may happen that the medical user, with short 
experience in this specific field, might not be able to detect the 
presence of a certain symptom, even when it is present. The 
robustness indicator intends to assess how the system behaves 
when faced to different levels of experience. 
The experiment consists in performing a series of cycles, 
measuring in each one the accuracy of the system, - in the way 
described above -, but removing from the knowledge base 
some symptoms in each cycle – symptoms that have been 
identified as those whose detection is more dependent on the 
experience of the physician-. The removal of symptoms implies 
that a certain symptom that used to be considered present is 
now considered absent, which would coincide with the case 
entry done by a less experienced doctor. 
 
Figure 4.  Results obtained in the experiment of robustness before partial 
information 
In Figure 4 we can see how the accuracy degrades as we 
remove symptoms. However, it is important to notice that, even 
though the accuracy of the system decreases, it keeps a 
constant accuracy of 80% after the fifth iteration, which implies 
an interesting and desirable result. This behavior has been 
compared to previous versions developed in the research group 
using other techniques of intelligent systems (Bayesian 
inference, CBR without adaptation and without RBR), having 
obtained better results. [6], [7] 
C. Learning capacity 
This metric indicates the system’s capacity of incorporating 
knowledge. SEDMAS-RBC-Adapt has important learning 
capacities. As any CBR system, there is the possibility of 
retaining new diagnosis cases in the retention stage. Besides, 
this system has the additional ability to learn new adaptation 
cases, retaining change experiences. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
The integration of the CBR and RBR methods in the 
development of a medical diagnosis CDSS has proven to be 
appropriate and convenient. The approach developed not only 
presents excellent results for its precision, robustness before 
partial information and learning capacity, but it is also an 
example of how to take full advantage of each of the used 
techniques. 
Through the survey of a set of basic rules of pre-diagnosis, 
the simplest cases to diagnose are detected. Such survey is 
fairly simple as it is knowledge that doctors handle constantly. 
For less simple cases in which the diagnosis is not so direct, 
the system allows resorting to past experience. 
In this way, we can take the best out of CBR and RBR. 
Also, the approach of the adaptation process is paramount 
for the system to learn to adapt throughout the time, being able 
to gather knowledge indirectly from the medical expert. Such 
approach 
allows 
reutilizing 
the 
system’s 
adaptation 
knowledge, while maintaining the capacity to adapt in 
exceptional cases.
