Automated Scoring of Graphical Open-Ended Responses Using Artificial 
Neural Networks 
 
Matthias von Davier1, Lillian Tyack, Lale Khorramdel 
 
TIMSS & PIRLS International Study Center at Boston College 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords:  
International large-scale assessment 
Automated scoring  
Image responses 
Convolutional neural network 
Feedforward neural network 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
Abstract 
Automated scoring of free drawings or images as responses has yet to be utilized in large-scale 
assessments of student achievement. In this study, we propose artificial neural networks to classify 
these types of graphical responses from a computer based international mathematics and science 
assessment. We are comparing classification accuracy of convolutional and feedforward 
approaches. Our results show that convolutional neural networks (CNNs) outperform feedforward 
neural networks in both loss and accuracy. The CNN models classified up to 97.71% of the image 
responses into the appropriate scoring category, which is comparable to, if not more accurate, than 
typical human raters. These findings were further strengthened by the observation that the most 
accurate CNN models correctly classified some image responses that had been incorrectly scored 
by the human raters. As an additional innovation, we outline a method to select human rated 
responses for the training sample based on an application of the expected response function derived 
from item response theory. This paper argues that CNN-based automated scoring of image 
responses is a highly accurate procedure that could potentially replace the workload and cost of 
second human raters for large scale assessments, while improving the validity and comparability 
of scoring complex constructed-response items. 
 
Introduction 
The transition to a computer-based assessment of student skills has enabled international large-
scale assessments (ILSAs) to improve measurement through innovative item-types including 
constructed-response items. Not only are constructed-response items considered more engaging 
than traditional item types (e.g., multiple-choice items), but they also capture complex constructs 
with greater nuance and precision (Bejar, 2017; Zhai, 2021). The TIMSS 2019 digital assessment, 
for example, incorporated many constructed-response items, including grid-based image responses 
(graphing and drawing), to better measure higher-order mathematics and science skills (Cotter et 
al., 2020). At this time, the scoring of image response-based items necessitates human raters 
trained to score items based on comprehensive scoring guides. However, scoring errors and 
inconsistencies in scoring may arise due to rater effects such as severity or leniency, and other 
nuisance variables, such as fatigue or distractions, or simply due to differences in decision making 
based on human judgment (Zhang, 2013). One approach to mitigating human scoring errors is 
utilizing double rating designs where two different human raters score responses independently. 
However, this method increases workload, time, and costs. Another approach is to use automated 
scoring in place of a second human rater, which is low cost, consistent, and fast.  
Large-scale assessments have utilized machine-supported scoring for some time (Attali & 
Burstein, 2006; Foltz et al., 1999; Sukkarieh et al., 2012; Yamamoto et al., 2017). However, these 
approaches have focused on automated scoring of text-based responses, and did not take more 
recent advances in using neural networks for deep learning of complex classification and 
prediction tasks into account. Artificial neural networks can also be used for text generation such 
as summarization, generation of questions and answers, as well as item stems in addition to 
automated scoring of existing items (von Davier, 2018, 2019). Furthermore, ANNs can be shown 

2 
 
to perform estimations of parameters of complex probability functions that are both analytically 
intractable and difficult to estimate (Radev et al. 2019). Finally, ANNs can be shown to be 
universal function approximation methods (e.g., Hornik et. al. 1989; Zhou, 2020) and thus are 
ideally suited not only to generate text and approximate intractable estimation problems but also 
to mimic and even improve upon human scoring. 
While machine learning can also be applied to non-text-based item responses, such as images 
(Pawlowicz & Downum, 2021; Yu et al., 2018), the automated scoring of constructed responses 
created using graphical input (e.g., images, graphs) has yet to be utilized in educational large-scale 
assessment. This study explores the automated scoring of image responses from a TIMSS 2019 
item using ANNs, providing a comparison between feed-forward and convolutional approaches. 
The results have wider implications for ILSAs, showing how ANN-based scoring systems for 
image responses can be on par with human raters and utilized in a cost-efficient manner. 
Background 
-order cognitive processes, computer-based technology is 
needed to expand the range of tasks and response modes. Assessments that include a variety of 
computer-enhanced item types improve inferences about student cognition and narrow the gap 
between what can be seen and what can be measured (Zenisky & Sireci, 2002). Constructed-
response items, in particular, are thought to allow measurement of a wider range of abilities and 
cognitive processes (Parshall et al., 2009). Additionally, they are thought to can capture higher-
order thinking by asking students to draw shapes or pictures to demonstrate their understanding. 
In 2019, the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) used a variety of 
computer-based constructed-response items in their Problem Solving and Inquiry (PSI) tasks. PSIs 
are sets of items that simulate real-world situations, allowing students to apply process skills and 
knowledge across interrelated problems (Cotter et al., 2020). PSI items that require students to 
measurement of science and mathematics achievement. These response types provide researchers 
with information about student ability based on a performance that goes beyond entering a number 
or writing a short response.   
While using image-based constructed-response items is beneficial to ILSAs, current scoring 
practices limit their widespread use. These items require human raters for scoring, which tends to  
be costly, time-consuming, and potentially less reliable than the scoring of choice-type responses 
such as those found in multiple choice items. . While scoring guides are designed to be 
comprehensive, they are not exhaustive; when students can draw responses freely, developing an 
inclusive scoring guide of all possible responses is unfeasible. Thus, some responses may require 
more complex decisions based upon human judgment, especially when those responses do not 
correspond with the existing examples in the scoring guide. When faced with these responses, 
raters may choose to treat them differently based on their interpretations of the guide and the 
response itself (Bejar, 2012). Differences in human judgment as well as effects arising from 
misinterpreted or only partially internalized scoring guides may lead to systematic scoring errors 
or inconsistencies in scoring. Additionally, rater effects such as severity and leniency, where raters 
may (or may not) be more apt to give students the benefit of the doubt than other raters, can impact 

3 
 
can lead to systematic differences of how human-scored items are functioning across participating 
countries and limit comparability of the results obtained from such items (Oliveri & von Davier 
2011; von Davier & von Davier, 2007; von Davier et al. 2018). 
Machine-based scoring can mitigate effects of human scoring in assessments, either by serving 
as a second scorer or replacing human scorers entirely. Machine learning algorithms apply the 
same decision rules to all responses, making its scoring procedure objective and consistent 
(Williamson et al., 2012). Furthermore, automated scoring is fast and can classify thousands of 
-rater system, for example, is used in the 
Graduate Record Examinations (GRE) for its essay portion. The essays are scored by a human 
rater and the e-rater system, with a second human rater used only when there is a vast disagreement 
between the two. Since its installment, the e-
accuracy and validity (Zhang, 2013).  
The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) also found similar benefits after 
implementing a machine-supported coding system. Unlike the e-
system requires a perfect match approach betwee
from a data 
base (consisting of student responses from past PISA cycles that have been classified as correct or 
incorrect by human scorers). The machine automatically scores perfectly matching responses 
while responses with no perfect match are scored by a human rater (Yamamoto et al., 2017). While 
this approach showed to be very accurate for perfectly matching responses and reduced human 
workload, it was limited to short response items with high regularity in responses. Thus, this type 
of automated scoring could only be implemented for a fraction of the item pool (OECD, 2020).  
-by-character 
highlighting item types. Using an algorithm from bioinformatics developed for gene sequence 
comparisons, the authors compared the highlighting of multilingual text sequences from students 
with responses provided by experts. As opposed to a perfect match approach, this system evaluated 
the highlighted elements of the text sequences as falling between the minimum or the maximum 
evidence of matching expert responses. Student responses that did not match the minimum or 
exceeded the maximum were given no credit. Ultimately, the algorithm improved scoring accuracy 
by eliminating misclassifications of responses due to irrelevant extra characters, or randomly 
missing characters, and focusing on similarity measures rather than exact matching. 
New machine-based scoring approaches are more extensive and adaptable than the previously 
mentioned systems and other automated scoring procedures used currently in ILSAs. Machine 
learning has opened the door for more flexible scoring of responses for assessments. 
c-Rater 
system, for example, is a machine learning-based automated scoring system that makes 
classifications based on models trained to recognize key linguistic features unique to text-based 
items (Liu et al., 2014). Another example is the clustering system used by Zehner et al. (2016), 
where models were trained to identify semantic concepts in text-based items, cluster them, and 
apply scores to each cluster.  

4 
 
Machine learning can also be extended beyond text-based responses, namely to image 
responses, which has been illustrated in disciplines outside of large-scale assessments. Machine-
based recognition of images in the medical field has been used for the last decade, and recent 
studies have shown that automated scoring of cell images to judge whether they are cancerous 
using algorithms is just as accurate as classifications made by trained doctors with years of 
experience (Rimm et al., 2018). Automated scoring of images has also been used to identify organ 
decay, where a deep learning algorithm was trained to recognize what stage of fibrosis livers were 
in based on postmortem biopsies (Yu et al., 2018). 
 Machine learning has even been used in the arts as well, where Lecoutre et al. (2017) 
automatically classified paintings by artistic style to index large artistic databases. Their approach 
involved training algorithms to identify essential elements of 25 different artistic styles, eventually 
producing a model that had 62% accuracy. Recently, deep learning was used to classify ancient 
pottery fragments (known as sherds) in an archaeology study conducted by Pawlowicz and 
Downum (2021). The authors were able to train a model to classify pictures of sherds from Arizona 
by decorative style with an accuracy comparable to, and sometimes even higher than, expert 
archaeologists they recruited.  
Besides Rimm et al. (2018), the aforementioned studies utilized a specific type of machine-
learning known as artificial neural networks (ANNs). ANNs were designed to mimic how neurons 
communicate in the human brain, enabling machines to learn and classify based upon a system of 
layers and nodes. 
received, hidden layers where the data is processed, and an output layer where classifications are 
made. Nodes function as interconnected processing elements within each layer, identifying pixels 
of images that certain classes have in common with one another. Neural network models can be 
trained on text sequences or on a set of images, where they learn to identify features unique to each 
class. Then, the models are tested on a set of validation data where they classify images they have 
 
Two primary ANN approaches used for image classification are feedforward neural networks 
(FFNs) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs). FFNs are considered a form of traditional 
ANN with the basic three-part structure of input, hidden, and output layers. As their name suggests, 
the information processed by the nodes is only passed on in one (forward) direction. CNNs, on the 
other hand, have additional convolutional layers and pooling layers that occur before the fully 
connected layers (i.e., the FFN architecture). These additional layers allow the information to be 
processed in a non-linear manner and make CNNs especial
& Nash, 2015).  
Despite the success of using ANNs to classify images in various fields, the procedure has yet 
to be implemented by any ILSAs. Thus, the current study was designed to assess both the 
automated scoring of image responses and to compare ANN approaches for potential use for image 
classification in large-scale assessments. The classification problem in this study is implemented 
as a supervised learning task based on an image response item from the TIMSS 2019 assessment 
that was administered as computer-based assessment in about half of the countries participating in 
TIMSS. 

5 
 
 
Methods 
Item Selection and Rationale  
The study utilizes image responses from the third item in the TIMSS 2019 Building PSI task. 
specifications. Students received full credit for drawing the back of the shed and its sides correctly 
and partial credit if only the back wall was correct; all other responses were considered incorrect. 
This item was difficult for students
on average, only about 26% of students received full credit, 
and 11% received partial credit.  
This item, in particular, was chosen because it would test whether automated scoring using 
neural networks could produce correct scoring results on par with human raters for complex 
TIMSS item response types. If the ANNs could score this complex item with high accuracy, it is 
expected to be just as successful for less complex items. Because the Building PSI item allows for 
partial credit and is scored with two points, it presents an additional challenge to the learning 
algorithm which has to distinguish between three score categories (0, 1, 2) instead of two (0 and 1 
for incorrect and correct). Additionally, there is much variety in the responses within each score 
category, presenting an even greater challenge of associating images that may appear quite 
different with the same category. For example, full credit responses may show the back wall and 
sides of the shed in any orientation, as long as their measurements are correct. Incorrect responses 
present an even greater challenge, as they may be blank, off task, or may show shapes that are 
similar to the correct ones but differ in dimensions or angles. 
 
Response Variability 
Image responses that received full credit tended to be uniform in appearance, but the 
border was considered a part of the image and students who used the border to compose one 
or more sides of the shape were still given credit if the dimensions were correct. Figure 1 includes 
some examples of full credit image responses. 
a)
b) 
 
c) 
 

6 
 
Figure 1. Examples of Full Credit Responses 
 
Image responses given partial credit were even more diverse than those that received full credit. 
Partial credit responses tended to vary from containing one shape (the back wall only) to containing 
multiple shapes. Figure 2 includes some examples of partial credit image responses. 
a) 
 
b) 
 
c) 
 
Figure 2. Examples of Partial Credit Responses 
 
Finally, incorrect image responses tended to be blank (the grid was left empty), off task, or 
have inaccurate shapes. While blanks are easy to identify and score, off task responses were the 
most diverse, ranging from unintelligible scribbles to geometric art. On the other hand, images 
with inaccurate shapes were responses where students had attempted to answer the item but did 
not have the correct dimensions to receive full or partial credit. Figure 3 includes some examples 
of incorrect responses. 
a) 
b)  
c)  
Figure 3. Examples of Incorrect Responses that have either Inaccurate Shapes (a) and are Off Task (b, c) 
 
Assignment and Incorrect and Inconsistent Response Removal 
Responses were collected from 23 countries that took the digital TIMSS 2019, as well as from 
three TIMSS 2019 benchmarking participants (e.g., regional entities, such as provinces and 

7 
 
municipalities). Before pre-processing, the sample was split for simple hold-out validation where 
the image responses were assigned to a training and a validation sample. The assignment was done 
using stratified random sampling on a by-country basis. Within each country the responses were 
clustered by score category (incorrect, partial credit, full credit). Then, 70% of responses in each 
cluster were randomly assigned to the training sample. The remaining image responses were 
assigned to the validation sample. This data splitting method was chosen so that there was roughly 
equal representation of responses from each country and each score category in both datasets. For 
neural network training, it is desirable to have a larger training sample so that the models are 
exposed to more responses. However, if the training sample is too large, then the validation sample 
will be smaller and the results potentially not as generalizable (Chollet, 2018). A split of 70/30% 
was chosen to maximize the number of responses in the training sample while still having a large 
number of responses in the validation sample.  
The image responses were also additionally assessed by an independent rater at the TIMSS & 
PIRLS International Study Center (ISC) to verify that the responses were given proper credit. This 
was done after analysis from a previous pilot study revealed that some image responses were 
scored incorrectly. More specifically, there were some scoring inconsistencies across the countries, 
particularly for imag
also with extraneous lines. For example, image responses with the back wall of the shed split into 
three squares sometimes received no credit, or full or partial credit depending on the country. 
Inconsistencies such as these are likely due to some raters giving the benefit of the doubt to 
students and because the scoring guide did not contain information about whether to give credit 
when extraneous lines were present together with shapes that had the correct dimensions.  
Initially, 416 image responses that were scored improperly by human raters (relative to the 
later use. However, during thi
responses revealed 9 additional incorrectly scored image responses from the validation sample. 
These responses were also set aside, and accuracies on the clean validation sample run again. Only 
these revised accuracies will be reported. Of the 425 removed responses, 193 were scored 
incorrectly, and 232 had common patterns of shapes that were scored inconsistently.  
14,737 image 
responses, with 10,238 images in the training sample and the remaining 4,499 images in the 
validation sample. Due to the difficult nature of the item, the majority of image responses were 
incorrect, with 63.66% of the training sample and 63.75% of the validation sample consisting of 
incorrect responses. 25.51% of the training sample and 25.54% of the validation sample received 
full credit. Partial credit image responses were the least prevalent, making up only 10.83% of the 
training sample and 10.71% of the validation sample.  
 
Pre-Processing and Array Creation 
After assignment, the images were converted from color to grayscale and their saturation was 
doubled to increase the contrast between the drawn shapes and the background grid. This process 

8 
 
was done in R using the magick package (Ooms, 2021). The images were then saved as PNG files, 
separated by training and validation samples. Figure 4a shows an image response after pre-
processing.  
Next, the images were arranged into arrays that could be used for neural network modeling 
with the keras package in R (Allaire & Chollet, 2021). Using the EBImage package, the images 
were resized to be 64x64 pixels. 64 was chosen as the pixel size after preliminary testing found 
that a pixel size of 28 lost too much information while using larger pixel sizes took too much time 
for the models to run without improving classification rates noticeably. The images were then 
arranged into two arrays, one for training and one for validation (based upon their assignment). 
Figure 4b displays an example of an image response from an array using the ggplot2 package. The 
corresponding image response classifications given by the human raters were also saved in an 
array using integer label format (rather than one-hot encoded format). 
a)  
b)  
 
 
Figure 4. Examples of an Image Response After Pre-Processing (a) and in an Array (b) 
 
Training the Models 
All models were trained using the keras package in R (Allaire & Chollet, 2021) and compiled 
using the sparse_categorical_crossentropy loss option. All models had the input shape of 64x64x1 
and had the final fully connected layer with three units, representing incorrect, partially correct, 
and fully correct. For every CNN model, the convolutional layers used a kernel size of 3x3 and 
were always followed by a 2-dimensional max pooling layer with a pool size of 2x2.  
First, modeling was conducted using 25 and 50 epochs of training to determine how model 
accuracy and loss fared compared to the time it took to run the models. In this stage of modeling, 
all models were trained using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014). Also, CNNs with zero 
padding and no padding were generated, as well as models with and without dropout layers. 
Models with dropout layers had dropout layers following each max pooling layer and fully 
connected layer, except for the final fully connected layer in the model. Each dropout layer used a 
dropout rate of 0.25, indicating that 25% of inputs would be dropped, at random, from the layer 
during each iteration of training.  

9 
 
After the ideal number of training epochs were determined, the Adam, AdaMax (Kingma & 
Ba, 2014), and Nadam (Dozat, 2016) optimizers were compared with zero and no padding, and 
either with or without dropout layers. The FFNs at these stages had two fully connected layers, 
with the first having 128 units. The CNNs at these stages had either one convolutional layer with 
32 filters or two convolutional layers with 32 and 64 filters, respectively.  
Finally, modeling turned to using different architectures with the best optimizer. Varying 
numbers of convolutional and fully connected layers were tested with different padding types. At 
this stage, all models included dropout layers. Each additional convolutional layer included 32 
more filters than the previous layer. Each additional fully connected layer included 64 more units 
than the previous layer. 
At each stage of the modeling process, model accuracy and loss were compared using the clean 
validation sample after training was complete.  
Once the three stages were complete, the most accurate models were tested on the 425 incorrect 
and inconsistently scored image responses (which were not included in the clean validation 
sample). This was done to test how much the models disagreed with the human raters for these 
image responses and how many incorrectly scored image responses they could classify correctly 
(giving the correct amount of credit). 
 
Results 
Testing Models on Clean Validation Data 
Stage 1
Varying Number of Epochs 
The modeling process provided comparisons between FFNs and CNNs when trained under the 
same conditions. Additionally, a comparison was made between the CNNs and a highly accurate 
FFN model identified in a previous study at the ISC as the best option. This previous study used 
the same item, modeling various epochs, optimizers, and architectural structures of FFNs only. 
The most accurate model from that study was trained on 300 epochs and trained using the Nadam 
optimizer; it had 90.35% accuracy on the clean validation sample and a loss of 0.30. 
In total, 50 models were created and trained. At each modeling stage, the CNNs outperformed 
the FFNs for accuracy in classifying the clean validation sample. The FFNs tended to be around 7 
to 10% less accurate than the CNNs, and even the most accurate FFN model from the previous 
study at the ISC was, on average, 2% to 6% less accurate than most of the CNNs.  
In the first stage of modeling, it was found that models with 50 epochs of training tended to 
have slightly higher accuracy than those with only 25 epochs of training. This was true for both 
the FFNs and CNNs, where models trained over 25 epochs had an accuracy of 80.77% for the FFN 
and accuracies of 92.82 to 94.75% for the CNNs while models trained over 50 epochs had an 
accuracy of 83.86% for the FFN and accuracies of 92.60% to 95.00% for the CNNs (see Table 1). 

10 
 
Based upon these results, it was decided that 50 epochs of training would be used for subsequent 
models. 
It was also found that the CNNs with one convolutional layer instead of two tended to be less 
accurate and have higher loss. Thus, modeling with only one convolutional layer was not pursued 
further. 
 
Table 1. Model Accuracies and Loss on Validation Data
25 epochs vs. 50 epochs 
Model 
25 epochs 
50 epochs 
Loss 
Accuracy 
Loss 
Accuracy 
FFN  
0.5092 
80.77% 
0.4133 
83.86% 
1 convolutional layer CNN with no padding 
0.3576 
93.02% 
0.4647 
93.35% 
2 convolutional layer CNN with no padding  
0.2685 
94.75% 
0.3200 
94.11% 
2 convolutional layer CNN with no padding 
and dropout layers 
0.1815 
93.80% 
0.2107 
95.00% 
1 convolutional layer CNN with zero padding 
0.3218 
92.82% 
0.4435 
93.18% 
2 convolutional layer CNN with zero padding  
0.3472 
93.44% 
0.3668 
92.60% 
2 convolutional layer CNN with zero padding 
and dropout layers 
0.1781 
94.33% 
0.2386 
94.35% 
 
 
Stage 2
Varying Optimizers 
For all three optimizers used in this study, the CNN models had higher accuracy and lower 
loss than the FFN model, with the accuracy difference ranging from around 9 to 13%. The Nadam 
optimizer yielded the highest accuracy of 95.38%, while the highest accuracy for models trained 
using Adam and AdaMax optimizers were 95.00% and 94.58%, respectively (see Table 2). 
 
Table 2. Model Accuracies and Loss on Validation Data with Different Optimizers 
Model
Adam
Nadam
AdaMax
Loss
Accuracy
Loss
Accuracy
Loss
Accuracy
FFN 
0.4133
83.86%
0.3440
86.97%
0.5367
78.42%
2 convolutional layer CNN with 
no padding 
0.3200 
94.11% 
0.4211 
93.55% 
0.2910 
94.29% 
2 convolutional layer CNN with 
no padding and dropout layers
0.2107 
95.00% 
0.2071 
95.38% 
0.1649 
94.58% 
2 convolutional layer CNN with 
zero padding 
0.3668 
92.60% 
0.3429 
94.58% 
0.3527 
93.40% 
2 convolutional layer CNN with 
zero padding and dropout layers
0.2386 
94.35% 
0.2165 
94.80% 
0.1729 
94.40% 
 
On average, Nadam tended to provide the highest accuracy and had lower loss than models 
compiled using the Adam optimizer. While AdaMax yielded models with the lowest loss overall, 
the accuracies were slightly lower than the other two optimizers. It was decided that subsequent 
models would be trained using the Nadam optimizer.  

11 
 
It was also decided that subsequent CNN models would include dropout layers. This was done 
because the models with dropout layers tend to avoid overfitting while providing comparable 
accuracy. Dropout layers compensate for overfitting the training data by removing some of the 
neural pathways at each training epoch. This limits activations from becoming strongly correlated 
and thus reduces over-training. Consequently, when the model is applied to the validation data, it 
will have accuracy comparable to the training data. The reduction in overfitting is evidenced by 
the lower loss values for the models with dropout compared to their non-dropout counterparts. 
Moreover, for the Adam and Nadam optimizers, the models with dropout layers have slightly 
higher accuracies. 
 
Stage 3
Varying Layer Numbers  
In general, the more convolutional and fully connected layers present in a model, the higher 
the accuracy and lower the loss when tested on clean validation data. Consistent with the pattern 
observed thus far, the FFNs had lower accuracies than the CNNs. The highest accuracy achieved 
by an FFN with the Nadam optimizer trained on 50 epochs was 86.97% when that FFN had two 
fully connected layers, with the next highest accuracy being 83.80% when that FFN had three fully 
connected layers. The CNNs, on the other hand, had accuracies ranging from 93.55 to 97.71%. 
Results for the most accurate CNN models for each additional convolutional layer can be found in 
Table 3. 
 
Table 3. Model Results for Validation Data with Different Number of Layers 
Number of Layers
Convolutional
Fully 
Connected
Model
Loss
Accuracy
Number of 
misclassified 
responses
0
2
FFN from Previous Study*
0.3020
90.35%
434
5
3
CNN with zero padding
0.0939
97.71%
103
4
4
CNN with zero padding
0.1013
97.24%
124
3
4
CNN with zero padding
0.1097
96.58%
154
*Trained on 300 epochs 
The most accurate model was a CNN with five convolutional layers, two fully connected 
layers, and zero padding. This model had a loss of 0.09 and an accuracy of 97.71%, 
misclassifying only 103 of the 4,499 image responses in the clean validation sample. 
Classification accuracy was highest for full credit responses, classifying 99.04% correctly, and 
second highest for incorrect responses, classifying 97.94% correctly. The model classified 
93.15% of partial credit responses correctly, which is one of the higher classification accuracies 
for this score category amongst all of the CNN models.  
In comparison, the best FFN model created in the previous study was 7.36% less accurate 
and misclassified 434 of the 4,499 validation responses. It had lower classification accuracy for 
each score category than the CNN models, especially for partial credit image responses. This 
FFN model had the highest classification accuracy for incorrect image responses, classifying 

12 
 
94.74% correctly. It had a classification accuracy of 89.56% for full credit image responses. It 
had the lowest classification accuracy for partial credit image responses, only classifying 66.18% 
correctly.  
Furthermore, the accuracy of image classifications by country varied less for CNN models 
compared to the FFN models. For the most accurate CNN model, the percent of correct 
classifications by country ranged from 92.91 to 99.28%. The average number of misclassified 
image responses across the countries was 4. For the best FFN model from the previous study, the 
percent of correct classifications by country ranged from 83.89 to 96.94%. The average number 
of misclassified image responses across the countries was 17. 
 
Comparing Misclassified Image Responses for FFNs and CNNs 
Image responses misclassified by the FFN models tended to have larger differences in scores 
between the human rating and the machine rating than the CNN models. Specifically, the FFN 
models would regularly give full credit to image responses that should have been classified as 
incorrect. The FNN models tended to associate more lines with more credit; thus, many of the 
image responses misclassified as receiving full credit were those that were off task or had 
inaccurate shapes with many lines. The FFN models also associated the angular lines of the sides 
of the shed (the roof) with full credit. As a result, many image responses where the sides of the 
shed were drawn correctly, but the back wall was not were given full credit when they should have 
received none (see Figure 5). The FFN models also exhibited misclassification of images that 
should receive partial credit
the algorithms tended to misclassify partial credit responses that 
contained only a rectangle (with no other shapes in the grid) as incorrect. 
a)  
b)  
c)  
 
Figure 5. Examples of Incorrect Image Responses Misclassified as Full Credit by FFN Models 
 
The CNN models tended to misclassify fewer images overall. And if misclassification 
occurred, the image responses were put into one of the adjacent score categories, with 
misclassifications of incorrect as full credit rarely occurring. Additionally, the CNN models did 
not associate more lines with full credit; thus, off task responses that were obviously incorrect to 

13 
 
the human eye (such as examples a and b in Figure 1) were not given any credit. Like the FFN 
models, the CNN models also associated correct diagonal lines of the roof or correct sides of the 
shed with full credit (even if the back wall was incorrect). They also tend to classify images where 
the sides of the roof were drawn close together as only deserving partial credit or no credit at all 
when 
they 
should 
have 
received 
full 
credit 
(see 
Figure 
6). 
 
a)  
b)  
c)  
 
Figure 6. Examples (rare) of Incorrect (a) and Partial Credit (b) Responses Misclassified as Full Credit and a Full 
Credit (c) Response Misclassified as Partial Credit by the CNN models. 
 
Testing Models on Incorrectly or Inconsistently Human-Scored Image Responses 
Overall model accuracy decreased, as expected, when the most accurate models were applied 
to the validation set containing incorrectly scored and inconsistently scored image responses. For 
the 425 incorrect and inconsistently scored responses in the sample, the CNN models disagreed 
with the (incorrect or inconsistent) human ratings for 76.71 to 80.71% of them. The disagreement 
was lower for the FFN model, with only 69.41% of image responses being scored differently. For 
incorrectly scored image responses only, the CNN models classified 87.05% to 89.64% correctly 
(scores matching an independent rater at the ISC). In comparison, the most accurate FFN from the 
previous study only classified 79.79% of them correctly.  
The most accurate CNN model classified correctly 167 of the 193 (86.53%) that human raters 
scored incorrectly, which was the highest accuracy for incorrectly scored responses of the CNN 
modes (see Table 6). 
 
Table 4. Model Performance for Inconsistent and Incorrect Image Responses 
Number of Layers
Overall Disagreement
Correct Classifications 
for Incorrect Responses
Convolutional
Fully 
Connected
Model
Number
Percent
Number
Percent
0 
2 
FFN from Previous Study* 
295 
69.41% 
131 
67.88% 
5 
2 
CNN with zero padding 
343 
80.71% 
167 
86.53% 
4 
4 
CNN with zero padding 
335 
78.82% 
163 
84.46% 

14 
 
3 
4 
CNN with no padding 
326
76.71%
157
81.35%
*Trained on 300 epochs 
 
Testing Models on Model Based Expected vs. Human-Scored Responses 
As discussed above and shown by example, some human scorers produce classifications that 
are either incorrect (do not follow the scoring guides) or inconsistent (the same response could be 
scored differently by different scorers). Due to this observation it can be questioned whether 
human generated scores are indeed the gold standard that represents the best training target. Instead 
of using an expert generated second scoring process, the assessment data available from other tasks 
responds to more items 
than the building task and these are used to produce data on their overall achievement. The latter 
can be modeled using item response theory (IRT; Lord & Novick, 1968) and population modeling 
to generate what is called plausible (proficiency) values. Population or conditioning models take 
achievement data (i.e., information from the IRT scaling) and reports of student academic context 
variables (i.e., from student questionnaires) into account to estimate more accurate proficiency 
values (i.e., plausible values) than can be estimated with IRT alone (see, for example, Mislevy & 
Sheehan, 1990; Thomas, 1993; von Davier et al, 2006; von Davier & Sinharay, 2013; von Davier 
et al. 2018).  
This study uses human rater generated scores and IRT-based expected or maximally likely scores 
and compares them to select images for the training data. These IRT-based estimates can be 
produced by utilizing the general student performance obtained from the TIMSS 2019 population 
modeling (von Davier, 2020) and the reported item parameters from the TIMSS 2019 IRT scaling 
(Foy et al., 2020) as fixed values in an IRT model to generate an estimate of the probability that a 
student with proficiency  solves an item with parameters 
 (for example). More precisely, 
we have a human rater generated score 
 that assigns no credit, partial credit, or full credit to 
the encounter of a student  with task  based on rater 
. Then, we can 
also generate expected scores based on the IRT item function that assigns response probabilities 
to each potential score level of the task, either using expected a priori (EAP) estimation or 
maximum a priori (MAP) estimation, 
  
or  
 
 
 and 
MAP estimation is the highest response probability for student 
. This approach allows for 
comparing the human rater generated score 
 and the IRT-based expected or maximally likely 

15 
 
score 
and 
, and to use the agreement between the two to select images for the 
training data. 
A training sample of images based on the agreement between the two provides a likely much 
having an additional expected rating
based on student achievement data that is highly related
allows us to select those responses that are most likely correct or incorrect, or receive partial credit, 
based on both human rating and most likely performance predicted using all available information 
on the student. 
An estimate of student ability was used to predict the expected response on the graphical response 
item. The achievement items used to estimate ability are a mix of both machine scored multiple-
choice items and human-scored constructed response items. The choice of ability estimate is 
secondary here, so we opted for the posterior mean of ability based on the  population modelused 
operationally in TIMSS 2019, which utilizes both item responses and contextual variables in the 
latent regression to reduce bias in secondary analyses (von Davier, 2020). The IRT item parameters 
were for the graphical response item were 
, and can be 
found in the TIMSS 2019 International Database (Fishbein, et al., 2021). For ANN modeling, only 
the clean sample of responses was used, meaning that all incorrect and inconsistently scored image 
responses were excluded.  
After computing the response probabilities and the likely IRT-based scores (MAP and EAP), it 
was revealed that the MAP-based scored matched 72.74% of the human-based scores. However, 
this method did not produce any expected scores of partial credit (one-point-responses). This is 
because the likelihood of receiving partial credit on the item under the IRT formula is never higher 
than the likelihood of receiving no credit or full credit. Therefore, any training sample constructed 
would be devoid of partial credit responses, and thus the model would not learn to distinguish them 
from incorrect or full credit.  
The EAP method, on the other hand, produced expected scores that matched 55.83% of the human-
based scores. Within these expected scores, there is an overrepresentation of partial credit 
responses, with 42.27% of the EAP-based scores consisting of partial credit compared to only 
about 10% being present in the human-based sample. As a consequence, there was a severe 
underrepresentation of expected full credit responses, with only 6.43% of the EAP-based scores 
consisting of full credit compared to 25% present in the human-based sample.  
As a result of the distributions of both the expected and maximally likely scores, two methods of 
analyses were chosen. The first method utilized the MAP-based scores, but removed all responses 
given partial credit by the human raters. This filtering increased the percentage of matching 
responses between the MAP-based scores and the human-based scores to 81.54%. The second 
method utilized an averaging of the MAP-based and EAP-based scores, which enabled analysis 
using a training sample that included partially correct responses, but also had a higher number of 
full credit responses than with EAP alone. 62.98% of the average MAP and EAP-based scores 
matched the human-based scores, with 25.49% of the expected scores consisting of partial credit 
and 23.20% consisting of full credit.  

16 
 
Examination of the average response probabilities revealed that the IRT model predicts much 
higher probabilities within respective score categories when the IRT-based scores and the human 
scores match. Conversely, nonmatching scores have probability distributions that are closer 
together. Additionally, the IRT model tends to overpredict incorrect responses because the item 
was difficult for students (see Tables 5 and 6).  
 
Table 5. Average posterior probabilities for MAP-based scores 
Sample 
P(incorrect) 
P(partial credit) 
P(full credit) 
Matching
incorrect 
78.50% 
10.04% 
11.46% 
Matching
full credit 
23.14% 
14.12% 
62.75% 
No match
incorrect  
29.22% 
15.43% 
55.35% 
No match
full credit 
59.90% 
14.63% 
25.47% 
Overall 
64.02% 
11.61% 
24.37% 
 
Table 6. Average posterior probabilities for average MAP and EAP-based scores 
Sample 
P(incorrect) 
P(partial credit) 
P(full credit) 
Matching
incorrect 
85.26% 
8.35% 
6.39% 
Matching
partial credit 
55.39% 
15.62% 
28.98% 
Matching
full credit 
23.14% 
14.12% 
62.75% 
No match
incorrect  
48.66% 
15.47% 
35.86% 
No match
partial credit 
57.85% 
12.44% 
29.71% 
No match
full credit 
59.90% 
14.63% 
25.47% 
Overall 
63.26% 
11.82% 
24.92% 
 
The next step in the process involved assigning the response to samples for neural network 
modeling. For both the MAP and EAP approaches, 70% of the responses where there was a match 
between the IRT-based score 
 (MAP) or 
 (average MAP and EAP) and the 
human-based score 
 were randomly assigned to the training sample (Tmatch), and the 
remaining 30% were assigned to a validation subset sample (Vmatch). All responses where there 
was no match between the scores were assigned to a separate validation sample (Vno_match). 
Additionally, random samples were also constructed for comparison. These randomly generated 
training samples (Trand) had the exact same number of responses (by score category) as the IRT-
based training samples, but were randomly assigned regardless of whether the IRT-based scores 
and the human scores matched. The remaining responses were assigned to one comparison 
validation sample (Vrand).  
For neural network modeling, FFN and CNN models underwent 50 epochs of training with the 
Nadam optimizer and the predictions were compared with the human-based responses. The CNN 
models were all constructed with zero padding and included dropout layers. For the MAP approach 
(with no partial credit responses), 7,489 responses were assigned to the training samples (Tmatch 
and Trand), 2,427 responses assigned to the mismatch validation sample (Vno_match), and 3,221 
responses assigned to the match validation subset (Vmatch); 5,648 responses were assigned to the 
random comparison validation sample (Vrand). For the average MAP and EAP approach, 6,461 

17 
 
responses were assigned to the training samples (Tmatch and Trand), 5,455 responses assigned to the 
mismatch validation sample (Vno_match), and 2,821 responses assigned to the match validation 
subset (Vmatch); 8,276 responses were assigned to the random comparison validation sample (Vrand). 
See Table 7).  
 
Table 7. Sample Sizes for ANN Modeling with IRT-based Scores and Random Comparison Samples 
 
IRT-based Samples 
Random Comparison Samples 
 
Training 
(Tmatch) 
Mismatch validation 
(Vno_match)   
Match validation 
subset (Vmatch) 
Training 
(Trand) 
Validation 
(Vrand) 
MAP-based Scores 
7,489 
2,427 
3,221 
7,489 
5,648 
Average MAP and 
EAP-based Scores 
6,461 
5,455 
2,821 
5,455 
8,276 
 
For both IRT-based approaches, the CNN models outperformed the FFN models for every 
validation sample. Additionally, performance was higher for the validation sample where the IRT 
and human scores matched than for the sample where they did not match. For the MAP-based 
scores the difference was only around 1%, but was around 4% for the average MAP and EAP-
based scores. Moreover,  compared to the random sample results, the validation sample where the 
scores did not match performed worse, but the validation samples where the scores matched tended 
to have slightly higher accuracy. For the CNN models, the random sample validation results were 
higher than the mismatch validation sample by about 1% for MAP-based scores and 3% for the 
averaged MAP and EAP-based scores. The differences between the match validation subset and 
the random comparison validation sample were much smaller, with only a 0.01 to 0.03% 
improvement for the MAP-based score models and a 0.5 to 1.5% improvement for the average 
MAP and EAP-based score models. In general, the models utilizing MAP-based scores had higher 
performance than the average MAP and EAP-based scores, with CNNs reaching 98.63% accuracy 
compared to 96.70% (see Tables 8 and 9). The higher performance for this approach is likely due 
to the absence of partial credit responses, which were challenging to classify for every model 
trained throughout this study.  
 
Table 8. Model Performance for MAP-based Scores 
Number of Layers
Mismatch validation 
sample
Match validation 
subset sample
Random comparison 
validation sample
Convol
utional
Fully 
Connected
Model 
Type
loss
accuracy
loss
accuracy
loss
accuracy
0
2
FFN
0.3297
86.86%
0.1662
93.70%
0.2075
91.41%
5
2
CNN
0.1293
97.90%
0.0859
98.54%
0.0714
98.51%
4
4
CNN
0.1155
97.36%
0.0676
98.63%
0.0682
98.62%
 
Table 9. Model Performance for Average MAP and EAP-based Scores 

18 
 
Number of Layers 
 
Mismatch validation 
sample 
Match validation 
subset sample 
Random comparison 
validation sample 
Convol
utional 
Fully 
Connected 
Model 
Type 
loss 
accuracy 
loss 
accuracy 
loss 
accuracy 
0 
2 
FFN 
0.6827 
72.41% 
0.3163 
88.90% 
0.5402 
78.78% 
5 
2 
CNN 
0.3535 
92.80% 
0.155 
96.70% 
0.1958 
95.86% 
4 
4 
CNN 
0.4391 
91.20% 
0.1781 
96.56% 
0.2368 
94.80% 
 
 
Discussion 
In each stage of the modeling process, the CNN models outperformed the FFN models both in 
terms of accuracy and loss. Not only did the CNN models reach accuracies upwards of 98%, but 
they also had very little overfitting when dropout layers were utilized. While both the CNN and 
FFN models had the lowest classification accuracy for partial credit image responses, the CNN 
models still had around 90% accuracy compared to the 60% accuracy for the FFN models. These 
results indicate that despite being a three-point item, the CNN models were able to automatically 
score most responses correctly.  
The benefit of using an ANN-based automated scoring system is that trained models can classify 
thousands of images in mere seconds with extremely high accuracy and little cost. ILSAs could 
train neural network models for image response-based items in place of second human raters. Any 
differences in classifications between the human raters and the automated scoring models could 
be reviewed by an expert rater at the ISC. The expert rater would only need to classify a fraction 
of the responses that a full-time rater would.  
Moreover, if CNNs are used instead of FFNs, the pool of image responses to review would be even 
smaller. For example, the number of image responses in the study that would need to be evaluated 
by an additional expert human rater was only 103 for the best CNN model instead of 434 for the 
best FFN model. This means that if the CNN model were used instead of the FFN model, the expert 
rater would have to evaluate only 2.29% of the validation image responses instead of 9.65%.   
Furthermore, the neural network models revealed inconsistencies and errors in the human ratings. 
As previously mentioned, early models correctly classified some image responses that were 
incorrectly classified by the human raters. Even after an independent rater at the ISC reviewed the 
entire sample of image responses, some incorrectly scored responses remained. These responses 
were classified correctly by the CNN models but appeared as misclassifications. While these 
results exemplify human rater effects, they also evidence just how accurate neural networks can 
be.  
To utilize CNNs operationally for automated scoring in ILSAs, models could be trained on a subset 
of image responses from past cycles or on responses from field test data collection. If response 
sample sizes are small, images can be transformed (e.g., rotated, flipped, and cropped) to increase 
 
validation responses. The most accurate model would then be used for automated scoring after the 
main data collection is complete.  

19 
 
An extra measure of quality control can be added to the scoring by constructing training and 
validation samples based on IRT expected scores. The results indicate that, in general, models 
trained on data where IRT-based and human scores matched performed similarly to models trained 
with randomly generated data samples (including matching and not matching scores) when applied 
to all data not included in the training samples (the validation samples). However, if we look closer 
at the results for the random comparison validation samples compared to the samples with only 
matching responses (the match validation subsets), we observe that the IRT expected score models 
had slightly higher accuracies and lower loss. This means that while the IRT-based ANN models 
have high classification in their own right, they work especially well for responses where there is 
agreement between human-based and IRT-based scores.  
This IRT-based approach to model construction could be used as a pre-modeling quality check, 
where IRT-based ANN models could be produced prior to actual modeling with randomly 
composed samples to help identify incorrectly scored image responses. This could be 
accomplished by examining image responses where there was a mismatch between predicted ANN 
scores and human-based scores, particularly for image responses where the IRT-based scores and 
human-based scores are the same. Utilizing this approach may aid an independent rater during the 
data cleaning process.   
Despite the overwhelming benefits of automated scoring using neural networks, two potential 
limitations exist. First, the process of training CNN models can be time-consuming, especially if 
ics processing units (GPU). 
That being said, the longest time it took to train a CNN model in the study using CPU was roughly 
two hours. Additionally, once a model is trained, it can be applied to new data in seconds, 
regardless of the processing unit. The training can also be done in advance using data collected 
prior to operational use, and in parallel on clusters of CPUs.  
The other potential limitation of using automated scoring with CNNs is that the high quality 
training data is needed, and training data must be cleaned before use. It is recommended that 
training data be carefully assessed so that incorrect image responses are re-scored and 
inconsistencies in ratings are identified. This process can be time-consuming for independent 
raters, but accurate training data is essential to training accurate models. The use of model based 
expected responses will be further explored for this purpose. One approach would be to clean the 
training data utilizing expected responses generated using a variety of models to impute or predict 
the most likely response category based on the other responses, but also utilizing covariates from 
context questionnaires.
