NEURAL CONTROL: CONCURRENT SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION
AND CONTROL LEARNING WITH NEURAL ODE
Cheng Chi
University of Toronto

ABSTRACT
Controlling continuous-time dynamical systems is generally a two step process: first, identify or
model the system dynamics with differential equations, then, minimize the control objectives to
achieve optimal control function and optimal state trajectories. However, any inaccuracy in dynamics
modeling will lead to sub-optimality in the resulting control function. To address this, we propose a
neural ODE based method for controlling unknown dynamical systems, denoted as Neural Control
(NC), which combines dynamics identification and optimal control learning using a coupled neural
ODE. Through an intriguing interplay between the two neural networks in coupled neural ODE
structure, our model concurrently learns system dynamics as well as optimal controls that guides
towards target states. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our model for learning
optimal control of unknown dynamical systems. The relevant code implementations can be accessed
at this GitHub link.
Keywords Neural ODE, Dynamical System, Optimal Control, System identification
1
Introduction
Optimal control is a robust mathematical framework that enables finding control and state trajectories for dynamical
systems over a period of time to minimize a performance metric [1]. The primary objective in optimal control is to
determine a control law that minimizes or maximizes a performance metric, such as energy consumption, time to
reach a target, or cost of operation. Solving optimal control problems can be difficult, especially for systems with
nonlinear dynamics. Classical optimal control theory, a cornerstone of modern control systems engineering, has
evolved through seminal contributions that establish principles for optimizing dynamic system behaviors. Central to this
evolution is the calculus of variations [2], providing foundational techniques for formulating and solving optimization
problems in continuous systems. Another pivotal contribution is Pontryagin’s Maximum Principle [3] [4] offering
necessary conditions for optimality in control problems, widely applicable in fields from aerospace to economics. The
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation, foundational in dynamic programming, extends these concepts to more
complex systems [5]. These works collectively underpin the theoretical framework of classical optimal control.
While classical approaches to optimal control are powerful, they often hinge on the analytical resolution of complex
equations, a task that can be daunting and computationally intensive. Recent advancements have seen the integration of
Machine Learning methods, particularly artificial neural networks (ANNs), into the domain of optimal control. Works
such as those by authors in [6] and [7] demonstrate the potential of embedding parameterized control functions within a
system’s dynamical equations. These approaches leverage auto-differentiation capabilities of ANNs to iteratively refine
and optimize control functions, a significant leap from traditional methods.
However, a critical assumption underlying these AI-enhanced methods is the prior knowledge of system dynamics.
Typically, this knowledge is encapsulated in differential equations, formulated through system identification – a process
of building mathematical models from empirical data. Traditionally, system identification relies on statistical methods
as elucidated in [8]. The advent of modern machine learning techniques has also revolutionized this process, enhancing
both efficiency and accuracy in modeling dynamic systems. Pioneering works in this area, such as those by [9], [10],
and [11], exemplify the successful application of these advanced techniques in system identification tasks.
arXiv:2401.01836v4  [cs.AI]  22 Apr 2024

PRIME AI paper
Building on these developments, we introduce - Neural Control (NC), which synergizes system identification with the
learning of optimal control, specifically tailored for continuous time dynamical systems. This framework eliminates
the need for separate system identification prior to control optimization in optimal control framework. By employing
a coupled neural ordinary differential equations, NC learns the underlying system dynamics while simultaneously
learning the optimal control function for continuous time optimal control.
Progress in automatic differentiation and machine learning methodologies has significantly enhanced the evolution of
modeling and control strategies in the domain of optimal control. For instance, reinforcement learning is an algorithmic
framework that can be applied for optimal control problems - generally in an unknown environment. Even though certain
RL algorithms can be used to approximate the solution to the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation (necessary
and sufficient condition for optimality), recent advancements in RL such as the policy gradient-based methods [12]
[13] or the actor-critic based methods [14] are in a purely data-driven regime. They directly parameterize the control
policy and collect a large number of interactions with the environment to build differentiable loss for improving
the parameterized policy, thus skipping the dynamics modelling and the derivation of optimality condition as in the
principle-driven approach. A subroutine in RL that involves dynamics modelling is known as the model-based RL,
where the approximation of unknown dynamics amounts to a supervised learning problem, and the learned dynamics
act as a subroutine in the original RL policy optimization process in the form of forward planning [15]. However, as
dynamics modeling and policy learning are often separate processes, powerful policy optimizers exploit inaccuracies
in learned dynamical models leading to adversarial examples and sub-optimal policies [16]. Besides, RL algorithms
are known for having a low data efficiency [17], and the available data can be extremely limited for some dynamical
systems [18].
Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (Neural ODEs) have demonstrated considerable efficacy as a framework for
modeling continuous systems using time series data that is sampled irregularly [19]. There has been a growing interest
in the application of Neural ODEs within the realm of continuous-time control tasks. Notably, the use of Neural ODEs
has been explored in the domain of learning optimal control functions, as evidenced in studies such as [6], [7], [20],
and [21]. These investigations have incorporated a parameterized controller within the actual dynamical functions f,
revealing that such controllers can emulate optimal control signals by minimizing a loss function, circumventing the
explicit resolution of maximum principle or Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equations.
Despite these advancements, existing methodologies predominantly focus on controlling continuous-time dynamical
systems when the dynamical functions are known. Conversely, the inherent suitability of Neural ODEs for modeling
continuous dynamical systems has prompted their extensive application in learning the dynamics of the underlying
system or system identification tasks, as highlighted in [9], [22], and [23].
However, to the best of our knowledge, there has been no methodological integration of system identification and the
learning of optimal control policies within a singular Neural ODE framework. In response to this gap, we introduce
Neural Control (NC). NC represents a novel approach that combines the dual processes of learning the optimal control
function and identifying system dynamics. This integration is executed within a coupled Neural ODE structure, enabling
concurrent optimal control function learning and system identification in an end-to-end manner. This approach aims to
harness the full potential of the Neural ODE model for controlling continuous-time systems.
2
Method
In this section, we introduce our method: Neural Control (NC), a coupled neural ODE structure that simultaneously
learns optimal control as well as system dynamics of unknown dynamical systems. We first briefly introduce few
relevant concepts before discussions of NC.
2.1
Classical optimal control
In this section, we briefly explain the classical methods for solving optimal control problems and particularly the
Maximum principle [3].
The first implicit step of controlling an unknown system would be to try to formulate system dynamics as a system of
ODEs, which relies on prior knowledge or requires fitting the parameters in the ODEs. Once the dynamics are estimated
and represented as f(x, u, t), where x represents the state variable, u is the control input, and t denotes time, we can
express the system as follows:
˙x(t) = f(x(t), u(x, t), t)
(1)
Then we formulate our control objective as minimization of the functions shown in equation (2):
J(u) =
Z T
0
L(x(t), u(x, t), t) dt + M(x(T))
(2)
2

PRIME AI paper
where M(x(T)) specifies the terminal cost that penalizes the state attained at T, and L(x(t), u(x, t), t) represents the
instantaneous cost. The subsequent steps involve converting the constrained optimization problem (equation (1) as
constraints) into unconstrained optimization via Lagrange multiplier, redefining terms inside that functional with the
quantity known as Hamiltonian, and applying a first-order necessary optimality condition on the augmented objective
functional. Eventually we reach the necessary condition for the optimality of the control: if (u∗, x∗) is optimal, then:
˙xi = ∂H
∂λi
˙λi = −∂H
∂xi
∀i
λ(T) = ∂M
∂x (x(T))
H(x∗(t), u∗(x, t), λ∗(t)) ≤H(x∗(t), u, λ∗(t))
∀u
(3)
where λ∗(t) are the costate variables associated with x∗(t). The aforementioned optimality condition typically leads
to a system of differentiable equations, and the solutions to this system contain the desired optimal control. This
principle-driven approach is often analytically and computationally intractable when applied to complex dynamical
systems.
2.2
Neural ODE
Neural ODE (Ordinary Differential Equation) [19] is a powerful modelling framework that leverages differential
equations and neural networks to learn continuous-time dynamics. The key equation of Neural ODE is:
dh(t)
dt
= fθ(h(t), t)
(4)
where h(t) represents the hidden state at time t, f is a neural network parameterized by θ, and t denotes the continuous
time variable. The initial condition for Neural ODE is given by h(t0) = h0. The solution of the Neural ODE or
the model predictions can be obtained by numerically integrating the above equation over the desired time interval.
The efficient back-propagation for training neural ODE is achieved by the adjoint method. It requires solving a
backward-in-time second ODE, known as the adjoint ODE, which is associated with the original ODE. By solving
the adjoint ODE, we obtain gradients of the loss function with respect to the state variables of the original ODE at
each time step. These gradients are then utilized, along with the chain rule, to compute gradients with respect to the
parameters of the neural network [24].
2.3
Neural Control: NC
2.3.1
Model architecture
Our NC model consists of a coupled neural ODE structure. We still parameterize the control function u(x, t) through a
neural network hθ(x, t), denoted as the controller. This controller is then embedded as part of the dynamics represented
by another neural network gγ(x, u, t) denoted as the dynamics learner, and the control signal u is given by the controller.
This is represented by the following equations manifested by a coupled neural ODE structure:
˙x = gγ(x, hθ(x, t), t)
(5)
This is essentially a coupled neural ODE where the neural part consists of two neural networks: controller hθ and
dynamics learner gγ. The integration in Equation (5) is conducted using a numerical solver over the dynamics specified
by the coupled hθ and gγ, and this is how NC makes a prediction about the state xT as a result of continuously
controlling the state evolution using the controller in the environment with unknown dynamics. For instance, starting at
x0, NC predicts where the system will end up by:
xT = x0 +
Z T
0
gγ(xt, hθ(xt, t), t)dt
(6)
2.3.2
Training Loss
There are two objectives when we train our NC model given by gγ(x, hθ(x, t), t). The first objective is for the dynamics
learner ˆgγ to approximate the real unknown dynamics f(x, u, t): the integration in Equation (5) gives us the model
prediction of the trajectory roll-out, and we want this prediction to match the real trajectory coming from the environment
(the real dynamics) using the same controller hθ. The second objective is for the controller hθ: we want to satisfy the
optimal control objectives, for example, by continuously applying control signal u given by hθ, the end state in the
predicted trajectory xT using the dynamics learner gγ (which is also the end state in the real trajectory if gγ is well
trained) should be close to our target state x∗.
3

PRIME AI paper
Figure 1: Training loss for dynamics learner gγ and controller hθ
These two objectives manifest the training loss, which is presented in Figure 1 below:
Starting from the same initial state x0, the predicted trajectory under gγ(x, hθ(x, t), t) is shown in red, and the real
trajectory coming from applying the same controller hθ in the environment or in real dynamics f is shown in black. As
gγ should approximate f, the mean squared error (MSE) between these two trajectories (shown in green) is used to
update gγ to reflect the dynamic learning objective. In contrast, the MSE loss between xpred
T
and x∗(shown in blue) is
used to train controller hθ to reflect the optimal control objective. Note that the controller loss can also be constructed
using the whole trajectory, which is the case for our CartPole experiment in Section 3, and we use a single end state
here for illustrative purpose.
By setting up the losses in this manner, the training of the controller is conducted exclusively through simulation using
roll-out by gγ (as depicted by the blue arrows in Figure 1), and the real trajectories data from the environment is only
required for training dynamics learner. This significantly improves data efficiency, which is demonstrated by our results
in section 3 where we successfully learn to control the CartPole system with less than 60 trajectories collected from the
environment. This is extremely data-efficient compared to traditional RL methods that use hundreds or thousands of
trajectories or episodes for CartPole [25].
The relationship between controller hθ and dynamics learner gγ is intriguing. On one hand, the dynamics learner
determines whether the controller training is effective or not, as it is purely using trajectory roll-outs under gγ. If gγ
has already been well-trained and sufficiently approximates f, the controller training process genuinely enhances the
controller’s performance in terms of our control objective: guiding states towards the target state under the real and
unknown dynamics f. If the dynamics learner is poorly trained, the controller may exploit the learned dynamics and
produce ineffective controls when deployed in the real dynamics.
On the other hand, the controller plays a vital role in shaping the trajectory’s roll-out within the state space, as
its outputs serve as inputs to both the dynamics learner gγ(x, hθ(x, t), t) and the true dynamics f(x, hθ(x, t)). As
indicated in Figure 1, these trajectories roll-outs establish the training loss for the dynamics learner. Therefore, the
controller essentially determines which portion of the state space dynamics the dynamics learner would fit. Through
this mechanism, the controller effectively directs the dynamics learner’s training process.
2.3.3
Alternative Training
A naive approach for training NC model gγ(x, hθ(x, t), t) is a two-stage training process. In the first stage, the dynamics
learner gγ is trained to accurately capture the underlying dynamics f by leveraging a diverse set of controllers (ideally
all possible control functions) for generation the input controls u. In the second stage, the controller hθ is trained within
the learned dynamics model gγ to attain optimal control, which is similar to the approach described in [6] for learning
optimal control with known dynamics.
There are two shortcomings with this two-stage training approach: First, once the training of the controller begins, no
further updates will be made to the learned dynamics gγ. Consequently, the controller has the potential to exploit the
fixed learned dynamics and generate adversarial controls if gγ is poorly fit. This raises uncertainty regarding whether
4

PRIME AI paper
the set of controllers used in the initial stage of training gγ is truly diverse enough for exploring all the state space of f
for a good fit of gγ.
Furthermore, it is unnecessary to precisely fit f over all state space. As mentioned earlier, the controller dictates
which portion of the vector field the dynamics learner should approximate. Since our goal is to train the controller
to be optimal, our focus is on thoroughly exploring the vector field of f that is relevant to the optimal controller and
controllers from previous training steps only. Therefore, we do not need to generate all possible control functions (and
we may not even be able to generate near-optimal controllers from the start) for training the dynamics learner in the first
stage. Instead, the dynamics learner only needs to approximate the vector field locally, specifically in the regions where
the current controller is leading, which is shown in Figure 6 Appendix A.
Figure 2: The kth alternation of the dynamics learner gγ and controller hθ alternative training
This naturally leads to the alternative training scheme depicted in Figure (2) for training NC model gγ(x, hθ(x, t), t).
In this scheme, we alternate the training of the two neural networks, gγ and hθ, for in total of K iterations. We denote
the neural networks at the kth alternation as gk
γ and hk
θ, respectively.
Within each alternation, such as the kth alternation, we first train the dynamics learner gk
γ using numerous gradient
steps to obtain gk+1
γ
while keeping the controller gk
γ fixed. After this training, this new dynamics learner has learned to
approximate the real dynamics near the trajectories that the current controller hk
θ leads to.
Subsequently, we fix the dynamics learner and focus on training the controller hk
θ (only optimal under gk
γ) to be optimal
under gk+1
γ
in terms of the control objective, resulting in a new controller hk+1
θ
. However, this new controller would lead
to a different portion of the state space whose dynamics may not be accurately approximated by the current dynamics
learner gk+1
γ
, as gk+1
γ
only approximates the true dynamics well near the trajectories associated with the previous
controller hθk. Therefore, we proceed to the next iteration. This alternative process continues until convergence is
achieved for both the dynamics learner and the controller.
The algorithm for alternative training with the corresponding loss definitions is outlined in Algorithm 1. It is important
to note that, for the purpose of illustration, the algorithm is presented with only one initial state. However, it can be
readily extended to handle a batch of initial states.
3
Experiments
3.1
Control task: Linear System
We now investigate the control performance of NC applied to a linear dynamical system described by f(x, u) = Ax+Bu.
This is the same tasked used in [6] and [26].
Dynamical system and control objectives
For such systems, analytical optimal control (OC) inputs can be derived using the Maximum Principle described in
Equation (3). The optimal control input u∗(t) is given by the equation:
u∗(t) = B⊤eA⊤(T −t)W(T)−1v(T)
(7)
5

PRIME AI paper
Algorithm 1 Alternative Training of NC Model
1: Input: Initial state x0, Target state x∗, Initialized neural networks g0
γ and h0
θ, Number of alternations K between
training gγ and hθ, Training iterations ng and nh within each alternation for training gγ and hθ respectively,
Interactive environment f
2: Initialize k ←0
3: while k < K do
4:
Deploy hk
θ in environment f starting from x0
5:
Collect real trajectories Treal
6:
Train Dynamics Learner
7:
For ng update steps:
8:
Deploy hk
θ in gk
γ starting from X0
9:
Collect predicted trajectories Tpred
10:
Update gk
γ with dynamics fitting loss:
11:
Lg = MSE(Tpred, Treal)
12:
Train Controller
13:
For nc update steps:
14:
Deploy hk
θ in already updated gk
γ starting from X0
15:
Collect predicted trajectories Tpred
16:
Update gk
γ with control loss:
17:
Lc = MSE(Tpred, x∗)
18:
k ←k + 1
19: end while
Figure 3: The full training process of NC for Ax+Bu task
.
v(T) = x(T) −eA(T −0)x(0) represents the difference between the target state x(T) and the initial state x(0) under
free evolution, as denoted in Equation (7). The matrix W(T) corresponds to the controllability Gramian, defined as:
W(T) =
Z T
0
eAtBB⊤eA⊤tdt.
(8)
This control task is the same task [6] used, but we assume the dynamics is unknown, and our NC model gγ(x, hθ(x, t), t)
does not have access to the true dynamics f(x, u). We aim to evaluate whether our NC can learn the analytical optimal
control without the knowledge of the true dynamics. We set problem dynamics parameters: A =

01
10

and the driver
6

PRIME AI paper
matrix B =

1
0

. We use a batch of uniformly random five initial states, the target state is set to be x∗= (1, −1), and
control horizon is set to be T = 1. Therefore, our control objective is to bring the system state xT at T = 1 closer to
the target state starting from those initial states x0 in the randomly generated batch.
Algorithm set-up
For solving this linear control task with our NC model gγ(x, hθ(x, t), t), we employ a controller hθ and a dynamics
learner gγ with one hidden layer consisting of 30 neurons each. The output layer of both neural networks uses the
identity activation function, while the hidden layer uses the tanh non-linear activation function.
To train our model using Algorithm 1, we set the training alternation parameter to K = 10, indicating that it only needs
to collect at most ten sets of real trajectories from the environment or the true dynamics. Within each alternation, we
train both the dynamics learner and the controller for 10000 gradient steps (ng, nc = 10000), using a constant learning
rate of 0.005. The training process leverages the built-in auto-differentiation functions in Jax.
Results
Figure (3) demonstrate the full training process of NC when controlling the Ax + Bu linear system. It provides an
overview of the full alternative training process, consisting of six pairs of plots separated by dashed lines. Each pair
corresponds to the results obtained in a specific training alternation k. The top-left pair corresponds to the initial training
alternation (k = 0), while the bottom-right pair represents the fully trained model after K = 10 alternations between
the dynamics learner and the controller training. The pairs in between correspond to intermediate training alternations.
In each pair of plots, the left plot displays the trajectory roll-outs under the real dynamics f (shown in black) and the
current dynamics learner gk
γ (shown in red), using the controller hk
θ for the current alternation k. Meanwhile, the right
plot shows the control signal generated along the trajectories using the current controller hk
θ. These control signals
corresponds to the outputs of hk
θ(x, t), where x represents the states in the trajectories under f and gk
γ, respectively.
The final trajectory plot at the bottom right corner reveals that the trained NC controller hK
θ successfully guides
the system from various initial states to the target state x∗= (1, −1), in both learned dynamics and real dynamics
(which shows that the training of the gK
γ is successful as well). The training losses for dynamics learner and controller
corresponds to these six alternations (each alternation we take nc, ng gradient steps) are shown in Figure (8) Appendix
C.
Moreover, it is fascinating to observe that the controller and dynamics learner converge almost simultaneously: as
the controller performs better (end states in trajectories are closer to the target state), the dynamics learner adjusts to
fit the dynamics more accurately (deviation between black and red trajectories are smaller). As discussed in Section
2.3.3, an intriguing interaction unfolds between the controller and the dynamics learner. The controller effectively
guides the dynamics learner’s learning process by leading it to different regions of the vector field in f that require
accurate fitting. Conversely, the dynamics learner imposes constraints on the controller by specifying the dynamics
that the controller will operate within. In essence, they mutually shape each other’s training objectives and supervise
one another during each alternation k. As the alternations progress, the quality of this mutual supervision between
the two neural networks continually improves. As the controller’s performance enhances, the dynamics learner learns
to approximate dynamics that are closer to optimal trajectories in the state space. Simultaneously, as the dynamics
learner becomes more proficient, the controller’s training becomes more effective in terms of the objective of steering
the states closer to the target states, as the dynamics that the controller operates in is closer to the true dynamics. This
iterative feedback loop reinforces their collaborative training and leads to increasingly refined coordination between the
controller and the dynamics learner.
These findings once again highlight the captivating interactions and relationships between the controller hθ and dynamics
learner gγ in our NC model gγ(x, hθ(x, t), t). Through this enthralling interplay between the two neural networks, we
can solve optimal control tasks without any prior knowledge of the system dynamics.
3.2
Control Task: CartPole
We now investigate the control performance of NC applied to a non-linear dynamical system known as CartPole or
inverted pendulum.
Dynamical system and control objectives
The CartPole system is a classic problem in control theory and reinforcement learning. It consists of a pole that is
attached to a cart, which can move along a frictionless track.
7

PRIME AI paper
Figure 4: CartPole dynamical system
The state of the system is typically represented by four variables: (x, ˙x, θ, ˙θ) that represents the position of the pole,
the horizontal velocity of the pole, the pole angle with respect to the vertical axis, and the pole’s angular velocity,
respectively.
The control objective is to maintain the pole in an upright position (keep system state at (0,0,0,0)) by applying
appropriate control inputs, which is the horizontal force applied to the cart. The CartPole system is a challenging
problem because it is inherently unstable. Small changes in the control inputs or disturbances can cause the pole to fall.
The dynamics of the system f(x, ˙x, θ, ˙θ) that inputs the four-dimensional state and returns ˙x, ¨x, ˙θ, ¨θ (the instantaneous
change to the state) is given by the following system of differential equations [27]:
˙x = ˙x
¨x = F + mp l ( ˙θ2 sin θ −¨θ cos θ)
mc + mp
˙θ = ˙θ
¨θ =
g sin θ + cos θ

−F −mp l ˙θ2 sin θ
mc+mp

l ·

4
3 −mp cos2 θ
mc+mp

(9)
Here, F represents the control input applied to the cart, which is determined by the controller. The gravitational
acceleration is g = 9.8. The masses of the cart and the pole are represented by mc = 1.0 and mp = 0.1 respectively.
The length of the pole is l = 0.5 (half of the actual pole length). Equation (9) shows that the system dynamics are
highly non-linear. Note that the first line ˙x = ˙x simply means that the first dimension of the output of f (how x should
change) is directly equal to the third dimension of the input to f.
An important observation is that the control loss in our NC model for the CartPole task has transitioned from a
single-end-state loss to an integral loss. The control loss now measures the mean squared error between the desired
state (0,0,0,0) and all states along the trajectories. This is because the objective is to maintain the pole in an upright
position throughout the entire trajectory. This can be easily incorporated into our NC alternative training algorithm by
changing line 17 of Algorithm 1.
Algorithm Set-up
For solving the CartPole control task with our NC model gγ(x, hθ(x, t), t), we set up our controller hθ with a single
hidden layer consists of 64 neurons and one-dimensional output for control F, and our dynamics learner gγ with
two hidden layers consisting of 64 and 32 neurons respectively and having a four-dimensional output corresponds to
˙x, ¨x, ˙θ, ¨θ. The output layer for both hθ and gγ uses the identity activation function, while the hidden layer uses the
tanh non-linear activation function. We set the training alternation parameter to K = 12 in Algorithm 1. During each
alternation, we train the controller for nc = 2000 gradient steps with a learning rate of 0.0001. The training of the
dynamic learner follows a multi-stage approach that enhances the stability of training. Firstly, we minimize the mean
squared errors of trajectory roll-outs from t = 0 to t = 0.5 for 2000 gradient steps, using a learning rate of 0.005. Next,
we extend the training to cover the time range from t = 0 to t = 1 for an additional 2000 gradient steps, with a learning
8

PRIME AI paper
Figure 5: The full training process of NC for CartPole task
.
rate of 0.001. Finally, we continue the training from t = 0 to t = T for another 2000 gradient steps, employing a
learning rate of 0.0001. This multi-stage training can be seen in Figure (9) Appendix C, where the dynamics learner loss
plots have spikes for every 2000 gradient steps. On the other hand, the dynamic trainer follows a multi-stage training
approach for the purpose of stability. AT first, the time step is set to t = 0.5 with nc = 10000 gradient steps and a
learning rate of 0.001. Then, the time step is extended to a time range of t = 0.5 to t = 1 with an additional 10000
gradient steps nc and a learning rate of 0.0001.
Results
Figure (5) indicates the full training process of NC for controlling the CartPole system with four pairs of plots. The pair
on the top corresponds to the initial training alternation (k = 0), while the bottom represents the fully trained model
after K = 12 alternations. The pairs in the middle correspond to intermediate training alternations. In each plot pair,
the left plot illustrates the trajectory roll-outs under the real dynamics f (shown in dashed lines) and under the current
dynamics learner gk
γ using the controller. Since the states in this case have four dimensions, we represent the trajectory
roll-outs by plotting the values of each state dimension over time, rather than directly visualizing the trajectories in the
state space. It is important to note that we visualize the results for a single initial state from the batch of data. The right
plot in each pair displays the control signals generated along the trajectories.
We can observe that NC controller hK
θ successfully controls the CartPole system after K alternations, as it keeps the
system evolution near the target state (0,0,0,0) which corresponds to the upright position of the pole, and the trajectory
roll-outs in learned dynamics are close to real dynamics. Again, the training losses for dynamics learner and controller
correspond to these four alternations are shown in Figure (9) Appendix C.
One thing to note here is the data efficiency of NC algorithm. As indicated in Algorithm 1 line 5, we only need to
interact with the real environment and collect real trajectories at each alternation k for each initial state in our batch.
Therefore, we only need to collect in total K ∗N trajectories or episodes from the real environment where N is the
batch size. For this particular experiment, we only collected less than 60 trajectories before successfully solving the
CartPole tasks, which is more data-efficient compared to RL methods that uses hundreds or thousands of trajectories.
9

PRIME AI paper
4
Conclusion
We introduced a novel framework denoted as NC that consists of a coupled neural ODE for controlling dynamical
systems with unknown dynamics. This is achieved via an alternative training between two neural networks in our NC
model: the dynamics learner and the controller. Through an intriguing interplay and mutual supervision between these
two neural networks, the model learns the optimal control as well as the system dynamics. We applied NC in different
dynamical systems and demonstrated the effectiveness of NC for learning the optimal control with high data efficiency.
This manuscript presents a detailed and technical exposition of the method introduced in Chapter 3 (’TEL for Optimal
Control: NC’) of the thesis titled ’Theory Embedded Learning’ available at this link [28].
