1
DeHIN: A Decentralized Framework for
Embedding Large-scale Heterogeneous
Information Networks
Mubashir Imran, Hongzhi Yin, Tong Chen, Zi Huang, Kai Zheng
Abstract—Modeling heterogeneity by extraction and exploitation of high-order information from heterogeneous information networks
(HINs) has been attracting immense research attention in recent times. Such heterogeneous network embedding (HNE) methods
effectively harness the heterogeneity of small-scale HINs. However, in the real world, the size of HINs grow exponentially with the
continuous introduction of new nodes and different types of links, making it a billion-scale network. Learning node embeddings on such
HINs creates a performance bottleneck for existing HNE methods that are commonly centralized, i.e., complete data and the model are
both on a single machine. To address large-scale HNE tasks with strong efﬁciency and effectiveness guarantee, we present
Decentralized Embedding Framework for Heterogeneous Information Network (DeHIN) in this paper. In DeHIN, we generate a
distributed parallel pipeline that utilizes hypergraphs in order to infuse parallelization into the HNE task. DeHIN presents a context
preserving partition mechanism that innovatively formulates a large HIN as a hypergraph, whose hyperedges connect semantically
similar nodes. Our framework then adopts a decentralized strategy to efﬁciently partition HINs by adopting a tree-like pipeline. Then,
each resulting subnetwork is assigned to a distributed worker, which employs the deep information maximization theorem to locally
learn node embeddings from the partition it receives. We further devise a novel embedding alignment scheme to precisely project
independently learned node embeddings from all subnetworks onto a common vector space, thus allowing for downstream tasks like
link prediction and node classiﬁcation. As shown from our experimental results, DeHIN signiﬁcantly improves the efﬁciency and
accuracy of existing HNE models as well as outperforms the large-scale graph embedding frameworks by efﬁciently scaling up to
large-scale HINs.
Index Terms—Decentralized Network Embedding, Heterogeneous Networks, Link Prediction, Node Classiﬁcation
!
1
INTRODUCTION
Many
real-world
interactions
recorded
via
digital
medium take the form of heterogeneous information net-
works (HINs). HINs typically consist of multiple types of
nodes connected by a variety of links/relationships. Due
to the ﬂexibility and diversity of relationships provided by
HINs, heterogeneous network embedding (HNE) is widely
adopted to perform several downstream tasks such as item
recommendation, link prediction, and node classiﬁcation. To
effectively execute such tasks on an HIN, low-dimensional
vector representations (i.e., embeddings) for each node are
learned, such that the representations effectively preserve
both feature and neighborhood information for each node
belonging to that HIN.
Advancing the accuracy of downstream tasks for HINs, a
large number of centralized HNE approaches have been de-
veloped [48], which learn the low-dimensional representa-
tion of the entire network on a single machine. However, in
the case of large-scale HINs, these centralized frameworks
•
M. Imran, H. Yin, T. Chen, and Z. Huang are with the School of
Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, The University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia

•
K. Zheng is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu,
China.

Hongzhi Yin is the corresponding author.
at large neglect model scalability and efﬁciency.
The centralized HNE paradigm requires the entire net-
work data to be present and all model parameters to be
stored and updated on one machine throughout the training
phase. Though this assumption suits small networks, it
makes centralized HNE models unable to scale to large
networks due to multiple constraints from memory, com-
putational cost, and accuracy perspectives. For instance,
the graph transformer network (GTN) [50] needs to take
the network’s full adjacency matrix as its input, while a
contemporary network can contain up to billions of nodes
and edges (e.g. the WDC e-commerce dataset [28]), making
it unable to handle large-scale networks efﬁciently. Hence,
attempts on improving the scalability of centralized HNE
methods are made, such as the mini-batch implementation
[51] of graph convolutional network (GCN) [22], subgraph
sampling [16], and network coarsening [24]. However, the
huge time consumption is unavoidable with sampled mini-
batches/subgraphs as they need to be iterated over the
whole network for model training [51], [16], and network
coarsening [24] incurs accuracy loss as the condensed net-
work fails to fully preserve the subtle characteristics of
merged nodes/edges. Moreover, most of them [51], [24]
are designed purely for homogeneous networks, thus being
inapplicable to HNE.
Another natural solution to embedding large-scale HINs
is a decentralized HNE paradigm, that exploits model par-
allelism [32] or data parallelism [19]. In the case of model
arXiv:2201.02757v1  [cs.LG]  8 Jan 2022

2
parallelism, the communication overhead renders it highly
inefﬁcient as billions of model parameters need to be shared
and synchronized at each iteration to keep all learned node
embeddings within the same distribution. In contrast, data
parallelism is a more favorable choice for HNE as the
network data can be partitioned and assigned to different
workers, where each worker can deploy a fully localized
model to learn node embeddings for a speciﬁc network
partition. In our previous work [5], we presented a de-
centralized architecture DDHH based on data parallelism,
that learns low-level vector representations of nodes on
partitioned HINs and then align the independently learned
representations onto the same space. Although DDHH ef-
ﬁciently computes network embeddings in a decentralized
setting, it still suffers from two key challenges, which we
will discuss below.
Challenge 1: Efﬁcient Partitioning of HIN. DDHH adopts
a partitioning strategy where the two hyperedges (i.e., a set
of nodes connected via a predeﬁned relation) are contracted
based on the number of edges and common nodes between
them. This helps preserve the maximum node context
within each partition. However, score comparison creates a
bottleneck and prevents parallelism during the partitioning
phase. Secondly, node links need to be recomputed after
every iteration, increasing the search time signiﬁcantly.
Challenge 2: Context-aware Embedding Alignment. Node
embeddings learned through different workers need to be
aligned onto a uniﬁed space to support subsequent tasks.
For this purpose, DDHH uses an orthogonal alignment
mechanism named Procrustes Alignment. DDHH,
however, considers only a single learned representation of
a node across multiple HIN partitions when learning the
ﬁnal embedding of each node, ignoring any other
representations of that node present across multiple
partitions. As each partition carries a speciﬁc context, the
embedding alignment scheme sacriﬁces the expressiveness
of learned node embeddings.
In order to address the above challenges, we propose
Decentralized Embedding Framework for Large-scale Heteroge-
neous Information Networks (DeHIN) that signiﬁcantly im-
proves the DDHH model in our conference paper with fully
distributed partitioning and context-aware alignment. In
order to compute partitions efﬁciently, we put forward a de-
centralized partitioning strategy based on hyperedges. The
partitioning mechanism adopts a binary tree-like pipeline
to match the nodes at different workers and a hash table
that holds bucket ids for tracing each node’s corresponding
hyperedges, reducing the lookup time to a constant. In
DeHIN, each worker has two buckets of nodes, and it
contracts the hyperedges from one bucket into the other
depending upon a similarity score. After each iteration,
workers share the contracted bucket with their neighbors
and the process is repeated until there is only one bucket
containing all contracted partitions left. In this way, DeHIN
effectively parallelizes the contraction-based HIN partition-
ing mechanism presented in DDHH while ensuring the
quality of each partition. Meanwhile, instead of straightfor-
wardly preserving a node’s embedding from one partition
during alignment, DeHIN adopts an aggregation strategy
to preserve all contexts of each node by accounting for each
of the network partitions it appears in. Speciﬁcally, as an
extension to our conference paper [5], this paper makes the
following contributions:
•
We propose a novel, fully parallelizable HNE par-
titioning algorithm in DeHIN, which preserves the
heterogeneity and high-order relationships in each
generated partitions with the generated hyperedges
while being highly efﬁcient.
•
To maximize the contextual information within each
learned node embedding, we design a context-aware
alignment scheme. Based on translation matrix ap-
proximation, it maps the learned embeddings, re-
ceived from the distributed workers, onto the a single
orthogonal space by jointly considering a node’s
context in multiple partitions.
•
To show the efﬁciency and effectiveness of DeHIN,
we make use of 4 large-scale datasets, and conduct
extensive experimentation on both effectiveness and
efﬁciency.
2
RELATED WORK
In this section, we review related work regarding our re-
search. Speciﬁcally, our work is relevant to heterogeneous
network embedding, large-scale network embedding and
hypergraph embedding.
2.1
Network Embedding
Network embedding assigns each node in the network a
low-dimensional vector representation [6], [53]. These rep-
resentations should effectively preserve the network struc-
ture and node properties [19]. Depending upon the type
of nodes and links within a network, we can classify a
network into two main categories [52] i.e, homogeneous
and heterogeneous networks, which require different em-
bedding techniques. Another generic class of graph network
representation is hypergraphs, which have recently been
adopted to resolve a wide range of optimization problems,
including scheduling, relation sampling among visuals, and
video segmentation.
2.1.1
Heterogeneous Network Embedding
Heterogeneous networks are networks that contain different
types of nodes and edges. Each node and edge belonging
to a heterogeneous network tend to have unique attributes
associated with it. These attributes are designed to capture
different characteristics of that network [31], [36]. HNE
models aim to sample a network’s heterogeneity by either
generating meta-paths such as metapath2vec [7], HIN2Vec
[10] , MAGNN [11], HGT [16] or by constructing smaller
bipartite graphs such as PME [3], HEER [33] and PTE
[37]. They then apply transductive and inductive learning
approaches [2], [48], on the sampled data to obtain low
dimensional vector representations for each node in the
network.
HNE models that adopt the bipartite strategy, initially
split heterogeneous networks into multiple bipartite net-
works, by sampling both explicit and implicit links between
the vertices [12], [13], [17]. They then apply different opti-
mization strategies to learn node embeddings. A few HNE

3
models that harness the structural utility of bipartite graphs
also adopt centrality-based metric learning to capture high-
order proximity [4], [3].
2.1.2
Hypergraph Embedding
Hypergraph representation has been adopted as a tool to
model complex high-order relationships, e.g. vertices in
social networks possess far more complicated relationships
than vertex-to vertex edge relationships among schedul-
ing networks. Recently hypergraph embedding frameworks
have been developed on top of homogeneous graph embed-
ding models, including Spectral Hypergraph Embedding
[55], HGNN [9], DHGNN [20] and DHNE [44]. Spectral
Hypergraph Embedding [55] treats network embedding as
a k-way partitioning problem and uses eigendecomposition
of adjacency matrix to approach the optimum matching
problem. Similar to GCN, HGNN [9] adopts spectral con-
volution to hypergraph and train the network using a semi-
supervised learning approach. DHGNN [20] stack multiple
convolution layers, that use node and hyperedge features
to compute the embeddings. After each layer, the output
is used to reconstruct the hypergraph’s structure, which
is then passed on to the next layer. This is done to be
better able to extract both global and local relationship
information. DHNE [44] uses an auto-encoder to preserve
the structural information of hyperedges present in the
network.
2.2
Large-scale Network Embedding Frameworks
Most existing node embedding models are designed to pro-
cess networks having a few thousand nodes [56]. However,
real-world networks are usually very large. Scaling the
existing network embedding models to efﬁciently process
networks with tens of millions of nodes is a challenging
problem. In order to meet this demand, recently a few large-
scale network embedding frameworks have been purposed,
which can adapt to very large networks on a single machine.
Among the large-scale network embedding frameworks,
MILE [24], iteratively coarsens the network to execute net-
work embedding on a much smaller, contracted network.
The embeddings of the contracted nodes are reﬁned to the
original nodes using a deep model. A key limitation of
MILE is its ability to adapt with scaling network size. In
this approach, the embedding quality is greatly affected,
by the increase in network size. Additionally, the embed-
ding reﬁnement mechanism of the source node, down from
a super node is a computationally expensive process for
large-scale networks. Parameter sharing, i.e., model paral-
lelism, is another approach to deal with very large-scale
datasets. COSINE and Py-Torch-BigGraph (PGB) [23], [54]
utilizes parameter sharing approach. These models generate
non-overlapping partitions, having distinct vertices. The
limitation posed to these large-scale network embedding
frameworks is that they are highly dependent on the bus
bandwidth.
Another very widely adopted large-scale network em-
bedding framework is GraphVite [56]. It is a hybrid sys-
tem that utilizes both, the CPU and the GPU for train-
ing node embeddings. Training is made by utilizing and
co-optimizing the existing network embedding algorithm.
Fig. 1. Pipeline of DeHIN. Multiple hyperedges are extracted from the
HIN and placed in individual buckets. The workers iteratively contract
two buckets to obtain the partitioned subnetworks. Each Partitioned
subnetwork is assigned to an individual worker that learns embedding
via mutual information maximization. The learned embeddings are then
aligned at the server side through context-aware orthogonal procrustes
transformation.
They also purpose an efﬁcient collaboration strategy is to
further reduce the cost of synchronization among CPUs
and GPUs. DeLNE [19] adopts data parallelism approach
to deal with large-scale networks. It partitions a network
into smaller part [21] and learn vector representation in a
completely decentralized fashion, using Variational Graph
Convolution Auto-Encoders (VGAE) [22].
Although the above-mentioned large-scale network em-
bedding frameworks are efﬁcient and produce quality em-
beddings as reported in [19], these frameworks are designed
for homogeneous networks. Heterogeneous network em-
bedding models require high-order characteristics of a node
to be preserved along with its structure, during the struc-
ture sampling phase. Secondly, partitioning a heterogeneous
network, that consists of interconnected nodes and edges
of different types, is a far more complex and tedious task.
PBG [23] is a distributed system that trains on an input
network by ingesting its list of edges and their relation
types. However, the PBG still requires a global model to
be every iteration. This constant sharing of information,
as depicted in our results, is extremely inefﬁcient as the
number of links grows. Decentralized Deep Heterogeneous
Hypergraph (DDHH) [5] is another decentralized node em-
bedding framework, speciﬁcally designed for HNE, that
uses hyperedge sampling to partition HIN. Each worker
in DDHH uses the information maximization theorem for
learning node embeddings locally then aligns the learned

4
embeddings using an orthogonal alignment mechanism.
However, as mentioned in Section 1, it suffers from two
major drawbacks i.e., it incurs high computational and time
cost in its partitioning mechanism, and also loss of high
order context during alignment. To address the efﬁciency
issue of DDHH, we propose a fully parallelizable HNE
partitioning algorithm in DeHIN. DeHIN also introduces
a hash table that keeps track of each node’s hyperedges,
efﬁciently providing the best contraction option and dis-
cards the need for recomputing/relocating node’s links at
each iteration. To preserver high-order context during the
alignment phase, DeHIN maximizes the contextual informa-
tion within each learned embeddings, using a context-aware
alignment scheme.
3
PRELIMINARIES
Here, we introduce some of the preliminary concepts that
are commonly adopted throughout the paper and formulate
the research problem.
Deﬁnition 2.1: A HIN consist of vertices belonging to one
or more types, connected via one or more types of edges.
Formally, an HIN can be represented as G = {V, E, X, R}.
Here V is the set of all vertices v type and E is the set of all
edges, connecting nodes e = (v, v′, r), through relationship
type r ∈R, and X represents the set of node features x.
Deﬁnition 2.2: A connected component (CC) represents a
set of nodes {v1, v2, v3..., vn} connected via single path pi,
such that all the edges {e1, e2, e3..., en} in pi belong to the
same relationship type r.
Deﬁnition 2.3: A hyperedge eH = {v1, v2, ..., vn} can
connect two or more vertices simultaneously. Given an
HIN, we contract all connected vertices V having same
relationship types r ∈R, into multiple sets. Each set
represent hyperedges EH, where each v in a hyperedge eH
have common properties. A v is incident to a hyperedge eH
if v ∈eH.
Deﬁnition 2.4: A hypergraph is a graph GH = {V, EH}
having vertices V connected via hyperedges EH. An HIN is
converted into a hypergraph by generating all possible
hyperedges EH, as described in deﬁnition 2.3.
Deﬁnition 2.5: An anchor network GA = {VA, EA}
contains such vertices v that are shared among two or more
subnetwork. These vertices are called anchor (i.e., common)
nodes VA ∈V. First-order neighbours of each anchor node
is also included in the anchor network VA, connected via
hyperedges EA.
Problem Deﬁnition: Decentralized Embedding for
Large-scale HIN. Given an HIN, our goal is to compute a
low-dimensional vector representation v ∈Rd for each
vertex v ∈V in G, by aborting distributive partitioning
approach, that partitions G in into k subnetworks
{G1, G2, ..., Gk} and learn node embeddings for each
subnetwork independently. Finally, the independently
learned embeddings of all partitions are eventually
mapped onto the same vector space via an alignment
scheme MGn(bZ).
4
METHODOLOGY
The decentralized learning pipeline of DeHIN in Fig. 1 can
be divided into three phases. First of all, a partitioning
unit generates hypergraphs from the given HIN and then
adopts a parallel partitioning approach to obtain multiple
smaller subnetworks. Secondly, at each worker, we utilize
a deep information maximization algorithm to learn vector
representations of largely unlabeled nodes. And Finally, a
server-side that aligns all the embeddings received from
each worker, into a uniﬁed space. Details of each component
are introduced in the following section.
4.1
HIN Partition
In order to effectively preserve the structural and higher-
order properties of a node, GNNs require full access to
the node’s neighborhood belonging to each of its rela-
tionships R. However real-world HINs are billion-scale in
size, containing millions of nodes and edges of numerous
types. Learning quality node representations for such HINs,
by adopting a framework based on centralized or model
parallelism architecture, is extremely infeasible as explained
in Section 1. Therefore, we devise a smart data parallelism
framework that allows the HIN to be efﬁciently partitioned
and re-aligns the independently learned node embeddings.
To better retain the network structure and high-order
information for the node embedding task, each partition
should: 1) maximize the diversity of each node’s relationship,
so that each partition retains (almost) all possible behaviors
of its nodes, 2) maintain each node’s neighborhood, so that the
network structure is preserved. Our proposed HIN partition
pipeline consists of two main steps, namely Hypergraph
Generation and Distributed Network Partition.
4.1.1
Hypergraph Generation
Heterogeneous network exhibits semantically complex and
high-order relationships among its nodes, e.g., in IMDB net-
work, a viewer can review a movie, and this movie is directed
by a director [26]. For most GNN-based HNE approaches, a
heterogeneous network is commonly input into the models
in three ways: 1) in the form of an adjacency matrix of the
whole network [50], 2) by converting it into relation-speciﬁc
bipartite graphs [57] or 3) by creating problem-speciﬁc meta-
paths [30]. However, when the size and diversity grow on
larger heterogeneous networks, the ﬁrst two methods incur
heavy memory footprints, thus being unsuitable for embed-
ding large networks. Though metapath-based sampling can
be modiﬁed for generating network partitions, it has limited
ﬂexibility
Intuitively, in an HIN, different relationships r ∈R
among nodes represent a certain perspective [47], i.e., a
node’s role in context to its varying relationship with its
neighbors. For example, in a publication dataset [39], a pa-
per serves as a citation in a paper-paper relationship, while it
is a publication record in a paper-author relationship. Hence,
based upon the relationship a node has with its neighbors,
we identify and construct hyperedges. Speciﬁcally, we adopt
an edge contraction strategy to sample meaningful hyper-
edges from an HIN. All the edges belonging to a r ∈R are
contracted, to form hyperedges of type r, and this process is
carried out in parallel for each relationship type in R.

5
Fig. 2. A: The original HIN. B: Each edge type is sampled into different
buckets. C: All connected nodes in each bucket form hyperedges.
In DeHIN, sampling hyperedges by contraction is mo-
tivated by the graph’s connectivity, as connected nodes
(e.g., nodes in a pairwise relationship or a path) usually
possess high proximity compared with disconnected nodes
[14], [18]. In other words, hyperedges are sets of connected
vertices extracted from each relationship type within a het-
erogeneous network. Given an HIN G having |V| nodes,
|E| edges and |R| relationships, we generate |R| buckets
B, each holding a collection of hyperedge belonging to a
single relation r ∈R. Essentially, we engage |R| workers
so that all nodes connected via same r ∈R (i.e. all nodes
in Gr) are split into separate buckets, as shown in Fig.
2B. Nodes in each bucket are then contracted by utilizing
parallel Breadth First Search (BFS). These collected paths,
representing connected components in Gr, are denoted as
hyperedges EH ∈Br which is illustrated in Fig. 2C.
To this end, EH encloses complete high-order neighbour-
hood set of each contained node, within a single r. The
time complexity of generating hyperedges for |R| buckets
in parallel is O(|Er
max|), where |Er
max| represents the highest
number of edges in any r. The space complexity of this
module is O(|Er| + |Vr|), where Er and Vr represents the
total number of edges and vertices on the worker with
relationship r.
4.1.2
Distributed Network Partition
The main objective of our partition task is to produce seman-
tically distinct subnetworks and ensure parallelism among
the distributed workers. The hyperedge construction strat-
egy we adopted in Section 4.1.1 ensures that each hyperedge
encompasses the complete single-typed neighborhood of
each node. This property helps to preserve the structure
of the HIN. We design a scoring function in Algorithm 1
that makes sure a maximum number of |R| of a node are
grouped together. We also provide a graphical explanation
in Fig. 3. Initially |B|
2
workers are generated. Each worker
is assigned two buckets each, denoted by B1 and B2. Hy-
peredges (EH ∈B1) are sorted on the basis of their size.
We use Red and Black (RB) trees as a data structure of
the buckets for efﬁciency. A scoring function, that uses a
hash table to ﬁnd which EH ∈B2 that has most common
nodes to EH ∈B1. Those EH ∈B2 having more common
nodes with EH ∈B1, are contracted from smallest to largest.
The hash table points to the list of hyperedges (EH) each
node is afﬁliated with. This scoring function makes sure
that maximum R are grouped together. In the next iteration
|B|
2 (with updated |B|) workers are generated, and the same
process is repeated until only one bucket remains.
In order to avoid partition size implosion or explosion,
we always set a lower-bound and an upper-bound for the
Algorithm 1: Bucket-based Hypergraph Partition
Input: List of Buckets [B1, B2, ...B|R|], size lower
bound m, size upper bound m′, Nodes’
Hyperedge HashTable[]
Output: k subnetworks {G1, G2, ..., Gk}
1 while |B| ̸= 1 do
2
Generate |B|
2 ∀k workers in parallel
/* assign 2 buckets to each woker
*/
3
Red&Black-Tree(Bodd)
4
foreach (E)H ∈Bodd do
5
seH
i = ComputeScore((E)H, HashTable)
/* eH
i
is the ith hyperedge in Bodd
*/
6
7
if |Bj+2[seH
i ]| + |eH
i | < m′ then
8
Contract(Bj+2[seH
i ], eH
i )
9
else
10
Bj+2 ←eH
i
11
BucketRenumbering
/* renumber all the even Buckets in
previous iteration to range {1, ... |B|
2 }
*/
12
13 foreach (E)H ∈B1 do
14
temp ←∅
15
if |(E)H
i | < m then
16
(E)H
i ←Concatenate((E)H
i , temp)
17
temp ←(E)H
i
18
else
19
Gk ←(E)H
i
20 return {G1, G2, ..., Gk} = Partitions
contractions. Two hyperedges are contracted only if the
upper-bound is not exceeded. In case a single hyperedge
exceeds the upper bound, it no longer takes part in the
contraction process and remains deactivated for remaining
iterations. When only one bucket is left, all the hyperedges
that are smaller than the lower-bound are contracted to-
gether randomly. For our experiments, we set the lower-
bound to 10,000 nodes. Since each partition encloses the
complete neighborhood of a node w.r.t. at least one r, our
opted lower-bound is sufﬁcient for the model to preserve
neighborhood structure. High-order information of these
nodes is comprehended by the alignment mechanism, given
in Section 4.3. To obtain a reasonable data size for our
distributed embedding models, we keep the upper-bound
of the contracted EH to a maximum value between the
lower-bound and the largest connected component (the size
of largest EH). Worst-case running time of Algorithm 2 is
O(k|Bk||EH| log |EH|), where k is the number of iterations
and Bk is the smallest bucket in the kth iteration. The
space complexity at a given worker b during this stage is
O(|VbEH
b |), where Vb represents the vertices on worker b
and EH
b are the total number of hyperedges connecting those
vertices.
Finding buckets to be contracted at each iteration, such
that for every node we can sample most of its relations,
without violating upper-bound, is an NP-Hard problem.
Since GNNs can easily learn structural properties of a node

6
Fig. 3. Iterative contraction of EH between buckets. Hash table main-
tains all the hyperedges a node is engaged in.
in single r ∈R and our alignment scheme can effectively
align heterogeneous node contexts from different partitions,
our context-aware neighborhood partition is sufﬁcient.
4.2
Distributed Subnetwork Embedding
Each subnetwork constructed thus far contains a number
of connected components and is rich with neighborhood
semantics. These subnetworks are then assigned to a dis-
tributed worker, which computes node embeddings using
a local model. The main objective of each worker model is
to maximize information between the connected nodes of
the provided subnetwork. We denote union of each node’s
vi ∈Gn (1 ≤n ≤k) ﬁrst-order neighborhood as Si and
term its corresponding hyperedge as a patch Pi = Sv ∪EH
i .
GNNs have been widely adopted as an effective ap-
proach for embedding heterogeneous networks [50], [47].
Utilizing the power of GNNs, in our work, we approach
the node embedding task as an unsupervised representation
learning problem without any assumptions on the availabil-
ity of labeled nodes. To achieve this, any GNN model can
be adopted at this stage. DeHIN provides the ﬂexibility to
choose any network embedding model during subnetwork
embedding stage. This includes models with supervised loss
functions such as hinge loss or link prediction-based loss
in the absence of labeled data. However, in our work, we
deal with large-scale networks having a very small amount
of labeled data. Secondly, we deal with heterogeneous data
where the links between nodes are of multi-type. However,
in our work we exploit the theorem that two nodes should
exhibit high afﬁnity if they are similar in their features or
structural properties. By taking advantage of similarities be-
tween the neighborhood structure and the node features in
a subnetwork, we make use of deep graph information max-
imization (DGIM) [45] based approach for unsupervised
learning task, where we substitute hyperedges as patches.
To learn a node’s embedding representation, the DGIM
model maximizes the mutual information between a node’s
patch Pi and the summary of the complete subnetwork Gn.
Here Pi represents a hyperedge and Gn represents the col-
lection of all hyperedges belonging to a single subnetwork.
We construct a feature matrix X ∈RN×d0 for a Gn,
having N = |Gn| nodes. The feature vector of vi ∈Gn
is represented by the i-th row xi ∈X . To mathematically
represent the connections among the nodes in Gn, we also
deﬁne an adjacency matrix A ∈RN×N, having self-loops.
Our main objective is to learn an encoder function FGn(·),
such that FGn(X, A) = Z ∈RN×d = [z1; z2; ...; zn] where
matrix Z carries all N nodes’ embedding:
Z = FGn(X, A).
(1)
In DeHIN, we design the encoder using graph convolu-
tion network (GCN) [22] for effective aggregation of the
node’s neighborhood. GCN assists the learning process by
effectively aggregating a node’s neighborhood embeddings,
accumulating features and structural information within the
embedding. The propagation rule for a l layered GCN,
where l ≥1, is as follows:
Z(l) = FGn(Z(l−1), A) = σ(D−1
2 AD−1
2 Z(l−1)W(l−1)),
(2)
where σ(·) represents a nonlinear activation function and D
is a diagonal degree matrix that is normalized by −1
2 power.
The embedding and the weight matrices of all nodes in Gn,
for layer l, are represented as Z(l) and W(l). Here, for layer 0
we set Z(0) = Xi. We denote the i-th node embedding in the
ﬁnal output Z(l) as zi. Essentially, each node representation
zi (i.e., the i-th row of Z) can be viewed as a patch-level
summary for Pi.
In our information maximization scheme, we aim to
maximize the probability of having the learned patch-level
summary zi belong to the subnetwork Gn. In this regard,
we obtain the subnetwork-level global summary vector
s ∈R1×d with a readout function R(·), which combines all
zi ∈Z(l) into a uniﬁed representation. As the learned zi is
sufﬁciently expressive, we formulate R(·) as the following
average pooling with nonlinearity to avoid excessive com-
putational complexity:
s = R (FGn(X, A)) = σ( 1
N
N
X
i=1
zi).
(3)
With the subnetwork representation s, we utilize a discrim-
inator function D(·), such that D(zi, s) outputs a scalar
indicating the afﬁnity score between each (zi, s) pair. In or-
der to maximize D(zi, s), we also generate corrupted patch
representation w.r.t. each node vi, denoted as ezi. Therefore,
a fully-trained D(·) can be expected to produce a higher
pairwise score for a positive tuple (zi, s), and a lower one for
the negative tuple (ezi, s). Speciﬁcally, by corrupting either
the original node connections or raw node features in Gn, we
can naturally produce the corrupted representation ezi with
Eq. 2 as each generated ezi no longer reﬂects the authentic
information about network structure or node properties. In
DeHIN, we generate corrupted edges, represented by eA,
by inserting new edges and deleting existing edges from
eA at random. Note that though each node’s feature vector
remains unchanged, we denote the corresponding node
feature matrix as eX ∈R
e
N×d0 because some nodes might
vanish with deleted edges, returning a total of e
N ≤N
nodes.

7
As an objective function, we adopt binary cross-entropy
loss for all positive and negative instances:
L =
1
N + e
N
 N
X
i=1
E(X,A) [log D(zi, s)]
+
e
N
X
j=1
E(eX,eA) [log D(ezj, s)]

,
(4)
where we formulate the discriminator D(·) as a feedforward
network followed by a sigmoid-activated projection layer:
D(zi, s) = sigmoid
 σ([zi, s]WD + b) · w⊤,
(5)
where WD ∈R2d×d and b ∈R1×d are the weight and
bias, while w ∈R1×d is the projection weight. In Eq.
4, based on Jensen-Shannon divergence [25] between the
joint (i.e., positive instances) and the product of marginals
(i.e., negative instances), thus thoroughly maximizing the
mutual information between zi and s. The subnetwork
embedding model is trained via stochastic gradient descent
to minimize loss L. As such, we can obtain high-quality
node embeddings for partition Gn. For all k subnetworks
{G1, G2, ..., Gk}, each worker has the same learning scheme
but the parameters are speciﬁc to each partition Gn and are
not shared across different partitions. So, the distributed
embedding model on each worker is fully localized, and
no communication costs are introduced in the subnetwork
embedding phase.
4.3
Embedding Alignment
As we create an independent embedding model for each
partition, the corresponding node representations are in-
dependently learned from a partition-speciﬁc vector space.
Also, different partitions may overlap in some common
nodes in different contexts i.e. relationship type R, leading
to multiple embeddings in different context for the same
node. To perform subsequent tasks, all node embeddings
from different subnetworks need to be projected onto the
same vector space, so as to be positioned in the same
distribution and become comparable to each other. One
naive approach is constructing pairwise mappings between
the embeddings of adjacent partitions or by translating the
embeddings of all k partitions onto the same space. How-
ever, transferring and mapping all the nodes onto the same
space is a computationally exhaustive process. Another em-
bedding alignment approach, commonly adopted in cross-
lingual word embedding tasks, is projecting the embeddings
of source subnetwork onto target subnetwork using anchor
(common) nodes. The problem with this approach is that it
does not account for heterogeneous data and the resulting
embeddings are not on the same orthogonal space. Hence,
we propose an efﬁcient yet effective embedding alignment
approach for those distributively learned node embeddings.
Rather then transferring and mapping all the node onto
the same space, which is a computationally exhaustive pro-
cess, we present an efﬁcient mapping scheme. During the
partition phase we sample the top k number of nodes from
each subnetwork which are connected to one or more sub-
networks, along with their ﬁrst-order neighborhood. Here
top nodes refers to the nodes having maximum out degree
Fig. 4. The embedding alignment process. There are three common
nodes shared between the subnetwork (blue triangles) and the anchor
graph (red triangles). The embeddings of these nodes are aligned by
a mapping function consisting of rotation, scaling, and translation. The
remaining nodes belonging to the source subnetwork are mapped onto
same orthogonal space with the learned mapping function.
with the neighboring subnetworks, and k is determined by
the lower and upper-bound of the newly formed subnet-
work. We refer to this subnetwork as anchor network and
is deﬁned as GA = {VA, EA}. We learn node embeddings
of GA locally on the server using a DGIM model and the
corresponding vector space of anchor network embeddings
ZA is regarded as the target space. Our aim is to align all the
incoming subnetwork embeddings onto anchor network’s
embedding space, by learning mapping functions MGn(·).
Consider a subnetwork Gn having µ anchor nodes from
GA. Aim of the learned mapping function MGn(·) is to: 1)
project µ anchor node embeddings onto the target vector
space; and 2) ensures the projected embeddings preserve
high similarity with the same anchor node embeddings
learned from GA. Using the learned MGn(·), we are able
to map all the node embeddings from Gn onto the same
space as that of ZA, which is the target vector space. This
not only enables us to perform embedding alignment on
each individual subnetwork embedding with substantially
lowered computational power and storage requirements,
but also makes the embedding process highly salable.
We further elaborate our alignment mechanism by con-
sidering a single partition Gn. We collect all µ anchor node
embeddings {zi|∀vi ∈Gn ∩GA} from Gn.
From its node embeddings {z1, z2, ..., zN}, we gather
all µ anchor node embeddings {zi|∀vi ∈Gn ∩GA}. Using
the approach discussed in Section 4.2, we can obtain node
embeddings {g1, g2, ..., g|VA|} (of the same embedding di-
mension d) for the anchor network GA, and acquire set
{gi|∀vi ∈Gn∩GA}. To support subsequent computation, we
convert both sets of anchor node embeddings into matrices,
respectively denoted by bZ, bG ∈Rµ×d. Then, we formulate
MGn(·) as a sequence of transformations on bZ such that
MGn(bZ) ≈bG. To be speciﬁc, as shown in Fig. 4, the trans-
formations include rotation and scaling on all anchor node
embeddings in bZ, followed by a vector-level translation:
MGn(bZ) = c · bZT + j⊤t ≈bG,
(6)
where T ∈Rd×d is the rotation matrix, c ∈R is the scaling
factor, t ∈R1×d is the translation vector and j = 11×µ is
a vector consisting of 1s. To ensure bZ is mapped onto the
same orthogonal space as bG, we quantify the alignment loss
as follows:
Ψ =

c · bZT −bG

F + j⊤t,
(7)
where ∥·∥F is the Frobenius norm. In order to estimate those
three parameters in MGn(·), we employ least square corre-

8
spondence [15], [40] in DeHIN. To obtain the least square
estimate of T, t and c, we devise the following Lagrangean
expression [35]:
F = tr(Ψ⊤Ψ) + tr(L(T⊤T)),
(8)
where L is the Lagrangean multiplier matrix and tr(·) is the
trace of a matrix. In Eq.(8), tr(Ψ⊤Ψ) can be rewritten as:
tr{Ψ⊤Ψ} = tr(bG
⊤bG) + c2 · tr(T⊤bZ
⊤bZT) + p · tt⊤
−2c · tr(bG
⊤bZT) + 2 · tr(bG
⊤j⊤t) + 2c · tr(T⊤bZ
⊤j⊤t), (9)
where p = jj⊤= µ is a scalar representing the total rows in
the matrices. To infer t, we set the derivative of Eq. 8 w.r.t. t
to 0:
∂F
∂t = 2p · t −2 · bG
⊤j⊤+ 2c · T⊤bZ
⊤j⊤= 0,
(10)
which leads to:
t = (bG −c · bZT)⊤j⊤
p
.
(11)
To estimate T, we take the derivate of Eq. 8 w.r.t. T:
∂F
∂T = 2c2 · bZ
⊤bZT−2c· bZ
⊤bG+2c· bZ
⊤j⊤t+T(L+L⊤), (12)
from which we can see that bZ
⊤bZ and L⊤L are both sym-
metric matrices. After multiplying T⊤with Eq.(12), we can
easily conclude that the term T⊤bZ
⊤bG −T⊤bZ
⊤j⊤t is also
symmetric.
Hence, considering Eq. 11, we can formulate a symmetric
matrix S ∈Rd×d as:
S = T⊤bZ
⊤bG −T⊤bZ
⊤j⊤t
= bZ
⊤
I −j⊤t
p

,
(13)
here I represents an identity matrix. To compute T, we
utilize singular value decomposition svd(·) to achieve the
following equilibrium:
svd(SS⊤) = T · svd(S⊤S)T⊤
s.t. VDSV = T · WDSW⊤T⊤
(14)
where V and W represents orthonormal eigenvector matri-
ces, and DS represents a diagonal eigenvalue matrix. By
solving Eq. 13, we have:
T = VW⊤.
(15)
Finally, by making use of Eq.(10) and Eq.(11), we com-
pute the scaling factor as follows:
c =
tr

T⊤bZ
⊤ I −j⊤t
p
bG

tr

bZ
⊤ I −j⊤t
p
bZ

.
(16)
To learn the mapping function for aligning all node em-
beddings, the above learning process for MGn(·) is repeated
k times for all subnetworks. The nodes having |R| contextual
representations in j different subnetworks, we ﬁrst align
them w.r.t. their partition and anchor graph. Then these
aligned embeddings z1
a, z1
b, z1
c... are averaged to form the
ﬁnal node embedding:
z =
P|R|
j
zj
|R|
,
(17)
which comprehensively combines each node’s high-order
information and helps with generalization, using multi-
context aggregation.
5
EXPERIMENTS
In the experimentation section, we extensively evaluate the
node embedding quality and the efﬁciency of DeHIN. To
quantify our evaluation criteria, we adopt node classiﬁca-
tion and link prediction tasks, and evaluate the efﬁciency of
DeHIN against large-scale graph embedding frameworks.
Speciﬁcally, research questions (RQs) we aim investigate are:
RQ1:
How effective is the partitioning mechanism of De-
HIN?
RQ2:
While handling large-scale networks, how is the em-
bedding quality of DeHIN for the node classiﬁcation
task?
RQ3:
How good are the embeddings computed by DeHIN
for predict unseen links?
RQ4:
How efﬁcient is DeHIN when embedding large-scale
networks as compared to distributed network em-
bedding frameworks? Ablation Study
RQ5:
How effective is DeHIN after ablating its multi-
context alignment mechanism?
5.1
Baseline Methods
To show the performance of DeHIN, we compare it with
several strong baselines that are designed for HNE task.
•
metapath2vec [7]: In-order to capture the hetero-
geneity, metapath2vec utilizes the node paths gen-
erated through guided random walks. These path
speciﬁcally captures the node context.
•
PTE [37]: This method decomposes a heterogeneous
network into number of bipartite networks, each rep-
resenting a relationship type. Its objective function
computes the sum of log-likelihood over all bipartite
networks.
•
HIN2Vec [10]: HIN2Vec is a neural network model
that is also based on metapaths. Given a set of
relationships speciﬁed by meta-paths, HIN2Vec is
able to learn expressive node representations from
heterogeneous networks.
•
HEER [33]: This method extends PTE by computing
the closeness between types of relationships.
•
R-GCN [29]: R-GCN aggregates neighbours having
same edge types and considers edge heterogeneity
by learning multiple convolution matrices.
•
HAN [47]: HAN uses attention mechanism that
learns wights of node neighbourhood, sampled using
meta-path generation mechanism.
•
MAGNN [11]: Embeddings are learned in MAGNN
using meta-path based neighborhood and edge type
information to parametrizes a transformer-based self
attention architecture.

9
TABLE 1
Statistics of four networks. Connected components (CC) are computed
after dividing each network into multiple hypergraphs.
Statistics
Yelp
PubMed
DBLP
Freebase
#Nodes
82,465
63,109
1,989,077
12,164,758
#Node Type
4
4
4
8
#Edges
30,542,675
244,986
275,940,913 62,982,566
#Edges Type
4
10
6
36
#Features
N/A
200
300
N/A
#Label Type
16
8
13
8
Total CC
81
9,028
65,167
1,069,314
Largest CC Size
82,417
24,429
1,766,444
1,561,926
Average Nodes per CC
7,417
454
618
47,190
#DeHIN Partitions
4
10
23
339
•
HGT [16]: Transformer-based self-attention model is
used in HGT, parametrized by edge type.
•
TransE [1]: This method models relationship among
nodes by interpreting them as translations operating
on the node embeddings.
•
DistMult [49]: DistMult develops a simple bilinear
model by generalizing NTN [34] and TransE, for
learning low dimensional vector representation of
network nodes.
•
ComplEx [42]: ComplEx approach the link predic-
tion problem using latent factorization to compute
complex valued embeddings.
•
ConvE [8]: ConvE consists of a single convolution
layer, projection layer and an inner product layer,
speciﬁcally designed for the link prediction in knowl-
edge graphs.
The embedding dimensions of all baselines is set
to 32, and all other hyperparameters are tuned fol-
lowing the original papers. Implementations of these
methods in python package is provided by [48]1.
The above methods are, however, centralized models. These
methods incur memory constraints and are time-consuming
on a single computing unit. In order to show the efﬁciency
of DeHIN, we also compare it with the following distributed
network embedding frameworks:
•
DeLNE [19]: DeLNE adopts data parallelism ap-
proach to embed large-scale networks. As it is orig-
inally designed for homogeneous graphs, we imple-
ment DeLNE on heterogeneous by treating all node
and edge types uniformly.
•
PBG [23]: PyTorch-BigGraph is a distributed system
that trains on an input graph by ingesting its list of
edges and their relation types. It outputs an embed-
ding for each node by placing linked nodes close in
the vector space.
•
DDHH: DDHH is a large-scale decentralized HIN
embedding framework, we presented in [5]. DDHH
adopts centralized partitioning strategy and uses or-
thogonal alignment mechanism, while only consid-
ering the ﬁrst instance of the node received at the
server.
•
DeHIN-Basic: In order to study the effectiveness of
our alignment mechanism and ablation study, we
remove alignment settings of DeHIN to construct
DeHIN-Basic.
1. https://github.com/yangji9181/HNE
5.2
Datasets
In our experiments, we use four real large-scale hetero-
geneous networks extracted and labeled by [48], which
are biomedical library (PubMed), business (Freebase), e-
commerce network (YELP) and academic networks (DBLP).
Data statistics are provided in Table 1. The characteristics of
each dataset are as follows:
•
PubMed2: PubMed is a biomedical literature net-
work of genes, diseases, chemical and species.
word2vec is used to extract embeddings from
PubMed papers to get 200 features and are aggre-
gated with associated nodes. A small portion of
diseases are manually labeled into eight categories.
Each labeled disease has only one label.
•
YELP3: It is constructed using business, users, loca-
tions and reviews from YELP network. A few thou-
sand businesses are manually labeled into sixteen
categories. Each labeled business has one or multiple
labels.
•
DBLP4: DBLP dataset consists of a network of au-
thors, papers, venues and parsed phrases. Each pa-
per has 300 features, computed using word2vec.
Author and venue features are the aggregation of
their corresponding paper embeddings. Labels rep-
resent authors’ research ﬁelds, that were manually
annotated. Each labeled author has only one label.
•
Freebase5: Freebase network is constructed by link-
ing books, ﬁlms, music, sports, people, locations,
organizations, and businesses. Nodes are not asso-
ciated with any features. Each label represents eight
different genres of literature. Each labeled book has
only one label.
5.3
Implementation Details
In our implementation largely adopted two platforms,
Python for processing and Oracle of data storage. We set
the minimum partition size to m to 10,000 and the upper
bound m′ is set to 40,000, to balance the density and scale
of the data. The bounds are determined after numerous
partition and training runs on each dataset. Table 1 shows
the number of partitions generated for each dataset. Our
alignment mechanism further supports integrating high-
order relationship information for each node. For DeHIN
workers, we set the embedding dimension d to 32, the
number of epochs for each worker model to 100 (early
stopping enabled) with a learning rate of 0.01. Due to the
availability of maximum of 80 cores, we run workers in
batches for training and record the total time as time taken
by the slowest worker plus the alignment time. To maintain
efﬁciency, we run 20 worker models simultaneously with
each worker utilizing 4 CPU cores at a time.
5.4
Partition Effectiveness and Efﬁciency (RQ1)
To show the effectiveness of our distributed HIN partition
module, we compare it against METIS [21], which is widely
2. https://www.nlm.nih.gov/databases/download
3. https://www.yelp.com/dataset
4. https://dblp.org/xml/release/
5. https://developers.google.com/freebase/data

10
Fig. 5. A) Partition time of METIS (blue) and DeHIN (orange), as well as
the hypergraph generation time of DeHIN (green) in minutes. B) Partition
quality, measured by average neighbourhood loss (%).
adopted for graph partitioning task because of its efﬁciency
and partition quality. In our work, we keep the partition
size equal to the maximum value between lower-bound and
largest connected component. To further evaluate the parti-
tion quality of both methods, we compare the two methods
w.r.t. time efﬁciency in minute Fig. 5A and percentage of
average neighbourhood loss for each node. We compare the
average loss of each node’s neighbourhood in partitioned
networks against average neighbourhood of node in the full
network which is calculated via,
%SAvg Loss =
kP
j=1
|R|
P
r=1
|V j|
P
i=1
(Sr
i −Sr,k
i
)
|R|
P
r=1
|V |
P
i=1
Sr
i −|V |
× 100
(18)
where, Si is the ﬁrst-order neighbourhood of node nr
i in
context r, while Sk
i is the ﬁrst-order neighbourhood of nr
i
in kth partition. Although, hyperedge generation is done
in parallel for each relationship type, yet it is costly for
networks having long CC. For partition task DeHIN out-
performs METIS (Fig. 5A). METIS produces partitions with
high clustering coefﬁcient but fails to preserve adequate
neighbourhood structure (Fig. 5B), as it cuts meaningful
edges that are required to learn network‘s structural proper-
ties. Rather than cutting edges, DeHIN samples hyperedges,
each with holding a complete connected neighbourhood
within r, hence effectively preserving a node’s structural
properties. This also affects the ﬁnal embedding alignment
process, where we try to orthogonally align different con-
texts of a node that are spread out.
Fig. 6.
Comparision of learning time between centralized setting of
DeHIN (i.e., DGIM model) and DeHIN with 2,4,6,8 and 10 workers.
TABLE 2
Results of the node classiﬁcation task.
Model
Node classiﬁcation (Macro-F1/Micro-F1)
PubMed
YELP
Freebase
DBLP
metapath2vec
12.90/15.51
5.16/23.32
20.55/46.43
43.85/55.07
PTE
09.74/12.27
5.10/23.24
10.25/39.87
43.34/54.53
HIN2Vec
10.93/15.31
5.12/23.25
17.40/41.92
12.17/25.88
HEER
11.73/15.29
5.03/22.92
12.96/37.51
09.72/27.72
R-GCN
10.75/12.73
5.10/23.24
06.89/38.02
09.38/13.39
HAN
09.54/12.18
5.10/23.24
06.90/38.01
07.91/16.98
MAGNN
10.30/12.60
5.10/23.24
06.89/38.02
06.74/10.35
HGT
11.24/18.72
5.07/23.12
23.06/46.51
15.17/32.05
TransE
11.40/15.16
5.05/23.03
31.83/52.04
22.76/37.18
DistMult
11.27/15.79
5.04/23.00
23.82/45.50
11.42/25.07
ComplEx
09.84/18.51
5.05/23.03
35.26/52.03
20.48/37.34
ConvE
13.00/14.49
5.09/23.02
24.57/47.61
12.42/26.42
DeHIN
12.07/24.30
5.02/27.02
42.80/56.56
28.49/55.11
In Fig. 6 we also compare the running time of a central-
ized DeHIN (i.e., a DGIM model on a single worker) against
DeHIN with 2,4,8 and 10 workers, using two of the smaller
datasets i.e., YELP and PubMed. We choose to report the
efﬁciency for these datasets since it is inefﬁcient to compute
the mutual information between the node patches and the
complete network summary for our large-scale HINs in the
case of centralized DeHIN. The time comparison shows that
distributed learning reduces the learning time signiﬁcantly
with four or more workers. This is because the DGIM
model compares the patch summary of both positive and
negative samples against a complete graph summary. For
larger HINs, computing a complete graph summary is a
very exhaustive process.
5.5
Node Classiﬁcation Task (RQ2)
Using 70% of labeled nodes, we train a support vector ma-
chine (SVM) [46] classiﬁer to support the node classiﬁcation
task. The rest of the 30% nodes are used for evaluation
purpose. Details of node labeling is explained in Section 5.2.
The reported experimental results in Table 2 are averaged
on ﬁve runs.
For the task of node classiﬁcation, DeHIN produces
comparable results with other state-of-the-art methods. Due
to the presence of increased relationship information (36
links) in Freebase network, alignment mechanism of DeHIN
is more able to capture high-order node relationships and
hence improved classiﬁcation accuracy as compared with
the rest. Low Macro-F1 score in the case of PubMed, Yelp
and DBLP networks is mainly due to very high class imbal-
ance in the labeled data. Macro-F1 is a straightforward av-
eraged result for all classes. Though metapath2vec performs
well on several minority classes and thus achieves a higher
Macro-F1, it does not necessarily mean that its has more
correct predictions than DeHIN on all test cases. When the
classes are highly imbalance, Macro-F1 is less representative
for a model’s performance. So in DBLP, Micro-F1 is a more
reliable metric and it achieves the best performance among
all baselines. Comparable Micro-F1 score for DeHIN suggest
that the learned embeddings of the labeled nodes, across all
datasets, can distinguish positive predictions.

11
TABLE 3
Results of the link prediction task.
Model
Link Prediction Accuracy (AUC)
PubMed
YELP
Freebase
DBLP
metapath2vec
69.38
80.52
56.14
65.26
PTE
70.36
50.32
57.89
57.72
HIN2Vec
69.68
51.64
58.11
53.29
HEER
68.31
76.1
55.8
67.2
R-GCN
69.06
73.72
55.78
53
HAN
63.33
72.17
50.18
50.5
MAGNN
65.85
N/A
51.5
50.24
HGT
61.11
50.03
50.12
50.1
TransE
73.00
79
55.68
59.98
DistMult
67.95
69.13
52.84
63.53
ComplEx
70.61
80.28
54.91
52.87
ConvE
75.96
80.11
60.43
65.92
DeHIN
78.74
80.31
64.51
61.71
TABLE 4
Hyperparameter settings for PBG, DeLNE and DeHIN. Number of
workers are given in the order of PubMed/YELP/DBLP/Freebase and
LR represents the learning rate of each worker.
Models
RAM
#CPUs
#Workers
LR
#Epochs
PBG
1008 GB
80
N/A
0.1
100
DeLNE
1008 GB
80
4/12/150/500
0.1
100
DeHIN
1008 GB
80
10/5/98/343
0.1
100
5.6
Link Prediction Task (RQ3)
For the link prediction task, Hadamard function is used to
construct feature vectors for node pairs. 20% of the links
are hidden before the training while two-class LinearSVC is
trained on rest of the 80% training links. The resulted AUC
(area under the ROC curve) is the resultant of 5 iterations.
DeHIN distinguishes true links from false with com-
parable accuracy against centralized models in Table 3.
However, for the two datasets (YELP and DBLP) having
only 4 relationship types and very high link-type imbal-
ance i.e. YELP having 90% phrase-context-phrase link among
total link types and DBLP with 89% Author Year Author
link as majority link type, metapath2vec (80.52/80.31) and
HEER (67.2/61.71) have slightly better performance. This
is because DeHIN captures high-order information in em-
beddings by capturing relationship types from node links.
For the datasets having higher link type diversity, DeHIN is
better at predicting true from false links and vice versa.
5.7
Efﬁciency Analysis (RQ4)
All of the centralized models are designed to improve
node classiﬁcation and link prediction accuracies. For large-
scale HINs, these models take days to converge and learn
embeddings. In order to test the efﬁciency of DeHIN, we
compare it with models that support parallel computations.
The Hyperparameter settings for each framework are given
in Table 4.
As depicted in Table 5, DeHIN outperforms both PBG
and DeLNE in its time consumption for training and ac-
curacy for multi-node classiﬁcation task. The signiﬁcantly
lower time consumption, against PBG and DeLNE comes
from three aspects. Firstly, it pre-processes the data and
generates partitions by utilizing decentralized computa-
tions. Secondly, owing to our distributed architecture with
no requirement on model parameter sharing across work-
ers, DeHIN bypasses the potentially heavy communication
overhead. Thirdly, since our distributed subnetwork embed-
ding model can directly aggregate patch information for
each node, it is computationally efﬁcient. Though the node
classiﬁcation accuracy of PBG is comparable with DeHIN,
having a large number of relationships makes it harder for
PBG to maintain parallelism, inuring heavy communication
overhead.
5.8
Ablation Study (RQ5)
Table 5 also depicts the ablation study of DeHIN against its
basic settings i.e., DeHIN-basic and DDHH (our previous
work). DeHIN-basic has no alignment mechanism, while
DDHH completely neglects the broader semantic context of
a common node by keeping only its ﬁst instance received at
the server. We can see in Table 5 that both, the orthogonal
procrustes alignment and multi-context aggregation sup-
port heavenly in efﬁciently preserving high-order context
information, as DeHIN outperforms all baselines for node
classiﬁcation task.
6
CONCLUSION
Learning node embeddings on HIN that consists of billions
of nodes and links, creates a performance bottleneck for
existing centralized HNE methods. To boost the HNE task
with efﬁciency and embedding quality, we propose Decen-
tralized Embedding Framework for Heterogeneous Information
Network (DeHIN) in this paper. In DeHIN, we generate a
distributed parallel pipeline that utilizes hypergraphs in-
order to infuse parallelization in HNE task. DeHIN inno-
vatively formulates large-scale HINs into hypergraph to
support parallel HIN partitioning. It then employs deep
information maximization theorem on distributed workers,
to locally learn node embeddings for each subnetwork. We
also purpose a salable context aware alignment mechanism,
that project node embeddings onto a public vector space
and aggregates the distributed context. We show in our
experimental results the signiﬁcant improvement of De-
HIN against state-of-the-art models, by effectively capturing
multi-order context of nodes and its distributive nature.
In this work, we presented an efﬁcient HIN partition
mechanism, along with an alignment mechanism that can
effectively align unseen node embeddings to a common
vector space. We can extend the notion of aligning unseen
embedding in future research to ﬁnd similarities in unseen
model parameters. This is especially useful in the case of
federated learning, where each worker has personal data
rather than shared data. Similarity-based model alignment
model aggregation can boost local convergence in the case
of federated learning.
