ECAI 2009 - International Conference – 3rd Edition 
Electronics, Computers and Artificial Intelligence 
3-5 June, 2009, Piteşti, ROMÂNIA 
 
 
Medium Access Control for Wireless Sensor Networks 
based on Impulse Radio Ultra Wideband 
 
BERTHE Abdoulaye1,2, LECOINTRE Aubin1,2, DRAGOMIRESCU 
Daniela1,2, PLANA Robert1,2 
1 CNRS; LAAS; 7 avenue du colonel Roche, F-31077 Toulouse, France 
2 University of Toulouse; UPS, INSA, INP, ISAE; LAAS; F-31000 Toulouse, France 

 
 
Keywords: Wireless Sensor Networks, Access Scheme, Automatic Repeat 
ReQuest, Modeling and Simulation, Impulse Radio Ultra Wideband. 
 
Abstract. This paper describes a detailed performance evaluation of 
distributed Medium Access Control (MAC) protocols for Wireless Sensor 
Networks based on Impulse Radio Ultra Wideband (IR-UWB) Physical layer 
(PHY). Two main classes of Medium Access Control protocol have been 
considered: Slotted and UnSlotted with reliability. The reliability is based on 
Automatic Repeat ReQuest (ARQ). The performance evaluation is performed 
using a complete Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) simulator built on the 
Global Mobile Information System Simulator (GloMoSim). The optimal 
operating parameters are first discussed for IR-UWB in terms of slot size, 
retransmission delay and the number of retransmission, then a comparison 
between IR-UWB and other transmission techniques in terms of reliability 
latency and power efficiency. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Wireless Sensor Networks is a system 
composed of several autonomous nodes. The nodes’ 
architecture includes a microprocessor, several 
sensor and actuator devices and also a radio 
communication device [1-3]. Through their radio 
communication module, the nodes have the ability 
to perform wireless communication in order to 
accomplish a collaborative task. WSNs support a 
large range of application: monitoring, local area 
control, factory and house automation, and also 
tactical applications [1-3]. 
The intrinsic constraints when dealing with 
WSNs are reliability, power efficiency, latency 
efficiency and simplicity. The use of IR-UWB at the 
PHY layer has been envisioned for WSNs because 
of its good behaviours which are low radiated 
power, simple circuitry, high multipath resolution 
and its resistance against fading [4]. Due to this 
PHY layer advantages and the nature of the targeted 
application, the envisioned MAC protocols for IR-
UWB have been proven to be ALOHA-like [5]. 
A key issue when designing a new system is 
an accurate performance prediction regarding some 
specific constraints. Thus, a WSN designer may 
need a performance evaluation tool built on accurate 
simulation 
architecture 
to 
predict 
WSNs 
performances, before the real deployment. However, 
little has been done in MAC protocols detailed 
performance evaluation and optimization regarding 
the previously mentioned WSNs constraints for IR-
UWB. The purpose of this paper is to present an 
accurate and detailed WSN performance evaluation 
with ALOHA-like MAC protocols. The reliability is 
considered using the Automatic Repeat ReQuest 
(ARQ) mechanism [2]. The optimal number of 
retransmission is first determined for the Slotted and 
UnSlotted 
protocols. 
Then, 
the 
optimal 
retransmission delay and the optimal slot size are 
presented for the UnSlotted and Slotted protocols. 
Finally IR-UWB is compared to other techniques in 
terms of reliability, latency and power efficiency. 
This paper will be organized as follows: Section 1 
presents related work, and then Section 2 presents 
the modeled MAC protocols for IR-UWB. In 

 
Section 3, the performance evaluation is presented 
and finally Section 4 concludes. 
 
1. RELATED WORK 
 
Modeling and simulation are the commonly 
used methods to evaluate WSNs performances. As 
alternative PHY and MAC solutions for the IEEE 
802.15.4a standard, several IR-UWB MAC-PHY 
models have been proposed. In [6], an analytical 
modeling of pure and slotted ALOHA protocols is 
presented and a new ALOHA-like protocol is also 
proposed (UWB)2. Although the analytical study is 
a useful method to predict performances, it lacks of 
accuracy compare to a detailed simulation model 
[7]. In [5], the benefits of using ALOHA-like 
protocols are demonstrated and based on this, a new 
MAC protocol: Dynamic Channel Coding (DCC) 
MAC and a simulation model are proposed. In [8] 
multichannel distributed protocols: M-ALOHA, M-
PSMA, BSMA and their performances evaluation 
are presented. In [9] an analytical modeling and also 
a performance evaluation of slotted ALOHA over 
IR-UWB using an existing simulation platform is 
presented. 
None 
of 
these 
works 
address 
WSNs 
performances optimization regarding its intrinsic 
constraints 
(reliability, 
latency 
and 
power 
efficiency). They do not analyze the impact of the 
number of retransmission nor the slot size on the 
system reliability. In this work, we propose a 
detailed 
performance 
evaluation 
of 
WSNs; 
including sensor, sensing channel and a remote 
detection, and identification application models. 
 
2. MAC PROTOCOL FOR IR-UWB 
 
The benefits of ALOHA like Medium Access 
protocol have been demonstrated for IR-UWB 
[4][6-10]. Because of the PHY layer characteristics 
and also the requirements of simplicity. We 
modeled UnSlotted and Slotted protocols on the 
Network 
Simulator 
GloMoSim. 
These 
are 
lightweight medium sharing protocols. A node 
immediately transmits once it has a packet to 
transmit without caring about the channel state 
(Clear Channel Assessment) CCA mode 3. As 
specified in the 802.15.4 draft, the channel is always 
reported to be free with TH-IR-UWB.  
In the UnSlotted MAC protocol, once a node 
has a packet to transmit, it transmits it on the 
medium. After performing a transmission, the MAC 
scheduler waits for the acknowledgement of the 
transmitted packet for a defined duration. When the 
acknowledgement is received before the expiration 
of this delay, it transmits the next packet. Otherwise, 
the transmitted packet must be retransmitted until 
the 
number 
of 
retransmission 
exceeds 
the 
retransmission limit. The impact of the number of 
retransmission and the retransmission limit on the 
reliability and the latency efficiency are presented in 
the Section 3. 
 
In the Slotted protocol, the medium is divided 
into time slots and a node is allowed to transmit 
only at the beginning of a new time slot. This 
reduces the collision probability as it effectively 
reduces the number of concurrent transmission 
being performed. The main advantage of the Slotted 
protocol is the power management easiness. Once 
synchronized, the nodes can collaborate and 
schedule a wake up time to check if there is a packet 
addressed to them on the medium, which is not 
possible for the UnSlotted MAC protocol. 
 
 
3. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
 
In this section, the simulation results are 
presented. The simulation scenario consists of a 
typical WSN application (Figure 1). The sensor 
nodes are in charge to detect and identify an event 
of interest and relay it to a base station. This can be 
used, for instance, in a local area protection or a 
secured 
transportation 
system. 
The 
relevant 
simulation parameters are summarized in Table 1. 
The simulations are run on an enhanced 
GloMoSim (Release 2.02) simulator. The simulated 
scenario consists of 60 sensor nodes including the 
base station, scattered in 140 × 70 m2. Six targeted 
nodes represented in the simulation by mobile nodes 
generate the targeted event at the period of one 
second with an additional Jitter of 0.1 second. Two 
of them are equipped with a radio communication 
interface that allows them to respond to the 
identification requests sent by the sensor nodes. The 
used multi hop routing protocol is Ad hoc On 
Demand Distance Vector (AODV). 

3 
Medium Access Control for Wireless Sensor Networks based on Impulse Radio 
Ultra Wideband 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Simulation scenario 
 
 
Table 1: Simulation parameters 
 
Parameter 
TH-IR-UWB 
OQPSK 
Bandwidth (MHz) 
100 
2 
Frequency (GHz) 
0.8 
2.45 
Throughput (Mbps) 
1 
0.25 
Capture Model 
ber based 
ber based 
Antenna Height (m) 
0.45 
0.03 
Antenna Gain (dB) 
3 
3 
Noise Figure (dB) 
5 
10 
Temperature (K) 
270 
270 
Sensitivity (dBm) 
-85 
-96 
RX-Threshold (dBm) 
-80 
-85 
TX-Power (dBm) 
-24.318 
17 
 
 
Figure2: Optimum Operating Parameters: Slot Size and Retransmission Delay
Comparative analysis 
 
In Figure 2, we can note that increasing the 
slot size in the slotted protocol decreases the 
reliability and leads to high latency. In the 
UnSlotted protocol, increasing the retransmission 
delay leads to high reliability, however it leads to 
high latency. In Figure 3 below, the impact of the 
retransmission delay is presented for both the 
Slotted and UnSlotted protocols. It can be seen that 
up to six retransmissions, increasing the number of 
retransmission 
also 
increases 
the 
reliability. 
Base Station 
Authentication device 
Sensor device

 
However, when the number of retransmission 
exceeds 12, it has a negative impact on the 
reliability and the latency efficiency. We should also 
note that the Slotted MAC is more reliable than the 
UnSlotted one but the latter is more latency 
efficient. For the same scenario, the reliability and 
the latency efficiency of CSMA over OQPSK was 
0.5 and 7.10-3. Table 2 summarizes the comparison 
between CSMA over OQPSK and IR-UWB 
regarding the power consumptions for one day. 
Table 2: Power Consumption 
 
Parameter 
TH-IR-UWB 
OQPSK 
Power consumption (mW-h)
468 
1396,8 
TX Power Consumption 

1.2 V 
52,2 mW/s 

RX Power Consumption 

1.2 V 
59,1 mW/s 

 
 
Figure3: Optimum Operating Parameters: Number of Retransmission
 
CONCLUSION 
 
In this paper we presented Slotted and 
UnSlotted 
ALOHA-like 
MAC 
protocols 
performance evaluation for WSN based on IR-UWB 
regarding the WSN constraints. The optimal 
operating parameters for IR-UWB have been 
analyzed in terms of slot size, retransmission delay 
and retransmission limit. A comparison between 
CSMA over OQPSK and distributed MAC over IR-
UWB has been also presented in the context of low 
cost, low power and high reliable WSNs.  
Our future work will include tracking 
algorithm 
performance 
evaluation 
and 
also 
reconfigurable 
IR-UWB 
MAC 
and 
PHY 
implementation.
