Fuzzy Object-Oriented Dynamic Networks. II
D. A. Terletskyi1, A. I. Provotar2
1 Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, Kyiv, 03680, Ukraine

2 University of Rzeszow, Rzeszow, 35–310, Poland

Abstract. This article generalizes object-oriented dynamic networks to
the fuzzy case, which allows one to represent knowledge on objects and
classes of objects that are fuzzy by nature and also to model their changes
in time. Within the framework of the approach described, a mechanism
is proposed that makes it possible to acquire new knowledge on the basis
of basic knowledge and considerably diﬀers from well-known methods
used in existing models of knowledge representation. The approach is
illustrated by an example of construction of a concrete fuzzy object-
oriented dynamic network.
Keywords: fuzzy object, class of fuzzy objects, modiﬁer, exploiter.
Introduction
At present, one of important problems in the ﬁeld of knowledge representation
is the generalization of knowledge representation models (KRMs) to the fuzzy
case using a powerful tool such as fuzzy sets [1]. The need for this general-
ization is stipulated by the fact that the body of knowledge available to man
is inexact, incomplete, or diﬀused in a sense [2], [3]. Since fuzzy sets form an
eﬃcient apparatus for modeling objects and processes of such a nature, it is
expedient to generalize KRMs and use them. There are many similar general-
izations, in particular, fuzzy logic, fuzzy semantic networks, fuzzy production
models, fuzzy neural networks, fuzzy ontologies, fuzzy frames, fuzzy UML, etc.
First of all, these KRMs are theoretical models that can practically be imple-
mented within the framework of concrete intelligent information systems (IISs)
with applying some programming paradigm or other. In recent years, object-
oriented programming (OOP) is most popular and widely used. The majority of
well-known KRMs can be implemented in concrete IISs with the help of OOP.
Moreover, KRMs such as frames or scripts are ideologically close to OOP. This
approach is also rather eﬃcient in constructing and controlling databases [3], [4].
However, despite all its advantages, the possibilities of representation of objects
that are fuzzy by nature are not provided in it. Therefore, the improvement of
this approach with the help of fuzzy sets is a topical problem [2], [3], [5].
To represent fuzzy and diﬀused knowledge, this article proposes to gener-
alize such KRMs to object-oriented dynamic networks [6]. To construct fuzzy
arXiv:1602.01628v2  [cs.AI]  16 Feb 2016

object-oriented dynamic networks, the concepts of a fuzzy object, a class of
fuzzy objects, and also operations over them [7] are used.
Object-Oriented Representation of Fuzzy Knowledge
Let us consider some features of the object-oriented approach to fuzzy knowledge
representation whose basic concepts are fuzzy objects, classes of fuzzy objects,
and relations between them.
Each real or abstract object has some characteristic properties that can be
represented in the form of attributes of its object model. An object is called
fuzzy if it has at least one fuzzy property, i.e., a property expressed with the
help of a fuzzy set [5], [8], [9].
Since there are objects of identical nature, the concept of a class is introduced
within the framework of which they are deﬁned. Thus, each object is a concrete
example of some class (type) of objects. In OOP, a class is considered as a certain
prototype or an abstract object for constructing concrete objects of some type.
A class of objects is called fuzzy if it has at least one fuzzy property [8], [9].
A class of objects can be considered from two diﬀerent positions, namely,
extensional and intensional [8], [9], [10]. In the ﬁrst case, it is speciﬁed with
the help of a deﬁnite number of objects that belong to it and, in the second
case, it is speciﬁed with the help of enumeration of its own attributes and their
possible values. It may appear that, despite their distinctions, the both methods
of representation of a class of objects are ﬁnally reduced to same result, namely,
to a deﬁnite class of objects. In fact, the classes of objects obtained with the
help of these approaches can have fundamental diﬀerences.
If the extensional approach is used, then the obtained class of objects will de-
pend on the objects themselves on the basis of which it is deﬁned. If all attributes
of all objects are deﬁned, i.e., each property of each object has a concrete value
or a range of values, then the class deﬁned on the basis of these objects will also
be deﬁned. Otherwise, it will be partially deﬁned or undeﬁned.
If the intensional approach is applied, then the deﬁniteness of the obtained
class of objects will depend on the deﬁnition of its attributes, i.e., if all the
properties of a class of objects are completely deﬁned, then, as is obvious, the
class will also be deﬁned and, otherwise, it will by partially deﬁned or undeﬁned.
It is also important to know the author and purpose of deﬁnition of some
class of objects or other. Assume that there are three squares of diﬀerent sizes.
If a certain class of squares is deﬁned on their basis, then we obtain the class
describing squares of only these three sizes. If we assume that a class of squares
should be described without alluding to any concrete squares, then, theoretically,
a class of squares can be deﬁned that describes, for example, the squares from the
previous case. If concrete squares are not considered, then, most likely, a class
will be deﬁned that described squares of all possible sizes. Proceeding from the
last assertion, we can draw the conclusion that both methods of representation
of classes of objects are useful but the mentioned nuances should be taken into
account in using them.

In OOP, objects and classes are related with the help of well-deﬁned relations
within the framework of the corresponding hierarchy constructed with the help
of an inheritance mechanism [11]. In the case of fuzzy objects and classes of
fuzzy objects, the membership of an object in a class can be fuzzy (partial),
i.e., with some measure. The following relations between fuzzy objects and their
classes are singled out: generalization, aggregation, and association [5], [9]. The
generalization relation shows that some class is a subclass or an example of
another class. The aggregation relation shows that some class is a component
part of another class. The association relation reﬂects certain semantic relations
between classes that are not related among themselves by a generalization or
aggregation relation.
Within the framework of the object-oriented approach to the representation
of fuzzy knowledge, we will consider an KRM underlain by frames or, more
exactly, its generalization to the fuzzy case [12], [13]. Frames are similar to
OOP in many respects, but, in this case, the emphasis in frame systems is
on the infrastructure of their object domains constructed from objects, classes,
and relations between them, whereas, in OOP, the attention is accented on the
messaging between concrete objects [14]. As well as classes and objects in the
object-oriented approach to knowledge representation, frames are also commonly
called fuzzy if they have at least one fuzzy attribute or partially inherit other
frames [12]. The introduction of the conception of partial inheritance leads to
considerable changes in this mechanism as a result of addition of new possibilities
to it.
Fuzzy Object-Oriented Dynamic Networks
To construct fuzzy object-oriented dynamic networks, we will use the concep-
tion of object-oriented dynamic networks, which is described in [6], and also
generalizations of all its component parts to the fuzzy case [7].
Deﬁnition 1 A fuzzy object-oriented dynamic network FOODN is an object-
oriented dynamic network for which at least one of the following conditions is
fulﬁlled:
1. ∃Ak, . . . , Am ∈= {A1, . . . , An}, where 1 ≤k ≤m ≤n and Ak, . . . , Am are
fuzzy objects.
2. ∃Tp, . . . , Tq ∈C = {T1, . . . , Tw}, where 1 ≤p ≤q ≤w and Tp, . . . , Tq are
classes of fuzzy objects;
3. ∃Ri, . . . , Rj ∈R = {R1, . . . , Rv}, where 1 ≤i ≤j ≤v and Ri, . . . , Rj are
fuzzy relations between fuzzy objects and classes of fuzzy objects.
As relations between fuzzy objects and classes of fuzzy objects that form
the set R, we consider the three above-mentioned types of relations used in
the object-oriented approach to the representation of fuzzy knowledge. Note
that, to some extent, these types of relations are inherent in semantic networks,
frames, and scripts and are described in detail in the corresponding literature,
in particular, in [14], [15].

To illustrate FOODN, we will use the example of OODN presented in [6] since
it is intuitive and rather easily understandable and also reﬂects basic distinctive
features of the proposed knowledge representation model.
Example 1. Let us consider the classes T(Pg), T(Rb) and T(Sq) of fuzzy
objects that describe the class of fuzzy convex polygons, class of fuzzy rhom-
buses, and class of fuzzy squares, respectively. We deﬁne their speciﬁcations and
signatures as follows:
T(Pg) =(P(Pg), F(Pg)) = (p1(Pg), . . . , p4(Pg), f1(Pg)),
T(Rb) =(P(Rb), F(Rb)) = (p1(Rb), . . . , p6(Rb), f1(Rb), f2(Rb)),
T(Sq) =(P(Sq), F(Sq)) = (p1(Sq), . . . , p6(Sq), f1(Sq), f2(Sq)).
We present the speciﬁcations and signatures of the classes of fuzzy objects T(Pg),
T(Rb) and T(Sq) with the help of Tables 1 and 2, respectively.
Table 1. Speciﬁcation of the Classes of Fuzzy Objects T(Pg), T(Rb) and T(Sq)
Property pi
Semantic Values of Proper-
ties of Classes of Objects
Values of Properties of Classes of Objects
T(Pg)
T(Rb)
T(Sq)
p1
Number of sides
4
4
4
p2
Sizes of sides
fuzzy
fuzzy
fuzzy
p3
Number of angles
4
4
4
p4
Grade measures of angles
(0◦, 180◦) (0◦, 180◦)
90◦, 90◦, 90◦, 90◦
p5
Equality of all sides
–
1
1
p6
Equality of all angles
–
fuzzy
1
Table 2. Signature of the Classes of Fuzzy Objects T(Pg), T(Rb) and T(Sq)
Method fi
Calculus Function
Body of the Method of Classes of Objects
T(Pg)
T(Rb)
T(Sq)
f1
Perimeter of a ﬁgure f1(Pg) = Pn
i=1 ai
f1(Rb) = 4a
f1(Sq) = 4a
f2
Area of a ﬁgure
–
f2(Rb) = a2 sin α f2(Sq) = a2
Analyzing Table 1, note that the value of the property p2 is speciﬁed as
fuzzy, i.e., sizes of sides of ﬁgures are represented in the form of fuzzy sets.
The deﬁnition of the classes T(Pg), T(Rb) and T(Sq) is intensional since, in
this situation, there is no need to consider the classes describing concrete types
of polygons, rhombuses, and squares. For the same reason, for the properties
p4(Pg)and p4(Rb) concrete values are not speciﬁed and only ranges of possible
values are given.

Let us consider concrete objects of the classes T(Rb) and T(Sq) namely, the
fuzzy rhombus Rb1 and fuzzy square Sq1. We deﬁne the values of their properties
and methods taking into account the speciﬁcations and signatures of their classes
with the help of Tables 3 and 4 respectively.
Table 3. Speciﬁcations of the Fuzzy Objects Rb1 and Sq1
Property pi
Values of Properties of Classes of Objects
Rhombus Rb1
Square Sq1
p1
4
4
p2
({1.8/0.9 + 2/1 + 2.1/0.95}, cm),
({1.8/0.9 + 2/1 + 2.1/0.95}, cm),
({1.8/0.9 + 2/1 + 2.1/0.95}, cm),
({1.8/0.9 + 2/1 + 2.1/0.95}, cm)
({2.7/0.85 + 3/1 + 3.1/0.95}, cm),
({2.7/0.85 + 3/1 + 3.1/0.95}, cm),
({2.7/0.85 + 3/1 + 3.1/0.95}, cm),
({2.7/0.85 + 3/1 + 3.1/0.95}, cm)
p3
4
4
p4
95◦, 85◦, 95◦, 85◦
90◦, 90◦, 90◦, 90◦
p5
1
1
p6
0.8
1
Table 4. Signatures of the Fuzzy Objects Rb1 and Sq1
Method fi Body of the Method of Classes of Objects
Rhombus Rb1
Square Sq1
f1
f1(Rb1) = 4a
f1(Sq1) = 4a
f2
f2(Rb1) = a2 sin α
f2(Sq1) = a2
We now pass to the direct construction of a fuzzy object-oriented dynamic
network for the fuzzy objects Rb1 and Sq1 and the classes of fuzzy objects T(Pg),
T(Rb) and T(Sq). It is obvious that the set of fuzzy objects is O = {Rb1, Sq1},
and the set of classes of fuzzy objects is C = {T(Pg), T(Rb), T(Sq)}. The classes
of fuzzy objects T(Rb) and T(Sq) are examples of the class of fuzzy objects
P(Pg), and any square is a rhombus. According to these conclusions, the set of
relations R is of the form
R =
n
Rb1
instance−of
−−−−−−−−→T(Rb), Sq1
instance−of
−−−−−−−−→T(Sq),
T(Rb)
a−kind−of
−−−−−−−→T(Pg), T(Sq)
a−kind−of
−−−−−−−→T(Pg), T(Sq)
is−a
−−−→T(Rb)
o
,
which can also be written as
R = {Rb1 ∈T(Rb), Sq1 ∈T(Sq), T(Pg) ⊆T(Rb), T(Pg) ⊆T(Sq),
T(Rb) ⊆T(Sq)}.

We will deﬁne a set of exploiters E using the universal operations over objects
and classes that are proposed in [16]; their practical application to fuzzy objects
and classes of fuzzy objects is considered in [7]. Thus, the set of exploiters E
consists of the operations of union, intersection, diﬀerence, symmetric diﬀerence,
and also the operation of cloning fuzzy objects and classes of fuzzy objects, i.e.,
E =

En
1 , En
2 , E3
2, E2
4, E1
5
	
= {∪, ∩, \, ÷, Clonei} ,
where En
1 is the union operation, En
2 is the intersection operation, E2
3 is the
diﬀerence operation, E2
4 is the operation of symmetric diﬀerence, and E1
5 is
the cloning operation. The inferior index of each exploiter is its number in the
signature, and the upper index is its arity. These operations are partly universal
since they can be applied to all fuzzy objects and their classes.
We deﬁne a set of modiﬁers M as follows:
M = {M1(T(Sq)) : T(Sq) →T(Rb), M1(T(Rb)) : T(Rb) →T(L1),
M2(T(Rb)) : (T(Rb)) →T(Sq), M1(T(Pg)) : T(Pg) →T(L),
M1(Sq1) : Sq1 →Rb1, M1(Rb1) : Rb1 →L11, M2(Rb1) : Rb1 →Sq1} ,
where
M1(T(Sq)) = M1(P(Sq)) = M1(p6(S1)) = M1(1) = 0.8
is the partial modiﬁer that changes the property p6(Sq) of the class of fuzzy
squares T(Sq) and, thereby, transforms it into the class of fuzzy rhombuses
T(Rb);
M1(T(Rb)) = M1(p1(Rb)) = M1(4, sides) = (3, of segment)
is the partial modiﬁer that changes the property p1(Rb) of the class of fuzzy
rhombuses T(Rb) by transforming it into some class of fuzzy broken lines T(L1);
M2(T(Rb)) = M2(P(Rb)) = M2(p6(Rb)) = M2(0.8) = 1
is the partial modiﬁer that changes the property p6(Rb) of the class of fuzzy
rhombuses T(Rb) by transforming it into the class of fuzzy squares T(Sq);
M1(T(Pg)) = M1(p1(Pg)) = M1(4, sides) = (3, of segment)
is the partial modiﬁer that changes the property p1(Pg) of the class of fuzzy
convex polygons T(Pg) by transforming it into some class of fuzzy broken lines
T(L);
M1(Sq1) = M1(p4(Sq1), p6(Sq1)) = M1((90◦, 90◦, 90◦, 90◦), 1) =
= ((95◦, 85◦, 95◦, 85◦), 0.8)
is the partial modiﬁer that changes the properties p4(Sq1) and p6(Sq1) by trans-
forming the fuzzy square Sq1 into the fuzzy rhombus Rb1;
M1(Rb1) = M1(p1(Rb1)) = M1(4, sides) = (3, of segment)

is the partial modiﬁer that changes the property p1(Rb1) of the fuzzy rhombus
Rb1 by transforming it into the fuzzy broken line L11;
M2(Rb1) = M2(p4(Rb1), p6(Rb1)) = M2((95◦, 85◦, 95◦, 85◦), 0.8) =
= ((90◦, 90◦, 90◦, 90◦), 1)
is the partial modiﬁer that changes the properties p4(Rb1) and p6(Rb1) of the
fuzzy rhombus Rb1 by transforming it into the fuzzy square Sq1.
Analyzing the modiﬁers from the set M, note that some of them simultane-
ously modify several properties of fuzzy objects and classes of fuzzy objects. The
properties being modiﬁed are non-randomly chosen since all of them are related
in one way or another, and a change in one of them must imply corresponding
changes in the others. This follows from the reﬂection principle considered in [7].
For simplicity and also for the understanding of the structure and essence of
the fuzzy object-oriented dynamic network constructed for the objects Rb1 and
Sq1 and classes of objects T(Rb), T(Sq) and T(Pg) we represent it in the form
of a connected digraph (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. The FOODN fragment for the fuzzy objects Rb1 and Sq1 and classes of fuzzy
objects T(Rb), T(Sq) and T(Pg).
The graph vertices are considered to be the fuzzy objects Rb1, Sq1, L11, and
L21 and the classes of fuzzy objects T(Rb), T(Sq), T(Pg), T(L), T(L1) and
T(L2) and relationships between them, i.e., the relations a-kind-of, instance-of,
and is-a, and the modiﬁcations M1(T(Sq)), M1(T(Rb)), M2(T(Rb)), M1(T(Pg)),
M1(Rb1), M2(Rb1) and M1(Sq1). The relations partly connect objects and classes
of objects among themselves and form some hierarchy. This part of the network
is static since only the structure of knowledge on some objects and classes of
objects can be represented with its help.
Modiﬁcations can be considered as some new type of relations between ob-
jects and classes of objects that is presented as modiﬁcation-of. Proceeding from

Fig. 1, note that
T(Sq)
modification−of
−−−−−−−−−−−→T(Rb)
and, vice versa,
T(Rb)
modification−of
−−−−−−−−−−−→T(Sq).
But, in contrast to the other types of relations, modiﬁcations are not completely
static since modiﬁers are some methods that can be applied to objects or classes
of objects, and, as a result, they change them.
If we consider modiﬁcations of some fuzzy square Sqk with the help of some
modiﬁer M1(Sqk) that transforms it into some fuzzy rhombus Rbm, then, as a
result, from a fuzzy square, we obtain a fuzzy rhombus rather than both these
ﬁgures simultaneously as is illustrated in Fig. 1 by the example of modiﬁcation
of the fuzzy square Sq1. The FOODN presented in Fig. 1 is constructed on the
basis of the objects Sq1 and Rb1 and, hence, they are component parts of the
network. This method of graphical representation of the process of modiﬁcation
is chosen with a view to showing changes in the essence of an object or a class
of objects after applying a modiﬁer to it. It may appear that this solution is not
most optimal, but if a modiﬁcation of an object is considered as a process of
creating a new class of objects and not just as a change in this concrete object,
then the chosen method of graphical representation of the process of modiﬁcation
is suﬃciently substantiated.
In Fig. 1, a fragment of a fuzzy object-oriented dynamic network without ex-
ploiters is shown. The principles of operation of the exploiters of the constructed
FOODN are presented in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Graphic representation of the principles of operation of exploiters for sets of
objects and classes of objects.

In Fig. 2, a graph is presented that is a part of the FOODN shown in Fig. 1.
The vertices of the former graph are classes of fuzzy objects. The classes T(Rb)
and T(Sq) are of major importance since they are arguments for ﬁve types of
exploiters from the set of exploiters E. All the other classes of objects are the
results of using the classes T(Rb) and T(Sq) by the exploiters En
1 , En
2 , E2
3,
E2
4, and E1
5. To represent the result of each exploitation, several edges are used
whose number equals the arity of the corresponding exploiter. For example, to
represent the result of exploitation of the classes of objects T(Rb) and T(Sq)
by the exploiter E2
1, two edges ∪(Rb) and ∪(Sq) are used. A part of edges of
the graph is marked by dashed lines in order to emphasize the fact that the
intersection, diﬀerence, and symmetric diﬀerence of objects or classes of objects
do not always exist [16]. Note that Fig. 2 illustrates the results of using only
two classes of fuzzy objects from the set C by exploiters from the set E. Similar
graphs can be constructed for any fuzzy objects from the set O and classes of
fuzzy objects from the set C. Exploiters can also be applied to fuzzy objects or
classes of fuzzy objects obtained as a result of the previous use of exploiters with
a view to generating new objects and classes of objects.
Modiﬁers and exploiters form the dynamic component of a network since the
network can be extended and modiﬁed with their help and, as a result, new
knowledge can be obtained and also its changes in time can be modeled.
In the presented example, only universal operations over objects and classes
of objects were considered as exploiters. Note that the set of exploiters E, as
well as the set of modiﬁers M, can consist of any methods that satisfy the
corresponding deﬁnitions of an exploiter and a modiﬁer that are presented in [6].
Exploiters are of great importance in object-oriented dynamic networks since
their use allows one to create new objects and classes of objects of a network
on the basis of objects and classes of objects underlying the network. Thus,
exploiters allow one to obtain knowledge that is unobvious and thereby to ex-
pand the description of some object domain or other. The results of possible
applications of exploiters to objects or classes of objects are given in Table 5.
Table 5. Results of Diﬀerent Applications of the Exploiters En
1 , En
2 , E2
3, E2
4, and E1
5.
Exploiter Results of Application to Objects
Results of Application to Classes of
Objects
∪
A set of objects and class of objects
∩
\
A class of object
A class of objects
÷
Clonei
An object
Analyzing Table 5, one can see that the operations of intersection, diﬀerence,
and symmetric diﬀerence make it possible to generate new classes of objects, and
the cloning operation makes it possible to generate copies of objects or classes

of objects. Of particular interest is the union operation that makes it possible
to create sets of objects and classes of objects from elements of these sets. This
approach to the creation of classes of objects is materially extensional, but, at the
same time, it allows one to create heterogeneous classes, i.e., classes describing
objects of diﬀerent types. Such classes are immediately relevant to sets of objects
that can consist of not only one-type elements. In this case, the class of objects
that forms a set of objects is some prototype despite its extensional nature since,
after deﬁning such a class, new objects of this type can be constructed. Note that,
within its framework, only the objects can be constructed that are equivalent
to the objects belonging to the set of objects underlying this class. In many
existing KRMs, the main representative components are objects, classes, and
concepts that are represented by them. If sets of objects are used for knowledge
representation, then, in contrast to objects, classes, and even concepts, they
allow one to simultaneously consider some number of not necessarily one-type
objects, which allows one to describe more complicated knowledge structures.
Conclusions
This work presents the conception of the object-oriented approach to the rep-
resentation of fuzzy knowledge. The generalization of object-oriented dynamic
networks to the fuzzy case is proposed. The representation of fuzzy knowledge
is illustrated by an example of construction of a fuzzy object-oriented dynamic
network for some classes of fuzzy convex polygons. The described approach al-
lows one to represent fuzzy knowledge and to model its changes in time and also
provides a mechanism for obtaining new knowledge from basic knowledge; this
mechanism considerably diﬀers from well-known methods of knowledge acquisi-
tion in existing KRMs.
