Enabling Semantic Analysis of User Browsing Patterns in
the Web of Data
Julia Hoxha
Institute of Applied Informatics
and Formal Methods
Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology
D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany

Martin Junghans
Institute of Applied Informatics
and Formal Methods
Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology
D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany

Sudhir Agarwal
Institute of Applied Informatics
and Formal Methods
Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology
D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany

ABSTRACT
A useful step towards better interpretation and analysis of
the usage patterns is to formalize the semantics of the re-
sources that users are accessing in the Web. We focus on
this problem and present an approach for the semantic for-
malization of usage logs, which lays the basis for eﬀective
techniques of querying expressive usage patterns. We also
present a query answering approach, which is useful to ﬁnd
in the logs expressive patterns of usage behavior via formu-
lation of semantic and temporal-based constraints.
We have processed over 30 thousand user browsing sessions
extracted from usage logs of DBPedia and Semantic Web
Dog Food. The logs are semantically formalized using re-
spective domain ontologies and RDF representations of the
Web resources being accessed. We show the eﬀectiveness of
our approach through experimental results, providing in this
way an exploratory analysis of the way users browse the Web
of Data.
Keywords
web browsing behavior modeling, semantic technologies, us-
age log analysis, linear temporal logic, model checking
1.
INTRODUCTION
Understanding of user behavior in accessing Web resources
is a powerful tool for Web sites providers to improve their
applications, the design and content of the Web sites, to an-
alyze users’ navigation intentions and respectively improve
search or build adaptive sites. Furthermore, it helps to build
recommendation systems that suggest users future actions
based on their past behavior.
The beneﬁts of analyzing usage behavior analysis has been
driving continuous research in the realm of Web Usage Min-
ing, which aims at discovering navigation patterns from the
logs of HTTP requests of pages and Web resources from the
visitors of the sites. Due to the primarily syntactical nature
of such resources, the representation of users’ requests lacks
a semantic formalization. This makes the comprehension of
the mined patterns diﬃcult.
A useful step towards a better interpretation and analysis
of the usage patterns is to formalize the semantics of Web
resources and user browsing behavior. We focus on this prob-
lem and present in this paper an approach for the seman-
tic formalization of user Web browsing activity. It lays the
basis for eﬀective techniques of querying expressive usage
patterns, as well as more intelligent mining and recommen-
dation methods.
In our approach, we map the records of usage logs issued
by human visitors to meaningful events of the application
domain where they were triggered. Therefore, instead of a
syntactic representation, we now provide a semantic, for-
mal description of each log by mapping it to concepts of a
vocabulary of the domain knowledge. Instead of using ﬂat
taxonomies to represent such vocabulary, we address the use
of ontologies to structure domain concepts and relations, en-
suring a rich semantic model of the Web site content.
Nowadays there is an increasing number of semantically-
enabled Web sites, which provide an ontology for the repre-
sentation of their content and belonging Web resources. In
this work, we assume that the domain ontology is already
provided and, therefore, focus for now on the formalization
of usage logs of these semantically-enabled Web sites. As
such, we show the applicability of our approach using the
USEWOD datasets [4] of logs from two Linked Open Data
servers: DBpedia 1 and Semantic Web Dog Food (SWDF) 2.
The goal of our approach is the formalization of brows-
ing behavior not only restricted at a single Web site, but
rather at multiple sites. The absence of publicly available
cross-site usage logs is another reason for choosing the USE-
WOD datasets. Despite the fact that these data are gath-
ered independently from the two Web servers, we design our
techniques with the aim of discovering patterns of cross-site
behavior, investigating traces of users navigation from one
1http://dbpedia.org
2http://data.semanticweb.org
arXiv:1204.2713v3  [cs.AI]  17 Apr 2012

Web domain (e.g. DBpedia) to another (e.g. SWDF, various
search engines, etc.).
Another crucial aspect in analyzing browsing behavior, is
also its temporal dynamic related to the order of requests
being issued. We present a query formulation and answering
approach that is able to search for expressive patterns in
terms of temporal constraints. We apply a formalism that
extends description logic with temporal constructs (such
as what happens next, eventually, always) based on Lin-
ear Temporal Logic [10]. We further show how to search for
behavioral patterns upon the semantically formalized usage
logs applying the query answering technique. The adapta-
tion and application of this logic and techniques for the set-
ting of Web usage analysis are novel.
HTTP Requests of Usage Logs 
InProceedings 
swrc:Conference 
Event 
swrc:InProceedings 
foaf:Person 
dc:creator 
isA 
ns2:relatedToEvent 
swrc:Publication 
ns1:name 
ns3:based_near 
dbpedia: 
PopulatedPlace 
ID     Time   
     User Action  
 
1       [17:04:10:14]    http://www.germanwings.com/en/  
1       [ 17:04:11:12]   http://www.germanwings.com/skysales/Select.aspx 
1       [ 17:04:12:33]   https://www.avis.com/car-rental/location/search.ac 
1       [ 17:04:13:58]   http://www.nytimes.com/pages/politics/ 
1       [ 17:04:14:35    https://www.avis.com/car-rental/reservation/   
 
 
 
                 
               start-reservation.ac?resForm.pickUpLocation=Lyon 
1 
[17:11:49:21     http://www.google.de/search?q=Lyon+www2012 
1       [17:11:49:33]   http://dbpedia.org/page/Lyon 
1       [17:11:49:39]   http://data.semanticweb.org/conference/www/2011/ 
                            demo/a-demo-search-engine-for-products 
Domain Ontology 
literal 
Figure 1: User browsing logs and domain ontology
Example 1 (Usage Logs and Domain Knowledge) In
an example of usage logs (Fig. 1), we show a user sessions in
which the user starts looking for ﬂights at germanwings.com,
afterwards searches for cars to rent at avis.com, in between
reads some news at nytimes.com. She then continues fur-
ther the reservation for car rental. Afterwards, the user per-
forms a search at google.com, followed by a visit of the Lyon
page at DBpedia. At last, she browses a speciﬁc paper from
WWW2011 conference at SWDF.
In our approach, we map the entries of usage logs to con-
cepts in the domain ontology (in this case illustrating that of
SWDF), e.g. last log entry represents a swrc:InProceedings 3
of type swrc:Publication. We can also extend the context for
each log via the domain ontology, deriving in this case more
information (e.g. author, conference, location, etc.) that we
can use to query for more expressive usage patterns.
Leveraging usage data with semantics helps to ﬁnd in this
use case patterns, such as:
• Find browsing sessions between March and April 2009
in which the users were browsing DBpedia or SWDF,
eventually performed an engine search, then immedi-
ately returned back to the previous site(i.e. goal is to
detect possible bottlenecks in site design or search).
• Find how often users have visited resources of English
Musicians of Jazz genre (i.e. apply the extended con-
text derived from the ontology in the background) .
• Search for ﬂight tickets at a given site, but then make
reservation for car rental at another Web site (i.e. goal
3http://ontoware.org/swrc/swrc v0.3.owl#
is to detect failing services from the perspective of a
Web site provider).
• Patterns of arranging a travel to a city, afterwards ac-
cess a DBpedia page about that city, then look for a
conference located in this city (goal is to predict what
users might want to visit in the future based on (per-
sonal/collective) past behavior).
• Find only semantically-relevant events in the usage
patterns. e.g. ﬁlter out reading the news in the middle
of a travel arrangement session, etc.
The contributions of this work are as follows:
- Formalization approach for cross-site user browsing behav-
ior and speciﬁc techniques applied to formalization of usage
logs from Linked Open Data servers (DBpedia and SWDF).
- A framework for querying expressive patterns of user brows-
ing behavior with semantic- and temporal-based constraints.
We introduce an approach for query formulation using tem-
poralized description logics, which allows us to reason about
user behavior with temporal conditions. We also present the
approach of answering such queries using model checking
techniques(Sec. 3). To the best of our knowledge, these are
techniques not previously applied in the setting of Web us-
age analysis.
- Experimental results that show the feasibility of our tech-
niques and aslo serve as an exploratory analysis of the way
users browse the Web of Data, in this case focusing our study
on DBPedia and SWDF sites.
2.
SEMANTIC FORMALIZATION OF USER
BROWSING BEHAVIOR
When browsing or searching the Web, users interact with
Web resources via browsers interface (e.g. clicking links, sub-
mitting HTML forms, etc.). We use the term browsing event
to describe the basic component of user behavior in perform-
ing activities (actions) with the Web browser directly.
Deﬁnition 1 (Event) We deﬁne a browsing event as a tu-
ple e = (l, T , P, t), where l is the full URL invoked, T is a set
of event types for which this event qualiﬁes, P={p1, ..., pm}
is a set of parameters and t is the occurrence time. For sim-
plicity, we denote event time by ei.t and set of event types
by ei.T .
Each event resulting from the interaction of a user with
a speciﬁc Web page serves a particular function (search-
ing within a portal, searching in a search engine, browse
information, booking, login, etc.) related to some content
(e.g. ﬂight reservation, car rental, organization, person, ho-
tel, etc.).
Deﬁnition 2 (Event Type) An event e can be mapped to
two types denoted by the set T = {Tc, Tf}, where Tc is the
type of content to which this event relates, Tf is the type of
function this event e serves.
Referring to the example in Fig. 1, each log entry is regarded
as a browsing event, e.g. e7 = (http://dbpedia.org/page/Lyon,
T , P, 17:11:49:33), where content type Tc={InProceedings}
and event function type Tf = {Informative}. Other examples

time:Instant 
wam:hasStartEvent 
event:Event 
wam:<http://greenlinkeddata.org/wam.owl#> 
time:<http://www.w3.org/2006/time#> 
event: <http://purl.org/NET/c4dm/event.owl#> 
wam:EndEvent 
wam:User 
wam:hasEndEvent 
wam:hasUser 
Literal 
wam:userID 
Literal 
wam:userIP 
wam:interval 
Literal 
wam:hasURL 
wam:fullURL 
wam:baseURL 
Literal 
wam:hasValue 
wam:contentType 
wam:type 
wam:EventType 
wam:ParameterName 
wam:ContentType 
wam:ParameterType 
wam:parameterType 
wam:Parameter 
wam:hasName 
wam:subType 
wam:Type 
wam:hasParameter 
wam:InputVariable 
wam:OutputVariable 
wam:FunctionType 
wam:belongsTo 
wam:functionType 
wam:Event 
wam:EventURL 
wam:StartEvent 
time:Interval 
time:TemporalEntity 
time:DateTimeDescription 
wam:hasTime 
wam:hasEvent 
wam:Session 
time:inDateTime 
Literal 
wam:order 
wam:hasInput 
wam:baseURL 
Figure 2: Web Browsing Activity Model - WAM
of content type for a browsing event include person, organi-
zation, real estate, education, stock exchange, etc. Whereas,
examples of function type could be login, search, checkout,
reserve, etc.
We have extended the deﬁnition of a browsing event with
parameters, which can be extracted based on the informa-
tion contained in the URL l. We consider three main con-
ceptual elements in a link: URL base, variable names, and
values. Based on the typical convention of URL formation,
we syntactically split the link into two basic parts: URL
base, which deﬁnes domain name, and the rest of the URL
is used to extract input variables, which are modeled as event
parameters.
Deﬁnition 3 (Parameter) An event parameter p, which
can be further classiﬁed as input or output parameter
4,
is a pair p=(vname, vvalue) consisting of variable name and
value.
In the example of Fig. 1, the input parameter of event e5
is p=(resForm.pickUpLocation, Lyon). Furthermore, events
are grouped into sessions, which represent a period of sus-
tained Web usage. The boundaries of a session are normally
determined by temporal and behavioral factors (e.g. brows-
ing intention). We follow previous research [5] in deploying
an heuristic, which starts a new session after a user’s idle
period of 30 minutes between the browsing events.
Deﬁnition 4 (Session) We denote a user session as a tu-
ple S = {s, Ts, Te, U}, where s = ⟨e1, e2, ..., en⟩is an ordered
sequence of browsing events performed from user U, such
that ei.t ≤ei+1.t for all i, where i denotes the event order
4In this work, we focus on the input parameters only
in the sequence. Furthermore, Ts is the starting time and Te
the ending time of the session, such that Ts ≤ei.t ≤Te.
Ordering of the events in a session is used to later deﬁne the
notion of abstract time, under which we formulate temporal
constraints to query behavioral patterns.
2.1
Web Browsing Activity Model
For the realization of the concepts deﬁned above, we present
a Web Browsing Activity Model (WAM) 5, which we for-
malize as an ontology illustrated in Fig. 2. Classes in WAM
are divided into three groups: Core classes, External classes,
and Type classes. External classes are basic concepts that we
reuse from well-established ontologies. Each wam:Event is a
subclass of the concept event:Event from the Event ontol-
ogy 6. Each wam:Session has one wam:StartEvent and one
wam:EndEvent, both of type wam:Event. Class wam:User is
simply characterized by user IP address and ID, but the on-
tology allows ﬂexible future extendability with user proﬁles
or other attributes (e.g IP-based geographical location). To
annotate of event timestamps and session interval, we reuse
basic concepts from OWL Time ontology, 7 which models
knowledge about time such as temporal units, instants, etc.
The WAM ontology is expressed in OWL-2-DL with under-
lying SROIQ logic [8].
Semantic Enrichment using Domain Knowledge
Each user browsing activity recorded in logs is physically
represented by a URL, but conceptually it comprises an
5http://greenlinkeddata.org/wam.owl
6http://purl.org/NET/c4dm/event.owl#
7http://www.w3.org/2006/time#

w
w
w 
. . . 
User 1 
User n 
? 
w
w
w 
Web Browsing Behavior 
Monitoring System 
Monitoring  
Server 
Semantic Activity Models 
Domain 
Ontologies 
Semantic Formalization 
Selection 
Target Data 
---  --- 
---  --- 
---  --- 
---  --- 
Preprocessed  
Data 
Transformation 
Preprocessing 
Transformed  
Data 
Event A 
Event B 
Event C 
Event K 
 Event N 
Semantic 
Activity Models 
Semantic 
Formalization 
Annotation  
with Domain Ontology 
Cross-site  
Browsing  
Activities 
Pattern Mining 
Querying 
Analysis 
Repository 
Formalization 
Monitoring 
Figure 3: Platform for semantic analysis of user browsing behavior
event that serves a particular function and relates to a spe-
ciﬁc content. We give meaning to each event issued as an
HTTP request in the logs, by mapping its respective URL
to the WAM concepts according to two dimensions: content
and function, respectively modeled as wam:ContentType and
wam:FunctionType. In order to ﬁnd the correct semantics of
the event types, we refer to the knowledge of the domain
(Web site) where this event occured. In this paper, we refer
to the domain ontologies 8 and RDF representations of Web
resources available for DBpedia and SWDF. In the follow-
ing section, we present the approach that we apply for the
formalization of such browsing events.
2.2
Formalization Approach
Our overall approach (illustrated in Fig. 3) aims at monitor-
ing user browsing behavior across multiple Web sites. Each
log entry is a tuple L = {UserID, URL, timestamp} con-
sisting of a user ID, referring momentarily to the encoded
IP address of the user, URL of the accessed Web resource,
and real time when this happened.
Firstly, these usage data logs are centrally stored in raw
form as produced upon each user interaction. We regard
each entry log L as a browsing event, as deﬁned in Def. 1.
These events are grouped into sessions based on user IP ad-
dress. The formalized browsing events constitute semantic-
rich models of user browsing activity, which we store in a
repository. This repository is then used as foundation for the
semantic analysis of usage behavior, including query answer-
ing techniques, which we present in Section 3, and further
potential semantic pattern mining mechanisms.
Below we present the formalization algorithm, which takes
as input a set of raw logs, preprocesses these data following
the engineering steps also shown in Fig. 3.
The algorithm yields as result a set of the ABox asser-
8It is important to distinguish domain ontology from our
WAM ontology, which we present for the formalization of
usage logs.
Algorithm 1 Main Algorithm for Formalization of Web
Browsing Events
Require: Web server log entries L=L1, L2, ... where Li =
(IP, t, URL, ReferringURL)
Ensure: DL-LTL Update knowledge base with new ABox
assertions A for sessions and events
Step 1. Clean logs L from records of bots, in order
to ﬁlter only human-generated requests
Step 2. Group logs in sessions based on user IP
address
Step 3. Filter logs
Introduce a new event for each session of Li that con-
tains a referring URL from another Web domain
Step 4. Formalize browsing sessions based on the
WAM ontology
For each log entry Li create a session of browsing events
s = ⟨e1, e2, ..., en⟩
for all ei ∈s, where ei = (U, l, t) do
b = extractBaseUrl(l);
Assertions αe = {Event(ei), fullURL(ei, ei.l),
baseURL(ei, ei.b), time(ei, ei.t), order(ei, j++)}
Find event content types αt=ﬁndContentTypes(l, b)
Find function types and parameters, and create as-
sertions αf, αp, accordingly.
end for
A = αe ∪αt ∪αf ∪αp
Step 4.1 Serialize A for sessions and events in
RDF/XML
Step 5. Update knowledge base (Sesame reposi-
tory of semantic logs)
tions related to each event, based on the TBox concepts
shown in the WAM ontology. We focus here on the approach
used to annotate the content type of each event, using the
RDF/XML representation of the Web resource requested
(Alg. 2, line 3). In the end, the generated DL axioms and
assertions are added in the knowledge base, which is a triple-
store repository of these semantic usage logs.

Algorithm 2 Semantic Enrichment of Browsing Events
ﬁndContentTypes(l, b)
Require: Ordered sequence of events s = ⟨e1, e2, ..., en⟩
Ensure: ABox assertions αt related to content types
Given URL l and its Web domain b
Ob= getDomainOnt(b);
3: Resource Rl = findResource(l,Ob);
We conﬁgure for each domain (DBpedia, SWDF) a
template of mappings from Web resources to their
RDF/XML representation e.g. for SWDF add ’/rdf’ to
a link that is a URI, or replace ’html’ with ’rdf’ for a
link that is an HTML page.
6: Find classes Tc = classMembership(Rl); We read the
RDF representation of the resource and ﬁnd classes (us-
ing rdf:type) to which it belongs.
for all T ∈Tc do
αt = {ContentType(T), contentType(ei, T)}
9: end for
3.
QUERYING USER BROWSING PATTERNS
It is important to reason about the browsing behavior of
users not only using conditions related to the enriched se-
mantics, but also addressing temporal constraints regarding
the dynamics of such behavior. To achieve this, we allow
queries upon our knowledge base to be formulated involving
temporal operators such as eventually, until, always.
This motivates us to address temporal logics capable of on-
tological reasoning. To support such temporal reasoning, we
follow an approach similar to the one in [3], which presents
the temporalized description logic ALC-LTL as an extension
of ALC with Linear Temporal Logic (LTL). Instead of ALC,
we apply in our approach SROIQ (as in [8]) the DL under-
lying OWL-2-DL, which used to express our WAM ontology.
We refer to this formalism as DL-LTL and use it for formu-
lation of queries upon the formalized browsing events and
sessions.
3.1
Query Formulation
In our querying approach, we consider the notions of real
time and abstract time. As mentioned in Def. 4 of a session,
the ordering of events within the session is used as basis
for abstract time to formulate temporal constraints. As an
example, let’s consider the following query:
Query q1: Find sessions where user starts browsing homepage
of Web site wa, then eventually performs search in an engine
(site), afterwards returns back to site wa.
Answering q1 requires ﬁnding a session with a start time
Ts and end time Te, and also the set of events ei ∈S s.t.
Ts ≤ei.t ≤Te. Within this set of events, we ﬁlter only those
events having the required URLs and order. The former part
of the query deals with the real time, whereas the latter tem-
poral part deals with the abstract time (ordering of events
in a timeline).
This query can be expressed as a DL-LTL formula, whose
notion we deﬁne inductively as follows:
• every ABox assertion is a DL-LTL formula. For exam-
ple, Event(e) and hasURL(a, b) are DL-LTL formulas.
• if ϕ and ψ are DL-LTL formulas, then so are ϕ ∧ψ,
ϕ ∨ψ, ¬ϕ, ϕUψ, and Xϕ ( U being the Until operator
and X the Next operator).
As an example, the DL-LTL formula
Event(e1) ∧∃contentType.Publication(e1))∧
X(Event(e2) ∧∃functionType.SearchEngine(e2))
describes an event e1 with content type Publication and fol-
lowed by an event e2 of event function type search engine.
For query answering, we need to check if a temporal pat-
tern is satisﬁed within a session. By Deﬁnition 4, every ses-
sion S = (s, Ts, Te, U) contains a sequence of events s =
⟨e0, . . . , en⟩with Ts ≤e.t ≤Te. Since the temporal opera-
tors refer to the ordering of the events in this sequence, we
consider this order to be the timeline of the abstract time.
As mentioned above, we are interested in queries that not
only requires checking the satisfaction of temporal patterns
in a session, but also the satisfaction of certain conditions
on the session itself. Similar to the description of an event,
a session is also described with a set of ABox assertions.
We deﬁne an atom over a given variable x as an assertion
parametrized with variable x, i.e., atoms are of the form
C(x), R(x, a) or R(a, x) for a concept C, a property R and
a constant a. We deﬁne a query as follows:
Deﬁnition 5 Let ω and ϕ be conjunctions of atoms over a
some variable x. A query Q over x is an expression of the
following form
Q(x) ←ω, ϕ
(1)
s.t. ω denotes the set of assertions related to the session, and
ϕ is a DL-LTL formula representing the temporal pattern
related to the events within the session.
Given a set of sessions {S1, . . . , Sl} along with an ontology
O, the answer Ans(Q) to a query Q of form (1) over variable
x is a subset of {S1, . . . , Sl} such that for each S ∈Ans(Q)
we have S(A) |= ω[x/S], and S(A), 0 |= ϕ[x/S],
where ω[x/S] (ϕ[x/S]) represents the conjunction of asser-
tions obtained from ω(x) by replacing the variable x with
S.
We separate conditions (to be satisﬁed) on a session from the
temporal patterns (to be veriﬁed) within the session in order
to make the formulation of the query more understandable.
Below we give examples of three queries and their formula-
tion DL-LTL.
Query q1: Find sessions where user starts browsing home-
page of Web site wa, then eventually performs search in an
engine (site), aftewards returns back to site wa.
q1(s) ←(Session(s) ∧hasEvent(s, e1)
∧hasEvent(s, en) ∧hasEvent(s, em)),
(Event(e1) ∧baseURL(e1, wa)∧
∃functionType.Homepage(e1)) ∧
3((Event(em) ∧∃functionType.EngineSearch(em)) ∧
X(Event(en) ∧baseURL(en, wa)))
Query q2: Find sessions where user browses site related to
music, then eventually performs a search in site google.com

or site yahoo.com, then immediately comes back to a page
of a music group in site wb
q2(s) ←(Session(s) ∧hasEvent(s, e1)
∧hasEvent(s, em) ∧hasEvent(s, en)),
(Event(e1) ∧∃contentType.Music(e1)) ∧
3((Event(em)∃functionType.EngineSearch(em)) ∧
∧(baseURL(em, “http : //www.google.com“)
∨baseURL(em, “http : //www.yahoo.com“)) ∧
X(Event(en) ∧baseURL(en, “wb“)∧
∃contentType.MusicGroup(en)))
Query q3: Find sessions where user is browsing all the time
sites wa or wb
q3(s) ←(Session(s) ∧Event(e) ∧hasEvent(e)),
□(baseURL(e, “wa“) ∨baseURL(e, “wb“))
In the following section, we introduce the approach we apply
for answering such queries.
3.2
Query Answering Approach
We present a query answering approach based on a match-
making technique, which allows to automatically retrieve
sessions of user browsing events that satisfy a set of semantic
and temporal conditions. These conditions are formulated in
a query q, which as deﬁned in Def. 5 is an expression of the
form q(x) ←ω, ϕ, s.t. ω consists of constraints related to the
session itself, and ϕ is a DL-LTL formula representing the
temporal pattern related to the events within the session.
The query is posed upon the set of sessions S, which are for-
malized with the approach described in Section 2 and that
we have stored in a central repository. In order to ﬁnd the
answers to the query, we apply a matchmaking mechanism
that proceeds as follows:
Step 1 - Checking Satisﬁability of Session Constraints.
This steps deals with expression ω of the query q, which
deﬁnes constraints related solely to the attributes of the ses-
sion. As explained earlier, ω consists of a conjunction of
parametrized ABox assertions αs. In this step, we check for
each of the sessions in the repository if it satisﬁes the asser-
tions, using HermiT reasoner 9.
For example, in this step we would retrieve sessions with
starting time Ts in July and userIP of a particular value
IP.
Step 2 - Checking Satisﬁability of Temporal Constraints.
The remaining part of the query Q consists of the DL-
LTL formula ϕ, which deﬁnes the temporal constraints over
the events contained in the sessions that we retrieved in Step
1. Therefore, only the resulting set of sessions from step 1
(denoted as S1) are now considered in Step 2.
In order to check the satisfaction of temporal constraints, we
iterate over the sessions in S1 and (a) build a ﬁnite state au-
tomaton (FSA) for each Si ∈S1, afterwards (b) iterate over
the states of the automaton in order to determine whether
9http://hermit-reasoner.com/
a condition holds in the respective state. In the sequel, we
provide more details about this veriﬁcation technique, which
applies a model checking mechanism based on the modal µ-
calculus [9]. The goal is to check if the formula q holds in
the session Si ∈S1 represented as a sequence of events.
Step 2(a) - Construction of the FSA
The semantics of a DL-LTL formula ϕ with temporal con-
straints is deﬁned over a ﬁnite-state transition system that
represents the sequence of events within a session Si. Let
FSi = (P, p0, π) denote an FSA representing the sequence
of events in session Si. The automaton is described by a ﬁnal
set P of states, a unique start state p0 ∈P, and a transition
function π : P →P. Each state corresponds to a separate
knowledge base (set of DL axioms of OWL ontology) that
describes one event of the sequence, while the event sequence
order is preserved by the transition function.
We construct a FSi from each sequence of events in the ses-
sion: the start state p0 ∈P of FSi is generated by adding
the axioms of WAM ontology OA that describes the domain
terminology used for events (TBox) as well as ABox asser-
tions related to the session itself and its ﬁrst event (with
order 1).
The subsequent states and transitions are generated accord-
ing to the event sequence in Si. For a sequence ⟨ei, ei+1⟩of
two subsequent events ei and ei+1, a transition π = (ei, ei+1)
is added from the state pi to a new state pi+1. State pi+1 is
created by adding the description of the event ei+1 and the
static domain knowledge from OA.
Step 2(b) - Veriﬁcation of DL-LTL formula in q
For a given automaton FSi and a given the DL-LTL formula
ϕ, the matchmaker ﬁndes the subset of states of FSi in which
the formula is satisﬁed. In case ϕ is deﬁned as a composite
formula, then it is broken down into a set of atomic formulas
φi. The ﬁnal result is aggregated from the results of the
atomic formulas recursively according to the semantics of
the query formalism. We proceed as follows for each of the
atomic formulas:
If φ = ⊤(true), then all the states of FS are returned.
If φ = ⊥(false), then an empty set is returned.
If φ = Ψ (proposition Ψ over a desired event description)
then according to the semantics of the query formalism, we
need to ﬁnd those states in which the proposition Ψ holds,
i.e., the desired event occurred.
Iterating over all the states of the automaton FS, we add
a state p in the resulting set, if the proposition Ψ holds in
state p. Since a state is an OWL ontology and a proposition
is a data query 10, we execute the data query on the OWL
ontology. If the result set of the data query is non-empty,
then the proposition holds in the state, otherwise not. A
detailed explanation of the matchmaking algorithm is pre-
sented in [2, 1]. The end result of this veriﬁcation technique
is a set of sessions (URIs), in which the sequence of events
satisiﬁes the DL-LTL formula part of the query q.
10Currently we only support conjunctive queries on ontolo-
gies with our own implementation of query evaluation based
on HermiT reasoner.

Table 1: Results of the Formalization Approach
SWDF
2009
DBPedia
3-3
#sessions
2831
31893
avg.#sessions/day
235.92
2899
#triples
277788
> 3million
Monitoring
Pe-
riod
01.Jul.09-
12.Jul.09
01.Jul.09-
12.Jul.09
4.
IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION
We provide a Java SE implementation of the introduced for-
malization approach, deploying the steps of processing us-
age logs, cleaning, and formalization with WAM ontology
(whose consistency is checked with Pellet 1.5.2 reasoner).
We have further implemented the step of semantic enrich-
ment of events with predeﬁned ontologies of Web domains,
which we read and query using Jena Framework 11. In or-
der to show the feasibility of our formalization approach, we
have performed experiments in which we have processed and
semantically formalized logs from the datasets as featured
in Table 1. The formalized sessions and events are serial-
ized in RDF representations, which are afterwards imported
via OpenRDF Sesame Core 2.6.0 API 12 into a repository
of a Sesame Framework 13. This repository is available on-
line 14 for the interested reader to test the semantic models.
Because of privacy restrictions of the datasets, we have im-
ported only a small portion of the formalized logs in this
repository.
Regarding the content of the datasets, we observed that
SWDF has between 161 and 309 user sessions daily, with
an average of 235.9 sessions/day. The majority of the daily
sessions (57.2%) start at search engines and then continue
at SWDF, while 33.5% start with the user directly access-
ing SWDF. From the daily sessions initiated in search en-
gines, an average of 97% start at Google (.com,.de, etc.)
and only 2.7% at Bing. There are very few sessions from
human users containing SPARQL queries (in average 1.46%
daily sessions). The majority of sessions containing SPARQL
queries belong to machines/bots, which we have ﬁltered out
of our usage data formalization approach.
We have also performed experiments to test the feasibility
of the query answering approach. We formulated and exe-
cuted a set of DL-LTL queries on the repository of formal-
ized events. These queries are illustrated in Table 2. We used
an IBM Thinkpad T60 dual core, with 2 GHz per core, Win-
dows 7 (32-bit) as the operating system, and a total of 2 GB
memory.
In order to check the performance and scalability of the
query answering mechanism, we have performed tests with
diﬀerent number of sessions, which is a portion of those saved
in the repository. We observed that the answering time varies
slightly for the queries (∼0.15 seconds), starting with 0.5
seconds for query execution in 500 sessions. For the largest
number of sessions (up to 1000) upon which we performed
11http://incubator.apache.org/jena/
12http://www.openrdf.org/doc/sesame2/api/
13http://www.openrdf.org/
14http://46.4.66.131:8080/openrdf-
workbench/repositories/wam/query
Table 2: Queries used for experiments
Query
Description
Q1
ﬁnd all sessions starting with a search in a
search engine, then followed by a browsing
event in DBpedia
Q2
ﬁnd all sessions starting with a browsing event
in SWDF, followed by a search in google.com
Q2
ﬁnd all sessions where users have visited pages
of Tango Musicians in DBpedia
Q4
ﬁnd all sessions where users have browsed pa-
pers of the conference WWW2009 in SWDF,
and then the page of Madrid in DBpedia
Q5
ﬁnd all sessions where the users have eventu-
ally visited English Artists in DBPedia
tests, the answering time is still feasible and always below
1.4 seconds.
In the diagram of Figure 4, we show query answering time,
reporting separately the time it takes for the OWL rea-
soning and for the model checking when testing it for one
query (Q1) and diﬀerent number of sessions. We observe that
model checking time is minimal, and reasoning takes nearly
94% of the overall answering time.
time (sec) 
nr. sessions 
Figure 4: Query answering time (composed of OWL
reasoning time and model checking time) for one
query and diﬀerent nr. of session
Overall, we observe that the query answering mechanism
performs within feasible times (taking into consideration
that we have not applied indexing, optimization techniques,
parallelization, etc. yet).
5.
RELATED WORK
The works related to ours may be grouped as follows:
Modeling cross-site browsing behavior. Interest to char-
acterize online behavior has started much earlier with works
such as those of Catledge et al. [6], Montgomery et al. [13]
that try to identify browsing strategies and patterns in the
web. Browsing activity has been studied and modeled, e.g.
Bucklin et al. [5] and others, usually exploiting server-side
logs of visitors in a speciﬁc website. Regarding the modeling
of browsing behavior at multiple websites, Downey et al. [7]
propose a state machine representation for describing search
activities. Park and Fader
[15] present a statistical model
of browsing behavior in two Web sites.

Ontologies in Web usage mining. There is an extensive
body of work dealing with usage log analysis and mining, but
we focus on the combination of these techniques with seman-
tic technologies, which start with contributions of works such
as those of Stumme et al. [16] and Oberle et al. [14]. In this
ﬁeld, research has been mostly focused on search query logs
or user proﬁling. Recent approaches, which use semantics
for extracting behavior patterns from web navigation logs,
are presented by Yilmaz et al. [18] and Mabroukeh et al.
[11]. While Yilmaz combines ontology and sequence infor-
mation for sequence clustering, and Mabroukeh investigates
sequential pattern mining and next step prediction. Vanzin
et al. [17] present ontology-based ﬁltering mechanisms for
retrieval of Web usage patterns, and more recently Mehdi
et al. [12] tackle the problem of mining meaniningful usage
patterns and clarify the impact of ontologies to solve this
problem. These works are restricted to only one domain and
not cross-site browsing behavior.
6.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present an approach for the formalization
of user Web browsing behavior across multiple sites, where
we map usage logs to comprehensible events from the appli-
cation domain. We have implemented this formalization ap-
proach and performed experiments with real-world datasets
of usage logs from two Linked Open Data Servers (DBpedia
and Semantic Web Dog Food).
Additional dynamic aspects of user browsing behavior can
be discovered if reasoning not only with semantic constraints,
but also with temporal conditions is enabled. For this pur-
pose, we introduce an approach to formulate queries using a
temporalized description logic called DL-LTL, which com-
bines SROIQ with Lineal Temporal Logic (LTL). Along-
side the formalism, we present a query answering mecha-
nism, which is based on a model checking technique . This
allows to automatically retrieve sessions of user browsing
events that satisfy a set of semantic and temporal conditions.
We show the feasibility of our approach through evaluations
with usage logs from DBpedia and SWDF.
We plan to further investigate techniques related to the ac-
quisition of the domain ontology when this is not provided,
since it is a crucial component of the semantic enrichment of
usage data with concepts from the application domain. We
will also work on pattern mining and prediction techniques,
which will use as basis the semantically formalized events
generated from this work.
7.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partly funded by the EU-FP7 Project X-LIKE
(Ref. 288342).
8.
