530 
VAN DER GAAG & RENOOIJ 
UAI2001 
Analysing Sensitivity Data from Probabilistic Networks 
Linda C. van der Gaag and Silja Renooij 
Institute oflnformation and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University 
P.O. Box 80.089, 3508 TB Utrecht, The Netherlands 
{linda,silja}®cs.uu.nl 
Abstract 
With the advance of efficient algorithms for sen­
sitivity analysis of probabilistic networks, study­
ing the sensitivities revealed by real-life net­
works is becoming feasible. As the amount of 
data yielded by an analysis of even a moderately­
sized network is already overwhelming, effective 
methods for extracting relevant information from 
these data are called for. One such method is 
to study the derivatives of the sensitivity func­
tions yielded, to identify the parameters that upon 
variation are expected to have a large effect on 
a probability of interest. We further propose to 
build upon the concept of admissible deviation, 
which captures the extent to which a parameter 
can be varied without inducing a change in the 
most likely outcome. 
We illustrate these con­
cepts by means of a sensitivity analysis of a real­
life probabilistic network in the field of oncology. 
1 
Introduction 
The numerical parameters for a probabilistic network are 
generally estimated from statistical data or assessed by hu­
man experts in the domain of application. As a result of 
incompleteness of data and partial knowledge of the do­
main, the assessments obtained inevitably are inaccurate. 
Since the outcome of a probabilistic network is built upon 
these assessments, it may be sensitive to the inaccuracies 
involved and, as a result, may even be unreliable. 
The reliability of the outcome of a probabilistic network 
can be evaluated by subjecting the network to a sensitivity 
analysis. In general, sensitivity analysis of a mathematical 
model amounts to investigating the effects of inaccuracies 
in the model's parameters by systematically varying the 
values of these parameters [1]. For a probabilistic network, 
sensitivity analysis amounts to varying the assessments for 
one or more of its numerical parameters and investigating 
the effects on, for example, a probability of interest [2]. 
Straightforward sensitivity analysis of a probabilistic net­
work is highly time-consuming. The probability of interest 
has to be computed from the network for a number of devi­
ations from the original assessment for every single param­
eter. Even for a rather small network, this easily requires 
thousands of propagations. 
Recently, however, efficient 
algorithms for sensitivity analysis have become available, 
rendering analysis of real-life probabilistic networks feasi­
ble [2, 3]. These algorithms build upon the observation that 
the sensitivity of a probability of interest to parameter vari­
ation complies with a simple mathematical function; this 
sensitivity function basically expresses the probability of 
interest in terms of the parameter under study. Computing 
the constants for these sensitivity functions requires just a 
limited number of propagations. 
Sensitivity analysis of a real-life probabilistic network 
tends to result in a huge amount of data. For example, for a 
real-life network in the field of oncology, comprising some 
lOOO parameters, we found that a single analysis yielded 
close to 5000 sensitivity functions with two or three con­
stants each. Because the sensitivities exhibited by a prob­
abilistic network typically change with evidence, such an 
analysis has to be performed a number of times. For our 
network, for example, we conducted over 150 analyses in­
volving data from real patients. For extracting relevant in­
formation from the data thus generated, effective methods 
are called for that allow for (automatically) identifying pa­
rameters that are quite influential upon variation. These 
parameters should be selected for further investigation as 
the inaccuracies in their assessments are likely to affect the 
network's outcome. 
In her work on sensitivity analysis of probabilistic net­
works, K. Blackmond Laskey introduced the concept of 
sensitivity value [4]. 
The concept builds upon the (par­
tial) derivative of the sensitivity function that expresses the 
network's probability of interest in terms of a parameter 
under study: the sensitivity value is the absolute value of 
this derivative at the original assessment for the parame­
ter. As currently available algorithms for sensitivity anal­
ysis of probabilistic networks yield the probability of in-

UAI 2001 
VAN DER GAAG & RENOOIJ 
531 
terest explicitly as a fimction of the parameter under study, 
the derivative and its associated sensitivity value are read­
ily determined. In this paper, we study the derivatives of 
sensitivity functions and show how sensitivity values can 
be used for selecting parameters for further investigation. 
In many real-life applications of probabilistic networks, the 
outcome of interest is not a probability, but rather the most 
likely value of a variable of interest. In a medical applica­
tion, for example, the outcome of interest may be the most 
likely diagnosis given a patient's symptoms and signs. For 
this type of outcome, the derivative of a sensitivity fimction 
and its associated sensitivity value are no longer appropri­
ate for establishing the effect of parameter variation: a pa­
rameter with a large sensitivity value may upon variation 
not induce a change in the most likely outcome, while a 
parameter with a small sensitivity value may induce such a 
change for just a small deviation from its original assess­
ment. To describe the sensitivities of this type of outcome, 
we introduce the concept of admissible deviation. This 
concept captures the extent to which a parameter can be 
varied without inducing a change in the most likely value 
for the variable of interest. We show how the concept of 
admissible deviation can be used for selecting parameters. 
The various concepts introduced in this paper will be illus­
trated by means of a sensitivity analysis of a moderately­
sized real-life probabilistic network in the field of oncol­
ogy. We would like to note that this network exhibits con­
siderable sensitivity to parameter variation. This observa­
tion contradicts earlier suggestions that probabilistic net­
works are highly insensitive to inaccuracies in the assess­
ments for their parameters I 5, 6]. Our results now seem 
to indicate that the sensitivities exhibited by probabilistic 
networks may vary from application to application. 
The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2, we provide 
some preliminaries on sensitivity analysis of probabilistic 
networks. In Section 3, we briefly discuss the oesophagus 
network with which we will illustrate the concepts intro­
duced in the subsequent sections. In Section 4, we study 
the derivative of a sensitivity function and its associated 
sensitivity value. In Section 5, we introduce the concept 
of admissible deviation and discuss its use for extracting 
relevant information from sensitivity data. The paper ends 
with our conclusions and directions for further research in 
Section 6. 
2 
Preliminaries 
Sensitivity analysis of a probabilistic network amounts to 
establishing, for each of the network's numerical parame­
ters, the sensitivity function that expresses the probability of 
interest in terms of the parameter under study. In the sequel, 
we denote the probability of interest by Pr( A = a I e) , or 
Pr(a I e) for short, where a is a specific value of the vari­
able A of interest and e denotes the available evidence. The 
network's parameters are denoted by x = p(bi I 1r), where 
bi is a value of a variable B and 1r is a combination of val­
ues for the parents of B. We write !Pr(ale)(x) to denote the 
sensitivity function that expresses the probability Pr(a I e) 
in terms of the parameter x; for ease of exposition, we will 
often omit or abbreviate the subscript for the fimction sym­
bol f, as long as ambiguity cannot occur. 
Upon varying a single parameter x = p(bi I 1r) in a prob­
abilistic network, the other parameters p(bi I 1r), j =f:. i, 
specified for the variable B need to be co-varied. Each pa­
rameter p(bi I 1r) can thus be seen as a function gj(x) of 
the parameter x under study. In the sequel, we assume that 
the parameters p(bj I 1r) are co-varied in such a way that 
their mutual proportional relationship is kept constant, that 
is, a parameter p(bi I 1r) is co-varied according to 
for p(bi I 1r) < 1. 
if j = i 
otherwise 
Under the assumption of co-variation described above, a 
sensitivity function f(x) is a quotient of two functions that 
are linear in the parameter x under study [2, 7]; more for­
mally, the function takes the form 
f(x) 
=a · x + b 
c·x+d 
where the constants a, b, c, and d are built from the assess­
ments for the numerical parameters that are not being var­
ied. From this property we have that a sensitivity function 
is characterised by at most three constants. These constants 
can be feasibly determined from the network, for example 
by computing the probability of interest for a small num­
ber of values for the parameter under study and solving the 
resulting system of equations [2]. An even more efficient 
algorithm that is closely related to junction-tree propaga­
tion, is available from [3]. 
3 
The oesophagus network 
The oesophagus network that will be used to illustrate con­
cepts throughout this paper, is a real-life probabilistic net­
work for the staging of oesophageal cancer. The network 
was constructed and refined with the help of two experts 
in gastrointestinal oncology from the Netherlands Cancer 
Institute, Antoni van Leeuwenhoekhuis, and is destined for 
use in clinical practice [8]. 
As a consequence of a lesion of the oesophageal wall, a 
tumour may develop in a patient's oesophagus. The char­
acteristics of the tumour, such as its location in the oe­
sophagus and its macroscopic shape, influence the tumour's 
prospective growth. The tu±nour typically invades the oe­
sophageal wall and upon further growth may affect neigh-

532 
VAN DER GMG & RENOOIJ 
UAI 2001 
""""""' 
-:' 
I 
... . 
--
CT.­
':" 
\.. 
Gutro-eirrami 
--
--.F 
Figure 1: The oesophagus network. 
bouring organs. In time, the tumour may give rise to lym­
phatic and haematogenous metastases. The characteristics, 
depth of invasion, and extent of metastasis of the cancer 
largely influence a patient's life expectancy and are indica­
tive of the effects and complications to be expected from 
the various therapeutic alternatives. The three factors are 
summarised in the stage of the cancer, which can be ei­
ther I, IIA, liB, III, IVA or !VB, in the order of progressive 
disease. To establish the stage of a patient's cancer, typi­
cally a number of diagnostic tests are performed, ranging 
from biopsies of the primary tumour to gastroscopic and 
endosonographic examinations of the oesophagus. 
The oesophagus network is depicted in Figure 1. It cur­
rently includes4 2 variables. The number of values per vari­
able ranges between two and six, with an average of 3.4. 
The number of incoming arcs per variable ranges between 
zero and three with an average of 1.7; the average number 
of outgoing arcs is 2.5, with a minimum of zero and a maxi­
mum of 11. For the network, a total of932 probabilities are 
specified. The variable with the largest number of proba­
bilities, 144, models the stage of the cancer; this variable is 
deterministic. The largest number of probabilities specified 
for a non-deterministic variable is 80. 
Building upon the concepts outlined in Section 2, we per­
formed a sensitivity analysis of the oesophagus network. 
We took the probability of a specific stage for the proba­
bility of interest. As six different stages are defined, we 
performed six separate analyses, each time focusing on an-
other stage. Of the prior network, that is, the network with­
out any evidence entered, we found 206 of the 932 param­
eters to be influential upon variation. For these parameters, 
the analyses yielded a total of 1236 sensitivity functions 
with two or three constants each. Because a network's 
sensitivities typically change with evidence, we repeated 
the analysis with data entered from 156 patients diagnosed 
with oesophageal cancer. The number of data entered per 
patient ranged between 6 and 21, with an average of 14 .8. 
The parameters that we found to be influential upon vari­
ation differed between patients. The number of influential 
parameters also differed considerably and was found to be 
as high as 826. 
4 
The derivative and its sensitivity value 
For extracting relevant information from the huge amount 
of sensitivity data that is typically generated from a proba­
bilistic network, effective methods are needed. In this sec­
tion, we discuss a method for this purpose that is based 
on the derivative of a sensitivity function and its associated 
sensitivity value. This method provides for selecting pa­
rameters that upon variation have a large effect on a proba­
bility of interest. In the next section, we introduce another 
method, based on the concept of admissible deviation, that 
focuses on the most likely value of a variable of interest. 
In Section 2, we argued that the sensitivity of a probability 
of interest to variation of a parameter x can be expressed as 

UAI 2001 
VAN DER GMG & RENOOIJ 
533 
a function f ( x) of the form 
f(x) =a· x + b 
c·x+d 
The first derivative r ( X) of this function is 
f'(x) = 
a·d-b·c 
(c · x + d)2 
The probability of interest is sensitive to deviations from 
the original assessment x0 of the parameter under study, if 
the sensitivity value lf'(xo)l is greater than zero. 
As an example, Figure 2 depicts a sensitivity function that 
we found for the oesophagus network. The function shows 
the effect of varying the parameter p(Sono-cervix =yes I 
Metas-cervix = no) on the probability Pr(Stage = III I 
case 6) for a specific patient. The assessment for the pa­
rameter under study is x0 = 0.07. For this assessment, we 
find a sensitivity value of 0.53, which indicates that devia­
tions from the original assessment would not greatly affect 
the probability of interest. If the assessment would have 
been 0.02 rather than 0.07, however, a much larger sensitiv­
ity value, of 4.74, would have been found, which indicates 
that even minor deviations would have had a considerable 
effect. For the value 0.20, on the other hand, a sensitivity 
value of just 0.07 is found. If the assessment for the pa­
rameter would have been 0.20, therefore, deviations would 
have had hardly any effect on the probability of interest. 
Based upon the concept of sensitivity value, we might con­
clude that the parameters for whose assessments the sensi­
tivity values are the largest, are the most likely to be quite 
influential upon variation and therefore should be selected 
for further investigation. Sensitivity values, however, pro­
vide insight in the effect of small deviations only from a 
parameter's assessment. When larger deviations are con­
sidered, the quality of the value as an approximation of the 
« 0.8 
"' .. 
" 
d 
<> §" 0.6 
II .. 
"' 
d §. 0.4 
0:: 
0.2 
OL_¬ 
__ _L ______ L-----­------®----¯ 
0 
xo 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
p(Sono-éeTuiz = yes!Meta.:'I-CeTvix =no) 
Figure 2: The sensitivity function J(x) expressing the 
probability Pr(Stage = III I case 6) in terms of the pa­
rameter x = p(Sono-cervix =yes I Metas-cervix = no). 
effect may break down rapidly, as noted before by Laskey 
[4]. For some parameters, it may be that the sensitivity val­
ues for slightly smaller assessments are very large and the 
sensitivity values for slightly larger assessments are quite 
small. For the parameter under study in Figure 2, for ex­
ample, this property holds: the sensitivity value of the orig­
inal assessment is rather small, but for smaller assessments 
especially the sensitivity values become quite large. Find­
ing a relatively small sensitivity value for a parameter's as­
sessment is therefore no guarantee that the probability of 
interest is hardly affected by variation of this parameter. 
From our discussion of the sensitivity function shown in 
Figure 2, we have that the quality of a sensitivity value 
for indicating the effect of parameter variation decreases 
as the parameter's original assessment lies closer to the x­
coordinate of the function's "shoulder". Therefore, to de­
cide whether or not the probability of interest is likely to 
be affected by inaccuracies in the assessment for a specific 
parameter, we should consider not just the associated sen­
sitivity value but also the distance of the assessment to the 
x-coordinate of the shoulder of the sensitivity function. We 
define the concept of shoulder more formally. 
A sensitivity function is either a linear function or a hyper­
bola. For c = 0, for example, the sensitivity function is 
linear, as we then have that 
f(x) = a· x + b = a· x + b 
= é. x 
+ # 
c·x+d 
d 
d 
d 
If the sensitivity function is not linear, it takes the form of 
a hyperbola: 
1" 
f(x) =- + t, 
x -s 
with 
1" = ---:::-­
c2 
d 
a 
s = --, and t =
-
c 
c 
For ease of reference, Figure 3 depicts the general shape of 
a hyperbola. The hyperbola has two asymptotes, parallel 
to the x- andy-axes, in x = sand f(x) = t, respectively. 
The hyperbola further is symmetrical in the line that has 
an absolute gradient of 1 and goes through the intersection 
point (s, t) of the hyperbola's asymptotes. The point (s, t) 
is termed the center of the hyperbola. The point at which 
the hyperbola intersects with the line in which it is symmet­
rical, is called the vertex of the hyperbola; this vertex is the 
point referred to before as the function's shoulder. As the 
symmetry line has a gradient with an absolute value of 1, 
the gradient of the hyperbola at the vertex also has an abso­
lute value ofl. Using this property we can easily determine 
the x-coordinate x of the vertex: 
lf'(x)l = I (x =rs)21 
= 1 ¢::::> x = 
s ± vfrT 
We now return to a sensitivity function f(x) expressing a 

534 
VAN DER GAAG & RENOOIJ 
UAI 2001 
j(x) 
t 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
,'/ vertex 
, 
, , 
, 
, 
, -' 45° 
--{_) 
________________________________ _ 
center 
s 
X 
Figure3: Ahyperbolaf(x). 
network's probability of interest in terms of a parameter x 
under study. As noted above, if this function is not linear, it 
takes the form of a hyperbola. The center of the hyperbola 
is (- ", è). Because a sensitivity function is defined on 
the entire probability interval [0, 1] and moreover is non­
negative, we have that -4 < 0 and .!!. > 0. For the x-
c 
c 
-
coordinate x of the vertex of the hyperbola, we find 
, 
-d ± Jia · d-b · cl 
x=
--___!_...!.._ 
___ ...: 
c 
For the sensitivity function shown in Figure 2, for example, 
the x-coordinate of the vertex of the hyperbola is x = 0.05. 
We observe that the original assessment x0 = 0.07 for the 
parameter under study lies quite close to this coordinate. 
We recall that the sensitivity value for x0 is just 0.53. Be­
cause the assessment lies close to x, however, the sensitiv­
ity value cannot be considered a good approximation of the 
effect of the parameter's variation: small deviations from 
the assessment, especially to smaller values, have a con­
siderable effect on the probability of interest. We conclude 
that this parameter should be selected for further investiga­
tion, regardless of its small sensitivity value. 
From the above observations, we have that for extracting 
from the sensitivity data the parameters that deserve fur­
ther attention, parameters whose assessment has a sensi­
tivity value larger than 1 should be identified. In addition, 
parameters whose original assessment lies close to the x­
coordinate of the vertex of the associated sensitivity func­
tion should be selected. 
To conclude our discussion of sensitivity values, we would 
like to note that in the analysis of the oesophagus network 
we found rather strong sensitivities. An example is shown 
in Figure 4: for the parameter under study, a sensitivity 
value of6.97 was found. 
5 
Admissible deviation 
In the previous section, we focused on the derivative of a 
sensitivity function and showed how its associated sensi-
tivity value can be used for selecting parameters that upon 
variation have a large effect on a specific probability of in­
terest. Often, however, we are interested not in the effect of 
parameter variation on a probability of interest, but in the 
effect on the most likely value for a variable of interest. In 
a medical application, for example, the most likely diagno­
sis given a patient's symptoms and signs may be the out­
come of interest. For this type of outcome, the derivative 
of a sensitivity function and its associated sensitivity value 
are no longer appropriate for establishing a parameter's ef­
fect upon variation. For some parameters, deviation from 
their original assessment may have a considerable effect on 
the probability of a specific outcome and yet not induce a 
change in the most likely one; for other parameters, varia­
tion may have little effect on the probabilities involved and 
nonetheless result in a change in the most likely outcome. 
We would like to note that the idea of focusing on the most 
likely value of a specific variable conforms to the practice 
of sensitivity analysis of decision-theoretic models where 
the most preferred decision is the outcome of interest [9]. 
To provide for studying the effects of parameter variation 
in view of a most likely outcome, we enhance the basic 
method of sensitivity analysis for probabilistic networks 
with the computation of an interval within which a param­
eter can be varied without inducing a change in the most 
likely value of a variable of interest. Now, let A be the 
variable of interest. Let x be the parameter under study and 
let xo be its assessment. The admissible deviation for x0 
is a pair of real numbers (r, s) such that x0 can be varied 
between the bounds max(xo - r, 0) and min(xo + s, 1) 
without inducing a change in the most likely value for the 
variable A; r and s, moreover, are the largest numbers for 
which this property holds. Note that the interval within 
which a parameter can be freely varied can be bounded 
for two reasons: either the most likely outcome changes 
if the parameter is varied beyond the specified boundary, 
0.2 
Q UL----------------- 
0.02 
p(X-lungè = 1/MIMetas-lungs = 110) 
Figure 4: The sensitivity function f(x) expressing the 
probability Pr(Stage = IVB I case 1) in terms of the pa­
rameter x = p(X-lungs = yes I Metas-lungs = no). 

UAI2001 
VAN DER GAAG & RENOOIJ 
535 
or the boundary of the probability interval [0, 1] has been 
reached. To express that a parameter can be varied as far as 
the boundary of the probability interval, we use the symbol 
oo in the admissible deviation associated with its assess­
ment. 
The admissible deviation for a parameter's assessment can 
be computed from the sensitivity functions !Pr(a;le) that 
are yielded for the various values a, of the variable A. 
More specifically, the admissible deviation is established 
by studying the points at which two or more of these func­
tions intersect. Suppose that for the original assessment xo 
of the parameter x, the value ai is the most likely value for 
the variable of interest. Also suppose, for ease of exposi­
tion, that neither of the bounds of the admissible deviation 
equals oo. The admissible deviation for x0 now is the pair 
(r, s ), where the leftmost deviation r is the smallest real 
number for which x0 - r is the x-coordinate of a point at 
which the sensitivity function !Pr(a;le)(x) intersects with 
another sensitivity function fPr(a11e)(x) with j "1- i; the 
rightmost deviation s is defined analogously. 
We present various examples to illustrate the difference be­
tween using sensitivity values and admissible deviations for 
studying the effects of parameter variation. The examples 
are taken from patient-specific analyses of the oesophagus 
network. The figures used display the sensitivity functions 
yielded for all the values of the variable Stage that models 
the stage of a patient's cancer. As we are now considering 
a variable of interest rather than a probability of interest, 
using the concept of sensitivity value for selecting interest­
ing parameters amounts to examining the sensitivity values 
from all functions for the parameter under study. 
Our first example addresses a parameter that induces small 
sensitivity values and upon variation does not result in a 
change in the most likely outcome. The sensitivity func­
tions for the parameter are depicted in Figure 5: the fig­
ure shows the effects of varying x = p( CT-lungs = yes I 
0.05 
p(CT-Iung• = ye•IMetas-lungs =no) 
Figure 5: The sensitivity functions expressing the prob­
abilities Pr(Stage I case 138) in terms of the parameter 
p(CT-lungs =yes I Metas-lungs =no). 
Metas-lungs = no) on the probabilities of the various 
different values of the variable Stage for a specific pa­
tient. From the figure, it is readily seen that the param­
eter's assessment has associated a small sensitivity value 
from each of the sensitivity functions. The sensitivity func­
tion f1v8(x), for example, that expresses the probability 
Pr(Stage = IVB I case 138) in terms of the parameter 
under study, is 
f ( ) _ 0.09208 ·X + 1.17403 
!VB X 
-
X+ 1.17403 
from which we find a sensitivity value of 
lf:vs(0.05)I = 0.71145 
We further observe that the assessment x0 = 0.05 for the 
parameter lies relatively far from the x-coordinate i; of the 
function's vertex: 
i; 
= -1.17403+yi0.09208·l.l7403-1 '17403·11 
1 
-0.14 
Based on the concept of sensitivity value as discussed in the 
previous section, we conclude that the parameter does not 
deserve additional attention. Inspection of Figure 5 now 
further reveals that the admissible deviation for the param­
eter's assessment equals ( oo, oo) , which indicates that the 
parameter can be varied over the entire probability interval 
[0, 1] without inducing a change in the most likely stage. 
Based on the concept of admissible deviation, therefore, 
the parameter should also be further disregarded. 
For our next example, we consider a parameter that induces 
large sensitivity values, but upon variation is not expected 
to result in a change in the most likely outcome. The sensi­
tivity functions for the parameter are depicted in Figure 6: 
the figure shows the effects of varying x = p( CT-loco = 
yes I Metas-loco = no) on the probabilities of the dif-
  
"' 
"" 
• 
., 
0.6 ,------------, 
8 0.4 
• 
"' 
ª 
ç 
Q: 
p(CT-Ioco = li""IMetas-loco =no) 
IIA 
Figure 6: The sensitivity functions expressing the prob­
abilities Pr(Stage I case 82) in terms of the parameter 
p(CT-loco =yes I Metas-loco =no). 

536 
VAN DER GMG & RENOOIJ 
UAI 2001 
ferent values of the variable Stage. 
For the parameter's 
original assessment x0 
= 0.02, large sensitivity values 
are found from some of the six functions. For example, 
from the sensitivity function that expresses the probability 
Pr(Stage = IIA I case 82) in terms of the parameter, a sen­
sitivity value of 2.07 is found. When studying the effects of 
variation on the probabilities of interest, therefore, the pa­
rameter should be selected for further investigation. Now 
consider the effects of variation on the most likely value 
of the variable Stage. For the parameter's assessment xo, 
we find that stage III is the most likely stage for the patient 
under study. The sensitivity function for this stage inter­
sects with the sensitivity function for stage IIA at x = 0.17. 
Further inspection of the figure reveals that the admissible 
deviation for the parameter's assessment is (oo, 0.15). We 
observe that the rightmost deviation is relatively large com­
pared to the original assessment. We therefore conclude 
that inaccuracies in the assessment are not reasonably ex­
pected to affect the most likely outcome, and the parameter 
should not be selected for further investigation. 
We now address a parameter that induces small sensitivity 
values but upon variation affects the most likely outcome. 
Figure 7 depicts the sensitivity functions for the parameter 
x = p( Wall-inv = T2 I Shape = polypoid, 5 :::; Length < 
lOcm). For the original assessment x0 = 0.2 of the pa­
rameter, the largest sensitivity values are found from the 
functions for the stages IIA and III: 
lf{IA(Q.2)1 
lf{u(0.2)[ 
= 0.32151 
= 
0.34832 
As the sensitivity functions are linear in the parameter 
under study, the computed sensitivity values describe the 
effects of variation exactly. 
Based upon the concept of 
sensitivity value, we therefore conclude that the parame­
ter should not be selected for further investigation. Now, 
the admissible deviation for the parameter's assessment is 
0.6 ,-----,---------, 
IIA 
0.2 
p(Wall·inv = T2ISI>ape =polypoid, 5::; Length< 10) 
Figure 7: The sensitivity functions expressing the prob­
abilities Pr(Stage I case 120) in terms of the parameter 
p(Wall-inv = T2[ Shape = polypoid, 5:::; Length< 10cm). 
computed to be (0.10, oo). As the leftmost deviation is 
quite small compared to the assessment 0.20, we find that 
the parameter deserves further investigation. We would like 
to note that, if the original assessment had been in the inter­
val [0.04, 0.10], then the sensitivity values would not have 
changed, but the admissible deviation would have become 
extremely small for both directions of variation. 
Our final example pertains to a parameter that induces large 
sensitivity values and upon variation is expected to result 
in a change in the most likely outcome. The sensitivity 
functions for the parameter are displayed in Figure 8: the 
figure shows the effects of varying x 
= p( CT-organs = 
medias! llnv-organs = none). From two of the sensitivity 
functions, we find relatively large sensitivity values: 
lf{1A(0.05)I 
lf{n (0.05) I 
1.34333 
0.99446 
In addition, the original assessment x0 = 0.05 for the pa­
rameter lies very close indeed to the x-coordinates :i:nA and 
xm of the vertices of the two functions: 
XnA 
= 0.0597 
:i:m 
0.0499 
Based upon the concept of sensitivity value, therefore, the 
parameter should be selected for further investigation. We 
now consider the effects of variation on the most likely out­
come. We observe that for the original assessment the most 
likely stage is IIA. The admissible deviation for the assess­
ment is computed to be (0.002, oo). We observe that the 
leftmost deviation is extremely small, indicating that an in­
accuracy by just 0.002 in the original assessment will lead 
to a different most likely value for the variable Stage and 
may in fact result in a different treatment decision for the 
patient under consideration. 
The above examples illustrate that admissible deviations 
0.6 
ê---------j iiA 
---------._.j ill 
0.2 
0.05 
p(CT-organl! = m.edia.!tllnv-organ.s =none) 
Figure 8: The sensitivity functions expressing the prob­
abilities Pr(Stage I case 63) in terms of the parameter 
p(CT-organs =medias! [Inv-organs =none). 

UAI 2001 
VAN DER GAAG & RENOOIJ 
537 
provide additional insight into the sensitivity of a proba­
bilistic network's outcome to inaccuracies in its parame­
ters. We would like to note that the use of admissible de­
viations is especially of interest when decisions are to be 
based on the most likely value of a variable of interest [10]. 
6 
Conclusions 
Sensitivity analysis of a probabilistic network serves to 
yield insight in the effects of inaccuracies in its numerical 
parameters. As for real-life networks a sensitivity analysis 
tends to result in a huge amount of data, effective methods 
for selecting relevant parameters from the generated data 
are called for. In this paper, we introduced two such meth­
ods. 
One of our methods for extracting relevant information 
from sensitivity data builds upon the derivative of a sen­
sitivity function and its associated sensitivity value. Basi­
cally, a parameter x is selected for further investigation if 
the sensitivity function that expresses the network's proba­
bility of interest in terms of x, has a large sensitivity value, 
that is, a large absolute gradient at the original assessment 
x0 for the parameter. We argued that the sensitivity value 
of a parameter's assessment does not constitute a sufficient 
criterion for its selection: if the assessment lies close to 
the x-coordinate of the vertex of the associated sensitivity 
function, then small deviations may have a large effect on 
the probability of interest, regardless of the assessment's 
sensitivity value. To identify parameters that are likely to 
have a large effect on the probability of interest, therefore, 
not only the sensitivity value of its assessment need to be 
considered, but also the distance of the assessment to the 
x-coordinate of the sensitivity function's vertex. 
The derivative and its associated sensitivity value are suit­
able for identifying parameters that have the largest influ­
ence on a network's probability of interest. We argued, 
however, that if the network's outcome is not a single prob­
ability, but rather the most likely value for a variable of 
interest, then the sensitivity value is no longer appropriate 
for this purpose. We introduced the concept of admissible 
deviation to provide for studying the effects of parameter 
variation on this type of outcome: the admissible devia­
tion (r, s) for a parameter's assessment indicates the largest 
interval within which the assessment can be varied freely 
without inducing a change in the most likely outcome. 
We illustrated the various concepts introduced in this paper 
by means of a sensitivity analysis of the oesophagus net­
work, a moderately-sized real-life network in the field of 
oncology. The analysis of this network resulted in a huge 
amount of data in which considerable sensitivities were 
hidden. Our methods proved quite useful for extracting the 
relevant information from these data. 
Acknowledgements. This research has been (partly) supported 
by the Netherlands Computer Science Research Foundation with 
financial support from the Netherlands Organisation for Scien­
tific Research (NWO). We are most grateful to Babs Taal and 
Berthe Aleman from the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Antoni van 
Leeuwenhoekhuis, who spent much time and effort in the con­
struction of the oesophagus network.
