Expectation Learning for Adaptive
Crossmodal Stimuli Association
Pablo Barros1, German I. Parisi1, Di Fu2,3, Xun Liu2,3, and Stefan Wermter1
1Knowledge Technology, Department of Informatics, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany
2CAS Key Laboratory of Behavioral Science, Institute of Psychology, Beijing, China
3Department of Psychology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Abstract—The human brain is able to learn, generalize, and
predict crossmodal stimuli. Learning by expectation ﬁne-tunes
crossmodal processing at different levels, thus enhancing our
power of generalization and adaptation in highly dynamic en-
vironments. In this paper, we propose a deep neural architecture
trained by using expectation learning accounting for unsuper-
vised learning tasks. Our learning model exhibits a self-adaptable
behavior, setting the ﬁrst steps towards the development of deep
learning architectures for crossmodal stimuli association.
I. INTRODUCTION
Crossmodal processing is one of the characteristics of the
human brain which is necessary for understanding the world
around us. The meaningful processing of crossmodal informa-
tion allows us to enhance our perceptual experience [1] also
for unisensory stimuli [2], to solve associative incongruence
and conﬂicts [3], and to learn new concepts [4].
Computational models for crossmodal learning have been
proposed in the past to enhance tasks such as classiﬁcation,
regression, and prediction. Most of these models propose
solutions for crossmodal fusion at an early [5] or late stage [6],
[7], e.g., by using crossmodal representations to increase the
level of abstraction for a perception task. However, these mod-
els typically rely on individual and independent mechanisms
for processing unimodal representations where modalities do
not inﬂuence each other [8], [9]. Neurophysiological ﬁndings
evidence that different brain regions are activated and com-
municating with each other also when processing unisensory
information [10]. The development of computational models
that use brain-inspired principles for crossmodal processing
may lead to more robust perception and interaction mecha-
nisms in complex crossmodal environments.
In addition to the interaction between modality-speciﬁc
regions, the brain also ﬁne-tunes information using what is
known as the expectation effect [11]. While we are looking
at an object, we are also estimating thousands of comparisons
and clustering with similar and different objects that we have
seen before. An even stronger effect of learning by expecta-
tion occurs with crossmodal information. When looking to a
woman, one already expects to hear a female voice when she
speaks [12]. This also causes an overﬁtting behavior when
we have experienced very few examples in our lives: if we
grew up near an opera house and never heard any other music
style, every time we see a live show we would expect the
singer to sing an opera. This is an important effect of learning
as once we realize that there is an incongruence between
what we expect and what really occurs, e.g. when the singer
suddenly starts to sing death metal and not opera, we learn
a novel association [13]. Such a learning process, referred to
as learning by expectation, makes us experts in associating
concepts in an unsupervised way and using the difference of
what was expected and what was perceived as a modulatory
effect for learning new concepts.
In this paper, we introduce the use of a deep neural structure
for crossmodal associative learning based on expectation. We
evaluate our model on a crossmodal person identiﬁcation task
using visual and auditory information. The proposed model is
composed of two channels, one to process each modality and
composed of a series of convolution and pooling layers able to
learn a low-dimensional representation of high-level abstract
data. We use a self-organizing network to learn concurrent
events for the two modalities. Additionally, each channel is
paired with a reconstruction channel that can reconstruct the
high-level input stimuli by using the low-dimensional speciﬁc
representation. In contrast to conventional deep learning mod-
els, our model is trained entirely in an unsupervised fashion
and has a continuous learning behavior. In other words, we
do not rely on a large amount of data for learning and we
also exhibit a self-adaptive behavior for the application of our
learning model in real-world scenarios.
II. EXPECTATION LEARNING MODEL
The proposed model is composed of two modality channels:
one to learn facial features and the other to learn vocal
characteristics. Each of these channels has two columns of
convolution and pooling layers: one for perception and one
for expectation. In the visual channel, the perception column is
composed of three convolution layers, each of them followed
by a pooling layer. At the end, we have a fully connected
layer, representing the low-dimensional visual perception. The
visual expectation column starts with a fully connected layer,
with the same concept as in the perception column. We then
proceed to have a similar structure as the visual perception
column, but inverted. That means that instead of pooling, we
use up-sampling operations to expand the dimensions of the
information. In the end, we have an extra convolution layer
with 3 ﬁlters to generate an RGB image.
arXiv:1801.07654v1  [cs.LG]  23 Jan 2018

Fig. 1. Proposed model for crossmodal learning. The model has two modality-
speciﬁc channels which have a perception and expectation columnn. We
use a self-organizing co-occurrence association model to create prototype
crossmodal neurons which will be used to generate expected stimuli.
Our auditory channel has a similar structure, with also
two columns: perception and expectation. The perception
column has three convolution layers. Each of these layers is
followed by a max-pooling operator. This column has a fully
connected layer that represents our low-dimensional auditory
representation. We use 1 s of audio which is pre-processed
using a 25 ms Hamming window with a stride of 20 ms and we
produce a spectrogram using a log-Fourier transform with 40
Mel scale coefﬁcients, producing a 100x40 spectrogram. The
expectation column follows the same structure but inverted as
in the visual column. We also make use of the subsampling
instead of the max-pooling to expand the dimensionality of
the data.
Each of the channels is connected to an unsupervised layer
trained as a self-organizing map. This layer represents our
co-occurrence association and is trained using both visual
and auditory low-dimensional representation as input. We
concatenate both representations and train the co-occurrence
layer for each forward pass of the network. This allows us
to create prototype neurons which will encode the crossmodal
representation even when only one modality is present. All
of our max-pooling layers have a dimension of 2x2. Figure 1
shows the proposed model and architecture.
To train the co-occurrence layer, we ﬁrst do a forward pass
in the network to generate low-dimensional stimuli represen-
tations. Then, we train the co-occurrence association using
the concatenated stimuli as input. For not biasing this layer
towards representing the latest stimuli, we make use of a replay
memory. This memory stores the 50 last forward passes. This
helps to maintain the state of the self-organizing map based on
previous stimuli and helps it to forget outliers. If an association
is incongruent, but still present in the input data, it will be
made fewer times than congruent associations and thus will
be removed from the replay memory after a number of passes.
We proceed to train this layer for 100 epochs for each forward
pass using the whole replay memory as input.
Finally, to train the visual and auditory channels, we use
an adversarial learning approach. Once we perform a forward
pass, we use the best-matching unit of the co-occurrence layer
to retrieve two low-dimensional representations: one visual and
one auditory. We use this as input to both expectation models.
Each expectation model will generate an expected stimulus.
We then proceed to calculate the training loss which will be
used to train our model, using the approach based on the
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) objective.
The Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) objective train-
ing can be explained as a generalization of our expectation
learning. In GAN learning, the two entities, the discriminator
and the generator are trained together to learn how to distin-
guish fake and original data and to generate indistinguishable
fake data, respectively. One of the common problems of such
models is the stabilization of the discriminator as the generator
starts to learn how to copy the input data. The use of auto-
encoders as discriminative/generative models was introduced
and achieved better stabilization than traditional GANs [14],
speciﬁcally because of the use of the auto-encoder loss to
train the model instead of the categorical fake/not fake error.
Our model uses the concept of a generative auto-encoder. The
perception column can be explained as an encoding network
and the expectation model as a decoding one.
Recent work on generative auto-encoders propose the use
of the Wasserstein distance between the loss of the auto-
encoder reconstruction for real and generated data as a loss
function [15]. Our approach uses a similar concept but instead
of using the loss of an auto-encoder reconstruction, we use
the Wasserstein distance between a perceived stimuli and an
expected one. Due to the process of co-occurrence association,
the expected stimuli can be reconstructed also when only one
modality is present. This allows us to train both channels even
when only one channel is perceived by using the unimodal
expectation error.
III. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
We evaluated our model using a crossmodal person iden-
tiﬁcation task. We use the Enterface05 audio-visual chal-
lenge database [16] which contains recordings of 44 different
subjects which are speaking phrases in different emotion
intonations. Each subject has 5 examples of each of the 6
emotional intonations, for a total of 30 videos with a frame rate
of 25 frames per second. We feed our network using always
1 s of audio and 1 frame which is randomly chosen from the
25 frames.
We trained our model with two different strategies: ﬁrst, we
trained the model with 70% of the data of each subject and
proceed to evaluate if the model recognizes the person using
the other 30 % of the data. We proceeded with experiments
with unimodal and multimodal stimuli. In the second strategy,
we pre-trained the model with 20 subjects. We then proceeded
to evaluate how the model learns the association of a new

TABLE I
UNIMODAL AND CROSSMODAL ACCURACY AND STANDARD DEVIATION
FOR THE FIRST TRAINING STRATEGY: TRAINING THE CROSSMODAL
NETWORK FOR PERSON IDENTIFICATION.
Auditory
Visual
Crossmodal
91.4 % (2.1)
95.3 % (2.2)
98.2 % (1.5)
Fig. 2. Expectation error over time learning a new audio-visual stimulus for
each channel.
subject. This was done by analyzing the expectation error over
time to see how it behaves while the network is learning a new
association. For this purpose, we used a 6-second video with
a subject which was not present in the training set.
For a proper evaluation, we used the person re-identiﬁcation
architecture by Ahmed et al. [17]. This implementation uses
multi-channel convolution layers to identify if two persons
used as input are the same or not. We slightly modiﬁed the
architecture using our auditory channel topology to make an
auditory identiﬁcation. As a baseline, training this network
with the same data distribution as our ﬁrst training strategy
obtained an accuracy of 98% for vision and 96% for audio.
For this experiment, we calculated the reconstructed prediction
based on crossmodal and unimodal stimuli. The results of the
ﬁrst experiment are listed in Table I.
The expectation error over time for a new subject is exhib-
ited in Figure 2. It is possible to see that the error for the visual
expectation decreases faster than the auditory one although the
auditory expectation error is lower as the ﬁrst second is fed
to the network. That means that the network associated better
auditory characteristics than visual ones at ﬁrst but later the
visual channel learns faster. An interesting behavior is that
the loss of the auditory stimulus grows after the third epoch,
which could be explained by the update of the co-occurrence
layer that is adapting to the new visual stimulus faster than
the auditory one.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper shows the ﬁrst steps towards the development
of a deep neural network for learning crossmodal stimuli
association via expectation learning. Our network is trained
fully unsupervised and adapts some characteristics of ad-
versarial learning to simulate the expectation effect present
in the human brain. We stress the importance of having a
self-adaptive learning model which does not rely on labeled
training data. Here, we showed preliminary experiments for
a person identiﬁcation task with unimodal and crossmodal
stimuli and showed the behavior of the network when learning
novel associations.
The proposed model does not take into consideration the
crossmodal expectation error during training which can be
modulated by unimodal stimuli. We are planning to use uni-
modal stimuli as modulatory feedback for crossmodal learning
which would improve the stability of the model and its power
of generalization. We are also exploring the use of plasticity
strategies for our unsupervised co-occurrence layer which can
improve the learning capabilities of the network, currently
limited by the topology of the self-organizing layer.
