Toddler-Guidance Learning: Impacts of Critical Period on
Multimodal AI Agents
Junseok Park
Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
Kwanyoung Park
Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
Hyunseok Oh
Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
Ganghun Lee
Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
Minsu Lee
AIIS, Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
Youngki Lee
Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
Byoung-Tak Zhang
AIIS, Seoul National University
Seoul, Republic of Korea
ABSTRACT
Critical periods are phases during which a toddler’s brain develops
in spurts. To promote children’s cognitive development, proper
guidance is critical in this stage. However, it is not clear whether
such a critical period also exists for the training of AI agents. Simi-
lar to human toddlers, well-timed guidance and multimodal inter-
actions might significantly enhance the training efficiency of AI
agents as well. To validate this hypothesis, we adapt this notion of
critical periods to learning in AI agents and investigate the critical
period in the virtual environment for AI agents. We formalize the
critical period and Toddler-guidance learning in the reinforcement
learning (RL) framework. Then, we built up a toddler-like envi-
ronment with VECA toolkit to mimic human toddlers’ learning
characteristics. We study three discrete levels of mutual interaction:
weak-mentor guidance (sparse reward), moderate mentor guidance
(helper-reward), and mentor demonstration (behavioral cloning).
We also introduce the EAVE dataset consisting of 30,000 real-world
images to fully reflect the toddler’s viewpoint. We evaluate the
impact of critical periods on AI agents from two perspectives: how
and when they are guided best in both uni- and multimodal learn-
ing. Our experimental results show that both uni- and multimodal
agents with moderate mentor guidance and critical period on 1
million and 2 million training steps show a noticeable improve-
ment. We validate these results with transfer learning on the EAVE
dataset and find the performance advancement on the same critical
period and the guidance.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Generative and developmen-
tal approaches; Sequential decision making; Transfer learn-
ing; Neural networks.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

ICMI ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Montréal, QC, Canada
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8481-0/21/10...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3462244.3479932
Figure 1: Overall approach to testing the critical period. We
first trained the agent for 1/2/3/4 million frames only with
sparse rewards. We then continued training the agent with
guidance (helper-reward, behavior cloning) or without guid-
ance (sparse reward) for an additional 2 million frames.
KEYWORDS
Reinforcement Learning; Toddler Object Learning; Virtual Environ-
ment for Cognitive Agents; Guidance
ACM Reference Format:
Junseok Park, Kwanyoung Park, Hyunseok Oh, Ganghun Lee, Minsu Lee,
Youngki Lee, and Byoung-Tak Zhang. 2021. Toddler-Guidance Learning:
Impacts of Critical Period on Multimodal AI Agents. In Proceedings of the
2021 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (ICMI ’21), October
18–22, 2021, Montréal, QC, Canada. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3462244.3479932
1
INTRODUCTION
Mentor guidance is critical in the early stages of cognitive develop-
ment. Learning in the child stage significantly influences learning-
to-learn capabilities like goal-setting and self-control [56]. For this
reason, parent-child interaction is crucial in the overall cognitive
arXiv:2201.04990v1  [cs.LG]  12 Jan 2022

ICMI ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Montréal, QC, Canada
Junseok Park, Kwanyoung Park, Hyunseok Oh, Ganghun Lee, Minsu Lee, Youngki Lee, and Byoung-Tak Zhang
development process, including linguistics and object understand-
ing [28]. Adequate supervision in the early stages of learning is
also important for machine learning (ML), as the sample efficiency
of supervised learning is in general much higher than that of un-
supervised approaches [26]. Prior works have investigated diverse
forms of guided learning on ML agents such as distillation [2], im-
itation learning, weakly-supervised RL [23]. However, there has
been limited cross-domain research to find an optimal guidance
strategy for a given task.
In this work, we are inspired by the concept of critical periods
in the infant-toddler learning, a specific period in which the acqui-
sition of language and visual/auditory processing capabilities are
highly accelerated [10, 16, 21, 22, 34, 40, 41], and we explore the
question, "does such a critical period also exist for machine learning
(ML) agents?". In particular, we aim to identify the optimal guidance
during training on a certain task, and study the correspondence
between the optimal duration of guidance in ML algorithms and the
critical period in human learning. This study is significant in that
the optimal guidance strategy for a task can significantly enhance
the training efficiency of the ML model.
To this end, we define and empirically study the optimal initial
time of mentor guidance as the counterpart of the critical period
in AI agents. To do this we formulate a reward structure that is
variable through the training iterations, in terms of the Partially
Observable Markov Decision Process(POMDP) in RL framework.
We then formalize mentor guidance as a policy-invariant mutable
reward structure on a given task. Finally, we formally define the
optimal initial time of mentor guidance, and study it as the AI
agent’s equivalent to the critical period seen in toddlers.
Our key finding from experiments is that reinforcement learn-
ing agents indeed have a critical period much like toddlers in the
moderate guidance learning setting. To demonstrate this, we have
implemented guidance inside the VECA [29] virtual environment in
a multimodal agent RL framework to model mentor guidance. First,
we have modeled learning-through-play of toddlers with an object
navigation RL task using VECA. Second, we introduce the EAVE
dataset, a real-world image and audio dataset accurately reflecting
the toddler’s point of view. For our experiments, we have imposed
three levels of guidance as seen in Fig 2: weak-mentor guidance
(sparse reward), moderate mentor guidance (helper-reward), and
mentor demonstration (behavioral cloning) and we adjust these
guidances and their duration to find the best-performing setting.
Our studies on unimodal and multi-modal RL agents show that the
critical period has appeared only when the toddler agent has mod-
erate guidance while learning. Moreover, we validate our results
using the EAVE dataset via transfer learning. Results confirm that
the models trained on their appropriate critical period (1M&2M
iterations) noticeably outperform the models trained after (3M&4M
iterations) their critical period.
To summarize, this paper’s contributions are threefold:
• We use a policy-invariant mutable reward structure to for-
mulate the human toddler’s critical period in an ML model,
especially the multimodal humanoid RL agent we developed.
• We construct a multimodal Navigation RL task and a real-
world EAVE dataset that can effectively demonstrate the
critical period in a multimodal RL agent.
Figure 2: Three types of guidance. (a) Weak-Mentor Guid-
ance (green) and Moderate-Mentor Guidance (blue) use a re-
ward bonus method based on RL. (b) Mentor demonstration
(red) use behavioral cloning (Imitation Learning)
• We empirically study the critical period in a unimodal and
multimodal RL task with four different periods: 1/2/3/4 mil-
lion training iterations. Agent trained in a critical period
outperforms others significantly with proper guidance. Fur-
thermore, the performance advantage transfers well to the
real-world downstream task.
2
RELATED WORKS
Curriculum Learning [4, 9, 31, 37, 44, 50] is an easy-to-hard train-
ing strategy in ML that gradually increases the complexity of the
data samples used during the training process [43]. Humans learn
the easy and preliminary concepts sooner and the difficult and ad-
vanced concepts later. Moreover, humans learn much better when
the examples are not randomly presented but are organized in a
meaningful order [13, 43]. Curriculum learning applies a similar
strategy for ML model training, and achieves two major advantages:
faster convergence and better performance. There is a number of
domains including face recognition [24], object segmentation [55]
and reinforcement learning [46] in which curriculum learning has
been successfully applied. However, using curriculum learning does
not always benefit performance. It requires careful design of the
difficulty hierarchy before training. For instance, the diversity of the
data samples may be restricted if the task difficulty measure prefers
choosing easy examples only from a small subset of classes [42, 43].
An approach diametrical to easy-to-hard curriculum learning, that
is emphasizing harder examples as in hard example mining [18, 39]
or anti-curriculum learning [7, 32], can achieve improved results
in some cases.
ML researchers have recently taken interest in ideas from child
learning further technical advances [3, 36, 49, 51, 52]. Learning
properly in a child stage is crucial for learning-to-learn capabilities
like goal-setting and self-control [48, 56]. Life experiences and prior
knowledge learned in one’s childhood are known to influence adult
learning as well. The latest works in deep learning like visual object
learning [3] are inspired by the way children learn. Achille et al. [1]
is the first work to show that deep artificial neural networks also
exhibit critical periods like humans, a decisive time window for the
post-natal developmental stage. In deep neural network training, a
rapid growth in information is followed by a reduction of informa-
tion from an analysis with Fisher Information. Unfortunately, their
analysis is limited to supervised learning in convolution neural

Toddler-Guidance Learning: Impacts of Critical Period on Multimodal AI Agents
ICMI ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Montréal, QC, Canada
networks (CNNs), and not executed on either RL or multimodal
setup. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first attempt
to apply the toddler’s developmental characteristic of humans to
effective RL training. We aim to understand how the functionality
and learning-to-learn capabilities are nurtured through appropriate
supervision.
Several works in developmental psychology note that more guid-
ance does not mean better human development. A general under-
standing of objects develops in an early stage of toddler learn-
ing with weak supervision as well as through interactions like
mouthing, chewing, and rotating [14, 33]. Furthermore, teaching
formal subjects too early for a child is counterproductive in the
long run [45]. Inspired by human toddler learning, we conjecture
that there is also a form of optimal supervision and an optimal
time period for RL training of intelligent machines. We empirically
search for a type of guidance that accelerates the training, but does
not change the optimal policy of the environment.
3
METHOD
Reinforcement Learning. Reinforcement learning (RL) is a frame-
work for experience-driven autonomous learning [46] in which an
agent interacts with the environment to learn optimal behaviour,
improving over time through trial and error [2]. Upon observing
the consequent state, an agent learns to alter its policy in response
to received rewards. The environment in RL is typically assumed
to be a Markov Decision Process (MDP). MDP is memoryless; the
conditional probability of the next state and reward are stochasti-
cally determined only from the current state and action, and do not
depend on the past [38].
3.1
Guidance in a POMDP
In social psychology, a social behavior or social action is a behav-
ior that affects the other person and provokes a response [17, 47].
A general social interaction sequence is defined as a sequence of
a person acting toward another (under the expectation), and the
other acting towards the person in response (under the interpre-
tation) [11]. Guided learning, or mentor guidance, can be defined
as a process in which learners achieve their learning goal with the
supervision of a more experienced mentor [5].
Inspired by these psychological discoveries, we formalize the
notion of Guidance in the context of Partially Observable Markov
Decision Process (POMDP). We find it analogous of a person as an
agent, and an effect of the behavior as a change in the observation.
Partially-observable Markov decision processes (POMDP) extend
RL frameworks so that an agent observes only part of the world
state [12]. A POMDP is a 7-tuple ⟨𝑆,𝐴,𝑇, 𝑅, Ω,𝑂,𝛾⟩consisting of:
𝑆, a set of possible states; 𝐴, a set of actions; 𝑇, a set of transition
probabilities; 𝑅, a reward function 𝑅(𝑠,𝑎) for a state 𝑠and action 𝑎;
Ω, a set of possible observations,𝑂, a set of observation probabilities
𝑜(𝑠,𝑎) = 𝑃𝑟(𝑜|𝑎,𝑠) for given state 𝑠and action 𝑎; and 𝛾a discount
factor. We extend this to include a no-op action (do nothing) in the
action space as 𝐴′ = 𝐴Ð{𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑝}.
3.1.1
Mutable Reward Structure. Mutable reward structure is a
reward function that is variable under number of iterations. Since
MDP is memoryless, the state should incorporate the number of
training iteration as a reference. Suppose the state consists of (𝑠,𝑡)
where 𝑡∈N is the training iteration. The reward structure ˜𝑅is
mutable if such state 𝑠∈𝑆, action 𝑎∈𝐴exists.
˜𝑅((𝑠,𝑡),𝑎) ≠˜𝑅((𝑠,𝑡+ 1),𝑎)
(1)
The mutable reward structure is dependent on the past, so the prop-
erties under the MDP do not hold anymore. However, the policy
is invariant [27] if two MDPs become graph-isomorphic after a
positive linear transformation 𝑓: R →R is applied between corre-
sponding weights. Policy invariance also holds when the reward
structure is a potential-based shaping function. Reward structure
morphing to a policy-invariant MDP preserves the optimal policy,
and the value of the current policy. We further define such reward
function as a policy-invariant mutable reward structure.
3.1.2
Mentor Guidance. Mentor guidance can be interpreted as a
policy-invariant mutable reward structure that efficiently trains
the learner (mentee). Parent-child interaction, one of the major
mentor guidance in human, is a special form of interaction which
establishes a strong bond between the parent and the child and
greatly facilitates the cognitive development of a child [28]. The
parent agent observes the child’s state and has interactions with
the child to optimize the child’s ability on various tasks. It shows
that continuous care and guidance of mentor can hugely facillitate
the mentee’s performance. Motivated by it, we investigate a specific
case of policy-invariant mutable reward structure, e.g. helper re-
ward, aiming to optimize the learner’s performance. We also study
the behavior cloning, a mutable reward structure that the policy
invariance is not known. The guidance 𝐺𝑇on a task 𝑇is defined as
a reward structure 𝐺𝑇= ˜𝑅𝑇(𝑠,𝑎) where 𝑠∈𝑆, 𝑎∈𝐴with agents
performance metric as 𝐽𝑇.
3.2
Critical Period
Critical periods are maturational stages in the lifespan of humans
that act as decisive period of learning in a particular learning do-
main as human grow up [16]. The critical period for the develop-
ment of the human visual system is considered to be between three
and eight months [34]. Other critical periods have also been identi-
fied for the development of hearing and the vestibular system [6, 21].
Besides, critical periods for language acquisition indicate that the
first few years of life constitute the time during which language
develops readily, and after which language acquisition is much
more difficult. [40] To sum up, critical period stands for the effec-
tive initiation time for supervising the cognitive development after
birth. We can see the correspondence between the critical period
of a toddler and the morphing of a reward structure. In this work,
we seek the critical period of an ML agent. We empirically search
whether the initial morphing period of best guidance is finite, and
can be reached in a reasonable number of training iterations.
3.3
Optimal Guidance as a Critical Period
3.3.1
Initial Time of Guidance. For human, the parent’s guidance
initiates from the beginning of the child’s life. For the machine
intelligence however, the guidance should persist only for a certain
period for a learner to solve the task and learn on their own. We
model this characteristic to the RL setting. Given the guidance, the
reward morphing starts from an initial time 𝑡𝐺and continues only
for a certain amount of time. The guidance resets from this point on.

ICMI ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Montréal, QC, Canada
Junseok Park, Kwanyoung Park, Hyunseok Oh, Ganghun Lee, Minsu Lee, Youngki Lee, and Byoung-Tak Zhang
Object Finding Query
(One-Hot Encoding)
(b) Transfer Learning
Image Classification
“Teddy Bear”
Real-World Observation
Linear Regression
Interaction
Feature Maps
3136
256
84
84
6
20
20
32
9
9
64
7
64
8
8
4
4
3
7
CNNs
MLP
⋰
⋰
⋰
(a) Training Process
Linear proj.
Masking 
𝜋𝑎𝑠
𝑄(𝑠, 𝑎)
7
3136
256
CNNs
MLP
Interaction
Feature Maps
VECA Visual Observation
(Binocular Eyesight)
84
84
6
20
20
32
7
64
8 8
4
4
3
7
9
9
64
3
500
256
MLP
Right-Ear HRTF
Flatten
𝑅∈500
Left-Ear HRTF
250
250
1
1
𝐿𝐶𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑐
𝐿𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟
MLP
512
512
Right-Eye(RGB channel)
512
256
5
VECA  Audio 
Observation
(3D spatialized audio)
512
1
Left-Eye(RGB channel)
Figure 3: Architecture of the baby agent. (a) Its visual observation is encoded as a feature map from the CNN encoder, and
the audio observation is encoded with an MLP encoder. These feature maps are concatenated and linearly combined to make
an interaction feature map. It is masked with a linearly projected object embedding and fed to an MLP, which outputs the
Q-function 𝑄(𝑠,𝑎) and movement policy 𝜋(𝑎|𝑠). (b) We validate helper models in another relevant task via transfer learning
We denote the initial morphing time of the guidance as 𝑡𝐺. So for a
series of learning episodes {𝐸𝐺
𝑖} with guidance𝐺and their duration
{𝑡𝑖}, the time interval of guidance lies in [𝑡𝐺,𝑡𝐺+Í
𝑖𝑡𝑖]. This raises
the question: What is the optimal initial period of guidance for the
learner’s performance?
3.3.2
Optimal Guidance. We can define an optimal guidance policy
on a set of guidance reward structures {𝐺𝑗} as the one which results
in the best performance with their optimal initial morphing time.
Suppose the 𝐽𝑇(𝜋𝜃) is the performance of policy parameter 𝜃on
task 𝑇, and Pr(𝜃|𝐺,𝑡𝐺) is a trained policy distribution under the
guidance 𝑅= 𝐺∈{𝐺𝑗} and its duration 𝑡𝐺. The optimal guidance
can be defined as the guidance and its initial morphing period tuple
(𝐺∗,𝑡∗
𝐺) providing the best performance on a specific task 𝑇.
(𝐺∗,𝑡∗
𝐺) = arg max
𝐺,𝑡𝐺

max
𝜃∼𝑃𝑟(𝜃|𝐺,𝑡𝐺) E𝜋𝜃
 𝐽𝑇(𝜋𝜃)
(2)
3.4
Transfer Learning
Transfer learning aims to help improve learning of some task in
the target domain using knowledge learned from the source do-
main [53]. Transfer learning is used for few-shot learning on new
datasets or in previously unseen domains both to reduce training
effort and to transfer some of the knowledge and inductive biases
acquired during training in the source domain. One recent work
modeled learning-through-play of a toddler by training a Deep
Neural Network (DNN) model in a RL framework and transfer this
model to a different domain to evaluate it in terms of visual object
understanding [30]. They aim to acquire a general understanding
of objects by exploring the environment and actively interacting
with the objects, as a toddler does.
Hyperparameter
Candidate values
Optimal value
𝛼(entropy coefficient)
{0.003, 0.01, 0.03}
0.01
Learning rate
{0.0001, 0.0003, 0.001}
0.0003
𝛾(discount factor)
{0.95, 0.99}
0.99
Table 1: Tuned hyperparameters used in SAC.
4
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
4.1
Implementation Details
We designed the architecture of the agent as seen in Fig. 3 (a) to
learn and store transferable knowledge. We used Soft Actor-Critic
(SAC) [15] to train the agent. In particular, we used 8 workers and
updated the parameter per 256 steps with batch size 512 using the
replay buffer size of 20,000. Other important hyperparameters of
SAC are tuned as shown in Table. 1.
Visual observations of the agent are encoded using a Convolu-
tional Neural Network (CNN) encoder and an Multi-Layer Percep-
tron (MLP), resulting in interaction feature maps. These features
are masked with a linearly embedded representation of the object
and determine the action of the agent. Since the agent’s movement
only depends on masked features, the agent must learn to represent
abstract features of its observation corresponding to the target ob-
ject. Then the visual feature extractor of the agent is transferred to
the EAVE dataset and learned with the Adam [19] gradient descent
optimizer. We trained the network on a server with Ubuntu 18.04
LTS, Xeon Gold 5128 Scalable CPU and six RTX3090 GPUs.
4.2
Interactive Virtual Environment
We implemented an interactive virtual environment supporting
toddler-like visual observations and active physical interaction
with objects, to train and evaluate guidance on different levels

Toddler-Guidance Learning: Impacts of Critical Period on Multimodal AI Agents
ICMI ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Montréal, QC, Canada
Figure 4: VECA engine characteristics. Unlike other existing
RL environments, we trained the toddler AI agents in a set-
ting endowed with various human features and characteris-
tics (e.g. binocular vision).
and for different durations. We used VECA toolkit [29], a virtual
environment generation toolkit for human-like agents, to build the
toddler-guidance learning environment. In particular, we leveraged
a toddler AI agent to be a humanoid avatar including several human
characteristics: 1) binocular vision, 2) 3D spatialized audio, 3) mesh-
based tactiles, 4) joint-level physics, 5) objective interaction, and
a 6) realistic collider as seen in Fig. 4. The concept of the critical
period was founded on human learning. Therefore, we believe that
a humanoid agent is able to more precisely learn from observations
than most of the existing RL environment agents, which don’t
reflect the human features for testing the critical period [8, 20, 35,
54]. The agent’s goal is to learn the ability to visually locate distant
objects, which are the same 10 objects as in the EAVE real-world
dataset seen in Fig. 5 (b), while freely exploring and observing
nearby objects as seen in Fig 6 (b) and (c). The environment’s
reward structure is modified to implement the different levels and
durations of guidance. We aim to observe the influence of guidance
on establishing a profound visual understanding of an object during
the RL stage.
4.3
EAVE Dataset Collection
We have collected an Egocentric Audio-Visual Exploration Dataset
for Unsupervised Alignment Learning (EAVE dataset) in order to
approximate everyday images observed by toddlers. Most existing
visual image datasets [25] do not take into account how humans
actually perceive the input, meaning their “first-person” perspective,
thus they cannot fully capture the features of real human-visual
input. In particular, the way toddlers perceive the world has two
main unique aspects: 1) in the input observed by toddlers objects
occupy a relatively larger size compared to an adult’s view of the
scene (so the image has a much higher resolution); 2) the world is
observed by toddlers from a larger variety of different angles than by
adults [3]. To complement the aforementioned characteristics of the
toddler’s point of view, we used 10 toys in red, green and blue (for
a total of 30 objects) as can be seen in Fig. 5 (a) and collected 30,000
images using a depth camera. Because toddlers do not typically
see only a single object in real-world environments, each image
includes three objects much like the “real-world observations” from
Fig. 5 (a). We are attempting to collect the image perspectives by
assuming the baby’s point of view from a variety of angles Fig. 5 (c).
Figure 5: (a) Example of visual images with bounding boxes
and the 10 objects used in the EAVE dataset, (b) The same
10 objects in the Virtual Environment (VECA), (c) The EAVE
visual dataset includes egocentric images from the toddler’s
POV at various angles.
Moreover, each image has one main object which has the baby’s
attention. For each image, we label the bounding box information
of the three objects and the main object such that it is possible to
crop each object individually as a single-object image. Note that
the EAVE dataset is only used for transfer learning experiments in
the Study 3.
Figure 6: Various viewpoints of our 3D environment. (a)
Developed 3D-toddler playroom Environment top view, (b)
Third-person point of view, (c) First-person point of view of
a toddler agent while learning the objects.
4.4
Study 1: Examining the impact of the level
of interaction in unimodal learning
The purpose of study1 is to compare the performance of the agent
in a visual (unimodal) environment trained with various start times
(for a fixed duration of guidance) and mutual interaction in the
form of guidance, and find if there exists a critical period for each
mutual interaction. To observe the effect of mutual interaction, we
designed the procedure of the experiment as shown in the left side
of Fig. 3. We first trained the agent for 1/2/3/4 million frames only
with sparse rewards. For each pre-trained agent, we then continued
training the agent with guidance (helper-reward, behavior cloning)
or without guidance for 2 million frames as seen in Fig 1.

ICMI ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Montréal, QC, Canada
Junseok Park, Kwanyoung Park, Hyunseok Oh, Ganghun Lee, Minsu Lee, Youngki Lee, and Byoung-Tak Zhang
Figure 7: Performance of the agents during the guidance. Vertical axis indicates the average reward while the gray dotted
line indicates average reward of the ideal policy (0.069/0.028 and 0.077/0.031 for unimodal and multimodal environment
with/without helper reward). Horizontal axis indicates the number of frames that the guidance is provided. Agents guided
with helper-reward show a remarkable difference in the performance. Agents guided with behavior-cloning improves, but the
difference is negligible. Without guidance, agents fail to improve. For helper-reward in multi-modal environment, we used
two seeds to ensure that the result is not by the randomness of training. For other experiments, we used single seed.
4.4.1
Task Design. We designed an object-finding task to train the
agent in the virtual environment. We used the VECA [29] toolkit to
implement and built up an interactive 3D environment that includes
ten objects (of the same categories as in the EAVE dataset) and a
baby agent. For each episode, two objects are colored randomly (in
red, green, blue) and randomly placed with the agent in the square
room with length of 18 units, with the distance of at least 4 units
for each other as seen in Fig 6 (a). The agent receives the reward
+1 for reaching the target object, and receives -1 for reaching the
wrong object. We say that the agent reached the object if the agent
is looking towards the object and the distance is less than 2.5 units.
Note that the distance is necessary because the object, which is on
the floor, will disappear from the eyesight if it gets closer since the
agent can’t move its head vertically. The maximum length of each
episode is 256. The agent receives RGB 84x84 binocular vision and
receives the information about the target object as a 10-dimensional
one-hot vector. The agent can walk around the environment with
maximum speed of 0.33 units per frame, which is represented by
two continuous action variables 𝑎𝑓(within [0, 1], forward walking
speed) and 𝑎𝑟(within [-1, 1], direction of walking).
Please note that this task is not easy to solve with SAC without
guidance. First, random (maximum-entropy) actions in this envi-
ronment are likely to lead the agent to head into the wall, which
fills most of the replay buffer with unhelpful data. Moreover, the
agent has to learn color- and perspective-independent features of
the object since the object is placed and colored randomly. Also, the
presence of a wrong object requires the agent not only to navigate
to the target object, but also to avoid the wrong object.
This reward function (3) encourages the agent to look towards
the object, visually recognize it, and move towards the object.
4.4.2
Design of guidance. For moderate mentor guidance, we gave
the agent helper reward formulated as follows:
𝑟
′ =


−0.03𝑎𝑓
If target is out of eyesight
0.05𝑎𝑟+ 0.03𝑎𝑓
If target is left of eyesight
−0.05𝑎𝑟+ 0.03𝑎𝑓
If target is right of eyesight
(3)
For mentor demonstration, we set the mentor’s policy according
to its visual information. In particular, if the target object is out of
eyesight then the agent turns right to find the object. If the target
object is in its eyesight then the agent walks forward and turns
slightly left/right if the object is on the right/left side of eyesight.
4.4.3
Results. For guidance from helper-rewards, we found that
there exists a noticeable difference in performance depending on
the time from which the guidance is provided as shown in Fig.
7(1)(a). For convenience, we denote 𝑛M-helper as the model that is
trained with helper reward guidance starting from 𝑛million frames.
In detail, the 2M-helper had much higher average reward (0.03) than
the other agents (0.00/-0.01/-0.01 for 1M/3M/4M). This shows that
a critical regime indeed exists for guidance from helper-rewards in
the object-finding task. Note that for guidance from helper-rewards,
helper reward is included when calculating the reward plotted in
Fig. 7(1)(a) so the reward is negative on the early stage. Fig. 8(1)(a)
compares the trajectories of the agents, visually showing that the
policy of the 2M-helper performs better than the other agents.

Toddler-Guidance Learning: Impacts of Critical Period on Multimodal AI Agents
ICMI ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Montréal, QC, Canada
Figure 8: Visualization of the trajectory for each agent’s policy in unimodal and multimodal environments. Blue dots represent
starting points of the agents. Green/red dots and circles represent the target/wrong object and the boundary for reaching it
respectively. Note that the agent has to get inside the boundary and also face towards the object to clear the task.
However, we found that there was no remarkable difference
between the performance for behavior-cloning. As shown in Fig.
7(1)(b), the average rewards are similar (around 0.01) for all agents.
These agents learned how to navigate to the target object, but could
not learn how to avoid the wrong object as shown in Fig. 8(1)(b).
Without guidance, the agent was unable to learn to solve the
task properly as shown in Fig. 7(1)(c) and Fig. 8(1)(c). Compared to
the results with guidance, these experiments show that guidance
does aid in the agents’ learning process.
4.5
Study 2: Examining the impact of the level
of interaction in multimodal learning
The purpose of study2 is to examine the effect of interaction in
a multimodal environment and observe how the modality of the
agent affected its performance and the critical period. To do so,
we modified the object-finding task in Study 1 to an audio-visual
task. Specifically, each object has its unique sound and makes this
sound during the whole episode. Since the audio observation of the
agent is 3D-spatialized, the agent can recognize the direction of
each sound source. Thus, we expect that this task would be easier
than Study 1, but still challenging since the agent has to learn the
relation between the object and the sound. Other detailed setups
about the learning process and guidance are identical to Study 1.
4.5.1
Results. Similar to Study 1, we find that there exists a notice-
able difference in performance for guidance from helper-rewards,
as shown in Fig. 7(2)(a). This shows that a critical regime also exists
for guidance from helper-rewards in the multimodal object-finding
task. However, the critical regime differed from Study 1: the 1M-
and 2M-helper had much higher average reward (0.046 and 0.050)
than 3M-(0.02), 4M-(0.02) agents. Fig. 8(2)(a) compares the trajecto-
ries of the agents, visually showing that the policy of the 1M- and
2M-helper performs better than the other agents. We observed that
the agent majorly uses the audio to get the direction of the object,
so it turns right/left even if the object is slightly left/right, which
results in wiggling behavior.
The agents guided with behavior-cloning had only a negligible
difference in performance as shown in Fig. 7(2)(b). These agents
showed behavior similar to the agents in Study 1: they learned to
navigate to the target object but didn’t learn to avoid the wrong
object as shown in Fig. 8(2)(b). However, the average reward was
lower than in the unimodal environment. We think that because
the target policy is only based on visual observation, so the audio
observation worked as noise during behavior cloning.
Without guidance, the agent couldn’t solve the task properly as
shown in Fig. 7(2)(c) and Fig. 8(2)(c). These results show that the
multi-modality of the agent didn’t give rise to a new critical period
for guidance methods without critical regime, but affected the time
of critical period of the guidance with a critical regime.
4.6
Study 3: Transfer to a real-world dataset
In study1, we trained with three levels of guidance learning (Sparse-
reward, helper-reward, and behavioral cloning) Fig. 2. This leads
to three distinct sets of CNN and MLP weights from the trained
models, and we can evaluate each of these sets of weights in another
relevant task via transfer learning as seen in Fig. 3 (b).
We previously observed that the 2M- and 1M-helper models
showed a noticeable difference in performance compared to the
models with no critical period (3M-, 4M-helper) on both uni- and
multimodal AI agents. If such a disparity in performance is valid, we
believe that the models pre-trained with helper-reward guidance
should show comparable results on real-world data input which
better reflects the characteristics of toddlers’ observations.
To verify the validity of our claims, we evaluated the transfer
performance of image encoders (consisting of the CNN and the
MLP) from 1M-, 2M-, 3M-, and 4M-helper models. Specifically, we
fixed the parameters of the image encoders after pre-training and
connected additional linear layers for image classification. Next,
we used the EAVE dataset images, which was collected in the real
world in accordance with the toddler’s viewpoint, as input (size
84x84) with a total of 6 channels, consisting of the toddler agent’s

ICMI ’21, October 18–22, 2021, Montréal, QC, Canada
Junseok Park, Kwanyoung Park, Hyunseok Oh, Ganghun Lee, Minsu Lee, Youngki Lee, and Byoung-Tak Zhang
Figure 9: Transfer learning performance with the moderate
guidance learning (helper-reward) using the EAVE dataset
on unimodal (1) and multimodal (2) agents.
binocular vision with RGB channels each to the right and left side.
We trained the model for 500 000 iterations with batch size 32.
As shown in Fig. 9, we found that the transferred 2M- ( Uni:64.6/
Multi:65.8%) and 1M-helper ( Uni:64/Multi:64.9%) models with a crit-
ical period achieved a better performance in terms of accuracy than
the 3M- (Uni:63.3/multi:64.9%) and 4M-helper ( Uni:62.1/multi:64.2%)
models without a critical period on the EAVE dataset. The multi-
modal agent’s set of CNN and MLP weights has shown a much
higher average accuracy than the unimodal agent. Hence, we con-
firm that multimodal learning rather than unimodal can be helpful
in efficiently learning the representation of objects during learning.
Furthermore, similar to study1 (see Fig. 7 (1),(2)-(a)). we see a dis-
tinct difference in moderate guidance learning performance with
a helper-reward and can accordingly rank the models in the same
order where the models (2M,1M) with a critical period significantly
outperform the ones without. Through this, we validate that the
learning performance of toddler AI agents indeed depends on the
critical period for the setting with moderate guidance learning.
5
DISCUSSIONS
Our paper has made three key contributions as a first step toward
discovering the optimal guidance corresponding to critical periods
in AI agents. First, to prove that RL-based humanoid AI agents
also have critical periods like a toddler has, we found for the first
time that AI agents also show specific critical periods (2M, 1M-
helper) within the only moderate guidance learning setting (see
Fig. 7 (1),(2)-(a)). We assume that 3M/4M frames are past the critical
period, so the policy overfits more to the sparse reward, unable to
reach the performance of the 2M/1M model. Behavioral Cloning
merely imitates the mentor’s trajectory, unable to generalize beyond
the mentor-given policy. However, the helper reward is the optimal
guidance among them.
Second, we collected the EAVE dataset, which contains images
that imitate a toddler’s point of view and its special characteristics
and which, along with the developed virtual environment with
a humanoid agent, allowed us to verify the qualitative notion of
critical periods in a computational and cognitive way. Furthermore,
we specifically designed the agent as a humanoid agent, mimick-
ing the toddler’s viewpoint’s characteristics in VECA, so that a
humanoid agent can closely learn and more efficiently observe the
features of objects in the same way a toddler does. We believe that
those human-like learning features enable us to test and validate
the critical learning period more reliably.
Lastly, Our findings are especially significant for both Human-AI
interaction domain and Human-in-the-loop RL, possibly used to
determine the best time for human intervention in the training of
AI agents. We developed and designed both uni- and multimodal
agents, and confirm that the multimodal agent achieves a consider-
able improvement over every result of the unimodal agent, inspired
by actual human cognitive development. The multimodal agent
has a higher average reward and accuracy on object-finding task (
Fig. 7 (2)-(a)) and transfer learning on the EAVE dataset (Fig. 9 (b)).
We validate that multimodal learning at 2M&1M accompanying the
critical period is more effective for learning useful representation
compared to the unimodal approach.
In the future, we aim to analyze the critical period based on a
more toddler-like RL algorithm deeper in the multi-task&meta-RL
domain or develop an algorithm that automatically finds the critical
learning period of the agent with additional verification studies.
In this work, however, we employed a conventional RL algorithm
with a light deep learning structure as a first step towards this goal.
Also, testing the generalizability of the critical period concept
requires further experiments. Since the concept is from humans,
we speculate that physically grounded humanoid agents will more
likely show critical periods here. We plan to study this in various
environments including non-humanoid agent in the future.
6
CONCLUSION
Toddlers usually have a distinctive increase in performance during
the critical period [34]. At this time, the increase in learning perfor-
mance depends on the timing of mutual interaction. To investigate
a similar effect in learning in AI agents, we studied three levels
of mutual interaction learning (forms of guidance) in the virtual
environment based on our formulation of toddler guidance learning
terms in the RL framework. We validated our observations of the
model’s critical period on real-world observations (EAVE dataset).
Corresponding to the critical period in toddlers, we observed a
similar increase in performance using optimal guidance during the
training of an AI agent. Specifically, we found that only moder-
ate mutual interaction with a multimodal agent leads to a distinct
increase in performance within the critical period and further af-
fects the period during which the AI agent achieves remarkable
performance compared to the unimodal agent.
