The joint role of geometry and illumination on material
recognition
Manuel Lagunas∗
Universidad de Zaragoza, I3A
Zaragoza, Spain
Ana Serrano
Universidad de Zaragoza, I3A, Max Planck Institute for
Informatics
Zaragoza, Spain
Diego Gutierrez
Universidad de Zaragoza, I3A
Zaragoza, Spain
Belen Masia
Universidad de Zaragoza, I3A
Zaragoza, Spain
ABSTRACT
Observing and recognizing materials is a fundamental part of our
daily life. Under typical viewing conditions, we are capable of ef-
fortlessly identifying the objects that surround us and recognizing
the materials they are made of. Nevertheless, understanding the un-
derlying perceptual processes that take place to accurately discern
the visual properties of an object is a long-standing problem. In this
work, we perform a comprehensive and systematic analysis of how
the interplay of geometry, illumination, and their spatial frequen-
cies affects human performance on material recognition tasks. We
carry out large-scale behavioral experiments where participants
are asked to recognize different reference materials among a pool of
candidate samples. In the different experiments, we carefully sam-
ple the information in the frequency domain of the stimuli. From
our analysis, we find significant first-order interactions between
the geometry and the illumination, of both the reference and the
candidates. In addition, we observe that simple image statistics and
higher-order image histograms do not correlate with human per-
formance. Therefore, we perform a high-level comparison of highly
non-linear statistics by training a deep neural network on material
recognition tasks. Our results show that such models can accurately
classify materials, which suggests that they are capable of defining
a meaningful representation of material appearance from labeled
proximal image data. Last, we find preliminary evidence that these
highly non-linear models and humans may use similar high-level
factors for material recognition tasks.
KEYWORDS
Material recognition, Surface geometry, Scene illumination, Con-
founding factors, Material perception
1
INTRODUCTION
Under typical viewing conditions, humans are capable of effortlessly
recognizing materials and inferring many of their key physical
properties, just by briefly looking at them. While this is almost an
effortless process, it is not a trivial task. The image that is input
to our visual system results from a complex combination of the
surface geometry, the reflectance of the material, the distribution
of lights in the environment, and the observer’s point of view. To
recognize the material of a surface while being invariant to other
factors of the scene, our visual system carries out an underlying

perceptual process that is not yet fully understood [Adelson 2000;
Dror et al. 2001a; Fleming et al. 2001].
So how does our brain recognize materials? We could think that,
similar to solving an inverse optics problem, our brain is estimating
the physical properties of each material [Pizlo 2001]. This would
imply knowledge of many other physical quantities about the object
and its surrounding scene, from which our brain could disentangle
the reflectance of the surface. However, we rarely have access to
such precise information, so variations based on Bayesian inference
have been proposed [Kersten et al. 2004].
Other approaches are based on image statistics, and explain
material recognition as a process where our brain extracts image
features that are relevant to describe materials. Then, it would try
to match them with previously acquired knowledge, in order to
discern the material we are observing. Considering this approach
our visual system would disregard the illumination, motion, or other
factors in the scene and try to recognize materials by representing
their typical appearance in terms of features instead of explicitly
acquiring an accurate physical description of each factor. This type
of image analysis can be carried out in the primary domain [Adelson
2008; Fleming 2014; Geisler 2008; Motoyoshi et al. 2007; Nishida
and Shinya 1998], or in the frequency domain [Brady and Oliva
2012; Giesel and Zaidi 2013; Oliva and Torralba 2001]. However, it is
argued if our visual system actually derives any aspects of material
perception from such simple statistics [Anderson and Kim 2009].
For instance, Fleming and Storrs [2019] have recently proposed the
idea that highly non-linear encodings of the visual input may better
explain the underlying processes of material perception.
In this work, we thoroughly analyze how the confounding ef-
fects of illumination and geometry influence human performance
in material recognition tasks. The same material can yield differ-
ent appearances due to changes in illumination and/or geometry
(see Figures 1 and 2), while it is possible to have two different ma-
terials look the same by tweaking the two parameters [Vangorp
et al. 2007]. We aim to further our understanding of the complex
interplay between geometry and illumination in material recogni-
tion. We have carried out large-scale, rigorous online behavioral
experiments where participants were asked to recognize different
materials, given images of one reference material and a pool of
candidates. By using photorealistic computer graphics, we obtain
carefully controlled stimuli, with varying degrees of information in
the frequency domain. In addition, we observe that simple image
statistics, image histograms, and histograms of V1-like subband
2021-02-05 01:37. Page 1 of 1–15.
arXiv:2101.02496v2  [cs.CV]  4 Feb 2021

Journal of Vision (JOV), Nov. 2020
Manuel Lagunas, Ana Serrano, Diego Gutierrez, and Belen Masia
Figure 1: Two spheres made of silver, under two different il-
luminations, leading to completely different pixel-level sta-
tistics.
Figure 2: Two objects of different geometries but made of the
same material, under the same illumination. The object on
the left appears to be made of a shinier material.
filters do not correlate with human performance in material recog-
nition tasks. Inspired by Fleming and Storrs’ recent work [2019], we
analyze highly non-linear statistics by training a deep neural net-
work. We observe that such statistics define a robust and accurate
representation of material appearance and find preliminary evi-
dence that these models and humans may share similar high-level
factors when recognizing materials.
1.1
Material recognition
Recognizing materials and inferring their key features by sight is
invaluable for many tasks. Our experience suggests that humans
are able to correctly predict a wide variety of rough material cate-
gories like textiles, stones, or metals [Fleming 2014; Fleming and
Bülthoff 2005; Ged et al. 2010; Li and Fritz 2012]; or items that we
would call "stuff" [Adelson 2001] — like sand or snow—. Humans
are also capable of identifying the materials in a photograph by
briefly looking at them [Sharan et al. 2009, 2008] or of inferring
their physical properties without the need to touch them [Flem-
ing et al. 2015a, 2013; Jarabo et al. 2014; Maloney and Brainard
2010; Nagai et al. 2015; Serrano et al. 2016]. This ability is built
from experience, by actually confirming visual impressions with
other senses. This way, material perception becomes a cognitive
process [Palmer 1975] whose underlying intricacies are not fully
understood yet [Anderson 2011; Fleming et al. 2015b; Thompson
et al. 2011].
1.2
Interplay of geometry and illumination
Material perception is a complex process that involves a large num-
ber of distinct dimensions [Mao et al. 2019; Obein et al. 2004; Sève
1993] that, sometimes, are impossible to physically measure [Hunter
et al. 1937]. The illumination of a scene [Beck and Prazdny 1981;
Bousseau et al. 2011; Zhang et al. 2015] and the shape of a sur-
face, are responsible for the final appearance of an object [Nishida
and Shinya 1998; Schlüter and Faul 2019; Vangorp et al. 2007], and
therefore, for our perception of the materials it is made of [Olkko-
nen and Brainard 2011]. Humans are capable of estimating the
reflectance properties of a surface [Dror et al. 2001b] even when
there is no information about its illumination [Dror et al. 2001a;
Fleming et al. 2001], yet we perform better under illuminations that
match real-world statistics [Fleming et al. 2003]. Indeed, geometry
and illumination have a joint interaction in our perception of glossi-
ness [Faul 2019; Leloup et al. 2010; Marlow et al. 2012; Olkkonen and
Brainard 2011], and color [Bloj et al. 1999]. In this work, we explore
the interplay of shape, illumination, and their spatial frequencies
in our performance at recognizing materials. To achieve that, we
launch rigorous online behavioral experiments where we rely on
realistic computer graphics to generate the stimuli and carefully
vary their information in the frequency domain.
1.3
Image statistics and material perception
One of the goals in material perception research is to untangle
the processes that happen on our visual system in order to com-
prehend their roles and know what information they carry. There
is an ongoing discussion on whether our visual system is solving
an inverse optics problem [Kawato et al. 1993; Pizlo 2001] or if it
matches the statistics of the input to our visual system [Adelson
2000; Motoyoshi et al. 2007; Thompson et al. 2016] in order to un-
derstand the world that surrounds us. Later studies regarding our
visual system and how we perceive materials dismiss the inverse
optics approach and claim that it is unlikely that our brain estimates
the parameters of the reflectance of a surface, when, for instance,
we want to measure glossiness [Fleming 2014; Geisler 2008]. In-
stead, they suggest that our visual system joins low and mid-level
statistics to make judgments about surface properties [Adelson
2008]. On this hypothesis, Motoyoshi et al. [2007] suggest that
the human visual system could be using some sort of measure of
histogram symmetry to distinguish glossy surfaces. Other works
have explored image statistics in the frequency domain [Hawken
and Parker 1987; Schiller et al. 1976], for instance, to characterize
material properties [Giesel and Zaidi 2013], or to discriminate tex-
tures [Julesz 1962; Schaffalitzky and Zisserman 2001]. However, it is
argued if our visual system actually derives any aspects of material
perception from simple statistics [Anderson and Kim 2009; Kim and
Anderson 2010; Olkkonen and Brainard 2010]. Instead, recent work
by Fleming and Storrs [2019] proposes that to infer the properties
of the scene, our visual system is doing an efficient and accurate en-
coding of the proximal stimulus (image input to our visual system).
Thus, highly non-linear models, such as deep neural networks, may
better explain human perception. In line with such observation,
Bell et al. [2015] show how deep neural networks can be trained in
a supervised fashion to accurately recognize materials, and Wang
et al. [2016] later extend it to also recognize materials in light fields.
Closer to ours, Lagunas et al. [2019] devise a deep learning based
material similarity metric that correlates with human perception.
They collected judgements on perceived material similarity as a
whole, not explicitly taking into account the influence of geometry
2021-02-05 01:37. Page 2 of 1–15.

The joint role of geometry and illumination on material recognition
Journal of Vision (JOV), Nov. 2020,
Figure 3: Graphical user interface of the online behavioral
experiments. In particular, this screenshot belongs to the
Test SH. On the left, the user can see the reference material
together with her current selection. On the right, she can
observe all the candidate materials. To select one candidate
material, the user clicks on the corresponding image and it
is automatically added to the selection box on the left.
or illumination, and build their metric upon such judgements. In
contrast, we focus on analyzing to which extent geometry and illu-
mination do interfere with our perception of material appearance.
We launch several behavioral experiments with carefully controlled
stimuli, and ask participants to specify which materials are closer
to a reference. In addition, taking inspiration from these recent
works, we explore how highly non-linear models, such as deep
neural networks, perform in material classification tasks. We find
that such models are capable of accurately recognizing materials,
and further observe that deep neural networks may share similar
high-level factors to humans when recognizing materials.
2
METHODS
We carry out a set of online behavioral experiments where we ana-
lyze the influence of geometry, illumination, and their frequencies
in human performance for material recognition tasks. Participants
are presented with a reference material and their main task is to
pick five materials from a pool of candidates that they think are
closer to the reference. A screenshot of the experiment can be seen
in Figure 3.
2.1
Stimuli
We obtain our stimuli from the dataset proposed by Lagunas et
al. [2019]. This dataset contains images created using photorealis-
tic computer graphics, with 15 different geometries; six different
real-world illuminations ranging from indoor scenarios to urban
or natural landscapes; and 100 different materials measured from
their real-world counterparts which were pooled from MERL data-
base [Matusik et al. 2003]. We sample the following factors for our
experiments:
Geometries. Among the geometries that the dataset contains, we
choose the sphere and Havran-2 geometry [Havran et al. 2016].
These are a low and high spatial frequency geometries, respectively,
suitable to test how the spatial frequencies of the geometry affect the
final appearance of the material and our performance at recognizing
it.
Test HH
Test SH
Test SS
Test HS
Figure 4: Examples of the stimuli in each different online be-
havioral experiment. On the left, we show an example of the
reference stimuli with one of the six illuminations. On the
right, we show a small subset (six out of the 100 materials)
of the candidate stimuli with St. Peters illumination.
• Sphere: Representing a smooth, and low spatial frequency
geometry, widely adopted in previous behavioral experi-
ments [Filip et al. 2008; Jarabo et al. 2014; Kerr and Pellacini
2010; Sun et al. 2017].
• Havran-2:1 It is a geometry with high spatial frequencies,
and with high spatial variations that has been obtained
through optimization techniques. Havran-2 surface has had
significant success in recent perceptual studies and applica-
tions [Guarnera et al. 2018; Guo et al. 2018; Lagunas et al.
2019; Vávra and Filip 2016].
The stimuli in each different experiment can be observed in
Figure 4. The geometry in the reference and candidate samples
changes depending on the experiment, the details are as follows:
• Test HH: Both the reference and the candidates depict
Havran geometry.
• Test HS: The reference depicts Havran and the candidates
depict the sphere.
• Test SH: The reference depicts the sphere while the candi-
dates depict Havran.
• Test SS: Both the reference and the candidates depict the
sphere geometry.
Illuminations. To prevent a pure matching task, we choose dif-
ferent illuminations between the reference and candidate materials
for all behavioral experiments.
• The reference samples depict six different illuminations cap-
tured from the real-world. All illuminations can be observed
in Figure 5. To have an intuition of the content in the cap-
tured illumination, the insets show the RGB intensity for the
horizontal purple line. We use all illuminations in the dataset
since they contain a mix of spatial frequencies suitable to
empirically test how the spatial frequencies of the illumina-
tion may affect human performance on material recognition
tasks. The illuminations Grace, Ennis, and Uffizi have a broad
spatial frequency spectrum, Pisa and Doge mainly contain
medium and low spatial frequency content, while Glacier
mainly has low spatial frequency content. To simplify the
notation, we will refer to them throughout the paper as
1To simplify the notation we will refer to this geometry as Havran.
2021-02-05 01:37. Page 3 of 1–15.

Journal of Vision (JOV), Nov. 2020
Manuel Lagunas, Ana Serrano, Diego Gutierrez, and Belen Masia
Uﬃzi
Grace
Ennis
Pisa
Doge
Glacier
St. Peters
Figure 5: Left: All illuminations depicted in the online behav-
ioral experiments. The inset corresponds to the pixel inten-
sity for the horizontal purple line. Right: Magnitude spec-
trum of the luminance for each illumination.
high-frequency, medium-frequency, and low-frequency illu-
minations, respectively.
• The candidate samples depict the St. Peters illumination (ex-
cept in an additional experiment discussed in Section 4 where
they depict Doge illumination). St. Peters is an illumination
that has been used in the past for several perceptual stud-
ies [Fleming et al. 2003; Serrano et al. 2016], and it can be
seen in Figure 5. The inset shows the RGB pixel intensity for
the horizontal purple line.
To quantify the spatial frequencies of the illuminations, we have
employed the high-frequency content measure (HFC) [Brossier et al.
2004]. This measure characterizes the frequencies in a signal by
summing linearly-weighted values of the spectral magnitude, thus
avoiding to arbitrarily choose a separation between high and low
frequencies, or visually assessing the slope of the 1/f amplitude
spectrum. A high HFC value means higher frequencies in the signal.
Figure 6 shows the HFC for each illumination.
Materials. We use all the materials from the Lagunas et al.
dataset [2019]. The reference trials are sampled uniformly to cover
all 100 material samples in the dataset. Examples of the stimuli used
in each behavioral experiment are shown in Figure 4, where the
image on the left shows the reference material and the right area
shows a subset of the candidate materials.
High-frequency content measure
Figure 6: High-frequency content (HFC) measure computed
for all the candidate and reference illuminations. We can
observe how high-frequency illuminations (Uffizi, Grace,
Ennis, St. Peters) also have a high HFC value, medium-
frequency illuminations (Pisa, Doge) have a lower HFC
value, and, last, low-frequency illuminations (Glacier) have
the lowest HFC value.
2.2
Participants
The online behavioral experiments were designed to work across
platforms on standard web browsers, and they were conducted
through the Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) platform. In to-
tal, 847 unique users took part in them (368 users belonging to
the experiments explained in Section 3, and 479 belonging to the
additional experiments explained in Section 4), 44.61% of them fe-
male. Among the participants, 62.47% claimed to be familiar with
computer graphics, 25.57% had no previous experience and 9.96%
declared themselves professionals. We also sampled data regarding
the devices used during the experiments: 94.10% used a monitor,
4.30% used a tablet, and 1.60% used a mobile phone. In addition, the
most common screen size was 1366x728 px. (42.01% of participants),
minimum screen size was 640x360 px. (two people), and a maximum
of 2560x1414 px. (one person). Users were not aware of the purpose
of the behavioral experiment.
2.3
Procedure
Subjects are shown a reference sample and a group of candidate
material samples. Each experiment, HIT in MTurk terminology,
consists of 23 unique reference material samples or trials, three of
which are sentinels used to detect malicious or lazy users. Users are
asked to "select five material samples which you believe are closer to
the one shown in the reference image". Additionally, we instruct them
to make their selection in decreasing order of confidence. We let the
users pick five candidate materials because just one answer would
provide sparse results. We launched 25 HITs for each experiment
and each HIT was answered by six different users. This resulted in
a total of 27.000 non-sentinel trials, 12.000 belonging to the four
experiments analyzed in Section 3, and 15.000 of them belonging
to the five additional experiments discussed in Section 4 (a total of
nine different experiments with 25 HITs each, each HIT answered
2021-02-05 01:37. Page 4 of 1–15.

The joint role of geometry and illumination on material recognition
Journal of Vision (JOV), Nov. 2020,
by six users and 20 non-sentinel trials per HIT). Users were not
allowed to repeat the same HIT.
The set of materials in the candidate samples does not vary
across HITs, however, the position of each sample is randomized for
each trial. This has a two-fold purpose: it prevents the user from
memorizing the position of the samples, and it prevents them from
selecting only the candidate samples that appear at the top of their
screen. The reference samples do not repeat materials during a HIT
and the reference material is always present among the candidate
samples. During the experiment, stimuli keep a constant display
size of 300x300 px. for the reference, and of 120x120 px. for the
candidate stimuli (except for some of the additional experiments
explained in Section 4 where both reference and candidate stimuli
are displayed at either 300x300 px. or 120x120 px.). Figure 3 shows a
screenshot with the graphical user interface during the behavioral
experiments. On the left-hand side, we can observe the selection
panel with the current trial and the selection of the current materials.
The right-hand side displays the set of candidate materials whereof
users can pick their selection. Users were not able to go back and
re-do an already answered trial, but they could edit their current
selection of five materials until they were satisfied with their choice.
Additionally, once the 23 trials of the HIT are answered, to have
an intuition about the main features that humans use for material
recognition, we asked the user: "Which visual cues did you consider
to perform the test?".
To minimize worker unreliability, the user performs a brief train-
ing before the real test [Welinder et al. 2010]. To avoid giving the
user further information about the test, we use a different geometry
(Havran-3 [Havran et al. 2016]) during the training phase. In this
phase, the items of the interface are explained and the user is given
guidance on how to perform the test using just a few images [Garces
et al. 2014; Lagunas et al. 2018; Rubinstein et al. 2010].
Sentinels. Each sentinel shows a randomly selected image from
the pool of candidates as the reference sample. We consider user
answers to the sentinel as valid if they pick the right material
within their five selections, regardless of the order. We rejected
users that did not correctly answer at least one out of the three
sentinel questions. In order to ensure that users answers were well
thought and that they were paying attention to the experiment,
we also rejected users that took less than five seconds per trial (on
average). In the end, we adopt a conservative approach and rejected
19.8% of the participants, gathering 21.660 answers (9.560 belonging
to the behavioral experiments explained in Section 3 and 12.100
belonging to the additional experiments explained in Section 4).
3
RESULTS
We investigate which factors have a significant influence on user
performance and on the time they took to complete each trial
in the four experiments: Test HH, Test HS, Test SH and Test
SS. The factors we include are: the reference geometry Gref, the
candidate geometry Gcand, and the illumination of the reference
sample Iref, as well as their first-order interactions (recall that the
illumination of the candidate samples remains constant in these
behavioral experiments). We also include the Order of appearance
of each trial. We use a general linear mixed model with a binomial
distribution for the performance since it is well-suited for binary
dependent variables like ours, and a negative binomial distribution
for the time, which provides more accurate models than the Poisson
distribution by allowing the mean and variance to be different. Since
we cannot assume that our observations are independent, we model
the potential effect of each particular subject viewing the stimuli
as a random effect. Since we have categorical variables among our
predictors, we re-code them to dummy variables for the regression.
In all our tests, we fix a significance value (𝑝-value) of 0.05. Finally,
for factors that present a significant influence, we further perform
pairwise comparisons for all their levels (least significant difference
pairwise multiple comparison test).
3.1
Analysis of user performance and time
In our online behavioral experiments, we rely on the top-5 accuracy
to measure user performance. This metric considers an answer as
correct if the reference is among the five candidate materials that
the user picked in the trial. Since participants picked five materials
ranked in descending order of confidence, the top-1 accuracy could
also be considered for our analysis. However, the task they have to
solve is not easy and users have an overall top-1 accuracy of 9.21%
which yields sparse results. A random selection would yield a top-1
accuracy of 1% and a top-5 accuracy of 5%.
Influence of the geometry. There is a clear effect in user perfor-
mance when the the geometry changes, regardless if that change
happens in the candidate (Gcand, 𝑝= 0.005) or the reference geom-
etry (Gref, 𝑝< 0.001). This is expected, since the geometry plays
a key role in how a surface reflects the incoming light and, there-
fore, will have an impact on the final appearance of the material.
Figure 7 shows user performance in terms of top-5 accuracy with a
95% confidence interval when the reference and candidate geom-
etry change jointly (left) or individually (center and right). Users
seem to perform better when they have to recognize the material
in a high-frequency geometry compared to a low-frequency one.
Those results also suggest that changes in the frequencies of the
reference geometry may have a bigger impact on user performance
than changes in the frequencies of the candidate geometry (i.e.,
users perform better with a high-frequency reference geometry and
low-frequency candidate geometry, compared to a low-frequency
reference geometry and a high-frequency candidate geometry).
Influence of the reference illumination. We observe that the il-
lumination of the reference image has a significant effect on user
performance (Iref, 𝑝< 0.001). This is expected since all the materi-
als in a scene are reflecting the light that reaches them, therefore
changes in illumination can significantly influence the final appear-
ance of a material, and how we perceive it [Bousseau et al. 2011].
Figure 8, left, shows the top-5 accuracy for each reference illumina-
tion and groups of illuminations with statistically indistinguishable
performance. We can observe how users seem to have better per-
formance when the surface they are evaluating has been lit with a
high-frequency illumination (Ennis, Grace, and Uffizi); while users
appear to perform worse in scenes with a low-frequency illumi-
nation (Glacier); users show an intermediate performance with a
medium-frequency illumination (Doge and Pisa). Moreover, we per-
formed a least significant difference pairwise multiple comparison
2021-02-05 01:37. Page 5 of 1–15.

Journal of Vision (JOV), Nov. 2020
Manuel Lagunas, Ana Serrano, Diego Gutierrez, and Belen Masia
Figure 7: Left: Top-5 accuracy for each of the four behavioral
experiment. Center: Top-5 accuracy for each reference geom-
etry Gref. Right: Top-5 accuracy for the candidate geometry
Gcand. We can see how users seem to perform better when
the candidate and reference are a high-frequency geometry.
All plots have a 95% confidence interval. The names marked
with ∗are found to have statistically significant differences.
test to obtain groups of illuminations with statistically indistin-
guishable performance. These groups can be observed in Figure 8,
under the x-axis. If we focus on Iref we can see how high- (green),
medium- (blue), and low-frequency (red) illuminations yield groups
of similar performance. There is an additional group of statistically
indistinguishable performance represented in pink color.
Influence of trial order. The order of appearance of the trials
during the experiment does not have a significant influence in
users performance (Order, 𝑝= 0.391).
First order interactions. We find that the interaction between the
candidate geometry and the reference illumination has a significant
effect on user performance (Gcand ∗Iref , 𝑝< 0.001). Users seem
to perform better with a high-frequency geometry (compared to
a low-frequency one) when the reference stimuli features a high-
frequency illumination (Iref =Uffizi, 𝑝= 0.019; Iref =[Grace, Ennis],
𝑝< 0.001). On the other hand, there appears to be no significant
changes in performance between a high- and low- frequency can-
didate geometry when the reference stimuli has a medium- or low-
frequency illumination (Iref =Doge, 𝑝= 0.453; Iref =Pisa, 𝑝= 0.381;
Iref =Glacier, 𝑝= 0.770). We argue that user performance is driven
by the reference sample. When the reference material is lit with
a low-frequency illumination, users seem to not be able to prop-
erly recognize it. Therefore, changes in the candidate geometry
are not relevant to user performance. These results can be seen
in Figure 8, center. Furthermore, under the x-axis, we can observe
the groups with statistically indistinguishable performance where
high-, medium-, and low-frequency illuminations yield groups of
similar performance.
We also found out that the interaction between the reference
geometry and the reference illumination has a significant impact in
user performance (Gref ∗Iref , 𝑝= 0.012). Users seem to show better
performance for all illuminations with a high-frequency reference
geometry (Gref =Havran, Iref =Uffizi, 𝑝= 0.002; Iref =[Ennis, Pisa,
Doge, Glacier], 𝑝< 0.001), except for Grace illumination (𝑝= 0.176),
where the differences in humans performance are statistically indis-
tinguishable. These results, together with the groups of statistically
indistinguishable performance, can be seen in Figure 8, right.
In general, we can not conclude that there are significant changes
in performance due to the interaction between the candidate and
reference geometry (Gref ∗Gcand, 𝑝= 0.407). Nevertheless, with
a low-frequency reference geometry (Gref =sphere), users seem
to perform significantly better with a high-frequency candidate
geometry (Gcand=Havran, 𝑝= 0.009).
3.1.1
Analysis of the time spent on each trial. To account for time,
we measure the number of milliseconds that passed since the trial
loaded in their screen and until they picked all five materials and
pressed the "Continue" button.
Influence of trial order. We find that the order of the trials has
a significant influence on the average time users spend to answer
them (𝑝< 0.001). Users spend more time in the first questions and
that after few trials the average time they spend becomes stable at
around 20 seconds per trial (recall that the order does not influence
performance). This is expected as users have to familiarize with
the experiment during the first iterations. As the test advances,
they learn how to interact with it and the time they spend becomes
stable. Additional figures and results on the factors that influence
the spent time can be found in Appendix A.
3.2
High-level factors driving material
recognition
In addition to the analysis, we also try to gain intuition on which
high-level factors drive material recognition, investigate how sim-
ple image statistics and image histograms correlate with human
answers, and analyze highly non-linear statistics in material classi-
fication tasks by training a deep neural network.
Visualizing user answers. To gain intuition on which high-level
factors humans might use while recognizing materials, we em-
ploy a stochastic triplet embedding method called t-STE (t-Student
stochastic triplet embedding) [Van Der Maaten and Weinberger
2012] directly on user answers. This method maps user answers
from their original non-numerical domain into a two-dimensional
space that can be easily visualized (find additional details in the
Appendix B). Figure 9 shows the two-dimensional embeddings after
applying the t-STE algorithm to the answers of each online behav-
ioral experiment. Each point in the embedding represents one of
the 100 materials from the Lagunas et al. dataset. The insets show
the color of each material based on the color classification proposed
by Lagunas et al. We can observe how materials are clustered by
color and, if we focus in a single color, they seem to be clustered by
reflectance properties (for instance, in Test HH, red color cluster,
we can observe how on the left there are specular materials while
on the right there are diffuse materials). This suggests that users
have followed a two-step strategy to recognize the materials, and
that the high-level factors driving material recognition might be
color first, and the reflectance properties second. At the end of the
HIT, users were asked to write the main visual features they used to
recognize materials. Out of 368 unique users from the experiments
analyzed in Section 3, 273 answered that they have used the colors,
and 221 answered that they relied on the reflections. Among them,
2021-02-05 01:37. Page 6 of 1–15.

The joint role of geometry and illumination on material recognition
Journal of Vision (JOV), Nov. 2020,
Figure 8: Left: Top-5 accuracy for each reference illumination (Iref ). We can see how users seem to perform better with high-
frequency illuminations (Uffizi, Grace, Ennis), while their performance is worse with a low-frequency illumination (Glacier).
Additionally, they have an intermediate performance for medium-frequency illuminations (Doge and Pisa). Center: Top-5
accuracy for each reference illumination when the candidate geometry (Gcand) changes. We can observe how users appear to
perform significantly better with a high-frequency geometry (Havran) and illumination. On the other hand, for low-frequency
illuminations, changes in the candidate geometry yield statistically indistinguishable performance. Right: Top-5 accuracy
for each reference illumination when the reference geometry (Gref ) changes. We can observe how users seem to perform
significantly better for all high-frequency illuminations, except for Grace. The horizontal lines under the x-axis represent
groups of statistically indistinguishable performance. We can observe how the groups usually cluster high-, medium- and
low-frequency illuminations. The reference illuminations marked with ∗denote significant differences in user performance
between geometries for that illumination. The error bars correspond to a 95% confidence interval.
157 answered both color and reflections as some of the visual cues
they have used to perform the task. This observation, together with
the t-STE visualization, strengthens the hypothesis of a two-step
strategy.
Image statistics. Previous studies focused on simple image statis-
tics as an attempt to further understand our visual system [Adelson
2008; Motoyoshi et al. 2007]. Nevertheless, it is argued if our visual
system actually derives any aspects of material perception using
such simple statistics [Anderson and Kim 2009; Kim and Anderson
2010; Olkkonen and Brainard 2010]. We tested out the correlation
between the first four statistical moments of the luminance (consid-
ered as the ratio: 𝐿= 0.3086 ∗𝑅+ 0.6094 ∗𝐺+ 0.0820 ∗𝐵), the pixel
intensity for each color channel independently, and the joint RGB
pixel intensity, directly against users top-5 accuracy. To measure
correlation we employ a Pearson P and Spearman S correlation
test. We found out that there is little to no correlation except for the
standard deviation of the joint RGB pixel intensity where P2 = 0.43
(𝑝< 0.001) and S2 = 0.50 (𝑝< 0.001). Additional information can
be found in Appendix C.
Image histograms. We also compute the histograms of the RGB
pixel intensity, of the luminance, of a Gaussian pyramid [Lee and
Lee 2016], of a Laplacian pyramid [Burt and Adelson 1983], and
of log-Gabor filters designed to simulate the receptive field of the
simple cells of the Primary Visual Cortex (V1) [Fischer et al. 2007].
To see how such histograms would perform at classifying materials,
we train a support vector machine (SVM) that takes the image
histogram as the input and classifies the material in that image. We
use a radial basis function kernel (or Gaussian kernel) in the SVM.
We use all image histograms that do not feature Havran geometry
as the training set and leave the ones with Havran as test set. In the
end, the best performing SVM uses the RGB image histogram as
the input and achieves a 24.17% top-5 accuracy in the test set.
In addition, we compare the predictions of each SVM directly
against human answers. For each reference stimuli we compare
the five selections of the user against the five most-likely SVM
material predictions for that stimuli. The best SVM uses the his-
tograms of V1-like subband filters and agrees with humans 6.36%
of the time. Moreover, we compare histogram similarities against
human answers using a chi-square histogram distance [Pele and
Werman 2010]. For a reference image stimuli we measure its simi-
larity against all possible candidate image stimuli and compare the
closest five against participants’ answers. The Gaussian pyramid
histogram obtained the best result, agreeing with humans 6.29% of
the time. These results show how simple statistics, and higher-order
image histograms seem not to be capable of fully capturing human
behavior. We have added additional results on the SVMs and human
agreement in Appendix C.
Image frequencies. To understand if humans performance could
be explained by taking into account the spatial frequency of the
reference stimuli, at their viewed size, we have added the high-
frequency content measure (HFC), and the first four statistical mo-
ments of the reference stimuli magnitude spectrum to the factors
analyzed in Section 3. We found that the Skewness (𝑝< 0.001) and
2021-02-05 01:37. Page 7 of 1–15.

Journal of Vision (JOV), Nov. 2020
Manuel Lagunas, Ana Serrano, Diego Gutierrez, and Belen Masia
Test HH
Test HS
Test SH
Test SS
Figure 9: Visualizations of user answers to each of the four online behavioral experiments (namely Test HH, Test HS, Test
SH, and Test SS) using the t-STE algorithm [Van Der Maaten and Weinberger 2012]. The inset shows the color of each material
based on the color classification proposed by Lagunas et al. [2019]. We can see how, for all experiments, materials with similar
color properties are grouped together. Furthermore, if we explore the color clusters individually, we can see how there is
a second-level arrangement by reflectance properties. These observations suggest that users may be performing a two-step
process while recognizing materials where first, they sort them out by color, and second, by reflectance properties.
Kurtosis (𝑝< 0.001) of the magnitude spectrum seem to have a sig-
nificant influence on humans performance; however, they present
a very small effect size.
Highly non-linear models. Recent studies suggest that, to under-
stand what surrounds us, our visual system is doing an efficient
non-linear encoding of the proximal stimulus (the image input to
our visual system) and that highly non-linear models might be able
to better capture human perception [Delanoy et al. 2020; Fleming
and Storrs 2019]. Inspired by this hypothesis, we have trained a
deep neural network called ResNet [He et al. 2016] employing a
loss function suitable to classify the materials in the Lagunas et al.
dataset. The images feature the same illuminations as the reference
stimuli. We left out the images rendered with Havran geometries
for validation and testing purposes, and use the rest during training.
To know which material the network classifies we add a softmax
layer at the end of the network. The softmax layer outputs the
probability of the input image to belong to each material in the
dataset. In comparison, the model used by Lagunas et al. does not
have the last fully-connected and softmax layer, and it is trained
using a triplet loss function aiming for similarity instead of clas-
sification. At the end of the training, the model achieves a top-5
accuracy of 89.63% on the test set, suggesting that such models
are actually capable of extracting meaningful features from labeled
proximal image data (additional details on the training can be found
in Appendix D). To gain intuition on how the network has learned,
we have used the UMAP (Uniform Manifold Approximation and
Projection) algorithm [McInnes and Healy 2018]. This algorithm
aims to reduce the dimensionality of a set of feature vectors while
maintaining the global and local structure of their original mani-
fold. Figure 10 shows a two-dimensional visualization of the test set
obtained using the 128 features of the fully-connected layer before
softmax. We can observe how materials seem to be grouped first
by color and then by its reflectance properties suggesting that the
model may have used similar high-level factors to humans when
classifying materials.
Figure 10: Two-dimensional embedding obtained using the
UMAP algorithm [McInnes and Healy 2018] on the 128 fea-
tures of the last fully-connected layer of a ResNet model [He
et al. 2016] trained to classify materials. The inset shows the
color of each material based on the color classification pro-
posed by Lagunas et al. [2019]. We can observe how materi-
als are arranged by color clusters. Moreover, we can observe
similarities between this visualization and the t-STE visual-
ization on user answers.
We additionally assess the degree of similarity between the high-
level visualization of each online behavioral experiment and the
high-level visualization of the deep neural network. We calculate
2021-02-05 01:37. Page 8 of 1–15.

The joint role of geometry and illumination on material recognition
Journal of Vision (JOV), Nov. 2020,
the similarity in a pairwise fashion where we choose a material
sample and retrieve its five nearest neighbors in two different low-
dimensional representations. Then, we compute the percentage of
materials that are the same in both groups of nearest neighbors.
We repeat this process for all the materials and calculate the sim-
ilarity as the average. The low-dimensional representations are
obtained with stochastic methods, where the same input can have
different results if we vary the parameters. To evaluate the degree
of self-similarity, we run the t-STE algorithm [Van Der Maaten
and Weinberger 2012] on each behavioral experiment using five
different sets of fully randomly sampled parameters. We obtain a
self-similarity value of 0.66, on average across experiments. On
the other hand, a set of random low-dimensional representations
has a similarity of 0.06, on average. Figure 11 shows the average
pairwise similarity normalized by the value of self-similarity and
random similarity for all experiments and the deep neural network
visualization. If we compare between behavioral experiments, we
can observe a decreasing degree of similarity as their stimuli feature
fewer frequencies in the spectrum, where Test SS yields the lowest
similarity in each of the pairwise comparisons. We argue that Test
SS has the lowest similarity because it is the experiment where
users have the worst performance, thus yielding a blurry high level
visualization. On the other hand, the network is very accurate at
classifying materials and yields a high-level visualization with well-
defined material clusters. Moreover, if we focus on the deep neural
network visualization, we can observe how its similarity values
are, in general, on par with those obtained by users in Test HH,
Test HS, and Test SH. This result further supports the hypothesis
that both humans and deep neural networks may rely on similar
high-level visual features for material recognition tasks. However,
this is just a preliminary result that may highlight a future avenue
of research, and a thorough analysis of the perceptual relationship
between deep learning architectures and humans is out of the scope
of this paper.
4
DISCUSSION
From our online behavioral experiments, we have observed that
humans appear to perform better at recognizing materials in stim-
uli with high-frequency illumination and geometry. Moreover, our
performance when recognizing materials is poor on low-frequency
illuminations, and it remains statistically indistinguishable irrespec-
tive of the spatial frequency content in the candidate geometry.
Asymmetric effect of the reference and candidate geometry. It is
also interesting to observe that humans seem to have better per-
formance with a high-frequency reference geometry, compared to
a high-frequency candidate geometry (𝑝= 0.001, see Figure 12,
left). The number of candidates with respect to the reference could
be used as an explanation for this observation, since users may
devote more time to inspecting the single reference than the higher
number of candidates. At the same time, a lower performance with
a high-frequency reference geometry may speak against an inverse
optics approach since having multiple candidate materials with
the same geometry and illumination could provide a strong cue to
inferring the material.
One potential factor that may explain this difference in perfor-
mance is the different display sizes of the reference (300x300 px.)
DNN
Test HH
Test HS
Test SH
Test SS
Test HH
Test HS
Test SH
Test SS
0.53
0.51
0.46
0.22
1.00
0.56
0.48
0.23
0.56
1.00
0.51
0.25
0.48
0.51
1.00
0.25
0.23
0.25
0.25
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.8
1.0
0.6
Figure 11: Normalized pairwise similarity for each online be-
havioral experiment and the deep neural network trained
for material classification. We can observe how the pairwise
similarity decreases as the stimuli in the experiments cover
fewer frequencies in the spectrum, where Test SS has the
lowest similarity. Additionally, we can see how the similari-
ties between the neural network and each behavioral exper-
iment are on par with those obtained by humans between
Test HH, Test HS, and Test SH.
and the candidate (120x120 px.) stimuli. To test this hypothesis,
we have launched two additional experiments where we collect
answers on Test HS and Test SH displaying the candidate and
the reference stimuli at size 300x300, and other two additional ex-
periments where they are displayed at 120x120 px. We sample the
stimuli to cover all the possible combinations of illuminations and
materials and keep other technical details as explained in Section 2.
We perform an analysis of the gathered data similar to the one
explained in Section 3, but using the different experiment type
as a factor. From our results we observe that such asymmetric ef-
fect remains present when the stimuli are displayed at 300x300 px.
(𝑝< 0.001) and when they are displayed at 120x120 px. (𝑝< 0.001).
Those results can be seen in Figure 12, middle and right. It is also
interesting to observe how users have slightly worse performance
when the stimuli are displayed at 300x300 px. At such display size
only three candidate stimuli per row could be displayed taking
into account the most used display size. Thus, seems reasonable
to think that the need for additional scrolling could be hampering
participants performance.
Influence of the candidate illumination. We have seen that hu-
mans seem to be better at recognizing materials under high-
frequency reference illuminations. However, in Figure 5 and 6 we
can see that the St. Peters candidate illumination features a similar
frequency content to the reference illuminations where users have
better performance. To asses if St. Peters illumination contains a
set of frequencies that aids recognizing materials under reference
illuminations with a similar set of frequencies, we have launched an
additional behavioral experiment. In this experiment we use Doge, a
medium-frequency illumination, as the candidate illumination. We
sample the stimuli to cover all materials and reference illuminations
in Test HH. Other technical details are kept as explained in Sec-
tion 2. From the data collected (see Figure 13), we can observe how,
using Doge as the candidate illumination, humans performance
2021-02-05 01:37. Page 9 of 1–15.

Journal of Vision (JOV), Nov. 2020
Manuel Lagunas, Ana Serrano, Diego Gutierrez, and Belen Masia
Original
High res.
Low res.
Figure 12: Top-5 accuracy obtained by participants in the
original experiment (left), when the stimuli are displayed
at 300x300 px. (middle), and at 120x120 px. (right). We can
observe how the asymmetric effect of participants perform-
ing better when Havran is the reference geometry (TestHS)
compared to when it is the candidate (TestSH) remains
present when the participants observe the reference and can-
didate stimuli at identical sizes (middle and right). The ∗de-
notes significant differences. The error bars correspond to a
95% confidence interval.
follows a similar distribution to the original experiment (with St.
Peters as the candidate illumination). Participants seem to perform
better with high-frequency reference illuminations (Uffizi, Grace,
Ennis), they perform worse with medium-frequency ones (Pisa),
and have their worst performance with low-frequency reference il-
luminations (Glacier). In addition, participants seem to have slightly
better performance with a high-frequency candidate illumination
(St. Peters) compared to a medium-frequency one (Doge).
Interplay between material, geometry, and illumination. We have
looked into how geometry, illumination, and their frequencies af-
fect our performance in material recognition tasks. Our stimuli
were rendered images in which we varied the frequency of the
illumination, and of the underlying geometry of the object present.
To better understand how our factors (illumination and geometry)
affect the generated stimuli, and thus the proximal stimulus, we
offer here a brief description of the rendering equation, providing
an explanation of the probable effect of how the frequencies of the
geometry and illumination in the 3D scene affect the final, rendered
image that is used as a stimulus in our experiments. From the point
of view of the rendering equation, the radiance 𝐿𝑜at point 𝑥in
direction 𝜔𝑜, assuming a distant illumination and non-emissive
surfaces can be approximated as
𝐿𝑜(𝑥,𝜔𝑜) ≈
∫
Ω
𝐿𝑖(𝜔𝑖) 𝐹(𝜔𝑖,𝜔𝑜) 𝑇(𝑥,𝜔𝑖,𝜔𝑜) 𝑑𝜔𝑖,
(1)
where 𝐿𝑖accounts for the incoming light, the variable 𝐹accounts
for the reflectance of the surface, and 𝑇depends on the point of the
surface we are evaluating, therefore, on the geometry.
The simulation of the radiance 𝐿𝑜can be seen as a convolu-
tion (spherical rotation) [Ramamoorthi and Hanrahan 2001] be-
tween each signal: incoming radiance 𝐿𝑖, material 𝐹and geometry
𝑇. Moreover, if we analyze 𝐿𝑜in the frequency domain (where
F is the Fourier transform), and apply the convolution theorem
Top-5 accuracy (Test HH)
St. Peters
Doge
Figure 13: Left: Top-5 accuracy for each reference illumi-
nation when St. Peters, a high-frequency illumination, is
the candidate illumination. Right: Top-5 accuracy for each
reference illumination when Doge, a medium-frequency
illumination, is the candidate illumination. Both results
have been obtained for Test HH. We can observe how, for
both candidate illuminations, participants seem to perform
better with high-frequency reference illuminations (Uffizi,
Grace, Ennis), they perform worse with medium-frequency
ones (Pisa), and have their worst performance with low-
frequency reference illuminations (Glacier). In addition, we
also observe that participants have slightly better perfor-
mance when St. Peters (high-frequency illumination) is the
candidate illumination. The error bars correspond to a 95%
confidence interval.
(𝑓∗𝑔= F (𝑓) · F (𝑔)) the value of F  𝐿𝑜
 becomes
F  𝐿𝑜
 ≈F  𝐿𝑖
 F  𝐹 F  𝑇.
(2)
Equation 2 shows how the frequency of the radiance 𝐿𝑜in the
final image is a multiplication of all the other signals 𝐿𝑖, 𝐹, and
𝑇in the frequency domain. Thus, the final image will only have
the frequencies that are contained within the three other signals.
Figure 14 shows how when we convolve two high-frequency signals,
the resulting one keeps the high-frequency content; on the other
hand, when we convolve a high- and a low-frequency signal, the
resulting one has most of its frequencies masked.
We can relate the observations made from Equation 2 to the
results on user performance that we obtained from the online be-
havioral experiments. We have seen that users seem to consistently
perform better when they recognize materials from high-frequency
geometries and illuminations. This finding is supported by Equa-
tion 2 since, to avoid filtering the frequencies of the material in the
stimuli, it should have a high-frequency geometry and illumina-
tion. Moreover, a low-frequency geometry (or illumination) could
filter out the frequencies of the illumination (or geometry) and the
material, thus yielding fewer visual features on the final image
and, as a result, worse users performance. This is consistent with
our findings from the analysis of first-order interactions for users
performance in Section 3.1.
Material categories. We have seen that the reflectance properties
seem to be one of the main high-level factors driving material recog-
nition. In this regard, we have also investigated users performance
using the classification by reflectance type proposed by Lagunas et
al. [2019], where the MERL database is divided into eight different
2021-02-05 01:37. Page 10 of 1–15.

The joint role of geometry and illumination on material recognition
Journal of Vision (JOV), Nov. 2020,
High frequency conv.
Low frequeny conv.
Figure 14: Example of a convolution (𝐹∗𝑇, green line) be-
tween a material (𝐹, orange line) and a geometry (𝑇, blue
line) with different frequency content. Left: We can see how
when we convolve a geometry and a material with high spa-
tial frequencies, the resulting convolution also retains high-
frequency content. Right: We observe how when geometry
has low spatial frequencies and the material has high spa-
tial frequencies, the resulting convolution does not retain
high-frequency content. Note that 𝑇and 𝐹are not necessar-
ily related to a real BRDF or shape from the ones reported
in this manuscript.
categories with similar reflectance properties. On average, users
perform best on acrylics, with a top-5 accuracy of 45.45%, while
they have their worst performance with organics, with an accuracy
of 10.22%. Figure 15 shows the top-5 accuracy for each category
in each reference illumination. Firstly, we observe that users seem
to perform better with high-frequency illuminations (Uffizi, Grace,
Ennis). However, we can see how fabrics and organics do not follow
this trend. We argue that fabrics and organics contain mostly mate-
rials with a diffuse surface reflectance (low-frequency) that clamp
the frequencies of the illumination and, therefore, yield fewer cues
in the final stimulus that is input to our visual system.
5
CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we have presented a thorough and systematic analysis
of the interplay between geometry, illumination, and their spa-
tial frequencies in human performance recognizing materials. We
launched rigorous crowd-sourced online behavioral experiments
where participants had to solve a material recognition task between
a reference and a set of candidate samples. From our experiments,
we have observed that, in general, humans appear to be better at
recognizing materials in a high-frequency illumination and geome-
try. We found that simple image statistics, image histograms, and
histograms of V1-like subband filters are not capable of capturing
human behavior, and, additionally, explored highly non-linear sta-
tistics by training a deep neural network on material classification
tasks. We showed that deep neural networks can accurately per-
form material classification, which suggests that they are capable of
encoding and extracting meaningful information from labeled prox-
imal image data. In addition, we gained intuition on which are the
main high-level factors that humans and those highly non-linear
statistics use for material recognition and found preliminary evi-
dence that such statistics and humans may share similar high-level
factors for material recognition tasks.
Limitations and future work. To collect data for the online behav-
ioral experiment we have relied on the Lagunas et al. [Lagunas et al.
2019] dataset which contains images of a diverse set of materials,
Figure 15: Users performance, in terms of top-5 accuracy,
for material recognition tasks taking into account the re-
flectance of the materials. We can observe how, on average,
users perform better for high-frequency illuminations (Uf-
fizi, Grace, and Ennis). Also, we can see how for classes, like
fabrics or organics, containing materials with diffuse sur-
face reflectance (low-frequency), users do not have better
performance with broad frequency content illuminations.
We argue that, since they have a low-frequency surface re-
flectance, even though there is a high-frequency illumina-
tion, those frequencies cannot be represented on the final
stimulus that is input to our visual system.
geometries, and illuminations that faithfully resemble their real-
world counterparts. This database focuses on isotropic materials,
which are capable of modeling only a subset of real-world materials.
A systematic and comprehensive analysis of other heterogeneous
materials, or an extension of this study to other non-photorealistic
domains, remains to be done. Our stimuli were rendered using
the sphere and Havran geometry, although those surfaces have
been widely used in the literature [Havran et al. 2016; Jarabo et al.
2014; Lagunas et al. 2019; Serrano et al. 2016], introducing new
geometries could help to further analyze the contribution of the
spatial frequencies of the geometry in our perception of material
appearance [Nishida and Shinya 1998]. Moreover, to select our
stimuli, we characterized the frequency content of real-world il-
luminations using the high-frequency content measure [Brossier
et al. 2004]. We focus on real-world illuminations, which are by
definition broadband, therefore, we do not impose nor limit their
frequency distribution in our analyses; carefully controlling the
2021-02-05 01:37. Page 11 of 1–15.

Journal of Vision (JOV), Nov. 2020
Manuel Lagunas, Ana Serrano, Diego Gutierrez, and Belen Masia
spatial frequency of the stimuli via filtering in order to isolate fre-
quency bands and study their individual contribution to the process
of material recognition is an interesting avenue of research.
In our additional experiments, we have investigated the asym-
metric effect in performance with a high-frequency reference ge-
ometry, compared to a high-frequency candidate geometry when
all stimuli are displayed at the same size. A rigorous study of the
interplay between display size, the spatial frequencies of the stimuli,
and how this affects humans performance on material recognition
remains an interesting line of future work. Furthermore, despite
the fact that our neural network was trained to classify materials,
without any sort of perceptual information, it achieved an agree-
ment with participants answers of 22.43%. This does not prove that
the neural network follows the same mechanisms as humans do
when performing these tasks. However, this result together with
the increase in popularity of deep neural networks, makes the anal-
ysis of the perceptual relationship between learned features and
the features that our visual system uses to recognize materials a
promising avenue to explore. Last, we hope that our analyses will
provide relevant insights that will help shed light on the underlying
perceptual processes that occur when we recognize materials and,
in particular, on how the confounding factors of geometry and
illumination affect our perception of material appearance.
