Published as a workshop paper at ”Machine Learning for Remote Sensing”, ICLR 2023
TOWARDS EXPLAINABLE LAND COVER MAPPING: A
COUNTERFACTUAL-BASED STRATEGY
Cassio F. Dantas†∗, Diego Marcos‡∗, Dino Ienco†∗
†UMR TETIS, INRAE, ‡Inria, ∗University of Montpellier, France

ABSTRACT
Counterfactual explanations are an emerging tool to enhance interpretability of
deep learning models. Given a sample, these methods seek to find and display to
the user similar samples across the decision boundary. In this paper, we propose
a generative adversarial counterfactual approach for satellite image time series in
a multi-class setting for the land cover classification task. One of the distinctive
features of the proposed approach is the lack of prior assumption on the targeted
class for a given counterfactual explanation. This inherent flexibility allows for
the discovery of interesting information on the relationship between land cover
classes. The other feature consists of encouraging the counterfactual to differ
from the original sample only in a small and compact temporal segment. These
time-contiguous perturbations allow for a much sparser and, thus, interpretable
solution. Furthermore, plausibility/realism of the generated counterfactual expla-
nations is enforced via the proposed adversarial learning strategy.
1
INTRODUCTION
Deep learning techniques have gained widespread popularity in the remote sensing field due to im-
pressive results on a variety of tasks such as image super-resolution, image restoration, biophysical
variables estimation and land cover classification from satellite image time series (SITS) data (Yuan
et al., 2020). Of particular importance, this last task provides useful knowledge to support many
downstream geospatial analyses (Inglada et al., 2017). Despite the high performances achieved by
recent deep learning frameworks on this task, they remain black-box models with limited under-
standing on their internal behavior. Due to this limitation, there is a growing need for improving
the interpretability of deep learning models in remote sensing with the objective to raise up their
acceptability and usefulness, as their decision-making processes are often not transparent (Adadi &
Berrada, 2018; Guidotti et al., 2019; Arrieta et al., 2020). Counterfactual explanation methods have
recently received increasing attention as a means to provide some level of interpretability (Wachter
et al., 2017; Verma et al., 2020; Guidotti, 2022) to these black-box models. Counterfactual explana-
tions aim to describe the behaviour of a model by providing minimal changes to the input data that
would result in realistic samples that result in the model predicting a different class.
For these perturbations to be more easily interpretable it is desirable that they are sparse and that
they can be identified with some semantic element of the input data. In the case of time series,
this would require to perturb a short and contiguous section of the timeline (Delaney et al., 2021).
Most papers on counterfactual explanations focus on image data, while much fewer concentrate on
time series (Delaney et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Ates et al., 2021; Guidotti et al., 2020; Lang et al.,
2022; Van Looveren et al., 2021; Filali Boubrahimi & Hamdi, 2022). To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first paper focusing more specifically on counterfactuals for remote sensing time series
data. The proposed approach generates counterfactual explanations that are plausible (i.e. belong
as much as possible to the data distribution) and close to the original data (modifying only a limited
and contiguous set of time entries by a small amount). Finally, it is not necessary to pre-determine a
target class for the generated counterfactual.
Paper outline
In Section 2 we describe the considered study case with the associated remote
sensing data. After detailing the proposed method in Section 3, we present the experimental results
in Section 4. Concluding remarks and future works are outlined in Section 5.
1
arXiv:2301.01520v2  [cs.LG]  20 Aug 2023

Published as a workshop paper at ”Machine Learning for Remote Sensing”, ICLR 2023
Figure 1: Study site location and corresponding ground truth.
Class
Label
Pixels
1
Cereals
9 731
2
Cotton
6 971
3
Oleaginous
7 950
4
Grassland
12 998
5
Shrubland
22 546
6
Forest
17 435
7
Bare soil
1 125
8
Water
1 205
Total
79 961
Table 1: Ground Truth statistics.
2
STUDY AREA
The study site covers an area around the town of Koumbia, in the Province of Tuy, Hauts-Bassins
region, in the south-west of Burkina Faso. This area has a surface of about 2338 km2, and is situated
in the sub-humid sudanian zone. The surface is covered mainly by natural savannah (herbaceous and
shrubby) and forests, interleaved with a large portion of land (around 35%) used for rainfed agri-
cultural production (mostly smallholder farming). The main crops are cereals (maize, sorghum and
millet) and cotton, followed by oleaginous and leguminous crops. Several temporary watercourses
constitute the hydrographic network around the city of Koumbia. Figure 1 presents the study site
with the reference data (ground truth) superposed on a Sentinel-2 image.
The satellite data consists of a time series of Sentinel-2 images spanning the year 2020 from Jan-
uary to December (Jolivot et al., 2021). All images were provided by the THEIA Pole platform1
at level-2A, which consist of atmospherically corrected surface reflectances (cf. MAJA processing
chain (Hagolle et al., 2015)) and relative cloud/shadow masks. A standard pre-processing was per-
formed over each band to replace cloudy pixel values as detected by the available cloud masks based
on the method proposed in (Inglada et al., 2016). Finally, from the spectral raw bands at 10-m of
spatial resolution the NDVI (Normalized Differential Vegetation Index) was derived.
The GT (ground truth) data for the study site is a collection of (i) digitized plots from a GPS field
mission performed in October 2020 and mostly covering classes within cropland and (ii) additional
reference plots on non-crop classes obtained by photo-interpretation by an expert. Finally, the poly-
gons have been rasterized at the S2 spatial resolution (10-m), resulting in 79961 labeled pixels. The
statistics related to the GT are reported in Table 1.
3
PROPOSED METHOD
Architecture
overview
The
proposed
GAN
(generative
adversarial
network)-
inspired architecture is shown in Fig. 2.
A counterfactual xCF is obtained for each
input sample x by adding a perturbation δ:
xCF = x + δ
(1)
The perturbation δ is generated by a Noiser
module learned with the goal to swap the
prediction of the Classifier. A Discrimina-
tor module is leveraged to ensure the gener-
ation of realistic counterfactual examples.
Classi er
Real
Counterfactual
(frozen)
Noiser
Class A
Class B
Discriminator
Figure 2: Schematic view of the proposed approach.
1http://theia.cnes.fr
2

Published as a workshop paper at ”Machine Learning for Remote Sensing”, ICLR 2023
Implementation and training
Regarding the different components of the proposed architecture,
we get inspiration from state-of-the-art satellite image time series land cover mapping literature.
For the Classifier network we leverage the Temporal Convolutional Neural Network (TempCNN)
model (Pelletier et al., 2019). This architecture has an encoder based on several one-dimensional
convolutional layers to explicitly cope with the temporal dimension of the time series data followed
by two fully connected layers and a final output layer to provide the multi-class decision. The same
architecture is used for the Discriminator module, replacing the output layer with a single neuron
with sigmoid activation. The Noiser module is implemented as a multi-layer perceptron network
with two hidden layers (each with 128 neurons) and an output layer with the same dimensionality of
the time series data. For each of the hidden layers, batch normalization, tangent activation function
and a drop-out regularization are employed in this order while for the output layer only the tangent
activation function is used. (to restrict the output domain between ±1, like the NDVI index). The
Classifier model is pre-trained on the training set and, then, frozen during the adversarial learning
stage —devoted to learn the Noiser and Discriminator modules (see eq. (4)).
The Noiser module is updated w.r.t. a composite loss made of three parts detailed further below.
Lnoiser = Lcl + λgenLgen + λw-ℓ1Lw-ℓ1
(2)
Class-swapping loss
To generate counterfactuals that effectively change the predicted class we
use the following loss which enforces the reduction of the classifier’s softmax output p(y(i)) for the
original label y(i), eventually leading to a change on the predicted class:
Lcl = −1
n
n
X
i=1
log(1 −p(y(i)))
(3)
Note that, conversely to standard literature (Filali Boubrahimi & Hamdi, 2022; Lang et al., 2022)
in which a target class for the counterfactual example is chosen a priori, here we purposely do not
enforce the prediction of a predefined target class. Instead, we let the Noiser free to generate a
perturbation δ that will change the classifier output to any other class different from yi.
GAN-based regularization for plausibility
Counterfactual plausibility is enforced via a GAN-
inspired architecture, where the Discriminator is trained to identify unrealistic counterfactuals while,
simultaneously, the Noiser module acts as a generator with the goal to fool the discriminator in a
two player game. The following non-saturating GAN losses are used for the adversarial training:
Ldsc = −1
n
n
X
i=1
h
log D(x(i)) + log

1 −D(x(i)
CF)
i
,
Lgen = −1
n
n
X
i=1
log

D(x(i)
CF)

(4)
where D(x(i)) denotes the discriminator’s output for a real input x(i) (with expected output 1) and
D(x(i)
CF) its output for a fake input x(i)
CF (with expected output 0). The loss Ldsc is minimized by the
Discriminator while Lgen is minimized the generator (i.e., the Noiser).
Unimodal regularization for time-contiguity
To generate perturbations concentrated around a
contiguous time frame we employ a weighted L1-norm penalization, with weights growing quadrat-
ically around a central time ˜t(i) chosen independently for each sample i ∈{1, . . . , n}:
Lw-ℓ1 = 1
n
n
X
i=1
T
X
t=1
d(t, ˜t(i))2|δ(i)
t |
(5)
where, for the i-th sample, ˜t(i) is chosen as the time step with the highest absolute value perturbation
˜t(i) = argmaxt |δ(i)
t |. To avoid biasing ˜t towards the center, we use the modulo distance d(t, ˜t) =
min
 (t −˜t)%T, (˜t −t)%T

which treats the time samples as a circular list. Besides enforcing
sparsity, penalizing the entries of δ also enforces the proximity (similarity) between xCF and x.
4
RESULTS
In this section, we analyse the class transitions induced by the counterfactual generation process and
discuss some examples of generated counterfactual explanations. In the appendix, we also discuss
per-class average perturbations (sec. A.1), assess the plausibility of the generated counterfactual
examples via an anomaly detection strategy (sec. A.2) and perform an ablation analysis (sec. A.3).
3

Published as a workshop paper at ”Machine Learning for Remote Sensing”, ICLR 2023
CEREALS
COTTON
OLEAGINOUS
GRASSLAND
SHRUBLAND
FOREST
B.
W.
CEREALS
COTTON
OLEAGINOUS
GRASSLAND
SHRUBLAND
FOREST
B.
W.
Figure 3: Summary of class transitions induced by the counterfactuals. Training data (left) and test
data (right), where B. stands for Bare Soil and W. for Water classes.
Figure 4: Examples of original time series with corresponding counterfactual from classes Shrub-
land (4) and Forest (5) on both ways.
Experimental setup
The Koumbia study case described in Section 2 was split into training, vali-
dation and test sets containing respectively 50-17-33% of the 79961 samples. Each data sample cor-
responds to a (univariate) NDVI time series with 24 time samples. First, the Classifier was trained
over 1000 epochs with batch size 32 and Adam optimizer with learning rate 10−4 and weight decay
of same value. The model weights corresponding to the best obtained F1-score on the validation
set were kept. Then, with the classifier weights frozen, the Noiser and Discriminator modules are
simultaneously trained over 100 epochs with batch size 128 and Adam optimizer. Finally, we em-
pirically set λgen = 5·10−1 and λw-ℓ1 = 5·10−2 on the reported results.
Visualizing class relationships
Class transitions induced by the counterfactual samples are sum-
marized in Fig. 3, with arrow widths proportional to the number of counterfactuals leading to that
specific transition. The left (resp. right) graph was generated by feeding the network with each of the
training (resp. test) data samples. They present very similar behavior, indicating that the proposed
method generalizes well to unseen data. We recall that class transitions are not pre-defined; on the
contrary, our method allows input samples to freely split-up into multiple target classes. Transitions
obtained in such a way thus bring up valuable insights on the relation between classes.
Counterfactual examples
Two illustrative examples of counterfactual explanations are shown in
Fig. 4. It is interesting to observe the similarity between the generated counterfactual and a real
data example from the same class (on the neighboring plot). To transform a Shrubland sample into
a Forest one, NDVI is added between the months of July and October. The opposite is done to
obtain the reverse transition, which is reassuring. One can verify that the obtained counterfactuals
do look realistic besides differing from the real signal only on a contiguous time window. These two
properties have been explicitly enforced via the losses in eqs. (4) and (5).
5
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a new framework to generate counterfactual SITS samples of vegetation
indices (NDVI) for the land cover classification task. The proposed method overcomes the restriction
to apriori define the source and the target classes for the counterfactual generation process while
leveraging adversarial learning to ensure realistic counterfactual samples. A possible future work
would be to extend the framework to the case of multivariate time series satellite data.
4

Published as a workshop paper at ”Machine Learning for Remote Sensing”, ICLR 2023
