256 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
Inference for Belief Networks Using Coupling From the Past 
Michael Harvey 
Dept. of Computer Science 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 

Abstract 
Inference for belief networks using Gibbs 
sampling produces a distribution for unob­
served variables that differs from the correct 
distribution by a (usually) unknown error, 
since convergence to the right distribution 
occurs only asymptotically. The method of 
"coupling from the past" samples from ex­
actly the correct distribution by ( conceptu­
ally) running dependent Gibbs sampling sim­
ulations from every possible starting state 
from a time far enough in the past that all 
runs reach the same state at time t = 0. Ex­
plicitly considering every possible state is in­
tractable for large networks, however. We 
propose a method for layered noisy-or net­
works that uses a compact, but often impre­
cise, summary of a set of states. This method 
samples from exactly the correct distribution, 
and requires only about twice the time per 
step as ordinary Gibbs sampling, but it may 
require more simulation steps than would be 
needed if chains were tracked exactly. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
Conditional probabilities for a Bayesian belief network 
can be calculated exactly only when the network can 
be transformed into a "junction tree" in which the 
number of states for each clique is manageable (see 
Cowell, et al 1999). For densely connected networks, 
clique sizes are large, and the time for exact calcula­
tions grows exponentially with the size of the network. 
Stochastic simulation methods, in particular Markov 
chain Monte Carlo methods such as Gibbs sampling, 
are not limited by the density of edges in the network, 
but suffer from other problems. A Gibbs sampling 
simulation converges to the desired invariant distribu­
tion asymptotically, but the distribution after a finite 
Radford M. Neal 
Dept. of Statistics and Dept. of Computer Science 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 

time differs from that desired by a generally uncertain 
amount. This error is greatest in the early part of 
the chain, which is generally thrown away in a burn­
in phase until it is felt that the error has dropped to 
within the desired tolerance. The burn-in time must 
usually be estimated because the rate of convergence 
of the Markov chain is not known theoretically. It is 
possible to overestimate and waste computing time, 
or underestimate and include states that are too far 
from the desired distribution. The conservative user 
might greatly overestimate the required burn-in time, 
to minimize the risk of getting the wrong answer. 
To overcome this problem of initialization bias, Propp 
and Wilson (1997) introduced exact sampling, also 
known as perfect simulation, using the method of "cou­
pling from the past" to obtain states from exactly the 
desired distribution. Instead of starting a single chain 
in some arbitrary initial state at time t = 0, dependent 
chains are started in every possible state at some time 
T < 0, far enough back that all the chains coalesce to 
a single state by time t = 0. The state at t = 0 then 
comes from the correct distribution, and useful sam­
pling can begin at that time with zero bias (ie, with 
no systematic error). The final results are still approx­
imate due to ordinary sampling error, but this error is 
easily controlled. 
Propp and Wilson showed how coupling from the past 
can be implemented efficiently when the state space 
can be partially ordered, with unique maximal and 
minimal states, in a way that is preserved through 
transitions. 
Belief networks lack this monotonicity 
property, so some other way of keeping track of all 
possible chains is needed. We show that it is possi­
ble to represent a set of chains by a single summary 
chain, whose states are sets of states of the original 
chain. The set of chains may contain both those that 
are of interest and spurious chains added at intermedi­
ate stages of the simulation due to this representation 
being imperfect. When the summary chain reaches a 
state that represents a single state of the original chain, 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
257 
coalescence of all the true chains (as well as the spu­
rious chains) will have occurred. The summary chain 
will then exactly represent the single coalesced chain, 
whose state at t = 0 comes from exactly the desired 
distribution. 
We apply this idea to inference for conditional distri­
butions in layered noisy-or belief networks, in which 
variables that are siblings are not also directly con­
nected. For these networks, the summary chain tran­
sitions can be performed efficiently. The computa­
tion time required will depend on the coalescence 
time of the true chains, plus the overhead caused by 
any spurious chains. We give examples showing that 
this overhead can sometimes be large. Other tests 
on randomly-generated two-layer networks of "dis­
eases" and "symptoms" show that the summary chain 
method works well enough to be of practical interest. 
Interestingly, the relative overhead compared to simple 
Gibbs sampling appears to be smallest for the most dif­
ficult problems, for which uncertainty concerning the 
necessary burn-in time would be greatest. 
2 
NOISY-OR BELIEF NETWORKS 
A belief network is a directed acyclic graph in which 
nodes represent random variables and edges describe 
how the joint distribution for these variables is ex­
pressed. 
A variable with an edge pointing to an­
other variable is a "parent" of that variable. For 
each variable A with parents B1, · · · , Bn, the condi­
tional probabilities P(A = a I B1 = b1, · · · , Bn = bn) 
are specified. 
Joint probabilities for all variables, 
P(A1 = a1,···, Am = am), are expressed in terms 
of the product of all forward conditional probabilities: 
II P(A; =a; I values, aj, for parents, Aj, of A;) 
The noisy-OR scheme is a way of specifying these con­
ditional distributions without explicitly listing proba­
bilities for every combination of values for the parent 
variables. It applies when variables take on values of 0 
and 1. Each parent variable influences the child vari­
able to be turned on (value = 1) when it is turned on. 
The degree of influence is determined by a weight, c;, 
on the link from parent X; to child W, giving the prob­
ability of turning on the child given that the parent X; 
is turned on. (If these weights are all one, the scheme 
is a deterministic OR-gate.) Variable W is also caused 
to be on for some other reason with probability pw. 
The conditional probability for W to be on is therefore 
P(W = 1 I values, x;, for parents, X;) 
1 - (1 - Pw) II (1 - c;) 
i : Xi=l 
3 
GIBBS SAMPLING 
Stochastic simulation using Markov chains was intro­
duced as a way of sampling from conditional distribu­
tions for belief networks by Pearl (1987, 1988). The 
method is now commonly known as Gibbs sampling. 
3.1 
Sampling using Markov chains 
A Markov chain is specified by a sequence of dis­
crete random variables x<o), X(l), · · ·, a marginal dis­
tribution, Po, for the initial state X(o), and tran­
sition probabilities for state x<t+I) to follow state 
x<t): 
P(x<t+I) I x(t)). 
The joint distribution of 
x<o), X(l), · · · is then determined upon making the 
Markov assumption that x<tl is conditionally indepen­
dent of x<t-k) for k > 1 given x(t-l). 
Stationary Markov chains have transition probabilities 
that do not depend on time, which can be represented 
with a transition matrix M. The value in the i1th row 
and /th column of M is the probability of a transi­
tion to state j given that the system is in state i. The 
state probabilities at time t (i.e., P(X(t) 
= j)) can 
be represented as a row vector Pt, with Pt = p0Mt. 
A distribution 7f is invariant if 7f = 7f M. 
An er­
godic Markov chain has an invariant distribution that 
is reached asymptotically no matter what the initial 
distribution Po is, i.e. limt-+oo Pt = 7f. 
The error in the distribution of the Markov chain at 
time t can be measured by the total variation distance 
between the state distribution at that time, Pt, and 
the invariant distribution, 7f. For a finite state space 
x, this is 
1 
IIPt- 1rll = 2 L IPt(x)- 1r(x)l. 
xEx 
Asymptotically, the error decays exponentially as 
error = ae-tfc 
where a and c are constants specific to the Markov 
chain. (See Rosenthal (1995) for further discussion.) 
If the user has an error tolerance E, the burn-in time 
for Gibbs sampling should be 
burn in time= -c ln(Eja) 
However, the convergence behaviour of the Markov 
chain is usually unknown (i.e., the constants a and 
c are not known). The conservative user will try to 
choose as large a burn-in time as is practical to lessen 
the chances of obtaining erroneous results. 
3.2 
Gibbs sampling for belief networks 
When the state, X, consists of several variables, 
X1, ... , Xn, a transition matrix that leaves a desired 

258 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
distribution 1r invariant can be built from a sequence 
of matrices representing transitions that change only 
a single variable. The transition matrix M, on the 
state space of all possible combinations of values for 
X1, . . .  ,Xn, is written as M = B1Bz···Bn, with Bk 
representing an update that changes only xk (i.e., en­
tries in Bk for transitions that change variables other 
than Xk are zero). In the Gibbs sampling scheme, the 
entries in Bk corresponding to changes in Xk alone 
are the conditional probabilities under 1r of the vari­
able Xk taking on its various values, given the current 
values of the other variables. Each such Bk will leave 
the distribution 1r invariant, and hence so will M. 
Pearl (1987) derives Gibbs sampling transition proba­
bilities for a belief network. When other variables are 
fixed, conditional probabilities for a particular variable 
depend only on its parents, its children, and its chil­
dren's parents. From the definition of belief networks, 
P(VkjV1, , · · ·, Vk-1, Vk+l, · · ·, Vn) 
ex: P(VkjV1, · · ·, vk-d II P(Y;jV1, · · 
· , vk, · 
· ·, V;-d 
j>k 
Here V1, V2, · · ·, Vk_1 are possible parents of Vk, and 
Vj for j > k are possible children of vk' since v is 
ordered with parents before children. This expression 
can be evaluated using the specified conditional dis­
tributions for a variable given its parents. When Vj 
is not actually a child of Vk, the corresponding factor 
can be omitted. 
The effect of sampling from the distribution of un­
known variables conditional on known values for other 
variables is achieved by simply keeping the values of 
the known variables fixed while the others are updated 
by Gibbs sampling, using the above probabilities. 
For noisy-or belief networks, if a child of the variable 
being updated has the value 0, the other parents of 
that child can be ignored in the calculation - child 
variables instantiated to 0 cannot transmit informa­
tion between parents. 
4 
EXACT SAMPLING 
Propp and Wilson (1997) proposed exact sampling us­
ing coupling from the past as a way to eliminate the 
error from using finite-length simulation runs. An er­
godic Markov chain will reach its equilibrium distribu­
tion if it is run for an infinite amount of time. There­
fore, if one were willing to wait forever, one could be 
sure that the correct distribution of the Markov chain 
had been reached. Propp and Wilson show that it is 
not necessary to wait forever to arrive at this result, 
however- that, at least when the state space is finite, 
there is a way to find the exact result with a finite num-
ber of computations. The state found in this way may 
be used as the starting state for a Gibbs sampling run 
that will be free of bias. 
4.1 
The idea of coupling from the past 
Propp and Wilson's idea is to run many chains from 
some time, T < 0, in the past, starting from every pos­
sible state. These chains are "coupled", by introducing 
dependencies between their transitions, in an attempt 
to make them coalesce to the same state by t = 0. If by 
time t = 0 they have all coalesced into one chain, then 
it can be said that no matter what state was started 
from at time t = T, the same state at time t = 0 results. 
If coalescence of chains started at t = T does not oc­
cur by time t = 0, then the procedure is repeated from 
further back in the past. 
At a minimum, the chains started from the various 
initial states must be dependent to the extent that 
two chains arriving at the same state henceforth use 
the same pseudo-random numbers for all their subse­
quent transitions. This causes chains to stay together 
once they first coalesce. Coalescence of all chains to 
a single state can be encouraged by introducing de­
pendencies beyond this. Such dependencies between 
chains do not invalidate the results as long as tran­
sitions made at different times remain independent. 
In this paper, we will consider only systematic Gibbs 
sampling, in which the variables of the network are 
updated in some sequence. Randomness is therefore 
required only for setting the value of the variable be­
ing updated according to its conditional distribution. 
A single real-valued pseudo-random number is suffi­
cient for making this random choice at each time step. 
Dependencies between chains are introduced by using 
the same such random number for all chains. If the 
chains are restarted from further back in the past, the 
same pseudo-random numbers as before are used at 
those times that were previously visited. 
Propp and Wilson show that if the chain is ergodic, 
this coupling from the past procedure will, with prob­
ability 1, lead to coalescence at t = 0 once the chains 
are started from sufficiently far in the past, and that 
the unique state of the coalesced chains at t = 0 is dis­
tributed exactly according to the chain's equilibrium 
distribution. 
When coalescence does not occur, it would be ineffi­
cient to try again with a chain started just one time 
step further back, since the new chain must be run all 
the way to time t = 0. It is more efficient to start runs 
at times t = -1, -2, -4, -8,-16, ···until coalescence 
finally occurs. Propp and Wilson (1997) show that 
this scheme is not far from optimal, requiring no more 
than four times the total number of simulation steps 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
259 
as would be needed if the actual coalescence time were 
somehow guessed. 
Note that a coalesced chain must be continued to time 
t = 0 to obtain a state from the correct distribution. 
Usually, coalescence occurs before reaching time t = 0, 
but if the state at that time is used, there is a bias 
introduced toward conditions that favour coalescence 
of chains. By always selecting the state at time t = 0, 
there is no dependence on the time that coalescence 
occurs. Also note that when the chains do not all 
coalesce, it is not valid to just throw away these chains 
and start new chains from further back. Instead, the 
old chains must be extended backwards in time- i.e., 
the old pseudo-random numbers generated at times 
that were already visited must be re-used. Otherwise, 
a bias is introduced by a preference for pseudo-random 
numbers that more easily allow coalescence. 
4.2 
Using states obtained by exact sampling 
The coupling from the past procedure just described 
can be performed a number of times, each time with 
new pseudo-random variables, thus obtaining multiple 
independent states from exactly the desired distribu­
tion. Each time the procedure is run, it must search 
for a starting time that allows the chains to coalesce. 
The procedure typically requires varying amounts of 
running time to complete (i.e., one must go back vary­
ing amounts of time in the past to cause the chains to 
coalesce). In practice, if any of these independent at­
tempts result in coalescence, it is reasonable to expect 
all such attempts to succeed within a reasonable time 
period, since the chances of coalescing further back 
in the past are independent of the failure to coalesce 
later on. However, if none of the runs coalesce in a 
reasonable time, one must declare the results indeter­
minate, which is superior to getting a wrong answer 
using Gibbs sampling with the same number of steps. 
A state from the invariant distribution found using 
coupling from the past may be used to initialize an or­
dinary Gibbs sampling run, which continues forward 
from t = 0. The states at times t 2: 0 will all have 
exactly the correct distribution. However, it is desir­
able to run the coupling from the past procedure sev­
eral times, in order to find a number of initial states 
from the invariant distribution, and to take samples 
from each of the chains that follow them. These ini­
tial states are more valuable than the states that follow 
them, since they are completely independent of each 
other, but they come at the cost of coupling chains 
from the past. At the same time, the following states 
are less valuable because of their dependence on prior 
states, but they can be produced at the much lower 
cost of one Markov chain transition. 
4.3 
Efficiently tracking chains 
Keeping track of every chain for every possible starting 
state is generally infeasible, since the size of the state 
space is exponential in the number of variables in the 
network. Propp and Wilson (1997) show that coupling 
from the past can be implemented efficiently when 
states can be given a partial order that is preserved 
through Markov chain transitions, by simulating just 
two chains, started from the minimal and maximal 
states. Furthermore, they show that for such mono­
tonic chains, coalescence cannot be much slower than 
convergence of the chain. This makes coupling from 
the past quite attractive for such problems. 
Belief network states usually cannot be ordered in a 
way that makes the Markov chain monotonic. An al­
ternative way of keeping track of every chain is there­
fore needed. There is also no known guarantee that 
the coalescence time will not be much greater than 
the time required for Gibbs sampling to converge to 
close to the desired distribution, though we know of 
no examples of this occurring. 
To address the efficiency issue, a scheme is needed to 
simplify the tracking of all the chains. For noisy-or 
belief networks, we attempt to summarize the chains 
with one chain whose states are sets of states of the 
original chain. The amount of work for each transition 
of the summary chain is the same as for two transitions 
of the original chain, provided that no sibling vari­
ables in the network are directly connected. However, 
our method does not track the set of chains precisely, 
which may slow detection of coalescence, though the fi­
nal result is still from the exactly correct distribution. 
Similar techniques, applied to simulation of Markov 
random fields, have been independently developed by 
Huber (1998) and by Haggstrom and Nelander (1999). 
5 
EXACT SAMPLING FOR 
NOISY-OR BELIEF NETWORKS 
We now show how coalescence of a large number 
of Markov chains for a layered noisy-or belief net­
work can be determined by simulating one summary 
chain, whose states approximate sets of states of chains 
started in all possible initial states. 
5.1 
Approximating a set of states 
The state space S of noisy-or belief networks has vari­
ables that take the values 0 or 1. We approximate a 
set of states in S by a single state in a state space 
S(?), in which variables take the values 0, 1, or ?. The 
mapping, (3, from such a state to a set of states of the 

260 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
original space is 
j3(V(?)) = { V E S : for all i, 11;,(?) = V;, or 11;,(?) = ?} 
That is, j3 selects all the states in S where every vari­
able matches the corresponding variable in S(?), with 
? matching either 0 or 1. For example, 
{  } 
110010 
110011 
(3(1 ?001 ?) 
Not every set of states in S can be represented exactly 
by a state in S(?). 
For instance, there is no exact 
representation of { 100010 } 
100011 
110010 
Hence, to avoid losing true states, the approximation 
will sometimes have to include spurious states as well. 
5.2 
Approximating a set of chains 
We now show how a single summary chain on S(?) can 
be simulated so as to approximate a set of chains on 
S, with none of the true chains being lost, though spu­
rious chains may be introduced, delaying coalescence. 
Like the original Gibbs sampling chain, transitions in 
the summary chain change one variable at a time. For 
each state in S, the variable being updated has some 
conditional probability of changing to a 1, given the 
other variables in that state. Over the set of states that 
the state of the summary chain maps to, this condi­
tional probability will have some maximum and some 
minimum value, which can be used to determine the 
transition probabilities of the variable in s(?), using 
the fact that the chains are coupled by using the same 
pseudo-random variable, U. We that assume U is uni­
formly distributed over [0, 1)), and that transitions in 
the original chain are determined by setting the vari­
able being updated to 1 if U is less than the conditional 
probability of a 1, and to 0 otherwise. Transitions in 
the summary chain can then be determined as follows: 
• If U is less than the minimum probability, then 
all the original chains would set the variable to 1. 
Set the variable in the summary chain to 1 also. 
• Similarly, if U is greater then or equal to the max­
imum probability, set the variable in the summary 
chain to 0. 
• If U is between the minimum and maximum prob­
abilities, then some of the original chains would 
set the variable to 0 and some would set it to 1. 
To represent this, set the variable in the summary 
chain to ?. 
Transitions done this way do not lose track of any 
of the true chains, but spurious chains may be intro­
duced. For example, consider a transition in the sum­
mary chain that changes the last variable of 1 ?0010 
(which j3 maps to {100010, 110010}), and suppose 
that in the original chains, the transitions from these 
two states are to states with different values for the 
last variable (e.g., 100010 --t 100010 and 110010 --t 
110011). The transition in the summary chain will 
have to be to the state 1?001?, which maps to four 
states of S, rather than the previous two states. Hence 
two spurious chains have been introduced. 
5.3 
Efficient simulation of the summary chain 
It is possible to determine the minimum and maxi­
mum of the conditional probability used in updating 
vk, which is P(Vk = 1 I vl, . . . , Vk-1, vk+l, . .. , Vn), 
over all V in j3(S(7)), without exhaustive search, by 
examining just two judiciously chosen two states in 
j3(S(?)), for which this conditional probability will take 
on its minimum and maximum value. Let pa(V;) be 
parents of V;, and c(V;) be the children of V;. The 
required conditional probability is minimized or max­
imized by minimizing or maximizing the ratio 
P(Vk = 1[pa(Vk)) x 
TI 
P(l'J [pa(l'J), Vk = 1) 
VjEc(Vk) 
P(Vk=O[pa(Vk))x 
TI 
P(Vj[pa(Vj), Vk=O) 
VjEc(Vk) 
The rules for selecting the appropriate states are 
summarized below, and justified in detail by Harvey 
(1999). 
For the minimum probability that Vk = 1, look at the 
V E j3(V(7l) for which: 
If l'J is a child or parent of Vk and l'i(?) = ? , 
then l'J = 0. 
If Vp is a parent of some child, l'J, of Vk, and 
l'i(?) = 1, and vPl = ?, then Vp = 1. 
For the maximum probability that Vk = 1, look at the 
V E j3(V(?)) for which: 
If l'J is a child or parent of Vk and l'i(?) = ? , 
then l'J = 1. 
If Vp is a parent of some child, l'J, of Vk, and 
l'i(?) E {1, ?}, and Vo?) = ?,then Vp = 0. 
Note that variables not mentioned above are irrelevant 
to computing the conditional probability for vk. 
These rules assume that sibling variables are not di­
rectly connected. 
That is, a child does not share a 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
261 
parent with its parent vk 0 If this were so, the two pos­
sible settings for the value of that parent could have 
opposite effects on the conditional probability ratios 
for vk being 0 or 1 given its parents, and for the child 
of vk having its present value given that vk is 0 or 
1. For layered networks, in which edges go only from 
variables in one layer to those in the layer immediately 
below, this problem does not arise. 
5.4 
Time required 
The summary chain is started at some time T < 0 in 
the state where all variables are set to ? , representing 
the set of all possible states. If none of the states of 
the network have zero probability, it is not hard to 
show that if T is early enough, then by time t = 0, the 
summary chain will have reached a state representing 
a single network state - i.e., one in which none of 
the variables are set to ? . Since no chains are lost 
in the approximation used, the true set of chains will 
have coalesced when this happens. However, because 
of spurious chains, the summary chain may need to be 
started at an earlier time than would be needed if all 
chains were tracked explicitly. 
The coalescence time for a simulation is the minimum 
time in the past sufficient to produce coalescence by 
t 
= 0. 
If simulation is done using start times of 
-T = 1, 2, 4, 8, ... , Propp and Wilson (1997) show that 
the expected total number of time steps simulated is 
around 2.89 times the coalescence time. Our noisy-or 
simulation scheme requires two calculations of condi­
tional probability at each time step, in order to obtain 
the minimum and the maximum. Therefore, the ex­
pected computational work, measured in terms of com­
putations similar to ordinary Gibbs sampling updates, 
is 5. 78 times the expected coalescence time. 
6 
COALESCENCE TIMES 
When the summary chain method is used, the coales­
cence time may be greater than if chains were tracked 
explicitly. Here we look at the relationship between 
these two coalescence times for some small problems 
by calculating the convergence rates of the original and 
summary chains from the eigenvalues of their transi­
tion matrices. The convergence rate of the original 
chain can be bounded in terms of its expected coa­
lescence time, and though the reverse is not true in 
general, we will here take the convergence rate to be 
indicative of the chain's expected coalescence time. 
6.1 
Transition matrix eigenvalues 
The convergence rate of an ergodic Markov chain is re­
lated to the magnitudes of the eigenvalues of the tran-
sition matrix M, as reviewed, for example, by Rosen­
thal (1995). There is a (left) eigenvector corresponding 
to the invariant distribution, 1r, of the Markov chain, 
with eigenvalue equal to 1. 
The magnitudes of the 
other (possibly complex) eigenvalues are less than 1. 
If the Markov chain is started in the initial distribu­
tion Po, the distribution at time n will be Pn = p0Mn. 

of convergence being determined by the magnitude of 
the eigenvalue whose magnitude is second-largest (i.e., 
the largest other than the eigenvalue associated with 
1r, whose value is 1). This eigenvalue will have a mag­
nitude less than one, but the closer it is to one, the 
slower will be the convergence of the Markov chain. 
The transition matrix of a summary chain will have 
all the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the original 
chain, including the eigenvector and eigenvalue corre­
sponding to the invariant distribution, to which both 
chains converge (if the original chain is ergodic). The 
summary chain will also have some eigenvectors and 
eigenvalues associated with states where some vari­
ables have ? as their value, and some of these eigen­
values may be larger in magnitude than the second 
largest eigenvalue of the original chain. Therefore, the 
summary chain cannot converge any faster than the 
chains it summarizes, and may converge more slowly. 
Below, we examine these eigenvectors and eigenvalues 
for some simple diagnostic networks in which a top 
layer of variables represent "diseases", which can cause 
various "symptoms", represented by variables in the 
bottom layer. Interest focuses on inference for what 
diseases are present, given certain observed symptoms. 
6.2 
Perfectly summarized networks 
The transitions of the chains being coupled from the 
past can be perfectly summarized in certain types of 
networks. A trivial example is a one-disease network 
with one or more symptoms that are known. When 
there is just one ? variable in the summary state, it is 
an exact representation of a set of two states. 
Any network with two unknowns can also be perfectly 
summarized. Although it is possible that the state 
of the summary chain does not exactly represent the 
set of states of the true chains, each variable of the 
summary chain summarizes the set of values for that 
variable correctly, even if some constraints between 
variables are missed. (This can be shown by induc­
tion, starting with the initial situation where all values 
are possible, and all summary variables are set to ? . ) 
When the true chains all coalesce, the summary chain 
will therefore show coalescence as well (i.e., it will have 
no ? values). 

262 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
Disease apriori probability: 
0.1 
Symptom apriori probability: 
0.0 
Noisy-or weight: 
1.0 
Figure 1: A network with two diseases. 
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the original chain 
states 
00 
01 
10 
11 
1 
.81 
0 
0.47368 
0.47368 
0.05263 
0 
0.49809 
-0.44828 
-0.04981 
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the summary chain 
1 
.81 
.81 
states 
00 
0 
0 
0 
0? 
0 
0 
0 
01 
0.47368 
0.49809 
-0.44178 
?0 
0 
0 
0 
?? 
0 
0 
0.49391 
?1 
0 
0 
0.05488 
10 
0.47368 
-0.44828 
-0.09631 
1? 
0 
0 
0 
11 
0.05263 
-0.04981 
-0.01070 
Table 
1: 
Eigenvectors and eigenvalues of transition 
matrices for the two-disease network. 
An example two-disease network is shown in Figure 1. 
The original Markov chain has 22 
= 4 states for the 
two disease variables (00, 01, 10, 11). The summary 
chain has 32 = 9 states (00, 0?, 01, ?0, ??, ?1, 10, 1?, 
11). The non-zero eigenvalues of the transition matri­
ces, with associated eigenvectors (as column vectors) 
are shown in Table 1. 
The largest eigenvalue in the summary chain apart 
from the eigenvalue of 1 is 0.81, the same as the second­
largest eigenvalue of the original chain. This suggests 
that coalescence using the summary chain will be just 
as quick as when explicitly tracking chains from all 
possible initial states, and indeed experimental results 
show that both methods perform identically. 
Simple networks such as these are not of great inter­
est by themselves, but they may exist as sub-networks 
within a larger network. 
In a noisy-or network of 
symptoms and diseases, a symptom that is known 
to be absent does not produce interactions between 
the diseases that are its potential causes. Sections of 
the network can effectively be independent, with sub­
states whose transitions do not interact with those of 
other sections. If a large network consists only of inde­
pendent single-disease sub-networks, for example, ex­
act sampling will converge in one iteration. Such sit­
uations are discovered at run-time, depending on how 
the symptoms are instantiated. 
6.3 
Imperfectly summarized networks 
In general, network transitions cannot be perfectly 
summarized by a chain in which states consist of 0/1/? 
variables, and this can lead to worse convergence for 
such a summary chain than for the original chain. A 
moderate example of this is shown in Figure 2. 
The non-zero eigenvalues and associated eigenvectors 
of the summary chain transition matrix for this net­
work are shown in Table 2. 
Some of these are the 
same as for the transition matrix of the original chain. 
The additional eigenvector, which has non-zero com­
ponents for states with ?-valued variables, has an 
eigenvalue whose magnitude is greater than that of 
all the other eigenvalues less than 1. Its magnitude of 
.97, compared to the next largest, v'0.8512 + 0.0752 6 
0.85, indicates moderately worse convergence for the 
summary chain. Experiments with this network show 
that detecting coalescence by t = 0 using the summary 
chain requires starting on average 53.9 time steps in 
the past, compared to only 17.6 time steps if every 
state is tracked explicitly. 
If the probabilities in the imperfectly summarized net­
work are more extreme, the summary chain is much 
worse than tracking every state. Figure 3 shows a net­
work that coalesces quickly when every state is tracked 
explicitly, and hence must also converge quickly when 
ordinary Gibbs sampling is done, but for which a very 
long time is needed (on average) for coalescence to be 
detected when using the summary chain. This sum­
mary chain's second-largest eigenvalue is .996, com­
pared to 0.352 for the original chain. The non-zero 
apriori symptom probability in this network helps the 
set of chains to coalesce quickly by allowing for other 
explanations of the evidence besides the diseases of the 
network - an effect that is lost when sets of states are 
approximately summarized. 
7 
EMPIRICAL TESTS 
Although the above results show that coupling from 
the past using a summary chain can perform poorly, 
empirical testing shows that it performs reasonably 
well on simulated two-level diagnostic networks. These 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
263 
Disease apriori probability: 
0.1 
Symptom apriori probability: 
0.0 
Noisy-or weight: 
1.0 
Figure 2: An imperfectly-summarized network. 
0.973 
0.851 + 0.075i 
0.851 - 0.075i 
states 
000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
00? 
0 
0 
0 
0 
001 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0?0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0?? 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0?1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
010 
0 
0 
0 
0 
01? 
0 
0 
0 
0 
011 
0.321 
-0.193 
0.338 + Oi 
0.338 + Oi 
?00 
0 
0 
0 
0 
?0? 
0 
0 
0 
0 
?01 
0 
0 
0 
0 
??0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
??? 
0 
0.441 
0 
0 
??1 
0 
0.049 
0 
0 
?10 
0 
0 
0 
0 
?1? 
0 
0.049 
0 
0 
?11 
0 
0.005 
0 
0 
100 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10? 
0 
0 
0 
0 
101 
0.321 
-0.191 
-0.152 - 0.283i 
-0.152 + 0.283i 
1 ?0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 ?? 
0 
0.045 
0 
0 
1 ?1 
0 
0.005 
0 
0 
110 
0.321 
-0.189 
-0.167 + 0.254i 
-0.167- 0.254i 
11? 
0 
0 
0 
0 
111 
0.036 
-0.021 
-0.019 + 0.028i 
-0.019 - 0.028i 
Table 2: Eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the summary 
chain for the imperfectly-summarized network. 
tests are described in detail by Harvey (1999). 
Tests were first performed using randomly-generated 
networks with 10 possible diseases and 10 symptoms 
whose structure was thought to be plausible for an 
actual application. The performance of coupling from 
the past using the summary chain was then compared 
to performance when every chain is tracked explicitly. 
For these problems, coalescence of the summary chain 
took at most 512 iterations, and using the summary 
chain was never hugely worse than tracking all chains. 
Further tests were run on networks of the same size 
that were constructed randomly so as to produce a 
larger fraction of difficult problems. In these tests, the 
summary chain tended to work well on the problems 
for which coalescence was slowest (even tracking every 
chain explicitly), with coalescence typically detected 
using the summary chain in only about twice the time 
that was required when tracking every chain explicitly. 
When coalescence is slow even when tracking all states 
Disease apriori probability: 
Symptom apriori probability: 
Noisy-or weight: 
0.001 
0.001 
1.000 
Figure 3: Extreme imperfectly-summarized network 
explicitly, it is likely (though not guaranteed) that 
Gibbs sampling would also converge slowly. Neverthe­
less, calculations show that if the convergence prop­
erties of the chain for these problems were somehow 
known, use of coupling from the past would be com­
putationally favourable only for users with quite a low 
error tolerance. In practice, the convergence proper­
ties are not known, however, which makes relying on a 
"burn-in" period problematic. Coupling from the past 
eliminates all uncertainty about whether the right dis­
tribution has been reached, which may make it attrac­
tive whenever it is computationally feasible.
