arXiv:1003.0902v1  [q-bio.GN]  3 Mar 2010
1
Markov Logic Networks in the Analysis of Genetic Data
Nikita A. Sakhanenko, David J. Galas∗
Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA

Abstract
Complex, non-additive genetic interactions are common and can be critical in determining phenotypes.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and similar statistical studies of linkage data, however, assume
additive models of gene interactions in looking for associations between genotype and phenotype. In
general, these statistical methods view the compound eﬀects of multiple genes on a phenotype as a
sum of partial inﬂuences of each individual gene and can often miss a substantial part of the heritable
eﬀect. Such methods do not make use of any biological knowledge about underlying genotype-phenotype
mechanisms. Modeling approaches from the Artiﬁcial Intelligence ﬁeld that incorporate deterministic
knowledge into models while performing statistical analysis can be applied to include prior knowledge in
genetic analysis. We chose to use the most general such approach, Markov Logic Networks (MLNs), that
employs ﬁrst-order logic as a framework for combining deterministic knowledge with statistical analysis.
Using simple, logistic regression-type MLNs we have been able to replicate the results of traditional
statistical methods. Moreover, we show that even with quite simple models we are able to go beyond
ﬁnding independent markers linked to a phenotype by using joint inference that avoids an independence
assumption.
The method is applied to genetic data on yeast sporulation, a phenotype known to be
governed by non-linear interactions between genes. In addition to detecting all of the previously identiﬁed
loci associated with sporulation, our method is able to identify four additional loci with small eﬀects on
sporulation. Since their eﬀect on sporulation is small, these four loci were not detected with standard
statistical methods that do not account for dependence between markers due to gene interactions. We
show how gene interactions can be detected using more complex models, which in turn can be used as
a general framework for incorporating systems biology with genetics. Such future work that embodies
systems knowledge in probabilistic models is proposed.

2
Author Summary
We have taken up the challenge of devising a framework for the analysis of genetic data that is fully
functional in the usual statistical correlation analysis used in genome-wide association studies, but also
capable of incorporating prior knowledge about biological systems relevant to the genetic phenotypes.
We develop a general genetic analysis approach that meets this challenge. We adapt an AI method for
learning models, called Markov Logic Networks, that is based on the fusion of Markov Random Fields
with ﬁrst order logic. Our adaption of the Markov Logic Network method for genetics allows very complex
constraints and a wide variety of model classes to be imposed on probabilistic, statistical analysis. We
illustrate the use of the method by analyzing a data set based on sporulation eﬃciency from yeast, in
which we demonstrate gene interactions and identify a number of new loci involved in determining the
phenotype.
Introduction
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have allowed the detection of many genetic contributions to
complex phenotypes in humans (see www.genome.gov). Studies of biological networks of diﬀerent kinds,
including genetic regulatory networks, protein-protein interaction networks and others, have made it clear,
however, that gene interactions are abundant and are therefore of likely importance for genetic analysis [1].
Complex, non-additive interactions between genetic variations are very common and can potentially play
a crucial role in determining phenotypes [2–5]. GWAS and similar statistical methods such as classical
QTL studies generally assume additive models of gene interaction that attempt to capture a compound
eﬀect of multiple genes on a phenotype as a sum of partial inﬂuences of each individual gene [6,7]. These
statistical methods also assume no biological knowledge about the underlying processes or phenotypes.
Since biological networks are complex, and since variations are numerous, unconstrained searches for
associations between genotype and phenotype require large population samples, and can succeed only
in detecting a limited range of eﬀects. Without imposing any constraints based on biological knowledge
searching for gene interactions is very challenging, particularly when input data consist of diﬀerent data
types coming from various sources.
The major question that motivated this work is “Can we constrain traditional statistical approaches
by using biological knowledge to deﬁne some known networks that inﬂuence patterns in the data, and

3
can such approaches produce more complete genetic models?” For example, we might use the patterns
present in the genotype data to build more predictive models based on both genotype and phenotype
data. Note that the problem of using biological knowledge to constrain a model of genetic interaction is
closely connected to the problem of integrating various types of data in a single model. In this article
we employ a known Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) approach (Markov Logic Networks) to reformulate the
problem of deﬁning and ﬁnding genetic models in a general way and use it to facilitate detection of
non-additive gene interactions. This approach allows us to lay the foundations for studies of essentially
any kind of genetic model, which we demonstrate for a relatively simple model.
Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) is one of the most general approaches to statistical relational learning,
a sub-ﬁeld of machine learning, that combines two kinds of modeling: probabilistic graphical models,
namely Markov Random Fields, and ﬁrst-order logic. Probabilistic graphical models, ﬁrst proposed by
Pearl [8], oﬀer a way to represent joint probability distributions of sets of random variables in a compact
fashion. A graphical structure describing the probabilistic independence relationships in these models
allows the development of numerous algorithms for learning and inference and makes these models a
good choice for handling uncertainty and noise in data. On the other hand, ﬁrst-order logic allows us
to represent and perform inferences over complex, relational domains. Propositional (Boolean) logic,
which biologists are most familiar with, describes the truth state on the level of speciﬁc instances, while
ﬁrst-order logic allows us to make assertions about the truth state of relations between subsets (classes) of
instances. Moreover, using ﬁrst-order logic we can represent recursive and potentially inﬁnite structures
such as Markov chains where a temporal dependency of the current state on the state at the previous
time step can be instantiated to an inﬁnite time series. Thus, ﬁrst order logic is a very ﬂexible choice for
representing general knowledge, like that we encounter in biology.
MLNs merge probabilistic graphical models and ﬁrst-order logic in a framework that gains the beneﬁts
of both representations. Most importantly, the logic component of MLNs provides an interface for adding
biological knowledge to a model through a set of ﬁrst-order constraints. At the same time, MLNs can
be seen as a generalization of probabilistic graphical models since any distribution represented by the
latter can be represented by the former, and this representation is more compact due to the ﬁrst-order
logic component. Even so, various learning and inference algorithms for probabilistic graphical models
are applicable to MLNs and are thereby enhanced with logic inference.
One key advantage of logic-based probabilistic modeling methods, and in particular MLNs, is that

4
they allow us to work easily with data that are not independent and identically distributed (not i.i.d.).
Many statistical and machine learning methods assume that the input data is i.i.d., a very strong, and
usually artiﬁcial, property that most biological problems do not share. For instance, biological variables
most often have a spatial or temporal structure, or can even be explicitly described in a relational database
with multiple interacting relations. MLNs thus provide a means for non-i.i.d. learning and joint inference
of a model. While the input data used in GWAS and in other genetic studies are rich in complex statistical
interdependencies between the data points, MLNs can easily deal with any of these data structures.
There are various modeling techniques that employ both probabilistic graphical models and ﬁrst-order
logic [9–17]. Many of them impose diﬀerent restrictions on the underlying logical representation in order
to be able to map the logical knowledge base to a graphical model. One common restriction employed, for
example, in [12,13,15,16] is to use only clausal ﬁrst-order formulas of the form b1 ∧b2 ∧. . . ∧bn ⇒h that
are used to represent cause-eﬀect relationships. The majority of the methods, such as those introduced
in [10, 11, 15], use Bayesian networks, directed graphical models, as the probabilistic representation.
However, there are a few approaches [16,17] that instead use Markov Random Fields, undirected graphical
models, to perform inferences.
We use Markov Logic Networks [17] that merge unrestricted ﬁrst-order logic with Markov Random
Fields, and as a result use the most general probabilistic logic-based modeling approach. In this paper
we show this MLN-based approach to understanding complex systems and data sets. Similar to [18]
that proposed a Bayesian approach that can be used to infer models for QTL detection, our MLN-
based approach is a model inference method that goes beyond just hypothesis testing. Moreover, in
this paper we describe how we have adapted and applied MLN to genetic analysis so that complex
biological knowledge can be included in the models. We have applied the method to a relatively simple
genetic system and data set, the analysis of the genetics of sporulation eﬃciency in the budding yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In this system, recently analyzed by Cohen and co-workers [19], two genetically
and phenotypically diverse yeast strains, whose genomes were fully characterized, were crossed and the
progeny studied for the genetics of the sporulation phenotype.
This provided a genetically complex
phenotype with a well-deﬁned genetic context to which to apply our method.

5
Methods
Markov Random Fields
Given a set of random variables of the same type, X = {Xi : 1 ≤i ≤N} and a set of possible values
(alphabet) A = {Ai : 1 ≤i ≤M} so that any variable can take any value from A1 to AM (it is easy
to extend this to the case of multiple variable types). Consider a graph, G, whose vertices represent
variables, X, and whose edges represent probabilistic dependencies among the vertices such that a local
Markov property is met. The local Markov property for a random variable Xi can be formally written
as Pr(Xi = Aj | X \ {Xi}) = Pr(Xi = Aj | N(Xi)) that states that a state of random variable Xi is
conditionally independent of all other variables given Xi’s neighbors N(Xi), N(Xi) ⊆X \ {Xi}. Let C
denote the set of all cliques in G, where a clique is a subgraph that contains an edge for every pair of its
nodes (a complete subgraph). Consider a conﬁguration, γ, of X that assigns each variable, Xi, a value
from A. We denote the space of all conﬁgurations as Γ = AX. A restriction of γ to the variables of a
speciﬁc clique C is denoted by γC.
A Markov Random Field (MRF) is deﬁned on X by a graph G and a set of potentials V = {VC(γC) :
C ∈C, γ ∈Γ} assigned to the cliques of the graph. Using cliques allows us to explicitly deﬁne the topology
of models, making MRFs convenient to model long-range, higher-order connections between variables.
We encode the relationships between the variables using the clique potentials.
By the Hammersley-
Cliﬀord theorem, a joint probability distribution represented by an MRF is given by the following Gibbs
distribution
Pr(γ) = 1
Z
Y
C∈C
exp (−VC(γC)) ,
(1)
where the so-called partition function Z = P
γ∈Γ
Q
C∈C exp(−VC(γC)) normalizes the probability to
ensure that P
γ∈Γ Pr(γ) = 1.
Without loss of generality we can represent a Markov Random Field as a log-linear model [20]:
Pr(γ) = 1
Z exp
 X
i
wifi(γ)
!
,
(2)
where fi : Γ →R are functions deﬁning features of the MRF and wi ∈R are the weights of the MRF.
Usually, the features are indicators of the presence or absence of some attribute, and hence are binary.
For instance, we can consider a feature function that is 1 when some Xi has a particular value and 0

6
otherwise. Using these types of indicators, we can make M diﬀerent features for Xi that can take on
M diﬀerent values. Given some conﬁguration γX\{Xi} of all the variables X except Xi, we can have a
diﬀerent weight for this conﬁguration whenever Xi has a diﬀerent value. The weights for these features
capture the aﬃnity of the conﬁguration γX\{Xi} for each value of Xi. Note that the functions deﬁning
features can overlap in arbitrary ways providing representational ﬂexibility.
One simple mapping of a traditional MRF to a log-linear MRF is to use a single feature fi for each
conﬁguration γC of every clique C with the weight wi = −VC(γC). Even though in this representation the
number of features (the number of conﬁgurations) increases exponentially as the size of cliques increases,
the Markov Logic Networks described in the next section attempt to reduce the number of features
involved in the model speciﬁcation by using logical functions of the cliques’ conﬁgurations.
Given an MRF, a general problem is to ﬁnd a conﬁguration γ that maximizes the probability Pr(γ).
Since the space Γ is very large, performing an exhaustive search is intractable. For many applications,
there are two kinds of information available: prior knowledge about the constraints imposed on the
simultaneous conﬁguration of connected variables; and observations about these variables for a partic-
ular instance of the problem. The constraints constitute the model of the world and reﬂect statistical
dependencies between values of the neighbors captured in an MRF. For example, when modeling gene
association with phenotype, the restrictions on the likelihood of conﬁgurations of co-expressed genes may
be cast as an MRF with cliques of size 2 and 3 (see ﬁgure 1). In the next section, we give a biological
example involving construction of MRFs with cliques of size 3 and 4, and provide more mathematical
details.
Figure 1. An example of a Markov Random Field. The MRF represents four genes inﬂuencing a
phenotype with potentials V1, . . . , V4 (blue edges). This model restricts genetic interactions to two
pair-wise interactions with potentials V5, V6 (red cliques).

7
Markov Logic Networks:
Mapping First-Order Logic to Markov Random
Fields
Markov Logic Networks merge Markov Random Fields with ﬁrst-order logic. In ﬁrst-order logic (FOL)
we distinguish constants and variables that represent objects and their classes in a domain, as well
as functions specifying mappings between subgroups of objects, and predicates representing relations
among objects or their attributes. We call a predicate ground if all its variables are assigned speciﬁc
values. To illustrate, consider a study of gene interactions through the phenotypic comparison of wild
type strains, single mutants, and double mutants such as the one presented in [3]. Consider a set of
constants representing genes, {g1, g2}, gene interaction labels, {A, B}, and diﬀerence between phenotype
values of mutants, {0, 1, 2}. We deﬁne the following predicates: RelWS/2 (a 2-argument predicate which
captures a relation between a wild type and a single mutant), RelWD/3 (a relation between a wild type
and a double mutant), RelSS/3 (a relation between two single mutants), RelSD/4 (a relation between
a single mutant and a double mutant), Int/3 (an interaction between two genes). Using FOL we can
deﬁne a knowledge base consisting of two formulas:
∀x, y ∈{g1, g2}, ∀c ∈{0, 1}, ∀v, u ∈{0, 1, 2}, Int(x, y, c) ⇒(RelWS(x, v) ⇔RelSD(y, x, y, u))
∀x, y ∈{g1, g2}, ∀c ∈{0, 1}, ∀v, u, w ∈{0, 1, 2}, RelWS(x, v) ∧RelWS(y, u) ∧RelWD(x, y, w) ⇒Int(x, y, c).
The ﬁrst rule represents the knowledge that depending on the type of interaction between two genes,
there is a dependency between RelWS(x, v) and RelSD(y, x, y, u) relations. The second rule captures the
knowledge that three relations, RelWS(x, v), RelWS(y, u), and RelWD(x, y, w), together determine the type
of gene interaction.
Note that ﬁrst-order formulas deﬁne relations between (potentially inﬁnite) groups of objects or their
attributes. Formulas in FOL can be seen as relational templates for constructing models in proposi-
tional logic. Therefore, FOL oﬀers a compact way of representing and aggregating relational data. For
example, two ﬁrst-order formulas above can be replaced with 288 propositional formulas since variables
x, y, c can be assigned 2 diﬀerent values and variables u, v, w can be assigned 3 values. Moreover, us-
ing representational power of FOL, we can specify inﬁnite structures such as temporal relations, e.g.,
Expression(e1, t1) ∧NextTimeStep(t1, t2) ⇒Expression(e2, t2), that can give rise to a theoretically
inﬁnite number of propositions.

8
The principal limitation of any strictly formal logic system is that it is not suitable for real applications
where data contain uncertainty and noise. For example, the formulas speciﬁed earlier hold for the real
data most of the time, but not always. If there is at least one data point where a formula does not hold,
then the entire model is disregarded as being false. The two allowed states, true or false, is equivalent
to allowing only probability values 1 or 0. Markov Logic Networks, however, relax this constraint by
allowing the model with unsatisﬁed formula with a lesser probability than one. The model with the
smallest number of unsatisﬁed formulas will then be the most probable.
Markov Logic Networks (MLNs) extend FOL by assigning a weight to each formula indicating its
probabilistic strength. An MLN is a collection of ﬁrst-order formulas Fi with associated weights wi. For
each variable of a Markov Logic Network there is a ﬁnite set of constants representing the domain of the
variable. A Markov Logic Network together with its corresponding constants is mapped to a Markov
Random Field as follows.
Given a set of all predicates on an MLN, every ground predicate of the MLN corresponds to one
random variable of a Markov Random Field whose value is 1 if the ground predicate is true and 0
otherwise. Similarly, every ground formula of Fi corresponds to one feature of the log-linear Markov
Random Field whose value is 1 if the ground formula is true and 0 otherwise. The weight of the feature
in the Markov Random Field is the weight wi associated with the formula Fi in the Markov Logic Network.
From the original deﬁnitions (1) and (2) and the fact that features of false ground formulas are equal
to 0, the probability distribution represented by a ground Markov Logic Network is given by
Pr(γ) = 1
Z exp
 X
i
wini(γ)
!
= 1
Z
Y
i
exp (−Vi(γi)ni(γ)) ,
(3)
where ni(γ) is a number of true ground formulas of the formula Fi in the state γ (which directly cor-
responds to our data), γi is the conﬁguration (state) of the ground predicates appearing in Fi. Vi is a
potential function assigned to a clique which corresponds to Fi, and exp(−Vi(γi)) = exp(wi). Note that
this probability distribution would change if we changed the original set of constants. Thus, one can
view MLNs as templates specifying classes of Markov Random Fields, just like FOL templates specifying
propositional formulas.
Figure 2 illustrates a portion of a Markov Random Field corresponding to the ground MLN. We
assume a set of constants and an MLN speciﬁed by the knowledge base from the example above, where

9
a weight is assigned to each formula.
Figure 2. An example of a subnetwork of a Markov Random Field unfolded from a Markov
Logic Network program. Each node of the MRF corresponds to a ground predicate (a predicate
with variables substituted with constants). The nodes of all ground predicates that appear in a single
formula form a clique such as the one highlighted with red. The blue triangular cliques correspond to
the ﬁrst formula of the MLN and are assigned the weight of the formula (2.1). The larger rectangular
cliques, such as the one colored red, correspond to the second formula of the MLN with the weight 1.5.
An Example: Application to Yeast Sporulation Dataset
We applied our method to a data set generated by Cohen and co-workers [19]. They generated and
characterized a set of 374 progeny of a cross between two yeast strains that diﬀer widely in their eﬃciency
of sporulation (a wine and an oak strain). For each of the progeny the sporulation eﬃciency was measured
and assigned a normalized real value between 0 and 1. To generate a discrete value set we then binned
and mapped the sporulation eﬃciencies into 5 integer values. Each yeast progeny strain was genotyped at
225 markers that are uniformly distributed along the genome. Each marker takes on one of two possible
values indicating whether it derived from the oak or wine parent genotype.
Using Markov Logic Networks, we ﬁrst model the eﬀect of a single marker on the phenotype, i.e.,
sporulation eﬃciency. Deﬁne a logistic-regression type model with the following set of formulas:
∀strain ∈{1, . . ., 374}, G(strain, m, g) ⇒E(strain, v), wm,g,v,
(4)
for every marker m under consideration (at this point we consider one marker in a model), genotype value
g ∈{A, B}, and phenotype value v ∈{1, . . ., 5}. This Markov Logic Network contains two predicates, G

10
and E. Predicate G denotes markers’ genotype values across yeast crosses, e. g., G(strain, M1, B) captures
all yeast crosses for which the genotype of a marker M1 is B. Similarly, predicate E denotes the phenotype
(sporulation eﬃciency) across yeast crosses, for instance, E(strain, 1) captures all yeast strains for which
the level of sporulation eﬃciency is 1. The Markov Logic Network (4) contains 10 formulas, 1 marker
of interest times 2 possible genotype values times 5 possible phenotype values. Each formula represents
a pattern that holds true across all yeast crosses (indicated by the variable strain) with the same
strength (indicated by the weight wm,g,v). In other words, the weight wm,g,v represents the ﬁtness of the
corresponding formula across all strains.
Instantiations of the predicate G represent a set of predictor variables, whereas instantiations of the
predicate E represent a set of target variables (4). There are 748 ground predicates of G (assuming we
handle only one marker in a model) and 1870 ground predicates of E. Each ground predicate corresponds
to a random variable in the corresponding Markov Random Field (see the previous section for more
details). Since our MLN contains 10 formulas and there are 374 possible instantiations for each formula,
the corresponding log-linear Markov Random Field contains 3740 features, one for each instantiation of
every formula.
Learning the Weights of MLNs
Each data point in the original dataset corresponds to one ground predicate (either E or G in our example).
For example, the information that a genotype value of a marker M71 in a strain S13 is equal to A
corresponds to a ground predicate G(S13, M71, A).
Therefore, the original dataset can be represented
with a collection of ground predicates that logically hold, which in turn is described as a data vector
d = ⟨d1, . . . , dN⟩, where N is the number of all possible ground predicates (N = 2618 in this example).
An element di of the vector d is equal to 1, if the ith ground predicate (assuming some order) is true
and thus is included in our collection, and 0 otherwise. Note that this vector representation is possible
under a closed world assumption stating that all ground predicates that are not listed in our collection
are assumed to be false.
In order to carry out training of a Markov Logic Network we can use standard Newtonian methods
for likelihood maximization. The learning proceeds by iteratively improving weights of the model. At
the jth step, given weights w(j), we compute ∇w(j)L(w(j)), the gradient of the likelihood, which is our
objective function that we maximize. Consequently, we improve the weights by moving in the direction

11
of the positive gradient, w(j+1) = w(j) + α∇w(j)L(w(j)), where α is the step size.
Recall that the likelihood is given by
L(w | γ) = Pr(γ | w) = 1
Z exp
 X
i
wini(γ)
!
=
exp (P
i wini(γ))
P
γ′∈Γ exp (P
i wini(γ′)),
(5)
where γ is a state (also called a conﬁguration) of the set of random variables X and Γ is a space of all
possible states. Therefore, the log-likelihood is
log L(w | γ) = log Pr(γ | w) =
X
i
wini(γ) −log

X
γ′∈Γ
exp
 X
i
wini(γ′)
!
.
(6)
Now derive the gradient with respect to the network weights,
∂
∂wj
log L(w | γ) = nj(γ) −
1
P
γ′∈Γ [Z Pr(γ′)]
∂
∂wj
X
γ′∈Γ
exp
 X
i
wini(γ′)
!
= nj(γ) −
1
P
γ′∈Γ [Z Pr(γ′)]
X
γ′∈Γ
"
nj(γ′) exp
 X
i
wini(γ′)
!#
= nj(γ) −
X
γ′∈Γ
[ni(γ′)L(w | γ′)] .
(7)
Note that the sum is computed over all possible variable states γ′. The above expression shows that
each component of the gradient is a diﬀerence between the number of true instances a corresponding
formula Fj (the number of true ground formulas of Fj) and the expected number of true instances of Fj
according to the current model. However, computation of both components of the diﬀerence is intractably
large.
Since the exact number of true ground formulas cannot be tractably computed from data [17], the
number is approximated by sampling the instances of the formula and checking their truth values accord-
ing to the data.
On the other hand, it is also intractable to compute the expected number of true ground formulas
as well as the log-likelihood L(w | γ′). The former involves inference over the model, whereas the later
requires computing the partition function Z = P
γ′∈Γ exp (P
i wini(γ′)). One solution, proposed in [17],

12
is to maximize the pseudo-likelihood
ˆL(w | γ) =
N
Y
j=1
Pr(γj | γMBj; w),
(8)
where γj is a restriction of the state γ to the jth ground predicate and γMBj is a restriction of γ to what
is called a Markov blanket of the jth ground predicate (the state of the Markov blanket according to
our data). We elected to use this approach. Similar to the original deﬁnition of the Markov blanket in
the context of Bayesian networks [8], the Markov blanket of a ground predicate is a set of other ground
predicates that are present in some ground formula. Using the yeast sporulation example, the set of
ground predicates {∀m, ∀g | G(S1, m, g)} is the Markov blanket of E(S1, 1) due to the knowledge base (4).
Maximization of pseudo-likelihood is computationally more eﬃcient than maximization of likelihood,
since it does not involve inference over the model, and thus does not require marginalization over a large
number of variables. Currently, we use the limited-memory Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (L-BFGS)
algorithm from the Alchemy implementation of MLNs [21] to optimize the pseudo-likelihood.
Using MLNs for Querying
After learning is complete, we have a trained Markov Logic Network that can be used for various types
of inference. In particular, we can answer such queries as “what is the probability that a ground predicate
Q is true given that every predicate from a set (a conjunction) of ground predicates Ev = {E1, . . . , Em}
is true?” The ground predicate Q is called a query and the set Ev is called an evidence. Answering this
query is similar to computing the probability Pr(Q | E1 ∧. . . ∧Em, MLN). Using the product rule for
probabilities we get
Pr(Q | E1 ∧. . . ∧Em, MLN) = Pr(Q ∧E1 ∧. . . ∧Em | MLN)
Pr(E1 ∧. . . ∧Em | MLN)
=
P
γ∈ΓQ∩ΓE Pr(γ | MLN)
P
γ∈ΓE Pr(γ | MLN)
,
(9)
where ΓP is the set of all possible conﬁgurations where a ground predicate P is true, and ΓE = ΓE1 ∩
. . . ∩ΓEm.
Computing the above probabilistic query for majority of real application problems, which include
the computational problems posed by the complexity experienced in systems biology, is intractable.

13
Therefore, we need to approximate Pr(Q | E1 ∧. . . ∧Em, MLN), which can be done using various
sampling-based algorithms.
Markov Logic Networks adopt a knowledge-based model construction approach consisting of two steps:
1. constructing the smallest Markov Random Field from the original MLN that is suﬃcient for computing
the probability of the query, and 2. inferring the Markov Random Field using traditional approaches.
One of the commonly used inference algorithms is Gibbs sampling where at each step we sample a ground
predicate Xj given its Markov blanket. In order to deﬁne the probability of the node Xj being in the
state γj given the state of its Markov blanket we use the earlier notation.
Given a jth ground predicate Xj, all the formulas containing Xj are denoted by Fj. We denote the
Markov blanket of Xj as MBj and a restriction of γ to the Markov blanket (the state of the Markov
blanket) as γMBj. Similarly, a restriction of the state γ to Xj is denoted as γj. Recall that each formula
F of a Markov Logic Network corresponds to a feature of a Markov Random Field, where the feature’s
value is the truth value f of the formula F depending on states γ1, . . . , γk of the ground predicates
X1, . . . , Xk constituting the formula and denoted by f = F|γ1,...,γk. Note that F|γ1,...,γk can also be
shown as F|γ1,γMBj . Using this notation we can express the probability of the node Xj to be in the state
γj when its Markov blanket is in the state γMBj as
Pr(γj | γMBj) =
exp
P
Fi∈Fj wiFi|γj,γMBj

exp
P1
t=0
P
Fi∈Fj wiFi|Xj=t,γMBj
.
(10)
For the Gibbs sampling, we let a Markov chain converge and then estimate the probability of a
conjunction of ground predicates to be true by counting the fraction of samples from the estimated
distribution in which all the ground predicates hold. The Markov chain is run multiple times in order to
handle situations when the distribution has multiple local maxima so that the Markov chain can avoid
being trapped on one of the peaks. One of the current implementations, called Alchemy [21], attempts
to reduce the burn-in time of the Gibbs sampler by applying a local search algorithm for the weighted
satisﬁability problem, called MaxWalkSat [22].

14
Components of the Computational Method
The general overview of the computational method is given in ﬁgure 3. At the ﬁrst step, the method
traverses the set of all markers and assigns an error score to each marker indicating its predictive power.
An error score of a marker corresponds to performance of an MLN (4) based on this single marker (a
random variable m of (4) that essentially chooses the location of markers to use in the model has only
one value
the location of this single marker). The algorithm selects markers whose error scores are
considerably lower than the average: we selected the outliers that are 3 standard deviations below the
mean.
The current version of the method greedily selects a marker with the lowest score and appends it to a
list of ﬁxed markers (which is initially empty). The algorithm then repeats the search for an outlier with
the lowest score, but this time a marker’s score is computed using an MLN (4) that estimates a joint
eﬀect of the marker under consideration together with all of the currently ﬁxed markers on a phenotype
(the variable m takes on the locations of all ﬁxed markers and the marker under consideration). At each
iteration the algorithms expands the list of ﬁxed markers and rescans all of the remaining markers for
outliers. The method stops as soon as no more outliers are detected and returns the ﬁxed markers as
potential loci associated with the phenotype.
Our scanning for predictive genetic markers can be seen as an instance of the variable selection
problem. We use cross-validation to compare probabilistic models and select the one with the best ﬁt to
the data and the smallest number of informative markers. Using cross-validation we assess how a model
generalizes to an independent dataset, addressing the model overﬁtting problem and facilitating unbiased
outlier detection. Particularly, we use K-fold cross-validation which is illustrated in ﬁgure 3(A). The
data set is arbitrarily split into K folds, D1, . . . , DK, and K iterations are performed. The ith iteration
of cross-validation selects S
j̸=i Dj as a training dataset and Di as a testing dataset. The model is then
trained on the training dataset and the performance of the model is assessed using the testing dataset
resulting in a prediction error. The average of prediction errors from K steps, called a cross-validation
error, is used as a score of the model. In case of yeast sporulation eﬃciency dataset introduced earlier,
we used 11-fold cross-validation (since a population of 374 yeast strains can be evenly partitioned into 11
subsets with 34 strains in each). The results were generally insensitive to the cross-validation parameters.
Recall that we distinguish two types of variables, the target variables whose values are predicted,
and the predictor variables whose values are used to predict the values of the target variables. In the

15
Figure 3. Components of the computational method. This ﬁgure illustrates three major
computational components. We used cross-validation to estimate the goodness of ﬁt of a model. Panel
A depicts 4-fold cross-validation. The data is partitioned into four sets and at each iteration a model is
trained on three sets and then tested on the fourth set resulting in four prediction error scores that are
then averaged for a total cross-validation error. Panel B shows details of model training and testing.
Using training data we estimate the weights of each formula of an MLN template. The trained MLN is
evaluated on testing data resulting in an error score. We shuﬄe the order in the training data and the
order of the testing data and repeat the training and testing. The error scores after each evaluation are
averaged to produce the average error score of the MLN. Panel C shows how the components illustrated
in panels A and B are combined to search for the most informative markers. At the Nth iteration of
the search, given a data set and set of N −1 ﬁxed markers, the method traverses the set of all markers
and evaluates models constructed using the ﬁxed markers and a selected marker. Note that at the Nth
iteration, N-marker models consider the ﬁxed markers (N −1) as possible interactors with the next
marker we found. The method then selects the outlier model, adds the corresponding marker to the set
of ﬁxed markers, and repeats the traversal of the markers. The method stops when no outliers are found.
example above, sporulation eﬃciency of a yeast strain is a target variable, whereas genotype markers are
predictor variables. Note that in some cases we can treat variables as both targets and predictors (e.g.
gene expression in eQTL datasets). During the evaluation phase in the ith iteration of cross-validation
we consider the testing dataset Di. Using knowledge-based model construction approach, we build a
Markov Random Field that is small yet suﬃcient to infer the values of all target variables in the set
Di. The target variables are inferred based on the values of the predictor variables from Di (see section

16
“Using MLNs for Querying”).
The model prediction of a target variable X that can take on any value from {x1, x2, x3} can be
represented as a vector ˆv = ⟨p1, p2, p3⟩, where pj = Pr(X = xj | Di, ΘMRF ) is the probability of X to
take on a value xj given the testing data Di and the Markov Random Field with parameters ΘMRF . On
the other hand, the actual value of X (provided in the testing dataset Di) can be represented as a vector
v = ⟨v1, v2, v3⟩, where ∀j ̸= k, vj = 0 and vk = 1 iﬀX = xk in Di. Then the prediction error should
measure the diﬀerence between the prediction ˆv and the true value v. We used the Euclidean distance
d(ˆv, v) to compute the prediction error. This approach might make the comparison to other approaches
diﬃcult since the error can be a value that is not bounded by 0 and 1, but by 0 and
√
M, where M is the
size of the domain of X (3 in our example). Further computation is required to obtain values for model
accuracy, to explain variance, and other standard characteristics. On the other hand, Euclidean distance
is certainly suﬃcient for comparing predictions of diﬀerent models.
Due to the approximate nature of learning and inference in MLNs (see sections “Learning the Weights
of MLNs” and “Using MLNs for Querying”), two structurally identical models, trained on two data sets
that diﬀer only in the order of the samples, can generate predictions with slight diﬀerences. This is
due to the fundamental path-dependency of learning and inference algorithms in knowledge-based model
construction. For example, the order of training data aﬀects the order in which the Markov Random
Field is built, which in turn aﬀects the way the approximate reasoning is performed over the ﬁeld. Path-
dependency introduces artiﬁcial noise into predictions and considerably reduces our ability to distinguish
a signal with a small magnitude (such as a possible minor eﬀect of a genetic locus on a phenotype) from
a background.
In order to reduce the eﬀect of path-dependency on overall model prediction we shuﬄe the input data
set and average the resulting predictions. We employed an iterative approach, based on shuﬄing, for
denoising. At each iteration the model is retrained and reevaluated on newly shuﬄed data and the running
mean of the model prediction is computed (see ﬁgure 3(B)). The method incrementally computes the
prediction average until achieving convergence, namely until the diﬀerence between the running average
at the two consecutive iterations is smaller than T h for W consecutive steps. The parameters T h and
W are directly connected with the total amount of shuﬄing and re-estimation performed as illustrated
in ﬁgure 4.
In order to perform rigorous denoising, we select a lower value for the threshold T h (0.0001) and a

17
0
5
10
15
0
50
100
150
Number of markers fixed
Average number of shuffles
 
 
Th=0.0005,W=5
Th=0.0004,W=5
Th=0.0002,W=10
Th=0.0001,W=10
Figure 4. The amount of shuﬄing depends on the threshold and the size of the window.
Note that the number of iterations until convergence of the algorithm increases when the threshold
decreases or the window size increases. Note also that selecting tight stopping parameters tends to
allow the algorithm to identify more informative markers.
larger window size W (10). The shuﬄing-based denoising procedure is applied at each iteration of the
cross-validation. Averaging of the predictions after data shuﬄing reduces the amount of artiﬁcial noise
enabling the overall method for detection of genetic loci to distinguish markers with a smaller eﬀect on
the phenotype (the algorithm detects more informative markers as illustrated in ﬁgure 4).
There are many diﬀerent strategies to search for the most informative subset of genetic markers. In
this section we used a greedy approach in order to illustrate the general MLN-based modeling framework
presented in this paper. In the next section we show that MLN-based modeling that accounts for depen-
dencies between markers through joint-inference allows us to ﬁnd interesting biological results by using
a greedy search method. In order to be conﬁdent that the ﬁxed markers are meaningful, we manually
selected markers at each iteration of the search from the set of outliers and arrived at a similar set of
candidate loci (within the same local region).
Results
The analyses presented in this paper are based on the dataset from [19] containing both phenotype
(sporulation eﬃciency) and genotype information of yeast strains derived from one intercross. The results

18
are obtained using our method that searches for the largest set of genetic markers with the strongest
compound eﬀect on the phenotype. All the detailed information on the computational components of
our method is presented in the Methods section.
In their paper Gerke et al. [19] identiﬁed 5 markers that have an eﬀect on sporulation eﬃciency
including 2 markers whose eﬀect seems to be very small. Moreover, Gerke et al. provided evidence for
non-linear interactions between 3 major loci. The presence of conﬁrmed markers with various eﬀect and
non-linear interactions make the dataset from [19] an ideal choice for testing our computational method.
Our method allows us to deﬁne and to use essentially any genetic model. First we used a simple
regression-type model that mimics simple statisical approaches, like GWAS. At the ﬁrst stage, the method
compares the markers according to their individual predictive power. The amount of the eﬀect of a marker
on the phenotype is estimated by computing a prediction error score from a regression model based solely
on this marker. The top line on the left panel in ﬁgure 5 illustrates the error scores of all markers ordered
by location (X axis). In ﬁgure 5 we observe three loci (around markers 71, 117, and 160) with the
strongest eﬀect on sporulation eﬃciency, which were identiﬁed in [19].
At the next stage, our method adds the marker with the strongest eﬀect (marker 71) to all the
following models. This allows us to compare all other markers according to their predictive power in
conjunction with the ﬁxed marker 71. This time the prediction error score of a marker indicates how
well this marker together with the marker 71 predicts the sporulation eﬃciency.
The score is, thus,
computed from the regression model based on two markers: the marker 71 and a second marker. This is
an important distinction from traditional GWAS where the searches for multiple inﬂuential markers are
performed independently from each other. In our approach, using MLNs and in particular joint-inference,
the compound eﬀect of markers is estimated allowing us to see possible interactions between markers.
The method continues the iterations and selects 11 markers before the error no longer improves
suﬃciently and the computation stops.
Among the selected markers, 5 are the same loci previously
identiﬁed in [19] (markers 71, 117, 160, 123, 79), 3 are the markers next to the loci with the strongest
eﬀect (markers 72, 116, 161), and 3 are the new markers that have not been reported before (markers 57,
14, 20). In addition, the method identiﬁes another marker (marker 130) as a candidate for a locus that
has an eﬀect on sporulation eﬃciency, although this marker was not selected due to its weak predictive
power. Notice that even with a relatively simple model, such as logistic regression, and a quite stringent
criterion for outliers (3 standard deviations from the mean, a p-value 0.003 for a normal distribution) we

19
Figure 5. Prediction of sporulation eﬃciency using a subset of markers. This ﬁgure shows
the execution of the algorithm plotted as error scores vs markers for a number of models. The top line
in the left plot shows error scores of the models based only on a single marker plotted on the X-axis. A
green star indicates the outlier marker with the smallest error and purple stars depict other outliers
(markers whose error diﬀers from the mean error by 3 standard deviations). The second line shows the
error scores of the models based on a corresponding marker together with the previously selected
marker (indicated with the green star). All the following lines are interpreted in the similar way. The
left plot shows ﬁve markers with a large eﬀect. The rest of the identiﬁed markers (six markers with a
small eﬀect) are illustrated in the right plot.
are able to exceed the number of identiﬁed candidate loci. We argue that our method is more eﬃcient
at discovering markers with a very low individual eﬀect on phenotype that have non-trivial interactions
with other sporulation-aﬀecting loci due to the use of joint-inference of MLNs.
There are several distinct properties of our method that are important to note.
First, although
the method selects the neighboring markers of the three strongest loci, it does not select a neighbor
immediately after the original loci has been identiﬁed, because there are better markers to be found. For
example, after selecting the ﬁrst marker 71, the method ﬁnds markers 117 and 160, and only then selects
marker 72, which is the neighbor of 71. The method selects the next strongest marker at each stage that
maximally increases the compound eﬀect of selected markers. Second, our method does not ﬁnd markers
that do not add suﬃcient predictive power. The criterion for outliers determines when the method stops
and determines the conﬁdence that the added markers have a real eﬀect on the phenotype.

20
For each new marker (57, 14, 20, 130) we examined all genes that were nearby (diﬀerent actual
distances were used). For example for the marker 14 we considered all genes located between markers
13 and 15. Table 1 shows genes located near these newly identiﬁed markers that are involved in either
meiosis or in sporulation.
The simple logistic regression-type model that was used can be summarized using the ﬁrst-order
formula G(strain, m, g) ⇒E(strain, v), which captures the eﬀect of a subset of markers on phenotype.
In order to investigate gene-gene interactions we used a pair-wise model which can be summarized by the
formula G(strain, m1, g1) ∧G(strain, m2, g2) ⇒E(strain, v). The pair-wise model subsumes the simple
regression model, since whenever m1 and m2 are identical, the pair-wise MLN is mapped to the same set
of cliques as those from the simple MLN. However, the pair-wise model deﬁnes the dependencies between
two loci and a phenotype that are mapped to an additional set of 3-node cliques. The pair-wise model
allows us explicitly to account for the pair-wise gene interactions. When using the pair-wise model, the
joint-inference is performed over an MLN where possible interactions between two markers are speciﬁed
with ﬁrst-order formulas.
The assumption inherent in genome-wide analyses is that a simple additive eﬀect can be observed
when applying the pair-wise model to loci that do not interact: the compound eﬀect is essentially a sum of
the individual eﬀects of each locus. On the other hand, for two interacting markers, the pair-wise model
is expected to predict a larger-than-additive compound eﬀect. Since the pair-wise model incorporates
possible interactions, the prediction error of this model should be smaller than the error of a simple model
by a factor that corresponds to how much the interaction information helps to improve the prediction.
By using the pair-wise model, we investigated the presence of interactions between markers 71, 117,
160 which correspond to loci with the strongest eﬀect on sporulation eﬃciency. We denote the prediction
error of a simple regression model based on markers M1, . . . , Mn as errorS(M1, . . . , Mn), and the error
of a pair-wise model based on markers M1, . . . , Mn as errorP W (M1, . . . , Mn). Figure 6 compares the
prediction errors of the simple regression model based on one marker (red line) and the errors of the pair-
wise model based on two markers one of which is preset to 71 (blue line). Note that the baseline prediction
error of the pair-wise model is the same as errorS(71), which means that on average the choice of a second
marker in the pair-wise model does not aﬀect the prediction. There are, however, 2 markers that visibly
improve the prediction, namely markers 117 and 160. Note that the prediction error errorP W (71, 160)
(the right blue peak) is lower than errorS(160) (the rightmost red peak) by only a value roughly equal to

21
0
50
100
150
200
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
Markers (IDs)
Prediction error
 
 
simple
pair+71
Figure 6. Investigating the 71-117 loci interaction. This ﬁgure compares a standard
genome-wide scan made by a simple regression model based on a single marker (red line) and a scan
made by a pair-wise model based on two markers, one of which is preset to 71 (blue line). The green
lines represent the size of the leftmost red peak corresponding to the diﬀerence d between the baseline
prediction error of the simple model and the error errorS(71). Pink bars represent how much the
diﬀerence between errorS(117) and errorP W (71, 117) is larger than d. The large size of the leftmost
pink bar indicates a strong interaction between markers 71 and 117.
the diﬀerence between the average prediction errors of simple and pair-wise models (this value is equal to
the size of the leftmost red peak). The reduction of the prediction error, when combining markers 71 and
160, is additive, suggesting that there is no interaction between these two markers. On the other hand, if
we look at the eﬀect of combining markers 71 and 117, we can see that the prediction improvement using
the pair-wise model based on both markers (the size of the left blue peak) is considerably more than just
a sum of prediction improvements of two simple models independently (the leftmost and the middle red
peaks). The non-additive improvement suggests that there is an interaction between the markers 71 and
117.
Figures 7 and 8 show a similar analysis to that illustrated in ﬁgure 6 performed on the other two
markers. The analysis shown in ﬁgure 7 conﬁrms the interactions between markers 71 and 117 and,
additionally, suggests that there is an interaction between markers 117 and 160. Figure 8 conﬁrms the
interaction between 117 and 160 and the absence of the interaction between 71 and 160. One can see from
ﬁgure 8 that the leftmost blue peak indicating errorP W (71, 160) is a sum of errorS(71) and errorS(160)
(the pink bar next to the left pink star is extremely short). On the other hand, the rightmost blue peak

22
0
50
100
150
200
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
Markers (IDs)
Prediction error
 
 
simple
pair+117
Figure 7. Investigation of 117-71 and 117-160 loci interactions. This ﬁgure compares a
standard genome-wide scan using a single-marker model and a scan using a pair-wise model based on
two markers, one of which is preset to 117. See the caption of ﬁgure 6 for more details. Both pink bars
indicate the presence of non-additive interactions between markers 117 and 71 and markers 117 and 160.
is a lot more than just a sum of individual errors (the pink bar is tall). In fact, errorP W (117, 160) is
almost the same as errorP W (71, 160).
The two predicted interactions, 71-117 and 117-160, were experimentally identiﬁed in [19].
The
strength of these interactions is signiﬁcant enough to immediately stand out during the analysis in
ﬁgure 6. We next applied this analysis to the set of all nine identiﬁed loci (71, 117, 160, 123, 57, 14, 130,
79, 20) in order to quantify possible interactions between every pair of markers. For each two markers A
and B from the set of loci we compute the prediction errors of a simple model based solely on either A
or B, denoted as errorS(A) and errorS(B). We also compute the prediction error of a pair-wise model
based on both A and B, denoted as errorP W (A, B). Consequently the size of a possible interaction
between A and B, denoted as i(A, B), is estimated using the following expression:
i(A, B) = d(A, B) −d(A) −d(B)
= (median −errorP W (A, B)) −(median −errorS(A)) −(median −errorS(B))
= errorS(A) + errorS(B) −errorP W (A, B) −median.
(11)
Here median is a baseline of prediction error of a simple model based on a single marker. We averaged

23
0
50
100
150
200
0.84
0.86
0.88
0.9
0.92
Markers (IDs)
Prediction error
 
 
simple
pair+160
Figure 8. Investigating an interaction between markers 117 and 160. This ﬁgure compares a
standard genome-wide scan using a single-marker model and a scan using a pair-wise model based on
two markers, one of which is preset to 160. See the caption of ﬁgure 6 for more details. Note
errorP W (71, 160) that is almost the same as errorP W (117, 160) even though errorS(71) is considerably
lower than errorS(117). The tall pink bar on the right side of the ﬁgure indicates a non-additive
interaction between markers 117 and 160. On the other hand, the pink bar on the left is almost
non-existent indicating absence of an interaction between markers 71 and 160.
the errors over 10 independently computed iterations. We next determined how high the value i(A, B)
should be in order to conﬁdently predict an interaction between markers A and B. We selected 36 pairs
of randomly selected markers that were not from the set of nine informative markers and computed
i(A, B) for each pair. Since we do not expect any interactions between random, non-informative markers,
their i(A, B) values are used to estimate a conﬁdence interval for no interaction. We computed a mean
and standard deviation of the set of i(A, B) values corresponding to the randomly chosen markers. It is
estimated that a value of 2.54 standard deviations away from the mean completely covers the set of i(A, B)
values for all random markers, and we therefore argue there is a strong likelihood of interaction between
markers A and B whenever i(A, B) is more than 3 standard deviations away from the mean. Whenever
i(A, B) is less than 3 but more than 2.54 standard deviations away from the mean, we argue there is a
probable interaction between A and B. Estimated interactions between identiﬁed loci are illustrated as a
network of marker interactions in ﬁgure 9 where the color of each link represents the level of conﬁdence of
the corresponding interaction. We repeated the estimation of interactions by randomly selecting another
36 pairs of markers and computing the conﬁdence intervals for the new set (2.32 standard deviations).

24
The probable interactions identiﬁed from the ﬁrst experiment were conﬁrmed in the second experiment.
Two possible interactions, however, were identiﬁed in one experiment but not the other and are depicted
in ﬁgure 9 with dashed links. This is a result of a slightly shifted mean of the second set of 36 random
marker pairs relative to the ﬁrst set, and the marginal size of the eﬀect. Two interactions with very
large i(A, B) values, 71-117 and 117-160, were previously identiﬁed in [19]. We also found several smaller
interactions illustrated in ﬁgure 9 that have not been identiﬁed before.
Note that since we measure
absolute values i(A, B), it is not a surprise that interactions 71-117 and 117-160 are so large, since the
corresponding loci (71, 117, 160) are by far the strongest. Locus 117, which is involved in the strongest
interactions, corresponds to the gene IME1 [19], the master regulator of meiosis (www.yeastgenome.com).
Since IME1 is a very important sporulation gene, it is entirely reasonable that this gene is central to our
interaction network (ﬁgure 9).
Figure 9. Estimated network of gene-gene interactions. This ﬁgure shows a network of
estimated interactions between loci based on genetic data and sporulation phenotype. The color of the
links corresponds to the level of conﬁdence of interactions. The three darkest colors are associated with
the most likely interactions. The fourth color is associated with an interaction 123-117 that scored high
in the ﬁrst experiment (more than 3 standard deviations away from the mean), but lower in the second
experiment (2.5 standard deviations), although still above the conﬁdence level (2.32 standard
deviations). Two possible interactions depicted with the dashed lines with the lightest color scored
above the conﬁdence level in the ﬁrst experiment (2.54 standard deviations), but below the conﬁdence
level in the second experiment (1 standard deviation). Loci 160, 71, 117, 123, 79 were previously
identiﬁed in [19]. Moreover, the genes of the three major loci were detected: IME1 (locus 117), RME1
(locus 71), and RSF1 (locus 160) [19]. The two strongest interactions, 160-117 and 117-71, were also
identiﬁed in [19].

25
Discussion
The method presented in this paper provides a framework for using virtually any genetic model in a
genome-wide study because of the high representational power of MLNs. This power stems from the use
of general, ﬁrst-order logic conjoined to probabilistic reasoning. Moreover, the use of knowledge-based
model approaches that build models based on both data and a relevant set of ﬁrst order formulas [23]
allows us to eﬃciently incorporate prior biological knowledge into a genetic study. The generality of
MLNs allows greater representational power than most modeling approaches. The general approach can
be viewed as a seamless uniﬁcation of statistical analysis, model learning and hypothesis testing.
As opposed to standard genome-wide approaches to genetics which assume additivity, the aim of the
method described in this article is not to return values corresponding to the strength of individual eﬀects
of each marker. Our method aims at discovering the loci that are involved in determining the phenotype.
The method computes the error scores for each marker in the context of the others representing the
strength of each marker’s eﬀect in combination with other markers. It will be valuable in future to derive
a scoring technique for markers that can be used directly to compare with results of the traditional
approaches. In general, our approach provides a way of searching for the best model predicting the
phenotype from the genetic loci. Since the model and the corresponding joint-inference methodology
incorporate the relations between the model variables, we are able to begin a quantitative exploration of
possible interactions between genetic loci.
Our method shows promise in that it can accommodate complex models with internal relationships
among the variables speciﬁed. The development of a succinct and clear language and grammar based on
FOL for the description of (probabilistic) biological systems knowledge will be critical for the widespread
application of this method to genetic analyses. Achieving this goal will also represent a signiﬁcant step
toward the fundamental integration of systems biology and the analysis and modeling of networks with
genetics. Additionally, the development of the biological language describing useful biological constraints
can alleviate the computational burden associated with model inference. MLN-based methods, such as
ours, that perform both logic and probabilistic inferences are computationally expensive. While increases
in computing power steadily reduce the magnitude of this problem, there are other approaches that
will be necessary. Given such a focused biological language, we could tailor the learning and inference
algorithms speciﬁcally to our needs and thus reduce the overall computational complexity of the method.

26
Another future direction will be to ﬁnd fruitful connections between a previously developed information
theory-based approach to gene interactions [24] with this AI-derived approach. There are clear several
other applications of this approach in the ﬁeld of biology. It is clear that there are, for example, many
similarities between the problem discussed here and the problems of data integration.
Biomarker identiﬁcation, particularly for panels of biomarkers, is another important problem that
involves many challenges of data integration and that can beneﬁt from our MLN-based approach. Similar
to GWAS or QTL mapping, where we search for genetic loci that are linked with a phenotype of interest,
in biomarker detection we search for proteins or miRNAs that are associated with a disease state in a set
of patient data. Just as in genetics, we can represent biomarkers as a network because there are various
underlying biological mechanisms that govern the development of a disease. Often the most informative
markers from a medical point of view have weak signals by themselves. MLNs can allow us to incorporate
partial knowledge about the underlying biological processes to account for the inter-dependencies making
the detection of the informative biomarkers more eﬀective. It is clear that the approach described here
has the potential to integrate the biomarker problem with human genetics, a key problem in the future
development of personalized medicine.
