1 
 
Overcoming Misleads In Logic Programs by Redefining Negation  
M. A. El-Dosuky a, T. T. Hamza a , M. Z. Rashad a and A. H. Naguib b 
a Faculty of Computers and Information sciences, Mansoura University, Egypt 

b Faculty of Sciences, Mansoura University, Egypt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords: logic programming, negation as failure, incomplete information, justification 
 
1. Introduction 
Negation as failure and incomplete information in logic programs have been studied by many researchers, 
mainly because of their role in the foundations of declarative reading of logic programming. This paper gives 
a review of some of the definitions of the concepts related to of the declarative reading of logic programming. 
Then, the paper provides a framework to overcome misleads and to solve a misleading case study. 
 
The paper begins with reviewing the relevant work of contributions to logic programming emphasizing many 
concepts such as negation as failure, closed world assumption, incomplete information, and their 
consequences (Section 2). Then we comment on the standard definitions of the relevant logic programming 
concepts such as: compound terms, substitution, common instance, facts, rules, reduction, variables 
quantification, unifier, Most General Unifier (MGU), computation, and structured data (Section 3). 
Then we briefly discuss the semantics of logic programming. A logic program can have many semantics 
according the point of view. The common semantics are operational, denotational, and declarative (Section 
4). Then we present our framework for overcoming misleads in logic programs using negation as invalid 
(Section 5). Then we investigate the features of the presented framework in the next section. 
 
2. Related work 
Different research communities have investigated various aspects of the declarative readings of logic 
programming. 
Logic programming languages are a great tool for knowledge representation. The main non-monotonic 
feature is Negation As Failure [Clark1978] . It enables to express knowledge not readily expressible in 
classical logic. However, these languages cannot directly represent incomplete knowledge about the world. 
A consistent classical theory distinguishes between three types of sentences : provable, refutable, and 
undecidable.  However, a logic program answers either yes or no, with no counterpart for undecidable 
sentences which represent the incompleteness of information. The reason for this is due to the declarative 
semantics of logic programming automatically applies the closed world assumption [Reiter1978]. It states 
that each ground atom that does not follow from the facts in the program is assumed to be false. The causal 
logic [Bochman 2004] is shown to make any causal logic program satisfies the Negation As Default 
principle (alias Closed World Assumption). 
Many attempts are made to allow for the correct representation of incomplete information. The first is 
probably due to Jack Minker [Minker1982] . Another  attempt is to expand the language of logic programs 
with classical negation as failure by modal operators K and M defined with details in [Gelfond1994]. For the 
set of rules T and formula F, KF stands for "F is known to be true by a reasoner with a set of premises T" and 
MF means "F may be believed to be true". Incomplete information can be captured by communicating other 
intelligent parities [Rosati2003]. This framework is well-suited for representing situations in which an agent 
cooperates in a team, and each agent is able to communicate his knowledge to other agents in the team. 
Logic programming — and negation as failure — has many declarative readings. One view is that logic 
programming is a logic for default reasoning. In this view, negation as failure is a modal operator. In an 
alternative view, a logic program is interpreted as a definition. In this view, negation as failure is the classical 
objective negation [Denecker 2000]. 
There is an epistemological ambiguity that arises in the context of logic programming [Denecker 2004]. 
There are several logic programming formalisms, each has  a pair of a formal syntax and a formal semantics. 
[Denecker 2004] falsifies our assumptions that that each such pair has a unique declarative reading and for 
a program in several formal logics  shall its declarative reading is the same in each of them.  
Negation as failure and incomplete information in logic programs have 
been studied by many researchers In order to explains HOW a negated 
conclusion was reached, we introduce and proof a different way for 
negating facts to overcoming misleads in logic programs. Negating 
facts can be achieved by asking the user for constants that do not 
appear elsewhere in the knowledge base. 

2 
 
3. Preliminaries 
Definition: Facts 
A relation between objects is called a predicate . A relation is summarized in a simple phrase called a fact 
that consists of the relation name followed by the object or objects (enclosed in parentheses) .The facts ends 
with a period (.). Facts can also express properties of objects as well as relations, depending on arity. 
Examples : 
 
A relation: 
Jack likes Sarah 
likes( jack , sarah) 
A property: 
Kermit is green 
green ( kermit) 
 
Definition: Rules 
Rules enable you to infer facts from other facts. A rule has two parts Head and Body 
Head Å <subgoal1>,<subgoal2> , … , <subgoalN> 
The body of the rule consists one or more sub-goals . 
 
Definition: Compound terms 
Compound terms have the form: f(t1,t2,….,tn). where f is called functor,  ti is the arguments, and  n is the arity. 
A functor looks like fact, but it is not a fact . It’s just a data object, which you can handle in much the same 
way as a symbol or number. A functor does not stand for some computation to be performed. It’s just a name 
that identifies a kind of compound data object and holds its arguments together. 
Example:   successor(zero) 
 
Definition: Structured Data  
Structured data are constructed by grouping similar arguments of  a fact and giving a name to that group. 
Facts are the counterpart of tables, while structured data corresponds to records with aggregate fields.  
Example: 
A fact about a lecture course on logic given on Monday from 9 to 11 by prof. Jack in the Victory 
building, room A, can be represented as  
course (logic, monday, 9, 11, jack, victory, a). 
Using structured data, we can define a four-argument version of this fact as 
course (logic, time(monday, 9, 11),lecturer(jack), location(victory, a)). 
 
In a logic language, commonly Prolog, you can do this by declaring a domain containing the 
compound object date. For example, declaring the time: 
time_compound = time (symbol, integer, integer) 
 
Using the concept of primary key, we can rewrite this fact in terms of binary relations, each takes a 
specific information and the course name as a primary key. 
day (logic, monday). 
start_time(logic, 9). 
finish_time(logic, 11). 
lecturer(logic, jack). 
building(logic, victory). 
room(logic, a). 
It is possible to define  a set of retrieval rules to check a specific piece of information within the fact. 
lecturer(Course, Lecturer) Å course (Course, Time, Lecturer, Location). 
duration (Course, Length) Å  
course (Course, time(Day, Start, Finish), Lecturer, Location), 
plus(Start, Length, Finish). 
teaches(Lecturer, Day) Å 
course (Course, time(Day, Start, Finish), Lecturer, Location). 
 
Definition: Substitution  
Substitution is a finite set of pairs of the form Xi = ti. Where: Xi is a variable and ti is a term. Note that Xi ≠ Xj 
for every i ≠ j and Xi does not occur in tj. 
Example:  {X = jack} 
 
Definition: common instance 
C is a common instance of A and  B if it is an instance of A and an instance of B. In other word, if there are 
substitutions θ1 and θ2 such that C=Aθ1 is syntactically identical to Bθ2 
Example:  
A = plus(0, 3, Y) 
 
θ1 = {Y = 3} 
 
B = plus(0, X, X) 
 
 
θ2 = {X = 3} 
 
 
 
      C = plus(0, 3, 3) 

3 
 
Definition: Reduction 
A reduction of goal G by a program P is the replacement of G by the body of an instance of a clause in P, 
whose head is identical to the chosen goal. Example:  the goal grandparent(abraham, X)?   
Can be reduced to           parent (abraham, Y), parent(Y, X) 
with respect to the clause  :          grandparent(Z, X) Å parent (Z, Y), parent(Y, X). 
 
Definition: Variables quantification 
Variables in queries are existentially quantified, while in facts are universally quantified. A query 
p(T1,T2,…,Tn)? , which contain the variables X1,X2, ..., Xk  reads: 
"Are there X1,X2, ..., Xk   such that p(T1,T2,..., Tn)? " usually, existential quantification is usually omitted. 
Example: the query father (abraham, X)? reads : 
"Does there exist an X such that abraham is the father of X ? " 
A fact p(T1,T2,…,Tn)  reads : "For all X1,X2, ..., Xk ,where Xi  are the variables occurring in the fact p(T1,T2,..., 
Tn) , is true ". Logically, from a universally quantified fact one can deduce any instance of it. 
Example: From likes(X, apple) , deduce likes (abraham, apple)  
 
Definition: Most General Unifier (MGU) 
A unifier of two terms is a substitution making the terms identical. If two terms have a unifier, we say they 
unify. MGU of two terms is a unifier such that the associated common instance is most general. If two terms 
unify, all MGUs are equivalent.  
 
Definition: Computation 
a computation of a goal Q= Q0 by a program P is a sequence of triples (Qi, Gi, Ci) . 
where : Qi is a conjunctive goal, Gi is a goal occurring in Qi, and Ci is a clause AÅB1,…, Bk in P, that 
contains new variables not occurring in Qj,  0≤j≤i. 
 
For a detailed introductory discussion please refer to  ([Sterling& Shapiro 1994] and [Bochman1998]). 
 
4.Semantics of Logic Programs 
A logic program can have many semantics according the point of view. The common semantics are 
operational, denotational, and declarative. The operational semantics of logic programs are considered a 
way of describing the meaning of the programs procedurally. It is a set of ground goals that are instances of 
queries solved by a logic program P using abstract interpretation as shown in section 4.1. The declarative 
semantics of logic programs are derived from the term model, referred to as the Herbrand base. The 
declarative semantics is discussed in section 4.2. 
The denotational semantics of logic programs are defined in terms of a function which assigns meaning to 
the program. The function is over the domain computed by the program. Meaning is defined as the least 
fixpoint of the function, if it exists. The denotational semantics is out of concern of this paper, since 
Kowalski's famous slogan "Algorithms= Logic + Control" [Kowalski1979] implies that declarative logic 
statements can be interpreted as procedural computer instructions. We presume that declarative and 
operational semantics are sufficient to reflect the algorithm of a logic program. 
 
4.1. Interpreting logic programs 
In the next, we show the algorithm of an abstract interpreter for logic programs. It is used to construct the 
operational semantics for a logic program. Note that this algorithm depends on unify function which is 
mentioned in line 5. This function is defined by the Unification algorithm. 
 
Abstract interpreter for logic programs 
Input: a goal G and a program P 
Output: an instance of G that is a logical consequence of P, or no otherwise. 
Algorithm: 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
 
initialize the resolvent to G. 
 
while the resolvent is not empty do 
 
 
choose a goal A from the resolvent 
 
 
choose a (renamed) clause A’ Å B1, …, Bn from P 
 
 
such that A and A’ unify with MGU Θ. 
 
(if no such goal and clause exist, exit the while loop) 
 
 
replace A by B1, …, Bn in the resolvent  
 
 
 
apply Θ to the resolvent and to G 
 
if the resolvent is empty, then output G, else output no. 
 
 

4 
 
Unification algorithm 
Input: two terms T1 and T2 to be unified 
Output: Θ, the MGU of T1 and T2, or failure 
Algorithm: 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
Initialize the substitution Θ to be empty,  
Initialize the stack to contain the equation T1 = T2,  
Initialize failure to false. 
 
while stack not empty and no failure do 
 
 
pop X = Y from the stack 
 
 
case 
 
 
 
X is a variable that does not occur in Y: 
 
 
 
 
substitute Y for X in the stack and in Θ 
 
 
 
 
add X = Y to Θ 
 
 
 
Y is a variable that does not occur in X: 
 
 
 
 
substitute X for Y in the stack and in Θ 
 
 
 
 
add Y = X to Θ 
 
 
 
X and Y are identical constants or variables: 
 
 
 
 
continue 
 
 
 
X is f(X1, …, Xn) and Y is f(Y1, …, Yn) 
 
 
 
for some functor f and n > 0: 
 
 
 
 
push Xi = Yi, i = 1 … n, on the stack 
 
 
 
otherwise: 
 
 
 
 
failure is true 
 
if failure, then output failure else output Θ 
 
Tracing a logic program is a good way for capturing its declarative meaning. A trace of a computation of logic 
program (Qi, Gi, Ci) is a sequence of pairs (Gi, Θi'), where Θi' is the subset of mgu Θi computed at the ith 
reduction, restricted to variables in Gi . The meaning of a logic program is a set of ground deducible from the 
program. Example: tracing the appending of two lists. 
append([ ], Ys, Ys). 
append([X|Xs],Ys,[X|Zs])Å append(Xs,Ys,Zs). 
Trace: 
 
 
append ([a, b], [c, d], Ls) 
 
 
 
Ls = [a|Zs] 
 
 
 
append([b], [c, d], Zs) 
 
 
Zs = [b|Zs1] 
 
 
 
 
append([], [c, d], Zs1) 
 
Zs1 = [c, d] 
 
 
 
 
 
true 
 
 
 
 
 
 
output: Ls = [a, b, c, d] 
 
Implementation of Negation as failure  
Classical negation plays a special rule in logic programming[Alferes1998]. Negation as failure is 
implemented as not predicate. It is a meta-logical predicate, which means that it takes predicates as its 
argument.  To implement not predicate, cut and fail predicates are used as follows : 
     not(X) :- X, !, fail. 
     not(X). 
Fail always fails when the search reaches it. It corresponds to any impossible condition as 2=3. Cut, denoted 
!, always succeeds when the search reaches it. Cut is procedural and cannot be understood in non-
procedural terms. Cuts can be useful for reducing the search space of a program [Colmerauer& 
Roussel1996]. 
 
Dynamic Database 
The bottleneck of any system written in Prolog is the knowledge base (dynamic database). An internal 
database is composed of facts that you can add directly into and remove from program at run time. There 
are three predicates to add a single fact at runtime: 
• 
asserta asserts a new fact before the existing facts for the predicate,  
• 
assertz asserts a new fact after the existing facts for that predicate 
• 
assert behaves like assertz. 
To remove facts from the databases. retract can be used with the form: retract(<the fact> ) 
Retract will remove the first fact in the database that matches <the fact>, instantiating any free variables in 
<the fact>. 
For a detailed review for interpreting logic programs, you can refer to  ([Sterling& Shapiro 1994] , 
[Colmerauer1985] , and [Krzysztof1996]). 
 

5 
 
4.2. Declarative reading of logic programs 
One  feature of the declarative reading of logic programs that makes it very useful is the justification and 
explanation of HOW and WHY this semantics characterizes this declarative reading  [Denecker 2000]. 
Explanation is an important facility provided by expert systems [Merritt1989]. The system must be able to 
explain HOW it arrived a conclusion and WHY it is performing some computation. To answer how a 
conclusion was reached, work back through the inference chain. To answer why a computation is being 
performed, the system must state its current goal. Figure 1 applies this  concept on a simple rule. Decision 1 
was made true because Facts 1, 2, 3 are true. The system may ask the user if fact 3 is true, because it is 
trying to determine if decision 1 should be made. 
 
 
Figure 1: HOW and WHY Explanation of a simple rule 
 
Definition: Interpretation 
Let P be a logic program. Let U(P) be Herbrand Universe of P and B(P) be Herbrand Base of P. U(P) is the 
set of all ground terms that can be formed from the constants and function symbols appearing in P.  B(P) is 
the set of all ground goals that can be formed from predicates in P and the terms in the Herbrand universe. 
An interpretation of a logic program is a subset of the Herband base. 
 
For a review for the famous Herbrand theorem and new sequent forms of Herbrand theorem and their 
applications, you can refer to  [Lyaletski2006]. 
 
Definition: Model 
Let P be a logic program. Let I be an interpretation. I is a model for P if for each ground instance of a clause        
AÅ B1, …, Bn in P   A is in I if B1, …, Bn are in I. 
 
Definition: Minimal Model 
Let P be a logic program. Let M(P) be minimal model of P. M(P) is the intersection of all models. The minimal 
model is the declarative meaning of a logic program 
 
Definition: Mapping 
Let P be a logic program. Let TP be natural mapping from interpretations to interpretations.  
TP(I) = { A in B(P) : A Å B1, …, Bn, n ≥ 0, is a ground instance of a clause in P, and B1, …, Bn are in I}. 
 
Definition: Intended meaning 
Let P be a logic program. Let M  be the intended meaning of P. M is a set of ground goals intended by 
programmer for the program to compute. 
Definition: Correctness 
Let P be a logic program. Let M  be the intended meaning of P. P is correct with respect to M if M(P) is 
contained in M. 
 
Definition: Completeness 
Let P be a logic program. Let M  be the intended meaning of P. P is complete with respect to M if M is 
contained in M(P). 
 
For a comprehensive review for declarative reading of logic programs, you can refer to  ([Sterling& Shapiro 
1994] , [Lyaletski2006] , and [Denecker 2000]). 
 
5. Overcoming Misleads In Logic Programs by Redefining Negation  
5.1 Motivation 
Sometimes it is very hard to explain HOW a negated conclusion was reached. Consider the following verbal 
problem [Dow&Mayer 2004]:  
Marsha and Marjorie were born on the same day of the same month of the same year to the same 
mother and the same father yet they are not twins. How is that possible? 
 
Fact 1 
Fact 2 
Fact 3 
AND 
Decision  1 

6 
 
To represent that Marsha and Marjorie were born on the same day of the same month of the same year to 
the same mother and the same father we can use the person predicate as follows:  
person(marsha, father1, mother1, month1, year1), 
person(marjorie, father1, mother1, month1, year1). 
 
To represent that twins were born on the same day of the same month of the same year to the same mother 
and the same father we can use the twin predicate as follows 
twin (A,B) Å 
 
person(A, Father, Mother, Month, Year), 
 
person(B, Father, Mother, Month, Year). 
By tracing the goal of not being twins as the given example in section 4.1 
goal 
not(twin (marsha, marjorie)) 
we reach a conclusion of No. There is no way to explain HOW they are not twins, because of the 
contradicting definition of twin predicate. We need another representation that can provide an explanation for  
not being twins. 
 
5.2 Methodology 
In this section we provide and prove the key properties of our framework to explain HOW a negated 
conclusion can be reached. But first, let us review some important inference rules. 
 
Definition: Skolemization 
Skolemization is a way of eliminating existential quantifiers. Variables bound by existential quantifiers not 
inside the scope of universal quantifiers can be replaced by constants. 
Example:  
∃x[x<5]  can be changed to c<5, with c a suitable constant according to existential instantiation. 
For a review for the famous Skolemization and you can refer to ([Bürckert, et al 1996] and [Skolem1970]). 
 
Definition: Existential Instantiation 
For any sentence a, variable v , and constant symbol k that does not appear elsewhere in the knowledge 
base: 
α)
, } 
 / 
{ 
SUBST(
α
   
k
v
v
∃
 
For example, from ∃ x Kill(x, Victim), we can infer Kill(Murderer, Victim), as long as Murderer does not 
appear elsewhere in the knowledge base [Russel&Norvig 2003]. 
 
Theorem Negating facts can be achieved by asking the user for constants that do not appear elsewhere in 
the knowledge base 
Proof 
As noted in section 3, variables in facts are universally quantified, so a fact p(x1,…,xn, t1,…,tm) actually 
means : 
∀x1…∀xn p(x1,…,xn, t1,…,tm)   
where x1..xn are variables and t1 .. tm are terms. 
Negating the fact using De Morgan Laws  
¬∀x1…∀xn p(x1,…,xn, t1,…,tm) ≡ ∃x1…∃xn ¬ p(x1,…,xn, t1,…,tm) 
 
Applying Skolemization to eliminate existentially quantified variables with constants.  
 
∃x1…∃xn ¬ p(x1,…,xn, t1,…,tm)  ≡   ¬ p(c1,…,cn, t1,…,tm) 
 
By introducing another predicate s(n+1) with the form 
s(p, c1,…,cn, t1,…,tm)  ≡    p(c1,…,cn, t1,…,tm) 
 
So ∃x1…∃xn ¬ p(x1,…,xn, t1,…,tm)  ≡   ¬ p(c1,…,cn, t1,…,tm) ≡ s(¬p, c1,…,cn, t1,…,tm)   
 
To ensure that constants c1,…,cn do not appear elsewhere in the knowledge base, we rely on asking the 
user for them and remembering the answer as described in the next section. 
 
5.3 Asking the user and Remembering the answer 
The ask predicate [Merritt1989]  will have to determine from the user whether or not a given attribute-value 
pair is true for a specific person.  A new predicate, known is used to remember the user's answers to 
questions. It is not specified directly in the program, but rather is dynamically asserted whenever ask gets 

7 
 
new information from the user. Every time ask is called it first checks to see if the answer is already known 
to be yes or no. If it is not already known, then ask will assert it after it gets a response from the user. The 
arguments to known are: yes/no, attribute, person, and value.  
 
Our new version of ask looks like: 
 
ask(A, P, V) Å 
 
 
known(yes, A, P, V), !. % succeed if true and stop looking 
 
ask(A, P, V) Å 
 
 
known(_,A, P, V), !, fail.    % fail if false 
 
ask(A, P, V) Å 
 
 
write(A, " of person ", P,  " is ", V, " ? "),  
 
 
readln(Y), % get the answer 
 
 
asserta(known(Y, A, P, V)), % remember it 
 
 
Y = yes. % succeed or fail 
 
5.4 Case study 
Consider the verbal problem introduced in section 5.2 again. Using the concept of structured data we can 
define missing information to be anything that relate to the existing data and do not occur in the knowledge 
base. For example: consider "family" which can be derived from "father" and "mother". Also consider "day" 
which can be derived from "month" and "year ". Now, any two persons who share father and mother can 
have different families or different birth date, so they are not twins.  
Another way is to add one or more new objects that do not occur in the knowledge base. Thus, any two 
persons who share father, mother and birth date can have another person with the same  father, mother and 
birth date, so they are triplets not twins.  
 
The full corresponding PROLOG listing is shown below: 
domains 
name, father, mother, month, year = symbol 
missing =country(symbol, symbol); family(symbol, symbol); day(symbol, symbol) 
predicates 
person(name, father, mother, month, year); 
person(name, father, mother, month, year, missing) 
state (symbol, name, name) 
clauses 
person(marsha, father1, mother1, month1, year1). 
person(marjorie, father1, mother1, month1,year1). 
 
state (twin, A,B) Å 
 
person(A, Father, Mother, Month, Year), 
 
person(B, Father, Mother, Month, Year). 
state (not_twin, A,B) Å 
 
person(A, Father, Mother, Month, Year, country(X, A)), 
 
person(B, Father, Mother, Month, Year, country(Y, B)). 
state (not_twin, A,B) Å 
 
person(A, Father, Mother, Month, Year, family(X, A)), 
 
person(B, Father, Mother, Month, Year, family (Y, B)). 
state (not_twin, A,B) Å 
 
person(A, Father, Mother, Month, Year, day(X, A)), 
 
person(B, Father, Mother, Month, Year, day (Y, B)). 
state (not_twin, A,B) Å 
 
person(A, Father, Mother, Month, Year), 
 
person(B, Father, Mother, Month, Year), 
 
person(C, Father, Mother, Month, Year). 
 
Any missing data can be acquired using the ask predicate as follows: 
 
country (X, P) Å ask(country, P, X). 
 
day (X,P) Å ask(day, P, X). 
 
 
person(P, Father, Mother, Month, Year) Å 
 
 
ask if there is a person P of father  Father, mother Mother, month Month, and year Year 
 
 

8 
 
A trace of the goal         state (not_twin, marsha, marjorie)?     shows how Marsha and Marjorie can share the 
same father, mother and birth date but still not be twins as they have they have different families or different 
countries.  Another way of explanation is that although they share father, mother and birth date, there is 
another person with the same  father, mother and birth date, so they are triplets not twins.  
6. Conclusion and Future work 
In order to explains HOW a negated conclusion was reached, we introduce negating facts in a different way. 
Negating facts can be achieved by asking the user for constants that do not appear elsewhere in the 
knowledge base. 
In future work, we aim to investigate efficient implementation in detail. We aim to introduce a predicate 
named not to automatically perform the labor required. 
Another promising direction for future research is to incorporate the negating methodology proposed in this 
paper into one of the several extensions to PROLOG. The resulting, more flexible support for representing 
negation may constitute an important step towards built-in support for overcoming misleads in logic programs 
and form a qualitative leap for introducing creativity to machines.
