How do neurons operate on sparse distributed representations? A 
mathematical theory of sparsity, neurons and active dendrites1 
 
Subutai Ahmad1*, Jeff Hawkins1 
1Numenta, Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA 
* Correspondence: Subutai Ahmad, Numenta Inc., 791 Middlefield Road, Redwood City, CA 
94063 USA.  

Keywords: sparse coding, neurons, active dendrites, neocortex, NMDA spike. 
 
Abstract 
We propose a formal mathematical model for sparse representations and active dendrites in 
neocortex. Our model is inspired by recent experimental findings on active dendritic processing and 
NMDA spikes in pyramidal neurons. These experimental and modeling studies suggest that the basic 
unit of pattern memory in the neocortex is instantiated by small clusters of synapses operated on by 
localized non-linear dendritic processes. We derive a number of scaling laws that characterize the 
accuracy of such dendrites in detecting activation patterns in a neuronal population under adverse 
conditions. We introduce the union property which shows that synapses for multiple patterns can be 
randomly mixed together within a segment and still lead to highly accurate recognition. We describe 
simulation results that provide further insight into sparse representations as well as two primary 
results. First we show that pattern recognition by a neuron with active dendrites can be extremely 
accurate and robust with high dimensional sparse inputs even when using a tiny number of synapses 
to recognize large patterns. Second, equations representing recognition accuracy of a dendrite predict 
optimal NMDA spiking thresholds under a generous set of assumptions. The prediction tightly 
matches NMDA spiking thresholds measured in the literature. Our model matches many of the 
known properties of pyramidal neurons. As such the theory provides a mathematical framework for 
understanding the benefits and limits of sparse representations in cortical networks. 
1. 
Introduction 
A wealth of empirical evidence suggests the neocortex represents information using sparse 
distributed patterns of activity (Barth and Poulet, 2012). Representations are sparse because at any 
point in time only a small percentage of neurons are active while the rest are inactive.  
Representations are distributed because although each active neuron contributes information, it is the 
set of active neurons that determine what is being represented. The diversity of sparse distributed 
representations (SDRs) in neocortex is remarkable. Sparse representations exist in early auditory, 
visual and somatosensory areas (Hromádka et al., 2008; Weliky et al., 2003; Vinje and Gallant, 2000; 
Crochet et al., 2011). These representations correspond directly to sensory features such as visual 
                                                            
1 This manuscript has been submitted for journal publication and is under review. The arXiv journal ref will be 
updated once published. Until then please cite as arXiv:1601.00720 [q-bio.NC]. The authors welcome all comments. 

 
 
Sparse Distributed Representations 
 
2 
This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article 
edges and audio frequency bands. Representations in higher cortical areas are more abstract and 
categorical in nature.  These areas can encode concepts that have no direct correlation to sensory 
features (Kiani et al., 2007). Primary motor areas encode sparse motor maps that correspond to 
specific movements (Graziano and Aflalo, 2007). Premotor areas encode more abstract behavioral 
“plans” such as the notion of “grasping and inserting food into your mouth” (Graziano et al., 2002). 
The ubiquity of sparse distributed representations suggests that they enable operations essential for 
brain function and neural computation.  To function effectively these representations must have 
tremendous capacity and must be extremely tolerant to noise.   The exact laws governing their 
behavior are unknown. 
Our experimental understanding of the mechanics of how neurons operate on their inputs has evolved 
significantly over the last 15 years. The majority of computational models (starting with the 
McCulloch–Pitts neuron (McCulloch and Pitts, 1943)) assume a linear integration of inputs followed 
by a non-linear transfer function (Gazzaniga, 2004) (Figure 1A). Experimentally it is now well 
established that biological neurons are significantly more complex, particularly with respect to 
synaptic integration. Excitatory neurons, specifically pyramidal cells, have thousands of synapses 
(Spruston, 2008) and a complex dendritic structure (Figure 1B). Proximal synapses, those closest to 
the cell body, have a relatively large effect on the likelihood of a cell generating an action potential.   
[Figure 1 goes about here, please see end of manuscript] 
However, a majority of the synapses are distal, or far from the cell body. The activation of a single 
distal synapse (and its associated subthreshold potential) has almost no effect at the soma, but the 
coincident activation of a cluster of 8-20 spatially localized synapses generates a large regenerative 
NMDA spike (Spruston, 2008; Larkum et al., 2009; Antic et al., 2010). Synaptic activity must be 
spatially localized (typically within 20-300 microns) and tightly synchronized (typically within 1-5 
milliseconds) to generate an NMDA spike (Major et al., 2013; Kleindienst et al., 2011; Takahashi et 
al., 2012). The spikes can then depolarize the cell for an extraordinary duration, sometimes for 50-
200 milliseconds. Thus spatially localized dendritic segments act as coincidence detectors and 
provide a means for the many distal synapses to play a significant role in the cell’s activity (Larkum 
et al., 2004; Smith et al., 2013).  See (Antic et al., 2010; Major et al., 2013; Kastellakis et al., 2015) 
for detailed reviews of experimental findings and biophysical mechanisms. It is now generally 
understood that pyramidal cells contain a large number of non-linear active dendritic segments that 
independently modulate cell responses (Branco and Häusser, 2011; Major et al., 2013). The majority 
of information stored in a neuron may therefore be in the form of small independent synaptic 
clusters. A pyramidal neuron with ten thousand synapses could potentially have over one hundred 
such clusters. 
Sparse representations are ubiquitous in neocortex, and the basic properties of active dendrites and 
pyramidal cells are thought to be consistent throughout neocortex (Spruston, 2008). It behooves us to 
ask whether there exist a common set of governing principles related to active dendrites and sparsity 
that are universal and independent of modality. A number of studies have explored sparse 
representations from a theoretical perspective. Early work on sparse coding (Olshausen and Field, 
1997) suggests that sparse representations of the type found in V1 might satisfy information theoretic 
optimality criteria. Additional analysis (Kanerva, 1988; Rolls and Treves, 1990; Olshausen and Field, 
2004; Nadal and Toulouse, 2009; Babadi and Sompolinsky, 2014) suggests that sparse 
representations may be particularly convenient for learning and memory systems. However none of 
these studies have considered models with active dendrites. With a few notable exceptions (Poirazi 
and Mel, 2001; Legenstein and Maass, 2011) theoretical studies have ignored active dendrites 

 
 
Sparse Distributed Representations 
 
3 
altogether. The studies that do model active dendrites have typically not explicitly incorporated 
sparse representations.  
In this paper we develop a novel mathematical theory of sparse distributed representations and 
networks of neurons with active dendrites. We develop our analysis first from the perspective of a 
single dendritic segment and then from the perspective of a population of neurons. We propose that 
neurons form just a few synapses to a sparse subsample of active cells in activity patterns they need 
to recognize. In other words, a small set of spatially localized synapses on a dendritic branch can 
detect a prototypical pattern in a large population of active cells. We derive theoretical results that 
characterize the learning capacity and robustness of such representations in the context of neural 
tissue.  The analysis demonstrates that individual neurons have the capacity to learn and classify a 
large number of patterns under extremely unreliable and noisy conditions. The results hold even 
when dendrites form synapses with a small subset of the cells in the pattern they want to recognize.  
Additionally, computer simulations of the equations provide some detailed numerical insights, such 
as natural bounds on the sparsity of representations, and the specific number of synapses required to 
initiate dendritic spikes.  The results provide an explanation for the experimental findings and 
suggest that, through active dendrites, neurons can operate on sparse distributed representations in a 
highly robust and efficient manner. 
2. 
Materials and Methods 
We assume an abstract neuron model with a collection of active dendrites. Our model departs from 
the traditional integrate and fire neurons used in artificial neural network models (Figure 1A). Instead 
we treat the neuron as a set of independent dendritic segments, each detecting one or more patterns of 
activity in some presynaptic area. This is consistent with the models discussed in (Poirazi et al., 
2003; Larkum et al., 2009; Wu and Mel, 2009), a prototype of which is shown in Figure 1C.  
Note that in real neurons synaptic input can be classified by where the dendrite segment is on the cell 
(proximal, distal basal, and apical) and where the afferents that connect to the dendrite segment 
originate.  These dendritic zones are shown in Figure 1B and the location of the dendritic segment 
can affect somatic integration and spiking.  In this paper we do not explicitly model the conversion of 
dendritic spikes into somatic spikes. This is an active area of research and there are several existing 
theories. (Poirazi et al., 2003) treat the neuron as a two-layer perceptron. (Jahnke et al., 2013; Breuer 
et al., 2014) have incorporated active dendrites into recurrent neural networks for synchrony and 
recalling precisely timed sequences. We have proposed a model that utilizes networks of neurons 
with active dendrites to form a powerful sequence memory mechanism (Hawkins and Ahmad, 2016).  
Instead this paper focuses on the recognition capability of individual active dendritic segments, as 
shown in Figure 2, without regard to where the segment is on the neuron or the presynaptic source of 
synapses on the segment. In our analysis the segment is generic and agnostic – it simply receives 
some input and decides whether or not to initiate a dendritic spike. The overall recognition accuracy 
of a neuron in any of the above models will be bounded by the accuracy of its dendritic segments and 
the underlying representation. As such, an analysis of these two components can be used to provide 
insights into the overall capabilities of these models. 
2.1. 
Model Dendrite 
Figure 2 illustrates our segment model and how a segment detects patterns. We model the 
instantaneous activity of presynaptic cells as being either on or off. The effect of an individual 

 
 
Sparse Distributed Representations 
 
4 
This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article 
synapse is similarly binary. As shown in Figure 2A, a dendritic segment would typically be 
connected to a very small subset of all possible neurons in an input region. Although this paper 
focuses on a static analysis (i.e. we do not model learning), the existence of plasticity rules reliant on 
synapse clustering and NMDA spikes has been shown experimentally (Takahashi et al., 2012; 
Losonczy and Magee, 2006; Makino and Malinow, 2011; Makara et al., 2009). The specific subset of 
synapses within a segment will change over time as a result of structural plasticity (Chklovskii et al., 
2004). Therefore the number of potential connections to a segment via plasticity is much larger than 
the number of actual connections. The actual connections are a subset of prototype activity patterns 
to be recognized.  
[Figure 2 goes about here, please see end of manuscript] 
Formally, we denote the number of potential connections as 𝑛. A dendritic segment is represented as 
a binary vector 𝑫= 𝑏!, ⋯, 𝑏!!!  where a non-zero value 𝑏! indicates a synaptic connection to 
presynaptic cell 𝑖 and 𝑠= 𝑫 indicates the number of synapses on that segment. Experimental 
findings suggest that typical numbers for 𝑠 are between 20 and 300 (Major et al., 2013). 𝑛, the 
number of potential connections is assumed to be much larger (numbering in the thousands) leading 
to very sparse 𝑫.  
Similarly, the binary vector 𝑨! represents presynaptic activity (the activity of all potential 
connections) at time 𝑡. 𝑨! is of dimensionality 𝑛 with 𝑎! = 𝑨!  as the number of active cells. The 
activity is assumed to be sparse, i.e. 𝑎! ≪𝑛.  Figure 2B illustrates such a scenario. When a threshold 
𝜃 of the synapses on 𝑠 fire simultaneously, this is a “match” and causes a dendritic spike: 
𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ(𝑨!, 𝑫) ≡𝑨! ∙𝑫≥𝜃 
(1) 
The binary dot product computes the overlap between the presynaptic area and the synapses stored on 
the segment; it is simply the number of bits that are “1” in the same locations in both vectors. 
The use of very sparse vectors models the biology of active dendrites and is similar to the model in 
(Wu and Mel, 2009). It is a departure from most other computational models that typically assume 
full connectivity between a cell and its input area. An important property of our model is that activity 
in the presynaptic area that does not correspond to a synaptic connection on a segment has no impact 
on that segment.  The rest of this paper explores mathematical properties of the model dendrite as it 
relates to pattern recognition. 
 
3. 
Results 
3.1. 
Accuracy of detecting a single pattern on a single segment 
The synapses on segments represent a small subsample of the full patterns of activity in presynaptic 
areas. Given this, how reliably can a single segment detect the larger pattern? We assume that 
through learning the segment has created synapses to a subset of the active cells corresponding to a 
given pattern. The segment thus represents some prototypical pattern. We consider the problem of 
robustly detecting repeat occurrences of that pattern under various distortions. The degree to which a 
presynaptic pattern has to match the synapses is controlled by 𝜃, the NMDA spike threshold. Lower 
values of 𝜃 lead to more stability in recognition, i.e. the lower the value of 𝜃 with respect to 𝑠, the 
more deviation or noise the segment can tolerate. This comes at a cost since the lower the value of 𝜃 
the more likely the segment would falsely detect a match to a different pattern. Thus there are 

 
 
Sparse Distributed Representations 
 
5 
inherent tradeoffs between the number of synapses per segment, the segment threshold, and the 
number of potential connections that affect overall noise robustness and the possibility of false 
matches. This is illustrated conceptually in Figure 3.  
[Figure 3 goes about here, please see end of manuscript] 
In order to quantify this effect, we introduce the notion of an “overlap set”.  Let 𝑿 be a binary SDR 
vector with 𝑛 components. The overlap set of 𝑿 with respect to 𝑏,  Ω!(𝑛, 𝑎, 𝑏), is defined as the set 
of vectors of size 𝑛 with 𝑎 bits on that have exactly 𝑏 bits of overlap with 𝑋. The cardinality of this 
set, Ω!(𝑛, 𝑎, 𝑏) , is the number of such vectors. Assuming 𝑏≤𝑿 and 𝑏≤𝑎, Ω!(𝑛, 𝑎, 𝑏)  can be 
computed as the number of subsets of 𝑿 with 𝑏 bits ON, multiplied by the number of other patterns 
containing  𝑛−𝑿 bits, of which 𝑎−𝑏 bits are ON. In other words, this is: 
Ω! 𝑛, 𝑎, 𝑏
=
𝑿
𝑏
× 𝑛−𝑿
𝑎−𝑏
 
(3) 
We can now answer the following question: given a dendritic segment 𝑫 and random presynaptic 
activity pattern 𝑨𝒕, what is the probability of a match, 𝑃(𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑨!, 𝑫)?  This is simply the number 
of possible matching vectors divided by the number of possible patterns: 
𝑃(𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑨!, 𝑫) =
Ω! 𝑛, 𝑎!, 𝑏
!
!!!
!
!!
 
(4) 
It may be difficult to get an intuitive sense for this equation but as 𝑛, 𝑠 and 𝜃 increase, the 
denominator increases more than exponentially faster than the numerator. This means that the “grey 
area” representing the overall space in Figure 3 increases much faster than any of the “white areas” 
representing possible matches. In other words by increasing the parameters 𝑛 and 𝑠 it is easy to make 
the chance of false positives be extremely small.  
Eq. (4) computes the probability of a false positive, but what about false negatives? If a pattern 
corresponding to one stored on a segment is corrupted with noise, it is possible that fewer than 𝜃 
synapses will overlap.  Assume a dendritic segment 𝑫 represents a subsample of some presynaptic 
activity pattern 𝑨𝒕 using 𝑠 synapses.  Let 𝑨𝒕
∗ represent a corrupted version of 𝑨𝒕 such that 𝑣 of the ON 
bits are now off. If 𝑣 is sufficiently small, i.e. 𝑣≤𝑠−𝜃, the probability of a false negative is 0.  As 
𝑣 increases the probability of a false negative, i.e. 𝑨!
∗∙𝑫< 𝜃, increases. We can compute the 
probability of such false negatives in a similar manner as above, by using overlap sets. The number 
of vectors 𝑨𝒕
∗ that have exactly 𝑏 bits of overlap with 𝑫 is: 
Ω𝑫𝑎!, 𝑣, 𝑏
=
𝑠
𝑏× 𝑎! −𝑠
𝑣−𝑏 
(5) 
Thus the probability of a false negative is: 
𝑃(𝑨!
∗∙𝑫< 𝜃) =
Ω! 𝑎!, 𝑣, 𝑏
!
!!!!!!!
!!
!
 
(6) 
In general 𝑎!, the number of cells active in 𝑨! will be greater than 𝑠, the number of synapses on a 
segment. 𝑠 will thus represent a (possibly very small) subsample of the actual pattern but the 
equations suggest it is still possible to get robust performance yielding a very efficient storage 
mechanism.  To get a sense of the actual numbers for realistic scenarios, consider the following 

 
 
Sparse Distributed Representations 
 
6 
This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article 
example. Suppose 𝑛= 10,000 and 𝑠= 30. If the overall sparsity is 3% (i.e. 𝑎! = 300 active cells) 
the segment is subsampling a tenth of the bits in 𝐴!. With a threshold 𝜃= 12, the probability of a 
false match is about one in 10!". In other words, even with 10% subsampling there is a negligible 
chance of a false positive with a random pattern. Even with a 20% corruption of 𝐴! (i.e. 60 bits, 
double the number of synapses on the segment), the probability of a false negative is smaller than one 
in 10!. In Section 4 we will show the range of robust parameters through simulations.  
3.2. 
Accuracy of a population of segments 
Neurons have thousands of synapses arranged along numerous dendrite segments.  It only takes 8 to 
20 active synapses on a short section of dendrite to generate an NMDA spike (Major et al., 2013).  
Therefore a neuron has the potential to recognize hundreds of unique patterns.  Further, in any 
cortical region, millions of neurons are each simultaneously trying to recognize hundreds of patterns.  
Will the robustness exhibited by a single dendrite segment be maintained in a region of neural tissue?  
Consider the case of 𝑀 patterns represented by M independent dendritic segments (potentially on 
different cells), each with 𝑠 synapses and a threshold of 𝜃. In this scenario, each segment represents 
one pattern and it is a false positive if any of the segments falsely detect a different pattern. 
Let 𝑆 be a set of 𝑀 vectors, 𝑆= 𝑫!, ⋯, 𝑫!!!  where each vector 𝑫! represents a single dendritic 
segment.  Given random presynaptic input 𝑨, we classify it as belonging to this set as follows: 
𝑨∈𝑆 ≝ ∃𝑫!∈!𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑫!, 𝑨=  𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒 
(7) 
Given a new pattern 𝑨!, how reliably can we classify it? Here we assume the number of noise bits to 
be ≤𝑠! −𝜃 where 𝑠! = 𝑫!  denotes the number of synapses on 𝑫!.  As such there are no false 
negatives, only false positives. The probability of a false positive (one or more matching segments) 
is: 
𝑃𝑨∈𝑆= 1 −(1 −𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑨!, 𝑫!
)! 
(8) 
In practice the probability of an individual overlap is extremely small and it is difficult to compute 
without numerical issues. It is useful to use instead the following bound: 
𝑃(𝑨∈𝑆) ≤𝑀∙𝑃(𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ(𝑨!, 𝑫!)) 
(9) 
For sparse high dimensional vectors, with parameters in the ranges we are concerned with, Eq. (9) is 
in fact a very tight upper bound.  To get a sense of the numbers and the overall capacity, consider the 
following example. Suppose n=10,000 and you have 3% sparsity (𝑎! = 300). By storing 30 synapses 
per segment using a segment threshold of 15, you can detect a million random SDR patterns with a 
false positive rate better than 1 in a billion!  
This result points to a remarkable property of high dimensional sparse representations. You can 
convert patterns to a set of decorrelated high dimensional SDRs and simply store a small bit-wise 
subsample of each one. You can then classify a massive number of these patterns almost perfectly 
even in the presence of a large amount of noise and system unreliability.  Thus a large collection of 
independent neurons, each with an independent set of segments, can robustly classify a very large 
number of patterns with a relatively small number of synapses. 

 
 
Sparse Distributed Representations 
 
7 
3.3. 
The union property 
We have shown that a small number of synapses can reliably detect patterns in large populations of 
cells. The synapses recognizing a given pattern are typically spatially co-located on a dendritic 
segment (Kleindienst et al., 2011). However it is highly unlikely that synapses on dendritic segments 
are cleanly segregated into individual patterns. It is much more likely that synapses are somewhat 
mixed together. This is consistent with experimental results which show that a dendritic segment can 
contain hundreds of synapses yet a relatively small number of active synapses anywhere on the 
segment can trigger an NMDA spike (Major et al., 2008, 2013). In this section we consider what 
happens if the synapses to recognize multiple patterns are mixed together within a given dendritic 
segment. We show that our model dendrite can maintain robust recognition when multiple sets of 
synapses dedicated to recognizing different patterns are mixed together on a common dendritic 
segment. 
It turns out that one of the properties of high dimensional sparse representations is their ability to 
reliably store a set of patterns within a single vector (Kanerva, 1988). We call this the “union 
property” as it involves creating a union (binary OR) of multiple patterns.  Suppose we allow a single 
segment to contain 𝑠 synapses from 𝑨!! and an additional 𝑠 synapses from 𝑨!!. The segment would 
spike if at least 𝜃 cells from 𝑨!! or 𝑨!! are active. By adding additional groups of 𝑠 synapses from 
other patterns, this segment will detect additional patterns.  The vector representation of such a 
segment consists of the binary OR of the 𝑠 synapses from each pattern. We say that this segment now 
represents a union of patterns and any combination of 𝜃 active synapses from this union will cause a 
spike.  
The advantage of a union is that a fixed SDR element (such as that represented by a single segment) 
can be used to recognize a varying number of patterns.  There will never be a false negative: the 
segment will reliably fire in the presence of any of the stored activity patterns with up to 𝑠−𝜃 bits of 
noise.  The downside of course is that there is now a larger potential for false positives. It is possible 
for the segment to spike due to a mixture of active cells, say half from 𝐴!!and half from 𝐴!!. As you 
add more patterns to the union there are an increasing number of mismatch possibilities and the 
segment is increasingly likely to spike for random patterns.  Although forming a union introduces a 
potentially significant source of error, we will show that with high dimensional vectors pattern 
recognition can still be performed very reliably using such a union representation. 
Formally, the mechanics of unions are simple. To “store” a set of 𝑀 sparse patterns we simply take 
the Boolean OR of all of them to create a new binary vector X (Figure 4).  
𝑿=
𝒙!
!!!
!!!
 
(10) 
Some of the bits in 𝒙! may overlap so 𝑿 is now a binary vector such that 𝑿≤
𝒙!
!!!
!!!
. To check if 
a new pattern y is a member of the set, we compute the match as in Eq. (1).  
How reliable is the classification operation? We first consider the case of exact matches, i.e. 𝜃= 𝒚.   
For simplicity we also assume all vectors in 𝑿 have the same number of ON bits. Note that if 𝒚= 𝒙! 
for some 𝑖, the match operation will always be successful. However for other vectors there is a 
chance of a false positive match due to mix and match errors. A false positive with a new random 
pattern 𝑦 occurs if all of the bits in 𝒚 overlap with 𝑿.  When 𝑀= 1, the probability that any given bit 
is 0 is 1 −𝑞, where 𝑞=
𝒙!
! .  As M grows, the probability that a given bit is still 0 is: 

 
 
Sparse Distributed Representations 
 
8 
This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article 
𝑝! = (1 −𝑞)! 
(11) 
The probability that a given bit in X is ON is therefore 1 −𝑝! . The probability of a false positive 
match, i.e. that all the bits in 𝒚 are ON is therefore: 
𝑃(𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑿, 𝒚) = (1 −𝑝!) 𝒚= (1 −1 −𝑞!) 𝒚 
(12) 
This calculation is equivalent to the probability of false positives in Bloom filters (Bloom, 1970) and 
very similar to the analysis of sparse memory in Willshaw networks (Nadal and Toulouse, 2009). We 
can now plug this back into Eq. (4) to compute the probability of error for inexact matches. After M 
union operations, the expected number of ON bits in X is:  
𝐸𝑿
= 1 −𝑝! 𝑛 
(13) 
The expected size of the overlap set is: 
𝐸Ω𝑿𝑛, 𝑎, 𝑏
=
1 −𝑝! 𝑛
𝑏
× 𝑛−1 −𝑝! 𝑛
𝑎−𝑏
 
(14) 
We can now calculate how accurately a single dendritic segment can represent a mix of different 
patterns. Suppose a segment D represents a union of M different patterns. The expected number of 
synapses on this segment 𝑠 is 𝐸𝑠= 1 −𝑝! 𝑛. Given random presynaptic activity 𝑨!, the expected 
probability of a false match is therefore: 
𝐸[𝑃(𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑫, 𝑨! )] =
𝐸[ Ω𝑫𝑛, 𝑎, 𝑏]
!
!!!
!
!
 
(15) 
The equation is complex but the numbers can be illuminating. As an example, suppose the population 
size 𝑛= 20000, with 𝑎= 100 cells active at a time. Suppose each pattern on a segment is 
represented by 25 synapses and 𝜃= 15. If you union together 𝑀= 10 patterns, on average you 
would get fewer than 250 synapses on the segment. In this scenario the false positive rate is less than 
one in 10!!.  To gain an intuition for this, it is useful to think about the expected number of ON bits 
in the SDR, i.e. Eq. (13). With 𝑀= 10, 98.75% of the bits in the vector representing this segment 
are zero. When you match against an additional vector, there is a very high chance it will have most 
of its bits among this 98.75%, and hence it won’t lead to a false positive. Only vectors that have at 
least 15 of their bits ON among the 1.5% will cause a false positive. 
The net impact of the union property is that individual dendritic segments can be sloppy and reliable 
at the same time. There are limits, but such segments can mix together a number of independent 
patterns with virtually no chance of false positive errors. The equations do suggest a higher threshold 
when multiple patterns are mixed together in order to maintain a given error rate. This is consistent 
with the finding that a larger number of active synapses are required to initiate an NMDA spike when 
the synapses are spread out over a dendrite’s length (Major et al., 2013; McBride et al., 2008). The 
union property provides some theoretical foundation for the proposal that a longer stretch of dendrite 
can reliably function as a more flexible decision making unit detecting multiple patterns (Major et al., 
2008). 
 
4. 
Simulation Results 
Due to the various factorials and exponentials involved in the above equations it is sometimes 
difficult to develop a solid intuitive understanding of the various scaling properties. The range of 

 
 
Sparse Distributed Representations 
 
9 
parameters leading to robust recognition may be unclear, and it may also be unclear how these results 
translate to real neurons and experimental data. In this section we describe a number of simulation 
results2. Our goal is to develop intuitions for the reader, and to demonstrate the applicability of the 
results.  
4.1. 
Numerical experiments with an artificial dendrite  
We first report results from numerical experiments that randomly sampled large numbers of vectors 
and explicitly calculated matches using a simple threshold dendritic model. These simulations are 
used to verify the equations for false positives (Eq. (4)) and false negatives (Eq. (6)). We also used 
this method to simulate the effects of noise and estimate the associated probability of false negatives. 
Figure 4A shows numerically simulated and predicted false positive rates. To compute false positive 
rates we first create a prototype dendrite that samples 𝑠 synapses from a randomly generated 
presynaptic vector with 𝑎 bits out of 𝑛. We then randomly generate a second sparse vector and test 
whether the two vectors match. The entire process is then repeated 100 million times for each tested 
combination of 𝑠, 𝑎, and 𝑛. (Due to the extremely low error rates, in order to obtain reliable results 
these experiments require a large sampling of the space.) As can be seen from the chart, there is 
virtually no difference between theoretical and experimentally observed false positive rates.  
[Figure 4 goes about here, please see end of manuscript] 
Figure 4B shows a similar experiment exploring the probability of false negatives. To compute false 
negative rates we first create a prototype dendrite that samples 𝑠 synapses from a randomly generated 
presynaptic vector 𝑨 with 𝑎 bits out of 𝑛. We then randomly generate a noisy version 𝑨∗ with up to v 
ON bits swapped with other bits. We then tested whether the subsampled dendrite matched the noisy 
version 𝑨∗.  As before we repeated the entire process a large number of times (10 million for 4B). 
The theoretical and observed false negative rates are virtually identical. 
It is impractical to accurately calculate errors through random sampling for realistic numbers of 
synapses and neurons (an error rate of 1 in 10!" requires a sampling size of at least 10!"). 
Nevertheless, these experiments are sufficient to show that the theoretical predictions from Eqs. (4) 
and (6) match simulation results closely. In subsequent experiments we calculate the equations 
directly using high precision math libraries. This allows us to explore a larger part of the parameter 
space and draw conclusions for numbers that are closer to those in biology.  
4.2. 
Subsampling and the effects of sparsity and dimensionality 
We ran a number of simulations to illustrate some of the properties of dendritic matching (i.e. 
Eq. (4)). Figure 5A shows the effect of the underlying dimensionality of the representation space, i.e. 
the population of cells. We plot the drop in error rates as you increase the population size, 𝑛, while 
maintaining a fixed sparsity level and a fixed number of synapses on a segment. The error drops 
rapidly (faster than exponentially) as 𝑛 increases, becoming essentially 0 once 𝑛> 2000. Note that it 
is not possible to get robust recognition with a dense representation, as shown by the dashed line 
representing a 50% activity level. Thus both sparsity and high dimensionality are required to achieve 
robust recognition with a small number of synapses. 
                                                            
2 The source code for all simulations in this paper can be found at 
https://github.com/numenta/nupic.research/tree/master/projects/sdr_paper  

 
 
Sparse Distributed Representations 
 
10 
This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article 
[Figure 5 goes about here, please see end of manuscript] 
Figure 5B examines the effect of changing the number of synapses on a dendritic segment. It 
illustrates how segments can store a tiny subsample from a large population and still robustly 
recognize complex patterns. If the population of cells increases beyond a few thousand, and the 
overall activity is sparse, it is possible to achieve reliable recognition with a small sample of each 
pattern. The chart shows that the error rate decreases exponentially with the number of synapses. For 
many situations a subsample of 20 to 25 synapses leads to an error rate better than 10!!". Note that 
since 𝜃=
!
!, this includes a noise level up to 50%.  This helps explain how even a small number of 
synapses on a segment are sufficient for robust recognition performance.  The dashed line shows that 
denser representations lead to high error rates. Although not shown, small 𝑎 and 𝑛 (e.g. 𝑎= 32 and 
𝑛= 128) also lead to high error.  In other words, in order to achieve accurate recognition with a 
small subsample, you need both sparsity and a sufficiently high dimensionality. 
Eq. (4) was calculated directly to obtain the above results. In order to verify the accuracy of the 
equations we also ran some numerical simulations by randomly sampling large numbers of vectors 
and explicitly calculating matches using a simulated dendritic model.  
4.3. 
Estimating the optimal spike threshold 
The mathematics behind sparse representations can help provide insight into key experimental 
results. In Figure 6 we show that the equations can be used to explore the effect of different dendritic 
spike thresholds and suggest an optimal range. Figure 6 shows the median probability of error as a 
function of the synaptic threshold for a dendritic spike. Each point on the graph holds the threshold 𝜃 
fixed and represents the median probability of error computed over a large range of all other 
parameters: 𝑛 (the number of potential synapses), presynaptic activity 𝑎, and 𝑠 the number of 
synapses on each segment. We systematically varied 𝑛 from 10,000 to 200,000, presynaptic activity 
from 0.5% to 3% of 𝑛, and 𝑠 from 20 to 50. The shaded area of the chart is the region corresponding 
to low error (for illustration purposes we show the range of thresholds that lead to an error of 1 in a 
billion or lower).   
Figure 6 demonstrates that a NMDA spike threshold of 9 and higher leads to low error rates under a 
very wide range of assumptions.  A spike threshold beyond 15 or 20 leads to diminishing returns. 
Beyond 20 the error rates are so low that the extra metabolic cost of forming additional synapses due 
to higher thresholds is not justified. Thus the equations predict that the optimal dendritic spiking 
threshold is between 9 and 20. This lines up well with experimental results, which show actual 
spiking thresholds to be between 8 and 20 (Major et al., 2013; Branco and Häusser, 2011). 
[Figure 6 goes about here, please see end of manuscript] 
4.4. 
The effect of unions on a segment 
Figure 7 shows two simulations that demonstrate the effect of the union property on a dendritic 
segment. As discussed earlier, a segment can contain synapses from a mixture of independent 
patterns and initiate an NMDA spike if any of them are detected. Figure 7A shows how the expected 
number of synapses on a segment scales with the number of patterns (i.e. Eq. (13)). Experimental 
results show that a single dendritic segment can contain anywhere from 100 and 400 synapses (Major 
et al., 2013). The graph suggests that this translates to between 4 and 16 independent patterns, 
dependent on the number of synapses used to represent each pattern. Figure 7B illustrates the 

 
 
Sparse Distributed Representations 
 
11 
probability of mix and match errors for segments that represent such a union of patterns. Here 𝑛, the 
size of the presynaptic population, and the overall sparsity levels are critical factors.  As the graph 
shows, a larger presynaptic population implies a low chance of mix and match errors. A small 
presynaptic population of 1000 leads to relatively high error rates, but a population of 20,000 can 
lead to extremely low error rates even with 10 patterns stored. Overall these graphs show that it is 
possible for a single dendritic segment to sloppily store a mixture of multiple patterns, yet maintain 
remarkably high accuracy for detecting each pattern. 
[Figure 7 goes about here, please see end of manuscript] 
Note that the error rates plotted in Figures 4-7 are for individual segments. However, the correct 
classification of a pattern is always performed by a population of neurons. Populations of active cells 
can contain a significant number of incorrect false positives activations without error in classification 
of the entire population. Therefore, even if individual neurons operate in a region of unacceptably 
high false positives, the population accuracy will be substantially lower.  
5. 
 Discussion 
Sparse distributed representations are ubiquitous in neocortex. In this paper we have proposed a 
formal mathematical model for sparse representations in neocortex based on properties of active 
dendrites. Our model and the core operations of overlap and match are inspired by experimental 
findings on active dendritic processing and NMDA spikes in pyramidal neurons. We derived a 
number of scaling laws demonstrating that systems based on these principles can achieve extreme 
robustness to noise and faults in the system. Our simulation results provide detailed insights into 
various parameter regimes and show that both sparsity and high dimensionality are required for 
maximum accuracies. In addition we show that the equations can be used to predict experimental 
results, such as the optimal spiking thresholds for active dendrites. 
Our work is directly related to the theoretical work of (Kanerva, 1988; Rolls and Treves, 1990; 
Olshausen and Field, 2004) as well as the work on active dendrites (Poirazi and Mel, 2001).  (Rolls 
and Treves, 1990) were perhaps the first to make the connection between the improved robustness to 
noise afforded by sparse representations and the role of non-linear dendrites and NMDA receptors.  
A difference with these papers is that they use a typical Euclidean distance norm and a weighted 
linear sum with scalar vectors instead of our overlap metric with binary vectors. (Poirazi and Mel, 
2001) showed increased capacity and lower error rates in neurons with active dendrites compared to 
linear neurons with a similar number of synapses.  They did not explicitly compute the impact of 
increased dimensionality and increased sparseness. Specifically, their experimental simulations were 
limited to a relatively low dimensionality of 400, a sub-optimal range according to Eq. (4). (The 
number of synapses in their simulations, 25, does fall in a good range as demonstrated by Figure 5B.) 
Our analysis thus suggests that the error rates reported in their simulations would be significantly 
improved with dimensionalities and sparsities in the ranges indicated by Eq. (4) and Figure 5A.  
(Babadi and Sompolinsky, 2014) have also developed a theoretical model of sparsity that is close in 
spirit to our results. They explicitly test the hypothesis that expanded sparse representations of an 
input space lead to improved reliability and noise robustness (they observe that primary sensory areas 
typically undergo a 25:1 expansion of the axons entering the area). They too generally conclude that 
sparsity in high dimensional spaces is desirable. However they do not explicitly model non-linear 
active dendrites (they use a linear readout) and do not analyze the highly sparse connectivity 
consistent with the literature on active dendrites.  The error rates and noise tolerances suggested by 

 
 
Sparse Distributed Representations 
 
12 
This is a provisional file, not the final typeset article 
our results are orders of magnitude lower than the readout errors reported in their paper. The 
numerical results in our paper also more closely match known experimental data on active dendrites. 
The impact of sparse encodings in the context of associative networks has been studied by (Rolls and 
Treves, 1990; Nadal and Toulouse, 2009). (Sommer and Palm, 1999; Knoblauch et al., 2010) have 
also studied the impact of sparse representations and various forms of Hebbian plasticity on 
associative memories.   Their analysis has focused on pattern completion and does not explicitly 
consider recognition and the benefits of subsampling.  Despite the differences noted, taken together 
the above papers provide general support for the power of sparse high dimensional representations, 
and the insights to be gained from mathematical modeling and simulations of sparsity. 
In this paper we have discussed neurons with active dendrites, and their error rates in pattern 
detection. We have not discussed the functional implication of these matches. What does the neuron 
do once a dendritic match occurs? The functional benefits of active dendrites are a topic of active 
research, and there have been several theories proposed in the literature. These theories include 
translation invariance (Mel et al., 1998), the efficient propagation of neural activity (Polsky et al., 
2009), facilitating top-down prediction (Larkum, 2013), sequence storage (Losonczy et al., 2008; 
Branco et al., 2010), and gain control (Larkum et al., 2004). In the context of recurrent networks 
(Jahnke et al., 2013; Breuer et al., 2014) have shown that active and non-linear dendrites can 
facilitate the propagation of synchrony and the replay of precisely timed sequences. Finally, 
elsewhere we have described a detailed theory and working implementation that shows how active 
dendrites and networks of pyramidal cells lead to a sophisticated and practical sequence memory 
algorithm (Hawkins and Ahmad, 2016).  The overall capabilities of all of these models are bounded 
by the robustness of the underlying dendritic representations. As such, the mathematical framework 
proposed in this paper can be used to provide insights into the overall power of these models and 
suggest optimal ranges for dendritic parameters. 
The equations in this paper assume random and decorrelated neural activity. The distribution of 
individual spiking neurons and neural correlation in neocortex is a topic of some debate (Cohen and 
Kohn, 2011). A number of papers have suggested that one of the outcomes of neural plasticity and 
inhibition is to decorrelate the inputs. For example, Hebbian-style learning plus inhibition leads to 
individual neurons that represent successive principal components of the input space (Oja, 1982). 
(Barlow and Földiák, 1989) discuss the theoretical benefits of decorrelated responses in cortex. 
Indeed in-vivo measurements of neural activity imply correlation is low, even for neurons with 
highly overlapping receptive fields (Smith and Häusser, 2010; Ecker et al., 2010). (Vinje and Gallant, 
2000) show that with natural image stimuli, the selectivity and sparseness of individual V1 neurons 
increases in vivo, and decorrelates the responses of neuron pairs. (Simoncelli and Olshausen, 2001) 
reviews additional experimental evidence demonstrating that correlated visual inputs are decorrelated 
as early as V1. In addition it is our belief that, due to the underlying robustness of sparse 
representations, it is not necessary to have completely uncorrelated random distributions to obtain 
high fault tolerance.  It is clear that increased correlation will lead to higher than random probability 
of overlap between vectors. Eq. (6) and Figure 4 analyze this condition and suggest that a significant 
amount of overlap can be tolerated without impacting performance. Our analysis has focused on 
uniformly random distributions; extending them to other distributions is an interesting topic for 
future work. 
The equations in this paper assume binary synapses and binary cell activations, and ignore the 
possibility of scalar weights or outputs. The question of binary synapses is a topic that is heavily 
debated in literature. For example some researchers have argued that synapses are inherently binary 
(Petersen et al., 1998), while others have argued the opposite (Enoki et al., 2009). (Amit and Fusi, 

 
 
Sparse Distributed Representations 
 
13 
1994; Fusi and Abbott, 2007) have studied the memory capacity of bounded synapses. Interestingly, 
in some of their studies (Poirazi and Mel, 2001) found that binary receptive fields led to the best 
memory capacity, and 4-level synapses were optimal in others.  For the purposes of this paper we 
simply note that the robustness demonstrated in this paper relies on sparseness, but does not rely on 
binary values. Synapses and cell outputs represented by higher resolution vectors are a superset of 
binary vectors and thus in theory can only add to the power demonstrated here. Consider the case 
where cell outputs (and synapses) can each take on 𝑚 different values.  If every state can be equally 
discriminated, it would be possible to create an identical system using binary vectors of size 𝑛log! 𝑚 
and directly apply the equations in this paper. This would provide bounds although their tightness 
could potentially be improved. A comprehensive study of the scaling properties of multi-valued or 
continuous SDRs is beyond the scope of this paper, but represents an interesting direction for future 
research. 
Individual neurons and synapses are inherently unreliable (Faisal et al., 2008), yet the overall system 
works extremely well.  The results in this paper shed light on how cortical processing can be 
incredibly robust and fault tolerant as long as the underlying representation is sparse and high 
dimensional. The mathematical model described here is not specific to any sensory modality or 
cortical area. As such the properties should be ubiquitous for pyramidal cells everywhere. It is our 
hope that over time, a complete theoretical understanding of the learning and scaling properties of 
neocortical representations can be developed.
