1
Large-Scale Trafﬁc Signal Control by a Nash Deep
Q-network Approach
Yuli Zhang, Shangbo Wang, Ruiyuan Jiang
Abstract—Reinforcement Learning (RL) is currently one of
the most commonly used techniques for trafﬁc signal control
(TSC), which can adaptively adjusted trafﬁc signal phase and
duration according to real-time trafﬁc data. However, a fully
centralized RL approach is beset with difﬁculties in a multi-
network scenario because of exponential growth in state-action
space with increasing intersections. Multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL) can overcome the high-dimension problem by
employing the global control of each local RL agent, but it
also brings new challenges, such as the failure of convergence
caused by the non-stationary Markov Decision Process (MDP).
In this paper, we introduce an off-policy nash deep Q-Network
(OPNDQN) algorithm, which mitigates the weakness of both fully
centralized and MARL approaches. The OPNDQN algorithm
solves the problem that traditional algorithms cannot be used
in large state-action space trafﬁc models by utilizing a ﬁctitious
game approach at each iteration to ﬁnd the nash equilibrium
among neighboring intersections, from which no intersection
has incentive to unilaterally deviate. One of main advantages
of OPNDQN is to mitigate the non-stationarity of multi-agent
Markov process because it considers the mutual inﬂuence among
neighboring intersections by sharing their actions. On the other
hand, for training a large trafﬁc network, the convergence rate
of OPNDQN is higher than that of existing MARL approaches
because it does not incorporate all state information of each
agent. We conduct an extensive experiments by using Simulation
of Urban MObility simulator (SUMO), and show the dominant
superiority of OPNDQN over several existing MARL approaches
in terms of average queue length, episode training reward and
average waiting time.
Index Terms—Multi-agent, reinforcement learning, deep Q-
network, nash equilibrium, trafﬁc light control.
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITH the growth of vehicle ownership, the current trafﬁc
demand is rising rapidly. Trafﬁc jams and vehicular
accidents are becoming more seriously with the increasing
travel demand. One of the main reasons is the unreasonable
trafﬁc signal settings. It has been reported in [1] that the
current trafﬁc signal network cannot adaptively respond to
the real time trafﬁc state. Existing trafﬁc light control either
deploys ﬁxed-time mode without considering real-time trafﬁc
or considering the trafﬁc to a very limited degree [2], , which
cause the vehicle accumulation at intersections and degrade
trafﬁc efﬁciency [3]. Therefore, developing an effective trafﬁc
signal control strategy is of great signiﬁcance in urban net-
work.
In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) technique had
many signiﬁcant achievements in trafﬁc signal control (TSC)
because RL can better solve the decision optimization prob-
lem of sequential actions. In the literature, TSC using RL
methods could be categorized into model-based and model-
free approaches. In a model-based approach, agent trying
to understand environment and creating a model based on
interact with environment. A model-free RL approach learns
the optimal policy base without thoroughly understanding the
dynamics of the trafﬁc system [4]. A model-free method is
straightforward and convenient for implementation, therefore,
model-free RL methods are widely used in TSC. There are
two variants for model-free RL: Value-based and Policy-
based method. Q-learning is a value-based RL method which
able to compare the expected utility of the available actions
without requiring a model of the environment. However, the
Q-table will be huge if state space is vast, and searching and
storing it involves a lot of time and memory, so Q-learning
approach performance depends on the quality of trafﬁc feature
design [5], [6], [7]. Deep Q-Network (DQN), ﬁrst proposed
in 2015 by Mnih et al., successfully combines RL with deep
learning by using a multi-layer convolutional neural network
to approximate the Q-function [8]. It can be observed from
[9], [10] that DQN can achieve good performance for small
state-action space in single-agent control. In 2019, Liang
and Du proposed a Double-Dueling-Deep Q-Network method,
including dueling network, double network and deep network
[11] to control the trafﬁc light cycle in a single intersection.
Even though RL technique has made good achievements in
TSC for single intersection scenario, it is infeasible for large-
scale urban road network with multiple intersections because
of exponential growth of state-action space with increase of
number of intersections. To overcome the extremely high di-
mension of joint action space issue, some researchers proposed
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) approach, which
distributes global control to each local agent [12], [13]. In
2020, Chu et al., [14] proposed an Advantage Actor-Critic
(A2C) algorithm in an adaptive TSC environment, which can
improve the observability of each agent by considering the
control policies of other agents. Chen et al., improved A2C
by using difference reward method [15] in 2021. However, the
disadvantage of the distributed A2C approach is that when the
state dimension or the number of surrounding intersections
increases, intersections will have a severe mutual inﬂuence,
resulting in a non-stationary environment.
Since Nash presented the concept of nash equilibrium in
game theory in [16], there are some research about nash Q-
learning. In 2004, Hu and Wellman designed an on-policy
nash Q-learning algorithm which extended Q-learning to non-
cooperative multi-agent environments [17]. However, this on-
policy nash Q-learning algorithm has an apparent defect in
that it needs to know or be able to calculate the control
arXiv:2301.00637v1  [cs.GT]  2 Jan 2023

2
policies of each agent. We conclude that the on-policy ap-
proach is impractical in complex trafﬁc networks, because
it is cumbersome to obtain the accurate control policies. To
tackle the problem, this paper proposes an off-policy nash
deep Q-Network (OPNDQN) algorithm that ﬁnd the optimal
strategy by searching the nash equilibrium among neighboring
intersections iteratively without need of knowing or calculating
the control policy, i.e. the conditional probability of selecting
an action based on current state. The main contributions are
as follows:
• We propose the OPNDQN algorithm that can achieve the
nash equilibrium of the expected cumulative reward for
non-cooperative agents without knowing or calculating
the control policies, and apply it in a large-scale trafﬁc
signal control scenario;
• We evaluate the performance of the proposed approach,
by conducting extensive experiments using SUMO. (Sim-
ulation of Urban MObility) [18]. We compare the
OPNDQN algorithm to Fully Decentralized DQN ap-
proach, Multi-agent Q-Learning (MAQL), Cooperative
Multi-agent Deep Reinforcement Learning approach (Co-
MARL) [19] and Multi-agent Advantage Actor-Critic
(MA2C). The results show that the proposed OPNDQN
approach outperforms these methods in terms of multiple
trafﬁc metrics that are: average queue length, episode
training reward, and average waiting time.
II. METHODOLOGY
To let reader better understand the OPNDQN approach, we
ﬁrstly brieﬂy review the Markov Decision Process.
A. Markov Decision Process
Markov Decision Process (MDP) is the basic framework for
illustrating RL problem, which is described by a sequential
decision process that state space, action space, reward, state
transition function, and discount factor. RL is a sequential de-
cision process that interacts with the environment to maximize
a target reward function through long-term trial and error. A
MDP can be deﬁned with a quin-tuple ⟨S, A, R, T, γ⟩:
• State space S: The set of all possible states. State is
the description and generalization of the environment. st
(st ∈S) is a state observed by an agent at t-th time instant.
• Action space A: The set of all possible actions. at (at ∈A)
is an action of an agent at t-th time instant.
• Reward R: The reward space. After the agent performs
an action, the environment returns a value (reward) to
the agent. rt (rt ∈R) is a reward of an agent at t-th time
instant.
• State transition function T: A function used by the
environment to generate new states. It represents the
probability of transitioning from one state to another.
The state transition function T can be expressed as:
p (st+1 | st, at) = P
 S′ = st+1 | S = st, A = at

, where p
is the probability, at is the action of an agent at t-th time
instant, st is the state of an agent, and st+1 represents the
state that all agents transfer to at the next moment.
• Discount factor γ: Discounts on future reward. (γ ∈
[0, 1])
B. OPNDQN
To facilitate the reader’s understanding of the OPNDQN
method, we will start with a single-agent system. Let us
deﬁne st, at, rt as the state matrix, action vector and reward
vector at t-th time instant, respectively, in a MDP, we deﬁne
all rewards from start to end as: r1, · · · , rt, · · · , rtEnd. Combine
discount rates, future discounted return at time t as Ut, it can
be represented as:
Ut = rt + γ · rt+1 + γ2 · rt+2 + · · · + γtEnd−t · rtEnd
(1)
The randomness of Ut comes from all sequences of actions
and observations after time t. To eliminate the effect of
randomness, we use the expectation of Equation (1) and
deﬁne the action-value function Qπ (st, at) as
Qπ (st, at) = E [Ut | St = st, At = at, π]
(2)
where π is a policy mapping sequences to actions. Traditional
DQN method uses the maximization method to determine the
optimal policy π∗and derive the optimal action-value function:
Q∗(st, at) = max
π
E [Ut | St = s, At = a, π∗]
(3)
The optimal action-value function obeys an important identity
known as the Bellman equation [8]. Assuming that the
agent knows the optimal Q-value for the subsequent state,
then the optimal policy is to select action at+1 maximising
the expected value: rt + γQ∗(st+1, at+1). In practice, it is
common to use a neural network to approximate the Q-value:
Q(st, at; θ) ≈Q∗(st, at)
(4)
where θ is the parameter of the neural network. We deﬁne a
neural network function approximator as a Q-network.
However, in MARL, multi-agent system interacts with the
same environment, which make the neural network unable
to converge because of non-stationarity. To ﬁll the gap, we
try to investigate how to mitigate the non-stationarity of the
MDP by considering the inﬂuence caused by neighboring
agents. Some of literature tends to let each agent collect the
information of all other agents to increase the observability
in the process of model training to increase the stationarity,
however, it will negatively affect the convergence rate because
of extremely large dimension of state-action space [19]. In this
paper, we propose an OPNDQN approach, which ﬁnds the
nash equilirium strategies among neighboring agents at each
iteration, by only sharing their actions. The advantage of this
approach is not simply to increase the Q-value of each agent,
but to ﬁnd a balance between the agent and its neighbors so
that each agent increases its own rewards without lowering the
rewards of neighbors. We consider a non-cooperative multi-
agent system with N agents, each of which has n neighbors.
For all s1 ∈S1, . . . , sN ∈SN, a1 ∈A1, . . . , aN ∈AN, we use a
ﬁctitious game method to ﬁnd the nash Q-value for complex
model-free learning of multi-agent. We deﬁne that the action
selection by the agent i (i ∈N) depends not only on its own

3
state, action and reward values but also on the action of their
neighbours ˆi (ˆi ∈n):
ai
t = NashQt

si
t, ai
t, a
ˆi
t; θi

(5)
The ﬁctitious game process can be described as follows:
initialize the actions ai
t and aˆi
t at each episode, then update
the group actions to increase each agent’s Q-value to the Nash
Equilibrium, where no agent can further increase its Q-value
by unilaterally change its action (Eq. 6).
NashQi 
si, ai, a
ˆi; θi

Step j ≤NashQi 
si, ai, a
ˆi; θi

Step j−1
(6)
where j is ﬁctitious game loop counter. The action (real action
to do) with the largest Q-value among all the previously
selected actions is the nash equilibrium strategy. It is worth
noting that in the above ﬁctitious game process, the process
of a searching for nash equilibrium by changing actions aˆi
t is
ﬁctitious, while the agent i and its neighbor ˆi do not make
real action. The agents does not make real actions until the
ﬁnal nash strategy ai
Step j is found. The ﬂow of the ﬁctitious
game can be seen in Fig. 1. Fictitious game in pseudocode of
OPNDQN is as follows:
Algorithm 1 Fictitious Game
Input: random actions ai
Output: nash joint actions ai
Step j or random actions ai
Notation: The parameters in the neural network θ, agents
number n, nash parameter ϵ
1: Initialize ai to the random action.
2: if probability ϵ select random action then
3:
Output ai
4: else
5:
while Step j = 1 do
6:
ai
Step j = argmax Qi 
si , ai
Step j−1, aˆi
Step j−1; θi

7:
if eq (6) then
8:
break
9:
end if
10:
end while
11:
Output ai
Step j−1
12: end if
We deﬁne the target yi
k and train a Q-network by minimising
a sequence of loss functions Li
k (θk) that changes at each
iteration k:
yi
k = ri
t + γ · NashQi 
si
t+1, ai,ˆi
t+1; θk

(7)
Li
k (θk) = E

yi
k −Qi
t

si
t, ai,ˆi
t ; θk
2
(8)
Compute the gradient of loss L with respect to θ:
∇θkLk(θk) = E[ri
t + γ · NashQi(si
t+1, ai,ˆi
t+1; θk)
−Qi
t(si
t, ai,ˆi
t ; θk))∇θkQi
t(si
t, ai,ˆi
t ; θk)]
(9)
The stochastic gradient descent method is used to optimize the
loss function Li
k (θk), the parameters θk of the neural network
converge to a ﬁxed value with the increase of the number of
training step k.
C. Target Network
To update the parameters θ in the neural network, a target
value θ∗is deﬁned to help guide the update process. Using the
target network to update the parameters, Equation (10) can be
written as:
yi
k = ri
t + γ · NashQi 
si
t+1, ai,ˆi
t+1; θ∗
k

(10)
D. Overall Architecture
Algorithm 2 OPNDQN Algorithm
Input: replay memory size M, minibatch size B, nash
parameter ϵ, pre-train steps tp, target network update rate α,
discount factor γ.
Notation: The parameters in the primary neural network θ,
the parameters in the target neural network θ∗, the replay
memory m, the agents number n, training step number k,
time t.
1: Initialize parameters θ, θ∗with random values.
2: Initialize m to be empty.
3: Initialize si with the starting scenario at the intersections.
4: Initialize ai to the random action.
5: for Episode=1 do
6:
Initialize state si
7:
while the number of vehicles N > 0, k=1 do
8:
Algorithm 1→ai
t
9:
Take action ai
t
10:
observe reward ri
t and new state si
t,
11:
Add episode to buffer
12:
Assign si
t+1 to si
t : si
t ←si
t+1.
13:
k ←k + 1.
14:
if |M| > B and k > tp then
15:
Select B samples from replay memory m
16:
Algorithm 1 →ai
t+1
17:
nash Qi
t+1 = Qi
t+1

si
t+1, ai
t+1, aˆi
t+1; θ∗
i

18:
Calculate the loss L:
19:
L =
 r + γnashQi
t+1

−Q(si
t, ai
t, a
ˆi
t+1; θi)]2.
20:
Update θi with ∇L using RMS optimizer.
21:
Assign θi to θ∗
i .
22:
if the number of vehicles N = 0 then
23:
break
24:
end if
25:
end if
26:
end while
27: end for
As illustrated in Fig. 1, we took four intersections as an
example to show the training process of an agent i (red
box). We can see that the intersection with red box has three
neighbors (blue box). The intersections can transmit action
information to each other, and the agent can receive the action
that the adjacent intersections want to change. After train step
number k greater than or equal to the pre-train steps value tp
is completed, the parameter of agent i is trained in the training
model. We use evaluation network and the target network with
the same fully connected network for the DQN used in this
paper. Each network contains three hidden layers with sizes

4
Fig. 1: Overall architecture of the OPNDQN approach.
Fig. 2: A road network with 25 trafﬁc signal control agents.
of 32, 64, 64, and each layer selects the relu function as the
activation function. The output layer outputs the Q-value of
the action. Root Mean Square (RMS) with learning rate of
0.0001 was selected as the gradient optimizer. In training, we
utilize a mini-bacth method with a batchsize of 64.
III. SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT
In this section, we will describe the applied simulation
environment for this research. We will ﬁrstly illustrate the
road network model, and followed by the deﬁnition of states,
actions and reward.
A. Road network
The simulation road network is a 5 × 5 as shown in Fig. 2.
The total size of the grid is 600 × 600 meters. The vehicle
information of the road network, including input vehicle
number (IVN)(vehicle number/episode) and trafﬁc ﬂow rate
(TFR)(vehicle number/seconds) are summarized in Table I.
Direction
Entrance
IVN
TFR
North
Entrance 1
1000 veh/epi
1/20 veh/s
Entrance 2
1000
1/10
Entrance 3
1100
1/15
Entrance 4
1050
1/20
Entrance 5
900
1/10
South
Entrance 1
1100
1/15
Entrance 2
900
1/15
Entrance 3
900
1/20
Entrance 4
1000
1/10
Entrance 5
950
1/20
East
Entrance 1
1050
1/20
Entrance 2
1000
1/15
Entrance 3
950
1/15
Entrance 4
1000
1/20
Entrance 5
850
1/10
West
Entrance 1
950
1/15
Entrance 2
1000
1/20
Entrance 3
1050
1/10
Entrance 4
1000
1/10
Entrance 5
1000
1/20
TABLE I: The vehicle input information of the road network.
B. States
Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 show how to set up the state values. Fig.
3 shows a snapshot of the trafﬁc status at a simple network
(four intersections for example), which is divided into square-
shape grids. The position matrix has the same size of the grids,
which is shown in Fig. 4. The vehicle’s position is set to 1,
and the blank cells mean no vehicle in the corresponding grid,
which set to 0. It is worth noting that the length of each grid
is equal to the length of the car, and a grid only have a 1 or
0.

5
Fig. 3: The snapshot of trafﬁc at one time instant.
Fig. 4: The corresponding position matrix of Fig. 3.
C. Actions
In our model, the action space is deﬁned by the green light
phase duration of each stage change. We formulate a ﬁxed
period of 40 seconds. The green light duration of each trafﬁc
light can be changed to 10 seconds, 15 seconds, 20 seconds, 25
seconds, or 30 seconds. The remaining period is the duration
of the red light (Each 40 seconds is an epoch, and after all
vehicles of a route ﬁle run, the episode is incremented by 1
and the route ﬁle is reset). Each agent has the same action
space.
D. Reward
The role of the reward is to provide feedback to the RL
model about the performance of the previous action, so the
formulation of the reward is particularly important. We deﬁne
reward as the change in cumulative waiting time between two
adjacent epochs. We deﬁne the cumulative waiting time of all
vehicles in the T epoch as WT , then the reward in the T epoch
is deﬁned as:
rT = WT −1 −WT
(11)
The meaning of this reward is an increment in the cumulative
waiting time of all vehicles after the action. If the reward in the
current epoch is larger than before, it means that the waiting
time of vehicles is decreasing, which can achieve the purpose
of optimization.
IV. EVALUATION
In this section, we will show the simulation results as
well as the OPNDQN performance analysis for this research.
We ﬁrstly illustrate the parameters used by the OPNDQN
algorithm.
A. Evaluation Parameters
TABLE II: PARAMETERS IN OFF POLICY NASH DEEP
Q-NETWORK
Parameter
Value
Replay memory size M
20000
Minibatch size B
64
Starting ϵ
1
Ending ϵ
0.01
Pre-training steps tp
2000
Target network update iteration
100
Discount factor γ
0.99
Learning rate ϵr
0.0001
The model is trained in iterations. One iteration is an
episode. The entire development environment is written in
Tensorﬂow [20], and the parameters of the model are shown
in Table II.
B. Baseline Methods
We compare the performance of the OPNDQN with the
following baseline methods:
(1) Multi-agent Q-learning (MAQL) [7]: We use the Q-
learning method separately at each intersection, the Q-table
is applied to ﬁnd the optimal trafﬁc light control policy. Each
intersection is independent, and no information sharing.
(2) Multi-agent Advantage Actor-Critic (MA2C) [14]: We
use A2C method separately at each intersection. Each agent
uses critic network evaluates the policy of each actor and
guides them to optimize their policies.
(3) Fully Decentralized DQN Approach [8]: We use the
traditional DQN method separately at each intersection, each
agent is essentially inﬂuenced by the latest actions of its
neighbours, while searching the optimal strategy to control
an intersection by a DQN.
(4) Cooperative Multi-agent Deep RL Approach (Co-
MARL): Haddad et al., proposed a Co-MARL approach in
2022 [19]. The Co-MARL method applies a DQN, while trans-
ferring state, action and reward received from their neighbour
agents to its own loss function during the learning process.
Unlike our OPNDQN approach, Co-MARL does not let the
agent play a game but uses the information transmitted by the
neighbor agent as the state of learning to achieve the purpose
of agent cooperation.
C. Performance Analysis
The simulation results are shown in Fig. 5, 6, 7. Fig. 5
shows the performance comparisons of cumulative reward in
every episode under the same trafﬁc ﬂow rate. As we can see,

6
Fig. 5: Performance comparisons for reward.
when episodes approximately equal to 80, our method has con-
verged. It takes 250 episodes for the fully decentralized DQN
method, MA2C method and Co-MARL method to converge.
The MAQL method is the least effective, and the model is
almost impossible to converge. Meanwhile, in terms of training
effect, the value of reward after convergence of our approach
method is higher than the other four methods. Fig. 6 shows
ﬁve methods of average vehicle waiting time per episode. It
can be seen that after the training of OPNDQN method, the
average waiting time of vehicles is shortened to about 6.4
seconds, which is 0.2 seconds better than MA2C method, and
0.4 seconds lower than fully decentralized DQN method and
MA2C method (MAQL was not taken into account, because
it does not converge). Although in the average waiting time of
vehicles, our method is not much more than the other methods,
but in the convergence speed, our method is far better than the
other four methods. To evaluate the performance of various
signal control methods, we also compared the average queue
length of vehicles at each intersection per episode in Fig.
7. We can see that OPNDQN is also performing very well,
converging before 100 episodes and keeping the queue length
at around 25. It can also be noted that the OPNDQN method
has stronger stability after the completion of convergence. The
three standard curves of fully decentralized method, MA2C
method and Co-MARL method have large oscillation after
convergence due to the mutual inﬂuence between intersec-
tions, which proves that our OPNDQN approach has better
robustness and stability.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we study the ATSC problem for a large
trafﬁc network, and then propose an OPNDQN approach.
Firstly, we ﬁnd a nash equilibrium between agents by using
a ﬁctitious game method. Secondly, we use the nash Q-value
between agents rather than the maximum Q-value, it allows the
agents to achieve equilibrium through learning. At the same
time, OPNDQN method overcomes the problem that the fully
centralized method is challenging to train large-scale neural
networks. From the experimental results, the convergence
Fig. 6: Performance comparisons for average waiting time.
Fig. 7: Performance comparisons for average queue length.
speed of the OPNDQN algorithm is much higher than such
approaches. Furthermore, our method has high stability after
the algorithm converges. Experiments also demonstrate that
with a large number of agents, the advantages of our method
are prominent.
