Meta-learning within Projective Simulation
Adi Makmal,1 Alexey A. Melnikov,1, 2 Vedran Dunjko,1 and Hans J. Briegel1
1Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at Innsbruck, Technikerstraße 21a, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria
2Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik und Quanteninformation der ¨Osterreichischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften, Technikerstraße 21a, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria
(Dated: September 5, 2018)
Learning models of artiﬁcial intelligence can nowadays perform very well on a large variety of tasks.
However, in practice diﬀerent task environments are best handled by diﬀerent learning models, rather
than a single, universal, approach. Most non-trivial models thus require the adjustment of several
to many learning parameters, which is often done on a case-by-case basis by an external party.
Meta-learning refers to the ability of an agent to autonomously and dynamically adjust its own
learning parameters, or meta-parameters. In this work we show how projective simulation, a recently
developed model of artiﬁcial intelligence, can naturally be extended to account for meta-learning
in reinforcement learning settings. The projective simulation approach is based on a random walk
process over a network of clips. The suggested meta-learning scheme builds upon the same design
and employs clip networks to monitor the agent’s performance and to adjust its meta-parameters
“on the ﬂy”. We distinguish between “reﬂexive adaptation” and “adaptation through learning”, and
show the utility of both approaches. In addition, a trade-oﬀbetween ﬂexibility and learning-time is
addressed. The extended model is examined on three diﬀerent kinds of reinforcement learning tasks,
in which the agent has diﬀerent optimal values of the meta-parameters, and is shown to perform
well, reaching near-optimal to optimal success rates in all of them, without ever needing to manually
adjust any meta-parameter.
I.
INTRODUCTION
There are many diﬀerent kinds of artiﬁcial intelligent
(AI) schemes. These schemes diﬀer in their design, pur-
pose, and underlying principles [1]. One feature common
to all non-trivial proposals is the existence of learning pa-
rameters, which reﬂect certain assumptions or bias about
the task or environment with which the agent has to cope
[2]. Moreover, as a consequence of the so-called no-free
lunch theorems [3], it is known that it is impossible to
have a ﬁxed set of parameters which are optimal for all
task environments. In practice these parameters (which,
for some schemes, may be more than a dozen, e.g. in
the extended learning classiﬁer systems [4]) are typically
ﬁne-tuned manually by an external party (the user), on
a case-by-case basis.
An autonomous agent, however,
is expected to adjust its learning parameters, automat-
ically, by itself. Such a self monitoring and adaptation
of the agent’s own internal settings is often termed as
meta-learning [2, 5, 6].
In the AI literature the term meta-learning, deﬁned as
“learning to learn” [7] or as a process of acquiring meta-
knowledge [2, 6], is used in a broad sense and accounts
for various concepts. These concepts are tightly linked
to practical problems, two of which are mostly consid-
ered in the context of meta-learning. In the ﬁrst prob-
lem meta-learning accounts for a selection of a suitable
learning model for a given task [8–12] or combination of
models [13], including automatic adjustments when the
task is changed.
In the second problem meta-learning
accounts for automatic tuning of model learning param-
eters, also referred to as meta-parameters [5, 14–18] in
reinforcement learning (RL) or hyperparameters [19–25]
in supervised learning.
Both of these concepts of meta-learning are widely ad-
dressed in the framework of supervised learning.
The
problem of supervised learning model selection, or al-
gorithm recommendation, is solved by, e.g., the k-
Nearest Neighbor algorithm [9], similarity-based meth-
ods [8], meta decision trees [13] or an empirical error
criterion [11].
The second problem in meta-learning,
the tuning of hyperparameters, is usually solved by
gradient-based optimization [19], grid search [20], ran-
dom search [21], genetic algorithms [22] or Bayesian op-
timization [23, 25]. Approaches to combined algorithm
selection and hyperparameter optimization were recently
presented in Refs. [23–25].
In the RL framework, where an agent learns from
interacting with a rewarding environment [26], the no-
tion of meta-learning usually addresses the second prac-
tical problem, the need to automatically adjust meta-
parameters, such as the discount factor, the learning rate
and the exploitation-exploration parameter [14–18, 27].
In the context of RL it is also worthwhile to mention the
G¨odel machine [28], which is, due to its complexity, of
interest predominantly as a theoretical construction in
which all possible meta-levels of learning are contained
in fully self-referential learning system.
In this paper we develop a simple form of meta-learning
for the recently introduced model of projective simula-
tion (PS) [29]. The PS is a model of artiﬁcial intelligence
that is particularly suited to RL problems (see [30–32]
where the PS was shown to perform well, in compar-
ison to more standard RL machinery, on both toy- and
real-world tasks such as the “grid-world”, the “mountain-
car”, the “cart-pole balancing” problem and the “Inﬁ-
nite Mario” game, and see [33] where it handles inﬁnitely
large RL environments through a particular generaliza-
arXiv:1602.08017v1  [cs.AI]  25 Feb 2016

2
tion mechanism). The model is physics-oriented, aiming
at an embodied [34] (rather than computational) realiza-
tion, with a random-walk through its memory structure
as its primary process.
PS is based on a special type
of memory, called the episodic & compositional memory
(ECM), that can be represented as a directed weighted
graph of basic building blocks, called clips, where each
clip represents a memorized percept, action, or combi-
nations thereof. Once a percept is perceived by the PS
agent, the corresponding percept clip is activated, initiat-
ing a random-walk on the clip-network, that is the ECM,
until an action clip is hit and the corresponding action is
performed by the agent. This realizes a stochastic pro-
cessing of the agent’s experience.
The elementary process of the PS, namely the random-
walk, is an established theoretical concept, with known
applications in randomized algorithms [35], thus provid-
ing a large theoretical tool box for designing and analyz-
ing the model. Moreover, the random walk can be ex-
tended to the quantum regime, leading to quantum walks
[36–38], in which case polynomial and even exponential
improvements have been reported in e.g. hitting and mix-
ing times [39–41]. The results in the theory of quantum
walks suggest that improvements in the performance of
the PS may be achievable by employing these quantum
analogues. Recently, a quantum variant of the PS (envi-
sioned already in [29]) was indeed formalized and shown
to exhibit a quadratic speed-up in deliberation time over
its classical counterpart [42–44].
From the perspective of meta-learning, the PS is a
comparatively simple model with few number of learn-
ing parameters [30]. This suggests that providing the PS
agent with a meta-learning mechanism may be done while
maintaining its overall simplicity. In addition to simplic-
ity, we also aim at structural homogeneity: the meta-
learning component should be combined with the basic
model in a natural way, with minimal external machin-
ery. In accordance with these requirements, the meta-
learning capability which we develop here is based on
supplementing the basic ECM network, which we call
the base-level ECM network, with additional meta-level
ECM networks that dynamically monitor and control the
PS meta-parameters. This extends the structure of the
PS model from a single network to several networks that
inﬂuence each other.
In general, when facing the challenge of meta-learning
in RL, one immediately encounters a trade-oﬀbetween
eﬃciency (in terms of learning times) and success rates
(in terms of achievable rewards), on the one side, and
ﬂexibility on the other side (as pointed out, e.g., also in
[45]). Humans, for example, are extremely ﬂexible and
robust to changes in the environment, but are not very
eﬃcient and reach sub-optimal success rates. Machines,
on the other hand, can learn fast and perform optimally
at a given task (or a family of tasks), yet fail completely
on another. Clearly, to achieve a level of robustness, ma-
chines would have to repeatedly revise and update their
internal design, i.e. to meta-learn, a process which nec-
essarily takes time. Moreover, reaching optimal success
rates in certain tasks, may require an over-ﬁtting of the
scheme’s meta-parameters, which might harm its success
in other tasks.
It can therefore be expected that any
form of meta-learning (which improves the ﬂexibility of
the model), may do so at the expense of the model’s ef-
ﬁciency and (possibly even) success rates, and we will
observe this inclination also in our work.
Another aspect of meta-learning which we highlight
throughout the paper is the underlying principles that
govern the agent’s internal adjustment. Here, we distin-
guish between two diﬀerent (sometimes complementary)
alternatives which we call reﬂexive adaptation and adap-
tation through learning. Informally, by reﬂexive adapta-
tion we mean that the agent’s meta-parameters are ad-
justed via a ﬁxed recipe (which may or may not be deter-
ministic), which takes into account only the recent perfor-
mance of the agent, while ignoring the rest of the agent’s
history.
Essentially, this amounts to adaptation with-
out a need for additional memory. An example for such
a reﬂexive adaptation approach for meta-learning can
be found in [15] where the fundamental RL parameters,
namely, the learning rate α, the exploitation-exploration
parameter β, and the discount factor γ are tuned accord-
ing to predeﬁned equations; In contrast, an agent which
adapts its parameter through learning, exploits to that
end its entire individual experience. Accordingly, adapta-
tion through learning does require an additional memory.
In this work we consider both kinds of approaches1.
The
paper
is
structured
as
follows:
Section
II
shortly describes the PS model including its meta-
parameters.
Section III demonstrates the advantages
of meta-learning, by considering explicit task scenarios
where the PS model has diﬀerent optimal values of the
meta-parameters. In Section IV we present the proposed
meta-learning design and explain how it combines with
the basic model. The model is then examined and ana-
lyzed through simulations in Section V, where the per-
formance of the meta-learning PS agent is evaluated in
three diﬀerent types of changing environments. Through-
out this section the proposed meta-learning scheme is
further compared to other, more naive, alternatives of
meta-learning schemes. Finally, Section VI concludes the
paper and discusses some of its open questions.
II.
THE PS MODEL
For the beneﬁt of the reader we ﬁrst give a short sum-
mary of the PS; for a more detailed description, including
recent developments see [29–33]. The central component
1 The terminology we employ is based on the basic classiﬁcation of
intelligent agents; if we perceive the meta-learning machinery as
an agent, then the reﬂexive adaptation mechanism corresponds
to simple reﬂexive agents, whereas the learning adaptation mech-
anism corresponds to a learning agent.

3
of the PS model is the episodic & compositional mem-
ory (ECM), formally a network of clips.
The possible
clips include percept clips (representing a percept) and
action clips (representing an action), but can also include
the representations of various combinations of percept
and action sequences (thus representing e.g. an elapsed
exchange between the agent and environment, or sub-
sets of the percept space as occurring in the model of
PS with generalization [33]).
Within the ECM, a clip
ci may be connected to clip cj via a weighted directed
edge, with a corresponding time-dependent real positive
weight h(t)(ci, cj) (called h-value), which is larger than
or equal to its initial value of h0 = 1.
The deliberation process of the agent corresponds to a
random walk in the ECM, where the transition probabil-
ities are proportional to the h−values. More speciﬁcally,
upon encountering a percept, the clip corresponding to
that percept is activated, and a random walk is initiated.
The transition probability from clip ci to cj at time step
t, corresponds to the re-normalized h-values:
p(t)(cj|ci) =
h(t)(ci, cj)
P
k h(t)(ci, ck).
(1)
The random walk is continued until an action clip has
been hit, upon which point the corresponding action is
carried out.
The learning aspect of the PS agent is achieved by the
dynamic modiﬁcation of the h−values, depending on the
response of the environment. Formally, at each time-step,
the h-values of the edges that were traversed during the
preceding random walk are updated as follows:
h(t+1)(ci, cj) = h(t)(ci, cj) −γ(h(t)(ci, cj) −1) + λ, (2)
where 0 ≤γ ≤1 is a damping parameter and λ is a non-
negative reward given by the environment. The h-values
of the edges which were not traversed during the preced-
ing random walk are not rewarded (no addition of λ), but
are nonetheless damped away toward their initial value
h0 = 1 (by the γ term). With this update rule in place,
the probability to take rewarded actions is increased with
time, that is, the agent learns.
The damping parameter γ is a meta-parameter of the
PS model. The higher it is, the faster the agent forgets
its knowledge.
For certain settings, introducing addi-
tional parameters to the ECM network can lead to bet-
ter learning performance. A particularly useful general-
ization is the “edge glow” mechanism, introduced to the
model in [30]. Here, an additional time-dependent vari-
able 0 ≤g ≤1 is attributed to each edge of the ECM,
and a term depending on its value is added to the update
rule of the h−values:
h(t+1)(ci, cj) = h(t)(ci, cj) −γ(h(t)(ci, cj) −1)
+ g(t)(ci, cj)λ.
(3)
This update rule holds for all edges, so that edges which
were not traversed still may end up being enhanced, pro-
portional to their g−value.
The g−value dynamically
changes. Each time an edge is traversed, its g-value is
set to g = 1, and dissipates in the following time steps
with a rate η:
g(t+1)(ci, cj) = g(t)(ci, cj)(1 −η).
(4)
The η parameter is thus another meta-parameter of the
model.
The decay of the g-values ensures that the reward ef-
fects the edges traversed at diﬀerent points in time, to a
diﬀerent extent. In particular, recently traversed edges
are enhanced more (after a rewarding step), relative to
edges traversed in the more remote past. The η param-
eter controls the strength of this temporal dependence.
For instance, a low value of η implies that the edges which
were traversed a while back in the past will nonetheless
be enhanced. In contrast, by setting η = 1, only the last
traversed path is enhanced in which case the update rule
reverts back to Eq. (2).
The glow mechanism thus establishes temporal cor-
relations between percept-action pairs, and enables the
agent to perform well also in settings where the reward
is delayed (e.g. in the grid-world and the mountain-car
tasks [31]) and/or contingent on more than just the im-
mediate history of agent-environment interaction (such
as in the n-ship game, as presented in [30]).
The basic variant of the PS model (so-called two-
layered variant) can be formally contrasted to more stan-
dard RL schemes, where it closely resembles the SARSA
algorithm [46]. An initial analysis of the relationship of
the two models was given in [33]. Readers familiar with
the SARSA model may beneﬁt from the observation that
the functional roles of the α and γ parameters in SARSA
are closely matched by the γ and η parameters of the
PS, respectively.
However, as the PS is explicitly not
a state-action value function-based model, the analogy
is not exact.
For more details we refer the interested
reader to [33]. In the following section, we describe the
behaviour of the PS model, and the functional role of its
meta-parameters in greater detail.
III.
ADVANTAGES OF META-LEARNING
The basic memory update mechanism of the PS,
as captured by Eq. (3)-(4) has two meta-parameters,
namely the damping parameter γ, and the glow param-
eter η.
In what follows, we examine the role of these
parameters in the learning process of the agent. We then
demonstrate, through examples, that for none of these
parameters there is a unique value that is universally
optimal, i.e. that diﬀerent environments induce diﬀerent
optimal γ and η values. These examples provide direct
motivation for introducing a meta-learning mechanism
for the PS model.

4
A.
Damping: the γ parameter
The damping parameter 0 ≤γ ≤1 controls the for-
getfulness of the agent, by continuously damping the h-
values of the clip network. A direct consequence of this
is that a non-zero γ value bounds the h-values of the clip
network to a ﬁnite value, which in turn limits the max-
imum achievable success probability of the agent. As a
result, in many typical tasks considered in the RL litera-
ture (grid-world, mountain-car, and tic-tac-toe, to name
a few), in which the environments are consistent, i.e. not
changing, the optimal performance is achieved without
any damping, that is by setting γ = 0.
However, when the environment does change, the agent
may need to modify its “action pattern”, which implies
varying the relative weights of the h-values. Presetting a
ﬁnite γ parameter would then quicken the agent’s learn-
ing time in the new environment, at the expense of reach-
ing lower success probabilities, as demonstrated and dis-
cussed in Ref. [29].
This gives rise to a clear trend:
The higher the value of γ, the faster is the relearning
in a changing environment, and the lower is the agent’s
asymptotic success probability.
The trade-oﬀbetween learning time and success prob-
ability in changing environments can be demonstrated on
the invasion game [29] example. The invasion game is a
special case of the contextual multi-armed bandit prob-
lem [47] and has no temporal dependence. In this game
an agent is a defender and should try to block an attacker
by moving in the same direction (left or right) with the
attacker. Before making a move, the attacker shows a
symbol (“⇐” or “⇒”), which encodes its future direction
of movement. Essentially, the agent has to learn where
to go for every given direction symbol. Fig. 1 illustrates
how the PS agent learns by receiving rewards for success-
fully blocking the attacker. Here, during a phase of 250
steps, the attacker goes right (left) whenever it shows a
right (left) symbol, but then, at the second phase of the
game, the attacker inverts its rules, and goes right (left)
whenever it shows left (right). It is seen that higher val-
ues of γ yield lower success probabilities, but allow for a
faster learning in the second phase of the game.
To illustrate further the slow-down of the learning time
in a changing environment when setting γ = 0, Fig. 2
shows the average success probability of the basic PS
agent in the invasion game as a function of number of
trials, on a log scale. Here the attacker inverts its rules
whenever the agent reaches a certain success probability
(here set to 0.8). We can see that the time that the agent
needs to learn at each phase grows exponentially in the
number of the changes of the phases, requiring more and
more time for the agent to learn, so that eventually, for
any ﬁnite learning time, there will be a phase for which
the agent fails to learn.
Setting a zero damping parameter in changing envi-
ronments may even be more harmful for the agent than
merely increasing its learning time. To give an example,
consider an invasion game, where the attacker inverts its
100
200
300
400
500
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
γ = 1/50 (upper)
γ = 1/10 (middle)
γ = 1/5 (lower)
phase I (⇐
⇒)
phase II (⇒
⇐)
trials
average success probability
Figure 1. (Color online) Invasion game: The attacker inverts
its strategy after 250 steps. The agent’s average success prob-
ability is plotted as a function of number of trials (games). A
trade-oﬀbetween success probability and relearning time is
depicted for diﬀerent γ values. An optimal value of η = 1 is
used. The simulation was done by averaging over 106 agents.
Adapted from [29].
1
10
100
1000
104
105
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
trials (log scale)
success probability
I
II
I
II
I
II
I
II
Figure 2. Invasion game: The attacker inverts its strategy
whenever the agent’s success probability reaches 0.8.
The
agent’s performance is plotted as a function of number of tri-
als on a log scale, demonstrating learning times that increase
exponentially with the number of inversions. The simulation
was done with a single agent, where the success probabili-
ties were extracted directly from the agent’s base-level ECM
network. Meta-parameters: γ = 0, η = 1.
rules every ﬁxed ﬁnite number of steps. Without damp-
ing, the agent will only be able to learn a single set of
rules, while utterly failing on the inverted set. This is
shown in Fig. 3.
The performance of the PS agent in the considered
examples, shown in Figs. 1 – 3, suggests that it is im-
portant to raise the γ parameter whenever the environ-
ment changes (the performance drops down) and set it
to zero whenever the performance is steady. As we will
show in Section IV B this adjustment can be implemented
by means of reﬂexive adaptation. However the reﬂexive
adaptation of the γ parameter makes meta-learning less
general, because it ﬁxes the rule of the parameter adjust-
ment. To make the PS agent more general we will im-

5
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
trials
average success probability
I
II
I
II
I
II
I
II
I
II
I
II
Figure 3.
Invasion game:
The attacker changes its strat-
egy every 500 steps. The agent’s average success probability
is plotted as a function of number of trials, demonstrating
that only one of the two set of the attacker’s strategy can be
learned. Moreover, the performance of the agent, averaged
over the two phases, converges to the performance of a ran-
dom agent. The simulation was done by averaging over 100
agents, where for each agent the success probabilities were
extracted directly from its base-level ECM network. Meta-
parameters: γ = 0, η = 1.
plement γ adaptation also through learning, which gives
the agent the possibility to learn the opposite rule, i.e. to
decrease γ whenever the agent’s performance goes down.
So far we assumed that the glow mechanism is turned
oﬀby setting η = 1, which is optimal for the invasion
game.
The same holds in all environments where the
rewards depend only on the current percept-action pair,
with no temporal correlations to previous percepts and
actions. In the next section, however, we look further
into scenarios where such temporal correlations do exist,
and study their inﬂuence on the optimal η value.
B.
Glow: the η parameter
In task environments where reward from an environ-
ment is a consequence of a series of decisions made by an
agent, it is vital to ensure that not only the last action
is rewarded, but the entire sequence of actions. Other-
wise, these previous actions, which eventually led to a
rewarded decision, will not be learned. As described in
Sec. II, rewarding a sequence of actions is done in the PS
model by attributing a time dependent g-value to each
edge of the clip network and rewarding the edge with
a reward proportional to its g-value.
Once an edge is
excited, its g-value is set to g = 1, whereas all other g-
values decay with a rate η, which essentially determines
the extent to which past actions are rewarded. As we
show next, the actual value of the η parameter plays a
crucial role in obtaining high average reward, its optimal
value depends on the task, and ﬁnding it is not trivial.
Here we study the role of the η parameter in the n-ship
game example, introduced in [30]. In this game n ships
arrive in a sequence, one by one, and the agent is capable
of blocking them. If the agent blocks one or several ships
out of the ﬁrst n−1 ships, it will get a reward of λmin = 1
for each ship immediately after blocking it. If, however,
the agent will refrain from blocking the ships, although
there is an immediate reward for that, it will get a larger
reward of λmax = 5 × (n −1) for blocking only the last,
n-th ship. In this scenario the optimal strategy diﬀers
from the greedy strategy of collecting immediate rewards,
because the reward λmax is larger than the sum of all the
small rewards that can be obtained during the game.
The optimal strategy in the described game can be
learned by using the glow mechanism and by carefully
choosing the η parameter. The optimal η value depends
on the number of ships n, as shown in Fig. 4, where
the dependence of the average reward received during
the game on the η parameter is plotted for each n ∈
{2, 3, 4}. It is seen that as the number of n ships grows,
the best average reward is obtained using a smaller η
value, i.e.
the optimal η value decreases.
This makes
sense as a smaller η value leads to larger sequences of
rewarded actions.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
η parameter
average reward
2-ship game
λmax = 5
3-ship game
λmax = 10
4-ship game
λmax = 15
γ = 10−4
Figure 4. (Color online) n-ship game: The dependence of the
performance on the η parameter is shown for diﬀerent n. The
performance is evaluated by an average reward gained during
the 106-th game. The simulation was done by averaging over
103 agents. The γ parameter was set to 10−4. Adapted from
[30].
The simulations of the n-ship game shown in Fig. 4 em-
phasize the importance of setting a suitable η value. In
other, more involved scenarios, such a dependency may
be more elusive, making the task of setting a proper η
value even harder. An internal mechanism that dynami-
cally adapts the glow parameter according to the (possi-
bly changing) external environment would therefore fur-
ther enhance the autonomy of the PS agent. In Section
IV A we will show how to implement this internal mech-
anism by means of adaptation through learning.
IV.
META-LEARNING WITHIN PS
To enhance the PS model with a meta-learning compo-
nent, we supplement the base-level clip-network (ECM)

6
with additional networks, one for each meta-parameter
ξ (where ξ could be, e.g. γ or η). Each such meta-level
network, which we denote by ECMξ obeys the same prin-
ciple structure and dynamic as the base-level ECM net-
work as described in Section II: it is composed of clips,
its activation initiates a random-walk through the clips
until an action-clip is hit, and its update rule is given by
the update rule of Eq. (2), albeit with a diﬀerent internal
reward:
h(t+1)
ξ
(ci, cj) = h(t)
ξ (ci, cj) −γξ(h(t)
ξ (ci, cj) −1) + λξ. (5)
The meta-level ECM networks we consider in this work
are two-layered, with a single percept-clip and several
action-clips.
The action clips of each meta-level net-
work determine the next value of the corresponding meta-
parameter. This is illustrated schematically in Fig. 5.
ξ
a1
a2
. . .
an
hξ
set ξ to
Figure 5. A schematic two-layered meta-level ECMξ network,
whose actions control the value of a general meta-parameter
ξ.
While the base-level ECM network is activated at every
interaction with the environment (where each percept-
action pair of the agent counts as a single interaction), a
meta-level ECMξ network is activated only every τξ inter-
actions with the environment. Following each activation,
an action-clip is encountered and the meta-parameter ξ
(thus either γ or η) is updated accordingly. At the end
of each such τξ time window the meta-level network re-
ceives an internal reward λξ which reﬂects how well the
agent performed during the past τξ interactions, or time
steps, compared to the performance during the previous
τξ time window. This allows a statistical evaluation of
the agent’s performance in the last τξ time window.
Speciﬁcally, we consider the quantity
Λξ(T) =
T
X
t=T −τξ+1
λ(t),
(6)
which accounts for the sum of rewards that the agent has
received from the environment in the τξ steps before the
end of the time step T. The internal reward λξ is then set
by comparing two successive values of such accumulative
rewards:
λξ = sgn (∆ξ)
(7)
where ∆ξ(T) =
Λξ(T )−Λξ(T −τξ)
max{Λξ(T ),Λξ(T −τξ)} is the normalized dif-
ference in the agent’s performance between two succes-
sive time windows, before time step T.
In short, the
meta-level ECMξ network is rewarded positively (neg-
atively) whenever the agent performs better (worse) in
the latter time window (implementation insures that the
corresponding h-values do not go below 1). The normal-
ization plays no role at this point, however the numerical
value of ∆ξ will matter later on. When there is no change
in performance (∆ξ(T) = 0) the network is not rewarded.
The presented design requires the speciﬁcation of sev-
eral quantities for each meta-level ECMξ network, includ-
ing: the time window τξ, the number of its actions and
the meaning of each action. In what follows we specify
these choices for both the η and the γ meta-level net-
works.
A.
The glow meta-level network (ECMη) –
adaptation through learning only
The glow meta-level network (ECMη) we use in this
work is depicted in Fig. 6. The network is composed of a
single percept (Sη = 1) and Aη = 10 actions which corre-
spond to setting the η parameter to one of 10 values from
the set {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 1}. The internal glow network is ac-
tivated every τη times steps. This time window should be
large enough so as to allow the agent to gather reliable
statistics of its performance. It is therefore sensible to set
τη to be of the order of the learning time of the agent,
that is the time it takes the agent to reach a certain frac-
tion of its asymptotic success probability (see also [30]).
The learning time of the PS was shown in [30] to be lin-
ear in the number of percepts S and actions A in the
base-level network. We thus set the time window to be
τη = NηSASηAη, which is also linear with the number
of percepts Sη and actions Aη of the meta-level network.
Here Nη is a free parameter; the higher its value, the
better the statistics the agent gathers. In this work, we
set Nη = 30 throughout, for all the examples we study.
η
0.1
0.2
. . .
1
hη
set η to
Figure 6. The glow meta-level network (ECMη): The speciﬁc
realization employed in this work.
The hη-values of the η-network are updated through
internal rewarding as described, and the PS agent learns
with time what the preferable η values in a given scenario
are. The preferable η values are further adjusted to ac-
count for changes in the environment. These continuous
adjustments of the η-network then allow the PS agent to
adapt to new environments by learning.

7
B.
The damping meta-level network (ECMγ) –
combining reﬂexive adaptation with adaptation
through learning
The second meta-learning network, the damping meta-
level network (ECMγ), is presented in Fig. 7. It is com-
posed of only two actions which correspond to updating
the γ parameter by using one of two functions according
to the following rules:
Rule I:
γ ←fI(γ) = (1 −| ˜∆γ|)γ + | ˜∆γ| −˜∆γ
2
(8)
and
Rule II:
γ ←fII(γ) = (1 −| ˜∆γ|)γ + | ˜∆γ| + ˜∆γ
2
(9)
where ˜∆γ = ∆γ+Cγ
1+Cγ
and ∆γ is deﬁned after Eq. (7). Rule
I invokes a reﬂexive increase of the γ parameter when
the agent’s performance deteriorates, and a reﬂexive de-
crease when the performance improves. This rule (“nat-
ural rule”) is natural for typical RL scenarios: a drop of
performance is assumed to signify a change in the envi-
ronment, at which point the agent should do well to for-
get what it learned thus far, and focus on exploring new
options - in the PS both are achieved by the increase of
γ. In contrast, if the environment is in a stable phase, as
the agent learns, the performance improves, causing γ to
decrease, which will lead to optimal performance. Rule
II (“opposite rule”) is chosen to do exactly the opposite,
namely performance increase causes the agent to forget.
Our main purpose for the introduction of this rule is to
demonstrate the ﬂexibility of the meta-learning agent to
learn even the correct strategy of updating γ. Although
in all the environments which are typically considered in
literature, and in this work, the natural rule is the bet-
ter choice, and thus could in principle be hard-wired, our
agent is challenged to learn even this2. The role of Cγ
parameter, which we set to Cγ = 0.2 throughout this
work, is to avoid unwanted increase of γ under statistical
ﬂuctuations. Note that the functions in Eqs. (8) and (9)
ensure that γ ∈[0, 1].
2 It is possible to concoct settings where the opposite rule may be
beneﬁcial using minor and major rewards. The environment may
use minor rewards to train the agent to a deterministic behavior
over certain time periods, after which a major reward (domi-
nating the total of all small rewards) is issued only if the agent
nonetheless produced random outcomes all along. If the periods
are appropriately tailored, this can train the meta-learning net-
work to prefer the opposite rule. The study of such pathological
settings are not of our principal interest in this work.
γ
fI(γ)
fII(γ)
hγ
set γ to
Figure 7.
The damping meta-level network (ECMγ): The
speciﬁc realization employed in this work.
The described γ-network is activated every τγ = Nγτη
steps, where τη is the time window of the glow network
as deﬁned above, and where Nγ is a free parameter of the
γ-network, which we set it to Nγ = 5 throughout the pa-
per. The agent ﬁrst learns an estimate of the range of an
optimal η, and changes γ afterwards. This is assured by
choosing the time window for the γ-network larger than
for the η-network. This relationship between the time
windows τγ and τη is required in order for the PS agent
to gain a meaningful statistics during τγ steps. Other-
wise, if η is not learned ﬁrst, the agent’s performance
will signiﬁcantly ﬂuctuate, leading to erratic changes of
γ through the reﬂexive adaptation rule. Note that large
ﬂuctuations in γ yield very poor learning results as even
moderate values of γ lead to a rapid forgetting of the
agent.
The meta-learning by the ECMγ network is realized
as follows. Starting from an initially random value, the
γ parameter is adapted both via direct learning in the
γ-network and via reﬂexive adaptation through rule I or
rule II. Given that the overall structure of the environ-
ment was learned (i.e. whether the natural rule I or oppo-
site rule II is preferable), γ is henceforth adapted reﬂex-
ively. These reﬂexive rules reﬂect an a-priory knowledge
about what strategy is preferable in given environments.
We note that the γ parameters could be learned without
such reﬂexive rules, by using networks which directly se-
lect the γ values (like in the case of the η network), how-
ever such approaches have shown to be much less eﬃcient.
In general, reﬂexive adaptation of the meta-parameters
is preferable to adaptation through learning as it is sim-
pler. The need for learning adaptation arises when the
landscape of optimal values of the meta-parameters is
not straightforward, as is the case for the η parameter,
as illustrated in Fig. 4.
V.
SIMULATIONS
To examine the proposed meta-learning mechanism we
next evaluate the performance of the meta-learning PS
agent in several environments, namely the invasion game,
the n-ship game and variants of the grid-world setting.
These environments were chosen because of their diﬀer-
ent structures, which exhibit diﬀerent optimal damping
and glow parameters.
The goal is that the PS agent

8
will adjust its meta-parameters properly, so as to cope
well with these diﬀerent tasks. To challenge the agent
even further, each of the three environments will sud-
denly change, thereby forcing the agent to readjust its
parameters accordingly. Critically, for all tasks the same
meta-level networks are used, along with the same choice
of free parameters (Nη = 30, Nγ = 5, and Cγ = 0.2), as
described in Sections IV A-IV B.
To demonstrate the role of the meta-learning mecha-
nism, we compare the performance of the meta-learning
PS agent to the performance of the PS agent without
this mechanism. Without the meta-learning the PS agent
starts the task with random γ and η parameters and does
not change them afterwards. To show the importance of
learning the optimal η parameter (which may not be as
obvious as for the case of γ) we construct a second refer-
ence PS agent for comparison, which uses the γ-network
to adjust the γ parameter, but takes a random choice out
of the possible η-actions in the η-network.
A.
The invasion game
We start with the simplest task: the invasion game (see
Section III A). As before, the agent is rewarded with λ =
1 whenever it manages to block the attacker and it has
to learn whether the attacker will go left or right, after
presenting one of two symbols. We consider, once again,
the scenario in which the attacker switches between two
strategies every ﬁxed number of trials. In one phase of
the game it goes left (right) after showing a left (right)
symbol, whereas in the other phase it does the opposite.
This is repeated several times. The task of the agent is
to block the attacker regardless of its strategy. We recall
that in such a scenario (see Fig. 3) the basic PS agent
with ﬁxed meta-parameters (γ = 0, η = 1) can only cope
with the ﬁrst phase, but fails completely at the second.
Fig. 8 (a) shows in solid blue the performance of the
meta-learning PS agent, in terms of average success prob-
abilities, in this changing invasion game. Here each phase
lasts 1.2×105 steps, and the attacker changes its strategy
20 times. It is seen that with time the average success
probability of the PS agents increases towards optimal
values and that the agents manage to block the attacker
equally well for both of its strategies. This performance
is achieved due to meta-learning of the γ and η param-
eters, the dynamics of which are shown in solid blue in
Fig. 8 (b) and (c), respectively. It is seen in Fig. 8 (b)
that after some time and several phase changes, the value
of the γ parameter raises sharply whenever the attacker
changes its strategy, and decays toward zero during the
following phase. This allows the agent to rapidly forget
its knowledge of the previous strategy and then to learn
the new one. Fig. 8 (c) shows the η parameter dynamics.
As explained in Section III B the optimal glow value for
the invasion-game is η = 1, as the environment induces
no temporal correlations between previous actions and
rewards. The meta-learning agent begins with an
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
PS with meta-learning
PS with random η action
PS with ﬁxed random γ and η
(a)
(b)
(c)
trials
trials
trials
×106
×106
×106
average success probability
average γ
average η
Figure 8. (Color online) Invasion game: The attacker inverts
its strategy every 1.2×105 steps. Three types of PS agents are
depicted: with full meta-learning capability (in solid blue),
with adjusted γ value but with η value that is chosen ran-
domly from the ECMη network (in dashed red), and agents
whose γ and η values are ﬁxed to random values, each agent
with its own values (in dotted gray). Top: The performances
of the diﬀerent agents are shown as a function of trials; Mid-
dle: The average γ value is shown as a function of trials;
Bottom: The average η value is shown as a function of tri-
als. The simulations were done by averaging over 100 agents,
where for each agent the success probabilities were extracted
directly from its base-level ECM network.
η-network that has a uniform action probability.
Yet,

9
with time, its meta-level ECMη network learns and the
average η parameter approaches the optimal value of η =
1.
To show the advantage of the meta-learning networks
we next consider the performance of agents without this
mechanism. First, we look at the performance of a PS
agent with ﬁxed random γ and η parameters as shown in
Fig. 8 (a) in dotted gray. It is seen that on average, such
an agent performs rather poor, with an average success
rate of 0.6. This can be expected, as most of the γ and
η values are in fact harmful for the agent’s success. The
average value of each parameter goes to 0.5 as depicted
in Fig. 8 (b) for the γ parameter and in Fig. 8 (c) for the
η parameter in dotted gray (the slight deviation from 0.5
is due to ﬁnite sample size).
A more challenging comparison is shown in Fig. 8 (a)
in dashed red, where the agent adjusts its γ parameter
exactly like the meta-learning one, but uses an η-network
(the same one as the meta-learning agent) that does not
learn or update.
It is seen that such an intermediate
agent can already learn both phases to some extent, but
does not reach optimal values.
This is because small
η values – corresponding to sustained glow over several
learning cycles – are harmful in this case. The dynamics
of the parameters of this PS agent are shown in Fig. 8
(b) and (c) in dashed red, where γ behavior is similar
to the one of the meta-learning agent, and the average η
ﬂuctuates around η = 0.55, which is the average value of
the 10 possible actions in the η-network.
In this example we encounter for the ﬁrst time the
trade-oﬀbetween ﬂexibility and learning time.
The
meta-learning agent exhibits high ﬂexibility and robust-
ness, as it manages to repeatedly adapt to changes in
the environment. However, this comes with a price: the
learning time of the agent slows down and the agent re-
quires millions of trials to master this task. This is, how-
ever, to be expected. Not only that the agent has to learn
how to act in a changing environment, but it must also
learn how to properly adapt its meta-parameters, and the
latter occurs at the time-scales of τγ = 6000 elementary
cycles. The agent begins with no bias whatsoever regard-
ing its a action pattern or its γ and η parameters. Fur-
thermore, the agent begins with no a-priory knowledge
regarding the inherent nature of the rewarding process of
the environment: is it a typical environment (where the
agent should prefer the natural rule), or is it an untypical
environment which ultimately rewards random behavior
(where the opposite rule will do better)? This too needs
to be learned. Fig. 9 shows the average probability of
choosing rule I (Eq. (8)) in the γ−network as a function of
trials. It is seen that with time the γ−network chooses to
update the γ parameter according to rule I with increas-
ing probability, reﬂecting the fact that in this setup the
environment acts indeed according to the natural rule.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
trials, ×106
γ-network:
probability to choose rule I
PS with meta-learning
Figure 9. Invasion game: The attacker inverts its strategy
every 1.2 × 105 steps as in Fig. 8. The performance of the
γ-network of the meta-learning PS is shown as a function of
trials, in terms of the probability to choose rule I (see Eq. 8).
The simulation was done by averaging over 100 agents.
B.
The n-ship game
In the n-ship game (see Section III B) the environment
rewards the agent depending on its previous actions. In
what follows we consider a dynamic n-ship game, that is
we allow n to change with time. In particular, the envi-
ronment starts with n = 1 (where no temporal correla-
tions exist) and increases the number of ships n by one,
every 3.5 × 105 × n steps. As explained in Section III B
each n-value requires a diﬀerent glow parameter η. This
scenario therefore poses the challenge of continuously ad-
justing the glow parameter.
Fig. 10 (a) shows in solid blue the performance of the
meta-learning PS agent in this changing n-ship game.
The best possible reward is indicated by a dashed blue
horizontal line, and it is seen that such agents learn to
perform optimally, for all number of ships n. This success
is made possible by the meta-learning mechanism.
First, the γ parameter is adjusted, such that the agent
forgets whenever its performance decrease and vice versa
(see Eq. (8)). Here we assume that the γ-network already
learned in previous stages that the environment follows
the natural rule (we used an h-value ratio of 105 to 1
for rule I). This γ-network leads to a dynamics of the
average γ parameter shown in Fig. 10(b) in solid blue.
It is seen that whenever the environment changes, the γ
parameter increases, thereby allowing the agent to forget
its previous knowledge. A slow decrease of the damping
parameter makes it then possible for the agent to learn
how to act in the new setup.
Second, the glow parameter η is adjusted dynamically.
Fig. 10 (c) shows the probability distribution of choosing
each action of the η-network at the end of each phase. It
is seen that as n grows, the η-network learns to choose a
smaller and smaller glow parameter value, which allows
the back propagation of the reward from the ﬁnal ship
to the ﬁrst n −1 ships. A similar trend was observed in
Fig. 4 where larger n values result with smaller

10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
PS with meta-learning
PS with random η action
optimal strategy
greedy strategy
random strategy
(a)
(b)
(c)
ship
2 ships
3 ships
4 ships
trials
trials
η actions
×106
×106
average reward
average γ
average η probability
1-ship game
2-ship game
3-ship game
4-ship game
Figure 10. (Color online) n-ship game: The number of ships
n increases from one to four. Each phase lasts for 3.5×105×n
trials. Two types of PS agents are depicted: with full meta-
learning capability (in solid blue), and with adjusted γ value
but with η value that is chosen randomly from the ECMη
network (in dashed red). Top: The performance of the two
diﬀerent agents is shown as a function of trials in terms of
average reward.
For each phase the average reward of the
optimal strategy, a greedy strategy and a fully random one is
plotted in dashed light-blue, dotted-dashed purple, and dot-
ted orange, respectively; Middle: The average γ values of
the two diﬀerent kinds of agents are shown as a function of
trials; Bottom: For the meta-learning PS agent the proba-
bility to choose each of the 10 η-actions is plotted at the end
of each phase in a diﬀerent plot. Connecting lines are shown
to guide the eyes. The simulations were done by averaging
over 100 agents, where for each agent the average reward was
extracted directly from its base-level ECM network.
optimal η values.
As shown in Fig. 10 (c) the meta-
learning PS agent essentially captures the same knowl-
edge in its η-network. Yet, this time the knowledge is
obtained through the agent’s experience, rather than by
an external party.
The PS agent without the meta-learning is not able
to achieve similar performance. Performance of an agent
with ﬁxed random γ and η is poor and not shown, be-
cause its behavior was close to a random strategy (dotted
orange horizontal lines in Fig. 10 (a)). This performance
is expected, because most of the values are harmful for
the agent’s success.
We only show the more challeng-
ing comparison (dashed red in Fig. 10), where the agent
adjusts its γ parameter exactly like the meta-learning
one, but uses an η-network (the same one as the meta-
learning agent) which does not learn or update. It is seen
that for n = 1 such an intermediate agent can cope with
the environment, but that for higher values of n it fails
to reach the optimal performance because of a random η
parameter, and achieves only a mixture of a greedy strat-
egy (dot-dashed purple horizontal lines) and an optimal
strategy (dashed light blue horizontal lines).
C.
The grid-world task
As a last example, we consider a benchmark problem in
the form of the grid-world setup as presented in Ref. [48].
This is a delayed-reward scenario, where the agent walks
through a maze and gets rewarded with λ = 1 only when
it reaches its goal. At each position, the agent can move
in one of four directions: left, right, up, or down. Each
move counts as a single step. Reaching the goal marks
the end of the current trial and the agent is then reset
to its initial place, to start another round. The basic PS
agent was shown to perform well in this benchmark task
[31]. Here, to challenge the new meta-learning scheme we
situate the agent in three diﬀerent kinds of grid-worlds:
(a) The basic grid-world of Ref. [48], illustrated in the left
part of Fig. 11; (b) The same sized grid-world with some
of the walls positioned diﬀerently, as shown in the middle
part of Fig. 11; and (c) The original grid-world, but with
an additional small distracting reward λmin = 1
3, placed
only 12 steps from the agent, shown in the right part of
Fig. 11. The game then ends either when the big reward
λmax = 1 or the small reward λmin are reached. In all
cases the shortest path to the (large) reward is composed
of 14 steps.
Since it is the same agent that goes through each of
the phases, it has to forget its previous knowledge when-
ever a new phase is encountered, and to adjust its meta-
parameters to ﬁt the new scenario. The third phase poses
an additional challenge for the agent: for optimal perfor-
mance, it must avoid taking the small reward and aim at
the larger one.
Fig. 12 (a) shows in solid blue the performance of the
meta-learning PS agent throughout the three diﬀerent
phases of the grid-world. The performance is shown in

11
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 11. (Color online) Three setups of the grid-world task. Left: The basic grid-world as presented in Ref. [48]; Middle:
Some of the walls are positioned diﬀerently; Right: The basic grid-world with a distracting small reward λmin placed 12 steps
from the agent. In all three setups a large reward of λmax awaits the agent in 14 steps.
terms of steps per reward as a function of trials. In all
cases the optimal performance is 14 steps per one reward.
In the last phase, a greedy agent would reach the small
reward of λmin = 1
3 in 12 steps, thus resulting with 36
steps per unit of reward. It is seen that the meta-learning
agent performs optimally in all phases, except of the last
phase, where the performance is only suboptimal with
an average of about 16 steps per unit reward (instead of
14). This ﬂexibility through all phases is achieved due to
the adjustments of the γ parameter, whose progress over
time is shown in Fig. 12 (b) in solid blue. Similar to the
n-ship game, we assume that the γ-network has already
learned that the environment uses the “straightforward”
logic, by setting the h-value ratio of 105 to 1 for choosing
rule I. The PS agent with the same γ-network, but with-
out updated η-network, performs similarly in the ﬁrst
two phases (Fig. 12 (a) in dashed red) in terms of ﬁnd-
ing eventually an optimal path. This is to be expected
because for ﬁnding an optimal path it is only necessary
that 0 < η < 1.
It is seen, however, that this agent
learns much slower than the full meta-learning agent, so
that hundreds of thousands more steps are required on
average to ﬁnd an optimal path. This is also reﬂected in
the behavior of the γ parameter: with a random η value,
the γ parameter goes to zero much slower, as shown in
Fig. 12 (b).
The importance of the η parameter is however better
demonstrated in the third phase, where the diﬀerence
between the achieved performance of the agent with and
without η-learning is very signiﬁcant. In particular, the
PS agent with a random η converges to the greedy strat-
egy and gets a unit of reward every 36 steps (Fig. 12 (a)
in dashed red). The reason is that optimal performance
(a unit of a reward every 14 steps) can only be achieved
by setting the η parameter to a value from a certain,
limited, range, which we analyze next.
The range of optimal η values can be obtained by fo-
cusing on the (4, 9) location in the grid-world (see Fig. 11
(c)). In this location, the agent has two possible actions
that lead faster to the large and small rewards, namely
up and down, respectively. Because these two actions re-
sult with a faster reward, edges corresponding to these
actions are enhanced stronger than for the other actions.
This enhancement is gained by adding the increments
g(t)(ci, cj)λ to the h-values at the end of each game, as
one can see from the update rule in Eq. (3). If the PS
agent follows the greedy strategy, then this increment is
equal to λmin = 1/3 and is added to the edge correspond-
ing to the action “down”. For the optimal strategy the
increment is λmax(1 −η)2 = (1 −η)2 (since λmax = 1),
because the large reward occurs two decisions away from
the current position and the g-value is damped from the
value of 1 to the value of (1 −η)2. The optimal strategy
will prevail only if the increment in each game is larger
than for the greedy strategy. This is the only case when
0 < η < 1 −
p
1/3 < 0.43. Most of the actions in the
η-network of the PS agent have values larger than 0.43,
therefore the agent with random η actions converges to
the greedy strategy and does not get the best possible re-
ward. The PS agent with meta-learning is able to learn
to use the η parameter from the optimal range, and as
shown in Fig. 12 (c) the agent indeed mostly uses the
values of η = 0.1 and 0.2.
VI.
SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
We have developed a meta-learning machinery that al-
lows the PS agent to dynamically adjust its own meta-
parameters. This was shown to be desirable by demon-
strating that, like in other AI schemes, no unique choice
of the model’s learning parameters can account for all
possible tasks, as optimal values for the meta-parameters
vary from one task environment to another.
We em-
phasize that the presented meta-learning component is
based on the same design as the basic PS, using random
walk on clip-networks as the central information process-
ing step. It is therefore naturally integrated into the PS
learning framework, preserving the model’s stochastic na-
ture, along with its simplicity.
The basic PS has two principal meta-parameters: the
damping parameter γ and the glow parameter η. For each
meta-parameter we have assigned a meta-learning clip-
network, whose actions control the parameter’s value.
Each meta-level network is activated every ﬁxed number
of interactions with the environment. This time

12
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
15
35
55
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
(η = 0.1) or (η = 0.2)
other 8 values
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
PS with meta-learning
PS with random η action
(a)
(b)
(c)
trials
trials
trials
×106
×106
×106
average number of steps
per unit of reward
average γ
average η probability
Figure 12. (Color online) Grid-world task: Two types of PS
agents are depicted: with full meta-learning capability (in
solid blue), and with adjusted γ value but with η value that
is chosen randomly from the ECMη network (in dashed red).
Top: The performances of the two diﬀerent agents are shown
as a function of trials in terms of average number of steps
per unit reward; Middle: The average γ values of the two
diﬀerent kinds of agents are shown as a function of trials;
Bottom: For the meta-learning PS agent the probability to
choose η = 0.1 or η = 0.2 and the probability to choose either
of the other 8 η-actions are plotted as a function of trials;
The ﬁrst two phases of the game last 106 trials, whereas the
last phase lasts 5 × 106 trials. These phases correspond to
three diﬀerent kinds of grid-worlds shown in Fig. 11.
The
simulations were done by averaging over 104 agents.
window allows the agent to gather statistics about its
performance, so as to monitor its recent success rates
and thereby to evaluate the setting of the corresponding
parameters. When the agent’s success increases, the pre-
vious action of the meta-level network is rewarded pos-
itively, otherwise, when the performance deteriorates, a
negative reward is assigned (no reward is assigned when
there is no change in the agent’s success). As a result,
the probability that the random walk on the meta-level
network hits more favorable action clips increases with
time and the meta-level network essentially learns how
to properly adjust the corresponding parameter in the
current environment.
The meta-learning process occurs on a much larger
time-scale compared to the base-level network learning
time scale. This is necessary as meta-level learning re-
quires statistical knowledge of the agent’s performance,
which is directly controlled by the base-level network,
whose learning time is linear with the state space of the
task, represented by the number of percepts and actions
in the base-level network.
In meta-level learning we have distinguished between
adaptation through learning, which exploits the entire
individual history of the agent to update the value of the
meta-parameter, and reﬂexive adaptation, which updates
the meta-parameter using only recent, localized informa-
tion of the agent’s performance. We saw that the glow pa-
rameter can be well adjusted with a full learning network
that is only via adaptation through learning, whereas for
the damping parameter, it is more sensible to combine
the two kinds of adaptations.
The presented meta-learning scheme was examined in
three diﬀerent environmental scenarios, each of which
requires a diﬀerent set of meta-parameters for optimal
performance.
Speciﬁcally, we have considered the “in-
vasion game”, where there are no temporal correlations
between actions and rewards (implying that the optimal
glow value is ηopt = 1), the “n-ship game” where tem-
poral correlations do exist and ηopt depends on n, and
ﬁnally the “grid-world”, a real-world scenario with de-
layed rewards, for which it is suﬃcient that ηopt ̸= 1 in
the basic setup, but requires that ηopt << 1 in the more
advanced setup, where the agent can be distracted by a
small reward.
In all scenarios, the environment furthermore suddenly
changes, thus requiring the agent to also adjust its for-
getting parameter γ. Overall, situating an agent in such
changing environments enforces it to repeatedly and dy-
namically revise its internal settings. The meta-learning
PS agent was shown to cope well in all scenarios, reach-
ing success probabilities that approach near-optimal or
optimal values.
For comparison, we checked how a PS agent with ﬁxed
set of random meta-parameters would handle these sce-
narios, and observed that such an agent would perform
signiﬁcantly worse. This is not surprising, as most of the
possible meta-parameter values (especially those of the
γ parameter) are harmful for the agent. Therefore, for

13
a more challenging comparison, we checked the perfor-
mance of an agent that adapts its forgetting parameter γ
in exactly the same way as the meta-learning agent, but
chooses its glow parameter η randomly, out of the same
set of actions available in the η-network we used. Such an
intermediate agent performed better than the basic PS
agent with random choice of meta-parameters, but sub-
stantially worse than the full meta-learning agent. This
demonstrates the importance of adjusting both γ and η
in a proper way. In particular, it shows that the learning
of the η-network plays a crucial role.
Importantly, throughout the paper, we used the same
set of choices for the meta-learning scheme. In partic-
ular, we used the same meta-level networks ECMγ (in-
cluding the reﬂexive rules of the γ-parameter adaptation)
and ECMη, and the same time windows τγ and τη. This
indicates that the suggested meta-learning scheme is ro-
bust, as it requires no further adjustment of additional
parameters by an external party, for all the cases we have
considered.
[1] Russell, S. J. & Norvig, P. Artiﬁcial Intelligence - A Mod-
ern Approach, chap. 4 (Pearson Education, New Jersey,
2003).
[2] Brazdil, P., Giraud-Carrier, C., Soares, C. & Vilalta, R.
Metalearning: Applications to Data Mining (Springer,
2009).
[3] Wolpert, D. & Macready, W. No free lunch theorems for
optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Com-
putation 1, 67–82 (1997).
[4] Wilson, S. W. Classiﬁer ﬁtness based on accuracy. Evo-
lutionary computation 3, 149–175 (1995).
[5] Schaul, T. & Schmidhuber, J. Metalearning. Scholarpedia
5, 4650 (2010).
[6] Giraudo-Carrier, C., Vilalta, R. & Brazdil, P.
Intro-
duction to the special issue on meta-learning. Machine
Learning 54, 187–193 (2004).
[7] Thrun, S. & Pratt, L. (eds.) Learning to learn (Springer
Science & Business Media, 1998).
[8] Duch, W. & Grudziski, K. Meta-learning via search com-
bined with parameter optimization.
In Kopotek, M.,
Wierzcho, S. & Michalewicz, M. (eds.) Intelligent Infor-
mation Systems 2002, vol. 17 of Advances in Soft Com-
puting, 13–22 (Physica-Verlag HD, 2002).
[9] Brazdil, P., Soares, C. & da Costa, J. Ranking learning
algorithms: Using IBL and meta-learning on accuracy
and time results. Machine Learning 50, 251–277 (2003).
[10] Zhao, P. & Yu, B.
On model selection consistency of
lasso. Journal of Machine Learning Research 7, 2541–
2563 (2006).
[11] Adankon, M. M. & Cheriet, M. Model selection for the
LS-SVM. Application to handwriting recognition. Pat-
tern Recognition 42, 3264–3270 (2009).
[12] Abdulrahman, S. M., Brazdil, P., van Rijn, J. N. & Van-
schoren, J.
Algorithm selection via meta-learning and
sample-based active testing. In Proceedings of the Meta-
learning and algorithm selection workshop at ECMLP-
KDD 2015, 55–66 (2015).
[13] Todorovski, L. & Deroski, S. Combining classiﬁers with
meta decision trees.
Machine Learning 50, 223–249
(2003).
[14] Ishii, S., Yoshida, W. & Yoshimoto, J. Control of ex-
ploitationexploration meta-parameter in reinforcement
learning. Neural Networks 15, 665 – 687 (2002).
[15] Schweighofer, N. & Doya, D. Meta-learning in reinforce-
ment learning. Neural Networks 16, 5–9 (2003).
[16] Eriksson, A., Capi, G. & Doya, K. Evolution of meta-
parameters in reinforcement learning algorithm. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems 2003.
[17] Kobayashi, K., Mizoue, H., Kuremoto, T. & Obayashi,
M. A meta-learning method based on temporal diﬀer-
ence error. In Leung, C., Lee, M. & Chan, J. (eds.) Neu-
ral Information Processing, vol. 5863 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 530–537 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2009).
[18] Tokic, M., Schwenker, F. & Palm, G. Meta-learning of
exploration and exploitation parameters with replacing
eligibility traces. In Zhou, Z.-H. & Schwenker, F. (eds.)
Partially Supervised Learning, vol. 8183 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, 68–79 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2013).
[19] Bengio, Y. Gradient-based optimization of hyperparam-
eters. Neural computation 12, 1889–1900 (2000).
[20] Bardenet, R. & K´egl, B.
Surrogating the surrogate:
accelerating gaussian-process-based global optimization
with a mixture cross-entropy algorithm. In Proceedings
of the 27th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, 55–62 (2010).
[21] Bergstra, J. & Bengio, Y.
Random search for hyper-
parameter optimization.
Journal of Machine Learning
Research 13, 281–305 (2012).
[22] Reif, M., Shafait, F. & Dengel, A. Meta-learning for evo-
lutionary parameter optimization of classiﬁers. Machine
learning 87, 357–380 (2012).
[23] Thornton, C., Hutter, F., Hoos, H. H. & Leyton-Brown,
K. Auto-weka: Combined selection and hyperparameter
optimization of classiﬁcation algorithms. In Proceedings
of the 19th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 847–855 (ACM,
2013).
[24] Smith, M., Mitchell, L., Giraud-Carrier, C. & Martinez,
T.
Recommending learning algorithms and their asso-
ciated hyperparameters.
In Proceedings of the Meta-
learning and algorithm selection workshop at ECAI 2014,
39–40 (2014).
[25] Feurer, M., Springenberg, T. & Hutter, F.
Initial-
izing Bayesian hyperparameter optimization via meta-
learning. In Proceedings of the 29th AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 1128–1135 (2015).
[26] Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Reinforcement learning:
An introduction (MIT Press, Cambridge Massachusetts,
1998).
[27] Achbany, Y., Fouss, F., Yen, L., Pirotte, A. & Saerens,
M. Tuning continual exploration in reinforcement learn-
ing: An optimality property of the boltzmann strategy.
Neurocomputing 71, 2507 – 2520 (2008). Artiﬁcial Neu-

14
ral Networks (ICANN 2006) / Engineering of Intelligent
Systems (ICEIS 2006).
[28] Schmidhuber, J. Completely self-referential optimal re-
inforcement learners. In Artiﬁcial Neural Networks: For-
mal Models and Their Applications, vol. 3697 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, 223–233 (Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2005).
[29] Briegel, H. J. & De las Cuevas, G. Projective simulation
for artiﬁcial intelligence. Scientiﬁc Reports 2, 400 (2012).
[30] Mautner, J., Makmal, A., Manzano, D., Tiersch, M. &
Briegel, H. J. Projective simulation for classical learning
agents: a comprehensive investigation. New Generation
Computing 33, 69–114 (2015).
[31] Melnikov, A. A., Makmal, A. & Briegel, H. J. Projective
simulation applied to the grid-world and the mountain-
car problem. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 3 (3), 24–34
(2014). arXiv:1405.5459.
[32] Bjerland, Ø. F. Projective Simulation compared to rein-
forcement learning. Master’s thesis, University of Bergen,
Norway (2015).
[33] Melnikov, A. A., Makmal, A., Dunjko, V. & Briegel,
H. J. Projective simulation with generalization. Preprint,
arXiv:1504.02247 [cs.AI] (2015).
[34] Pfeiﬀer, R. & Scheier, C.
Understanding intelligence
(MIT Press, Cambridge Massachusetts, 1999).
[35] Motwani, R. & Raghavan, P. Randomized Algorithms,
chap. 6 (Cambridge University Press, New York, NY,
USA, 1995).
[36] Feynman, R. P. & Hibbs, A. R. Quantum mechanics and
path integrals. International series in pure and applied
physics (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1965).
[37] Aharonov, Y., Davidovich, L. & Zagury, N. Quantum
random walks. Physical Review A 48, 1687–1690 (1993).
[38] Aharonov, D., Ambainis, A., Kempe, J. & Vazirani, U.
Quantum walks on graphs. In Proceedings of the 33rd An-
nual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC
’01, 50–59 (ACM, New York, 2001).
[39] Childs, A. M. et al. Exponential algorithmic speedup by
a quantum walk. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM
Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’03, 59–68
(ACM, New York, 2003).
[40] Kempe, J.
Discrete quantum walks hit exponentially
faster. Probability Theory and Related Fields 133, 215–
235 (2005).
[41] Krovi, H., Magniez, F., Ozols, M. & Roland, J. Quantum
walks can ﬁnd a marked element on any graph. Algorith-
mica 1–57 (2015).
[42] Paparo, G. D., Dunjko, V., Makmal, A., Martin-Delgado,
M. A. & Briegel, H. J.
Quantum speed-up for active
learning agents. Physical Review X 4, 031002 (2014).
[43] Dunjko, V., Friis, N. & Briegel, H. J. Quantum-enhanced
deliberation of learning agents using trapped ions. New
Journal of Physics 17, 023006 (2015).
[44] Friis, N., Melnikov, A. A., Kirchmair, G. & Briegel, H. J.
Coherent controlization using superconducting qubits.
Scientiﬁc Reports 5, 18036 (2015).
[45] Anderson, M. L. & Oats, T. A review of recent research
in metareasoning and metalearning.
AI Magazine 28,
7–16 (2007).
[46] Rummery, G. A. & Niranjan, M.
On-line Q-learning
using connectionist systems. Tech. Rep., University of
Cambridge (1994).
[47] Wang, C.-C., Kulkarni, S. R. & Poor, H. V. Bandit prob-
lems with side observations. IEEE Transactions on Au-
tomatic Control 50, 338–355 (2005).
[48] Sutton, R. S. Integrated architectures for learning, plan-
ning, and reacting based on approximating dynamic pro-
gramming. In Proceedings of the 7th International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, 216–224 (1990).
