On the Performance of Network Parallel Training in Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
Ludvig Ericson, Rendani Mbuvha
School of Computer Science & Communication
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden

Abstract—Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) have received
increasing attention in recent years with applications that span
a wide range of disciplines including vital domains such as
medicine, network security and autonomous transportation.
However, neural network architectures are becoming increas-
ingly complex and with an increasing need to obtain real-time
results from such models, it has become pivotal to use par-
allelization as a mechanism for speeding up network training
and deployment. In this work we propose an implementation
of Network Parallel Training through Cannon’s Algorithm for
matrix multiplication. We show that increasing the number of
processes speeds up training until the point where process
communication costs become prohibitive; this point varies by
network complexity. We also show through empirical efﬁciency
calculations that the speedup obtained is superlinear.
I. INTRODUCTION
Artiﬁcial neural networks, or ANNs, are computational
tools that are inspired by their biological namesake. ANNs
are particularly useful when estimating functions of ar-
bitrary complexity using given example data[1]. This in-
turn makes them well suited for pattern recognition tasks
where they have been successfully applied in dimensionality
reduction, time series prediction, and data mining. While
they have long been on the fringes of the research com-
munity since their inception in the ’80s, recent advances
in computer and material sciences have allowed for an
unprecedented growth in computation power, and thus al-
lowing the possibility of even more sophisticated networks.
One of the drawbacks of modern ANNs is the time it takes
to train such a network.
As society becomes increasingly dependent on machine
learning applications, real-time output from on-line train-
ing of neural network systems is critical to positive user
experiences and usefulness of such systems. Thus speeding
up neural network training with a parallel algorithm as we
propose has become essential to the efﬁcient deployment of
machine learning applications. The case for parallelization
is also reinforced by the increase in availability of multi-
core CPUs and general purpose graphical processing units
in recent years.
Most early work in parallelization of neural networks
like [2] primarily suggest special customised hardware. This
approach has certain limitations as such hardware is costly
and may display suboptimal performance when utilized
for other tasks. Consequently, this can be impractical for
modern scalability platforms such as HPC clusters and
cloud computing infrastructure.
Dahl et al. [3] present a Pattern Parallel Training (PPT)
algorithm for parallel ANN training. In PPT, multiple ANNs
are duplicated in different processes. In each process an
ANN is trained on a randomly selected subset of the training
examples. At the end of an epoch each process broadcasts
its weight updates which are then applied to all other ANNs.
This has the effect of reducing the training time by faster
convergence.
Suri et al. [4] use a similar approach to [3], however,
at the end of each full training round they apply an
evolutionary algorithm to select the best candidate networks
for further training.
The approach presented here is most similar to our
work is [5] who also use a Node Parallelization strategy,
while communicating the weights corresponding to “ghost”
neurons. Their strategy requires that each process is fed
with all the inputs. It therefore follows that this becomes
onerous on the amount of memory required.
The contribution and novelty in our proposed approach
centers on its memory efﬁciency in that by using Cannon’s
algorithm it does not require all the inputs to be fed to each
process and that no specialized hardware is required. The
remainder of this paper is organised as follows: Section II
describes Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, Backpropagation and
our proposed implementation of Network Parallel Training.
Section III sets out our experiments. Section IV discusses
the experimental results. We conclude our paper in section
V
II. METHODS
A. Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
An ANN is deﬁned by a weighted, directed graph
G = (V, E), where the vertices are likened to neurons;
edges to “synapses,” the connections between neurons. The
weights are sensitivities, e.g. a highly-weighted connection
will contribute more to the excitation of a neuron. We will
concern ourselves only with fully-connected feed-forward
networks. A feed-forward network is one in which the graph
arXiv:1701.05130v1  [cs.AI]  18 Jan 2017

is acyclic, and so the neurons can be subdivided into layers.
Being fully-connected, all layers are maximally connected
to the next. The output zj of some neuron j is thus a
function of the output of the previous layer. We deﬁne it as
zj = fj(x) = h(
X
{i,j}∈E
wijzi + bj),
where h is some non-linear activation function, gi is the
output of the ith neuron in the previous layer, wij is the
weight for that connection, and bj is the neuron’s bias.
A choice for the non-linearity function h that has gained
popularity in recent years is the ReLU, or rectiﬁed linear
unit. We will use the leaky ReLU, deﬁned as
h(x) =
(
x
if x > 0,
0.01x
otherwise.
The activation can be described in terms of a matrix
multiplication. Let Wi be the weights of ith layer, with
each neuron as a column of weights. The activations Zi for
that layer on a row-wise subset X of the training data is
then
Zi = h(XWi + bi).
B. Training Neural Networks
Training a neural network is done with stochastic gra-
dient descent, or SGD. In SGD, the gradient of the loss
function L is computed for a single sample. The network
parameters are then updated using the expression θ′ =
θ−η∇L, where 0 < η < 1 is the learning rate. This process
is repeated until some convergence criterion is satisﬁed.
The loss function is typically the L2 distance of the
network output and the ground truth label, and some reg-
ularization, i.e. given ground truth label y, network output
fθ, and regularization strength λ, we have
L(x, y) = |y −fθ(x)|2 + λ|θ|2,
where | · |2 is the Euclidean distance (i.e. L2 distance.)
A common way to extend SGD is through mini-batch
processing, where a batch of samples are processed, and the
gradient update is computed by the mean of each sample’s
gradient. A further improvement is momentum learning,
where consecutive updates in the same direction contribute
to “momentum” in that direction.
C. Network Parallel Training
Network Parallel Training (NPT) [3] is sometimes re-
ferred to as Unit Parallelization. In NPT, one divides the
network units within each layer across different processes.
In its simplest form, each process is responsible for cal-
culating activation of a single unit in each layer [6]. In a
more practical setup the units are divided in a linearly load
balanced manner. See ﬁgure 1 for an example.
In our approach, the strategy is to compute the matrix-
matrix multiplication XWi for each layer in parallel using
Figure 1.
Illustration of the unit division in Network Parallel Training
[3].
Cannon’s algorithm for matrix multiplication, then compute
the activation output for that unit. The shifting of the
local matrices within Cannon’s algorithm as deﬁned in
algorithm 1 allows for the partial products required for the
calculation of activations in each unit to be available within
the corresponding process.
D. Cannon’s Algorithm
Cannon’s algorithm is a popular parallelization strategy
for matrix multiplication[7]. The algorithm efﬁciently com-
putes matrix multiplications by shifting rows and columns
of the candidate matrices between processes based on a de-
ﬁned set of rules. Algorithmm 1 shows Cannon’s algorithm
of two candidate matrices A (M×N) and B (N×K) within
a grid of p×q processes. In the context of Backpropagation,
Cannon’s algorithm effectively allows communication of
weights between nodes that are placed within different
processes.
Algorithm 1: Cannon’s Matrix Multiplication
Data: Number of parts N, sub-matrices A, B
Result: Local part C of global matrix multiplication
begin
Shift rows of A such that the mth row of A shifts
m −1 positions to the left
Shift columns of B such that the nth column of B
shifts n −1 positions to upwards
for i ∈{1, 2, . . . , N} do
C ←−C + AB
Shift rows of A one process to the left, and
columns of B one process upwards
end
Undo initial shifts in A and B
end

E. Implementation
We implement our Neural Network in C using the
Message
Passing
Interface
(MPI)
[8].
We
use
the
MPI Cart create function to create a virtual Cartesian
grid topology that enables parallelization as depicted in
ﬁg. 1.
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
No. of processes P
101
102
103
104
Runtime TP
Runtime with varying network size, no. of processors, nodes
1 layer, 1 node
1 layer, 4 nodes
2 layers, 4 nodes
2 big layers, 4 nodes
Figure 2.
Plot of the runtimes TP .
III. EXPERIMENTS
A. Training Data
The data was created artiﬁcially by imposing a linear
relationship between the inputs Xij and the outputs Yik. The
inputs are created by sampling random numbers uniformly
between 0 and 200, with the bias input set to 1. The output
vector is created using
Yik = ((7(k + 1) mod 1000)+
(3k mod 100))Xik.
Interestingly, since 7, 3 and 1000 are all pairwise coprimes,
this forms a basis for all linear functions y = kx + m with
parameters k, m ∈[0, 1000).
B. Experiment Setup
In order to evaluate the performance of our NPT algo-
rithm we created the following networks of different sizes
and complexity:
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
No. of processes P
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Speedup SP
Speedup with varying network size, no. of processors, nodes
1 layer, 1 node
1 layer, 4 nodes
2 layers, 4 nodes
2 big layers, 4 nodes
Figure 3.
Plot of speedup SP . We deﬁne the speedup at P processes
as SP =
T ∗
S
TP where TP is the execution time of our algorithm with P
processes. T ∗
S is the “fastest known sequential version”, since we do not
know of any better algorithm, we let T ∗
S = T1.
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
No. of processes P
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Efficiency ηP
Efficiency with varying network size, no. of processors, nodes
1 layer, 1 node
1 layer, 4 nodes
2 layers, 4 nodes
2 big layers, 4 nodes
Figure 4.
Plot of the efﬁciency ηP = SP
P .
1) A One hidden layer network with the number of input
and output units q = 128
2) A Two hidden layer network with the number of input
and output units q = 128
3) A Two hidden layer network with the number of input
and output units q = 256 - we refer to this as the “big”
network.
We used an MPI barrier to synchronize before starting
the training routine, and immediately stored the wall-clock
time. The same was done after training completed. The
runtime data is presented as relative runtimes in table I.
IV. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
The networks above were run on an HPC cluster with
an increasing number of processors. The resulting runtimes
in seconds are shown in ﬁgure 2 together with the relative
performance statistics in table I. It can be seen that for the
single layer networks the runtimes decrease as processes
increase until we obtain the optimal point with 16 processes;
after this point communication cost becomes prohibitive
resulting in increasing runtimes. As the number of nodes
are increased from 1 to 4, the runtime also increases which
might imply the additional cost of redundant communica-
tion and startup related to the unused nodes.
Increasing the number of layers l from 1 to 2 increases
the optimal number of processes from 16 to 32 which
gives empirical evidence that the runtimes are linear in the
number of layers l .The runtimes for the “big” network
increase quadratically relative to the two layered network
on the same number of nodes Thus the optimal number of
processes for the “big layer” network is 64.
It is rather surprising that the runtimes of the two layered
network are lower than those of the single layered after 32
processes by a signiﬁcant margin on the same number of
nodes. This is a point that will require further investigation.
The speedup curve in ﬁgure 3 shows similar results as
in the runtime plot with exactly the same optimal process
parameters. The efﬁciency plot in ﬁgure 4 shows that it is
more processor efﬁcient to have 8 processors - above this
the overall beneﬁt (increase in speedup) of having additional
processes decreases.

P
1 layer, 1 node
2 layer, 1 node
2 layer, 4 node
2 big layers, 4 node
1
25.69
51.46
51.00
215.88
2
8.73
17.04
17.07
71.98
4
3.47
6.60
6.85
24.78
8
1.71
3.21
3.13
11.33
16
1.00
1.87
1.96
5.80
32
1.16
2.22
1.87
3.87
64
2.54
4.89
2.30
2.80
128
2.94
10.80
3.28
5.34
Table I
RELATIVE PERFORMANCE OF THE DIFFERENT WORKLOADS AS MEASURED IN WALL-CLOCK TIME WITH THE BASELINE AS A 1 LAYER NETWORK
WITH ON SINGLE NODE WITH 16 PROCESSES.
An important observation from the efﬁciency plots is that
the processor efﬁciency exceeds 1 in certain regions - this
implies that the seedup is superlinear [9]. Thus meaning
- adding additional processes until a certain point actually
increases the speedup possibly due to reduction in RAM
access times.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND REMARKS
An implementation of Network Parallel Training using
Cannon’s algorithm was proposed. Running times, Speedup
and Efﬁciency were evaluated on networks of varying
complexity. Results show that when using this strategy
signiﬁcant speedup is obtained. This effect is even more
pronounced for more complex networks. We have also
showed that there are regions where such speedup is super-
linear thus increasing the efﬁciency of resource utilization.
It would be interesting to explore different means of
parallelization other than a per-unit based split of the weight
matrices. The topologies tested here were of relatively lim-
ited size. Parallelized neural networks are mostly necessary
once the networks are of unusually large size, otherwise
communication time is going to far outweigh any beneﬁts
of parallel execution due to the many data dependencies.
The data model used was a simple linear function de-
pending only on one variable. While it was not relevant for
the scope of this work, implementing a more sophisticated
means of data generation would be an interesting next step.
Another aspect to explore is how the local matrix mul-
tiplication can be improved. Perhaps ofﬂoading the matrix
multiplication to a graphics processing unit would be ben-
eﬁcial.
