Towards a conceptual framework 
for innate  immunity 
 
 
Jamie  Twycross, Uwe Aickelin 
 
Proceedings  ICARIS-2005, 4th  International Conference  on Artificial Immune 
Systems,  LNCS 3627, pp 112-125, Springer-Verlag, Banff, Canada, 2005 
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, UK 

 
 
Abstract.  Innate immunity now occupies a central role in immunology. 
However, artificial  immune  system models have largely  been inspired  by 
adaptive not  innate  immunity.  This  paper  reviews  the biological  prin- 
ciples  and  properties of  innate immunity and,  adopting a  conceptual 
framework, asks  how  these  can  be  incorporated into  artificial   models. 
The  aim is to outline  a meta-framework for models of innate immunity. 
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
Immunology has traditionally divided the immune system into innate  and adap- 
tive  components with  distinct functional  roles.  For  many  years,  research  was 
focused on the  adaptive  component.  However, the  prevailing  view in immunol- 
ogy now shows the innate  system to be of central  importance  [1]. The first part 
of this paper  focuses on  the  innate  immune  system  and  on  ways  in  which  it 
interacts with and controls  the adaptive  immune system  and discusses research 
over the last decade which has uncovered  the molecular  basis for many of these 
mechanisms,  reviewed in [2]. It first contrasts the  innate  and  adaptive immune 
systems and  briefly reviews essential  biology. It  then  discusses specific mecha- 
nisms of interaction between  cells of the  innate  and  adaptive immune  systems, 
and concludes by showing how these mechanisms  are examples  of more general 
systemic properties. 
While  the integral  role of the  innate  immune  system  has  been  established 
in immunology,  artificial  immune system models, surveyed in [3, 4], have largely 
taken  their  inspiration  from adaptive immunity.  The  second part of this  paper 
adopts  the  conceptual framework  of Stepney  et al. [5] and  addresses  how ideas 
from innate  immunity  might be modelled in artificial immune systems. The con- 
ceptual framework is first briefly summarised  and then a general meta-framework 
for models incorporating innate  immunity  is presented and  refined through the 
discussion of specific models properties. 
 
 
2 Innate immunity 
 
This  section  begins with  an  overview of well-established  conceptions  of innate 
immunity. Research which over the last decade has served to highlight the central 

 
 
 
 
role of the  innate  immune  system  is then  discussed.  Lastly,  general  properties 
of the innate  immune  system which have been drawn  out  by this  research  are 
presented. Review  papers  as  well as  the  original  articles  are  cited,  and  origi- 
nal  figures  are  reproduced  to  enhance  the  necessarily  brief  summaries  of the 
mechanisms. 
 
 
2.1  Contrasting  innate and adaptive  immunity 
 
Differences between the  innate  and  adaptive immune systems  can be seen on a 
number of levels (Table 1). The adaptive immune system is organised around  two 
classes of cells: T cells and B cells, while the cells of the innate immune system are 
much more numerous,  including natural killer (NK ) cells, dendritic  cells (DC s), 
and  macrophages.  The  receptors  of innate  system  cells are  entirely  germline- 
encoded,  in  other  words  their  structure is determined by  the  genome  of the 
cell and has a fixed, genetically-determined specificity. Adaptive  immune system 
cells possess somatically generated  variable-region  receptors such as the TCR and 
BCR  (T  and  B cell receptors) with  varying  specificities, created  by a complex 
process of gene segment  rearrangement  within  the  cell. On a population level, 
this leads to a non-clonal distribution of receptors on innate immune system cells, 
meaning that all cells of the same type have receptors  with identical specificities. 
Receptors  on adaptive  immune system cells however, are distributed clonally in 
that there  are  subpopulations of a specific cell type (clones)  which all possess 
receptors  with  identical  specificities, but  that generally,  cells of the  same type 
have receptors  with different specificties [1, 6, 7]. 
 
 
property
innate immune system
adaptive immune system
cells
receptors 
 
recognition 
response 
action  time 
evolution 
DC, NK, macrophage.
germline-encoded. 
rearrangement not  necessary. 
non-clonal  distribution. 
conserved  molecular patterns. 
selected  over evolutionary time.
cytokines, chemokines. 
immediate effector activation. 
vertebrates and invertebrates. 
T  cell, B cell.
encoded  in gene segments. somatic  
rearrangement necessary.  clonal 
distribution. 
details  of molecular structure. 
selected  over lifetime  of individual.
clonal expansion, cytokines. 
delayed  effector activation. 
only vertebrates. 
Table  1: Differences  between  innate  and  adaptive immunity. 
 
 
 
The molecules which a receptor  is able to bind with and recognise are known 
as ligands. While all receptors at the most basic level recognise molecules, ligands 
are often discussed in terms of higher-level structures. The variable-region recep- 
tors of adaptive  immunity  recognise features  of pathogen structure, with BCRs 
directly recognising peptide  sequences on pathogens, such as components  of bac- 
terial  cell membranes, and TCRs  recognising peptide  sequences which have first 
been processed by DCs. These receptors  are selected for over the lifetime of the 

 
 
 
 
organism by processes such as clonal expansion,  deletion or anergy and are under 
adaptive  not evolutionary pressure.  Conversely, innate  immune system receptors 
recognise  a genetically-determined set of ligands  under  evolutionary   pressure. 
One  key group  of innate  receptors  is the  pattern recognition  receptor  (PRR) 
superfamily  which recognises evolutionary-conserved pathogen-associate molec- 
ular  patterns (PAMPs). PRRs  do not  recognise a specific feature  of a specific 
pathogen  as variable-region receptors  do, but instead  recognise common features 
or products  of an entire  class of pathogens. The  immune  system  utilises  adap- 
tation of variable-region receptors  to  keep pace  with  evolutionary  more  rapid 
pathogens  [1, 6]. 
The  environment of a cell in vivo is the  tissue in which it is located.  Tissue 
is formed  by  specialised  groups  of differentiated cells, and  itself forms  major 
components  of organs. A substantial part  of tissue volume is extracellular space 
and  filled by  a structured network  of macromolecules  called  the  extracellular 
matrix.  Many  of the  molecules  found  in the  extracellular matrix  are  actively 
produced  by  cells and  involved  in intercellular  signalling  [8, 9]. Cytokines  are 
secreted  molecules  which  mediate  and  regulate  cell behaviour,  two important 
subsets  of which are tissue factors,  inflammation-associated molecules expressed 
by tissue cells in response to pathogen invasion, and chemokines, cytokines which 
stimulate   cell movement and  activation. Cytokines  bind  to  germline-encoded 
cytokine  receptors  present  on all cells and  are widely produced  and  consumed 
by both  innate  and  adaptive  immune  system  cells during  an immune  response. 
Recognition  by the  innate  immune  system  leads to the  immediate initiation  of 
complex networks of cytokine  signalling which orchestrate the  ensuing immune 
response. Adaptive  responses additionally involve processes of cell selection such 
as clonal expansion,  deletion  and anergy,  which take several days [1, 6]. 
 
 
2.2  Recent  developments 
 
This section reviews key developments  over the last decade in our understanding 
of the innate  immune system.  Over this period, intense  research has highlighted 
the central role of the innate  system in host defense through  its interaction with 
the adaptive immune system and with tissue, and uncovered the molecular basis 
for these interactions. These developments  have lead immunologists to reevaluate 
the  roles of both  the  innate  and  adaptive  immune  systems in the  generation  of 
immunity, installing  innate  immunity as a vital component in the initiation and 
modulation of the adaptive  immune response [2]. 
NK  cells of the  innate  immune  system  respond  to  the  disruption of nor- 
mal  cell physiology in what  has  been termed  the  “missing  self ” model of NK 
cell activation [10]. Most normal  tissue cells constitutively express MHC class I 
molecules, which present intracellular host-derived peptides on the  cell surface. 
Presentation of virus-derived  peptides leads to activation of CTL  (cytotoxic  T 
lymphocyte) cells and  apoptosis  in the  infected  cell through ligation  with  the 
TCR  of the CTL [11]. However, viruses and other infectious agents have evolved 
to interfer  with  MHC class I antigen presentation [12] and  so evade a CTL  re- 
sponse.  In  the  “missing  self ” model (Figure  1), NK cells are  activated  either 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1: NK receptors and  NK recognition, from [2] 
 
 
by reduced  signalling through receptors  of the  KIR family, inhibitory receptors 
specific for host MHC class I, leading to apoptosis  of the cognate  cell [13]. This 
creates a no-win situation for the virus: if MHC class I expression  is unaffected, 
it will be open to detection  and removal through  a CTL-based adaptive  immune 
response,  but  if it affects MHC class I expression,  it will be open to detection 
and removal  through an NK-based  innate  immune response. 
Some of the most exciting recent advances have been made in uncovering the 
role of TLRs  in determining  DC differentiation and  so a mechanism  by which 
the  innate  immune system  mediates  the quality of an adaptive immune system 
response [2, 15] (Figure  2). Initial  ligation by different PAMPs  and tissue factors 
of different TLRs on DCs “primes ” DCs to differentiate along different pathways, 
resulting  in mature and  immature DCs which produce  different  Th  (T  helper) 
cell polarisation factors.  Release  of these  polarisation factors  upon  interaction 
with  naive T cells causes the  naive cell to differentiate  into  Th1,  Th2  or Treg 
cells, all distinct types of T cell [14]. DCs, through TLRs,  couple the  quality of 
the adaptive immune effector response to the nature of the pathogen. Other  PRR 
receptor  families have also been implicated  in Th polarisation [16]. Interestingly, 
recent research [17] suggests a renewed role for variable-region receptors  not just 
in the  determination of the  antigen  specificity of an immune  response, but also 
in the  regulation  of this  response. In place of the  purely  “instructive ” DC to T 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2: DC polarisation of Th  cells, from [14] 
 
 
 
cell paradigm, the responding Th1 or Th2 cells reinforce signals to B cell or CTL 
effectors in a “success-driven ” consensual  model of T cell polarisation. 
As well as polarising  Th  cells, DCs play a key role in maintenance of pop- 
ulations  of T cells. Tolerance  is the  ability of the  immune  system  to react  in a 
non-biodestructive manner  to stimuli  and  has long been associated  with  adap- 
tive immunity.  Tolerance  is usually  discussed  in terms  of apoptosis  or anergy 
of self-reactive  T  and  B cells, and  was initially  proposed  to occur  centrally  in 
a relatively  short  perinatal period,  as epitomised  in the  clonal selection  theory 
of Burnet   [19, 20]. While  recent  research  shows  the  continuing  importance of 
central  tolerance  mechanism  [21], it  is now accepted  that peripheral tolerance 
mechansims  which operate  to censor cells throughout the lifetime of the host are 
of equal  importance.  DCs of the  innate  immune  system  lie at  the  heart  of the 
generation  of peripheral  tolerance.  Models propose that DCs continually  uptake 
apoptotic and other material  from peripheral  tissues under normal steady-state, 
nonpathogenic conditions.  Periodically,  DCs  migrate  to  draining  lymph  nodes 
where they  delete  lymphocytes  by presenting  the  processed  material which, as 
representative of tissue in the absence of pathogen, needs to be tolerated by the 
host  [22]. Signals  received  by  DCs  ‘license ”  [18]  (Figure  3) them  to  promote 
either  T cell clonal expansion,  or T cell clonal anergy  or deletion.  Research  has 
established the molecular  basis for such models. The absence of TLR  signalling 
on DCs [22, 23] or the presence of signalling through receptors  involved in the up- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3: DC Th  tolerance, from [18] 
 
 
 
take of apoptotic material [24, 25] leads to distinct semimature and mature DC 
populations  which interact with T cells to promote  tolerance  or immunogenicity 
respectively. 
Cosignalling receptors  and their ligands provide another mechanism by which 
DCs determine  the  qualitative and  quantitative nature of adaptive  immune  re- 
sponses.  CD80  and  CD86  are  costimulatory molecules  expressed  on DCs  and 
bind  with  the  CD28  and  CTLA-4  cosignalling  receptors  on Th  cells. Binding 
to  CD28  leads  to upregulation of Th  activity  and  an  immunogenic  response, 
whereas  CTLA-4  binding  to  downregulation  of activity   and  tolerance.  CD28 
is constitutively expressed  by Th  cells, whereas  the latter in proportion to the 
strength of TCR stimulation. CD80 and CD86 do not bind equivalently to CD28 
and CTLA-4, and through selective expression by DCs of these molecules, innate 
immune system  cells initiate and regulate  Th cell activity.  A key concept  which 
has  emerged  from  this  research  is the  importance of sequential  and  properly 
timed  interactions in the development of an immune response [2, 26, 27]. 
 
 
2.3  Summary 
 
As the  biology described  in this  section  shows, the  protection afforded  to  the 
host  by the immune  system  as  a whole arises  from mechanisms  of the innate 
and  adaptive  immune  systems,  which  help  form  an  integrated  system  of host 
protection. While there can be no doubt  that specific recognition by the adaptive 

 
 
 
 
immune system plays an important role in functions such as pathogen recognition 
and  removal,  it  is now clear  that innate  immune  system  mechanisms  play  an 
equally important  role. The  mechanisms  discussed  above are specific examples 
of more general properties  of innate  and adaptive  immune system function  and 
interaction, which are summarised  in Table  2. 
 
 
 
property 1 pathogens are recognised in different ways by the innate and
adaptive immune  systems. 
property 2 innate immune system receptors are determined by evolu-
tionary pressure. 
property 3 response to pathogens is performed by both the innate and
adaptive systems. 
property 4 the innate immune system initiates and directs the response
of the adaptive immune  system. 
property 5 the innate immune system maintains populations of adaptive
immune  system  cells. 
property 6 information from tissue is processed by the innate immune
system  and  passed  on to the  adaptive immune  system. 
Table  2: General properties of the innate  immune  system. 
 
 
 
 
Considering the innate  as well as adaptive  immune system highlights how im- 
mune system cells interact with pathogens  on multiple levels (Property 1). While 
the variable-region  receptors  of adaptive immunity are often specific for one fea- 
ture of one particular pathogen, germline-encoded  receptors  such as PRRs  of in- 
nate immunity  are specific for features  belonging to an entire class of pathogens. 
Innate  immune system cells also respond not only to pathogen  structure, but also 
to pathogen behaviour,  either  directly  through PAMPs  and TLRs,  or indirectly 
through  changes  in tissue  cell behaviour  (NK cells). Innate  receptor  specificity 
is determined by  evolutionary  pressures,  whereas  adaptive   processes  such  as 
peripheral  tolerance determine the range  of specificities of adaptive  receptors 
(Property 2). 
Innate  immune system cells, as well as recognising pathogen, respond to them 
directly  (Property 3), as with  NK cell monitoring  of MHC  class I expression. 
Such recognition  and  response  mechanisms  when taken  together  show how the 
innate  and adaptive immune systems work together  to provide a broad  coverage 
of protection to  the  host.  Recognition  by the  innate  immune  system  does not 
usually lead to a solely innate  response, but instead  also initiates and modulates 
an adaptive  response through DC polarisation of Th cells and modulation of cos- 
timulatory signals (Property 4). Mechanisms  such as DC tolerisation of Th cells, 
as well as relying on antigen  processed by DCs, also shows how innate  immune 
system cells maintain populations of cells (Property 5). The adaptive  response is 
driven by information not only directly  sensed by adaptive immune system cells, 
but equally  by information gathered and  processed  by innate  immune  system 

 
 
 
 
cells, as with  DC collection,  processing  and  presentation of antigen  to  T  cells 
(Property 6). 
 
 
3 Modelling innate immunity 
 
As artificial  immune  systems  develop  in their  sophistication and  so are  more 
able  to realise  the  functions  of biological  immune  systems,  they will need  to 
incorporate properties  of innate  immunity  into  their  models.  This  section  first 
reviews the  conceptual framework  for artificial  immune  systems  of Stepney  et 
al.  [5]. Adopting  this  framework  and  drawing  on  the  biology  of the  previous 
section, it then  proposes a number of general properties  of models incorporating 
innate  immunity.  Looking first at  the  mechanisms  of the  previous  section  as a 
whole, and then  individually,  these general properties  are discussed and refined. 
The aim is to suggest a meta-framework which highlights the  key properties  of 
models in general and how they  might be realised in various  individual  models. 
 
 
3.1  Conceptual frameworks 
 
In [5], Stepney  et al. present a conceptual framework  within  which biologically- 
inspired  models and  algorithms can be developed  and  analysed.  Figure  4 sum- 
marises their  framework,  in which probes provide the experimenter with an in- 
complete  and  biased  view  of a  complex  biological  system  which  then  allows 
the  construction and  validation  first of simplifying  abstract representions, and 
consequently  of analytical  computational frameworks,  which themselves  provide 
principles  for the design and analysis  of biologically-inspired  algorithms. 
 
 
 
probes, 
observations, 
experiments 
 
 
simplifying 
abstract 
representation 
modelling 
 
analytical 
framework/ 
principle 
 
 
 
biological system 
bio-inspired 
algorithms 
 
 
Fig. 4:  A  conceptual framework for  biologically-inspired algorithms  [5]. 
 
 
Stepney  et al. (ibid.)  also apply  similar  ideas to develop a meta-framework, 
Figure  5, which  allows common  underlying  properties  of classes of models  to 
be analysed  by asking questions,  called meta-probes, of each of the  models un- 
der consideration. They  suggest a number  of questions  based around  properties 
which are thought to affect complex behaviour  in general.  These areas relate  to 

 
 
 
 
openness,  diversity,  interaction, structure and  scale (ODISS).  Using this  meta- 
framework,  the  authors analyse  the  commonalities of population and  network 
models. 
 
 
 
cross-domain  modelling 
 
meta-probes 
 
meta 
representation 
 
 
meta 
framework 
 
 
probes, 
observations, 
experiments 
 
biological system 
 
simplifying 
abstract 
representation 
 
x n 
modelling 
analytical 
framework/ 
principle 
 
bio-inspired algorithms 
 
novel unified 
algorithms 
 
 
Fig. 5:  A  conceptual framework for  integrating biologically-inspired  computational domains [5]. 
 
 
 
While  Stepney  et  al.  use  the  meta-framework to  analyse  artificial   models 
for essential  features  and commonalities, this paper uses it to analyse  biological 
models. The  latter approach, apart from being pragmatic as very few artificial 
models currently exist,  also allows biology to  have  much  more  of an  influence 
on the meta-framework.  Whichever approach  is taken, meta-frameworks and the 
development of computational and mathematical models present a route through 
which artificial immune system research can help biologists answer research ques- 
tions in their field. 
 
 
3.2  
A  meta-framework for  innate models 
 
This section takes the general properties  of the innate  immune system presented 
in Section  2 and  abstracts them  by  adopting the  conceptual  framework.  The 
abstracted properties  form the basis of a meta-framework for innate  models and 
are presented  in terms  of each of the ODISS areas of the conceptual  framework: 
openness : the interaction between the immune system and the host is one of a 
poised system in dynamic equilibrium  coupled to an ever-changing  environment. 
The  relatively  constant  populations   of innate   immune  system  cells contrasts 
with  the  fluctuating populations of the  adaptive  system.  The  innate  immune 
system provides examples of mechanisms  for controlling the dynamic  allocation 
of resources of populations  of agents. 
diversity : the  different  classes of cells of the  innate  and  adaptive  immune 
systems  leads  to the  idea  of distinct  groups  of functionally  similar  agents.  At 
a different level, clonal distribution of receptors  is an good example  of different 
ways in which diversity manifests itself in biological systems. The underlying pro- 
cesses which drive diversity  of innate  receptors  are evolutionary, while adaptive 
receptor  diversity  is established  through adaptation. 

 
 
 
 
interaction : in the wider sense considering the innate  immune system shows 
how  computation is  largely  communication,  with  immunity  arising  from  the 
cytokine  networks  of signalling interactions between intercommunicating tissue 
cells and the innate  and adaptive immune systems. Adaptive  and innate  immune 
cells are also specialised to access different informational levels. Innate  cells focus 
on class features,  while adaptive cells on individual  features.  Crosstalk  between 
signalling networks is also a prevalent property  in the immune system. Spatiality 
and temporally  are key features  of interactions across all levels. 
structure : considering  the  innate  immune  system  necessitates  a view of the 
immune system composed of distinct subsystems.  Functional similarities  as well 
as differences can be seen between the innate  and adaptive  subsystems.  The in- 
nate and adaptive  are themselves composed of interacting populations of agents. 
Cell differentiation pathways  provide an even more fine-grained  division of cells 
into types. 
scale : diverse populations  of large numbers  of cells is a hallmark  of the  im- 
mune system. A challenge for artificial  immune systems is the  need to simulate 
large populations  of agents.  Exploiting  the emergent properties  of distinct pop- 
ulations  of large numbers of simple agents rather than  a smaller number of more 
complex  agents,  along  with  distributed and  parallel  architectures for artificial 
immune systems [28] may provide a way forward. 
 
 
3.3  Refining the framework 
 
As  seen  in  the  previous  section,  the innate   immune  system  provides  exam- 
ples of general  properties  for artificial  systems.  Systems  of agents  form a con- 
venient  meta-representation  of artificial  systems,  and  many  artificial  systems 
are based  on populations of interacting agents.  This  section  adopts  this  meta- 
representation and  refines the general properties  of the previous section  by dis- 
cussing how they  might be instantiated in models. 
Cells seen as autonomous agents  forms the  basis of the  meta-representation 
discussed here. The intercellular communication involved in all the mechanisms 
of Section 2 suggests the need for similar means of intercommunication between 
agents. Signals which allow groups of agents to control the functions and state  of 
other groups of agents are necessary. A finer-grain representation of intercellular 
signals into distinct classes, as seen in the biological immune system, such as cos- 
timulatory, primer  or chemokine signals, would allow artificial  systems  to more 
closely approximate the control  mechanisms  and systemic  properties  of biologi- 
cal systems. A key role of the  environment which these agents  exist in, termed 
artificial  tissue  here, is the provision of a milieu in which agents can interact via 
signalling.  As well as passing  signals between agents,  mechanisms  such as anti- 
gen processing and presentation to Th cells by DCs suggest the need for agents 
with the ability to “consume ”, process and pass on information to other  agents. 
Some groups of agents,  akin to Th or CTL cells, would not have direct  access to 
information, but  instead  see it through the filter provided  by these information 
processing agents. Artificial tissue would provide the mechanisms  for these kinds 
of interaction with the environment and other  agents. 

 
 
 
 
The representation of pathogens  at multiple levels suggests another “service ” 
which artificial  tissue has to provide. A problem  must  be represented at  multi- 
ple levels. The  artificial  tissue allows agents  of the  artificial  immune  system  to 
access different  levels of information about  events.  At the  very  least,  informa- 
tion concerning  the structure of events and signals relating  to the way elements 
behave  or interact with  the  tissue  as a whole needs to  be accessible.  Classical 
static  classification  problems  could perhaps  be translated into such a multilevel 
representation by clustering algorithms  or statistical methods  which give indi- 
cations  of how individual  feature  vectors relate  to a whole set of other  vectors. 
However, the  innate  immune  system  clearly  relies on sensing the  behaviour  as 
well as structure of pathogens, and tissue models built entirely from information 
derived from structural considerations, such as similarity  or differences between 
feature  vectors,  fail to capture this  reliance.  Dynamic,  realtime  problems  such 
as  intrusion detection offer a much  more  amenable  domain  as  they naturally 
include notions of behaviour.  For example, a computer virus not only has a par- 
ticular structure, its program  code, but also behaves  in a certain  way through 
its interactions with other  programs  and operating  systems, searching for other 
machines,  subverting  the function of existing programs,  installing  backdoors  on 
systems, and so on. 
Over its  lifetime a cell differentiates  along a particular  pathway, with  each 
differentiation  stage  along  this  pathway  representing  a  specific cell type.  All 
cells at the same stage of differentiation are of the same type and have the same 
phenotypic  configuration  and  functional  characteristics. Which  pathway  a cell 
follows is the result  of the environmental pressures the cell experiences. Little  of 
the dynamics of the immune system can be captured if agents in artificial immune 
system models do not possess similar  developmental characteristics. This could 
be modelled  by endowing  agents  with  a set  of functions,  subsets  of which  the 
agent performs  at  any  one time  and  which  represent the  current type of the 
agent.  Transitions from one type  to another are  a result  of interactions  of the 
agent with its environment and could be pictured  as a branching  tree structure. 
While cells act as individuals, differentiating  along their own individual  path- 
ways, they also act as part of a group. At this population level, considering the 
innate  immune system highlights  the need for groups of agents which respond to 
different types of information. Certain agents might identify fixed patterns in this 
information, embodying some type of notional  TLR,  while others would identify 
variable  patterns, akin  to  TCRs.  The  processes  which  drive  the  specificity of 
receptors  may be adaptive  or evolutionary,  with  different pressures  biasing  the 
type of information surveyed by agents. 
Cells control other  cells on an individual  contact-dependant level. They  also 
control cells in a local neighbourhood  through the production of cytokines.  This 
localised control leads to dynamical  patterns at the population level. DC control 
of Th  proliferation through costimulatory molecules is a good example  of how 
local interactions control the  population of Th  cells and  determine  population- 
level phenomena  such  as clonal  distribution. Effects  of the  artificial  tissue  on 
one group of agents should have resulting  effects on populations of other  agents. 

 
 
 
 
The  generation  of peripheral  tolerance  by DCs suggests  a mechanism  by which 
signals presented  by the artificial  tissue are received by one group of agents and 
have a  direct  effect on  other  groups  of agents.  This  control might not  be  as 
clearcut as live or die, but more a direction  of differentiation pathways,  of which 
polarisation  of Th cells by TLRs  on DCs is a good example. 
Lastly,  mechanisms  of trust or obligation  are established. The NK “missing 
self ”  model  is a  good  example  of this.  The  provision  of sufficient  quantities 
of MHC  can  be  seen  as  a  monitoring   requirement, imposed  by  NK  cells,  of 
the  system. If tissue  cells fail to provide  MHC they  are destroyed. In realtime 
monitoring situations, models of such a suppression-based mechanism  might be 
used to establish  if groups of data  providing  agents  are functioning. 
 
 
3.4  Summary 
 
Using the biology of the previous section as a basis, this section has sketched out 
a meta-framework for models of innate  immunity, discussing general properties 
of such models and also how they might be realised more concretely.  While the 
properties presented  have tried to capture the core features  of innate  immunity, 
due to space and intellectual constraints they are not exhaustive  and need to be 
combined  with  existing  frameworks  of adaptive  models [5] if integrated models 
are to be built. 
 
 
4 
Conclusion 
 
This paper has presented a summary  of current biological understanding of the 
innate  immune system, contrasting it with the adaptive  immune system. Adopt- 
ing a conceptual framework  it then  proposed  and refined a meta-framework for 
artificial  systems  incorporating ideas from innate  immunity.  While emphasising 
the  role of innate  immunity, in reality, the  innate  and  adaptive  systems are in- 
timately coupled  and  work together  to protect the  host. As already  suggested, 
combining  the  properties  suggested  here  with  those  of traditional population 
and network  models would enable artificial  systems to more closely reflect their 
biological counterparts. 
Other possibilities for future work include a review within the proposed 
framework  of artificial  immune  system  models such  as  [29, 30] which  already 
include  innate  immunity.  This  would help evaluate  and  compare  these models, 
discerning commonalities  and providing direction  for future research. Developing 
more detailed  mathematical and  computational models would be an important 
next step in a more detailed  understanding of the properties  of innate  immunity. 
These  models could then  be used to instantiate a range  of systems in different 
application domains.  More realistic and principled  models could also extend  un- 
derstanding on the dynamics  of competing  immunological models such as those 
of instructive or  consensual  regulation of Th1/2 responses,  or  modulation of 
costimulatory signals. 

 
 
 
 
Couching ideas of innate  immunity  within an accepted  conceptual framework 
provides  a step  in developing more integrated artificial  immune  system  models 
which take into account the key role the innate  immune system plays in host pro- 
tection.  As always, the beauty  and subtlety of the immune system will continue 
to provide  a rich source of inspiration for designers of artificial  systems. 
 
 
5
