53 
Query Expansion in Information Retrieval Systems using a Bayesian 
Network-Based Thesaurus 
Luis M. de Campos, Juan M. Fernandez, Juan F. Huete 
Departamento de Ciencias de la Computaci6n e I.A. 
E.T.S.I. Informatica, Universidad de Granada 
18071 - Granada, SPAIN 

Abstract 
Information Retrieval (IR) is concerned with 
the identification of documents in a collec­
tion that are relevant to a given information 
need, usually represented as a query contain­
ing terms or keywords, which are supposed to 
be a good description of what the user is look­
ing for. IR systems may improve their effect­
iveness (i.e., increasing the number of relev­
ant documents retrieved) by using a process 
of query expansion, which automatically adds 
new terms to the original query posed by an 
user. In this paper we develop a method of 
query expansion based on Bayesian networks. 
Using a learning algorithm, we construct a 
Bayesian network that represents some of the 
relationships among the terms appearing in 
a given document collection; this network is 
then used as a thesaurus (specific for that col­
lection). We also report the results obtained 
by our method on three standard test collec­
tions. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
A good definition that establishes the whole process of 
Information Retrieval (IR) is given by G. Salton [25]: 
'IR is concerned with representation, storage, organ­
isation, and accessing of information items'. When all 
these tasks are carried out by means of a computer, 
we will refer to 'automatic information retrieval' and 
we will define an Information Retrieval System (IRS) 
as the software that implements these tasks in a com­
puter. With respect to the meaning of an information 
item, we will only deal with documents, or in a broader 
sense, textual representations of any type of object, i.e. 
a research article, a book, a message in an electronic 
mail file, etc. 
In this paper, we mainly focus our attention in the part 
of an IRS devoted to accessing to information items, 
i.e., the identification of documents in a collection that 
are relevant to a particular information need: an user 
interacts with the IRS by formulating a query, which is 
a description of his/her information need, getting, as 
a result, a set of documents which are intended to be 
the most suitable for the request. All IRSs draw con­
clusions about the content of a document (and there­
fore about the appropriateness of this document with 
respect to a given query) by examining some repres­
entation of that document, which consists of several 
document features, usually in the form of particular 
words and phrases which are intended as a good con­
cise description of the content of the document. 
To solve the IR problem, a great number of retrieval 
models, i.e., specifications about how to represent doc­
uments and queries and how they are compared, have 
been developed, since it was set up in the 1940s. In 
[1, 8], the reader can find a very complete review of 
most of the techniques used in the IR field. It should 
be noted that the IR problem is pervaded with uncer­
tainty, most of the tasks involved in this area could be 
described as uncertain processes. In fact, the user's 
query is a vague description of his/her information 
need because, due to several reasons, he/she can not 
express in a precise way what he/she really wants. The 
query and document representation construction is an­
other example, because it gives as a result incomplete 
characterisations, in the form of keywords or terms, of 
the content of both queries and documents. 
For any given retrieval model, there is a great vari­
ety of techniques designed to improve the effectiveness 
of the retrieval. Among them, we stand out the use 
of thesauri and query expansion. A typical thesaurus 
contains a set of words and the relationships among 
them. The user of the IRS can use this structure to 
build queries or improve them (in the sense of get­
ting new words to formulate the query), restricting the 
query if it retrieves too many documents, or broaden­
ing it if it gets too few ones. On the other hand, query 

54 
de Campos, Fernandez, and Huete 
expansion is the addition of new words to the query 
by the IRS, based on previously retrieved documents 
or on thesauri, having as an objective increasing the 
number of relevant documents retrieved. 
The purpose of this research is to explore the possibil­
ities of using Bayesian networks to automatically con­
struct, for any given document collection, a thesaurus 
which may be used to improve the performance of an 
IRS by means of the query expansion technique (the 
thesaurus itself being a Bayesian network). More pre­
cisely, from the set of terms appearing in a document 
collection, we build a Bayesian network that represents 
some of the relationships among these terms using a 
learning algorithm. So, given a particular query, we 
instantiate the terms that compose it and propagate 
this information through the network. Then; by select­
ing the new terms whose posterior probability is high 
and adding them to the original query, we obtain the 
expanded query. In our experiments, we have used this 
method (on several standard test collections) as a pre­
processing step for a classic system in the IR context, 
and one of the most used experimental IRSs: Smart. 
It was proposed by Salton [25] and developed at the 
Cornell University. 
The paper is divided into 5 sections. Section 2 contains 
a short review of several basic concepts and methods 
used in Information Retrieval, which can help non­
specialized readers to better understand the rest of the 
paper. In Section 3 we explain the learning algorithm 
used to construct the Bayesian network representing 
the thesaurus. Section 4 describes the experiments we 
have carried out with three standard test collections 
( Adi, Cranfield and M edlars), as well as the results 
obtained. Finally, Section 5 contains the concluding 
remarks and some proposals for future research. 
2 
PRELIMINARIES: 
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL 
BASICS 
First, we are going to describe the operation of an IRS. 
Given a set of documents in their original format, the 
first step is to translate each document to a suitable 
representation for a computer to use. That translation 
is called indexing, and the output of this process is a 
list of words, known as terms or keywords, extracted 
from the text and considered significant. Sometimes, 
the terms have associated a number which may rep­
resents the frequency of occurrence of that. term, or a 
more complex weight expressing the importance of the 
term. The IRS stores these representations instead of 
the complete documents, so for each document, a list of 
terms is stored. An inverted file· is a structure in which 
each term has a list of documents where it occurs. 
The user expresses his/her information needs formulat­
ing a query, using a formal query language or natural 
language. That query is also indexed to get a query 
representation and the retrieval continues with the part 
of the process in which the query representation is 
matched with the stored document representations us­
ing a search strategy. Finally, a set of document identi­
fiers is presented to the user. In an operational system, 
the process stops here, but in an experimental one, the 
next step is to measure the effectiveness of the retrieval, 
i.e. IRS evaluation. That evaluation can be carried out 
with different methods, but the main one is that based 
on recall and precision estimations [21, 25]. The first 
one measures the ability of the IRS to present all the 
relevant documents (recall = number of relevant docu­
ments retrieved / number of relevant documents). The 
second one, precision, measures its ability to present 
only the relevant documents (precision = number of 
relevant documents retrieved / number of documents 
retrieved). To compare IRS performance in terms of 
these measures, the curve recall-precision is plotted for 
each query. 
There are four classic retrieval models: Boolean, vec­
tor space, cluster and probabilistic models [21, 25]. As 
Boolean and cluster models are not directly related to 
our work, we shall briefly describe only vector space 
and probabilistic models. In the vector-space model, 
documents and queries are both represented as vectors 
of length n, being n the number of terms in the collec­
tion, each position containing a weight. Documents 
and queries are compared using a similarity function, 
the most common one being the cosine of the angle 
between the two vectors. Smart, the IRS we are go­
ing to use as the basic method, belongs to this kind 
of models. The probabilistic retrieval also represents 
the documents and the queries as vectors containing 
a probabilistic weight for each term, which expresses 
the degree of importance of that term. These models 
compute the probabj}ity of relevance given a document 
and a query (the probability that a document satisfies 
a query) and are based on the 'Probability ranking 
principle'. This principle states that the best overall 
retrieval effectiveness will be achieved when documents 
are ranked in decreasing order of their probability of 
relevance [23]. Many probabilistic IR models have been 
developed, which mainly differ in the way in which they 
estimate the probability of relevance [12, 17, 21, 22]. 
As a brief bibliographical review, we are going to 
mention the main research lines related to applying 
Bayesian networks to IR. We will start at Croft and 
Turtle's studies [7, 28}, where these authors have car­
ried out one of the most important works in this 
field, developing a complete IR model based on two 
networks, the document and query networks, linked 

between them. Closely related to this work, Ghazfan 
et al. [13] give a different meaning to Croft and Turtle's 
network. Fung et al. [10] build a knowledge base, also 
composed of two types of Bayesian networks, that rep­
resents the relationships among concepts in the docu­
ments. Other interesting works on Bayesian networks 
and IR can be found in [2, 9, 18, 24]. 
There are several techniques which can be used in com­
bination with any IR model to improve the effective­
ness of the retrieval. We shall mention only thesauri 
and query expansion-based methods. 
Thesauri are useful tools for the indexing and retrieval 
processes. A thesaurus may contain a set of basic 
terms and synonyms, antonyms, more general terms, 
more specific terms, etc, but usually in specific subject 
areas. Schutze and Pederson [26] make a good review 
of the different approaches to build these structures. 
We are going to center on automatic thesaurus con­
struction. Mainly, these methods are based on statist­
ical techniques, which try to find patterns of cooccur­
rence between terms among all the documents in the 
collection. This task is carried out by computing any 
kind of similarity function between all pairs of terms, 
and grouping in common classes all terms whose sim­
ilarity coefficients are sufficiently large (25]. 
Classified as a query modification technique, query ex­
pansion is the addition of new terms to the query, based 
on previously retrieved documents or on thesauri, with 
the objective of recall improvement. Using the re­
trieved documents, those terms that appear in relev­
ant documents are added to the query, and using a 
thesaurus, synonyms or broader terms, related terms 
in general, are added to query terms [15]. The basis 
for the cooccurrence-based thesaurus use in query ex­
pansion is the Association Hypothesis [21], that states 
that terms which occur in common documents tend to 
be about the same subject. Therefore, if a query term 
is good at distinguishing relevant and not relevant doc­
uments, any other term closely related to it, i.e., which 
cooccurs frequently with it, is also likely to be good 
discriminating documents and should be added to the 
query. Han et al. (14] present a good classification of 
query expansion methods. 
3 
THE THESAURUS 
CONSTRUCTION ALGORITHM 
Given a document collection, we have built a thesaurus 
based on a Bayesian network. From an inverted file 
used as a learning file, our method learns a polytree of 
terms, i.e. a directed acyclic graph ( dag) where there is 
no more than one undirected path connecting each pair 
of nodes. The polytree nodes represent terms of the 
Query Expansion using Bayesian Networks 
55 
collection in the form of binary variables. Each vari­
able, a, takes its values from the set {a0, a! }, where 
a0 stands for 'the term a is not relevant', and a1 rep­
resents 'the term a is relevant'. 
There are two important reasons for learning a poly­
tree instead of a more general Bayesian network: 
any document collection contains a very big num­
ber (typically thousands) of terms. 
As each term 
is associated to a node, our network shall be very 
large. So, the processes needed to estimate a net­
work from empirical data (learning) can be extremely 
time-consuming. This task can be obviously allevi­
ated by applying efficient learning algorithms [3, 20] 
which build more straightforward graphs as singly con­
nected networks (forest, trees and polytrees), inten­
ded as approximations of more complex models due to 
the loss of expressiveness (since the kind of depend­
ency /independency relationships that singly connected 
networks may represent is more restrictive than for 
general dags). The second reason is based on the 
methods of inference available for Bayesian networks 
(i.e., the propagation algorithms). Again, we deal with 
a potentially time-consuming process, but for singly 
connected networks there are also efficient and exact 
propagation methods which run in a time proportional 
to the number of nodes [1 9]. Among the singly con­
nected networks, our choice was polytrees because we 
gain a little more accuracy. Therefore, our aim is to 
approximate the real dependency model of the terms 
in a document collection by means of a polytree, in 
which the most important (in)dependencies between 
the terms of the collection are expressed. 
The algorithm we have implemented to learn the poly­
tree is described in Figure 1. Our algorithm is quite 
similar to two algorithms for learning polytrees, the 
PA algorithm [3] and Rebane and Pearl's (RP) [20] 
(the two algorithms being based on Chow and Lin's 
method for constructing dependence trees [5]). Ac­
tually, we could say that it is a combination of both 
algorithms, with some additional features. 
As it can be noticed, this algorithm has three main 
different parts: in step 1, we compute the degrees of 
dependency between all pairs of nodes. The second 
part, step 2, represents the tree skeleton construction, 
and the last one, from step 3 until the end, performs 
the orientation of the edges in the tree, finally making 
up a polytree. 
Several remarks have to be made about these three 
parts. First, the measure used to establish the depend­
ency between nodes (which is, in some sense, analog­
ous to the functions usually employed in IR systems 
for measuring the similarity between the terms in the 

56 
de Campos, Fernandez, and Huete 
1. For every pair of nodes a, (3 E U, being U the set 
of nodes, do 
1.1. Compute Dep(a, (3/0). 
2. Build a maximum weight spanning tree G, where 
the weight of each edge a-{3 is 
D ( 
) 
_ { Dep(a, (3/0) 

-
0 
if •I(a, (3/0) 
if I( a, (3/0) 
(1) 
3. For every triplet of nodes a, (3, 1 E U such that a-1, 
1-(3 E G do 
3.1. If Dep(a,(J/0) < Dep(a,,B/J) and --.J(a,,B/J) then 
direct the subgraph a-1-(3 as a 4 1 +- (3. 
4. Direct the remaining edges without introducing new 
head to head connections. 
5. Return G. 
Figure 1: Algorithm for Learning a Polytree 
collection) is 
(2) 
That is, the Kullback-Leibler cross entropy (also called 
Mutual information measure), which measures the de­
pendency degree between two variables a and (3 (which 
is equal to zero if a and (3 are marginally independ­
ent, and such that the more dependent a and (3 are, 
the greater Dep( a, (3/0) is). The probabilities p( ai, (Jj) 
are estimated from the inverted file by counting fre­
quencies. So, for example, p( a1, (30) is the probabil­
ity that the term a appears in a document and not 
(3, and p( at) is the probability of occurrence of term 
a (we are assuming that a term a is relevant for a 
given document if it appears in that document). Here, 
we use, as the RP algorithm does, the marginal cross 
entropy as dependency measure. The PA algorithm 
uses a combination of Dep(a, (3/0) and the conditional 
dependency degrees (conditional mutual information 
measures) Dep( a, (3/J), for every other node T 
The reason why we have not combined the marginal 
dependency of two terms with the conditional depend­
encies of these two terms conditioned to the rest of 
terms, has been that, due to the great amount of terms 
in a collection, the computation of the conditional de­
pendencies, although it has to be carried out only once, 
has been proved extremely time-consuming but also a 
big storage is needed. These two obstacles have leaded 
us to use only the marginal dependency as the depend­
ency measure; methods to include some conditional de­
pendencies in certain cases are being studied. 
The next step is the tree skeleton construction. If we 
assume that the computed dependency values are link 
weights in a graph, this algorithm gets a maximum 
weight spanning tree (MWST), i.e. a tree where the 
sum of the weigths of its links is maximum. We con­
sidered two different methods to obtain the MWST: 
Kruskal's and Prim's algorithms [6], although, finally, 
we opted for the latter. The fundamental reason for 
this choice was that Kruskal's algorithm is suggested 
for sparse graphs and not for complete ones, as our 
case is, because it requires sorting all the computed 
dependencies. Prim's method begins with a one-node 
tree, and at each step adds to the tree the link between 
a node inside the tree and a node outside it having the 
maximum dependency degree, until n - 1 links have 
been adjoined, where n is the number of nodes in the 
graph. 
Due to the great number of terms that there are gener­
ally in a collection, the values of the dependencies are 
very low in general, and sometimes the algorithm does 
not have any good choice and selects as the highest 
value among all the dependencies being considered a 
very low value, adding the corresponding link to the 
tree. The problem lies in the fact that the two linked 
nodes are almost more independent than dependent, 
and therefore the model we are building loses accuracy 
with respect to the original one. 
To solve this problem, the algorithm, once it has selec­
ted a. new link a-{3 to be added to the tree, performs 
an independency test between a and (3 (namely a Chi 
Square test with one degree of freedom based on the 
own value of Dep(a, (3/0) [16]); then it really adds this 
link to the tree only if the independency test fails (in the 
algorithm in Figure 1, this is denoted as --.J(a, ,B/0)). 
This is equivalent to redefine the weights of the links, 
using eq. (1) instead of eq. (2). In this way, we can 
obtain a non-connected tree, i.e., a forest, as the result 
of this step. 
Once the skeleton is built, the last part of the learning 
algorithm deals with the orientation of the tree, getting 
as a result a polytree. This process is based on the PA 
algorithm: in a head to head pattern a ---* 1 
+- ;3, 
the instantiation of the head to head node 1 should 
normally increase the degree of dependency between 
a and {3, whereas in a non-head to head pattern such 
as a +- 1 4 (3, the instantiation of the middle node 
1 should produce the opposite effect, decreasing the 
degree of dependency between a and ;3. So, we com­
pare the degree of dependency between a and (3 after 
the instantiation of 1, Dep( a, (3/J), with the degree 
of dependency between a and (3 before the instanti­
ation of/, Dep(a, (3/0), and direct the edges toward 
1 if the former is greater than the latter. Finally, the 
algorithm directs the remaining edges without intra-

clueing new head to head connections. This strategy 
produced, in our preliminary experiments, structures 
where several nodes had a great number of parents; this 
fact leads to have very big probability tables and, as a 
consequence, it causes problems of storage and reliab­
ility (in the estimation of these tables). For that reason 
we have restricted a bit the rule that produces head to 
head connections, by including another condition in the 
antecedent: we want to be sure that if we decide to in­
clude a head to head connection ct -+ 1 +-- {3, then the 
nodes ct and f3 are not conditionally independent given 
I· So, we also test this condition, once again using 
a Chi Square test of independency based of the value 
Dep(ct,/311) (in this case with two degrees of freedom). 
At last, and once the polytree structure has been built, 
the algorithm has to compute (from the inverted file) 
the prior probabilities for the root nodes, and the con­
ditional probabilities of the rest of the nodes, given all 
their parents, and the Bayesian network is completely 
specified. 
4 
EXPERIMENTATION 
In this section we are going to briefly describe the 
material used in our experiments (databases and soft­
ware), as well as the experimental design and the ob­
tained results. 
4.1 
STANDARD TEST COLLECTIONS 
AND SOFTWARE USED 
Our experiments in query expansion using a Bayesian 
network-based thesaurus have been carried out with a 
set of three standard test collections. It is very com­
mon in IR that the experiments are made over standard 
test collections in order to compare several retrieval 
models. These collections are composed of a set of 
documents, a set of queries submitted by users and, 
finally, a set of relevance judgements, i.e. the set of 
documents which are relevant to each query. This last 
set is used to measure the retrieval effectiveness. 
Three well-known standard collections have been the 
basis on which our experiments have been run: Adi, 
Cranfield and Medlars. Table 1 shows their basic char­
acteristics. These collections were obtained from the 
Computer Science Department ftp site at Cornell Uni­
versity, as well as the Smart IR Software [27]. We have 
chosen these three collections because their character­
istics are quite different. In particular, with respect to 
the number of terms, they cover a wide range of situ­
ations, going from a relatively small to a large number 
of terms. 
Smart, as we said in section 2, is an IRS which im­
plements the vector space model. An example of a 
Query Expansion using Bayesian Networks 
57 
Collection 
Adi 
Cranfield 
I Medlars I 
Subject 
Inform.Sci. 
Aeronautics 
Medicine 
Documents 
82 
1398 
1033 
Terms 
828 
3857 
7170 
Queries 
35 
225 
30 
Table 1: Characteristics of the Test Collections 
typical representation of the ith document or query is 
((t;l,Wil);(t;2,Wi2); ... ;(t;n,Win)), where each pair is 
a term and its weight. 
Smart has different weighting schemes. The weighting 
process is composed of three phases: 
1.- From indexing, the number of times that a term 
occurs in the document or in the query is associated 
to each term. This value is called term frequency (tf). 
Also, the weight can be 0 if the term does not appear 
or 1 if it does. These weights can be normalised. 
2.- Modification of the tf, normalised or not, using 
information obtained from the whole collection. The 
objective of this modification is to increase the weight 
of those terms rarest in the collection, and decrease the 
weight of the most common terms. 
3.- Finally, a normalization process can be carried out 
over the entire vector. 
Smart represents the three steps of the weighting pro­
cess by three characters, each one representing a dif­
ferent weighting strategy in the whole weighting con­
struction. In our experiments, we have used the tf 
weight without normalisation, no modification of the 
tf and no normalisation of the entire vector. In the 
Smart notation, our weighting scheme is 'nnn'. We 
have chosen it because is the 'default' option of Smart 
(although we know that it is not the best weighting 
scheme). 
4.2 
THE QUERY EXPANSION PROCESS. 
EXPERIMENT DESIGN 
Given a query submitted to our system, the query 
expansion process starts placing the evidences in the 
learnt polytree. This action means looking for the 
terms that appear in the query in the polytree nodes 
and setting their states to 'the term is relevant'. After 
that, a propagation process is carried out. As our net­
work is a polytree, we can use an exact and efficient 
inference method to propagate the probabilities [19]. 
As a result of the propagation, the probability that a 
term is relevant, given that all the terms in the query 
are relevant, is obtained for each node. The next step 
is to get those terms with highest probability. To select 
the terms to be added to the query we use a threshold 

58 
de Campos, Fernandez, and Huete 
value that establishes a lower limit, i.e., those terms 
whose posterior probability is higher than the given 
threshold are chosen to be incorporated in the query, 
setting up the expanded query. The tf weights of the 
added terms are precisely their posterior probabilit­
ies. Once the new query vector is completely created, 
Smart takes that new query and runs a retrieval, get­
ting a set of retrieved documents. 
Summing up, the whole expansion process is divided 
into two parts: 
the learning and the propagation 
phases. The former has as arguments the document 
collection (the learning file) and the confidence level 
for the two independency tests carried out. The lat-
, ter has two arguments: the Bayesian network and the 
threshold to select the additional terms. With this set 
of arguments we have designed a battery of experi­
ments for each collection, by using different confidence 
levels (90%, 95%, 97.5%, 99% and 99.5%) and different 
thresholds (0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8 and 0.9) 
So, for each collection a set of five thesauri has been 
created, each one with a different confidence level. The 
next step is to expand the set of standard queries 
of each collection using each one of the five thesauri 
of that collection. Each expansion is run five times, 
once per threshold, getting five new query files per 
thesaurus. Once twenty-five new sets of queries per 
collection are ready, Smart runs a retrieval and evalu­
ates the retrieval effectiveness. 
4.3 
RESULTS 
Tables 2, 3 and 4 display some of the results obtained 
for the three collections from all our experiments. In 
each table, precision/recall data are presented show­
ing precision at ten standard recall levels and the av­
erage of precision at all ten levels, using Smart with 
and without query expansion (Q.E.); we also show 
the difference as the percent change from the baseline 
(Smart). As suggested in [28], a difference of 5% in av­
erage precision is generally considered significant and 
a 10% difference is considered very significant. The 
precision value displayed at each fixed recall level is 
the average for the given number of queries. The last 
two rows in each table represent recall and precision 
obtained from the retrieval of a fixed number of doc­
uments (we used the default value of Smart, which is 
15). 
For each collection, we show the results of using query 
expansion only for one experiment, as well as the aver­
age results over the twenty-five experiments. Neverthe­
less, for the Adi and Medlars collections we obtained 
better results than the baseline in all the twenty-five 
experiments, in terms of both the average precision val­
ues and number of documents retrieved. So, our query 
Recall 
Smart 
Q.E.+ 
% 
level 
Smart 
change 
0.1 
0.4824 
0.5052 
4.73 
0.2 
0.4343 
0.4616 
6.29 
0.3 
0.4203 
0.4365 
3.85 
0.4 
0.3640 
0.3987 
9.53 
0.5 
0.3405 
0.3878 
13.89 
0.6 
0.2775 
0.3392 
22.23 
0.7 
0.2247 
0.2761 
22.87 
0.8 
0.2143 
0.2653 
23.80 
0.9 
0.1874 
0.2417 
28.98 
1.0 
0.1863 
0.2405 
29.09 
Average 
0.3132 
0.3553 
16.53 
Recall 
0.5036 
0.5983 
18.80 
Precision 
0.1524 
0.1695 
11.22 
Table 2: Results on the Adi Collection. 
Confidence Level: 95; Threshold: 0.5 
Aver. 25 
exper. 
0.4992 
0.4642 
0.4403 
0.3916 
0.3856 
0.3053 
0.2490 
0.2423 
0.2123 
0.211 1  
0.3401 
0.5746 
0.1679 
expansion method seems quite robust for these two col­
lections. The best average precision values are more of­
ten achieved in low-medium thresholds (0.5-0.7). The 
precision values in our experiments for the ten recall 
points are always better than those ones in the ori­
ginal set of queries, establishing greater distances in 
medium-high recall values. In these two collections, 
there are not significant differences between the five 
networks, corresponding to the five confidence levels 
used in the independency tests. 
Recall 
Smart 
Q.E.+ 
% 
Aver. 25 
level 
Smart 
change 
exper. 
0.1 
0.5236 
0.5150 
-1.64 
0.4887 
0.2 
0.4158 
0.4177 
0.46 
0.3926 
0.3 
0.3042 
0.3105 
2.07 
0.2962 
0.4 
0.2452 
0.2558 
4.32 
0.2415 
0.5 
0.2171 
0.2289 
5.44 
0.2124 
0.6 
0.1687 
0.1810 
7.29 
0.1675 
0.7 
0.1183 
0.1263 
6.76 
0.1187 
0.8 
0.0931 
0.1016 
9.13 
0.0927 
0.9 
0.0656 
0.0696 
6.10 
0.0650 
1.0 
0.0573 
0.0609 
6.28 
0.0569 
Average 
0.2209 
0.2267 
4.62 
0.2132 
Recall 
0.3397 
0.3450 
1.56 
0.3284 
Precision 
0.1591 
0.1636 
2.83 
0.1576 
Table 3: Results on the Cranfield Collection. 
Confidence Level: 97.5; Threshold: 0.9 
I 
However, for the Cranfield collection, it can be ob­
served how the threshold used to select the terms to 
expand the queries is an important parameter in the 
retrieval performance: the greater the threshold is the 
better the results are. The expansions are not good 

Recall 
Smart 
Q.E.+ 
% 
Aver. 25 
level 
Smart 
change 
exper. 
0.1 
0.6389 
0.7042 
10.22 
0.6788 
0.2 
0.5810 
0.6110 
5.16 
0.6016 
0.3 
0.5204 
0.5598 
7.57 
0.5505 
0.4 
0.4561 
0.4938 
8.27 
0.4865 
0.5 
0.3725 
0.3996 
7.28 
0.4013 
0.6 
0.2887 
0.3381 
17.11 
0.3297 
0.7 
0.2403 
0.2894 
20.43 
0.2786 
0.8 
0.1956 
0.2367 
21.01 
0.2292 
0.9 
0.1534 
0.1752 
14.21 
0.1725 
1.0 
0.0875 
0.1115 
27.43 
0.1033 
Average 
0.3535 
0.3919 
13.87 
0.3832 
Recall 
0.3161 
0.3406 
7.75 
0.3356 
Precision 
0.4467 
0.4800 
7.45 
0.4738 
Table 4: Results on the Medlars Collection. 
Confidence Level: 97.5; Threshold: 0.7 
at all for lower thresholds but they improve when this 
limit is higher: we only obtain better results than the 
baseline using high thresholds (0.8 and 0.9) (this ex­
plains the rather poor averages displayed in the last 
column in table 3). On the other hand, there are not 
remarkable differences between the results from the 
different networks, having a very similar behaviour. 
These results suggest that in this case query expan­
sion is useful when the number of terms added to each 
query is rather small (this fact is probably due to the 
characteristics of this collection). 
So far we do not know exactly why our method per­
formed for Adi and Medlars much better than for Cran­
field. To solve this question will probably require an 
in-depth study of the characteristics of these collections 
(specificity or generality of queries and indexing terms, 
number of terms per query, etc). 
In general, we may conclude that the improvement in 
retrieval effectiveness induced by our method is signi­
ficant but moderate. This fact encourages us to con­
tinue studying this topic, in order to get more sensible 
improvements. Other conclusions are, on the one hand, 
that the confidence level for the independency test is 
not very relevant to the retrieval performance of the 
expanded queries, but, on the other hand, the threshold 
imposed to select those terms which are going to be ad­
ded to the original query may be quite relevant. This 
suggests the necessity of developing some heuristics for 
automatically selecting the threshold according to the 
data in a given collection (for example taking into ac­
count the inverse document frequencies of terms in the 
queries). Anyway, it seems us that the improvement 
in retrieval performance is collection-dependent. 
Query Expansion using Bayesian Networks 
59 
5 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
We have developed a new query expansion method us­
ing a Bayesian network-based thesaurus (constructed 
automatically using a learning algorithm). Although 
we have applied it in combination with the well-known 
Smart system, our method could also be used as a 
preprocessing step for any other Information Retrieval 
System. The results obtained from the experiments 
show a moderate improvement of the retrieval effective­
ness when using our query expansion technique. Any­
way, we consider this work as a first step in a more 
general research centered on applying Bayesian net­
works to Information Retrieval. 
Our short-term research lines are to develop new learn­
ing algorithms, completely adapted to the IR context, 
or modify existing ones and test them on the good test­
ing ground of query expansion, helped by an IRS like 
Smart to run the retrievals. We will focus our long­
term efforts on the development of an IRS completely 
based on Bayesian networks. 
For our future developments, the main requirements 
that we are going to ask for are: 
• We will look for more accuracy in the thesaurus 
learning algorithms, in the sense of creating more 
complicated structures than the polytree intro­
duced in this paper, with the aim of being nearer 
to the real model defined by data, and at the same 
time taking into account the complexity of the 
problem. To carry out this idea, one of the first 
attempts will be the incorporation of conditional 
dependencies in the learning process. 
• Incorporating documents to our models, creating 
structures which would represent the relationships 
between them, and learning the document network 
as precisely as is possible. 
• Improving the performance of the propagation 
process, choosing the most adequate techniques 
and modifying them to reduce the time consumed 
in the propagation. For example, by making a pre­
processing in which the probability tables were in­
volved, so that at the moment of propagation the 
calculations would be minimum.
