1
Visual Analytics in Deep Learning:
An Interrogative Survey for the Next Frontiers
Fred Hohman, Member, IEEE, Minsuk Kahng, Member, IEEE, Robert Pienta, Member, IEEE,
and Duen Horng Chau, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Deep learning has recently seen rapid development and received signiﬁcant attention due to its state-of-the-art
performance on previously-thought hard problems. However, because of the internal complexity and nonlinear structure of deep neural
networks, the underlying decision making processes for why these models are achieving such performance are challenging and
sometimes mystifying to interpret. As deep learning spreads across domains, it is of paramount importance that we equip users of
deep learning with tools for understanding when a model works correctly, when it fails, and ultimately how to improve its performance.
Standardized toolkits for building neural networks have helped democratize deep learning; visual analytics systems have now been
developed to support model explanation, interpretation, debugging, and improvement. We present a survey of the role of visual
analytics in deep learning research, which highlights its short yet impactful history and thoroughly summarizes the state-of-the-art
using a human-centered interrogative framework, focusing on the Five W’s and How (Why, Who, What, How, When, and Where). We
conclude by highlighting research directions and open research problems. This survey helps researchers and practitioners in both
visual analytics and deep learning to quickly learn key aspects of this young and rapidly growing body of research, whose impact spans
a diverse range of domains.
Index Terms—Deep learning, visual analytics, information visualization, neural networks
!
1
INTRODUCTION
D
EEP learning is a speciﬁc set of techniques from the
broader ﬁeld of machine learning (ML) that focus on
the study and usage of deep artiﬁcial neural networks to
learn structured representations of data. First mentioned
as early as the 1940s [1], artiﬁcial neural networks have
a rich history [2], and have recently seen a dominate and
pervasive resurgence [3], [4], [5] in many research domains
by producing state-of-the-art results [6], [7] on a number of
diverse big data tasks [8], [9]. For example, the premiere ma-
chine learning, deep learning, and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
conferences have seen enormous growth in attendance and
paper submissions since early 2010s. Furthermore, open-
source toolkits and programming libraries for building,
training, and evaluating deep neural networks have become
more robust and easy to use, democratizing deep learning.
As a result, the barrier to developing deep learning models
is lower than ever before and deep learning applications are
becoming pervasive.
While this technological progress is impressive, it comes
with unique and novel challenges. For example, the lack
of interpretability and transparency of neural networks,
from the learned representations to the underlying decision
process, is an important problem to address. Making sense
of why a particular model misclassiﬁes test data instances
or behaves poorly at times is a challenging task for model
developers. Similarly, end-users interacting with an applica-
tion that relies on deep learning to make critical decisions
may question its reliability if no explanation is given by the
model, or become bafﬂed if the explanation is convoluted.
•
F. Hohman, M. Kahng, R. Pienta, and D. H. Chau are with the College of
Computing, Georgia Tech, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, U.S.A.

While explaining neural network decisions is important,
there are numerous other problems that arise from deep
learning, such as AI safety and security (e.g., when using
models in applications such as self-driving vehicles), and
compromised trust due to bias in models and datasets, just
to name a few. These challenges are often compounded, due
to the large datasets required to train most deep learning
models. As worrisome as these problems are, they will
likely become even more widespread as more AI-powered
systems are deployed in the world. Therefore, a general
sense of model understanding is not only beneﬁcial, but
often required to address the aforementioned issues.
Data visualization and visual analytics excel at knowl-
edge communication and insight discovery by using encod-
ings to transform abstract data into meaningful represen-
tations. In the seminal work by Zeiler and Fergus [10], a
technique called deconvolutional networks enabled projection
from a model’s learned feature space back to the pixel space.
Their technique and results give insight into what types
of features deep neural networks are learning at speciﬁc
layers, and also serve as a debugging tool for improving
a model. This work is often credited for popularizing vi-
sualization in the machine learning and computer vision
communities in recent years, putting a spotlight on it as
a powerful tool that helps people understand and improve
deep learning models. However, visualization research for
neural networks started well before [11], [12], [13]. Over
just a handful of years, many different techniques have
been introduced to help interpret what neural networks are
learning. Many such techniques generate static images, such
as attention maps and heatmaps for image classiﬁcation,
indicating which parts of an image are most important
to the classiﬁcation. However, interaction has also been
arXiv:1801.06889v3  [cs.HC]  14 May 2018

2
WHEN 
When in the deep learning 
process is visualization used? 
During Training 
After Training
§8
?
WHAT 
What data, features, and relationships 
in deep learning can be visualized? 
Computational Graph & Network Architecture 
Learned Model Parameters 
Individual Computational Units 
Neurons In High-dimensional Space 
Aggregated Information
WHO 
Who would use and benefit 
from visualizing deep learning? 
Model Developers & Builders 
Model Users 
Non-experts
HOW 
How can we visualize deep learning 
data, features, and relationships? 
Node-link Diagrams for Network Architecture 
Dimensionality Reduction & Scatter Plots 
Line Charts for Temporal Metrics  
Instance-based Analysis & Exploration 
Interactive Experimentation 
Algorithms for Attribution & Feature Visualization
WHY 
Why would one want to use  
visualization in deep learning? 
Interpretability & Explainability 
Debugging & Improving Models 
Comparing & Selecting Models 
Teaching Deep Learning Concepts
WHERE 
Where has deep learning 
visualization been used? 
Application Domains & Models 
A Vibrant Research Community
Visual Analytics in Deep Learning
§5
§6
§7
§9
Interrogative Survey Overview
§4
Fig. 1. A visual overview of our interrogative survey, and how each of the six questions, ”Why, Who, What, How, When, and Where,” relate to one
another. Each question corresponds to one section of this survey, indicated by the numbered tag, near each question title. Each section lists its
major subsections discussed in the survey.
incorporated into the model understanding process in visual
analytics tools to help people gain insight [14], [15], [16].
This hybrid research area has grown in both academia and
industry, forming the basis for many new research papers,
academic workshops, and deployed industry tools.
In this survey, we summarize a large number of deep
learning visualization works using the Five W’s and How
(Why, Who, What, How, When, and Where). Figure 1
presents a visual overview of how these interrogative ques-
tions reveal and organize the various facets of deep learning
visualization research and their related topics. By framing
the survey in this way, many existing works ﬁt a description
as the following ﬁctional example:
To interpret representations learned by deep models
(why), model developers (who) visualize neuron activa-
tions in convolutional neural networks (what) using t-
SNE embeddings (how) after the training phase (when)
to solve an urban planning problem (where).
This framing captures the needs, audience, and techniques
of deep learning visualization, and positions new work’s
contributions in the context of existing literature.
We conclude by highlighting prominent research direc-
tions and open problems. We hope that this survey acts as
a companion text for researchers and practitioners wishing
to understand how visualization supports deep learning
research and applications.
2
OUR CONTRIBUTIONS & METHOD OF SURVEY
2.1
Our Contributions
C1. We present a comprehensive, timely survey on visual-
ization and visual analytics in deep learning research,
using a human-centered, interrogative framework. This
method enables us to position each work with respect
to its Five Ws and How (Why, Who, What, How, When,
and Where), and ﬂexibly discuss and highlight existing
works’ multifaceted contributions.
• Our human-centered approach using the Five W’s
and How — based on how we familiarize ourselves
with new topics in everyday settings — enables
readers to quickly grasp important facets of this
young and rapidly growing body of research.
• Our interrogative process provides a framework to
describe existing works, as well as a model to base
new work off of.
C2. To highlight and align the cross-cutting impact that
visual analytics has had on deep learning across a
broad range of domains, our survey goes beyond
visualization-focused venues, extending a wide scope
that encompasses most relevant works from many top
venues in artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning, deep
learning, and computer vision. We highlight how visual
analytics has been an integral component in solving
some of AI’s biggest modern problems, such as neural
network interpretability, trust, and security.

3
C3. As deep learning, and more generally AI, touches more
aspects of our daily lives, we highlight important re-
search directions and open problems that we distilled
from the survey. These include improving the capa-
bilities of visual analytics systems for furthering in-
terpretability, conducting more effective design studies
for evaluating system usability and utility, advocating
humans’ important roles in AI-powered systems, and
promoting proper and ethical use of AI applications to
beneﬁt society.
2.2
Survey Methodology & Summarization Process
We selected existing works from top computer science jour-
nals and conferences in visualization (e.g., IEEE Transac-
tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (TVCG)),
visual analytics (e.g., IEEE Conference on Visual Analyt-
ics Science and Technology (VAST)) and deep learning
(e.g., Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NIPS) and the International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML)). Since deep learning visualization is rel-
atively new, much of the relevant work has appeared in
workshops at the previously mentioned venues; therefore,
we also include those works in our survey. Table 1 lists
some of the most prominent publication venues and their
acronyms. We also inspected preprints posted on arXiv
(https://arxiv.org/), an open-access, electronic repository
of manuscript preprints, whose computer science subject
has become a hub for new deep learning research. Finally,
aside from the traditional aforementioned venues, we in-
clude non-academic venues with signiﬁcant attention such
as Distill, industry lab research blogs, and research blogs
of inﬂuential ﬁgures. Because of the rapid growth of deep
learning research and the lack of a perfect ﬁt for publishing
and disseminating work in this hybrid area, therefore, the
inclusion of these non-traditional sources are important to
review, as they are highly inﬂuential and impactful to the
ﬁeld.
Visualization takes many forms throughout the deep
learning literature. This survey focuses on visual analytics
for deep learning. We also include related works from
the AI and computer vision communities that contribute
novel static visualizations. So far, the majority of work
surrounds convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and im-
age data; more recent work has begun to visualize other
models, e.g., recurrent neural networks (RNNs), long short-
term memory units (LSTMs), and generative adversarial
networks (GANs). For each work, we recorded the following
information if present:
• Metadata (title, authors, venue, and year published)
• General approach and short summary
• Explicit contributions
• Future work
• Design component (e.g. user-centered design method-
ologies, interviews, evaluation)
• Industry involvement and open-source code
With this information, we used the Five W’s and How
(Why, Who, What, How, When, and Where) to organize
these existing works and the current state-of-the-art of vi-
sualization and visual analytics in deep learning.
TABLE 1
Relevant visualization and AI venues, in the order of: journals,
conferences, workshops, open access journals, and preprint
repositories. In each category, visualization venues precede AI venues.
TVCG
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
VAST
IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
InfoVis
IEEE Information Visualization
VIS
IEEE Visualization Conference (VAST+InfoVis+SciVis)
CHI
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
NIPS
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
ICML
International Conference on Machine Learning
CVPR
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
ICLR
International Conference on Learning Representations
VADL
IEEE VIS Workshop on Visual Analytics for Deep Learning
HCML
CHI Workshop on Human Centered Machine Learning
IDEA
KDD Workshop on Interactive Data Exploration & Analytics
ICML Workshop on Visualization for Deep Learning
WHI
ICML Workshop on Human Interpretability in ML
NIPS Workshop on Interpreting, Explaining and Visualizing
Deep Learning
NIPS Interpretable ML Symposium
FILM
NIPS Workshop on Future of Interactive Learning Machines
ACCV Workshop on Interpretation and Visualization of Deep
Neural Nets
ICANN Workshop on Machine Learning and Interpretability
Distill
Distill: Journal for Supporting Clarity in Machine Learning
arXiv
arXiv.org e-Print Archive
2.3
Related Surveys
While there is a larger literature for visualization for ma-
chine learning, including predictive visual analytics [17],
[18], [19] and human-in-the-loop interactive machine learn-
ing [20], [21], to our knowledge there is no comprehen-
sive survey of visualization and visual analytics for deep
learning. Regarding deep neural networks, related surveys
include a recent book chapter that discusses visualization of
deep neural networks related to the ﬁeld of computer vi-
sion [22], an unpublished essay that proposes a preliminary
taxonomy for visualization techniques [23], and an article
that focuses on describing interactive model analysis, which
mentions deep learning in a few contexts while describing
a high-level framework for general machine learning mod-
els [24]. A recent overview article by Choo and Liu [25] is
the closest in spirit to our survey. Our survey provides wider
coverage and more detailed analysis of the literature.
Different from all the related articles mentioned above,
our survey provides a comprehensive, human-centered, and
interrogative framework to describe deep learning visual
analytics tools, discusses the new, rapidly growing commu-
nity at large, and presents the major research trajectories
synthesized from existing literature.

4
2.4
Survey Overview & Organization
Section 3 introduces common deep learning terminology.
Figure 1 shows a visual overview of this survey’s struc-
ture and Table 2 summarizes representative works. Each
interrogative question (Why, Who, What, How, When, and
Where) is given its own section for discussion, ordered to
best motivate why visualization and visual analytics in deep
learning is such a rich and exciting area of research.
§ 4
Why do we want to visualize deep learning?
Why and for what purpose would one want to use
visualization in deep learning?
§ 5
Who wants to visualize deep learning?
Who are the types of people and users that would use
and stand to beneﬁt from visualizing deep learning?
§ 6
What can we visualize in deep learning?
What data, features, and relationships are inherent to
deep learning that can be visualized?
§ 7
How can we visualize deep learning?
How can we visualize the aforementioned data, fea-
tures, and relationships?
§ 8
When can we visualize deep learning?
When in the deep learning process is visualization
used and best suited?
§ 9
Where is deep learning visualization being used?
Where has deep learning visualization been used?
Section 10 presents research directions and open prob-
lems that we gathered and distilled from the literature
survey. Section 11 concludes the survey.
3
COMMON TERMINOLOGY
To enhance readability of this survey, and to provide quick
references for readers new to deep learning, we have tab-
ulated a sample of relevant and common deep learning
terminology used in this work, shown in Table 3. The reader
may want to refer to Table 3 throughout this survey for
technical terms, meanings, and synonyms used in various
contexts of discussion. The table serves as an introduction
and summarization of the state-of-the-art. For deﬁnitive
technical and mathematical descriptions, we encourage the
reader to refer to excellent texts on deep learning and neural
network design, such as the Deep Learning textbook [26].
4
WHY VISUALIZE DEEP LEARNING
4.1
Interpretability & Explainability
The most abundant, and to some, the most important reason
why people want to visualize deep learning is to under-
stand how deep learning models make decisions and what
representations they have learned, so we can place trust in
a model [60]. This notion of general model understanding
has been called the interpretability or explainability when
referring to machine learning models [60], [61], [62]. How-
ever, neural networks particularly suffer from this problem
since oftentimes real world and high-performance models
contain a large number of parameters (in the millions) and
exhibit extreme internal complexity by using many non-
linear transformations at different stages during training.
Many works motivate this problem by using phrases such
as “opening and peering through the black-box,” “trans-
parency,” and “interpretable neural networks,” [13], [56],
[63], referring the internal complexity of neural networks.
4.1.1
Discordant Deﬁnitions for Interpretability
Unfortunately, there is no universally formalized and agreed
upon deﬁnition for explainability and interpretability in
deep learning, which makes classifying and qualifying inter-
pretations and explanations troublesome. In Lipton’s work
“The Mythos of Model Interpretability [60],” he surveys
interpretability-related literature, and discovers diverse mo-
tivations for why interpretability is important and is oc-
casionally discordant. Despite this ambiguity, he attempts
to reﬁne the notion of interpretability by making a ﬁrst
step towards providing a comprehensive taxonomy of both
the desiderata and methods in interpretability research.
One important point that Lipton makes is the difference
between interpretability and an explanation; an explanation
can show predictions without elucidating the mechanisms
by which models work [60].
In another work originally presented as a tutorial at the
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal
Processing by Montavona et al. [61], the authors propose ex-
act deﬁnitions of both an interpretation and an explanation.
First, an interpretation is “the mapping of an abstract con-
cept (e.g., a predicted class) into a domain that the human
can make sense of.” They then provide some examples of
interpretable domains, such as images (arrays of pixels) and
text (sequences of words), and noninterpretable domains,
such as abstract vector spaces (word embeddings). Second,
an explanation is “the collection of features of the inter-
pretable domain, that have contributed for a given example
to produce a decision (e.g., classiﬁcation or regression).”
For example, an explanation can be a heatmap highlighting
which pixels of the input image most strongly support an
image classiﬁcation decision, or in natural language process-
ing, explanations can highlight certain phrases of text.
However, both of the previous works are written by
members of the AI community, whereas work by Miller
titled “Explanation in Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Insights from
the Social Sciences” [62] postulates that much of the current
research uses only AI researchers’ intuition of what consti-
tutes a “good” explanation. He suggests that if the focus
on explaining decisions or actions to a human observer is
the goal, then if these techniques are to succeed, the expla-
nations they generate should have a structure that humans
accept. Much of Miller’s work highlights vast and valuable
bodies of research in philosophy, psychology, and cognitive
science for how people deﬁne, generate, select, evaluate,
and present explanations, and he argues that interpretability
and explainability research should leverage and build upon
this history [62]. In another essay, Offert [64] argues that to
make interpretability more rigorous, we must ﬁrst identify
where it is impaired by intuitive considerations. That is, we
have to “consider it precisely in terms of what it is not.”
While multiple works bring different perspectives, Lipton
makes the keen observation that for the ﬁeld to progress,
the community must critically engage with this problem
formulation issue [60]. Further research will help solidify
the notions of interpretation and explanation.

5
TABLE 2
Overview of representative works in visual analytics for deep learning. Each row is one work; works are sorted alphabetically by ﬁrst author’s last
name. Each column corresponds to a subsection from the six interrogative questions. A work’s relevant subsection is indicated by a colored cell.
WHY
WHO
WHAT
HOW
WHEN
WHERE
Work
4.1 Interpretability & Explainability
4.2 Debugging & Improving Models
4.3 Comparing & Selecting Models
4.4 Teaching Deep Learning Concepts
5.1 Model Developers & Builders
5.2 Model Users
5.3 Non-experts
6.1 Computational Graph & Network Architecture
6.2 Learned Model Parameters
6.3 Individual Computational Units
6.4 Neurons in High-dimensional Space
6.5 Aggregated Information
7.1 Node-link Diagrams for Network Architecture
7.2 Dimensionality Reduction & Scatter Plots
7.3 Line Charts for Temporal Metrics
7.4 Instance-based Analysis & Exploration
7.5 Interactive Experimentation
7.6 Algorithms for Attribution & Feature Visualization
8.1 During Training
8.2 After Training
9.2 Publication Venue
Abadi, et al., 2016 [27]
arXiv
Bau, et al., 2017 [28]
CVPR
Bilal, et al., 2017 [29]
TVCG
Bojarski, et al., 2016 [30]
arXiv
Bruckner, 2014 [31]
MS Thesis
Carter, et al., 2016 [32]
Distill
Cashman, et al., 2017 [33]
VADL
Chae, et al., 2017 [34]
VADL
Chung, et al., 2016 [35]
FILM
Goyal, et al., 2016 [36]
arXiv
Harley, 2015 [37]
ISVC
Hohman, et al., 2017 [38]
CHI
Kahng, et al., 2018 [39]
TVCG
Karpathy, et al., 2015 [40]
arXiv
Li, et al., 2015 [41]
arXiv
Liu, et al., 2017 [14]
TVCG
Liu, et al., 2018 [42]
TVCG
Ming, et al., 2017 [43]
VAST
Norton & Qi, 2017 [44]
VizSec
Olah, 2014 [45]
Web
Olah, et al., 2018 [46]
Distill
Pezzotti, et al., 2017 [47]
TVCG
Rauber, et al., 2017 [48]
TVCG
Robinson, et al., 2017 [49]
GeoHum.
Rong & Adar, 2016 [50]
ICML VIS
Smilkov, et al., 2016 [51]
NIPS WS.
Smilkov, et al., 2017 [16]
ICML VIS
Strobelt, et al., 2018 [52]
TVCG
Tzeng & Ma, 2005 [13]
VIS
Wang, et al., 2018 [53]
TVCG
Webster, et al., 2017 [54]
Web
Wongsuphasawat, et al., 2018 [15]
TVCG
Yosinski, et al., 2015 [55]
ICML DL
Zahavy, et al., 2016 [56]
ICML
Zeiler, et al., 2014 [10]
ECCV
Zeng, et al., 2017 [57]
VADL
Zhong, et al., 2017 [58]
ICML VIS
Zhu, et al., 2016 [59]
ECCV

6
TABLE 3
Foundational deep learning terminology used in this paper, sorted by importance. In a term’s “meaning” (last column), deﬁned terms are italicized.
Technical Term
Synonyms
Meaning
Neural Network
Artiﬁcial neural net,
net
Biologically-inspired models that form the basis of deep learning; approximate functions dependent
upon a large and unknown amount of inputs consisting of layers of neurons
Neuron
Computational unit,
node
Building blocks of neural networks, entities that can apply activation functions
Weights
Edges
The trained and updated parameters in the neural network model that connect neurons to one another
Layer
Hidden layer
Stacked collection of neurons that attempt to extract features from data; a layer’s input is connected to
a previous layer’s output
Computational
Graph
Dataﬂow graph
Directed graph where nodes represent operations and edges represent data paths; when implement-
ing neural network models, often times they are represented as these
Activation
Functions
Transform function
Functions embedded into each layer of a neural network that enable the network represent complex
non-linear decisions boundaries
Activations
Internal
representation
Given a trained network one can pass in data and recover the activations at any layer of the network
to obtain its current representation inside the network
Convolutional
Neural Network
CNN, convnet
Type of neural network composed of convolutional layers that typically assume image data as input;
these layers have depth unlike typical layers that only have width (number of neurons in a layer); they
make use of ﬁlters (feature & pattern detectors) to extract spatially invariant representations
Long Short-Term
Memory
LSTM
Type of neural network, often used in text analysis, that addresses the vanishing gradient problem by
using memory gates to propagate gradients through the network to learn long-range dependencies
Loss Function
Objective function,
cost function, error
Also seen in general ML contexts, deﬁnes what success looks like when learning a representation,
i.e., a measure of difference between a neural network’s prediction and ground truth
Embedding
Encoding
Representation of input data (e.g., images, text, audio, time series) as vectors of numbers in a high-
dimensional space; oftentimes reduced so data points (i.e., their vectors) can be more easily analyzed
(e.g., compute similarity)
Recurrent Neural
Network
RNN
Type of neural network where recurrent connections allow the persistence (or “memory“) of previous
inputs in the network’s internal state which are used to inﬂuence the network output
Generative
Adversarial
Networks
GAN
Method to conduct unsupervised learning by pitting a generative network against a discriminative
network; the ﬁrst network mimics the probability distribution of a training dataset in order to fool the
discriminative network into judging that the generated data instance belongs to the training set
Epoch
Data pass
A complete pass through a given dataset; by the end of one epoch, a neural network will have seen
every datum within the dataset once
4.1.2
Interpretation as Qualitative Support for Model Eval-
uation in Various Application Domains
While research into interpretation itself is relatively new, its
impact has already been seen in applied deep learning con-
texts. A number of applied data science and AI projects that
use deep learning models include a section on interpretation
to qualitatively evaluate and support the model’s predic-
tions and the work’s claims overall. An example of this is an
approach for end-to-end neural machine translation. In the
work by Johnson et al. [65], the authors present a simple and
efﬁcient way to translate between multiple languages using
a single model, taking advantage of multilingual data to im-
prove neural machine translation for all languages involved.
The authors visualize an embedding of text sequences, for
example, sentences from multiple languages, to support
and hint at a universal interlingua representation. Another
work that visualizes large machine learning embeddings is
by Zahavy et al. [56], where the authors analyze deep Q-
networks (DQN), a popular reinforcement learning model,
to understand and describe the policies learned by DQNs
for three different Atari 2600 video games. An application
for social good by Robinson et al. [49] demonstrates how
to apply deep neural networks on satellite imagery to
perform population prediction and disaggregation, jointly
answering the questions “where do people live?” and “how
many people live there?”. In general, they show how their
methodology can be an effective tool for extracting informa-
tion from inherently unstructured, remotely-sensed data to
provide effective solutions to social problems.
These are only a few domains where visualization and
deep learning interpretation have been successfully used.
Others include building trust in autonomous driving ve-
hicles [30], explaining decisions made by medical imaging
models, such as MRIs on brain scans, to provide medical
experts more information for making diagnoses [66], and
using visual analytics to explore automatically-learned fea-
tures from street imagery to gain perspective into identity,
function, demographics, and afﬂuence in urban spaces,
which is useful for urban design and planning [67].
In this survey we will mention interpretation and ex-
planation often, as they are the most common motiva-
tions for deep learning visualization. Later, we will discuss
the different visualization techniques and visual analytics
systems that focus on neural network interpretability for
embeddings [51], text [32], [40], [41], quantifying inter-
pretability [28], and many different image-based techniques
stemming from the AI communities [4], [10], [68], [69], [70].
4.2
Debugging & Improving Models
Building machine learning models is an iterative design
process [71], [72], [73], and developing deep neural net-

7
works is no different. While mathematical foundations have
been laid, deep learning still has many open research ques-
tions. For example, ﬁnding the exact combinations of model
depth, layer width, and ﬁnely tuned hyperparameters is
nontrivial. In response to this, many visual analytics sys-
tems have been proposed to help model developers build
and debug their models, with the hope of expediting the
iterative experimentation process to ultimately improve per-
formance [15], [47], [52]. Oftentimes this requires monitoring
models during the training phase [42], [58], identifying
misclassiﬁed instances and testing a handful of well-known
data instances to observe performance [29], [39], [50], and
allowing a system to suggest potential directions for the
model developer to explore [34]. This reason for why we
wish to visualize deep learning ultimately provides better
tools to speed up model development for engineers and re-
searchers so that they can quickly identify and ﬁx problems
within a model to improve overall performance.
4.3
Comparing & Selecting Models
While certainly related to model debugging and improve-
ment, model comparison and selection are slightly different
tasks in which visualization can be useful [74], [75], [76]. Of-
tentimes model comparison describes the notion of choosing
a single model among an ensemble of well-performing mod-
els. That is, no debugging needs to be done; all models have
“learned” or have been trained semi-successfully. Therefore,
the act of selecting a single, best-performing model requires
inspecting model metrics and visualizing parts of the model
to pick the one that has the highest accuracy, the lowest loss,
or is the most generalizable, while avoiding pitfalls such as
memorizing training data or overﬁtting.
Some systems take a high-level approach and compare
user-deﬁned model metrics, like accuracy and loss, and
aggregate them on interactive charts for performance com-
parison [27]. Other frameworks compare neural networks
trained on different random initializations (an important
step in model design) to discover how they would af-
fect performance, while also quantifying performance and
interpretation [28]. Some approaches compare models on
image generation techniques, such as performing image
reconstruction from the internal representations of each
layer of different networks to compare different network
architectures [77]. Similar to comparing model architectures,
some systems solely rely on data visualization representa-
tions and encodings to compare models [43], while others
compare different snapshots of a single model as it trains
over time, i.e., comparing a model after n1 epochs and the
same model after n2 epochs of training time [57].
4.4
Teaching Deep Learning Concepts
Apart from AI experts, another important reason why we
may wish to visualize deep learning is to educate non-
expert users about AI. The exact deﬁnition of non-experts
varies by source and is discussed further in Section 5.3.
An example that targets the general public is Teachable
Machines [54], a web-based AI experiment that explores
and teaches the foundations of an image classiﬁer. Users
train a three-way image classiﬁer by using their computer’s
webcam to generate the training data. After providing three
different examples of physical objects around the user (e.g.,
holding up a pencil, a coffee mug, and a phone), the system
then performs real-time inference on whichever object is
in view of the webcam, and shows a bar chart with the
corresponding classiﬁcation scores. Since inference is com-
puted in real-time, the bar charts wiggles and jumps back
and forth as the user removes an object, say the pencil,
from the view and instead holds up the coffee mug. The
visualization used is a simple bar chart, which provides
an approachable introduction into image classiﬁcation, a
modern-day computer vision and AI problem.
Another example for teaching deep learning concepts,
the Deep Visualization Toolbox [55] discussed later in this
survey, also uses a webcam for instant feedback when
interacting with a neural network. Taking instantaneous
feedback a step further, some works have used direct ma-
nipulation to engage non-experts in the learning process.
TensorFlow Playground [16], a robust, web-based visual
analytics tool for exploring simple neural networks, uses
direct manipulation to reinforce deep learning concepts, and
importantly, evokes the user’s intuition about how neural
networks work. Other non-traditional mediums have been
used to teach deep learning concepts and build an intuition
for how neural networks behave too. Longform, interactive
scrollytelling works focusing on particular AI topics that
use interactive visualizations as supporting evidence are
gaining popularity. Examples include “How to Use t-SNE
Effectively,” where users can play with hundreds of small
datasets and vary single parameters to observe their effect
on an embedding
[78], and a similar interactive article
titled “Visualizing MNIST” that visualizes different types
of embeddings produced by different algorithms [45].
5
WHO USES DEEP LEARNING VISUALIZATION
This section describes the groups of people who may stand
to beneﬁt from deep learning visualization and visual an-
alytics. We loosely organize them into three non-mutually
exclusive groups by their level of deep learning knowledge
(most to least): model developers, model users, and non-experts.
Note that many of the works discussed can beneﬁt multiple
groups, e.g., a model developer may use a tool aimed at
non-experts to reinforce their own intuition for how neural
networks learn.
5.1
Model Developers & Builders
The ﬁrst group of people who use deep learning visual-
ization are individuals whose job is primarily focused on
developing, experimenting with, and deploying deep neural
networks. These model developers and builders, whether
they are researchers or engineers, have a strong under-
standing of deep learning techniques and a well-developed
intuition surrounding model building. Their knowledge
expedites key decisions in deep learning workﬂows, such
as identifying the which types of models perform best on
which types of data. These individuals wield mastery over
models, e.g., knowing how to vary hyperparameters in the
right fashion to achieve better performance. These individ-
uals are typically seasoned in building large-scale models
and training them on high-performance machines to solve

8
real-world problems [24]. Therefore, tooling and research for
these users is much more technically focused, e.g., exposing
many hyperparameters for detailed model control.
Of the existing deep learning visual analytics tools pub-
lished, a handful tackle the problem of developing tools for
model developers, but few have seen widespread adoption.
Arguably the most well-known system is TensorBoard [27]:
Google’s included open-source visualization platform for its
dataﬂow graph library TensorFlow. TensorBoard includes a
number of built-in components to help model developers
understand, debug, and optimize TensorFlow programs. It
includes real-time plotting of quantitative model metrics
during training, instance-level predictions, and a visualiza-
tion of the computational graph. The computational graph
component was published separately by Wongsuphasawat
et al. [15] and works by applying a series of graph transfor-
mations that enable standard layout techniques to produce
interactive diagrams of TensorFlow models.
Other tools, such as DeepEyes [47], assist in a num-
ber of model building tasks, e.g., identifying stable layers
during the training process, identifying unnecessary layers
and degenerated ﬁlters that do not contribute to a model’s
decisions, pruning such entities, and identifying patterns
undetected by the network, indicating that more ﬁlters or
layers may be needed. Another tool, Blocks [29], allows a
model builder to accelerate model convergence and alle-
viate overﬁtting, through visualizing class-level confusion
patterns. Other research has developed new metrics beyond
measures like loss and accuracy, to help developers inspect
and evaluate networks while training them [58].
Some tools also address the inherent iterative nature
of training neural networks. For example, ML-o-scope [31]
utilizes a time-lapse engine to inspect a model’s training dy-
namics to better tune hyperparameters, while work by Chae
et al. [34] visualizes classiﬁcation results during training
and suggests potential directions to improve performance
in the model building pipeline. Lastly, visual analytics tools
are beginning to be built for expert users who wish to
use models that are more challenging to work with. For
example, DGMTracker [42] is a visual analytics tool built
to help users understand and diagnose the training process
of deep generative models: powerful networks that per-
form unsupervised and semi-supervised learning where the
primary focus is to discover the hidden structure of data
without resorting to external labels.
5.2
Model Users
The second group of people who may beneﬁt from deep
learning visualization are model users. These are users
who may have some technical background but are neural
network novices. Common tasks include using well-known
neural network architectures for developing domain speciﬁc
applications, training smaller-scale models, and download-
ing pre-trained model weights online to use as a starting
point. This group of users also include machine learning
artists who use models to enable and showcase new forms
of artistic expression.
An example visual analytics system for these model
users is ActiVis [39]: a visual analytics system for inter-
preting the results of neural networks by using a novel
Fig. 2.
ActiVis [39]: a visual analytics system for interpreting neural
network results using a novel visualization that uniﬁes instance- and
subset-level inspections of neuron activations deployed at Facebook.
visual representation that uniﬁes instance- and subset-level
inspections of neuron activations. Model users can ﬂexibly
specify subsets using input features, labels, or any inter-
mediate outcomes in a machine learning pipeline. ActiVis
was built for engineers and data scientists at Facebook to
explore and interpret deep learning models results and is
deployed on Facebook’s internal system. LSTMVis [52] is
a visual analysis tool for recurrent neural networks with a
focus on understanding hidden state dynamics in sequence
modeling. The tool allows model users to perform hypoth-
esis testing by selecting an input range to focus on local
state changes, then to match these states changes to similar
patterns in a large dataset, and ﬁnally align the results with
structural annotations. The LSTMVis work describes three
types of users: architects, those who wish to develop new
deep learning methodologies; trainers, those who wish to
apply LSTMs to a task in which they are domain experts in;
and end users, those who use pretrained models for various
tasks. Lastly, Embedding Projector [51], while not speciﬁ-
cally deep learning exclusive, is a visual analytics tool to
support interactive visualization and interpretation of large-
scale embeddings, which are common outputs from neural
network models. The work presents three important tasks
that model users often perform while using embeddings;
these include exploring local neighborhoods, viewing the
global geometry to ﬁnd clusters, and ﬁnding meaningful
directions within an embedding.
5.3
Non-experts
The third group of people whom visualization could aid
are non-experts in deep learning. These are individuals who
typically have no prior knowledge about deep learning, and
may or may not have a technical background. Much of the
research targeted at this group is for educational purposes,
trying to explain what a neural network is and how it works
at a high-level, sometimes without revealing deep learning
is present. These group also includes people who simply use
AI-powered devices and consumer applications.
Apart from Teachable Machines [54] and the Deep Vi-
sualization Toolbox [55] mentioned in Section 4.4, Tensor-
Flow Playground [16], a web-based interactive visualization
of a simple dense network, has become a go-to tool for

9
gaining intuition about how neural networks learn. Tensor-
Flow Playground uses direct manipulation experimentation
rather than coding, enabling users to quickly build an in-
tuition about neural networks. The system has been used
to teach students about foundational neural network prop-
erties by using “living lessons,” and also makes it straight-
forward to create a dynamic, interactive educational experi-
ence. Another web-browser based system, ShapeShop [38],
allows users to explore and understand the relationship be-
tween input data and a network’s learned representations.
ShapeShop uses a feature visualization technique called
class activation maximization to visualize speciﬁc classes of
an image classiﬁer. The system allows users to interactively
select classes from a collection of simple shapes, select a
few hyperparameters, train a model, and view the generated
visualizations all in real-time.
Tools built for non-experts, particularly with an ed-
ucational
focus,
are
becoming
more
popular
on
the
web. A number of web-based JavaScript frameworks
for training neural networks and inference have been
developed; however, ConvNetJS (http://cs.stanford.edu/
people/karpathy/convnetjs/) and TensorFlow.js (https://
js.tensorﬂow.org/) are the most used and have enabled de-
velopers to create highly interactive explorable explanations
for deep learning models.
6
WHAT TO VISUALIZE IN DEEP LEARNING
This section discusses the technical components of neural
networks that could be visualized. This section is strongly
related to the next section, Section 7 “How,” which describes
how the components of these networks are visualized in
existing work. By ﬁrst describing what may be visualized
(this section), we can more easily ground our discussion on
how to visualize them (next section).
6.1
Computational Graph & Network Architecture
The ﬁrst thing that can be visualized in a deep learning
model is the model architecture. This includes the compu-
tational graph that deﬁnes how a neural network model
would train, test, save data to disk, and checkpoint after
epoch iterations [27]. Also called the dataﬂow graph [27],
this deﬁnes how data ﬂows from operation to operation to
successfully train and use a model. This is different than
the neural network’s edges and weights, discussed next,
which are the parameters to be tweaked during training.
The dataﬂow graph can be visualized to potentially inform
model developers of the types of computations occurring
within their model, as discussed in Section 7.1.
6.2
Learned Model Parameters
Other components that can be visualized are the learned
parameters in the network during and after training.
6.2.1
Neural Network Edge Weights
Neural network models are built of many, and sometimes
diverse, constructions of layers of computational units [26].
These layers send information throughout the network by
using edges that connect layers to one another, oftentimes
in a linear manner, yet some more recent architectures
have shown that skipping certain layers and combining
information in unique ways can lead to better performance.
Regardless, each node has an outgoing edge with an ac-
companying weight that sends signal from one neuron in
a layer to potentially thousands of neurons in an adjacent
layer [16]. These are the parameters that are tweaked during
the backpropagation phase of training a deep model, and
could be worthwhile to visualize for understanding what
the model has learned, as seen in Section 7.1.
6.2.2
Convolutional Filters
Convolutional neural networks are built using a particular
type of layer, aptly called the convolutional layer. These
convolutional layers apply ﬁlters over the input data, of-
tentimes images represented as a two-dimensional matrix
of values, to generate smaller representations of the data to
pass to later layers in the network. These ﬁlters, like the
previously mentioned traditional weights, are then updated
throughout the training process, i.e., learned by the network,
to support a given task. Therefore, visualizing the learned
ﬁlters could be useful as an alternate explanation for what a
model has learned [10], [55], as seen in Section 7.6.
6.3
Individual Computational Units
Albeit reductionist, neural networks can be thought as a
collection of layers of neurons connected by edge weights.
Above, we discussed that the edges can be visualized, but
the neurons too can be a source of data to investigate.
6.3.1
Activations
When given a trained model, one can perform inference on
the model using a new data instance to obtain the neural
network’s output, e.g., a classiﬁcation or a speciﬁc predicted
value. Throughout the network, the neurons compute acti-
vations using activation functions (e.g., weighted sum) to
combine the signal from the previous layer into a new
node [26], [55]. This mapping is one of the characteristics
that allows a neural network to learn. During inference,
we can recover the activations produced at each layer. We
can use activations in multiple ways, e.g., as a collection
of individual neurons, spatial positions, or channels [46].
Although these feature representations are typically high-
dimensional vectors of the input data at a certain stage
within the network [46], it could be valuable in helping
people visualize how input data is transformed into higher-
level features, as seen in Section 7.2. Feature representations
may also shed light upon how the network and its compo-
nents respond to particular data instances [55], commonly
called instance-level observation; we will discuss this in
detail in Section 7.4 and 7.5.
6.3.2
Gradients for Error Measurement
To train a neural network, we commonly use a process
known as backpropagation [26]. Backpropagation, or some-
times called the backpropagation of errors, is a method to
calculate the gradient of a speciﬁed loss function. When
used in combination with an optimization algorithm, e.g.,
gradient descent, we can compute the error at the output
layer of a neural network and redistribute the error by
updating the model weights using the computed gradient.

10
These gradients ﬂow over the same edges deﬁned in the
network that contain the weights, but ﬂow in the opposite
direction., e.g., from the output layer to the input layer.
Therefore, it could be useful to visualize the gradients of
a network to see how much error is produced at certain
outputs and where it is distributed [33], [35], as mentioned
in Section 7.6.
6.4
Neurons in High-dimensional Space
Continuing the discussion of visualizing activations of a
data instance, we can think of the feature vectors recovered
as vectors in a high-dimensional space. Each neuron in a
layer then becomes a “dimension.” This shift in perspective
is powerful, since we can now take advantage of high-
dimensional visualization techniques to visualize extracted
activations [48], [79]. Sometimes, people use neural net-
works simply as feature vector generators, and defer the
actual task to other computational techniques, e.g., tradi-
tional machine learning models [4], [49]. In this perspective,
we now can think of deep neural networks as feature gener-
ators, whose output embeddings could be worth exploring.
A common technique is to use dimensionality reduction to
take the space spanned by the activations and embed it
into 2D or 3D for visualization purposes [48], [51], [79], as
discussed in Section 7.2.
6.5
Aggregated Information
6.5.1
Groups of Instances
As mentioned earlier, instance-level activations allow one
to recover the mapping from data input to a feature vector
output. While this can be done for a single data instance,
it can also be done on collections of instances. While at
ﬁrst this does not seem like a major differentiation from be-
fore, instance groups provide some unique advantages [39],
[43]. For example, since instance groups by deﬁnition are
composed of many instances, one can compute all the
activations simultaneously. Using visualization, we can now
compare these individual activations to see how similar or
different they are from one another. Taking this further,
with instance groups, we can now take multiple groups,
potentially from differing classes, and compare how the
distribution of activations from one group compares or
differs from another. This aggregation of known instances
into higher-level groups could be useful for uncovering the
learned decision boundary in classiﬁcation tasks, as seen in
Section 7.2 and Section 7.4.
6.5.2
Model Metrics
While instance- and group-level activations could be useful
for investigating how neural networks respond to particular
results a-priori, they suffer from scalability issues, since
deep learning models typically wrangle large datasets. An
alternative object to visualize are model metrics, including
loss, accuracy, and other measures of error [27]. These
summary statistics are typically computed every epoch and
represented as a time series over the course of a model’s
training phase. Representing the state of a model through
a single number, or handful of numbers, abstracts away
much of the subtle and interesting features of deep neural
networks; however, these metrics are key indicators for
communicating how the network is progressing during the
training phase [47]. For example, is the network “learning”
anything at all or is it learning “too much” and is simply
memorizing data causing it to overﬁt? Not only do these
metrics describe notions of a single model’s performance
over time, but in the case of model comparison, these
metrics become more important, as they can provide a quick
and easy way to compare multiple models at once. For this
reason, visualizing model metrics can be an important and
powerful tool to consider for visual analytics, as discussed
in Section 7.3.
7
HOW TO VISUALIZE DEEP LEARNING
In the previous section, we described what technical com-
ponents of neural networks could be visualized. In this
section, we summarize how the components are visualized
and interacted with in existing literature. For most neural
network components, they are often visualized using a few
common approaches. For example, network architectures
are often represented as node-link diagrams; embeddings of
many activations are typically represented as scatter plots;
and model metrics over epoch time are almost always rep-
resented as line charts. In this section, we will also discuss
other representations, going beyond the typical approaches.
7.1
Node-link Diagrams for Network Architectures
Given a neural network’s dataﬂow graph or model architec-
ture, the most common way to visualize where data ﬂows
and the magnitude of edge weights is a node-link diagram.
Neurons are shown as nodes, and edge weights as links.
For computational and dataﬂow graphs, Kahng et al. [39]
describe two methods for creating node-link diagrams. The
ﬁrst represents only operations as nodes, while the second
represents both operations and data as nodes. The ﬁrst way
is becoming the standard due to the popularity of Ten-
sorBoard [27] and the inclusion of its interactive dataﬂow
graph visualization [15]. However, displaying large num-
bers of links from complex models can generate “hairball”
visualizations where many edge crossings impede pattern
discovery. To address this problem, Wongsuphasawat et
al. [15] extracts high-degree nodes (responsible for many
of the edge crossings), visualizes them separately from the
main graph, and allow users to deﬁne super-groups within
the code. Another approach to reduce clutter is to place
more information on each node; DGMTracker [42] provides
a quick snapshot of the dataﬂow in and out of a node by
visualizing its activations within each node.
Regarding neural network architecture, many visual an-
alytics systems use node-link diagrams (neurons as nodes,
weights as links) [13], [14], [16], [35], [37]. The weight
magnitude and sign can then be encoded using color or
link thickness. This technique was one of the the ﬁrst to
be proposed [13], and the trend has continued on in litera-
ture. Building on this technique, Harley [37] visualizes the
convolution windows on each layer and how the activations
propagate through the network to make the ﬁnal classiﬁca-
tion. Similar to the dataﬂow graph examples above, some
works include richer information inside each node besides

11
Fig. 3. Each point is a data instance’s high-dimensional activations at a
particular layer inside of a neural network, dimensionally reduced, and
plotted in 2D. Notice as the data ﬂows through the network the activation
patterns become more discernible (left to right) [39].
an activation value, such as showing a list of images that
highly activate that neuron or the activations at a neuron as
a matrix [14]. As mentioned in the dataﬂow graph visual-
izations, node-link diagrams for network architecture work
well for smaller networks [16], but they also suffer from
scalabilty issues. CNNVis [14], a visual analytics system
that visualizes convolutional neural networks, proposes to
use a bi-clustering-based edge bundling technique to reduce
visual clutter caused by too many links.
7.2
Dimensionality Reduction & Scatter Plots
In Section 6, “What,” we discussed different types of high-
dimensional embeddings: text can be represented as vectors
in word embeddings for natural language processing and
images can be represented as feature vectors inside of a
neural network. Both of these types of embeddings are
mathematically represented as large tensors, or sometimes
as 2D matrices, where each row may correspond to an
instance and each column a feature.
The most common technique to visualize these embed-
dings is performing dimensionality reduction to reduce
the number of columns (e.g., features) to two or three.
Projecting onto two dimensions would mean computing
(x, y) coordinates for every data instance; for three dimen-
sions, we compute an additional z component, resulting in
(x, y, z). In the 2D case, we can plot all data instances as
points in a scatter plot where the axes may or may not
have interpretable meaning, depending on the reduction
technique used, e.g., principal component analysis (PCA)
or t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) [79].
In the 3D case, we can still plot each data instance as a
point in 3D space and use interactions to pan, rotate, and
navigate this space [51]. These types of embeddings are
often included in visual analytics systems as one of the main
views [35], [47], and are also used in application papers as
static ﬁgures [56], [65]. However, viewing a 3D space on
a 2D medium (e.g., computer screen) may not be ideal for
tasks like comparing exact distances.
Since each reduced point corresponds to an original
data instance, another common approach is to retrieve the
original image and place it at the reduced coordinate loca-
tion. Although the image size must be greatly reduced to
prevent excessive overlap, viewing all the images at once
can provide insight into what a deep learning model has
learned, as seen in the example in [77] where the authors
visualize ImageNet test data, or in [80] where the authors
create many synthetic images from a single class and com-
pare the variance across many random initial starting seeds
for the generation algorithm. We have discussed the typical
case where each dot in the scatter plot is a data instance,
but some work has also visualized neurons in a layer as
separate data instances [58]. Another work studies closely
how data instances are transformed as their information is
passed through the deep network, which in effect visualizes
how the neural network separates various classes along
approximated decision boundaries [48]. It is also possible to
use time-dependent data and visualize how an embedding
changes over time, or in the case of deep learning, over
epochs [81]. This can be useful for evaluating the quality
of the embedding during the training phase.
However, these scatter plots raise problems too. The
quality of the embeddings greatly depends on the algorithm
used to perform the reduction. Some works have studied
how PCA and t-SNE differ, mathematical and visually, and
suggest new reduction techniques to capture the semantic
and syntactic qualities within word embeddings [82]. It
has also been shown that popular reduction techniques
like t-SNE are sensitive to changes in the hyperparameter
space. Wattenberg meticulously explores the hyperparame-
ter space for t-SNE, and offers lessons learned and practical
advice for those who wish to use dimensionality reduction
methods [78]. While these techniques are commonplace,
there are still iterative improvements that can be done using
clever interaction design, such as ﬁnding instances similar
to a target instance, i.e., those “near” the target in the
projected space, helping people build intuition for how data
is spatially arranged [51].
7.3
Line Charts for Temporal Metrics
Model developers track the progression of their deep learn-
ing models by monitoring and observing a number of
different metrics computed after each epoch, including the
loss, accuracy, and different measure of errors. This can
be useful for diagnosing the long training process of deep
learning models., The most common visualization technique
for visualizing this data is by considering the metrics as time
series and plotting them in line charts [27]. This approach
is widely used in deep learning visual analytics tools [35],
[47]. After each epoch, a new entry in the time series
is computed, therefore some tools, like TensorBoard, run
alongside models as they train and update with the latest
status [27]. TensorBoard focuses much of its screen real-
estate to these types of charts and supports interactions
for plotting multiple metrics in small multiples, plotting
multiple models on top of one another, ﬁltering different
models, providing tooltips for the exact metric values, and
resizing charts for closer inspection. This technique appears
in many visual analytics systems and has become a staple
for model training, comparison, and selection.
7.4
Instance-based Analysis & Exploration
Another technique to help interpret and debug deep learn-
ing models is testing speciﬁc data instances to understand
how they progress throughout a model. Many experts have
built up their own collection of data instances over time,

12
having developed deep knowledge about their expected be-
haviors in models while also knowing their ground truth la-
bels [19], [39]. For example, an instance consisting of a single
image or a single text phrase is much easier to understand
than an entire image dataset or word embedding consisting
of thousands of numerical features extracted from an end
user’s data. This is called instance-level observation, where
intensive analysis and scrutiny is placed on a single data
instance’s transformation process throughout the network,
and ultimately its ﬁnal output.
7.4.1
Identifying & Analyzing Misclassiﬁed Instances
One application of instance-level analysis is using instances
as unit tests for deep learning models. In the best case
scenario, all the familiar instances are classiﬁed or predicted
correctly; however, it is important to understand when a
speciﬁc instance can fail and how it fails. For example, in
the task of predicting population from satellite imagery,
the authors showcase three maps of areas with high errors
by using a translucent heatmap overlaid on the satellite
imagery [49]. Inspecting these instances reveals three ge-
ographic areas that contain high amounts of man-made
features and signs of activity but have no registered people
living in them: an army base, a national lab, and Walt
Disney World. The visualization helps demonstrate that
the proposed model is indeed learning high-level features
about the input data. Another technique, HOGgles [83], uses
an algorithm to visualize feature spaces by using object
detectors while inverting visual features back to natural
images. The authors ﬁnd that when visualizing the features
of misclassiﬁed images, although the classiﬁcation is wrong
in the image space, they look deceptively similar to the
true positives in the feature space. Therefore, by visualizing
feature spaces of misclassiﬁed instances, we can gain a more
intuitive understanding of recognition systems.
For textual data, a popular technique for analyzing
particular data instances is to use color as the primary
encoding. For example, the background of particular char-
acters in a phrase of words in a sentence would be colored
using a divergent color scheme according to some criteria,
often their activation magnitudes [32], [36], [40]. This helps
identify particular data instances that may warrant deeper
inspection (e.g., those misclassiﬁed) [19].
When pre-deﬁned data instances are not unavailable
(e.g., when analyzing a new dataset), how can we guide
users towards important and interesting instances? To
address this problem, a visual analytics system called
Blocks [29] uses confusion matrices, a technique for sum-
marizing the performance of a classiﬁcation algorithm, and
matrix-level sorting interactions to reveal that class error
often occurs in hierarchies. Blocks incorporates these tech-
niques with a sample viewer in the user interface to show
selected samples potentially worth exploring.
7.4.2
Analyzing Groups of Instances
Instead of using individual data instances for testing and
debugging a model, it is also common for experts to per-
form similar similar tasks using groups of instances [19].
While some detail may be lost when performing group-
level analysis it allows experts to further test the model
by evaluating its average and aggregate performance across
different groups.
Much of the work using this technique is done on text
data using LSTM models [52]. Some approaches compute
the saliency for groups of words across the model and
visualize the values as a matrix [41], while others use matrix
visualizations to show the activations of word groups when
represented as feature vectors in word embeddings [50],
[84]. One system, ActiVis [39], places instance group anal-
ysis at the focus of its interactive interface, allowing users to
compare preset and user-deﬁned groups of activations. Sim-
ilar to the matrix visualization that summarizes activations
for each class in CNNVis [14], ActiVis also uses a scrolling
matrix visualization to unify both instance-level and group-
level analysis into a single view where users can compare
the activations of the user-deﬁned instances.
However, sometimes it can be challenging to deﬁne
groups for images or text. For textual data, people often use
words to group documents and provide aggregated data.
ConceptVector [85] addresses the instance group generation
problem by providing an interactive interface to create in-
teresting groups of concepts for model testing. Furthermore,
this system also suggests additional words to include in
the user-deﬁned groups, helping guide the user to create
semantically sound concepts.
7.5
Interactive Experimentation
Interactive experimentation, another interesting area that
integrates deep learning visualization, makes heavy use of
interactions for users to experiment with models [86]. By
using direct manipulation for testing models, a user can
pose “what if?” questions and observe how the input data
affects the results. Called explorable explanations [87], this
type of visual experimentation is popular for making sense
of complex concepts and systems.
7.5.1
Models Responding to User-provided Input Data
To engage the user with the desired concepts to be taught,
many systems require the user to provide some kind of
input data into the system to obtain results. Some visual
analytics systems use a webcam to capture live videos,
and visualize how the internals of neural network models
respond to these dynamic inputs [55]. Another example
is a 3D visualization of a CNN trained on the classic
MNIST dataset 1 that shows the convolution windows and
activations on images that the user draws by hand [37].
For example, drawing a “5” in the designated area passes
that example throughout the network and populates the
visualization with the corresponding activations using a
node-link diagram. A ﬁnal example using image data is
ShapeShop [38], a system that allows a user to select data
from a bank of simple shapes to be classiﬁed. The system
then trains a neural network and using the class activation
maximization technique to generate visualizations of the
learned features of the model. This can be done in real-
time, therefore a user can quickly train multiple models with
different shapes to observe the effect of adding more diverse
data to improve the internal model representation.
1. MNIST is a small, popular dataset consisting of thousands of
28×28px images of handwritten digits (0 to 9). MNIST is commonly
used as a benchmark for image classiﬁcation models.

13
Fig. 4. TensorFlow Playground [16]: a web-based visual analytics tool
for exploring simple neural networks that uses direct manipulation rather
than programming to teach deep learning concepts and develop an
intuition about how neural networks behave.
An example using textual data is the online, interactive
Distill article for handwriting prediction [32], which allows
a user to write words on screen, and in real-time, the
system draws multiple to-be-drawn curves predicting what
the user’s next stroke would be, while also visualizing the
model’s activations. Another system uses GANs to inter-
actively generate images based off of user’s sketches [59].
By sketching a few colored lines, the system presents the
user with multiple synthetic images using the sketch as
a guideline for what to generate. A ﬁnal example is the
Adversarial Playground [44], a visual analytics system that
enables users to compare adversarially-perturbed images, to
help users understand why an adversarial example can fool
a CNN image classiﬁer. The user can select from one of the
MNIST digits and adjust the strength of adversarial attack.
The system then compares the classiﬁcations scores in a
bar chart to observe how simple perturbations can greatly
impact classiﬁcation accuracy.
7.5.2
How Hyperparameters Affect Results
While deep learning models automatically adjust their in-
ternal parameters, their hyperparameters still require ﬁne-
tuning. These hyperparameters can have major impact on
model performance and robustness. Some visual analytics
systems expose model hyperparameters to the user for inter-
active experimentation. One example previously mentioned
is TensorFlow Playground [16], where users can use direct
manipulation to adjust the architecture of a simple, fully-
connected neural network, as well as the hyperparameters
associated with its training, such as the learning rate, activa-
tion function, and regularization. Another example is a Dis-
till article that meticulously explores the hyperparaemters of
the t-SNE dimensionality reduction method [78]. This article
tests dozens of synthetic datasets in different arrangements,
while varying hyperparameters such as the t-SNE perplexity
and the number of iterations to run the algorithm for.
7.6
Algorithms for Attribution & Feature Visualization
The ﬁnal method for how to visualize deep learning hails
from the AI and computer vision communities. These are
algorithmic techniques that entail image generation. Given
a trained a model, one can select a single image instance and
use one of the algorithmic techniques to generate a new im-
age of the same size that either highlights important regions
of the image (often called attribution) or is an entirely new
image that supposedly is representative of the same class
(often called feature visualization) [46], [88]. In these works,
it is common to see large, full-page ﬁgures consisting of
hundreds of such images corresponding to multiple images
classes [89]. However, it is uncommon to see interactivity
in these works, as the primary contribution is often about
algorithms, not interactive techniques or systems. Since the
focus of this interrogative survey is on visual analytics in
deep learning, we do not discuss in detail the various types
of algorithmic techniques. Rather, we mention the most
prominent techniques developed, since they are impactful
to the growing ﬁeld of deep learning visualization and
could be incorporated into visual analytics systems in the
future. For more details about these techniques, such as
input modiﬁcation, deconvolutional methods [10], and in-
put reconstruction methods, we refer our readers to the tax-
onomies [90] and literature surveys for visualizing learned
features in CNNs [22], [91], and a tutorial that presents
the theory behind many of these interpretation techniques
and discusses tricks and recommendations to efﬁciently use
them on real data [61].
7.6.1
Heatmaps for Attribution, Attention, & Saliency
One research area generates translucent heatmaps that over-
lay images to highlight important regions that contribute
towards classiﬁcation and their sensitivity [4], [69], [92], [93],
[94]. One technique called visual backpropagation attempts
to visualize which parts of an image have contributed to
the classiﬁcation, and can do so in real-time in a model
debugging tool for self-driving vehicles [30]. Another tech-
nique is to invert representations, i.e., attempt to reconstruct
an image using a feature vector to understand the what
a CNN has learned [77], [95], [96]. Prediction difference
analysis is a method that highlights features in an image to
provide evidence for or against a certain class [66]. Other
work hearkens back to more traditional computer vision
techniques by exploring how object detectors emerge in
CNNs and attempts to give humans object detector vision
capabilities to better align humans and deep learning vision
for images [83], [97]. Visualizing CNN ﬁlters is also popular,
and has famously shown to generate dream-like images,
becoming popular in artistic tasks [98], [99] . Some work
for interpreting visual question answering (VQA) models and
tasks use these heatmaps to explain which parts of an image
a VQA model is looking at in unison with text activation
maps when answering the given textual questions [36].
However, recent work has shown that some of these meth-
ods fail to provide correct results and argue that we should
develop explanation methods that work on simpler models
before extending them to the more complex ones [91].
7.6.2
Feature Visualization
For feature visualization, while some techniques have
proven interesting [100], one of the most studied techniques,
class activation maximization, maximizes the activation of
a chosen, speciﬁc neuron using an optimization scheme,
such as gradient ascent, and generates synthetic images that
are representative of what the model has learned about the

14
chosen class [68]. This led to a number of works improving
the quality of the generated images. Some studies generated
hundreds of these non-deterministic synthetic images and
clustered them to see how variations in the class activation
maximization algorithm affects the output image [80]. In
some of their most recent work on this topic, Ngyuen
et al. [70] present hundreds of high-quality images using
a deep generator network to improve upon the state-of-
the-art, and include ﬁgures comparing their technique to
many of the existing and previous attempts to improve the
quality of generated images. The techniques developed in
this research area have improved dramatically over the past
few years, where now it is possibly to synthetically generate
photorealistic images [101]. A recent comparison of feature
visualization techniques highlights their usefulness [88];
however, the authors note that they remain skeptical of their
trustworthiness, e.g., do neurons have a consistent meaning
across different inputs, and if so, is that meaning accurately
reiﬁed by feature visualization [46]?
8
WHEN TO VISUALIZE IN THE DEEP LEARNING
PROCESS
This section describes when visualizing deep learning may
be most relevant and useful. Our discussion primarily cen-
ters around the training process: an iterative, foundational
procedure for using deep learning models. We identify two
distinct, non-mutually exclusive times for when to visualize:
during training and after training. Some works propose that
visualization be used both during and after training.
8.1
During Training
Artiﬁcial neural networks learn higher-level features that
are useful for class discrimination as training progress [102].
By using visualization during the training process, there
is potential to monitor one’s model as it learns to closely
observe and track the model’s performance [48].
Many of the systems in this category run in a separate
web-browser alongside the training process, and interface
with the underlying model to query the latest model status.
This way, users can visually explore and rigorously monitor
their models in real time, while they are trained elsewhere.
The visualization systems dynamically update the charts
with metrics recomputed after every epoch, e.g., the loss,
accuracy, and training time. Such metrics are important to
model developers because they rely on them to determine
if a model (1) has begun to learn anything at all; (2) is
converging and reaching the peak of its performance; or (3)
has potentially overﬁtted and memorized the training data.
Therefore, many of the visual analytics systems used during
training support and show these updating visualizations as
a primary view in the interface [16], [27], [34], [35], [42],
[47]. One system, Deep View [58], visualizes model metrics
during the training process and uses its own deﬁned metrics
for monitoring (rather than the loss): a discriminability
metric, which evaluates neuron evolution, and a density
metric which evaluates the output feature maps. This way,
for detecting overﬁtting, the user does not need to wait long
to view to infer overﬁtting; they simply observe the neuron
density early in training phase.
Similarly, some systems help reduce development time
and save computational resources by visualizing metrics
that indicate whether a model is successfully learning or
not, allowing a user to stop the training process early [16].
By using visualization during model training, users can save
development time through model steering [35] and utilizing
suggestions for model improvement [34]. Lastly, another
model development time minimization focuses on diagnos-
ing neurons and layers that are not training correctly or
are misclassifying data instances. Examples include Deep-
Eyes [47], a system that identiﬁes stable and unstable layers
and neurons so users may prune their models to speed up
training; Blocks [29], a system that visualizes class confusion
and reveals that confusion patterns follow a hierarchical
structure over the classes which can then be exploited to
design hierarchy-aware architectures; and DGMTracker [42],
a system that proposes a credit assignment algorithm that
indicates how other neurons contribute to the output of
particular failing neurons.
8.2
After Training
While some works support neural network design during
the iterative model building process, there are other works
that focus their visualization efforts after a model has been
trained. In other words, these works assume a trained
model as input to the system or visualization technique.
Note that many, if not most, of the previously mentioned
algorithmic techniques developed in the AI ﬁelds, such as
attribution and feature visualization, are performed after
training. These techniques are discussed more in Section 7.6.
The Embedding Projector [51] specializes in visualizing
2D and 3D embeddings produced by trained neural net-
works. While users can visualize typical high-dimensional
datasets in this tool, the Embedding Projector tailors the ex-
perience towards embeddings commonly used deep learn-
ing. Once a neural network model has been trained, one can
compute the activations for a given test dataset and visual-
ize the activations in the Embedding Projector to visualize
and explore the space that the network has learned. Instead
of generating an overview embedding, another previously
discussed system, the Deep Visualization Toolbox [55], uses
a trained model to visualize live activations in a large small-
multiples view to understand of what types of ﬁlters a
convolutional network has learned.
More traditional visual analytics systems have also been
developed to inspect a model after it has ﬁnished training.
ActiVis [39], a visual analytics system for neural network
interpretation deployed at Facebook reports that Facebook
engineers and data scientists use visual analytics systems of-
ten in their normal workﬂow. Another system, RNNVis [43],
visualizes and compares different RNN models for various
natural language processing tasks. This system positions
itself as a natural extension of TensorFlow; using multiple
TensorFlow models as input, the system then analyzes the
trained models to extract learned representations in hidden
states, and further processes the evaluation results for visu-
alization. Lastly, the LSTMVis [52] system, a visual analysis
tool for RNN interpretability, separates model training from
the visualization. This system takes a model as input that
must be trained separately, and from the model, gathers the

15
required information to produce the interactive visualiza-
tions to be rendered in a web-based front-end.
9
WHERE IS DEEP LEARNING VISUALIZATION
For the last question of the interrogative survey, we divide
up “Where” into two subsections: where deep learning
visualization research has been applied, and where deep
learning visualization research has been conducted, describ-
ing the new and hybrid community. This division provides
a concise summary for practitioners who wish to investigate
the usage of the described techniques for their own work,
and provides new researchers with the main venues for this
research area to investigate existing literature.
9.1
Application Domains & Models
While many non-neural approaches are used for real-world
applications, deep learning has successfully achieved state-
of-the-art performance in several domains. Previously in
Section 4.1.2, we presented works that apply neural net-
works to particular domains and use visualizations to lend
qualitative support to their usual quantitative results to
strengthen users’ trust in their models. These domains in-
cluded neural machine translation [65], reinforcement learn-
ing [56], social good [49], autonomous vehicles [30], medical
imaging diagnostics [66], and urban planning [67].
Next we summarize the types of models that have been
used in deep learning visualization. Much of the exist-
ing work has used image-based data and models, namely
CNNs, to generate attribution and feature visualization
explanations for what a model has learned from an image
dataset. CNNs, while not exclusively used for images, have
become popular in the computer vision community and are
often used for image classiﬁcation and interactive, image-
based creative tasks [59], [103]. Besides images, sequential
data (e.g., text, time series data, and music) has also been
studied. This research stems from the natural language
processing community, where researchers typically favor
RNNs for learning representations of large text corpora.
These researchers make sense of large word embeddings
by using interactive tools that support dimensionality re-
duction techniques to solve problems such as sequence-
to-sequence conversion, translation, and audio recognition.
Research combining both image and text data has also been
done, such as image captioning and visual question an-
swering [104], [105]. Harder still are new types of networks
called generative adversarial networks, or GANs for short, that
have produced remarkable results for data generation [106],
e.g., producing real-looking yet fake images [107]. While
GANs have only existed for a couple of years, they are now
receiving signiﬁcant research attention. To make sense of the
learned features and distributions from GANs, two visual
analytics systems, DGMTracker [42] and GANViz [53], focus
on understanding the training dynamics of GANs to help
model developers better train these complex models, often
consisting of multiple dueling neural networks.
9.2
A Vibrant Research Community: Hybrid, Apace, &
Open-sourced
As seen from this survey, bringing together the visualization
communities with the AI communities has led to the design
and development of numerous tools and techniques for im-
proving deep learning interpretability and democratization.
This hybrid research area has seen accelerated attention and
interest due to its widespread impact, as evidenced by the
large number of works published in just a few years, as
seen in Table 2. A consequence of this rapid progress is that
deep learning visualization research are being disseminated
across multiple related venues. In academia, the premiere
venues for deep learning visualization research consists of
two main groups: the information visualization and visual
analytics communities; and the artiﬁcial intelligence and
deep learning communities. Furthermore, since this area is
relatively new, it has seen more attention at multiple work-
shops at the previously mentioned academic conferences, as
tabulated in Table 1.
Another consequence of this rapidly developing area is
that new work is immediately publicized and open-sourced,
without waiting for it to be “ofﬁcially” published at confer-
ences, journals, etc. Many of these releases take the form of a
preprint publication posted on arXiv, where a deep learning
presence has thrived. Not only is it common for academic
research labs and individuals to publish work on arXiv, but
companies from industry are also publishing results, code,
and tools. For example, the most popular libraries2 for im-
plementing neural networks are open-source and have con-
sistent contributions for improving all areas of the codebase,
e.g., installation, computation, and deployment into speciﬁc
programming languages’ open-source environments.
Some works have a corresponding blog post on an
industry research blog3, which, while non-traditional, has
large impact due to their prominent visibility and large
readership. While posting preprints may have its down-
sides (e.g., little quality control) the communities have been
promoting the good practices of open-sourcing developed
code and including direct links within the preprints; both
practices are now the norm. Although it may be overwhelm-
ing to digest the amount of new research published daily,
having access to the work with its code could encourage re-
producibility and allow the communities to progress faster.
In summary, given the increasing interest in deep learning
visualization research and its importance, we believe our
communities will continue to thrive, and will positively
impact many domains for years to come.
10
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS & OPEN PROBLEMS
Now we present research directions and open problems for
future research distilled from the surveyed works.
10.1
Furthering Interpretability
Unsurprisingly, with the amount of attention and impor-
tance on interpretability and explainability in the deep
learning visualization literature, the ﬁrst area for future
work is continuing to create new interpretable methods
for deep learning models. For the information visualiza-
tion and visual analytics communities, this could constitute
2. Popular libraries include TensorFlow [27], Keras, Caffe, PyTorch,
and Theano.
3. High impact industry blogs include: Google Research Blog, Ope-
nAI, Facebook Research Blog, the Apple Machine Learning Journal,
NVIDIA Deep Learning AI, and Uber AI

16
Fig. 5. Distill: The Building Blocks of Interpretability [46]: an interactive
user interface that combines feature visualization and attribution tech-
niques to interpret neural networks.
creating new visual representations for the components
in deep learning models, or developing new interaction
techniques to reveal deeper insights about one’s model. For
the AI communities, more insightful attribution and feature
visualization techniques for trained models that are fast
(computationally cheap) could be incorporated into visu-
alization systems. Combining visual representations, help-
ful interactions, and state-of-the-art attribution and feature
visualization techniques together into rich user interfaces
could lead to major breakthroughs for understanding neural
networks [46].
10.2
System & Visual Scalability
Throughout this survey, we have covered many visual an-
alytics systems that facilitate interpretation and model un-
derstanding. However, some systems suffer from scalability
problems. Visual scalability challenges arise when dealing
with large data, e.g., large number of hyperparameters
and millions of parameters in deep neural networks. Some
research has started to address this, by simplifying complex
dataﬂow graphs and network weights for better model
explanations [14], [15], [52]. But, regarding activations and
embeddings, dimensionality reduction techniques have a
limit to their usability when it comes to the number of points
to visualize [48]. We think this is an important research
direction, especially given that the information visualization
communities have developed techniques to visualize large,
high-dimensional data that could potentially be applicable
to deep learning [108].
Aside from visual scalability, some tools also suffer from
system scalability. While some of these problems may be
more engineering-centric, we think that for visual analytics
systems to adopted, they need to handle state-of-the-art
deep models without penalizing performance or increasing
model development time. Furthermore, these systems (often
web-based) will greatly beneﬁt from fast computations,
supporting real-time, rich user interactions [50]. This is espe-
cially important for visual systems that need to perform pre-
computation before rendering visualizations to the screen.
10.3
Design Studies for Evaluation: Utility & Usability
An important facet of visualization research is the eval-
uation of the utility and usefulness of the visual repre-
sentation. Equally important is to evaluate the usability
of deployed systems and their interactive visual analytics
techniques. It is encouraging to see many of the visual
analytics systems recognize this importance and report on
design studies conducted with AI experts before building a
tool to understand the users and their needs [14], [15], [19],
[39], [43], [52]. It is common to see example use cases or
illustrative usage scenarios that demonstrate the capabilities
of the interactive systems. Some works go beyond these and
conduct user studies to evaluate utility and usability [31].
In the AI communities, most works do not include user
studies. For those that do, they greatly beneﬁt from showing
why their proposed methods are superior to the ones being
tested against [69], [89], [109], [110]. Taking this idea to
the quantiﬁable extreme, a related avenue of evaluating
these techniques is the notion of quantifying interpretability,
which has been recently studied [28], [111]. Other domains
have recognized that interpretable deep learning research
may require evaluation techniques for their interpretations,
and argue that there is a large body of work from ﬁelds such
as philosophy, cognitive science, and social psychology that
could be utilized [62], [112].
When surveying the interfaces of deep learning visual
analytics tools, many of them contain multiple-coordinated
views with many visual representations. Displaying this
much information at once can be overwhelming, and when
interpretability is the primary focus, it is critical for these
systems to have superior usability. Therefore, we think fu-
ture works could further beneﬁt from including more mem-
bers of the human-computer interaction communities, in-
cluding interface and user experience designers, that could
help organize and prioritize interfaces using well-studied
guidelines [86].
10.4
The Human Role in Interpretability
10.4.1
Human v. Machine Understanding of the World
In deep learning interpretability work, researchers are de-
veloping methods to produce better explanations to “see
through the black-box,” but unfortunately some of these
methods produce visualizations that, while visually inter-
esting and thought-provoking [98], are not fully under-
standable by their human viewers. That is an important
facet of deep learning interpretability, namely, producing
visualizations and interpretations that are human under-
standable [88]. Some methods compare algorithmic results
with an empirically derived human baseline; this enables
comparison between machine and human generated re-
sponses to objects in the world, particularly in images [113].
Ultimately, researchers seek to understand the commonal-
ities and differences between how humans and machines
see and decompose the world [114]. Some tools that we
have surveyed achieve this by using live-video to compare
the input images and the neural network’s activations and
ﬁlters in real time [55]. Other tools give users explicit control
of an experiment by training multiple small models with
only a few exposed hyperparameters, automatically gener-
ating visualizations to then see the effect that the input data

17
has on the learned representation [38]. These “what-if” tools
and scenarios could potentially be extended to incorporate
human feedback into the training or model steering process
of neural network to better improve performance.
10.4.2
Human-AI Pairing
Much of this survey is dedicated towards reviewing the
state-of-the-art in visual analytics for deep learning, with
a focus on interpretability. These works use visualization to
explain, explore, and debug models in order to choose the
best preforming model for a given task, often by placing
a human in the loop. However, a slight twist on this idea
hearkening back to the original envisioning of the computer
has lead to the emergence of a new research area, one where
tasks are not exclusively performed by humans or machines,
but one where the two complement each other. This area,
recently dubbed artiﬁcial intelligence augmentation describes
the use of AI systems to help develop new methods for
intelligence augmentation [103]. Some related works we
have covered already propose artiﬁcial intelligence aug-
mentation ideas, such as a system that suggests potentially
interesting directions to explore in a high-dimensional 3D
embedding [51], predicting and showing where the next
stroke of a word could be when handwriting text [32],
automatically generating images based off of user-provided
sketches [59], and dynamically changing and steering a
neural network model while it trains [35]. We believe this is
a rich, under-explored area for future research: using well-
designed interfaces for humans to interact with machine
learning models, and for these machine learning models to
augment creative human tasks.
10.5
Social Good & Bias Detection
The aspirational pairing of humans and machines is a long-
term research endeavor. To quicken our pace, we must con-
tinue to democratize artiﬁcial intelligence via educational
tools, perhaps by using direct manipulation as an invitation
for people to engage with AI [16], [46], clear explanations
for model decision making, and robust tooling and libraries
for programming languages for people to develop such
models [15], [27]. While doing this, we must also ensure
that AI applications remain ethical, fair, safe, transparent,
and are beneﬁting society [63].
Another important consideration for future research is
detecting bias. This has been identiﬁed as a major problem
in deep learning [115], [116], and a number of researchers
are using visualization to understand why a model may
be biased [117]. One example that aims to detect data bias
is Google’s Facets tool [118], a visual analytics system de-
signed speciﬁcally to preview and visualize machine learn-
ing datasets before training. This allows one to inspect large
datasets by exploring the different classes or data instances,
to see if there are any high-level imbalances in the class or
data distribution.
Other works have begun to explore if the mathematical
algorithms themselves can be biased towards particular
decisions. An example of this is an interactive article ti-
tled “Attacking discrimination with smarter machine learn-
ing” [117], which explores how one can can create both fair
and unfair threshold classiﬁers in an example task such as
loan granting scenarios where a bank may grant or deny
a loan based on a single, automatically computed number
such as a credit score. The article aims to highlight that
equal opportunity [119] is not preserved by machine learning
algorithms, and that as AI-powered systems continue to
make important decisions across core social domains, it is
critical to ensure decisions are not discriminatory.
Finally, aside from data and model bias, humans are
often inherently biased decision makers. In response, there
is a growing area of research into detecting and understand-
ing bias in visual analytics 4 and its affect on the decision
making process [120]. Some work has developed metrics
to detect types of bias to present to a user during data
analysis [120] which could also be applied to visual tools for
deep learning in the future. Some work has employed de-
velopmental and cognitive psychology analysis techniques
to understand how humans learn, focusing on uncovering
how human bias is developed and inﬂuences learning, to
ultimately inﬂuence artiﬁcial neural network design [112].
10.6
Protecting Against Adversarial Attacks
Regardless of the beneﬁts AI systems are bringing to society,
we would be remiss to immediately trust them; like most
technologies, AI too has security faults. Identiﬁed and stud-
ied in seminal works, it has been shown that deep learning
models such as image classiﬁers can be easily fooled by
perturbing an input image [121], [122], [123]. Most alarming,
some perturbations are so subtle that they are untraceable
by the human eye, yet would completely fool a model into
misclassiﬁcation [122]. This sparked great interest in the AI
communities, and much work has been done to understand
how fragile deep neural network image classiﬁers are, iden-
tify in what ways can they break, and explore methods
for protecting them. Norton et al. [44] demonstrate adding
adversarial perturbations to images in an interactive tool,
where users can tweak the type and intensity of the attack,
and observe the resulting (mis)classiﬁcation. This is a great
ﬁrst start for using visualization to identify potential attacks,
but we think visualization can be majorly impactful in this
research space, by not only showcasing how the attacks
work and detecting them, but also by taking action and pro-
tecting AI systems from the attacks themselves. While some
work, primarily originating from the AI communities, has
proposed computational techniques to protect AI from at-
tacks, such as identifying adversarial examples before clas-
siﬁcation [124], modifying the network architecture [125],
modifying the training process [122], [126], and performing
pre-processing steps before classiﬁcation [127], [128], we
think visualization can have great impact for combating
adversarial machine learning.
11
CONCLUSION
We presented a comprehensive, timely survey on visualiza-
tion and visual analytics in deep learning research, using
a human-centered, interrogative framework. Our method
helps researchers and practitioners in visual analytics and
deep learning to quickly learn key aspects of this young
4. The DECISIVe Workshop (http://decisive-workshop.dbvis.de/) at
IEEE VIS is dedicated to understanding cognitive bias in visualization.

18
and rapidly growing body of research, whose impact
spans a broad range of domains. Our survey goes beyond
visualization-focused venues to extend a wide scope that
also encompasses relevant works from top venues in AI,
ML, and computer vision. We highlighted visual analytics
as an integral component in addressing pressing issues in
modern AI, helping to discover and communicate insight,
from discerning model bias, understanding models, to pro-
moting AI safety. We concluded by highlighting impactful
research directions and open problems.
