CA2T-Net: Category-Agnostic 3D Articulation Transfer from Single Image
Jasmine Collins1
Anqi Liang2
Jitendra Malik1
Hao Zhang2
Fr´ed´eric Devernay2
1 UC Berkeley
2 Amazon
Abstract
We present a neural network approach to transfer the
motion from a single image of an articulated object to a rest-
state (i.e., unarticulated) 3D model. Our network learns
to predict the object’s pose, part segmentation, and corre-
sponding motion parameters to reproduce the articulation
shown in the input image. The network is composed of three
distinct branches that take a shared joint image-shape em-
bedding and is trained end-to-end. Unlike previous meth-
ods, our approach is independent of the topology of the ob-
ject and can work with objects from arbitrary categories.
Our method, trained with only synthetic data, can be used
to automatically animate a mesh, infer motion from real im-
ages, and transfer articulation to functionally similar but
geometrically distinct 3D models at test time.
1. Introduction
We live in a 3D world where interacting with objects in
our environment is necessary to carry out daily activities.
Therefore, the objects around us have been designed with
the appropriate structures and part motions to afford vari-
ous actions to both humans and robotic agents. Whether
for general visual perception tasks such as functionality in-
ference or robotic action planning, it is a valuable skill to
be able to predict the part motions or articulations of ev-
eryday objects. Recently, there has been much interest in
training deep neural networks to learn such predictions, es-
pecially in the context of embodied AI [27, 18]. However,
the availability of 3D models with associated part articula-
tions [24, 27] for training these methods is still limited.
Creating articulated 3D models relies on human effort
which can be expensive in terms of time, cost and exper-
tise. As a result, most 3D model datasets do not contain
objects with any kind of functional part and motion anno-
tations. For example, Amazon Berkeley Objects (ABO) [3]
is a recently published, large-scale (8K models) dataset of
artist-created 3D models of real household objects. While
most of the 3D models in ABO represent objects that can
be interacted with, such as desks with openable drawers
or chairs that recline, the 3D models have all been con-
structed in their “rest” (i.e., unarticulated) poses that do
CA2T-Net
Rest-state mesh
Articulated image
Pose estimation
Part segmentation
Motion prediction
 Transfer to Real Images 
Animation
Motion Analogies
Training
Inference
Figure 1: Predicting pose, part, and motion annotations for
synthetic meshes given an exemplar image. At test time, we
can perform 3D animation, transfer motion to functionally similar
objects, and generalize to real {image, mesh} pairs.
not expose their real functionality. The same is true for
the vast majority of 3D models in well-established repos-
itories such as ShapeNet [2] (3M models) and PartNet [19]
(27K models) The largest 3D datasets with part articula-
tions, SAPIEN [27] and Shape2Motion [24], only contain
2K manually annotated synthetic models.
In this paper, we introduce single-view 3D articulation
transfer, a learning-based approach aimed at endowing the
many existing 3D models, in particular, those of real prod-
ucts such as ABO, with part articulations.
Speciﬁcally,
given a single RGB image, I, showing how an object can
be articulated, and a 3D mesh model M in its rest state,
our goal is to infer the pose, motion parameters, and 3D
part segmentation of M such that we can re-pose and trans-
form it to match the articulation in the input image. Our
method is structure-agnostic, as it makes no assumption
arXiv:2301.02232v2  [cs.CV]  22 Mar 2023

Method
Task
Input
Pose 3D Part Seg. Category-Speciﬁc
DeepPartInduction [32] Transfer articulation from PC →PC
2 PCs
×
✓
No
Shape2Motion [24]
Predict motion for all moveable parts
PC
×
✓
No
RPM-Net [30]
Predict motion for all moveable parts
PC
×
✓
No
ANCSH [15]
Articulated pose estimation
PC
✓
✓
Yes
NASAM [25]
Reconstruct and animate objects
RGBs + pose
×
✓
Yes
OPD [9]
Predict motion for all openable parts
RGB
✓
×
No
CA2T-Net (ours)
Transfer articulation from image →mesh
RGB, PC
✓
✓
No
Table 1: CA2T-Net addresses the problem of single-view articulation transfer, from an image to a mesh. Existing work targets related
problems, but differs in terms of task and inputs of the model.
on the topology of the input model. Unlike many exist-
ing methods for articulated pose estimation, our approach is
also category-agnostic, meaning no further training is nec-
essary to run our model on objects from novel categories
and it can make predictions for objects from arbitrary cate-
gories. Further, the object represented in the input image I
and the mesh M need not be exactly the same, but should
simply share a functional similarity to allow a plausible ar-
ticulation transfer. To our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to
pose the problem of single-view articulation transfer onto a
target 3D object. As indicated in Table 1, the most relevant
works [32, 24, 15, 9, 30] differ from our problem setting in
one way or another.
We call our network CA2T-Net for category-agnostic ar-
ticulation transfer, and demonstrate that our method has su-
perior performance in single-view 3D articulation transfer
compared to baseline methods and the current state-of-the-
art in terms of motion prediction. Our approach takes as
input an articulated image and rest-state 3D point cloud
and uses three branches to predict global pose, part seg-
mentation, and 3D motion parameters.
The network is
trained end-to-end using synthetic data. We also show three
downstream applications of our trained approach: auto-
matic mesh animation, generalization to functionally sim-
ilar objects, and transfer to real objects and images in ABO.
Our work is a ﬁrst step towards replacing manual part
and motion annotations [24, 27] with a fully automated in-
ference of part articulations and motion parameters of arbi-
trary 3D shapes. With the wide availability of images de-
picting object articulations (e.g., catalog images found in
the product metadata within ABO), our image-to-3D trans-
fer presents a promising step towards articulated 3D shape
creation at scale.
2. Related Work
Part Segmentation
In computer vision, most research on
2D or 3D part segmentation focuses on semantic [33, 19]
or functional [10, 7, 24, 9] meanings of the parts. Jiang et
al. [9] extended 2D semantic segmentation networks (e.g.
Mask R-CNN) to predict the location of openable parts from
a single-view image. Gelfand et al. [4] deﬁned a part seg-
mentation as a kinematic surface composed of points that
undergo the same type of motion. Other work has relied
on a category-level canonical container or a ﬁxed kinematic
structure. For example, follow-up work [15, 30] learned a
fully supervised canonicalization to map instance observa-
tions of different position, orientation, scale and articulation
into a canonical container. Xu et al. [29] estimated the part
segmentation from a depth image in a known category of a
ﬁxed kinematic chain. In contrast, our approach requires
neither semantic annotation nor category-level functional
information or kinematic structure. Further, our work is not
about learning semantic or functional part segmentation, but
rather image-guided part segmentation. Our method ﬁnds
the correspondence between an input image and a 3D shape
under different articulation conﬁgurations.
Articulated Pose Estimation
Articulated pose estima-
tion from a 2D image is another focus of our work. Re-
cently, Wang et al. [23] introduced the Normalized Object
Coordinate Space (NOCS), allowing category-level rigid
pose estimation. Follow-ups [15, 16] have used this rep-
resentation to perform articulated pose estimation. For ex-
ample, Li et al. [15] proposed a part-level canonical refer-
ence frame and performed part pose ﬁtting using RANSAC.
Liu et al. [16] extended NOCS to Real-World Articulation
NOCS which focuses on pose estimation for articulated ob-
jects with varied kinematic structures in real-world settings.
Kulkarni et al., [11] introduced an approach for articulating
a template mesh given a target image segmentation mask
from a category-speciﬁc image collection, but requires
hand-annotated part segmentations. Other work [30, 26, 31]
relies on a series of frames displaying an object actively ar-
ticulating. In contrast, our method does not require learning
the canonical representation with a ﬁxed kinematic structure
for each category. Without the need of sequences of images
of an object’s different articulation states as inputs, we re-
quire only an articulated single-view image and its unartic-
ulated 3D model to perform articulated pose estimation.

Figure 2: Diagram of training architecture. CA2T-Net takes in an RGB image and 3D model and predicts the global pose of the object
in the image, segmentation of the part that is articulated in the image, as well as part-speciﬁc motion parameters. Each motion attribute is
predicted from a spearate head.
Motion Estimation & Transfer
In 3D understanding,
considerable work has focused on the problem of mo-
tion prediction.
Methods largely differ in the types of
input(s) used for motion estimation and transfer.
Initial
work [4, 17, 30] utilized only the geometry of an object to
infer part segmentation and motion. Li et al. [14] focused
on predicting part mobility of an object from a sequence
of scans displaying the the dynamic motion of articulated
models. More recently, motion estimation has been per-
formed from depth images [1, 15]. Mo et al., [18] learned
to make per-point motion predictions from a single RGB or
depth image by interacting with articulated objects in simu-
lation. Other approaches use a sequence of images or video
clips to infer 3D part movement [6, 32, 8]. Wei et al., [25]
trained an implicit representation of the geometry, appear-
ance, and motion of an object in a self-supervised manner
from image observations, however their approach is limited
to certain classes of articulated objects. Recently, Jiang et
al., [9] introduced a method for estimating 3D motion pa-
rameters from single image. Their approach aims to predict
motion parameters for all “openable” parts, rather than fo-
cusing on transferring arbitrary motion from one object to
another.
Our work makes no assumptions on the input category
and can both estimate and transfer 3D motion. We formu-
late the problem as learning the articulated segmentation of
the input geometry, estimating the pose and predicting mo-
tion parameters of the moveable part (driven by the input
image). Unlike many existing approaches, our work is both
category-agnostic and structure agnostic.
3. Method
We propose a model for the single-view articulation
transfer task. Given an articulated RGB image and corre-
sponding 3D model, our method infers the pose, part seg-
mentation and motion parameters that can be used to deform
the mesh to match the input image.
3.1. Architecture
Our architecture is composed of 3 distinct branches: a
pose prediction branch, a motion prediction branch, and a
3D part segmentation branch. Our model takes two inputs:
an image I ∈Rh×w×3 and point cloud shape S ∈Rn×3,
where n is the number of points in a point cloud sam-
pled from the normalized input mesh.
Image features,
h = fθ(I), are extracted with a ResNet-18 [22], and shape
features, s = gθ(S), are extracted with a PointNet-like [21]
architecture, without input and feature transforms for pose-
invariance. Both the image and shape encoder are trained
from scratch. The shape and image features are concate-
nated and passed through a set of fully connected layers re-
sulting in a joint image and shape embedding, z ∈Rb×512.
Each of the three branches take z as input. An overview of
the full architecture can be found in Figure 2.
Pose Prediction
The pose prediction branch of our archi-
tecture is inspired by [28], a method that also takes as input
an RGB image (however unarticulated) and a 3D shape, and
predicts the pose of the 3D model in the image. As in [28]
we predict pose in terms of azimuth, elevation, and in-plane
rotation. The network ﬁrst classiﬁes the angle bin and the

Input
Rand
Freq
Ours
GT
Input
Rand
Freq
Ours
GT
Figure 3: Qualitative results on SAPIEN validation set. Our method’s predictions can be used to deform the input mesh to match the
articulated image.
regresses an offset. Let ˆli,j be the predicted bin for the j-th
Euler angle (azimuth, elevation, in-plane rotation) of the i-
th datapoint, and ˆδi,j be the predicted relative offset within
the bins. For bin prediction, we have 24 azimuth classes, 12
elevation classes, and 24 in-plane rotation classes. We train
the model with a cross-entropy loss (LCE) for bin classiﬁ-
cation and Huber loss (Lhuber) for regression offsets.
Lp =
N
X
i=1
X
j∈E
LCE(li,j, ˆli,j) + Lhuber(ˆδi,j, δi,j),
(1)
where E = {azimuth, elevation, in-plane} and li,j and δi,j
are the ground truth pose bins and offsets, accordingly.
Motion Estimation
In this work we consider two distinct
motion types, revolute (rotation) and prismatic (translation).
We parameterize the revolute motion in terms of motion
axis, origin, and magnitude, and prismatic in terms of mo-
tion axis and magnitude. Each motion attribute is predicted
by a separate head, for origin, axis, magnitude, and class.
Let Lmc be the classiﬁcation loss on motion type, deﬁned
as:
Lmc =
N
X
i=1
LCE(mi, ˆmi),
(2)
where mi is the ground-truth motion class represented as a
one-hot vector and ˆmi is the corresponding predicted class.
Motion axis ˆa ∈R3, origin ˆo ∈R3, and magnitude ˆz ∈
R are regressed and optimized using Huber loss:
Lm =
N
X
i=1
Lhuber(ai, ˆai) + Lhuber(oi, ˆoi)+
Lhuber(zi, ˆzi).
(3)
We predict motion parameters in the world coordinate space
(i.e., object’s canonical coordinate frame). Motion origin
and magnitude for prismatic motion is given in terms of
normalized object size, and magnitude for revolute motion
is given in terms of radians. As motion origin is not relevant
for prismatic joints, we only apply the motion origin loss,
Lhuber(oi, ˆoi), in the cases of predicted revolute motion.
3D Part Segmentation
Our 3D part segmentation branch
takes in the transformed global shape and image features, z,
as well as a 3D point, x ∈R3, and predicts whether or not
that point (from the pointcloud) corresponds to the move-
able part. Our architecture is inspired by DeepSDF [20]
which also takes as input a set of features and a 3D point.
After processing these inputs with 2 fully connected layers,
the initial inputs are again concatenated with the intermedi-
ate features and further processed by 3 more fully connected
layers. Let ˆp be the predicted conﬁdence of a certain point
x’s movability - we deﬁne the 3D part segmentation loss as:
Ls =
N
X
i=1
M
X
j=1
LCE(pi,j, ˆpi,j),
(4)
where i indexes over training datapoints and j over the M
sampled 3D points from the input shape. For training we
use M = 1000.
Full Training Objective
Our full training loss is a
weighted combination of losses applied to each of the three
branches:
L = λpLp + λmcLmc + λmLm + λsLs.
(5)
The coefﬁcients on the loss terms are λp = 2, λmc = 1,
λm = 8, and λs = 1. We train the network using the Adam
optimizer with a learning rate of 1e-3 and batch size of 128

Motion
3D
I-split
O-split

RandMot
12.6%
56.6%
78.8◦
1.09
62.0◦
0.746
54.5%
5.18
7.50
FreqMot
13.0%
69.0%
66.2◦
0.689
51.7◦
0.335
78.1%
3.51
9.09
CA2T-Net
89.0%
99.2%
6.23◦
0.274
36.7◦
0.166
92.2%
1.05
42.5
RandMot
13.6%
58.6%
79.1◦
1.13
63.2◦
0.734
54.5%
4.79
7.57
FreqMot
13.2%
74.4%
67.3◦
0.792
54.7◦
0.333
76.6%
3.38
8.84
CA2T-Net
74.0%
91.5%
58.7◦
0.605
51.9◦
0.230
81.8%
1.54
33.3
Table 2: Quantitative performance of baselines and CA2T-Net (ours) on SAPIEN validation split Results for per-image (I-split) and
per-object (O-split) dataset splits.
for 50 epochs and decrease the learning rate to 1e-4 for the
ﬁnal 10 epochs.
Inference
During inference, we randomly sample 100
points on each distinct part of the input model and compute
the network’s 3D part prediction for each point. We ap-
ply the network’s predicted motion only to parts that have
>50% points considered “moveable”.
4. Evaluation and Results
We train and evaluate our method using images and
ground-truth data generated from the SAPIEN PartNet-
Mobility [27] dataset.
4.1. Dataset
The original SAPIEN PartNet-Mobility dataset consists
of 2,346 CAD models from 46 categories with part segmen-
tations and motion annotations. As we are interested in ar-
ticulation transfer from a single-image, we focus on objects
with large moveable parts such as the door or drawer of a
cabinet, rather than the individual keys on a keyboard. To
do so, we ﬁlter out CAD models that only contain moveable
parts that consist of <5% of the overall surface area of the
object, as well as objects with missing or incomplete motion
data. After this ﬁltering process, 1,717 objects remain.
From the remaining objects, we render 256 images per
object using the SAPIEN Vulkan Renderer, each with a
random pose, randomly sampled part, and randomly sam-
pled motion parameters within the valid range. For sim-
plicity, we only consider one moving part at a time. The
pose distribution ranges from azimuth ∈[−90◦, 90◦], ele-
vation ∈[−45◦, 45◦], and in-plane rotation ∈[−20◦, 20◦].
Such ranges were chosen so that the articulated part on the
3D model is usually visible (most moveable parts are on
the front of the object, rather than the back). For each im-
age, we also randomly sample the camera’s ﬁeld-of-view
∈[20◦, 60◦]. In total we render approximately 280K im-
ages for training, and 10K images for evaluation.
For each image we also write out the rest-state mesh, the
ground truth pose of the object, 3D part segmentation (of
the articulated part from the rest of the object), and motion
parameters. The motion parameters consist of a motion type
∈{revolute, prismatic}, axis, origin, and magnitude. In
the case of revolute motion, the magnitude corresponds to a
rotation amount, whereas it corresponds to translation dis-
tance for prismatic motion. From the rest-state mesh we
sample a point cloud that is the input to our network. For
training, we resize images to 224 × 224 and sample a point-
cloud of 2500 points for each mesh. Pointclouds are further
normalized to ﬁt in a unit box.
4.2. Baselines
We consider three baseline approaches to single-view
articulation transfer: selecting a random motion and part
(RandMot), selecting the most frequent motion parameters
(FreqMot), and OPD-O [9], the current state-of-the-art ap-
proach for 3D motion prediction. RandMot and FreqMot
are inspired by similar baselines used by OPD [9], how-
ever modiﬁed to predict additional outputs such as object
pose and motion magnitude. RandMot gives a lower bound
on performance whereas FreqMot is a relatively strong
heuristic-based baseline approach.
RandMot
For the random motion (RandMot) baseline,
we sample a random set of ground truth labels from the
training dataset, including random pose, motion axis, mo-
tion origin, type, and magnitude. For the predicted part seg-
mentation, we randomly sample a valid part from the set of
parts contained in the input mesh.
FreqMot
In contrast to the RandMot baseline, the fre-
quent motion (FreqMot) baseline method predicts the most
frequent motion parameters from the train dataset.
We
still randomly sample a global pose, but sample the pre-
dicted part segmentation based on statistics from the train-
ing dataset. We compute the average size of the most fre-
quently sampled part in the training set and select the part

Motion
Pose (↑) Type (↑) Axis (↓) Origin (↓) Mag-R (↓) Mag-P (↓) Seg (↑)
Pose Only
69.6%
-
-
-
-
-
-
Motion Only
-
92.5%
52.2◦
0.599
52.3◦
0.26
-
Seg Only
-
-
-
-
-
-
78.9%
All
74.0 %
91.5%
58.7◦
0.605
51.9◦
0.23
81.8%
Table 3: Training for individual objectives vs multi-task learning. We train three separate networks for pose, motion and segmentation
only and compare their performance to the proposed multi-task objective. We ﬁnd that optimizing all losses together yields the best results.
Motion
Type (↑) Axis (↓) Origin (↓) mAP (↑)
OPD-O [9]
94.0%
72.5◦
0.912
41.0%
CA2T-Net
98.9%
50.5◦
0.757
49.2%
Table 4: Comparison to OPD for 3D motion prediction and
2D segmentation. We compare to OPD, a method that estimates
motion parameters for all movable parts given an RGB image.

that is most similar in size at inference time. For the re-
maining categorical variables, we sample the most frequent
value from the training set. For real-valued parameters such
as motion magnitude, motion axis, and motion origin, we
ﬁrst cluster the values from the training set and sample the
mean value of the most frequent cluster.
Openable Part Detection [9]
While designed for a differ-
ent problem formulation, Openable Part Detection (OPD) is
the most applicable to our articulation transfer task in terms
of model output. OPD takes a single RGB image and pre-
dicts 2D segmentation masks and 3D motion parameters for
all parts identiﬁed as “openable”. While their method can-
not be directly used to animate a 3D model, we can still
compare to them in terms of 3D motion prediction and 2D
part segmentation. Speciﬁcally, we compare our method to
OPD-O, the best-performing variant of OPD in terms of real
image performance. OPD-O also predicts motion parame-
ters in the world coordinate system by using an additional
branch to predict extrinsic parameters.
4.3. Metrics
We consider evaluation metrics for pose, motion, and
segmentation performance, as well as 3D reconstruction
metrics on the ﬁnal deformed mesh. Our Pose metric is
the percentage of pose estimations with rotation error less
than 30◦. Motion-Type refers to the 2-way classiﬁcation
accuracy of revolute or prismatic motion. Motion-Axis is
the average angular error (in degrees) between the normal-
ized predicted and ground-truth motion axes, and Motion-
Origin is the average L1 distance between the predicted and
ground-truth motion origin. Mag-R and Mag-P refer to the
revolute and prismatic magnitude errors, respectively, mea-
sured in degrees for the case of revolute motion and L1 dis-
tance for prismatic motion. Because motion origin is not
applicable for prismatic motion, we only evaluate motion
origin for predicted revolute parts. Seg. refers to the 3D seg-
mentation accuracy, measured across 1000 sampled points.
Finally for 3D reconstruction metrics, we report Chamfer

4.4. Experimental Results
Performance on Validation Set
We report the perfor-
mance of our model trained on the SAPIEN dataset in Ta-
ble 2. As no neural network-based approach currently ex-
ists for the full single-view articulation transfer task, we
compare against our two heuristic-based baselines: Rand-
Mot and FreqMot. We consider two train/validation splits
of varying difﬁcult, I-split (per-image: validation set con-
tains unseen images) and O-split (per-object: validation set
contains unseen images of novel objects).
Compared to the RandMot and FreqMot baselines, we
ﬁnd that our method achieves the best performance across
all metrics. Understandably, the validation performance is
better on the I-split than the O-split. Visualizations of each
method’s predictions can be found in Figure 3.
Comparison to OPD
We compare our approach to the
recently introduced OPD method [9], which represents the
state-of-the-art in terms of 3D motion estimation. OPD pre-
dicts 2D segmentation masks, motion type, and 3D motion
parameters (axis, origin) for all moveable parts (based on
priors in the training dataset) given a single image, whereas
CA2T-Net takes a 3D model and a driving input image, and
predicts 3D segmentation, motion type, and 3D motion pa-
rameters (axis, origin, and magnitude). To compare the two
approaches on a somewhat level playing ﬁeld, we evalu-
ate the performance of CA2T-Net and OPD on the motion
parameter predictions that the methods share in common.
Because OPD makes multiple predictions for all moveable
parts in an image but in our problem setting we are only
interested in the part that has actually moved in the image,

we take only the OPD predictions that have ≥0.5 IOU with
the ground-truth segmented part. Further, as OPD is limited
to predicting only openable part motion, we only consider
datapoints that come from the subset of the 11 categories
that OPD was trained on. This reduces the size of our vali-
ation set from 10,000 images to 1,039 images. We utilize
the CA2T-Net model trained on the more difﬁcult per-object
training split (O-split).
Results can be found in Table 4. We also compare to
OPD in terms of 2D segmentation ability, by projecting
the CA2T-Net -predicted 3D part segmentation to 2D and
measuring mAP at IoU = 0.5.
In general we ﬁnd that
CA2T-Net outperforms OPD in terms of motion type,
origin, and axis prediction, as well as 2D segmentation
ability.
Intuitively, learning 3D features from the input
model in CA2T-Net should support better prediction of 3D
motion parameters. A common failure case that we observe
with OPD is predicting a motion axis that is 180 degrees
rotated from the correct axis.
Multi-Task
vs
Single-Branch
Learning
We
study
the contribution of each of the loss terms corresponding to
each branch of our architecture by training three variants
of our model: pose prediction only, motion prediction only,
and 3D segmentation prediction only. The results can be
found in Table 3. We ﬁnd that the multi-task objective with
all three loss terms leads to the best performance across
most metrics, speciﬁcally for pose and 3D segmentation
estimation. The performance gains for motion estimation
are less pronounced. Intuitively, accurate pose prediction
should aid the alignment between the image and shape
inputs, which should improve part segmentation ability.
Such an effect may explain the boost in performance by
doing multi-task training.
Failure Cases The most common failure cases of our
method include pose prediction failure (e.g., predicting a
pose that is 180-rotated from the ground-truth pose) as well
as failure to segment any part of the object when the motion
magnitude is small. Visualizations of these failure cases
can be found in Figure 4.
5. Applications
We present three exciting applications of our model:
generalization to functionally similar objects (i.e., motion
analogies), 3D model animation, and transfer to real images
and meshes in ABO.
5.1. Motion Analogies
During training, our method takes as input a 3D model
that exactly matches the geometry of the object pictured in
the 2D image. However, at test time we can swap the 3D
input with a functionally similar 3D model that does not
Input
Pred
GT
Input
Pred
GT
Figure 4: Typical failure cases in articulation transfer. Pose
prediction failures (180 degrees off, left column), and failure to
predict a segmented part when motion magnitude in image is small
(right column).
Input
Motion Transfer
Input
Motion Transfer
Figure 5: Motion analogies. By presenting a functionally similar
but geometrically distinct 3D model at test time, we can transfer
motion across analogous 3D parts.
exactly match the input image to perform a motion anal-
ogy. To achieve this, we swap the input model with a dif-
ferent model from the same category as the original input
3D model, and run our method with no additional modiﬁca-
tions. The articulated outputs predicted by our method can
be seen in Figure 5. We note that in this setting our model
has to not only segment and predict motion for the corre-
sponding articulated part on the swapped shape, it also has
to accurately predict the pose in this setting that was never
seen during training. In general we ﬁnd that our method
can segment the functionally similar part and produce mo-
tion parameters that lead to a plausible deformation of the
non-matching input model, even when the input model is
drastically different from the articulated image (see Figure 5
left column, third row).
5.2. Animation: Interpolation and Extrapolation
A convenience of our motion parameterization is that an-
imation of the input 3D model can be achieved simply by
varying the predicted motion magnitude. As a result, the
predicted segmented part will move along or around the pre-
dicted axis. We can interpolate between the rest-state mag-
nitude (0) and predicted magnitude to simulate the motion
of a part opening and closing, or even consider magnitude

Input
Pred (New View)
Interpolation
Extrapolation
Figure 6: Interpolation and extrapolation in 3D from a single
input image. Our motion parameterization can easily be used to
interpolate between the rest-state and articulated object pose, or
even extrapolate beyond the motion that is seen in the input image.
settings beyond the predicted value to get motion extrapo-
lation. See Figure 6 for an animation example.
5.3. Transfer to Real Objects & Images
A natural source of real-world articulated objects, in-
cluding rest-state mesh and image pairs, comes from the
ABO dataset [3]. The dataset contains catalog images of
Amazon products, as well as a subset of 3D models corre-
sponding to the object in the images. The catalog images
range from stock-like photos to close-up detail shots, and
also sometimes contain an articulated picture of the object.
We gathered a subset of approximately 50 catalog images
that show articulated objects (with a single moving part) for
which there also exist corresponding 3D models as a real-
world use-case of the single-view articulation transfer setup.
Unlike the training objects in the SAPIEN dataset that
have annotated part segmentations, meshes from the ABO
dataset are unsegmented.
Further, articulated image in-
stances in ABO have no ground-truth in terms of pose,
part segmentation, and motion annotations. To achieve a
candidate part segmentation we leverage the fact that the
meshes in ABO happen to be designed by artists, part by
part, and thus different parts of the object tend to be repre-
sented by mesh pieces that are disconnected from the rest of
the object. As a result, running connected components on
the ABO meshes tends to give us an over-segmentation of
the object’s functionally relevant parts. We treat these con-
nected components as pseudo-part segmentations and can
then run CA2T-Net on this data with no modiﬁcations.
Qualitative results showing our model applied, without
any ﬁnetuning, to real images from the ABO dataset can be
seen in Figure 7. Note that the meshes in ABO were de-
signed to simply show the product in its rest-state, rather
than with articulation in mind (like in SAPIEN). This is
shown by the fact that drawers are simply external panels
rather than a full drawer part enclosed by the rest of the ob-
ject. Further, our model was trained only with inputs that
show a single articulated part, whereas realistic catalog im-
Image
3D Model
Articulation
New Viewpoint
Input
Predicted
Figure 7: Transfer results to real articulated objects. We run
our model on instances of ABO objects with no ﬁnetuning and are
able to make reasonable predictions despite the domain gap.
ages typically show multiple articulated parts at once. We
include a challenging instance of this in Figure 7 (row 3),
where the input image contains a recliner chair, which is a
category not seen during training, with multiple complex
motions, including a reclined headrest and raised footrest.
As our method is category-agnostic, it can handle inputs
like this at test-time.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
We proposed a method to transfer the articulation from
a single-view image to a 3D model in such a way that the
model can be deformed to match the input image. To our
knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to solve this task in the setting
of household objects from arbitrary categories. In this work
we only consider articulated exemplar images with a sin-
gle moving part displayed. Of course, articulated images
can commonly show multiple moving parts. Extending our
method to predict multiple motion types and part segmen-
tations is a practical next step and can be achieved by com-
bining Mask RCNN-style detections (as used in OPD) with
our method. Further, our method requires a 3D model as
input which can limit its practical use in say, an embodied
perception system navigating the world. Recent advances
in CAD model retrieval from a single image [12, 13, 5] can
be used to retrieve a similar 3D CAD model, and our results
on functionally similar shape swapping suggest that our ap-
proach will be able to handle this case. Thus combining
CA2T-Net with CAD retrieval methods could be a promis-
ing path forward to allowing our method to run on single
image inputs only. Finally, we consider only rigid motion
(further, just prismatic and revolute motion) in this work,
but considering how this approach can be extended to more
complicated motion types as well as non-rigid deformation
is an interesting avenue for future work.
