Automated Anonymisation of Visual and Audio Data in Classroom Studies
Ömer Sümer1, Peter Gerjets2, Ulrich Trautwein1, Enkelejda Kasneci1
1 University of Tübingen
2 Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien
Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
Understanding students’ and teachers’ verbal and non-verbal
behaviours during instruction may help infer valuable infor-
mation regarding the quality of teaching. In education re-
search, there have been many studies that aim to measure
students’ attentional focus on learning-related tasks: Based
on audio-visual recordings and manual or automated ratings
of behaviours of teachers and students. Student data is, how-
ever, highly sensitive. Therefore, ensuring high standards of
data protection and privacy has the utmost importance in cur-
rent practices. For example, in the context of teaching man-
agement studies, data collection is carried out with the con-
sent of pupils, parents, teachers and school administrations.
Nevertheless, there may often be students whose data can-
not be used for research purposes. Excluding these students
from the classroom is an unnatural intrusion into the organi-
sation of the classroom. A possible solution would be to re-
quest permission to record the audio-visual recordings of all
students (including those who do not voluntarily participate
in the study) and to anonymise their data. Yet, the manual
anonymisation of audio-visual data is very demanding. In this
study, we examine the use of artiﬁcial intelligence methods to
automatically anonymise the visual and audio data of a par-
ticular person.
Introduction
Visual and audio recording of classroom instructions has
been widely used in education research for many purposes
such as self-reﬂection, peer collaboration, teacher coach-
ing, or classroom observation research for assessment and
evaluation of teaching quality. Besides the traditional ap-
proaches in classroom observation and behaviour coding
systems (Helmke 1992), there are recent efforts in multi-
modal learning analytics that aim to automate these work-
ﬂows (Goldberg et al. 2019; Sümer et al. 2018). The progress
in the area of machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence
have additionally paved the way to conduct classroom stud-
ies in large-scale and automate these analyses. Unlike tra-
ditional types of data such as questionnaires or written re-
ports, audio-visual recordings of a classroom cannot be eas-
Copyright c⃝2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
ily anonymised as they lose the information which is re-
quired for further manual or automated analysis.
A typical practical challenge during such studies is that
there may be students who do not want to consent in the
study or their data being used by education practitioners. A
common approach to overcome this limitation is to reorder
the classroom by changing the seats of these persons so they
can sit out of the video coverage. However, this constitutes
an unnatural intervention in the usual form of classroom or-
ganisation. Furthermore, the students who do not participate
in the study may raise their hands and actively participate in
the ongoing instruction by speaking. Since voice also con-
tains private information, the collection, storage, distribu-
tion, and analysis of this kind of data might cause severe
violations of data protection laws and regulations.
In fact, the current digital transformation of our society
goes along with a corresponding change and regulation of
data protection laws. Whereas the US data protection leg-
islation is developing and, in comparison, Germany has the
most comprehensive and the ﬁrst data protection law in the
world (Hessen, 1970) (Hoel and Chen 2018). In Europe, the
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) of the Euro-
pean Union came into effect in May 2018. According to
DLA Piper1, there are also several Asian countries which re-
cently passed data protection laws. There is also an increas-
ing interest in the privacy of personal data, independent of
the underlying societal and individual foundations and the
scope of regulations.
In August 2019, Sweden issued its ﬁrst ﬁne to a public
board as they used facial recognition technology to keep
track of class participation during a few weeks in a pilot
study that aimed to automate the class register. Even though
the data was collected and stored in local and locked com-
puters without internet connection, according to the Swedish
data protection agency, they violated the GDPR in three
ways: (i) by processing personal data in a more intrusive
manner than what was necessary for the purpose (monitor-
ing of attendance), (ii) processing sensitive personal data
without legal basis, and (iii) not fulﬁlling the requirements
of data protection impact assessment and prior consultation.
(Swedish Data Protection Authority 2019). The Swedish ex-
1https://www.dlapiperdataprotection.com/
arXiv:2001.05080v1  [cs.CV]  14 Jan 2020

ample shows that even a simple use of visionary technolo-
gies may cause data breaches and that data protection in
educational situations is highly critical and must be carried
out after prior consultation. Contrary to the common under-
standing that computer vision and machine learning are used
to collect and analyse private, personal data, we show that by
leveraging these technologies, multimodal data can be efﬁ-
ciently and semi-automatically anonymised.
Let us consider an audio-visual recording of teaching situ-
ations at schools, which is typical research means in the ﬁeld
of classroom management since the 1990s. Under the na-
tional data protection laws and the GDPR, the current prac-
tice is to pseudo-anonymise the questionnaire data (pre- and
post-tests). Pseudo-anonymisation of categorical data can be
done using code words assigned to students, instead of us-
ing their names. However, audio-visual data cannot be easily
anonymised because they need to either be watched by edu-
cation researchers or processed by computer algorithms.
In studies that necessitates audio-visual data collection in
the classroom or small group discussions, there may be sub-
jects who do not want to participate in the research. Exclud-
ing these students may be impractical and raise other com-
plicated issues. In contrast to longer storage and data pro-
cessing, we propose to collect and store classroom data for
only a short period (a few hours to max. one day). During
this time, the collected audio-visual data can be automati-
cally processed, anonymised, and validated immediately.
Our contributions. We create a small-scale classroom
observation dataset that is composed of 6,5 hours of instruc-
tion in varying subjects and show the feasibility of auto-
mated anonymisation approaches on audio-visual data. Even
though our focus is educational data such as classroom ob-
servation recordings our approach is applicable to any other
domain of audio-visual data and makes the anonymisation
much more effective.
Related Works
In this section, we will review the previous works that con-
cern data anonymisation. As we mainly aim at audio-visual
data anonymisation, our focus will be video and audio.
Video.
Faces are perhaps the most characteristic features
containing private information in video data. In the domain
of computer vision, face detection, tracking, and recognition
are among the widely studied problems. In the recent years,
open and large-scale databases and the progress in the ﬁeld
of deep learning have led to fast and accurate results for face
detection, tracking and recognition even under challenging
conditions such as occlusion, lightning chances, eyeglasses,
or make-up.
In categorical datasets, the injection of noise using dif-
ferential privacy techniques is the right choice to protect
private information (Ji, Lipton, and Elkan 2014). However,
these methods are not suitable for images, and in particu-
lar, for face images since the injected noise deteriorates the
required face features. Even though it is far from guarantee-
ing privacy protection, crafting adversarial samples (Good-
fellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015) on images can at least en-
sure many trained face recognisers fail on perturbed images.
However, the anonymisation of faces is not only addressing
privacy protection for face identiﬁcation algorithms but also
face recognition by humans.
In recent years, there have been many successful applica-
tions of generative models to anonymise faces, such as ad-
versarial generative networks and variational autoencoders.
For example, a face can be swapped with another person’s
face to hide the original identity. In (Ren, Jae Lee, and Ryoo
2018), a face modiﬁer network was trained together with
adversarial regulariser and an action recognition network,
whose task is to recognise the action even in the modiﬁed
face. In this way, anonymised data can be used to train ac-
tion recognition models. In contrast, (Hukkelås, Mester, and
Lindseth 2019) ﬁrst ﬁlled the face that has to be anonymised
with noise and applied then a conditional GAN using these
patches and facial keypoints. In this manner, the authors con-
strained the background and head pose and guaranteed not
to have any leakage of private information.
The audio-visual data is used for either automated anal-
ysis or manual inspection of behavioural data. We found
two drawbacks of anonymisation based on generative mod-
els. First, they do not ensure temporally coherent genera-
tions and may induce ﬂickering identities in some partici-
pants, which distracts the viewer who uses the material for
educational purposes. Second, a face that looks like another
identity does not guarantee that details in facial expressions
are preserved.
In this paper, we are addressing the face in the visual do-
main. However, beyond faces, there are other features such
as hair clothing, and body pose and they may contain pri-
vate information. In the discussion section, we present how
to fulﬁl different levels of anonymisation.
Audio.
The task of audio anonymisation aims to identify
all intervals of a participant whose voice is audible. This task
can be approached using speaker diarisation. In general, di-
arisation is composed of several sub-tasks such as speaker
activity detection, speaker change detection, extraction of
an embedding representation and clustering. After having
speaker diarisation, we acquire clusters of speaking patterns
where each of them belongs to a different participant. Then,
a possible way is to ask a human annotator to locate an ex-
emplary of the anonymised person’s voice. Eventually, we
can anonymise all parts assigned to the same cluster.
The focus in this ﬁeld is to develop better embeddings,
which in practice can be acquired from the internal repre-
sentations of speaker recognition networks as in d-vectors
(Variani et al. 2014) and (Garcia-Romero et al. 2017). Re-
cently, (Zhang et al. 2019) modelled speakers using multiple
instances of a parameter-sharing recurrent neural network.
In contrast to previous works based on clustering, they iden-
tiﬁed different speakers interleaved in time.
Similar to changing faces with a fake identity, there exist
various anonymisation approaches in the context of audio
analysis. For example, (Fang et al. 2019) extracted speaker
identity features from an utterance and synthesised the input
by replacing the identity part with a pseudo-identity.

Figure 1: Our proposed anonymisation pipeline on multimodal educational data.
The most important part is to locate the speaking patterns
of a person. Later, there are two possible alternatives: either
to synthesise the voice by removing private acoustic param-
eters or directly silence these parts. We prefer the latter one
because when they did not give consent to participate in the
study, storage of behavioural data would not be an option
even by removing identity information. Furthermore, there
can be private cues in the content of their speech.
Approach
In practice, we have two working scenarios. (i) We are given
one or several participants to anonymise their data, and (ii)
we are being asked to anonymise all student data except
for the teacher’s instruction (e.g. when the teacher’s instruc-
tion is used for rhetorical analysis of teacher). Our audio-
visual anonymisation workﬂow is based on multiple ma-
chine learning steps and shown in Figure 1. The modalities
that contain private information in our application are video
and audio (including the spoken information during the con-
versations in the learning context). Depending on the level
of anonymisation expected, there can be varying levels of
anonymisation in visual and audio data. In this section, we
describe our approach to anonymise faces in the videos and
speaking patterns in the audio recordings.
Anonymising faces.
Videos can be taken from handheld
or static cameras. Also, they can contain footage taken from
different cameras. The ﬁrst step is, therefore, to locate shot
boundaries and create scenes. To detect shot boundaries,
including hard cuts and gradual transitions, we used the
TransNet (Soucek, Moravec, and Lokoc 2019) approach,
which is based on 3D dilated CNNs.
After detecting shot boundaries, we can deﬁne scenes,
si = [I1, ..., INi], where each scene si can be in vary-
ing length, either a few seconds or minutes. In each scene,
we employ the RetinaFace face detector (Deng et al. 2019)
which is trained on the WIDER face dataset (Yang et al.
2016). On the contrary to the face detection methods in the
literature that require several stages of networks, Retine-
Face is trained using multiple losses which combines extra-
supervision and self-supervised multitask learning objec-
tives. These additional losses include face classiﬁcation,
bounding box regression, extra supervision of facial land-
mark regression, and self-supervised mesh decoder for pre-
dicting a pixel-wise 3D shape face.
We acquire a set of faces with bounding boxes
{[b1
1, ..., b1
n1], ..., [bt
1, ..., bt
nt]}, where t is the index of frames
that belong to the scene, si, and nt is a varying number of
faces detected in each frame. Either in small groups or tra-
ditional classroom formation often students sit in their usual
seats and do not change their seats in a scene. Furthermore,
the face detector shows very decent performance even under
challenging situations, such as motion blur, partial occlu-
sion, or low image resolution. Thus, we employ a location-
based tracking approach.
We ﬁrst calculate the Intersection over Union (IoU) scores
between the bounding boxes in the consecutive frames:
s(bt, bt+1) = bt ∩bt+1
bt ∪bt+1
(1)
where b = [x, y, w, h]’s are bounding boxes. Then, we con-
vert the IoU scores to a cost matrix and assign the faces in
the current frame to the next one using minimum weight
matching in bipartite graphs that is also known as Hun-
garian algorithm (Kuhn 1955). In this way, we ﬁnd corre-
spondences that minimize the cost between the detections
of consecutive frames. As we maximize the intersection be-
tween bounding boxes of the same faces, the IoU scores are
negated. Even though a combination of several cost terms
(i.e. additionally visual similarity between faces) can yield
more reliable tracklets, in practice, we observed that the lo-
cation cue is enough to create tracklets in classroom scenes.
After having face tracks, we pick only one sample of the
person that we want to anonymise and use this sample as
a reference for the further face veriﬁcation steps. Depend-
ing on the camera angle and the subjects’ movement, their

Figure 2: Snapshots from the classroom observation videos.
head poses may show signiﬁcant variation. Thus, it is cru-
cial to pick a face track that represents these variations, for
instance, the one longer and containing different head poses.
As a face embedding, we use the Inception ResNet (V1)
trained minimizing Triplet loss (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and
Philbin 2015) on the VGGFace2 dataset (Cao et al. 2018).
Embedding vectors are L2 normalised and their dimension
is 512. To acquire the similarity of any face tracks in the
video with respect to our reference, we use cosine similari-
ties between them:
score = min
F(I(bi,ti)) · F(I(bj,tj))
||F(I(bi,ti))|| ||F(I(bj,tj))||
(2)
where F(.) is the face embedding, Ibi,ti ∈T(test) and Ibj,tj
is any face track from the same video where we want to
ﬁnd a speciﬁc subject whose face has to be anonymised.
Eventually, we threshold the cosine similarity scores to
retrieve query identity and either make these faces blurry or
set them to black.
Finding speaking patterns. Similar to the face informa-
tion, human voice also contains biometric traits. The main
task in our context is to ﬁnd the speaking patterns of a par-
ticipant whose data has to be anonymised. We use the Un-
bounded Interleaved-State Recurrent Neural Network (UIS-
RNN) (Zhang et al. 2019) to diarise speaking patterns of
different speakers.
An unbounded RNN network, the UIS-RNN, fed with
d-vectors that is extracted from equal-length audio seg-
ments. The number of speakers is decided using a Bayesian
non-parametric process, and different speakers are modelled
within the states of RNN in the time domain. As the UIS-
RNN approach performed better than k-means and Spectral
Clustering of d-vectors on benchmark datasets, we address
speaker diarisation using a pre-trained UIS-RNN model.
When we apply diarisazion to classroom data, we de-
ploy the speaker diarisation to the spectrograms of the entire
classroom recordings. Subsequently, we show these clus-
tered audio parts to annotators together with the original
video and ask them to pick the cluster to be anonymised.
Experimental Results
In order to test the feasibility of the automated anonymi-
sation in classroom observation videos, we ﬁrst created a
collection of classroom observation videos from YouTube.
These videos are either recorded from a static point or us-
ing handheld cameras and contain shot transitions. More
speciﬁcally, the video material consists of 18 classroom in-
struction videos, where the taught topics include English
language arts, maths, and social studies. The total duration
of this instruction material is approximately 6.5 hours. All
videos are available in the resolution of 1280x720px. Sam-
ple keyframes are depicted in Figure 2.
In the face anonymisation task, we ﬁrst created all face
tracks. Then, on 14 participants where their faces are visible
in different parts of videos, we manually labelled whether
they belong to the selected test identity or not. The evalua-
Figure 3: Face veriﬁcation results on classroom observation
videos: Precision vs. Recall and ROC curves.

tion task is to pick a representative face track and calculate
the similarity of each face track with respect to the query.
Figure 3 shows the test results in terms of precision
vs recall and receiver operating curves (ROC) per image.
The Area under Curve (AUC) is 0.95, which means that
our approach can recognise a given query identity with a
high precision. In the performance of face identiﬁcation of
anonymised participant, we observed that the effect of face
tracking is essential because it makes the veriﬁcation more
stable. Besides, using a representation that is trained on a
dataset that contains large pose variations is also helpful.
Figure 4: An example output of speaker diarisation on a 10-
minute classroom instruction from the dataset.
With regard to the audio analysis, we segmented the au-
dio signal of an example instruction scene from our dataset.
The output of the speaker diarisation can be seen in Fig-
ure 4. In this context, the UIS-RNN approach is quite robust
to ﬁnd the speaking patterns of a participant; however, in au-
dio sequences longer than 15-20 minutes, we observed that
it might over-segment some speakers, particularly the one
speaking most of the time.
In order to spot the speaking pattern of a speciﬁc speaker
on a long recording, such as whole day instruction with
several teaching units, there are two alternative approaches.
One is to use speaker diarisation and manually picking the
anonymised identity in shortened clips of the audio record-
ings. This option requires more human effort to prove and
check the quality of the diarisation. Alternatively, we may
ask an annotator to pick a few samples of the anonymised
person from different parts of the recording and retrieve
most likely parts with respect to d-vectors. We observed that
the presence of a face in the current frame is also a further
precursor of the active speaker can be that person.
In addition to anonymisation, the speaking patterns of a
classroom also indicate how a particular student actively par-
ticipates in the learning processes during the class.
Discussion and Future Outlook
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the levels of data anonymi-
sation in classroom studies, summarise then our key ﬁndings
and give an outlook on our future work in this context.
Different levels of data anonymisation
We focus on the automated anonymisation of video (faces)
and audio data in the educational context. In practice, the
level of data anonymisation and needed modalities may
vary. In this part, we ﬁrst address the modalities in detail
and then propose different levels of anonymisation.
Questionnaires. Many educational studies, including the
ones that require video recording, use questionnaires. They
may contain questions regarding personal information, edu-
cational, or socio-economical background of students. Par-
ticularly personal data, such as biometric data, rate, ethnic-
ity, and political opinion requires the highest level of pro-
tection. The most common approach to this challenge is
pseudonymisation.
It should be noted, however, that the pseudonymised data
may still be vulnerable to re-identiﬁcation and remains
therefore personal. In order to prevent re-identiﬁcation,
differential privacy is the current practice (Francis 2019)
and should be applied not only to data of speciﬁc partici-
pants who do not want to participate in the study, but to be
considered for all participants.
Video. Faces in the videos are the primary modality that
contains personal information. Therefore, our focus here
was on ﬁnding and anonymising faces. However, there are
other soft biometric traits (Jain, Dass, and Nandakumar
2004) which may require anonymisation. Some examples
are hair colour, body posture, and gesture patterns. When
the face of an anonymised person is detected and recog-
nised, hair can be occluded, for example by extending the
face bounding box around and top of the face.
So far, we did not consider body and gestures in our
analysis since this can be done by employing human pose
estimation. In case of a classroom recording including
approximately 20 students, deploying a multi-person pose
estimation method can considerably increase the processing
time. However, we will exploit this issue in our future work.
Audio. In our analysis, we tested speaker diarisation. No-
tably, the audio domain requires a more thorough under-
standing of the spoken conversation. For instance, even if
we anonymised face and speaking patterns of a participant,
other participants may talk about the anonymised person or
content. In order to address this issue, we need a seman-
tic understanding of the spoken text using speech-to-text ap-
proaches and efﬁcient search techniques for the information
relevant to selected keywords on the entire data.
In a manner that each level contains the anonymisation of
previous modalities, we can categorise the varying levels of
anonymisation for classroom studies as follows:
1. Pseudonymisation of questionnaires and personal data,
2. Anonymisation of hard biometric traits such as faces in
the video and speaking time,
3. Anonymisation of soft biometric traits such as body pos-
ture, gestures, and hair appearance,

4. Anonymisation of the spoken information during the in-
struction unit (either by anonymised participants or other
persons) such as students’ and school’s name or location.
The appropriate level of anonymisation can be chosen ac-
cording to the nature of the data and institutional board re-
view approval regarding ethical aspects of data collection,
storage and processing.
We can summarise the key ﬁndings of our work as fol-
lows:
• We created a small classroom observation dataset that is
representative of typical scenarios in educational studies.
• We investigated the feasibility of automated anonymisa-
tion on visual and audio domains. The essential modal-
ity on the visual domain is anonymisation of faces, for
which we showed that it could be solved in the context of
classroom observation data at high accuracy. Similarly, a
speaker diarisation approach helps to ﬁnd speaking clus-
ters and those parts in the audio signal belonging to point-
ing to participants that have to be anonymised.
As it is the case in most vision and machine learning ap-
plications, none of the methods can guarantee completely
accurate predictions. Furthermore, the owner of the data will
be ethically and legally responsible for the proper and accu-
rate anonymisation of the visual and audio modalities. Our
proposed approach can be seen as an alternative to speed
up anonymisation in a way that requires only quick manual
inspection and correction.
For further manual inspection, we can export the out-
put of face identiﬁcation and speaker diarisation results in
a compatible format with common multimedia annotation
tools such as the VGG Image Annotator (Dutta and Zisser-
man 2019) or the ELAN software (Sloetjes and Wittenburg
2008).
In future work, we plan to create a simple interface that is
compatible with available multimedia annotation tools and
can be used by educational practitioners without any tech-
nical experience and to conduct a user study on real multi-
modal collection and analysis process of educational data.
