Airport Gate Scheduling for Passengers, Aircraft, and Operation
Sang Hyun Kim, Eric Feron∗, John-Paul Clarke
School of Aerospace Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, U.S.A.

Aude Marzuoli†, Daniel Delahaye
´Ecole Nationale de l’Aviation Civile
Toulouse, France

November 27, 2024
Abstract
Passengers’ experience is becoming a key metric to
evaluate the air transportation system’s performance.
Eﬃcient and robust tools to handle airport oper-
ations are needed along with a better understand-
ing of passengers’ interests and concerns.
Among
various airport operations, this paper studies air-
port gate scheduling for improved passengers’ expe-
rience. Three objectives accounting for passengers,
aircraft, and operation are presented. Trade-oﬀs be-
tween these objectives are analyzed, and a balancing
objective function is proposed. The results show that
the balanced objective can improve the eﬃciency of
traﬃc ﬂow in passenger terminals and on ramps, as
well as the robustness of gate operations.
1
Introduction
Flight delays do not accurately reﬂect the delays im-
posed upon passengers’ full itineraries. The growing
interest to measure the Air Transportation System’s
performance calls for new metrics, reﬂecting passen-
gers’ experience [1]. The cost of congestion and delays
in such a complex system is huge. In 2011, according
to Airlines for America, 103 million system delay min-
utes have cost $7.7 billions to scheduled U.S. passen-
∗Eric Feron is also with ´Ecole Nationale de l’Aviation Civile.
†Aude Marzuoli is also with Georgia Institute of Technol-
ogy.
ger airlines [2]. Because of the hub-and-spoke struc-
ture of the airports network, major airports, such
as Hartsﬁeld-Jackson Atlanta International Airport,
have a signiﬁcant impact on the performance of the
overall system. In particular, connecting passengers
in such hubs may represent the largest share of traﬃc
and are most vulnerable to delays that can severely
perturb their journeys. In worst cases scenarios, a
single delay can ”snowball” through the entire net-
work [3].
Airport Collaborative Decision Making (A-CDM)
aims at reducing delays and improving system pre-
dictability, while optimizing the utilization of re-
sources and reducing environmental impact.
This
eﬀort is currently one of the ﬁve priority measures
in the Flight Eﬃciency Plan published by IATA,
CANSO and Eurocontrol [4]. In the U.S., the CDM-
based ground delay program planning and control ap-
peared in 1998; the stakeholders are the Joint Gov-
ernment Industry program, airlines, the Federal Avi-
ation Administration including Air Traﬃc Control
and Air Traﬃc Flow Management, and airports. The
mechanisms involve the provision of accurate data
(estimates of arrival and departure times) to stake-
holders, the share of information, the airline deci-
sion to cancel or delay ﬂights, and the rescheduling
with priority constraints. Several improvements have
been reported resulting from the CDM initiative,
such as the Collaborative Departure Queue Manage-
ment strategy at Memphis International Airport [5]
or the Surface Congestion Management scheme at
New York’s John F. Kennedy International Airport
[6]. However, there still is a growing need for more ef-
ﬁcient and more robust tools to handle operations at
1
arXiv:1301.3535v1  [cs.SY]  16 Jan 2013

Figure 1: Airport operations and the focus of this
study.
airports. This eﬀort should be combined with a nec-
essary shift towards a better understanding of pas-
sengers’ interests and concerns.
Most air travelers have experienced walking long
distances in a passenger terminal to catch a ﬂight
or waiting on board their aircraft while it is waiting
for a gate or is delayed by the movement of another
aircraft. Many of such situations can be resolved or
reduced by proper gate scheduling or assignment.
Airport operations range from landing to take-oﬀ
of an aircraft as shown in Fig. 1. When an aircraft
lands, it taxies into a ramp area and parks at a gate.
While the aircraft is docking at the gate, passengers
disembark and board the plane. When the aircraft
is ready to depart, it pushes back and taxies out to
a runway. Then, the aircraft takes oﬀthe airport.
Among these operations, this study focuses on the
optimization of ramp operations and the accommo-
dation of passengers.
The ﬁrst objective of this study is to minimize
the transit time of passengers in a passenger termi-
nal. The transit time of passengers consists of the
time from the security checkpoint to a gate, from a
gate to baggage claim, and from one gate to another
gate. This is the most common objective of tradi-
tional studies focusing on gate assignment [7, 8].
The second objective of this study is to minimize
taxi time on ramps [9]. The taxi time depends on the
length of taxi route. However, interfering taxi routes
cause taxi delay. If two aircraft taxi in opposite direc-
tions on the same taxi lane, which does not happen
on taxiway, it results in taxi delays. Because the taxi
route of an aircraft is determined by the locations of
assigned runway and gate, gate assignment is critical
to reduce taxi time and taxi delays on ramps.
The last objective of this study is to minimize dis-
turbances in gate operations or equivalently to max-
imize the robustness of gate assignment [10, 11]. Ro-
bust means that the gate assignment is less sensitive
to uncertain delays. Severe delays perturb gate op-
erations by forcing arriving aircraft to wait for gates,
or air traﬃc controllers to reassign gates. The dis-
turbances can be reduced if the gate assignment is
robust against uncertain delays. In addition, a ro-
bust gate assignment allows air traﬃc controllers to
utilize gate-holding departure control more eﬃciently
[12]. The gate-holding departure control delays push-
backs in order to reduce taxi times and emission when
the airport surface is congested. As a result, aircraft
occupy gates longer than scheduled and it can nega-
tively impact gate operations. If the gate assignment
is robust, aircraft are able to stay longer at gates
without disturbing gate operations and gate-holding
departure control performs better.
All three objectives cannot be satisﬁed at the same
time. Hence, this study presents trade-oﬀs between
objectives using ﬂight schedules in a U.S. hub airport.
2
Gate Assignment Problem
2.1
Data Source
Previous studies on gate assignment generated ﬁcti-
tious passenger data (e.g., number of transfer passen-
gers) because such data are not published. Thanks
to a major U.S. carrier, this study is able to assign
airport gates and analyze gate assignments with the
actual number of transfer passengers at a U.S. major
hub airport. Flight schedules and transfer passenger
data on May 1st, 2011 at the hub airport are obtained
from the carrier. All the ﬂights are assumed to be full
with passengers. Passengers who check in at the air-
port (origin passengers) and whose ﬁnal destination
is the airport (destination passengers) move from the
passenger terminal to a gate. Passengers who have
connecting ﬂights at the airport (transfer passengers)
move from a gate to another gate. Because only the
data on the number of transfer passengers of a sin-
gle carrier are available, passengers except transfer
passengers among the carrier’s ﬂights are dealt with
origin and destination (O&D) passengers.
2.2
Objective 1: Minimize Passenger
Transit Time
The ﬁrst objective is to minimize the transit time
of passengers. Passengers in an airport are catego-
rized into three groups. Origin passengers begin their
itinerary from the airport.
Destination passengers
2

ﬁnish their itinerary at the airport. Transfer passen-
gers change from one ﬂight to another at the airport.
The transit time of origin passengers depends on
the distance from a security checkpoint to a gate
(ds). Let vm denote the average moving speed, which
varies with the conﬁguration of passenger terminal:
vm is higher where passengers can move faster by
taking moving sidewalk, underground people mover,
etc. Assume that ﬂight i is assigned to gate j and
the number of origin passengers of ﬂight i is no
i , then
the total transit time of origin passengers of ﬂight
i is no
i ds
j/vm.
Similarly, the total transit time of
destination passengers of ﬂight i is nd
i db
j /vm, where
nd
i is the number of destination passengers of ﬂight
i, and db
j is the distance from gate j to a baggage
claim. Therefore, the transit time of O&D passen-
gers is determined by the location of a single gate
because the locations of the security checkpoint and
baggage claim are ﬁxed.
Contrarily, the transit time of transfer passengers
depends on the distance between two gates (djl). Let
nik denote the number of transfer passengers between
ﬂight i and ﬂight k. Then, the total transit time of
passengers who transfer between ﬂight i and ﬂight k
is nikdjl/vm.
Consequently, the transit times of O&D passengers
are expressed by linear terms and the transit times of
transfer passengers are expressed by quadratic terms
in the objective function (1), where xij is a decision
variable that indicates whether ﬂight i is assigned to
gate j. The formulation of the ﬁrst objective is given
below.
Objpax = minimize
X
i∈F
X
j∈G
(no
i
ds
j
vm + nd
i
db
j
vm ) xij
+
X
i∈F
X
j∈G
X
k∈F,k>i
X
l∈G
nik
djl
vm xij xkl
(1)
subject to
X
j∈G
xij = 1, ∀i ∈F
(2)
(tout
i
−tin
k + tbuﬀ)(tout
k
−tin
i
+ tbuﬀ)
≤M(2 −xij −xkj), i ̸= k, ∀i, k ∈F, ∀j ∈G (3)
xij ∈{0, 1}, ∀i ∈F, ∀j ∈G
(4)
where xij =
 1
if fi is assigned to gj
0
otherwise.
Two constraints are given in (2)-(3). Equation (2)
makes sure that every ﬂight is assigned to a single
gate.
Equation (3) constrains two successive gate
schedules, so that they are separated more than a
certain amount of time, which is called buﬀer time
(tbuﬀ). Equation (3) is meaningful only if ﬂights i
and k are assigned to gate j (xij = xkj = 1) be-
cause M is an arbitrarily large number. tin
i
indicates
the scheduled gate-in time (arrival time) of ﬂight i,
tout
i
indicates the scheduled gate-out time (departure
time). F and G denote the sets of ﬂights and gates.
2.3
Objective 2:
Minimize Aircraft
Taxi Time
The second objective is to minimize unimpeded taxi
time and taxi delay. The unimpeded taxi time for
an arrival measures from when an aircraft enters a
spot to when the aircraft parks at a gate without
any taxi delay. The taxi time from a spot to a gate
is calculated by dividing the distance from a spot
to a gate by the taxi speed.
The unimpeded taxi
time for a departure measures from when an aircraft
pushes back to when the aircraft leaves the ramp area
without any taxi delay. It contains the duration to
push back.
A taxi delay happens in either of the
following cases. 1) A taxiing aircraft blocks the push
back route of another aircraft. 2) Two aircraft taxi in
opposite directions on the same taxi lane. The ﬁrst
case is called a push back blocking and the push back
is delayed until the taxiing aircraft passes through
the push back route. The second case is called a taxi
blocking and one of the aircraft must shift its taxi
lane to another taxi lane. Therefore, the taxi routes
of two aircraft condition taxi delays.
Let nin
i
denote the number of arrival passengers
of ﬂight i and uin
j
denote the unimpeded arrival taxi
time of gate j. Note that arrival passengers include
both destination passengers and transfer passengers
of arriving ﬂight i. Let nout
i
denote the number of
departure passengers of ﬂight i and uout
j
denote the
unimpeded departure taxi time of gate j. Then, the
weighted unimpeded taxi time of ﬂight i, which is
weighted by the number of passengers on board, is
nin
i uin
j
+ nout
i
uout
j
.
Similar to the transit time of
O&D passengers of objective 1, the weighted unim-
peded taxi time is expressed by a linear term in the
objective function (5).
Taxi delay (tdly) involves a pair of aircraft and it
is weighted by the sum of the number of passengers
on board of both aircraft. For instance, if the taxi
delay occurs between two arrivals, the total number
of passengers is nin
i
+ nin
k . The quadratic terms of
the objective function (5) are weighted by a general
form, ni + nk.
The formulation of the second objective is given be-
low. The constraints of the ﬁrst objective are applied
3

Figure 2: Gate conﬂict and its duration.
equally.
Objtaxi = minimize
X
i∈F
X
j∈G
(nin
i uin
j + nout
i
uout
j
) xij
+
X
i∈F
X
j∈G
X
k∈F,k>i
X
l∈G
(ni + nk)tdly xij xkl
(5)
subject to (2)-(4).
2.4
Objective 3:
Maximize the Ro-
bustness of Gate Assignments
The third objective is to maximize the robustness of
gate assignments.
Equivalently, the objective is to
minimize the duration of gate conﬂicts. If a gate is
still occupied by an aircraft when another aircraft
requests the gate, the latter should wait until the as-
signed gate or another gate is available, which cor-
responds to a gate conﬂict. Fig. 2 illustrates a gate
conﬂict, where acta(i) and actd(i) denote the actual
arrival and departure times of ﬂight i, and the gate
separation is the time gap between the scheduled de-
parture time of ﬂight i (tout
i
) and the scheduled ar-
rival time of ﬂight k (tin
k ). In Fig. 2, ﬂight i is sched-
uled to leave the gate before ﬂight k arrives, but the
departure time of ﬂight i is delayed and ﬂight k ar-
rives earlier than schedule. So, when ﬂight k arrives,
the gate is not released yet and ﬂight k has to wait
for a gate.
Because the actual arrival and departure times are
unknown when gates are assigned, the duration of
a gate conﬂict is estimated based on the probabil-
ity distributions of arrival delay and departure de-
lay. The expected duration of a gate conﬂict is calcu-
lated by E[actd(i) −acta(k)|actd(i) > acta(k)] when
Figure 3: Expected duration of gate conﬂict.
tin
k
> tout
i
. Details of the calculation are given in
[11].
The expected duration of a gate conﬂict is known
to rely on gate separation [11]. Using the delay data
of a U.S. carrier at a hub airport in May 2011, the
expected duration is shown in Fig. 3 and it is ﬁt to
a×bsep(i,k), where a and b are constants and sep(i, k)
denotes the gate separation between ﬂights i and k.
The formulation of the third objective is given be-
low. Note that the expected duration of a gate con-
ﬂict is weighted by the number of arrival passengers.
Objrobust = minimize
X
i∈F
X
k∈F,k>i
nina × bsep(i,k) X
j∈G
xij xkj
(6)
subject to (2)-(4).
2.5
Trade-oﬀs of Multiple Objectives
It is known that there are trade-oﬀs between objec-
tives that are presented in this study [9, 13]. In or-
der to analyze the trade-oﬀs between three objectives,
ﬁve scenarios are presented in Table 1. Scenarios 1-3
optimize each objective. Scenario 4 weighs equally
on objective 1 and 2. So, it optimizes two objectives
concurrently. Scenario 5 takes all the objectives into
account: 40% on the ﬁrst and second objectives and
20% on the third objective. These percentages are
chosen arbitrarily: the proportion of three objectives
depends on the policy of airport gate managers and
airlines.
4

Table 1: Scenarios
Scenario
Objective Function
Explanation
Scenario 1
Obj = Objpax
Optimize objective 1 only.
Scenario 2
Obj = Objtaxi
Optimize objective 2 only.
Scenario 3
Obj = Objrobust
Optimize objective 3 only.
Scenario 4
Obj = 0.5Objpax + 0.5Objtaxi
Balance objective 1 and 2.
Scenario 5
Obj = 0.4Objpax + 0.4Objtaxi + 0.2Objrobust
Balance all the objectives.
Figure 4: Insert move.
Figure 5: Exchange move.
2.6
Optimization Method
The Tabu Search (TS) is a meta-heuristic algorithm
known to eﬃciently deal with combinatorial opti-
mization problems such as the gate assignment prob-
lem [14, 15]. Because the gate assignment problem is
complex, it is hard to ﬁnd the optimal solution in a
reasonable time. The TS can outperform the Branch
and Bound and Genetic Algorithm in terms of solu-
tion time and solution accuracy for the gate assign-
ment problem [9]. The TS is a local search so the al-
gorithm can converge to a local optimum, which is not
the global optimum. In order to help the TS escape
from a local optimum, a tabu memory restricts the
TS from utilizing recently used search moves for cer-
tain iterations. However, if a restricted search move
improves the objective value, the search move can be
used regardless of the tabu memory, known as the as-
piration criterion. Two types of neighborhood search
moves of TS are shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5. The in-
sert move changes a ﬂight’s gate assignment from one
to another, and the interval exchange move swaps the
gate assignments of two groups of ﬂights.
The TS iterates until the number of iteration
Figure 6: Transit time per passenger in minute.
reaches the maximum iteration or there is no im-
provement of the objective value after some iterations
past the last best score. The insert move is evaluated
at every iteration in order to intensify a local search
around a narrow neighborhood of the current solu-
tion. The interval exchange move is evaluated peri-
odically in order to diversify the search: the interval
exchange move brings a relatively large change in the
current solution. More details of the implementation
of the TS on the gate assignment problem are given
in [9].
3
Results
Fig. 6 illustrates the average transit time of each pas-
senger. As expected, scenario 1 (Pax 100%) results
in the shortest passenger transit time. In scenarios 4
and 5, passengers walk longer than in scenario 1 but
less than in the original (current) gate assignment
and scenarios 2 and 3.
Fig. 7 shows the average taxi time of each passen-
ger. Undoubtedly, scenario 2 (Taxi 100%) produces
the shortest taxi time with zero taxi delay.
From
Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, it is inferred that scenarios 4 and
5 balance well between two diﬀerent objectives: min-
imizing passenger transit time and minimizing taxi
5

Figure 7: Aircraft taxi time per passenger in minute.
Figure 8: Expected duration of gate conﬂict per pas-
senger in minute.
time.
Fig. 8 shows the average gate conﬂict duration of
each passenger. Scenario 3 (Robust 100%) induces
the shortest duration of gate conﬂict. Note that sce-
nario 5 (Pax 40%, Taxi 40%, Robust 20%) gives the
second best result of the robustness of gate assign-
ment while scenario 4 (Pax 50%, Taxi 50%) gives
less robust gate assignment. Consequently, scenario
5 balances three objectives at the same time better
than other scenarios.
From the results, scenarios 1, 2, and 3 give the
best results for each objective but lead to poor per-
formance with respect to other objectives. Also, sce-
nario 4 performs well just for objective 1 and 2. Only
scenario 5 succeeds at satisfying all the objectives.
The original gate assignment, however, does not show
satisfactory performance for the given objectives.
4
Conclusion
This study presented several simulations of gate as-
signments according to diﬀerent objectives.
These
objectives are minimizing transit time of passengers
in passenger terminals; minimizing aircraft taxi time
on ramps; and minimizing the duration of gate con-
ﬂicts. It is known that there are trade-oﬀs between
these objectives so an objective function that bal-
ances three objectives at the same time was proposed.
The balancing objective function satisﬁes all the three
objectives while other objective functions only satisfy
one or two objectives. Moreover, the balancing ob-
jective function outperforms the current gate assign-
ment in every objective. Therefore, the gate assign-
ment of the airport has a potential to be improved
regarding the eﬃciency of traﬃc ﬂow in passenger
terminals and on ramps, as well as on the robustness
of gate operations.
Future work will account for gate-holding strategies
generated by Airport CDM. Although this study in-
cludes the robustness of gate assignment, which was
shown to help gate-holding strategies perform bet-
ter, a comprehensive analysis of gate-holding strate-
gies and passengers’ experience at the airport is still
needed. Hence, future work will address the impact
of gate-holding strategies on passengers.
