1
  
Abstract— Cloud computing has been a main-stream computing 
service for years. Recently, with the rapid development in 
urbanization, massive video surveillance data are produced at an 
unprecedented speed. A traditional solution to deal with the big 
data would require a large amount of computing and storage 
resources. With the advances in Internet of things (IoT), artificial 
intelligence, and communication technologies, edge computing 
offers a new solution to the problem by processing all or part of 
the data locally at the edge of a surveillance system. In this study, 
we investigate the feasibility of using edge computing for smart 
parking surveillance tasks, specifically, parking occupancy 
detection using the real-time video feed. The system processing 
pipeline is carefully designed with the consideration of flexibility, 
online surveillance, data transmission, detection accuracy, and 
system reliability. It enables artificial intelligence at the edge by 
implementing an enhanced single shot multibox detector (SSD). A 
few more algorithms are developed either locally at the edge of the 
system or on the centralized data server targeting optimal system 
efficiency and accuracy. Thorough field tests were conducted in 
the Angle Lake parking garage for three months. The 
experimental results are promising that the final detection method 
achieves over 95% accuracy in real-world scenarios with high 
efficiency 
and 
reliability. 
The 
proposed 
smart 
parking 
surveillance system is a critical component of smart cities and can 
be a solid foundation for future applications in intelligent 
transportation systems. 
 
Index Terms—Edge computing, artificial intelligence, parking 
surveillance, smart city, object detection, internet of things  
I. INTRODUCTION 
rbanization has been posing great opportunities and 
challenges in different areas, including environment, 
health care, economy, housing, transportation, etc. The 
opportunities and challenges boost the fast advances in cyber-
physical technologies and bring connected mobile devices to 
people’s daily life. Nowadays, almost every person in the urban 
area is connected to the internet and has fast access to a variety 
of information. The convenience has been attracting more and 
more population to cities at an unprecedented scale and speed. 
In order to efficiently manage the data generated every day and 
 
This manuscript was first submitted for review on August 9, 2019. This work 
was supported in part by the Central Puget Sound Regional Transit Authority 
(Sound Transit) and the Pacific Northwest Transportation Consortium 
(PacTrans).  
 
 
use them to allocate urban resources better, the Smart City 
concept has been brought into people’s sight. This concept 
combines sensors, system engineering, artificial intelligence, 
and information and communication technologies for the 
optimization of city services and operations [1], [2]. 
Smart City applications have a high demand for computing 
services to process and store big data. Cloud computing is 
widely recognized as the best computing service for big data 
processing and artificial intelligence tasks. Nevertheless, with 
the urban data enlarged at explosive speed, cloud computing is 
no more the optimal solution in many cases because it not only 
consumes large bandwidth but also brings latency in 
information transmission [3]–[5]. Meanwhile, in some extreme 
situations where there is a limited internet connection (speed or 
volume limitation), it will be challenging to process all the data 
on the cloud or run data processing in an online manner. 
A key component of Smart City is traffic surveillance, which 
needs enormous computing power and storage resources to 
handle the city-wide surveillance video data. Recent work 
indicates that traffic video data dominate traffic sensing, thus 
generate significant data transmission, processing, and storage 
workload [6], [7]. However, current traffic surveillance systems 
are most for recording purposes (such as monitoring cameras at 
DOTs) [8], off-line analysis [9], and cloud computing [10]. A 
low-frame-rate and low-resolution video can even generate 
over 10Mb data per second and nearly 1Tb data per day. With 
the increasing deployment of city-wide traffic surveillance and 
growing needs in efficiency and algorithm complexity, 
traditional video surveillance off-line or on the cloud will not 
satisfy the demands shortly.  
The surveillance community has been aware of the need to 
shift the computing workload away from the centralized cloud 
to the clients. Edge computing, as an answer to this, allows data 
generated from Internet-of-things (IoT) devices to be handled 
closer to the local clients where it is produced rather than 
transmitting it to the cloud or centralized data server for 
processing. Recently, researchers started to examine the 
availability of edge computing for traffic surveillance [1], [3], 
Ruimin 
Ke 

Yifan 
Zhuang 

Engineering, University of Washington. 
 
A Smart, Efficient, and Reliable Parking 
Surveillance System with Edge Artificial 
Intelligence on IoT Devices 
Ruimin Ke, Student Member, IEEE, Yifan Zhuang, Ziyuan Pu, Yinhai Wang, Senior Member, IEEE 
U

 
2
[11]. Their studies lay a solid foundation that has excite further 
exploration in the field. 
The two scenes that require the most traffic surveillance are 
roadways and parking facilities. Smart parking has been 
introduced to solve parking sensing and management problems 
in cities. A recent report shows that people spend 17 hours on 
average on searching for parking spaces a year, while this 
number for New York drivers is 107 hours [12]. To improve the 
parking space searching efficiency, we will require smart 
parking surveillance systems for automatic and online parking 
occupancy detection. However, it faces the same challenge as 
other surveillance tasks regarding the computing workload and 
transmission volume in the video data processing. While there 
are many video processing studies for smart parking 
surveillance [12], [13], [22]–[25], [14]–[21], exploring edge 
computing solutions for parking surveillance is still at an early 
stage. Pioneering works have investigated implementing 
machine learning and artificial intelligence algorithms on IoT 
devices [16], [25]. While they provide insightful findings to the 
community, their objectives are not to develop a system for 
real-world practice. 
In this paper, we propose an edge computing surveillance 
system to detect parking space occupancy with smartness, 
efficiency, and reliability. These three metrics are defined 
towards the performance goals of our system: smartness is the 
automatic detection and pattern recognition in a parking garage 
scene; efficiency is about processing in a real-time and online 
manner; reliability means reliable and consistent detection 
performance in various environmental conditions. The system’s 
processing pipeline and components are carefully designed 
considering data transmission volume, efficient online 
processing, flexibility, detection accuracy, and system 
robustness. Adopting the recent research on artificial 
intelligence and computer vision, we implement a background-
based detection method and a single shot multibox detector 
(SSD) finetuned on a new traffic surveillance benchmark 
dataset on the edge devices. On the server, we improve a state-
of-the-art multiple object tracking method and develop an 
occupancy judgement method that can handle extreme lighting 
conditions and occlusions. The system is first developed and set 
up in a lab environment, and then it is deployed in a real-world 
parking garage for three months. The real-world test 
demonstrates the system’s exceptional performance in various 
challenging scenarios, and its potential to support a few critical 
future applications in smart cities. 
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows. 
1) This paper proposes a new system architecture with 
IoT and AI technologies for real-time smart parking 
surveillance, which splits the computation load to 
local IoT devices and servers targeting optimal system 
performance. 
2) The data transmission volume is designed to be small 
to handle the limited network bandwidth issue in real-
time video analytics. 
3) A new pipeline is proposed to perform detection in 
extreme lighting conditions and occlusion conditions 
with a combination of background subtraction and 
SSD detection. 
4) An SSD-Mobilenet detector is implemented using 
Tensorflow Lite on the IoT devices with transfer 
learning on the MIO-TCD traffic surveillance dataset. 
5) A tracking algorithm is designed to operate on the 
server side for vehicle tracking in parking garages. 
6) The thorough experimental results and findings from a 
variety of real-world scenarios can be a valuable 
reference for future research. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
From the sensing functionality perspective, recent work in 
the area of parking occupancy detection can be divided into 
three categories: wireless sensor network (WSN) solution [12], 
[14], [34], [26]–[33], moving sensor solution [35], [36], [45], 
[37]–[44], and vision-based solution [12], [13], [22]–[25], [14]–
[21]. 
WSN solution puts one sensor node to each parking space, 
then multiple sensor nodes are required for the detection of 
multiple parking spaces. A WSN sensor should be small, 
sturdy, low power, and cost-effective. Over the past years, 
WSN sensors with different sensing abilities have been 
developed and deployed. The most widely used ones are 
magnetic, ultrasonic, infrared, and loop sensors. For example, 
Sifuentes et al. design a simple yet effective magnetic-based 
parking vehicle detection method, which incorporates a wake-
up function using optical sensors [32]. Their system reliability 
is improved over standalone magnetic sensors. Park et al. 
develop an ultrasonic sensor solution for parking occupancy 
detection [26]. They design a multiple echo function for more 
accurate parking space detection than the single echo function 
in a real parking environment. The detection algorithms for 
WSN are commonly very efficient; in most cases, a 
thresholding method or a straightforward pipeline taking the 
sensor signals as input would work. However, simple 
algorithms lead to high false detections in certain scenarios: 
magnetic sensors are sensitive to large metals nearby, such as a 
truck in neighboring parking spaces; ultrasonic and infrared 
sensors can be influenced by the environment noises, such as 
weather and lighting conditions. Another unique feature of 
WSN is the large number of sensor nodes, which has high 
robustness to sensor failure. That is to say, even if a few sensors 
stop working, the system can still convey quite accurate parking 
information. However, this feature also leads to a high cost and 
scalability issue. The installation and maintenance of hundreds 
of 
sensors 
are 
inefficient, 
labor-intensive, 
or 
even 
impracticable, especially for in-ground sensors like loops. 
We summarize the second category as using moving sensors 
for parking occupancy detection [35], [36], [45], [37]–[44]. 
This group of work usually uses sensors on phone apps or probe 
vehicles to monitor urban parking availability via crowdsensing 
strategies. They can support various smart parking applications 
in urban areas and be an alternative to static parking sensors. 
For example, Bock et al. conduct multiple innovative studies on 
using GPS sensors on the crowd of taxis to sense on-street 
parking space availability [40]–[42]. They start the research by 
answering a question of how many probe vehicles are needed 

 
3
for on-street parking information collection, then prove the 
availability and investigate more detailed aspects such as 
misdetection amounts and quality of sensors. Some other 
studies explore and test the feasibility of onboard ultrasonic 
sensors and camera sensors as the moving sensors for 
crowdsensing 
[36]–[38]. 
While 
recent 
research 
has 
demonstrated the enormous potential of crowdsensing for 
parking occupancy detection in the future, their applicability is 
still limited to specific scenarios at present. First, the cost can 
be very high since it requires high penetration rates of sensors 
(probe vehicles) to obtain sufficient parking information; 
second, this strategy is suitable for on-street parking detection 
in urban areas but not for large parking lots or rural areas where 
there are few moving sensors. In additional to crowdsensing, 
researchers have also examined single moving sensors for 
parking occupancy detection, such as drones [44], [45]. With 
the advantage of the flexibility and wide view range, drones are 
considered an emerging parking sensor with high cost-
effectiveness. 
The vision-based solution has received increasing attention 
for parking occupancy detection lately with the advance in 
computer vision and data transmission technologies [12], [13], 
[22]–[25], [14]–[21]. Compared to WSN, where one sensor 
covers a single space or moving sensors where one moving unit 
has one sensor, one camera sensor covers multiple spaces; thus 
it decreases the cost per parking space. It is also more 
manageable and efficient since the installation of camera 
systems is non-intrusive and demands no closedown of parking 
lots. In addition, camera is information richer than other parking 
sensors, which has a greater potential to support more advanced 
parking management. Pioneering studies model the occupancy 
detection as a binary classification problem on predefined 
regions using relatively simple features and traditional 
classification methods [13], [15], [17], [23], [24]. Baroffio et al. 
propose a method utilizing hue histogram and linear support 
vector machine (SVM) [23]. Their method achieves real-time 
processing and high accuracy on the validation data. Bulan et 
al. design a pipeline based on background subtraction and 
SVM, which has a great performance and is robust to occlusion 
[15]. While these traditional methods tend to have an unstable 
detection performance in relatively complex scenarios, they lay 
a great foundation for more advanced methodologies. Recently, 
with the emerging trend in deep learning, researchers have 
examined the availability of deep learning models for vision-
based parking occupancy detection. For example, Nurullayev et 
al. propose a dilated convolutional neural network (CNN) 
architecture. With the specific architecture design, it is more 
robust and suitable for parking occupancy detection [21]. 
However, vision-based solutions often generate a large 
volume of data that may increase the cost and unreliability of 
data transmission. To solve this problem, vision-based systems 
have been implemented to edge devices instead of transmitting 
the original videos to the data processing center. Vitek and 
Melnicuk implement a histogram of gradient (HOG) based 
classifier on IoT devices, though the HOG feature is still 
handcrafted which can lead to significant errors in real-world 
parking scenes [25]. Some recent studies combine deep learning 
and IoT device to realize edge artificial intelligence to improve 
detection accuracy and reduce data transmission volume. 
Amato et al. implement CNN classifiers to determine the 
occupancy status of pre-defined parking spaces. Their work is 
an essential milestone in the area of parking occupancy 
detection. Though their CNNs are already quite efficient 
compared to most standard CNNs such as VGG [46], they still 
have a relatively slow classification speed even on a single 
image [16], [22]. Also, for this type of classification-based 
parking detection system, people need to manually label each 
parking space at local IoT devices after the installation, and in 
practical applications, it can be labor-intensive, not flexible, and 
not scalable.   
This paper focuses on proposing a new vision-based solution 
for parking surveillance. It improves performance regarding 
smartness, efficiency, and reliability with specific designs on 
both the system architecture and the algorithms.  
III. PROPOSED SOLUTION AND DESIGN 
A. Overview 
The overview of the system design is shown as a flow 
diagram in Figure 1. The system is composed of camera nodes, 
IoT devices, cellular data transmission modules, and a 
centralized server. In this study, the IoT devices are Raspberry 
Pi 3B, yet other IoT devices like Arduino and Jetson Nano could 
be the alternatives. The overall design considers the balance 
between computational load and data transmission volume, as 
well as the reliability and scalability of the system. 
 
Fig. 1 Overview of the system design and methodology 

 
4
Two efficient computer-vision-based object detection 
algorithms are implemented at the edge as two threads. They 
utilize the limited computation power of the IoT device to 
convert the raw video frames to detections in an online manner, 
thus largely reduce the data transmission volume and ensures 
efficient updates. Also, one video frame is transmitted to the 
data server every a few minutes for parking space labeling, 
results verification, and demonstration purposes.  
On the server side, we propose a real-time object tracking 
algorithm based on SORT [47], as well as occupancy 
judgement algorithms considering occlusion and extreme 
lighting conditions. The modified SORT algorithm is 
implemented on the server side rather than the edge side 
because this design reduces the computation load at the edge 
while this implementation does not increase the transmission 
volume. Background-based occupancy detection results and 
SSD-based occupancy detection results are combined based on 
the occupancy judgement algorithms for improved robustness 
and accuracy. 
B. Choice and Design of the Main Pipeline 
There are two major groups of pipelines in camera-based 
parking occupancy detection methods. In summary, in the first 
group, binary occupancy classifiers are developed to determine 
the status (occupied or vacant) of every parking space region in 
the camera view. The second group applies vehicle detection to 
localize vehicles in the whole camera view and then determines 
the status of parking spaces based on the matches of detection 
results and parking space locations. Both pipelines need a 
manual labeling process to mark the region of parking spaces 
that we are interested in. Note that automatic labeling has been 
attracting some research interests, but still far away from being 
practicable.  
This labeling process has little difference between 
classification and detection regarding flexibility or workload in 
traditional server-based parking detection systems, because in 
either case, the labeling process is done on the server side with 
raw videos/images directly sent back to the server. However, in 
an edge computing parking system, we argue that the detection-
based pipeline (the second group) is a better choice than the 
classification-based pipeline. 
1) The Classification-Based Pipeline and the Concern for 
Scalability 
First of all, please keep in mind that there are two options for 
the parking spaces labeling, i.e., locally on the IoT devices or 
on the server. For the classification-based pipeline, if the 
classification is done on the server, image patches of parking 
spaces would need to be transmitted back to the server, which 
significantly increases the data transmission volume and is not 
what we want. Hence, the classification task needs to be done 
on IoT devices, which means the classifier on IoT devices has 
to know where the parking spaces are. Thus, instead of labeling 
the parking spaces sitting by a server monitor, we would have 
to visit all IoT devices at different places, set up a monitor, look 
at the camera view after installation, and do the labeling. 
Moreover, once there is a change of the camera view (e.g., angle 
change or zooming in/out), someone needs to visit that IoT 
device again. This is not flexible or scalable. Remote 
connection to the IoT device could be a solution. However, in 
most cases, the IoT device connects to the internet using wifi or 
cellular network, which is not secure or friendly to remote 
access. 
2) The Detection-Based Pipeline and the Design 
For the detection-based pipeline, the detection has to be done 
at the edge. Otherwise, the system would turn into a traditional 
server-based system with raw videos being transmitted back to 
the server. As aforementioned, there is a matching stage 
following vehicle detection in the detection-based pipelines. In 
this study, we propose to move the detection to the edge side 
while keeping the matching stage on the server side. In this way, 
the system just transmits the detection results such as bounding 
boxes to the server for matching, rather than raw videos for 
detection and matching. With this design, we essentially keep 
the labeling process on the server side, which is flexible and 
scalable. To label the parking spaces, we make every edge 
device send one frame back to the server. This is a once-and-
for-all process, and even if there is a change in the camera view, 
the relabeling is much less labor-intensive than the 
classification-based pipeline. 
C. Vehicle Detection at the Edge 
There are two detection methods implemented at the edge of 
our system: single shot multibox detector (SSD) and 
background (BG) modeling detector. They work in separate 
threads at the edge and then their detection results are combined 
in occlusion or extreme lighting conditions on the server for 
enhanced performance. 
1) Enhanced SSD with MIO-TCD for Edge Artificial 
Intelligence 
SSD with a Mobilenet backbone network is the primary 
detector. There are different backbones for SSD, while 
Mobilenet has the lightest structure which makes the detection 
faster than other backbones. This is appropriate for an IoT 
device with limited computational power. We recommend 
using TensorFlow Lite for the SSD implementation since it is 
designed for deep learning on mobile and IoT devices. A 
normal state-of-the-art object detector like YOLO-V3 [48] with 
the TensorFlow platform still runs slowly with a speed lower 
than 0.05 frames-per-second (FPS) on Raspberry Pi 3B, and has 
a slightly lower detection accuracy as well. However, SSD-
Mobilenet with TensorFlow Lite runs over 1 FPS on the same 
device according to our test. The detection results including 
bounding boxes, object type, and detection probabilities (how 
likely the result is true) are transmitted back to the server. 
Compared to sending videos, it reduces the data volume by 
thousands of times (the exact number depends on the number 
of detections in the video). 
TensorFlow models can be converted to TensorFlow Lite 
models. We recommend training a TensorFlow model and then 
convert it to the TensorFlow Lite model. In order to improve 
the detection performance to make it more appropriate for 
practical applications, we enhance a pre-trained SSD on the 
Pascal VOC dataset [49] with a new traffic surveillance dataset 
called MIO-TCD [50], which contains 110,000 surveillance 

 
5
camera frames for traffic object detection training. This dataset 
includes a variety of challenging scenarios for traffic detection 
such as nighttime, truncated vehicle, low resolution, shadow, 
etc. To our knowledge, this is the first time MIO-TCD been 
adopted for parking detection, and we find it works well.  
Some key parameters for the training are listed as follows: 
the learning rate is 0.00001, the weight decay is 0.0005, the 
optimizer is Adam, the batch size is 32, and the training-
validation split ratio is 10:1. All layers are trainable. The 
training and validation loss curves, as well as some sample 
images at certain training steps, are displayed in Figure 2.  
The enhanced SSD-Mobilenet model demonstrates great 
performances on traffic detection, especially in challenging 
surveillance image data. Figure 3 shows three examples 
comparing detection results between SSD trained on Pascal 
VOC and Pascal VOC + MIO-TCD. In the first column, the pre-
trained SSD detects all big targets but misses two small targets 
in the back; in the second column, the pre-trained SSD misses 
two vehicles partially blocked by a tree; in the third column 
where there is snow in the nighttime, the pre-trained SSD 
misses most of the vehicles. Overall, the enhanced SSD 
produces much better detection results with few missed 
detections and no false detections. 
2) Background-Based Detection at the Edge 
Despite the enhanced performance of the SSD, the detection 
results are still not universally satisfying if your objective is to 
apply it to various real-world scenarios due to two reasons: (1) 
though much improved in speed, the SSD running 1 FPS still 
does not meet real-time detection at the edge, which limits the 
use of video temporal information; (2) deep learning model’s 
performance depends much on the training data, but the training 
data can never cover all real-world scenarios, so the detector 
itself could still perform poorly in extreme cases. Standalone 
SSD-based detection may be a good option for lab 
demonstration, but not for field practice universally. 
With this observation and consideration, we propose to add 
BG-based detection to the edge. BG-based detection is a widely 
used traditional method for traffic video surveillance that is 
sensitive to video noises and has no classification ability [51], 
[52]. But it has two advantages that can help compensate SSD: 
(1) it is very efficient and operates in real-time locally at the 
edge; (2) it has a relatively more stable detection performance 
in extreme scenarios where SSD does not work, though not as 
good in normal cases. The BG-based detection is followed with 
a regular blob detection step, then the bounding boxes of the 
detected blobs are transmitted back to the server. 
D. Data Transmission 
The data transmission module in the system is composed of 
a 4G LTE Huawei USB Modem E397u-53, a T-Mobile data-
only SIM card with 6GB monthly, and the software part. The 
T-Mobile data card is plugged into the 4G modem, and the 
modem connects with the Raspberry Pi via the USB interface. 
The connection of the device to the cellular network is activated 
via the Network Manager API in the software. The Network 
Manager allows automatic network connection upon start-up 
and automatic re-connection to the Internet whenever the 
connection fails. It is a reliable and helpful network connection 
tool that we recommend for IoT applications. 
 
 
Fig. 2 The training and validation loss curves and sample images from MIO-
TCD at certain training steps. 
 
 
Fig. 3 The enhanced SSD-Mobilenet Detector implemented at the edge of our system has a significantly improved detection performance, especially on 
challenging parking scenarios in surveillance image data. 
 

 
6
The reason we use cellular network connection for the data 
transmission is that the place where we do the field test does not 
have available wifi or ethernet. This will also be the case for 
many real-world IoT applications since the cellular network 
covers most urban areas and quite some rural areas. Other 
communications like Zigbee and LoRa are getting popular in 
IoT applications; however, they are good for short-distance 
communication rather than remote communication to the 
server. Cellular network communication is expensive with 
limited data amount, which, from another perspective, 
encourages data processing and reduction on edge. With the 
edge computing modules in the proposed parking system, it 
transmits BG-based detection results and SSD-based detection 
results to the server as strings. Also, the system transfers a video 
frame every ten minutes to the server for demonstration, 
validation, and space labeling. For an average camera, 
assuming one frame is 100Kb and the frame rate is 10 FPS 
(which is usually higher), and the detection results are 40Kb per 
minute, our system reduces the data transmission amount from 
around 86Gb per day per device to around 70Mb per day per 
device. 
E. Occupancy Judgement Pipeline and Algorithms 
With the detection results from the edge, we develop a 
parking occupancy judgement method on the server. This 
method first calculates the SSD-based occupancy based on a 
proposed matching algorithm and BG-based occupancy based 
on multiple object tracking, then combine them together 
considering extreme lighting conditions and occlusion 
conditions. 
1) SSD-Based Occupancy Detection 
The SSD-based detection results are matched with labeled 
parking spaces using a proposed matching algorithm. First, we 
design a metric for calculating the matching score of any space 
𝑖 and detection 𝑗. The score 𝑉𝑖𝑗 is shown below in Eq. (1), 
 
 
𝑉𝑖𝑗= 𝐼𝑜𝑈(𝑆𝑖 ,𝐵𝑗) × √𝑝𝑗 
(1) 
 
where IoU is the function to calculate the intersection-over-
union between two rectangles, 𝑆𝑖 and 𝐵𝑗 are the labeled parking 
space 𝑖 and the bounding box of detection 𝑗, and 𝑝𝑗 is the 
detection probability of detection 𝑗. Note that only detections 
with the category being a vehicle (e.g., car, van, bus, truck) will 
be kept in the detection list. Since the probability is between 0 
and 1, we multiply the IoU by the square root of the detection 
probability rather than the original probability in order to give 
more weight to the term 𝐼𝑜𝑈(𝑆𝑖 ,𝐵𝑗), which should be the 
primary indicator of parking occupancy status than the 
probability. 
Considering that parking occupancy status does not change 
very often, the status in the immediate previous time step is 
another indicator of the current status. Hence, a double 
thresholding method is adopted to filter out invalid 𝑉𝑖𝑗 with two 
thresholds 𝑇ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝑇ℎ𝑚𝑖𝑛 (𝑇ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑥> 𝑇ℎ𝑚𝑖𝑛). If space 𝑖 is 
occupied in the previous time step, the threshold for 𝑉𝑖𝑗 will be 
𝑇ℎ𝑚𝑖𝑛; otherwise, if space 𝑖 is vacant in the previous time step, 
the threshold for 𝑉𝑖𝑗 will be 𝑇ℎ𝑚𝑎𝑥.  
There are two cases that need further consideration: (1) one 
detection corresponding to multiple spaces and (2) one space 
corresponding to multiple detections. We deal with the first 
case first. Since one detection can only match one space at most, 
in the first case, the space with the largest matching score will 
be identified as occupied and others vacant. These should 
address part, if not all, of case 2. Then, if there are still case 2 
for any space, its status is occupied. 
2) Modified SORT and BG-Based Occupancy Detection 
The detections from background modeling at the edge are 
inputs to the BG-based occupancy detection algorithm on the 
server. The video’s temporal information is used in this module 
in the way of object tracking. Object tracking eliminates false 
detections and noises in the BG detection step and generates 
tracks of objects. Since our system only has the bounding 
boxes’ location information transmitted back, the object 
tracking algorithm is supposed to use no more information than 
the boxes’ locations. Tracking algorithms that require LiDAR, 
radar, or other image information (histogram, color, deep 
feature, etc.) would not work for our system [53]–[55]. 
A state-of-the-art tracking algorithm, called SORT [47], 
achieves excellent performance on efficiency and accuracy 
using only bounding box location information. The proposed 
tracking algorithm is a modified version of the algorithm. The 
original SORT does not have a re-identification process, which 
will lose track of an object if not detected for a few frames. In 
the BG-based detection method, only moving objects are 
detected. Thus, in parking lots, a vehicle is often lost with an ID 
switch when it stops to change direction (see Figure 4). This is 
also the motivation for Deep SORT, which adds a re-
identification metric using deep association [53]. In our system, 
the Deep SORT is not possible to incorporate because it 
requires deep features. Hence, we add a simple yet efficient 
decision rule to SORT: when a new ID is assigned to an object, 
the algorithm searches if the new object’s bounding box has 
enough overlap (IoU) with any old object within the past m 
seconds. An old object is defined as an object that was tracked 
in the past. If yes, the two objects are associated. 
With objects’ tracks and the labeled parking spaces, parking 
occupancy can be detected: if a track starts from inside a 
parking space and ends outside the space, and the tracked time 
of the object is over a threshold (𝑡_𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑘 seconds), the space’s 
status is vacant; if a track starts from outside any parking spaces 
and ends inside a space, and the tracked time is over a threshold 
(𝑡_𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑘 seconds), this space’s status is occupied. 
3) Final Detection Considering Occlusion and Extreme 
Lighting Condition 
The final detection considering occlusion and extreme lighting 
condition further improve the system accuracy in extreme 
cases. In the proposed system, the SSD-based method is the 
primary detector. The BG-based detector serves as the 
compensation for SSD in corner cases like occlusion and 
extreme lighting conditions. In normal condition, the proposed 
SSD-based method performs near-perfectly; however, in 
extreme lighting conditions such as strong fog, direct sunshine, 
and strong shadow, SSD or any pattern-based detector, 

 
7
especially when there is no following object tracking process, 
could have poor performance and sometimes even miss most 
targets. On the other hand, the BG method is relatively more 
stable in extreme conditions, though not as good as the 
enhanced SSD in normal conditions. 
If extreme lighting condition warning is triggered, the two 
sets of results will be combined. For those spaces detected as 
occupied in SSD detection, their final statuses are occupied 
given the low false-positive rate of SSD; for spaces recognized 
as vacant by SSD, the system under warning will believe the 
BG detection results. We determine if the lighting condition is 
bad enough to activate the combined detection using a metric 
as follows, 
 
 
𝑟𝑡= 𝑠𝑠𝑑𝑡
𝑏𝑔𝑡
 + 𝑠𝑠𝑑𝑡
𝑠𝑠𝑑𝑡−1
 
(2) 
 
where 𝑏𝑔𝑡 is the number of occupied spaces at current time t 
from the BG method, 𝑠𝑠𝑑𝑡 is the number of occupied spaces at 
current time t from the SSD method, and 𝑠𝑠𝑑𝑡−1 is the number 
of occupied spaces at the time t-1 from the SSD method. This 
metric measures the difference ratio for the two detection 
methods and the short-time change in the SSD-based method. 
Extreme lighting conditions change, such as direct sunshine, 
usually happens in a short time and have an immediate 
influence on SSD. One time step here is set to five minutes 
based on the consideration that five minutes is short enough to 
ensure most space statuses are the same and long enough for a 
sudden lighting condition change to impact the SSD detector. 
The SSD-based method will be re-activated when 𝑟1 =
𝑠𝑠𝑑𝑡
𝑏𝑔𝑡 
returns from very small to close to 1. 
Occlusion is often caused by a large vehicle’s appearance and 
camera angle. In this study, we consider the case that one 
vehicle blocking two spaces, while other types of occlusion are 
even rarer. The system checks routinely if a bounding box of a 
vehicle covers two spaces. Here “cover” means two adjacent 
parking spaces are both at least 𝑜𝑐𝑐%  inside a vehicle’s 
bounding box. In the occlusion case, the system first determines 
which space this vehicle is in by comparing the center of the 
two spaces, and the one closer to the camera (closer to the image 
bottom) is the space the vehicle in. For the other space, the 
system will use the BG-based results when it is occluded, 
because the object tracking will still give a clue which spaces a 
vehicle starts from or ends in. 
 
 
Fig. 4 BG-based detection and the original SORT tracking results. In a parking lot scene, the car at the bottom-left is lost with an ID switch due to its stop to 
change direction. Our modified SORT algorithm on the server solves this problem, thus reduce the error in parking occupancy detection. 
 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
A. Preliminary Test and Parameter Setting 
This study was sponsored by Sound Transit, which is a public 
transit agency serving the Seattle metropolitan area in the U.S. 
state of Washington. The preliminary test was conducted at the 
Smart Transportation Applications and Research Laboratory 
(STAR Lab) of the University of Washington. Before the field 
test, over five hours of parking lot surveillance video clips and 
over two thousand parking lot images were collected from the 
internet and the Angle Lake parking garage for preliminary test 
and system parameter setting. Note that the Angle Lake parking 
garage is the test site of this study, which is a busy parking 
garage located near the Sea-Tac International Airport with 
1,160 available parking spaces. The parameter setting is critical 
to the operation of the system. Table I summaries the key 
parameters of the system and their setting for the field test in 
the study based on the preliminary lab test. 
There are seven parameters that need to be set. The given 
parameter values in Table I can be a reference for the general 
parking context. For some specific cases, these parameters may 
need to be adjusted for optimal system performance. Thmax is 
always set larger than Thmin according to their definition. A general 
rule for setting these two parameters is that if neighboring parking 
spaces have larger overlaps from the camera angle, the two parameters 
may need to be set larger to avoid false matching. We do not suggest 
modifying IoU_track or t_track in most cases. They are parameters 
for the tracking algorithm, which are not sensitive to the context. But 
they can also be adjusted based on the drivers’ behaviors in a region or 
the user preference. The rt and r1 can be adjusted based on the number 
of parking spaces covered in the camera view and the weather 
conditions in a region. If a camera view includes quite a few parking 
spaces, say, more than 6, we do not recommend changing rt and r1 by 
much. But if a camera covers only 2 or 3 spaces, extra efforts would 
be expected in the parameter setting because you may not be able to 
tell whether a missed detection is due to sudden lighting changes or 
other factors. The difference in weather conditions of different regions 
could also influence the setting of these two parameters. The last 

 
8
parameter 𝑜𝑐𝑐% can be adjusted based on camera angles; the more the 
overlap of neighboring parking spaces, the larger 𝑜𝑐𝑐% should be. 
 
TABLE I DESCRIPTION AND SETTING OF KEY SYSTEM PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Parameter Description 
Default 
Value 
Thmax 
The larger threshold for the 
matching score  
Vij in the SSD-based occupancy 
detection 
 
0.25 
Thmin 
The smaller threshold for the 
matching score  
Vij in the SSD-based occupancy 
detection 
 
0.1 
IoU_track 
The intersection-over-union 
threshold to determine if a new 
object is associated with an old 
object in the modified SORT 
algorithm 
 
0.6 
t_track 
The time threshold in the unit of 
seconds to determine if a new object 
is associated with an old object in 
the modified SORT algorithm 
 
8 
rt 
The threshold to trigger the bad 
environment lighting warning to the 
system 
 
0.8 
r1 
The threshold to re-activate the 
normal detection pipeline in the 
system 
 
0.7 
occ% 
The portion of a space inside a 
vehicle bounding box to determine 
if the space is covered by the 
vehicle in camera view in the 
occlusion judgement 
90% 
B. System Installation and Data Collection 
Two IoT devices were installed, one on the sixth floor and 
another on the third floor of the Angle Lake parking garage. 
Figure 5 shows the installation of the IoT device on the sixth 
floor, the data server set up at the STAR Lab, and camera views 
from the two cameras. The sixth floor was an outdoor parking 
scene and the third floor was indoor. In the field test, our 
cameras monitored sixteen parking spaces, which were 
No.1013 – 1022 on the sixth floor and No.503 – 508 on the third 
floor. The purpose of choosing the sixth floor was to test the 
system performance outdoor, particularly how it performed in 
different weather, temperature, and time of day. The third floor 
was selected to test the indoor performance. The low ceiling 
height of this floor and the installation angle of the camera 
created challenges such as occlusion, which was meaningful for 
testing the system. The system was operating for three months 
from September 16, 2018, to December 15, 2018, at the Angle 
Lake parking garage. In total, only less than 20Gb data was 
transmitted back onto the STAR Lab server from the two IoT 
devices in three months.  
 
 
Fig. 5 System installation at the Angle Lake parking garage (top-left) and the 
server set up at STAR Lab (top-right); the bottom row displays the camera 
views of the devices we installed on the sixth floor (bottom-left) and the third 
floor (bottom-right). 
C. Results and System Evaluation 
Every ten minutes, a video frame was transmitted to the 
server for validation and demonstration. Overall, the system 
achieves 95.6% detection accuracy during the three months. 
Figure 6 presents the sample detection results and Table II 
shows the summarized statistics of the experiment. In this table, 
we divided the detection conditions into multiple categories 
based on the weather, time (day or night), day (weekday or 
weekends), and floor (indoor or outdoor). The categorization 
was done by manually classifying the scene pictures captured 
by the cameras as well as checking the historical weather 
records. And the detection performance for each category was 
summarized using accuracy as the metric ( 𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦=
𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟 𝑜𝑓 𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑠× 100% ). 
1) Cloudy and Rainy Scenarios 
The weather was classified into four categories, which are 
sunny, rainy, cloudy, and foggy conditions. For the third floor 
(indoor), there were no significant accuracy differences across 
the four weather conditions, while the sixth floor (outdoor) was 
influenced more by the weather. Among the four weather 
conditions, the system performed the best in cloudy conditions, 
reaching 97.5% accuracy on weekdays and 99.2% on 
weekends, due to the relatively consistent lighting conditions 
over the video field of views (Figure 6(a)). The second highest 
was in rainy conditions with an accuracy of 93.7% on weekdays 
and 96.2% on weekends, where the lighting conditions were 
similar to cloudy days. However, raindrops on the lens might 
sometimes block parking spaces though a camera shelter was 
employed to protect the camera (see Figure 6(b)). This was rare 
but the main cause of its lower accuracy than cloudy days. In 
rainy and cloudy days, background-based occupancy detection 
was seldom activated. 
2) Sunny and Foggy Scenarios 
The detection accuracies in sunny conditions and foggy 
conditions were both lower than cloudy and rainy days. We 
carefully examined the ground-truth images and found out the 
reasons. In sunny conditions, there were sometimes strong 
shadows of the vehicles, and reflections towards the camera on 

 
9
the sixth floor. In our case, shadows and reflections could 
significantly change the visual appearances of the vehicles, 
thereby confusing the feature extraction processes, especially 
when the occupancy was high: since vehicles were very close 
to each other and the ten parking spaces were covered by just 
one camera from around 25 – 30 feet away, the shadow of the 
fence on the sixth floor and the reflection sometimes could 
influence multiple vehicles; also, the shadow of one vehicle 
could not only change the visual appearance of itself but also 
the vehicles next to it. Foggy conditions had the lowest 
detection accuracy for the outdoor parking with 85.7% on 
weekdays and 91.6% on weekends. Our observation indicated 
that the thicker the fog was, the lower the detection accuracy 
was. In sunny and foggy conditions, background-based 
occupancy detection was activated more than rainy and cloudy 
conditions. They help compensate the SSD detection and 
significantly improve the accuracy following the proposed 
extreme condition detection pipeline. Though the overall 
accuracies of sunny and foggy days were still lower than the 
average, it was already increased a lot over standalone SSD-
based occupancy detection. For example, in Figure 6(c) and (d), 
it can be seen in the extreme lighting conditions like direct 
sunshine and strong fog, even the enhanced SSD’s performance 
significantly decreased with higher missed rates and lower 
detection probabilities. 
3) Nighttime, Weekend, and Occlusion 
It was interesting to note that the overall detection accuracy 
at night was higher than that during the day, and the detection 
performed better on weekends than on weekdays (see Figure 
6(e)(f)(g)). These results were mainly caused by the property of 
the SSD detector. Our detector was finetuned to have a very low 
false-positive rate in order to achieve high precision. In other 
words, in case there was a false detection, it is more likely that 
an occupied space was recognized as a vacant space, rather than 
a vacant space being recognized as occupied. According to this 
fact, it was interpretable that the accuracy at night and weekend 
were overall higher than in the day and weekday, because the 
traffic volume and the number of occupied spaces were lower 
at night and over the weekend. Moreover, the enhanced SSD 
got good detection results in dark due to the large number of 
image training samples taken at night in the MIO-TCD dataset. 
It was observed that the detection performance was more 
consistent on the third floor with a lower variance than the sixth 
floor in different weather conditions. Also, the main causes of 
errors in detection for the two floors were actually different. It 
was found that most errors on the sixth floor were caused by 
extreme lighting conditions (shadow, reflection, and fog), while 
on the third floor the errors were caused more by occlusion. For 
spaces 503, 504, and 505, the detection accuracy was almost 
100% for all scenarios. However, due to the installation angle 
of the camera and the low ceiling height, spaces 506, 507, 508 
could be partially or fully blocked by the vehicles parking next 
to them. Figure 6(h) showed an example of a van parking in 
space 507 completely blocking space 508, but the occlusion 
case was handled by our proposed pipeline. Note that occlusion 
was dealt with by our system with (1) SSD on partially blocked 
vehicles, or (2) BG-based detection and tracking if an occlusion 
warning was triggered. 
 
TABLE II SYSTEM DETECTION ACCURACY STATISTICS 
 
Sunny 
Rainy 
Cloudy 
Foggy 
Day 
Night 
Average 
Average 
91.4% 
93.5% 
95.5% 
89.9% 
92.7% 
98.4% 
95.6% 
On third Floor (Weekday) 
92.3% 
91.8% 
92.6% 
92.0% 
92.2% 
99.1% 
95.7% 
On third Floor (Weekend) 
94.3% 
94.5% 
93.9% 
93.1% 
94.0% 
99.0% 
96.5% 
On sixth Floor (Weekday) 
88.5% 
93.7% 
97.5% 
85.7% 
91.7% 
97.3% 
94.5% 
On sixth Floor (Weekend) 
93.8% 
96.2% 
99.2% 
91.6% 
95.4% 
98.9% 
97.2% 
 
 
Fig. 6 The figure displays final detection results (on the top of each image) and enhanced SSD-based detection results (in images) in representative scenarios. 
Extreme lighting condition or occlusion warning was triggered in scenario (c) (d) and (h), in which BG-based detection was activated. 

 
10
D. Comparison with State of the Arts 
We summarized the comparison between this study and the 
state of the arts in automatic parking surveillance in Table III. 
First of all, the system inputs are different among different 
systems. Taking images as the input could be straightforward 
but will lose the temporal information. Systems that have IoT 
devices leverage the power for efficient transmission and 
onboard processing so that they enable real-time occupancy 
updates. Compared to [15] and [19] which also use IoT devices, 
this study deploys the computations on both the edge and the 
server, which helps efficiently handle the workload; also, we 
implement a detection-based pipeline thereby does not need 
labeling on every IoT device. Please note that though previous 
systems including IoT devices do not have computation tasks 
on the server, they do need servers as part of the system for data 
storage. Regarding primary algorithms, this study and [20] are 
among the first efforts to use the deep-learning-based object 
detectors for parking (Faster R-CNN and SSD). However, SSD 
is the latest one-stage object detector, which is faster than the 
two-stage Faster R-CNN. Thus, it can better support edge 
computing. Our study also has the largest number of frame 
samples for training (127,125 frames). The work [19] has 
390,000 image patches for training, where one patch is one 
parking space they cropped from the original frame. They do 
not mention how many frames they use. This study and [15] are 
the two using real-world data for validation. While others using 
a few frames or images. Our validation covers a relatively long 
time (three months) and more scenarios. In terms of system 
efficiency, [18]–[20] do not mention their processing speeds or 
efficiency measures in their papers since that is not their main 
focus. [15] achieves 5 frames per second processing on their 
desktop with no artificial intelligence methods, but is still an 
impressive performance in 2013. [22] mentions their CNN can 
process 50 spaces in an image per 15 seconds (about 3 spaces 
per second). The proposed system achieves about 1 frame per 
second, which is faster than most existing systems (some not 
shown in the table). Updating a parking lot’s occupancy status 
every one second is sufficient in most cases. The state of the 
arts all achieve great accuracy (over 90%). Due to the different 
inputs and designs of these systems and the lack of a widely 
accepted public parking video dataset (image datasets does not 
work for many systems), the system accuracy of each system 
cannot be directly compared at this time. 
E. System and Data Applicability 
Figure 7 shows an example of the occupancy data, which was 
automatically collected on the week Nov 12 – Nov 18, 2018. 
The plots give an intuition on the parking occupancy patterns in 
the garage. The proposed system and the real-time parking 
occupancy data generated by the system can be valuable 
resources to support a variety of intelligent transportation 
applications, such as smart parking management, advanced 
infrastructure systems, and connected and automated vehicles.
 
TABLE III COMPARISON BETWEEN THE PROPOSED SYSTEM AND STATE OF THE ARTS 
Research work 
Bulan et al. 2013 
[15] 
Ling et al. 2017 
[18] 
Amato et al. 2017 
[22] 
Cho et al. 2018 
[19] 
Nieto et al. 2018 
[20] 
This study 
System input 
Video 
Video 
Image 
Image 
Multiple videos 
Video 
Computation 
platform 
Desktop 
IoT devices 
IoT devices 
NA 
Desktop 
IoT devices and 
server 
Process mode 
Post analysis 
Onboard 
processing 
Onboard 
processing 
Post analysis 
Post analysis 
Onboard processing 
Pipeline logic 
Detection 
Classification 
Classification 
Classification 
Detection 
Detection 
Primary 
algorithms 
SVM, HOG, BG 
Haar, F-test 
CNN 
Random forest 
Faster R-CNN, 
fusion 
SSD, BG, SORT, 
fusion 
# of training 
frames 
1,800 
469 
4,323 
390,000 
(patches) 
23,741 
127,125 
Validation 
data 
Several days 
real-world 
validation 
90 detections 
CNRPark + EXT 
image dataset 
24,000 image 
patches 
1,000 frames 
Three months real-
world validation 
Testing 
scenarios 
Outdoor, sunny, 
cloudy, rainy, 
daytime, 
occlusion 
Outdoor, 
daytime 
Outdoor, sunny, 
cloudy, rainy, 
daytime 
Indoor 
Outdoor, clear, 
rainy, daytime, 
nighttime 
Outdoor, indoor, 
occlusion, sunny, 
cloudy, rainy, foggy, 
daytime, nighttime 
System 
efficiency 
5 frames per 
second 
NA 
3 spaces per 
second 
NA 
NA 
1 frame per second 
System 
accuracy 
93.9% 
91% 
> 90% 
98.6% 
> 90% 
95.6% 
 
 
 

 
11
1) Application in Smart Parking Management 
One of the key components in intelligent transportation 
systems is smart parking management. Smart parking 
management targets improving the efficiency in parking 
resource allocation, parking information dissemination, and 
parking space searching with high accuracy, robustness, and 
low cost. Smart parking management also has the ability or 
potential to help mitigate traffic congestion and other societal 
problems. Parking prediction, dynamic parking pricing, real-
time parking guidance, etc., most smart parking management 
strategies and functions need parking occupancy data as the 
input. Thus, the proposed system, which is designed to work in 
a wide range of scenarios with low cost and high performance, 
provides foundations to smart parking applications as well as 
modern transportation management. 
2) Application in Advanced Infrastructure Systems 
Future advanced infrastructure systems will solve problems 
related to buildings, bridges, pipelines, roadways etc. by 
combining conventional physical assets with emerging cyber 
technologies in computer science, system engineering, and 
other fields. Edge computing will be a critical component of 
infrastructure management of tomorrow, especially with the 
emergence of 5G communication. A cost-effective, real-time, 
reliable, and scalable edge computing system for parking 
occupancy detection will offer new solutions and opportunities 
to smart city developments by making infrastructures like 
buildings and roadways smarter, more efficient, and more 
sustainable. 
3) Application in Connected and Automated Vehicles 
Parking occupancy data will be an essential component in 
connected and automated vehicle applications. First of all, 
automated vehicles will need to find parking themselves, which 
will be completed faster with their own systems communicating 
with nearby parking facilities. Additionally, parking facilities 
will serve as crucial nodes in a traffic roadway network to 
support V2I functions. IoT devices monitoring parking spaces 
will indirectly obtain the traffic conditions nearby from parking 
occupancy, thus help network-wide decision making in the era 
of connected and automated vehicles.  
 
 
Fig. 7 The parking occupancy patterns of the week Nov 12 – Nov 18, 2018. 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we described the design, development, 
deployment, and evaluation of a smart, efficient, and reliable 
parking surveillance system with edge artificial intelligence on 
IoT devices. We did a thorough literature review on smart 
parking surveillance. The proposed system was among the first 
efforts in applying edge computing techniques to real-world 
parking surveillance. The system processing pipelines and 
algorithms were carefully designed for the purpose of 
reasonably shifting computing workload to the edge, thus 
significantly reduce data transmission volume and enable 
efficient online parking occupancy detection. Experiments were 
conducted first in the STAR Lab and then in the Angle Lake 
parking garage for three months. The system components 
collaborated very well under the proposed scheme. The system 
achieved 95.6% overall detection accuracy in different 
scenarios including indoor, outdoor, cloudy, rainy, sunny, 
foggy, occlusion, daytime, and nighttime situations. The design 
has multiple advantages over the state-of-the-art parking 
surveillance systems and has a bright prospect in the 
applications of smart city and intelligent transportation systems. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to express our gratitude to the Central 
Puget Sound Regional Transit Authority (Sound Transit) and 
the Pacific Northwest Transportation Consortium (PacTrans) 
for funding this research, and the help Sound Transit provided 
in the system installation. We would also like to thank the 
reviewers for volunteering their time to review this manuscript.
