Natural Language Multitasking
Analyzing and Improving Syntactic Saliency of Latent Representations
Gino Brunner, Yuyi Wang, Roger Wattenhofer, Michael Weigelt∗
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
We train multi-task autoencoders on linguistic tasks and analyze the learned hidden
sentence representations. The representations change signiﬁcantly when translation
and part-of-speech decoders are added. The more decoders a model employs, the
better it clusters sentences according to their syntactic similarity, as the representa-
tion space becomes less entangled. We explore the structure of the representation
space by interpolating between sentences, which yields interesting pseudo-English
sentences, many of which have recognizable syntactic structure. Lastly, we point
out an interesting property of our models: The difference-vector between two sen-
tences can be added to change a third sentence with similar features in a meaningful
way.
1
Introduction
Representation learning has opened the doors for many creative neural networks that learn to generate
music or extract the artistic style of a painting and apply it to an arbitrary photograph (Gatys et al.
[2016]). In computational linguistics, progress has been made in neural machine translation, speech-
to-text and many other applications. However, creative algorithms that write poetry, mimic an author
or even develop ﬁctional languages are sparse or non-existent. Since good representations are crucial
for such creative tasks, we examine ways to improve learned representations and develop ways to
measure their linguistic quality. We analyze how improvements in the syntactic capabilities of a
model relate to the learned hidden representations. A syntax clustering experiment shows that the
representation space of multi-task models is more easily separable into disentangled regions than that
of single-task models. As a result, some simple sentence features can be added and subtracted from
each other in the representation space. Our work does not focus on optimizing one single task or
error, but on forcing the representations to contain useful information in a structured, analyzable way.
To this end we train several sequence to sequence models with an increasing number of decoders.
Each decoder has a distinctive linguistic task. We compare the sentence representations our models
have learned and explore how representations of different sentences relate to each other.2
2
Related work
Sutskever et al. [2014] use Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks to encode an arbitrary
sequence into a vector and decode it back into a (possibly different) sequence. They achieve results
in neural machine translation (NMT) that are competitive with statistical machine translation models
(SMT). The NMT objective is one of several tasks we use in our models. Luong et al. [2015] extend
Sutskever et al.’s model with three multi-task settings: One-to-many, many-to-one and many-to-many.
∗Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
2Our code is available at https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B7Mps2rt3vBoSHlWeElGT1JiS3c
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.
arXiv:1801.06024v1  [cs.CL]  18 Jan 2018

Their work shows that translation performance can beneﬁt from parsing and image caption tasks.
This kind of improvement from adding related tasks is also the subject of our work. Niehues and Cho
[2017] note that many linguistic resources that enabled SMT are not commonly used in NMT models.
They train translation models jointly with part-of-speech (POS) and named-entity recognition tasks
and show that both translation and POS tagging beneﬁt from the shared information. Our research is
rooted in the same idea, but we focus on the learned representations rather than on training objectives.
As an alternative to the bag-of-words feature many natural language processing (NLP) models use,
Le and Mikolov [2014] propose the “paragraph vector” to represent sentences, paragraphs and
whole documents. This feature outperforms bag-of-word models in text classiﬁcation and sentiment
analysis tasks. While it could be extended to deal with larger pieces of text, our work focuses on
the sentence-level. Liu et al. [2015] developed a multi-task deep neural network for multi-domain
classiﬁcation and information retrieval, which learns general semantic representations useful for both
tasks, demonstrating the advantage of multi-task learning. Artetxe et al. [2017] note that large parallel
corpora for the training of NMT models are scarce. They introduce a novel system that solely relies
on monolingual data while still learning to translate between languages. Vinyals et al. [2015] develop
a generative model that connects image processing and natural language generation. Their model
takes an image as input and generates an English sentence that describes the content of the image.
Such a complex task relies on good, well-generalized representations, which we are exploring in this
work as well.
3
Models
The model architecture we use to learn representations is the autoencoder, which operates in two
stages: An encoder transforms data into a “code” in a hidden layer, from which the decoder then tries
to reconstruct the original input. The decoder can be modiﬁed to learn a task other than reconstruction,
such as translating the input into a different language. Because text is of sequential nature we use
Long Short Term Memory recurrent networks (LSTM) as encoders and decoders.
3.1
Multi-task autoencoder
We extend the basic sequence to sequence autoencoder model by adding multiple decoders that
perform separate linguistic tasks. First, an encoder LSTM consumes a sequence of characters one
by one and updates its internal state. When the whole input sequence has been read, the encoder
state contains information about the entire sequence. This state is fed into a dense layer which we
call the “representation layer”, the output of which is a real vector with a speciﬁed dimension. The
analysis we perform in Section 4 refers to the output of this layer. Next, the representation vector
is fed to each decoder LSTM, which then generate output sequences corresponding to their tasks.
A single-task model will learn representations of its training data which are useful for the objective
at hand. Since it supports multiple decoders, our model architecture forces the representations to
contain useful information for each objective. Adding more linguistic tasks as decoders should make
representations more salient from a linguistic perspective and change the properties of the whole
representation space in a meaningful and analyzable way.
3.2
Decoders
We use four different decoders. The replicating (REP) decoder’s task is to reconstruct the input
sequence. The German and French (DE/FR) decoders attempt to translate the input sentence to
German and French respectively. The last decoder we use learns to tag words in the input sequence
with part-of-speech tags (POS), such as verb, noun, adjective. Figure 1 shows the architecture of our
multi-task autoencoder model.
3.3
Dataset
To train our models on the three tasks replication, translation and part-of-speech-tagging, we require
a multilingual corpus with sentences that correspond to each other. The transcripts of the European
Parliament sessions ( Koehn [2005]) are a suitable corpus with aligned English, German and French
sentences. The replication task uses the English sentences as both input and target. The training
data for the POS decoders was created using the python nltk module ( Loper and Bird [2002]) and
2

Encoder
State
DE/FR-Decoder
State
POS-Decoder
State
REP-Decoder
Representation Vector
FC
FC
English Sentence
English Sentence
German/French Sentence
POS-Tags
FC
State
Figure 1: Architecture of our multi-task autoencoder models. We use four different decoders:
Replicating (REP), translation to German (DE), translation to French (FR) and a part-of-speech
tagger (POS). The encoder and decoders are LSTMs. The fully connected (FC) layers transform the
ﬁxed-length representation vectors into variable length state vectors for each decoder.
the English text from the European Parliament corpus. The subset of this dataset we use contains
over 1.7 million sentences (for all decoders), 1.5 million of which were used as the training set. The
remaining 0.2 million sentences form the test set. A training example is a tuple whose size depends
on the model conﬁguration. For example, the single-task REP model uses 2-tuples (input: English
sentence, target: English sentence), whereas the multi-task REP-DE-POS-model uses 4-tuples (input:
English sentence, REP-target: English sentence, DE-target: German sentence, POS-target: POS-tag
sequence). While the number of available training examples is the same for each model, multi-task
models are trained with larger tuples and therefore more training data. To account for this imbalance,
we train reference models with fewer training examples and compare their performance to the main
models which we train on the full dataset.
3.4
Model conﬁgurations
We train models with different decoders and representation layer sizes. Table 1 shows the perplexities
reached by each decoder for some of the trained models. Perplexity measures how close a generated
sequence is to a target sequence and is deﬁned as the exponential of the cross entropy between the
two sequences. The model name simply lists its decoders and representation layer size. All encoder
and decoder LSTMs have 512 neurons. We have experimented with different numbers of layers,
neurons and representation layer sizes. Generally, our results were not sensitive to these choices, and
we thus refrained from ﬁne-tuning our models. The achieved perplexities are not competitive with
state-of-the-art models. However, our work focuses on learned representations, not on decoder losses.
The perplexities reached by the reference models mentioned in 3.3 are indistinguishable from the
main models, and are thus not listed separately.
Table 1: Model Conﬁgurations. For each model, the used decoderse and the size of the representation
vector is indicated.
Model name
REP
DE
FR
POS
REP-1024
1.05
-
-
-
REP-DE-1024
1.04
2.02
-
-
REP-DE-FR-1024
1.04
2.02
1.86
-
REP-DE-256
1.07
2.02
-
-
REP-DE-POS-256
1.14
2.05
-
1.10
3

4
Results
4.1
Syntax clustering
How can the quality of learned representations be measured?
The goal we pursue with our models is not the highest possible decoder accuracy. Instead, we are
interested in representations that capture some linguistic aspect of the input language. In order
to compare the learned representations of different models, we examine how well they cluster
syntactically similar sentences. We use 14 sentence prototypes with different syntactic structures, for
example “The +N is +A”, where +N, +V, +A and +D are placeholders for nouns, verbs, adjectives
and adverbs. Following is a list of all 13 sentence prototypes we used (the 14th category are empty
sentences):
1: The +N is +A.
2: The +N +Vs.
3: The +N has a +N.
4: The +N +Vs a +N.
5: The +N +Vs +D.
6: No +N ever +Vs.
7: Are +Ns +A?
8: The +Ns of +N +D +V the +A +N, but some +Ns still +V their +N.
9: In the +N of a +A +N, the +N will +V the +N of +Ving the +N.
10: +Ns +V the +A +N of +Ns +Ving on the +N.
11: In the +N of +N, +Ns would rather +V without +N than +V any +A +Ns.
12: +N +Vs in order to +V on a +N.
13: +A +Ns often +V like +Ns.
14: whitespace
Each sentence prototype is randomly populated by common English words 100 times. The syntax of
each sentence in such a category is very similar or identical to all others in the same category, but
different from sentences in other categories. These sentences are then fed into our models. We record
every resulting representation and pair it with its input sentence. Using K-means clustering with
K = 14 we cluster the representation-sentence pairs in the representation space. For each resulting
cluster, we count how many sentences of each prototype it contains. This yields a list such as this:
[30, 3, 1, 7, 88, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], which shows the content of one of 14 clusters: 30 sentences of
type one, 3 of type two and so on. Since most sentences in this cluster are of type ﬁve, this cluster
is assigned to be the cluster of sentence category ﬁve. However, 41 sentences of type other than
ﬁve were “falsely” assigned to this cluster. Therefore, the error of this cluster is 41. The sum of
errors of all 14 clusters is the clustering error, which is our quality measure for this experiment.
Since K-means clustering is nondeterministic, we run the algorithm 100 times. Table 2 shows the
best-of-100 clustering errors.
Table 2: Clustering errors by model
Model
REP
REP-FR
REP-FR-DE
REP-DE
REP-POS
REP-DE-POS
Error
51
26
24
22
8
0
Starting from the left, the single-task REP model has the highest clustering error. As we add German
and French translation decoders, the syntax clustering error decreases. Adding part-of-speech tagging
reduces the clustering error even more. Finally, combining translation and part-of-speech tagging
reduces the clustering error to zero. This means that the 14 syntactically different sentence prototypes
are perfectly separated in the representation space. It is not surprising that this model performs
better than the others: At least for humans and most classical algorithms, correct POS tagging is a
requirement or preparative step to syntax analysis. The distinctive advantage this model has over
the others indicates that neural language models beneﬁt from related linguistic tasks. Having clear,
separable clusters of sentences suggests that some aspects of syntax are disentangled in the multi-task
representation space. Figure 2 shows the syntax clusters for the worst and best performing models,
visualized using t-SNE. Clearly, using syntactically relevant tasks helps the model to learn more
clearly separated representations of syntax.
4

(a) Model with only a replicating (REP) decoder. The
sentence prototype representation clusters 1-5 as well
as 8 and 12 are very close together or overlapping.
(b) Model with replicating (REP), German transla-
tion (DE) and part-of-speech tagging decoders. No
sentence representation clusters are overlapping, and
only type 3 and 4 are close together.
Figure 2: Syntax clusters visualized with t-SNE.
We trained several reference models on fewer training examples to account for the different numbers of
decoders, and thus different amount of effective training data (as described in Section 3.3). Although
the clustering errors differ, there is no clear trend, as some models cluster worse and others better with
fewer examples (see Table 3). Note that the perplexities these models achieved are all comparable to
their reference models (trained with the full training set), and none of the models overﬁt the training
data.
Table 3: Best-of-100 clustering errors with fewer training examples
Model
R-D-1024
R-D-256
R-D-F-1024
R-D-P-256
Full training set
22
29
24
3
1/2 training set
37
33
-
-
1/3 training set
-
-
19
1
4.2
Interpolation
The sentence representations our models generate lie in a high-dimensional space. Clustering
experiments show that the data points from sentences in the training set are not spaced evenly in
this vector space, rather they form clusters or manifolds. Seeing how clearly some models cluster
sentences according to their syntax, the question arises: What lies between two sentences? More
precisely: If two sentences s1 and s2 have representations r1 and r2, what sentence corresponds to
r1+r2
2
? What about other points along a straight line between r1 and r2? Table 4 shows two example
outputs each of the REP decoder of the REP-DE-POS-256 and REP-DE-1024 models. As shown
in Section 4.1, the REP-DE-POS-256 has a signiﬁcantly lower clustering error, and it can be seen
that it also produces more plausible sentences with fewer non-words when doing interpolation in the
representation space.
Unsurprisingly, not every point in the representation space corresponds to a correct English sentence.
If we overlook the non-words in some of the interpolated sentences, the change in syntax can be
understood to a degree. However, linear interpolation does not seem to be enough to explore the
shape of this representation space. More work investigating these manifolds could yield useful results
for generative, creative algorithms. For example, what properties would a representation space have
5

Table 4: Sentence interpolation between two endpoints for two different models.
REP-DE-POS-256:
REP-DE-1024:
Is this what we want?
Is this what we want?
Is this meat which we need?
Is this what nath we affend?
Is that is very with true?
Whin to shakin the weaknes fan?
Whe nomists ha told day of items.
Why cust hesitage we chear thembox.
The course all hotels to drug itselve.
The consumer is of encautant where quote.
The consumer may took speed in follows Mr...
The consumer is botted there binds for EU.
The consumer must therefore be informed of GMOs.
The consumer must therefore be informed of GMOs
We will not tolerate a policy of religious repression.
We will not tolerate a policy of religious repression.
We will not threaten by insist regarding our representation.
We will not dossil at Ecoprat south direct-resprest and.
We must the knowled alro in economic objarimar represent.
We sant techni oy asplig poor correads in report’sed.
Whe is still want recoursion in viruccuroning responsibly.
The interest has lip porals often Mrs Martensrespre.
The issue where any returning ideology rrrengeing reply.
The insade to sarame places outso in requirponts resel.
There is a systemic policy of religious reprovement.
There is a strongly matic poorer ’fragen presumers’ thre.
There is a systematic policy of religious repression.
There is a systematic policy of religious repression.
if it were trained to understand two languages? How would representations of sentences and words
from different languages relate to each other?
4.3
Representation “arithmetic”
Some word embedding spaces have a special property, where differences between embedded words
can correspond to a direction on an axis that has a semantic or grammatical interpretation. For
example, the difference vector of queen and king might roughly equal that of woman and man
(Mikolov et al. [2013]). This raises the question whether sentence representations can have similar
properties. A simple assumption would be that the difference-vector of Cats are good pets. and
Dogs are good pets. should have canceled out the part about good pets and roughly point from Dogs
to Cats. Adding this difference-vector to any sentence that contains Dogs should then result in a
sentence where Dogs is replaced with Cats. The REP-DE-1024 model fails at this task, as shown
in Table 5. However, the arithmetic works better for the model that performed best in the syntax
clustering (REP-DE-POS-256) experiment, as is shown in Table 6. The arithmetic worked for ﬁrst
three sentences, and failed for the last two. While these results are not representative and require
more rigorous investigation, we did not cherry pick the examples.
The fact that the representation “arithmetic” works for a number of small examples shows that
the learned representations are much more complex than mere symbol probabilities. Since this
experiment only considers word occurrence and order, it remains open whether there is any semantic
component to this phenomenon. Adding specialized semantic tasks to our models could improve the
results.
Table 5: Representation “arithmetic” for the REP-DE-1024 model.
s1
s2
s3
s1 - s2 + s3
1: I am one.
-
I am two.
+
You are two.
=
You ready no.
2: This example works.
-
This example fails.
+
Another attempt fails.
=
Another attempt world.
3: A word in a phrase.
-
A tree in a phrase.
+
A tree is green.
=
A word is purevy?
4: The end is easier.
-
The start is easier.
+
A start is next!
=
A rew lieh in new!
5: A large number of
people want to work.
-
A small number of
people want to work.
+
A small sentence is
enough.
=
A large senselfeir
in or evacce.
Table 6: Representation “arithmetic” for the REP-DE-POS-256 model.
s1
s2
s3
s1 - s2 + s3
1: I am one.
-
I am two.
+
You are two.
=
You are one.
2: This example works.
-
This example fails.
+
Another attempt fails.
=
Another attempts work.
3: A word in a phrase.
-
A tree in a phrase.
+
A tree is green.
=
A word is green.
4: The end is easier.
-
The start is easier.
+
A start is next!
=
A need aid not!
5: A large number of
people want to work.
-
A small number of
people want to work.
+
A small sentence is
enough.
=
A large sector for
challenge.
6

5
Conclusion and Future Work
We trained several multi-task autoencoders on linguistic tasks and analyzed the learned sentence
representations. The representations change signiﬁcantly when translation and part-of-speech tagging
decoders are added. The more decoders a model uses, the better it can cluster sentence representations
according to their syntactic similarity. This indicates that the space (at least the part of it that is
associated with syntactic information) becomes more separable or disentangled as more tasks are
added.
We explored the structure of the representation space by interpolating between sentences, which
yields interesting pseudo-English sentences, many of which have recognizable syntactic structure.
Finally, we point out an interesting property of our models’ representations: The difference-vector
between two sentence representations can be added to change a third sentence with similar features
in a meaningful way. We call this process “representation arithmetic”, since it allows adding and
subtracting sentence features to and from other sentences.
In the future, we want to get a better understanding of the shape of the representation space. In-
terpolating inside the manifold the data populates could enable creative algorithms which produce
grammatical sentences by sampling from the inside of the manifold. Perhaps the “representation
arithmetic” property can be made more robust by adding semantic tasks as decoders. If this behavior
could be made more predictable, the representation space would have useful properties for generative
models, as semantic features could be transferred between sentences. So far we have not constrained
our latent space, since our focus did not lie on language generation. Nevertheless, we plan on
experimenting with Variational Autoencoders due to their inherent capability to disentangle the latent
space, which might enable better disentanglement of semantics and syntax.
