Context-Aware Target Apps Selection and Recommendation
for Enhancing Personal Mobile Assistants
MOHAMMAD ALIANNEJADI∗, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
HAMED ZAMANI, University of Massachusetts Amherst, USA
FABIO CRESTANI, Università della Svizzera italiana (USI), Switzerland
W. BRUCE CROFT, University of Massachusetts Amherst, USA
Users install many apps on their smartphones, raising issues related to information overload for users and
resource management for devices. Moreover, the recent increase in the use of personal assistants has made
mobile devices even more pervasive in users’ lives. This paper addresses two research problems that are vital
for developing effective personal mobile assistants: target apps selection and recommendation. The former is
the key component of a unified mobile search system: a system that addresses the users’ information needs
for all the apps installed on their devices with a unified mode of access. The latter, instead, predicts the
next apps that the users would want to launch. Here we focus on context-aware models to leverage the rich
contextual information available to mobile devices. We design an in situ study to collect thousands of mobile
queries enriched with mobile sensor data (now publicly available for research purposes). With the aid of this
dataset, we study the user behavior in the context of these tasks and propose a family of context-aware neural
models that take into account the sequential, temporal, and personal behavior of users. We study several
state-of-the-art models and show that the proposed models significantly outperform the baselines.
CCS Concepts: • Information systems →Retrieval on mobile devices; Query log analysis; Recommender
systems; Personalization; Query intent; • Human-centered computing →Personal digital assistants; Field
studies;
ACM Reference Format:
Mohammad Aliannejadi, Hamed Zamani, Fabio Crestani, and W. Bruce Croft. 2019. Context-Aware Target Apps
Selection and Recommendation for Enhancing Personal Mobile Assistants. ACM Transactions on Information
Systems 0, 0, Article 0 ( 2019), 30 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the number of available apps on the mobile app market has been growing due
to high demand from users, leading to over 3.5 million apps on Google Play Store, for example.1
As a consequence, users now spend an average of over five hours a day using their smartphones,
∗Part of the work reported in this paper was done while Mohammad Aliannejadi was affiliated with the Università della
Svizzera italiana (USI).
1https://www.thinkwithgoogle.com/advertising-channels/apps/app-marketing-trends-mobile-landscape/
This work was supported in part by the RelMobIR project of the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF), and in part by
the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires

© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
1046-8188/2019/0-ART0 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.
arXiv:2101.03394v1  [cs.IR]  9 Jan 2021

Fig. 1. A typical workflow of a unified mobile search framework.
accessing a variety of applications.2 An average user, for example, installs over 96 different apps on
their smartphones [10]. In addition, the emergence of intelligent assistants, such as Google Assistant,
Microsoft Cortana, and Apple Siri, has made mobile devices even more pervasive. These assistants
aim to enhance the capability and productivity of users by answering questions, performing actions
in mobile apps, and improving the user experience while interacting with their mobile devices.
Another goal is to provide users with a universal voice-based search interface; however, they still
have a long way to go to provide a unified interface with the wide variety of apps installed on users’
mobile phones. The diversity of mobile apps makes it challenging to design a unified voice-based
interface. However, given that users spend most of their time working within apps (rather than a
browser), it is crucial to improve their cross-app information access experience.
In this paper, we aim to address two research problems that are crucial for effective development
of a personal mobile assistant: target apps selection and recommendation in mobile devices. Target
apps selection is the key component towards achieving a unified mobile search system – a system
that can address the users’ information needs not only from the Web, but also from all the apps
installed on their devices. We argued the need for a universal mobile search system in our previous
work [6], where our experiments suggested that the existence of such a system would improve
the users’ experience. Target apps recommendation, instead, predicts the next apps that the users
would want to launch and interact with, which is equivalent to target apps selection with no query.
A unified mobile search framework is depicted in Figure 1. As we see in the figure, with such
a framework, the user could submit a query through the system which would then identify the
best target app(s) for the issued query. The system then would route the query to the identified
target apps and display the results in an integrated interface. Thus, the first step towards designing
a unified mobile search framework is identifying the target apps for a given query, which is the
target apps selection task [6].
Target apps recommendation is also crucial in a mobile environment. It has attracted a great deal
of attention in multiple research communities [12, 28, 49]. Among various benefits and use cases
discussed in the literature, we find the following two cases the most important ones: (i) to assist
users in finding the right app for a given task the user wishes to perform; (ii) to help the operating
system manage its resources more efficiently. It is worth noting that both use cases potentially
play essential roles in improving end users’ experience. The former reduces the users’ effort to
find the right app among various apps installed on their phone. On the other hand, the latter can
affect the users’ experience through smart resource management. For instance, a system could
remove many background processes of apps that are not going to be used in the near future to
2http://flurrymobile.tumblr.com/post/157921590345/us-consumers-time-spent-on-mobile-crosses-5
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

avoid excessive battery usage. It can also be used to allocate the required resources to an app that
is going to be launched by the user in the immediate future, providing faster and smoother user
experience. The use of a target apps recommendation system and a target apps selection system
brings even more benefits. While app usage data can help a target apps selection model provide
more accurate predictions, the submitted cross-app queries could also improve a recommendation
system’s performance. For example, in cases when a user is traveling, they would use travel
and navigation apps more often. This could be considered as an indication of the current user’s
information to the system. Also, assume a user submits the query “Katy Perry hits” to Google. The
recommendation system could use this information in its prediction and recommend music apps.
As mobile devices provide rich contextual information about users, previous studies [2, 32, 60]
have tried to incorporate query context in various domains. In particular, query context is often
defined as information provided by previous queries and their corresponding clickthrough data [57,
58], or situational context such as location and time [14, 29, 60]. However, as user interactions on a
mobile device are mostly with apps, exploring apps usage patterns reveals important information
about the user contexts, information needs, and behavior. For instance, a user who starts spending
time on travel-related apps, e.g., TripAdvisor, is likely to be planning a trip in the near future.
Carrascal and Church [18] verified this claim by showing that people use certain categories of apps
more intensely as they do mobile search. Modeling the latent relations between apps is of great
importance because while people use few apps on a regular basis, they tend to switch between apps
multiple times [18]. In fact, previous studies have tried to address app usage prediction by modeling
personal and contextual features [10], exploiting context-dependency of app usage patterns [35],
sequential order of apps [59] and collaborative models [56].
However, our previous attempt to study unified mobile search through crowdsourcing did not
capture users’ contexts in the data collection phase [6] because it was done on the phone’s browser,
failing to record any contextual and sensor data related to the user location and activities. In
addition, there are some other limitations. For example, we asked workers to complete a set of
given search tasks, which obviously were not generated by their actual information needs, and
thus the queries were likely different from their real search queries. In addition, not all of workers
completed their tasks on actual mobile devices, which affected their behavior. Furthermore, the
user behavior and queries could not be studied over a day-long or week-long continuous period.
These limitations have motivated us to conduct the first in situ study of target apps selection
for unified mobile search. This enables us to obtain clearer insights into the task. In particular,
we are interested in studying the users’ behavior as they search for real-life information needs
using their own mobile devices. Moreover, we studied the impact of contextual information on the
apps they used for search. To this aim, we developed a simple open source app, called uSearch, and
used it to build an in situ collection of cross-app queries. Over a period of 12 weeks, we collected
thousands of queries which enables us to investigate various aspects of user behavior as they search
for information in a cross-app search environment.
Using the collected data, we conducted an extensive data analysis, aiming to understand how
users’ behavior vary across different apps while they search for their information needs. A key
finding of our analysis include the fact that users conduct the majority of their daily search tasks
using specific apps, rather than Google. Among various available contextual information, we focus
on the users’ apps usage statistics as their apps usage context, leaving others for future work. This
is motivated by the results of our analysis in which we show that users often search on the apps
that they use more frequently. Based on the insights we got from our data analysis, we propose
a context-aware neural target apps selection model, called CNTAS. In addition, as we aimed to
model the sequential app usage patterns while incorporating personal and temporal information,
we proposed a neural target apps recommendation model, called NeuSA, which is able to predict
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

the next apps that a user would launch at a certain time. The model learns complex behavioral
patterns of users at different times of day by learning high-dimensional app representations, taking
into account the sequence of previously-used apps.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are:
• An in situ mobile search study for collecting thousands of real-life cross-app queries. We
make the app3, the collected search query data4, and the annotated app usage data5 publicly
available for research purposes.
• The first in situ analysis of cross-app queries and users’ behavior as they search with different
apps. More specifically, we study different attributes of cross-app mobile queries with respect
to their target apps, sessions, and contexts.
• A context-aware neural model for target apps selection.
• A personalized sequence-aware neural model for target apps recommendation.
• Outperforming baselines for both target apps selection and recommendation tasks.
Our analyses and experiments lead to new findings compared to previous studies, opening
specific future directions in this research area.
This paper extends our previous work on in situ and context-aware target apps selection for
unified mobile search [5]. We previously stressed the importance of incorporating contextual
information in a unified mobile search and studied the app usage statistics data to identify the
user’s intent of submitting a query more accurately. We showed that considering what applications
a person has used mostly in the past 24 hours is useful to improve the effectiveness of target apps
selection. In this paper, we further explore the effect of sequential app usage behavior of users
for target apps recommendation. This is an ideal complement to our context-aware target apps
selection model as these two components constitute an important part of context-aware mobile
computing [23]. In summary, this paper extends our previous work as follows:
• It presents a novel personalized time-aware target apps recommendation, called NeuSA.
• It compares the performance of NeuSA to state-of-the-art target apps recommendation.
• It describes the new dataset that we have collected and annotated for target apps recommen-
dation, which we will make publicly available for research purposes.
• It includes more analysis of the collected data and the experimental results.
• It provides more details on our proposed context-aware target apps selection model CNTAS.
This paper demonstrates that both our proposed models are able to outperform the state-of-
the-art. Also, it provides new analysis and insights into the effect of context in both target apps
selection and recommendation tasks. Finally, the joint analysis of context allows the reader to
observe and compare the effectiveness of analyzing and incorporating user behavior data into the
prediction.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of the
relevant studies in the literature. Section 3 elaborates on our effort for collecting the data, followed
by Section 4 where we analyze the collected data in depth. Then, in Sections 5 and 6 we describe both
our proposed models for context-aware target apps selection and recommendation, respectively.
Section 7 then includes details on the experimental setup, followed by Section 8 discussing and
analyzing the results. Finally, Section 9 concludes the paper and discusses possible future directions
that stem from this work.
3https://github.com/aliannejadi/uSearch
4https://github.com/aliannejadi/istas
5https://github.com/aliannejadi/LSApp
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

2
RELATED WORK
Our work is related to the areas of mobile IR, context-aware search, target apps recommendation,
human interaction with mobile devices (mobile HCI), and proactive IR. Moreover, relevant related
research has been carried out in the areas of federated search and aggregated search and query
classification. In the following, we briefly summarize the related research in each of these areas.
A mobile IR system aims at enabling users to carry out all the classical IR operations on a
mobile device [23], as the conventional Web-based approaches fail to satisfy users’ information
needs on mobile devices [20]. Many researchers have tried to characterize the main differences in
user behavior on different devices throughout the years. In fact, Song et al. [53] found significant
differences in search patterns done using iPhone, iPad, and desktop. Studying search queries is
one of the main research topics in this area, as queries are one of the main elements of a search
session. Kamvar and Baluja [31] conducted a large-scale mobile search query analysis, finding
that mobile search topics were less diverse compared to desktop search queries. Analogously, Guy
[26] and Crestani and Du [22] conducted comparative studies on mobile spoken and typed queries
showing that spoken queries are longer and closer to natural language. All these studies show that
significant changes in user behavior are obvious. Change of the interaction mode, as well as the
purpose and change of the information need, are among the reasons for this change [6].
Moreover, there has been studies on how mobile search sessions compare with desktop search
sessions [12, 27, 28, 55]. van Berkel et al. [55] did a comprehensive analysis on how various
inactivity gaps can be used to define an app usage session on mobile devices where they concluded
that “researchers should ignore brief gaps in interaction.” Carrascal and Church [18] studied user
interactions with respect to mobile apps and mobile search, finding that users’ interactions with apps
impact search. Also, they found that mobile search session and app usage session have significant
differences.
Given that mobile devices provide rich contextual information about users’ whereabouts, a large
body of research has tried to study the effect of such information on users’ behavior. Church and
Oliver [19] did a diary and interview study to understand users’ mobile Web behavior. Aliannejadi
et al. [3] conducted a field study where the recruited participants completed various search tasks in
predefined time slots. They found that the temporal context, as well as the user’s current activity
mode (e.g., walking vs. sitting), influenced their perception of task difficulty and their overall search
performance.
Also, Sohn et al. [52] conducted a diary study in which they found that contextual features
such as activity and time influence 72% of mobile information needs. This is a very important
finding, as it implies that using such information can greatly impact system performance and user
satisfaction. In fact, research on proactive IR mainly focuses on this fact [13, 49]. Shokouhi and
Guo [49] analyzed user interactions with information cards and found that the usage patterns of
the proactive information cards depend on time, location, and the user’s reactive search history.
Proactive IR is very useful in a mobile context, where the user has a limited attention span for
the mobile device and the applications running on it. Similarly, Benetka et al. [13] studied how
various types of activities affect users’ information needs. They showed that not only information
needs vary across activities, but they also change during an activity. Our work follows a similar
line leveraging the changing context to determine the target apps for a given query.
Other works focused on a more comprehensive comparison of user behavior where they found
using information from user search sessions among different platforms can be used to improve
performance [40]. It has also been shown that using external information such as online reviews
can be used to improve the performance of search on mobile devices [43]. Park et al. [42] inferred
users’ implicit intentions from social media for the task of app recommendation. This last work
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

is closely related to our previous work [6] where we introduced the need for a unified mobile
search framework as we collected cross-app queries through crowdsourcing. In contrast, we collect
real-life cross-app queries over a longer period with an in situ study design in this work.
Research on unified mobile search has considerable overlap with federated, aggregated search,
and query classification. While federated search systems assume the environment to be uncoopera-
tive and data to be homogeneous, aggregated search systems blend heterogeneous content from
cooperative resources [9]. Target apps selection, on the other hand, assumes an uncooperative
environment with heterogeneous content. Federated search has a long history in IR for Web search.
In the case of uncooperative resources Callan and Connell [15] proposed a query-based sampling
approach to probe the resources. Markov and Crestani [39] carried out an extensive theoretical,
qualitative, and quantitative analysis of different resource selection approaches for uncooperative
resources. One could study probing for unified mobile search; however, we argue that apps could
potentially communicate more cooperatively, depending on how the operating system would
facilitate that. More recently, research on aggregated search has gained more attention. Aggre-
gated search share certain similarities with target apps selection in dealing with heterogeneous
data [50]. However, research on aggregated search often enjoys fully cooperative resources as the
resources are usually different components of the bigger search engine. For example, Diaz [25]
proposed modeling the query dynamics to detect news queries for integrating the news vertical
in SERP. Research on query classification has also been of interest for a long time in the field of
IR. Different strategies are used to assign a query to predefined categories. As mobile users are
constantly being distracted by external sources, the queries often vary a lot, and it is not easy to
determine if a query is related to the same information need that originated the previous query.
Kang and Kim [33] defined three types of queries, each of which requiring the search engine to
handle differently. Shen et al. [48] introduced an intermediate taxonomy used to classify queries
to specified target categories. Cao et al. [16] leveraged conditional random fields to incorporate
users’ neighboring queries in a session as context. More recently, Zamani and Croft [62] studied
word embedding vectors for the query classification task and proposed a formal model for query
embedding estimation.
Predicting app usage has been studied for a long time in the field. Among the first works that
tried to model app usage, Liao et al. [37] proposed an app widget where users would see a list of
recommended apps. Their model predicted the list of apps based on temporal usage profiles of
users. Also, Huang et al. [30] studied different prediction models on this problem, including linear
and Bayesian, where they found that contextual information, as well as sequential usage data, play
important roles for accurate prediction of app usage. As smartphones kept evolving throughout
these years, more data about various apps and users’ context became available. As a result, more
research focused on studying the effect of such information, as well as incorporating them into
prediction models. For instance, Lu et al. [38] studied the effect of location data and proposed a
model that takes into account GPS data together with other contextual information. Baeza-Yates
et al. [10] studied next app recommendation for improved home screen usage experience, extracting
a set of personal and contextual features in a more commercial setting. Lee et al. [35] found that
the usage probabilities of apps follow the Zipf’s law, as opposed to “inter-running” and running
times which follow log-normal distributions. Wang et al. [56] modeled the apps following the idea
of collaborative filtering, proposing a context-aware collaborative filtering model to unload and
pre-load apps. Xu et al. [59] modeled the sequential app usage using recurrent networks. Zhao et al.
[63] proposed the AppUsage2Vec model, inspired by doc2vec. Their proposed architecture includes
an app-attention mechanism and a dual-DNN layer.
As indicated in the literature, contextual and personal information have great impact in predicting
user behavior on mobile devices. Also, researchers in the areas of federated and aggregated search
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

Fig. 2. uSearch interface on LG Google Nexus 5 as well as the survey. Checkboxes are used to indicate the
target app for a query.
have shown that contextual information play an important role in improved performance. In this
work, we explore various sources of contextual information for both tasks. We also explore the use
of recent app usage data as an implicit source of contextual information for target apps selection
and show that it indeed provide useful contextual information to the model. Moreover, we study
the collected data for both tasks, aiming to shed more light on the task of target apps selection and
recommendation.
3
DATA COLLECTION
In this section, we describe how we collected ISTAS (In SiTu collection of cross-App mobile Search),
which is, to the best of our knowledge, the first in situ dataset on cross-app mobile search queries.
We collected the data in 2018 by recruiting 255 participants. The participants installed a simple
Android app, called uSearch, for at least 24 hours on their smartphones. We asked them to use
uSearch to report their real-life cross-app queries as well as the corresponding target apps. We first
describe the characteristics of uSearch. Then, we provide details on how we recruited participants
as well as the details on how we instructed them to report queries through the app. Finally, we give
details on how we checked the quality of the collected data.
3.1
uSearch
In order to facilitate the query report procedure, we developed uSearch, an Android app shown
in Figure 2. We chose the Android platform because, in comparison with iOS, it imposes less
restrictions in terms of sensor data collection and background app activity.
User interface. As shown in Figure 2, uSearch consists of three sections. The upper part lists all
the apps that are installed on the phone, with the most used apps ranked higher. The participants
were supposed to select the app in which they had carried out their real-life search (e.g., Facebook).
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

In the second section, the participants were supposed to enter exactly the same query that they had
entered in the target app (e.g., Facebook). Finally, the lower part of the app, provided them easy
access to a unique ID of their device and an online survey on their demographics and backgrounds.
Collected data. Apart from the participants’ input data, we also collected their interactions within
uSearch (i.e., taps and scrolling). Moreover, a background service collected the phone’s sensors data.
We collected data from the following sensors: (i) GPS; (ii) accelerometer; (iii) gyroscope; (iv) ambient
light; (v) WiFi; and (vi) cellular. Also, we collected other available phone data that can be used to
better understand a user’s context. The additional collected data are as follows: (i) battery level;
(ii) screen on/off events; (iii) apps usage statistics; and (iv) apps usage events. Note that apps usage
statistics indicate how often each app has been used in the past 24 hours, whereas apps usage
events provides more detailed app events.6 Apps usage events record user interactions in terms
of: (i) launching a specific app; (ii) interacting with a launched app; (iii) closing a launched app;
(iv) installing an app; and (v) uninstalling an app; The background service collected the data at a
predefined time interval. The data was securely transferred to a cloud service.
3.2
Collection Procedure
We recruited participants through an open call on Amazon Mechanical Turk.7 The study received the
approval of the ethics committee of the university. We provided a clear statement to the participants
about the kind of data that we were collecting and the purpose of the study. Furthermore, we used
secure encrypted servers to store users’ data. We asked the participants to complete a survey inside
uSearch. Moreover, we mentioned all the steps required to be done by the participants in order
to report a query. In short, we asked the participants to open uSearch after every search they did
using any installed app on their phones. Then, we asked them to report the app as well as the query
they used to perform their search task. We encouraged the participants to report their search as
soon as it occurs, as it was very crucial to capture their context at the right moment.
After running several pilot studies, over a period of 12 weeks we recruited 255 participants,
asking them to let the app running on their smartphones for at least 24 hours and report at least
5 queries. Since some people may not submit 5 search queries during the period of 24 hours, we
asked them to keep the app running on their phones after the first 24 hours until they report 5
queries. Also, we encouraged them to continue reporting more than 5 queries for an additional
reward. As incentive, we paid the participants $0.2 per query. We recruited participants only from
English-speaking countries.
3.3
Quality Check
During the course of data collection, we performed daily quality checks on the collected data. The
checks were done manually with the help of some data visualization tools that we developed. We
visualized the use of selected apps in the participant’s app-usage history in a timeline to validate a
user’s claim when they report using a specific app for their search. As we were paying participants a
reward per query, we carefully studied the submitted queries as well as user interactions to prevent
participants from reporting false queries. For each query, we checked the apps usage statistics and
events for the same day. If a participant reported a query in a specific app (e.g., Facebook) but we
could not find any recent usage events regarding that app, we assumed that the query was falsely
reported. Moreover, if a participant reported more than 10 queries per day, we took some extra
quality measures into account. Finally, we approved 6,877 queries out of 7,750 reported queries.
6https://developer.android.com/reference/android/app/usage/package-summary
7http://mturk.com
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

Fig. 3. Number of queries and active participants per day, during the course of data collection (best viewed in
color).
3.4
Data Transfer
To prevent unwanted career charges, we limited the data transfer to WiFi only. For this reason,
we provided a very flexible implementation to manage the data in our app. In our app design, the
data is stored locally as long as the device is not connected to a WiFi network. As soon as a WiFi
connection is available, the app uploads the data to the cloud server. We made this point very clear
in the instructions and asked the participants to take part in the study only if they had a strong
WiFi connection at home or office.
3.5
Privacy Concerns
Before asking for required app permissions, we made clear statement about our intentions on how
we were going to use the participants’ collected data as well as what was collected from their
devices. We ensured them that their data were stored on secure cloud servers and that they could
opt out of the study at any time. In that case we would remove all their data from the servers.
While granting apps usage access was mandatory, granting location access was optional. We asked
participants to allow uSearch access their locations only if they felt comfortable with that. Note that,
through the background service, we did not collect any other data that could be used to identify
participants.
4
DATA ANALYSIS
In this section, we describe the basic characteristics of ISTAS, and present a thorough analysis of
target apps, queries, sessions, and context.
4.1
Basic Statistics
ISTAS. During the period of 86 days, with the help of 255 participants, we collected 6,877 search
queries and their target apps as well as sensor and usage data. The collected raw data was over
300 gigabytes. Here, we summarize the main characteristics of the participants based on the
submitted surveys. Over 59% of the participants were female. Nearly 50% of them were aged
between 25-34, followed by 22% between 35-44, and 15% 18-24 years. Participants were from all
kinds of educational backgrounds ranging from high school diploma to PhD. In particular, 32% of
them had a college degree, followed by 30% with a bachelor’s degree. Smartphone was the main
device used for connecting to the Internet for 53% of the participants, followed by laptop (25%).
Among the participants, 67% used their smartphones more often for personal reasons rather than
for work. Finally, half of the participants stated that they use their smartphones 4 hours a day or
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

Table 1. Statistics of ISTAS.
# queries
6,877
# unique queries
6,262
# users
255
# unique apps
192
# search sessions
3,796
# days data collected
86
Mean queries per user
26.97 ± 50.21
Mean queries per session
1.81 ± 2.88
Mean queries per day
79.96 ± 101.27
Mean days of report per user
7.38 ± 15.95
Mean unique apps per user
5.14 ± 14.06
Mean query terms
3.00 ± 1.96
Mean query characters
17.53 ± 10.46
more. Table 1 lists basic characteristics of ISTAS. In the table we see that we received 26.97 ± 50.21
queries per user. Notice that the high value of standard deviation (= 50.21) is due to existence of
some users who submitted numerous queries. Moreover, Figure 3 shows the number of queries and
active participants per day during the data collection period. Note that, as shown in Figure 3, in the
first half collection period, we were mostly developing the visualization tools and did not recruit
many participants.
LSApp. We collected LSApp (Large dataset of Sequential mobile App usage) using the uSearch8
data collection tool during an eight-month period involving 292 users. Notice that 255 of the users
were the same people that were involved in collecting ISTAS. The extra 37 participants were the
ones that either did not submit any queries during this period, or submitted low-quality queries
and were removed in the quality check phase. Table 2 summarizes the statistics of LSApp. Since
we observed many repeated app usage records with very short differences in time (< 10 seconds),
we considered all repeated app usage records with less than one minute time difference as one
record. Also, as the app usage data includes various system apps, we filtered out background system
packages and kept only the most popular apps in the data. We identify the most popular apps based
on the data we collected in this dataset.
4.2
Apps
How apps are distributed. Figure 4 shows how queries are distributed with respect to the top 20
apps. We see that the top 20 apps account for 88% of the searches in ISTAS, showing that the app
distribution follows a power-law. While Google and Chrome queries respectively attract 26% and
23% of the target apps, users conduct half (51%) of their search tasks using other apps. This finding
is inline with what was shown in a previous work [6], even though we observe a higher percentage
of searches done using Google and Chrome apps. In [6], we collected a dataset cross-app queries
called UniMobile under a different experimental setup where we asked the participants to submit
cross-app queries for given search tasks. Therefore, the differences in the collected data can be due
to two reasons: (i) ISTAS is collected in situ and on mobile devices, thus being more realistic than
UniMobile; (ii) ISTAS queries reflect real-life information needs rather than a set of given search
tasks, hence the information need topics are more diverse than UniMobile. Moreover, we observe a
8https://github.com/aliannejadi/uSearch
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

Table 2. Statistics of LSApp.
# app usage records
599,635
# sessions
76,247
# unique apps
87
# users
292
Mean duration/user
15 days
Mean session time length
5:26
Median session time length
1:46
Mean unique apps in each session
2.18
Median unique apps in each session
2
Mean app switches within a session
5.46
Median app switches within a session
2
# train instances
464,903
# validation instances
66,300
# test instances
132,751
Fig. 4. Number of queries per app for top 20 apps in ISTAS.
notable variety of apps among the top 20 apps, such as Spotify and Contacts. We also see Google
Play Store among the top target apps. This suggests that people use their smartphones to search
for a wide variety of information, most of which were done with apps other than Google or Chrome.
It should also be noted that users seek the majority of their information needs on various apps,
even though there exists no unified mobile search system on their smartphones, suggesting that
they might even do a smaller portion of their searches using Google or Chrome, if a unified mobile
search system was available on their smartphones.
How apps are selected. Here, we analyze the behavior of the participants in ISTAS, as they
searched for real-life information needs, in terms of the apps they chose for performing the search.
Figure 5a shows the distribution of unique apps per user. We can see how many users selected a
certain number of unique apps, with an average of 5.14 unique apps per user. Again, this indicates
that users seek information in a set of diverse apps. It is worth noting that in Figure 5a, we observe
a totally different distribution compared to [6], where the average number of unique apps per user
was much lower. We believe this difference is due to the fact that the participants in our work
reported their real-life queries, as opposed to the crowdsourcing setup of [6].
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

(a) apps per user
(b) apps per session
Fig. 5. Distribution of unique apps per user and per session in ISTAS.
Table 3. Cross-app query attributes for 9 apps. The upper part of the table lists the distribution of number of
query terms as well as mean query terms per app. The lower part lists the query overlap at different similarity
thresholds (denoted by 𝜏) per app. All shows query distributions across all apps.
All
Google
YouTube
Facebook
Amazon Sh.
Maps
Gmail
G. Play Store
Spotify
Contacts
# terms
Query term distribution
1
22%
13%
11%
22%
12%
25%
57%
49%
29%
81%
2
28%
26%
29%
48%
45%
27%
30%
33%
35%
10%
3
20%
21%
24%
16%
25%
18%
9%
12%
24%
7%
4
12%
13%
18%
10%
10%
13%
3%
4%
7%
2%
> 4
17%
26%
17%
4%
10%
17%
1%
1%
6%
0%
Mean
3.00
3.49
3.19
2.34
2.74
3.07
1.61
1.75
2.31
1.31
𝜏
Query overlap
> 0.25
56%
39%
41%
28%
27%
26%
27%
25%
8%
14%
> 0.50
19%
11%
15%
13%
7%
11%
12%
12%
4%
10%
> 0.75
13%
5%
8%
11%
5%
9%
12%
10%
2%
10%
On the other hand, Figure 5b plots the distribution of unique apps with respect to sessions, which
is how many unique apps were selected during a single search session. We see an entirely different
distribution where the average number of unique apps per task is 1.36. This shows that while users
seek information using multiple apps, they are less open to switching between apps in a single
session. This can partly be due to the fact that switching between apps is not very convenient.
However, this behavior requires more investigation to be fully understood, that we leave for future
work.
4.3
Queries
In order to understand the differences in user behavior while formulating their information needs
using different apps, we conducted an analysis on the attributes of the queries with respect to their
target apps. First, we start by studying the number of query terms in each app for the top 9 apps in
ISTAS.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

How query length differs among apps. The upper part of Table 3 lists the distribution of the
number of query terms in the whole dataset (denoted by All) as well as in each app. It also lists the
average query terms per app. As we can see, the average query length is 3.00, which is slightly lower
than previous studies on mobile query analysis [26, 31]. However, the average query length for apps
that deal with general web search such as Google is higher (= 3.49). This indicates that users submit
shorter queries to other apps. For instance, we see that Contacts has the lowest average query
length (= 1.31), as its queries are mainly contact names. Also, Gmail and Google Play Store have

subject or an app name) . This difference shows a clear behavioral difference in formulating queries
using different apps. Moreover, we can see that the distribution of the number of query terms varies
among different apps; take Contacts as an example, whose single-term queries constitute 81%
of its query distributions, which are often names of user’s personal contacts. This indicates that
the structure of queries vary across the target apps. Studying the most frequent query unigrams
of each app also confirms this finding. For example, Google’s most popular unigrams are mostly
stopwords (i.e., “to”, “the”, “of”, “how”), whereas Facebook’s most popular unigrams are not (i.e.,
“art”, “eye”, “wicked”, “candy”).
How query similarity differs across apps. The lower part of Table 3 lists the query similarity
or query overlap using a simple function used in previous studies [6, 21]. We measure the query
overlap at various degrees and use the similarity function sim(𝑞1,𝑞2) = |𝑞1 ∩𝑞2|/|𝑞1 ∪𝑞2|, simply
measuring the overlap of query terms. We see that among all queries, 18% of them are similar to
no other queries. We see a different level of query overlap in queries belonging to different apps.
The highest overlap is among queries from Web search apps such as Chrome and Google. Lower
query similarity is observed for personal apps such as Facebook and for more focused apps such
as Amazon Shopping. Note that the query overlap is higher when all app queries are taken into
account (All), as opposed to individual apps. This shows that users tend to use the same query or a
very similar query when they switch between different apps, suggesting that switching between
apps is part of the information seeking or query reformulation procedure on mobile devices.
4.4
Sessions
ISTAS. A session is a “series of queries by a single user made within a small range of time” [51].
Similar to previous work [18, 31, 51], we consider a five-minute range of inactivity as closing a
session. ISTAS consists of 3,796 sessions, with 1.81 average queries per session. The majority of
sessions have only one query (= 66%). Similarly, as shown in Figure 5b, participants use only one
app in the majority of sessions (= 80%). We also studied how similar queries were distributed among
single-app sessions as compared to multiple-app sessions. We found that queries are similar to
each other in multiple-app sessions. More specifically, query overlap at the threshold of > 0.25 is
49% and 56% in single-app and multiple-app sessions, respectively. This suggests that users tend to
switch between apps to search for the same information need as they reformulate their queries.
LSApp. For consistency with the search sessions, we consider a five-minute range of inactivity
also for LSApp. It is worth noting that even though the relevant work suggests smaller inactivity
periods [18, 55], we assume that a session ends after five minutes of inactivity to tackle the noisy
app usage data and appearance of background services while the user is continuously using the
same app. The collection contains a total number of 61,632 app usage sessions. Table 2 reports the
mean and median length of sessions in terms of time, number of switches between apps. Also, we
report the mean and median number of unique apps that users launch in a session. Comparing
the number of app switches with unique apps, we see that in many sessions, users tend to work
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Google Chrome
Facebook
Google
Facebook Messenger
Instagram
Messages
Gmail
Telegram
Contacts
YouTube
WhatsApp Messenger
Twitter
Phone
Google Play Store
Maps
Camera
Reddit
Samsung Gallery
Hangouts
Hangouts
Samsung Gallery
Reddit
Camera
Maps
Google Play Store
Phone
Twitter
WhatsApp Messenger
YouTube
Contacts
Telegram
Gmail
Messages
Instagram
Facebook Messenger
Google
Facebook
Google Chrome
Communication
News & Magazines
Photography
Productivity
Social
Tools
Travel & Local
Video Players & Editors
Fig. 6. Heat map depicting co-occurrence of apps in same sessions with other apps in LSApp. The graph on
the left shows the co-occurrence at app level, whereas the one on the right shows it at category level. Popular
apps such as Google Chrome dominantly co-occur with most of other apps in various categories.
with two apps and do multiple switches between them. To gain more insight into the nature of app
switches, we perform the two analyses shown in Figures 6 and 7.
Our first goal here is to show how top-used apps in LSApp are used in the same session by
users. To this end, we count the number of co-occurrences in sessions and normalize the numbers
by summing over all co-occurrence values. Note that we describe the definition of an app usage
session in Section 4.4. Figure 6 illustrates the co-occurrence values in the form of a heat map with
other apps displayed based on individual apps on the left, as well as categories on the right. We
have used the official taxonomy of apps from Google Play Store. Since every app always co-occurs
with itself (hence having the maximum value of each row), we have set the diagonal values to
zero for a better quality of the figure. We see from the first column that Google Chrome has the
highest share of usage compared to other apps because it has the highest value of most rows. It is
interesting to see that users employ more popular apps such as Google together with the other
apps in most of the sessions. As argued in [6], users tend to use multiple apps to complete a single
search task. Switching between popular search apps in our data suggests the same behavioral
pattern is observed here. On the right side of the figure, we see how each app co-occurs with
other apps based on their categories. It is interesting to observe that some app features could affect
what type of apps co-occur. For example, observing the co-occurrences of the “Photography” app
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

Communication
Social
Tools
Entertainment
Health & Fitness
Music & Audio
News & Magazines
Photography
Productivity
Shopping
Travel & Local
Video Players & Editors
START
(a) Switch pattern among app categories.
Contacts
Messaging
Phone
Facebook
Facebook Messenger
Gmail
Hangouts
Instagram
Telegram
(b) Switch pattern among apps belonging to Social and Communi-
cation categories.
Fig. 7. App switch pattern in sessions with a Markov model on (a) app category level and (b) apps belonging
to two categories. Edges represent a transition probability of over 0.05. Edges are directed and weighted by
transition probability, with blue and red edges indicating over 0.2 and 0.4 transition probabilities, respectively.
category, we see that social networking apps such as Instagram and Telegram exhibit some of the
lowest co-occurrence values. This could be because of the photography features that already exist
in such apps. Conversely, we see that apps such as Messages and Gmail co-occur more frequently.
Also, we see that other apps belonging to the same or related categories are, in some cases, used
in a session. For example, we see that Phone co-occurs with Messaging and Contacts. It is also
interesting to observe the lowest row of the figure, showing the co-occurrence of Hangouts. We
see that while Hangouts exhibits high co-occurrence with social media apps like Facebook and
Instagram, it is not highly used in the same sessions with instant messaging apps such as WhatsApp
Messenger, Facebook Messenger, and Messages. This suggests that apps that fall into the same
high-level category (i.e., social networking) tend to co-occur in a session, as users achieve different
goals. However, users tend to use only one of the apps that fulfill very similar needs (i.e., instant
messaging).
We illustrate the transition probabilities between app categories in Figure 7a. The figure shows a
Markov model of how users switch between apps that belong to different categories in a session.
We see that the majority of sessions start with apps of Tools, Social, and Communication categories.
Although users switch between various categories of apps, we see that they mostly tend to use apps
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

Fig. 8. Time-of-the-day distribution of queries and unique apps (best viewed in color).
of the same categories in a single session. This suggests that perhaps the types of tasks they complete
in a single session can be done using a single or a set of apps with similar proposes (i.e., belong to
the same category). To explore the transition probabilities between apps, we show in Figure 7b a
Markov model of app transitions in sessions for Social and Communication apps. Here, we also see
that even though users switch often among different apps, there is a higher tendency to switch to
the same app (i.e., blue- and red-colored edges indicate higher probabilities). This suggests that
while users are trying to perform a task, they might be interrupted by environmental distractions or
notifications on their phones, closing the current app and opening it later. In particular we see a self-
transition probability of over 0.4 on Phone, Instagram, Hangouts, and Facebook. This is perhaps
related to the users’ tendency to engage with these apps for longer, leading to a higher probability
of interruption. Interestingly, we observe that native Communication apps (i.e., Contacts, and
Phone, Messaging) form a cluster on the left side of the figure, with users switching mainly among
the three apps while switching to other apps only through Messaging.
4.5
Context
Temporal behavior. We analyze the behavior of users as they search with respect to day-of-week
and time-of-day. We see that the distribution of queries on different days of week slightly peaks on
Fridays. Notice that in this analysis, we only include the users that participated in our study for
more than six days. Moreover, Figure 8 shows the distribution of queries and unique target apps
across time-of-day for all participants. Our findings agree with similar studies in the field [12, 28].
As we can see, more queries are submitted in the evenings, however we do not see a notable
difference in the number of unique target apps.
Apps usage context. We define a user’s apps usage context at a given time 𝑡as the apps usage
statistics of that specific user during the 24 hours before 𝑡. Apps usage statistics contain details
about the amount of time users spent on every app installed on their smartphones. This gives
valuable information on users’ personal app preferences as well as their contexts. For example, a
user who has interacted with travel guide apps in the past 24 hours is probably planning a trip in
the near future. Therefore, we analyze how users’ apps usage context can potentially help a target
app selection model. Figure 9 shows the histogram of target app rankings in the users’ apps usage
contexts. We see that participants often looked for information in the apps that they use more
frequently. For instance, 19% of searches were done on the most used app, followed by 10% on the
second most used app. We also see that, in most cases, as the ranking increases, the percentage of
target apps decreases, suggesting that incorporating users app usage context is critical for target
apps selection.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

Fig. 9. Apps usage context ranking distribution of relevant target apps. Lower values of x axis mean that the
app has been used more often in the past 24 hours.
5
CONTEXT-AWARE NEURAL TARGET APPS SELECTION
In this section, we propose a context-aware neural model called CNTAS (Context-aware Neural
Target Apps Selection), which is an extension to our recent neural target apps selection model (i.e.,
NTAS1) [6]. Our model takes as input a query 𝑞, a candidate app 𝑎, and the corresponding query
context 𝑐𝑞and produces a score indicating the likelihood of the candidate app 𝑎being selected by
the user as the target app for the query 𝑞. In the following, we first describe a general framework
for context-aware target apps selection and further explain how it is implemented and how context
is incorporated into the framework.
Formally, the CNTAS framework estimates the probability 𝑝(𝑆= 1|𝑞,𝑎,𝑐𝑞;𝐴), where 𝑆is a binary
random variable indicating whether the app 𝑎should be selected (𝑆= 1) or not (𝑆= 0). 𝐴denotes
the set of candidate apps. This set can be all possible apps, otherwise those that are installed on
the user’s mobile device, or again a set of candidate apps that is obtained by another model in a
cascade setting. The app selection probability in the CNTAS framework is estimated as follows:
𝑝(𝑆= 1|𝑞,𝑎,𝑐𝑞;𝐴) = 𝜓(𝜙𝑄(𝑞),𝜙𝐴(𝑎),𝜙𝐶(𝑐𝑞)) ,
(1)
where 𝜙𝑄, 𝜙𝐴, and 𝜙𝐶respectively denote query representation, app representation, and context
representation components. 𝜓is a target apps selection component that takes the mentioned
representations and generates an app selection score. These components can be implemented in
different ways. In addition, 𝑐𝑞can contain various types of query context, including search time,
search location, and the users apps usage.
We implement the component 𝜙𝑄with two major functions: an embedding function E : 𝑉→R𝑑
that maps each vocabulary term to a 𝑑-dimensional embedding space, and a global term weighting
function W : 𝑉→R that maps each vocabulary term to a real-valued number showing its global
importance. The matrices E and W are the network parameters in our model and are learned to
provide task-specific representations. The query representation component 𝜙𝑄represents a given
query 𝑞= {𝑤1,𝑤2, · · · ,𝑤|𝑞|} as follows:
𝜙𝑄(𝑞) =
|𝑞|
∑︁
𝑖=1
c
W(𝑤𝑖) · E(𝑤𝑖) ,
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

which is the weighted element-wise summation over the terms’ embedding vectors. c
W is the
normalized global weights computed using a softmax function as follows:
c
W(𝑤𝑖) =
exp(W(𝑤𝑖))
Í|𝑞|
𝑗=1 exp(W(𝑤𝑗))
.
This is a simple yet effective approach for query representation based on the bag of words
assumption, which has been proven to be effective for target apps selection [6] and ad-hoc retrieval
[24, 47].
To implement the app representation component 𝜙𝐴, we learn a 𝑑-dimensional dense represen-
tation for each app. More specifically, this component consists of an app representation matrix
A ∈R𝑁×𝑑where 𝑁denotes the total number of apps. Therefore, 𝜙𝐴(𝑎) returns a row of the matrix
A that corresponds to the app 𝑎.
Various context definitions can be considered to implement the context representation component.
General types of context, such as location and time, has been extensively explored in different
tasks, such as web search [14], personal search [60], and mobile search [29]. In this paper, we refer
to the apps usage time as context, which is a special type of context for our task. As introduced
earlier in Section 4.5, the apps usage context is the time that the user spent on each mobile app in
the past 24 hours of the search time. To implement 𝜙𝐶, we first compute a probabilistic distribution
based on the apps usage context, as follows:
𝑝(𝑎′|𝑐𝑞) =
time spent on app 𝑎′ in the past 24 hours
Í
𝑎′′∈𝐴time spent on app 𝑎′′ in the past 24 hours ,
where 𝐴is a set of candidate apps. 𝜙𝐶is then computed as:
𝜙𝐶(𝑐𝑞) =
∑︁
𝑎′∈𝐴
𝑝(𝑎′|𝑐𝑞) · A𝐶[𝑎′] ,
where A𝐶∈R𝑁×𝑑denotes an app representation matrix which is different from A used in the
app representation component. This matrix is supposed to learn app representations suitable
for representing the apps usage context. A𝐶[𝑎′] denotes the representation of app 𝑎′ in the app
representation matrix A𝐶.
In summary, each of the representation learning components 𝜙𝑄, 𝜙𝐴, and 𝜙𝐶returns a 𝑑-
dimensional vector. The app selection component is modeled as a fully-connected feed-forward
network with two hidden layers and the output dimensionality of 1. We use rectified linear unit
(ReLU) as the activation function in the hidden layers of the network. Sigmoid is used as the final
activation function. To avoid overfitting, the dropout technique [54] is employed. For each query,
the following vector is fed to this network:
(𝜙𝑄(𝑞) ◦𝜙𝐴(𝑎)) · |𝜙𝑄(𝑞) −𝜙𝐴(𝑎)| · (𝜙𝐶(𝑐𝑞) ◦𝜙𝐴(𝑎)) · |𝜙𝐶(𝑐𝑞) −𝜙𝐴(𝑎)| ,
where ◦denotes the Hadamard product, i.e., the element-wise multiplication, and · here means
concatenation. In fact, this component computes the similarity of the candidate app with the query
content and context, and estimates the app selection score based on the combination of both.
We train our model using pointwise and pairwise settings. In a pointwise setting, we use mean
squared error (MSE) as the loss function. MSE for a mini-batch 𝑏is defined as follows:
L𝑀𝑆𝐸(𝑏) = 1
|𝑏|
|𝑏|
∑︁
𝑖=1
(𝑦𝑖−𝜓(𝜙𝑄(𝑞𝑖),𝜙𝐴(𝑎𝑖),𝜙𝐶(𝑐𝑞𝑖)))2 ,
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

LSTM
LSTM
LSTM
LSTM
...
a1
a2
an-2
an-1
time steps
...
used apps
user
id
time
slot
an
fully-connected feedforward
softmax
Fig. 10. The architecture of NeuSA
where 𝑞𝑖, 𝑐𝑞𝑖, 𝑎𝑖, and 𝑦𝑖denote the query, the query context, the candidate app, and the label in the
𝑖th training instance of the mini-batch. For this training setting, we use a linear activation for the
output layer.
CNTAS can be also trained in a pairwise fashion. Therefore, each training instance consists
of a query, the query context, a target app, and a non-target app. To this end, we employ hinge
loss (max-margin loss function) that has been widely used in the learning to rank literature for
pairwise models [36]. Hinge loss is a linear loss function that penalizes examples violating the
margin constraint. For a mini-batch 𝑏, hinge loss is defined as below:
L𝐻𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒(𝑏) = 1
|𝑏|
|𝑏|
∑︁
𝑖=1
max {0, 1 −sign(𝑦𝑖1 −𝑦𝑖2)(b𝑦𝑖1 −b𝑦𝑖2)} ,
where b𝑦𝑖𝑗= 𝜓(𝜙𝑄(𝑞𝑖),𝜙𝐴(𝑎𝑖𝑗),𝜙𝐶(𝑐𝑞𝑖)).
6
PERSONALIZED TIME-AWARE TARGET APPS RECOMMENDATION
In this section, we propose a neural sequence-aware model called NeuSA (Neural Sequential target
App recommendation), which captures the sequential dependencies of apps as well as users behavior
with respect to their usage patterns (i.e., the personal app sequence) and temporal behavior. In the
following, we first describe an overview of our target apps recommendation and further explain
how it is implemented.
Formally, NeuSA estimates the probability 𝑝(𝐿= 1|𝑢,𝑎,𝑐𝑢;𝐴), where 𝐿is a binary random
variable indicating whether the app 𝑎should be launched (𝐿= 1) or not (𝐿= 0). 𝐴denotes the set
of candidate apps. Similar to CNTAS, this set can be either all apps, those that are installed on
the user’s mobile device, or a set of candidate apps that is obtained by another model in a cascade
setting. The app recommendation probability in the NeuSA framework is estimated as follows:
𝑝(𝐿= 1|𝑢,𝑎,𝑐𝑢;𝐴) = 𝜓(𝜙𝑈(𝑢),𝜙𝐴(𝑎),𝜙𝐶(𝑐𝑢)) ,
where 𝜙𝑈, 𝜙𝐴, and 𝜙𝐶(𝑐𝑢) denote user, app, and user context representation components, respec-
tively. 𝜓is a target apps recommendation component that takes the mentioned representations and
generates a recommendation score. Any of these components can be implemented in different ways.
In addition, 𝑐𝑢can contain various types of user context, including time, location, and sequence of
previously-used apps.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

We implement the component 𝜙𝑈with an embedding function E : U →R𝑑that maps a user
to a 𝑑-dimensional embedding space. The matrix E is the network parameter in our model and is
learned to provide task-specific representations.
To implement the app representation component 𝜙𝐴, we learn a 𝑑-dimensional dense repre-
sentation for each app. In more detail, this component consists of an app representation matrix
A ∈R𝑁×𝑑where 𝑁denotes the total number of apps. Therefore, 𝜙𝐴(𝑎) returns a row of the matrix
A that corresponds to the app 𝑎.
General types of context, such as location and time, has been extensively explored in different
tasks, such as web search [14] and mobile search [29]. In this paper, we refer to the 𝑘previously-used
apps and time as context with 𝑘= 9. Therefore, we define a window of size 𝑘and consider the
sequence of used apps just before the time of recommendation as the sequence context. Follow-
ing [11], we break a full day (i.e., 24 hours) into 8 equal time bins (early morning - late night). To
implement 𝜙𝐶, we first compute a probabilistic distribution based on the apps usage records, as
follows:
𝑝(𝑎′|𝑐𝑢) =
time spent on app 𝑎′ in the current time bin
Í
𝑎′′∈𝐴time spent on app 𝑎′′ in the current time bin ,
where 𝐴is a set of candidate apps. 𝜙𝐶is then computed as:
𝜙𝐶(𝑐𝑢) =
∑︁
𝑎′∈𝐴
𝑝(𝑎′|𝑐𝑢) · A[𝑎′] ,
where A ∈R𝑁×𝑑denotes an app representation matrix. This matrix is supposed to learn app
representations suitable for representing sequences of apps. A[𝑎′] denotes the representation of
app 𝑎′ in the app representation matrix A.
Each of the representation learning components 𝜙𝑈, 𝜙𝐴, and 𝜙𝐶returns a 𝑑-dimensional vector.
The app recommendation component is modeled as a recurrent neural network (RNN) consisting
of Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) units. After modeling the sequence of apps in this layer,
the parameters, together with user and time features are passed to a fully-connected feedforward
network with two hidden layers. We use rectified linear unit (ReLU) as the activation function
in the hidden layers of the network. Softmax is used as the final activation function. To avoid
overfitting, the dropout technique [54] is employed. We train our model using pointwise training
setting where we use cross entropy as the loss function. Figure 10 depicts the architecture of our
proposed network.
7
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed model in comparison with a set of
baseline models.
7.1
Target Apps Selection
Data. We evaluate the performance of our proposed models on the ISTAS dataset. We follow two
different strategies to split the data: (i) In ISTAS-R, we randomly select 70% of the queries for
training, 10% for validation, and 20% for testing; (ii) In ISTAS-T, we sort chronologically the queries
of each user and keep the first 70% of each user’s queries for training, the next 10% for validation,
and the last 20% for testing. ISTAS-T is used to evaluate the methods when information about users’
search history is available. To minimize random bias, for ISTAS-R we repeated the experiments 10
times and report the average performance. The hyper-parameters of all models were tuned based

ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

Evaluation metrics. Effectiveness is measured by four standard evaluation metrics that were also
used in [6]: mean reciprocal rank (MRR), and normalized discounted cumulative gain for the top 1,

differences using the two-tailed paired t-test with Bonferroni correction at a 95% confidence interval
(𝑝< 0.05).
Compared methods. We compared the performance of our model with the following methods:
• MFU (Most Frequently Used): For every query we rank the apps in the order of their popularity in
the training set as a static (query independent) model.
• QueryLM, BM25, BM25-QE: For every app we aggregate all the relevant queries from the training
set to build a document representing the app. QueryLM is the query likelihood retrieval model [45].
For BM25-QE, we adopt Bo1 [8] for query expansion. We use the Terrier [41] implementation of
these methods.
• k-NN, k-NN-AWE: To find the nearest neighbors in k nearest neighbors (k-NN), we consider the
cosine similarity between the TF-IDF vectors of queries. Then, we take the labels (apps) of the
nearest queries and produce the app ranking. As for k-NN-AWE [62], we compute the cosine
similarity between the average word embedding (AWE) of the queries obtained from GloVe [44]
with 300 dimensions.
• ListNet, ListNet-CX: For every query-app pair, we use the scores obtained by BM25-QE, k-NN,
k-NN-AWE, and MFU as features to train ListNet [17] implemented in RankLib9. For every query,
we consider all irrelevant apps as negative samples. ListNet-CX also includes users’ apps usage
context as an additional feature.
• NTAS: A neural model approach that we designed for the target apps selection task in our previous
work [6]. We use the NTAS1 model due to its superior performance compared to NTAS2.
• Contextual baselines: In order to carry out a fair comparison between CNTAS and other context-
aware baselines, we apply a context filter to all non-contextual baselines. We create the context
filter as follows: for every app 𝛼in the training samples of user 𝑢, we take the time that 𝑢has
spent on 𝛼in the past 24 hours as its score. We then perform a linear interpolation with the
scores of all the mentioned baselines. Note that all scores are normalized. All these models are
denoted by a -CR suffix.
7.2
Target Apps Recommendation
Data. For every user, we take the 70% earliest app usage records as training set, 10% next records
as validation, and 20% latest records as test set.
Evaluation metrics. Effectiveness is measured by 6 standard evaluation metrics: mean reciprocal

choice of evaluation metrics was motivated by the two main purposes of app recommendation we

well a model is able to pre-load the next app among the top 𝑘predicted apps.
We determine the statistically significant differences using the two-tailed paired t-test at a 99.9%
confidence interval (𝑝< 0.001). Note that we apply the Bonferroni correction for the test against
the baselines (i.e., * in Table 6).
We compare the performance of our models with the following methods:
9https://sourceforge.net/p/lemur/wiki/RankLib/
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

• MFU (Most Frequently Used): For every test instance we rank the apps in the order of their
popularity in the training set as a static recommendation model.
• MRU (Most Recently Used): For every test instance we rank the apps in the order of the their
interaction time, so that the most recent apps are ranked higher.
• Bayesian & Linear [30]: We implement the two baselines proposed by Huang et al. [30], namely,
Bayesian and Linear. Both baselines incorporate various contextual information in modeling app
usage. In this work, we only use the contextual information available in our dataset, i.e., time,
weekday, user, and previous app.
• LambdaMART & ListNet: For a given candidate app and every app in the sequence context,
we compute the cosine similarity of their representation and consider it as a feature. The app
representations are the average word embedding (AWE) of app descriptions on Google Play Store.
Other features include the recommendation time and current user. These features were used to
train LambdaMART and ListNet as state-of-the-art learning to rank (LTR) methods, implemented
in RankLib.10
• k-NN & DecisionTree: Similar to LTR baselines, we take AWE similarity between app pairs as
well as user and time as classification features. We also include the apps that appear in the
context sequence as additional features. We train kNN and DecisionTree classifiers implemented
in scikit-learn.11
• TempoLSTM [59] models the sequence of apps using a two-layer network of LSTM units. The
temporal information as well as the application is directly passed to each LSTM node.
• NeuSA w/o user, NeuSA w/o time & NeuSA w/o user, w/o time: These are three variations of our model. The
only difference is in the use of time and user features in the models. NeuSA w/o user is trained
without user data; NeuSA w/o time without time data; and NeuSA w/o user, w/o time without neither of
them.
8
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In the following, we evaluate the performance of CNTAS trained on both data splits and study the
impact of context on the performance. We further analyze how the models perform on both data
splits.
8.1
Target Apps Selection
Performance comparison. Table 4 lists the performance of our proposed methods versus the
compared methods. First, we compare the relative performance drop between the two data splits.
We see that almost all non-contextual models perform worse on ISTAS-T compared to ISTAS-R,
whereas almost all context-aware models perform better on ISTAS-T. Among the non-contextual
methods, ListNet is the most robust model with the lowest performance drop and k-NN-AWE is the
only method that performs better on ISTAS-T (apart from MFU). Worse results achieved by MFU
suggests that ISTAS-T is less biased towards most popular apps, hence being more challenging. On
the other hand, QueryLM exhibits the highest performance drop (−27% on average), as opposed to
Contextual-k-NN-AWE with the highest performance improvement on ISTAS-T (+10% on average).
This indicates that k-NN-AWE is able to capture similar queries effectively, whereas QueryLM
relies heavily on the indexed queries. It should also be noted that MFU performs better on ISTAS-T
indicating that it is more biased towards popular apps.
Among the non-contextual baselines, we see that NTAS-pairwise performs best in terms of most
evaluation metrics on both data splits, this is because it learns high dimensional app and query
10https://sourceforge.net/lemur/wiki/RankLib/
11https://scikit-learn.org/
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

Table 4. Performance comparison with baselines on ISTAS-R and ISTAS-T datasets. The superscript * denotes
significant differences compared to all the baselines.
Methods
ISTAS-R Dataset
ISTAS-T Dataset
MRR

MRR

MFU
0.4502
0.2597
0.4435
0.4891
0.4786
0.2884
0.4752
0.5173
QueryLM
0.3556
0.2431
0.3534
0.3900
0.2706
0.1486
0.2713
0.3097
BM25
0.4205
0.3134
0.4363
0.4564
0.3573
0.2447
0.3771
0.3948
BM25-QE
0.4319
0.2857
0.4371
0.4727
0.3930
0.2411
0.4053
0.4364
k-NN
0.4433
0.2761
0.4455
0.4811
0.4067
0.2294
0.3982
0.4655
k-NN-AWE
0.4742
0.2937
0.4815
0.5211
0.4859
0.2950
0.4919
0.5392
ListNet
0.5170
0.3330
0.5211
0.5623
0.5118
0.3219
0.5208
0.5572
NTAS-pointwise
0.5221
0.3427
0.5231
0.5586
0.5162
0.3385
0.5162
0.5550
NTAS-pairwise
0.5257
0.3468
0.5236
0.5618
0.5214
0.3427
0.5183
0.5580
Context-Aware Methods
MFU-CR
0.4903
0.3015
0.4901
0.5268
0.5289
0.3576
0.5358
0.5573
QueryLM-CR
0.4540
0.2773
0.4426
0.5013
0.4696
0.3023
0.4597
0.5145
BM25-CR
0.5398
0.3653
0.5394
0.5871
0.5249
0.3496
0.5255
0.5723
BM25-QE-CR
0.5215
0.3398
0.5223
0.5693
0.5230
0.3474
0.5260
0.5728
k-NN-CR
0.4978
0.3114
0.4926
0.5431
0.5161
0.3481
0.4956
0.5555
k-NN-AWE-CR
0.5144
0.3233
0.5142
0.5632
0.5577
0.3722
0.5612
0.6086
ListNet-CR
0.5391
0.3544
0.5417
0.5845
0.5599
0.3780
0.5657
0.6037
ListNet-CX
0.5349
0.3580
0.5343
0.5784
0.5019
0.3139
0.5153
0.5521
NTAS-pointwise-CR
0.5532
0.3745
0.5580
0.5883
0.5627
0.3865
0.5663
0.5965
NTAS-pairwise-CR
0.5576
0.3779
0.5568
0.5870
0.5683
0.3923
0.5661
0.6047
CNTAS-pointwise
0.5614*
0.3833*
0.5592
0.5901
0.5702*
0.4146*
0.5655
0.5938
CNTAS-pairwise
0.5637*
0.3861*
0.5586
0.5924*
0.5738*
0.4182*
0.5679
0.6071
Fig. 11. Performance comparison with respect to certain apps with and without context.
representations which help it to perform more effectively. We see that applying the contextual filter
improves the performance of all models. These improvements are statistically significant in all cases,
so are not shown in the table. Although this filter is very simple, it is still able to incorporate useful
information about user context and behavior into the ranking. This also indicates the importance
of apps usage context, as mentioned in Section 4.5. Among the context-aware baselines, we see

ListNet-CR perform better in terms of other evaluation metrics. It should also be noted that ListNet-
CR performs better than ListNet-CX. This happens due to the fact that ListNet-CX integrates the
apps usage context as an additional feature, whereas ListNet-CR is the result of the combination of
ListNet and the contextual filter.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

(a) ΔMRR per app
(b) ΔMRR per user
Fig. 12. Performance difference per app and per user in terms of ΔMRR.
We see that our proposed CNTAS outperforms all the baselines with respect to the majority of
evaluation metrics. In particular CNTAS-pairwise exhibits the best performance. The achieved

is able to learn latent features from the interaction of mobile usage data in the context. These
interactions can reveal better information for better understanding the user information needs.
Impact of context on performance per app. In this experiment we demonstrate the effect of
context on the performance with respect to various apps. Figure 11 shows the performance for
queries that are labeled for specific target apps (as listed in the figure). We see that the context-
aware model performs better while predicting social media apps such as Facebook and Instagram.
However, we see that the performance for Google drops as it improves for Chrome. This happens
because users do most of their browsing activities on Chrome, rather than on Google; hence the
usage statistics of Chrome helps the model to predict it more effectively. Moreover, we study the
difference of MRR between the model with and without context for all apps. Our goal is to see how
context improves the performance for every target app. We see in Figure 12a that the performance is
improved for 39% of the apps. As shown in the figure, the improvements are much larger compared
with the performance drops. Among the apps with the highest context improvements, we can
mention Quora, Periscope, and Inbox.
Impact of context on performance per user. Here we study the difference of MRR between
the model with and without context for all users. Our goal is to see how many users are impacted
positively by incorporating context in the target apps selection model. Figure 12b shows how
performance differs per user when we apply context compared with when we do not. As we can
see, users’ apps usage context is able to improve the effectiveness of target apps selection for the
majority of users. In particular, the performance for 57% of the users is improved by incorporating
the apps usage context. In fact, we observed that users with the highest impact from context use
less popular apps.
Impact of context on performance per query length. We create three buckets of test queries
based on query length uniformly. Therefore, the buckets will have approximately equal number
of queries. The first bucket, called Short queries, contains the shortest queries, the second one,
called Med. queries, constitutes of medium-length queries and the last bucket, called Long queries,
obviously includes the longest queries of our test set. Table 5 lists the performance of the model
with and without context in terms of MRR. As we can see, the average MRR for all three buckets
is improved as we apply context. However, we observe that as the queries become shorter, the
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

Table 5. Performance analysis based on query length, dividing the test queries into three evenly-sized length
buckets.
Short queries
Med. queries
Long queries
MRR
MRR
MRR
w/o context
0.5302
0.4924
0.4971
w/ context
0.5733
0.5190
0.4977
Table 6. Performance comparison with baselines on the LSApp dataset. The superscripts ∗, ★, †, and ‡ denote
significant improvements compared to all the baselines, NeuSA w/o user, w/o time, NeuSA w/o user, and NeuSA
w/o time respectively (𝑝< 0.001).
Method
MRR

MFU
0.2630
0.1009
0.2800
0.3413
0.3229
0.4554
MRU
0.3652
0.0323
0.3232
0.4106
0.2928
0.4898
Bayesian [30]
0.1461
0.0679
0.1506
0.1687
0.1664
0.2047
Linear [30]
0.1363
0.0592
0.1433
0.1626
0.1636
0.2043
LambdaMART
0.3809
0.2257
0.4532
0.4739
0.4734
0.4958
ListNet
0.4992
0.3908
0.5477
0.5683
0.5632
0.6069
k-NN
0.4824
0.3699
0.5158
0.5519
0.5396
0.6165
DecisionTree
0.5025
0.4422
0.5315
0.5375
0.5343
0.5471
TempoLSTM [59]
0.6869
0.5715
0.7424
0.7730
0.7668
0.8316
NeuSAw/o user, w/o time
0.6924∗
0.5677
0.7539∗
0.7817∗
0.7817∗
0.8547∗
NeuSAw/o user
0.6971∗★
0.5721★
0.7592∗★
0.7940∗★
0.7873∗★
0.8608∗★
NeuSAw/o time
0.7036∗★†
0.5745∗
0.7672∗★†
0.8053∗★†
0.7964∗★†
0.8770∗★†
NeuSA
0.7049∗★†‡
0.5763∗★†
0.7680∗★†
0.8062∗★†
0.7969∗★†
0.8779∗★†
improvement increases. The reason is that shorter queries tend to be more general or ambiguous,
and thus query context can have higher impact on improving search for these queries.
8.2
Target Apps Recommendation
In the following, we evaluate the performance of NeuSA trained on LSApp and study the impact of
time and user features as well as of the learned app representations.
Performance comparison. Table 6 lists the performance of our proposed method as well as its
variations and baselines. As we can see, ListNet exhibits the best performance among LTR baselines
and DecisionTree among classification baselines. Moreover, all models outperform MFU in terms of

allowing most used apps to run in the background is not effective. Also, we see that while ListNet
consistently outperforms LambdaMART, k-NN exhibits a better performance than DecisionTree in

statistical baselines, namely, Bayesian and Linear. The large margin in the performance of simple
models such as k-NN with these two models indicates the effectiveness of representation-based
features (i.e., AWE similarity) for this task. Furthermore, we see that NeuSA outperforms all the
baselines by a large margin in terms of all evaluation metrics. For instance, we see a 39% relative
improvement over DecisionTree in terms of MRR and a 40% relative improvement over k-NN in

apps enables the model to capture users behavioral patterns in using their smartphones. It is worth
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

3
6
9
12
15
18
# previously-used apps (k)
0.690
0.692
0.694
0.696
0.698
0.700
0.702
0.704
MRR
Fig. 13. Performance of NeuSA in terms of MRR for different number of previously-used apps as context (𝑘).

able to pre-load 5 apps with an 87% recall value.
Impact of time and user features. To evaluate the impact of time and user features we compare
the performance of NeuSA with three variations called NeuSA w/o user, NeuSA w/o time, and NeuSA
w/o user, w/o time. As we described earlier, these three models are trained after removing user and time
features from the data. We see that in all cases, the performance consistently drops. In particular, we
see that when both user and time features are removed, NeuSA w/o user, w/o time exhibits the largest
performance loss, while still outperforming all the baseline models for the majority of metrics.
As we add the user feature to the model, we see that the performance improves, showing that
a personalized app recommendation model is effective. In particular, we see that NeuSA w/o time
outperforms NeuSA w/o user, w/o time significantly in terms of all evaluation metrics. Also, we see
a large drop of performance when we remove the user data from NeuSA, confirming again that
personal app usage patterns should be taken into consideration for this problem. Therefore, a
practical system can be trained on a large dataset of app usage from various users and be fine-tuned
on every user’s phone according to their personal usage behavior. Furthermore, although we see
that adding time to NeuSA w/o user, w/o time model results in significant improvements (i.e., NeuSA
w/o user), we do not observe the same impact after adding the user data to the model (comparing
NeuSA against NeuSA w/o time). This suggests that while temporal information contain important
information revealing time-dependent app usage patterns, it does not add useful information to
the personal model. This can be due to the fact that the personal information already conveys the
temporal app usage behavior of the user (i.e., each user temporal behavior is unique).
Impact of number of the context length. Here, we evaluate the effect of the number of previously-
used apps that we consider in our NeuSA model. To do so, we keep all the model parameters the
same and change the number of apps in the context (𝑘). We plot the performance of NeuSA for
various 𝑘values in Figure 13. As we see in the figure, even though the performance somewhat
converges with 𝑘≥3, the best performance is achieved with 𝑘= 9. This indicates that while the
model depends highly on the latest three apps that have been used by the user, it can learn some
longer patterns in some rare cases. Moreover, it is worth noting that the model’s performance using
only one app in the context in terms of MRR is 0.5509, indicating that using only one app is not
enough for accurate prediction of next-app usage.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

9
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we conducted the first in situ study on the task of target apps selection, which
was motivated by the growing interest in intelligent assistants and conversational search systems
where users interact with a universal voice-based search system [1, 4, 7, 34, 61]. To this aim, we
developed an app, uSearch, and recruited 255 participants, asking them to report their real-life
cross-app mobile queries via uSearch. We observed notable differences in length and structure
among queries submitted to different apps. Furthermore, we found that while users search using
various apps, a few apps attract most of the search queries. We found that even though Google
and Chrome are the most popular apps, users do only 26% and 23% of their searches in these apps,
respectively. The in situ data collection enabled us to collect valuable information about users’
contexts. For instance, we found that the target app for 29% of the queries were among the top
two most used apps of a particular user. Inspired by our data analysis, we proposed a model that
learns high-dimensional latent representations for the apps usage context and predicts the target
app for a query. The model was trained with an end-to-end setting. Our model produces a score
for a given context-query-app triple. We compared the performance of our proposed method with
state-of-the-art retrieval baselines splitting data following two different strategies. We observed
that our approach outperforms all baselines, significantly.
Furthermore, we proposed a neural sequence-aware model, called NeuSA, for predicting next
app usage. NeuSA learns a high-dimensional representation for mobile apps, incorporating the
app usage sequence as well as temporal and personal information into the model. We trained the
model on the app usage data collected from 292 real users. The results showed that the proposed
model is able to capture complex user behavioral patterns while using their phones, outperforming

Limitations. Like any other study, our study has some limitations. First, the study relies on
self-reporting. This could result in specific biases in the collected data. For instance, participants
may prefer to report shorter queries simply because it requires less work. Also, in many cases,
participants are likely to forget reporting queries or do not report all the queries that belong to the
same session. Second, the reported queries are not actually submitted to a unified search system
and users may formulate their queries differently is such setting. For example, in a unified system
a query may be “videos of Joe Bonamassa” but in YouTube it may be “Joe Bonamassa.” Both the
mentioned limitations are mainly due to lack of an existing unified mobile search app. Hence,
building such app would be essential for building a more realistic collection. Also, our study does
not consider the users’ success or failure in their search. Submitting queries in certain apps could
result in different chances of success, and consequently, affect users’ behavior in the session to
submit other queries in the same app or other apps. Finally, more efficient data collection strategies
could be employed based on active learning [46].
Future work. The next step in this research would be exploring the influence of other types of
contextual information, such as location and time, on the target apps selection and recommendation
tasks. In addition, it would be interesting to explore result aggregation and presentation in the
future, considering two important factors: information gain and user satisfaction. This direction can
be studied in both areas of information retrieval and human-computer interaction. Furthermore,
based on our findings in the analyses, we believe that mobile search queries can be leveraged
to improve the user experience. For instance, assuming a user searches for a restaurant using a
unified search system and finds some relevant information on Yelp. In this case, considering the
user’s personal preference as well as the context, the system could send the user a notification with
information about the traffic near the restaurant. This would certainly improve the quality of the
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 0, No. 0, Article 0. Publication date: 2019.

user experience. We also plan to investigate if the demographics of the participants are linked to
particular queries and behavior. And if such behavioral biases exist, how different models are able
to address such issues?
Acknowledgements. We thank the anonymous reviewers for the valuable feedback. This work
was supported in part by the RelMobIR project of the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF), and
in part by the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval. Any opinions, findings and conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect those of the sponsors.
