High Dimensional Robust M-Estimation: Arbitrary
Corruption and Heavy Tails
Liu Liu

Tianyang Li

Constantine Caramanis

The University of Texas at Austin
Abstract
We consider the problem of sparsity-constrained M-estimation when both explanatory and
response variables have heavy tails (bounded 4-th moments), or a fraction of arbitrary corruptions.
We focus on the k-sparse, high-dimensional regime where the number of variables d and the sample
size n are related through n ∼k log d. We deﬁne a natural condition we call the Robust Descent
Condition (RDC), and show that if a gradient estimator satisﬁes the RDC, then Robust Hard
Thresholding (IHT using this gradient estimator), is guaranteed to obtain good statistical rates.
The contribution of this paper is in showing that this RDC is a ﬂexible enough concept to recover
known results, and obtain new robustness results.
Speciﬁcally, new results include: (a) For
k-sparse high-dimensional linear- and logistic-regression with heavy tail (bounded 4-th moment)
explanatory and response variables, a linear-time-computable median-of-means gradient estimator
satisﬁes the RDC, and hence Robust Hard Thresholding is minimax optimal; (b) When instead of
heavy tails we have O(1/
√
k log(nd))-fraction of arbitrary corruptions in explanatory and response
variables, a near linear-time computable trimmed gradient estimator satisﬁes the RDC, and hence
Robust Hard Thresholding is minimax optimal. We demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our approach
in sparse linear, logistic regression, and sparse precision matrix estimation on synthetic and real-
world US equities data.
1
Introduction
M-estimation is a standard technique for statistical estimation [vdV00]. The past decade has seen
successful extensions of M-estimation to the high dimensional setting with sparsity (or other low-
dimensional structure), e.g., using Lasso [Tib96, BvdG11, HTW15, Wai19]. Yet sparse modeling in
high dimensions is NP-hard in the worst case [BDMS13, ZWJ14]. Thus theoretical sparse recovery
guarantees for most computationally tractable approaches (e.g., ℓ1 minimization [Don06, CRT04,
Wai09], Iterative Hard Thresholding [BD09]) rely on strong assumptions on the probabilistic models
of the data, such as sub-Gaussianity. Under such assumptions, these approaches achieve the minimax
rate for sparse regression [RWY11].
Meanwhile, statistical estimation with heavy tailed outliers or even arbitrary corruptions has long
been a focus in robust statistics [Box53, Tuk75, Hub11, HRRS11].1 But heavy-tails and arbitrary
corruptions in the data violate the assumptions required for convergence of the usual algorithms. A
central question then, is what assumptions are suﬃcient to enable eﬃcient and robust algorithms for
high dimensional M-estimation under heavy tails or arbitrary corruption.
Huber’s seminal work [Hub64] and more modern followup work [Loh17] has considered replacing
the classical least squared risk minimization objective with a robust counterpart (e.g., Huber loss).
Other approaches (e.g., [Li13]) considered regularization-based robustness approaches. However, when
there are outliers in the explanatory variables (covariates), these approaches do not seem to succeed
[CCM13]. Meanwhile, approaches combining recent advances in robust mean estimation and gradient
descent have proved remarkably powerful in the low-dimensional setting [PSBR18, KKM18, DKK+18],
1Following [Min18, FWZ16], by heavy-tail we mean satisfying only weak moment bounds, speciﬁcally, bounded 4-th
order moments (compared to sub-exponential or sub-Gaussian).
1
arXiv:1901.08237v2  [cs.LG]  29 May 2019

but for high dimensions, have so far only managed to address the setting where the covariance of the
explanatory variables is the identity, or sparse [BDLS17, LSLC18]. Meanwhile, ﬂexible and statistically
optimal approaches ([Gao17]) have relied on intractable estimators such as Tukey-depth.
For the heavy-tail setting, another line of research considers estimators such as Median-of-Means
(MOM) [NY83, JVV86, AMS99, Min15] and Catoni’s mean estimator [Cat12, Min18] only use weak
moment assumptions. [Min15, BJL15, HS16] generalized these ideas to M-estimation, yet it is not
clear if these approaches apply to the high-dimensional setting with heavy tailed covariates.
Main Contributions. In this paper, we develop a suﬃcient condition that when satisﬁed, guar-
antees that an eﬃcient algorithm (a variant of IHT) achieves the minimax optimal statistical rate.
We show that our condition is ﬂexible enough to apply to a number of important high-dimensional
estimation problems under either heavy tails, or arbitrary corruption of the data. Speciﬁcally:
1. We consider two models. For our arbitrary corruption model, we assume that an adversary re-
places an arbitrary ϵ-fraction of the authentic samples with arbitrary values (Deﬁnition 2.1). For
the heavy-tailed model, we assume our data (response and covariates) satisfy only weak moment
assumptions (Deﬁnition 2.2) without sub-Gaussian or sub-exponential concentration bounds.
2. We propose a notion that we call the Robust Descent Condition (RDC). Given any gradient es-
timator that satisﬁes the RDC, we deﬁne RHT – Robust Hard Thresholding (Algorithm 1) for
sparsity constrained M-estimation, and prove that Algorithm 1 converges linearly to a minimax
statistically optimal solution. Thus the RDC and Robust Hard Thresholding form the basis for a
Deterministic Meta-Theorem (Theorem 3.1) that guarantees estimation error rates as soon as the
RDC property of any gradient estimator can be certiﬁed.
3. We then obtain non-asymptotic bounds via certifying the RDC for diﬀerent robust gradient es-
timators under various statistical models. (A) For corruptions in both response and explanatory
variables, we show the trimmed gradient estimator satisﬁes the RDC. Thus our algorithm RHT
has minimax-optimal statistical error, and tolerates O(1/(
√
k log(nd)))-fraction of outliers. This
fraction is nearly independent of the d, which is important in the high dimension regime. (B) In the
heavy tailed regime, we use the Median-of-Means (MOM) gradient estimator. Our RHT algorithm
obtains the sharpest available error bound, in fact nearly matching the results in the sub-Gaussian
case. With either of these gradient estimators, our algorithm is computationally eﬃcient, nearly
matching vanilla gradient descent. This is in particular much faster than algorithms relying on
sparse PCA relaxations as subroutines ([BDLS17, LSLC18]).
4. We use Robust Hard Thresholding for neighborhood selection [MB06] for estimating Gaussian
graphical models, and provide model selection guarantees under adversarial corruption of the data;
our results share similar robustness guarantees with sparse regression.
5. We demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of Robust Hard Thresholding on both arbitrarily corrupted/heavy
tailed synthetic data and (unmodiﬁed) real data.
A concrete illustration of 3(B) above: Consider a sparse linear regression problem without noise
(sparse linear equations), with scaling n = O(k log d). When the covariates are sub-Gaussian, Lasso
succeeds in exact recovery with high probability (as expected). When the covariates have only 4-th
moments, we do not expect Lasso to succeed, and indeed experiments indicate this. Moreover, to
the best of our knowledge, no previous eﬃcient algorithm with O(k log(d)) samples can guarantee
exact recovery in this observation model ([FWZ16] has a statistical rate depending on the norm of
the parameter β∗, and thus exact recovery for σ = 0 is not guaranteed). Our contributions show that
Robust Hard Thresholding using MOM achieves this (see also simulations in Figure 1(b)).
Related work
Sparse regression with arbitrary corruptions or heavy tails. Several works in robustness of
high dimensional problems consider heavy tailed distributions or arbitrary corruptions only in the
2

response variables [Li13, BJK15, BJK17, Loh17, KP18, HS16, Min15, CLZL]. Yet these algorithms
cannot be trivially extended to the setting with heavy tails or corruptions in explanatory variables.
Another line [ACG13, VMX17, YLA18, SS18] focuses on alternating minimization approaches which
extend Least Trimmed Squares [Rou84]. However, these methods only have local convergence guar-
antees, and cannot handle arbitrary corruptions.
[CCM13] was one of the ﬁrst papers to provide guarantees for sparse regression with arbitrary
outliers in both response and explanatory variables by trimming the design matrix. Similar trimming
techniques are also used in [FWZ16] for heavy tails in response and explanatory variables. Those re-
sults are speciﬁc to sparse regression, however, and cannot be easily extended to general M-estimation
problems. Moreover, even for linear regression, the statistical rates are not minimax optimal. [LM16]
uses Median-of-Means tournaments to deal with heavy tails in the explanatory variables and obtains
near optimal rates.
However, Median-of-Means tournaments is not known to be computationally
tractable. [LL17] deals with heavy tails and outliers in the explanatory variables, but they require
higher moment bound (whose order is O(log(d))) in the isotropic design case. [Gao17] optimizes Tukey
depth [Tuk75, CGR18] for robust sparse regression under the Huber ϵ-contamination model, and their
algorithm is minimax optimal and can handle a constant fraction of outliers. However, computing
Tukey depth is intractable [JP78]. Recent results [BDLS17, LSLC18] leverage robust sparse mean
estimation in robust sparse regression. Their algorithms are computationally tractable, and can tol-
erate ϵ = const., but they require very restrictive assumptions on the covariance matrix (Σ = Id or
sparse), which precludes their use in applications such as graphical model estimation.
Robust M-estimation via robust gradient descent.
Works in [CSX17, HI17] and later
[YCRB18a] ﬁrst leveraged the idea of using robust mean estimation in each step of gradient descent,
using a subroutine such as geometric median. A similar approach using more sophisticated robust
mean estimation methods was later proposed in [PSBR18, DKK+18, YCRB18b, SX18, Hol18] for
robust gradient descent. These methods all focused on low dimensional robust M-estimation. Work
in [LSLC18] extended the approach to the high-dimensional setting (though is limited to Σ = Id
or sparse covariances).
Even though the corrupted fraction ϵ can be independent of the ambient
dimension d by using sophisticated robust mean estimation algorithms [DKK+16, LRV16, SCV17],
or the sum-of-squares framework [KKM18], these algorithms (except [LSLC18]) are not applicable to
the high dimensional setting (n ≪d), as they require at least Ω(d) samples.
Robust estimation of graphical models. A line of research using a robustiﬁed covariance
matrix in Gaussian graphical models [LHY+12b, WG17, LT18] leverages GLasso [FHT08] or CLIME
[CLL11] to estimate the sparse precision matrix. These robust methods are restricted to Gaussian
graphical model estimation, and their techniques cannot be generalized to other M-estimation prob-
lems.
Notation.
We denote the Hard Thresholding operator of sparsity k′ by Pk′, and denote the
Euclidean projection onto the ℓ2 ball B by ΠB. We use Ei∈uS to denote the expectation operator
obtained by the uniform distribution over all samples {i ∈S}.
2
Problem formulation
We now deﬁne the corruption and heavy tails model and sparsity constrained M-estimation.
Deﬁnition 2.1 (ϵ-corrupted samples). Let {zi, i ∈G} be i.i.d. observations with distribution P.
We say that a collection of samples {zi, i ∈S} is ϵ-corrupted if an adversary chooses an arbitrary
ϵ-fraction of the samples in G and modiﬁes them with arbitrary values.
This corruption model allows corruptions in both explanatory and response variables in regression
problems where we observe zi = (yi, xi). Deﬁnition 2.1 also allows the adversary to select an ϵ-fraction
of samples to delete and corrupt.
3

Deﬁnition 2.2 (heavy-tailed samples). For a distribution P of x ∈Rd with mean E(x) and covariance
Σ, we say that P has bounded 2k-th moment, if there is a universal constant C2k such that, for a unit
vector v ∈Rd, we have EP |⟨v, x −E(x)⟩|2k ≤C2k EP (|⟨v, x −E(x)⟩|2)k.
Deﬁnition 2.2 allows heavy tails in both explanatory and response variables for zi = (yi, xi). For
example, in Corollary 4.3, we study linear regression with bounded 4-th moments for x and bounded
variance for y and noise.
Let ℓ: Rd ×Z →R be a convex and diﬀerentiable loss function. Our target is the unknown sparse
population minimizer β∗= arg minβ∈Rd,∥β∥0≤k Ezi∼P ℓi(β; zi), and we write f as the population
risk, f(β) = Ezi∼P ℓi(β; zi). Note that β∗’s deﬁnition allows model misspeciﬁcation. The following
Deﬁnition 2.3 provides general assumptions for the population risk.
Deﬁnition 2.3 (Strong convexity/smoothness). For the population risk f, we assume µα∥β1 −
β2∥2
2/2 ≤f(β1) −f(β2) −⟨∇f(β2), β1 −β2⟩≤µL∥β1 −β2∥2
2/2, where µα is the strong-convexity
parameter and µL is the smoothness parameter. The condition number is ρ = µL/µα ≥1.
A well known result [NRWY12] considers ERM with convex relaxation from ∥β∥0 to ∥β∥1, by cer-
tifying the RSC condition for sub-Gaussian ensembles – this obtains uniform convergence of the em-
pirical risk. From an optimization viewpoint, existing results reveal that gradient descent algorithms
equipped with soft-thresholding [ANW12] or hard-thresholding [BD09, JTK14, SL17, YLZ18, LB18]
have linear convergence rate, and achieve known minimax lower bounds in statistical estimation
[RWY11, ZWJ14].
Given samples S, running ERM on the entire input dataset: minβ∈B,∥β∥0≤k Ei∈uS ℓi(β; zi), can-
not guarantee uniform convergence of the empirical risk, and can be arbitrarily bad for ϵ-corrupted
samples. The next two sections outline the main results of this paper, addressing this problem.
3
Robust sparse estimation via Robust Hard Thresholding
We introduce our meta-algorithm, Robust Hard Thresholding, that essentially uses a robust gradient
estimator to run IHT. We require several deﬁnitions to specify the algorithm, and describe its results.
We use b
G(β) as a placeholder for the estimate at β, obtained from whichever robust gradient estimator
we are using. Let G(β) = Ezi∼P ∇ℓi(β; zi) denote the population gradient. We use b
G and G when
the context is clear.
Many previous works ([CSX17, HI17, PSBR18, DKK+18, YCRB18a, YCRB18b, SX18]) have
provided algorithms for obtaining robust gradient estimators, then used as subroutines in robust
gradient algorithms. However, those results require controlling ∥b
G −G∥2, and do not readily extend
to high dimensions, as suﬃciently controlling ∥b
G −G∥2 seems to require n = Ω(d). A recent work
[LSLC18] on robust sparse linear regression uses a robust sparse mean estimator [BDLS17] to guarantee
∥b
G −G∥2 = O(δ1∥β −β∗∥2 + δ2) with sample complexity Ω(k2 log(d)). However, their algorithm
requires the restrictive assumption Σ = Id or sparse, and thus cannot be extended to more general
M-estimation problems.
To address this issue, we propose Robust Hard Thresholding (Algorithm 1), which uses hard
thresholding after each robust gradient update2. In line 7, we use a gradient estimator to obtain
the robust gradient estimate b
Gt. In line 8, we update the parameter by hard thresholding βt+1 =
Pk′(βt −η b
Gt), where the hyper-parameter k′ proportional to k is speciﬁed in Deﬁnition 2.3. A key
observation in line 8 is that, in each step of IHT, the iterate βt is sparse, and thus the perturbation
from outliers or heavy tails only depends on IHT’s sparsity k′ instead of the ambient dimension d.
Based on a careful analysis of the hard thresholding operator in each iteration, we show that rather
than controlling ∥b
G −G∥2, it is enough to control a weaker quantity: this is what we call the Robust
2Our theory requires splitting samples across diﬀerent iterations to maintain independence between iterations. We
believe this is an artifact of the analysis, and do not use this in our experiments. [BWY17, PSBR18] use a similar
approach for theoretical analysis.
4

Algorithm 1 Robust Hard Thresholding
1: Input: Data samples {yi, xi}N
i=1, gradient estimator b
G.
2: Output: The estimation bβ.
3: Parameters: Hard thresholding parameter k′ = 4ρ2k.
4: Split samples into T subsets each of size n. Initialize with β0 = 0d.
5: for t = 0 to T −1, do
6:
At current βt, calculate all gradients for current n samples: gt
i = ∇ℓi(βt), i ∈[n].
7:
For {gt
i}n
i=1, we obtain b
Gt
8:
Update the parameter:
βt+1 = Pk′

βt −η b
Gt
. Then project: βt+1 = ΠB(βt+1).
9: end for
10: Output the estimation bβ = βT .
Descent Condition Deﬁnition 3.1 and we deﬁne it next; it plays a key role in obtaining sharp rates of
convergence for various types of statistical models.
Robust Descent Condition
The Robust Descent Condition eq. (1) provides an upper bound on the inner product of the robust
gradient estimate and the distance to the population optimum. This is a natural notion to control
the potential progress obtained by using a robust gradient update instead of the population gradient.
Deﬁnition 3.1 ((α, ψ)-Robust Descent Condition (RDC)). For the population gradient G at β, a
robust gradient estimator b
G(β) satisﬁes the robust descent condition if for any sparse β, eβ ∈Rd,

D
b
G(β) −G(β), eβ −β∗E ≤

α∥β −β∗∥2 + ψ


 eβ −β∗

2.
(1)
We begin with a Meta-Theorem for Algorithm 1 that holds under the Robust Descent Condition
Deﬁnition 3.1 and assumptions on population risk Deﬁnition 2.3. In Theorem 3.1, we prove Algo-
rithm 1’s global convergence and its statistical guarantees. The proofs are collected in Appendix B.
Theorem 3.1 (Meta-Theorem). Suppose we observe samples from a statistical model with popula-
tion risk f satisfying Deﬁnition 2.3. If a robust gradient estimator satisﬁes (α, ψ)-Robust Descent
Condition (Deﬁnition 3.1) where α ≤
1
32µα, then Algorithm 1 with η = 1/µL outputs bβ such that
∥bβ −β∗∥2 = O(ψ/µα), by setting T = O (ρ log (µα∥β∗∥2/ψ)).
We note that Theorem 3.1 is deterministic in nature. In the sequel, we omit the log term in the
sample complexity due to sample splitting. We obtain high probability results via certifying that
the RDC holds for certain robust gradient estimators under various statistical models. To obtain the
minimax estimation error rate in Theorem 3.1, the key step is providing a robust gradient estimator
with suﬃciently small ψ, in the deﬁnition of RDC.
Section 4 uses the RDC and Theorem 3.1 to obtain new results for sparse regression under heavy
tails or arbitrary corruption.
Before we move to this, we observe that we can use the RDC and
Theorem 3.1 to recover existing results in the literature. Some immediate examples are as follows:
Uncorrupted gradient satisﬁes the RDC.
Suppose the samples follow from sparse linear
regression with sub-Gaussian covariates and noise N(0, σ2). The empirical average of gradient samples
satisﬁes eq. (1) with ψ = O(σ
p
k log(d)/n), by assuming ℓ1 constraint on β and eβ [LW11]. Plugging
in this ψ to Theorem 3.1 recovers the well-known minimax rates for sparse linear regression [RWY11].
RSGE implies RDC. When Σ = Id or is sparse, [BDLS17] and [LSLC18], respectively, provide
robust sparse gradient estimators (RSGE) which upper bound ∥b
G(β) −G(β)∥2 ≤α∥β −β∗∥2 + ψ,
for a constant fraction ϵ of corrupted samples.
Noting that |⟨b
G(β) −G(β), eβ −β∗⟩| ≤∥b
G(β) −
5

G(β)∥2∥eβ−β∗∥2, we observe that RSGE implies RDC. Hence any RSGE can be used in Algorithm 1.
The RSGE for Σ = I in [BDLS17] guarantees an RDC with ψ = O(σϵ) when n = Ω(k2 log d/ϵ2), and
the RSGE for unknown sparse Σ from [LSLC18] guarantees ψ = O(σ√ϵ) when n = Ω(k2 log d/ϵ).
Again plugging these values for ψ into our theorem, recovers the results in those papers. 3
4
Main Results: Using the RDC and Algorithm 1
In the remainder of our paper, we use Theorem 3.1 and the RDC to analyze two well-known and com-
putationally eﬃcient robust mean estimation subroutines that have been used in the low-dimensional
setting: the trimmed mean estimator and the MOM estimator. We show that these two can obtain a
suﬃciently small ψ in the deﬁnition of the RDC. This leads to the minimax estimation error in the
case of arbitrary corruptions or heavy tails.
4.1
Gradient estimation
The trimmed mean and MOM estimators have been successfully applied to robustify gradient descent
[YCRB18a, PSBR18] in the low dimensional setting. They have not been used in the high dimensional
regime, however, because until now we have not had the machinery to analyze their algorithmic
convergence, statistical rates and minimax optimality in the high dimensional setting.
To show they satisfy the RDC with a suﬃciently small ψ, we observe that by using H¨older’s
inequality on the LHS of eq. (1), we have |⟨b
G(β) −G(β), eβ −β∗⟩| ≤∥b
G(β) −G(β)∥∞∥eβ −β∗∥1.
Using Algorithm 1, the Hard Thresholding step enforces sparsity of eβ −β∗. Therefore, controlling ψ
amounts to bounding the inﬁnity norm of the robust gradient estimate.
In Section 4.2, we show that by using coordinate-wise robust mean estimation, we can certify the
RDC with suﬃciently small ψ to guarantee minimax rates. Speciﬁcally, we show this for the trimmed
gradient estimator for arbitrary corruption, and and the MOM gradient estimator for heavy tailed
distributions.
Deﬁnition 4.1. Given gradients samples {∇ℓi(β; zi) ∈Rd, i ∈S}, for each dimension j ∈[d],
(♠): Trimmed gradient estimator removes the largest and smallest α fraction of elements in
{[∇ℓi(β; zi)]j ∈R, i ∈S}, and calculates the mean of the remaining terms. We choose α = c0ϵ for
constant c0 ≥1, and require α ≤1/2 −c1 for a small constant c1 > 0.
(♣): MOM gradient estimator partitions S into 4.5⌈log(d)⌉blocks and computes the sample
mean of {[∇ℓi(β; zi)]j ∈R} within each block, and then take the median of these means.4
4.2
Statistical guarantees
In this section, we consider some typical models for general M-estimation.
Model 4.1 (Sparse linear regression). Samples zi = (yi, xi) are drawn from a linear model P: yi =
x⊤
i β∗+ ξi, with β∗∈Rd being k-sparse. We assume that x’s are i.i.d. with normalized covariance
matrix Σ, with Σjj ≤1 ∀j, and the stochastic noise ξ has mean 0 and variance σ2.
Model 4.2 (Sparse logistic regression). Samples zi = (yi, xi) are drawn from a binary classiﬁca-
tion model P, where the binary label yi ∈{−1, +1} follows the conditional probability distribution
Pr(yi|xi) = 1/(1 + exp(−yix⊤
i β∗)), with β∗∈B ⊂Rd being k-sparse. We assume that x’s are i.i.d.
with normalized covariance matrix Σ, where Σjj ≤1 for all j.
To obtain the following corollaries, we ﬁrst certify the RDC for a certain robust gradient estimator
over random ensembles with corruption or heavy tails, and then use them in Theorem 3.1. We collect
the results for gradient estimation in Appendix A, and the proofs for corollaries in Appendix B.
3It remains an open question to obtain a RSGE for a constant fraction of outliers for robust sparse regression with
arbitrary covariance Σ.
4Without loss of generality, we assume the number of blocks divides n, and 4.5⌈log(d)⌉is chosen in [HS16].
6

Arbitrary corruption case.
Based on Theorem 3.1, we ﬁrst provide concrete results for arbitrary
corruption case Deﬁnition 2.1, where the covariates and response variables in the authentic distribution
P are assumed to be sub-Gaussian.
Corollary 4.1. Suppose we observe n ϵ-corrupted (Deﬁnition 2.1) sub-Gaussian samples from sparse
linear regression model (Model 4.1). Under the condition n = Ω
 ρ4k log d

, and ϵ = O

1
ρ2√
k log(nd)

,
with probability at least 1 −d−2, Algorithm 1 with trimmed gradient estimator satisﬁes the RDC with
ψ = O(ρσ
√
k(ϵ log(nd)+
p
log d/n)), and thus Theorem 3.1 provides ∥bβ−β∗∥2 = O(ρ2σ(ϵ
√
k log(nd)+
p
k log d/n)).
Time complexity. Corollary 4.1 has a global linear convergence rate. In each iteration, we only
use O(nd log n) operations complexity to calculate trimmed mean. We incur logarithmic overhead
compared to normal gradient descent [Bub15].
Statistical accuracy and robustness. Compared with [CCM13, BDLS17], our statistical error rate
is minimax optimal [RWY11, ZWJ14], and has no dependencies on ∥β∗∥2. Furthermore, the upper
bound on ϵ is nearly independent of d, which guarantees Algorithm 1’s robustness in high dimensions.
Corollary 4.2. Suppose we observe n ϵ-corrupted (Deﬁnition 2.1) sub-Gaussian samples from sparse
logistic regression model (Model 4.2). With probability at least 1 −d−2, Algorithm 1 with trimmed
gradient estimator satisﬁes the RDC with ψ = O(ρ
√
k(ϵ log(nd) +
p
log d/n)), and thus Theorem 3.1
provides ∥bβ −β∗∥2 = O(ρ2(ϵ
√
k log(nd) +
p
k log d/n)).
Statistical accuracy and robustness. Under the sparse Gaussian linear discriminant analysis model
(a typical example of Model 4.2), Algorithm 1 achieves the statistical minimax rate [LPR15, LYCR17].
Heavy-tailed distribution case.
We next turn to the heavy tailed distribution case Deﬁnition 2.2.
Corollary 4.3. Suppose we observe n samples from sparse linear regression model (Model 4.2) with
bounded 4-th moment covariates.
Under the condition n = Ω
 ρ6k log d

, with probability at least
1 −d−2, Algorithm 1 with MOM gradient estimator satisﬁes the RDC with ψ = O(ρ3/2σ
p
k log d/n),
and thus Theorem 3.1 provides ∥bβ −β∗∥2 = O(ρ5/2σ
p
k log d/n).
Time complexity. Similar to Corollary 4.1, Corollary 4.3 has a global linear convergence. In each
iteration, we only use O(nd) operations complexity – the same as normal gradient descent [Bub15].
Statistical accuracy. [LM16] uses Median-of-Means tournaments to deal with sparse linear regres-
sion with bounded moment assumptions for the covariates, and they obtain near optimal rates. We
obtain similar rates, however our algorithm is eﬃcient, where as Median-of-Means tournaments is
not known to be computationally tractable. [FWZ16, Zhu17] deal with the same problem by trun-
cating and shrinking the data to certify the RSC condition. Their results require boundedness of
higher moments of the noise ξ, and the ﬁnal error depends on ∥β∗∥2. Our estimation error bounds
exactly recover optimal sub-Gaussian bounds for sparse regression [NRWY12, Wai19], and moreover,
we obtain exact recovery when ξ’s variance σ2 →0.
Corollary 4.4. Suppose we observe n samples from sparse logistic regression model (Model 4.2).
With probability at least 1 −d−2, Algorithm 1 with MOM gradient estimator satisﬁes the RDC with
ψ = O(ρ3/2p
k log d/n), and thus Theorem 3.1 provides ∥bβ −β∗∥2 = O(ρ5/2p
k log d/n).
4.3
Sparsity recovery and Gaussian graphical model estimation
We next demonstrate the sparsity recovery performance of Algorithm 1 for graphical model learning
[MB06, Wai09, RWL10, RWRY11, BvdG11, HTW15]. Our sparsity recovery guarantees hold for both
heavy tails and arbitrary corruption, though we only present results in the case of arbitrary corruption
in this section.
7

We use supp(v, k) to denote top k indexes of v with the largest magnitude. Let vmin denote the
smallest absolute value of nonzero element of v. To control the false negative rate, Corollary 4.5 shows
that under the βmin-condition, supp( bβ, k) is exactly supp(β∗). The proofs are given in Appendix C.
Sparsity recovery guarantee for sparse logistic regression is similar, and is omitted due to space con-
straints. Existing results on sparsity recovery for ℓ1 regularized estimators [Wai09, LSRC15] do not
require the RSC condition, but instead require an irrepresentability condition, which is stronger. If
ϵ →0, Corollary 4.5 has the same βmin-condition as IHT for sparsity recovery [YLZ18].
Corollary 4.5. Under the same condition as in Corollary 4.1, and a βmin-condition on β∗, β∗
min =
Ω(ρ2σ(ϵ
√
k log(nd) +
p
k log d/n)), Algorithm 1 with trimmed gradient estimator guarantees that
supp( bβ, k) = supp(β∗), with probability at least 1 −d−2.
We consider sparse precision matrix estimation for Gaussian graphical models. The sparsity pat-
tern of its precision matrix Θ = Σ−1 matches the conditional independence relationships [KFB09,
WJ08].
Model 4.3 (Sparse precision matrix estimation). Under the contamination model Deﬁnition 2.1,
authentic samples {xi}m
i=1 are drawn from a multivariate Gaussian distribution N(0, Σ). We assume
that each row of the precision matrix Θ = Σ−1 is (k + 1)-sparse – each node has at most k edges.
For the uncorrupted samples drawn from the Gaussian graphical model, the neighborhood selection
(NS) algorithm [MB06] solves a convex relaxation of the following sparsity constrained optimization
to regress each variable against its neighbors
bβj = arg min
β∈Rd−1
1
m
m
X
i=1
(xij −x⊤
i(j)β)2,
s.t. ∥β∥0 ≤k,
for each j ∈[d],
(2)
where xij denotes the j-th coordinate of xi ∈Rd, and (j) denotes the index set {1, · · · , j −1, j +
1, · · · , d}. Let θ(j) ∈Rd−1 denote Θ’s j-th column with the diagonal entry removed. and Θj,j ∈R
denote the j-th diagonal element of Θ. Then, the sparsity pattern of θ(j) can be estimated through
bβj. Details on the connection between θ(j) and bβj are given in Appendix C.
However, given ϵ-corrupted samples from the Gaussian graphical model, this procedure will fail
[LHY+12b, WG17]. To address this issue, we propose Robust NS (Algorithm 2 in Appendix C), which
robustiﬁes Neighborhood Selection [MB06] by using Robust Hard Thresholding (with least square loss)
to robustify eq. (2). Similar to Corollary 4.5, a θmin-condition guarantees consistent edge selection.
Corollary 4.6. Under the same condition as in Corollary 4.1, and a θmin-condition for θ(j), θ(j),min =
Ω(Θ1/2
j,j ρ2(ϵ
√
k log(nd) +
p
k log d/n)), Robust NS (Algorithm 2) achieves consistent edge selection,
with probability at least 1 −d−1.
Similar to Corollary 4.1, the fraction ϵ is nearly independent of dimension d, which provides
guarantees of Robust NS in high dimensions. Other Gaussian graphical model selection algorithms
include GLasso [FHT08], CLIME[CLL11]. The experimental details comparing robustiﬁed versions of
these algorithms are presented in Appendix D.4.
5
Experiments
We provide the complete details for our experiment setup in Appendix D.
Sparse regression with arbitrary corruption.
We generate samples from a sparse regression
model (Model 4.1) with a Toeplitz covariance Σ. Here, the stochastic noise ξ ∼N(0, σ2), and we
vary the noise level σ2 in diﬀerent simulations. We add outliers with ϵ = 0.1, and track the parameter
error ∥βt −β∗∥2 in each iteration. Left plot of Figure 1 shows Algorithm 1’s linear convergence, and
8

Iterations
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
log(parameter error)
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
σ2 = 0.0
σ2 = 0.1
σ2 = 0.2
(a) log(

βt −β∗

2) vs. it-
erates.
Sample size
500
750
1000
1250
1500
Log(parameter error)
-6
-5.5
-5
-4.5
-4
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
Lasso on Log-Normal
MOM-HT on Log-Normal 
Lasso on Sub-Gaussian
(b)
log(

βt −β∗

2)
vs.
sample size.
Figure 1:
In the left plot, the corruption level ϵ is
ﬁxed and we use Algorithm 1 with trimming for diﬀerent
noise level σ2. In the right plot, we consider log-normal
samples, and we use Algorithm 1 with MOM for diﬀerent
sample size to compare with baselines (Lasso on heavy
tailed data, and Lasso on sub-Gaussian data).
(a) Graph estimated by Al-
gorithm 2.
(b)
Graph
estimated
by
Vanilla NS approach.
Figure 2:
Graph estimated from the S&P 500 stock
data by Algorithm 2 and Vanilla NS approach. Variables
are colored according to their sectors. In particular, the
stocks from sector Information Technology are colored as
purple.
the error curves ﬂatten out at the ﬁnal error level. Furthermore, Algorithm 1 can achieve machine
precision when σ2 = 0, which means exactly recovering of β∗.
Sparse regression with heavy tails.
We consider a log-normal distribution (a typical example
of heavy tails) in Model 4.1. More speciﬁcally, xi =
√
Σexi, and ξi = σeξi. Here, Σ is the same Toeplitz
covariance, each entry of exi and eξi follows from (Z −E Z)/
p
Var(Z), where Z ∼log N(0, 4). We ﬁx
k, d, σ, and vary sample size n. For log-normal samples, we run Algorithm 1 with MOM and vanilla
Lasso. We then re-generate standard Gaussian samples using the same dimensions with Σ and run
Vanilla Lasso. Each curve in the right plot of Figure 1 is the average of 50 trials. Algorithm 1 with
MOM signiﬁcantly improves vanilla Lasso on log-normal data, and has the same performance as Lasso
on sub-Gaussian data
Real data experiments.
We next apply Algorithm 2, to a US equities dataset [LHY+12a,
ZLR+12], which is heavy-tailed and has many outliers [dP18].
The dataset contains 1,257 daily
closing prices of 452 stocks (variables). It is well known that stocks from the same sector tend to be
clustered together [Kin66]. Therefore, we use Robust NS (Algorithm 2) to construct an undirected
graph among stocks. Graphs estimated by diﬀerent algorithms are shown in Figure 2. We can see
that stocks from the same sector are clustered together, and these clustering centers can be easily
identiﬁed. We also compare Algorithm 2 to the baseline NS approach (as in the ideal setting). We
can observe that stocks from Information Technology (colored by purple) are much better clustered
by Algorithm 2.
9
