Multi-Sensor Data and Knowledge Fusion
A Proposal for a Terminology Deﬁnition
Silvia Beddar-Wiesing, Maarten Bieshaar
Intelligent Embedded Systems, University of Kassel, Germany

Abstract. Fusion is a common tool for the analysis and utilization of
available datasets and so an essential part of data mining and machine
learning processes. However, a clear deﬁnition of the type of fusion is
not always provided due to inconsistent literature. In the following, the
process of fusion is deﬁned depending on the fusion components and the
abstraction level on which the fusion occurs. The focus in the ﬁrst part
of the paper at hand is on the clear deﬁnition of the terminology and
the development of an appropriate ontology of the fusion components
and the fusion level. In the second part, common fusion techniques are
presented.
1
Introduction
The generic term fusion describes the combination of diﬀerent fusion components
that consist of available datasets. A more speciﬁc deﬁnition of fusion is only
possible regarding the context and the purpose of the fusion, i.e., in particular
the components to fuse. In general, the assumption behind the application of
fusion is, that fusing datasets from diﬀerent sources improves the performance
of the subsequent data processing.
Consider the task of tracking a pedestrian at a crossroad with the help of
a set of cameras. The aim is to generate a position prediction of a pedestrian
at the next timestep. For this purpose, predictions based on the images from
diﬀerent cameras can be combined to obtain a more robust prediction. The
fusion on a previous stage of the data processing can improve the prediction
accuracy. Fusing knowledge in form of models for predestrian behavior, fusing
information about the location and velocity of the pedestrian or fusing images of
the same pedestrian to obtain less noisy images can contribute to a more precise
prediction.
Unfortunately, inconsistent vocabulary often complicates the clear deﬁnition
and description of fusion algorithms and, as a result, makes the categorization of
the datasets and the selection of a corresponding fusion technique diﬃcult. The
aim of the paper at hand is to clearify the terms of possible fusion components,
the terms used for the diﬀerent process levels and the deﬁnition of the total
process. Several deceptive deﬁnitions are discussed and afterwards, an ordered
deﬁnition for the fusion terms is proposed that combines the common deﬁnitions
of the fusion components and the fusion level. In the last section, a selected set
of fusion techniques for the diﬀerent fusion level are listed.
arXiv:2001.04171v1  [cs.AI]  13 Jan 2020

2
Subdivision of Fusion Techniques
To deﬁne a categorization of fusion techniques, it is necessary to ﬁrst deﬁne the
terms used for the fusion components. The deﬁnition of the fusion components
corresponds to the level of abstraction that can be determined by means of the
data-information-knowledge-wisdom (DIKW) hierarchy [1].
Furthermore, the constitution of the fusion components per level restrains the
possible fusion algorithms to a speciﬁc family of techniques. In the following, an
extension of the DIKW hierarchy is illustrated and afterwards, the fusion levels
are speciﬁed.
2.1
Fusion Components
There have been wide studies about the categorization of data. In this section,
two popular concepts are examined considering the application of the data as
fusion components.
One common categorization has been published by Ackoﬀ[1] and divides data
into ﬁve categories that can be transferred into each other: data, information,
knowledge, understanding, and wisdom.
Ackoﬀdescribes data as representations of objects or events. Processing the
data to improve the usability leads to information that is used in descriptions
and answers questions that begin with what, who, where, and how many. The
application of data and information generates knowledge that can transform
information into instructions and answers questions that begin with how. If
relations and patterns in the information are identiﬁed, the context has been
captured and, as a result, understanding has been reached. Understanding helps
with questions that begin with why. At least, wisdom includes the ability of
judgement and the competence of dealing with the value of the data, informa-
tion and knowledge. According to the further elaboration of the deﬁnitions from
Data
Information
Knowledge
Wisdom
understanding
relations
understanding
patterns
understanding
principles
Fig. 1. The adjusted DIKW hierarchy.
Ackoﬀin [4], Bellinger et al. take the view that understanding is not a stage in
the hierarchy but the condition for the transition from a lower to an upper level
as schematized in Figure 1. Thus understanding relations between data leads
to information, understanding patterns in information generates knowledge, and
understanding the underlying principles of knowledge results in wisdom.
With regard to the following fusion techniques that originate mostly from a
machine learning context, the extended version of the DIKW-hierarchy provides
a more applicable deﬁnition of the fusion components. In Section 3, the relation
between the extended DIKW-hierarchy and the fusion levels will be clariﬁed.
But ﬁrst, the fusion process and the levels of fusion are deﬁned in the following.

2.2
Deﬁnition of Fusion and Fusionlevel
Especially in terms of fusion deﬁnitions, the literature varies. In general, there
exist two kinds of perspectives: On the one hand, there are universal deﬁnitions
of fusion in sense of a whole process. On the other hand, fusion is performed
on components from diﬀerent abstraction levels. But due to the inconsistent
classiﬁcation of fusion techniques, the comparison of literature is often diﬃcult.
In particular, the deﬁnition of data and information fusion diﬀers.
In the following sections, the terminology of diﬀerent approaches is discussed
and in the conclusion, an ontology of the terms for the fusion components and
the fusion level is proposed in form of the fusion level rainbow as illustrated in
Figure 4.
Fusion. In [6], several diﬀering previous deﬁnitions as well as a new deﬁnition of
sensor, data and information fusion are listed. Staying with the attempt to cat-
egorize the general deﬁnitions, it is noticeable, that they focus on three diﬀerent
aspects in particular:
Firstly, the fusion components are a central aspect. In some literature, they
are explicitly identiﬁed as observations or measurements respectively raw data
[11,29,38]. In most cases, they are referred to as data or information, or it is
speciﬁed that they originate from multiple sources, but there is no detailed dis-
cussion about the representation of the data.
Secondly, some of the deﬁnitions also focus on the process behind the fusion.
A popular precedent for this is one of the ﬁrst deﬁnitions of fusion published by
the Joint Directors of Laboratories (JDL) in form of a data fusion lexicon [39].
The fusion process is described as the „association, correlation, and combination
of data and information from single and multiple sources“[39]. It is additionally
mentioned, that the fusion has several levels that are explained separately as
listed in the next section. A diﬀerent description of fusion in [26] interprets the
process as the application of prior knowledge to a concrete realization.
Thirdly, most authors focus on the purpose of the fusion or consider the com-
bination of the three aspects presented. The most common goal that is stated
includes an improvement of the obtained information due to fusion. Further
advantages are reﬂected in its applicability for many purposes: The resulting
understanding of the observed situation [36], smoothed data and reduction in
uncertainty [7], an optimal estimate of a hidden state [14], an improved perfo-
mance of inference [19], improvement in prediction [34] or decision tasks [12] or
in general richer and more useful information [37],[38].
Fusionlevel. Many deﬁnitions of the level of fusion refer to the published data
fusion lexicon of the JDL [39]. Here, the level speciﬁcation originally has been
analysed from the point of view of a military application, but it can be extended
to several fusion applications. It consists of three interrelated levels, but it is

more common to use the extended JDL deﬁnition. The latter is illustrated in
Figure 2 and includes the three levels from the JDL model (levels 1 - 3), extended
by three more levels as described in [20]. The six levels are deﬁned as follows:
Level 0: Fusion of raw data in form of signal reﬁnement to obtain preliminary infor-
mation about the characteristics of the observed object or situation.
Level 1: Data is processed to specify the position or identity of an entity, or to classify
characteristics of it. This is called the object reﬁnement.
Level 2: Relationships between objects and events considering the environment leads
to a situation reﬁnement by, e.g., analyzing relation structures.
Level 3: Characterized as the threat reﬁnement. In general, this can be interpreted as
a risk estimation by drawing inferences or predictions for application-speciﬁc
operations.
Level 4: The performance improvement of the entire fusion process by reﬁning the
elements of it during a suitable type of monitoring.
Level 5: A process of cognitive reﬁnement via optimizing the interaction of the process
with the user, that is dissociated from the previous levels.
Data-
bases
National
Distributed
Local
Human/
Computer 
Interface
Data Fusion
   Domain
Source
Preprocessing
Level 1
Processing
Object
Refinement
Level 2
Processing
Situation
Refinement
Level 3
Processing
Threat
Refinement
Level 4
Processing
Process
Refinement
Database Management
System
Support
Database
Fusion
Database
Sources
Fig. 2. The extended fusion level deﬁnition of the JDL includes six diﬀerent levels that
can be passed through during an entire fusion process (sketched here based on[20]).
For a more diﬀerentiated categorization of fusion processes, the goal of the
paper at hand is to combine the characterization of the fusion components from
Section 2.1 and the fusion levels (and eventually the constitution of the fusion
components). But, from this point of view, the level deﬁnitions from the JDL
are too broad and the interest of the type of fusion components emerges only in
the ﬁrst four levels.
In contrast to the JDL model, the model proposed by Dasarathy [9], where
fusion processes are divided into ﬁve levels, is more associated to the DIKW-
hierarchy from Section 2.1. The reason is, that the choice of devision is di-
rectly related to the fusion components and the fusion emissions. Interpreting

the knowledge as a feature of the observed event and wisdom as decisions, that
can exist, e.g., as classiﬁcation decisions, evaluation of a regression model or a
prediction, the following model is directly based on the DIKW-hierarchy.
In addition, Varshney [36] added a sixth level, so that all possible ascending
(relating to the components presented in 2.1) or equal pairs of inputs and out-
puts of a fusion are considered. The all-encompassing extension of Dasarathy’s
model is illustrated in [20] and will be brieﬂy listed in the following. For this
representation, the shortcuts DAI (input: data), DAO (output: data), FEI (in-
put: feature), FEO (output: feature), DEI (input: decision) and DEO (output:
decision) are used. All pairs of inputs and outputs during a fusion process can
be interpreted as follows:
1 DAI/DAO: signal detection (fusion of raw datasets generates data with less
noise, a sharper signal can, e.g., be used to detect signal sections)
2 DAI/FEO: feature extraction (fusion of datasets generates data that can be
used to extract relevant features)
3 DAI/DEO: Gestalt-based object characterization (fusion of raw datasets can
lead to a better characterization of an object or a decision)
4 FEI/DAO: model-based detection and feature extraction (fusion of features
leads to reﬁned features from which data can be generated, e.g., the fusion
of Gaussians and subsequent sampling)
5 FEI/FEO: feature reﬁnement (fusion of diﬀerent models that describe the
same feature generates a more conﬁdent feature model)
6 FEI/DEO: feature-based object characterization (feature level fusion reﬁnes
the description of an object or a decision)
7 DEI/DAO: model-based detection and estimation (decision fusion sharpens
the decision model from which data can be generated e.g. mixture of gener-
ative experts and subsequent sampling with the Gibb’s Sampler [5])
8 DEI/FEO: model-based feature extraction (decision fusion can lead to a
decision from which a feature can be derived)
9 DEI/DEO: object/decision reﬁnement (e.g. mixture of experts leads to a
better decision)
But in fact, the combination of data as input and decision as output does
not often occur in common tasks. Additionally, cases 4, 7 and 8 are feature
respectively decion level fusions from which can be sampled or conclusions drawn
afterwards. Depending on the form of the feature representation, samples can
be generated by common sampling methods as described in [5].

Furthermore, there is a set of models that apply an additional backward
connection from the top level to the data acquisition process as in the OODA
(Observe, Orient, Decide, Act) loop [3]. As a result, the generation and collection
process of input data can be adapted with regard to the conclusive decision
evaluation.
One last model has to be mentioned here that is also common, but especially
used in image fusion applications and is similar to the described deﬁnitions
before. Here the fusion is divided into the pixel, feature and decision level [8].
Analogous to the data, feature and decision fusion, this model is applied to
image processing, which is a subset of the sensor fusion. An illustration is given
in Figure 3.
Fig. 3. For image data, the data level fusion is known as pixel level fusion and used
for image processing (ﬁgure inspired by the depiction from [8]).
In order to combine the delineated fusion level terms, the following ordered
ontology describes the relations between the terms:
◦(Pixel, Sensor) Data Fusion
◦Information Fusion
◦Knowledge/Feature Fusion
◦Decision Fusion
and is illustrated in Figure 4.

At the bottom of the entire fusion process, raw data given by sensors or
other sources are fused while understanding characteristics and relations of the
input. The reﬁned data with a low information loss compared to the original
data provides an updated representation for further applications.
The obtained information is a fundamental basis for the feature extraction in
the next level that proposes an underlying model for the data. This can provide
knowledge that can be used to understand patterns in the data and thus create
awareness of underlying principles in the source data.
On top of the fusion process, the aim is to gain wisdom in form of performance
improvement in decision making and thus the choice of action. Depending on the
impact of the action, the entire fusion process can be adapted at the diﬀerent
stages.
Images
Sensory
Data
Data
Pixel
Fusion
Sensor
Fusion
Data
Fusion
Information
Information 
Fusion
Knowledge
Knowledge/
Feature Fusion
Awareness
Abstraction
Understanding
Adjustment of  data acquisition
Decision
Fusion
Wisdom
Fig. 4. The Fusion Level Rainbow. Based on the extended Dasarathy model, the fusion
within a component leads to a reﬁned element of the corresponding component or to
a more abstract emission.

3
Fusion Techniques of the Particular Levels
In this section, selected techniques from diﬀerent fusion levels will be presented.
At the beginning of 3.1, a ﬁne structure of sensor fusion techniques is outlined.
Afterwards, statistical fusion methods are described in more detail. To get a
short overview of algorithms used in data and information fusion, the focus in
Section 3.2 is on the constitutions of data that require diﬀerent fusion processes.
At the end in Section 3.3 and 3.4, diﬀerent forms of knowledge and decision
fusion techniques are characterized.
3.1
Sensor Fusion
In the fusion level rainbow (Fig. 4), the sensor fusion is a subset of the lowest
level of fusion, the data fusion. Sensor data is a special case of data that can be
represented as a data point in a high dimensional space and is produced by (mul-
tiple) sensors. Sensor fusion techniques once again can be categorized according
to the information ﬂow between the available sensor network and diﬀerent sensor
conﬁgurations.
Firstly, the fusion can be implemented centralized or decentralized [18]. In the
centralized architecture, the measurements of all sensors are available during the
fusion process, so a batch method is used. In contrast to this, in the decentralized
fusion, the measurements of each sensor is fused within a seperate fusion model.
Then during the global fusion process, only the model information of each sensor
is available and processed sequential. The decentralized fusion is preferred since
the fusion process is considered as being more robust and reliable [14].
Secondly, sensor fusion can be furthermore divided into three cases depending
on the sensor conﬁguration as listed in [10]:
Competitive Sensor Fusion. (homogeneous) Either data from sensors of the
same modality are fused or the sensors can be transformed to the same baseline
previously and are fused afterwards. Data fusion of competitive sensors can be
used to reduce noise respectively uncertainty.
In connection to the initial example, competitive sensors in form of cameras
used for the pedestrian tracking produce images of the same person at the same
time. Fusing the images that may contain a degree of uncertainty, the resulting
images are less noisy and more applicable for the tracking task.
Complementary Sensor Fusion. (heterogeneous) Sensors observe the same
event and fusion of them generates a complemented image of the observation.
This means, the sensors can measure diﬀerent and disjunct parts of the same
event and the combination leads to a complete characterization of it.
A complementary set of cameras, e.g., can provide an extended picture of
a crossroad in contrast of the image of only one camera which simpliﬁes the
subsequent tracking of a pedestrian.

Cooperative Sensor Fusion. A sensor is conﬁgurated depending on the in-
formation from other sensors to generate more useful information. This form of
sensor network conﬁguration includes some sort of temporal delay and depen-
dency on a decision of an expert. The tracking task can require the possibility
to adapt the camera angles after observing a certain behaviour of the pedestrian.
Sensor fusion techniques also diﬀer in the assumptions about the system
under consideration. For processing sensor data with uncertainties, statistical
sensor fusion techniques for static and dynamic systems are presented by Fredrik
Gustafsson in [18]:
Statistical Sensor Fusion The main idea behind statistical models is, that
the sensors are noisy and the „true“ characterization of the event is given by a
state vector x. Furthermore, it is expected, that by fusing diﬀerent sensors, the
state vector gets more precise.
The assumption here is that N given observations yn ∈Rny, n ∈[N], stacked
in y ∈RN×ny, can be described by a model
y = h(x) + e.
Gustafsson discusses linear models h(x) = Hx with a stacked factormatrix
H ∈RN·ny×nx, as well as nonlinear models, that relate the observations to the
hidden state vector x ∈Rnx. Most of the time, the stacked error e ∈RN·ny is
assumed to be Gaussian, but the non-Gaussian case is mentioned too.
In the static case, the hidden state x ∈Rnx is time-invariant, so that the
model describes, e.g., the observation of the same event by means of several
sensors or of the same sensor at diﬀerent timestamps.
In the dynamic case, the state xk ∈Rnx is additionally varying with time
according to a sequential update model
xk+1 = f(xk) + vk,
with a linear or non-linear mapping f : Rnx →Rnx and a Gaussian or non-
Gaussian noise vk ∈Rnx.
For providing a new state estimation, Gustafsson gives an insight into a
variety of least squares approaches that can be applied, while the measurements
are independent.
In case of correlated measurements in the static case, Gustafsson presents
the safe fusion algorithm, which will be discussed in 3.2.
For dynamic systems, Gustafsson lists popular ﬁltering algorithms, such as
several variations of the Kalman Filter [23], that make inference on the state from
the observations using dynamic linear or nonlinear models. Numerical methods
approximating the nonlinear ﬁlter models are also discussed. In the grid-based
methods, e.g., parts of the calculation during the ﬁltering process are approxi-
mated by discretising the state space [21] or replacing integrals by ﬁnite sums
[27].

3.2
Data and Information Fusion
In this section, the case of data respectively information fusion in the second
lowest levels of the fusion level rainbow (Fig. 4) in general are under considera-
tion. When selecting a data fusion technique, the ﬁrst aspect to focus on is the
constitution of the data. In [25], a detailed overview of fusion techniques for the
following types of data quality is given:
Imperfect Data. The case of imperfect data occurs in nearly all applications
of data fusion. To deal with a certain degree of imperfect data, the following
algorithms, that are described together with former extensions in [25], can be
used:
– Probabilistic Fusion: The main idea is to represent the imperfection of data
by means of uncertainty in form of probability distributions. Fusing them
according to the Bayesian fusion formula from [5]:
p(X|Z) = p(Z|X) · p(X)
p(Z)
(1)
determines the posterior probability distribution of the (real, underlying)
state X depending on the observations Z = {z1, . . . , zt}, the likelihood
p(Z|X) and the (chosen) prior distribution p(X). Analogously, the Bayesian
fusion can be formulated for the dynamic case by using observations up to
time t [18].
Based on this Bayes theorem, several fusion techniques have been formulated,
that are used in algorithms for numerous applications, such as the Kalman
ﬁlter. For more information see [25].
– Evidential Belief Reasoning: In the Dempster-Shafer evidential theory (DSET),
possible measurement hypotheses obtain correspoding beliefs and plausibili-
ties. Usually, Dempster’s rule of combination is used to fuse two belief masses
of the same set by summing up the product of the belief masses of every pair
of supersets regarding conﬂicting subsets. Consequential, the DSET provides
a fusion technique that can be seen as a generalization of the Bayesian fusion
where probability mass functions are used as belief functions [33].
The DSET has been proposed to represent incomplete data, analogously to
the probability theory by modeling the membership uncertainty of an ele-
ment in a well-deﬁned class.
– Fusion and Fuzzy Reasoning: In contrast, the fuzzy set theory is mainly de-
signed to represent and to operate on vague data and to model the fuzzy
membership of an element in an ill-deﬁned class [25]. For this purpose, a grad-
ual membership function is introduced that deﬁnes a fuzzy set by assigning
a membership degree between 0 and 1 to each element of the (discrete) uni-
verse. The higher the degree, the more the element belongs to the fuzzy set.
Fusing of membership degrees can be done in form of conjunctive and dis-
junctive fusion rules to obtain a fuzzy fusion output (i.e., the fusion function
is bounded from above by the minimum in the former and from below by
the maximum in the latter case), as further described in [40].

– Possibilistic Fusion: Based on the fuzzy set theory, possibility theory is con-
ceived to again represent incomplete data by modeling an uncertain member-
ship of the elements in the universe in well-deﬁned classes with a possibility
distribution [25]. Another diﬀerence to fuzzy theory is to require normalized
membership functions that can be used to deﬁne a possibility and a necessity
degree. The former determines the plausibility and the latter the certainty
of a subset of the universe. So the possibility theory diﬀers from probability
theory by the use of the two dual set-functions. The fusion rules are identical
to the ones for the fuzzy fusion.
– Rough Set Based Fusion: The idea of the rough set theory is to approximate
a data set by an upper and lower bound of sets to obtain a rough represen-
tation of the original set. The lower bound set includes subsets of the data
that deﬁnitely belong to the original set. The diﬀerence of the upper and
lower bound sets includes subsets that cannot be classiﬁed as belonging or
not belonging to the original set. In the approximation, the granularity of
the data can be considered by choosing an appropriate size of the united
subsets.
Datasets can then be fused by combining the rough sets of their approxima-
tions with the aid of classical conjunctive or disjunctive fusion techniques of
set theory such as the union or intersection of sets [25].
– Random Set Theory: The theory of random sets uses a form of generalized
random variables, the random sets, which take sets as random values. In [17],
random sets and their characteristics are described in detail. In addition,
Goodman et al. discuss applications of random sets in single- and multi-
target data fusion which can be used for the data association problem.
The handling with coarse data in general by using the random set theory is
described in [30] extensively.
Correlated Data. As mentioned in Section 3.1, correlated data can be fused
by the safe fusion algorithm [18] or evolved algorithms as listed in [25]. Here it is
assumed, that the correlation is unknown and the data respectively information
is represented as a point in a high dimensional space.
The safe fusion algorithm presumes a decentralized network and is based
on the covariance intersection (CI) algorithm proposed by Julier and Uhlman
[22]. This means in addition, it is assumed that the models of the depending
measurements include Gaussian noise and thus possess individual means and
covariances.
The algorithm determines a covariance that deﬁnes the minimal ellipsoid that
encloses the intersection of (sequentially entering) covariances by making use of
a transformation deﬁned by the sequentially emerging singular value decompo-
sition (SVD, [15]) as illustrated in Figure 5.
In case of a known correlation, it can be eliminated before fusing the data
[25], e.g., by the principal component analysis [5].

Fig. 5. Safe fusion algorithm visualized (similar as illustrated in [18]) in the fusion
of two covariances. In the ﬁrst step, both covariances are transformed corresponding
to the SVD of one covariance (blue). The SVD of the obtained manipulated second
covariance (green) yields in the second transformation of both covariances. The ﬁnal
intersection of the covariances is then covered by the target covariance (thick ellipse).
Inconsistent Data. There are several forms of inconsistencies, which must be
dealt with in diﬀerent ways. These are listed in the following:
– spurious data: Sensor data can be distorted by permanent failures or slowly
evolving errors of a sensor. The most common ideas of dealing with spurious
data is the identiﬁcation or prediction of systematic errors. After that, sus-
picious data can be excluded from the fusion process. A statistical approach
for detecting spurious data can be found in [28]. Kumar et al. formulated an
extension of the basic Bayesian fusion formula (1) by augmenting a random
variable which describes whether the data is spurious or not depending on
the data and the true state.
– out-of-sequence-measurements (OOSM): There are two diﬀerent aspects that
have to be considered in dynamic systems: the validity and the out-of-
sequence arrival of data. When a history of measurements is necessary for
the fusion process, the data should be updated at appropriate intervals to
guarantee a valid fusion result. In addition, an implementation of an entire
sensor network can entail delayed data deliveries for the fusion process. A
possible approach for these problems has been proposed by Kaugerand et al.
in [24], that deﬁnes a fusion interval in which incoming data is permitted to
be fused. Also in [25], some strategies for dealing with out-of-sequence data
are presented.
– conﬂicting data: The problem of conﬂicting data results in misleading con-
clusions as discussed in [41]. Extensions of the DSET have been developed to
especially address the problem of inconsistent data and are mentioned in [25].

In a statistical environment, in complement to the CI algorithm, the covari-
ance union (CU) algorithm can be applied to deviating measurements for a
consistent fusion with the assumption of a Gaussian uncertainty [35]. The
union process consists of the computation of a mean and a covariance, so
that the previous covariances added to the deviation of the previous mean
from the new mean constitute a lower limit of e.g. the determinant of the
new covariance.
Disparate Data. An aspect, that has not been considered yet is the fusion of
data from sensors and sensor intelligence (hard information), data from human
intelligence, open source intelligence and communications intelligence (soft infor-
mation) [31]. Hard information can be represented in a mathematical framework
and can therefore be used for the fusion techniques as presented above.
Whereas soft information is produced by human sources and is therefore avail-
able in „context-dependent languages over bandwidth-limited channels“ [31]. The
research on modeling uncertainty of such soft information is quite young, but
there are some models for linguistic data described in [2].
3.3
Knowledge Fusion
When the abstraction of the fusion components increases along the fusion level
rainbow (Fig. 4), the components can be available in form of models that include
knowledge from the observed event.
Knowledge fusion itself has two diﬀerent levels: it can be performed at model
or parameter level.
Model Fusion. Knowledge can be represented in form of diﬀerent models. A
simple example of such a model is a Gaussian distribution that includes infor-
mation about the distribution of the data [5]. In addition, artiﬁcial data can be
generated with it. This kind of model is called a generative model.
To fuse knowledge from several models in form of mixture models, they have
to be in the same modality [5], i.e., they consist of the same base model but
are trained diﬀerently or model diﬀerent aspects of the underlying data. A high
diversity in knowledge is prefered for a fusion as discussed for the case of ensem-
bles in [32]. In case of fusing models, the training can diﬀer in the training set
or the prior parameter setting.
The fused knowledge is then composed of a linear combination of the distinct
models. The mixture of Gaussian distributions, e.g., results in a Gaussian mix-
ture model (GMM). It descibes the distribution of a data set, that is assumed
to be more complex than a unimodal Gaussian, by a convex combination of
a selected number of Gaussians. The concluding mixture model contains more
precise knowledge about the overall distribution and the mixture coeﬃcients
imply additive knowledge about the responsibility of a mixture component for
generating a given data point.

Further examples for model fusion techniques are Convolutional Neural Net-
works [5] and Multiple Kernel Learning based Ensemble Methods [16]. The latter
approach permits diﬀerent kernels representing knowledge that are fused by a
(non-) linear combination function.
Parameter Fusion. Moreover, knowledge given by classiﬁcation models can
be available as classiﬁcation rules or decisions (as the outputs of the classiﬁers).
The combination of classiﬁers at the component level is equivalent to the mixture
models and the combination at the output level will be presented in the next
section.
The parameter fusion is a more complex fusion form and is applied on the
parameter level of the classiﬁcation models. In [12], a knowledge fusion technique
for generative classiﬁers based on mixture models (CMMs) is presented.
For the fusion algorithm, two or more probabilistic generative classiﬁer that
describe the same process have to be given. Each one is divided by the number
of classes into parts that are mixtures of probabilty densities conditioned by the
class and the mixture component. Additionally, the densities have to be deﬁned
on the same input space, i.e., especially on the same number of continuous and
categorical dimensions and are trained on diﬀerent training sets.
Before applying the algorithm, conjugate hyperdistributions for all hyperpa-
rameters per component are introduced and trained via the variational inference
(VI) algorithm as described in [12].
Having deﬁned the hyperdistributions, the ﬁrst step of the algorithm deter-
mines similar hyperdistributions of each component via an appropriate similarity
measure. Assuming that a posterior distribution for a class is calculated by the
Bayesian formula (1) and the classiﬁers use the same prior knowledge, the fusion
rule of two similar hyperdistributions is determined by the multiplication of the
two posteriors divided by the prior. The derivation of this rule can be found in
[12].
Using conjugate priors, the fused posterior distribution has the same func-
tional form as the given classiﬁers, so the estimation of the fused parameters are
deducible from a sequence of mathematical transformations of the fusion rule.
For setting the distributions in the continuous dimensions to multivariate
Gaussians and the distributions of the categorical ones to multinomial distri-
butions, the hyperdistributions are Dirichlet respectively normal-Wishart dis-
tributions. The fusion formulae for the corresponding parameters are listed in
[12].

3.4
Decision Fusion
The decision fusion of multiple classiﬁers may consist of the direct combination
of decisions or the selection of one suitable classiﬁer for a speciﬁc input area.
– Committee/Ensemble: The decision is given as a combination of decisions
from distinct models [5]. Boosting is an ensemble technique that trains the
models iteratively and a decision is calculated by, e.g., weighting the models
depending on their performance as in the adaptive boosting (AdaBoost)
algorithm [13].
– Decomposition-Based Ensemble Methods: In case of time series data, several
ensemble methods based on the lossless decomposition of the input signal
can be used for forecasting [32], which can be interpreted as decision making.
After decomposing the time series into a set of signals that fully represent
the original signal, the predictions from the components can be combined to
one predition for the origin.
– Mixture of Experts: Depending on the input domain, a decision is made from
one (hard or soft) selected model from the mixture of experts. The selection
can be implemented in form of decision trees. Whereas in the Bayesian Model
Averaging, one model is determined for the entire input space by introducing
a prior probability for each model [5].
4
Conclusion
The ideal deﬁnition should have no space for interpretation or double allocation
of the terminology. The goal of this paper was to provide a clear deﬁnition for
fusion and its components for the applicability in varous contexts. After having
discussed several deﬁnitions, the fusion levels have been deﬁned considering the
previous speciﬁed fusion components. The resulting fusion level rainbow (Fig. 4)
includes the entire range of fusion components and levels and provides a clear
deﬁnition of fusion for further applications. Finally, an overview of common
fusion techniques was given for each of the previously deﬁned levels.
In the presented deﬁnitions, decisions are often associated with predictions
or classiﬁcations. The deﬁnitions are analogously valid for regression problems.
The concurrent fusion of components from diﬀerent levels has not been con-
sidered in the paper at hand and is left for future work. In addition, the hybridiza-
tion of the fusion techniques are in common use and have not been addressed
here.
Acknowledgment
This work results from the project DeCoInt2, supported by the German Re-
search Foundation (DFG) within the priority program SPP 1835: "Kooperativ
interagierende Automobile", grant number SI 674/11-1.
