arXiv:2201.04762v1  [cs.CR]  13 Jan 2022
PRIVACY AMPLIFICATION BY SUBSAMPLING IN TIME DOMAIN
A PREPRINT
Tatsuki Koga
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093

Casey Meehan
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093

Kamalika Chaudhuri
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093

January 14, 2022
ABSTRACT
Aggregate time-series data like trafﬁc ﬂow and site occupancy repeatedly sample statistics from
a population across time. Such data can be profoundly useful for understanding trends within a
given population, but also pose a signiﬁcant privacy risk, potentially revealing e.g., who spends time
where. Producing a private version of a time-series satisfying the standard deﬁnition of Differential
Privacy (DP) is challenging due to the large inﬂuence a single participant can have on the sequence:
if an individual can contribute to each time step, the amount of additive noise needed to satisfy
privacy increases linearly with the number of time steps sampled. As such, if a signal spans a long
duration or is oversampled, an excessive amount of noise must be added, drowning out underlying
trends. However, in many applications an individual realistically cannot participate at every time
step. When this is the case, we observe that the inﬂuence of a single participant (sensitivity) can be
reduced by subsampling and/or ﬁltering in time, while still meeting privacy requirements. Using a
novel analysis, we show this signiﬁcant reduction in sensitivity and propose a corresponding class
of privacy mechanisms. We demonstrate the utility beneﬁts of these techniques empirically with
real-world and synthetic time-series data.
1
Introduction
Time-series data about people’s behavior can be sensitive, yet may contain information that is highly beneﬁcial for
society. As a concrete example, consider highway trafﬁc data that is released by the California Department of Trans-
portation 1 (Chen et al., 2001). The data contains aggregate statistics (number of cars, average speed, etc.) every ﬁve
minutes gathered by physical sensors. Just like any other form of sensitive, aggregate data, this trafﬁc data could
expose the behavior of a single participant. In an extreme case, if a participant is the only driver on a highway (say,
late at night), then an adversary could track their movement through the entire road network. However, such data is
absolutely vital for society to manage critical road infrastructure and strategize on where to augment it. To this end,
we aim to provide a privacy mechanism that releases a sanitized version of a given time-series while preserving its
aggregate trends through time.
We adopt differential privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006b), one of the most widely used privacy deﬁnitions, as our pri-
vacy measure. For data with bounded sensitivity, a ﬁrst plausible DP mechanism is to add Gaussian (Dwork and Roth,
2014) or Laplace (Dwork et al., 2006b) noise proportional to the sensitivity. Rastogi and Nath (2010) propose a second
algorithm that adds noise to the ﬁrst k discrete Fourier transform (DFT) coefﬁcients and ignores higher frequencies of
the signal. In both cases, the problem is that the sensitivity scales with T , the number of time steps. If an individual
can theoretically participate at each timestep, then the worst-case inﬂuence they can have on the time-series grows
linearly with T . Thus, as T becomes larger, the requisite noise variance increases, and the resulting output loses utility.
In this paper, we take a new approach to addressing this longstanding problem using subsampling and ﬁltering tech-
1https://pems.dot.ca.gov/

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
niques from the signal processing domain. We ﬁnd that random subsampling along with ﬁltering can reduce sensitivity
without signiﬁcant losses of utility.
Our starting point is to observe two key properties of real time-series data, which we exploit to design better mecha-
nisms that add signiﬁcantly less noise for a given T . The ﬁrst is that time-series data is often oversampled. Returning
to our example, a transit analyst may be interested in observing how trafﬁc changes on an hourly basis. This being
the case, the ﬁve-minute sampling period of the sensor system is excessive and contributes very little to their utility.
Indeed, with standard mechanisms, this excessive sampling rate may damage their utility since it increases the number
of time steps, T , many times beyond what is needed. The second property is that a single person almost never con-
tributes to the aggregate statistics at every time step. It is implausible that an individual passes the same sensor on a
highway every ﬁve minutes for more than a year.
We formalize these two observations into mathematical assumptions, and exploit them as follows. The ﬁrst property
motivates our use of subsampling, which trades these unnecessary extra time steps in exchange for reduced additive
noise. The second property enables us to signiﬁcantly boost this reduction in additive noise: we know that, feasibly,
an individual can only participate in a limited number of time steps to begin with. This allows us to show that w.h.p.
they will contribute to an even smaller number of timesteps after subsampling, thus allowing us to signiﬁcantly scale
down noise added.
We additionally extend our results to a class of mechanisms that ﬁlter and subsample the time-series. For the trafﬁc
analyst, the process of subsampling may be high variance if trafﬁc changes signiﬁcantly during an hour. In essence,
which sample is chosen during that hour will have a large effect on the shape of the resulting time series. To mitigate
this the analyst may wish to average the time series in time (ﬁlter) before subsampling. Unfortunately, this signiﬁcantly
complicates the privacy analysis used on subsampling alone. To address this we employ a novel concentration analysis
that accounts for the effects of subsampling and ﬁltering simultaneously.
This paper investigates how and in what circumstances subsampling and ﬁltering enable us to achieve a better privacy-
utility tradeoff for publishing aggregate time-series data under differential privacy. Ultimately, by exploiting the
two reasonable assumptions listed above, we make nontrivial gains in utility while maintaining a strong (ǫ, δ)-DP
guarantee. Using a novel concentration analysis, we propose a class of ﬁlter/subsample mechanisms for publishing
sanitized time-series data. Our experiments indicate that—by using signiﬁcantly less additive noise than baseline
methods—our mechanisms achieve a better privacy-utility tradeoff in general for oversampled time-series.
1.1
Related Work
With regards to subsampling and Differential Privacy, prior work has shown that subsampling individuals (rows)
helps amplify privacy (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011; Beimel et al., 2014, 2013; Bassily et al., 2014; Abadi et al., 2016;
Balle et al., 2018); our setting is different from these results in that we consider subsampling time steps which are
equivalent to columns or features, which has not been considered in prior work.
The most closely related work in terms of publishing time-series data privately is by Rastogi and Nath (2010). They
propose an ǫ-DP algorithm that perturbs only the ﬁrst k discrete Fourier transform (DFT) coefﬁcients with the Laplace
mechanism and zeros the remaining high frequency coefﬁcients, since adding noise to those results in the sanitized
time-series being scattered. However, the sensitivity still scales with T and the algorithm perturbs the ﬁrst k coefﬁcient
a lot if T is large. In comparison, we provide an analysis using subsampling that introduces better scaling with
T . Fan and Xiong (2012) utilize the Kalman ﬁlter to correct the noisy signal by the Laplace mechanism and adopt
adaptive sampling to reduce the published time steps, thereby reducing the number of compositions. Their main focus
is real-time data publishing, where we focus on ofﬂine data publishing.
Closer to our line of study is differentially private continual observation (Dwork et al., 2010; Chan et al., 2011), which
proposes a method to repeatedly publish aggregates (in particular, count) under the continual observation of the data
signal. The main difference from our work is that they protect event-level privacy; namely, they try to hide the event
that an individual participates in the time-series at a single time step by perturbation. We hide participation in the
entire time-series, assuming that an individual can participate at multiple time steps.
As for DP under ﬁltering, Ny and Pappas (2014) investigate the DP mechanisms for general dynamic systems. The
work relates ﬁlters to an input with the sensitivity, but it does not address the issue that the sensitivity depends linearly
on T .
More broadly, some work proposes new privacy deﬁnitions suitable for trafﬁc (more generally, spatio-temporal) data
(Xiao and Xiong, 2015; Cao et al., 2017, 2019; Meehan and Chaudhuri, 2021). Though these deﬁnitions are more
appropriate for some situations, we believe the classic DP deﬁnition is the right choice for our setting, where there is
a trusted central authority.
2

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
2
Preliminaries and Problem Setting
Among aggregate time-series data, we focus on a count data throughout this paper. More formally, we consider time-
series signal x ∈NT of length T , where xt corresponds to the count of individuals’ participation at time t. The count
signal x is an output of a function count : X →NT , where X is the input space. We aim to publish the randomized
version of x, denoting as z, with a privacy guarantee.
The appropriate privacy notion for our setting is differential privacy. We say two datasets D, D′ ∈X are neighboring
if they differ on at most an individual’s participation.
Deﬁnition 1 ((ǫ, δ)-DP (Dwork et al., 2006a)). A randomized algorithm M satisﬁes (ǫ, δ)-DP if for any neighboring
datasets D, D′ and for any S ⊆range(M),
Pr{M(D) ∈S} ≤exp(ǫ) Pr{M(D′) ∈S} + δ.
One of the most famous DP algorithms is the Gaussian mechanism, which adds the Gaussian noise with a variance
proportional to the L2-sensitivity (Dwork et al., 2006b). The L2-sensitivity of a function f is the maximum difference
between the outputs of f from any neighboring datasets in terms of ℓ2-norm.
Deﬁnition 2. The L2-sensitivity of a function f : X →Rd is
∆2,f = max
D,D′ ∥f(D) −f(D′)∥2,
where D and D′ are neighboring datasets and ∥· ∥2 is ℓ2-norm.
Theorem 1 (Gaussian mechanism (Dwork and Roth, 2014)). Let ǫ ∈(0, 1) be arbitrary and f : X →Rd be a
function. Then, for c2 > 2 ln(1.25/δ), the algorithm M:
M(D) = f(D) + (ξ1, . . . , ξd)⊤
satisiﬁes (ǫ, δ)-DP, where ξi’s are drawn i.i.d. from N(0, σ2) and σ ≥c∆2,f
ǫ
.
As we see from the Gaussian mechanism, the larger L2-sensitivity leads to the higher noise variance. Thus, we
consider ﬁltering and subsampling the input signal to reduce the sensitivity.
Filtering the signal is a well-used technique in signal processing. In particular, low-pass ﬁlters attenuate the effect of
high frequencies and make the signal smoother. Let h ∈RT be a ﬁltering vector and y ∈RT be a ﬁltered signal. We
express the ﬁltering operation as yt = PT −1
k=0 xkh(t−k) mod T for all t ∈[T ]. With a matrix A ∈RT ×T , this can be
seen as yt = (Ax)t = PT −1
k=0 atkxk , where (A)ij = aij = h(i−j) mod T , for all t ∈[T ]. Note that a matrix A is a
circular matrix. From now on, we represent the ﬁlter with A and the ﬁltered signal with y = Ax. We further assume
that the ℓ1-norm of each row is normalized to 1, i.e., ∥At∥1 = 1 for all t ∈[T ], where At is t-th row of a matrix A.
As opposed to row-wise subsampling in the past DP literature that can completely discard an individual’s participation
in a dataset with some probability, we contemplate column-wise subsampling. Formally, we deﬁne the subsampling
operator as Subsample : RT × J →RT ′, where J = {j ⊆[T ]} is the power set of [T ] and T ′ is a length of
subsampled signal. We deﬁne J ∈J as the random variable of subsampling indices. We consider the Poisson
sampling with parameter p for J, i.e., for all t ∈[T ], t ∈J with probability p independently. Therefore, we express
the subsampling to x with j as ˆx = Subsample(x, j), where ˆx ∈R|j|.
3
Privacy Ampliﬁcation by Subsampling
Recalling the example of the California highway trafﬁc data (Chen et al., 2001), the number of cars passed by the
physical sensor is sampled once every ﬁve minutes. The sensitivity grows exceedingly large with the number of
sampled time steps, T ; thus, the noise added to satisfy DP becomes too large to convey even daily or weekly trends for
baseline mechanisms. However, it is extremely unlikely that a single individual participates at every sensor snapshot
in a day. Therefore, by making the mild assumption that an individual participates no more than at I < T time
steps in the signal, we can signiﬁcantly reduce the sensitivity. Without subsampling, this trivially reduces the (L2-)
sensitivity by a factor of
p
I/T. In this section, we demonstrate how we can reduce the sensitivity even further with
high probability through subsampling and propose our (ǫ, δ)-DP algorithm that utilizes subsampling.
3

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
Table 1: Maximum number of check-ins per individual (I) for 15 most visited venues in Gowalla (left) and Foursquare (right)
datasets.
ID
I (T = 725)
1
63
2
35
3
39
4
29
5
51
6
39
7
43
8
19
9
27
10
208
11
27
12
34
13
45
14
47
15
75
ID
I (T = 2126)
1
208
2
127
3
98
4
225
5
265
6
121
7
191
8
78
9
94
10
182
11
170
12
206
13
94
14
82
15
350
3.1
Assumption
To make the above assumption precise, we formalize it as follows.
Denote i-th individual’s participation to the dataset D as di ∈RT . Thus, xt = count(D)t = P
i di,t. Without loss of
generality, we assume di,t ∈{0, 1} for all i and t, i.e., an individual can participate at most once at each time step. It
is straightforward to extend our results to the case where participation is at most M > 1 times. The formal statement
for limited individual’s participation assumption is as follows.
Assumption 1. supi
P
t di,t = I, i.e., an individual can participate at most I time steps.
Assumption 1 formalizes the observation that no individuals participate at all time steps, especially when the signal
is oversampled. In most cases, the maximum time steps that an individual can participate at are smaller than T ; thus,
I < T . This assumption is empirically evident in real time-series data. Table 1 shows the maximum number of check-
ins per individual for the top 15 most visited venues for Gowalla (Cho et al., 2011) and Foursquare (Yang et al., 2015,
2016) datasets. Similar to our highway example, it is implausible that an individual checks into a certain venue every
time step. We see that I is, at least empirically, much smaller than T . Since we do not know the exact value of the
maximum individual’s participation a priori, we must set I conservatively in practice. However, even if the assumption
does not hold strictly, our guarantee is still valid with gentle privacy degradation as discussed in Section 3.3.1. This
assumption yields that ∆2,count =
√
I.
Although the assumption reduces the L2-sensitivity from
√
T to
√
I, we will show that random subsampling reduces
it further in the following sections.
3.2
Sensitivity Reduction by Subsampling
With the assumption in mind, the naive approach to achieve DP is to apply the Gaussian mechanism with the sensitivity
parameter ∆2,count =
√
I. The dependency on
√
I is undesirable as I, which tends to be proportional to T , becomes
larger. Therefore, we propose to apply random subsampling to relax this dependency. The intuition behind it is that
the probability that subsampled time steps contain all (or most) of an individual’s participation is very low under
Assumption 1; thus, we get the further dependency reduction. Formally, we show that Subsample helps reduce the
L2-sensitivity with high probability, where the probability is over the choice of J, under Assumption 1.
Throughout the analysis, we assume that D = D′ ∪{di}, i.e., i-th individual is the only one who participates in D
and does not in D′. Also, we let ji = {t|di,t = 1}, time indices that i-th individual participates.
3.2.1
Sensitivity Reduction by Subsampling Only
We start from examining the sensitivity of fs(·, ·) = Subsample(count(·), ·). Intuitively, under Assumption 1, the
probability that J contains almost all I time steps is small; thus, we obtain the sensitivity reduction with high proba-
bility.
4

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
Theorem 2. Fix I′ ≤I. Let δ′ = Pr{|J ∩ji| > I′} = PI
t=I′+1
 I
t

pt(1 −p)I−t. Then, with probability 1 −δ′,
∆2,fs =
√
I′.
The proof follows directly from the tail probability of the binomial distribution with parameters I and p. By using the
tail bound of the binomial distribution, we can explicitly express the upper bound of I′ for ﬁxed δ′ with I and p.
Corollary 1. Let δ′ < 1. Then, with probability 1 −δ′, ∆2,fs =
√
I′ ≤
r
Ip +
q
I
2 log 1/δ′.
The claim is a direct consequence of the Hoeffding’s inequality. We see with high probability that the dependency on
I is replaced by Ip plus the probably small additional term.
3.2.2
Sensitivity Reduction by Filtering and Subsampling
Next, we consider the case where we ﬁlter the signal before subsampling. Some ﬁlters have an averaging effect across
time steps; thus, ﬁltered signals become smoother and less noisy in general.
Again, we go back to our running example of the CA highway trafﬁc data. The signal is very oversampled for an
analyst who is only interested in how trafﬁc trends change every two hours. Changes on the order of ﬁve minutes do
not contribute to their utility, but magniﬁes the sensitivity signiﬁcantly. By ﬁltering, we effectively average in time to
smooth the signal, and ultimately reduce the variance after subsampling. As detailed in Section 2 we represent a ﬁlter
as a matrix A, which, after multiplying with the signal, produces the smoother signal.
However, from the DP point of view, ﬁltering spreads the content of t-th time step across all time steps; thus, the
effects of subsampling are now less obvious. As an extreme example, consider a ﬁlter that simply averages across all
time points, i.e., Aij = 1/T for any i and j. Then, any individual’s contribution scatters equally along all time steps.
Thus, the intuition above does not hold here, but still, we can apply a similar way of thinking if A is somewhat similar
to the identity matrix—there exist time steps that i-th individual’s inﬂuence is large, and the probability of choosing
almost all such time steps is low.
We deﬁne the function as ffs(·, ·) = Subsample(A count(·), ·). By letting δi = 1 if i ∈J and 0 otherwise and
B = diag(δ1, . . . , δT )A, we can express ffs(x, J) = Bx. Fix two signals x, x′ induced by neighboring datasets.
Then, it holds that
∆2
2,ffs = ∥Bx −Bx′∥2
2
= (x −x′)⊤B⊤B(x −x′)
≤λmax(B⊤B)∥x −x′∥2
2 ≤σ2
max(B)I,
where the last inequality follows from Assumption 1. It remains to bound the maximum singular value of B to
complete bounding the sensitivity.
To bound how large the maximum singular value is likely to be, we use the following simpliﬁed version of the theorem
by Tropp (2015).
Theorem 3 (Simpliﬁed version, (Tropp, 2015)). For ε ≥0,
P

σ2
max(B) ≥(1 + ε)pσ2
max(A)
	
≤2srank(A)

eε
(1 + ε)1+ε
pσ2
max(A)/L
,
where srank(A) = ∥A∥2
F
∥A∥2 is the stable rank of A, the ratio between the squared Frobenius norm of A and the squared
spectral norm of A, and L = maxt ∥At∥2
2.
As we assume in Section 2 that A is a circular matrix and ∥At∥1 = 1 for all t ∈[T ], σmax(A) = 1 and L =
∥A1∥2
2. Combining this theorem with the sensitivity bound with the maximum singular value, we are able to bound the
reduction in sensitivity from both subsampling and ﬁltering simultaneously. Our ﬁnal sensitivity reduction theorem
for ﬁltered and subsampled signals is given below.
Theorem 4. Fix α ∈(0, 1]. Let δ′ = 2srank(A)

eα2/p−1
(α2/p)α2/p
p/L
. Then, with probability at least 1 −δ′, ∆2,ffs =
α
√
I.
Note that the theorem above does not fully make use of Assumption 1; thus, the statement holds even if we replace
I with T . Also, we note that by taking A to be an identity matrix, the function ffs is exactly the same as fs, but the
bound is looser than Theorem 2 in general. Furthermore, it is hard to obtain the explicit upper bound for α in general,
but we give the relationship between α and δ′ in Appendix 3.
5

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
Algorithm 1 Our (ǫ, δ)-DP Algorithm
Input: count signal x ∈RT , ﬁlter A ∈RT ×T , parameters p, α, ǫ, δ
Output: ˆz ∈RT
y = Ax
Sample J uniform randomly with a parameter p.
ys = Subsample(y, J)
z = ys + (ξ1, . . . , ξ|J|)⊤, where ξi ∼N

0, 2 ln(1.25/δ)
(ǫ/(α
√
I))2

Interpolate z to get ˆz with J.
3.3
Algorithm
Algorithm 1 gives our (ǫ, δ)-DP algorithm for a ﬁltered and subsampled count signal. The central idea is to utilize the
sensitivity analysis in the previous section and add less variance noise than the standard Gaussian mechanism. One
note is that the interpolation in the last line of Algorithm 1 does not incur a privacy breach by using J as long as the
interpolation is bijective given J, which is usually the case.
From Theorems 2 and 4, we see that Algorithm 1 satisﬁes (ǫ, δ)-DP. In short, our privacy guarantee allows smaller ǫ
in exchange for a little larger δ under the same noise variance as the standard Gaussian mechanism.
Corollary 2. Let δ′ be the one in Theorem 4. Algorithm 1 satisﬁes (ǫ, δ + δ′(exp(ǫ/α) −exp(ǫ)))-DP.
The corollary follows directly from Theorem 4. We provide the detailed proof in Appendix 1.
The guarantee implicitly requires δ′ to be small enough. In other words, if δ′(exp(ǫ/α)−exp(ǫ)) is smaller or equal to
δ, the compensation for the δ term is negligible and we obtain the better privacy. Also, δ′ is a monotonously decreasing
function with respect to α; thus, one can easily ﬁnd appropriate α to satisfy desired δ′ numerically.
When A is an identity matrix, i.e., not ﬁltering before subsampling, we have a better privacy guarantee.
Corollary 3. Let A be an identity matrix, I′ =

α2I

and δ′ be the one in Theorem 2. Algorithm 1 satisﬁes (ǫ, δ +
δ′(exp(
p
I/I′ǫ) −exp(ǫ)))-DP.
The proof is almost identical to the one for Corollary 2. Note that the above guarantee heavily relies on Assumption 1
as opposed to Corollary 2.
3.3.1
Graceful Privacy Degradation When Assumption 1 Fails
Although we succeed in amplifying privacy by subsampling, one would cast doubt on the validity of Assumption 1,
i.e., any individual participates at most I time steps. Here, we show even if the assumption does not hold precisely,
our algorithm still satisﬁes DP and the privacy level does not degrade abruptly.
Proposition 1. If supi
P
t di,t = cI for some c > 1, then Algorithm 1 satisﬁes (√cǫ, δ+δ′(exp(√cǫ/α)−exp(√cǫ))-
DP.
In short, the above proposition claims that if the actual participation limit is cI instead of I, privacy parameters
increase only slightly; in particular, ǫ only increases by a factor of √c.
4
Experiments
We next investigate how well our algorithm works in practice by empirically evaluating it on real and synthetic data.
Speciﬁcally, we ask the following questions:
1. How does our algorithm compare with existing baselines such as the Gaussian mechanism and DFT in terms
of accuracy?
2. How does ﬁltering before subsampling improve accuracy?
3. How does the sampling frequency of the time-series data affect accuracy?
We answer the ﬁrst question by experimenting with three real datasets in Section 4.2. We then answer the rest of the
questions with a synthetic dataset in Section 4.3.
6

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
Table 2: Mean MAEs and standard deviations of Gaussian mechanism, DFT and our algorithms (with and without ﬁlter) on PeMS,
Gowalla, and Foursquare dataset for (ǫ, δ) = (0.5, 10−4). We see that our algorithm without ﬁltering performs the best on these
real world datasets. We explore when ﬁltering is optimal on the Synth dataset.
PeMS
Gowalla
Foursquare
Gaussian
93.0 ± 1.6
33.0 ± 1.5
57.4 ± 1.5
DFT
55.7 ± 2.8
39.3 ± 3.5
42.9 ± 3.4
Ours w/o Filter
42.8 ± 2.9
16.7 ± 2.7
29.5 ± 2.4
Ours w/ Filter
60.9 ± 4.0
21.2 ± 3.9
39.6 ± 3.6
4.1
Setup
Datasets.
We consider four datasets – three real, and one synthetic.
PeMS (T = 1800) (Chen et al., 2001) is a dataset collected by California Transportation Agencies (CalTrans) Perfor-
mance Measurement System (PeMS). We select a sensor from a highway in the Bay area, California, and sample the
ﬂow data, the number of cars that passed the sensor, every ﬁve minutes from Jan. 2017. Gowalla (T = 725) (Cho et al.,
2011) is a dataset of check-in information from a location-based social networking website called Gowalla. We use
the most visited location and aggregate the check-in count every 24 hours from Feb. 2009. Foursquare (T = 2126)
(Yang et al., 2015, 2016) is a similar dataset with check-in information from the location data platform Foursquare.
We pick the most checked-in place and aggregate the count every 6 hours from April 2012. Since raw Gowalla and
Foursquare datasets contain user IDs, we use them to calculate the empirical I in Table 1. We set I = ⌈T/10⌉as
conﬁrmed by Table 1.
Since we do not have the data generating mechanisms for real data, to understand how the sampling frequency affects
the accuracy and the conditions under which ﬁltering helps, we also experiment with a synthetic dataset Synth. We
generate the signal value given time step t as xt = a sin(ωt) + b + ct, where we set a = 200, b = 500 and
c = 0.1. The resulting signal has two overall trends: periodicity and linear growth. We expect a good algorithm
to return a randomized version that maintains both trends. We control the sampling frequency to examine how the
extent of oversampling affects the utility. We do this by, given (relative) sampling frequency f, generating the signal
x(f) = (x0, x1/f, x2/f, . . .). Thus, as the relative frequency increases, the signal is oversampled more and the length
gets larger. We set T = 10000 for f = 1 (thus, T = 10000 · f given f) and I = 100 for any f. We generate several
signals with varying f’s (f ∈{1, 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, 1/32, 1/64}). We provide the reason why we ﬁx I for the Synth
data in Appendix 2. Furthermore, we consider the case where there is observation noise: unbiased randomness added
to each time step that is typical in real-world time-series. To do so, we add mean-zero Gaussian noise to each time
step, yielding a more realistic, noisy version of the signal: ˜xt = xt + dˆσt, where ˆσt’s are drawn i.i.d. from N(0, 1)
and d = 100.
Algorithms.
The simplest baseline for our problem is the standard Gaussian mechanism. The Gaussian mechanism
for time-series data adds noise corresponding to the sensitivity
√
I to each of T time steps by considering time-series
data as a T -dimensional vector. The more involved baseline is the algorithm by Rastogi and Nath (2010) (DFT). It
adds noise to the ﬁrst k discrete Fourier transform coefﬁcients and ignores higher frequency contents of the signal. For
DFT, we use the hyperparameters reported as being the best in their paper. While DFT is originally an ǫ-DP algorithm,
we extend it to be (ǫ, δ)-DP by changing the noise distribution to Gaussian from Laplace for direct comparison with
our algorithm. For our algorithm, we consider two variations—with and without ﬁltering.
Experiment Setup.
We set the privacy parameters and α so that each mechanism guarantees (ǫ, δ) = (0.5, 10−4)-
DP throughout the experiments. Accuracy is measured by the mean absolute error (MAE) between the raw signal and
the output. For the noisy Synth data, we measure the MAE between the true signal (before adding observation noise)
and the output. For each time-series, we repeat the algorithms 1000 times and report the mean and standard deviation
of MAE; this is because the outputs depend heavily on the randomness of the mechanisms. We choose a subsampling
parameter for our algorithm p to be 0.1, i.e., the subsampled signal length would be around T/10 for the real datasets.
For the synthetic signal, p = 0.1 · (1 −log(f)/4). We present further details of the experiments in Appendix 2.
4.2
Results on Real Data
Table 2 summarizes the MAEs on the real datasets. We see that for all the datasets, our algorithm without ﬁltering
performs the best, indicating the superiority of this algorithm. Ours with ﬁltering performs better than the baselines
on the Gowalla and Foursquare dataset, but slightly worse than DFT on the PeMS dataset. This might be due to the
7

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
Figure 1: Two baseline mechanisms (left) and our mechanism with and without ﬁltering (right), each operating on Synth time-
series with observation noise. We plot the noiseless Synth time-series in blue for reference. Output by our algorithm with ﬁltering
concentrates around raw signal the most, demonstrating value of our ﬁlter + subsample algorithm when operating on noisy time-
series.
10
−1
10
0
Relative Sampling Freq ency
40
60
80
100
120
140
MAE
Ga ssian
DFT
O rs w/o Filter
O rs w/ Filter
(a) Without observation noise
10
−1
10
0
Relative Sampling Freq ency
40
60
80
100
120
140
MAE
Ga ssian
DFT
O rs w/o Filter
O rs w/ Filter
(b) With observation noise
Figure 2: Mean MAEs (smaller is better) and standard deviations of Gaussian mechanism, DFT, and our algorithms (with and with-
out ﬁlter) on Synth data under varying relative sampling frequencies for (ǫ, δ) = (0.5, 10−4). Signal is sampled more frequently,
i.e., more oversampled, as relative sampling frequency gets larger. We see that (1) our algorithms (with and without ﬁlter) perform
better as signal gets more oversampled, and (2) our algorithm with ﬁltering performs best when the input signal is noisy (right).
periodic nature of the PeMS signal—DFT is suitable for periodic signals in general. Although the overall performance
of our algorithms is better than the baselines, it seems that the variance of MAE is slightly larger than the standard
Gaussian mechanism. We anticipate that the main reason is the interpolation in Algorithm 1.
4.3
Results on Synthetic Data
To better understand when ﬁltering works well, we compare the results with and without observation noise. We
anticipate that the averaging effect of ﬁltering offers better performance when observation noise is present. Figure 1
shows in orange examples of outputs of four mechanisms: the two baseline mechanisms and our mechanism with
and without ﬁltering, each operating on the Synth time-series with observation noise. For reference the Synth signal
is plotted in blue (without obs. noise for clarity). We show the outputs operating on the noiseless Synth signal in
Appendix 2. Figures 2a and 2b show the MAEs for Synth dataset with and without observation noise while sweeping
relative sampling frequency f. We see that our mechanism with ﬁltering generally outperforms the one without
ﬁltering when there is observation noise, conﬁrming our hypothesis. Filtering before subsampling has an averaging
effect in time, canceling out the observation noise and thus accurately conveying the underlying trends. We can observe
this effect directly in Figure 1. The output from our algorithm with ﬁltering concentrates around the raw Synth signal
the most, yielding a lower MAE and better capturing underlying trends. On the other hand, when the signal is noiseless,
ﬁltering does not help achieve better utility. As seen in Section 3.2, the sensitivity reduction is larger for subsampling
without ﬁltering; thus, ours without ﬁltering is more helpful for less noisy signals.
8

arXiv Template
A PREPRINT
To understand the impact of oversampling, i.e., how sampling frequency matters to utility, we observe the results under
several (relative) sampling frequencies (f). The larger f is, the more oversampled the signal is. For both Figures 2a
and 2b, we see a similar trend that MAEs get smaller as f becomes larger for our algorithms (with and without ﬁltering).
This trend validates the hypothesis that almost no information gets lost by subsampling for oversampled signals. In
such a case, we gain utility due to the reduced sensitivity achieved by subsampling. By contrast, for less frequently
sampled, fast-moving signals, our algorithms perform worse than the standard Gaussian mechanism. We expect that
this is because the error caused by the interpolation dominates the error by adding noise. The linear interpolation
does not supplement the information lost by subsampling. Note that MAEs for the Gaussian mechanism and DFT are
almost constant because, for experiments on Synth, we ﬁx I for all f’s.
4.4
Discussion
Throughout the experiments, we have made the three questions clear.
Our experimental results on real data reveal that our algorithm, especially without ﬁltering, is superior to the baseline
mechanisms, the Gaussian mechanism and DFT, in terms of MAE. This is mainly because the sensitivity reduction
by subsampling reduces the noise variance and the error incurred by the interpolation is small due to the oversampled
nature of real data.
Filtering improves utility when signals contain observation noise as conﬁrmed by the result on the Synth data. It is
helpful when we want to capture underlying trends rather than to reproduce original signals because applying a ﬁlter
has an averaging effect and thus lessens the effect of observation noise. On the contrary, for noiseless signals, we
should use our algorithm without ﬁltering since the sensitivity reduction is larger for subsampling but not ﬁltering in
general.
The result on the Synth data also indicates that our algorithm works better as data gets oversampled. This result
veriﬁes our hypothesis that subsampling preserves overall trends for oversampled signals. The sensitivity reduction is
also signiﬁcant since our algorithm outperforms the baseline mechanisms for such signals.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
This paper investigates how subsampling and ﬁltering help achieve a better privacy-utility tradeoff for the longstanding
problem of publishing sanitized aggregate time-series data with a DP guarantee. Using a novel concentration analysis,
we show subsampling and ﬁltering reduce the sensitivity with high probability under reasonable assumptions for real
time-series data. We then propose a class of DP mechanisms exploiting subsampling and/or ﬁltering, which empirically
outperform baselines. Going forward, we plan to develop theoretical utility guarantees for our mechanisms, and
explore how alternative interpolation schemes impact utility. Finally, we believe feature-wise subsampling is beneﬁcial
beyond time-series data, and are investigating other applications for our techniques.
