Video-based Sign Language Recognition without Temporal Segmentation
Jie Huang1, Wengang Zhou2, Qilin Zhang3, Houqiang Li4, Weiping Li5
1,2,4,5Department of Electronic Engineering and Information Science, University of Science and Technology of China
3HERE Technologies, Chicago, Illinois, USA

Abstract
Millions of hearing impaired people around the world rou-
tinely use some variants of sign languages to communicate,
thus the automatic translation of a sign language is mean-
ingful and important. Currently, there are two sub-problems
in Sign Language Recognition (SLR), i.e., isolated SLR that
recognizes word by word and continuous SLR that translates
entire sentences. Existing continuous SLR methods typically
utilize isolated SLRs as building blocks, with an extra layer of
preprocessing (temporal segmentation) and another layer of
post-processing (sentence synthesis). Unfortunately, tempo-
ral segmentation itself is non-trivial and inevitably propagates
errors into subsequent steps. Worse still, isolated SLR meth-
ods typically require strenuous labeling of each word sepa-
rately in a sentence, severely limiting the amount of attainable
training data. To address these challenges, we propose a novel
continuous sign recognition framework, the Hierarchical At-
tention Network with Latent Space (LS-HAN), which elim-
inates the preprocessing of temporal segmentation. The pro-
posed LS-HAN consists of three components: a two-stream
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) for video feature rep-
resentation generation, a Latent Space (LS) for semantic gap
bridging, and a Hierarchical Attention Network (HAN) for
latent space based recognition. Experiments are carried out
on two large scale datasets. Experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed framework.
Introduction
A key challenge in Sign Language Recognition (SLR) is the
design of visual descriptors that reliably captures body mo-
tions, gestures, and facial expressions. There are primarily
two categories: the hand-crafted features (Sun et al. 2013;
Koller, Forster, and Ney 2015) and Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) based features (Tang et al. 2015; Huang et
al. 2015; Pu, Zhou, and Li 2016). Inspired by the recent suc-
cess in CNN (Ran et al. 2017a; 2017b), we design a two-
stream 3D-CNN for video feature extraction.
Temporal segmentation is also a difficulty in continuous
Sign Language Recognition (SLR). The common scheme to
continuous SLR is to decompose it to isolated word recogni-
tion problem, which involves temporal segmentation. Tem-
poral segmentation is non-trivial since the transitional move-
Accepted by 32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence (AAAI-18), preprint version available at https://
qilin-zhang.github.io/publications/
ments are diverse and hard to detect, and as a preprocessing
step, inaccurate segmentation could incur errors in the sub-
sequent steps. In addition, it is highly time consuming to
label each isolated fragments.
Motivated by video caption with Long-Short Term Mem-
ory (LSTM), we circumvent the temporal segmentation with
Hierarchical Attention Network (HAN), an extension to
LSTM by considering structure information and attention
mechanism. The scheme is to feed HAN with the entire
video and output complete sentence word-by-word. How-
ever, HAN locally optimizes the probability of generating
the next word given the input video and previous word, ig-
noring the relationship between video and sentences (Pan et
al. 2015). As a result, it could suffer from robustness issues.
To remedy this, we incorporate a Latent Space model to ex-
plicitly exploit the relationship between visual video and text
sentence.
In summary, the major contributions of the paper are:
• A new two-stream 3D CNN for the generation of global-
local video feature representations;
• A new LS-HAN framework for continuous SLR without
requiring temporal segmentation;
• Joint optimization of relevance and recognition loss in the
proposed LS-HAN framework;
• Compilation of the largest (as of September 2017) open-
source Modern Chinese Sign Language (CSL) dataset for
continuous SLR with sentence-level annotations.
Related Work
In this section, a brief review of continuous SLR, video sub-
title generation, and latent space model is given.
Continuous SLR
Most existing SLR researches (Huang et al. 2015; Guo et al.
2016; Dan Guo and Wang 2017; Liu, Zhou, and Li 2016)
fall into the category of isolated SLR, i.e., recognition of
words or expressions, similar to action recognition (Cai et
al. 2016). A more challenging problem is the continuous
SLR, which involves the reconstruction of sentence struc-
tures. Most existing continuous SLR methods divide the
sentence-to-sentence recognition problem into three stages,
temporal segmentation of videos, isolated word/expression
recognition (i.e., isolated SLR), and sentence synthesis with
a language model. For example, DTW-HMM (Zhang, Zhou,
arXiv:1801.10111v2  [cs.CV]  14 Sep 2025

and Li 2014) proposed a threshold matrix based coarse tem-
poral segmentation step followed by a Dynamic Time Warp-
ing (DTW) algorithm and a bi-grammar model. In (Koller,
Zargaran, and Ney 2017), a new HMM based language
model is incorporated. Recently, transitional movements at-
tract a lot of attention (Dawod, Nordin, and Abdullah 2016;
Li, Zhou, and Lee 2016; Yang, Tao, and Ye 2016; Zhang et
al. 2016) because they can serve as the basis for temporal
segmentation.
Despite its popularity, temporal segmentation is intrin-
sically difficult: even the transitional movements between
hand gestures can be subtle and ambiguous. Inaccurate seg-
mentation can incur significant performance penalty on sub-
sequent steps (Zhang, Zhou, and Li 2014; Koller, Forster,
and Ney 2015; Fang, Gao, and Zhao 2007). Worse still, the
isolated SLR step typically requires per-video-frame labels,
which are highly time consuming.
Video Description Generation
Video description generation (Pan et al. 2015; Venu-
gopalan et al. 2015; Yao et al. 2015) is a relevant re-
search area, which generates a brief sentence describing
the scenes/objects/motions of a given video sequences. One
popular method is the sequence-to-sequence video-to-text
(Venugopalan et al. 2015), a two layer LSTM on top of
a CNN. Attention mechanism can be incorporated into a
LSTM (Yao et al. 2015), which automatically selects the
most likely video frames. There are also some extensions
to the LSTM-style algorithms, such as bidirectional LSTM
(Bin et al. 2016), hierarchical LSTM (Li, Luong, and Juraf-
sky 2015) and hierarchical attention GRU (Yang et al. 2016).
Despite many similarities in targets and involved tech-
niques, video description generation and continuous SLR
are two distinctive tasks. Video description generation pro-
vides a brief summary of the appearance of a video se-
quence, such as “A female person raises a hand and stretch
fingers” while the continuous SLR provides a semantic
translation of sign language sentences, such as “A signer
says ‘I love you’ in American Sign Language. ”
Latent Space based Learning
Latent space model is a popular tool to bridge the seman-
tic gap between two modalities (Zhang et al. 2015b; 2015a;
Zhang and Hua 2015), such as between textual short de-
scriptions and imagery (Pan et al. 2014). For example, the
combination of LSTM and latent space model is proposed
in (Pan et al. 2015) for video caption generation, in which
both an embedding model and an LSTM are jointly learned.
However, this embedding model is purely based on the Eu-
clidean distance between video frames and textual descrip-
tions, ignoring all temporal structures. It is suitable for the
generation of video appearance summaries, but falls short of
semantic translation.
Signing Video Feature Representation
Signing video is characterized primarily by upper body mo-
tions, especially hand gestures. The major challenge of hand
gesture detection and tracking is the tremendous appear-
ance variations of hand shapes and orientations, in addi-
tion to occlusions. Previous researches (Tang et al. 2015;
Kurakin, Zhang, and Liu 2012; Sun et al. 2013) on pos-
ture/gesture models rely heavily on collected depth maps
from Kinect-style RGB-D sensors, which provides a con-
venient way in 3D modeling. However, a vast majority of
existing annotated signing videos are recorded with conven-
tional RGB camcorders. An effective RGB video based fea-
ture representation is essential to take advantage of these
valuable historical labeled data.
Inspired by the recent success of deep learning based
object detection, we propose a two-stream 3-D CNN for
the generation of video feature representation, with accu-
rate gesture detection and tracking. This particular two-
stream 3-D CNN takes both the entire video frames and
cropped/tracked gesture image patches as two separate in-
puts for each stream, with a late fusion mechanism achieved
through shared final fully connected layers. Therefore, the
proposed CNN encodes both global and local information.
Gesture Detection and Tracking
Faster R-CNN (Girshick 2015) is a popular object detection
method, which is adopted in our proposed method for ges-
ture detection and tracking. We pre-train a faster R-CNN
on the VOC20071 person-layout dataset2 with two output
units representing hands versus background. Subsequently,
we randomly select 400 frames from our proposed CSL
dataset and manually annotate the hand locations for fine-
tuning. After that, each video is processed frame-by-frame
for gesture detection.
The faster R-CNN based detection can fail when the hand-
shape varies hugely or is occluded by clothes. To local-
ize gestures in these frames, compressive tracking (Zhang,
Zhang, and Yang 2012) is utilized. The compressive tracking
model represents target regions in multi-scale compressive
feature vectors and scores the proposal regions with a Bayes
classifier. The Bayes classifier parameters are updated based
on detected targets in each frame, the compressive tracking
model is robust to huge appearance variations. Specifically,
a compressive tracking model is initialized whenever the
faster R-CNN detection fails, with the successfully detec-
tions from the immediate prior video frame. Conventional
tracking algorithms often suffer from the drift problem, es-
pecially with long video sequences. Our proposed method is
largely immune to this problem due to limited length of sign
videos.
Two-stream 3D CNN
Due to the nature of signing videos, a robust video fea-
ture representation requires the incorporation of both global
hand locations/motions and local hand gestures. As shown
in Fig. 1, we design a two-stream 3-D CNN based on the
C3D (Tran et al. 2015), which extracts spatio-temporal fea-
tures from a video clip (16 frames as suggested in (Tran et
1http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/voc2007/index.html
2It contains detailed body part labels (e.g., head, hands and
feet).

…
…
global
local
Convolution & pooling
Fully 
connected
Output
16
Figure 1: Two-stream 3-D CNN. Input is a video clip con-
taining 16 adjacent frames. Two streams share the same
structure as C3D (Tran et al. 2015). Blue and red blocks
represent convolutional and pooling layers, respectively.
Global-local feature representations are fused in the right-
most two fully connected layers.
al. 2015)). The input to the network is a video clip con-
taining adjacent 16 frames. The upper stream is designed
to extract global hand locations/motions, where the input
is resized (227 × 227) complete video frames. The lower
stream focuses on the local, detailed hand gestures, where
the input is cropped (also 227×227), tracked image patches
containing tight bounding boxes of hands. Left and right
hand patches are concatenated as multi-channel inputs. Each
stream shares the same network structure as the C3D net-
work, including eight convolutional layers and five pooling
layers. Two fully connected layers serve as fusion layers to
combine global and local information from the upper and
lower stream, respectively.
The two-stream CNN is first pre-trained with an isolated
SLR dataset (Pu, Zhou, and Li 2016), after which all weights
are fixed and the last SoftMax and fully-connected layer are
discarded. During the test phase, this CNN is truncated at
the first fully connected layer (as a feature extractor) and
each test video is divided into 16-frame clips with a tempo-
ral sliding window and subsequently fed into the two-steam
3D CNN. The 4096 dimensional output of the truncated
3D CNN is the desired global-local feature representation
for this particular 16-frame video clip. Consequently, each
video is denoted as a sequence of such 4096 dimensional
feature vectors.
Proposed LS-HAN Model
In this section, we present the Hierarchical Attention Net-
work (HAN) for continuous SLR in a latent space. HAN
is an extension to LSTM, which incorporates the attention
mechanism based on the structure of input. In the proposed
joint learning model, the optimization function takes into ac-
count both the video-sentence relevance error Er in a latent
space, and a recognition error Ec by HAN,
min
θr,θc
1
N
N
X
i=1
λ1Er(V (i), S(i); θr)
+ (1 −λ1)Ec(V (i), S(i); θr, θc) + λ2R ,
(1)
#Start
the
cup
is
blue
HAN
s’1
s’2
s’3
s’4
s’5
input
v’1
v’2
v’n
latent 
space
global-local
3D-CNN
one-hot vector
Figure 2: The proposed LS-HAN framework. Input are
video paired with annotation sentence. Video is represented
with global-local features and each word is encoded with
one-hot vector. They are mapped into the same latent space
to model video-sentence relevance. Based on the mapping
results, we utilize HAN for automatic sentence generation.
where N denotes the number of instances in the training
set, and ith instance being a video with annotated sentence
(V (i), S(i)). θr and θc denote parameters in the latent space
and HAN, respectively. R is a regularization term. Eq. (1)
represents the minimization of the mean loss over training
data with some regularizations. The balance between the
loss term and the regularization term is achieved by weights
λ1 and λ2.
In the following, the term Er is first formulated in the
video-sentence latent space, followed by details on sentence
recognition with HAN and the formula of term Ec. Finally,
the overall training and testing processes of LS-HAN are
presented.
Video-sentence Latent Space
As shown in Fig. 2, the input to our framework is videos
with paired annotated sentences. Video is represented with
the proposed global-local features, while each word of the
annotated sentence is encoded with a “one-hot” vector3.
Let the videos be V = (v1, v2, ..., vn), and the sentence be
S = (s1, s2, ..., sm), where vi ∈RDc is the Dc-dimensional
global-local feature of the ith video clip. n denotes the total
number of clips in this video, sj ∈RDw is the “one-hot”
vector of jth word of sentence, Dw is vocabulary size and m
represents the total number of words in the current sentence.
The goal of the latent space is to construct a space to
bridge semantic gaps, we map V
∈RDc×n and S ∈
RDw×m to the same latent space as fv(V ) = (v′
1, v′
2, ..., v′
n)
and fs(S) = (s′
1, s′
2, ..., s′
m), where fv and fs are mapping
function for video features and sentence features, respec-
tively,
fv(x) = Tvx
and
fs(x) = Tsx ,
(2)
3A one-hot vector is a binary index used to distinguish words
with a given vocabulary. All bits are ‘0’, except the ith bit being ‘1’
for the ith word in this vocabulary.

5
10
15
20
25
clip
word
5
10
15
20
25
clip
word
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
D[i,j]
(a)
(b)
D[i,j]
Figure 3: Associated warping paths generated by DTW. X-
axis represents the frame index, y-axis indicates the word
sequence index. Grids represent the matrix elements D[i, j].
(a) shows three possible alignment paths of raw DTW. (b)
shows the alignment paths of Window-DTW which are
bounded by windows.
Tv ∈RDs×Dc and Ts ∈RDs×Dw are transformation ma-
trices that project video content and semantic sentence into
common space. Ds is the dimension of the latent space.
To measure the relevance between fv(V ) and fs(S), the
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) algorithm is used to find
the minimal accumulating distance of two sequences and the
temporal warping path,
D[i, j] = min(D[i −1, j], D[i −1, j −1]) + d(i, j) , (3)
d(i, j) = ||Tvvi −Tssj||2 ,
(4)
where D[i, j] denotes the distance between (v′
1, ..., v′
i) and
(s′
1, ..., s′
j), and d(i, j) denotes the distance between v′
i and
s′
j. Thus we define the loss of video-sentence with single
instance as,
Er(V, S; θr) = D(n, m) .
(5)
This DTW algorithm assumes that words appearing ear-
lier in a sentence should also appear early in video clips,
i.e., a monotonically increasing alignment. Per our evalua-
tion dataset, most signers vastly prefer simple sentences to
compound ones, thus simple sentences with a single clause
makes up the majority of the dataset. Therefore, approxi-
mate monotonically increasing alignment can be assumed.
The associated warping path is recovered using back-
tracking. This warping path is normally interpreted as the
alignment between frames and words. For better alignment,
the Windowing-DTW (Biba and Xhafa 2011) is used, as
shown in Fig. 3, and D[i, j] is only computed within the
windows. In the following experiments, the window length
is n
2 , except the first and last one at boundary 0 and n. All
adjacent windows have n
4 overlap.
Recognition with HAN
Inspired by recent sequence-to-sequence models (Venu-
gopalan et al. 2015), the recognition problem is formulated
as the estimation of log-conditional probability of sentences
attention
attention
#start
the
cup
is
blue
clipi1
clipi2
clipiT
−
!
h iT
−
!
h i2
−
!
h i1
−
!
h 1
−
!
h 2
−
!
h L
w1
w2
wL
 
−
h i1
 
−
h i2
 
−
h iT
 
−
h 1
 
−
h 2
 
−
h L
h1
h2
h3
h4
h5
FOLS
HQFRGHU
ZRUG
HQFRGHU
GHFRGHU
latent vector
y1
y2
y3
y4
y5
Figure 4: HAN encodes videos hierarchically and weights
the input sequence via a attention layer. It decodes the hid-
den vector representation to a sentence word-by-word.
given videos. By minimizing the loss, contextual relation-
ship among the words in sentences can be kept.
Ec(V, S; θr, θc) = log p(s′
1, s′
2, ..., s′
m|v′
1, v′
2, ..., v′
n; θc)
=
m
X
t=1
log p(s′
t|v′
1, ..., v′
n, s′
1, ..., s′
t−1; θc) .
(6)
First, input frame sequences are encoded as a latent vector
representation on a per-frame basis, followed by decoding
from each representation to a sentence, one word at a time.
We extend the encoder in HAN to reflect the hierarchical
structures in its inputs (clips form word and words form sen-
tence) and incorporate the attention mechanism. The modi-
fied model is an unnamed variant of HAN.
As shown in Fig. 4, the inputs (in blue) are clip sequences
and word sequences represented in latent space. This model
contains two encoders and a decoder. Each encoder is a bidi-
rectional LSTM with a attention layer; while the decoder is
a single LSTM. The clip encoder encodes the video clips
aligning to a word. As shown in Fig. 5, we empirically try
three alignment strategies:
1. Split clips to two subsequences;
2. Split to subsequences every two clips;
3. Split evenly to 7 subsequences, since each sentence con-
tains 7 words on average in the training set.
The outputs of bidirectional LSTM pass through the atten-
tion layer to form a word-level vector, where the attention
layer acts as information selecting weights to the inputs.
Subsequently, the sequences of word-level vectors are pro-
jected into a latent vector representation, where decoding is
carried out with annotation sentence. During the decoding,
#Start is used as the start symbol to mark the beginning of
a sentence and #End as the end symbol that indicates the
end of a sentence. At each time stamp, words encoded with
“one-hot vector” are mapped into the latent space and fed to
the LSTM (denoted in green) together with the hidden state
from the previous timestamp. The LSTM cell output ht is
used to emitted word yt. A softmax function is applied to
obtain the probability distribution over the words ˆy in the

attention
attention
w1
w2
attention
attention
attention
w1
w2
clip1
clipi
clipi+1
clipn
clipi
clipi+1
attention
attention
w1
w2
clipi+1
clipi+t
wL/2
wL/7
ҁD҂
ҁE҂
ҁF҂
Figure 5: Alignment reconstruction in the testing phase. (a)
Split clips to two subsequences and encode as HAN; (b)
Split to subsequences every two adjacent clips; (c) Split
evenly to 7 subsequences, where 7 is average sentence length
in the training set.
vocabulary voc.
p(yt|ht) =
exp(Wytht)
P
ˆy∈voc exp(Wˆyht),
(7)
where Wyt, Wˆy are parameter vectors in the softmax layer.
All next words are obtained based on the probability in
Eq. (7) until the sentence end symbol is emitted.
Inspired by (Yang et al. 2016), the coherence loss in
Eq. (6) can be further simplified as,
Ec(V, S; θr, θc) =
m
X
t=1
log p(s′
t|ht−1, s′
t−1)
=
m
X
t=1
log
exp(Wstht)
P
ˆs′∈voc exp(Wˆs′ht) .
(8)
Learning and Recognition of LS-HAN Model
With previous formulations of the latent space and HAN,
Eq. (1) is equivalent to,
min
Tv,Ts,θ
1
N
N
X
i=1
λ1Er(V (i), S(i); Tv, Ts)
+ (1 −λ1)Ec(V (i), S(i); Tv, Ts, θ)
+ λ2(∥Tv∥2 + ∥Ts∥2 + ∥θ∥2) ,
(9)
where Tv and Ts are latent space parameters, θ is a HAN
parameter. The optimization of LS-HAN requires the partial
derivatives of Eq. (9) with respect to parameters Tv, Ts and θ
and the solutions of such equations. Thanks to the linearity,
the two loss terms and the regularization item could be opti-
mized separately. For simplicity, we only elaborate the com-
putation of partial derivatives of Er and Ec in the simplest
case (with only one sample), ignoring unrelated coefficients
and regularization terms.
Consider the partial derivative of Er with respect to ma-
trices Tv and Ts. According to Eq. (5),
∂Er(V, S; Tv, Ts)
∂Tv
= ∂D(n, m)
∂Tv
,
(10)
Substitution of Eq. (3) in Eq. (10) leads to
∂D(n, m)
∂Tv
= min(∂D(n −1, m)
∂Tv
, ∂D(n −1, m −1))
∂Tv
)
+ ∂d(n, m)
∂Tv
.
(11)
Eq. (11) is recursive and allows for gradient back-
propagation through time. As a result, ∂D(n,m)
∂Tv
can be rep-
resented by ∂d(i,j)
∂Tv
for i < n, j < m,
∂D(n, m)
∂Tv
= f
∂d(i, j)
∂Tv
|i < n, j < m

,
(12)
where f(·) denotes a function that can be represented.
Since the term ∂d(i,j)
∂Tv
can be obtained according to Eq. (4),
∂D(n,m)
∂Tv
can be computed by the chain rule. Likewise,
∂Er(V,S;Tv,Ts)
∂Ts
could be similarly computed.
Consider the partial derivative of HAN error Ec with
respect to Tv, Ts and the network parameter θ. Regular
stochastic gradient descent is utilized, with gradients cal-
culated by the Back-propagation Through Time (BPTT)
(Werbos 1990), which recursively back-propagates gradi-
ents from current to previous timestamps. After gradients
are propagated back to the inputs,
∂Ec(V,S;Tv,Ts,θ)
∂V ′
and
∂Ec(V,S;Tv,Ts,θ)
∂S′
are obtained. With Eq. (2), further simpli-
fication could be obtained,
∂Ec(V, S; Tv, Ts, θ)
∂Tv
= ∂Ec(V, S; Tv, Ts, θ)
∂V ′
· V ,
(13)
∂Ec(V, S; Tv, Ts, θ)
∂Ts
= ∂Ec(V, S; Tv, Ts, θ)
∂S′
· S .
(14)
Therefore, all gradients with respect to all parameters could
be obtained. The objective function in Eq. (9) can be mini-
mized accordingly.
During the testing phase, the proposed LS-HAN is used to
translate signing videos sentence-by-sentence. Each video
is divided into clips with a sliding window algorithm. The
alignment information need to be reconstructed. Empirical
experiments verify that the strategy 3 outperforms others,
therefore it is employed in the testing phase. After encod-
ing, the start symbol “#Start” is fed to HAN indicating
the beginning of sentence prediction. During each decoding
timestamp, the word with the highest probability after the
softmax is chosen as the predicted word, with its representa-
tion in the latent space fed to HAN for the next timestamp,
until the emission of the end symbol “#End”.
Experiments
In this section, datasets are introduced followed by evalu-
ation comparison. Additionally, a sensitivity analysis on a
trade-off parameter is included.
Datasets
Two open source continuous SLR datasets are used in the
following experiments, one for CSL and the other is the

Table 1: Statistics on Proposed CSL Video Dataset
RGB resolution
1920×1080
# of signers
50
Depth resolution
512×424
Vocab. size
178
Video duration (sec.)
10∼14
Body joints
21
Average words/instance
7
FPS
25
Total instances
25,000
Total hours
100+
German sign language dataset RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather
(Koller, Forster, and Ney 2015). The CSL dataset in Tab. 1
is collected by us and released on our project web page4. A
Microsoft Kinect camera is used for all recording, providing
RGB, depth and body joints modalities in all videos. The
additional modalities should provide helpful additional in-
formation as proven in hyper-spectral imaging efforts (Ran
et al. 2017a; Zhang et al. 2011; 2012; Abeida et al. 2013),
which is potentially helpful in future works. In this paper,
only the RGB modality is used. The CSL dataset contains
25K labeled video instances, with 100+ hours of total video
footage by 50 signers. Every video instance is annotated
with a complete sentence by a professional CSL teacher.
17K instances are selected for training, 2K for validation,
and the rest 6K for testing. The RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather
dataset contains 7K weather forecasts sentences from 9 sign-
ers. All videos are of 25 frames per second (FPS) and at res-
olution of 210 × 260. Following (Koller, Forster, and Ney
2015), 5,672 instances are used for training, 540 for valida-
tion, and 629 for testing.
Experimental Setting
Per (Tran et al. 2015), videos are divided into 16-frame
clips with 50% overlap, with frames cropped and resized at
227 × 227. The outputs of the 4096-dimensinoal fc6 layer
from 2-stream 3D CNN are clip representations. The fol-
lowing parameters are set based on our validation set. The
dimension of latent space and the size of hidden layer in
HAN are both 1024. The trade-off parameter λ1 in Eq. (9)
of relevance loss and coherence loss is set to 0.6. The regu-
larization parameter is empirically set to 0.0002.
Evaluation Metrics
Predicted sentence can suffer from errors including word
substitution, insertion and deletion errors, following (Fang,
Gao, and Zhao 2007; Starner, Weaver, and Pentland 1998;
Zhang, Zhou, and Li 2014),
Accuracy = 1 −S + I + D
N
× 100% ,
(15)
where S, I, and D denote the minimum number of substitu-
tion, insertion and deletion operations needed to transform
a hypothesized sentence to the ground truth. N is the num-
ber of words in ground truth. Note that, since all errors are
accounted against the accuracy rate, it is possible to get neg-
ative accuracies.
Table 2: Continuous SLR Results. Methods in bold text are
the original and modified versions of the proposed method.
Methods
Accuracy
LSTM (Venugopalan et al. 2014)
0.736
S2VT (Venugopalan et al. 2015)
0.745
LSTM-A (Yao et al. 2015)
0.757
LSTM-E (Pan et al. 2015)
0.768
HAN (Yang et al. 2016)
0.793
CRF (Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira )
0.686
LDCRF (Morency, Quattoni, and Darrell 2007)
0.704
DTW-HMM (Zhang, Zhou, and Li 2014)
0.716
LS-HAN (a)
0.792
LS-HAN (b)
0.805
LS-HAN (c)
0.827
Results and Analyses
The continuous SLR results over our CSL dataset is summa-
rized in Tab. 2. Since our framework is based on LSTM, we
compare with LSTM, S2VT, LSTM-A, LSTM-E and HAN,
which are also related to LSTM. Note that LSTM-E that
jointly learns LSTM and embedding layer is much similar to
our method. One of the key differences is that LSTM-E ig-
nores temporal information for brevity during its embedding
process, while we choose to retain temporal structural in-
formation while optimizing video-sentence correspondence.
Given the result that our method achieve 0.059 higher ac-
curacy than LSTM-E, our solution to model video-sentence
relevance is a better choice.
Besides, we also make a comparison with continuous SLR
algorithms: CRF, LDCRF and DTW-HMM. These models
require segmentation when do recognition, which may in-
cur and propagate the inaccuracy. Our method obtains 0.141,
0.123 and 0.111 higher accuracy, respectively, showing the
advantage of circumventing the temporal segmentation.
As presented at the bottom of Tab. 2, we test the schemes
that makes up the missing of alignment during recognition,
as mention in previous subsection Learning and Recogni-
tion of LS-HAN Model. We see that LS-HAN with scheme
(c) achieves the highest accuracy. Although this alignment
is not the true alignment result, we still suppose this scheme
is feasible for our model considering the significant results.
Tab. 3 shows a comparison of our result with the recently
published results. For a fair comparison, we only utilize
hands sequences, as with all competing methods. Both Deep
Hand and Recurrent CNN are extensions to CNN. The for-
mer combines CNN with an EM algorithm, while the lat-
ter proposes the RNN-CNN, which takes advantage of both
the feature learning capability of CNN and the temporal se-
quence modeling capability of the iterative EM and RNN.
Our approach shares a similar idea but goes a step further,
which bridges semantic gap with a latent space, then applies
HAN to hypothesize semantic sentence. The presented LS-
HAN outperforms both Deep Hand and Recurrent CNN.
4https://ustc-slr.github.io/datasets/2015_
csl

Top1
Top2
Top3
Top4
Top5
0.7
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.5
DTW Distance
Figure 6: LSTM-based and Latent Space similarity measure
comparison.
Table 3: Continuous SLR on RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather.
Methods
Accuracy
(Koller, Forster, and Ney 2015)
0.444
Deep Hand (Koller, Ney, and Bowden 2016)
0.549
Recurrent CNN (Cui, Liu, and Zhang 2017)
0.613
LS-HAN (only hand sequence)
0.617
Relationship Between HAN and LS
In the proposed LS-HAN, video-sentence correlations are
indicated by both the most likely sentence outputs from
HAN and the distance metrics in the Latent Space. Theo-
retically, these two measures should be identical, therefore,
an empirical test is carried out and the results are presented
in Fig. 6. 10 video sequences are randomly selected and fed
into the HAN, with each video generating 5 most likely sen-
tences. In Fig. 6, these 5 mostly likely sentences are denoted
as vertices on a polyline and sorted with descending proba-
bilities along the X-axis. In addition, the DTW distances in
the Latent Space between the video (indicated by the poly-
line) and each sentences (denoted by the vertices) are visu-
alized along the Y-axis. Theoretically, if these two similar-
ity measures are identical, all polylines in Fig. 6 should be
monotonically increasing. Practically there are some noises
but the increasing trends are within our expectations.
Sensitivity Analysis on Parameter Selections
The robustness of the proposed LS-HAN with respect to dif-
ferent selections of parameters are summarized in this sec-
tion. A sample sensitivity analysis on the trade parameter λ1
in Eq. (9) is presented here and illustrated in Fig. 7. LS-HAN
recognition accuracy is evaluated with 2.5k instances in the
validation set with varying λ1 values. Expectedly, extreme
λ1 values lead to high error rate; while the optimal choice
is approximately 0.6. Such reasonable sensitivity behaviors
also verify the validity of establishing an HAN model in the
video-sentence latent space.
Conclusion
In this paper, the LS-HAN framework is proposed for con-
tinuous SLR is proposed, which eliminated both the error-
prone temporal segmentation and the sentences synthesis
in post-processing steps. For video representation, a two-
stream 3D CNN generates highly informative global-local
Figure 7: Validation error rate with respect to varying trade-
off parameter λ1 in Eq. (9).
features, with one stream focused on global motion infor-
mation and the other on local gesture representations. A La-
tent Space is subsequently introduced via an optimization of
labeled video-sentence distance metrics. This latent space
captures the temporal structures between signing videos and
annotated sentences by aligning frames to words. Our future
work could involve the extension of the LS-HAN to longer
compound sentences and real-time translation tasks.
