Mastery Guided Non-parametric Clustering to Scale-up Strategy Prediction
Anup Shakya, Vasile Rus, Deepak Venugopal
University of Memphis

Abstract
Predicting the strategy (sequence of concepts) that a student
is likely to use in problem-solving helps Adaptive Instruc-
tional Systems (AISs) better adapt themselves to different
types of learners based on their learning abilities. This can
lead to a more dynamic, engaging, and personalized expe-
rience for students. To scale up training a prediction model
(such as LSTMs) over large-scale education datasets, we de-
velop a non-parametric approach to cluster symmetric in-
stances in the data. Specifically, we learn a representation
based on Node2Vec that encodes symmetries over mastery or
skill level since, to solve a problem, it is natural that a stu-
dent’s strategy is likely to involve concepts in which they have
gained mastery. Using this representation, we use DP-Means
to group symmetric instances through a coarse-to-fine refine-
ment of the clusters. We apply our model to learn strategies
for Math learning from large-scale datasets from MATHia,
a leading AIS for middle-school math learning. Our results
illustrate that our approach can consistently achieve high ac-
curacy using a small sample that is representative of the full
dataset. Further, we show that this approach helps us learn
strategies with high accuracy for students at different skill
levels, i.e., leveraging symmetries improves fairness in the
prediction model.
Introduction
The recent pandemic has spurred a remarkable growth in
virtual learning and with it, the necessity to develop per-
sonalized learning technologies in the absence of face-to-
face instruction. To this end, Intelligent Tutoring Systems
(ITSs) (Rus et al. 2013) and more broadly Adaptive In-
structional systems (AISs) scale-up one-on-one instruction
to large and diverse student populations. However, for an
AIS to better adapt to a learner, it needs to understand a
learner’s problem-solving approach. For example, a student
attempting to solve a math problem shown in Fig. 1 (a)
needs to formulate a plan or a strategy to solve the prob-
lem, an example of which is also shown in the figure. By
predicting this likely strategy, an AIS can be personalized to
meet the student’s learning needs such as interventions spe-
cific to concepts utilized in the likely strategy. In this paper,
we focus on developing a scalable model to predict Math
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
learning strategies based on interactions between students
and educational software. In particular, we apply deep neu-
ral network based models such as Long-Short Term Memory
(LSTMs) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) to extract se-
quential patterns that correspond to learner strategies. How-
ever, LSTMs are computationally expensive and notoriously
slow to converge (You et al. 2019) in large datasets. To scale-
up, we take advantage of symmetries in strategies. In par-
ticular, when we consider the domain of math learning for
middle-school students, it is highly unlikely that each stu-
dent will follow a completely unique strategy. Instead, it
is more likely to have groups of students who adopt simi-
lar/symmetrical strategies. Further, these symmetry groups
are based on the skills or mastery level of a student as illus-
trated by an example in Fig. 1 (b).
To scale-up strategy learning, we develop a non-
parametric approach to partition the data such that each
partition is likely to be invariant in strategies. Thus, train-
ing on samples drawn from the partitions effectively rep-
resents strategies over the full data. To identify invariance
in strategies, we apply DP-Means (Kulis and Jordan 2012)
where we jointly cluster students and problems through the
Hierarchical Dirichlet Process (HDP) framework. We adap-
tively penalize the DP-Means objective such that we have
a coarse-to-fine refinement of the clusters. Specifically, we
penalize the formation of clusters based on symmetries in-
duced by the clusters which we estimate through positional
embeddings (Vaswani et al. 2017). To learn a representation
for students/problems, we develop a mastery-based embed-
ding. Specifically, strategies are closely related to mastery
over skills, i.e., if a student has mastered a skill, he/she will
naturally tend to apply that skill in a strategy. We estimate
mastery in a skill based on the attention given to that skill in
a Transformer model that maps skills to the correct applica-
tion of skills.
We evaluate our approach on two datasets from MATHia,
a commercial AIS widely used for math learning in schools.
The data is available through the PSLC datashop (Stamper
et al. 2011). The Bridge-to-Algebra 2008-09 and
the Carnegie Learning 2019-20 datasets are both
large datasets that consist of millions of data instances (each
instance is a student-problem pair and has multiple interac-
tions in the dataset). We show that our approach helps scale-
up over large datasets while yielding high accuracy in pre-
arXiv:2401.10210v1  [cs.CY]  4 Jan 2024

(a)
(b)
Figure 1: (a) Example of a strategy used by a student to solve a math problem. (b) Different strategies to solve linear equations
based on increasing levels of mastery.
dicting strategies. Further, we show that our mastery-based
embeddings is fair, i.e., the predictions made by our model
is unbiased over diverse levels of mastery.
Proposed Approach
Problem Description
Since strategy is a generic term, we define it more precisely.
Specifically, we consider strategies in the context of struc-
tured interaction between students and tutors. In this case,
a student interacts with a tutor and solves a problem by se-
quentially solving the steps that lead to the final solution.
Each step is associated with a specific knowledge compo-
nent (KC) (Koedinger, Corbett, and Perfetti 2012) which is
defined by domain experts and corresponds to the knowl-
edge required to solve that step. Operationally, a step can be
associated with multiple KCs in which case, we can just un-
roll the step to ensure that each step has a single KC. Using
this, as in prior work (Ritter et al. 2019), we define strategies
as follows.
Definition 1 A strategy used by student S to solve problem
P is a sequence of KCs denoted by K = K1 . . . Kn, where
Ki is a knowledge component that S uses to solve the i-th
step in P.
Our task is to predict the likely strategy for a given
student-problem pair. Note that the same problem can have
several possible strategies as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Typically,
these strategies are closely related to the skill level of a stu-
dent, i.e., students at higher skill levels may use more com-
plex strategies than students at lower skill levels. We lever-
age this to learn a representation (embedding) for students
and problems such that similar embeddings correspond to
symmetries in strategies. We use non-parametric clustering
to cluster instances based on this representation and train an
LSTM model by sampling from the clusters instead of train-
ing over the full dataset. Note that, the use of symmetries
to learn better representations from data is in fact a general
concept that is formalized under Geometric Deep Learn-
ing (Bronstein et al. 2021). By training deep models over
informative instances from groups of symmetric instances,
the Effective Model Complexity is reduced which improves
generalization (Nakkiran et al. 2020).
Strategy Invariance
We define symmetries over S, P which denote the set of
students and problems respectively as follows.
Definition 2 A strategy-invariant partitioning w.r.t D is a
partitioning {Si}k1
i=1 and {Pj}k2
j=1 such that ∀i, j, if S, S′ ∈
Si, P, P ′ ∈Pj, S, S′ follow equivalent strategies for P, P ′
respectively.
where D is the dataset (sequences of KCs for student-
problem pairs), k1 and k2 are the number of parti-
tions/clusters for students and problems respectively.
The benefit of strategy-invariant partitioning is that we
can scale up without sacrificing accuracy by training a pre-
diction model only on samples drawn from the partitions
instead of the full training data. Therefore, our task is to
learn such a partitioning. Since it is hard to know apriori
how many partitions are needed, we formulate this as a non-
parametric clustering problem and use DP-Means (Kulis and
Jordan 2012) to learn the clusters.
To formalize our approach, we begin with some notation.
Let xi1 denote the i-th student and let xj2 denote the j-
th problem. Let zik indicate the student/problem cluster to
which xik belongs. We refer to the student and problem clus-
ters as local clusters. A global cluster combines student and
problem clusters. Specifically, v1c = g and v2c′ = g indi-
cates that the c-th student cluster is associated with the c′-th
problem cluster through the g-th global cluster. The objec-
tive function is defined as follows.
g
X
p=1
X
xij∈ℓp
||xij, µp||2
2 + λℓk + S(ℓ1 . . . ℓp)g
(1)
where ℓp is the p-th global cluster, k = k1 + k2 is the to-
tal number of local clusters, g is the total number of global
clusters, λℓis a local penalty for the formation of a local
cluster and S(ℓ1 . . . ℓp) is a global penalty for the formation
of a global cluster. Specifically, S is a measure of symmetry
in strategies across the global clusters. To minimize Eq. (1),
we can directly apply DP-Means with the Hard Gaussian Hi-
erarchical Dirichlet Process (HDP) clustering as specified in
(Kulis and Jordan 2012). This jointly clusters students and
problems while assigning the optimal number of clusters to
each. However, in our case, computing the global penalty
S(ℓ1 . . . ℓp) is challenging, i.e., how can we assign a global

penalty that corresponds to the symmetry in the local clus-
ters? We do this using a coarse-to-fine clustering as follows.
We start with a fixed (large) value for the global penalty λg
that results in a coarse clustering. Then, depending upon the
symmetries that we estimate from the coarse clusters, we
reduce λg resulting in finer-grained clusters until we reach
a fixed point (the change in symmetries is minimal) or for
a fixed number of iterations. Algorithm 1 summarizes our
overall approach for coarse-to-fine clustering. In the next
two sections, we describe embeddings (based on mastery)
that we learn to represent the data instances in Algorithm 1
and the quantification of approximate symmetries in a given
clustering.
Algorithm 1 Coarse-to-Fine Refinement
Input: Student/Problem set: {xij}, Penalty parameter: λℓ
Output: Global strategy clustering {ℓ1, . . . , ℓg}
Initialize : Global cluster penalty λg = y (where y is a large
number), t = 0, cluster coherence coht−1 = 0.
1. repeat
2.
t = t + 1
3.
Perform HDP clustering with parameters: ({xij}, λℓ, λg)
4.
Compute cluster coherence score, coht = S(ℓ1, . . . ℓg)
5.
Reduce: λg = λg −ϵ
6. until coht > coht−1
Mastery-based Embedding
Mastery in a skill implies that a student is able to apply the
skill correctly when they have the opportunity to apply it.
For example, if a student has mastered the skill of addition,
then the student should be able to apply this in an equation
or in a word problem. Mastery has been explored in sev-
eral well-known learning models, and arguably one of the
most well-known methods is Bayesian Knowledge Tracing
(BKT) (Corbett 2001). Here, mastery over a skill is formal-
ized as a latent variable in an HMM model. This variable
is updated based on the performance of the student at each
opportunity given to the student to apply that skill. More re-
cently, Deep Knowledge Tracing (DKT) (Piech et al. 2015)
has shown that the hidden layers in a deep network can learn
more complex representations of student skills which are
much more expressive than BKT. In particular, the connec-
tion between symmetries in strategies and mastery is that
the ability to use a KC K in a strategy is dependent upon the
level of skill in K′ that is a pre-requisite to K (also called as
pre-requisite structure in DKT). Thus, students with similar
pre-requisite structures will tend to use symmetrical strate-
gies. Here, we train an attention model to quantify mastery
over a KC and use it to learn an embedding which we refer
to as MVec.
To learn the MVec embeddings, we use an approach sim-
ilar to Node2Vec (Grover and Leskovec 2016). Specifically,
we construct a relational graph G = (V,E) as follows. Each
student, problem, and KC in the training data is represented
as a node V ∈V. For every student S who uses KC K
as a step to solve problem P, there exists 2 edges E, E′
∈E, where E connects the node representing the student
to the node representing the KC and E′ connects the node
Figure 2: Illustrating a graph network of three students,
problems, and KCs. The figure on the right shows some of
the sampled random walks/paths.
representing the KC to the node representing the problem.
An example graph over 3 students, problems, and KCs is
shown in Fig. 2. We now sample paths in the graph simi-
lar to Node2Vec and learn embeddings for these paths using
word embedding models (Word2Vec) (Mikolov et al. 2013).
Specifically, the objective function is as follows.
max
f
X
u∈V
logP(NQ(u)|f(u))
(2)
where f : u →Rd is the representation for nodes u ∈V,
NQ(u) denotes the neighbors of u sampled from a distri-
bution Q. As in Node2Vec, we assume a factorized model
that gives us the conditional likelihood that is identical to
Word2Vec.
P(ni|f(u)) =
exp(f(ni) · f(u))
P
v∈V exp(f(v) · f(u))
(3)
where ni is a neighbor of u. The conditional likelihood is
optimized by predicting neighbors of u using u as input in an
autoencoder neural network. The hidden layer learns similar
embeddings for nodes with symmetrical neighborhoods. To
do this, we generate walks on G as shown for the example
in Fig. 2, and in each walk, given a node, we predict neigh-
boring nodes similar to predicting neighboring words in sen-
tences. To generate these walks, a simple sampling strategy
Q is to randomly sample a neighbor for a node. However,
in our case, it turns out that each neighbor may have dif-
ferent importance when it comes to determining symmetry.
Specifically, if a student has achieved mastery in applying
a KC to a problem, then the corresponding edges should
be given greater importance when determining symmetry
between nodes in G. To do this, we train a Sequence-to-
Sequence attention model (Vaswani et al. 2017) from which
we estimate the sampling probabilities for edges in G.
The intuitive idea in quantifying mastery is illustrated in
Fig. 3 which shows the opportunities given to 3 students to
apply KCs in different problems. For each sequence of KCs,
we predict if the student got the step correct or wrong in the
first attempt (abbreviated as CFA for Correct First Attempt)
when given an opportunity to apply the KC. The CFA values
are performance indicators for the student, i.e., if they have
mastered a KC, then they are likely to get the step correct
in every opportunity they get to apply that KC. We train a

Figure 3: An example to illustrate the use of attention for mastery estimation. The bar charts show for each KC, the attention on
a KC across steps that the student solves successfully (CFA=1) normalized by total attention for that KC. Larger values indicate
that the model believes the student understands the KC as the attentions on it is large when CFA=1 and vice versa.
model to predict the CFA values (CFA = 1 indicates a cor-
rect application of the KC) given the KCs used in a problem.
The predicted values from the model are shown for each
KC. The bar graphs show mastery over the KCs. As seen
here, the first student is inconsistent in applying the skill,
find the slope using points (labeled as E) since the predic-
tions for this oscillate between 0 and 1 whenever the stu-
dent tries to apply this KC. On the other hand, student 2
consistently applies the same skill correctly and therefore
the attention value is higher. We train the attention model
from opportunities based on curriculum structure. Specifi-
cally, the curriculum consists of multiple units and each unit
is further subdivided into sections. For each student S, from
every unit that the student has completed say U, we select a
problem P from each section that the student has worked on
in U and train the model to predict the CFA values for each
KC used in P. We use the standard architecture described
in (Vaswani et al. 2017) for this model. Specifically, the in-
put consists of the KC sequence, and the encoder maps this
sequence to a latent representation and the decoder decodes
the CFA values one at a time. The attention is given by,
Attention(Q, Y, V ) = softmax
QY T
√dk

V
(4)
where Q, Y , and V are the standard query, key, and value
matrices respectively as defined in (Vaswani et al. 2017),
and dk is the dimension of the embedding that represents
the latent representations. We use the encoder-decoder at-
tention, i.e., the query is the decoder representation and the
key is the encoder representation. The attention weights are
an estimate of the alignment between encoded latent rep-
resentations of mastery with the decoded representation of
correctly applying a skill at each step in the problem. The
projection of mastery over K based on the attention vectors
is estimated by the following equation.
α(S, P, K) =
P
i
P
v∈π(ai) v
P
i
P
v∈π(ai) v + P
i
P
v∈¯π(ai) v
(5)
where π(·) extracts only those values in the input vec-
tor where the corresponding output for that step is predicted
as 1, i.e., the model predicted that the student could solve
the step correctly. ¯π(·) is the complement of π(·), i.e., it ex-
tracts attention values corresponding to steps that were pre-
dicted as mistakes. We sample G as a factored distribution,
i.e., Q(S)∗Q(K|S)∗Q(P|K, S), where Q(S) is the proba-
bility of sampling a student node, Q(K|S) is the probability
of sampling a KC K given student S and Q(P|K, S) is the
probability of sampling problem P given K, S. We assume
that Q(S) is a uniform distribution over students. The con-
ditional distributions are defined as follows.
Q(K|S) = 1/n
X
p
α(S, P, K)
(6)
Q(P|K, S) = α(S, P, K)
(7)
where n is the number of opportunities given to student S to
apply KC K. The algorithm to generate MVec embeddings
is shown in Algorithm 2. As shown here, we sample a path in
the graph as follows. We first sample student S uniformly at
random, then we sample a KC K from Q(K|S) and a prob-
lem from Q(P|K, S). We then predict each node in the path
using the neighboring nodes through a standard Word2Vec
model. The resulting embeddings are learned in the hidden
layer of this model. Note that for scalability, we do not con-
struct/store the full graph G at any point. Instead, we only
sample paths in an online manner as shown in Algorithm 2.
Strategy Symmetry
To perform the coarse-to-fine refinement (Algorithm 1), we
need to estimate symmetry in strategies across the global
clusters, i.e., S(ℓ1, . . . , ℓg). A naive approach is to represent
the sequence of KCs as a single vector by taking a mean of
their MVec embeddings. In this case, we can estimate the
symmetry between the two strategies based on the distance
of their mean vectors. However, this representation assumes
that all permutations of a sequence of KCs are equivalent
to each other. This is clearly problematic since an essential

Table 1: Illustrating symmetries in strategies where similar colors indicate similar steps. The three strategies have a different
number of steps and other small differences but the core idea behind them remains the same. A naive matching will however
assume that the three strategies are very different.
Strategy 1
action add/sub
params add/sub
rm-extra-terms
rm-coeff
act mul/div
params mul/div
rm-extra-terms
find-x
Strategy 2
rm-constants
rm-coeff
div-coeff-of-x
rm-extra-terms
find-x
Strategy 3
rm-coeff
div-coeff-of-x
simplify-eqn
rm-constants
rm-extra-terms
find-x
Algorithm 2 Generate MVec embeddings
Input: Relation Graph: G = (V, E) with student, problem and
KCs as nodes, Embedding dimension: d, pre-trained attention-
model A
Output: Embeddings for each node v ∈Rd
Initialize: set of walks, W = empty
1. for all t = 1 to T do
2.
Sample a path < S, K, P > in G from Q(S) ∗Q(K|S) ∗
Q(P|K, S) using Eq. (6) and (7).
3.
W = W ∪< S, K, P >
4. end for
5. ve = word2vec(W, d)
6. return ve
aspect of reasoning about problems is to understand the se-
quence of steps. On the other hand, if we strictly require the
KCs from two strategies to align exactly, this is too restric-
tive since it is perfectly acceptable for students to add/delete
steps in reasoning though the core strategy remains equiva-
lent. An example of this is illustrated in Table 1. In this case,
3 strategies are shown which differ in their steps. However,
the core idea behind each of the strategies is the same and
it turns out that aligning the key steps makes the strategy
invariant across the students as shown in the figure.
To match strategies approximately, we represent a strat-
egy using a combination of embeddings and positional en-
codings (Vaswani et al. 2017) and approximately align two
strategies to estimate the symmetry between them. The idea
in positional encodings is to encode positions in a sequence
using a continuous vector space with sine and cosine func-
tions. Given the positional encoding vectors for say the i-th
KC in strategy S1 and the j-th KC in strategy S2, their sim-
ilarity ⃗p⊤
i ⃗pj will indicate how close or far apart these po-
sitions are. Note that this similarity takes into account the
variability in the number of steps in S1 and S2. Thus, the
step-positions in the two strategies will have similar vector
representation if they are at similar positions relative to their
overall sequences.
A KC K in the strategy is represented by its positional
embedding ⃗K = ⃗
Ke + ⃗
Kp where ⃗
Ke is the embedding for
K and ⃗
Kp is the positional encoding for K in the strategy.
To compute symmetry between strategies, we compute an
alignment between their positional embeddings. Alignment
is a fundamental problem in domains such as Bioinformat-
ics where a classical approach that is often used is the Smith
and Waterman algorithm (SW) (Smith and Waterman 1981).
The idea is to perform local search to compute the best pos-
sible alignment between two sequences. SW requires a sim-
ilarity function which in our case is the similarity between
two KCs and we set this to be s(K, K′) = ⃗K⊤⃗K′, i.e., the
cosine similarity between the embeddings of K and K′. Fur-
ther, SW also requires a gap penalty which refers to the cost
of leaving a gap in the alignment. In our case, we set the
gap penalty to 0 since we want symmetry between strategies
to be invariant to gaps. That is, if two strategies are sym-
metric, adding extra steps in the strategies is acceptable. SW
iteratively computes a scoring matrix based on local align-
ments. The worst-case complexity to compute the scoring
matrix that gives us scores for the best alignment is equal to
O(m ∗n) where m and n are lengths of the strategies. Note
that in our case, we are interested in quantifying the sym-
metry based on the alignment. Specifically, let K and K′
be two strategies of lengths n and m respectively. SW gives
us an alignment between K and K′ denoted by L(K, K′).
The alignment can be represented by pairs of aligned KCs
in the strategy or a gap. We compute the symmetry score be-
tween K and K′ as r(K, K′) =
1
max(n,m)
P
(K,K′)∈L(K,K′)
( ⃗K⊤⃗K′), where (K, K′) ∈L(K, K′) are aligned KCs and
⃗K⊤⃗K′ is their similarity. We see that 0 ≤r(K, K′) ≤1.
Based on this, we estimate symmetry in the clustering as
follows.
S(ℓ1, . . . , ℓg) =1
g
g
X
p=1
Zp
X
K,K′∈T (ℓp)
r(K, K′)
(8)
T(ℓp) is a set of all strategies in ℓp, i.e., ∀S, P ∈ℓp, where S
is a student and P is a problem, ∃K ∈T(ℓp), where K is the
strategy followed by S for P and Zp =
2
|T (ℓp)|(|T (ℓp)|−1) is
the normalization term. Thus, a larger value of S(ℓ1, . . . , ℓg)
implies that the clustering corresponding to ℓ1, . . . , ℓg has a
greater degree of symmetry in strategies.
Training the Prediction Model
We use the LSTM architecture in (Shakya, Rus, and Venu-
gopal 2021) to predict strategies. Specifically, the model is a
one-to-many LSTM that takes the embeddings correspond-
ing to a student and a problem as input and generates a se-
quence of knowledge components as output. To train the
model, we sample instances from the converged global clus-
ters, and for each sampled student-problem pair, we concate-
nate their positional embeddings and feed them as input to
the LSTM. The output corresponds to a sequence of KCs,
each of which is encoded as a one-hot vector. To handle
variable-length strategies, a special stop symbol is used to
denote the end of a sequence. The entire model is trained
using the categorical cross-entropy loss.

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4: Illustrating Scalability vs Accuracy. (a), (b) show test accuracy for strategy prediction for varying training datasize
limits. (c), (d) show accuracy (strategy prediction) for different training time limits. (e) shows accuracy for different groups of
students (based on their performance). The x-axis denotes different ranges of %s, where a range a −b denotes that students in
this group got > a and < b steps correct in their first attempt. The y-axis shows accuracy over the groups.
Table 2: Main parameters for the models.
Transformer-based model
LSTM-based strategy model
Dimension →512
Latent Dimension →200
Number of layers →6
Epochs →60
Number of heads →8
Batch Size →30
Dimensions of key, value and query →64
Adam Optimizer with Learning rate 0.01
Max Sequence Length →150
Dropout →0.1
Dropout →0.1
Weight Sharing →False
Experiments
Experimental Setup
We used two datasets provided by MATHia for evaluating
our proposed approach, Bridge-to-Algebra 2008-09 (BA08)
and Carnegie Learning MATHia 2019-20 (CL19). BA08
consists of about 20 million interactions for about 6000 stu-
dents and 52k unique algebra problems and 1.6 million in-
stances (student, problem pairs). CL19 contains 47 million
interactions for 5000 students, 32k problems and 1.9 mil-
lion instances. Both datasets are publicly available through
the PSLC datashop. To train the attention model, we used
the implementation in (Vaswani et al. 2017). For the strategy
prediction, we used the LSTM model as described in the pre-
vious section. The parameters for the two models are shown
in Table 2. For generating MVec embeddings, we used Gen-
sim (Mikolov et al. 2013) with an embedding dimension set
to 300. We initialize the local cluster penalty λℓ= 7 and
initial global cluster penalty λg = 9 for Coarse-to-Fine re-
finement. We perform our experiments with 64 GB RAM
and a 16GB quadro GPU.
Comparision to Baselines
We compared our approach with the following methods. The
first one is the approach in (Shakya, Rus, and Venugopal
2021) (CS) where the LSTM is trained over samples, but
mastery is not used to learn the embeddings. We also applied
a general importance sampling approach for deep learning
proposed in (Katharopoulos and Fleuret 2019) (IS) using
their publicly available implementation. However, IS failed
to output any results for datasets of our size and therefore
we do not show it in our graphs. We also developed a strati-
fied sampler (GS for group sampling) where the distribution
is only proportional to the number of problems solved by a
student, i.e., we sample more instances from students that
have data associated with them. The last baseline is a naive
Random Sampler (RS) used as a validation check where we
sample students and problems uniformly at random. We re-
fer to our approach as Attention Sampling (AS). In our eval-
uation, for each approach, we enforce a limit on the number
of training instances and measure the test accuracy of mod-
els trained with this limit. This is similar to effective model
complexity (Nakkiran et al. 2020) which is the number of
training samples to achieve close to zero error. We report the
average accuracy based on three training runs.
Results
Accuracy and Scalability. The accuracy results for BA08
and CL19 are shown in Fig. 4 (a) and (b). As shown in (a),
for BA08, in our approach (AS), it takes less than around
10% of the data to obtain test accuracy that is greater than
80%. CS is the next best performer but is consistently below

AS for all training sizes. GS performs significantly worse
which illustrates that symmetries are more complex and a
simple grouping based on problems/students is insufficient.
The poor performance of RS validates that the problem of
choosing the correct samples is indeed a challenging one.
As seen in Fig. 4 (b), for a considerably larger dataset CL19,
we can observe similar performance as in BA08. AS remains
the best performer and here CS is less stable since we see a
performance drop as we increase the limit on training sam-
ples. This suggests that CS may not be able to capture all
symmetries (at all mastery levels) and thus may produce a
less effective training sample. The results for GS and RS
are similar to those observed in BA08. As mentioned be-
fore, IS failed to produce any results. Fig. 4 (c) and (d) show
the training time required to obtain a specific accuracy for
BA08 and CL19 respectively. Even with the extra process-
ing that is needed to compute the mastery-based embeddings
and the non-parametric clustering, AS requires the shortest
training time to achieve an accuracy that is higher than the
other approaches. This illustrates the significance of leverag-
ing symmetries in the data to train the model. As mentioned
before, the full data is infeasible to train and when attempt-
ing to use the full data, the model did not converge even after
several days of training time. For CL19, the training time is
larger since it takes longer to compute the groups using non-
parametric clustering due to the larger size of the dataset.
However, considering that CL19 is significantly larger than
BA08, we see that AS can easily scale big datasets.
Analyzing Bias. The strategy prediction model is fair if it
does not disproportionately favor a sub-group of students,
i.e., if it strategy predictions are not biased for students at a
specific mastery-level. To evaluate fairness, we divided the
students in the test data into 5 performance groups. The per-
formance groups are based on the % of problem steps the
students solve correctly in their first attempt. For a student
S in performance group G, we predict the strategies for all
problems attempted by S in the test set and measure the av-
erage accuracy µS. We then compute the accuracy over a
performance group as 1/|G| P
S∈G µS. Fig. 4(e) shows our
results for variants, NS (no symmetries are used), SS (ap-
proach in (Shakya, Rus, and Venugopal 2021) that does not
use mastery) and SS+MS (our approach that uses mastery).
As shown here, SS+MS yields a consistent improvement in
performance across all performance groups illustrating that
our approach is fair across diverse mastery levels.
Conclusion
Mastery over concepts is closely related to problem-solving
strategy. Using this connection, here, we developed embed-
dings and through non-parametric clustering on these em-
beddings, we segregated big datasets into partitions where
strategies are likely to be invariant. Sampling from these
partitions scales up strategy prediction such that it performs
equally well for students at all skill levels. We demonstrated
the effectiveness of our approach in Math learning datasets.
