On The Fragility of Learned Reward Functions
Lev McKinney∗
University of Toronto

Yawen Duan∗
University of Cambridge

David Krueger
University of Cambridge

Adam Gleave
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Reward functions are notoriously difﬁcult to specify, especially for tasks with
complex goals. Reward learning approaches attempt to infer reward functions from
human feedback and preferences. Prior works on reward learning have mainly
focused on the performance of policies trained alongside the reward function.
This practice, however, may fail to detect learned rewards that are not capable of
training new policies from scratch and thus do not capture the intended behavior.
Our work focuses on demonstrating and studying the causes of these relearning
failures in the domain of preference-based reward learning. We demonstrate with
experiments in tabular and continuous control environments that the severity of
relearning failures can be sensitive to changes in reward model design and the
trajectory dataset composition. Based on our ﬁndings, we emphasize the need for
more retraining-based evaluations in the literature.
1
Introduction
Reward functions for most real-world tasks are difﬁcult or impossible to specify procedurally.
Speciﬁcally, hand-designed reward functions frequently misspecify the task [18]. The ﬁeld of reward
learning attempts to overcome this challenge by designing algorithms to infer reward functions
from data. These learned reward functions aim to succinctly represent the desired behaviors [22],
drastically reduce the amount of human feedback required to learn a task [8] and allow practitioners
to generalize these behaviors to new environments [10].
One of the most promising approaches is to learn reward functions from binary human preferences
over trajectory segments where these segments are collected online using a sampler agent trained to
optimize the learned reward [8]. This form of preference-based reward learning is already being used
to train large language models to summarize [41] and become more helpful and harmless [3].
Prior work has typically focused on the performance of the sampler agent [19, 8]. Unfortunately,
the sampler agent performing the correct behavior does not guarantee that a robust reward function
has been uncovered. In particular, when using reinforcement learning to train a randomly initialized
relearner agent on the learned reward, the reward may fail to induce the correct behavior despite the
sampler agent behaving well [15]. If we only require a policy that works passably well in the exact
training environment, this may not be an issue because we can use the sampler agent and throw away
the learned reward. We argue, however, that such a method cannot be accurately described as learning
a reward function. At most, it is a preference-based policy learning technique, using reward functions
to give a helpful inductive bias during training. Moreover, it is desirable for many applications to
1Equal contribution. Work done during internship at Center for Human-Compatible AI, UC Berkeley.
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2301.03652v1  [cs.LG]  9 Jan 2023

truly uncover a reward function. For example, we might wish to train a new policy using a learned
reward function with a more powerful R.L. algorithm or different agent architecture than was used
during the initial reward learning process.
Past work has preformed preliminary investigations into the robustness of learned rewards in toy
environments [28], in Atari [15] and for ﬁne-tuning language models [3, 32]. However, these
investigations are typically only reported short sections of their respective papers.
Inspired by this work, our paper empirically examines the relearner performance for learned reward
functions. Since we have access to a ground truth reward in our synthetic experiments, we deﬁne
poor relearner performance as achieving relatively low ground truth returns. Our results show that
relearing can produce very different policies than the sampler, frequently achieving low ground-truth
returns. Thus, we argue that current preference-based reward learning methods may produce reward
functions that are not reliable as signals for policy relearning.
Our paper makes three key contributions:
• We demonstrate that state-of-the-art reward learning algorithms can produce reward models
that fail to train new agents from scratch in tabular and continuous control settings;
• We show that the severity can increase as the trajectory dataset concentrates on high reward
regions;
• Finally, as an example of how these relearning failures can be sensitive to changes in reward
model design, we demonstrate that reward ensembles can effect relearning failures.
2
Related Work
Preference-based reward learning
Our primary focus is on methods that learn from preference
comparisons between two trajectories [2, 36, 29, 8]. Preference comparison is one of the most
scalable reward learning methods, successfully applied to ﬁne-tune large transformer language
models [24, 32, 21, 3] to enhance their performance at certain tasks. Note that trajectory comparison
methods contain more information about the reward than demonstrations, so they tend to produce
better results when available [30]. However, note that these methods may still fare poorly when the
human preference feedback does not match their model of human rationality [20].
Other reward learning approaches
Many other methods have been developed to learn reward
functions from human data [16]. One of the most popular is Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) [22]
methods that infer a reward function from demonstrations [1, 27, 39, 38, 40, 9, 10]. T-REX [6] is a
hybrid approach, learning from a ranked set of demonstrations. An alternative approach learns from
“sketches” of cumulative reward over an episodeCabi et al. [7].
Reward hacking
Pan et al. provides the ﬁrst systematic empirical study of reward hacking: RL
agents exploiting misspeciﬁed reward functions [25]. Notably, they ﬁnd that increasing agent capabil-
ities, such as by increasing the RL policy’s model size, can sometimes lead to worse performance on
the ground truth reward, while performance on the misspeciﬁed proxy reward increases. In contrast
to our work, Pan et al. only study reward hacking in hand-designed rewards designed to illustrate the
phenomenon, whereas we investigate this phenomenon in learned rewards.
Reward hacking has also been studied from a theoretical perspective. Under the framework of general
principle agent problems Zhuang and Hadﬁeld-Menell examines the case where the agent’s utility
function can only account for a limited subspace of the set of attributes that make the true utility [37].
The authors proceed to show that, within their model, an optimal state under this proxy utility can
have arbitrarily low ground truth utility, assuming the attributes that make up the reward exhibit
a condition analogous to decreasing marginal utility and increasing opportunity cost. Skalse et al.
instead propose a formal deﬁnition of reward hacking [31]. In our paper, however, we focus on
more concrete cases of relearning failures and practically attainable measures, such as relearner
performance being close to sampler performance.
The most closely related work is by Ibarz et al., which evaluates their learned reward functions by
freezing them and training a new policy, analogous to our relearner evaluations [15, Section 3.2].
However, this study was only a small, half-page section of their paper, and they did not examine
factors that may increase or decrease the chances/severity of relearning failures.
2

Another important related work is by Reddy et al., who observes that rewards can fail to generalize
due to a lack of informative trajectories in their training data [28]. They attempt to ameliorate this
by querying humans on diverse hypothetical trajectories generated from a model. However, their
method requires a world model and primarily focuses on taking advantage of this model to improve
reward quality. In addition, they assume the user provides feedback through quantitative reward
labels, whereas we focus on the more realistic and widely used preference comparison setting.
Finally, past work has found that language models trained on a preference-based reward model can
learn to exploit their reward model [32, Section 4.3]. In a similar vein, Bai et al. found that the ability
of their reward model to correctly predict human preferences over a pair of inputs degraded as those
inputs where perceived as more rewarding by the model [3, Section 4.2]. However, none of these
works have offered much analysis of what leads to reward hacking or in general relearning failures,
beyond training against the learned reward for to long [32, Section 4.3] or a lack of data from off
distribution [28].
Retraining and transfer in IRL domain
There has also been multiple works exploring relearning
and transfer when learning rewards learned from expert demonstrations i.e. inverse reinforcement
learning (IRL). Fu et al. [10] propose an IRL method to learn state-only reward functions disentangled
from transition dynamics and preform experiments on transferring their learned rewards to new agents
and environments. Ni et al. [23] derive an analytic gradient estimator for an arbitrary f-divergence
between expert and on policy distributions with respect to the reward functions parameters. In their
relearning evaluations, they ﬁnd that there method produces relearners that match expert performance.
Finally, Wang et al. [34] borrows methods from random network distillation to directly estimate the
expert distribution with only expert data. This process, removes the need for a sampler, obviating the
issue of relearning failures. In contrast to these IRL methods, our work focuses on the more scalable
preference-based reward learning setting.
3
Background
Deep RL from Human Preferences
We follow the framework of learning a preference model ˆrφ
from trajectory segment comparisons. Our method is the closest to deep reinforcement learning
from human preferences [8]. It consists of four phases iterated: trajectory collection, preference
elicitation, reward inference and policy optimization. During trajectory collection, the current
policy, initially a random policy, samples rollouts from the environment collecting trajectory segments
σi = (s0, a0, s1, a1, · · · , sn) without reward labels and stores them in B. In phase two, the algorithm,
elicits preferences y ∈{≻, ≺, ≡} for randomly selected pairs of segments (σ1, σ2) ∈B from a
labeler — human or synthetic 1. The preferences are then stored in a preference dataset D. The
algorithm assumes these preferences have been sampled from the Bradly-Terry model [4],
P(σ1 ≻σ2) =
exp
P
s,a,s′∈σ1 r(s, a, s′)

exp
P
s,a,s′∈σ1 r(s, a, s′)

+ exp
P
s,a,s′∈σ2 r(s, a, s′)
.
(1)
a widely used approximate model for human data in the preference based reward learning literature
[8, 15, 19]. In the third phase reward inference, the reward ˆrφ is ﬁt by using Adam [17] to minimize
the negative log likelihood of ˆrφ under D. The fourth and ﬁnal phase of each iteration consists of
policy optimization. In this stage, we can apply existing deep reinforcement learning algorithms to
improve our policies expected return under the learned reward, and the process repeats.
4
Training and Evaluation Procedure
Reward Learning
We train reward models with synthetic data that is sampled from the Bradley-
Terry model of Eq. 1 with r set to the ground truth reward. In the tabular setting, we train the sampler
policy using soft Q-Learning [13] and the learned reward networks simply take the current state as a
one-hot vector for input. In the continuous control setting, we use soft actor-critic (SAC) [14] from
Stable-Baselines3 [26] and the learned reward networks receive the observation, action and next
observation as input. See Appendix A for further details.
1We follow Ibarz et al. in selecting preference pairs to query uniformly at random [15]
3

0
10
20
30
40
50
Number of Iterations
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Ground Truth Return
RL Budget
0.5M
1M
2M
4M
8M
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Number of Timesteps
1e6
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Ground Truth Return
RL Budget
0.5M
1M
2M
4M
8M
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Number of Preference Pairs
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Segment Pair Average Return
RL Budget
1M
8M
(a) Reward learning curves
(b) Relearning curves
(c) Preference datasets
Figure 1: Anti-correlated sampeler and relearner ground truth returns in HalfCheetah. (a) x-axis
represents the number of iterations of each run. See section 3 RL budget is the total number of RL
timesteps available to the sampler. (b) x-axis represents the number of timesteps during relearning.
In plots (a-b), for each RL budget setting, we performed ten runs of reward learning, and for each of
these, we ran ﬁve relearning evaluations for a total of 50 relearning runs. Solid lines and shaded lines
represent the mean and 90% conﬁdence respectively. (c) Scatterplot of average ground truth reward
of each segment pair in the example preference datasets with 1M and 8M RL budgets.
Reward Ensembles
Christiano et al. and Lee et al. use reward ensembles to estimate the uncertainty
of the learned reward [8, 19]. We explore how these ensembles may have another beneﬁt, reducing
the variance of off-distribution transitions. As in prior works, we train each ensemble member on
bootstrapped datasets, normalize their outputs separately and use their mean as the reward.
Relearning
We freeze the learned reward and train a new, randomly initialized, relearner policy to
evaluate our reward functions. We evaluate this policy under the ground truth reward. This is similar
to the method employed by Ibarz et al. [15, Section 3.2] to study reward hacking. In the continuous
control settings this consist of training a new agent from the learned reward function using the same
R.L. algorithm as the sampler, then evaluating it under the ground truth reward. In the tabular setting,
we simply solve for the soft-optimal policy (α = 0.1) [13] under the learned reward function.
5
Experiments
First, we investigate the occurrence of relearning failures in the continuous control domain. We use
HalfCheetah environment as our test bed since it has been used in past works on preference-based
reward learning [8]. Here we ﬁnd that increasing the number of training timesteps the sampler takes
between sampling trajectories for labeling increases the severity of relearning failures. Next, we focus
on the effects of reward model design and observe that reward ensembles may reduce reward hacking
in tabular environments by reducing the variance of off-distribution transitions. To demonstrate this
failure mode we use the stay inside environment which consists of two rooms separated by a wall
with a small doorway. The agent receives reward for staying in the inside room see Figure 2b.
5.1
Preference Trajectory Dataset Imbalance and Relearning Failure
The reward model is a function of the dataset D used to train it. One of the simplest ways to change
the preference dataset is to vary the number of timesteps T spent training the sampler between
collecting trajectory fragments. We call the total number of interactions the sampler has with the
environment during reward learning the RL budget. Note the RL budget does not affect the number
of comparisons collected.
Figure 1 shows the learning curves of the sampler and relearner experiments in HalfCheetah. We
ﬁnd that despite higher RL budget leading to higher sampler returns during reward learning, the
relearners’ performance has the reverse trend; increasing sampler RL budget actually decreases
relearner ground truth return.
We can gain some insight into why this is happening by exploring preference datasets shown in
Figure 2c. First let’s consider the preference dateset produced by one of the runs with the highest-
budget (8M timesteps). We ﬁnd that the trajectory segments contained in this datset are concentrated
in high ground truth reward regions. On the other hand, when we consider the low-budget dataset (1M
timesteps), the distribution of trajectory segments provides a better coverage across all the ground
truth reward scales within the support. We hypothesize that having an overwhelming proportion of
4

high-reward trajectory segments in the preference dataset — and little preference data on trajectories
in the transition from high to low reward — may cause the reward model to effectively over-ﬁt to
the high-reward region. This overﬁtting leads to poor supervision over randomly initialized policies.
Overall, we believe this could explain the observed relearning failures.
It’s important to note that we did not see a signiﬁcant increase in relearning failure when increasing
the RL budget in the tabular setting. See Appendix D.
5.2
Reward Ensembles
1
5
Number of Ensemble Members
−500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Return
Sampler
Relearner
(a) Effect of reward ensembles on sampler and
relearner returns
(b) Ground truth reward
(c) Example no ensemble
(d) Example with ensemble
1
5
Number of Ensemble Members
0
5
10
Maximum Reward
(e) Max reward
Figure 2: Ensembles eliminate relearning failures in the stay inside environment. (b) depicts the
ground truth reward in the stay inside environment. (c) shows an example individual learned reward
and (d) with a ﬁve member ensemble. Finally, (e) shows the distribution of max learned-reward
across all states. All sub-ﬁgures come from the same run which included 20 seeds.
Our tabular experiments provide a concrete, interpretable example of how relearning failures can be
effected by reward model implementation details. In particular, we focus on reward ensembles and
observe that they have drastic effects on relearners but leave the sampler’s performance unchanged.
In the stay inside environment, when using a reward ensemble of size ﬁve, all relearners preform at
least as well as their respective samplers, as can be seen in Figure 2a. However, if we use only a single
reward, the relearners behaviour is inconsistent; some relearners do substantially better then their
respective samplers, but almost as many do substantially worse, getting near zero return. Thus, while
adding an ensemble has a minimal effect on the sampler, it changes the behaviour of the relearners.
To understand why this happens we must consider the off-distribution behaviour of our reward models.
In the stay inside environment, the samplers typically stay in the inside half of the environment.
Thus there is often insufﬁcient coverage of the outside half of the environment in our trajectory
dataset. Thus, the reward off-distribution is largely unconstrained by the data. This means that
small changes in the off-distribution behavior of our reward network can become critically important.
Reward models based on neural networks produce spurious high rewards off distribution, see Figure 2.
When these reward delusions are more rewarding than any of the in-distribution transitions, reward
hacking can occur and cause relearning failures. Reward ensembles tends to have lower variance
off distribution than an individual reward network. Thus, any reward delusions tend to have a lower
reward (according to the reward model). This can be directly seen in Figure 2 (c-e). This effect
reduces the chance that the optimal policy will be attracted to one of these spurious rewards during
relearning, which is what we see in Figure 2a.
6
Limitations and Discussion
Our experiments have a few important limitations. First, they are limited to simple ground truth reward
functions and environments. For example, in Half-Cheetah-v3 [5, 11], the reward function is
essentially a linear in the observation, action and next observation. While these relearning failures also
appear in more complex tasks [15, Section 3.2], it is unclear if it is precisely the same phenomenon
5

that causes them. The design decisions that seem to improve retraining performance in small-scale
experiments, in our case, reward ensembles and less sampler training, may not be the same as those
that address the problem at a larger scale. We leave such explorations to future work.
Overall, we have demonstrated that evaluations of relearning performance can differ substantially
from the results of simply evaluating the sampler agent trained alongside the reward model. We hope
to see future works include relearning evaluation as they appear to hold fruitful insights into the
quality of the learned reward functions.
6

Author Contributions
Lev McKinney designed and implemented the tabular experiments and wrote the relevant parts of
the method and experiments sections. In addition, he wrote the introduction, discussion and related
works sections of the paper/appendix. Yawen Duan designed and ran the initial experiments that
displayed reward model relearning failure on continuous control environments, and wrote relevant
sections of the paper. David Krueger provided ideas, guidance and general feedback on experiment
design and analysis. Adam Gleave provided initial ideas of the project, provided high-level and
detailed feedback on experiments and analysis.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This paper was completed as part of an internship at the Center for Human-Compatible Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. Funding for this internships was provided by the Berkeley Existential Risk Initiative.
