arXiv:1504.03874v1  [cs.AI]  15 Apr 2015
Bridging belief function theory to modern machine learning
Thomas Burger∗
iRTSV-BGE (Universit´e Grenoble-Alpes, CNRS, CEA, INSERM)
Grenoble, France

November 23, 2021
Abstract
Machine learning is a quickly evolving ﬁeld which now looks really diﬀerent from what it was 15 years ago,
when classiﬁcation and clustering were major issues. This document proposes several trends to explore the
new questions of modern machine learning, with the strong afterthought that the belief function framework
has a major role to play.
Keywords: belief functions; machine learning;
1
Introduction
In an age of user generated web-contents and of portable devices with embedded computer vision capabilities,
machine learning (ML) and big data mining questions are fundamental. As a result, these questions naturally
penetrate neighboring research ﬁelds, including belief function theory (BFT), so that it is now usual to attend
a “Classiﬁcation” session [26] or a “Machine Learning” session [16] in a conference devoted to belief functions.
However, it is hard to accept that among the various proposed approaches based on BF, very few have
become state-of-the-art ML methods, the knowledge of which has spread beyond the BF community. Without
any doubt, this can be partly explained by the relative size of the scientiﬁc communities under consideration:
although quickly growing, the BF one is relatively small with respect to that of statistics, Bayesian networks,
neural networks, etc. However, this reason alone is not suﬃcient: There are indeed other topics, such as for
instance, information fusion, where BF-based methods are now as well recognized as are methods based on
more classical formalisms, such as probabilities, or ontologies.
In this report, I assume an additional reason: that some researchers focused on BFT (especially the
youngest), who have progressively turned their interests towards ML problems, may not capture the newest
trends of this ﬁeld. In fact, I used to be an example of such researchers, and I acknowledge that my ﬁrst
perceptions of ML were clearly outdated. This is why, I propose a short review of the respective evolution of
BFT and of ML, as well as an attempt to put them in perspective. Of course, many senior researchers may
ﬁnd this exercise futile, as they have their own broad view on the question. However, to my knowledge, no
recent referenced article is available for any reader seeking for a starting point to question the links between
ML and BFT.
This document is structured as follow: In Section 2, a brief recall of the evolution of the mainstream in the
BF community is provided. Then, in Section 3, a short summary of the earlier ages of ML up to the mid-90s,
is sketched, as well as a coarse description of the successful interactions between ML and BFT in those times.
Afterward, I provide in Section 4 a synthetic overview of the revolution that blew over ML around the early
2000s, and which modiﬁed its goals and the organization of its supporting community. As BFT does not seem
to ﬁt in this new picture of the ML world, I list in Section 5 a few problems that may still be of interest for
the current mainstream of BFT, as well as some potential interesting evolutions for the community to adapt
to the newly raised questions.
2
The landscape of belief function interpretations
When considering BF interpretations, one often opposes Demspter’s imprecise statistic view to Shafer and
Smets singular view, such as described in [27]. However, there is another way to sort the various interpreta-
tions: it is to refer to the mathematical object a mass function is perceived as a generalization of. This leads
to the following taxonomy:
∗The author would like to thank Fabio Cuzzolin, who organized, a “discussion panel on the status and future of the belief function
theory” during the BELIEF 2014 conference [16]. This very enriching brainstorm was the starting point for this work, which can be
seen as a rejoinder to this discussion panel.
1

• The probability-aﬃliated interpretation: “A mass function is an object which generalizes a discrete
probability measure, where the probability masses are not necessarily known, but are only assumed to
belong to an interval”. Whatever the origin of this imprecise probability, i.e. either statistical (such as
in Dempster’s view [19, 20], or as in the Theory of Hints [39]), or subjective (such as with Shafer or
Shenoy [55, 58, 59, 57]), the mathematical theory behind is that of random sets [36, 43].
• The set-aﬃliated interpretation: “A mass function is a set description of the real value of an ill-known
variable, which is enriched by weightings which add up to one”. Of course, this view is conceptually
closer to that of fuzzy sets, possibility theory [31], and to artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in general.
• The capacity-aﬃliated interpretation: “A mass function is only a particular type of Choquet’s ca-
pacity, the Moebius transform of which is totally monotone”. Such interpretation is strongly related to
multi-criteria optimization and to operational research [33].
From a historical perspective, the oldest probability-aﬃliated interpretation (of Dempster) was rooted
in imprecise statistics, before moving towards non-frequentist views (that are more classicaly associated to
nowadays subjective views), under the inﬂuence of Shafer; yet, in Shafer and Shenoy works [56], the link to
probability remains strong as the reference to random set is explicit. Later on, the set-aﬃliated interpretation
has spread under the inﬂuence of renown authors (such as Zadeh, Dubois, Smets or Yager), with a strong
background in data fusion, fuzzy sets and expert systems. Among them, Smets constantly positioned his work
with respect to Bayesian classiﬁers [51] or Bayesian reasoning [63]; however, the Transferable Belief Model
(TBM [60]) was a non-probabilistic model, which, in Smet’s view [61], was not compliant with random sets.
Besides, the capacity-aﬃliated interpretation of BF has never really developed on its own, independently of
other works in operational research and in game theory. Finally, todays, the great majority of the belief
function community accepted the set-aﬃliated interpretation, as it appears in proceedings such as [26, 16],
where the majority of the articles undertook this interpretation.
3
Classiﬁcation, clustering and belief functions
As fully described by Miclet and Cornu´ejols in [14], the short history of ML is full of rapid and strong
evolutions, so that to date, the discipline which was originally part of AI, has completely separated from its
parent discipline to make its own path, which appears to strongly converge toward statistics and optimization:
They review the original heuristics motivated by bio-inspiration (such as multi-layer perceptrons for instance),
their transformation into more systematic explorations (through the concept of version space, introduced by
Mitchel [42] in 1982), the golden age of symbolic learning, and ﬁnally, the opposition between supervised and
unsupervised learning, so that the classiﬁcation and clustering problems were at the center of attention in the
mid-90s.
Yet it is not described in [14], Probabilistic Graphical Models (PGM) developed in parallel during this
period. In fact, this omission is not really surprising, as PGM is a community on its own, well separated
from the ML community. In fact, PGM are also classically used in problems such that data fusion or system
diagnosis, which may not involve any learning. However, for a long time, Bayesian networks were amongst
the state-of-the-art supervised learning methods, along with others non-probabilistic methods (k-NN, decision
tree, etc.). On the other hand, unsupervised learning was mainly non-probabilistic: AHC, Kohonen maps, and
of course, k-means. This latter is interesting: Although not probabilistic, this algorithm provides a relaxed
solution of the EM algorithm applied to a mixture of Gaussian models [21, 1]. However, in parallel, Bezdek
proposed [5], and established [44] a fuzzy version of the k-means, named “fuzzy c-means”, which in spite of its
non-probabilistic motivation, behaves similarly to the EM algorithm. This clearly illustrates that, in spite of
diﬀerent culture (statistics or fuzzy sets), similar tools are proposed in diﬀerent communities. Another episode
related to the multiple cultural anchors of k-means recently showed up: it was established that k-means is the
discrete counterpart to the PCA [30], a classical non-probabilistic method in statistics, which was developed
in the multivariate analysis school [35]. In a nutshell, up to the mid-90s, the connections between ML and
IA, although weakening, have remained appearent; The problems of interest in ML are related to clustering
and classiﬁcation; Various formalisms are involved in ML, including probabilities, and none of them claims a
clear superiority.
In this context, BFT (still rooted in the probability-aﬃliated interpretation, while the set-aﬃliated one is
growing) naturally join the trend, so that numerous evidential versions of classical algorithms are successfully
proposed and rapidly become state-of-the-art references. Among them, a signiﬁcant proportion are proposed
by Denoeux, such as the evidential k-NN [22] and the evidential neural network [23] in the late 90s or the early
2000s. On this basis, during the early 2000s, numerous derivations of virtually any classical ML algorithms
are proposed. Among them, Smets’ series on target identiﬁcation and on Kalman ﬁlter [51, 50, 49, 52, 46, 64]
is of prime importance for two reasons. First, they had thrived on top of the generalized Bayesian theorem,
proposed a decade earlier [62]. This theorem proposes to link the likelihood and plausibility functions, so
that it becomes possible to derive algorithms in the BF framework, which ﬁt the parameters of a model to
observed data, in a perfectly compatible ML language [68]. This path was taken over by Denoeux in order to
extend Demspter’s EM algorithm [13, 24, 25], while cautiously stepping out of the TBM framework.
The second reason of the importance of Smet’s series on Kalman ﬁlter is cultural: As a defender of his own
TBM, he constantly opposed the TBM and the Bayesian views [51, 63], so that, under his major inﬂuence,
ML, which from the mid-90s, is less and less inﬂuenced by probabilities, was depicted in the BF community
2

mainly as a Bayesian ﬁeld. In this context, numerous researchers of the BF community, including me (as a
PhD student of the mid-2000s), were frozen in a decade-old past, where the ML community would be both
inspired by Bayesianism and mainly focused on classiﬁcation and clustering; two facts that obviously do not
hold anymore.
4
A recap of modern ML
The works of Vapnik, on support vector machines [7] and on statistical learning theory [69], have provided the
foundations of a major revolution which transformed ML in the late 1990s, and which, according to St´ephane
Mallat [41], still had major impacts ﬁfteen years later. The cornerstones of this revolution are three of them.
The ﬁrst one is obviously the kernel trick [53], which deeply roots machine learning in the frameworks of
distance geometry, Riemannian analysis, and multivariate analysis (a ﬁeld of statistics which does not assume
any probabilistic model underlying the data). The second one is the idea that a learning problem should be
addressed through the minimization of its empirical risk [2]. Finally, the third one is to accept that, depending
on the dimensionality of the description space, and on the size of the dataset, the empirical risk minimization
may be ill-posed, so that a regularizer should be involved in the optimization.
These ideas percolated in the ML community for a decade, providing the tools to give a unifying descrip-
tion [41, 12, 70] of wavelet transform based signal processing, diﬀusion process, kernel machines and deep
neural networks1. Combined with the ﬁrst works on variable section by ℓ1 penalty [67], this lead to major
breakthroughs in sparse learning [40], which is of prime importance for the uncertainty theory communities,
for its main connection to the Robust Uncertainty Principles, proposed by Cand`es, Romberg and Tao [10].
Todays, in the mid-2010s, ML is not anymore an inter-disciplinary ﬁeld on which interfere diﬀerent theories
ranging from cognitive sciences through AI to probability, to solve supervised or unsupervised problems: both
the background culture and the objectives has changed.
Regarding the objectives, they relate to those
of information retrieval, social networks, recommender systems, feature extraction, variable selection, data
factorization, and sublinear optimization. Even if improving clustering and classiﬁcation method still deserves
some interest2, the harder problems presented in ML challenges [3] receives most of the focus. Regarding the
background culture, the ﬁeld is less interdisciplinary and it is mainly considered as a sub-domain of applied
mathematics build on top of optimization (mainly convex), geometry, multivariate statistics and harmonic
analysis. Very little room is left for subjective probabilities or for AI. This is described in [14], yet it is also
well illustrated by the applied mathematics background of most of the researchers recently hired in ML labs.
5
Some room for belief functions in ML
In this context, it may appear as particularly diﬃcult for the BF community to adapt to the recent evolution
of ML, in order to provide state-of-the-art developments. First, BF interpretations and ML have had opposite
evolutions so far: From a probability-aﬃliated view compatible with statistics, BFT had given more room to
subjectivism, to ﬁnally end in a preponderant set-aﬃliated view tailored to data fusion and AI problems. On
the other hand, ML has quit IA to become more and more tied to functional analysis and convex optimization.
This antagonism is well illustrated by the following observation: In ML the entries are raw observations,
modeled by a set of points living in a vector space; On the other hand, in the TBM, the entries are assumed
to be subjective opinions from diﬀerent agents and of high semantics. In a similar way, a major asset of
the BFT is to provide a rich description of the various types of uncertainty associated with some pieces of
information; On the other hand, in ML one is classically not interested in modeling them, but rather to blindly
minimize a loss function. Nevertheless, BF community still has several cards to play with respect to ML. In
the sequel of this section, I present some of them, sorted according to the BF interpretation they aﬃliate to.
5.1
Staying on to set-aﬃliated interpretations
The ﬁrst one is to keep the set-aﬃliated interpretations, including the TBM, and to restrict to some very
speciﬁc ML problems where it is adapted. This is deﬁnitely the easiest way, as it prevents any change of
the current mainstream of the BF community. However, it remains of interest, even if the path is narrowing
under the pressure of big data constraints. Obviously, one must focus on problems where, at the ﬁrst stage,
several agents are used on dedicated learning tasks, and at the second stage, some cooperation or combination
between them is expected. This encompasses a wide class of problems that are classically faced in computer
vision, among which a few of them [17, 18, 48] are addressed in the BFT:
• Ensemble learning: the idea is here to combine the capabilities of several classiﬁers so that their
consensus decision is more robust. This setting has long been explored in the BF framework (see [38, 47]
as well as their references), by several researchers, including myself [9, 37]. However, the impact all these
works is limited by lack of theoretical performance guaranties, such as with boosting methods [32].
1The latters have revolutionized computer vision as well as many other ML application ﬁelds, as described by De Freitas in a
recent keynote lecture [16].
2More precisely, clustering and classiﬁcation challenging problems still exist, yet, in a setting that diﬀers from the original one
on which BFT is classically used: for instance classiﬁcation of billions of items over millions of classes, or computer vision problems
where the classiﬁcation itself is not the issue with respect to the feature extraction problem that precedes.
3

• Co-training: In this setting [6], various classiﬁers work on diﬀerent feature spaces or on diﬀerent
datasets, in order to have complementary knowledge. Then, each classiﬁer is used to label examples
that are useful for the other classiﬁers to improve their performances. This can be extended to transfer
learning problems, where models trained on a ﬁrst setting are transposed to other similar settings [15].
• Active learning: A classiﬁer asks a human agent to label the training examples that it knows are
useful to improve its prediction capability [54].
In all these settings, it is required to have several agents, either humans or machines, to automatically evaluate
the level of knowledge of each, and to provide a communication scheme between them, so that they can improve
one another both their speciﬁcity (i.e. being capable of taking a decision), and their consistency (in order
to limit their misleading predictions). Described in such a way, BFT seems to be an adapted framework to
consider this problem in the most general case. Even if strictly speaking, the learning process would not be
accounted for, such a “cooperation framework” would be of prime interest for numerous tasks such as complex
scene analysis, bioinformatics, etc.
5.2
Going back to probability-aﬃliated interpretations
The second option relies on reversing on purpose the evolution of the BF theories, and to go back to the
probability-aﬃliated interpretations, as they root on solid statistical foundations. Even if ML is more and
more involved in optimization, the problem formulation remains in the language of statistics, and as such
it is compliant with Dempster’s original view3. In such a setting, it could be interesting to address several
questions. For instance:
• Is it possible to reformulate the empirical risk minimization principle in the BF framework? Does the
minimizer remain convex, if several forms of uncertainties are distinctly accounted for in its expression?
• Can we relate the bias-variance dilemma to that of the speciﬁcity-consistency trade-oﬀ[45]?
• Is it possible to extend the multiple test correction setting at the center of most omics studies [4, 65] to
BF, to account for badly imputed data?
Apart from these rather general questions, let us note that the recent works [13, 24, 25] which rely on
the likelihood interpretation of plausibility, in a setting which diﬀers from the TBM is already a step in this
direction. The citation rates of these works acknowledge the idea that going back to a probability-aﬃliated
interpretation makes sense.
5.3
Moving on to capacity-aﬃliated or other interpretations
The last solution is to try to accelerate the evolution of BF community, so that after the probability-aﬃliated
and the set-aﬃliated interpretations, that of capacity-aﬃliated focuses the interest. In fact, this view is much
more related to optimization, and the options it provides in terms of modeling as well as in terms of solver
could deﬁnitely be of interest for ML. Basically, it would lead to consider ML learning problems which rely on a
game theory setting, or in which multiple criteria have to be optimized in the meantime. Of course, this would
naturally lead to models which do not restrict to totally monotone capacities (i.e. BF), but to other types
of capacities. More generally, encompassing the BFT in a wider frameworks (Choquet capacities, Walley’s
lower capacity, or any other, whatever it is) is potentially enriching, and this line has already been adopted by
other researchers on questions which are central to ML: Hypothesis testing with interval data [29], regression
based on Choquet’s capacities [66], partial order ranking [11, 28], computation of the Vapnik-Chervonenkis
dimension of Choquet integral [34], etc. Beyond, numerous remaining questions are worthy:
• Can we propose an optimizer for the Exploitation-Exploration trade-oﬀ(deﬁned in the multi-armed
bandit problem [8], as well as in most online learning settings) on the basis of the various imprecision
measures available in BFT?
• Is there a mean to reduce the imprecision of a source of information, by means of a convex ℓ1-penalized
optimization, as proposed in [10] for raw signals?
3 Interestingly enough, this couple of short sentences have raised numerous reviewer’s comments, among which few of them are
worthy being discussed here:
• A ﬁrst comment addressed the fact that in this evolution of ML, the problem formulation remains in the language of statistics,
and question its probabailistic interpretation. As a matter of fact, the involvement of a risk function, deﬁned as the expectation
of loss function, that is justiﬁed to be approximated by the empirical risk on the basis of the assumption that the data are
i.i.d., deﬁnitely roots machine learning to statistic, multivariate analysis and measure theory; even if traditional hypothesis
testing or parametric probabilistic modeling is not involved, and even if optimization methods are used to solve the problem.
• Another comment requires being cited: “Which ’solid foundations’?
This assertion seems just the repetition of a clich´e
contrasting the ’solid foundations’ of probability and statistics to an alleged lack of such foundations for non-probabilistic
approaches. We are never told what these ’solid foundations’ actually are.” The ’solid foundations’ of the statistical approaches
to ML are described at lenght in Vapnik’s Statistical learning theory [69] (and that are sketched in the previous bullet), which
in addition to providing a axiomatization of the problem, provides metrics to objectively evaluate experimental results as well
as generalization bounds. I have never said that non-probabilistic approaches lack of such foundations, as this anonymous
reviewer have misread it; yet I believe these foundations have not been proven to adapt to the current ML problems that are
already formalized in the literature.
4

• As a penalized optimization amounts to ﬁnding a trade-oﬀbetween two criteria (the loss functions and
a regularity measure), does it make sense to tackle such type of ML problems in the framework of
multicriteria optimization?
6
Conclusion
Finally, even if the modern ML mainstream is less interested in the classiﬁcation/clustering problems that
were a natural application ﬁeld to BFT, there remain few open questions which would advantageously beneﬁt
from BFT. Among these open questions, few are based on well-established interpretations which are aﬃliated
to probability or to set theories (cooperation framework), while some requires the BFT to move forwards,
to accept wider interpretations (Choquet’s capacities) or to be inserted into wider frameworks (lower prob-
abilities). Among these open questions, few are tentatively addressed by leading researchers who points the
directions by providing successful ﬁrst results (imprecise ranking, computer vision, likelihood interpretation of
plausibility), while others remain unaddressed (robust uncertainty principle, similarities between bias-variance
and speciﬁcity-consistency trade-oﬀs). Finally, despite separating from AI to the proﬁt of applied mathemat-
ics, ML still provides an interesting playground to BFT researchers. Yet, most importantly, on few speciﬁc
ML open questions, we can even expect signiﬁcant BFT contributions.
