A Commonsense Reasoning Framework for Explanatory
Emotion Attribution, Generation and Re-classiﬁcation
Antonio Lietoa,b, Gian Luca Pozzatoa, Stefano Zoiaa, Viviana Pattia, Rossana
Damianoa
aUniversity of Turin, Department of Computer Science, Turin, Italy
bICAR-CNR, Palermo, Italy
Abstract
We present DEGARI (Dynamic Emotion Generator And ReclassIﬁer), an explain-
able system for emotion attribution and recommendation. This system relies on a re-
cently introduced commonsense reasoning framework, the T
CL logic, which is based
on a human-like procedure for the automatic generation of novel concepts in a Descrip-
tion Logics knowledge base. Starting from an ontological formalization of emotions
based on the Plutchik model, known as ArsEmotica, the system exploits the logic TCL
to automatically generate novel commonsense semantic representations of compound
emotions (e.g. Love as derived from the combination of Joy and Trust according to
Plutchik). The generated emotions correspond to prototypes, i.e. commonsense repre-
sentations of given concepts, and have been used to reclassify emotion-related contents
in a variety of artistic domains, ranging from art datasets to the editorial contents avail-
able in RaiPlay, the online platform of RAI Radiotelevisione Italiana (the Italian public
broadcasting company). We show how the reported results (evaluated in the light of the
obtained reclassiﬁcations, the user ratings assigned to such reclassiﬁcations, and their
explainability) are encouraging, and pave the way to many further research directions.
Keywords: Explainable AI, Commonsense reasoning, Knowledge Generation,
Concept Combination, Computational Models of Emotion
1. Introduction and Background
Emotions have been acknowledged as a key part of the aesthetic experience through
all ages and cultures, as witnessed by terms such as “sublime” [53] and “pathos” [52],
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
June 3, 2021
arXiv:2101.04017v5  [cs.AI]  2 Jun 2021

associated with the experience of art since the ancient times. The advent of computa-
tional tools and methods for investigating the way we respond emotionally to objects
and situations has paved the way to a deeper understanding of the intricate relation-
ship between emotions and art. For example, Van Dongen et al. [66] have studied how
art affects emotional regulation by measuring the brain response through EEG: their
research shows that, in comparison with photographs depicting real events, artworks
determine stronger electro-physiological responses; in parallel, Leder et al. [24] argue
that the emotional response to art – measured through facial muscle movements – is
attenuated in art critics, and stronger in non-experts, thus showing the universality and
spontaneity of this response.
The association between art and emotions is even stronger when the artistic expres-
sion is conveyed by non-textual media, as in music and, at least partly, in movies. For
example, music has proven to be an effective tool for emotion regulation: as demon-
strated by Thoma et al. [65], music can induce speciﬁc emotional states in everyday
situations, an effect which is sought for by the users and can be exploited to create
effective affective recommender systems [4]. Finally, emotional engagement is of pri-
mary importance in narrative media, such as ﬁlm and television, as extensively inves-
tigated by a line of research which draws from both ﬁlm studies and emotion theories
[58, 64].
As a consequence of the multi-faceted, complex role played by emotions in the
experience of art and media, the investigation of this phenomenon with computational
tools has relied on a variety of models and methodologies, ranging from dimensional
models, better suited to investigate physiological, continuous correlate of emotions
[54, 69, 36], to categorical models, which lend themselves to inspecting the conscious
level of emotional experience [47, 16, 5]. Dimensional models typically measure the
emotional engagement along the arousal and hedonic axes, and are useful to study
how the emotional response evolves over time. For example, Lopes et al. [34] rely on
crowdsourced annotations of tension, arousal and variance in audio pieces to realize
sound-based affective interaction in games. Categorical models are useful to collect
the audience experience as discrete emotional labels, and are easily mapped to tex-
2

tual descriptions of emotions across languages. As exempliﬁed by Mohammad and
Kiritchenko [39], discrete emotional labels, merged from different categorical models
[47, 43], can shed light on the reception of art, letting correlations emerge between
attributed emotions, liking and subjects.
In many cases, the emotional response of the audience is conveyed through lan-
guage, non only in textual media, but also in relation to art and other media: consider,
for example, tags and social media comments concerning artworks and exhibitions.
Automatically detecting affective states and emotions from text has gained consider-
able attention over recent years, leading to the development of several resources - such
as annotated corpora, ontologies and lexicons within the Computational Linguistics
community [23, 42, 68], also in response to the spread of supervised methods requiring
a large amount of training data. Recently, deep neural network models have attracted
increasing attention, and are being applied also to tasks related to the detection of
affective states, obtaining promising results. Several neural architectures have been
developed for a variety of tasks ranging from emotion detection [11], to dimensional
sentiment analysis [67] and the most common sentiment polarity detection task, and
have been evaluated against datasets on different types of social media texts, including
long reviews, or, most of the time, short microblog messages, such as tweets. Inter-
estingly, attention-based deep models turned out to be particularly effective, achieving
state-of-the-art results on both long review and short tweet polarity classiﬁcation. This
is the case of the attention-based bidirectional CNN-RNN deep model for sentiment
analysis in [6], showing that applying an attention layer to the outputs of the LSTM
and GRU branches of the network makes the semantic representations more informa-
tive.
Affective information expressed in texts is multi-faceted, and the wide variety of
affective linguistic resources developed in the last years, mainly for English, but also
for other languages, basically reﬂects such richness. When we speak about affective
states in the context of natural language communication, we mean to refer to several
aspects, which vary in their degree of stability, such as: emotion, sentiment, person-
ality, mood, attitudes or interpersonal stance [40]. Given the wide variety of affective
states, in recent years, research has focused on a ﬁner-grained investigation of the role
3

of emotions, as well as on the importance of other affect dimensions such as sentiment
and emotion intensity [38, 2] or activation. On this line, recent efforts on predicting the
degree of intensity for emotion and sentiment in different domains led to interesting ex-
periments devoted to effectively combining deep learning and feature driven traditional
models via an ensemble framework approach [2].
Depending on the speciﬁc research goals addressed, one could be interested in is-
suing a discrete label describing the affective state expressed (frustration, anger, joy,
etc.) to address different contexts of interaction and tasks. Both basic emotion theo-
ries, in the Plutchik-Ekman [16] tradition, and dimensional models of emotions, have
provided a precious theoretical grounding for the development of lexical resources
[60, 41, 37, 9, 61] and computational models for emotion extraction. However, there
is a general tendency to move towards richer, ﬁner-grained models, possibly including
complex emotions, especially in the context of data-driven and task-driven approaches,
where restricting the automatic detection to a small set of basic emotions would fall
short to achieve the objective. This is also our perspective.
From a computational point of view, the choice of the model of affect to be used
in order to give psychological grounding to the resource or the corpus to be developed
is driven from, and highly intertwined with, the speciﬁc sentiment analysis task to be
addressed, which, in turn, usually depends on the application domain to be tackled and
on the ﬁnal purpose of mining affective contents in texts. In this sense, evaluating the
emotional responses of an audience in front of an artwork, with the purpose of moni-
toring the emotional impact of a cultural heritage exhibition on visitors [7], is different
from monitoring political sentiment or mining the levels of anger in comments threads
of software developers [19]. There are still few works and resources speciﬁcally de-
veloped to address emotion detection in the art and media domain. These include the
work by Mohammad and Kiritchenko [39], where the authors describe the WikiArt
Emotions Dataset, which includes emotion annotations for thousands of pieces of art
from the WikiArt.org collection, and the work by Patti et al. [7, 46] where the Ar-
sEmotica framework1 is proposed, which relies on the combined use of NLP affect
1Available at http://130.192.212.225/fuseki/ArsEmotica-core
4

resources and an ontology of emotions to enable an emotion-driven exploration of on-
line art collections.
The diversity of computational models implied by the analysis of the emotional re-
sponse to art and media, and of the applications that exploit this response to improve
the user experience – from learning to entertainment – witnesses the complexity of the
underlying processes (including, but not limited to, aesthetic, self-regulatory, social
and cultural processes). This diversity, however, can be an obstacle to the develop-
ment of models which work across domains and formats, preventing techniques from
being transferred across similar tasks (e.g., emotion annotation and affective recom-
mendation). In particular, the differences in emotion annotation between datasets can
endanger the development and cross-validation of new techniques for analysing and
exploiting emotions in art and media. In this sense, techniques for merging and ex-
tending emotional categories can be useful to overcome these limitations. A notable
example of such a comprehensive system is SenticNet [9], which relies on the Hour-
glass model [10]. The Hourglass model, recently revised and extended [63], is inspired
by Plutchik’s model of emotions [48]. Such model, formalized in the ArsEmotica
ontology and described in detail in Section 4, can be represented as a wheel of emo-
tions, formed by: basic or primary emotions; opposite emotions; similarity between the
emotions; compound emotions (or complex emotions) generated by the primary ones.
Similarly to the SenticNet framework, our system also relies on the Plutchik model.
The choice of this model is based on the fact that it provides a recipe for the generation
of compound emotions that is compliant with the commonsense reasoning framework
of the TCL logic. As such, we exploited the reasoning mechanisms of TCL to generate
the compound emotions according to Plutchik’s theory.
In this paper, we illustrate and validate this approach by means of the DEGARI
system (Dynamic Emotion Generator And ReclassIﬁer) for emotion attribution and
recommendation. In particular, we exploit the compound concepts generated by the
system to automatically reclassify items in three datasets in the artistic and media do-
mains. As a result of this reclassiﬁcation process, an emotional enrichment is obtained
and new emotional labels are associated with the items in the original datasets. To
the best of our knowledge, DEGARI is the ﬁrst emotion-oriented system employing
5

a white box approach to emotion classiﬁcation based on the human-like conceptual
combination framework proposed in the TCL logic. DEGARI is available at http:
//di.unito.it/DEGARI.
The key contributions provided in this work are the following:
• an entirely explainable AI system for automatic emotion re-classiﬁcation and
recommendation based on a well founded emotion theory (Plutchik model) and
on a probabilistic logic framework modelling human-like for concept combina-
tion (i.e. the TCL logic);
• the ontology of the Plutchik emotion model (made available as a free resource at
http://130.192.212.225/fuseki/ArsEmotica-core and queryable
via a SPARQL endpoint at http://130.192.212.225/fuseki/dataset.
html?tab=query&ds=/ArsEmotica-core);
• an empirical and replicable validation (i.e. data and software are publicly avail-
able) of the proposed framework on three different datasets covering diverse
artistic domains: multimedia, paintings and miscellaneous artistic items (poems,
videos, pictures and music).
The paper is organized as follows: after a brief overview of the rationale adopted by
our commonsense reasoning framework (Section 2), we present in Section 3 - for the
sake of self-containedness - a more detailed description of the TCL logic (by referring to
[32] for a complete explanation). In Section 4 we present the ontological model ArsE-
motica (enriched with an emotional lexicon) formalizing Plutchik’s theory of emotions
and used as a standard representation to leverage the reasoning capabilities of the TCL
within the system DEGARI. Sections 5 and 6 present the DEGARI system that, start-
ing from the basic emotions represented in ArsEmotica (and according to Plutchik’s
theory), generates compound emotions and uses these novel emotional categories for
artistic content reclassiﬁcation. Section 7 discusses how DEGARI can be considered as
an explainable AI system. Finally, Section 8 shows the outcome of the automatic and
explainable reclassiﬁcation obtained with DEGARI (exploited in different settings and
with different affective lexicons) and the results of a user study on 44 people showing
6

the feasibility of using the obtained reclassiﬁcations as recommended labels. Section 9
ends the paper.
2. Commonsense Concept Invention via Dynamic Knowledge Combination
The overall rationale assumed in the TCL reasoning framework is that the process of
automatic generation of novel concepts within a knowledge base (also known as knowl-
edge invention process) can be obtained, as happens in humans [32, 30], by exploiting a
process of commonsense conceptual combination. This generative phenomenon high-
lights some crucial aspects of the knowledge capabilities in human cognition. Such
ability, in fact, is associated to creative thinking and problem solving. Still, however,
it represents an open challenge in the ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) [8]. Dealing
with this problem, indeed, requires, from an AI perspective, the harmonization of two
conﬂicting requirements that are hardly accommodated in symbolic systems [18]: the
need for a syntactic and semantic compositionality (typical of logical systems) and the
one concerning the exhibition of typicality effects. According to a well-known argu-
ment [44], in fact, prototypes (i.e. commonsense conceptual representations based on
typical properties) are not compositional. The argument runs as follows: consider a
concept like pet ﬁsh. It results from the composition of the concept pet and of the con-
cept ﬁsh. However, the prototype of pet ﬁsh cannot result from the composition of the
prototypes of a pet and a ﬁsh: e.g., a typical pet is furry and warm, a typical ﬁsh is
grayish, but a typical pet ﬁsh is neither furry and warm nor grayish (typically, it is red).
The pet ﬁsh phenomenon is a paradigmatic example of the difﬁculty to address when
building formalisms and systems trying to imitate this combinatorial human ability. In
this paper, we exploit the recently introduced nonmonotonic extension of Description
Logics TCL (typicality-based compositional logic, introduced in [32]), which is able to
account for this type of human-like concept combination 2. More speciﬁcally, we show
2Other works have already shown how such logic can be used to model complex cognitive phenomena
[32], goal-directed creative problem solving [33, 28, 12] and to build intelligent applications for computa-
tional creativity [31]. Alternative approaches to the problem of commonsense conceptual combination are
discussed in [17], [26], [14]. The advantages of TCL with respect to such approaches are detailed in [32].
7

how it can be used as a tool for the generation of novel compound emotions and, as a
consequence, for the suggestion of novel emotion-related contents.
In TCL, “typical” properties can be directly speciﬁed by means of a “typicality” op-
erator T enriching the underlying Description Logic (from now on, DL for short), and
a TBox can contain inclusions of the form T(C) ⊑D to represent that “typical Cs are
also Ds”. As a difference with standard DLs, in the logic TCL one can consistently ex-
press exceptions and reason about defeasible inheritance as well. Typicality inclusions
are also equipped by a real number p ∈(0.5, 1] representing the probability/degree of
belief in such a typical property: this allows us to deﬁne a semantics inspired to the
DISPONTE semantics [49] characterizing probabilistic extensions of DLs, which in
turn is used in order to describe different scenarios where only some typicality prop-
erties are considered. Given a KB containing the description of two concepts CH and
CM occurring in it, we then consider only some scenarios in order to deﬁne a revised
knowledge base, enriched by typical properties of the combined concept C ⊑CH⊓CM
by also implementing a heuristics coming from the cognitive semantics.
By relying on TCL, this work introduces the system DEGARI which, ﬁrst, auto-
matically builds prototypes of existing compound emotions by extracting information
about concepts or properties relying on the ArsEmotica ontology enriched with the
NRC Emotion Intensity Lexicon [38] (this lexicon associates, in descending order of
frequency, words to emotional concepts). In this setting, words with the highest fre-
quencies of association to emotional concepts have been used as typical features of
the basic emotions in the Plutchik model. Such prototypes of basic emotions have
been formalized by means of a TCL knowledge base, whose TBox contains both rigid
inclusions of the form
BasicEmotion ⊑Concept,
in order to express essential desiderata but also constraints, as an example Joy ⊑
PositiveEmotion as well as prototypical properties of the form
p :: T(BasicEmotion) ⊑TypicalConcept,
representing typical concepts of a given emotion, where p is a real number in the range
(0.5, 1], expressing the frequency of such a concept in items belonging to that emo-
8

tion: for instance, 0.72 :: T(Surprise) ⊑Delight is used to express that the typical
feature of being surprised contains/refers to the emotional concept Delight with a fre-
quency/probability/degree of belief of the 72%.
Given the ArsEmotica knowledge base (see Section 4) equipped with the proto-
typical descriptions of basic emotions, DEGARI exploits the reasoning capabilities of
the logic TCL in order to generate new derived emotions as the result of the creative
combination of two (or even more) basic or derived ones. DEGARI also reclassiﬁes
the artistic and multimedia contents taking the new, derived emotions into account.
Intuitively, an item of the tested dataset belongs to the new generated emotion if its
metadata (name, description, title) contain all the rigid properties as well as at least
the 30% of the typical properties of such a derived emotion. In this respect, DEGARI
can be seen as a “white box” recommender system, able to suggest to its users artistic
contents belonging to new emotions by providing an explanation of such a recommen-
dation.
We have tested DEGARI by performing different kinds of evaluation that are re-
ported and discussed in Section 8. In the following, in order to make the paper self-
contained we recall in more detail the main features of the above described TCL logic.
3. THE DESCRIPTION LOGIC T
CL FOR CONCEPT COMBINATION
The logic TCL [32] used by the system DEGARI as the basis for the generation of
new compound emotions combines three main ingredients. The ﬁrst one relies on the
DL of typicality ALC + TR introduced in [20], which allows to describe the protoype
of a concept. In this logic, “typical” properties can be directly speciﬁed by means of
a “typicality” operator T enriching the underlying DL, and a TBox can contain in-
clusions of the form T(C) ⊑D to represent that “typical Cs are also Ds”. As a
difference with standard DLs, in the logic ALC + TR one can consistently express
exceptions and reason about defeasible inheritance as well. For instance, a knowledge
base can consistently express that “normally, athletes are ﬁt”, whereas “sumo wrestlers
usually are not ﬁt” by T(Athlete) ⊑Fit and T(SumoWrestler) ⊑¬Fit, given that
SumoWrestler ⊑Athlete. The semantics of the T operator is characterized by the
9

properties of rational logic [25], recognized as the core properties of nonmonotonic
reasoning. ALC + TR is characterized by a minimal model semantics corresponding
to an extension to DLs of a notion of rational closure as deﬁned in [25] for proposi-
tional logic: the idea is to adopt a preference relation over ALC + TR models, where
intuitively a model is preferred to another one if it contains less exceptional elements,
as well as a notion of minimal entailment restricted to models that are minimal with
respect to such preference relation. As a consequence, T inherits well-established
properties like speciﬁcity and irrelevance: in the example, the logic ALC + TR allows
us to infer T(Athlete ⊓Bald) ⊑Fit (being bald is irrelevant with respect to being ﬁt)
and, if one knows that Hiroyuki is a typical sumo wrestler, to infer that he is not ﬁt,
giving preference to the most speciﬁc information.
A second ingredient consists of a distributed semantics similar to the one of prob-
abilistic DLs known as DISPONTE [50], which allows labeling inclusions T(C) ⊑D
with a real number between 0.5 and 1, which represents its degree of belief/probability,
under the assumption that each axiom is independent from each others. Degrees of
belief in typicality inclusions allow deﬁning a probability distribution over scenarios:
roughly speaking, a scenario is obtained by choosing, for each typicality inclusion,
whether it is considered as true or false. In a slight extension of the above example, we
could have the need to represent that both the typicality inclusions about athletes and
sumo wrestlers have a degree of belief of 80%, whereas we also believe that athletes
are usually young with a higher degree of 95%, with the following KB:
(1) SumoWrestler ⊑Athlete
(2) 0.8 :: T(Athlete) ⊑Fit
(3) 0.8 :: T(SumoWrestler) ⊑¬Fit
(4) 0.95 :: T(Athlete) ⊑YoungPerson
In this case, we consider eight different scenarios, representing all possible combina-
tions of typicality inclusion: as an example, {((2), 1), ((3), 0), ((4), 1)} represents the
scenario in which (2) and (4) hold, whereas (3) does not. Obviously, (1) holds in every
scenario, since it represents a rigid property, not admitting exceptions. We equip each
scenario with a probability depending on those of the involved inclusions: the scenario
10

of the example has probability 0.8×0.95 (since 2 and 4 are involved) ×(1−0.8) (since
3 is not involved) = 0.152 = 15.2%. Such probabilities are then taken into account in
order to choose the most adequate scenario describing the prototype of the combined
concept.
As a third element of the proposed formalization is a method inspired by cognitive
semantics [22] for the identiﬁcation of a dominance effect between the concepts to be
combined: for every combination, we distinguish a HEAD, representing the stronger
element of the combination, and a MODIFIER. The basic idea is: given a KB and two
concepts CH (HEAD) and CM (MODIFIER) occurring in it, we consider only some
scenarios in order to deﬁne a revised knowledge base, enriched by typical properties of
the combined concept C ⊑CH ⊓CM.
Let us now present the logic TCL more precisely. The language of TCL extends the
basic DL ALC by typicality inclusions of the form T(C) ⊑D equipped by a real
number p ∈(0.5, 1] – observe that the extreme 0.5 is not included – representing its
degree of belief, whose meaning is that “we believe with degree/probability p that,
normally, Cs are also Ds” 3
Deﬁnition 3.1 (Language of TCL). We consider an alphabet of concept names C, of
role names R, and of individual constants O. Given A ∈C and R ∈R, we deﬁne:
C, D := A | ⊤| ⊥| ¬C | C ⊓C | C ⊔C | ∀R.C | ∃R.C
We deﬁne a knowledge base K = ⟨R, T , A⟩where:
• R is a ﬁnite set of rigid properties of the form C ⊑D;
• T is a ﬁnite set of typicality properties of the form
p :: T(C) ⊑D
where p ∈(0.5, 1] ⊆R is the degree of belief of the typicality inclusion;
3The reason why we only allow typicality inclusions equipped with probabilities p > 0.5 is due to our
effort of integrating two different semantics: typicality based logic and DISPONTE. In particular, as detailed
in [32] this choice seems to be the only one compliant with both formalisms. On the contrary, it would be
misleading to also allow low degrees of belief for typicality inclusions, since typical knowledge is known to
come with a low degree of uncertainty.
11

• A is the ABox, i.e. a ﬁnite set of formulas of the form either C(a) or R(a, b), where
a, b ∈O and R ∈R.
A model M in the logic TCL extends standard ALC models by a preference relation
among domain elements as in the logic of typicality [20]. In this respect, x < y means
that x is “more normal” than y, and that the typical members of a concept C are the
minimal elements of C with respect to this relation4. An element x ∈∆I is a typical
instance of some concept C if x ∈CI and there is no C-element in ∆I more normal
than x. Formally:
Deﬁnition 3.2 (Model of TCL). A model M is any structure
⟨∆I, <, .I⟩
where:
• ∆I is a non empty set of items called the domain;
• < is an irreﬂexive, transitive, well-founded and modular (for all x, y, z in ∆I, if
x < y then either x < z or z < y) relation over ∆I;
• .I is the extension function that maps each atomic concept C to CI ⊆∆I, and
each role R to RI ⊆∆I × ∆I, and is extended to complex concepts as follows:
– (¬C)I = ∆I \ CI
– (C ⊓D)I = CI ∩DI
– (C ⊔D)I = CI ∪DI
– (∃R.C)I = {x ∈∆I | ∃(x, y) ∈RI such that y ∈CI}
– (∀R.C)I = {x ∈∆I | ∀(x, y) ∈RI we have y ∈CI}
4It could be possible to consider an alternative semantics whose models are equipped with multiple
preference relations. However the approach based on a single preference relation in [20] ensures good com-
putational properties (reasoning in the resulting nonmonotonic logic ALC + TR has the same complexity
of the standard ALC), whereas adopting multiple preference relations could lead to higher complexities.
12

– (T(C))I = Min<(CI), where Min<(CI) = {x ∈CI | ∄y ∈CI s.t. y <
x}.
A model M can be equivalently deﬁned by postulating the existence of a function
kM : ∆I 7−→N, where kM assigns a ﬁnite rank to each domain element [20]: the
rank of x is the length of the longest chain x0 < . . . < x from x to a minimal x0, i.e.
such that there is no x′ such that x′ < x0. The rank function kM and < can be deﬁned
from each other by letting x < y if and only if kM(x) < kM(y).
Deﬁnition 3.3 (Model satisfying a knowledge base in TCL). Let K = ⟨R, T , A⟩be
a KB. Given a model M = ⟨∆I, <, .I⟩, we assume that .I is extended to assign a
domain element aI of ∆I to each individual constant a of O. We say that:
• M satisﬁes R if, for all C ⊑D ∈R, we have CI ⊆DI;
• M satisﬁes T if, for all q :: T(C) ⊑D ∈T , we have that 5 T(C)I ⊆DI, i.e.
Min<(CI) ⊆DI;
• M satisﬁes A if, for each assertion F ∈A, if F = C(a) then aI ∈CI,
otherwise if F = R(a, b) then (aI, bI) ∈RI.
Even if the typicality operator T itself is nonmonotonic (i.e. T(C) ⊑E does not
imply T(C ⊓D) ⊑E), what is inferred from a KB can still be inferred from any KB’
with KB ⊆KB’, i.e. the resulting logic is monotonic. As already mentioned, in order
to perform useful nonmonotonic inferences, in [20] the authors have strengthened the
above semantics by restricting entailment to a class of minimal models. Intuitively,
the idea is to restrict entailment to models that minimize the atypical instances of a
concept. The resulting logic corresponds to a notion of rational closure on top of
ALC + TR. Such a notion is a natural extension of the rational closure construction
5It is worth noticing that here the degree q does not play any role.
Indeed, a typicality inclusion
T(C) ⊑D holds in a model only if it satisﬁes the semantic condition of the underlying DL of typical-
ity, i.e. minimal (typical) elements of C are elements of D. The degree of belief q will have a crucial role in
the application of the distributed semantics, allowing the deﬁnition of scenarios as well as the computation
of their probabilities.
13

provided in [25] for the propositional logic. This nonmonotonic semantics relies on
minimal rational models that minimize the rank of domain elements. Informally, given
two models of KB, one in which a given domain element x has rank 2 (because for
instance z < y < x), and another in which it has rank 1 (because only y < x), we
prefer the latter, as in this model the element x is assumed to be “more typical” than
in the former. Query entailment is then restricted to minimal canonical models. The
intuition is that a canonical model contains all the individuals that enjoy properties that
are consistent with KB. This is needed when reasoning about the rank of the concepts:
it is important to have them all represented.
Given a KB K = ⟨R, T , A⟩and given two concepts CH and CM occurring in K,
the logic TCL allows deﬁning a prototype of the combined concept C as the combination
of the HEAD CH and the MODIFIER CM, where the typical properties of the form
T(C) ⊑D (or, equivalently, T(CH ⊓CM) ⊑D) to be ascribed to the concept C are
obtained by considering blocks of scenarios with the same probability, in decreasing
order starting from the highest one. We ﬁrst discard all the inconsistent scenarios, then:
• we discard those scenarios considered as trivial, consistently inheriting all the
properties from the HEAD from the starting concepts to be combined. This
choice is motivated by the challenges provided by task of commonsense concep-
tual combination itself: in order to generate plausible and creative compounds,
it is necessary to maintain a level of surprise in the combination. Thus both sce-
narios inheriting all the properties of the two concepts and all the properties of
the HEAD are discarded, since they prevent this surprise;
• among the remaining ones, we discard those inheriting properties from the MOD-
IFIER which are in conﬂict with properties that could be consistently inherited
from the HEAD;
• if the set of scenarios of the current block is empty, i.e. all the scenarios have
been discarded either because trivial or because the MODIFIER is preferred, we
repeat the procedure by considering the block of scenarios having the immedi-
ately lower probability.
14

Remaining scenarios are those selected by the logic TCL. The ultimate output of our
mechanism is a knowledge base in the logic TCL whose set of typicality properties is
enriched by those of the compound concept C. Given a scenario w satisfying the above
properties, we deﬁne the properties of C as the set of inclusions p :: T(C) ⊑D, for
all T(C) ⊑D that are entailed from w in the logic TCL. The probability p is such that:
• if T(CH) ⊑D is entailed from w, that is to say D is a property inherited
either from the HEAD (or from both the HEAD and the MODIFIER), then p
corresponds to the degree of belief of such inclusion of the HEAD in the initial
knowledge base, i.e. p : T(CH) ⊑D ∈T ;
• otherwise, i.e. T(CM) ⊑D is entailed from w, then p corresponds to the degree
of belief of such inclusion of a MODIFIER in the initial knowledge base, i.e.
p : T(CM) ⊑D ∈T .
The knowledge base obtained as the result of combining concepts CH and CM
into the compound concept C is called C-revised knowledge base, and it is deﬁned as
follows:
KC = ⟨R, T ∪{p : T(C) ⊑D}, A⟩,
for all D such that either T(CH) ⊑D is entailed in w or T(CM) ⊑D is entailed in
w, and p is deﬁned as above.
As an example, consider the following version of the above mentioned Pet-Fish
problem. Let KB contains the following inclusions:
Fish ⊑LivesInWater
(1)
0.6 :: T(Fish) ⊑Greyish
(2)
0.8 :: T(Fish) ⊑Scaly
(3)
0.8 :: T(Fish) ⊑¬Aﬀectionate
(4)
0.9 :: T(Pet) ⊑¬LivesInWater
(5)
0.9 :: T(Pet) ⊑LovedByKids
(6)
0.9 :: T(Pet) ⊑Aﬀectionate
(7)
representing that a typical ﬁsh is greyish (2), scaly (3) and not affectionate (4), whereas
a typical pet does not live in water (5), is loved by kids (6) and is affectionate (7).
15

Concerning rigid properties, we have that all ﬁshes live in water (1). The logic TCL
combines the concepts Pet and Fish, by using the latter as the HEAD and the former
as the MODIFIER. The prototypical Pet-Fish inherits from the prototypical ﬁsh the
fact that it is scaly and not affectionate, the last one by giving preference to the HEAD
since such a property conﬂicts with the opposite one in the modiﬁer (a typical pet is
affectionate). The scenarios in which all the three typical properties of a typical ﬁsh are
inherited by the combined concept are considered as trivial and, therefore, discarded,
as a consequence the property having the lowest degree (Greyish with degree 0.6) is
not inherited. The prototypical Pet-Fish inherits from the prototypical pet only prop-
erty (6), since (5) conﬂicts with the rigid property (1), stating that all ﬁshes (then, also
pet ﬁshes) live in water, whereas (7) is blocked, as already mentioned, by the HEAD/-
MODIFIER heuristics. Formally, the Pet ⊓Fish-revised knowledge base contains, in
addition to the above inclusions, the following ones:
0.8 :: T(Pet ⊓Fish) ⊑Scaly
(3’)
0.8 :: T(Pet ⊓Fish) ⊑¬Aﬀectionate
(4’)
0.9 :: T(Pet ⊓Fish) ⊑LovedByKids
(6’)
In [32] it has been also shown that reasoning in TCL remains in the same complexity
class of standard ALC Description Logics.
For the purposes of this paper, it is worth-noticing that, as mentioned, the TCL rea-
soning framework presented in this section has been applied, via the DEGARI system,
to the generation of new compound emotions by starting from the affective ontological
knowledge base named ArsEmotica. Such ontological model is described in the next
section.
4. The ArsEmotica Ontological Model enriched with the NRC Emotion Intensity
Lexicon
The affective knowledge leveraged by the TCL logic via the DEGARI system is
encoded in an ontology of emotional categories based on Plutchik’s psychological cir-
16

cumplex model [47], called ArsEmotica6 and includes also concepts from the Hour-
glass model [10]. The ontology structures emotional categories in a taxonomy, which
currently includes 48 emotional concepts. The design of the taxonomic structure of
emotional categories, of the disjunction axioms and of the object and data properties
mirrors the main features of Plutchik’s circumplex model. As already mentioned, such
model can be represented as a wheel of emotions (see Figure 1) and encodes the fol-
lowing elements:
Figure 1: The Wheel of Emotion of the Plutchik Model
6The
ArsEmotica
ontology
is
available
here:
http://130.192.212.225/fuseki/
ArsEmotica-core and queryable via SPARQL endpoint at:
http://130.192.212.225/
fuseki/dataset.html?tab=query&ds=/ArsEmotica-core
17

• Basic or primary emotions: Joy, Trust, Fear, Surprise, Sadness, Disgust, Anger,
Anticipation; in the color wheel, this is represented by differently colored sectors.
• Opposites: basic emotions can be conceptualized in terms of polar opposites:
Joy versus Sadness, Anger versus Fear, Trust versus Disgust, Surprise versus
Anticipation.
• Intensity: each emotion can exist in varying degrees of intensity; in the wheel,
this is represented by the vertical dimension.
• Similarity: emotions vary in their degree of similarity to one another; in the
wheel, this is represented by the radial dimension.
• Complex emotions: a complex emotion is a composition of two basic emotions;
the pair of basic emotions involved in the composition is called a dyad. Looking
at the Plutchik wheel, the eight emotions in the blank spaces are compositions
of similar basic emotions, called primary dyads. Pairs of less similar emotions
are called secondary dyads (if the radial distance between them is 2) or tertiary
dyads (if the distance is 3), while opposites cannot be combined.
We have chosen to encode the Plutchik model in the ontology for several reasons.
First, it is well-grounded in psychology and general enough to guarantee a wide cov-
erage of emotions. This is important for implementing successful strategies aimed
at mapping tags to the emotional concepts of the ontology. In addition, it is easy to
imagine that many different shades of emotions can be sought in the artistic domain.
Literature on the psychology of art, indeed, suggests that the encoding of further com-
plex emotions, such as Pride and Shame (belonging to the secondary and tertiary dyads,
respectively, in the Plutchik model) could give further interesting results [57]. For this
reason, we considered it appropriate to broaden the classiﬁcation with respect to what
has been done in [7, 46], also including the compound emotions corresponding to the
secondary and tertiary dyads of the Plutchik model. Second, the Plutchik wheel of
emotions is perfectly compliant with the generative model underlying the TCL logic.
Finally, it encodes interesting notions, e.g. emotional polar opposites, which can be
exploited for ﬁnding novel, non obvious relations among artworks.
18

Within the ArsEmotica ontology, the class Emotion is the root for all the emotional
concepts. The Emotions hierarchy includes all the 48 emotional categories presented as
distinguished labels in the model. In particular, the Emotion class has two disjoint sub-
classes: BasicEmotion and ComplexEmotion. Basic emotions of the Plutchik model
are direct sub-classes of BasicEmotion. Each of them is specialized again into two sub-
classes representing the same emotion with weaker or stronger intensity (e.g. the basic
emotion Joy has Ecstasy and Serenity as sub-classes). Therefore, we have 24 emotional
concepts subsumed by the BasicEmotion concept. Instead, the class CompositeEmo-
tion has 24 subclasses, corresponding to the primary (Love, Submission, Awe, Dis-
approval, Remorse, Contempt, Aggressiveness e Optimism), secondary (Hope, Guilt,
Curiosity, Despair, Unbelief, Envy, Cynicism e Pride) and tertiary (Anxiety, Delight,
Sentimentality, Shame, Outrage, Pessimism, Morbidness, Dominance) dyads. Other
relations in the Plutchik model have been expressed in the ontology by means of object
properties: the hasOpposite property encodes the notion of polar opposites; the hasSib-
ling property encodes the notion of similarity and the isComposedOf property encodes
the notion of composition of basic emotions. Moreover, a data type property hasScore
was introduced to link each emotion with an intensity value i mapped into the above
mentioned Hourglass model.
The devised model allows attributing complex emotions from basic ones by exploit-
ing simple SWRL rules (i.e. if-then clauses) allowing to infer, via the isComposedOf
property connecting Basic and Composite Emotions, the fact that if an agent feels two
emotions (suppose for a given item), and if these emotions jointly constitute a Com-
posite Emotion, then the latter emotion will be automatically assigned to the agent in
order to better describe his/her aesthetic experience.
Due to the need of modeling the links between words in a language and the emo-
tions they refer to, the ArsEmotica Ontology is also integrated with the ontology frame-
work LExicon Model for ONtologies (LEMON) [35]. In particular, such integration al-
lows differentiating explicitly between the language level (lexicon-based) and the con-
ceptual one in representing the emotional concepts [46]. Within this enriched frame-
work, it is possible to associate a plethora of emotional words, with the encoding of
language information, to the corresponding emotional concepts. In this work, we have
19

used the ArsEmotica model of emotional concepts with the NRC Emotion Intensity
Lexicon mentioned above [38]. Such lexicon provides a list of English words, each
with real-values representing intensity scores for the eight basic emotions of Plutchik’s
theory. The lexicon includes close to 10, 000 words including terms already known to
be associated with emotions as well as terms that co-occur in Twitter posts that con-
vey emotions. The intensity scores were obtained via crowdsourcing, using best-worst
scaling annotation scheme. For our purposes, we considered the most frequent terms
available in such lexicon (and associated to the basic emotions of the Plutchik wheel)
as typical features of such emotions. In this way, once the prototypes of the basic emo-
tional concepts were formed, the TCL reasoning framework was used to generate the
compound emotions.
5. DEGARI: Generating Novel Emotions from ArsEmotica
In this section we describe DEGARI, the system exploiting the logic TCL on the Ar-
sEmotica knowledge base in order to generate and suggest novel emotion related con-
tents and tested on the RaiPlay catalog 7, as well as on two artwork datasets: WikiArt
Emotions8 and ArsMeteo [1, 7]. DEGARI is implemented in Python and it makes use
of the library owlready29 for relying on the services of efﬁcient DL reasoners (like
HermiT).
DEGARI’s prototypes generation proceeds in two steps: in the ﬁrst one, it builds
a prototypical description of basic emotions in the language of the logic TCL, in order
to describe their typical properties; as a second step, it exploits the above described
reasoning mechanism of such a Description Logic in order to combine the prototypi-
cal descriptions of pairs of basic emotions, generating the prototypical description of
compound emotions. As mentioned above, the obtained ontology is then tested by
re-classifying the items belonging to RaiPlay, Wiki Art and ArsMeteo, keeping the
generated compound emotions into account: this allows us to describe a novel and
7https://www.raiplay.it
8http://saifmohammad.com/WebPages/wikiartemotions.html
9https://pythonhosted.org/Owlready2/
20

completely explainable recommending system, which is able to suggest items belong-
ing also to compound emotions.
Concerning the ﬁrst step, DEGARI builds a knowledge base in the logic TCL char-
acterized by typicality inclusions of the form
p :: T(BasicEmotion) ⊑Property
where BasicEmotion is one of the eight basic emotions of the Plutchik model: Joy,
Trust, Fear, Surprise, Sadness, Disgust, Anger, and Anticipation. Typical properties
are selected from the list of words characterizing each basic emotion in the NRC Emo-
tion Intensity Lexicon where, as already mentioned, the probability p represents the
intensity score for the emotion. In detail, for each basic emotion, we consider the six
properties/words having the highest scores.
As an example, consider the basic emotion Joy. The words having the highest
scores are happiness (0.98), bliss (0.97), to celebrate (0.97), jubilant (0.97), ecstatic
(0.95), and euphoria (0.94). Therefore, the knowledge base generated by DEGARI
will contain, among others, the following inclusions:
Joy ⊑¬Holocaust
0.98 :: T(Joy) ⊑Happiness
0.97 :: T(Joy) ⊑Bliss
0.97 :: T(Joy) ⊑Celebrating
0.97 :: T(Joy) ⊑Jubilant
0.95 :: T(Joy) ⊑Ecstatic
0.94 :: T(Joy) ⊑Elation
DEGARI then computes novel compound emotions by combining existing ones (by
using the same logical procedure of the pet-ﬁsh problem). As an example, let us con-
sider the combination of the above basic emotion Joy with Fear, whose prototypical
description is as follows:
0.96 :: T(Fear) ⊑Kill
0.95 :: T(Fear) ⊑Annihilate
0.95 :: T(Fear) ⊑Terror
21

0.98 :: T(Fear) ⊑Torture
0.97 :: T(Fear) ⊑Terrorist
0.97 :: T(Fear) ⊑Horriﬁc
In order to obtain a description of the compound emotion Guilt as the result of
the combination of the two basic emotions (Joy ⊓Fear) in the logic TCL, DEGARI
combines the two basic emotions by implementing a variant of CoCoS [29], a Python
implementation of reasoning services for the logic TCL in order to exploit efﬁcient
DLs reasoners for checking both the consistency of each generated scenario and the
existence of conﬂicts among properties, following the line of the system DENOTER
[13]. More in detail, DEGARI considers both the available choices for the HEAD and
the MODIFIER, and it allows restricting its concern to a given and ﬁxed number of
inherited properties. The combined emotion Guilt has the following TCL description
(concept Joy ⊓Fear):
0.98 :: T(Joy ⊓Fear) ⊑Happiness
0.97 :: T(Joy ⊓Fear) ⊑Celebrating
0.97 :: T(Joy ⊓Fear) ⊑Bliss
0.98 :: T(Joy ⊓Fear) ⊑Torture
0.97 :: T(Joy ⊓Fear) ⊑Terrorist
0.97 :: T(Joy ⊓Fear) ⊑Horriﬁc
Obviously, rigid properties of basic emotions (if any) are inherited by the compound
emotion (in the example, Joy ⊓Fear ⊑¬Holocaust), and this retain the system from
considering any inconsistent typical properties even if they have the highest probability.
It is worth noticing that the properties of the derived emotion are still expressed in
the language of the logic TCL, therefore the combined emotion, Guilt in the example,
can be further combined with another emotion, in order to iterate the procedure.
As mentioned above, the DEGARI component devoted to compute the above de-
scribed concept combination of prototypical descriptions relies on CoCoS [29], an im-
plementation of a reasoning machinery for the logic TCL, generating scenarios and
choosing the selected one(s) as described in Section 3. CoCoS is implemented in
22

Python and exploits the translation of an ALC + TR knowledge base into standard
ALC introduced in [20] and adopted by the system RAT-OWL [21]. CoCoS makes use
of the above mentioned library owlready2, which allows relying on the services of
efﬁcient DL reasoners, e.g. the HermiT reasoner.
CoCoS is embedded in DEGARI and allows one: i) to include the logical descrip-
tions of the concepts to be combined; ii) to select which among the concepts has to be
intended as HEAD and as MODIFIER(s); iii) to choose how many typical properties
one wants to inherit in the scenarios that will be selected by TCL. In addition to pre-
senting the selected scenario with typical properties of the combined concept, CoCoS
also allows the users to select alternative scenarios, ranging from more trivial to more
surprising ones.
6. Reclassiﬁcation of Emotion-related Content based on DEGARI
By starting from the generated prototypes of the compound emotions in ArsEmot-
ica, DEGARI is also able to perform an emotion-oriented reclassiﬁcation of the items
of the considered datasets.
In particular, DEGARI employs two different strategies to extract metadata from
the items to reclassify. In a ﬁrst case (e.g., for the ArsMeteo and WikiArt datasets)
the metadata are either stored in the provided resource (e.g., in WikiArt) or are the
result of a social tagging activity based on the artistic community. In the second case
(e.g., in the case of the RaiPlay dataset) the metadata associated to every and each item
(title, name of the program/episode, description of the program/series, description of
the episode) are extracted from a crawler. Such metadata are then used to generate
the typical description of the items via the computation of the most frequent terms
retrieved in their textual description (the assumption is that the most frequently used
terms to describe an item are also the ones that are more typically associated to them).
The frequencies are computed as the proportion of each property with respect to the set
of all properties characterizing the item, in order to compare them with the properties
of the derived emotion. If the item contains all the rigid properties and at least the 30%
of the typical properties of the compound emotion under consideration, then the item
23

is classiﬁed as belonging to it. Last, DEGARI suggests the set of classiﬁed contents,
in a descending order of compatibility, where the rank of compatibility of a single
item with respect to an emotion is intuitively obtained as the sum of the frequencies of
“compatible” concepts, i.e. concepts belonging to both the item and the prototypical
description of the genre. Formally:
Deﬁnition 6.1. Given an item m, let DerivedEmotion be a compound emotion gener-
ated from the ArsEmotica mode as deﬁned in Section 5 and let Sm be the set of words
occurring in m. Given a knowledge base KB of compound emotions built by DEGARI,
we say that m is compatible with DerivedEmotion if the following conditions hold:
1. m contains all rigid properties of DerivedEmotion, i.e. {C | DerivedEmotion ⊑
C ∈KB} ⊆Sm
2. m contains at least the 30% of typical properties of DerivedEmotion , i.e.
| Sm ∩SDerivedEmotion |
| SDerivedEmotion |
≥0.3,
where SDerivedEmotion is the set of typical properties of DerivedEmotion.
As another example, consider the derived emotion Joy ⊓Surprise, which in the
Plutchik wheel corresponds to the combined emotion “delight”. The knowledge base
in the logic TCL describing such a compound emotion is as follows:
0.98 :: T(Joy ⊓Surprise) ⊑Happiness
0.97 :: T(Joy ⊓Surprise) ⊑Bliss
0.97 :: T(Joy ⊓Surprise) ⊑Celebrating
0.97 :: T(Joy ⊓Surprise) ⊑Jubilant
0.95 :: T(Joy ⊓Surprise) ⊑Estatic
Joy ⊓Surprise ⊑¬Holocaust
Joy ⊓Surprise ⊑¬Anticipation
For instance, the multimedia item “`E arrivata la felicit`a” (“Happiness has arrived”)
(https://www.raiplay.it/programmi/earrivatalafelicita) from the
RaiPlay dataset is reclassiﬁed in the novel, generated emotion Joy ⊓Surprise, since:
24

• all rigid properties of both basic emotions are satisﬁed, that is to say neither
Holocaust nor Anticipation belong to the properties extracted for the item;
• more than the 30% of the typical properties10 of the compound emotion are sat-
isﬁed; in particular, “`E arrivata la felicit`a” has Happiness (0.98) and Surprise
(0.93).
This item will be then recommended by DEGARI as shown in Figure 2.
7. Explanation
Figure 2 also shows how DEGARI can be considered as an explainable AI system:
indeed, an explanation of the reasons why the multimedia item “`E arrivata la felicit`a”
(“Happiness has arrived”) has been reclassiﬁed in the compound concept is provided,
in order to let the user be aware of the procedure of the system. As a difference with
“black box” approaches, DEGARI explicitly reports that the “instance’s description
has the following word(s) in common with category prototype”, followed by the two
matching properties Surprise and Happiness. The list of matching properties provided
by DEGARI as a textual output is generated during the reclassiﬁcation process. For
each considered artwork, the properties of the artwork’s prototype’s are compared to
the ones of the emotion’s prototype. The reclassiﬁcation is based only on the matching
properties (if present), therefore providing an explanation of the reclassiﬁcation is as
simple as storing the matches in an array and printing it as an output. Moreover, the
whole procedure is completely transparent and could be used to further expand the
feedback provided by system: from the axiom system (and the corresponding semantics
of the Description Logic with typicality) to the DISPONTE semantics adopted by the
logic TCL in order to compute the prototypical description of the compound emotion.
10The 30% threshold was empirically determined: i.e., it is the percentage that provides the better trade-off
between overcategorization and missed categorizations.
25

Figure 2: An Example of the Laconic Explanation provided by DEGARI about the reasons
determining the reclassiﬁcation of an item in the RaiPlay dataset.
26

8. Evaluation
DEGARI evaluation has been carried out on three different datasets and evaluated
in a fourfold way. The datasets considered (described in detail below) are: ArsMeteo,
the RaiPlay catalog, and Wiki Art Emotion. The evaluation has concerned a ﬁrst, com-
pletely automatic, test consisting in calculating the percentage of the reclassiﬁed items
within the novel hybrid emotion classes generated by the system via TCL. In this case,
the spread of the reclassiﬁed items along most of the concepts of the wheel of emotion
has been considered as a positive indicator. This aspect, indeed, shows how the created
prototypes of the compound emotions are mostly meaningful and able to reclassify the
artistic content available in the three original datasets. A second evaluation has con-
cerned the use of an ablation experiment testing the components of the TCL logic used
by DEGARI in order to determine, if any, a difference in terms of the obtained output.
A third evaluation has consisted in testing, within the pipeline provided by DEGARI,
two different emotional lexicons: the above mentioned NRC lexicon and the lexicon
of Shaver’s model of emotions [56]. The rationale of this experiment was to assess
to what extent the combinatorial mechanisms used by DEGARI were dependent from
the particular lexicons used. A fourth evaluation, ﬁnally, aimed at measuring the satis-
faction of the potential users of the system when exposed to the contents of the novel
categories suggested by DEGARI, consisted in a user study11 involving 44 subjects,
who evaluated a total of 30 recommendations generated by the system. All the partic-
ipants were recruited online using an availability sampling strategy. Participants were
all naive to the experimental procedure and to the aims of the study.
In the following, we brieﬂy describe the adopted datasets: two of them are art-
related ones (ArsMeteo and WikiArt Emotion), while the RaiPlay dataset contains all
the multimedia items (e.g. movies, tv series, tv shows, documentaries etc.) available
on the online multimedia platform or RAI, Radiotelevisione Italiana.
11This is one of the most commonly used methodology for the evaluation of recommender systems based
on controlled small groups analysis, see [55].
27

8.1. ArsMeteo Dataset
ArsMeteo [1] is an art portal for sharing artworks and their emerging, connective
meanings. Its development is led by a non-proﬁt cultural organization called Asso-
ciazione Culturale ArsMeteo (AMA), based in Turin, Italy. It enables the collection
of digital (or digitalized) artworks and performances, belonging to a variety of artistic
forms including poems, videos, pictures and music. Meanings are given by the tagging
activity of the community. All contents are accessible as “digital commons”. Cur-
rently, the portal has collected over 350,000 visits and gathered a collection of over
9, 000 artifacts produced by 307 artists; it has collected almost 38, 000 tags.
8.2. RAIPLAY Dataset
The RaiPlay dataset is composed of 4, 612 multimedia items extracted from RaiPlay
https://www.raiplay.it/, the online platform of RAI, the national Italian
broadcaster. Such dataset contains different types of multimedia content grouped in
six main narrative categories: Movies, Fiction, Kids, TV Series, Drama, Comedy. As
mentioned, each multimedia item/episode is equipped with metadata, including: ti-
tle, name of the program/episode, description of the program/series, description of the
episode. Such descriptions are used by DEGARI to extract the relevant information to
associate to every item and to decide whether, given the extracted information, the item
should be reclassiﬁed in one of the previously generated compound emotions.
8.3. WikiArt Emotions
WikiArt Emotions is a dataset of 4,105 artworks with annotations for the emotions
evoked in the observer [39]. The artworks were selected from the online visual art en-
cyclopedia WikiArt.org. Each piece of art is annotated for one or more of 20 emotion
categories (including neutral). Annotations were obtained via crowdsourcing, asking
annotators to include all the emotions evoked by the title of the artwork, the image of
the artwork or the artwork as a whole. The annotators were also asked to specify if the
artwork depicted a face or a human body (but not a face): this additional information is
included in the dataset (if an artwork didn’t depict a face nor a body, it was marked as
28

“none”). In order to decide if an emotion applies or not to an artwork, the authors spec-
iﬁed an aggregation threshold of 40%: if at least 40% of the responses indicated that a
certain emotion applied, then the label was chosen. Other distributions on the dataset
with different aggregation thresholds (30% and 50%) are available, but we chose to use
the 40% threshold version, as recommended by the authors of the dataset [39].
ArsMeteo
(9171 artworks)
RaiPlay
(4612
media
items)
WikiArt
Emotions
(4105 artworks)
Emotion
Reclassiﬁed
Items
Percentage
Reclassiﬁed
Items
Percentage
Reclassiﬁed
Items
Percentage
aggressiveness (anger anticipation)
12
0.13%
7
0.15%
0
0.00%
aggressiveness (anticipation anger)
11
0.12%
2
0.04%
0
0.00%
anxiety (anticipation fear)
33
0.36%
88
1.91%
0
0.00%
awe (fear surprise)
63
0.69%
132
2.86%
508
12.38%
contempt (anger disgust)
13
0.14%
2
0.04%
0
0.00%
curiosity (surprise trust)
47
0.51%
49
1.06%
508
12.38%
cynicism (anticipation disgust)
5
0.05%
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
delight (joy surprise)
52
0.57%
117
2.54%
1672
40.73%
despair (fear sadness)
19
0.21%
20
0.43%
0
0.00%
disapproval (sadness surprise)
58
0.63%
64
1.39%
404
9.84%
dominance (anger trust)
11
0.12%
2
0.04%
0
0.00%
envy (anger sadness)
25
0.27%
21
0.46%
0
0.00%
envy (sadness anger)
17
0.19%
20
0.43%
0
0.00%
guilt (fear joy)
22
0.24%
73
1.58%
1618
39.42%
guilt (joy fear)
24
0.26%
73
1.58%
1618
39.42%
hope (anticipation trust)
50
0.55%
51
1.11%
661
16.10%
hope (trust anticipation)
44
0.48%
52
1.13%
661
16.10%
love (joy trust)
24
0.26%
72
1.56%
1618
39.42%
morbidness (disgust joy)
25
0.27%
70
1.52%
1618
39.42%
29

optimism (anticipation joy)
23
0.25%
24
0.52%
1413
34.42%
outrage (anger surprise)
41
0.45%
46
1.00%
508
12.38%
pessimism (anticipation sadness)
37
0.40%
20
0.43%
412
10.04%
pessimism (sadness anticipation)
29
0.32%
20
0.43%
0
0.00%
pride (anger joy)
20
0.22%
72
1.56%
1618
39.42%
remorse (disgust sadness)
31
0.34%
20
0.43%
0
0.00%
sentimentality (sadness trust)
18
0.20%
20
0.43%
0
0.00%
sentimentality (trust sadness)
28
0.31%
20
0.43%
0
0.00%
shame (disgust fear)
35
0.38%
88
1.91%
0
0.00%
submission (fear trust)
33
0.36%
88
1.91%
0
0.00%
unbelief (disgust surprise)
35
0.38%
44
0.95%
508
12.38%
unbelief (surprise disgust)
47
0.51%
47
1.02%
508
12.38%
OVERALL⋆
166
1.81%
235
5.49%
2434
59.29%
Table 1: Automatic evaluation overall data. ⋆This is NOT a sum: the overall count represents
the total number of artworks classiﬁed for at least one emotion.
8.4. Automatic Reclassiﬁcation
The obtained results for what concerns the automatic evaluation are presented in
Table 1. Overall, the ﬁgure shows that for two of the three datasets (ArsMeteo and
RaiPlay) DEGARI is able to reclassify and spread the original items along the entire
wheel of emotions assumed by the Plutchik model, thus allowing a more ﬁne grained
characterization.
In these two cases, the percentage of the reclassiﬁed items is of 5.49% and 1.81%,
respectively. On the other hand, the WikiArt Emotions dataset contains orthogonal
results since, in this case, 16 out of the 31 generated compound emotions are ﬁlled
with reclassiﬁed items. In this case, however, a large part of the dataset (59.29%) is
involved in such a reclassiﬁcation.
The main reason for these orthogonal results is in the kind of input considered by
DEGARI. Indeed, while for ArsMeteo and RaiPlay the metadata associated to the items
are either the result of a social tagging activity by a community of artists (like in Ar-
30

Figure 3: Top Reclassiﬁed Content of ArsMeteo in the Compound Emotional Classes generated
by DEGARI
sMeteo12) or the result of an information extraction pipeline (in RaiPlay); in WikiArt
Emotions, all the metadata associated to the items are the result of a controlled crowd-
sourcing activity based on predeﬁned emotion tags.
While this fact, on one hand, creates - for the WikiArt Emotions dataset - cleaner
metadata and allows the reclassiﬁcations of most of the items available in the dataset,
on the other hand, it forces the user to use a predeﬁned vocabulary for annotation that,
as such, inhibits more free associations that could have led to a wider reclassiﬁcation
12The ArsMeteo dataset has the additional difﬁculty of being a heterogeneous dataset, touching different
artistic genres (from poetry to literature, to paintings).
31

Figure 4: Top Reclassiﬁed Content of RaiPlay in the Compound Emotional Classes generated
by DEGARI
and redistribution of the items along the entire Plutchik wheel. In all the 3 cases,
however, most of the compound emotions generated by DEGARI are ﬁlled with new
items.
In order to test the efﬁcacy of the method employed by the DEGARI system (re-
lying, as mentioned, on the TCL logic) we conducted an ablation experiment in order
to determine the components of TCL shaping the above presented output. Although the
adoption of such an experimental setting is not usual in symbolic approaches (since
the causal connection between the output and the composing elements of a formalism
32

Figure 5: Top Reclassiﬁed Content of WikiArt Emotions in the Compound Emotional Classes
generated by DEGARI
or of an algorithms is - in such approaches - directly made explicit)13, the dissection
imposed by such a setting allowed, nonetheless, a better understanding of what are the
mandatory and the corollary elements of the formalism upon which our system is based
on. In particular, as described in section 3, TCL relies on three ingredients: a Descrip-
tion Logic of Tipicality ALC +TR, the DISPONTE semantics, and the Head/Modiﬁer
heuristics. The ﬁrst two ingredients (i.e. the ALC + TR and the DISPONTE logics)
13This aspect represents an important difference with the currently in auge deep learning models that,
on the other hand, suffer from the well known opacity issues and, as a consequence, require by default
the adoption of such experimental technique in order to investigate which elements of such models are the
relevant ones for producing and justifying a particular output.
33

Table 2: Ablation Experiment of DEGARI showing the difference of considering (or not) the
Head/Modiﬁer (H/M) Cognitive Heuristics and its crucial effect on emotion reclassiﬁcations
ArsMeteo
WikiArt
RaiPlay
Total (with H/M)
607
1428
15853
Total (without H/M)
212
570
6531
Delta (n. of reclassiﬁcations)
−395
−854
−9322
Delta (percentage of reclassiﬁcations)
−65.07%
−59.97%
−58.80%
are mandatory elements in order to obtain the commonsense conceptual combination
proposed in TCL and therefore cannot be “ablated” (since no output would be provided
in case of deleting either the typical component of the logic or the probabilistic one).
On the other hand, the head/modiﬁer heuristics is an additional element built on the top
of the probabilistic commonsense framework and, as such, can be an element subject
to an ablation study. We performed such a study and the results are available below.
The Table 2 shows the evident advantage (in terms of reclassiﬁed items) of using this
heuristics compared to the cases in which it is not used.
In the ﬁgures 3, 4, 5, ﬁnally, are also reported, for each dataset, the generated com-
pound emotions that have received more reclassiﬁcations (the horizontal histograms
indicate the number of the reclassiﬁed items for each compound emotion).
8.4.1. Extended Experiment with the Shaver Lexicon
In order to extend our experimental evaluation, we decided to test the well known
lexicon provided by Shaver’s emotion model [56] (along with the Plutchik model and
with the commonsense compositional mechanisms adopted by DEGARI over it) and
compare the reclassiﬁcations/recommendations provided by our system with the ﬁrst
evaluation (using the NRC lexicon described above). Created with the goal of inves-
tigating the intuitions behind people’s conceptualization of emotions – as a way to
reveal their nature –, Shaver’s model has been created through a hierarchical clustering
analysis of lexical data, having the Rosch’s theory of prototypes as reference [51]. In
34

other words: the work by Shaver and colleagues investigates the role of prototypes in
representing emotions in human conceptualization. It uses, as typical features of each
emotional concept, the most common words used to described them 14.
Starting from a list of 135 words that human subjects rated as proper emotion words,
Shaver and colleagues asked 100 participants to gather these words by similarity, then
computed clusters of words that represent subordinate emotions categories. These clus-
ters, detected based on co-occurrence relations, are characterized by heterogeneity and
by the intrinsic fuzziness of the terms they contain: for example, one cluster contained,
among others, related words such “arousal”, “desire” and “lust”. A higher level of
clustering, roughly corresponding to the so called basic or primary emotions in the
literature, was then detected: love, joy, surprise, anger, sadness, and fear were the
resulting basic prototypical categories. The 6 basic emotion prototypes can be further
identiﬁable as positive or negative emotions at a higher level and each prototype emo-
tion subsumes a list of emotion words, obtained by merging the subordinate clusters
they subsume.
In this experiment, we have used the Shaver model of emotion as a lexical base for
generating the prototypical emotional concepts with TCL (thus substituting, de facto,
the NRC lexicon used in the previous experiment). As mentioned above, the Shaver
model of emotion is particularly compliant with the overall assumptions of TCL since it
provides the typical words associated to emotional concepts, collected from empirical
data. It, however, differs from Pluthick’s model, since it does not provide any com-
positional procedure to generate compound emotions by design. As a consequence of
this state of affairs, in order to test the generative capacity of TCL also in this setting,
we re-used Plutchik’s model for determining the compositional rules of emotion com-
bination. However, this time, the lexicon used was provided by the Shaver model (and
not obtained from the NRC).
Plutchik’s and Shaver’s emotional models present some differences. In particular:
14We remind here that, according to Rosch’s theory [51], the prototypes are commonsense representations
of a given concept. Here concepts are represented by means of typicality-based features, like in the TCL
logic.
35

Shaver’s model considers only 6 emotional concepts (of which 5 are also considered
as primary emotions in the Pluthcik model). As a consequence of this state of affairs,
we employed the TCL mechanisms only on such 5 emotional concepts (anger, fear, joy,
sadness and surprise). As the Shaver model provides many lexical terms for each emo-
tion, we selected a subset of terms. To be consistent to what we did with the NRC
Lexicon, we selected a maximum of 6 terms as typical properties. The proababilistic
rating of the words selected form the Shaver’s model were obtained by the intensity rat-
ings already provided in the NRC Lexicon. As a result, the typical properties selected
to be part of an emotion prototype were the Shaver terms having a higher intensity in
NRC.
In Table 3 are the results of the different reclassiﬁcations. For the compound emo-
tions generated starting from both Shaver’s lexicon and the NRC lexicon, it emerges
that Shaver’s lexicon performs better on the ArsMeteo dataset, which is the most di-
versiﬁed one. For 4 out of 10 reclassiﬁcations with compound emotions, it also obtains
better results on the RaiPlay dataset, while only in 3 cases obtains more reclassiﬁca-
tions than the NRC dataset. This datum overall shows that there are minimal differ-
ences in the adoption of the different lexicons using the provided pipeline in terms of
number of reclassiﬁcations and that, overall, the combinatorial mechanisms used by
DEGARI for emotion reclassiﬁcation are, for these two lexicons, relatively indepen-
dent from the particular lexicon used.
8.5. User Study
The goal of the user study was to assess the acceptance of the emotion categories
suggested by DEGARI, with the ultimate goal of using the reclassiﬁcations produced
by the system to improve the annotation of artworks and media, and, consequently, the
applications which depend on it, such as personalization and recommendation.
Methods and material. The user study consisted in an online questionnaire (in Ital-
ian). The questionnaire contained 10 items, each accompanied by an image, or, for the
multimedia items, by the ﬁlm poster, accompanied by the link to the online player for
watching the content. For each item, the users received two questions: the ﬁrst question
(Question 1) asked them to rate the association of the item with the emotional category
36

Table 3: Reclassiﬁcation results using Shaver lexicon, compared to the original NRC lexicon
ArsMeteo
(9171 artworks)
RaiPlay
(4612
media
items)
WikiArt
Emo-
tions
(4105 artworks)
Emotion
NRC
Shaver
NRC
Shaver
NRC
Shaver
awe (fear surprise)
63
117
132
7
508
0
delight (joy surprise)
52
71
117
2
1672
0
delight (surprise joy)
52
57
117
88
1672
0
despair (fear sadness)
19
49
20
132
0
508
disapproval (sadness surprise)
58
83
64
2
404
0
envy (anger sadness)
25
30
21
49
0
508
guilt (fear joy)
22
44
73
0
1618
0
guilt (joy fear)
24
45
73
117
1618
1672
outrage (anger surprise)
41
49
46
20
508
0
pride (anger joy)
20
27
72
64
1618
404
TOTAL
324
572
618
481
7946
3092
37

Table 4: User ratings of the emotions proposed by DEGARI
ArsMeteo
WikiArt
RaiPlay
All
Average rating
6.47
6.12
6.42
6.32
Standard deviation
2.48
2.47
2.1
2.41
Median
7
7
7
7
provided by DEGARI on 10-point scale; the second question (Question 2) asked them
to associate the item to additional emotion categories, taken from the Plutchik model.
Users were divided in 3 groups, each corresponding to a different set of 10 items. For
each dataset, the selected items were the ones ranked higher by DEGARI for each
generated compound emotional category.
Participants and procedure. The study involved 44 users (23 females, 21 males). Con-
cerning the age groups, 2 users were below 18; 17 users were in the 19-35 age range; 12
in the 36-50 range; 10 in the 51-70 range; 3 were older than 70. Users were randomly
assigned to the questionnaires. The ﬁrst questionnaire was ﬁlled out by 12 users; the
second questionnaire was ﬁlled out by 20 users; the third questionnaire was assigned
to 12 users. As a result, 440 ratings and 1065 emotion categories were collected.
Results and analysis. Concerning Question 1, the average rating assigned by the users
to the emotion category proposed by Degari was 6.3, with only slight differences be-
tween the datasets (see Table 4). The average rating was 6.47 for ArsMeteo, 6.42 for
RaiPlay, and 6.12 for WikiArt. The standard deviation was 2.41 (2.48 for ArsMeteo,
2.47 for WikiArt, and 2.1 for RaiPlay), suggesting that the differences in ratings were
limited. Also, the median rating is 7 for all data sets, with only 2 proposed emotion
categories (1 from Arsmeteo and 1 from WikiArt) rated below 5.
Concerning Question 2 (namely, the additional emotions attached by the users to the
items), 308 were attached to the items in ArsMeteo, 308 to the items in WikiArt, and
449 to the items in RaiPlay, yielding 1065 user emotion categories. The average num-
ber of emotion categories per users was 24.2. In order to investigate the overlapping
38

Table 5: Overlapping of user tags with DEGARI emotions
ArsMeteo
WikiArt
RaiPlay
All
User tags
308
308
449
1065
Proposed emotions
36
50
41
127
Overlapping
27.28%
20%
19.50%
22.05%
between the set of emotion categories proposed by DEGARI for each item (apart for
the top ranked category tested through Question 1), we compared the emotion cate-
gories selected by the users with the ones proposed by DEGARI (Table 5). Data show
that 22.05% of the emotion categories additionally proposed by DEGARI for each item
matched those selected by the users, with a higher value for ArsMeteo (27.78%), and
a lower value for WikiArt (20%) and RaiPlay (19.51%). This datum is a positive one
since it concerns the non-top ranked emotional categories suggested by the system (for
which the degree of acceptability by the users was always above 5 out of a 10-point
scale except for 2 items, and with a median of 7 for every considered dataset).
To conclude, the collected data suggest that the emotion categories proposed by
DEGARI as a result of the reclassiﬁcation process are generally accepted by the users,
with few exceptions that deserve further investigation. The acceptance is clear for the
top ranked emotion, but a satisfactory degree of acceptance can be inferred also for the
remaining suggested categories, for which an overlapping of 20% and more with the
user tags has been found in all datasets.
9. Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, we presented DEGARI: an explainable AI system relying on the TCL
Description Logics and on the ArsEmotica knowledge base to generate, according to
Plutchik’s theory of emotion, compound emotional concepts starting from the basic
ones. Such newly created categories, characterized by lexicon-based typical features,
are then used in DEGARI to reclassify, in an emotional settings, the items of three
39

different datasets. The novelty of this system relies on the fact that DEGARI is, to
the best of our knowledge, the ﬁrst emotion-oriented system employing a white box
approach to emotion classiﬁcation based on the human-like conceptual combination
framework proposed in the TCL logic. The explainability requirement comes for free
as a consequence of this logic-based approach, as shown in Figure 2.
Overall, the white box approach proposed by DEGARI for emotionally-driven con-
tent reclassiﬁcation could be useful for addressing the very well known ﬁlter bubble
effect [45] in recommender systems, by introducing seeds of serendipity in content
discovery by users. One fundamental discussion about the applicability of DEGARI
in practice is whether or not it represents a truly innovative technical solution for an
emotion-based recommender system. According to Sohail et al. [59], recommender
systems “try to identify the need and preferences of users, ﬁlter the huge collection
of data accordingly and present the best suited option before the users by using some
well-deﬁned mechanism”. Despite the huge amount of proposals, the main families
of recommender systems can be identiﬁed as based on: i) collaborative ﬁltering; ii)
content-based ﬁltering; iii) hybrid ﬁltering. At their core of functioning, collabora-
tive ﬁltering exploits similarities of usage patterns among mutually afﬁne users, while
content-based ﬁltering exploits content similarity. DEGARI by deﬁnition falls into the
latter category since in its current form it uses content description (obtained in differ-
ent ways) as the input. From the technical point of view, however, it differs from the
current mainstream approaches that are mostly based on the comparison and matching
of visual and perceptual features of the content [62, 15]. In practice, our approach adds
a logic layer capable of mapping and representing - in a commonsense and cognitively
compliant fashion [27] - new emotional categories which can be used to affect user
preferences and content consumption in a way that cannot be derived from the pure
statistical analysis of content and/or the comparison of similar users. Moreover, the
proposed approach has been applied to a well-known model, the Plutchik circumplex
model of emotions [47] and to two different emotional lexica (NRC and Shaver’s), but
could in principle be applied to other models which organize emotions by similarity,
opposition and composition, such as for example the extended version of the Hourglass
model used in SenticNet [63]. Being independent from the speciﬁc application model
40

and type of expression, this approach can work effectively in different domains, as
shown by its use on the datasets of artworks and media illustrated in this paper. In this
sense, it can promote the interoperability of affective annotations and the cross-domain
reuse of techniques and methods.
In the future work, we plan to extend the evaluation currently conducted in the
form of a user study to a large scale one to further validate the effectiveness of the
proposed approach. We also plan to extend the applications of this system to different
domains. A ﬁrst extension will be in the ﬁeld of the emotional-oriented recommenda-
tion of artworks within Museums and cultural heritage sites (this is a work currently
under development within the H2020 European SPICE project15). In addition, also the
ﬁeld of music recommendation represents a current area of investigation.
From a technical perspective, in future research, we aim at studying the application
of optimization techniques in [3] in order to improve the efﬁciency of the DEGARI
knowledge generation system. Secondly, we aim at considering more accurate and
multimodal descriptions of artistic and media items, by exploiting Automatic Speech
Recognition data and semantic visual categories extracted from video and audio chan-
nels of the content. Finally, as mentioned, we plan to improve the provided recommen-
dations by justifying the content reclassiﬁcation (and the derived recommendations)
based on the probabilistic ranks assigned to the shared features between the generated
emotion and the items being reclassiﬁed.
