IntechOpen Series  
Artificial Intelligence, Volume 7
Machine Learning 
Algorithms, Models and Applications
Edited by Jaydip Sen

Machine Learning - 
Algorithms, Models and 
Applications
Edited by Jaydip Sen
Published in London, United Kingdom

Supporting open minds since 2005

Machine Learning - Algorithms, Models and Applications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.94615
Edited by Jaydip Sen
Assistant to the Editor: Sidra Mehtab
Contributors
Pooja Kherwa, Saheel Ahmed, Pranay Berry, Sahil Khurana, Sonali Singh, Jaydip Sen, Sidra Mehtab, 
David W. W Cadotte, David W. Anderson, Kalum J. Ost, Racheal S. Akinbo, Oladunni A. Daramola, Bongs 
Lainjo, Rajdeep Sen, Abhishek Dutta
© The Editor(s) and the Author(s) 2021
The rights of the editor(s) and the author(s) have been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988. All rights to the book as a whole are reserved by INTECHOPEN LIMITED. 
The book as a whole (compilation) cannot be reproduced, distributed or used for commercial or 
non-commercial purposes without INTECHOPEN LIMITED’s written permission. Enquiries concerning 
the use of the book should be directed to INTECHOPEN LIMITED rights and permissions department 

Violations are liable to prosecution under the governing Copyright Law.
Individual chapters of this publication are distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution 3.0 Unported License which permits commercial use, distribution and reproduction of 
the individual chapters, provided the original author(s) and source publication are appropriately 
acknowledged. If so indicated, certain images may not be included under the Creative Commons 
license. In such cases users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce 
the material. More details and guidelines concerning content reuse and adaptation can be found at 
http://www.intechopen.com/copyright-policy.html.
Notice
Statements and opinions expressed in the chapters are these of the individual contributors and not 
necessarily those of the editors or publisher. No responsibility is accepted for the accuracy of 
information contained in the published chapters. The publisher assumes no responsibility for any 
damage or injury to persons or property arising out of the use of any materials, instructions, methods 
or ideas contained in the book.
First published in London, United Kingdom, 2021 by IntechOpen
IntechOpen is the global imprint of INTECHOPEN LIMITED, registered in England and Wales, 
registration number: 11086078, 5 Princes Gate Court, London, SW7 2QJ, United Kingdom
Printed in Croatia
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

Machine Learning - Algorithms, Models and Applications
Edited by Jaydip Sen
p. cm.
This title is part of the Artificial Intelligence Book Series, Volume 7
Topic: Machine Learning and Data Mining
Series Editor: Andries Engelbrecht 
Topic Editor: Marco Antonio Aceves Fernandez 
Print ISBN 978-1-83969-484-4
Online ISBN 978-1-83969-485-1
eBook (PDF) ISBN 978-1-83969-486-8
ISSN 2633-1403

Interested in publishing with us? 

Numbers displayed above are based on latest data collected. 
For more information visit www.intechopen.com
5,600+ 
Open access books available
156
Countries delivered to
12.2%
Contributors from top 500 universities
Our authors are among the
Top 1%
most cited scientists
138,000+
International authors and editors
170M+ 
Downloads
We are IntechOpen,
the world’s leading publisher of 
Open Access books
Built by scientists, for scientists
BOOK
CITATION
INDEX
 
C
L
A
R
I
V
A
T
E
 
A
N
A
L
Y
T
I
C
S
I
N
D
E
X
E
D
Selection of our books indexed in the Book Citation Index (BKCI)  
in Web of Science Core Collection™

IntechOpen Book Series  
Artificial Intelligence
Volume 7
Aims and Scope of the Series
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a rapidly developing multidisciplinary research area 
that aims to solve increasingly complex problems. In today’s highly integrated 
world, AI promises to become a robust and powerful means for obtaining solutions 
to previously unsolvable problems. This Series is intended for researchers and stu-
dents alike interested in this fascinating field and its many applications.

Meet the Series Editor
Andries Engelbrecht received the Masters and Ph.D. degrees in 
Computer Science from the University of Stellenbosch, South 
Africa, in 1994 and 1999 respectively. He is currently appointed 
as the Voigt Chair in Data Science in the Department of Indus-
trial Engineering, with a joint appointment as Professor in the 
Computer Science Division, Stellenbosch University. Prior to 
his appointment at Stellenbosch University, he has been at the 
University of Pretoria, Department of Computer Science (1998-2018), where he 
was appointed as South Africa Research Chair in Artifical Intelligence (2007-2018), 
the head of the Department of Computer Science (2008-2017), and Director of 
the Institute for Big Data and Data Science (2017-2018). In addition to a number of 
research articles, he has written two books, Computational Intelligence: An Intro-
duction and Fundamentals of Computational Swarm Intelligence.

Jaydip Sen is associated with Praxis Business School, Kolkata, 
India, as a professor in the Department of Data Science. His re-
search areas include security and privacy issues in computing and 
communication, intrusion detection systems, machine learning, 
deep learning, and artificial intelligence in the financial domain. 
He has more than 200 publications in reputed international 
journals, refereed conference proceedings, and 18 book chapters 
in books published by internationally renowned publishing houses, such as Spring-
er, CRC press, IGI Global, etc. Currently, he is serving on the editorial board of the 
prestigious journal Frontiers in Communications and Networks and in the technical 
program committees of a number of high-ranked international conferences orga-
nized by the IEEE, USA, and the ACM, USA. He has been listed among the top 2% of 
scientists in the world for both the years 2020 and 2021 as of August 2021.
Meet the Volume Editor

Contents
Preface
XVII
Chapter 1 
1
Introductory Chapter: Machine Learning in Finance-Emerging 
Trends and Challenges
by Jaydip Sen, Rajdeep Sen and Abhishek Dutta
Chapter 2 
15
Design and Analysis of Robust Deep Learning Models for Stock 
Price Prediction
by Jaydip Sen and Sidra Mehtab
Chapter 3 
47
Articulated Human Pose Estimation Using Greedy Approach
by Pooja Kherwa, Sonali Singh, Saheel Ahmed, Pranay Berry  
and Sahil Khurana
Chapter 4 
59
Ensemble Machine Learning Algorithms for Prediction 
and Classification of Medical Images
by Racheal S. Akinbo and Oladunni A. Daramola
Chapter 5 
79
Delivering Precision Medicine to Patients with Spinal Cord Disorders; 
Insights into Applications of Bioinformatics and Machine Learning  
from Studies of Degenerative Cervical Myelopathy
by Kalum J. Ost, David W. Anderson and David W. Cadotte
Chapter 6 
103
Enhancing Program Management with Predictive Analytics 
Algorithms (PAAs)
by Bongs Lainjo

Preface
Machine learning (ML) is the ability of a system to automatically acquire, integrate, 
and then develop knowledge from large-scale data, and then expand the acquired 
knowledge autonomously by discovering new information, without being 
specifically programmed to do so. In short, the ML algorithms can find application 
in the following: (1) a deeper understanding of the cyber event that generated 
the data under study, (2) capturing the understating of the event in the form of a 
model, (3) predicting the future values that will be generated by the event based 
on the constructed model, and (4) proactively detect any anomalous behavior of 
the phenomenon so that appropriate corrective actions can be taken beforehand. 
ML is an evolutionary area, and with recent innovations in technology, especially 
with the development of smarter algorithms and advances in hardware and storage 
systems, it has become possible to perform a large number of tasks more efficiently 
and precisely, which were not even imaginable a couple of decades before. Over the 
past few years, deep learning (DL), a specialized subset of machine learning that 
involves more complex architectures, algorithms, and models for solving complex 
problems and predicting future outcomes of complex events, has also evolved.
Recent times are witnessing rapid development in machine learning algorithm 
systems, especially in reinforcement learning, natural language processing, 
computer and robot vision, image processing, speech, and emotional processing 
and understanding. There are numerous applications of machine learning that have 
emerged or are evolving at present in several business domains, such as medicines 
and healthcare, finance and investment, sales and marketing, operations and 
supply chain, human resources, media and entertainment, and so on.
Of late, the applied ML systems in the industry are exhibiting some prominent 
trends. These trends will utilize the power of ML and artificial intelligence (AI) 
systems even further to reap benefits in business and society, in general. Some of 
these trends are as follows: (1) less volume of code and faster implementation of 
ML systems; (2) increasing use of light-weight systems suitable for working on the 
resource-constrained internet of things (IoT) devices; (3) automatic generation of 
codes for building ML models; (4) designing novel processes for robust management 
of the development of ML systems for increased reliability and efficiency; (5) more 
wide-spread adoption of deep-learning solutions into products of all domains and 
applications; (6) increased use of generative adversarial networks (GAN)-based 
models for various image processing applications including image searching, 
image enhancement, etc.; (7) more prominence of unsupervised learning-based 
systems that require less or no human intervention for their operations; (8) use of 
reinforcement learning-based systems; and finally, (9) evolution of few-shots,  
if not zero-shot learning-based systems.
In tune with the increasing importance and relevance of ML models, algorithms, 
and their applications and with the emergence of more innovative uses-cased of 
DL- and AI-based systems, the current volume presents a few innovative research 
works and their applications in real-world, such as stock trading, medical and 
healthcare systems, and software automation. The chapters in the book illustrate 

IV
how ML and DL algorithms and models are designed, optimized, and applied 
for achieving higher precision and efficiency in business and other processes in 
real-world scenarios.
The book presents six chapters that highlight different architectures, models, 
algorithms, and applications of machine learning, deep learning, and artificial 
intelligence. The subject matter discussed in the chapters of the book illustrates the 
complexities involved in the design, training, validation, testing, and deployment 
of machine learning and deep learning models in real-world applications.
In the introductory chapter entitled Introductory Chapter: Machine Learning in 
Finance-Emerging Trends and Challenges, Jaydip Sen, Rajdeep Sen, and Abhishek 
Dutta present a landscape of the emerging trends and challenges in banks and 
other financial institutions that machine learning-based models will face in the 
near future and how the organizations should transform those challenges into 
opportunities for their business.
In Chapter 2, Design and Analysis of Robust Deep Learning Models for Stock Price 
Prediction, Jaydip Sen and Sidra Mehtab present a set of deep learning-based 
regression models for precise and robust prediction of future prices of a stock listed 
in the diversified sector in the National Stock Exchange (NSE) of India. The models 
are built on convolutional neural network (CNN) and long short-term memory 
(LSTM) network architectures, and they are designed to handle high-frequency 
stock price data. The performances of the models are compared based on their 
execution time and prediction accuracies.
In Chapter 3, Articulated Human Pose Estimation Using Greedy Approach, Pooja Kherwa, 
Sonali Singh, Saheel Ahmed, Pranay Berry, and Sahil Khurana propose a method 
of bottom-up parsing for human pose estimation that localizes anatomical key 
points of humans. The authors have also presented results on the performance of 
their proposed mechanism.
In Chapter 4, Ensemble Machine Learning Algorithms for Prediction and Classification 
of Medical Images, Racheal S. Akinbo and Oladunni A. Daramola discuss how 
ensemble machine learning models can be applied for classifying medical images, 
such as ultrasound reports, X-rays, mammography, fluoroscopy, computer-aided 
tomography, magnetic resonance image, magnetic resonance angiography, nuclear 
medicine, and positron emission tomography.
In Chapter 5, Delivering Precision Medicine to Patients with Spinal Cord Disorders; 
Insights into Applications of Bioinformatics and Machine Learning from Studies of 
Degenerative Cervical Myelopathy, Kalum J. Ost, David W. Anderson and David 
W. Cadotte present an approach towards designing a machine learning-based 
clinical diagnosis system that supports the diagnostic prediction of DCM severity. 
The proposed system is intended to serve as a support system to the patients 
rather than a recommendation system. Extensive discussion has been made on the 
system design, data collection process, data preprocessing, model building, and 
performance results of the system.
In Chapter 6, Enhancing Program Management with Predictive Analytics Algorithms 
(PAAs), Bongs Lainjo identifies various practical aspects of software development 
with a particular focus on predictive model design and deployment. The author also 
XVIII

V
discusses how predictive analytics algorithms can be used to predict future events 
in different domains of applications, for example, healthcare, manufacturing, 
education, sports, and agriculture.
I hope that the volume will be very useful for advanced graduate and doctoral 
students, researchers, practicing data scientists and data engineers, professionals, 
and consultants working on the broad areas of machine learning, deep learning, 
artificial intelligence, and other allied areas in computer science. It will also be of 
use to faculty members and scientists in graduate schools, universities, and research 
labs engaged in teaching research in machine learning and its applications. Since 
the volume is not an introductory treatise on the subject, the readers are expected to 
have basic knowledge of the fundamental principles and theoretical backgrounds of 
machine learning models and algorithms to understand their advanced applications 
discussed in the book.
I express my sincere thanks to all authors of the chapters in the volume for their 
valuable contributions. Without their cooperation and eagerness to contribute, 
this project would never have been successful. All the authors have been extremely 
cooperative and punctual during the submission, editing, and publication process 
of the book. I express our heartfelt thanks to Ms. Marica Novakovic, author service 
manager of IntechOpen Publishers, for her support, encouragement, patience, and 
cooperation during the project and her wonderful coordination of all activities 
involved in it. My sincere thanks also go to Ms. Anja Filipovic, commissioning 
editor of IntechOpen Publishers, for reposing faith in me and delegating me with 
the critical responsibility of editorship of such a prestigious academic volume. 
I will be certainly failing in my duty if I do not acknowledge the encouragement, 
motivation, and assistance I received from Ms. Sidra Mehtab, my assistant editor 
and the co-author of one of the chapters in the book. I sincerely thank the valuable 
contributions received from the coauthors, of the introductory chapter of the 
book, Mr. Rajdeep Sen and Mr. Abhishek Dutta. The members of my family have 
always been the sources of my inspiration and motivation for such scholastic work. 
I dedicate this volume to my beloved sister, Ms. Nabanita Sen, who unfortunately 
left us on 27 September 2021, due to the deadly disease of cancer. My sister has 
been always the pillar of strength for me, and this volume also would not have 
been a success without her constant support and motivation, despite her suffering 
due to her terminal illness. Last but not the least, I gratefully acknowledge the 
support and motivation I received from my wife Ms. Nalanda Sen, my daughter Ms. 
Ritabrata Sen, my mother Ms. Krishna Sen, my brother Mr. Rajdeep Sen, and my 
sister-in-law, Ms. Toby Kar. Without their support, motivation, and inspiration, 
the publication of this volume would not have been possible.
Jaydip Sen
Professor,
Department of Data Science,
Praxis Business School,
Kolkata, India
XIX

1
Chapter 1
Introductory Chapter: Machine 
Learning in Finance-Emerging 
Trends and Challenges
Jaydip Sen, Rajdeep Sen and Abhishek Dutta
1. Introduction
The paradigm of machine learning and artificial intelligence has pervaded our 
everyday life in such a way that it is no longer an area for esoteric academics and 
scientists putting their effort to solve a challenging research problem. The evolution 
is quite natural rather than accidental. With the exponential growth in process-
ing speed and with the emergence of smarter algorithms for solving complex and 
challenging problems, organizations have found it possible to harness a humongous 
volume of data in realizing solutions that have far-reaching business values.
Financial services, banking, and insurance remain one of the most significant 
sectors that has a very high potential in reaping the benefits of machine learning 
and artificial intelligence with the availability of rich data, innovative algorithms, 
and novel methods in its various applications. While the organizations have only 
skimmed the surface of the rapidly evolving areas such as deep neural networks 
and reinforcement learning, the possibility of applying these techniques in many 
applications vastly remains unexplored. Organizations are leveraging the benefits 
of innovative applications of machine learning in applications like customer seg-
mentation for target marketing of their newly launched products, designing optimal 
portfolio strategies, detection, and prevention of money laundering and other illegal 
activities in the financial markets, smarter and effective risk management is credit, 
adherence to the regulatory frameworks in finance, accounts, and other operations, 
and so on. However, the full capability of machine learning and artificial intelligence 
still remains unexplored and unexploited. Leveraging such capabilities will be criti-
cal for organizations to achieve and maintain a long-term competitive edge.
While one of the major reasons for the slow adoption of AI/ML models and 
methods in financial applications is that the algorithms are not well known and 
there is an inevitable trust deficit in deploying them in critical and privacy-sensitive 
applications, the so-called “black-box” nature of such models and frameworks 
that analyzes their internal operations in producing outputs and their valida-
tions also impede faster acceptance and deployment of such models in real-world 
applications.
This introductory chapter highlights some of the challenges and barriers that 
organizations in the financial services sector at the present encounter in adopting 
machine learning and artificial intelligence-based models and applications in their 
day-to-day operations.
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 presents some emerg-
ing applications of machine learning in the financial domain. Section 3 highlights 
emerging computing paradigms in finance. Some important modeling paradigms 

Machine Learning - Algorithms, Models and Applications
2
in the era of machine learning and artificial intelligence are discussed in Section 4. 
Section 5 discusses some new challenges and barriers currently faced by the finan-
cial modelers. Some emerging risks, new choices, and modern practices in financial 
modeling are presented in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes the chapter.
2. Emerging application of machine learning in finance
With the increasing availability and declining cost for complex models executing 
on high-power computing devices exploiting the unlimited capacity of data stor-
age, the financial industry is geared up to exploit the benefits of machine learning 
to leverage a competitive business edge. While some of the use cases have already 
found their applications in the real world, others will need to overcome some 
existing business and operational challenges before they are deployed. Some of the 
applications are mentioned below.
Risk Modeling: One of the major applications of AI/ML models and algorithms 
is in the extensive domain of risk modeling and management [1]. While on one hand, 
the risk modeling credit and market is a critical application of machine learning, on 
the other hand, a non-finance application such as operational risk management, com-
pliance, and fraud management is also quite important. The majority of the classifica-
tion approaches and modeling techniques in machine learning such as binary logistic 
regression, multinomial logistic regression, linear and quadratic discriminant analy-
sis, and decision trees, etc., are the foundational building blocks of applied modeling 
in the real world. However, in data science applications, the availability of data and its 
richness play a pivotal role. Hence, in data-rich applications such as credit risk model-
ing and scoring, designing mortgage schemes, the AI/ML models have already made 
substantial inroads in comparison to scenarios such as low default credit portfolios for 
well-known parties that lack the availability of data. Fraud analytics remains another 
intensive area of AI/ML applications in the non-financial domain.
Portfolio Management: The portfolios are designed based on the recommenda-
tions of smart algorithms that optimize various parameters with return and risk 
being the two most important ones [2]. Using the information provided by the users 
such as their ages of retirement, amount of investment, etc., and other associate 
details such as their current ages, current assets at hand, the algorithm allocate 
the invested amount into diverse asset classes to optimize the return and the risk 
associated with the portfolio. Once an initial allocation is made, the algorithm 
continuously monitors the market environment and changes the allocation so that 
the portfolio remains at its optimized level always. These AI-enabled portfolio 
managers, known as the Robo-advisors are increasingly being used in real-world 
portfolio design due to their superior adaptability and optimization skill to their 
human counterparts.
Algorithmic Trading: Algorithmic trading exploits the use of algorithms to 
carry out stock trading in an autonomous manner with minimal human interven-
tion [3]. Invented in 1970, algorithmic trading deploys automated pre-programmed 
stock trading instructions that can be executed very fast and at a very short time 
interval (i.e., at a very high frequency) to optimize trading returns and objectives. 
Machine learning and artificial intelligence have pushed algorithmic trading into a 
new dimension where not only advanced trading strategies can be made very fast 
but also deep insights can be made into the stock price and overall market move-
ments. While most hedge funds and financial organizations do not make their 
trading strategies public, it is well known that machine learning, of late, is playing 
an increasingly important role in calibrating high-frequency, high-volume trading 
decisions in real-time for critical applications.

3
Introductory Chapter: Machine Learning in Finance-Emerging Trends and Challenges
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.101120
Fraud detection and analysis: Fraud detection and analysis is one of the most 
critical machine learning applications in the finance industry [4]. There is an 
increased level of security and privacy risk associated with sensitive information 
both from the organization and personal front due to ubiquitous availability of 
connectivity, high computational power in devices, an increased amount of data 
stored and communicated online. These issues have changed the way online fraud 
analysis and detection are being made. While detection in earlier days used to 
depend on matching a large set of complex rules, the recent approaches are largely 
based on the execution of learning algorithms that adapts to new security threats 
making the detection process more robust while being agile.
Loan and Insurance Underwritings: Loans, credit, and insurance underwrit-
ing is also an area where the large-scale deployment of machine learning models 
can be made by financial institutions for achieving competitive advantage [5]. At 
large banks and insurance firms, the availability of historical data of consumers, 
financial lending/borrowing information, insurance outcomes, and default-related 
information in paying debts, can be leveraged in training robust machine learning 
models. The learned patterns and trends can be exploited by the learning algorithms 
for lending and underwriting risks in the future to minimize future defaults. The 
deployment of such models can lead to a paradigm shift in business efficiency 
and profit. However, at present, there is a limited utilization of such models in 
the industry as their deployments are largely confined within large financial 
institutions.
Financial Chatbots: Automation in the finance industry is also an outcome of 
the deployment of machine learning and artificial intelligence. Accessing the rel-
evant data, machine learning models can yield an insightful analysis of the underly-
ing patterns inside them that helps in making effective decisions in the future. In 
many cases, these models may provide recommended actions for the future so that 
the business decision can be made in the most efficient and optimum way. AI-based 
systems in financial applications also can minimize their errors learning fast from 
their past actions that also reduce wastages of precious resources including time. AI 
chatbots provide an effective way of interaction with the customers while automat-
ing many routine tasks in a financial institution [6].
Risk Management: Machine learning techniques are revolutionizing the way 
corporates handle the risks associated with their operations. Risk management 
examples are diverse and infinite ranging from deciding about the amount a bank 
should lend a customer or how to improve compliance to a process or the way risk 
associated with a model can be minimized [7].
Asset price prediction: Predicting future asset prices is one of the most chal-
lenging tasks that finance professionals have to do frequently. The price of an asset 
is affected by numerous factors driven by the market including speculative activi-
ties. In the classical approach, an asset price is determined by analyzing historical 
financial reports and past market performances. With rich data available, of late, 
machine learning-based models have started playing significant roles in predicting 
future asset prices in a robust and precise manner [8].
Derivative pricing: In the traditional approach, derivative pricing models are 
designed on numerous assumptions which do not hold good in the real world. These 
assumptions attempt to establish an empirical relationship among several predictor 
variables such as the strike price, maturity time, and option type, and the target vari-
able which is the price of the derivative. Machine learning models have gotten rid of 
the requirement of such assumptions as they attempt to fit in the best possible func-
tion between the predictors and the target by minimizing the error. Accuracy and the 
minimal time needed for the deployment of the models in real-world use cases make 
machine learning the most impactful paradigm in the task of derivative pricing [9].

Machine Learning - Algorithms, Models and Applications
4
Money Laundering: As per a report published by the United Nations, it is 
estimated that 2–5% of the world’s aggregated GDP is accounted for the amount of 
money being laundered worldwide. Machine learning models can find applications 
in detecting money laundering activities with minimal false-positive cases [10].
3. Emerging paradigms in computing in finance
Several new capabilities and approaches and frameworks in machine learning, 
data science, and artificial intelligence have become available to the modelers and 
engineers for all disciplines including finance professionals and researchers. Some 
of them are as follows.
Virtual Agents: The machine learning paradigm will witness the increasing 
deployment of agents in various tasks. These agents have the capability of perform-
ing complex data mining tasks through a large set of policy rules, defined proce-
dures and regulations, and provide automated responses to queries.
Cognitive Robotics: The robots in the cognitive domain have the power of 
automating several tasks which are currently done by humans. This automation 
comes with an additional level of sophistication, speed, and precision in perform-
ing the tasks.
Text Analytics: The applications of sophisticated algorithms, frameworks, 
and models of natural language processing in analyzing voluminous and complex 
financial contracts and documents help processing and decision making faster and 
more accurately with minimal associated risks.
Video Analytics: Advancements in the fields of computer vision, image pro-
cessing, speech processing, and speech recognition together with the exponential 
growth in hardware capabilities have led to very promising progress in compliance, 
audit, model validation in various financial applications including automated 
generation and presentation of financial reports.
4. Emerging trends in modeling techniques
With the increasing proliferation of machine learning models in innovative 
applications in the financial industry, some computing and modeling paradigms 
will find more adoption. Some of them are as follows.
Sparsity-aware learning: Sparsity-aware learning has evolved as an alternative 
model regularization approach to address several problems that are usually encoun-
tered in machine learning [11]. Considerable effort has been spent in designing such 
frameworks in an iterative manner for solving estimation tasks of model parameters 
avoiding overfit.
Iteratively designing schemes such frameworks in solving estimation tasks of 
model parameters avoiding overfit.
Sparsity-aware learning systems are well-suited in financial modeling applications 
leading to extremely robust and accurate models for various applications in finance.
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces: Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces 
(RKHS) is essentially a Hilbert space function that evaluates a continuous function 
in the linear space [12]. These functions find important applications in statistical 
learning as every functional representation in RKHS represents minimization of an 
empirical function embodying the associated risk, and the representation is made 
as a linear combination of the data points in the training set transformed by the 
kernel function. Accordingly, RKHS has a very high potential in risk modeling and 
evaluation in finance.

5
Introductory Chapter: Machine Learning in Finance-Emerging Trends and Challenges
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.101120
Monte Carlo simulation: This method of modeling provides the modeler with 
a large range of possible outcomes and probabilities that they will occur for any 
choice of action that is taken. It is used in a diverse set of domains like finance, 
energy, project management, and monitoring, research and development, and 
insurance. It performs risk analysis by designing models of possible results by 
substituting a range of values – a probability distribution – for any factor that has 
inherent uncertainty. The ability in handling uncertainty makes this approach 
particularly popular in modern-day modeling in finance [13].
Graph theory: Multivariate financial data pose a very complex challenge in pro-
cessing and visualization in addition to being difficult in modeling. Graph theory 
provides the modeler with a very elegant, efficient, and easily interpretable method 
of handling multivariate financial data [14].
Particle filtering: It is a method of modeling nonlinear and non-Gaussian 
systems with a very high level of precision. Its ability to handle multi-modal data 
makes it one of the most effective and popular modeling techniques in many fields 
including finance [15]. Stated in simple words, particle filtering is a technique for 
identifying the distribution of a population that has a minimum variance by identi-
fying a set of random samples traversing through all the states to obtain a probabil-
ity density function that best fits into the original distribution and then substituting 
the integral operation on the function by the mean of the sample.
Parameter learning and convex paths: While optimization methods have been 
proved to be very effective in training large-scale deep neural networks involving 
millions of parameters, the regularization of these methods has become of para-
mount importance for proper training of such networks [16]. Accordingly, intensive 
work has been also carried out in estimating the biases associated with the optimum 
value of the objective function arrived at by the algorithms. The estimation of such 
biases provides the modeler with an idea about the degree of inaccuracy in the 
models for critical applications including financial modeling.
Deep learning and reinforcement learning: The application of machine 
learning in finance has largely been manifested in the form of models built on 
deep neural network architecture and smarter algorithms for the optimization 
and training of such networks. Reinforcement learning-based models have made 
the automation of such models a reality. A vast gamut of applications, such as algo 
trading, capital asset pricing, stock price prediction, portfolio management can 
be very effectively designed and executed using deep learning and reinforcement 
learning frameworks [17–26].
5. New challenges in financial modeling
Despite the numerous opportunities and advantages that machine learning and 
artificial intelligence-based applications are likely to provide to the financial sector, 
there will be some initial challenges and barriers too. This section highlights some 
of the challenges as follows.
Data challenges: While the availability of data in finance is quite plenty, the 
time series data in finance (e.g., stock prices) are quite small in size for data-hungry 
machine learning and deep learning models. Models built on limited time series 
data are naturally less trained and improperly designed. The result is a sub-optimal 
performance of the models. Another problem in finance is that financial data 
cannot be synthesized unlike images in the fields of computer vision and image 
processing. Since finance data cannot be synthesized, one has to wait for financial 
data to be produced in the real world before using them in model training and vali-
dation. The third challenge with financial data is the high level of noise associated 

Machine Learning - Algorithms, Models and Applications
6
with high-frequency trading data. Since high-frequency data in finance are invari-
ably associated with a high level of noise, the machine learning models trained 
on such noisy data are intrinsically imprecise. Data evolution in finance poses the 
fourth challenge. Unlike data in most other fields, where the data features do not 
change with time, the features in financial data in harmony with financial markets 
evolve and change with time. This implies that financial variables will not carry the 
same meaning and significance over a long period, say one decade. The changes in 
the semantic meaning and significance of financial variables make it particularly 
difficult for the machine learning model to derive a consistent explanation and 
learning over a reasonably long period [27].
Black-box nature of the models: Machine learning and artificial intelligence-
based models are black-box in nature [28]. In these models, while the outputs from 
the model are available and most of the time, they are easily interpretable, the 
biggest shortcoming is their lack of power of explanation of the output. In many 
critical applications in finance, mere outputs are not sufficient, and strong logical 
support for explaining the output is mandatory to instill sufficient confidence in the 
minds of the decision-makers. In absence of such explainable characteristics of the 
machine learning models, it will always remain a difficult job for the modelers to 
advocate the suitability of such models in critical business use cases.
Validation challenges of the models: Due to their higher complexity and 
opaqueness in operation, the machine learning models pose some significant chal-
lenges to risk management and validation [29]. While the regulators demand the 
machine learning models to comply with the SR 11–7 and OCC 2011–2012 standards 
of risk management, the optimum execution of the models may not be possible if 
all those guidelines are to be strictly adhered to. Model risk is an event that occurs 
when a model is designed following its intended objective but it introduces errors 
while in execution yielding inaccurate results from the perspective of its design and 
business use case. Another manifestation of model risk can happen when a model is 
built and deployed inaccurately or with faults without proper knowledge about its 
limitations and shortcoming.
Challenges in model testing and outcome analysis: The performance of a model 
and its accuracy in testing are evaluated by outcome analysis [29]. Since the neural 
network model has a natural tendency to overfit or underfit the data based on the 
training, it is imperative on the part of the model evaluation team to address the 
bias-variance trade-offs in the training and validation process. Since the traditional 
k cross-validation procedure used in backtesting of predictive models does not work 
effectively for machine learning model validation, the machine learning model vali-
dators should take particular care in carrying out normalization and feature selection 
before model training and validation. Validation loss and accuracy should be strictly 
monitored and analyzed to ensure that no overfitting or underfitting is present in the 
model before it is sent to the production phase. Neural network models are also diffi-
cult to evaluate on their sensitivity analysis as these models lack explainability. Since 
establishing a functional relationship between the explanatory variables and the 
target variable in a neural network model is a difficult task unlike statistical models, 
sensitivity analysis between the inputs and the output may involve a computationally 
involved challenge while the results of the analysis may be quite complex.
Challenges with models designed by vendors: As per the requirements speci-
fied in SR 11–7 and OCC 2011–2012 standards, models supplied by vendors are 
required to adhere to the same rigor as internally developed models [29]. However, 
in many practical situations, due to proprietary restrictions testing of vendors 
supplied models becomes a challenge. For vendor-supplied models, banks and 
financial institutions will have to mostly rely on softer forms of validation. The 
softer form of validation may include periodic review of model performance and 

7
Introductory Chapter: Machine Learning in Finance-Emerging Trends and Challenges
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.101120
conceptual soundness, stringent assessment of model customization, review of the 
development process, and applicability of the model in the portfolio of operations 
of the bank.
6. Emerging risks, new choices, and modern practices
In all domains including finance, the major cause that contributes to the risk in a 
machine learning model is the complexity associated with the model. The machine 
learning algorithms are intrinsically very complex as they work on voluminous and 
possibly unstructured data such as texts, images, and speech. As a consequence, 
training of such algorithms demands sophisticated computing infrastructure and a 
high level of knowledge and skill on the part of the modelers. However, countering 
such complexities with overly sophisticated models can be very counterproduc-
tive. Instead of adopting a complex approach, the banks and financial institutions 
should understand the risks associated with their business and operations and 
manage them with simple model-validation approaches. The issues that will domi-
nate the risk management landscape for machine learning models in the financial 
industry are – (i) interpretability of the models, (ii) model bias, (iii) extensive 
feature engineering, (iv) importance of model hyperparameters, (v) production 
readiness of models, (vi) dynamic calibration of models, and (vii) explainable 
artificial intelligence. These issues are briefly discussed below.
Model interpretability: Since all machine learning models are essentially black 
boxes, their interpretability requirements have to be determined by the banks and 
financial institutions based on the risk associated with their use cases [28]. While 
some use cases may demand a highly granular and transparent interpretation of the 
model’s working, the requirements for some use cases may not be so stringent. For 
example, in credit granting by banks to its customers, there may be a clear explana-
tion required to be given by a machine learning model in cases where such credits 
are refused by the banks. However, another use case that involves minimal risk to 
the bank’s operations such as recommendation of a product sent to the mobile app 
installed on a customer’s hand-held device may not demand any understanding of 
the reason why the model has made such recommendation.
The model validation process should make sure that models comply with their 
intended objectives and policies. Despite being black-box in nature, machine learn-
ing models come with various provisions for their interpretation. Depending on the 
type of the model, these approaches may be widely different as discussed below.
Models like linear regression which are not only linear but monotonic in their 
behavior, the coefficients associated with the explanatory variables exhibit their 
respective influence on the target variable in the model.
Ensemble models such as ada boosting or gradient boosting, are nonlinear but 
monotonic in their behavior. In these monotonic models, if the explanatory vari-
ables are restricted in their values, the restriction will cause either an increase or 
a decrease in the value of the target variable. This monotone nature of the models 
simplifies the contributions of the explanatory variables in the predicted values of 
the target variable by the model.
The complex deep neural network-based models which are not only nonlinear 
but also non-monotonic have methods like Shapley additive explanations (SHAP), 
and local interpretable model agnostic explanations (LIME) for their global and local 
interpretability.
Model bias: Machine learning models are susceptible to four different types of 
bias. These biases are, (i) sample bias, (ii) bias in measurement, (iii) bias due to 
algorithms, and (iv) bias towards or against a particular category of people [29]. For 

Machine Learning - Algorithms, Models and Applications
8
example, the algorithm used in building a random forest model has a bias towards 
input features that have a more distinct set of values. For example, a model built 
on a random forest algorithm for assessing potential money laundering activities is 
likely to be biased towards the features with a higher number of levels in its catego-
ries (e.g., occupation), while features having a lower number of categorical levels 
(e.g., country) might be better suited to detect money laundering activities. To 
counter the issues about algorithmic bias, the validation processes must be equipped 
with the ability to select the most appropriate algorithm in a given context. Feature 
engineering and designing challenger models are some of the methods to counter 
algorithmic biases in models. The bias against or in favor of a particular group of 
people can be avoided by defining a fair set of policies by the banks and financial 
institutions. Models should be tested for fairness for various cases, and necessary 
corrections should be made in case aberrant outputs are produced by the models.
Extensive feature engineering: The task of feature engineering involves much 
more complications in machine learning and deep learning models than classical 
statistical models. The factors that contribute to the increased complexity in feature 
engineering in machine learning are as follows: The first and the most obvious 
reason is the large number of features involved in machine learning models. First, 
machine-learning models usually involve a very large number of input variables. 
The second reason is due to the increased use of unstructured data input in machine 
learning models. Unstructured data like text, images, and speech involve an enor-
mously large number of features after data preprocessing which add to the com-
plexity in modeling. The use of commercial-off-the-shelf frameworks in modeling 
such as AutoML has also led to an increased number of features as these frameworks 
automatically generate derived features from the raw data for providing a better fit 
of the models into the data in the training phase. While such an approach leads to 
better training, it is very likely to yield overfitted models in most practical use cases. 
The banks must have a robust feature engineering strategy in place for mitigating 
their operational and business risks. The feature strategy is likely to be different for 
a diverse set of applications. In the case of highly critical and risk-intensive applica-
tions like the evaluation of credit-worthiness of customers, every single feature in 
the model needs to be assessed very closely. On the other hand, for routine appli-
cations involving low risks, an overall review of the feature engineering process 
involving a robust data wrangling step may be sufficient.
Model hyperparameters: In machine learning models, the algorithms have 
parameters associated with them that are not parameters of the models. For example, 
the number of levels in the constituent decision trees of a random forest (also known 
as the depth of the trees), or the number of hidden layers in the architecture of a deep 
learning model must be decided before the models can be trained. Stated differently, 
the parameters are not determined from the training data of the models, and these 
are called hyperparameters of the models. The values of hyperparameters in machine 
learning models are most often determined by trial-and-error methods or brute force 
search methods like grid search. The absence of an exact and efficient way of finding 
the optimum values of the hyperparameters makes designing machine learning and 
deep learning models a particularly challenging task as a wrong choice of values of 
the hyperparameters can lead to imprecise models. Of late, banks and other financial 
institutions are depending more on sophisticated binary classification models built 
on support vector machines with the additional capability of text analytics for ana-
lyzing customer complaints. However, these models will be difficult to generalize for 
a multitude of applications as they will be sensitive to the kernel used in the training.
Production readiness of models: Unlike statistical models which are designed 
as an aggregation of rules of codes to be executed in a production system, machine 
learning models are built on algorithms requiring intensive computations most 

9
Introductory Chapter: Machine Learning in Finance-Emerging Trends and Challenges
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.101120
of the time. However, in many situations, financial model developers ignore this 
important point and tend to build overly complex models only to find later that 
the production systems of the banks are unable to support such complexity. A very 
simple example could be a highly complex deep learning model built for detecting 
frauds in financial transactions that is unable to satisfy the latency constraint in its 
response. To ensure that the machine learning models are production-ready, the 
validation step should make a reliable estimation of the volume of data that the 
model will require to process on the production architecture [30].
Dynamic calibration of models: There is an adaptable class of machine learn-
ing models that can dynamically modify their parameters based on the patterns in 
the data [31]. An obvious example is a model built on the reinforcement learning 
approach. While the autonomous learning of such models is a great boon, there is 
also a new type of risk associated with such models. In absence of sufficient external 
control and with too much emphasis on learning from the short-term patterns on 
the data, the long-term performance of the models may be adversely affected. The 
consequence is an additional complexity in financial modeling – when to recalibrate 
the model dynamically? The dynamic recalibration time will also need to be adapted 
for different applications like algorithmic trading, creditworthiness determination, 
etc. A comprehensive validation process should now include a set of policies that 
will guide the modelers in evaluating dynamic recalibration so that the model can 
adhere to its intended objectives while appropriate controls are in place for ensuring 
that risks are mitigated when they emerge. This is surely not going to be an easy 
task as it will involve the complex job of thresholding, identifying the health of the 
models based on their critical metrics of performance on out-of-sample data.
Explainable artificial intelligence: In the explainable artificial intelligence par-
adigm, an AI program scans through the code of another AI program and attempts 
to explain the operating steps and the output yielded by the latter program. This 
approach can be exploited to adjust the values of the explanatory variables in a pre-
dictive model so that the desired value of the target variable (i.e., the output of the 
model) is obtained [32]. In this way, explainable AI provides a very easy and elegant 
way to record, analyze and interpret the learning method of a complex model and 
for repeating the same in the future. Although the computing paradigm is still in 
research labs, its adoption in a commercial environment especially in the financial 
industries is not far away.
7. Conclusion
In the days to come, the financial industry will show increasingly more reliance 
on machine learning and artificial intelligence-based emerging methods and mod-
els to leverage competitive advantages. While the regulatory and compliance will 
evolve into a more standardized framework, machine learning will continue to pro-
vide the banks and other financial institutions more opportunities to explore and 
exploit emerging applications, while being more efficient in delivering the existing 
services. While the emerging techniques discussed in the chapter will play their 
critical roles in mitigating future risks in models, they will also guide the authorities 
in designing effective regulations and compliance frameworks in risk-intensive 
applications like creditworthiness assessment, trade surveillance, and capital asset 
pricing. The model validation process will increasingly be adapted to mitigate 
machine learning risks, while considerable effort and time will be spent in fine-
tuning the model hypermeters in handling emerging applications. However, banks 
will have more opportunities to deploy the models in a large gamut of applications, 
gaining competitive business advantages and mitigating risks in operations.

Machine Learning - Algorithms, Models and Applications
10
Author details
Jaydip Sen1*, Rajdeep Sen2 and Abhishek Dutta3
1 Department of Data Science, Praxis Business School, Kolkata, India
2 Independent Researcher and Financial Analyst
3 School of Computing and Analytics, NASHM Knowledge Campus, Kolkata, India

© 2021 The Author(s). Licensee IntechOpen. This chapter is distributed under the terms 
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, 
provided the original work is properly cited. 

11
Introductory Chapter: Machine Learning in Finance-Emerging Trends and Challenges
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.101120
