January 2024
Mobile ALOHA:
Learning Bimanual Mobile Manipulation with
Low-Cost Whole-Body Teleoperation
Zipeng Fu*1, Tony Z. Zhao*1, Chelsea Finn1
*project co-leads, 1Stanford University
https://mobile-aloha.github.io
use cabinet
cook shrimp
push chairs
Learned Policies
wipe wine
high ﬁve
call elevator
Figure 1: Mobile ALOHA
. We introduce a low-cost mobile manipulation system that is bimanual and supports
whole-body teleoperation. The system costs $32k including onboard power and compute. Left: A user teleoperates to
obtain food from the fridge. Right: Mobile ALOHA can perform complex long-horizon tasks with imitation learning.
Abstract
Imitation learning from human demonstrations has
shown impressive performance in robotics. How-
ever, most results focus on table-top manipulation,
lacking the mobility and dexterity necessary for gen-
erally useful tasks. In this work, we develop a system
for imitating mobile manipulation tasks that are bi-
manual and require whole-body control. We first
present Mobile ALOHA, a low-cost and whole-body
teleoperation system for data collection. It augments
the ALOHA system [104] with a mobile base, and a
whole-body teleoperation interface. Using data col-
lected with Mobile ALOHA, we then perform super-
vised behavior cloning and find that co-training with
existing static ALOHA datasets boosts performance
on mobile manipulation tasks. With 50 demonstra-
tions for each task, co-training can increase success
rates by up to 90%, allowing Mobile ALOHA to au-
tonomously complete complex mobile manipulation
tasks such as sauteing and serving a piece of shrimp,
opening a two-door wall cabinet to store heavy cook-
ing pots, calling and entering an elevator, and lightly
rinsing a used pan using a kitchen faucet.
1. Introduction
Imitation learning from human-provided demonstra-
tions is a promising tool for developing generalist
robots, as it allows people to teach arbitrary skills
to robots. Indeed, direct behavior cloning can en-
able robots to learn a variety of primitive robot skills
ranging from lane-following in mobile robots [67],
to simple pick-and-place manipulation skills [12, 20]
to more delicate manipulation skills like spreading
pizza sauce or slotting in a battery [18, 104]. How-
ever, many tasks in realistic, everyday environments
require whole-body coordination of both mobility
and dexterous manipulation, rather than just individ-
ual mobility or manipulation behaviors. For example,
consider the relatively basic task of putting away a
heavy pot into a cabinet in Figure 1. The robot needs
to first navigate to the cabinet, necessitating the mo-
bility of the robot base. To open the cabinet, the robot
needs to back up while simultaneously maintaining
a firm grasp of the two door handles, motivating
whole-body control. Subsequently, both arms need
to grasp the pot handles and together move the pot
into the cabinet, emphasizing the importance of bi-
manual coordination. Along a similar vein, cooking,
cleaning, housekeeping, and even simply navigating
an office using an elevator all require mobile manip-
ulation and are often made easier with the added
flexibility of two arms. In this paper, we study the
feasibility of extending imitation learning to tasks
that require whole-body control of bimanual mobile
1
arXiv:2401.02117v1  [cs.RO]  4 Jan 2024

Mobile ALOHA: https://mobile-aloha.github.io
robots.
Two main factors hinder the wide adoption of
imitation learning for bimanual mobile manipula-
tion. (1) We lack accessible, plug-and-play hardware
for whole-body teleoperation. Bimanual mobile ma-
nipulators can be costly if purchased off-the-shelf.
Robots like the PR2 and the TIAGo can cost more
than $200k USD, making them unaffordable for typi-
cal research labs. Additional hardware and calibra-
tion are also necessary to enable teleoperation on
these platforms. For example, the PR1 uses two hap-
tic devices for bimanual teleoperation and foot ped-
als to control the base [93]. Prior work [5] uses a
motion capture system to retarget human motion to
a TIAGo robot, which only controls a single arm and
needs careful calibration. Gaming controllers and
keyboards are also used for teleoperating the Hello
Robot Stretch [2] and the Fetch robot [1], but do not
support bimanual or whole-body teleoperation. (2)
Prior robot learning works have not demonstrated
high-performance bimanual mobile manipulation
for complex tasks. While many recent works demon-
strate that highly expressive policy classes such as
diffusion models and transformers can perform well
on fine-grained, multi-modal manipulation tasks, it
is largely unclear whether the same recipe will hold
for mobile manipulation: with additional degrees of
freedom added, the interaction between the arms
and base actions can be complex, and a small devia-
tion in base pose can lead to large drifts in the arm’s
end-effector pose. Overall, prior works have not
delivered a practical and convincing solution for bi-
manual mobile manipulation, both from a hardware
and a learning standpoint.
We seek to tackle the challenges of applying imi-
tation learning to bimanual mobile manipulation in
this paper. On the hardware front, we present Mobile
ALOHA, a low-cost and whole-body teleoperation
system for collecting bimanual mobile manipulation
data. Mobile ALOHA extends the capabilities of the
original ALOHA , the low-cost and dexterous biman-
ual puppeteering setup [104], by mounting it on a
wheeled base. The user is then physically tethered to
the system and backdrives the wheels to enable base
movement. This allows for independent movement
of the base while the user has both hands controlling
ALOHA . We record the base velocity data and the
arm puppeteering data at the same time, forming a
whole-body teleoperation system.
On the imitation learning front, we observe that
simply concatenating the base and arm actions then
training via direct imitation learning can yield strong
performance. Specifically, we concatenate the 14-
DoF joint positions of ALOHA with the linear and
angular velocity of the mobile base, forming a 16-
dimensional action vector. This formulation allows
Mobile ALOHA to benefit directly from previous deep
imitation learning algorithms, requiring almost no
change in implementation. To further improve the
imitation learning performance, we are inspired by
the recent success of pre-training and co-training on
diverse robot datasets, while noticing that there are
few to none accessible bimanual mobile manipula-
tion datasets. We thus turn to leveraging data from
static bimanual datasets, which are more abundant
and easier to collect, specifically the static ALOHA
datasets from [81, 104] through the RT-X release
[20]. It contains 825 episodes with tasks disjoint
from the Mobile ALOHA tasks, and has different
mounting positions of the two arms. Despite the
differences in tasks and morphology, we observe
positive transfer in nearly all mobile manipulation
tasks, attaining equivalent or better performance
and data efficiency than policies trained using only
Mobile ALOHA data. This observation is also con-
sistent across different class of state-of-the-art imi-
tation learning methods, including ACT [104] and
Diffusion Policy [18].
The main contribution of this paper is a system
for learning complex mobile bimanual manipulation
tasks. Core to this system is both (1) Mobile ALOHA,
a low-cost whole-body teleoperation system, and (2)
the finding that a simple co-training recipe enables
data-efficient learning of complex mobile manipu-
lation tasks. Our teleoperation system is capable of
multiple hours of consecutive usage, such as cook-
ing a 3-course meal, cleaning a public bathroom, and
doing laundry. Our imitation learning result also
holds across a wide range of complex tasks such
as opening a two-door wall cabinet to store heavy
cooking pots, calling an elevator, pushing in chairs,
and cleaning up spilled wine. With co-training, we
are able to achieve over 80% success on these tasks
with only 50 human demonstrations per task, with
an average of 34% absolute improvement compared
to no co-training.
2. Related Work
Mobile Manipulation. Many current mobile ma-
nipulation systems utilize model-based control,
which involves integrating human expertise and
insights into the system’s design and architec-
ture [9, 17, 33, 52, 93]. A notable example of model-
based control in mobile manipulation is the DARPA
Robotics Challenge [56]. Nonetheless, these systems
can be challenging to develop and maintain, often
2

Mobile ALOHA: https://mobile-aloha.github.io
wrist cameras
top camera
100cm
200cm
65cm
#Dofs
Weight
Size
Payload
Arm Repeatability
Arm Accuracy
Battery life
Max pulling force
Rolling resistance
14 (arms) + 2 (base)
75kg
80W * 84L * 140H (no leaders)
90W * 135L * 140H
750g (per arm) 55kg (base)
1mm
5-8mm
12 hours (1620Wh)
100N at 100cm vertically
13N (vinyl floor)
battery pack 
laptop
operator
Figure 2: Hardware Details. Left: Mobile ALOHA has two wrist cameras and one top camera, with onboard power and
compute. Middle: The teleoperation setup can be removed and only two ViperX 300 [3] are used during autonomous
execution. Both arms can reach a min/max height of 65cm/200cm, and extends 100cm from the base. Right: Technical
specifications of Mobile ALOHA .
requiring substantial team efforts, and even minor
errors in perception modeling can result in signifi-
cant control failures [6, 51]. Recently, learning-based
approaches have been applied to mobile manipu-
lation, alleviating much of the heavy engineering.
In order to tackle the exploration problem in high-
dimensional state and action spaces of mobile ma-
nipulation tasks, prior works use predefined skill
primitives [86, 91, 92], reinforcement learning with
decomposed action spaces [38, 48, 58, 94, 101], or
whole-body control objectives [36, 42, 99]. Unlike
these prior works that use action primitives, state
estimators, depth images or object bounding boxes,
imitation learning allows mobile manipulators to
learn end-to-end by directly mapping raw RGB ob-
servations to whole-body actions, showing promis-
ing results through large-scale training using real-
world data [4, 12, 78] in indoor environments [39, 78].
Prior works use expert demonstrations collected by
using a VR interface [76], kinesthetic teaching [100],
trained RL policies [43], a smartphone interface [90],
motion capture systems [5], or from humans [8].
Prior works also develop humanoid teleoperation by
using human motion capture suits [19, 22, 23, 26],
exoskeleton [32, 45, 72, 75], VR headsets for visual
feedbacks [15, 53, 65, 87], and haptic feedback de-
vices [14, 66]. Purushottam et al. develop an ex-
oskeleton suit attached to a force plate for whole-
body teleoperation of a wheeled humanoid, However,
there is no low-cost solution to collecting whole-
body expert demonstrations for bimanual mobile
manipulation. We present Mobile ALOHA for this
problem. It is suitable for hour-long teleoperation,
and does not require a FPV goggle for streaming
back videos from the robot’s egocentric camera or
haptic devices.
Imitation Learning for Robotics. Imitation learn-
ing enables robots to learn from expert demon-
strations [67]. Behavioral cloning (BC) is a sim-
ple version, mapping observations to actions. En-
hancements to BC include incorporating history
with various architectures [12, 47, 59, 77], new
training objectives [10, 18, 35, 63, 104], regulariza-
tion [71], motor primitives [7, 44, 55, 62, 64, 97],
and data preprocessing [81]. Prior works also fo-
cus on multi-task or few-shot imitation learning,
[25, 27, 30, 34, 46, 50, 88, 102], language-conditioned
imitation learning [12, 47, 82, 83], imitation from
play data [21, 57, 74, 89], using human videos [16,
24, 29, 60, 69, 80, 84, 96], and using task-specific
structures [49, 83, 103]. Scaling up these algorithms
has led to systems adept at generalizing to new ob-
jects, instructions, or scenes [12, 13, 28, 47, 54]. Re-
cently, co-training on diverse real-world datasets
collected from different but similar types of robots
have shown promising results on single-arm manip-
ulation [11, 20, 31, 61, 98], and on navigation [79].
In this work, we use a co-training pipeline for bi-
manual mobile manipulation by leveraging the ex-
isting static bimanual manipulation datasets, and
show that our co-training pipeline improves the per-
formance and data efficiency of mobile manipula-
tion policies across all tasks and several imitation
learning methods. To our knowledge, we are the
first to find that co-training with static manipula-
tion datasets improves the performance and data
efficiency of mobile manipulation policies.
3. Mobile ALOHA Hardware
We develop Mobile ALOHA, a low-cost mobile manip-
ulator that can perform a broad range of household
tasks. Mobile ALOHA inherits the benefits of the
original ALOHA system [104], i.e. the low-cost, dex-
3

Mobile ALOHA: https://mobile-aloha.github.io
terous, and repairable bimanual teleoperation setup,
while extending its capabilities beyond table-top ma-
nipulation. Specifically, we incorporate four key
design considerations:
1. Mobile: The system can move at a speed com-
parable to human walking, around 1.42m/s.
2. Stable: It is stable when manipulating heavy
household objects, such as pots and cabinets.
3. Whole-body teleoperation: All degrees of
freedom can be teleoperated simultaneously,
including both arms and the mobile base.
4. Untethered: Onboard power and compute.
We choose AgileX Tracer AGV ("Tracer") as the
mobile base following considerations 1 and 2. Tracer
is a low-profile, differential drive mobile base de-
signed for warehouse logistics. It can move up to
1.6m/s similar to average human walking speed.
With a maximum payload of 100kg and 17mm height,
we can add a balancing weight low to the ground
to achieve the desired tip-over stability. We found
Tracer to possess sufficient traversability in acces-
sible buildings: it can traverse obstacles as tall as
10mm and slopes as steep as 8 degrees with load,
with a minimum ground clearance of 30mm. In prac-
tice, we found it capable of more challenging ter-
rains such as traversing the gap between the floor
and the elevator. Tracer costs $7,000 in the United
States, more than 5x cheaper than AGVs from e.g.
Clearpath with similar speed and payload.
We then seek to design a whole-body teleopera-
tion system on top of the Tracer mobile base and
ALOHA arms, i.e. a teleoperation system that allows
simultaneous control of both the base and the two
arms (consideration 3). This design choice is particu-
larly important in household settings as it expands
the available workspace of the robot. Consider the
task of opening a two-door cabinet. Even for humans,
we naturally step back while opening the doors to
avoid collision and awkward joint configurations.
Our teleoperation system shall not constrain such
coordinated human motion, nor introduce unnec-
essary artifacts in the collected dataset. However,
designing a whole-body teleoperation system can
be challenging, as both hands are already occupied
by the ALOHA leader arms. We found the design of
tethering the operator’s waist to the mobile base to
be the most simple and direct solution, as shown in
Figure 2 (left). The human can backdrive the wheels
which have very low friction when torqued off. We
measure the rolling resistance to be around 13N on
vinyl floor, acceptable to most humans. Connecting
the operator to the mobile manipulator directly also
enables coarse haptic feedback when the robot col-
lides with objects. To improve the ergonomics, the
height of the tethering point and the positions of
the leader arms can all be independently adjusted
up to 30cm. During autonomous execution, the teth-
ering structure can also be detached by loosening 4
screws, together with the two leader arms. This re-
duces the footprint and weight of the mobile manip-
ulator as shown in Figure 2 (middle). To improve the
ergonomics and expand workspace, we also mount
the four ALOHA arms all facing forward, different
from the original ALOHA which has arms facing
inward.
To make our mobile manipulator untethered (con-
sideration 4), we place a 1.26kWh battery that
weights 14kg at the base. It also serves as a bal-
ancing weight to avoid tipping over. All compute
during data collection and inference is conducted
on a consumer-grade laptop with Nvidia 3070 Ti
GPU (8GB VRAM) and Intel i7-12800H. It accepts
streaming from three Logitech C922x RGB webcams,
at 480x640 resolution and 50Hz. Two cameras are
mounted to the wrist of the follower robots, and
the third facing forward. The laptop also accepts
proprioception streaming from all 4 arms through
USB serial ports, and from the Tracer mobile base
through CAN bus. We record the linear and angular
velocities of the mobile base to be used as actions of
the learned policy. We also record the joint positions
of all 4 robot arms to be used as policy observations
and actions. We refer readers to the original ALOHA
paper [104] for more details about the arms.
With design considerations above, we build Mo-
bile ALOHA with a $32k budget, comparable to a
single industrial cobot such as the Franka Emika
Panda. As illustrated in Figure 2 (middle), the mo-
bile manipulator can reach between 65cm and 200cm
vertically relative to the ground, can extend 100cm
beyond its base, can lift objects that weight 1.5kg,
and can exert pulling force of 100N at a height of
1.5m. Some example tasks that Mobile ALOHA is
capable of includes:
• Housekeeping: Water plants, use a vacuum, load
and unload a dishwasher, obtain drinks from the
fridge, open doors, use washing machine, fling and
spread a quilt, stuff a pillow, zip and hang a jacket,
fold trousers, turn on/off a lamp, and self-charge.
• Cooking: Crack eggs, mince garlic, unpackage
vegetables, pour liquid, sear and flip chicken thigh,
blanch vegetables, stir fry, and serve food in a dish.
• Human-robot interactions: Greet and shake
“hands” with a human, open and hand a beer to
human, help human shave and make bed.
We include more technical specifications of Mo-
4

Mobile ALOHA: https://mobile-aloha.github.io
bile ALOHA in Figure 2 (right). Beyond the off-the-
shelf robots, we open-source all of the software and
hardware parts with a detailed tutorial covering 3D
printing, assembly, and software installation. The
tutorial is on the project website.
4. Co-training with
Static ALOHA Data
The typical approach for using imitation learning to
solve real-world robotics tasks relies on using the
datasets that are collected on a specific robot hard-
ware platform for a targeted task. This straightfor-
ward approach, however, suffers from lengthy data
collection processes where human operators collect
demonstration data from scratch for every task on
the a specific robot hardware platform. The policies
trained on these specialized datasets are often not ro-
bust to the perceptual perturbations (e.g. distractors
and lighting changes) due to the limited visual diver-
sity in these datasets [95]. Recently, co-training on
diverse real-world datasets collected from different
but similar types of robots have shown promising
results on single-arm manipulation [11, 20, 31, 61],
and on navigation [79].
In this work, we use a co-training pipeline that
leverages the existing static ALOHA datasets to im-
prove the performance of imitation learning for mo-
bile manipulation, specifically for the bimanual arm
actions. The static ALOHA datasets [81, 104] have
825 demonstrations in total for tasks including Ziploc
sealing, picking up a fork, candy wrapping, tearing a
paper towel, opening a plastic portion cup with a lid,
playing with a ping pong, tape dispensing, using a
coffee machine, pencil hand-overs, fastening a velcro
cable, slotting a battery, and handling over a screw
driver. Notice that the static ALOHA data is all col-
lected on a black table-top with the two arms fixed
to face towards each other. This setup is different
from Mobile ALOHA where the background changes
with the moving base and the two arms are placed in
parallel facing the front. We do not use any special
data processing techniques on either the RGB obser-
vations or the bimanual actions of the static ALOHA
data for our co-training.
Denote the aggregated static ALOHA data as as
Dstatic, and the Mobile ALOHA dataset for a task m as
Dm
mobile. The bimanual actions are formulated as tar-
get joint positions aarms ∈R14 which includes two
continuous gripper actions, and the base actions are
formulated as target base linear and angular veloci-
ties abase ∈R2. The training objective for a mobile
manipulation policy πm for a task m is
E(oi,aiarms,ai
base)∼Dm
mobile

L(ai
arms, ai
base, πm(oi))

+
E(oi,aiarms)∼Dstatic

L(ai
arms, [0, 0], πm(oi))

,
where oi is the observation consisting of two wrist
camera RGB observations, one egocentric top cam-
era RGB observation mounted between the arms,
and joint positions of the arms, and L is the imi-
tation loss function. We sample with equal prob-
ability from the static ALOHA data Dstatic and the
Mobile ALOHA data Dm
mobile. We set the batch size
to be 16. Since static ALOHA datapoints have no
mobile base actions, we zero-pad the action labels
so actions from both datasets have the same dimen-
sion. We also ignore the front camera in the static
ALOHA data so that both datasets have 3 cameras.
We normalize every action based on the statistics
of the Mobile ALOHA dataset Dm
mobile alone. In our
experiments, we combine this co-training recipe
with multiple base imitation learning approaches,
including ACT [104], Diffusion Policy [18], and
VINN [63].
5. Tasks
We select 7 tasks that cover a wide range of capa-
bilities, objects, and interactions that may appear in
realistic applications. We illustrate them in Figure 3.
For Wipe Wine, the robot needs to clean up spilled
wine on the table. This task requires both mobil-
ity and bimanual dexterity. Specifically, the robot
needs to first navigate to the faucet and pick up the
towel, then navigate back to the table. With one arm
lifting the wine glass, the other arm needs to wipe
the table as well as the bottom of the glass with the
towel. This task is not possible with static ALOHA,
and would take more time for a single-armed mobile
robot to accomplish.
For Cook Shrimp, the robot sautes one piece of raw
shrimp on both sides before serving it in a bowl. Mo-
bility and bimanual dexterity are also necessary for
this task: the robot needs to move from the stove to
the kitchen island as well as flipping the shrimp with
spatula while the other arm tilting the pan. This task
requires more precision than wiping wine due to the
complex dynamics of flipping a half-cooked shrimp.
Since the shrimp may slightly stick to the pan, it is
difficult for the robot to reach under the shrimp with
the spatula and precisely flip it over.
For Rinse Pan, the robot picks up a dirty pan and
rinse it under the faucet before placing it on the
drying rack. In addition to the challenges in the pre-
vious two tasks, turning on the faucet poses a hard
perception challenge. The knob is made from shiny
5

Mobile ALOHA: https://mobile-aloha.github.io
Wipe Wine: The robot base is initialized within a square of 1.5m x 1.5m with yaw up to 30°. It first navigates to the sink and picks up the towel 
hanging on the faucet (#1). It then turns around and approaches the kitchen island, picks up the wine glass (randomized in 30cm x 30cm), wipes 
the spilled wine (#2), and puts down the wine glass on the table (#3). Each demo has 1300 steps or 26 seconds.
Cook Shrimp: The robot is randomized up to 5cm and all objects up to 2cm. The right gripper first pours oil into the hot pan (#1) followed by 
raw shrimp (#2). With left gripper lifting the pan at an angle, the right gripper grasps the spatula and flips the shrimp (#3). The robot then turns 
around and pours the shrimp into an empty bowl (#4) before placing the pan on the table. Each demo has 3750 steps or 75 seconds.
Wash Pan: The pan randomized up to 10cm with yaw up to 45°. The left gripper grasps the pan (#1) before turning around to the faucet. The 
right gripper opens then closes the faucet with left gripper holding the pan to receive the water (#2). The left gripper then swirls the water inside 
the pan, pours it out, before placing the pan on the rack (#3). Each demo has 1100 steps or 22 seconds.
Use Cabinet: The robot is randomized up to 10cm and pots up to 5cm. A total of 3 pots are used. The robot first approaches the cabinet and 
grasp both handles, then backs up pulling both doors open (#1). Next, both arms grasp the handles of the pot, move forward, and place it inside 
the cabinet (#2). The robot then backs up and closes both cabinet doors (#4). Each demo has 1500 steps or 30 seconds.
Take Elevator: The robot starts 15m from the elevator and is randomized across the 10m wide lobby. The robot goes around a column to reach 
the elevator button (#1). The right gripper presses the button (#2) and the robot enters the elevator (#3). Each demo has 2250 steps or 45 seconds.
#1
#2
#3
init.
Push Chairs: The robot’s initial position is randomized up to 10cm. Demonstration dataset contains pushing in the first 3 chairs, and the robot is 
tested with all 5 chairs. Each demo has 2000 steps or 40 seconds.
#1
#2
#3
#4
init.
#1
#2
#3
init.
#1
#2
#3
#4
init.
#1
#2
#3
init.
#1
#2
#3
init.
Figure 3: Task Definitions. We illustrate 6 real-world tasks that Mobile ALOHA can perform autonomously. The 7th
task High Five is illustrated in the Appendix A.1 due to space constraint. For each task, we describe randomization
and sub-task definitions. We also include an illustration of the base movement for each task (not drawn to scale).
6

Mobile ALOHA: https://mobile-aloha.github.io
Wipe Wine (50 demos)
Cook Shrimp (20 demos)
Grasp
Towel
Lift Glass
and Wipe
Place
Glass
Whole
Task
Add
Oil
Add
Shrimp
Flip
Shrimp
Plate
Shrimp
Whole
Task
Co-train
100
95
100
95
100
100
60
67
40
No Co-train
95
58
90
50
100
100
40
50
20
Rinse Pan (50 demos)
Use Cabinet (50 demos)
Grasp
Pan
Turn On
Faucet
Place
Pan
Whole
Task
Open
Cabinets
Grasp
Pot
Place
Pot
Close
Cabinet
Whole
Task
Co-train
100
80
100
80
95
100
95
95
85
No Co-train
100
0
100
0
95
95
100
95
85
Call Elevator (50 demos)
Push Chairs (50 demos)
High Five (20 demos)
Navi.
Press
Button
Enter
Elevator
Whole
Task
1-3rd
Chair
4th
(OOD)
5th
(OOD)
Whole
Task
Unseen
Attire
Unseen
Human
Navi.
Whole
Task
Co-train
100
100
95
95
100
85
89
80
90
80
100
85
No Co-train
100
5
0
0
100
70
0
0
90
80
100
85
Table 1: Co-training improves ACT performance. Across 7 challenging mobile manipulation tasks, co-training
with static ALOHA dataset consistently improve the success rate (%) of ACT. It is particularly important for sub-tasks
like Press Button in Call Elevator and Turn on Faucet in Rinse Pan, where precise manipulation is the bottleneck.
stainless steel and is small in size: roughly 4cm in
length and 0.7cm in diameter. Due to the stochas-
ticity introduced by the base motion, the arm needs
to actively compensate for the errors by “visually-
servoing” to the shiny knob. A centimeter-level error
could result in task failure.
For Use Cabinet, the robot picks up a heavy pot and
places it inside a two-door cabinet. While seemingly
a task that require no base movement, the robot
actually needs to move back and forth four times
to accomplish this task. For example when open-
ing the cabinet door, both arms need to grasp the
handle while the base is moving backward. This
is necessary to avoid collision with the door and
have both arms within their workspace. Maneuvers
like this also stress the importance of whole-body
teleoperation and control: if the arms and base con-
trol are separate, the robot will not be able to open
both doors quickly and fluidly. Notably, the heaviest
pot in our experiments weighs 1.4kg, exceeding the
single arm’s payload limit of 750g while within the
combined payload of two arms.
For Call Elevator, the robot needs to enter the el-
evator by pressing the button. We emphasize long
navigation, large randomization, and precise whole-
body control in this task. The robot starts around
15m from the elevator and is randomized across the
10m wide lobby. To press the elevator button, the
robot needs to go around a column and stop precisely
next to the button. Pressing the button, measured
2cm×2cm in size, requires precision as pressing the
peripheral or pressing too lightly will not activate
the elevator. The robot also needs to turn sharply
and precisely to enter the elevator door: there is only
30cm in clearance between the robot’s widest part
and the door.
For Push Chairs, the robot needs to push in 5 chairs
in front of a long desk. This task emphasizes the
strength of the mobile manipulator: it needs to over-
come the friction between the 5kg chair and the
ground with coordinated arms and base movement.
To make this task more challenging, we only collect
data for the first 3 chairs, and stress test the robot to
extrapolate to the 4th and 5th chair.
For High Five, we include illustrations in the Ap-
pendix A.1. The robot needs to go around the kitchen
island, and whenever a human approach it from the
front, stop moving and high five with the human. Af-
ter the high five, the robot should continue moving
only when the human moves out of its path. We col-
lect data wearing different clothes and evaluate the
trained policy on unseen persons and unseen attires.
While this task does not require a lot of precision,
it highlights Mobile ALOHA’s potential for studying
human-robot interactions.
We want to highlight that for all tasks mentioned
above, open-loop replaying a demonstration with ob-
jects restored to the same configurations will achieve
zero whole-task success. Successfully completing
the task requires the learned policy to react close-
loop and correct for those errors. We believe the
source of errors during the open-loop replaying is
7

Mobile ALOHA: https://mobile-aloha.github.io
Wipe Wine (50 demos)
Push Chairs (50 demos)
Grasp
Towel
Lift Glass
and Wipe
Place
Glass
Whole
Task
1st
Chair
2nd
Chair
3rd
Chair
Whole
Task
VINN + Chunking
Co-train
85
18
100
15
100
70
86
60
No Co-train
50
40
100
20
90
72
62
40
Diffusion Policy
Co-train
90
72
100
65
100
100
100
100
No Co-train
75
47
100
35
100
80
100
80
ACT
Co-train
100
95
100
95
100
100
100
100
No Co-train
95
58
90
50
100
100
100
100
Table 2: Mobile ALOHA is compatible with recent imitation learning methods. VINN with chunking, Diffusion
Policy, and ACT all achieves good performance on Mobile ALOHA, and benefit from co-training with static ALOHA.
the mobile base’s velocity control. As an example,
we observe >10cm error on average when replaying
the base actions for a 180 degree turn with 1m ra-
dius. We include more details about this experiment
in Appendix A.4.
6. Experiments
We aim to answer two central questions in our ex-
periments. (1) Can Mobile ALOHA acquire complex
mobile manipulation skills with co-training and a
small amount of mobile manipulation data? (2) Can
Mobile ALOHA work with different types of imita-
tion learning methods, including ACT [104], Diffu-
sion Policy [18], and retrieval-based VINN [63]? We
conduct extensive experiments in the real-world to
examine these questions.
As a preliminary, all methods we will examine em-
ploy “action chunking” [104], where a policy predicts
a sequence of future actions instead of one action at
each timestep. It is already part of the method for
ACT and Diffusion policy, and simple to be added for
VINN. We found action chunking to be crucial for
manipulation, improving the coherence of generated
trajectory and reducing the latency from per-step
policy inference. Action chunking also provides a
unique advantage for Mobile ALOHA: handling the
delay of different parts of the hardware more flexibly.
We observe a delay between target and actual veloc-
ities of our mobile base, while the delay for position-
controlled arms is much smaller. To account for a
delay of d steps of the mobile base, our robot exe-
cutes the first k −d arm actions and last k −d base
actions of an action chunk of length k.
6.1. Co-training Improves Performance
We start with ACT [104], the method introduced
with ALOHA, and train it on all 7 tasks with and
without co-training. We then evaluate each pol-
icy in the real-world, with randomization of robot
and objects configurations as described in Figure 3.
To calculate the success rate for a sub-task, we di-
vide #Success by #Attempts. For example in the
case of Lift Glass and Wipe sub-task, the #Attempts
equals the number of success from the previous sub-
task Grasp Towel, as the robot could fail and stop at
any sub-task. This also means the final success rate
equals the product of all sub-task success rates. We
report all success rates in Table 1. Each success rate
is computed from 20 trials of evaluation, except Cook
Shrimp which has 5.
With the help of co-training, the robot obtains 95%
success for Wipe Wine, 95% success for Call Elevator,
85% success for Use Cabinet, 85% success for High
Five, 80% success for Rinse Pan, and 80% success for
Push Chairs. Each of these tasks only requires 50 in-
domain demonstrations, or 20 in the case of High Five.
The only task that falls below 80% success is Cook
Shrimp (40%), which is a 75-second long-horizon task
for which we only collected 20 demonstrations. We
found the policy to struggle with flipping the shrimp
with the spatula and pouring the shrimp inside the
white bowl, which has low contrast with the white
table. We hypothesize that the lower success is likely
due to the limited demonstration data. Co-training
improves the whole-task success rate in 5 out of the
7 tasks, with a boost of 45%, 20%, 80%, 95% and 80%
respectively. For the remaining two tasks, the suc-
cess rate is comparable between co-training and no
co-training. We find co-training to be more helpful
for sub-tasks where precise manipulation is the bot-
tleneck, for example Press Button, Flip Shrimp, and
Turn On Faucet. In all of these cases, compounding
errors appear to be the main source of failure, either
from the stochasticity of robot base velocity control
or from rich contacts such as grasping of the spatula
and making contact with the pan during Flip Shrimp.
We hypothesize that the “motion prior” of grasping
8

Mobile ALOHA: https://mobile-aloha.github.io
25
35
50
Num. Mobile ALOHA Demos
0
20
40
60
80
100
Success (%)
Wipe Wine
Co-train
No Co-train
Figure 4: Data efficiency.
Co-training with static
ALOHA data leads to better data efficiency and consistent
improvements over training with Mobile ALOHA data
only. Figure style credits to [70].
and approaching objects in the static ALOHA dataset
still benefits Mobile ALOHA, especially given the in-
variances introduced by the wrist camera [41]. We
also find the co-trained policy to generalize better
in the case of Push Chairs and Wipe Wine. For Push
Chairs, both co-training and no co-training achieve
perfect success for the first 3 chairs, which are seen
in the demonstrations. However, co-training per-
forms much better when extrapolating to the 4th
and 5th chair, by 15% and 89% respectively. For Wipe
Wine, we observe that the co-trained policy performs
better at the boundary of the wine glass randomiza-
tion region. We thus hypothesize that co-training
can also help prevent overfitting, given the low-data
regime of 20-50 demonstrations and the expressive
transformer-based policy used.
6.2. Compatibility with
ACT, Diffusion Policy, and VINN
We train two recent imitation learning methods,
Diffusion Policy [18] and VINN [63], with Mobile
ALOHA in addition to ACT. Diffusion policy trains a
neural network to gradually refine the action predic-
tion. We use the DDIM scheduler [85] to improve in-
ference speed, and apply data augmentation to image
observations to prevent overfitting. The co-training
data pipeline is the same as ACT, and we include
more training details in the Appendix A.3. VINN
trains a visual representation model, BYOL [37] and
uses it to retrieve actions from the demonstration
dataset with nearest neighbors. We augment VINN
retrieval with proprioception features and tune the
relative weight to balance visual and proprioception
feature importance. We also retrieve an action chunk
instead of a single action and find significant per-
formance improvement similar to Zhao et al.. For
Static ALOHA proportion (%)
30
50
70
(default)
Success (%)
95
95
90
Table 3: Co-training is robust to different data mix-
tures. Result uses ACT training on the Wipe Wine task.
Co-train Pre-train
No Co-train
No Pre-train
Success (%)
95
40
50
Table 4: Co-train vs. Pre-train. Co-train outperforms
pre-train on the Wipe Wine task. For pre-train, we first
train ACT on the static ALOHA data and then fine-tune it
with the Mobile ALOHA data.
co-training, we simply co-train the BYOL encoder
with the combined mobile and static data.
In Table 2, we report co-training and no cotraining
success rates on 2 real-world tasks: Wipe Wine and
Push Chairs. Overall, Diffusion Policy performs sim-
ilarly to ACT on Push Chairs, both obtaining 100%
with co-training. For Wipe Wine, we observe worse
performance with diffusion at 65% success. The Dif-
fusion Policy is less precise when approaching the
kitchen island and grasping the wine glass. We hy-
pothesize that 50 demonstrations is not enough for
diffusion given it’s expressiveness: previous works
that utilize Diffusion Policy tend to train on upwards
of 250 demonstrations. For VINN + Chunking, the
policy performs worse than ACT or Diffusion across
the board, while still reaching reasonable success
rates with 60% on Push Chairs and 15% on Wipe Wine.
The main failure modes are imprecise grasping on
Lift Glass and Wipe as well as jerky motion when
switching between chunks. We find that increasing
the weight on proprioception when retrieving can
improve the smoothness while at a cost of paying
less attention to visual inputs. We find co-training
to improve Diffusion Policy’s performance, by 30%
and 20% for on Wipe Wine and Push Chairs respec-
tively. This is expected as co-training helps address
overfitting. Unlike ACT and Diffusion Policy, we
observe mixed results for VINN, where co-training
hurts Wipe Wine by 5% while improves Push Chairs
by 20%. Only the representations of VINN are co-
trained, while the action prediction mechanism of
VINN does not have a way to leverage the out-of-
domain static ALOHA data, perhaps explaining these
mixed results.
9

Mobile ALOHA: https://mobile-aloha.github.io
1
2
3
4
5
Trial Num.
20
40
60
80
Duration (s)
Wipe Wine
1
2
3
4
5
Trial Num.
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Use Cabinets
Avg. User
Expert
Figure 5: Teleoperator learning curves. New users
can quickly approach expert speed on an unseen tasks
teleoperating Mobile ALOHA .
7. Ablation Studies
Data Efficiency. In Figure 4, we ablate the num-
ber of mobile manipulation demonstrations for both
co-training and no co-training, using ACT on the
Wipe Wine task. We consider 25, 35, and 50 Mobile
ALOHA demonstrations and evaluate for 20 trials
each. We observe that co-training leads to better data
efficiency and consistent improvements over train-
ing using only Mobile ALOHA data. With co-training,
the policy trained with 35 in-domain demonstrations
can outperform the no co-training policy trained
with 50 in-domain demonstrations, by 20% (70% vs.
50%).
Co-training Is Robust To Different Data Mix-
tures. We sample with equal probability from the
static ALOHA datasets and the Mobile ALOHA task
dataset to form a training mini-batch in our co-
training experiments so far, giving a co-training data
sampling rate of roughly 50%. In Table 3, we study
how different sampling strategies affect performance
on the Wipe Wine task. We train ACT with 30% and
70% co-training data sampling rates in addition to
50%, then evaluate 20 trials each. We see similar
performance across the board, with 95%, 95% and
90% success respectively. This experiment suggests
that co-training performance is not sensitive to dif-
ferent data mixtures, reducing the manual tuning
necessary when incorporating co-training on a new
task.
Co-training Outperforms Pre-training. In Ta-
ble 4, we compare co-training and pre-training on
the static ALOHA data. For pre-training, we first
train ACT on the static ALOHA data for 10K steps
and then continue training with in-domain task data.
We experiment with the Wipe Wine task and observe
that pre-training provides no improvements over
training solely on Wipe Wine data. We hypothesize
that the network forgets its experience on the static
ALOHA data during the fine-tuning phase.
8. User Studies
We conduct a user study to evaluate the effective-
ness of Mobile ALOHA teleoperation. Specifically,
we measure how fast participants are able to learn to
teleoperate an unseen task. We recruit 8 participants
among computer science graduate students, with 5
females and 3 males aged 21-26. Four participants
has no prior teleoperation experience, and the re-
maining 4 have varying levels of expertise. None
of the them have used Mobile ALOHA before. We
start by allowing each participant to freely interact
with objects in the scene for 3 minutes. We held
out all objects that will be used for the unseen tasks
during this process. Next, we give each participants
two tasks: Wipe Wine and Use Cabinet. An expert
operator will first demonstrate the task, followed
by 5 consecutive trials from the participants. We
record the completion time for each trial, and plot
them in Figure 5. We notice a steep decline in com-
pletion time: on average, the time it took to perform
the task went from 46s to 28s for Wipe Wine (down
39%), and from 75s to 36s for Use Cabinet (down 52%).
The average participant can also to approach speed
of expert demonstrations after 5 trials, demonstrat-
ing the ease of use and learning of Mobile ALOHA
teleoperation.
9. Conclusion, Limitations and
Future Directions
In summary, our paper tackles both the hardware
and the software aspects of bimanual mobile ma-
nipulation. Augmenting the ALOHA system with a
mobile base and whole-body teleoperation allows us
to collect high-quality demonstrations on complex
mobile manipulation tasks. Then through imitation
learning co-trained with static ALOHA data, Mobile
ALOHA can learn to perform these tasks with only
20 to 50 demonstrations. We are also able to keep the
system accessible, with under $32k budget including
onboard power and compute, and open-sourcing on
both software and hardware.
Despite Mobile ALOHA’s simplicity and perfor-
mance, there are still limitations that we hope to ad-
dress in future works. On the hardware front, we will
seek to reduce the occupied area of Mobile ALOHA.
The current footprint of 90cm x 135cm could be too
narrow for certain paths. In addition, the fixed height
of the two follower arms makes lower cabinets, ovens
and dish washers challenging to reach. We are plan-
10

Mobile ALOHA: https://mobile-aloha.github.io
ning to add more degrees of freedom to the arms’
elevation to address this issue. On the software front,
we limit our policy learning results to single task im-
itation learning. The robot can not yet improve itself
autonomously or explore to acquire new knowledge.
In addition, the Mobile ALOHA demonstrations are
collected by two expert operators. We leave it to fu-
ture work for tackling imitation learning from highly
suboptimal, heterogeneous datasets.
