Mapping EU fishing activities using ship tracking data 
Michele Vespe, Maurizio Gibin, Alfredo Alessandrini, Fabrizio Natale, Fabio Mazzarella, Giacomo C. Osio 
European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Italy 
 
Abstract: Information and understanding of fishing activities at sea are fundamental 
components of marine knowledge and maritime situational awareness. Such information is 
important to fisheries science, public authorities and policy makers. In this paper we 
introduce a first map at European scale of EU fishing activities extracted using Automatic 
Identification System (AIS) ship tracking data. The resulting map is a density of points that 
identify fishing activities. A measure of the reliability of such information is also presented 
as a map of coverage reception capabilities.  
Introduction 
Mapping fishing activities at sea has been investigated using data from different ship tracking systems. 
Amongst them, terrestrial networks of Automatic Identification System (AIS) receivers offer the possibility 
to track vessels independently of their flag, at wide scale. Conceived primarily as a collision avoidance and 
vessel monitoring tool, AIS is nowadays a cornerstone of safety of navigation. In addition, AIS is becoming 
progressively used to improve Maritime Situational Awareness to detect ship’s behaviour anomalies and 
project the current situation into the future (Pallotta et al., 2013). Historical AIS data have been proved 
effective in mapping merchant routes (Fernandez et al., 2014) and other activities such as off-shore, 
research and exploration etc. (Vespe et al., 2015). In Europe (EU Dir 2011/15/EU), even fishing vessels 
down to 15 m in length are required to be fitted with AIS, and this has a significant impact in understanding 
the spatial distribution of fishing efforts (e.g., Natale et al., 2015, and Mazzarella et al., 2014) and the 
economics of the EU fisheries sector (Natale et al., 2016). The knowledge of fishing activities is not only 
fundamental for fisheries science, but it is also a key element for policy makers, e.g. in planning activities at 
sea (Maritime Spatial Planning) or in assessing the impact of introducing new Marine Protected Areas. 
Following the findings reported in (Natale et al., 2015), the paper introduces for the first time an 
aggregated and anonymised map of EU fishing activities at European scale. The map is produced by 
processing AIS historical data in the period September 2014 to September 2015. A spatial coverage of the 
data is also computed after aggregating the data from multiple providers in order to give an estimate of the 
reliability of the results in the different areas. 
Data 
The data used in this analysis originated from AIS terrestrial networks of receivers and contain information 
on the time, position, direction and speed of individual vessels above 15 meters length. AIS data format and 
structure are very similar to the output of a commercially available GPS device. Having a rather high time 
and space granularity, AIS data require additional care on the shortening of the computational time needed 
for the implementation of the analysis work flow. The AIS dataset used in our analysis contains fishing 
vessels only. In order to identify fishing vessels the available vessel identifiers transmitted with AIS 
(Maritime Mobile Service Identity - MMSI) are linked to the EU fishing fleet register1 through call sign and 
                                                          
1 European Union Fleet Register data (http://ec.europa.eu/fisheries/fleet/) 

name. The output of this process is a set of EU fishing vessels whose dynamic information is later 
processed. In addition, also information on the primary and secondary gears from the fleet register are 
stored and subsequently used to isolate specific fishing categories such as trawlers, purse seiners, etc. 
(ISSCFG, 1980). In this study we analyse fishing activities related to trawlers only (bottom otter, beam and 
midwater trawls2) which represent the largest portion of the EU fishing vessels above 15 meters of length. 
The choice of this group of actively towed fishing gears was based on the importance of these gears and on 
the reliability of identifying when a boat is actively fishing rather than steaming (Mazzarella et al., 2014). 
Once linked to the fleet register, the dataset was anonymised.  
Methods 
The methodology to map EU fishing activities using AIS data can be summarised in the following steps: 
Data cleaning: the position and speed data relevant to the above vessels are selected and cleaned in 
case of errors. The data are also decimated to an interval of 5 minutes between consecutive 
observations. This brings to a total of more than a 150 million messages analysed in this study and 60 
million of such messages classified as fishing by the model. 
 
Fishing Behaviour Identification: the points corresponding to fishing behaviour (see Algorithm 1) are 
extracted based on the assumption that there is a separation of fishing activities with a steaming 
speed that is relatively high with respect to fishing speed (Mazzarella et al., 2014).  
 
 
 
Figure 1: track and speed profile of a trawler showing three clusters of velocities corresponding to in port, 
fishing (position highlighted in yellow) and steaming behaviours  
The resulting speed profiles, after excluding the zero-velocity points that relate to messages sent when 
the vessel is likely to be in a port, show a bi-modal distribution. This is shown in Figure 1, where the 
track of a trawler is plotted on a map and colour-coded by these speed intervals. The transit legs 
                                                          
2 ISSCFG codes Bottom otter trawl (OTB), Beam trawl (TBB), Bottom pair trawl (PTB), Midwater otter trawl (OTM), Midwater pair 
trawl (PTM), and Multi-rig otter trawl (OTT) (ISSCFG, 1980). 

contain the high speed points, whereas the low speed points around 3.5 knots cluster in the middle of 
the sea at the far ranges of the track (yellow), and are therefore likely indicating fishing grounds. By 
applying this approach for all fishing vessels in a specific area, it is possible to understand the fishing 
grounds and map high intensity fishing areas. 
 
Depending on vessel size, area, fishing gear and many other factors, fishing vessels exhibit specific 
mean and standard deviation values of the speed bi-modal distributions. For this reason, the 
identification of fishing behaviour has to be implemented for each individual vessel (Natale et al., 
2015). Using a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM), an unsupervised classification method, we isolated the 
two main activities distributions and obtained the component parameters. Fishing speed confidence 
intervals were built for each vessel using the first component mean and standard deviation. 
 
Algorithm 1: Fishing Behaviour Identification 
Require: AIS_messages // AIS messages identified by MMSI and include lat, lon, speed etc. 
Require: MMSI_list // List of MMSI#  that identify EU fishing vessels 
Require: Fishing_points  = [] 
 
1:    for all MMSI_i ∈ MMSI_list do 
2:    // Construct the speed profile for the fishing vessels identified by the MMSI_i 
3:           speed_data_i ← AIS_messages(find(AIS_messages.MMSI = MMSI_i)). speed 
4     // Extract the relevant track for the same vessel  
5:           lat_i ← AIS_messages(find(AIS_messages.MMSI = MMSI_i)).lat 
6:           lon_i ← AIS_messages(find(AIS_messages.MMSI = MMSI_i)).lon 
7:    // Find the parameters of the mixture of two Gaussian distributions through EM algorithm  
8:    // over speed values greater than 0.5 (this excludes values relevant to vessels in port or close to it) 
9:            [µ_i_1, µ_i_2, θ_i_1, θ_i _2] ← Expectation_Maximisation (speed_data_i > 0.5) 
10:   // Evaluate the fishing speed thresholds for each vessel as ± k standard deviations from the first mode 
11:          [v_th_l, v_th_h] ← µ_i_1 ± k·θ_i_1 
12:   // Isolate fishing points between ± k standard deviations from the first mode 
13:          Fishing_indexes_i ← find(v_th_l  < speed_data_i < v_th_h )) 
13:          Fishing_points ← add [lat_i(Fishing_indexes_i), lon_i(Fishing_indexes_i)] 
14:   end for 
15:   return Fishing_points 
 
Aggregate results into density maps: the resulting points classified as fishing are aggregated into 1 km2 
cells. It is worth noting that the AIS time decimation allows for the computation of a time-coherent 
map, where every point corresponds to a 5 minutes fishing activity. In Figure 2, the density of all 
messages classified as ‘fishing’ is reported. The map highlights the high intensity fishing areas in EU 
waters over one year. 
 
 

 
 
Figure 2: Density of AIS messages classified as “fishing” 
 
Accuracy and validation 
The aggregated fishing intensity value for a specific cell is subject to the completeness of information that 
can be collected in that area. In our case, since the reception of AIS is related to the radio propagation of 
the messages transmitted by the vessel, such completeness is mainly linked to the distance to the closest 
AIS receiving station. Nevertheless, the propagation of AIS messages is also influenced by the atmospheric 
conditions in the area and significantly varies accordingly.  

 
Figure 3: Spatial coverage map representing the reliability of the results in Figure 2 
The AIS reception spatial coverage in this study is averaged over the AIS dataset period and is shown in 
Figure 3. This has been calculated for each cell as the ratio between received and expected tracks of vessels 
traveling at normal cruising speed. The majority of them are merchant vessels that, differently from fishing 
vessel, follow specific routes. Consequently the trajectories can be derived even with incomplete tracks. A 
coverage map tells where the information is expected to be complete, and therefore reliable. As an 
example, low fishing intensity values in areas with low reception capability may be underestimated. Thus, 
the map of fishing intensity areas has to be used together with the relevant coverage map.  
The coverage map shows high coverage in all European coastal waters and over the continental shelf (sea 
bottom up to 200 m depth). This are the areas of operation of all bottom and – partially - mid water trawls, 
thus the AIS coverage will be reliable for these gears. In particular, in Figure 4 the results of the density of 
AIS messages classified as “fishing” is shown over part of the continental shelf. It can be seen that high 
density areas are located in correspondence of isobaths and follow the bathymetric profile of the area. This 
is a known behaviour of trawlers that often operate at constant depths. Moreover, it can be observed that 
the known shipping routes in the areas are not visible, demonstrating that the fishing activity is consistently 
isolated from the steaming behaviour. 
 

 
Figure 4: AIS derived fishing activities over the continental shelf extracted from Figure 2 highlighting the 
correlation with the bathymetry over the area (bottom-left, from the GEBCO world map 2014, 
www.gebco.net) 
The coverage map provides reliable information on the accuracy and the precision of the density map, 
while validation of the machine learning method used in the analysis has to be assessed indirectly. The 
density map produced represents to our knowledge the first attempt in creating a European level fine scale 
dataset of fishing intensity. Information about the effort3 of European fishing vessel is available through the 
European Data Collection Framework. This information is mostly collected from logbooks and is aggregated 
by ICES statistical rectangles. ICES statistical rectangles are a bespoke gridded geography introduced by the 
International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) in the 1970s and have a size of 1 degree longitude 
and 0.5 degree latitude.  
At the moment, there is not requirement for Member States to submit more detailed fishing activity data, 
however, it has become increasingly essential to access finer scale fishing information to assess fisheries 
management measures.  
Vessel positioning data is also available in the EU through the Vessel Monitoring Systems (VMS). VMS data 
is being used to derive high resolution maps of fishing activity on a regional scale by the ICES working group 
                                                          
3 Effort is a more sophisticated measure of fishing intensity and it is constructed as the product of the engine power of the fishing 
vessel by the amount of time spent at sea fishing and it is measured in Kilowatt per days at sea. Fishing intensity is expressed as 
number of points classified as fishing per square kilometre. 

on Spatial Data Fisheries (WGSFD). The WGSFD's main duties are to advice on collating, aggregating, 
analyse and present spatial fisheries information. The final output of the WGSFD is an annual report (ICES 
2015) and data products available to the public. Both the report and the data products produced for the 
this year contains 2013 data about fishing intensity not calculated and measured as the one produced by 
the machine learning method presented in this paper. 
Conclusions 
The paper has introduced a first map at European scale of EU fishing activities using AIS ship tracking data 
over one year. For the first time it is possible to compare the intensity of fishing activity, in terms of density 
of AIS signals, of towed gear at EU level on similar scales.  
The first emerging pattern is that all the continental shelf area in the EU Mediterranean countries is almost 
all subject to a high intensity of trawled gear fishing. The intensity and extension of fishing in the Adriatic 
Sea is unique at EU level, although the intensity increases on an East-to-West gradient. In the North East 
Atlantic the majority of the continental shelf is subject to trawling activities but with a high patchiness of 
intensity: coastal areas have greater intensity than off shore areas like the centre of the North Sea.  
The classification of gear from the EU Fleet Register was assumed to be correct for selecting the towed 
gears. There might be however some misclassifications as there are some AIS fishing signals south of the 
Balearic Islands which are only compatible with gears Midwater Pair Trawl (PTM) and Midwater Otter Trawl 
(OTM), which are however not declared by Spain in 2014 according to the DCF data provided by Spain. 
Similarly in the Ligurian Sea there is an offshore group of AIS fishing signals that is not compatible with 
towed demersal gear and there is no official reporting of PTM and OTM in the area. Both these areas could 
be compatible with Purse seine or long line fishing. Based on these two cases there might some 
misclassification of Primary Gear in the Fleet Register that is worth investigating.   
The level of detail of the layers allows identifying different types of fishing and can be used to investigate 
and characterise the relations between fishing grounds and fishing coastal communities for a coherent 
analysis of European fisheries from an environmental and socio-economics perspective.  
A typical policy application of the map of fishing activity would be in the evaluation of the impacts of 
environmental conservation measures established on a geographical basis like in the case of fisheries 
management in Natura 2000 sites. Such measures include for example banning fishing activity using mobile 
bottom contacting gear (e.g. beam trawls and bottom otter trawls) to protect reef structures and achieving 
favourable conservation status under the Habitats Directive (for a recent example of policy application in 
the Baltic Sea and Kattegat see Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/1778). Since the protected 
sites are sometimes limited to few square km a detailed spatial representation of fishing intensity is needed 
in these cases to assess the environmental effectiveness of the planned measures. Knowing “who is fishing 
where” is essential to calculate indicators of spatial dependency of fishing fleets and coastal communities in 
the affected areas and these indicators can be easily converted into employment and GVA equivalents to 
assess and the socio–economic effects on the fishing sector. 
In order to become a sound element of knowledge for researchers, public administrations and policy 
makers, the fishing intensity layer has to be associated to the level of AIS spatial coverage, which can be 
thought of as a reliability of information. 
Fisheries management carefully keeps track of the distribution of fishing effort and its footprint. To get an 
estimate of fishing effort or of fishing footprint (Eigaard et al. 2015) it would be necessary to link the 

density of AIS with the size or the engine power of the fishing vessels, which is directly linked to the size of 
the gear towed. This additional step is beyond the scope of this paper but is a very important avenue for 
future research. 
Software  
We employ different software packages for the preparation of the map. AIS data were collated and cleaned 
using the Pandas data analysis library.  
For the analysis part the statistical software R was used. R proved particularly useful and flexible but it 
required additional efforts to optimizing the code for computational efficiency. It was necessary to employ 
the latest software libraries available to R, above all “data.table” and parallelize the code.  
The final results data were then converted into vector and raster data files and consequently mapped using 
Quantum GIS.  
A georeferenced fishing intensity layers can be downloaded from the Blue Hub website, Mapping Fishing 
Activities (MFA) section.
