arXiv:1801.06007v2  [cs.NE]  12 Mar 2018
Layered TPOT
Speeding up Tree-based Pipeline Optimization
Pieter Gijsbers1, Joaquin Vanschoren1, and Randal S. Olson2
1 Technische Universiteit Eindhoven
2 University of Pennsylvania
Abstract. With the demand for machine learning increasing, so does
the demand for tools which make it easier to use. Automated machine
learning (AutoML) tools have been developed to address this need, such
as the Tree-Based Pipeline Optimization Tool (TPOT) which uses ge-
netic programming to build optimal pipelines. We introduce Layered
TPOT, a modiﬁcation to TPOT which aims to create pipelines equally
good as the original, but in signiﬁcantly less time. This approach evalu-
ates candidate pipelines on increasingly large subsets of the data accord-
ing to their ﬁtness, using a modiﬁed evolutionary algorithm to allow for
separate competition between pipelines trained on diﬀerent sample sizes.
Empirical evaluation shows that, on suﬃciently large datasets, Layered
TPOT indeed ﬁnds better models faster.
1
Introduction
The ﬁeld of Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) aims to automate many
of the tasks required to construct machine learning models, hence lowering the
barrier to entry and yielding better models, faster. AutoML methods typically
automate one or more steps in the creation of useful machine learning pipelines,
such as the selection of preprocessing or learning algorithms, hyperparameter
optimization, or a combination of them. A few methods even construct and
optimize entire pipelines, such as the Tree-based Pipeline Optimization Tool
(TPOT)[14]. TPOT uses genetic programming to evolve optimal pipelines, aim-
ing to ﬁnd machine learning pipelines yielding accurate predictive models while
trying to keep the pipeline as simple as possible.
In this paper, we introduce a novel improvement of TPOT, aimed at reduc-
ing the time needed to evaluate pipelines, without reducing the quality of the
ﬁnal pipeline. Indeed, the most time-consuming part in the optimization process
is evaluating the performance of candidate machine learning pipelines. In our
modiﬁcation, this time is reduced by initially evaluating the pipelines on a small
subset of the data, and only allowing promising pipelines to be evaluated on the
full dataset. In order to do this in a fair manner, modiﬁcations to the evolution-
ary algorithm are implemented to prevent direct comparison between pipelines
which are evaluated on diﬀerent subsets of the data. As such, we aim to ﬁnd
pipelines of similar quality in much less time, making the tool more accessible

and practical by requiring less computational time. We call this improvement
Layered TPOT (LTPOT).
This paper is organized as follows. First, we review related work in Sect. 2.
Then, in Sect. 3, we discuss the proposed modiﬁcation to TPOT in detail. Next,
in Sect. 4, we lay out how LTPOT will be evaluated, discuss the results of these
evaluations, and propose aspects of LTPOT which can be researched in future
work. Finally, we conclude the study in Sect. 5.
2
Related Work
The ﬁeld of AutoML is a culmination of work in the ﬁelds of algorithm selection,
hyperparameter optimization and machine learning. Several AutoML systems
support at least some form of automatic pipeline construction.
Auto-WEKA [18] uses Sequential Model-based Algorithm Conﬁguration
(SMAC) to do combined algorithm selection and hyperparameter optimiza-
tion [10], which is an adaptation of Sequential Model-Based Optimization from
statistical literature. Auto-WEKA uses algorithms from the WEKA library [8],
to build pipelines with one learner (possibly an ensemble) and optionally a
single feature selection technique.
Auto-sklearn [6], built on the Python library scikit-learn [15], is a re-
implementation of Auto-WEKA with two extensions. The ﬁrst is the use of
meta-learning to warm-start the Bayesian optimization procedure, a technique
which has earlier been proven useful in [7]. The second addition is the automatic
construction of ensembles from models evaluated during the optimization
process. Furthermore, auto-sklearn allows for more preprocessing steps to be
included in the pipeline: it allows for one feature preprocessor, which includes
feature extraction techniques as well as feature selection techniques, in addition
to up to three data preprocessor methods, such as missing value imputation
and rescaling.
TPOT diﬀers from Auto-sklearn and Auto-WEKA by using an evolutionary
algorithm instead of SMAC. Additionally, TPOT uses a tree-based structure to
represent pipelines, and considers pipelines with any number of preprocessing
steps. Hence, TPOT is not constrained in the number nor the order of prepro-
cessing steps.
The main idea of LTPOT is to ﬁrst evaluate pipelines on a subset of the
data, to get an indication of whether or not the pipeline is promising relative
to other pipelines. This idea has been explored before, for example in Sample-
based Active Testing [1], or algorithm selection using learning curves [16], where
promising algorithm conﬁgurations are ﬁrst evaluated on a smaller data sample
to create a proxy for their performance on the full dataset.

The use of subsets to evaluate machine learning conﬁgurations is also used
in Hyperband [11]. Hyperband dynamically allocates resources to more promis-
ing algorithm conﬁgurations, based on experiments executed on gradually more
resources. One application that is explored is using data samples as a resource,
and using increasingly bigger subsets of the data to evaluate the algorithm con-
ﬁgurations with. In a speciﬁc selection of datasets they showed that using this
technique improved over Random Search, SMAC and Tree-structured Parzen
Estimators, as introduced in [3].
In the context of evolutionary algorithms, evaluating individuals on a subset
of the data to ﬁlter out bad individuals is also implemented in GTMOEP [20].
Rather than a successive halving approach, they perform a selection of indi-
viduals based on evaluation on 1% of the data. However, there is very little
evaluation done to have a clear picture of the eﬀects of this approach on the
resulting pipelines across datasets.
3
Methods
In this section, we describe the modiﬁcations made to TPOT. First, we give
a brief description of how TPOT constructs and optimizes machine learning
pipelines. Then, we describe the Layered TPOT (LTPOT) structure and moti-
vate its design.
3.1
Structure of TPOT
To construct and optimize machine learning pipelines, TPOT uses tree-based ge-
netic programming [2]. Pipelines are represented by genetic programming trees.
An example of a tree representation of a machine learning pipeline is shown
in Fig. 1. The tree consists of several nodes, which can either be Primitives or
Terminals, in Fig. 1 depicted as squares and ellipses, respectively. Primitives are
operators which require input, such as an algorithm requiring data and hyper-
parameter values. Terminals are constants which can be passed to primitives.
Finally, a primitive can also be used as input to a primitive, as can be seen
in Fig.1, where the StandardScaler primitive provides the scaled dataset to the
Bernoulli Naive Bayes algorithm. Information of required input and output types
is used to ensure that only valid pipelines are constructed.
The evolutionary algorithm then works by using these machine learning
pipelines as their individuals. It will perform mutation, for example changing
a hyperparameter or adding a preprocessing step, as well as crossover, by se-
lecting two pipelines which share a primitive, which allows them to exchange
subtrees or leaves. Finally, pipelines are evaluated and assigned a ﬁtness score,
so that a selection procedure can determine which individuals should be in the
next generation.

    Bernoulli
Naive Bayes
Alpha = 1.0
Standard
  Scaler
Dataset
Fig. 1: A visual representation of a tree-based machine learning pipeline that
applies standard scaling to the data before learning a Bernoulli Naive Bayes
model.
As mentioned earlier, in theory these pipeline trees could be arbitrarily large.
However, very extensive machine learning pipelines are often undesirable. With
more hyperparameters, long pipelines can be harder to tune, be more prone to
overﬁtting, hinder understanding of the ﬁnal model, and require more time to
be evaluated, slowing down the optimization process.
Because of these reasons, we use a multiobjective optimization technique,
NSGA-II[4], to select individuals based on the Pareto front of the trade-oﬀbe-
tween the pipeline length and its performance.
3.2
Layered TPOT Concept
During the TPOT optimization process, most time is spent on evaluating ma-
chine learning pipelines. Every machine learning pipeline is evaluated on the full
dataset, which can take a lot of time. Layered TPOT (LTPOT) aims to reduce
the amount of pipelines evaluated on the entire dataset by doing a selection
process, so that only the most promising pipelines need to be evaluated on the
full dataset. It achieves this by evaluating pipelines on a small subset of the
data, and only if a pipeline exhibits good performance on that subset it will be
evaluated on more data.
Age-Layered Population To incorporate a fair evaluation of pipelines on
subsets gradually increasing in size, we designed a layered structure to separate
competition among individuals. In this, we were inspired by the Age-Layered
Population Structure (ALPS) [9], where individuals are segregated into layers to
reduce the problem of premature convergence. The problem of premature con-
vergence occurs when the individuals in the population converge to a good local
optimum, which means that any new individuals are unlikely to be competitive
with this local optimum, and through selection are ﬁltered out of the population
before they themselves can converge to a local optimum. In ALPS, all individuals
were given an age which would increase as an individual or its oﬀspring would
remain in the population, and perform breeding and selection only in separate

age groups called layers. This segregation is important, because otherwise the
old, locally well optimized, individuals would often prevent young individuals
from being able to survive the multiple generations they needed to get closer to
their local optimum.
Layers in LTPOT In LTPOT, we wish to evaluate pipelines on subsets of
the data. However, the performance of a machine learning pipeline is inﬂuenced
by the amount of training data it receives. This means that when evaluating
individuals on diﬀerent subsets of the data, their performance cannot directly be
compared to one another. Therefore, the individuals are segregated into layers.
At each layer, individuals will be evaluated on a subset of diﬀerent size. The
layers are ordered, such that in the ﬁrst layer the subset used to evaluate the
individuals is the smallest, and every layer above that will increase the subset
size. When an individual performs well in one layer, it will eventually be trans-
ferred to the next. This way, only the best pipelines will be evaluated on the
entire dataset in the last layer. A visual overview of the structure and ﬂow of
LTPOT is given in Fig.2.
Layer 1
 N/8 samples
new  population
new
top k
rest
top k
top k
Layer 2
N/4 samples
Layer 3
N/2 samples
Layer  4
N samples
new
new
rest
rest
Fig. 2: A visual overview of the Layered TPOT structure. After a certain number
of generations, each layer passes their best k individuals on to the next layer,
while the ﬁrst layer will be provided with a newly generated set of individuals.
Correlation of performance between layers In the extreme, the selec-
tion procedure implicitly assumes that the relative performance of two pipelines

is the same when evaluated on a subset of the dataset as it is on the entire
dataset. However, this assumption does not always hold. The learning curves for
two pipelines may cross, meaning that one pipeline performs better after being
trained on a small subset of the data, while the other performs better when
trained on the full dataset. Generally speaking, as the pipelines are evaluated on
more data, the relative performance correlates more strongly with the relative
performance obtained when they are trained on the entire dataset. This is why
our design will evaluate the pipelines on gradually larger subsets of data, so that
when a pipeline performs worse than expected as the dataset increases, it need
not be evaluated on bigger datasets. Unfortunately, in the case where a pipeline
has poor performance on a small subset, but good performance on the entire
dataset, LTPOT will not pick up this pipeline.
We set up an experiment to verify whether or not there is indeed a correlation
between the performance of a pipeline on a sample of the dataset and its per-
formance on the entire dataset. In this experiment, we evaluated 50 pipelines
on 12 datasets with ten times 10-fold cross-validation, with various samples
sizes of the dataset as well as the entire dataset. All datasets were part of the
Penn Machine Learning Benchmark (PMLB) [13]. The average AUROC of each
pipeline for each sample size was determined for each dataset. Sample sizes were
{N/21, . . . , N/25}, where N is the number of instances in the dataset. Because
the evolutionary algorithm performs pipeline selection based on the ranking of
the algorithms, rather than the value of the score metric, we ranked the averaged
scores and computed the correlation of the rankings.
dataset
instances features
ρ N
2
ρ N
4
ρ N
8
ρ N
16
ρ N
32
satimage
6435
36
0.984 0.903 0.833 0.759 0.641
clean2
6598
168
0.972 0.946 0.890 0.825 0.765
ann-thyroid
7200
21
0.982 0.967 0.946 0.924 0.828
twonorm
7400
20
0.978 0.929 0.898 0.759 0.829
mushroom
8124
22
0.973 0.962 0.935 0.867 0.781
agaricus-lepiota
8145
22
0.989 0.980 0.920 0.877 0.805
coil2000
9822
85
0.939 0.878 0.815 0.568 0.529
pendigits
10992
16
0.984 0.983 0.945 0.844 0.771
nursery
12958
8
0.995 0.995 0.857 0.917 0.917
magic
19020
10
0.988 0.974 0.961 0.947 0.934
letter
20000
16
0.990 0.959 0.918 0.899 0.801
krkopt
28056
6
0.984 0.942 0.917 0.913 0.750
Table 1: An overview of the spearman ρ calculated by comparing the ranking
of pipelines trained on subsets of the data compared to the entire dataset, p <
0.0001 in all cases. The subscript in the column denote the size of the subset.
In Table 1 the Spearman ρ-values are displayed, that signify the correlation
between the ranking of pipelines trained on a sample of the dataset, and the

ranking of pipelines when trained on the entire dataset. The p-values are omitted
because in all cases they are smaller than 0.0001 and all correlations are thus
signiﬁcant. From Table 1 we see that that there is a positive correlation between
the rankings for all sample sizes and datasets, and the correlation gets stronger
as the sample size gets closer to the full dataset size.
We experimented with various curve ﬁtting methods to extrapolate the learn-
ing curves of pipelines so that crossing learning curves might be predicted earlier,
but they did not improve the results. In future work the use of meta-learning for
learning curve extrapolation, such as in [16], will be tried.
3.3
Layered TPOT Algorithm
We will now give a more in-depth break down of the algorithm used in LT-
POT. Algorithm 1 shows the core of the layered algorithm LayeredEA, and
Algorithm 2 gives descriptions of the subroutines called from LayeredEA.
Algorithm 1 Layered Evolutionary Algorithm
1: function LayeredEA(population, S, g, G, D)
population: a set of pipelines that will be the ﬁrst generation
S: set containing the sample size for each layer
g: interval in generations for when a transfer should occur
G: total number of generations
D: dataset to construct a pipeline for
2:
M ←∥S∥
⊲Denote the number of layers.
3:
P ←∥population∥
⊲Denote population size.
4:
L1 ←population
5:
L2, . . . , LM ←∅
6:
for i in 1..G do
7:
for l in 1..M do
8:
if Ll ̸= ∅and i mod g < 2(M−l+1) then
9:
oﬀspring ←VarOr(Ll, P)
10:
Evaluate(oﬀspring, Sl, D)
11:
Ll ←Selection(Ll ∪oﬀspring, P)
12:
end if
13:
end for
14:
if i mod g = 0 then
15:
for l in (M −1)..1 do
16:
Ll+1 ←Ll+1 ∪Top(Ll, P/2)
17:
end for
18:
L1 ←NewPopulation(P)
19:
end if
20:
end for
21:
return Top(LM, 1)
22: end function

Algorithm 2 Functions called in Layered EA
1: function VarOr(Population, N)
Performs mutation and crossover on the individuals in Population, creating N new
individuals.
end function
2: function Evaluate(Population, s, D)
Evaluates each individual on a subset of dataset D, created by taking s instances
by stratiﬁed sampling. Individuals are evaluated based on 3-fold CV accuracy and
number of components in the pipeline. Results are saved as attributes of individu-
als.3
end function
3: function Selection(Population, p)
Creates pareto-fronts based on the accuracy-pipeline complexity trade-oﬀ. Then
takes the ﬁrst p individuals after ordering the population by which pareto-front
they are in (individuals in the ﬁrst front come ﬁrst).
end function
4: function Top(Population, k)
Returns the k best individuals of the population, by constructing a pareto-front
based on the accuracy-pipeline complexity trade-oﬀ.
end function
5: function NewPopulation(P)
Creates a new population of P individuals.
end function

Selecting parameter values Before calling LayeredEA, the number of layers
as well as their sample size is deﬁned. The sample size of a layer dictates how
many instances are sampled from the dataset, to create the subset that the
pipelines in that layer will be evaluated on. The subset is created by stratiﬁed
uniform random sampling without replacement, and pipelines will be evaluated
on this subset with 5-fold cross-validation. In this study, the sample sizes used
in each layer are dictated by the size of the dataset. Let the dataset contain N
instances, then the ﬁnal layer will always train on the entire dataset, and each
subsequent layer will use half of the data the layer above did. In this study, the
number of layers used is 4, for every dataset. The respective sample sizes used
at each layer are thus N
8 , N
4 , N
2 and N. In this paper we use the term higher
layer loosely to denote layers which sample more of the entire dataset (i.e. the
layer with sample size N
2 is higher than the layer with sample size N
4 ).
There are two ways to specify for how long the main loop of lines 7 through 20
should run: a set amount of generations G, or an amount of time. We chose not
to work with a speciﬁc number of generations G, but instead let the main loop in
lines 7 through 20 run for eight hours. For parameter g, the amount of generations
between transfer, we experimented with values 2 and 16. With a g value of 2,
LTPOT acts almost as a ﬁlter, allowing only very little optimization in early
layers. A value of 16, however, allows many generations of early optimization,
before passing individuals through to the next layer.
For the ﬁnal part of the initialization, a population of size P is generated
randomly.
LayeredEA When calling LayeredEA, as shown in Algorithm 1, the ﬁrst step
is to denote constants based on the input, speciﬁcally the number of layers M
(line 1) and the size of the population P (line 2), as well assigning the initial
population to the ﬁrst layer (line 4) and marking all other layers as empty (line
5).
Then, the evolutionary algorithm will start iterating through the generations
(line 6-20), at each generation again progressing the evolutionary algorithm in
each layer (line 7-13) and then if required transferring individuals from one layer
to the next (line 14-19).
Progressing the evolutionary algorithm in each layer (line 7-13), only happens
for layers which are active. This means that there must be a population in the
layer (ﬁrst clause on line 8), which it may not yet have if not enough transfers
have taken place yet. Additionally, layers which evaluate on more data are not
active every generation (second clause on line 8), this is motivated below.
When progressing the evolutionary algorithm, it executes the same steps as
TPOT would. First, a new population is created from the individuals evaluated
during the last generation in the same layer, by performing mutation and cross-
over (line 9). However, every time a layer is passed new individuals from a
previous layer, as well as in the very ﬁrst generation, the provided population is

taken as is without creating oﬀspring.4 The new individuals are then evaluated
based on the sample of the data as deﬁned by their layer (line 10). Finally, based
on the Pareto-front of the trade-oﬀbetween the performance score of the pipeline
as well as the pipeline length, the best individuals are picked among the new
individuals as well as last generation’s (line 11). Then, every g generations, the
best individuals from each layer get passed to the next one. In our conﬁguration
we chose to transfer half of the layer’s population.
The ﬁnal pipeline chosen by LTPOT is the pipeline which has the best score in
the highest layer (line 21).
Optimizations There are a few scenario’s that either require some additional
clariﬁcation, or deviate from the above algorithm:
The ﬁrst time a layer receives individuals from the layer before it, the selec-
tion procedure will oversample from this population so that the population in
the layer will also grow to size P (line 11). This is done so that in subsequent
generations, more variations of the original pipelines will exist, allowing for a
better search for optimal pipelines.
Secondly, if LTPOT runs for a speciﬁed amount of generations, layers will
be turned oﬀwhenever their population can no longer reach the highest layer.
For example, let LTPOT be conﬁgured with 4 layers. When LTPOT is less than
3 ∗g generations away from completion, any individual in the lowest layer will
never reach the highest layer, thus rendering any results obtained in this layer
useless. Whenever this happens, the respective layer will no longer have their
individuals evaluated or transferred to a next layer.
Next, there is the earlier mentioned restriction on activating layers as shown
in the second clause on line 8. LTPOT has a selection process in place for which
pipelines will be evaluated on the entire dataset. This means that at higher lay-
ers, the pipelines in the population are likely already quite good. Because of
these two factors, we want to limit the exploration in higher layers. To do this,
instead of running the evolutionary algorithm in each layer every generation,
higher layers can be turned oﬀfor some generations. In this study, for a layered
structure with M layers, layer l is progressed for min(2(M−l+1), g) generations
every g generations, with l ∈{1, · · · , M}. This is demonstrated with g = 12 and
M = 4 in Fig.3, and checked in the second clause on line 8. We have not yet
evaluated if this leads to signiﬁcant improvements.
Finally, to prevent any one pipeline from halting the algorithm, a pipeline’s
evaluation is automatically stopped if it exceeds a given time limit. If the eval-
uation is stopped this way, the pipeline is marked as failure and will not be
considered as parent for the next generation. This behavior is present in the
4 This is not incorporated in the pseudo-code of algorithm 1, to keep the general
structure clear.

Layer 1
Layer 2
Layer 3
Layer 4
On
Oﬀ
Fig. 3: Not every layer should run experiments every generation. This ﬁgure
illustrates that the higher layers will be ’turned oﬀ’ in higher layers, meaning
that no iterations of the evolutionary algorithm are executed.
original TPOT, and adopted to LTPOT by further decreasing the time limit
by layer. In the top layer, each individual is allowed the same evaluation time
as it would in TPOT. However, for lower layers, the time allowed is decreased
quadratically proportional to the sample size (a layer with half the data gets a
fourth of the time per individual).
4
Empirical evaluation
4.1
Experimental Questions
The goal of LTPOT is to ﬁnd pipelines at least as good as TPOT’s, but in
less time. This also means that, given the same amount of time, LTPOT could
very well ﬁnd better pipelines. To assess whether or not this is achieved, we will
evaluate LTPOT in three ways.
First, we want to evaluate if, given the same amount of time, LTPOT will
outperform TPOT when their best found pipelines are compared. To do this, a
ranking is constructed between TPOT and LTPOT for each dataset over time,
by ranking the performance of the best pipeline found so far at regular time in-
tervals. We omit a comparison to Random Search, as TPOT compared favorably
to Random Search in earlier work [12].
Secondly, to quantify how much faster LTPOT is, we compare the time
needed for LTPOT to ﬁnd a pipeline at least as good as the best pipeline found
by TPOT. We then compare it to the time TPOT needs to ﬁnd this pipeline.
Finally, we will also compare the Area Under the Receiver Operating Char-
acteristic curve (AUROC) of the ﬁnal pipelines found by each method, so we
can quantify the diﬀerence in model quality between the methods.
4.2
Experimental setup
We compare LTPOT to the original TPOT by evaluating both on a selection of
18 large datasets. We speciﬁcally chose larger datasets so that there will be a

distinct diﬀerence in time needed to evaluate individuals on the entire dataset
versus just a subset. All datasets in the selection contain at least one hundred
thousand instances, though most contain exactly one million. The selection in-
cludes pseudo-artiﬁcial datasets described in [17]. The datasets are available for
download and inspection on OpenML5, an open database for machine learning
experiments [19]. We previously evaluated LTPOT on a selection of datasets
from the Penn Machine Learning Benchmark [13], which TPOT was initially
evaluated on. Because those datasets were relatively small, pipeline evaluations
were quick even on the full dataset, so there was no signiﬁcant beneﬁt of using
LTPOT. On each dataset, each method is evaluated nine times, starting with a
diﬀerent initial generation each time.
As described earlier, there are many hyperparameters with which to tune
LTPOT. In this study, we only experiment with g, the amount of generations
between transfer. The choices for g will be 2 and 16, and these conﬁgurations
will be referred to as LTPOT-2 and LTPOT-16, respectively. This is meant to
give insight in the eﬀectiveness of two functions of LTPOT: ﬁltering and early
optimization. For LTPOT-2, layers act almost solely as a ﬁlter, by passing the
best individuals to the next layer every other iteration, not much optimization
takes place in lower layers, but it does allow for the early discarding of pipelines
which seem to perform poorly. With LTPOT-16, we instead see that a lot of
optimization can take place based on results found in lower layers, as relatively
more time is spent evaluating and improving individuals in lower layers com-
pared to LTPOT-2. In other words, LTPOT-2’s ﬁrst layer allows for more early
exploration, while LTPOT-16’s ﬁrst layer is more focused on exploitation.
The amount of individuals transferred, k, will be set to 15, which is half of the
total population size P = 30. Each LTPOT conﬁguration, as well as TPOT, is
run nine times per dataset, each time with a diﬀerent random seed, guaranteeing
a diﬀerent initial population and subsequent choices for crossover and mutation.
Each run set to last 8 hours, but each individual pipeline may only be evaluated
for at most 10 minutes. We explored diﬀerent values for P and diﬀerent amounts
of evaluation time per individual, while keeping the total run time constant at
8 hours, and found that for the chosen datasets these values strike a balance
between having a diverse enough population and being able to evaluate enough
generations.
4.3
Results
First, we compare the various conﬁgurations by their average rank over time,
which can be seen in Fig. 4. In this ﬁgure, for each conﬁguration, for every
dataset and seed, the best found pipelines so far are ranked against each other
every minute. For each method, the average Friedman rank [5] across all these
datasets and seeds is calculated based on the highest AUROC score achieved by
5 https://www.openml.org/s/69

the best pipeline so far, using the ﬁxed hyperparameter values stated above. To
calculate the rank, we consider the result a tie if the diﬀerence in AUROC values
is smaller than 0.1. A lower rank is better.
0
100
200
300
400
500
Time (minutes)
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
Average rank
Average rank over time
Vanilla TPOT
Layered TPOT­2
Layered TPOT­16
Fig. 4: Ranking of each method averaged over all datasets based on internal AUC
scores of the best individual found so far.
In Fig. 4, we see that LTPOT on average achieves the best scores throughout
the entire 8 hour period. LTPOT-16 starts by outperforming LTPOT-2 slightly,
but as time goes on its relative performance drops, even being surpassed by
TPOT. From this, it seems that while LTPOT works well as a ﬁlter, optimization
in early layers does not pay oﬀbeyond the early stages. Thus, a lower value for g
is better based on these results. Furthermore, we see that towards the end TPOT
is decisively improving over LTPOT-16, but only very slowly over LTPOT-2, as
the average rank of LTPOT-2 increases only very slowly.
A diﬀerent rank does not necessarily mean the found model performance
diﬀers a lot. To clarify this, we look at the diﬀerence in AUROC by dataset per
conﬁguration, as seen for 9 of 18 datasets in Fig. 5.6
In Fig. 5 we show a boxplot that describes the distribution of AUROC scores
of the ﬁnal pipelines by each method. No single method is dominant over the
others, and diﬀerences in AUROC scores are small for almost all datasets. Using
a student t-test, we determined that there is no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence
(p < 0.05) between the ﬁnal pipelines (after the full 8 hour time budget).
However, looking at the average ranking by conﬁguration in Fig. 4, we see
that under smaller time budgets LTPOT-2 often ﬁnds pipelines which are better
6 A similar ﬁgure for the other 9 datasets can be found in Appendix A.

TPOT
L­2
L­16
0.920
0.947
0.973
1.000
BNG­trains
TPOT
L­2
L­16
0.9900
0.9918
0.9937
0.99  
BNG­labor
TPOT
L­2
L­16
0.788
0.801
0.813
0.826
BNG­breast­cancer
TPOT
L­2
L­16
0.96 
0.977
0.988
1.000
BNG­ionosphere
TPOT
L­2
L­16
0.8900
0.8917
0.8933
0.89 0
BNG­spect_test
TPOT
L­2
L­16
0.718
0.721
0.724
0.727
airlines
TPOT
L­2
L­16
0.69
0.70
0.71
0.72
Click_prediction_small
TPOT
L­2
L­16
0.99994 
0.999963
0.999982
1.000000
skin­segmentation
TPOT
L­2
L­16
0.99880
0.99913
0.99947
0.99980
BNG­mushroom
AUC­scores­of­best­pipeline­by­method­by­dataset
Fig. 5: An overview of achieved AUROC score for each run of each method by
dataset.
than TPOT. In this scenario, it is interesting to see how much time LTPOT
needs to ﬁnd a pipeline at least as good as the best pipeline TPOT found. We
compared LTPOT-2 to TPOT for each dataset and seed, and looked at how
long it took for the method which found the best pipeline to ﬁnd a pipeline at
least as good as the best found pipeline by the other method. Figure 6 shows
the time diﬀerence (in minutes) between ﬁnding these equally good pipelines.
Positive values indicate that LTPOT is faster. Yellow distributions correspond
to seeds where LTPOT eventually found the best pipeline, and show how much
sooner LTPOT found a pipeline at least as good as the best pipeline of TPOT.
Blue distributions correspond to cases where TPOT eventually found the best
pipeline, and show how much later TPOT found a pipeline at least as good as
LTPOT’s best.
In general, when LTPOT ﬁnds the best pipeline, it ﬁnds a pipeline at least
as good as TPOT’s best pipeline much sooner. In particular for LTPOT-16 we
see that it often is at least 200 minutes faster. Even in the cases where TPOT
eventually ﬁnds the best pipelines, we see that it often ﬁnds a pipeline at least
as good as LTPOT’s best only after LTPOT already found it. This again is es-
pecially true for LTPOT-16, where almost all yellow distributions are entirely
positive.

1169
1180
1182
120
1217
124
126
131
132
135
139
140
143
146
1502
269
73
77
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
400
500
minutes between equal pipelines
LTPOT­2
LTPOT­2
TPOT
1169
airlines
1180
BNG spect_test
1182
BNG adult
120
BNG mushroom
1217
Click_prediction_small
124
BNG credit­a
126
BNG credit­g
131
BNG sick
132
BNG sonar
135
BNG spambase 
139
BNG trains
140
BNG heart­statlog
143
BNG vote
146
BNG ionosphere
1502
skin­segmentation
269
BNG hepatitis
73
BNG labor
77
BNG breast­cancer
−200
−100
0
100
200
300
400
500
minutes between equal pipelines
LTPOT­16
LTPOT­16
TPOT
Distribution of time difference between finding equal performance pipelines
Fig. 6: Violin plots of the time diﬀerence between ﬁnding two equally good
pipelines. Datasets are shown together with their OpenML ID number.
However, even when one method ﬁnds a pipeline at least as good as the
other method’s eventual best pipeline, it can still be the case that the eventual
worst method at that same time already has quite a good pipeline. Therefore,
we compare the performance of the best pipeline of each method found at time t,
where time t is the time where the best method ﬁnds a pipeline at least as good
as the eventual best pipeline of the worst method. Between 18 datasets and 9
seeds, there are 162 comparisons between TPOT and LTPOT-2 or LTPOT-16.
The comparison in AUROC at time t is shown in Figure 7.
We see that when TPOT ﬁnds a pipeline at least as good as LTPOT’s best,
in most cases it does so when LTPOT already has found a pipeline at most
0.01 AUROC worse. However, when LTPOT ﬁnds a pipeline at least as good
as TPOT’s best, TPOT has relatively worse pipelines more often, and in some
cases as much as over 0.2 AUROC worse.
From this we conclude that in many cases LTPOT ﬁnds good pipelines faster.
While LTPOT-2 does not always ﬁnd the best pipeline, when it doesn’t, it ﬁnds
comparable pipelines at least as quickly as TPOT. LTPOT-16 ﬁnds comparable
pipelines even quicker, although it becomes less competitive under larger time
budgets.

0.0 ­ 0.01 0.01 ­ 0.05 0.05 ­ 0.1
0.1 ­ 0.2
0.2 ­ 0.5
Difference in AUROC
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
count
Difference in AUROC at time t if ___ finds best
LTPOT­2
TPOT
0.0 ­ 0.01 0.01 ­ 0.05 0.05 ­ 0.1
0.1 ­ 0.2
0.2 ­ 0.5
Difference in AUROC
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
count
Difference in AUROC at time t if ___ finds best
LTPOT­16
TPOT
Fig. 7: Shows the AUROC diﬀerence at time t, which is the time the best method
(color coded) ﬁnds a pipeline at least as good as the other method will ﬁnd.
4.4
Future work
The structure of Layered TPOT allows for more hyperparameters to be tuned,
and their eﬀect remains unexplored at this point. The number of layers as well
as the eﬀect of their granularity could possibly be tuned to the dataset. Whether
or not to turn oﬀhigher layers, and with which frequency, should be explored
as well. The amount of individuals to transfer between layers may also change
how quickly higher layers can optimize pipelines. The choice of the amount
of generations before transfer, g, will inﬂuence how much optimization will be
done in the lower layers. Perhaps these parameters should change over time in a
single run. All of these choices come in addition to the hyperparameters already
available for TPOT, such as the population size, mutation rate and crossover
rate.
Finally, there are possible changes not yet captured in hyperparameters. For
instance, it might be better to favor crossover over mutation in higher layers, so
that the focus of exploration shifts to combining promising pipelines in higher
layers. It could be that having a big population in the higher layers is unneces-
sary, and shrinking population size there might yield similar results in a faster
time frame. Currently, the way to evaluate individuals quickly is to sample a
number of instances of the data. Instead, one could create a subset by selecting
features, or apply compression techniques to represent the data. We will explore
these aspects in subsequent work.

Results of this study will be made available on OpenML7, and the code for
Layered TPOT can be found on Github8.
5
Conclusion
In this paper we presented an extension to TPOT called Layered TPOT. In the
extension, instead of evaluating each pipeline on all data, only pipelines which
have shown good results on subsets of the data are evaluated on all data. It
does this by introducing layers. In each layer a distinct group of individuals is
subject to the evolutionary algorithm, but individuals are only evaluated on a
subset of the data as deﬁned by the layer. Each subsequent layer will evaluate
the individuals on more data, and if an individual performs well in one layer, it
will be transferred to the next, to be trained on more data and compete with
other promising pipelines trained on the same subset size.
To determine the usefulness of LTPOT, two conﬁgurations have been com-
pared to TPOT, on a selection of 18 large datasets. The results showed that
LTPOT is not strictly better than TPOT, but it often ﬁnds good pipelines much
faster, and under smaller time budgets, it outperforms TPOT on average. More-
over, LTPOT allows for a lot of ﬂexibility in the conﬁguration of its structure,
and the eﬀects of changes to these conﬁgurations remain to be explored.
