JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 13, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
1
A Random Matrix Theoretical Approach to Early Event Detection
Using Experimental Data
Yingshuang Cao1, Long Cai1, Robert C. Qiu1,2, Jie Gu1,Xing He1,Qian Ai1, and Zhijian Jin1
In this paper, High-dimensional data analysis methods are proposed to deal with random matrix which is composed by the real
data from power network before and after the fault. The mean spectral radius (MSR) of non-Hermitian random matrices is deﬁned
as a statistic analytic for the fault detection. By analyzing the characteristics of random matrices and observing the changes of the
spectral radius of random matrices, grid failure detection will be achieved. This paper describes the basic mathematical theory of
this big data method, and the real-world data of a certain China power grid is used to verify the methods.
Index Terms—Fault recognition and diagnosis, Big Data, spectral radius, random matrices and modern smart grid
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE increasing data have become a strategic resource in
smart grids.[1] These datasets contains valuable informa-
tion and signals. Our team uses the theory of big data to detect
fault through analysing these datasets. The result can be used
to improve the safety and stability of modern power system.
The amount of real-time information in power system
increases quickly with the development of the smart grid.
These data are mostly unstructured and come from different
resources. In recent years, increasing data are collected from
Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs), Intelligent Electronic
Devices (IEDs), Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
(SCADA) and so on [2]. There is a complex relationship
between these high-dimensional data. The current research
mainly focused on determining fault detection signal and the
detection signal treatment [3-4]. But when applied to complex
power grid, these methods become inefﬁcient and invalid. With
the advent of the era of Big Data, the theory of big data has
been applied to many ﬁelds [5-7]. It has been proven to be a
good method to analyze these massive and high-dimensional
data. In recent years, Big Data are also studied in power
system analysis of faults and disturbances and some promising
researches were made [8,9].
Fault detection is the keystone of our research and also
the key to improve the safety and stability of modern power
system. Fault detection requires continuous monitoring and
processing of massive quantities of data in order to detect
and identify emerging patterns, which means telling signals
from noises. For smart grids, uncertain locations of PMUs,
small random loads/generators ﬂuctuations and sample errors
could be regarded as noises, whereas sudden changes of
loads/generators, system faults, network reconﬁguration as
signals. It is a big challenge to respond within a tolerable
elapsed time or hardware resources by extracting analysis from
streaming data in the smart grids.
The work of [8] is the most related work to our paper.
Xie, Chen and Kumar used the principal component analysis
(PCA) for early event detection with both simulations and
experimental data. Our work is built upon their work but
different from their work in a fundamental sense. PCA is a
widely adopted approach in unsupervised machine learning.
First, they used the features extracted from the data in the
training phase; second, they used the extracted features for
early event detection. Their pioneering work motivates our
research on one hand; we are motivated by the line of research
in the spirit of [5-7,10], on the other hand. The central
idea of our approach is to model a large power system as
a high-dimensional statistical problem. So we can exploit
the high-dimensionality of the massive datasets. The high-
dimensionality of the data is a blessing, not a curse. The
work of [13] is also related here. We only study the power
grid using simulations in that paper. This current paper is
regarding experimental data. The objectives of two papers are
also different.
In this paper, random matrix theory is used to model the
real-life data from a certain power grid in China. This is es-
sentially an anomaly detection problem in the literature of big
data. It may be modeled as binary hypothesis testing: normal
hypothesis H0 (no signal present) and anomaly hypothesis
H1 (signal present). Traditionally, we model the dataset in
hypothesis H1 as a standard Gaussian noise random vector
whose entries are Xi ∼CN(0, 1), i = 1, · · · , n. In our real-
life data, the traditional Gaussian model seems be not natural.
We use the universality of random matrix theory to argue that
the Gaussian random matrix can be used to model our real
data, even though the data are non-Gaussian. This universality
is only valid when the data dimension is high. This is in some
sense like the central limit theorem.
The anomaly hypothesis H1 is claimed when the data
deviates from the normal hypothesis H0. Our central analysis
is focused on the latter.
We use the measurement data without the knowledge of
any other power grid information. In other words, our black
box approach is model-free and purely data-driven, relying on
the high dimensionality of the data. Abstract statistical laws in
high dimension probability serves as the basis for our approach
[5,6,7]. The uniﬁed feature of the abstract results have proved
effective using real-life data.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II is used
to explain, principal component analysis and random matrix
theory. Based on the theories in Section II, related algorithms
and test sample are proposed in Section III. Conclusions and
possible future research directions are presented in Section IV.
arXiv:1503.08445v1  [stat.AP]  29 Mar 2015

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 13, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
2
II. THE BASIC PRINCIPLE OF RANDOM MATRIX THEORY
AND PRINCIPLE COMPONENT ANALYSIS
A. Random Matrix Theory
1) Marchenko-Pastur Law (MP Law)
The MP Law describes the asymptotic behavior of singular
values of large rectangular random matrices [11]. Let X =
{ξij} be a N × T (N/T = c ∈(0, 1)) random matrix whose
entries are independent identically distributed (i.i.d.) random
variables with mean µ = 0 and variance σ2 < ∞.
The empirical spectrum density (ESD) of the corresponding
sample covariance matrix S =
1
T XXH ( i.e. f (λ (S)) )
converges to the distribution of MP Law with density function:
fMP (x) =

1
2πxcσ2
p
(b −x)(x −a)
, a ≤x ≤b
0
, otherwise
(1)
where a = σ2(1 −√c)2, b = σ2(1 + √c)2, c = N/T.
2) Kernel Density Estimation (KDE)
A nonparametric estimate of the empirical spectral density
of the sample covariance matrix is used
fn(x) =
1
nh
Xn
i=1 K( x−λi
h
)
(2)
where λi(i = 1, 2, · · · , n) are the eigenvalues of S, and
K (·) is the kernel function for bandwidth parameter h.
3)
The Single-Ring Law
For each n ≥1, let An be a random matrix which admits
the decomposition[12]:
An = UnTnVn,
Tn = diag(s1, · · · , sn)
(3)
where Si are positive, and Un and Vn are two independent
random unitary matrices which are Haar-distributed indepen-
dently from Tn. In probability, the ESD of An converges
weakly to a deterministic measure whose support is under
certain mild conditions. Some outliers to single ring law are
observed.
Consider the matrices product eZ = QL
i=1 Xu,i, where Xu
is the singular value equivalent of the rectangular N ×T non-
Hermitian random matrix e
X, whose entries are independent
identically distributed (i.i.d.) variables with mean µ(exk,:) = 0
and variance σ2(exk,:) = 1 for k = (1, 2, · · · , N). The matrices
product eZ is converted to Z by a transform which make the
variance to σ2(z:,k) = 1/N for k = (1, 2, · · · , N). Thus, the
empirical spectrum density of Z converges almost surely to
the same limit given by
fZ(x) =

1
πcσ|λ|(2/α−2)
, (1 −c)α/2 ≤|λ| ≤1
0
, otherwise
(4)
as N, T →∞with the ratio N/T = c ∈(0, 1]. On the
complex plane of the eigenvalues, the inner circle radius is
(1 −c)α/2 and outer circle radius is unity [13]. Moreover,
S = ZZH is able to acquired and its ESD converges to the
distribution of MP Law.
4) Universality of the MP Law
Akin to the central limit theorem, universality [5, page 347]
refers to the phenomenon that the asymptotic distributions of
various covariance matrices (such of eigenvalues and eigenvec-
tors) are identical to those of Gaussian covariance matrices.
These results let us calculate the exact asymptotic distribu-
tions of various test statistics without restrictive distributional
assumptions of matrix entries. The presence of the universality
property suggests that high-dimensional phenomenon is robust
to the precise details of the model ingredients [14]. For
example, one can perform various hypothesis tests under the
assumption that the matrix entries not Gaussian distributed but
use the same test statistic as in the Gaussian case.
The data of power grid below can be viewed as a spatial
and temporal sampling of the random graph. Randomness is
introduced by the uncertainty of spatial locations and the sys-
tem uncertainty. Under real-life applications, we cannot expect
the matrix entries follow i.i.d. distribution. Numerous studies
based on both simulations [10] and experiments however,
demonstrate that the MP law is universally followed. In such
cases, universality properties provide a crucial tool to reduce
the proofs of general results to those in a tractable special
case—the i.i.d. case in our paper.
B. Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
A method based on PCA is proposed to testify our result.
PCA is the most commonly used linear dimensionality reduc-
tion methods. PCA reduces the dimensionality by preserving
the most variance of original data. Due to the increasing size
of PMU data, the dimensionality analysis of PMU data has
been studied in recent literature. The analysis shows the rank
of PMU data matrix is low. The massive PMU data essentially
lie in a much reduced dimensional space.
Let P denote the number of available PMUs across the
whole power network, p denote the number of PMUs used
in computation. Each PMU provides l measurements. There
are a number of PMUs in interconnected power network, with
each PMU providing measurements of voltage magnitude and
power ﬂow. At each time sample, a total of p×l measurements
are collected. In this paper, we conduct the analysis for each
category of measurements independently. Deﬁne the measure-
ment vector −→y = [y(1), y(2), · · · , y(p)]T containing the p mea-
surements. Use to denote the measurements of time t. Deﬁne
the measurement matrix Y i+T
p×T = [−→y i+1, −→y i+2, · · · , −→y i+T ],
The PCA-based event detection at time i + T + 1 is described
as follows [8]:
1) Calculate the matrix of CY = Y i+T
p×T

Y i+T
p×T
T
.
2) Calculate the T nonzero eigenvalues and vectors of CY .
3) Rearrange the T eigenvalues in decreasing order, with
the eigenvectors being the principal components (PCs).
4) Out of the N PCs, select the m largest eigenvalues and
corresponding PCs.
5) Form a new m-dimensional subspace from the m PCs.
6) Project the vector −→y i+T +1 onto the m-dimensional PC-
based space.
7) Calculate the length of the projection vector.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 13, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
3
III. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES
This case is based on the ﬁeld data. The operation data of
a certain power grid in China is collected. It includes the data
of substation, breaker, line, bus, generator, frequency and so
on. All of the PMU data are real-life data from ﬁve different
interconnected power grids in China. Fig.1 shows the structure
of the data lists from our test power grid. The sampling interval
is 1 min (s) and the sampling duration is 4320mins (3days).
These data are exported from the power grid database
and the time of grid failure is unknown in advance. After
our analysis, the result has been compared with the real-life
situation. At ﬁrst the data of power ﬂow are analyzed by PCA
method, but valid information isn’t got by this way (Fig.2).
Then the output data of active power of all generators are
placed in a random matrix in time series. For 10 samples
(10mins), we constitute a single random matrix and normalize
each row of the matrix and calculate the mean spectral radius
of every matrix. The mean spectral radius is regarded as a big
data analytic index changes over time.
Fig. 1: The structure of the data lists from a certain power
grid in China
Fig. 2: The results of load ﬂow analysis
Fig. 3 shows the relationship between Marcenko-Pastur Law
and Kernel Density Estimation. Their matching degree will
decrease when the grid fails. At the same time, the blue
curve represents the M-P Law and the red curve represents the
empirical eigenvalue density. When the degree of coincidence
(a) Prefault
(b) fault
(c) After fault
Fig. 3: Empirical eigenvalue density functions of random
matrices. The Marchenko-Pastur law is given in eq.(1)
of the blue and red lines is higher, the matrix lines with the M-
P Law better. Compared (a) with (b), the empirical eigenvalue
density of the pre-fault matrix lines with the M-P Law much
better than the fault matrix. In such a system, loads dramatic
change or system failures break the random distribution of
system data, i.e. i.i.d. Under statistics perspective, it leads to
a ﬂuctuation in a certain direction, as well as the deviation of
M-P law for the system data. When other generators increase
their output to maintain the stability of the grid, the random
matrix will meet the i.i.d. gradually, so the blue and red lines
close to each other again in (c). From a statistical perspective,
the pre-fault describes the global behavior (the M-P law) of the
power grid, while the fault tells the local behavior of this grid.
We know by experience that the fault tends to occur locally.
The M-P law is the asymptotic distribution when the data size
grows to inﬁnity.
The mean spectral radius changes suddenly when a failure
occurs as shown in Fig.4. Failure detection will be achieved
through observing the relationship between the M-P Law
and the empirical eigenvalue density of the matrix which is
composed by the sampling data directly. Similar, the drastic
change of the mean spectral radius indicates the occurrence of
failure. The result is consistent with the results in PCA method
shows in Fig.5. And they are very close to the real situation
shows in Fig.6. Unlike the data we get from simulation, the
output of all generators are always changing in the real power
grid. when one generator fails, other generators will increase

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 13, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2014
4
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
Time/min
MSR
Fig. 4: The average radius using time series for the events
Fig. 5: Generator unit output analysis chart by PCA for the
events
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
time/min
Active Power/MW
Power change of the faulty generator
Fig. 6: Power change of the faulty Generator
their output to maintain the stability of the grid, so the mean
spectral radius returns to the original position (Fig.4) earlier
than when the fault is removed (Fig.6).
IV. CONCLUSION
A novel random matrix method is proposed to detect
power grid failure. Compared with the widely used principal
components, our method exploits the convergence of the
empirical spectral density, a phenomenon arising from high-
dimensional probability space. We compared two methods
using the real-life datasets collected in China. It seems that
two methods work well in the case of our system data. The
next stage of research is to use sketching as a tool [15,16]. Our
proposed sketching method projects the data set into a lower-
dimensional subspace. Dimensionality reduction techniques,
like e.g. principal component analysis, are commonly used
in statistics. However, their focus is usually on reducing the
number of variables. Our method aims to reduce the number
of observations while keeping the algebraic structure of the
data. This leads to a speed-up in the subsequent (frequentist
or Bayesian) regression analysis, because the run-time of the
common algorithms usually heavily depends on the data size.
