An Adaptive Device-Edge Co-Inference Framework
Based on Soft Actor-Critic
Tao Niu∗, Yinglei Teng∗IEEE Senior Member, Zhu Han† IEEE Fellow, and Panpan Zou∗
∗Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
†University of Houston, Texas, USA

Abstract—Recently, the applications of deep neural network
(DNN) have been very prominent in many ﬁelds such as com-
puter vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP) due
to its superior feature extraction performance. However, the
high-dimension parameter model and large-scale mathematical
calculation restrict the execution efﬁciency, especially for Internet
of Things (IoT) devices. Different from the previous cloud/edge-
only pattern that brings huge pressure for uplink communication
and device-only fashion that undertakes unaffordable calculation
strength, we highlight the collaborative computation between the
device and edge for DNN models, which can achieve a good
balance between the communication load and execution accuracy.
Speciﬁcally, a systematic on-demand co-inference framework is
proposed to exploit the multi-branch structure, in which the pre-
trained Alexnet is right-sized through early-exit and partitioned at
an intermediate DNN layer. The integer quantization is enforced
to further compress transmission bits. As a result, we establish a
new Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) optimizer-Soft Actor
Critic for discrete (SAC-d), which generates the exit point,
partition point, and compressing bits by soft policy iterations.
Based on the latency and accuracy aware reward design, such
an optimizer can well adapt to the complex environment like
dynamic wireless channel and arbitrary CPU processing, and is
capable of supporting the 5G URLLC. Real-world experiment
on Raspberry Pi 4 and PC shows the outperformance of the
proposed solution.
Index Terms—Deep Neural Network (DNN), Inference, Inter-
net of Things (IoTs), Reinforcement Learning, Edge Computing
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, a series of AI based applications have
been integrated into a variety of scenarios, such as image
recognition [1], natural language processing [2], and intel-
ligent voice assistant [3]. Typical network structures such
as Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Deep Neural
Network (DNN) can extract high-dimensional features of data,
and thus have powerful processing performance. However, the
breakthrough performance is at the cost of high computational
complexity, which dramatically increases the inference latency
and energy consumption of forward propagation. Hence, an
unavoidable problem is how to efﬁciently deploy these deep
models, especially in Internet of Things (IoT) scenarios.
In order to solve the contradiction between huge resource
demand of DNNs and resource shortage of devices, one
traditional method is to unload data to a powerful server
and return ﬁnal results after computing. However, the rapid
growth of intelligent devices will lead to huge pressure for
cloud/edge computing. As the data size increases, communi-
cation becomes the bottleneck that limits the real-time data
This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of
China (No. 2021YFB3300100) and the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (No. 62171062).
uploading. For example, the size of an image is usually about
2-10 MB, which takes one second or more to upload to an edge
server with limited bandwidth, and thus is difﬁcult to meet the
requirements of 5G Ultra-reliable and Low Latency Commu-
nications (URLLC). Besides, such a centralized computation
pattern requires data collection on a single point, which brings
user data security risks once the cloud becomes unreliable
[4]. Another solution is to run a lightweight version of the
original deep network models on devices, usually compressed
by network pruning or quantization [5]. However, the accuracy
loss of these lightweight models is ﬁxed when it is compressed
that users can hardly shift the compromise between accuracy
and execution latency for various applications.
To overcome the above challenges and deploy DNNs ef-
ﬁciently, we propose an device-edge collaborative optimiza-
tion framework, which combines model partition with multi-
branch selection and accelerates DNNs inference through an
optimization design. By joint consideration of latency and
energy consumption, we can deploy original models between
the mobile device and the edge server while ensuring accuracy
as much as possible. Moreover, our method can adaptively
responds to dynamic environmental factors such as channel
ﬂuctuation, network bandwidth and CPU processing speed,
etc. Speciﬁcally, the main contributions are summarized as
follows:
• We study and implement different acceleration methods
of DNNs under the device-edge framework. Based on
measurement of early-exit, model partition and data
quantization, we reveal that there is a signiﬁcant room
for inference acceleration by combining these methods.
• Based on our insights above, we design a dynamic device-
edge collaborative acceleration framework by adopting
a novel deep reinforcement learning (DRL) method-Soft
Actor-Critic for discrete (SAC-d) to make implementation
decision on the exit point, partition point and quantization
bits. Unlike previous studies [6] [7] that only consider the
latency of DNNs inference, we treat the accuracy and
latency adaptively in the optimization objectives through
the hyperparameter setting.
• We carry out real-world experiments on Cifar-10 dataset
by using Deep Q Network (DQN) and SAC-d. Exper-
iment results show that the proposed framework can
accelerate DNNs inference up to 4× and guarantee the
performance even under limited bandwidth.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We discuss
related work in Sec. II. We present our framework details and
formulation in Sec. III. We evaluate our method in Sec. IV,
and ﬁnally conclude the paper in Sec. V.
arXiv:2201.02968v1  [cs.LG]  9 Jan 2022

Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed framework. Our framework consists of three stages (i) Ofﬂine Stage: Train the multi-branch network and measure data for
optimization. (ii) Optimizing Stage: Use DRL to give the strategy about the exit point, partition point and quantization bit once requirements and bandwidth
are set. (iii) Online Stage: Deploy models between the edge server and device based on the given strategy.
II. RELATED WORK
In order to deploy pre-trained DNNs on different devices,
researchers have proposed different deployment solutions. In
this section, we give a comprehensive description on these
techniques.
A. Model Partition
Model partition refers to dividing DNNs into two parts,
e.g. between the edge and the device, with the computation-
intensive part executed on the powerful server and the rest
running locally. The mixed use of computation resource op-
timizes latency and energy consumption, as well as releases
calculation pressure on devices, and thus obtains better infer-
ence performance.
Based on the current situation of cloud-based methods,
Neurosurgeon [8] proposes the idea of DNN partition, which is
a dynamic architecture that can automatically divide DNNs be-
tween the edge and cloud. Considering from both latency and
energy efﬁciency aspects, Neurosurgeon proposes a regression-
based method to estimate the latency of each layer in the
DNN model and return an optimal partition point. JALAD [9]
solves the optimization of end-to-end latency as an Integer
Linear Programming (ILP) problem through modeling and
obtains a reasonable partition scheme for different DNNs
under dynamic environmental conditions. For the Industrial
Internet scenario, Boomerang [6] uses DQN to make deci-
sions on the partition scheme based on latency requirements
and bandwidth conditions under the device-edge framework.
However, a large amount of intermediate data is required to
transmit in Boomerang, which may fail to cope with complex
models.
B. Early-Exit
A model with high accuracy usually has a deep structure,
which does not suit for local inference due to large resource
consumption. Early-exit [10] is a special multi-branch struc-
ture based on the idea that shallow layers of the network can
correctly classify most of the dataset. Traditional chain struc-
tures are added with side branches, from which classiﬁcation
results are allowed to output with different conﬁdence. Then,
by using entropy as the conﬁdence criterion, it can achieve
on-demand latency optimization.
DeepIns [11] proposes a manufacture inspection system
for smart industry using early-exit. In DeepIns, devices are
responsible for data collection, the edge server acts as the
ﬁrst exit point and the cloud data center acts as the second
exit point. Edgent [9] combines model partition and early-
exit, using collected device data to train a regression model to
predict runtime of each layer. During inference, each partition
point is traversed along branches to ﬁnd an optimization
solution, so as to achieve the effectiveness of balancing
latency and accuracy. However, Edgent is not an industry-
oriented framework and does not consider expensive energy
consumption in the situation of limited bandwidth.
C. Data Quantization&Encoding
Due to the existence of the convolutional layer, the shallow
part of the network usually increases the dimensionality of the
feature map, resulting in a much larger size of the intermediate
data while partitioning models. In the pre-trained ResNet
[12], data size of some shallow layers can be 20× of the
input data, which imposes an extra communication load. Data
quantization&encoding is one of the mainstream technologies
for data compression. By using a more compact than 32-
bit ﬂoating-point format to present layer inputs, weights, or
both, it can not only reduce the memory occupation and
transmission pressure, but also enhance the ability of privacy
protection. Deep Compression [5] and Minerva [13] combine
weight pruning and data quantization to enable fast, low-power
and highly-accurate DNN inference. Based on model partition,
JALAD [11] introduces min-max normalization and Huff-
man coding, horizontally analyzes the relationship between
quantization bits and accuracy loss. [14] uses lossless/lossy

Fig. 2. Trained multi-branch network based on Alexnet. Each exit possesses
different accuracy.
encoding methods to compress data as much as possible while
maintaining low loss of accuracy.
III. SYSTEM FRAMEWORK
In this section, we demonstrate our synthesized device-edge
co-inference framework in detail. Fig. 1 presents the workﬂow
of our framework, illustrated in three stages: ofﬂine stage,
optimizing stage and online stage. With the DRL optimizer,
our framework can provide strategies of exit point, partition
point and quantization bits dynamically according to the local
transmission and energy environment.
A. Ofﬂine Stage
During the ofﬂine stage, some initialization are performed:
i) To train a mutli-branch network and deploy it on both edge
server and devices. ii) To measure layer latency and energy
consumption for later optimization.
Fig. 2 shows a multi-branch structure based on Alexnet [15],
where Exit3 represents the main branch and the rest indicate
side branches. As the exit point moves backward, each branch
provides an increasing accuracy rate as the corresponding
runtime and energy consumption increase as well. Once the
multi-branch model is trained, it can be deployed between
devices and edge servers for inference. Exit point can be
selected according to the actual environmental factors and
requirements.
In addition to the pre-trained multi-branch network, we need
to measure the layer latency in advance. Previous work [7] uses
a regression model to predict layer latency, but due to factors
such as CPU resource scheduling, layer latency of the same
device usually ﬂuctuates. Therefore, it is difﬁcult to obtain
the accurate prediction by a regression model trained with
measured data. By taking average of multiple measurements,
we can obtain stable latency of each layer on devices and edge
servers.
Former studies usually only consider layers with large
FLOPs such as convolutional layers and fully connected layers
while partitioning. However, as shown in Fig. 3, we ﬁnd that
although latency of other types of layers is relatively small, the
accumulation of it is not neglectable. Hence, we measure the
latency of each layer in order to optimize the overall latency
as much as possible.
Fig. 3. Layer latency of multi-branch network when inferencing locally on
Cifar-10 dataset (batchsize = 8).
Other than accuracy and latency, we also take energy con-
sumption of devices as optimization constraint. Computation
energy consumption on devices is usually composed of multi-
ple tasks, meanwhile, the transmission energy consumption is
unstable due to the instantaneous ﬂuctuations of the network.
Such two factors together make it difﬁcult to measure the total
energy cost for a particular deep learning task. For tractability,
we follow the theoretical modeling in [17] and calculate energy
consumption as follows,
Ecompute =
n
X
i=1
k0f 2OiXp,
(1)
where n is the number of network layers, k0 is a constant
related to the device, f is the CPU frequency, Oi is the
computational intensity of each layer, and Xp is the data size
to be processed.
The transmission energy consumption can be written as,
Etransmission=
PXt
Blog2 (1 + P ∗γ),
(2)
where γ indicates the signal to interference plus noise ratio,
P represents the transmission power between the device and
edge server, B is the available bandwidth, and Xt is the data
size to be transmitted.
Denote e as the total energy consumption, the total energy
consumption of inference can be written as,
e = Etransmission + Ecompute.
(3)
Furthermore, to alleviate high communication overhead
caused by excessively large intermediate data, we use the
following formula to quantify it, which has been proven
feasible for compressing the parameters [14]. By mapping 32-
bit ﬂoating-point number xi to integer space of [0, c], we can
greatly reduces its size,
xi = round
(c −1)(xi −min(x))
max(x) −min(x)

.
(4)
After quantization, data becomes rather sparse, which con-
tains a large number of zero values while most of the rest
tend to zero. Therefore, intermediate data can be further
compressed by encoding. We use the commonly used Huff-

Fig. 4. The workﬂow of DRL optimizer.
man coding in our experiment, and results show that our
data compression method can compress data to 1/10 or less.
Nevertheless, quantization unavoidably causes a certain loss
to the overall accuracy. Therefore, the accuracy drop should
be included in our optimization when combined with model
partition. We measure the accuracy loss of compressing feature
maps of different partition points, which will be analyzed later.
B. Optimization Stage
Different from [6], we do not take an exhaustive method
to traverse all the possibilities after observing the bandwidth
between the device and the edge server, since it is not efﬁcient
for complex network structures. By introducing DRL as an
optimizer, we can make end-to-end decision with respect to
exit point, partition point and quantization bit, as shown in
Fig. 4.
Denote T, e, acc and B as the latency, energy consumption,
accuracy and bandwidth, respectively. Then at step t, we can
express the environment state as,
st = {Tt, et, acct, Bt}.
(5)
Denote ep ∈{1, 2, 3}, pp ∈{0, ..., 20} and c ∈{8, 12, 16}
as the exit point, partition point and quantization bits, respec-
tively. Then the action selected by the agent at step t is given
by,
at = {ept, ppt, ct}.
(6)
• Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) for discrete action
Soft Actor-Critic for discrete action (SAC-d) [16] is an off-
policy actor-critic method with soft policy updating based on
the maximum entropy RL framework. Unlike the actor-critic
architecture, the SAC updates policy π through maximizing
information entropy H of state apart from the conventional
cumulative rewards r, as described below,
π∗= arg max
π
T
X
t=0
E(st,at)∼τπ

γt(r(st, at) + αH(π(.|st))

,
(7)
where γ is the discount factor and α is the entropy temperature
that balance reward and entropy.
SAC uses one neural network with parameter θ for Q-value
Qθ and another neural network parameterized by φ for the
policy πφ. To update these parameters, SAC alternates between
a soft policy evaluation and a soft policy improvement. At the
soft policy evaluation step, θ is updated by minimizing the
following cost function,
JQ(θ) = E(st,at)∼D
1
2(Qθ(st, at) −ˆQ(st, at))
2
,
(8)
where
ˆQ(st, at) = r(st, at)+
γE(st+1,at+1)∼D′
h
ˆQ(st+1, at+1) −α log(πφ(at+1|st+1))
i
.
(9)
D is an experience replay buffer, D′ is composed of the state
transition distribution and the agent, and Qθ denotes the target
Q function whose parameters are periodically updated from
the learned θ. Since the action space is discrete, [16] fully re-
covers the action distribution instead of forming a Monte-Carlo
estimate, and calculates the expectation directly to reduce the
variance of estimation at the soft policy improvement step.
The policy π with its parameters φ is updated by minimizing
the following objective,
Jπ(φ) = Est∼D

πt(st)T [α log(πφ(st)) −Qθ(st)]

.
(10)
Similarly, the temperature objective is changed as,
J(α) = πt(st)T

α log(πt(st)) +
−
H

,
(11)
where
−
H is a constant vector represents the target entropy.
In order to put more emphasis on latency when bandwidth
is limited and to pursue accuracy when it is sufﬁcient, hyper-
parameters a and b are introduced in our reward function, then
at step t, the reward rt can be deﬁned as below,
rt = a ∗acct + b/Tt.
(12)
To provide an automatic ﬁne-tune objective that can guide
agent to react dynamically to the bandwidth, we ﬁrst stan-
dardize accuracy and latency to the same magnitude. Then
the hyperparameter a is set to a logarithmic form which varies
with the bandwidth, as shown below,
a = n ∗ln

1 + B
s

,
(13)
where n is the normalization coefﬁcient that limits a between
0 and 1, s is used to describe the sensitivity of a to different
bandwidth, and b is set to 1−a to balance the effect of accuracy
and latency.
The entire DRL optimization process can be written as,
max
X
t
rt
s.t.
rt =

a ∗acct + b/Tt,
e ≤ˆe,
0
else,
(14)
where ˆe is the constraint of energy consumption of the end
device.
C. Online Stage
During the online stage, based on the real-time uplink
detection, the DRL optimizer can dynamically output an
inference strategy and guide device-edge to execute the DNNs
collaboratively. Our DRL optimizer can be executed either on
the edge server or the device since its runtime is quite short,
i.e., less than 5ms.

(a) Comparison
(b) Accuracy Loss
Fig. 5. Compression performance of data quantization at different partition points.
IV. EXPERIMENT
In this section, we carry out real-world experiments to eval-
uate the performance of our design. For comparison, the DQN
is chosen as baseline and explored to test the effectiveness for
our proposed co-inference pattern.
A. Experiment Setup
1) Model Structure: Due to the popularization of CNN in
image classiﬁcation, we focus on the disassembled CNN struc-
ture. Speciﬁcally, a multi-branch network based on Alexnet
is adopted and trained from scratch for 100 epochs on
Cifar-10 dataset. As mentioned above, our network has three
branches, each with 9/12/20 layers. During training, we set
batch size as 128, learning rate as 0.01 with exponential
decay. Accuracy of each branch increases as exit point moves
backward, which is 78.7%, 81.7% and 83.6%. Besides, we set
the quantization bits c as 4, 8 and 12 in order to shrink the
action space.
2) Real-world Experiment: We choose Raspberry Pi 4 as
the end device and a laptop as the edge server. Raspberry Pi
4 has a 4-core 64-bit cpu with a frequency of up to 1.5GHz
and 8G of RAM, while the laptop is equipped with a 6-core,
12-thread i7-10710u and 16G of memory. Both devices use
WiFi for connection, and the available bandwidth between the
device and the edge server is controlled by the WonderShaper
tool. During inference, to obtain a traceable CPU frequency,
we set both laptop and Raspberry Pi to its maximum CPU
frequency.
3) Optimizer: Both SAC-d and DQN consist of ﬁve fully
connected layers. In terms of traning parameters, we set γ
= 0.99, learning rate = 0.001. After collecting data such
as latency, energy consumption in the ofﬂine stage, DRL
optimizer is trained till convergence. Moreover, both multi-
branch network and DRL in our framework are implemented
by Pytorch.
B. Experiment Result
In our experiments, we deploy the pre-trained multi-branch
network on Raspberry Pi and PC to verify whether our frame-
work can dynamically make decisions that meet requirements
under a given limited bandwidth.
1) Layer Latency/Energy Distribution: Fig. 3 shows the
distribution of different layers on Raspberry Pi. It can be seen
that the convolutional layers and fully connected layers take
up most of the computing time. Although activation function
layers and pooling layers take less time, the amount of them
is non-negligible towards choosing the partition point, which
makes it necessary to take them into consideration.
2) Impact
of
Data
Quantization:
We
adopt
data
quantization&coding
for
intermediate
data
in
order
to
alleviate limitation caused by bandwidth. Fig. 5(a) shows
the difference after compression of different partition points,
which clearly indicates the great reduction of data sizes. Even
though
quantization&coding
signiﬁcantly
compresses
the
size of data, the accuracy loss it causes cannot be ignored.
Fig. 5(b) shows the impact of different quantization bits on
accuracy. It can be seen that different quantization bits take
the same trend, i.e., the higher quantization bits c is, the
lower the accuracy loss becomes. Meanwhile, for the output
of convolutional layers and the fully connected layers, serious
accuracy drop will be caused when quantifying. Contrarily,
this is not obvious on the activation function layers and
pooling layers, which indicates the partition point should
generally be selected at these type of layers.
3) Optimization Analysis: Fig. 6(c) shows the strategy of
SAC-d as we vary the bandwidth from 0 to 10 MB/s. When
bandwidth is limited in 0-0.1 MB/s, communication overhead
becomes the main bottleneck. Transmitting intermediate data
causes huge latency since the ﬁrst exit point is chosen, which
means the entire DNN is processed on the device. As the
bandwidth gradually increases, exit point remains unchanged
while partition point moves forward and quantization bits is
selected as the largest 16 bits, which indicates the comput-
ing power of device and communication overhead are both

(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 6. Evaluation results under different bandwidths. (a) Latency comparison. (b) Accuracy comparison. (c) Points selection result of SAC-d.
main bottlenecks in this situation. As the bandwidth further
increases to 7 MB/s, exit point changes to 2, indicating that the
bandwidth allows system to pursue higher accuracy. However,
the communication overhead still accounts for a relatively
large amount, and so quantization bits is selected as 12. When
the bandwidth is between 8 and 9 MB/s, due to the further
improvement of the bandwidth, the system can use 16 bits
to compress data so as to pursue higher accuracy. When the
network conditions are relatively good, e.g., the bandwidth is
above 9 MB/s, the exit point changes to 3, which gives more
allowance for inference accuracy.
Figs. 6(a) and (b) show the comparison of different optimiz-
ers on latency and accuracy. The curve ”On Device” means
that the original network is executed entirely on edge device
without early-exit. As the curve of latency after optimization
are all below that of on device, both DQN and SAC-d bring
signiﬁcant improvement with a little degradation on accuracy,
which imply that they can well adjust to ﬂuctuating network. It
can be seen that although the latency performance of SAC-d is
slightly worse than that of DQN in some region of bandwidth,
DQN shows a trend of only focusing on latency rather than
pursuing accuracy as well as latency in the same time, which
indicates DQN cannot cope with too large action space. As the
bandwidth no longer becomes system bottleneck, the accuracy
of SAC-d is far more higher than that of DQN.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes a dynamic inference framework in an
IoT environment, which integrates early-exit, model partition
and data quantization&coding. We study the trade-off between
the model accuracy and execution latency when a deep neural
network is decoupled to execute on an edge server and device.
Based on the detected real-time bandwidth as inputs, the pro-
posed DRL optimizer can output a strategy between the device
and edge server that guide them execute DNNs. Experiments
based on Raspberry Pi and PC prove the outperformance of
this device-friendly co-inference framework on latency, energy
consumption and accuracy, which makes it more suitable for
mission-critical IoT cases.
