Emergence through Selection: The Evolution of
a Scientiﬁc Challenge
Walter Quattrociocchi1 and Frederic Amblard2
1 University of Siena Pian Dei Mantellini 44, 53100, Siena, Italy
Tel: +39 0577 233 710

2 IRIT - Universit Toulouse 1 Capitole, 2, rue du Doyen Gabriel Marty
31042 Toulouse Cedex 9
Tel: +33 (0) 561 128 795

Summary. One of the most interesting scientiﬁc challenges nowadays deals with
the analysis and the understanding of complex networks’ dynamics and how their
processes lead to emergence according to the interactions among their components.
In this paper we approach the deﬁnition of new methodologies for the visualiza-
tion and the exploration of the dynamics at play in real dynamic social networks. We
present a recently introduced formalism called TVG (for time-varying graphs), which
was initially developed to model and analyze highly-dynamic and infrastructure-less
communication networks. As an application context, we chose the case of scientiﬁc
communities by analyzing a portion of the ArXiv repository (ten years of publica-
tions in physics). The analysis presented in the paper passes through diﬀerent data
transformations aimed at providing diﬀerent perspectives on the scientiﬁc commu-
nity and its evolutions.
On a ﬁrst level we discuss the dataset by means of both a static and temporal
analysis of citations and co-authorships networks. Afterward, as we consider that
scientiﬁc communities are at the same time communities of practice (through co-
authorship) and that a citation represents a deliberative selection pointing out the
relevance of a work in its scientiﬁc domain, we introduce a new transformation aimed
at capturing the interdependencies between collaborations’ patterns and citations’
eﬀects and how they make evolve a goal oriented systems as Science.
Finally, we show how through the TVG formalism and derived indicators, it is
possible to capture the interactions patterns behind the emergence (selection) of
a sub-community among others, as a goal-driven preferential attachment toward a
set of authors among which there are some key scientists (Nobel prizes) acting as
attractors on the community.
Key words: social networks analysis, evolving structures, scientiﬁc commu-
nities, emergence, time-varying graphs, temporal metrics, social selection.
arXiv:1102.0257v1  [cs.SI]  1 Feb 2011

2
Walter Quattrociocchi and Frederic Amblard
1 Introduction
One of the most interesting scientiﬁc challenges nowadays deals with the
analysis and the understanding of social networks’ dynamics and how their
processes lead to emergence according to the interactions at play among
their components. The research eﬀorts in this area strive to understand
what are the driving forces behind the evolution of social networks and
how they are articulated together with social dynamics, e.g., opinion dy-
namics, the epidemic or innovation diﬀusion, the teams formation and so
on ([7, 22, 15, 3, 28, 9, 31, 5, 30]). In this paper we approach the deﬁnition
of new methodologies for the visualization and the exploration of the dynam-
ics within real dynamic social networks. As an example, we chose the case
of scientiﬁc communities by analyzing a portion of the ArXiv repository (ten
years of publications in physics) focusing on the social determinants (e.g. goals
and potential interactions among individuals) behind the emergence and the
resilience of scientiﬁc communities. In particular, the analysis addresses the
co-existence of co-authorships’ and citations’ behaviors of scientists by focus-
ing on the most proﬁcient and cited authors interactions’ patterns and, in
turn, on how they are aﬀected by the selection process of citations. Such a
social selection a) produces self-organization because it is played by a group of
individuals which act, compete and collaborate in a common environment in
order to advance Science and b) determines the success (emergence) of both
topics and scientists working on them.
On the one hand, the studies on scientiﬁc network dynamics deal with the
understanding of the factors that play a signiﬁcant role in their evolution, not
all of them being neither objective nor rational e.g., the existence of a star
system [38], [24], [25], [1] the blind imitation concerning the citations [20], the
reputation and community aﬃliation bias [8]. On the other hand, having some
elements to understand such dynamics could enable for a better detection of
the hot topics and of the vivid subﬁelds and how the scientiﬁc production is
advanced with respect to selection process inside the community itself. Among
the available data to analyze such a system, a subset of the publications in
a given ﬁeld is the most frequently used such as in [29], [23], [26], and [33].
The scientiﬁc publications correspond to the production of such a system and
clearly identify who are the producers (the authors), which institution they
belong to (the aﬃliation), which funded project they are working on (the ac-
knowledgement) and what are the related publications (the citations), having
most of the time a public access to these data explain also a part of its frequent
use in the analyses of the scientiﬁc ﬁeld. Classical analyses concern either the
co-authorships network ([1, 24]) or the citation network ([11, 34]), more rarely
the institutional network ([28]). Moreover, such networks are often considered
as static and their structure is rarely analyzed overtime (an exception is the
one performed by [33] on Physical Review).
The illustrative analysis presented in the paper passes through diﬀerent
data transformations aimed at providing diﬀerent perspectives on the scien-

Emergence through Selection: The Evolution of a Scientiﬁc Challenge
3
tiﬁc network and its evolutions. On a ﬁrst level we discuss the dataset by
means of both static and temporal analysis of citations and co-authorships
networks. A second level of analysis consists in transforming the data in order
to explicit the interdependencies between the co-authorships and citations by
analyzing the scientists’ representations of the collaboration structure within
the scientiﬁc ﬁeld. Such a representation is captured through the network of
cited collaborations ([32]), i.e. from a publication we have several references to
other papers, each one corresponds to a promotion of the scientists authoring
the work.
One of the problem when trying to characterize such a dynamic structure
is that classical indicators from either graph theory or social network analysis
cannot be applied directly. Therefore, we used an algebra, the Time-Varying
Graphs (TVG) ([4]) that enables to take into account the dynamical aspects
of networks and allows for the deﬁnition of temporal indicators ([35]) to char-
acterize patterns in evolving structures.
Through our approach, we capture the attractiveness played by famous
authors on co-authorship behaviors and on the sub-communities structural
evolution.
2 Context
In [24] the network of scientiﬁc collaborations, explored upon several databases,
shows a clustered and small world structure. Moreover, several diﬀerences be-
tween the collaborations’ patterns of the diﬀerent ﬁelds studied are captured.
Such diﬀerences have been deepened in [25] with respect to the number of pa-
pers produced by a given group of authors, the number of collaborations and
the topological distances between scientists. Peltomaki and Alava in [27] pro-
pose a new emulative model aimed at approximating the growth of scientiﬁc
networks, by incorporating bipartition and sub-linear preferential attachment.
A model for the self-assembly of creative teams based on three parameters (e.g.
team size, the rate of newcomers in the scientiﬁc production and the tendency
of authors to collaborate with the same group) has been outlined in [9]. Con-
nectivity patterns in a citations network have been studied in relation to the
development of the DNA theory [11]. The work of Klemm and Eguiluz ( [12])
observed that real networks (e.g. movie actors, co-authorship in science, and
word synonyms) growing patterns are characterized by a clustering trend that
reaches an asymptotic value larger than regular lattices of the same average
connectivity.
In the ﬁeld of social network analysis several works have approached the
problem of temporal metrics [10, 14, 13]. Actually, the focus is on the deﬁnition
of instruments able to capture the intrinsic properties of complex systems’
evolution, that is, characterizing the interdependencies and the co-existence
between local behaviors (interactions) and their global eﬀects (emergence)
[6, 21, 40, 7, 30]. The research approach to characterize the evolution patterns

4
Walter Quattrociocchi and Frederic Amblard
of social networks, at the very beginning was mainly based upon simulations,
while in the past few years, due to the large availability of real datasets,
either the methodology of analysis and the object of research have changed
([37, 19, 13, 5, 17]). In particular, in the latter paper Leskovec states as central
problem, for the social networks in general and for the scientiﬁc communities
networks analysis in particular, the deﬁnition of mathematical models able
to deal and to reproduce all the properties of dynamical real world networks
such as the shrinking diameter ([18]), or the “small world” eﬀect [39]. Actually
instruments and paradigms aﬀording this challenge are mainly based upon
stochastic deﬁnitions ([16]) or conceptualized as a sequence of snapshots of
the network at diﬀerent times [36].
3 Preliminaries
3.1 Time-Varying Graphs
The time-varying graph (TVG) formalism, recently introduced in [4], is a
graph formalisms based on an interaction-centric point of view and oﬀers
concise and elegant formulation of temporal concepts and properties [35].
Let us consider a set of entities V (or nodes), a set of relations E among
entities (edges), and an alphabet L labeling any property of a relation (label);
that is, E ⊆V ×V ×L. The set E enables multiple relations between any given
pair of entities, as long as these relations have diﬀerent properties, that is, for
any e1 = (x1, y1, λ1) ∈E, e2 = (x2, y2, λ2) ∈E, (x1 = x2 ∧y1 = y2 ∧λ1 =
λ2) =⇒e1 = e2.
Relationships between entities are assumed to occur over a time span T ⊆
T, namely the lifetime of the system. The temporal domain T is assumed to
be N for discrete-time systems or R for continuous-time systems. The time-
varying graph structure is denoted by the set G = (V, E, T, ρ, ζ), where ρ :
E × T →{0, 1}, called presence function, indicates whether a given edge is
present at a given time, and ζ : E × T →T, called latency function, indicates
the time it takes to cross a given edge if starting at a given date. As in this
paper the focus is on the temporal and structural analysis of a social network,
we will deliberately omit the latency function and consider TVGs described
as G = (V, E, T, ρ).
TVGs as a sequence of footprints.
Given a TVG G = (V, E, T, ρ), one can deﬁne the footprint of this graph
from t1 to t2 as the static graph G[t1,t2) = (V, E[t1,t2)) such that ∀e ∈E, e ∈
E[t1,t2) ⇐⇒∃t ∈[t1, t2), ρ(e, t) = 1. In other words, the footprint aggregates
interactions over a given time window into static graphs. Let the lifetime
T of the time-varying graph be partitioned in consecutive sub-intervals τ =
[t0, t1), [t1, t2) . . . [ti, ti+1), . . .; where each [tk, tk+1) can be noted τk. We call
sequence of footprints of G according to τ the sequence SF(τ) = Gτ0, Gτ1, . . ..

Emergence through Selection: The Evolution of a Scientiﬁc Challenge
5
Expressing other Temporal Concepts
A sequence of couples J = {(e1, t1), (e2, t2) . . . , (ek, tk)}, such that {e1, e2, ..., ek}
is a walk in G is a journey in G if and only if ∀i, 1 ≤i < k, ρ(ei, ti) = 1 and
ti+1 ≥ti. The departure(J ) and arrival(J ) are respectively the starting date
t1 and the last date tk of a journey J .
Journeys can be thought of as paths over time from a source to a des-
tination and therefore have both a topological and a temporal length. The
topological length of J is the number |J | = k of couples in J (i.e., the
number of hops); its temporal length is its end-to-end duration: ||J || =
arrival(J ) −departure(J ).
4 Exploring the Dataset
4.1 The Dataset
As mentioned in the introduction, the scientiﬁc community analyzed in this
work has been extracted from the hep-th (High Energy Physics Theory) por-
tion of the arXiv website, an on-line repository available at http://arxiv.org/.
The dataset is composed by a collection of papers and therefore their
related citations over the period within January 1992 to May 2003. For each
paper the set of authors, the dates of the on-line publications on arXiv.org,
and the references are provided. There are 352 807 citations within the total
amount of 29 555 papers written by 59 439 authors. The broadness of the
time window covered allows us to explore the dataset in order to extract,
capture and characterize the evolution of the interactions patterns within the
community by means of diﬀerent data transformations.
4.2 The Networks Description
From the dataset, we can easily derive two graphs. The ﬁrst, namely the
co-authorships network, having authors as nodes and the undirected links
standing for the relation of co-authoring a paper. The second, the citations
network, where nodes are the papers and the links (directed) are the references
among papers. More formally, the derived graphs can be deﬁned as:
•
the co-authorship network as Ga : (Va, E) where nodes in Va are the
authors and links e ∈E connect nodes co-authoring a paper.
•
the citations network as Gc : (Vc, E) where the nodes in Vc are the
papers and each edge e ∈E corresponds to a reference to another paper.
In Table 1 we provide measures about the citations and collaborations
networks.
The diameters - e.g., the longest shortest path between to pairs of nodes
(respectively authors and papers) - of both networks have high values. The

6
Walter Quattrociocchi and Frederic Amblard
Network Indicators
Ga
Gc
Network Diameter
26
37
Network Modularity
0,706 0.617
Network Average Clustering Coeﬃcient 0.5006 0.156
Table 1. Co-authorships and Citations Graph Measures
modularity, measuring how a network can be partitioned into modules or
subparts, has high values on both graphs. Whereas the average clustering
coeﬃcient of the collaborations graph is higher than in the citations graph.
The networks are composed by several connected islands with few inter-
connections within them, and the co-authorships network is more clustered of
the citations graph.
5 Temporalizing the Dataset
In this section we are going to explicit the temporal aspects, (i.e. the structural
evolution) of the citations and co-authorships networks. The transformation is
performed through the time-varying graphs formalism deﬁned in the previous
section.
We derive two time-varying graphs: the temporal co-authorships network,
with undirected edges and authors as nodes where a link stands for the re-
lations of co-authoring a paper; and the temporal citations network having
papers as nodes and the links (directed) representing the citations from a pa-
per to another one. The temporal dimension of both networks is derived by
the paper’s submission date. The temporal co-authorship network has edges
labeled with the date of submission, while the temporal citations network has
the nodes labeled with the publication date of papers citing other papers.
More formally, we can deﬁne
•
the temporal co-authorships network as a quadruplet Gt
a : (V, E, T, ρ)
where the nodes in v ∈V are the authors and links e ∈E connect a couple
of scientists co-authoring a paper. The temporal domain T = [ta, tb) of the
function ρ, is the lifetime of each node v that in this context is assumed
as ta to be the submission date of the paper and tb = ∞.
•
the temporal citations network as a quadruplet Gt
c : (V, E, T, ρ) where
the nodes in the set V are the papers and each edge e ∈E corresponds to a
citation to another paper. As for the co-authorships network, the temporal
dimension T = [ta, tb) of the presence function ρ of Gt
c is deﬁned within
the submission date of papers and ∞.

Emergence through Selection: The Evolution of a Scientiﬁc Challenge
7
5.1 Citations Network Evolution
In this section we show the evolution of the temporal citations network Gt
c by
using the sequence of footprints as deﬁned in section 3.1. The values are com-
puted by aggregating the interactions occurring at each sub-interval SF(τ)
having τ ﬁxed to one year. Figure 1(a) shows the evolution of the cluster-
ing coeﬃcient the curve is characterized by a stable trend attesting on low
values. The density evolution, which is shown in Figure 1(b), presents the
same low and decreasing behavior, meaning that both the distances and in-
terconnections among nodes (citations within papers) are stable for all the
time windows observed. Also the modularity, shown in Figure 1(c), has a
decreasing but stable trend.
(a) Average Clustering Coeﬃcient
(b) Density
(c) Modularity
Fig. 1. Citations Graph Evolution
5.2 Co-authorships Network Evolution
The temporal co-authorships graphs presents a diﬀerent structural evolution
with respect to the temporal graph of citations analyzed in the previous sec-
tion. As before, here the values are computed by aggregating the interactions

8
Walter Quattrociocchi and Frederic Amblard
at each sub-interval SF(τ) where τ is ﬁxed to one year. The average cluster-
ing coeﬃcient evolution in the time interval observed, that is shown in Figure
2(a), has an oscillating trend with higher values than the ones reached by
the temporal citations graph. In addition, Gt
a has a more modular and denser
structure, as shown in Figure 2(c) and Figure 2(b). The captured trends are
characterized by a decreasing (and not stable) trend.
(a) Average Clustering Coeﬃcient
(b) Density
(c) Modularity
Fig. 2. Co-authorships Graph Evolution
6 Expliciting Interactions
In this section we provide an additional data transformation in order to cap-
ture more details about the evolution of our scientiﬁc network. The dynam-
ics in scientiﬁc communities are based upon competitions and collaborations
among authors and groups of scientists. In the analysis we want to capture a)
the resulting emerging eﬀects caused by these two opposite motivations and b)
how they are expressed in terms of collaborations and citations patterns. The
dataset analyzed in the current paper presents two explicit interactions: the

Emergence through Selection: The Evolution of a Scientiﬁc Challenge
9
papers’ co-authorships and the citations between papers. In addition, there
is an implicit level of interaction that depends upon the goals behind any re-
search paper: the quality and, at the same time, the necessity to be highly cited
(competition). Hence, often both the collaborations’ and citations’ strategies
are optimized in order to have the highest impact with respect to the problem
addressed and to collect the highest number of citations. How such processes
aﬀect the scientiﬁc production and the scientiﬁc communities structural evo-
lution?
6.1 Deriving the Interactions Graph
We approach the data transformation in order to explicit the co-authorships
and cited collaboration patterns and their interdependencies. The dataset is
transformed in an undirected graph, that we call the interaction network,
having as nodes the authors, weighted links representing the co-authorship
on a paper, and when a paper is cited by another work, the links’ weights,
connecting the authors of the referenced paper, are incremented.
More formally, the graph of the cited co-authorships is deﬁned as quadru-
pled Gcc : (V, E, T, ρ) on a discrete time. The nodes v ∈V are the authors,
the set of edges E represents the collaborations on a paper’s production.
The nodes appear on the graph the ﬁrst time a paper they wrote has been
published, and the interaction L is weighted with a variable wi, namely the
strength value of a collaboration, that is incremented at each citation received
by a paper produced by a given couple of nodes (u, v).
In the following section we analyze the behaviors and the interaction’s
strategies within the most cited authors’ network, such a graph, namely
Gi, is a subset of the global interaction network Gcc : (V, E, T, ρ).
In particular the nodes considered in the analysis are only the authors
having links’ strength values wi ≥150, that is, all the groups having more
than 150 citations on a work. Such a network in its maximum expansion,
during the 10 years temporal window observed, is composed by 12 583 nodes
and 84 512 edges.
6.2 The Phase Transition
Figure 3(b) shows the density values for each element of the temporal sequence
of footprints SF(τ) of the interactions network of the most proﬁcient scientists
Gi. The time interval τ is ﬁxed to one year.
The density trend starts with very low values and then an increase of the
graph’s sparsity occurs during its evolution with a very low counter-trend
during the period between 1999 and 2000.
The growing rate of the modularity, computed on SF(τ) is shown in 3(c).
It is characterized by an increasing rate until 1993, then it reaches its highest
values during the period between 1999 and 2000, but through a smoothed
rate. As far as we can see by the modularity evolution, the interconnections

10
Walter Quattrociocchi and Frederic Amblard
(a) Average Clustering Coeﬃcient
(b) Density
(c) Modularity
Fig. 3. Collaborations Graph Evolution
among separated groups of authors starts in 1993, then their interconnection
continues, but with a more stable rate. Looking at the curve of the average
clustering coeﬃcient shown in (Figure 3(a)), we can see a phase transition
occurring between 1999 and 2000 and separating a monotone trend from a
decreasing one.
We can interpret the modularity trend as showing that nodes during the
ﬁrst phase are divided in several and separated groups, while after the phase
transition of the clustering coeﬃcient, the connections among these groups
start to become denser causing a network structure with a smaller number
of larger communities (modules) - e.g. the network tends toward a structural
homogeneity.
6.3 Zooming on Interconnections
In order characterize the phenomena behind the phase transition outlined
in the previous section, in Figure 4 we show the trend of the average ratio
between nodes and edges in both the whole interaction network (in black)
and the network of the most proﬁcient scientists (in red). As we can see, the
phase transition, evinced in the clustering coeﬃcient evolution in Figure 3(a),
is not caused by an increase of the number of authors in the period between
1999 and 2000, neither it is a pattern related to the whole dataset.

Emergence through Selection: The Evolution of a Scientiﬁc Challenge
11
Fig. 4. The average number of edges per node for the entire network of the cited
co-authorships (in black) and for the network of the most proﬁcient authors (in red)
In Table 6.3 we present the evolution of the average degree, the average
path length and of the degree power law within the temporal window observed.
As for the previous indicators these values are computed on the sequence of
footprints SF(τ) with τ ﬁxed to one year of Gi.
Year Average Degree Average Path Length Power Law
1992
0,0095
1
0
1993
0,0176
1
-1,386
1994
0,012
1
-1,79
1995
0,0135
1,16
-2,16
1996
0,132
1,13
-2,27
1997
0,0118
1,12
-2,5
1998
0,106
1,12
-2,5
1999
0,066
3,92
-5,08
2000
0,64
3,79
-5,27
2001
0,6
3,82
-5,25
Table 2. Other interaction network’s measurements
In bold the values when the phase transition occurs. Neither the average
path length, indicating the average distances among nodes, the power law
degree, measuring how closely the degree distribution of a network follows
a power-law scale and the evolution of average degree, counting the average
number of connections at each node, are immune to the phase transition.

12
Walter Quattrociocchi and Frederic Amblard
7 Goals and Preferential Attachment
As the Time-Varying graphs is an interaction-centric formalism. In this section
we will show how such a modeling approach is compliant with one of the
widely diﬀused platforms for network analysis and how it is possible to show
the punctual evolution as in a movie of the temporal networks.
The most interesting emerging phenomenon from the previous section is
a phase transition in the evolution of the structure of the most proﬁcient
authors’ network occurring between 1999 and 2000. According to the tem-
poral analysis, such changes in the network are caused by a particular trend
regarding the interconnections among nodes (authors) of the most cited co-
authorships graph Gi.
In this section we outline the network evolution by showing the formation
of the biggest community at the beginning of the phase transition (1998) until
its maximum expansion (2002). In Figure 5 we provide a sequence of screen-
shots showing the nodes’ aggregation patterns. The pictures are obtained
through the Gephi platform ([2]). At the beginning (Figure 5(a)) there are
several separated components, that start to connect (Figure 5(b)).
(a) Several separated connected
components
(b) that start to connect with each
other
Fig. 5. Connections within the islands
Notice that the edges are emphasized with respect to the strength value
wi counting the number of citations of each couple of nodes. The component
(group of authors) in the center is highly cited and it is playing as an attractor
on the neighboring nodes as it is shown in Figure 6(a) until the maximum level
of connections in the group is reached, as shown in Figure 6(b).
7.1 Zooming on the Attractors
In this section we provide a more detailed vision on such a process of aggre-
gation toward the attractors. Let starts by introducing Figure 7 showing the

Emergence through Selection: The Evolution of a Scientiﬁc Challenge
13
(a) The
number
of
connections
within authors continues to increase.
(b) The maximum level of con-
nectivity is reached.
Fig. 6. The growing phase of interaction among authors
number of citations received at each semester by the most cited paper in our
dataset.
Fig. 7. the citations trend of the most cited paper for each semester
The citations rate has a strong increase after two semesters. The third
semester coincides with the interval (1999-2000) of the phase transition cap-
tured in the previous section.
Hence, in order to understand the eﬀect of this paper, in the following we
will show a sequence of snapshots of the network structure in the neighbor of
the authors of the most cited paper when it appears in our database. Notice
that in the following pictures, the nodes’ diameters are proportional to the
total amount of citations received by their papers.

14
Walter Quattrociocchi and Frederic Amblard
At the beginning there are only separated components as shown in Figure
8(a). Then a large node appears (Figure 8(b)), and near appears a node with
a smaller diameter but with a higher number of links. The biggest node is one
of the authors of the most cited paper and as we can see, the node has a very
low number of connections (collaborations) in that time interval.
(a) Before
(b) one of the authors (the biggest
node) of the most cited paper and a
smaller node with an higher degree
appear
Fig. 8. The appearence of one of the most cited authors
(a) The group of authors of the
most cited papers appears. The au-
thors are the two big nodes and the
smaller hub
(b) The portion of the graph be-
comes denser
Fig. 9. Densiﬁcation through the hub node
In Figure 9(a) the fat node (a Nobel prize) and the hub node are connected,
they publish a paper together with another node with a large diameter. Several
islands start to link the clique formed and as we can see in Figure 9(b) the
process of diﬀusion continues by means of new hubs.
The sequence of snapshots shows the interactions patterns behind the for-
mulation of the “String Theory” and of its consequent developments.

Emergence through Selection: The Evolution of a Scientiﬁc Challenge
15
Authors in the same community start to migrate toward the island of
the authors of the most cited paper. The increasing community densiﬁcation
causes the formation of a giant component around the group authoring the
most cited paper that in turns makes the network become denser and homo-
geneous as emerged in the analysis in the previous sections.
It is a goal-driven preferential attachment
e.g., the mechanism used to
explain the power law degree distributions in social networks - due to the
number of citations (representing the emergence through selection) to a given
group. Authors tend to join highly cited groups to satisfy both the quality and
the possibility to be highly cited requirements. Moreover, considering that at
the beginning there are several separated groups, the phenomenon can be in-
terpreted as a three-fold process with a ﬁrst phase as the exploration of ideas
by means of separated works aﬀorded by separated groups, a second one when
a part of the ideas explored starts to be cited more than the others, and a
third one when authors tend to join groups that have produced highly cited
works. The process tripartition resembles the phases of the natural selection,
e.g. the exploration, the selection and migration. In this context such a (social)
selection a) produces self-organization because it is played by a group of in-
dividuals which act, compete and collaborate in order to advance science and
b) determines the success (emergence) of a topic and of the scientists working
on it.
7.2 Characterizing the Community Evolution
Table 7.2 summarizes the network evolution by means of a) basic indicators,
e.g. the number of nodes, the number of edges and the community’s diameter)
and b) aggregated indicators, e.g. the cyclomatic number, the alpha, beta,
and gamma index. The cyclomatic number counts the number of cycles on the
graph, its magnitude characterizes the development of the nodes’ accessibility.
The alpha index is the ratio between the number of cycles in the graph and
their possible maximum value. The range of the alpha index spread within
0 to 1, that are from no cycles to a completely interconnected network. The
beta index, is a simple measure of connectivity. It relates the total number
of edges to the total number of nodes. The higher the value, the greater the
connectivity is. The gamma index measures the ratio between the number
of edges on the network and the maximum number of possible edges among
nodes. The gamma index spreads within 0 and 100, respectively indicating
the minimum and the maximum number of edges between nodes.
As we can see from the evolution of these parameters, the aggregation
pattern among separated components is evident for each one of the metric
proposed. In terms of nodes that join the community and their mutual con-
nections, the diameter over time passes through a phase of expansion and
then tends to stabilize.

16
Walter Quattrociocchi and Frederic Amblard
Measures
April 00 October 00 April 01 October 01 April 02 October 02 April 03
Vertices:
23
51
65
66
67
70
72
Edges:
29
75
99
100
106
110
114
Diameter:
6
10
10
10
8
8
8
Cyclomatic:
17
25
35
35
40
41
43
Alpha:
0,73
0,02
0,017
0,016
0,018
0,017
0,017
Beta:
1,69
1,47
1,52
1,51
1,58
1,57
1,58
Gamma:
61,9
51,02
52,38
52,08
54,3
53,92
54,28
Table 3. network measurement of the biggest community
8 Conclusions
In this paper we characterize the evolution of a scientiﬁc community extracted
by the ArXiv’s hep-th (High Energy Physics Theory) repository. The analysis
starts with a static vision on the dataset by showing the structure of the cita-
tions and co-authorships graphs derived by the dataset. Then by adding the
temporal dimension on both networks we characterize the structural changes
of the co-authorships and citations graphs. The temporal dimension and the
metrics used for the analysis were formalized using Time-Varying Graphs
(TVG), a mathematical framework designed to represent the interactions and
their evolution in dynamically changing environments.
Since we are interested in the relationships between collaborations and
citations behaviors of scientists, we focus on the network of most cited authors
and on its structural evolution where several interesting aspects emerge. The
network evolves toward a denser structure, a phase transition occurs in the
1999-2000 time interval causing the homogenization of communities.
Through our approach, we capture the role played by famous authors
on co-authorship behaviors. They act as attractors on the community. The
driving force is a sort of preferential attachment driven by the number of
citations received by a given group, that in terms of the goal of any scientiﬁc
community indicates a strategy oriented to the community belonging.
Furthermore, the evolution of the network from a sparse and modular
structure to a denser and homogeneous one, can be interpreted as a three-fold
process reﬂecting the natural selection. The ﬁrst phase is the exploration of
ideas by means of separated works, once some ideas start to be cited (selected)
more than others, then authors tend to join groups that have produced highly
cited works. The selection is performed by individuals in a goal oriented envi-
ronment and such a (social) selection produces self-organization because it is
played by a group of individuals which act, compete and collaborate in order
to advance Science. In fact, the driving force is an emergent eﬀect of the inter-
dependencies between citations and the goal of the scientiﬁc production since
the social selection determines the emergence of a topic and of the scientists
working on it by determining the so called preferential attachment toward
groups and topics having high potential of citations. Finally, we show that

Emergence through Selection: The Evolution of a Scientiﬁc Challenge
17
the migration of authors toward the most cited authors (attractors) expresses
through a hub node, - e.g. a node with few citations and several co-authorships.
In the next future we are going to outline the behavior of the most proﬁ-
cient scientist in terms of their aggregation patterns, and on how their works
are diﬀused within the community, that is, characterizing the reasons behind
the selection process causing the network structural evolution. Such aspects
will be addressed both with new analyses on diﬀerent datasets and by means
multi-agent simulations. The former stream will be devoted to the deﬁnition
of new patterns, the latter will be used for the understanding of how changing
some parameters of the network inﬂuences the evolution, and consequently
the quality, of the scientiﬁc production.
9 Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the Future and Emerging Technolo-
gies programme FP7-COSI-ICT of the European Commission through project
QLectives (grant no.: 231200).
