Decoder-tailored Polar Code Design Using the
Genetic Algorithm
Ahmed Elkelesh, Moustafa Ebada, Sebastian Cammerer and Stephan ten Brink
Abstract—We propose a new framework for constructing
polar codes (i.e., selecting the frozen bit positions) for arbitrary
channels, and tailored to a given decoding algorithm, rather than
based on the (not necessarily optimal) assumption of successive
cancellation (SC) decoding. The proposed framework is based
on the Genetic Algorithm (GenAlg), where populations (i.e.,
collections) of information sets evolve successively via evolu-
tionary transformations based on their individual error-rate
performance. These populations converge towards an information
set that ﬁts both the decoding behavior and the deﬁned channel.
Using our proposed algorithm over the additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN) channel, we construct a polar code of length
2048 with code rate 0.5, without the CRC-aid, tailored to plain
successive cancellation list (SCL) decoding, achieving the same
error-rate performance as the CRC-aided SCL decoding, and
leading to a coding gain of 1dB at BER of 10−6. Further, a
belief propagation (BP)-tailored construction approaches the SCL
error-rate performance without any modiﬁcations in the decoding
algorithm itself. The performance gains can be attributed to
the signiﬁcant reduction in the total number of low-weight
codewords. To demonstrate the ﬂexibility, coding gains for the
Rayleigh channel are shown under SCL and BP decoding.
Besides improvements in error-rate performance, we show that,
when required, the GenAlg can be also set up to reduce the
decoding complexity, e.g., the SCL list size or the number of BP
iterations can be reduced, while maintaining the same error-rate
performance.
Index Terms—Polar Codes, Channel Polarization, Polar Code
Construction, Reed–Muller Codes, Genetic Algorithm, Evolution-
ary Algorithms, Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
I. INTRODUCTION
Polar codes [2] are the ﬁrst family of codes proven to be
capacity achieving for any Binary Input Discrete Memoryless
Channel (BI-DMC) and with an explicit construction method
under low complexity successive cancellation (SC) decoding.
However, for ﬁnite lengths, both the SC decoder and the polar
code itself (i.e., its maximum likelihood (ML) performance)
are shown to be sub-optimal when compared to other state-
of-the-art coding schemes such as low-density parity-check
(LDPC) codes [3]. Later, Tal and Vardy introduced a succes-
sive cancellation list (SCL) decoder [4] enabling a decoding
performance close to the ML bound for sufﬁciently large list
sizes. A complexity reduced version was proposed in [5] with
Manuscript submitted September 20, 2018; revised January 28, 2019; date
of current version January 28, 2019.
The authors are with the Institute of Telecommunications, Pfaffen-

This work has been supported by DFG, Germany, under grant BR 3205/5-1.
Parts of this work have been accepted in the International ITG Conference
on Systems, Communications and Coding (SCC), Feb. 2019 [1].
a slight negligible performance degradation. The concatenation
with an additional high-rate Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC)
code [4] or parity-check (PC) code [6] further improves the
code performance itself, as it increases the minimum distance
and, thus, improves the weight spectrum of the code. This
simple concatenation renders polar codes into a powerful
coding scheme. For short length codes [7], polar codes were
recently selected by the 3GPP group as the channel codes for
the upcoming 5th generation mobile communication standard
(5G) uplink/downlink control channel [8].
On the other hand, some drawbacks can be seen in their high
decoding complexity and large latency for long block lengths
under SCL decoding due to their inherent sequential decoding
manner (see [9] and references therein), which currently limits
the usage of polar codes in several practical applications.
Although several other decoding schemes such as the iter-
ative belief propagation (BP) decoding [10] and the iterative
belief propagation list (BPL) decoder [11] exist, they are cur-
rently not competitive with CRC-aided SCL decoding in terms
of error-rate performance [12]. However, they promise more
efﬁcient decoder architectures in terms of decoding latency
and parallelism. The partitioned successive cancellation list
(PSCL) decoder [13] was introduced achieving almost the
same performance of the SCL decoder with a signiﬁcantly
lower memory requirement. Therefore, a good polar code
design tailored to an explicit decoder may change this situation
as it promises either an improved error-rate performance or
savings in terms of decoding complexity for a speciﬁc type
of decoder. In this work, we show that both can be achieved
by considering the decoding algorithm throughout the code
construction phase instead of constructing the code based on
the typical assumption of SC decoding. An intuitive example
why a design for SC is sub-optimal for other decoding schemes
can be given by considering the girth of the graph under BP
decoding, which strongly depends on the frozen positions of
the code. Thus, freezing additional nodes can even result in a
degraded decoding performance under BP decoding although
the ML performance indeed gets better (see Fig. 9 in [14]).
In a strict sense, one may argue that polar codes are
inherently connected with SC decoding and only a design
based on the concept of channel polarization results in a true
“polar” code (cf. Reed–Muller (RM) codes). However, from a
more practical point of view, we seek to ﬁnd the most efﬁcient
coding scheme for ﬁnite length constraints and, with slight
abuse of notation, we regard the proposed codes as polar codes.
Thus, a design method that considers the decoder and improves
arXiv:1901.10464v1  [cs.IT]  28 Jan 2019

the overall performance is an important step for future polar
code applications.
Except for the Binary Erasure Channel (BEC), existing
polar code constructions rely either on analytic approxima-
tions/bounds such as the Bhattacharyya parameter [2], density
evolution [15] and Gaussian approximation [16], [17] or
heuristics [18]–[20], including Monte-Carlo-based simulations
for speciﬁc decoding algorithms [21]–[23]. Additionally, sev-
eral concatenation schemes of polar codes and other coding
techniques have been proposed [24]–[28] to improve the ﬁnite
length performance under different decoders. However, an
explicit design tailored to SCL or BP decoding turns out to be
cumbersome due to the many dependencies in the decoding
graph and the high dimensionality of the optimization problem.
Polar code construction (or design), throughout this paper,
refers to selecting an appropriate frozen bit position vector.
In this work, we propose a new framework for polar code
construction matched to a speciﬁc decoding algorithm em-
bedded in the well-understood Genetic Algorithm (GenAlg)
context. As a result, the optimization algorithm works on a
speciﬁc error-rate simulation setup, i.e., it inherently takes
into account the actual decoder and channel. This renders
the GenAlg-based polar code optimization into a solid and
powerful design method. Furthermore, to the best of our
knowledge, the resulting polar codes in this work outperform
any known design method for plain polar codes under SCL
decoding without the aid of an additional CRC (i.e., CRC-
aided SCL performance could be achieved without the aid of
a CRC). Additionally, the BP decoder of the proposed code
achieves (and slightly outperforms) the SCL decoding perfor-
mance of the conventional code without any required decoder
modiﬁcations. We noticed that the performance gains can be
attributed to the signiﬁcant reduction in the total number of
low-weight codewords. Furthermore, the decoding complexity,
latency and memory requirements can be reduced for a ﬁxed
target error-rate after carefully constructing the polar code
using GenAlg. We make the source code public and also
provide the best polar code designs from this work online1.
Other optimization algorithms (e.g., differential evolution) can
be used to solve the polar code design problem. However, due
to the hard-decision nature of the problem (i.e., a bit-channel
can be either frozen or non-frozen) GenAlg seems to be more
suitable.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we brieﬂy
review the fundamental concepts of polar codes. In Sec. III,
the problem of polar code construction is presented along with
the most relevant work. Sec. IV introduces the GenAlg and dis-
cusses its preliminary concepts. The GenAlg-based polar code
construction is then presented in Sec. V. Results are presented
in Sec. VI and Sec. VII for additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) and Rayleigh fading channels, respectively. In Sec.
VIII, we show that the improved code construction method can
lead to signiﬁcant reduction in decoding complexity, latency
and memory requirements. Sec. IX depicts some conclusions.
1Link-will-be-Available-After-Review
II. POLAR CODES
Polar codes [2] are based on the concept of channel po-
larization, in which N = 2n identical copies of a channel W
are combined and N synthesized bit-channels are generated.
These synthesized bit-channels show a polarization behavior,
in the sense that some bit-channels are purely noiseless and
the rest are completely noisy. A recursive channel combination
provides the polarization matrix
GN = BN ·F⊗n,
F =

1
0
1
1

where BN is a bit-reversal permutation matrix and F⊗n denotes
the n-th Kronecker power of F. Extensions for kernels other
than the 2×2 kernel exist, but are not considered in this work.
However, the results from this work can be applied straight-
forwardly. The polar codewords x are given by x = u · GN,
where u contains k information bits and N −k frozen bits,
w.l.o.g. we set the frozen positions to “0”. The information
set A contains the k most reliable positions of u in which the
k information bits are transmitted and ¯A denotes the frozen
positions (i.e., the complementary set to A). The conventional
generator matrix, denoted by G, is constructed as the rows {ri}
of GN with i ∈A. The task of the polar code construction,
in its original form, is to ﬁnd the information set A which
maximizes the code performance (under SC decoding) for a
speciﬁc channel condition. More details on the problem of
polar code construction is provided in Sec. III.
In this work, a polar code with codeword length N and k
information bits is denoted by P (N,k), i.e., the information
set has the cardinality |A| = k and the code rate Rc = k/N.
Systematic polar encoding [29] can be applied which en-
hances the bit error rate (BER) performance with the same
block error rate (BLER) performance, when compared to non-
systematic polar codes. Throughout this work, we use non-
systematic polar encoding. However, it is straightforward to
use the GenAlg to construct systematic polar codes.
The basic polar decoding algorithms are:
• SC decoding [2]; the ﬁrst proposed decoder for polar
codes, where all information bits ˆui are sequentially
hard-decided based on the previously estimated bits,
{ ˆu1,..., ˆui−1} and the channel information y, where i ∈
{1,...,N}. Obviously, it suffers from unavoidable error
propagation (i.e., decision error at decided bit ˆui cannot
be corrected later and will eventually affect all next bit
decisions).
• SCL decoding [4]; denoted by SCL (L), utilizes a list
of L most likely candidate paths during SC decoding;
at every decision the decoder branches into two paths
( ˆui = 0 and ˆui = 1) instead of the hard decision in the SC
decoder. To limit the exponential growth of complexity,
only the L most reliable paths are kept sorted in the list
according to a speciﬁc path metric.
• CRC-aided SCL decoding [4]; denoted by SCL+CRC-
r (L), where an additional high-rate CRC of r bits is
concatenated to the polar code, to help in selecting the

ﬁnal codeword from the L surviving candidates, yielding
signiﬁcant performance gains in competing with the state-
of-the-art error correcting codes.
• BP decoding [10]; denoted by BP (Nit,max) is an iterative
message passing decoder based on the encoding graph of
the polar code. Log-likelihood ratio (LLR) messages are
iteratively passed along the encoding graph until reaching
a maximum number of iterations (Nit,max) or meeting an
early stopping condition. It can be inherently parallelized
and allows soft-in/soft-out decoding. However, the error-
rate performance of polar codes under BP decoding
is typically not competitive with state-of-the-art SCL
decoding. Throughout this work, we use the G-matrix-
based early stopping condition (“re-encoding”), where
decoding terminates when ˆx = ˆu·GN [30].
III. POLAR CODE CONSTRUCTION
The polar code construction phase is about deciding the
most reliable k bit positions that are set as the information
bit positions, while the remaining N −k bit positions are
set as frozen bit positions. Thus, ranking the bit-channels
according to their reliabilities is of major signiﬁcance in the
polar code construction phase. The information set A is the
outcome from the polar code construction phase specifying
the indices of the information bit positions. A corresponding
logical A-vector can be used such that A = [a1,a2,...,aN],
where ai ∈{0,1} and 1 ≤i ≤N. Bit position i is frozen if
ai = 0, while bit position j is non-frozen (i.e., can be used for
information transmission) if a j = 1. For instance consider the
P (8,4)-code, the information set A = {4,6,7,8} can thus be
represented by the logical vector A = [00010111].
The code construction can be considered as an optimization
problem, where the objective is to ﬁnd the (sub-) optimal set
of k good positions in a set of indices {1,...,N}, as shown
in (1). The reliability measure is the main difference between
various code construction algorithms, e.g., upper bound on the
BLER, exact BLER or BER as shown in (1).
Aopt = arg min
A
BER(A) or BLER(A)
subject to
 
N
∑
i=1
ai
!
= k,
ai ∈{0,1}.
(1)
where A = [a1,a2,...,aN], Rc = k/N and i = 1,2,...,N.
The information set A (or, equivalently, the A-vector) is
channel dependent, meaning that it depends on the respective
channel parameter (e.g., design SNR for AWGN channel,
or design ε for BEC). Thus, polar codes are non-universal.
However, techniques are proposed in [31] to devise universal
polar codes. In [10], Arıkan introduced adaptive polar codes,
or channel-tailored polar codes, in which the polar code is
designed using a channel-speciﬁc condition, i.e., setting the
design SNR equal to the SNR of the transmission channel. It
is worth mentioning that the minimum distance of polar codes
dmin depends on the polar code construction (i.e., A). Polar
codes dmin is equal to the minimum weight of the rows {ri}
in the GN-matrix with indices in A (i.e., i ∈A) [32, Lemma 3].
Choosing the best k bit positions for information transmis-
sion is even more crucial for short length polar codes. This can
be attributed to the fact that the bit-channels of short length
polar codes are not fully polarized, and the portion of semi-
polarized bit-channels (which would be normally unfrozen)
leads to high error-rates. Although efﬁcient polar code con-
struction only exists for the BEC case [2], many algorithms
were devised for the AWGN channel case. A survey on the
effect of the design SNR and the effect of the speciﬁc polar
code construction algorithm used on the error-rate performance
of SC decoding is presented in [33].
In [2], Arıkan uses the symmetric capacity I(Wi) or the
Bhattacharyya parameter Z(Wi) of the virtual channel Wi
to assess the reliability of the bit-channels (i.e., denoted as
“conventional construction” throughout this work). However,
the Bhattacharyya parameters are preferred because of being
connected with an explicit bound on the block error proba-
bility under SC decoding. A Monte-Carlo-based polar code
construction was also proposed by Arıkan in [2].
In [15], a density evolution-based polar code construction
algorithm was proposed. A Gaussian approximation of the
density evolution for polar code construction was proposed
in [16]. In [17], with the help of Gaussian approximation, the
approximated BLER is used to assess the reliabilities of the
bit-channels instead of the upper bound on the BLER (i.e.,
Bhattacharyya-based design), assuming SC decoding.
It is important to keep in mind that polar codes that are
constructed based on the mutual information or the Bhat-
tacharyya parameters of the bit-channels, as proposed by
Arıkan, are tailored to hard-output SC decoders. Thus, they
are not necessarily optimum when using other decoders such
as the soft-output BP decoder [23], [32], [34] or the SCL
decoder [23], [34], [35].
In [32], the authors observed that picking the frozen bit
positions according to the RM rule enhances the error-rate
performance signiﬁcantly under maximum a posteriori (MAP)
decoding due to the fact that the RM rule maximizes the
minimum distance dmin of the code. An RM code can be
viewed as a polar code with a different frozen/non-frozen bit
selection strategy [32], where both codes are based on the same
polarization matrix GN = F⊗n. However, the k information bit
positions of RM codes are the positions corresponding to the
k row indices with the maximum weights in the GN-matrix.
Consequently, the RM code construction phase is channel
independent as it merely depends on the row weights of the
GN-matrix. A hybrid polar and RM code construction [24]
results in signiﬁcant error-rate improvement gains under SCL
decoding without the CRC-aid, by improving the minimum
distance of the resultant code. This underlines the beneﬁts
of improving the minimum distance of the code and also
the need of an improved construction algorithm tailored to
the decoder. Similarly, improved error-rate performance of
multi-kernel polar codes under SCL decoding was achieved
by optimizing the distance properties of polar codes as shown

in [36]. A family of codes that interpolates between polar and
RM codes was introduced in [34]. These codes pass smoothly
from a polar to an RM code, for a ﬁxed codelength and
rate, by changing a design parameter α. These codes provide
signiﬁcant error-rate performance gains under BP and SCL
decoding.
In [23], an LLR-based polar code construction is proposed,
in which the LLRs of the non-frozen bits are tracked during
BP decoding to identify weak information bit-channels, and
then the information set A is modiﬁed by swapping these
weak information bit-channels with strong frozen bit-channels.
The resulting code shows an enhanced error-rate performance
under both BP and SCL decoding due to the resultant reduction
in the number of low weight codewords.
Furthermore, some work has been done to construct polar
codes which are tailored to a speciﬁc decoder, e.g., polar code
construction assuming SCL decoding [19] and assuming BP
decoding [21], [22], where a Monte-Carlo-based construction
is proposed similar to [2].
As the output alphabet size grows exponentially with the
codelength N, it is computationally of high complexity to
precisely calculate I(Wi) or Z(Wi) per bit-channel. However, a
quantization can be used to closely approximate them [37].
A recent discovery which reduces the complexity of the
polar code construction is the partial order for synthesized
channels [38], that is independent of the underlying binary-
input channel. According to [39], it sufﬁces to compute the
Bhattacharyya parameter (or any other reliability parameter)
of a sub-linear number of bit-channels, if we take advantage
of the partial order. Later an heuristic closed-form algorithm
called polarization weight (PW) [18] was proposed to deter-
mine the reliability of bit-channels based on their indices and
a carefully chosen parameter β [20], resulting in a signiﬁcant
complexity reduction in the polar code construction.
To the best of our knowledge, no analytical polar code
construction rule exists thus far which would be optimized
for BP or SCL decoding and, thus, the nature of the iterative
or list decoding is not usually taken into account while
designing the information set of a polar code [35]. Thus, the
problem of taking the type of decoding into consideration
while constructing the polar code is, thus far, an open problem.
In this work, we propose a method which always converges
to a “good enough” solution, i.e., leads to a better error-rate
performance when compared to the state-of-the-art polar code
construction techniques available nowadays.
IV. GENETIC ALGORITHM
GenAlg was ﬁrst introduced by Holland in 1975 [40] as an
efﬁcient tool that helps in achieving (good) solutions for high-
dimensional optimization problems which are computation-
ally intractable. Beside ﬁnding (good) local minima, a well-
parametrized GenAlg is known for converging to these minima
very quickly [41]. Due to that merit, GenAlg has attracted a
lot of research in the Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) ﬁeld leading
to improved and adaptive variants of it.
Start
Initialize
Population
Compute
Fitness
Stopping
condition
Return
ﬁttest
Selection
Crossovers
and
Mutations
Compute
Fitness
Terminate
yes
no
Fig. 1: An abstract view of the genetic algorithm (GenAlg).
Furthermore, researchers from other research ﬁelds (e.g.,
channel coding, signal processing) worked on adapting the
GenAlg to some of their speciﬁc problems that lacked enough
theoretical basis for solving. This lead to improvements over
the existent theoretical methods of dealing with the same
problems. One of the earliest applications of GenAlg in the
ﬁeld of channel coding was proposed in [42] where the
GenAlg was used to ﬁnd maximal distance codes. Besides,
it was used in [43] for decoding linear block codes.
Later, it was proposed in [41] to enable discarding the
systematic bits at the encoder side and help reconstructing
them at the decoder side using the GenAlg and, thus, enabling
rate adjustments without puncturing. Also, a GenAlg-based
LDPC decoder was developed [44] where the SNR value is
not required at the receiver side. Furthermore, a GenAlg-based
decoder for convolutional codes was introduced in [45].
An abstract view of the GenAlg setup is depicted in Fig. 1.
We brieﬂy review the GenAlg, revisit the most signiﬁcant
deﬁnitions relevant to the scope of this work and refer the
interested reader to [46] for more details. GenAlg is inspired
by the natural evolution where populations of offsprings,
resulting from parents, keep evolving and compete, while only
the ﬁttest offsprings are the ones that survive.
GenAlg tries to mimic the evolution of natural organisms
where it typically starts with an initial population of candidate
individuals and the ﬁttest of them survive and give birth to new
offsprings which represent the new population. The criterion
of ﬁtness is, therefore, critical for the GenAlg so that the
offsprings keep evolving towards the ﬁttest. If the size of
population and the number of evolution stages are sufﬁciently
large, the GenAlg converges to an ultimate (sub-) optimal
solution. The most important GenAlg fundamentals are brieﬂy
introduced in the following subsections.
A. Population
The population, in the GenAlg context, is the collection
of individuals that sample the search space at any arbitrary
search instance. Each individual (also called “chromosome”)
is, for instance, a binary vector of bits (hence called “genes”).

These individuals represent the candidate solutions to the
objective function of the optimization problem. Each of the
individuals is tagged with its own ﬁtness value according
to some ﬁtness function. One important parameter of the
GenAlg is the (allowed) population size which impacts the
optimization problem signiﬁcantly. The larger the size, the
better solution the optimization yields and, however, the slower
the convergence speed.
B. Fitness function
The ﬁtness function, which is most commonly the objective
function to be optimized, provides the baseline on which the
individuals of a population are to be evaluated and, thus, al-
lowed to survive. It provides a ﬁtness value for each individual
which serves as guideline for the GenAlg in the direction
of the optimal solution. The precise choice of the ﬁtness
function, thus, plays an important role in the quality of the
ﬁnal solution and the speed of converging to it. One important
property of the ﬁtness function is its speed of computation as
it is extensively executed in a typical optimization problem.
A more accurate estimation (or computation) of the ﬁtness
function usually enhances the quality of the ﬁnal solution.
C. Initialization
GenAlg typically starts with a randomly generated popu-
lation of candidate individuals where each of them compete
against each other and only the few ﬁttest of them survive.
The surviving individuals will then encounter evolutionary
transformations (namely: mutations and crossovers) to gen-
erate offsprings which would represent the new population.
However, a much faster and, possibly, better convergence is
often achieved by an initial population of estimates that are
good enough according to their ﬁtness values. It is worth-
mentioning that a more diverse initial population can enhance
the quality of the acquired solution (i.e., widened search
space).
D. Selection
Selection indicates how the GenAlg selects the parents
of the next offsprings at each evolution stage, where ﬁtter
individuals are forwarded as parents for the upcoming off-
springs and the weak ones perish. Many selection strategies
exist [47], where they mainly differ in the criterion of parent
selection and offspring proportion dedicated for each of the
selected parents. The selection strategy applied in this work
is called “Truncation selection” strategy where the population
is truncated to the ﬁttest T individuals and selected to be the
parents of the next offsprings.
E. Crossover
Crossover is the most signiﬁcant operation to which
GenAlg’s evolution towards the (sub-) optimal solution is
mostly attributed. Two parent vectors among the population
are subjected to crossover, by selecting a random crossover
point (or, generally, several points), such that the two parent
vectors exchange their genes (i.e., bits) up to the crossover
point. The simplest choice of the crossover point is a single
midpoint crossover. The resultant vectors are to undergo
competition with other offsprings for survival (i.e., survival of
the ﬁttest). Typically, crossover occurs at a user-deﬁned rate
called “crossover rate” pc.
F. Mutation
Mutation is the other evolutionary transformation where a
small random perturbance is caused to the individual vector
offsprings. This perturbance is, in its most common and
simplest form, a bit ﬂip in a random position. Mutation,
thus, provides more diversity and broadens the search space.
Furthermore, mutation helps in reducing the occurrence of
a famous phenomenon called premature convergence, where
early convergence to a sub-optimal solution occurs due to
the reduced population diversity [48]. For instance, if all
individuals in a population converged to a bit 0 at position
i while the optimal solution has bit 1 at this position, only
mutation can ﬁnd a way back towards this optimal solution.
Similar to crossover, mutation occurs at a user-deﬁned rate
called “mutation rate” pm.
V. GENETIC ALGORITHM-BASED POLAR CODE
CONSTRUCTION
As mentioned earlier, polar code construction can be viewed
as an optimization problem (see (1)) searching for the optimum
information set A that has the minimum (possible) cost func-
tion. This optimization problem can be solved using GenAlg.
The BER has been selected as the cost function throughout
this work for optimization conducted on AWGN channels, in
order to be consistent with the results in [4]. Whereas BLER
has been selected for optimization conducted on Rayleigh
fading channels, in order to be consistent with the results
in [49]. Moreover, the complexity can be considered as the
cost function (e.g., minimum list size in SCL decoding or
minimum number of BP iterations, to achieve a target error-
rate). All presented results throughout this work are simulated
on GPUs to accelerate our error-rate simulations [50]. Next, we
discuss the polar code construction scheme based on GenAlg,
Algorithm 1. The whole setup is depicted in Fig. 2.
A. Population
In this work, the population P = {Ai}, for i = 1,...,S, is a
collection of S candidate information sets represented by their
binary A-vectors, each with its own ﬁtness value (e.g., BER
or BLER), that represent the search space.
B. Initialization
As it turns out, GenAlg converges faster, and probably to
a better solution, if its population Pinit is initialized with a
sufﬁciently good collection of estimated A-vectors. For that
purpose, the population is initially ﬁlled with a collection
of A-vectors, all based on the Bhattacharyya construction
[2] obtained for BECs with various erasure probabilities (see
Algorithm 2). Besides, we considered having the A-vectors
constructed according to [24] among the initial population,

BERs = ComputeBERs
 Pi,SNRGenAlg

Initialize
Population
Rc
N
SNRGenAlg
Pinit
Polar Encoder
(Systematic or
Non-systematic)
Channel
(e.g.,
AWGN,
Rayleigh)
x
Polar Decoder
(e.g., BP, SCL)
y
Update Population
(selection, mutation,
crossover)
BERs
i < Npop,max?
Pi+1
yes
Pi+1
Select
ﬁttest A
Terminate
no
PNpop,max
AGenAlg
Fig. 2: An abstract view of the genetic algorithm (GenAlg)-based
polar code construction.
Algorithm 1 Genetic Algorithm-based Polar Codes
Input:
N,
▷codelength
Rc,
▷code rate
SNRGenAlg,
▷design SNR (Eb/N0) of the GenAlg
Npop,max,
▷maximum number of populations
T,
▷number of truncated parents
Output:
AGenAlg.
▷optimum A-vector
1: S ←0.5·(T 2 +3T)
▷Population size, see (2)
2: Pinit ←initializePopulation(N,Rc,SNRGenAlg,S)
3: for i = 1,2,...,Npop,max do
4:
P ←updatePopulation(P, BERs, T)
5:
BERs ←computeBERs(P, SNRGenAlg)
6: end for
7: AGenAlg ←select fittest A-vector from P
in the SCL-tailored polar code construction phase, which im-
proved the acquired solution AGenAlg remarkably. Furthermore,
one can possibly use the codes from [23], [34] in the initial
population to ensure sufﬁcient population diversity needed for
quick convergence.
C. Fitness function
The cost function chosen in this work is the error-rate (i.e.,
BER or BLER) at a user-deﬁned design SNR
 SNRGenAlg

.
Algorithm 2 initializePopulation
Input:
N,
▷codelength
Rc,
▷code rate
SNRGenAlg,
▷design SNR of the GenAlg
S,
▷population size
Output:
Pinit.
▷initial population
1: desSNR ←{0,··· ,5} dB
▷design SNRs of Pinit or equivalently
▷various BEC erasure probabilities
2: initialize an empty population Pinit
3: for each SNR in desSNR do
4:
A ←BhattacharyyaConstruction(N, Rc, SNR)
▷construction according to [2]
5:
add
A
to
Pinit
6: end for
7: BERs ←computeBERs(Pinit, SNRGenAlg)
8: Pinit ←select fittest S A-vectors in Pinit
Algorithm 3 computeBERs
Input:
Pinput,
▷input population of A-vectors
SNRGenAlg,
▷design SNR of the GenAlg
Output:
BERs.
▷BER-vector corresponding to Pinput
1: initialize an empty vector BERs
2: for each A in Pinput do
3:
BER ←polarDecode(A, SNRGenAlg)
▷simulate a speciﬁc A-vector under
▷desired decoder (e.g., BP, SCL, ...)

4:
add BER to BERs
5: end for
The ﬁtness function that decides the rank of each of the
individual A-vectors is, thus, selected to be the inverse of
the error-rate. In other words, the A leading to the minimum
error-rate is announced to be the optimum A (see Algorithm
3). We noticed that an accurate error-rate simulation signiﬁ-
cantly improves the quality of the acquired solution AGenAlg.
Alternatively, one might consider using mutual information,
LLR-reliability ∑N
i=1 |LLRi| or any other reasonable metric as
the ﬁtness function. This is left as an open research point.
D. Mutation
Mutation guarantees more diversity and acts against pre-
mature convergence at a certain bit position. It is, straightfor-
wardly, a bit ﬂip of a random position in the A-vector rep-
resenting a frozen-to-non-frozen (or a non-frozen-to-frozen)
switch at that respective bit position. A mutation example is
shown in Fig. 3a, where the offspring vector Y is the result of

00010111
X
m
Mutation
01010111
Y
Adjust rate
01000111
Z
(a) Mutation or swapping
00010111
X
00001111
W
C
Crossover
00011111
Y
Adjust rate
00011101
Z
(b) Crossover
Fig. 3: Examples of GenAlg’s evolutionary transformations in the
polar code construction context. Inputs (X and/or W) and output (Z)
satisfy the constraints in (1).
bit ﬂipping the 2nd bit of the parent vector X. However, the
polar code construction problem has the constraint that the
number of non-frozen bit positions (i.e., number of ones) is
equal to k to maintain the code rate Rc = k/N. To restore the
code rate Rc, one further mutation is applied to the resultant
offspring vector Y yielding the vector Z. Thus, the overall
operation is a “swap” of a frozen and a non-frozen bit position.
The pseudo algorithm of the mutation (i.e., swapping) is shown
in Algorithm 5. It can be clearly seen that for this speciﬁc
problem the mutation rate pm was chosen to be 1 (i.e., one
mutation always occurs for each parent per evolutionary step).
Algorithm 4 updatePopulation
Input:
Pinput,
▷input population of A-vectors
BERs,
▷BER-vector corresponding to Pinput
T,
▷number of truncated parents
Output:
Pout.
▷new population after GenAlg
▷transformations
1: initialize empty population Pout
2: newParents ←fittest T A-vectors from Pinput
3: add newParents to Pout
4: for each A in newParents do
5:
m ←mutation(A)
6:
add m to Pout
7: end for
8: for each pair A1,A2 in newParents do
9:
c ←crossover(A1,A2)
10:
add c to Pout
11: end for
E. Crossover
The crossover applied throughout this work is a single
midpoint crossover (see Fig. 3b), where the 1st half of the
ﬁrst parent vector X is combined with the 2nd half of the
second parent vector W to generate the vector Y. This often
leads to a change in the number of ones in the resulting vector
Y (i.e., remember from (1) that the total number of ones in
the A-vector should be equal to k and thus the code rate stays
Algorithm 5 mutation, see Fig. 3a
Input:
Ainput,
▷input A-vector
Output:
Aout.
▷output A-vector after swapping a frozen
▷and a non-frozen bit position
▷we assume pm = 1
1: Aout ←Ainput ▷initialize
2: idxs ones ←indices of 1’s in Aout
3: idxs zeros ←indices of 0’s in Aout
4: i ←random index from idxs ones
5: j ←random index from idxs zeros
6: Aout[i] ←0
▷random bit ﬂip 1 to 0 at position i
7: Aout[j] ←1
▷restore code rate Rc
constant Rc = k/N). To restore the code rate Rc, sequential
bit ﬂipping operations are applied to the resultant vector until
reaching the k ones in the binary A-vector (Z in Fig. 3b). The
pseudo algorithm of the crossover is shown in Algorithm 6.
Similar to mutation, the crossover rate pc was chosen to be 1
(i.e., one crossover always occurs for each pair of parents per
evolutionary step).
Algorithm 6 crossover, see Fig. 3b
Input:
Ainput1,
▷1st input A-vector i.e., parent 1
Ainput2,
▷2nd input A-vector i.e., parent 2
Output:
Aout.
▷output A-vector
▷we assume pc = 1
1: N ←length of Ainput1
2: Rc ←1
N ·∑N
i=1(Ainput1)
3: Aout ←concat

[Ainput1]N/2
1
,[Ainput2]N
N/2+1

▷concatenate two halves of
▷Ainput1 and Ainput2
4: Rcout ←1
N ·∑N
i=1(Aout)
5: while Rcout ̸= Rc do
6:
bit flip in Aout
7:
Rcout ←1
N ·∑N
i=1(Aout)
8: end while
F. Selection and population update
In this context, by the terms selection and population update
we mean picking the ﬁttest A-vectors and then applying
the evolutionary transformations (namely: mutations/swapping
and crossovers) in order to generate the new population. We
applied the following scheme in order to generate the new
population:
• The ﬁttest T A-vectors are always pushed forward as
members of the new population (i.e., self-offsprings). Al-
though this could be slowing down the convergence, this,

1.2
1.6
2
2.4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Eb/N0 [dB]
BER
Decoder

SC

SC

SC

SC

Fig. 4: BER performance of the GenAlg-based P(2048,1024)-code
under SC decoding over the AWGN channel and no CRC is used.
however, ensures convergence to the (local) optimum and
guarantees a monotonic behaviour of the cost function
through evolving populations which facilitates observing
the candidate solutions.
• Crossovers are applied between each pair of the ﬁttest T
A-vectors, resulting in new
 T
2

offsprings.
• Mutations (i.e., swapping operations) are applied on the
ﬁttest T A-vectors, resulting in new T mutated offsprings.
Consequently, the size of the new population S is
S =
T
|{z}
T fittest
+
T
2

| {z }
crossover
+
T
|{z}
mutation
= T 2 +3T
2
(2)
The pseudo algorithm of the selection and population update
scheme followed in this work is shown in Algorithm 4. For
all simulation results using the GenAlg as discussed next, we
set S = 20 and T = 5.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS OVER AWGN CHANNEL
In this section, we show the results of designing polar codes
using the GenAlg method over the AWGN channel. To be
coherent with the results shown in [4], we use codes of length
N = 2048 and code rate Rc = 0.5 in the AWGN channel
simulations.
A. SC decoder
All of the known polar code construction (i.e., frozen bit
position selection) algorithms assume that the SC decoder is
used. Thus, they all are tailored to hard-output SC decod-
ing. As shown in Fig. 4, all construction algorithms yield
codes having similar error-rate performance over the AWGN
channel, including the GenAlg-based construction. A similar
independent observation supporting our results was presented
in [33].
1
1.4
1.8
2.2
2.6
3
10−2
10−4
10−6
Eb/N0 [dB]
BER
Decoder

BP (Nit,max = 200)

BP (Nit,max = 200)

BP (Nit,max = 200)

SCL (L = 32)

(a) BER performance
10−4
10−3
Population index i

(b) Evolution of the BER at SNRGenAlg (Eb/N0) = 2dB
Fig. 5: GenAlg-based construction of a P(2048,1024)-code under
BP
 Nit,max = 200

decoding over the AWGN channel and no CRC
is used.
B. BP decoder
We use the GenAlg to design polar codes tailored to BP de-
coding over AWGN channel. Fig. 5a shows a BER comparison
between a code constructed via the method proposed in [37]
at a design SNR (Eb/N0) = 2dB and a code constructed using
our proposed GenAlg at SNRGenAlg (Eb/N0) = 2dB under
BP (Nit,max = 200) decoding. The GenAlg-based construction
yields a 0.5dB net coding gain at BER of 10−4 when compared
to the construction proposed in [37]. It is worth mentioning
that the only difference between the two codes is the selection
of the frozen/non-frozen bit positions, i.e., both use exactly the
same decoder. Fig. 5b shows the evolution (or enhancement)
of the BER per population (i.e., we plot the minimum BER
per population). Note that minor ﬂuctuations in the BERs per
population index can be explained by the Monte-Carlo output.
The dmin of the BP-tailored polar code using GenAlg was
found to be 8, while the dmin of the polar code constructed
via [37] is 16. This is due to the fact that the performance
of a linear code under iterative decoding is dominated by the
structure of the stopping sets in the Tanner graph of the code

1
1.4
1.8
2.2
2.6
3
10−2
10−4
10−6
Eb/N0 [dB]
BER
Decoder

SCL (L = 32)

SCL (L = 32)

SCL (L = 32)

SCL+CRC-16 (L = 32)

Fig. 6: BER performance of the GenAlg-based P(2048,1024)-code
under SCL decoding over the AWGN channel. The CRC-aided polar
code (
): N = 2048, k = 1024, r = 16 and, thus, the polar code
is a P(2048,1040)-code.
and not its dmin [51]. Thus, dmin is not the only parameter to be
maximized in order to design linear codes tailored to iterative
decoding. A fact supporting this claim is that the RM code
has a larger (maximum) dmin but worse error-rate performance
under iterative decoding when compared to polar codes [10].
In the following, we assess the robustness of the GenAlg-
based polar code design against inaccuracy in SNR estimation
(i.e., having a mismatch between the design SNR and the
operating SNR). We use the GenAlg to design an “adaptive”
polar code, in which the A-vector is channel-tailored, or SNR
(Eb/N0)-tailored (i.e., the frozen set is optimized separately
for each value of the SNR of the transmission channel). The
BER performance of this GenAlg-based adaptive polar code
(
) is very close to the polar code designed by the GenAlg
at 2dB (
) in the high SNR region as shown in Fig. 5a.
This means that GenAlg at a speciﬁc SNRGenAlg yields a polar
code which might be good enough for a certain wider range
of SNRs.
Note that the BER performance of the BP-tailored polar
code (
) is very close to the performance of a polar
code constructed via the method proposed in [37] under SCL
(L = 32) decoding (
), as also shown in Fig. 5a.
C. SCL decoder
Next, the GenAlg is applied to construct polar codes
tailored to SCL (L = 32) over the AWGN channel. Fig. 6
shows a BER comparison between a code constructed via
the method proposed in [37] at SNR (Eb/N0) = 2dB and a
code constructed using our proposed GenAlg at SNRGenAlg
(Eb/N0) = 2dB under SCL decoding with list size L = 32.
The GenAlg-based construction shows signiﬁcant performance
improvements, yielding a 1dB net coding gain at BER of
10−6 when compared to the construction proposed in [37],
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
10−6
10−4
10−2
Eb/N0 [dB]
BER
Decoder

SCL+CRC-16 (L = 32)

SCL+CRC-16 (L = 32)

SCL+CRC-16 (L = 32)

Fig. 7: BER performance of the GenAlg-based P(2048,1024)-code
under CRC-aided SCL decoding over the AWGN channel. The CRC-
aided polar code: N = 2048, k = 1024, r = 16 and, thus, the polar
code is a P(2048,1040)-code.
where again the only difference between the two codes is the
frozen/non-frozen bit positions.
The GenAlg-optimized polar code without CRC-aid under
SCL decoding (
) performs equally well as the CRC-aided
polar code under CRC-aided SCL decoding (
), with the
same list size L = 32 and the same code rate Rc = 0.5, as
shown in Fig. 6. The dmin of the SCL-tailored polar code using
GenAlg is 16 which is exactly the same as the dmin of the
polar code constructed via [37]. However, the RM-Polar code
(
) has a dmin = 32. Thus, dmin is not the only parameter to
be maximized in order to design polar codes tailored to SCL
decoding. Note that maximizing dmin will lead to an RM code.
D. CRC-aided SCL decoder
In this section, we use the GenAlg to design polar codes
tailored to CRC-aided SCL decoding over AWGN channel.
Fig. 7 shows a BER comparison between a code constructed
via the method proposed in [37] at SNR (Eb/N0) = 2dB and
a code constructed using our proposed GenAlg at SNRGenAlg
(Eb/N0) = 2dB under CRC-aided SCL decoding with list
size L = 32. The GenAlg-based construction yields a slight
improvement in terms of BER performance when compared
to the construction proposed in [37]. We want to emphasize
that all BER simulations are performed in the same decoding
framework and, thus, the gains are real gains caused by the
code design.
E. A-vector Analysis
The distribution of frozen bit-channels over the N syn-
thesized virtual channels is shown in the “Frozen channel
chart” in Fig. 8. Every square (or pixel) in Fig. 8 corresponds
to a bit-channel (i.e., we show N = 2048 pixels per sub-
ﬁgure). If a pixel is white, then the corresponding bit-channel
is used for information transmission (i.e., included in the
information set). If a pixel is colored, then the corresponding

(a) Frozen channel chart based on Arıkan’s Bhattacharyya

2033
2048
1
16

2033
2048
1
16

2033
2048
1
16

2033
2048
1
16
Fig. 8: Frozen channel chart (i.e., frozen bit position pattern) of a
P(2048,1024)-code over the AWGN channel with different polar
code construction algorithms. The 2048 bit positions are plotted over
a 16 × 128 matrix. Note that the bit-channels are sorted with de-
creasing Bhattacharyya parameter value. White: non-frozen; colored:
frozen.
bit-channel is a frozen bit position (i.e., included in the frozen
set). In Fig. 8a, we show the result of the Bhattacharyya-
based construction at a speciﬁc channel parameter. For the
sake of reproducibility, the frozen/non-frozen set constructed
using the Bhattacharyya bounds [2] at design SNR 3.6dB
is equivalent to the frozen/non-frozen set constructed using
the Bhattacharyya parameter for a BEC with ε = 0.32. The
N −k bit-channels with the highest Bhattacharyya value are
set to frozen (i.e., black pixel). The k bit-channels with the
smallest Bhattacharyya value are set to non-frozen (i.e., white
pixel). Then the bit-channels are sorted according to their
Bhattacharyya value in descending order (i.e., the N −k frozen
bit-channels followed by the k non-frozen bit-channels). And
we use this ordering to represent the other three constructions
(Fig. 8b, 8c and 8d), which clearly highlights the differences
between the output of different construction algorithms.
The conventional construction techniques (e.g., [2], [37])
assume that an SC decoder is used. Thus, these construction
techniques yield very similar A-vectors having a very similar
distribution as shown in Fig. 8a and 8b. Our proposed GenAlg-
based construction tailors the A-vector (or the code) to a
speciﬁc decoder (e.g., BP or SCL decoder). The BP decoder
has an iterative (i.e., non-sequential) decoding nature when
compared to SC decoding. Thus, the A-vector tailored to BP
decoding has a much different frozen bit-channel distribution
as shown in Fig. 8c. Note that the A-vector tailored to BP
decoding contains a signiﬁcant number of non-frozen bits
in the ﬁrst half part of the code, which is not the case in
the conventional code construction algorithms assuming SC
decoding. Similarly, the GenAlg-based construction tailored to
SCL decoding should take the list decoding nature into con-
sideration and, thus, a different frozen bit-channel distribution
as shown in Fig. 8d. By comparing Fig. 8a with Fig. 8c and
8d, in a pixel-by-pixel manner, one can see the differences in
the frozen/non-frozen sets due to the assumption of a different
decoder other than the SC decoder (i.e., BP and SCL) while
constructing the code.
Furthermore, Table I investigates the effect of a mismatch
between the polar code design and the polar decoder used. It
is shown that this mismatch can lead to a rather high error-
rate. Mismatch in this context means that a polar code which
is designed tailored to decoder X is decoded with another
different decoder Y. Table I shows that
• for SC decoding, the best construction method is [37]
• for BP decoding, the best construction method is our
proposed GenAlg
• for SCL decoding, the best construction method is our
proposed GenAlg.
Thus, the best case (i.e., achieving a target BER with the
minimum SNR) is to have a polar code tailored to the used
decoder. It should be emphasized that no additional CRC was
used for the results in Table I.
TABLE I: Illustration of polar design and decoder architecture
mismatch by evaluating the minimum Eb/N0 required to achieve a
target BER of 10−4 for a P(2048,1024)-code over AWGN channel

Decoder
SC
BP (Nit,max = 200)
SCL (L = 32)

2.7 dB
2.45 dB
1.8 dB

2.65 dB
2.45 dB
2 dB

> 9 dB
2 dB
> 7 dB

> 6 dB
2.55 dB
1.65 dB
F. Weight enumerators Ad
The weight enumerator Ad is the number of codewords
with weight d. There is no closed-form expression for the
weight enumerators of polar codes [23]. However, an algo-
rithm proposed in [52] can be used to ﬁnd the number of
minimum-weight codewords (i.e., Admin). Table II shows the
number of low-weight codewords in polar codes constructed
with different methods. Comparing the number of minimum-
weight codewords provides one explanation for the improved
error-rate performance of the GenAlg-based polar codes. It
can be seen that the genetic algorithm signiﬁcantly reduces the
number of minimum-weight codewords and the total number
of low-weight codewords, as shown in Table II.
TABLE II: The number of low-weight codewords for a
P(2048,1024)-code over AWGN channel

dmin
A8
A16

16
0
11648

8
8
773

16
0
1
Fig. 6 shows curves with the same slope for different polar
codes with different dmin. This observation can be attributed
to the fact that the SCL (L = 32) decoder is a sub-optimal

3
4
5
6
7
10−1
10−3
10−5
Eb/N0 [dB]
BLER
Decoder

BP (Nit,max = 200)

BP (Nit,max = 200)

BP (Nit,max = 200)
5G speciﬁcation of 3GPP [8]
BP (Nit,max = 200)

SCL (L = 32)
5G speciﬁcation of 3GPP [8]
Fig. 9: BLER performance of the GenAlg-based P(1024,512)-code
under BP decoding over the Rayleigh fading channel and no CRC is
used.
decoder for RM-Polar codes [24] and CRC-aided polar codes
[52] (i.e., a larger list size is needed to exploit the beneﬁts
of the enhanced dmin). Furthermore, the GenAlg SCL-tailored
polar code has dmin = 16 with only one codeword with weight
16 (i.e., A16 = 1). Thus, most of the decoding block errors are
attributed to the weight-32 codewords, if we consider the case
of transmitting the all-zero codeword.
VII. RESULTS FOR THE RAYLEIGH FADING CHANNEL
The problem of designing or constructing polar codes for
the Rayleigh fading channel was tackled in [49], [53]. To
demonstrate the ﬂexibility of the GenAlg-based design, we
optimize polar codes for Rayleigh fading channels and outline
some performance comparisons. To be coherent with the
results shown in [49], we use codes of length N = 1024 and
code rate Rc = 0.5 in the Rayleigh fading channel simulations.
Following the notation in [54], the system model is given by
y = α ·x+n
where y is the channel output, n is the Gaussian noise
attributed to the channel such that n ∼N (0,σ2
ch) and α > 0
is the fading coefﬁcient which follows a Rayleigh distribution
with E[α2] = 1. Assuming perfect Channel State Information
(CSI) (i.e., α is known to the receiver at each received bit
position), the corresponding channel LLRs, namely Lch, are
computed as
Lch(y) = log P(y|α,x = +1)
P(y|α,x = −1) = 2
σ2
ch
·α ·y.
A. BP decoder
We now design polar codes tailored to BP decoding over the
Rayleigh fading channel. Fig. 9 shows a BLER comparison
between a code constructed via [20], a code constructed
2
3
4
5
6
7
100
10−2
10−4
10−6
Eb/N0 [dB]
BLER
Decoder

Sequential (L = 32)

SCL (L = 32)

SCL (L = 32)

SCL (L = 32)
5G speciﬁcation of 3GPP [8]
SCL (L = 32)

SCL+CRC-24 (L = 32)
5G speciﬁcation of 3GPP [8]
Fig. 10: BLER performance of the GenAlg-based P(1024,512)-code
under SCL decoding over the Rayleigh fading channel. The CRC-
aided polar code (
): N = 1024, k = 512, r = 24 and, thus, the
polar code is a P(1024,536)-code.
via Arıkan’s Bhattacharyya bounds [2] at 3.6dB, a code
constructed based on the 5G speciﬁcation of 3GPP [8] and
a code constructed using our proposed GenAlg at SNRGenAlg
(Eb/N0) = 4.5dB under BP decoding with Nit,max = 200
iterations and the G-matrix-based early stopping condition.
The GenAlg-based construction yields a 0.8dB net coding
gain at BLER of 10−4 when compared to the constructions
proposed in [2], [8], [20]. The above mentioned four A-vectors
yield different polar codes with dmin = 16. It is remarkable to
observe that the BLER performance of the BP-tailored polar
code (
) outperforms the performance of the proposed 5G
polar code [8] under SCL (L = 32) (
) starting from 4.5dB,
as shown in Fig. 9.
B. SCL decoder
In this section, polar codes are tailored to SCL (L = 32)
decoding over the Rayleigh fading channel using the GenAlg.
Fig. 10 shows a BLER comparison between a code constructed
via [20], a code constructed via Arıkan’s Bhattacharyya
bounds [2] at 3.6dB, a code constructed based on the 5G
speciﬁcation of 3GPP [8] and a code constructed using our
proposed GenAlg at SNRGenAlg (Eb/N0) = 5dB under SCL
(L = 32) decoding. GenAlg-based construction yields a 2dB
net coding gain at BLER of 10−6 when compared to the
constructions proposed in [2], [8], [20]. It is worth mentioning
that our proposed SCL-tailored polar code (
) performs
equally well, in terms of error-rate, as the best polar code
with dynamic frozen symbols in [49, Fig. 4] for the same
list size L = 32. Also, our proposed code without the aid of
a CRC performs equally well, in terms of error-rate, as the
proposed 5G polar code [8] under CRC-aided SCL decoding

1.5
1.8
2.1
2.4
2.7
3
10−2
10−3
10−4
10−5
Eb/N0 [dB]
BER
Decoder

BP (Nit,max = 200)

BP (Nit,max = 30)

BP (Nit,max = 30)

Fig. 11: BER performance of the GenAlg-based P(2048,1024)-code
under BP decoding with reduced Nit,max over the AWGN channel and
no CRC is used.
(
). The GenAlg constructed polar code tailored to SCL
has a dmin = 32.
Note that the above shown gains come “for free”, since
optimizing the A-vector is done ofﬂine and it does not affect
the decoding complexity, latency or memory requirements.
However, for a ﬁxed target error-rate, the decoding complexity,
latency and memory requirements can also be reduced using
GenAlg as shown in the next section.
VIII. DECODING COMPLEXITY REDUCTION
Besides error-rate performance, also the decoding complex-
ity, memory requirements and latency are of major signiﬁcance
when selecting the best channel coding scheme for a certain
application. Further investigations are conducted to study the
impact of the polar code construction using the GenAlg on
the decoding complexity. This problem can be formulated as
follows. We try to construct a polar code using the GenAlg
such that, for a given ﬁxed target error-rate level, the decoder
used to decode the GenAlg-designed polar code is signiﬁcantly
less complex than the conventional polar code decoder. This
complexity reduction is of potential importance when it comes
to practical applications with constraints on the decoding
complexity, latency and memory requirements.
A. BP decoder
The GenAlg-based BP-tailored polar code only requires 30
BP iterations to achieve the same error-rate performance as
the polar code constructed via [37] under 200 BP iterations,
as shown in Fig. 11. Thus, an 85% reduction in the worst
case decoding complexity and latency (remember the early
stopping condition used) can be achieved with the same error-
rate performance just by changing the set of frozen/non-frozen
bit positions. Furthermore, at Eb/N0 = 2dB a 5% reduction
in the average number of BP iterations is achieved with the
same error-rate performance, reducing the average decoding
complexity and latency by 5%.
1.5
1.8
2.1
2.4
2.7
3
10−2
10−4
10−6
10−8
Eb/N0 [dB]
BER
Decoder

SCL (L = 32)

SCL (L = 4)

SCL (L = 4)

Fig. 12: BER performance of the GenAlg-based P(2048,1024)-code
under SCL decoding with reduced list size L over the AWGN channel
and no CRC is used.
B. SCL decoder
The GenAlg-based SCL-tailored polar code only requires a
list size of 4 to outperform, in terms of error-rate, the polar
code constructed via [37] under SCL with list size 32, as
shown in Fig. 12. Thus, an 87.5% reduction in the decoding
complexity and memory requirements with an improved error-
rate performance can be achieved just by tailoring the set of
frozen/non-frozen bit positions to the decoder. Note that a
larger list size tends to cause higher decoding latency [55],
[56] and thus, the optimized polar code construction also
reduces the decoding latency. It should be emphasized that
no additional CRC was used for the results in Fig. 12.
Despite the ofﬂine construction complexity added by the
GenAlg, the resulting polar codes can be decoded with state-
of-the-art decoders with much lower decoding complexity,
latency and memory requirements at a ﬁxed target error-rate,
when compared to polar codes constructed via other state-of-
the-art polar code construction techniques (e.g., [37]). Thus,
it is a trade-off between ofﬂine complexity (i.e., polar code
construction complexity) and online complexity (i.e., polar
decoding complexity).
According to [39], 80% of the channel (i.e., bit-channel
reliability) computations can be saved for moderate block
length polar codes (e.g., N ≈1000). Thus, we believe that
the GenAlg-based polar code construction complexity can
be signiﬁcantly reduced by ﬁxing some good bit-channels
as “for sure non-frozen” and some bad bit-channels as “for
sure frozen”, leading to obvious speed-ups in the convergence
speed of the GenAlg. The needed prior knowledge can be
easily derived from [20], [38], [39].
IX. CONCLUSION
As pointed out in [4], the best error-rate performance of
ﬁnite length polar codes (i.e., under ML decoding without
CRC concatenation) is not competitive with the state-of-the-art
coding schemes. Thus in this work, we focus on polar code

construction (i.e., changing the code itself which is deﬁned
by the A-vector) in order to boost the error-rate performance
under the state-of-the-art feasible practical decoders (e.g., BP,
SCL). We propose a Genetic Algorithm-based polar code
design where the channel type and the nature of the decoder
are taken into consideration, yielding signiﬁcant performance
gains in terms of error-rate. This also shows the importance
of a proper design algorithm and provides an estimate of the
capabilities of well-suited polar codes. For a polar code of
length 2048 and code rate 0.5 over the binary input AWGN
channel under plain SCL decoding, approximately a 1dB
coding gain at BER of 10−6 is achieved when compared to the
conventionally constructed polar codes. This enables achieving
the same error-rate performance of polar codes under state-of-
the-art CRC-aided SCL decoding with plain SCL decoding
without the aid of a CRC. Furthermore, GenAlg is used to
construct polar codes tailored to ﬂooding BP decoding, ﬁnally
closing the performance gap between conventional iterative BP
decoding and conventional SCL decoding.
GenAlg was used to reduce the decoding complexity, la-
tency and memory requirements of the BP and SCL decoders.
Thus, after GenAlg-based A-vector optimization, a few num-
ber of BP iterations or a small list size is needed, in order to
achieve a ﬁxed target error-rate.
In addition, for a polar code of length 1024 and code rate
0.5, GenAlg is used to optimize polar codes over Rayleigh
fading channels, yielding a 2dB performance gain under SCL
decoding at BLER of 10−6 when compared to conventional
polar design methods. The results suggest that the improved
performance is due to the signiﬁcant reduction in the total
number of low-weight codewords. It is worth mentioning that
the achieved gains come “for free”, since optimizing the A-
vector is done once and ofﬂine.
X. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Alexander Vardy and Ido
Tal for providing their set of frozen/non-frozen bit positions
as a baseline for comparison.
