Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
One-shot Policy Elicitation via Semantic
Reward Manipulation
Aaquib Tabrez · Ryan Leonard · Bradley Hayes
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract Synchronizing expectations and knowledge about the state of the world is an es-
sential capability for effective collaboration. For robots to effectively collaborate with hu-
mans and other autonomous agents, it is critical that they be able to generate intelligible
explanations to reconcile differences between their understanding of the world and that of
their collaborators. In this work we present Single-shot Policy Explanation for Augmenting
Rewards (SPEAR), a novel sequential optimization algorithm that uses semantic explana-
tions derived from combinations of planning predicates to augment agents’ reward func-
tions, driving their policies to exhibit more optimal behavior. We provide an experimental
validation of our algorithm’s policy manipulation capabilities in two practically grounded
applications and conclude with a performance analysis of SPEAR on domains of increas-
ingly complex state space and predicate counts. We demonstrate that our method makes sub-
stantial improvements over the state-of-the-art in terms of runtime and addressable problem
size, enabling an agent to leverage its own expertise to communicate actionable information
to improve another’s performance.
Keywords Human-agent collaboration · Policy Explanation · Cooperating Robots ·
Explainable AI
1 Introduction
Autonomous systems have been shown to to be capable of motivating behavior changes and
conveying new knowledge to improve human or agent performance on a multitude of tasks
[5,24,25]. Unfortunately, the process of generating concise and informative explanations
Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309, USA
Aaquib Tabrez (Corresponding Author)

Ryan Leonard

Bradley Hayes

arXiv:2101.01860v1  [cs.RO]  6 Jan 2021

2
Aaquib Tabrez et al.
Fig. 1: (Left) The red robot is engaged in a tabletop cleaning task but has a malformed policy
that will throw away all of the objects, despite some not being garbage. (Right) A human
agent attempts to navigate to a building exit in an emergency evacuation scenario lacking
knowledge about the location of the ﬁres. Using SPEAR, these policies can be repaired,
leveraging semantic updates to produce more optimal behavior.
capable of eliciting desired changes is a difﬁcult task, as it requires both insights into a
collaborator’s decision making process and the ability to determine and convey important
information. Further, repairing a human policy requires the generation of explanations which
are intelligible and concise, especially in situations with high costs of failure or time pressure
[20,8,39]. Similarly, for autonomous agents operating with different state representations,
policy repair requires a common ground (language) to communicate updates for efﬁcient
behavior modiﬁcation during the task.
In this work we provide a characterization of the problem of semantically manipulating
an agent’s policy through external advice, and propose a solution that provides autonomous
agents with the ability to: 1) Infer the reward function that most likely drives another agent’s
behavior; 2) Identify divergences between another agent’s reward function and their own;
and 3) Communicate advice to repair relevant differences concisely and efﬁciently at an
appropriate level of detail, removing harmful behaviors from the other agent’s policy.
An illustrative scenario that we use to showcase the importance and practicality of this
work is routing people during an emergency evacuation, particularly in cases where habi-
tants of the building are aware of neither the precise nature of the emergency nor the entire
building’s ﬂoorplan. Even if people are capable of navigating towards the nearest exit, un-
certainty about the nature of the environment and its hazards could be disasterous. Adding
to the complexity of time-critical, high-consequence scenarios like this one, it is essential
that any advice or instructions account for the recipient’s knowledge of the world, and there-
fore must also consider tradeoffs between accuracy, speciﬁcity, and interpretability [33,23].
As an example, someone visiting a building for a meeting may not know how to change
their evacuation plan when told “There’s a ﬁre near Conference Room 3”, but may be able
to adapt their plan if told “the north half of the building is on ﬁre” for the same scenario.
Even though the latter phrase may not communicate the true representation of the hazard,
it is more easily comprehensible to someone who is less familiar with the building than the
former. Thus, autonomous systems that aim to generate useful feedback to help others will

One-shot Policy Elicitation via Semantic Reward Manipulation
3
need to explicitly consider the complexity of their own explanations and the knowledge held
by those they attempt to help.
To achieve this, we present Single-shot Policy Explanation for Augmenting Rewards
(SPEAR), a novel Integer Programming-based algorithm for generating reward updates in
the form of semantic advice to improve the policies of human and robot collaborators.
SPEAR enables an autonomous robot to utilize knowledge about the beliefs and goals
of its collaborators to identify inaccuracies in their models, generating targeted, human-
interpretable guidance for updating their reward functions (and thus, policies) during a task.
Key to its effectiveness, SPEAR generates feedback with levels of speciﬁcity appropriate to
the agent’s understanding of the world. The four primary contributions of our work are:
– A characterization of the policy elicitation problem.
– SPEAR, a novel algorithm for improving task performance through semantic elicitation
of others’ policies.
– A linear programming formulation enabling semantic communication of world state re-
gions, achieving a several order of magnitude improvement over the nearest comparable
state-of-the-art [20] in terms of computation time and applicable domain size.
– An experimental validation and performance analysis of SPEAR, grounded in practical
application scenarios.
2 Background and Related Work
As autonomous systems become increasingly capable decision makers, Explainable AI (xAI)
has emerged as a necessary component for ﬁelding safe autonomous systems. Many of to-
day’s systems with learned control policies continue to only satisfy Donald Michie’s weak
criterion for learning systems*, despite explainability being recognized as crucial for im-
proving transparency, trust, and team performance [41,28,43], further underscoring the need
for the development of xAI techniques that work alongside popular, generally opaque meth-
ods.
Furthermore, these black-box models are difﬁcult to validate and debug when devel-
opers do not know what is happening inside the system, leading to further distrust and re-
sistance towards the widespread usage of these algorithms [3,36]. Most of the research in
explainable AI has been explicitly focused on making algorithms transparent to developers,
allowing them the ability to debug or predict model behavior in restricted domains (e.g.,
how model parameters affect the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision) [32,35]. These approaches are
fundamentally limiting to non-expert stakeholders and/or end-users who interact with the
models or products regularly, and thus directly experience the consequences of failures [11,
29]. Therefore, to generate explanations that are comprehensible and useful for both experts
as well as non-experts, they should draw from characteristics of everyday human-centric
explanations focused on the ‘why’ of particular events, properties, or decisions, rather than
general scientiﬁc relationships [28,21].
*In 1980, Donald Michie proposed three criteria to evaluate machine learning systems [27]:
1. Weak Criterion: A system increases performance on unseen data by learning from sample data.
2. Strong Criterion: The system contains the weak criterion plus the ability to communicate its learned
hypotheses function in symbolic form.
3. Ultra-strong Criterion: The system contains the strong criterion plus the ability to teach a user the learned
hypothesis function.

4
Aaquib Tabrez et al.
One popular approach in human-robot collaboration has been to use explanations to
speed up the learning process or to explore alternative policies. These approaches primar-
ily focus on active learning frameworks for modelling user preferences by asking questions
[31] or taking instruction [14] in natural language. While these systems focus on improv-
ing a robotic agent’s transparency and behavior using explanation, they don’t account for
collaborators’ level of knowledge or need for the information. Therefore, these traditional
goal-based agents lack the ability to consider a shared mental model in their planning, a
crucial element for building effective teammates and interpretable behavior [7,40].
Another trend in the direction of “Value of Information” (VOI) in human-robot interac-
tion has been to decide what information should be communicated and when it should be
delivered in the collaborative decision making process [22]. Kaupp et al. used VOI theory to
propose a framework in which robots query human operators in uncertain environments if
the expected beneﬁt of the humans’ feedback exceeds the cost of the query. They show that
accounting for human cost in querying has an advantage in performance, operator workload,
usability, and the users’ perception of the robot. More recently, active learning has been uti-
lized to understand user preference and provide valuable information while keeping trust
and adaptability of humans in account [9,31,34].
Identifying and resolving the model differences of a collaborator (i.e., establishing a
shared mental model) is a key aspect of establishing interpretability [19,7,12]. Having in-
terpretable and predictable behavior is essential for achieving team ﬂuency and avoiding
catastrophic failures in planning and decision making [18,30].
An effective approach for establishing shared mental models in human-robot collabora-
tion has been to use natural language to explain robots’ behavior or underlying logic [20,
37]. In [20], the authors formulated the problem of efﬁciently describing state regions as a
set cover problem, trying to ﬁnd the smallest logical expression of predicates that succinctly
describe a target state region. Their approach is innovative in performing explanation gen-
eration using communicable predicates, but their solution is exponential in memory and
runtime with respect to the size of the domain and predicate set, preventing its use in most
real-world problems.
Others have explored the generation of different types of explanations based on user
preference [44]. Work by Briggs and Scheutz explored adverbial cues informed by Grice’s
maxims [16] of effective conversational communication (quality, quantity, and relation) to
transparently track and update mental models of the collaborators [6]. Van et al. developed
transparent Reinforcement Learning (RL) models for the generation of contrastive explana-
tions of agent behavior based on the user’s query-derived policy, and of the learned policy
of the agent [42]. They show that people are more interested in explanations about the be-
havior of an agent rather than a single action taken by it. People have also been shown to
prefer contrastive, selective, and social properties in explanation, as previously hinted in the
psychology literature [8,10,28].
In this work we focus on policy elicitation, a process through which feedback is crafted
and given to another agent, in the form of reward function updates during task execution,
such that they change their behavior to match the desired policy. By providing reward infor-
mation for targeted regions of state space through explanations (symbolic updates), we can
modify a collaborator’s reward function using semantic descriptions. This allows our method
to operate at a level of abstraction that does not depend on the recipient’s underlying state
space representation, instead only requiring a similar vocabulary of planning predicates.

One-shot Policy Elicitation via Semantic Reward Manipulation
5
3 Policy Elicitation via Social Manipulation
The goal of policy elicitation is to cause a behavior change (policy update) in another agent
through some form of communicative act. To effectively collaborate with others and coach
them towards more optimal policies, it is essential that these communications are intelligible
[2,1,38], but directly communicating states (i.e. the feature vector itself) relies on both the
feature space between agents being the same and there being an efﬁcient mechanism to com-
municate that information quickly. These criteria are unlikely to hold with either humans or
heterogeneous autonomous agents (not all agents will have the same state representations) as
the intended recipients. Our work generates state space-agnostic natural language descrip-
tions of state regions and corresponding reward information, allowing agents to update their
reward functions (and policies).
We deﬁne a base predicate to be a pre-deﬁned boolean state classiﬁer (as found in tradi-
tional STRIPS planning [13]) with associated string explanation (e.g., in central hallway(x)
→“X is in the central hallway.”). To represent intersections of predicates (e.g., “in the
central hallway” AND “has ﬁre extinguisher”), we introduce composite predicates, which
consist of multiple base predicates and evaluate to true if and only if all base predicate mem-
bers evaluate to true. Predicates may also have a cost associated with them (e.g., how long
they take to communicate) to assist the optimizer with generating more desirable solutions.
In SPEAR, predicates are used to communicate reward updates to improve collaborator task
performance (Figure 3).
We characterize the problem of repairing or otherwise manipulating an agent’s policy as
one of identifying and reconciling divergence between a source and target reward function.
Our proposed algorithm relies upon the following assumptions: 1) agents can understand
the natural language description of the predicates; 2) agents are operating using a rational
planner informed by a reward function (or something analogous); and 3) agents’ suboptimal
action selections are attributable to a malformed reward function rather than a malformed
policy search algorithm or dynamics model.
Fig. 2: Rollouts of the agent’s estimated policy are used to identify problematic behavior. (a)
The true environment that the agent is acting in. (b) The environment that the agent believes
it is acting in. (c) A rollout of the agent’s estimated policy reveals the minimal amount of
hazardous states that need to be communicated for policy repair.

6
Aaquib Tabrez et al.
Fig. 3: A Boolean algebra over predicates with string descriptions is used as the basis for
grounding reward function updates in language. (a) A map of the environment with an over-
lay indicating states where various predicates are true. (b) A potential belief update for the
human’s reward function, realized after communicating “The center hallway is on ﬁre”.
Some of the ﬁres, indicated by being faded, don’t actually exist in the environment and are
an artifact of imprecise language. Despite this imprecision, the optimal policy can be elicited
from this update.
4 Approach
In this section, we specify the problem of reparative policy elicitation: repairing or manipu-
lating an agent’s policy by communicating corrections for model divergences. Our approach
to policy elicitation uses three components that: 1) estimate the agent’s reward function;
2) determine important reward function disparities that prevent desirable behavior; and 3)
determine which states to provide reward updates for and communicate a corrective expla-
nation.
4.1 Belief Estimation with Active Observation
We formulate our domain as a Markov Decision Process (MDP)[4], wherein an agent acts
to maximize an expected reward. M is a Markov Decision Process deﬁned by the 4-tuple
(S, A, T, R) where S is the set of states in the MDP, A is the set available actions, T is a
stochastic transition function describing the model’s action-based state transition dynamics,
and R is the reward function R : S × A × S →R. Intuitively, M serves as a simulator for
an agent in the task domain.
Belief estimation (inferring an agent’s plan) is performed by leveraging the assumption
that the agent has a rational planner and any sub-optimal behavior can be attributed to a
misinformed understanding of the task’s reward function Rh, where Rh is the malformed
reward function the agent is using [37]. We assume the agent’s dynamics model is correct
(Th = T).
Inferring an agent’s reward function Rh (e.g., the agent’s beliefs about the task w.r.t. the
world) is non-trivial and an active ﬁeld of research. Tabrez et al. [37] provides an approach
to this problem by solving for whether the agent knows about particular components of the

One-shot Policy Elicitation via Semantic Reward Manipulation
7
reward function; therefore if one can maintain a belief over which rewards another agent is
aware of, their reward function may be able to be inferred.
Intuitively, estimating Rh is achieved by observing agent behavior and the goal states
they approach — in the emergency evacuation domain, this corresponds to observing their
coverage of the building and which exits they are heading toward. Once we obtain Rh, we
can simulate the MDP M using Rh to get the agent’s expected policy πh.
4.2 Finding Important Model Divergences
Once we have our belief of the agent’s possible reward function Rh, we identify divergences
between the optimal policy π∗and the policy of the agent πh that would cause a reduction in
the agent’s expected cumulative reward. We do this by comparing agent policies trained on
R and Rh, where R is the true reward function of the domain and Rh is the reward function
used by the agent. We ﬁnd a set of states ¯S about which we communicate updated reward
information to augment Rh, such that a more optimal policy (closer to the expected reward
of π∗) is elicited (Figure 3b).
4.3 Communicating State Regions
We approach the problem of efﬁciently describing state regions as a set cover problem, try-
ing to ﬁnd the smallest logical expression of communicable predicates to succinctly describe
target states as in Hayes and Shah [20]. Unlike prior work, we solve for the minimum set
cover of the targeted state region using an Integer Program. The inputs to our IP formulation
include:
– A set of state indices ¯S that correspond to states with expected reward function diver-
gence that needs to be communicated about for policy repair.
¯S = {s1, s2, · · · , s| ¯
S|},
– A set of communicable predicates ¯P = {p1, p2, · · · p| ¯
P |} requiring the following for a
solution to exist:
∃¯Q ⊆¯P such that s ∈¯S is covered by a predicate in ¯Q, ∀s ∈¯S — for every state that
needs to be covered ( ¯S), there exists a non-empty subset of predicates that can cover it.
– A set of costs ¯C = {c1, c2, · · · , c| ¯
P |}, such that c ̸= 0 ∀c ∈¯C — every predicate has
non-zero cost associated with using it to update the agent’s reward function Rh.
– The desired trajectory for the agent ¯O = {o1, o2, · · · , o| ¯
O|}, where oi describes the
state achieved after taking the ith action following the optimal policy from the start
state.
The cost for each predicate can be customized per task. This is an important characteris-
tic, as many factors may inﬂuence the cost of a predicate. One such criteria for deﬁning cost
can be the length of the string describing the predicate. Such a criteria could generate more
easily understood explanations by imposing penalties for being too verbose.
A solution to the policy elicitation problem consists of selecting predicates to com-
municate reward information about speciﬁc state regions such that a more optimal policy
is produced within some ϵ bound of the optimal policy’s expected reward, |ER(π|R) −
ER(π|Rh)| ≤ϵ. To minimize this objective while satisfying all the constraints, we deﬁne
the mathematical formulation of our IP, which we refer to as SPEAR-IP, below:

8
Aaquib Tabrez et al.
min
| ¯
P |
X
j=1
cjxj + L
| ¯
O|
X
k=1
| ¯
P |
X
j=1
vkjxj
(1)
subject to
| ¯
P |
X
j=1
uijxj ≥1
∀i ∈[1, | ¯S|]
(2)
where we deﬁne the | ¯S| × | ¯P| matrix U by
uij =
(
1,
if si is covered by pj
0,
otherwise
(3)
and, the | ¯O| × | ¯P| matrix V by
vkj =
(
1,
if ok is covered by pj
0,
otherwise
(4)
where i and k are the indices into sets ¯P and ¯O respectively. xj ∈{0, 1} is a binary variable
with xj = 1 meaning predicate pj is included in the cover and xj = 0 indicating exclusion
from the set cover. Equation 1 is the objective function which needs to be minimized for the
desired set cover based on cost. The ﬁrst term of Equation 1 ensures that the net cost of the
predicates selected is as low as possible.
Equation 1’s second term heavily penalizes the objective function if the chosen set cover
overlaps with the desired path, in the case of communicating a negative reward (for positive
reinforcement this can be reversed). L is a large positive number, and is used to encapsulate
near-optimal behavior in the objective function (providing a soft constraint). The second
term can be used separately to provide a hard constraint for ﬁnding a solution which will
deﬁnitely elicit the desired path, but this approach inherently restricts the ability of an in-
teger program to ﬁnd solutions which would provide a near optimal policy update. This
second term in the formulation leads to three possible cases: 1) Set cover solution with
low objective value; 2) No solution for the set cover; and 3) Set cover solution with high
objective value.
Cases 1 and 2 are simple and describe the ability of SPEAR-IP to solve the set cover.
Case 3 is interesting and provides the option of further exploration to ﬁnd an alternate so-
lution with the given set of predicates. We can use the set cover from Case 3 to determine
which states in the cover overlapped with the desired path. Using these states as a reference,
we can simulate an alternate desired policy by penalizing these states in the true reward
function as well, effectively coming up with a contingency for not having precise enough
language available. This process of penalizing states through R is repeated until either Case
1 or 2 is achieved (i.e. an immediate solution with low objective value or no solution for
given a set of predicates).
Equation 2 provides a hard constraint for the inclusion of states from ¯S in the set cover.
Equation 3 deﬁnes the elements of matrix U, which encapsulates cover constraints from
¯S (inclusion of all states). Equation 4 deﬁnes the elements of matrix V using the desired
trajectory ¯O, encapsulating the requirements for eliciting the desired policy.

One-shot Policy Elicitation via Semantic Reward Manipulation
9
Algorithm 1: Single-shot Policy Explanation for Augmenting Rewards (SPEAR)
Input: MDP (S, A, T, R), Min. Reward Threshold RL, Agent Reward Function Rh, Current state
sc, Num. Rollouts k
Output: Semantic Reward Correction
1 ¯S ←∅; L ←large scalar value;
2 R∗
h ←Rh; // Best possible agent reward function
3 for rollout in range(1 to k) do
4
rc ←0; // Cumulative reward
5
πh ←policy trained on Rh;
6
// Find states to update for best possible R∗
h
7
s ←sc;
8
while s is not a terminal state do
9
// Perform forward rollout of πh
10
s′ ←T(s, πh(s));
11
rc ←rc + R(s, πh(s), s′);
12
s ←s′;
13
if rc ≤RL then // Reward too low
14
¯S = ¯S ∪s′; // Track state for later
15
R∗
h(s, πh(s), s′) ←R(s, πh(s), s′);
16
break;
17 π∗
h ←policy trained on R∗
h; π∗←policy trained on R;
18 Set Cover, Objective ←predicate selection( ¯S, π∗
h, ...);
19 if objective is no solution then exit;
20 if objective ≥L (from Eq. 1) then
21
for rollout in range(1 to k) do
22
s ←sc;
23
while s is not terminal do
24
// Perform forward rollout of π∗
25
s′ ←T(s, π∗(s));
26
if s′ ∈Set Cover then R(s, π∗(s), s′) ←−L;
27
s ←s′;
28
go to 1;
29 else
30
feedback ←“There’s a bad reward in Set Cover.”
31
return feedback
4.4 Algorithm
Here we outline the details of SPEAR for ﬁnding the predicates to communicate which will
elicit optimal behavior, as presented in Algorithm 1. We continue using our running example
of an emergency evacuation scenario (Figure 1-right) to build intuition and illustrate the
inner workings of our algorithm for a human-robot collaborative scenario.
Given an estimate of the human agent’s reward function, SPEAR communicates a re-
ward update in an attempt to elicit the best possible policy. To achieve this, (Line 3-16)
we perform multiple forward rollouts of the agent policy πh derived from Rh and (Line
13-16) compare the accumulated expected reward to the reward threshold RL. The moment
this threshold is crossed, the reward from that transition is determined to be relevant for
updating Rh and the state is added to the set cover.
This can be easily illustrated for our example, where Figure 2b shows the belief of an
agent trying to evacuate the building. Figure 3b gives insight into how updating the agent’s
reward function can result in an optimal policy even if the agent’s belief about the ﬁres
doesn’t truly match the environment.

10
Aaquib Tabrez et al.
After ﬁnding the states responsible for meaningful reward divergence, we ﬁnd a minimal
set cover of communicable predicates that map onto these states. This is achieved through
SPEAR-IP, discussed in Section 4.3. We use a third-party optimizer [17] to solve SPEAR-
IP (Line 18), where the predicate selection method takes in the states to cover ( ¯S) and
the best agent policy π∗
h. This gives a set of communicable predicates and a ﬁnal objective
value using Algorithm 2.
Line 19 checks whether or not a solution exists for a given set of predicates. In lines 20-
28, our algorithm evaluates case 3 to determine if alternate solutions exist. In lines 23-27,
SPEAR performs multiple forward rollouts of the optimal policy to ﬁnd states responsible
for a high objective value. In line 26, these states are penalized in the true reward function
(R) to incentivize the algorithm to ﬁnd an alternate solution which avoids these states. This
enables SPEAR to explore alternate solutions, making it more robust in applications where
the available predicates are insufﬁcient, overcoming barriers due to imprecise or unavailable
language.
In line 28, now that all the appropriate states are penalized, the algorithm repeats the
whole procedure from the beginning with a modiﬁed R, continuing this process until it
ﬁnds a low objective solution or no solution (case 1 or 2). Finally, in line 30, the update
is serialized as semantic feedback using the Set Cover. This feedback generation strategy
uses negative reward to drive an agent’s policy away from undesirable states, as improved
policies can then be elicited through the exclusion of states along the agent’s (hypothesized)
originally intended path. While similar outcomes can be achieved via positive reward, a state
exclusion-based strategy generally allows for the use of less precise predicates.
In Algorithm 2, we produce the set cover for communicating the reward update. Lines
4-7 evaluate states we want the agent to traverse (the desired trajectory ¯O) by performing
a forward rollout of the best attainable agent policy π∗
h. In lines 8-13, the matrices U and
V from Equation 3-4 are deﬁned, which form the basis of the constraints governing the
inclusion of states to cover and exclusion of optimal states (when giving information about
negative reward) in the set cover respectively. Finally, in line 15, SPEAR-IP is solved using
the matrices U and V to give Set Cover and Objective.
5 Evaluation and Discussion
To demonstrate the utility of our algorithm we present two applications in which an agent is
required to augment the policies of other agents (autonomous or human) via policy elicita-
tion from SPEAR. We also provide a characterization of SPEAR’s performance as a func-
tion of domain size and predicate count. Results are generated on an Intel(R) Core(TM)

5.1 Robotic Cleaning Task
In the ﬁrst scenario, one agent needs to correct the policy of a second robotic agent to prevent
it from removing speciﬁc items during a pick and place task (Figure 4). Importantly, these
robots do not operate in the same state space, and therefore cannot directly communicate
reward function updates to each other. Here, the Rethink Robotics Sawyer has been tasked
with clearing trash from a table, and is operating with the malformed belief that all objects
on the table’s surface are trash. The Kinova Movo is observing this scene and has accurate
knowledge about the environment (i.e., it knows that certain objects in the scene aren’t

One-shot Policy Elicitation via Semantic Reward Manipulation
11
Algorithm 2: Predicate selection (Minimal set cover)
Input: Set of States to cover ¯S, Agent policy π, MDP (S, A, T), Set of predicates ¯P, Current state
sc
Output: Set Cover and Objective (high, low, or no solution)
1 Set Cover ←∅; // Predicates in min set cover
2 O ←∅; // States we don’t want to cover
3 s ←sc; O ←O ∪s;
4 while s is not terminal do
5
// Perform ‘optimistic’ forward rollout of π
6
s ←most likely transition from T(s, π(s));
7
O ←O ∪s; //append occupied states
8 //Deﬁne matrix U to be | ¯S| × | ¯P| matrix s.t.
9 for i ∈[1, | ¯S|], j ∈[1, | ¯P|]
10 uij =
(
1,
if si ∈¯S is covered by pj ∈¯P
0,
otherwise
11 //Deﬁne matrix V to be | ¯O| × | ¯P| matrix s.t.
12 for k ∈[1, | ¯O|], j ∈[1, | ¯P|]
13 vkj =
(
1,
if ok ∈¯O is covered by pj ∈¯P
0,
otherwise
14 //For SPEAR-IP: refer to Equations 1 - 2
15 Set Cover, Objective ←SPEAR-IP(U, V );
16 return Set Cover, Objective
trash). As Sawyer’s reach expresses intent to remove one of the items that isn’t trash, Movo
detects that Sawyer’s policy is incorrect. Movo corrects Sawyer’s behavior by providing an
update for its reward function, allowing Sawyer to compute a better policy. We accomplish
this reward update step by generating semantic expressions about the reward function in
parts of the state space (i.e., predicate-grounded natural language communicating about a
region of negative reward) for Sawyer using SPEAR.
Within this task, Sawyer used a series of ArUco markers [15] to track the 6-dof poses
of various objects (states) on the tabletop. Using these poses, Sawyer systematically trans-
ferred all items classiﬁed as trash to the waste bin using an interruptable pick and place
action. As Movo observes Sawyer, it detects Sawyer’s end effector reaching for one of the
energy drinks on the table, thus indicating the intent to remove that object, and signalling
to Movo that Sawyer’s policy was malformed. Using SPEAR, Movo is able infer Sawyer’s
erroneous belief from this observed action (that a non-negative reward is associated with
putting the energy drink in the trash). Movo performs a forward rollout with the inferred
policy of Sawyer to predict which state transitions with negative reward Sawyer will reach.
Next, Movo computes an updated policy for Sawyer by determining which states should
be assigned negative reward and which of the available predicates are needed for commu-
nicating it with Algorithm 2. A DNF formula of predicates that covers the desired states
is then computed and communicated by Movo through natural language: “There is a Bad
Reward when energy drink is in the trash”. Finally, Sawyer uses its own set of predicates
to map the communication into its own state space, update its reward function accordingly,
and reconverge a repaired policy.
5.2 Emergency Evacuation
In our second scenario, our autonomous agent must help a human agent escape from a smart
building in which a series of ﬁres has broken out, as shown in Figure 2. While people in the

12
Aaquib Tabrez et al.
Fig. 4: (Left) Sawyer (red robot) views a misinformed policy for a tabletop cleaning task as
Movo (black robot) moves into position to assist. (Center) Movo, from its perspective views
the scene with the correct policy and watches Sawyer remove the correct (green) objects
from the table. Movo then observes Sawyer reach for one of the incorrect (red) objects
and delivers a verbal reward update. (Right) Sawyer computes an update to its planner thus
aligning with the desired policy.
building are not aware of the ﬁre locations, they are assumed to understand the generated
predicate-based language.
The building layout for each trial is generated with a stochastic placement of rooms,
hallways, and exits over a gridworld of ﬁxed size. For example, a gridworld of size 40X40
(1600 states) may have parameters: rooms = 10, hallways = 40, number of exits = 5. These
can be changed depending on the desired architecture. We then use these areas to create
predicates which are grounded in the layout of the building. In our validation, we also use
randomly generated predicates to prove the generalizability of our approach.
To accommodate the full range of possible state regions to cover using predicates, we
create composite predicates by creating the power set of base predicates. By combining
base predicates into composite predicates, each scenario has an upper bound of 2n −1 total
predicates.
Once the building layout and predicates are generated, we observe a randomly placed
human agent explore a hazard-free building over a ﬁxed number of episodes. The human
agent’s policy is then trained to always seek the shortest path to the closest exit that was dis-
covered during these exploration episodes. Initially, SPEAR has no knowledge about which
exits the human is aware of, but gradually, its belief about the human’s reward function is
updated from these observations. Next, we begin the evaluation by adding ﬁre in the build-
ing via random placement and expansion. Once this process completes, we start the SPEAR
evaluation. Predicates from SPEAR-IP are used to update the human agent’s reward function
during the episode. We update the policy of the human using the repaired reward function
after each update.
5.3 Analysis
We evaluated the performance of our algorithm as a function of state space size and the
number of predicates using different building layouts. We also demonstrated that our algo-
rithm can generalize to arbitrary state mappings by using randomly generated predicates. To
fairly evaluate this, we randomly generate ball-shaped predicates (evaluating to true within
a given radius of a random state vector). When in a structured environment, the predicates
grounded in the layout of the building tend to naturally make it easier to ﬁnd potentially haz-
ardous predicates. For example, in Figure 3a, predicates are grounded in the layout of the
building and ﬁre can be avoided through communicating the “Center Hallway” predicate
as it is directly associated with pathway of the human. However, if predicates are placed
stochastically throughout the map (corresponding to cases where the language isn’t tailored

One-shot Policy Elicitation via Semantic Reward Manipulation
13
Fig. 5: The evaluation of SPEAR algorithm in stochastic and deterministic evacuation do-
mains (25x25). Substantial increases in episode reward occur due to the generated symbolic
reward updates.
to the domain), ﬁnding a solution becomes more difﬁcult. Hence, by using randomly placed
predicates we make it difﬁcult for the algorithm to ﬁnd a low cost solution while also directly
increasing the computational time, providing performance analysis for cases of predicate-
domain mismatch.
We qualitatively assess our algorithm in an emergency evacuation scenario for both de-
terministic and stochastic environments (Figure 5). In the stochastic domain, a stochastic
transition function was applied describing the model’s action-based state transition dynam-
ics. For each map (25 X 25) in both environments, we evaluated our algorithm over the
course of 100 episodes. In each episode the reward was computed both before and after
the SPEAR update (exit: +100, ﬁre: -100, and each step: -1 ). At each time step, our agent
would take the prescribed action with a probability of 85% and would alternatively take a
step in a different random direction. For our stochastic evaluation, we set our forward rollout
count parameter, k, to 10. The results from our simulations show a substantial improvement
in the episodic reward after the SPEAR update, (Figure 5) demonstrating its utility in both
deterministic and stochastic domains.
Furthermore, we do performance analysis as a function of predicate count by dividing
into two success cases described in Section 4.3: 1) Maps with a low objective value solution
(Case 1); and 2) Maps with high objective value solution (Case 3).
For each map of a given size, we start with 100 base predicates and increase in in-
crements of 10. Figure 6-right shows how algorithm performance changes with increasing
predicate count on low objective value maps. For Case 1 solutions our algorithm exhibits
linear computational costs as a function of the number of predicates, and the set cover can
be computed within 50 seconds with nearly 10,000 communicable predicates to choose
from. To provide context for the signiﬁcance of this result, we can consider a comparison
against the state-of-the-art method for succinctly describing state regions (using the Quine-
McCluskey algorithm) by Hayes and Shah [20]. Our Integer Programming approach to this
set cover problem achieves a several order of magnitude improvement over the QM based
method (where set covers with 10 possible predicates takes 60-120 seconds to compute on

14
Aaquib Tabrez et al.
Fig. 6: (Left) SPEAR’s performance for high-objective (case 3) maps scales linearly as
predicate count increases. Sharp decreases in computation time (purple) occur when new
predicates cause SPEAR to ﬁnd solutions in fewer algorithm loops. (Right) SPEAR’s per-
formance for low objective (case-1) maps. Plots reveal a linear relationship between runtime
and predicate count.
similar hardware, deteriorating exponentially as a function of predicate count). SPEAR is
made possible by this performance improvement, effectively operationalizing the insight of
Hayes and Shah’s work as a means of communicating information about those state regions
— enabling SPEAR’s policy update method.
Similarly, we plot the performance for Case 3 solutions as predicate count increases
(Figure 6-left). We observe that the plots again scale linearly in practice with respect to
the number of predicates, but with higher computation time due to multiple SPEAR runs.
Computation time is higher here because the algorithm has to explore alternative solutions
for the desired policy, solving for set cover solutions multiple times (Section 4.3).
Our method achieves a dramatic improvement in computation time over the QM based
set cover approach for two reasons: ofﬂine computation of predicates and allowing approx-
imate solutions. QM uses a two-step procedure: 1) ﬁnding prime implicants, and 2) using
those prime implicants to ﬁnd the exact minimal set cover (see [26]). In SPEAR, we alle-
viate a signiﬁcant time sink by pre-computing predicate values over the state space (which
the QM approach had to solve online in step 1). Secondly, since SPEAR is often able to use
approximate set covers to communicate its reward updates (i.e., sometimes it’s okay to over-
state or under-state the reward region, as in Figure 3b), we are able to relax the requirement
of having an exact set cover. In contrast, QM solves for exact set cover making it slower in
execution and limited in application. For example, referring to Figures 2c and 3a, QM will
try to ﬁnd the precise set cover for covering only the two ﬁre states in the central hallway
(and fail as there is no exact solution). Whereas, SPEAR will try to ﬁnd the approximate
set cover that encompasses those ﬁre states, accepting inaccuracy if necessary so long as it
still achieves the same outcome as if there were a perfect solution (Case 1) and preferring
a suboptimal solution to no solution (Case 3). This added layer of approximation heuristic
makes SPEAR faster and more ﬂexible than the QM based approach.
Interestingly, we found some irregularities in performance as illustrated within the 80 X
80 world (Figure 6-left-purple). We found that a sudden dip in computation time can occur
when new language enables the algorithm to ﬁnd a Case 1 (single-loop of algorithm) or
cheaper Case 3 (still multiple loops of the algorithm, but fewer) solution.
The ﬁnal part of our analysis looks at the performance of our algorithm as domain size
increases with ﬁxed predicate count (100 base predicates). We generate a set of maps with
similar parameters for a ﬁxed state space size, sampling from these maps to get the mean and
conﬁdence bound for 10 simulation runs as shown in Figure 7. A signiﬁcant take-away from

One-shot Policy Elicitation via Semantic Reward Manipulation
15
Fig. 7: The evaluation of the SPEAR algorithm in stochastic and deterministic evacuation
domains (25x25). SPEAR’s performance as state space size increases using 100 randomly
generated base predicates. Computation time increases polynomially as a function of state
space size
this analysis is the insight that an attention mechanism is more important for abstracting and
reducing the domain’s state space than for limiting the number of predicates to consider, as
prior work anticipated [1,20,37].
We have shown that SPEAR enables dramatic improvements in agent performance through
policy elicitation, while also contributing a novel method for communicating about state re-
gions that substantially outperforms prior work. These contributions enable semantically
guided policy manipulation for a much broader class of problems than was previously pos-
sible, providing a method that scales linearly with predicate count as opposed to exponen-
tially, advancing the state-of-the-art in autonomous coaching through new algorithms and
improved foundational capability.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we describe an approach for policy elicitation, the manipulation of an agent’s
behavior through the use of semantically grounded reward updates. We present a novel Inte-
ger Programming-based algorithm for rendering policy explanation [20] and policy manip-
ulation [37] techniques feasible for use in applications substantially larger than previously
possible. We demonstrate a several order of magnitude improvement over the state-of-the-
art in terms of runtime and allowable domain size when communicating about state regions,
and utilize this to achieve signiﬁcant improvements in agent performance through policy
elicitation from an autonomous coaching agent.
