A Probabilistic Simulator of Spatial Demand for Product Allocation
Porter Jenkins 1, Hua Wei 1, J. Stockton Jenkins 2, Zhenhui Li 1
1 Penn State University
2 Brigham Young University
Abstract
Connecting consumers with relevant products is a very impor-
tant problem in both online and ofﬂine commerce. In physical
retail, product placement is an effective way to connect con-
sumers with products. However, selecting product locations
within a store can be a tedious process. Moreover, learning
important spatial patterns in ofﬂine retail is challenging due
to the scarcity of data and the high cost of exploration and
experimentation in the physical world. To address these chal-
lenges, we propose a stochastic model of spatial demand in
physical retail. We show that the proposed model is more pre-
dictive of demand than existing baselines. We also perform a
preliminary study into different automation techniques and
show that an optimal product allocation policy can be learned
through Deep Q-Learning.
Introduction
A key challenge for many physical retailers is choosing
where to display their products. In many large stores, it can
be difﬁcult for consumers to ﬁnd what they are looking for
since a typical retailer may sell thousands of products. Addi-
tionally, consumers often purchase goods that they had not
intended to buy beforehand, but are made on an impulse.
Proper placement reduces search costs and maximizes ”im-
pulse” buys (Badgaiyan and Verma 2015). For example, sup-
pose a shopper visits a supermarket intending to purchase
groceries. As the shopper checks out he sees a soft drink
beverage placed near the cash register, and adds it to his
cart. The shopper’s decision to purchase the drink was in
part a function of the environmental cues and placement of
the product (Mattila and Wirtz 2008). The main idea of this
work is propose a strategy for automating the decision pro-
cess of product placement in an optimal way.
Some existing work explores domains adjacent to the op-
timal product allocation problem. A large body of opera-
tions research analyzes shelf space distribution. For exam-
ple, early work proposed a dynamic programming algorithm
to discover an optimal shelf allocation strategy (Zufryden
1986). Other work poses shelf space allocation as a con-
strained optimization problem that can be solved via sim-
ulated annealing (Borin, Farris, and Freeland 1994). More
contemporary studies propose frequent pattern mining ap-
proaches to determine proﬁtable product item sets (Brijs
2001) (Aloysius and Binu 2011). To the best of our knowl-
Entrance
Deli (!")
Grocery (!#)
Pharmacy (!$)
Checkouts (!%)
Products
:
0
1
2
3
4
(a) Example ﬂoor plan
0
1
2
3
4
Products
0
1
2
3
Regions
(b) State matrix
0
1
2
3
4
Products
0
1
2
3
Regions
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(c) Revenue distribution
Figure 1: An example of the product allocation problem in
physical retail. We provide a sample ﬂoor plan of a small, re-
tail environment (a). Each section of the store is partitioned
into “regions” (e.g., r1). The product distributor or retailer
has to choose the regions in which to put each of ﬁve pos-
sible products. The current product locations are plotted as
colored x’s. We visualize the current allocation strategy as a
state matrix, where blue components denote a given region,
product combination has been selected (b). We also show the
historical spatial distribution of revenue as a heat map (c).
Darker colors indicate more historical revenue. The ﬁgure
suggests that the current conﬁguration may be sub-optimal.
In reality, many large retail environments have thousands of
products and many regions.
edge, none of the existing literature has studied the spatial
effects of product locations across the entire store.
However, learning a strategy for optimal product alloca-
tion is non-trivial. First, the number of candidate allocation
strategies is large but the historical data usually only ex-
plores a small subset. Not to mention that sales are also cor-
related with other factors such as holidays and store promo-
tions, which makes the search space even bigger. Because of
this issue of data sparsity we cannot directly rely on histori-
arXiv:2001.03210v1  [cs.AI]  9 Jan 2020

cal data to learn the best strategy. Second, the cost of exper-
imentation and exploration is high. It is not feasible to per-
form extensive experiments due to the potential lost revenue
and the physical cost of moving products around the store.
Finally, the correlation between product positions and sales
is likely complex and non-linear due to the dynamic nature
of the market; simple search heuristics may not provide an
optimal policy. For all of these reasons, we need an approach
that can accurately reﬂect the environment in a cost-efﬁcient
way.
Therefore, we design a new framework to solve these
challenges. We propose a probabilistic spatial demand sim-
ulator to be a mirror of the real environment and act as a
mechanism to study more complex search algorithms such
as reinforcement learning without incurring the high cost
of exploration in the physical world. We train the proposed
model using a new, real-world dataset. Additionally, when
deployed online, the model could be used to perform Monte
Carlo rollouts for efﬁcient exploration and experimentation
(Kaiser 2019).
In our experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed
model can effectively recover ground truth test data in two
retail environments. Finally, we do a preliminary study into
different optimization techniques using the proposed model.
In summary the key contributions of our paper are:
• We study the new problem of optimal product allocation
in physical retail
• We propose a probabilistic model of spatial demand that
can accurately recover observed data, and generate data
for new environment states
• We train PSD-sim on real data from two different retail
stores
• We do a preliminary study into various optimization
methods and show that Deep Q-Learning can learn an op-
timal allocation policy
Problem Deﬁnition
In the following section, we provide a formal deﬁnition of
the optimal allocation problem. Additionally, we deﬁne the
necessary components of our reinforcement learning agent:
the state space, action space, reward function, and state tran-
sition function.
Optimal Allocation Problem
In a physical retail environment R with a set of n spatial
regions, we represent the environment with a spatial graph
R = (V, E), where each region ri ∈V is a vertex in the
graph, the spatial neighboring relation between two regions
ri and rj are represented as eij ∈V. From G, we can con-
struct the adjacency matrix, A.
Additionally, we observe a set of k products, M = {mj :
0 < j <= k} that are sold. For each product, mj, we know
the retail price, pj.
The decision process faced by the retailer is to allocate
each product in M across regions in R. We deﬁne the allo-
cation policy as a function f:
f : R × M →Z
(1)
Z = {⟨ri, pj⟩, ...⟨rw, pq⟩}
(2)
Where Z is the set of selected product region, such that
w <= n, q <= k and Z ⊆R × M. This function is typi-
cally dynamic over time, which we denote as f t. To simplify
computation, we treat Zt as an (n×k) grid and refer to it as
the board conﬁguration at time, t. An optimal retail strategy
is to ﬁnd the allocation policy that maximizes revenue:
f ∗=
T
X
t
arg max
f t
X
i,j∈f t(R,M)
pjqi
(3)
where pj is the price for product mj, and qi is the quantity
sold in region ri and T is the future time horizon of analysis.
The main idea of the current work is to discover the long-
term, optimal allocation policy, f ∗from data.
Optimal Allocation as a Markov Decision Process
We believe that the optimal allocation problem is well suited
for reinforcement learning because the RL agent is designed
for sequential decision making that maximizes expected dis-
counted reward over time. We frame the inputs as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP). An MDP is deﬁned by the tuple
⟨S, A, P, r, δ⟩, where S is the state space, A is the set of
possible actions, P is the (typically unkown) state transition
function, r is the reward function and δ ∈[0, 1] is the dis-
count factor.
• State At each time, t, we observe the state of the retail
environment, E. We deﬁne the state, st ∈S, as the tuple
of state features, st = ⟨Zt, dt, g(t−1)⟩, where Zt is the
current board conﬁguration, dt is the current day of the
week (e.g., Sunday →0), and g(t−1) is a vector denoting
the revenue at the previous time, (pjqi)(t−1)∀z ∈Zt
• Action We deﬁne the action space A = R × M ×
{−1, 1} ∪{0}, indicating “to place”, “take way” or “do
nothing” for each product, mj in each region, ri.
• Reward The reward function in this case is the total prod-
uct revenue at time t, constrained by the monetary cost, c,
of placing a set of products in each region:
r(t) =
n
X
i=1
k
X
j=1
pjqt
ij −c
n
X
i=1
1Z(ri)
(4)
• State transition function: The state transition, P is de-
ﬁned as p(st+1|st, at) : S × A × S →[0, 1], which gives
the probability of moving to state, s(t+1) given the cur-
rent state and action. In the optimal allocation problem
the exact transition function, P is unknown since the cur-
rent state, st depends on the results of the previous time,
g(t−1). We model this transition as a stochastic process.
Proposed Method
In this section, we deﬁne our framework for solving the op-
timal allocation problem. Speciﬁcally, we outline our pro-
posed environment model that is used to simulate spatial de-
mand.

)
)'(
&'(
T
n
k
-'
.
-(
/
*(
2
3.
45
-6
Temporal weight
Region weight
Product weight
Revenue
Quantity
Price
+,
Autoregressive weight
regions: k
products: n
time: T
Figure 2: An overview of the proposed model as a Bayesian
network. The boxes are “plates” representing structures in
the data. The plates marked by k, n and T represent prod-
ucts, regions, and time, respectively. Circles denote ran-
dom variables and squares are deterministic quantities. The
model decomposes quantity as a function of region, product,
time, and auto-regressive weights.
Stochastic Model of Spatial Demand
We propose the following stochastic model of spatial de-
mand in physical retail. See Figure 2 for an overview. In the
current work, the stochastic model is used as a ‘simulator’ to
enable ofﬂine policy learning. There are many advantages of
using a probabilistic model in the optimal product allocation
problem. First, we are able to incorporate prior knowledge
about the data generating process, which can again improve
data efﬁciency and model effectiveness. Second, it provides
a natural framework for simulating future scenarios through
Monte Carlo roll-outs.
Our ultimate objective is to maximize total revenue at
time, ρ(t), which is deﬁned as:
ρ(t) =
n
X
i=1
ρ(t)
i
(5)
where ρ(t)
i
is the revenue for region, ri. Region-level rev-
enue is calculated over products, mj:
ρ(t)
i
=
k
X
j=1
pjq(t)
ij
(6)
The key variable of interest is, q(t)
ij , the quantity sold for
product, mj, region, ri, at time, t. We model q(t)
ij as a trun-
cated normal random variable:
q(t)
ij ∼ψ(µ, σ, a, b)
(7)
where, ψ(µ, σ, a, b) is the pdf of the truncated normal dis-
tribution. The term, φ(z) is the standard normal pdf, and
Φ(z) is its cumulative distribution function. See (Burkardt
2014) for more details. We set a = 0 and b = +∞, which
forces Φ(µ, σ2; b) = 1 and constrains quantity, q(t)
ij ∈R+.
The prior for q(t)
ij is characterized by the mean, µq, which
is a linear function of environment features, x and learned
weights, w, and the inverse gamma distribution for the vari-
ance, σq:
µq = x⊤w + b
(8)
σq ∼IG(αq, βq)
(9)
In our environment, we observe temporal features, xt, re-
gion features, xr, product features, xp, and autoregressive
features, xs: x = [xt, xr, xp, xs]⊤. We discuss our feature ex-
traction approach more in section
Region-level Weights
We initially model the weights for
each spatial region with a multivariate normal distribution,
with mean vector, µr and covariance matrix, Qr:
wr ∼N(µr, Qr)
(10)
Product-level Weights
We also deﬁne weights for each
product, mj, as follows:
wp ∼N(µp, Σp)
(11)
µp ∼N(δp, Γp)
(12)
Σp = LL⊤∼LKJ(σp)
(13)
We put a multivariate normal prior over the mean vec-
tor, µp which has hyperparameters µt and Σt. Addition-
ally, we put an LKJ prior over the covariance matrix, Σp.
We reparameterize Σt as its cholesky decomposition, LL⊤,
so that the underlying correlation matrices follows an LKJ
distribution (Lewandowski, Kurowicka, and Joe 2009). The
standard deviations, σp, follow a half-cauchy distribution.
The advantage of the LKJ prior is that is more computation-
ally tractable than other covariance priors (Lewandowski,
Kurowicka, and Joe 2009).
Temporal weights
The temporal features capture the
long-term and short-term seasonality of the environment.
The temporal weights are deﬁned similar to the product
weights. Namely, the temporal weights, wt, follow a mul-
tivariate normal distribution, with a normal prior over the
mean, and the LKJ prior for the covariance matrix:
wt ∼N(µt, Σt)
(14)
µt ∼N(δt, Γt)
(15)
Σt = LL⊤∼LKJ(σt)
(16)

Autoregressive weight
Finally, we specify the weight of
previously observed revenue values on q(t)
ij . The feature, xs
is an autoregressive feature denoting the previous k values of
product-level revenue, ρt
j = Pn
j=i pjq(t)
ij . We assume trun-
cated normal prior for ws, and half cauchy priors for the
location, µs and scale, σs:
ws ∼ψ(µs, σs, a, b)
(17)
µs ∼HalfCauchy(φs)
(18)
σs ∼HalfCauchy(ψs)
(19)
We again set a = 0 and b = +∞such that ws ∈R+.
wr
ij ∼N(wr, Qr)
(20)
wr ∼N(µi, Qr)
(21)
Note that both wr and wr
ij share the same same covariance
structure. Thus, the region weights are only hierarchical in
their means. Additionally, we treat the upper-level mean vec-
tor, µr as hyperparameter. In Section we test which environ-
ment model is more effective at predicting revenue on a test
set.
Training
We train the proposed model using the No U-Turn Sampler
(NUTS) algorithm (D. and Gelman 2011). This allows us
to draw samples from the posterior distribution of model
weights, W, as well as the posterior predictive distribution
of quantity, q(t)
ij , and revenue ρ(t). We use Automatic Differ-
ention Variational Inference (ADVI) (Kucukelbir 2017) as
an initialization point for the sampling procedure. All mod-
els are implemented in PyMC3 (Salvatier, Wiecki, and Fon-
nesbeck 2016)
We initialize with ADVI using 200,000 iterations. Once
initialized, we sample the posterior using NUTS with a tun-
ing period of 5,000 draws followed by 5,000 samples across
four chains.
Feature Extraction
In
order
to
train
the
proposed
model,
we
extract
environment-level features, x, which is composed of tem-
poral features, xt, region features, xr, product features, xp,
previous sales features and xs.
• Temporal features We use a one-hot vector denoting the
day of the week for, xt. This feature vector captures the
short-term temporality commmon in physical retail set-
tings. For example, weekends tend to be busier shopping
days than weekdays.
• Region features We again use a one-hot vector for spatial
regions, xr. This feature vector ’turns on’ the weight that
each region has on quantity via the weight vector, wr.
• Product features We expect each product to vary in pop-
ularity. We capture this effect by constructing a one-hot
vector for products, xp.
• Previous sales features Finally, we construct an autore-
gressive sales feature that represents the sales at time,
t −1. We use the previous sales for product mj, summed
across all regions, ws = ρ(t−1)
j
= Pk
i=1 pjq(t−1)
ij
. This
feature captures micro-ﬂuctuations in demand for each
product.
Experiments
In the following section we ﬁrst describe the dataset and
discuss interesting features of the problem. Next, we per-
form empirical evaluations of the proposed model across
two large retail environment by showing that it can more ac-
curately recover test data better than more elementary base-
lines. We explore the model by discussing the estimation of
region weights, and show that it is robust to previously un-
seen states. Finally, we do a preliminary inquiry into effec-
tive methods for optimization.
Dataset Decription
Store Id
Regions
Products
Time Horizon
#1
17
15
8/2018 - 8/2019
#2
12
15
8/2018 - 8/2019
Table 1: Dataset Summary
Stores: We collect data from two large supermarket and
retail stores in Salt Lake City, UT, USA. Each store primar-
ily sells groceries, common household goods and clothing.
Our dataset is comprised of transactions from August 2018
to August 2019.
Products: We observe quantities sold for a set of 15 prod-
ucts, as well as each product’s average price over the year.
All of the products in our dataset are popular beverage prod-
ucts.
Regions: The data provides daily counts of quantities at
the region-product level. Additionally, the locations of the
products are varied in product ”displays”. These displays
are small groups of products intended to catch the eye of
the shopper. See Figure 1 for an example of a product dis-
play layout. Store 1 is comprised 17 regions, and store 2
has 12. Each region represents a section of the store. In gen-
eral regions tend to be constructed based the functionally of
each space (e.g., pharmacy, deli, etc.). We construct a spatial
graph of these regions.
Model Evaluation
We ﬁrst evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed model in
predicting revenue on a test dataset. Speciﬁcally, we parti-
tion the time series into a training period from August 1,
2018 - July 4, 2019 , and a test period of July 5, 2019 to
August 31, 2019. We compare the proposed model to a va-
riety of discriminitive baselines, and simpler variants of the
proposed model. We evaluate all models in terms of the fol-
lowing error metrics:
MSE =
1
nkT
T
X
t=1
n
X
i=1
k
X
j=1
(ρ(t)
ij −ˆρ(t)
ij )2
(22)

Figure 3: Predictions and observed revenue during the test
period. Revenue is aggregated to the store-level. We display
the results from store 2 above. We show the posterior distri-
bution for revenue by plotting the mean (blue line) and inner
95% credible interval (gray shaded area). In general, the pre-
dicted revenue mirrors the behavior of the ground truth data.
the proposed model correctly predicts directional changes
(i.e., positive or negative) 82% of the time.
Table 2: Evaluation of the proposed model
Store 1
Store 2
Environment Model
MSE
MAE
MSE
MAE
OLS
2845.61
28.01
4816.41
34.81
RF
2908.73
26.77
5090.11
36.34
MLP
4037.91
34.66
7322.86
44.37
Proposed
2615.32
27.67
4492.52
34.48
MAE =
1
nkT
T
X
t=1
n
X
i=1
k
X
i=j
|ρ(t)
ij −ˆρ(t)
ij |
(23)
where the predicted revenue is equal to the quantity times
price for the ith product, in the jth region, at time, t: ˆρ(t)
ij =
ˆq(t)
ij pj. To compare to the discriminitive models, we obtain a
point estimate for ˆq(t)
ij by computing the mean of the samples
taken from posterior predictive distribution.
Baseline Approaches
The proposed model is a generative
environment model and is able to draw samples from the
full posterior distribution of revenue, ρ(t). We also compare
to the following discriminative prediction models:
• Linear Regression (OLS): Classical least squares regres-
sion that decomposes predicted quantity as a linear func-
tion of weights: ˆq(t)
ij = Xw + b.
• Random Forest (RF): An ensemble regressor that learns
many decisions trees and averages over the labels in each
terminal node to compute, ˆq(t)
ij . We use 100 trees.
• Multilayer Perceptron (MLP): A simple neural network
with two hidden layers of dimensions 256, and 128 with
ReLU activations, MSE loss, and stochastic gradient de-
scent optimizer.
We use the same features for all baselines. The features
used in the experiment are described above.
Results
We report the results in Table 2. Additionally, pre-
dictions over the test set are plotted in Figure 3. Overall we
have the following observations from the experiment.
First, the proposed model is overall more accurate at pre-
dicting future states than baselines. In particular, the pro-
posed model yields the smallest MSE scores. MSE give a
higher penalty to large errors, so in general the proposed
model tends to make fewer, bad mistakes than all other base-
lines. This result holds both in store 1, and store 2. Addition-
ally the proposed model minimizes the MAE score in store
2, but is beat out by only the Random Forest baseline for
store 1. Upon closer analysis we see that the Random Forest
baseline has the second largest MSE score in store 1, which
indicates that the Random Forest regressor has a higher vari-
ance than the proposed model. Overall, the proposed model
is better or comparable to all baselines in both retail stores.
Second, the use of prior information in the proposed
model allows it to perform better than the discriminitive
baselines. Because the proposed model is a generative,
Bayesian regression model we are able to set key hyperpa-
rameters at values according to our prior knowledge. For ex-
ample, we know that retail sales increase on the weekends.
By guiding the estimation of model parameters through the
use of human knowledge the proposed is able to achieve pre-
diction performance superior to OLS, RF, and the MLP in
nearly all cases.
Optimization Techniques
In this section we perform a preliminary study into various
search algorithms to solve the optimal product allocation
problem with the the proposed model environment model.
Because exploration and experimentation in the physical
world is costly, it is often preferable to design an agent that
can learn a policy ofﬂine before deploying into the online
environment (Kaiser 2019).
Search Algorithms
To this end we compare four methods
to search the problem space: random search, naive search,
Tabu search, and Deep Q-Learning
• Random Search A search algorithm that relies on a to-
tally random policy: at each time step, t choose a random
action.
• Naive Search The naive strategy in this case is simply “do
nothing.” At each time step, we do not move any products
and do not deviate from the initialized allocation policy.
This baseline allows us to assess whether searching and
exploration is useful at all.
• Tabu Search: A local neighborhood search algorithm that
maintains a memory structure called a “Tabu” list. The
“Tabu” list is comprised of recent actions to encourage
exploration and avoid getting trapped in local maxima.

30 days
60 days
90 days
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Cumulative reward (in thousands of $)
Random
Naive
Tabu
DQN
(a) Store 1
30 days
60 days
90 days
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative reward (in thousands of $)
Random
Naive
Tabu
DQN
(b) Store 2
Figure 4: A comparison of three search algorithms across store 1 and store 2. We vary the episode length in 30 day increments
(i.e., 30, 60, and 90 days in the future). The DQN algorithm is superior in all cases. Additionally, we observe that as the episode
length increases so does the relative effectiveness of the DQN. The DQN agent excels in the longer episode settings because it
is able to learn important, longer term strategies. On average, DQN offers an improvement of 24.5% over Tabu search in terms
of cumulative test reward.
We implement the Tabu algorithm with a “Tabu” list of
the previous 50 actions. We treat the local neighborhood
search as the enumeration over set of feasible actions
given the current state, st.
• Deep Q-Learning (DQN): A reinforcement learning al-
gorithm that utilizes a neural network to approximate the
state-action function, Q(s, a). The DQN typically em-
ploys an ϵ-greedy strategy for exploration. The explo-
ration probability, ϵ is typically annealed throughout train-
ing. DQN has been shown to be effective for learning
policies in complex, dynamic environments such as Atari
(Mnih 2015), Go (Silver 2016) (Silver 2017), and ride dis-
patching (Lin et al. 2018), and trafﬁc signal control (Wei,
Yao, and Li 2018). We train our DQN using 50,000 train-
ing iterations prior to the test period.
Policy Evaluation
In this section we conduct a policy
evaluation experiment. We randomly ﬁx the initial environ-
ment state and allow each of the search algorithms listed
above to interact with the environment according to its cor-
responding strategy in a test period of one episode. The state
in store 1 is initialized with 96 product-region pairs, while
the state in store 2 has 30. We record the total reward accu-
mulated by each agent during the entire episode. For each
store, we vary the episode length in 30 day increments: 30,
60, and 90 days in the future. This allows us to evaluate
whether longer rollouts have an effect on the policy of each
agent. The results of the policy evaluation experiment are
reported in table 4.
In general, we see that DQN is the most effective search
algorithm in both stores, and across all three episode set-
tings. In each case, it accumulates the most total reward
in the test episode. On average, DQN is 24.5% better than
Tabu, in terms of cumulative test reward. Tabu is the second
most effective search strategy, beating out the random and
naive search heuristics in all cases. Interestingly, the naive
search baseline of “do nothing” is more effective than ran-
dom searching in store 1, but not in store 2.
Additionally, it appears that as the episode length is in-
creases, so too does the relative effectiveness of DQN as
compared to Tabu. In the store 1, 30 day episode setting,
DQN exceeds Tabu by $10k. This difference increases to
$30k for 60 days and $72k for 90 days. In store 2 we see
a similar effect. The difference between DQN and Tabu in-
creases from $12k to $13.5k to $16k in the 30, 60, and 90
day settings respectively. Not only is DQN more effective,
but its performance relative to other baselines gets better
with longer episodes.
DQN excels as episode length increases in large part be-
cause the underlying Q-function is an approximation of dis-
counted, expected reward over time. This allows the agent
to potentially think multiple steps ahead and take a set of
actions that yield low immediate reward, but higher reward
in later steps. Conversely, the random and Tabu search base-
lines are short-term or greedy search algorithms. Especially
in the case of Tabu; at each time step, an action is solely
selected based on what will maximize short-term reward.
These results suggest that the correlations between spatial
allocation and sales is complex and dynamic. Thus both of
the two baselines achieve sub-optimal policies.
It is also interesting to note the behavior of the naive
search compared to the random strategies across the two
stores. In store 1, the environment is initialized with an al-
location strategy that already has many product placements
(96). We see that the naive strategy is a strong baseline, and
is superior to the random policy in each of the 30, 60 and 90
day settings. However, in store 2 where the initial allocation
is more sparse (30 placements), the random policy is better
than or equal to the naive search. This suggest that as more
products are placed it is more difﬁcult to ﬁnd incremental
improvements in the allocation strategy.

Related Work
There are two major streams of literature that intersect with
our problem: 1) shelf space allocation and 2) deep reinforce-
ment learning for spatial allocation.
Shelf Space Allocation
The shelf space allocation allocation problem has been stud-
ied in the operations research literature for many decades.
Some classical work approaches the problem by proposing
a dynamic programming algorithm to allocate limited shelf
space among a ﬁnite set of products. In this case, the objec-
tive function is composed of revenue, costs and a set of con-
straints (Zufryden 1986). Later work proposed a simulated
annealing optimization approach that accounts for two pri-
mary decisions variables: product assortment and allocated
space for each product (Borin, Farris, and Freeland 1994).
This optimization technique accounts for many different en-
vironment variables such as item proﬁtability, brand elastic-
ities, and supply chain features. More recently, frequent pat-
tern mining algorithms have been proposed to allocate prod-
uct shelf space. For instance Brijs et al. (Brijs 2001) propose
the PROFSET algorithm, which an association rule algo-
rithm that mines customer basket sets to identify proﬁtable
product pairings. This algorithm is a extension of frequent
item set algorithms that also accounts for product value. Ex-
tensions of this idea have also been proposed. Aloysius and
Binu propose a PreﬁxSpan algorithm for shelf allocation that
ﬁrst identiﬁes complementary categories from historical pur-
chase data before identifying product mix strategies within
categories (Aloysius and Binu 2011).
These existing studies differ from our work in the follow-
ing ways. First, they all focus on micro-regions (shelves)
within the retail environment. The spatial effects these mod-
els capture are markedly different from the macro-level ones
tackled in the current work. Second, these studies focus on
the number of each product on a shelf. They try to maximize
proﬁtability given the ﬁxed shelf volume. This optimization
problem is fundamentally different from allocating products
across the entire store. For these reasons, none of these meth-
ods can be directly applied to our problem.
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Spatial Resource
Allocation
Recent breakthroughs in reinforcement learning (Mnih
2015) (Silver 2016) (Silver 2017) have spurred interest in
RL as an optimization approach in complex and dynamic
environments. In particular, recent studies have proposed RL
algorithms as a mechanism for spatiotemporal resource allo-
cation.
Order dispatching. Signiﬁcant attention has been paid
to the order dispatching problem in ride sharing systems.
Brieﬂy, order dispatching refers to the problem of efﬁciently
matching riders and drivers in an urban environment. The
RL agent must learn the complex spatial dynamics to learn a
policy to solve the dispatching problem. For example, Lin et
al. (Lin et al. 2018) tackle the dispatch problem by propos-
ing a contextual multi-agent reinforcement learning frame-
work that coordinates strategies among a large number of
agents to improve driver allocation in physical space. Ad-
ditionally, Li et al. (Li 2019) also approach the order dis-
patching problem with multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL). Their method relies on the mean ﬁeld approxima-
tion to capture the dynamic, spatially distributed ﬂuctuations
in supply and demand. They empirically show that MARL
can reduce supply-demand gaps in peak hours.
Trafﬁc signal control Increasing trafﬁc congestion is a
key concern in many urban areas. Recent efforts to opti-
mize trafﬁc control systems via reinforcement learning has
shown encouraging results. These systems seek to adjust
trafﬁc lights to real-time ﬂuctuations in trafﬁc volume and
road demand. Wei et al (Wei, Yao, and Li 2018) propose In-
telliLight, which is a phase-gated deep neural network that
approximates state-action values. More recently (Wei 2019)
proposes a graph attentional network to facilitate coopera-
tion between many trafﬁc signals.
Spatial demand for electronic tolls Chen et al. (Chen
2018) propose a dynamic electronic toll collection system
that adjusts to trafﬁc patterns and spatial demand for roads
in real time. Their proposed algorithm, PG-β, is an extension
of policy gradient methods and decreases trafﬁc volume and
travel time.
While these reinforcement learning methods deal with the
large-scale optimization of spatial resource, they cannot be
directly applied to the product allocation problem because
the all rely on domain-speciﬁc simulators. We propose our
model in an effort to extend these state-of-the-art optimiza-
tion techniques to our problem.
Conclusion
In this paper, we studied the automation of product place-
ment in retail settings. The problem is motivated by the fact
that well placed products can maximize impulse buys and
minimize search costs for consumers. Solving this allocation
problem is difﬁcult because location-based, historical data
is limited in most retail settings. Consequently, the num-
ber of possible allocation strategies is massive compared to
the number of strategies typically explored in historical data.
Additionally, it is generally costly to experiment and explore
new policies because of the economic costs of sub optimal
strategies, and operational cost of deploying a new allocation
strategy. Therefore, we propose a probabilistic environment
model called that is designed to mirror the real world, and al-
low for automated search, simulation and exploration of new
product allocation strategies. We train the proposed model
on real data collected from two large retail environments.
We show that the proposed model can make accurate pre-
dictions on test data. Additionally, we do a preliminary study
into various optimization methods using the proposed model
as a simulator. We discover that Deep Q-learning techniques
can learn a more effective policy than baselines. On average,
DQN offers an improvement of 24.5% over Tabu search in
terms of cumulative test reward.
