Logical Methods in Computer Science
Vol. 8 (1:18) 2012, pp. 1–49
www.lmcs-online.org
Submitted
May 16, 2011
Published
Mar.
2, 2012
A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR THE
CALCULUS OF (CO)INDUCTIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
ANDREA ASPERTI a, WILMER RICCIOTTI b, CLAUDIO SACERDOTI COEN c,
AND ENRICO TASSI d
a,b,c Dipartimento di Scienze dell’informazione, Mura Anteo Zamboni 7, 40127, Bologna, Italy

d Microsoft Research-INRIA Joint Centre, Building I, Parc Orsay Universit´e, 28, rue Jean Rostand,
91893 Orsay Cedex

Abstract. The paper describes the reﬁnement algorithm for the Calculus of (Co)Inductive
Constructions (CIC) implemented in the interactive theorem prover Matita.
The reﬁnement algorithm is in charge of giving a meaning to the terms, types and
proof terms directly written by the user or generated by using tactics, decision procedures
or general automation. The terms are written in an “external syntax” meant to be user
friendly that allows omission of information, untyped binders and a certain liberal use of
user deﬁned sub-typing. The reﬁner modiﬁes the terms to obtain related well typed terms
in the internal syntax understood by the kernel of the ITP. In particular, it acts as a type
inference algorithm when all the binders are untyped.
The proposed algorithm is bi-directional: given a term in external syntax and a type
expected for the term, it propagates as much typing information as possible towards the
leaves of the term. Traditional mono-directional algorithms, instead, proceed in a bottom-
up way by inferring the type of a sub-term and comparing (unifying) it with the type
expected by its context only at the end. We propose some novel bi-directional rules for
CIC that are particularly eﬀective. Among the beneﬁts of bi-directionality we have better
error message reporting and better inference of dependent types.
Moreover, thanks to
bi-directionality, the coercion system for sub-typing is more eﬀective and type inference
generates simpler uniﬁcation problems that are more likely to be solved by the inherently
incomplete higher order uniﬁcation algorithms implemented.
Finally we introduce in the external syntax the notion of vector of placeholders that
enables to omit at once an arbitrary number of arguments. Vectors of placeholders allow
a trivial implementation of implicit arguments and greatly simplify the implementation of
primitive and simple tactics.
1998 ACM Subject Classiﬁcation: D.3.1, F.3.0.
Key words and phrases: reﬁner, type inference, interactive theorem prover, calculus of inductive construc-
tions, Matita.
LOGICAL METHODSl IN COMPUTER SCIENCE
DOI:10.2168/LMCS-8 (1:18) 2012
c
⃝
A. Asperti, W. Ricciotti, C. Sacerdoti Coen, and E. Tassi
CC
⃝
Creative Commons

2
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
1. Introduction
In this paper we are interested in describing one of the key ingredients in the implementation
of Interactive Theorem Provers (ITP) based on type theory.
The architecture of these tools is usually organized in layers and follows the so called
de Bruijn principle: the correctness of the whole system solely depends on the innermost
component called kernel. Nevertheless, from a user perspective, the most interesting layers
are the external ones, the ones he directly interacts with. Among these, the reﬁner is the one
in charge of giving a meaning to the terms and types he writes. The smarter the reﬁner is,
the more freedom the user has in omitting pieces of information that can be reconstructed.
The reﬁner is also the component generating the majority of error messages the user has to
understand and react to in order to ﬁnish his proof or deﬁnition.
This paper is devoted to the description of a reﬁnement algorithm for the Calculus
of (Co)Inductive Constructions, the type theory on which the Matita [6], Coq [12] and
Lego [19] ITPs are based on.
1.1. Reﬁnement. In this and in the previous paper [4] we are interested in the imple-
mentation of interactive theorem provers (ITP) for dependently typed languages that are
heavily based on the Curry-Howard isomorphism. Proofs are represented using lambda-
terms.
Proofs in progress are represented using lambda-terms containing metavariables
that are implicitly existentially quantiﬁed. Progression in the proof is represented by in-
stantiation of metavariables with terms. Metavariables are also useful to represent missing
or partial information, like untyped lambda-abstractions or instantiation of polymorphic
functions to omitted type arguments.
Agda [8] and Matita [6] are examples of systems implemented in this way. Arnaud
Spiwack in his Ph.D. thesis [31] partially describes a forthcoming release of Coq 8.4 that
will be implemented on the same principles.
The software architecture of these systems is usually built in layers. The innermost
layer is the kernel of the ITP. The main algorithm implemented by the kernel is the type
checker, which is based in turn on conversion and reduction. The type checker takes as input
a (proof) term possibly containing metavariables and it veriﬁes if the partial term is correct
so far. To allow for type-checking, metavariables are associated to sequents, grouping their
types together with the context (hypotheses) available to inhabit the type. The kernel does
not alter metavariables since no instantiation takes place during reduction, conversion or
type checking.
The kernel has the important role of reducing the trusted code base of the ITP. Indeed,
the kernel eventually veriﬁes all proofs produced by the outer layers, detecting incorrect
proofs generated by bugs in those layers. Nevertheless, the user never interacts directly
with the kernel and the output of the kernel is just a boolean that is never supposed to
be false when the rest of the system is bug free. The most interesting layers from the user
point of view are thus the outer layers. The implementation of a kernel for a variant of the
Calculus of (Co)Inductive Constructions (CIC) has been described in [4] down to the gory
details that make the implementation eﬃcient.
The next layer is the reﬁner and is the topic of this paper. The main algorithm imple-
mented by the reﬁner is the reﬁnement algorithm that tries to infer as much information as
it is needed to make its input meaningful. In other words it takes as input a partial term,
written in an “external syntax”, and tries to obtain a “corresponding” well typed term.

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
3
The input term can either be user provided or it can be a partial proof term generated
by some proof command (called tactic) or automation procedure. The gap between the
external and internal syntax is rather arbitrary and system dependent. Typical examples
of external syntaxes allow for:
• Untyped abstractions.
Hence the reﬁner must perform type inference to recover the
explicit types given to bound variables. The polymorphism of CIC is such that binders
are required to be typed to make type checking decidable.
• Omission of arguments, in particular omission of types used to instantiate polymorphic
functions. Hence the reﬁner must recover the missing information during type inference
to turn implicit into explicit polymorphism.
• Linear placeholders for missing terms that are not supposed to be discovered during type
inference. For instance, a placeholder may be inserted by a tactic to represent a new
proof obligation. Hence the reﬁner must turn the placeholder into a metavariable by
constraining the set of free variables that may occur in it and the expected type.
• Implicit ad-hoc sub-typing determined by user provided cast functions (called coercions)
between types or type families. Hence the reﬁner must modify the user provided term by
explicitly inserting the casts in order to let the kernel completely ignore sub-typing.
Coercions are user provided functions and are thus free to completely ignore their input.
Thus a reﬁner that handles coercions is actually able to arbitrarily patch wrong user pro-
vided terms turning them into arbitrarily diﬀerent but well typed terms. Moreover, the
insertion of a coercion between type families can also introduce new metavariables (the
family indexes) that play the role of proof obligations for pre-conditions of the coercion.
For instance, a coercion from lists to ordered lists can open a proof obligation that requires
the list to be sorted.
The reﬁner is the most critical system component from the user point of view since it
is responsible for the “intelligence” of the ITP: the more powerful the reﬁner is, the less
information is required from the user and the simpler the outer layers become. For instance,
a series of recent techniques that really improve the user experience have all been focused
in the direction of making the reﬁner component more powerful and extensible by the user.
Canonical structures [16], uniﬁcation hints [5] and type classes [30] are devices that let the
user drive some form of proof search that is seamlessly integrated in the reﬁnement process.
While the latter device is directly integrated into the reﬁnement algorithm, the ﬁrst two
are found in the uniﬁcation algorithm used by the reﬁner.
They all make it possible to achieve similar objectives, the second being more general
than the ﬁrst and the last two being incomparable from the point of view of eﬃciency
(where the second is best) and expressiveness (where the third is more ﬂexible).
The
implementation of type classes done in Coq is actually provided by an additional layer
outside the reﬁner for historical reasons.
In this paper we will describe only the reﬁnement algorithm implemented in a reﬁner
for a variant of the Calculus of (Co)Inductive Constructions. The algorithm is used in the
forthcoming major release of the Matita1 ITP (1.0.x). The algorithm calls a uniﬁcation
algorithm that will be speciﬁed in this paper and described elsewhere. We do not consider
type classes in our reﬁnement algorithm since we prefer to assume the uniﬁcation algorithm
1Matita is free software available at http://matita.cs.unibo.it

4
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
to implement uniﬁcation hints. Nevertheless, type classes can be easily added to our al-
gorithm with minor modiﬁcations and indeed the relevant bits that go into the reﬁner are
implemented in Matita.
Before addressing bi-directionality, which is a peculiarity of the algorithm that has not
been fully exploited yet2 for the CIC, we just conclude our overview of an ITP architecture
by talking about the next layer. The next layer after the reﬁner is that of tactics. This
layer is responsible for implementing commands that help the user in producing valid proof
terms by completely hiding to him the proof terms themselves. Tactics range from simple
ones that capture the introduction and elimination rules of the connectives (called primitive
tactics) to complicated proof automation procedures. The complexity of proof automation
is inherent in the problem. On the other hand, primitive tactics should be as simple as
building small partial proof terms. For instance, to reduce a proof of A ⇒B to a proof of
B given A it is suﬃcient to instantiate the metavariable associated to the sequent ⊢A ⇒B
with the term λx.? in external syntax where ? is a placeholder for a new proof obligation.
This is possible when the reﬁnement algorithm is powerful enough to reﬁne λx.? to λx : A.?1
where ?1 is a new metavariable associated to the sequent x : A ⊢B. When this is not the
case or when the reﬁner component is totally missing, the tactic is forced to ﬁrst perform
an analysis of the current goal, then explicitly create a new metavariable and its sequent,
and then emit the new proof term λx : A.?1 directly in the internal syntax.
1.2. Bi-directionality. When the external syntax of our ITP allows to omit types in
binders, the reﬁnement algorithm must perform type inference. Type inference was origi-
nally studied in the context of lambda-calculi typed a la Curry, where no type information
can be attached at all to the binders. The traditional algorithm for type inference, now
called uni-directional, performs type inference by ﬁrst traversing the term in a top-down
way. When a binder is met, a new metavariable (usually called type or uniﬁcation variable
in this context) is introduced for the type of the bound variable. Then type constraints are
solved traversing the term in a bottom-up way. When the variable or, more generally, a
term is used in a given context, its type (called inferred type) is constrained to be compati-
ble with the one expected by the context (called expected type). This triggers a uniﬁcation
problem.
Type inference, especially for the Hindley-Milner type system, gives the possibility
to write extremely concise programs by omitting all types. Moreover, it often detects a
higher degree of polymorphism than the one expected by the user. Unluckily, it has some
drawbacks. A minor one is that types are useful for program documentation and thus the
user desires to add types at least to top level functions. In practice, this is always allowed
by concrete implementations. Another problem is error reporting: a typing error always
manifests itself as a mismatch between an inferred and an expected type. Nevertheless, an
error can be propagated to a very distant point in the code before being detected and the
position where it is produced. The mismatch itself can be non informative about where
the error actually is. Finally, uniﬁcation quickly becomes undecidable when the expressive
power of the type system increases. In particular, it is undecidable for higher order logic
and for dependent types.
2The reﬁnement algorithm of Coq 8.3, the most widespread implementation of CIC, is almost mono-
directional with only the lambda-abstraction case handled in a bi-directional way. Many other interesting
cases of bi-directionality are obtained in this paper for inductive types and constructors.

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
5
To avoid or mitigate the drawbacks of type inference, bi-directional type-checking algo-
rithms have been introduced in the literature [24]. These algorithms take as input a λ-term
typed a la Curry and an expected top-level type and they proceed in a top-down manner
by propagating the expected type towards the leaves of the term.
Additional expected
types are given in local deﬁnitions, so that all functions are explicitly documented. Error
detection is improved by making it more local. The need for uniﬁcation is reduced and,
for simple type systems, uniﬁcation is totally avoided. Some terms, in particular β-redexes,
are no longer accepted, but equivalent terms are (e.g. by using a local deﬁnition for the
head). An alternative consists of accepting all terms by re-introducing a dependency over
some form of uniﬁcation.
Bi-directionality also makes sense for languages typed `a la Church, like the one we
consider here. In this case the motivations are slightly diﬀerent. First of all, typing infor-
mation is provided both in the binders and at the top-level, in the form of an expected type.
Hence information can ﬂow in both direction and, sooner or later, the need to compare the
expected and inferred types arises. In the presence of implicit polymorphism, uniﬁcation
is thus unavoidable. Because of dependent types and metavariables for proof obligations,
we need the full power of higher order uniﬁcation. Moreover, again because of uniﬁcation,
the problem remains undecidable also via using a bi-directional algorithm. Hence avoiding
uniﬁcation is no longer a motivation for bi-directionality. The remaining motivations for
designing a bi-directional reﬁnement algorithm for CIC are the following:
Improved error messages. A typing error is issued every time a mismatch is found between
the inferred and expected type. With a mono-directional algorithm, the mismatch is always
found at the end, when the typing information reaches the expected type. In a bi-directional
setting the expected type is propagated towards the leaves and the inferred type towards
the root, the mismatch is localized in smaller sub-terms and the error message is simpler.
For instance, instead of the message “the provided function has type A ⇒List B but it is
supposed to have type A ⇒List C” related to a whole function deﬁnition one could get the
simpler message “the list element has type B but it is supposed to have type C” related to
one particular position in the function body.
Improvement of the uniﬁcation algorithm. To make the system responsive, the semi-decidable
uniﬁcation algorithm is restricted to always give an answer in a ﬁnite amount of time. Hence
the algorithm could fail to ﬁnd a solution even when a solution exists. For instance, the
algorithms implemented in Coq and Matita are essentially backtracking free and they sys-
tematically favor projections over mimics: when unifying an applied metavariable ?1 a b c
with a b (for some a, b, c closed in a context Γ), the system instantiates ?1 with λx, y, z.y
rather than λx, y, z.b (where x, y, z /∈dom(Γ)). Moreover, uniﬁcation for CIC does not
admit a most general uniﬁer and it should recursively enumerate the set of solutions. How-
ever, it is usual in system implementations to let uniﬁcation return just one solution and
to avoid back-tracking in the reﬁnement algorithm3. Thus, if the solution found by uniﬁ-
cation is correct locally, but not globally, reﬁnement will fail. Thanks to bi-directionality,
uniﬁcation problems often become more instantiated and thus simpler, and they also admit
fewer solutions. In particular, in the presence of dependent types, it is easy to ﬁnd practical
3To the authors knowledge, Isabelle [18] is the only interactive prover implementing Huet’s algorithm [17]
capable of generating all second order uniﬁers

6
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
examples where the uniﬁcation algorithm ﬁnds a solution only on the problems triggered
by the bi-directional algorithm.
An interesting and practical example that motivated our investigation of bi-directionality
is the following. Consider a dependently typed data-type (Term S) that represents the
syntax of a programming language with binders. Type dependency is exploited to make
explicit the set S of variables bound in the term and every variable occurrence must
come with a proof that the variable occurs in the bound variables list:
(Var S x I)
has type (Term S) where x is a variable name, I is a proof of True and Var has type
∀S.∀a : String.x ∈S →Term S where x ∈S is a computable function that reduces to True
when x belongs to S and to False otherwise. Consider now the term (Lambda ? x (Var ? x I))
in concrete syntax that represents λx.x in our programming language. Note that no infor-
mation about the set of bound variables has been provided by the user. Thus it is possible to
simply deﬁne notational macros so that the user actually writes λx.x and this is expanded4
to Lambda ? x (Var ? x I). A uni-directional reﬁner is unlikely to accept the given term
since it should guess the right value for the second placeholder ? such that x ∈? reduces
to True and ? is the set of variables actually bound in the term. The latter information is
not local and it is still unknown in the bottom-up, uni-directional approach. On the other
hand, a bi-directional reﬁner that tries to assign type Term ∅to the term would simply
propagate ∅to the ﬁrst placeholder and then propagate ∅∪{x} to the second one, since
Lambda, which is a binder, has type ∀S.∀x.Term (S ∪{x}) →Term S. Finally, True is the
inferred type for I, whose expected type is x ∈∅∪{x}. The two types are convertible and
the input is now accepted without any guessing.
Improvement of the coercion mechanism. Coercions are triggered when uniﬁcation fails.
They are explicit cast functions, declared by the user, used to ﬁx the type of sub-terms.
Simplifying the uniﬁcation problem allows to retrieve more coercions. For instance, consider
a list [1; 2; 3] of natural numbers used as a list of integer numbers and assume the existence of
a coercion function k from natural to integers. In the mono-directional problem, the failing
uniﬁcation problem is (List N) vs (List Z). The coercion required is the one obtained lifting
k over lists. The lifting has to be performed manually by the user or by the system. In the
latter case, the system needs to recognize that lists are containers and has to have code to
lift coercions over containers, like in [10]. In the bi-directional case, however, the expected
type (List Z) would propagate to assign to each list element the expected type Z and the
coercion k would be applied to all integers in the list without need of additional machinery.
The bi-directional algorithm presented in this paper does not allow to remove the need for
the coercion over lists in all situations, but it is suﬃcient in many practical ones, like the
one just considered.
Introduction of vectors of placeholders (“. . . ”) in the external syntax. A very common use
of dependently typed functions consists in explicitly passing to them an argument which is
not the ﬁrst one and have the system infer the previous arguments using type dependencies.
For instance, if Cons : ∀A.A →List A →List A and l is a list of integers, the user can
simply write (Cons ? 2 l) and have the system infer that ? must be instantiated with the
type of 2, which is N.
4User provided notational macros are used to extend the external syntax of an ITP and they are expanded
before reﬁnement, yielding a term in external syntax to be reﬁned.

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
7
This scenario is so common that many ITPs allow to mark some function arguments
as implicit arguments and let the user systematically avoid passing them. This requires
additional machinery implemented in the ITP and it has the unfortunate drawback that
sometimes the user needs to explicitly pass the implicit arguments anyway, in particular in
case of partial function applications. This special situation requires further ad-hoc syntax to
turn the implicit argument into an explicit one. For instance, if we declare the ﬁrst argument
of Cons implicit, then the user can simply write (Cons 2 l) for the term presented above,

application to some higher order function expecting an argument of type N →List N →
List N.
An alternative to implicit arguments is to let the user explicitly insert the correct
number of placeholders “?” to be inferred by the system. Series of placeholders are neither
aesthetic nor robust to changes in the type of the function.
A similar case occurs during the implementation of tactics. Given a lemma L : H1 →
. . . →Hn →C, to apply it the tactic opens n new proof obligations by reﬁning the term
(L ? . . . ?) where the number of inserted placeholders must be exactly n.
In this paper we propose a new construct to be added to the external syntax of ITPs:
a vector of placeholders to be denoted by
_
? and to be used in argument position only. In
the actual external syntax of Matita we use the evocative symbol “. . . ” in place of
_
? . The
semantics associated to
_
? is lazy: an
_
? will be expanded to the sequence of placeholders of
minimal length that makes the application reﬁneable, so that its inferred type matches its
expected type. In a uni-directional setting no expected type is known in advance and the
implementation of the lazy semantics would require computationally expensive non-local
backtracking, which is not necessary in the bi-directional case.
Thanks to vectors of placeholders the analysis phase of many primitive tactics imple-
mentation that was aimed at producing terms with the correct number of placeholders can
now be totally omitted.
Moreover, according to our experience, vectors of placeholders
enable to avoid the implementation of implicit arguments: it is suﬃcient for the user to
insert manually or by means of a notation a
_
? before the arguments explicitly passed, with
the beneﬁt that the
_
? automatically adapts to the case of partial function application. For
example, using the inﬁx notation :: for (Cons
_
? ), the user can both write 2 :: l, which
is expanded to (Cons
_
?
2 l) and reﬁned to (Cons N 2 l), and pass :: to an higher order
function expecting an argument of type N →List N →List N. In the latter case, :: is
expanded to (Cons
_
? ) that is reﬁned to (Cons N) because of the expected type. If :: is
passed instead to a function expecting an argument of type ∀A.A →List A →List A, then
(Cons
_
? ) will be expanded simply to Cons whose inferred type is already the expected one.
The rest of the paper explains the bi-directional reﬁnement algorithm implemented in
Matita [6]. The algorithm is presented in a declarative programming style by means of
deduction rules. Many of the rules are syntax directed and thus mutually exclusive. The
implementation given for Matita in the functional OCaml language takes advantage of the
latter observation to speed up the algorithm. We will clarify in the text what rules are
mutually exclusive and what rules are to be tried in sequence in case of failure.

8
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
The reﬁnement algorithm is presented progressively and in a modular way. In Section 3
we introduce the mono-directional type inference algorithm for CIC implemented following
the kernel type checker code (that coincides with type inference if the term is ground) of
Matita. The presentation is already adapted to be extended in Section 4 to bi-directional
reﬁnement. In these two sections the external and internal syntaxes coincides. In Section 5
we augment the external syntax with placeholders and vectors of placeholders. Finally, in
Section 6 we add support for coercions. In all sections we will prove the correctness of the
reﬁnement algorithms by showing that a term in external syntax accepted by the reﬁner
is turned into a new term that is accepted by the kernel and that has the expected type.
Moreover, a precise correspondence is established between the input and output term to
grant that the reﬁned term corresponds to the input one.
For the sake of the reader, Appendix 8 is taken from [4] with minor modiﬁcations and
it shows the type checking algorithm implemented by the kernel. The syntax of the calculus
and some preliminary notions are also introduced in Section 2 before starting the description
of the reﬁnement algorithm.
2. Preliminaries
2.1. Syntax. We begin introducing the syntax for CIC terms and objects in Table 1 and
some naming conventions.
To denote constants we shall use c, c1, c2 . . . ; the special case of (co)recursively deﬁned
constants will be also denoted using f, f1, f2 . . . ; we reserve x, y, x1, x2 . . . for variables;
t, u, v, t′, t′′, t1, t2 . . . for terms; T, U, V, E, L, R, T ′, T ′′, T1, T2 . . . for types and we use s, s′, s1
. . . for sorts.
We denote by Γ a context made of variables declarations (x : T) or typed deﬁnitions
(x := t : T). We denote the capture avoiding substitution of a variable x for a term t by
[x/t]. The notation [x1/t1; . . . ; xn/tn] is for simultaneous parallel substitution.
To refer to (possibly empty) sequences of entities of the same nature, we use an arrow
notation (e.g. −→t ). For the sake of conciseness, it is sometimes convenient to make the
length of a sequence explicit, while still referring to it with a single name: we write −→
tn to
mean that −→
tn is a sequence of exactly n elements and, in particular, that it is a shorthand
for t1 t2 . . . tn; the index n must be a natural number (therefore the notation −−→
tn+1 refers to a
non-empty sequence). The arrow notation is extended to telescopes as in −−−→
(x : t) or −−−−−→
(xn : tn)
and used in binders, (co)recursive deﬁnitions and pattern matching branches.
As usual, Πx : T1.T2 is abbreviated to T1 →T2 when x is not a free variable in T2.
Applications are n-ary, consisting of a term applied to a non-empty sequence of terms.
Inductive types Il are annotated with the number l of arguments that are homogeneous
in the types of all constructors. For example consider the inductive type of vectors Vect
of arity ΠA : Type.N →Type. It takes two arguments, a type and a natural number
representing the length of the vector. In the types of the two constructors, Vnil : Vect A 0
and Vcons : Πm, Vect A m →A →Vect A (m + 1), every occurrence of Vect is applied
to the same argument A, that is also implicitly abstracted in the types of the constructors.
Thus Vect has one homogeneous argument, and will be represented by the object
ΠA : Type. inductive Vect : N →Type :=
Vnil : Vect A 0 | Vcons : Πm, A →Vect A m →Vect A (m + 1)

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
9
t
::=
x
identiﬁers
|
c
constants
|
Il
inductive types
|
k
inductive constructors
|
Prop | Typeu
sorts
|
t −−→
tn+1
n-ary application
|
λx : t.t
λ-abstraction
|
let (x : t) := t in t
local deﬁnitions
|
Πx : t.t
dependent product
|
match t in Il return t [k1
−−−→
(x : t) ⇒t | . . . | kn
−−−→
(x : t) ⇒t]
case analysis
|
?j[t ; . . . ; t]
metavariable occurrence
o
::=
let rec f1
−−−→
(x : t) : t := t and . . . and fn
−−−→
(x : t) : t := t
recursive deﬁnitions
|
let corec f1
−−−→
(x : t) : t := t and . . . and fn
−−−→
(x : t) : t := t
co-recursive deﬁnitions
|
deﬁnition c : t := t
deﬁnitions
|
axiom c : t
axioms
|
Π−−−→
xl : tl. inductive
I1
l
: A := k1,1 : t | . . . | k1,m1 : t
with . . .
with In
l
: A := kn,1 : t | . . . | kn,mn : t
inductives
Table 1: CIC terms and objects syntax
and referred to with Vect1. This is relevant for the pattern matching construction, since the
homogeneous arguments are not bound in the patterns because they are inferred from the
type of the matched term. For example, to pattern match over a vector v of type (Vect N 3)
the user writes
match v in Vect1 return T [Vnil ⇒t1 | Vcons (m : N) (x : N) (v′ : Vect N m) ⇒t2]
The inductive type Il in the pattern matching constructor is (almost) redundant, since
distinct inductive types have distinct constructors; it is given for the sake of readability and
to distinguish the inductive types with no constructors. In a concrete implementation it
also allows to totally drop the names of the constructors by ﬁxing an order over them: the
i-th pattern will be performed on the i-th constructor of the Il inductive type.
Since inductive types may have non homogeneous arguments, not every branch is re-
quired to have exactly the same type. The term introduced with the return keyword is a
function that computes the type expected by a particular branch and also the type of the
entire pattern matching. Variables −−−→
(x : t) are abstracted in the right hand side terms of ⇒.
The deﬁnitions of constants c (including (co)recursive constants f), inductive types Il
and constructors k are collected in the syntactic category of CIC objects o.
Metavariable occurrences, represented with ?j[t1 ; . . . ; tn], are missing typed terms
equipped with an explicit local substitution. The index j enables metavariables to occur
non-linearly in the term. To give an intuition of the role played by the local substitution,
the reader can think of ?j[t1 ; . . . ; tn] as a call to the, still unknown, function ?j with
actual arguments t1 . . . tn. The terms t1 . . . tn will be substituted for the formal arguments
of the ?j function inside its body only when it will be known.

10
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
We omit to write the local substitution when it is the identity substitution that sends
all variables in the current context with themselves.
Thus ?j will be a shorthand for
?j[x1 ; . . . ; xn] when x1, . . . , xn are the variables bound in the right order in the con-
text of the metavariable occurrence.
The CIC calculus extended with metavariables has been studied in [21] and the ﬂavor
of metavariables implemented in Matita is described in [26].
2.2. Typing rules. The kernel of Matita is able to handle the whole syntax presented
in the previous section, metavariables included. While we report in the Appendix 8 the
full set of typing rules implemented by the kernel, here we summarise only the ones that
will be reused by the reﬁnement algorithm. We will give a less formal but more intuitive
presentation of these rules, deﬁning them with a more concise syntax. Moreover, we will
put our deﬁnition in linear order, while most of them are actually mutually recursive.
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Proof problem (Σ)). A proof problem Σ is a ﬁnite list of typing declarations
of the form Γ?j ⊢?j : T?j.
A proof problem, as well as a CIC term, can refer to constants, that usually live in
an environment that decorates every typing rule (as in the Appendix 8). In the following
presentation we consider a global well formed environment Env, basically a collections of
CIC objects deﬁning all constants and inductive types and associating them to their re-
spective types. No reﬁnement rule will modify this environment that plays no role in this
presentation. In fact it is the task of the kernel to enable well typed deﬁnitions, inductive
types and (co-)recursive functions to enter the environment.
We thus omit the environment Env from the input of every judgment. We will fetch
from it the type T of a constant, inductive type or constructor r writing (r : T) ∈Env.
We regard CIC as a Pure Type System [7], and we denote by PTS the set of axioms. We
denote by s ∈PTS any sort of the PTS, with (s1 : s2) ∈PTS the fact that s2 types s1, and
with (s1, s2, s3) ∈PTS the fact that a product over s1 to s2 has sort s3. CIC is a full but
not functional PTS: all products are well formed but in (s1, s2, s3) ∈PTS it may be s2 ̸= s3.
This is because the calculus is parameterized over a predicative hierarchy Typeu for u in a
given set of universe indexes. In a predicative setting, given s1 = Typeu1 and s2 = Typeu2,
s3 is deﬁned as Typemax {u1,u2} according to some bounded partial order on the universe
indexes. The details for the actual PTS used in Matita are given in [4]. We will often write
simply Type when we are not interested in the universe index (e.g. in examples). We also
write Type⊤for the biggest sort in the hierarchy, if any, or a variable universe to be later
ﬁxed to be big enough to satisfy all the required constraints.
We also write (s1, s2) ∈elim(PTS) to check if an element of an inductive type of sort
s1 can be eliminated to inhabit a type whose sort is s2. This is relevant for CIC since the
sort of propositions, Prop, is non informative and cannot be eliminated to inhabit a data
type of sort Typeu for any u (but for few exceptions described in [4] Section 6).
Proof problems do not only declare missing proofs (i.e. not all T?j have sort Prop) but
also missing terms and, of particular interest for this paper, missing types.
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Metavariable substitution environment (Φ)). A metavariable substitution
environment Φ (called simply substitution when not ambiguous) is a list of judgments of
the form
Γ?j ⊢?j := t?j : T?j

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
11
stating that the term t?j of type T?j in Γ?j has been assigned to ?j.
We now anticipate the typing judgment of the kernel.
A formal deﬁnition of well
formedness for Σ and Φ will follow.
Deﬁnition 2.3 (Typing judgment). Given a term t, a proof problem Σ and a substitution
Φ, all assumed to be well formed, we write
Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t : T
to state that t is well typed of type T.
When Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t : T the type T is well typed and its type is either a metavariable or
a sort s ∈PTS.
The typing judgment implemented in our kernel is an extension of the regular typing
judgment for CIC [35, 23, 13]. It is described in [4] and reported in the Appendix 8. Here
we recall the main diﬀerences:
• Substitution of a regular variable x for a term t is extended with the following rule for
metavariables:
?j[t1 ; . . . ; tn][x/t] =?j[t1[x/t] ; . . . ; tn[x/t]]
• The conversion relation (denoted by ↓) is enlarged allowing reduction to be performed
inside explicit substitution for metavariables:
Γ ⊢ti ↓t′
i
i ∈{1 . . . n}
Γ ⊢?j[t1 ; . . . ; tn] ↓?j[t′
1 ; . . . ; t′n]
• The following typing rules for metavariables are added:
y1 : T1 ; . . . ; yn : Tn ⊢?j : T?j ∈Σ
Γ ⊢ti : Ti[y1/t1 ; . . . ; yi−1/ti−1]
i ∈{1 . . . n}
Γ ⊢WF(?j[t1 ; . . . ; tn])
(y1 : T1 ; . . . ; yn : Tn ⊢?j : T?j) ∈Σ
Γ ⊢WF(?j[t1 ; . . . ; tn])
Γ ⊢?j[t1 ; . . . ; tn] : T?j[y1/t1 ; . . . ; yn/tn]
Moreover, in many situations a metavariable occurrence is also accepted as a valid sort,
marking it so that it cannot be instantiated with anything diﬀerent from a sort.
This
additional labelling will be omitted, being marginal for the reﬁnement algorithm.
The technical judgment Γ ⊢WF(?j[t1 ; . . . ; tn]) states that a metavariable occurrence
?j[t1 ; . . . ; tn] is well formed in Γ.
In all the previous rules we assumed access to a global well formed proof problem Σ
and substitution Φ. Both Σ and Φ are never modiﬁed by the judgments implemented in
the kernel.
We now present the well formedness conditions, corresponding to the judgments ⊢WF
presented in the Appendix 8.
Deﬁnition 2.4 (Metavariables of term/context (M)). Given a term t, M(t) is the set of
metavariables occurring in t. Given a context Γ, M(Γ) is the set of metavariables occurring
in Γ.
The function M is at the base of the order relation deﬁned between metavariables.
Deﬁnition 2.5 (Metavariables order relation (≪Σ )). Let Σ be a proof problem. Let <Σ
be the relation deﬁned as: ?n1 <Σ ?n2 iﬀ?n1 ∈M(Γ?n2) ∪M(T?n2). Let ≪Σ
be the
transitive closure of <Σ .

12
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
Deﬁnition 2.6 (Valid proof problem). A proof problem Σ is a valid proof problem if and
only if ≪Σ
is a strict partial order (or, equivalently, if and only if ≪Σ
is an irreﬂexive
relation).
The intuition behind ≪Σ is that the smallest ?j (or one of them since there may be more
than one) does not depend on any other metavariable (e.g. M(Γ?j) = ∅and M(T?j) = ∅
where Γ?j ⊢?j : T?j ∈Σ). Thus instantiating every minimal ?j with a metavariable free term
will give a new Σ in which there is at least one ?j not depending on any other metavariable
(or Σ is empty). This deﬁnition is the key to avoid circularity in the following deﬁnitions.
In the rules given in Appendix 8 the partial order is left implicit by presenting Σ as
an ordered list. However, as proved by Strecker in his Ph.D. thesis [32], the order is not
preserved by uniﬁcation and thus in any realistic implementation Σ is to be implemented
as a set and the fact that ≪Σ remains a partial order must be preserved as an invariant.
Deﬁnition 2.7 (Well formed context (WF(Γ))). Given a well formed proof problem Σ, a
context Γ = y1 : T1, . . . , yn : Tn is well formed (denoted by WF(Γ)) if M(Γ) ⊆Σ and for
every i
y1 : T1, . . . yi−1 : Ti−1 ⊢yi : Ti
Deﬁnition 2.8 (Well formed proof problem (WF(Σ))). A valid proof problem Σ is a well-
formed proof problem (denoted by WF(Σ)) if an only if for all (Γ?j ⊢?j : T?j) ∈Σ we have
Σ, Γ?j ⊢T?j : s and s ∈PTS.
Deﬁnition 2.9 (Well formed substitution (WF(Φ))). Given a well formed proof problem
Σ, a substitution Φ is well formed (denoted by WF(Φ)) if for every (Γ?j ⊢?j := t?j : T?j) ∈Φ
we have Σ, ∅, Γ?j ⊢t?j : T?j.
The well formedness deﬁnitions given so far are actually implemented by the kernel in
a more precise but less intuitive way. We thus refer to the kernel judgments in the following
deﬁnition, that will be used in the speciﬁcation of all reﬁnement rules.
Deﬁnition 2.10 (Well formed status (WF(Σ, Φ, Γ))). Given a proof problem Σ, a sub-
stitution Φ and a context Γ, the triple Σ, Φ, Γ is well formed (denoted by WF(Σ, Φ, Γ))
when WF(Σ) and WF(Φ) and WF(Γ).
We shall sometimes omit Γ, considering it equal to a default, well formed context, like
the empty one. The recursive operation of applying a substitution Φ to a term t is denoted
by Φ(t) and acts as the identity for any term but metavariables contained in Φ, on which
it behaves as follows:
Φ(?j[t1 ; . . . ; tn]) = t?j[y1/t1 ; . . . ; yn/tn]
when
(y1 : T1; . . . ; yn : Tn ⊢?j := t?j : T?j) ∈Φ
Note that, thanks to the extensions to the type checking rules made in Deﬁnition 2.3,
substitution application is type preserving.
Substitutions do apply also to well formed
proof problems in the following way:
Φ(Γ?j ⊢?j : T?j) = Φ(Γ?j) ⊢?j : Φ(T?j)
(for each ?j ∈Σ)
The substitution application operation is seldom used explicitly, since all judgments
take as input and give back a substitution. Nevertheless it will be used in the examples.
Deﬁnition 2.11 (Weak-head normalization (▷whd)). Given a context Γ, substitution Φ and
proof problem Σ, all assumed to be well formed, it computes the weak head normal form

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
13
of a well typed term t according to the reduction rules of CIC. It is denoted by:
Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t ▷whd t′
Note that ?j is in weak head normal form iﬀ?j ̸∈Φ.
By abuse of notation we will write Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t1 ▷whd Πx1 : T1 . . . Πxn : Tn.tn+1 to
mean that for all i ∈{1 . . . n} Σ, Φ, Γ; x1 : T1; . . . ; xi−1 : Ti−1 ⊢ti ▷whd Πxi : Ti.ti+1 and
Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢tn+1 ▷whd tn+1. Such repeated use of weak head computation to produce spines
of dependent products occur frequently in the kernel and in the reﬁnement rules, especially
when dealing with inductive types.
Deﬁnition 2.12 (Conversion (↓)). Given a proof problem Σ, substitution Φ and context
Γ, all assumed to be well formed, and two terms t1 and t2, it veriﬁes if t1 and t2 have a
common normal form according to the rules of CIC given in Appendix 8. It is denoted by:
Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t1 ↓t2
3. Mono-directional refinement
We now present the mono-directional reﬁnement algorithm for CIC implemented in the old
versions of Matita (0.5.x) and directly inspired by the rules for type checking implemented
in the kernel. In this section we assume the external syntax to coincide with the syntax of
terms. Hence the algorithm actually performs just type inference. Nevertheless, we already
organize the judgments in such a way that the latter extension to bi-directionality will be
achieved just by adding new typing rules.
3.1. Speciﬁcation. To specify what is a reﬁnement algorithm we must ﬁrst introduce the
notion of proof problem reﬁnement.
Intuitively, a pair (proof problem, substitution) is
reﬁned by another pair when the second is obtained by reducing some proof obligations to
new ones. It thus represents an advancement in the proof discovery process.
Deﬁnition 3.1 (Proof problem reﬁnement (≤)). We say that Σ′, Φ′ reﬁnes Σ, Φ (denoted
by Σ′, Φ′ ≤Σ, Φ) when Φ ⊂Φ′ and for every (Γ?j ⊢?j : T?j) ∈Σ either (Γ′
?j ⊢?j : T ′
?j) ∈Σ′
or (Γ′
?j ⊢?j := t?j : T ′
?j) ∈Φ′ where Γ′
?j = Φ′(Γ?j) and T ′
?j = Φ′(T?j).
Speciﬁcation 3.2 (Reﬁner in type inference mode (R⇑)). A reﬁner algorithm R in type
inference mode ⇑takes as input a proof problem, substitution and context, all assumed
to be well formed, and a term t. It fails or gives in output a new proof problem, a new
substitution, a term t′ and a type T ′. It is denoted by:
(Σ, Φ) Γ ⊢t R⇑
⇝t′ : T ′ (Σ′, Φ′)
Precondition:
WF(Σ, Φ, Γ)
Postcondition (parametric in ≼):
WF(Σ′, Φ′)
∧
Σ′, Φ′ ≤Σ, Φ
∧
Σ′, Φ′, Γ ⊢t′ : T ′
∧
t′ ≼t
The speciﬁcation is parametric in the ≼relation that establishes a correspondence
between the term t to be reﬁned and the reﬁner output t′. In order to prove correctness,
we are only interested in admissible ≼relations deﬁned as follows.

14
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
Deﬁnition 3.3 (Admissible relations (≼)). A partial order relation ≼is admissible when
for every term t1 in external syntax and t2 and T in internal syntax and for every variable
x occurring free only linearly in T we have that t1 ≼t2 implies T[x/t1] ≼T[x/t2].
Admissibility for equivalence relations correspond to asking the equivalence relation to
be a congruence.
When the external syntax corresponds to the term syntax and coercions are not con-
sidered, we can provide an implementation that satisﬁes the speciﬁcation by picking the
identity for the ≼relation. Combined with Σ′, Φ′ ≤Σ, Φ, the two postconditions imply
that Φ(t′) must be obtained from t simply by instantiating some metavariables. In Sec-
tions 5 and 6, we shall use weaker deﬁnitions of ≼than the identity, allowing replacement
of (vectors of) placeholders with (vectors of) terms and the insertion of coercions as results
of the reﬁnement process. All the ≼relations considered in the paper will be large partial
orders over terms of the external syntax (that always include the internal syntax).
We will now proceed in presenting an implementation of a reﬁnement algorithm in type
inference mode
R⇑
⇝. The implementation is directly inspired by the type checking rules
used in the kernel. However, since reﬁnement deals with terms containing ﬂexible parts,
conversion tests need to be replaced with uniﬁcation tests. In a higher order and dependently
typed calculus like CIC, uniﬁcation is in the general case undecidable. What is usually
implemented in interactive theorem provers is an essentially ﬁst order uniﬁcation algorithm,
handling only some simple higher order cases. The uniﬁcation algorithm implemented in
Matita goes beyond the scope of this paper, the interested reader can ﬁnd more details
in [26, 5]. Here we just specify the expected behavior of the uniﬁcation algorithm.
Speciﬁcation 3.4 (Uniﬁcation (
?≡−U)). An uniﬁcation algorithm takes as input a proof
problem, a substitution and a context, all assumed to be well formed, and two well typed
terms t1 and t2. It fails or gives in output a new proof problem and substitution. It is
denoted using the following notation where • can either be = or be omitted. In the former
case universe cumulativity (a form of sub-typing) is not taken in account by uniﬁcation.
(Σ, Φ) Γ ⊢t1
?≡t2
U•
⇝(Σ′, Φ′)
Precondition:
WF(Σ, Φ, Γ)
∧
Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t1 : T1
∧
Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t2 : T2
Postcondition:
WF(Σ′, Φ′)
∧
Σ′, Φ′ ≤Σ, Φ
∧
Σ′, Φ′, Γ ⊢t′
1 ↓• t′
2
3.2. Implementation.
3.2.1. Additional judgments. For the sake of clarity we prefer to keep the same structure
for the mono and bi-directional reﬁners. We thus give the deﬁnition of some functions that
are trivial in the mono-directional case, but will be replaced by more complex ones in the
following sections.
Even if we presented the syntax of CIC using the same category terms, types and sorts,
some primitive constructors (like the λ and Π abstractions) expect some arguments to be
types or sorts, and not terms. A type level enforcing algorithm forces a term in external
syntax to be reﬁned to a valid type.

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
15
Speciﬁcation 3.5 (Type level enforcing (F)). A type level enforcing algorithm takes as
input a proof problem Σ, a substitution Φ and a context Γ, all assumed to be well formed,
and a term T. It fails or it returns a new term T ′, a sort s, a new substitution Φ′ and proof
problem Σ′. It is denoted by:
(Σ, Φ) Γ ⊢T
F⇝T ′ : s (Σ′, Φ′)
Precondition:
WF(Σ, Φ, Γ)
Postcondition (parametric in ≼):
WF(Σ′, Φ′)
∧
Σ′, Φ′ ≤Σ, Φ
∧
Σ′, Φ′, Γ ⊢T ′ : s
∧
s ∈PTS
∧
T ′ ≼T
Note that one may want to accept a metavariable as the sort s, eventually labelling it in
such a way that the uniﬁcation algorithm will refuse to instantiate it with a diﬀerent term.
The choice must be consistent with the one taken in the implementation of the kernel.
The task of checking if a term has the right type is called reﬁnement in type forcing mode
and it will be denoted by R⇓
⇝. In the mono-directional case, R⇓
⇝will be simply implemented
calling the
C⇝algorithm that will handle coercions in Section 6 but which, at the moment,
only veriﬁes that no coercion is needed by calling the uniﬁcation procedure.
Speciﬁcation 3.6 (Explicit cast (C)). A cast algorithm takes as input a proof problem
Σ, a substitution Φ and a context Γ, all assumed to be well formed, and a term t with its
inferred type T and expected type T ′. It fails or it returns a new term t′ of type T ′, a new
proof problem Σ′ and substitution Φ′. It is denoted by:
(Σ, Φ) Γ ⊢t : T
?≡T ′
C⇝t′ (Σ′, Φ′)
Precondition:
WF(Σ, Φ, Γ)
∧
Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t : T
∧
Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T ′ : s
Postcondition (parametric in ≼):
WF(Σ′, Φ′)
∧
Σ′, Φ′ ≤Σ, Φ
∧
Σ′, Φ′, Γ ⊢t′ : T ′
∧
t′ ≼t
Speciﬁcation 3.7 (Reﬁner in type forcing mode (R⇓)). A reﬁner algorithm R in type
forcing mode ⇓takes as input a proof problem Σ, a substitution Φ and a context Γ, all as-
sumed to be well formed, and a term t together with its expected well formed type T. It fails
or returns a term t′ of type T, a new proof problem Σ′ and substitution Φ′. It is denoted by:
(Σ, Φ) Γ ⊢t : T R⇓
⇝t′ (Σ′, Φ′)
Precondition:
WF(Σ, Φ, Γ)
∧
Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T : s
Postcondition (parametric in ≼):
WF(Σ′, Φ′)
∧
Σ′, Φ′ ≤Σ, Φ
∧
Σ′, Φ′, Γ ⊢t′ : T
∧
t′ ≼t

16
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
3.2.2. Notational conventions. The arguments Σ and Φ will be taken as input and returned
as output in all rules that deﬁne the reﬁner algorithm. To increase legibility we adopt the
following notation, letting Σ and Φ be implicit. Each rule of the form
(rule)
Γ ⊢t ⇝t′
Γ ⊢t′ ⇝t′′
Γ ⊢t ⇝t′′
has to be interpreted as:
(rule)
(Σ, Φ) Γ ⊢t ⇝t′ (Σ′, Φ′)
(Σ′, Φ′) Γ ⊢t′ ⇝t′′ (Σ′′, Φ′′)
(Σ, Φ) Γ ⊢t ⇝t′′ (Σ′′, Φ′′)
Moreover we will apply this convention also to rules not returning Σ or Φ as if they were
returning the Σ or Φ taken as input.
Note that the Σ′ and Φ′ returned by all rules considered in this paper are well formed
and are also a proof problem reﬁnement of the Σ and Φ provided as input. Being a proof
problem reﬁnement is clearly a transitive relation. Thus we have for free that all the omitted
pairs (proof problem, substitution) are reﬁnements of the initial ones.
3.2.3. Role of the relations and their interaction. In this paragraph we shortly present the
role played by the relations R⇑
⇝, R⇓
⇝,
C⇝and
F⇝introduced so far and the auxiliary ones
ET
⇝
and
Et
⇝
that will be speciﬁed when needed.
The relation R⇑
⇝links a term with its inferred type, while R⇓
⇝links a term with the
type expected by its context.
R⇓
⇝will thus exploit the extra piece of information not only
checking that the inferred type uniﬁes with the expected one, but also propagating this
information to its recursive calls on subterms (when possible).
R⇑
⇝and R⇓
⇝will be deﬁned
in a mutually recursive way.
The relation
F⇝
links a term with its reﬁnement asserting that the reﬁnement is a
type. This is relevant when typing binders like (λx : t.t′), where t is required to be a type.
In its simplest formulation the relation is a simple assertion, linking a type with itself. In
Section 6 the reﬁnement relation ≼
will admit to link a term t that is not a type with
a function applied to t that turns its input into a type. For example t may be a record
containing a type and
F⇝may link it with (πn t), where πn is the projection extracting
the type from the record.
F⇝is recursively deﬁned in terms of R⇑
⇝
The relation
C⇝links a term t, its inferred type T1 and the type expected by its context
T2 with a reﬁnement of the term t′ asserting that the reﬁned term has type T2. In its simple
formulation the relation is a simple assertion that T1 and T2 are the same and thus links
t with itself. In Section 6 the reﬁnement relation ≼
will admit to explicitly cast t. For
example a natural number n of type N may be casted into the rationals Q reﬁning it to
(λx : N.x/1) n. The
C⇝relation is non recursive.

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
17
The relations
ET
⇝
and
Et
⇝
are auxiliary relations only used to ease the presentation
of the R⇑
⇝and R⇓
⇝relations in the case of applications. Both auxiliary relations are thus
recursively deﬁned with R⇑
⇝and R⇓
⇝.
3.2.4. Rules for terms. We now give an implementation for the reﬁner in both modes and
for the auxiliary judgments. The implementation is parametric on the uniﬁcation algorithm,
that is not described in this paper.
( C⇝−ok)
Γ ⊢T1
?≡T2
U⇝
Γ ⊢t : T1
?≡T2
C⇝t
(R⇓
⇝−default)
Γ ⊢t R⇑
⇝t′ : T ′
Γ ⊢t′ : T ′ ?≡T
C⇝t′′
Γ ⊢t : T R⇓
⇝t′′
( F⇝−ok)
Γ ⊢T R⇑
⇝T ′ : s
s1 ∈PTS
Γ ⊢T ′ : s
?≡s1
C⇝T ′′
Γ ⊢T
F⇝T ′′ : s
Note that s1 is arbitrary, and the actual code prefers the predicative sorts Typeu over
Prop. This is the only rule deﬁned in this section to be non syntax oriented: in case of
an incorrect choice of s1, backtracking is required. The actual algorithm implemented in
Matita performs the choice of s1 lazily to remain backtracking free5.
( R⇑
⇝−variable)
(x : T) ∈Γ
or
(x := t : T) ∈Γ
Γ ⊢x R⇑
⇝x : T
( R⇑
⇝−constant)
(r : T) ∈Env
r ∈{k, I, c}
Γ ⊢r R⇑
⇝r : T
( R⇑
⇝−sort)
(s1 : s2) ∈PTS
Γ ⊢s1
R⇑
⇝s1 : s2
( R⇑
⇝−meta)
(Γ?j ⊢?j : T?j) ∈Σ
or
(Γ?j ⊢?j := t?j : T?j) ∈Φ
Γ?j = −−−−→
xn : Tn
Γ ⊢ti : Ti[−−−−−−→
xi−1/t′
i−1] R⇓
⇝t′
i
i ∈{1 . . . n}
Γ ⊢?j[−→
tn] R⇑
⇝?j[−→
t′
n] : T?j[−−−→
xn/t′
n]
Note that the operation of ﬁring a β-redex must commute with the operation of applying
a substitution Φ. Consider for example the term v = (λx.?j[x]) u and the substitution
Φ = {x : T ⊢?j := t(x) : T(x)}. If one applies the substitution ﬁrst, and then reduces
the redex obtains t(u), whose type is T(u). If one ﬁres the redex ﬁst, the fact that x is
substituted by u in ?j is recorded in the local substitution attached to the metavariable
5Laziness will be no longer suﬃcient to avoid backtracking when we will add additional rules to handle
coercions in Section 6.

18
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
instance. Indeed ∅, ∅, ∅⊢v ▷whd?j[u] and Φ(?j[u]) = t(u) : T(u). Therefore ?j[u] is given
the type T(u) by the rule ( R⇑
⇝−meta).
( R⇑
⇝−letin)
Γ ⊢T
F⇝T ′ : s
Γ ⊢t : T ′ R⇓
⇝t′
Γ; x := t′ : T ′ ⊢u R⇑
⇝u′ : T2
Γ ⊢let (x : T) := t in u R⇑
⇝let (x : T ′) := t′ in u′ : T2[x/t′
1]
( R⇑
⇝−lambda)
Γ ⊢T1
F⇝T ′
1 : s1
Γ; x : T ′
1 ⊢t R⇑
⇝t′ : T
Γ ⊢λx : T1.t R⇑
⇝λx : T ′
1.t′ : Πx : T ′
1.T
( R⇑
⇝−product)
Γ ⊢T1
F⇝T ′
1 : s1
Γ; x : T ′
1 ⊢T2
F⇝T ′
2 : s2
(s1, s2, s3) ∈PTS
Γ ⊢Πx : T1.T2
R⇑
⇝Πx : T ′
1.T ′
2 : s3
We now state the correctness theorem holding for all the rules presented so far and for the
few ones that will follow. The proof is partitioned in the following way: here we state the
theorem, introduce the proof method we adopted and prove the theorem for the simple rules
presented so far. Then we will introduce more complex rules, like the rule for application,
and we will prove for each of them the correctness theorem.
Theorem 3.8 (Correctness). The
C⇝,
F⇝, R⇑
⇝, R⇓
⇝,
ET
⇝, and
Et
⇝algorithms deﬁned by
the set of rules presented in this section obey their speciﬁcation for all admissible ≼relations
that include the identity for terms in the internal syntax. In particular, the algorithms are
correct when the identity relation is picked for ≼.
Proof. We assume the uniﬁcation algorithm to be correct w.r.t. its own speciﬁcation. For
every judgment, the proof is by induction on the proof tree. For each rule, we assume that
the precondition of the judgment holds for the rule conclusion and that the appropriate
postcondition holds by induction hypothesis for every hypothesis. We need to prove that
the precondition of every hypothesis holds and that the postcondition of the conclusion
holds too. The proofs are mostly trivial for the rules presented so far. In particular, the
proof for each rule R⇑
⇝−name or R⇓
⇝−name follows from the corresponding rule K−name
reported in the Appendix 8.
We will shortly introduce the rules dealing with applicatios together with their correctness
proofs since applications are handled slightly diﬀerently from the way they are processed
by the kernel.

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
19
The next rule deals with applications which are n-ary in our implementation of CIC. In a
calculus without dependent types, n-ary applications could be handled simply by putting the
head function type in the form of a spine of n products and then by verifying that the type
of each argument matches the corresponding expected type. In the presence of dependent
types, however, it is possible to write functions whose arity depends on the arguments
passed to the function. For instance, a function f could be given type ∀n : N.(repeat N n)
where (repeat N n) reduces to N →. . . →N where the number of products is exactly n. For
this reason, the only possibility is to process applications one argument at a time, checking
at every step if the function still accepts more arguments.
We implement this with an
additional judgment
Γ ⊢t −−−−−−−−−→
(xi := vi : Ti) : T |▲−→
un
ET
⇝v : V
called “eat products” to be speciﬁed and implemented immediately after the ( R⇑
⇝−appl)
rule.
( R⇑
⇝−appl)
Γ ⊢t R⇑
⇝t′ : T
Γ ⊢t′ : T |▲−−→
un+1
ET
⇝v : V
Γ ⊢t −−→
un+1
R⇑
⇝v : V
Speciﬁcation 3.9 (Eat products (ET )). The
ET
⇝algorithm reﬁnes an n-ary application by
consuming an argument at a time. It takes as input a proof problem Σ, a substitution Φ and
a context Γ, all assumed to be well formed, the part of the already processed application
t (x1 := v1 : T1) . . . (xr := vr : Tr) together with its type T, and the list of arguments yet
to be checked. The notation (xi := vi : Ti) means that the i-th already processed argument
has type Ti and is consumed by a product that binds the variable xi. The algorithm fails or
returns the reﬁned application v together with its type V, a new substitution Φ′ and proof
problem Σ′. It is denoted by:
(Σ, Φ) Γ ⊢t −−−−−−−−−−→
(xr := vr : Tr) : T |▲−→
uk
ET
⇝v : V (Σ′, Φ′)
Precondition:
WF(Σ, Φ, Γ)
∧
Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢vi : Ti
i ∈{1 . . . r}
∧
Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t v1 . . . vr : T
Postcondition (parametric in ≼):
WF(Σ′, Φ′)
∧
Σ′, Φ′ ≤Σ, Φ
∧
Σ′, Φ′, Γ ⊢v : V
∧
v ≼t v1 . . . vr u1 . . . uk
The applicative case is one of the two most complicated rules. Moreover, the reﬁnement
algorithm for the application does not mimic the one used in the kernel. Therefore we show
the correctness of the ( R⇑
⇝−appl) rule and of the implementation of the
ET
⇝algorithm.
Correctness of ( R⇑
⇝−appl). The only rule precondition is WF(Σ, Φ, Γ) that is also the
precondition for the ﬁrst premise. By induction hypothesis on the ﬁrst premise we know
Σ′, Φ′, Γ ⊢t′ : T where Σ′, Φ′ are implicitly returned by the ﬁrst call and passed to
the second one.
Moreover Σ′, Φ′ ≤Σ, Φ and t′ ≼t.
Therefore the preconditions for
the second premise are satisﬁed. By induction hypothesis on the second premise we know
Σ′′, Φ′′, Γ ⊢v : V where Σ′′, Φ′′ are implicitly returned by the second call and by the
rule as a whole. Moreover Σ′′, Φ′′ ≤Σ′, Φ′ and v ≼t′ −−→
un+1. By transitivity of proof
problem reﬁnement, we also have Σ′′, Φ′′ ≤Σ, Φ. Moreover, since ≼is admissible, we also

20
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
have v ≼t′ −−→
un+1 ≼t −−→
un+1. All post-conditions have been proved and therefore the rule is
correct.
The
ET
⇝algorithm is implemented as follows.
(ET −empty)
Γ ⊢t −−−−−−−−−−→
(xr := vr : Tr) : T |▲
ET
⇝t −→
vr : T
Correctness of the (ET −empty) rule is trivial.
(ET −prod)
Γ ⊢T ▷whd Πx : U1.T1
Γ ⊢u1 : U1
R⇓
⇝u′
1
Γ ⊢t −−−−−−−−−−→
(xr := vr : Tr) (x := u′
1 : U1) : T1[x/u′
1] |▲−→
un
ET
⇝v : V
Γ ⊢t −−−−−−−−−−→
(xr := vr : Tr) : T |▲u1 −→
un
ET
⇝v : V
Correctness of (ET −prod). Let Σ, Φ be the well formed pair taken as input by the rule
and passed to the second premise, that returns the well formed pair Σ′, Φ′.
Similarly,
let Σ′′, Φ′′ be the well formed pair given in output by the second premise and by the
whole rule.
By induction hypotheses Σ′, Φ′ ≤Σ, Φ and Σ′′, Φ′′ ≤Σ′, Φ′ and thus
Σ′′, Φ′′ ≤Σ, Φ as required. By the rule pre-condition, T is well typed in Σ, Φ, Γ and
so are U1 and T1 obtained by reduction.
Thus the premises of the second rule are all
satisﬁed and, by induction hypothesis, Σ′, Φ′, Γ ⊢u′
1 : U1
∧
u′
1 ≼u1.
By rules
K−appl −rec and K−appl −base applied to the rule pre-condition t v1 . . . vr : T we get
t v1 . . . vr u′
1 : T1[x/u′
1]. Since all preconditions for the third premise are satisﬁed, by
induction hypothesis we know Σ′′, Φ′′, Γ ⊢v : V and v ≼t v1 . . . vr u′
1 u2 . . . un. By
admissibility of ≼we conclude also v ≼t v1 . . . vr u1 . . . un. Since all post-conditions
have been proved, the rule is correct.
(ET −ﬂexible)
Γ ⊢T ▷whd ?j
or
Γ ⊢T ▷whd ?j w1 . . . wl
Γ ⊢u1
R⇑
⇝u′
1 : U1
Σ ⇝Σ ∪{Γ; −−−−→
xr : Tr; x : U1 ⊢?k : Type⊤}
Γ ⊢T
?≡Πx : U1.?k[−−−→
xr/vr; x/x]
U⇝
Γ ⊢t −−−−−−−−−−→
(xr := vr : Tr) (x := u′
1 : U1) : ?k[−−−→
xr/vr; x/u′
1] |▲−→
un
ET
⇝v : V
Γ ⊢t −−−−−−−−−−→
(xr := vr : Tr) : T |▲u1 −→
un
ET
⇝v : V
Correctness of (ET −ﬂexible). The proof is similar to the one for the ET −prod rule. We only
list the major diﬀerences here. The fact Σ′, Φ′, Γ ⊢u′
1 : U1 is now obtained by induction
hypothesis on the second premise. The role of T1 is now played by ?k[−−−→
xr/vr; x/x]. The
induction hypothesis on the third premise yields Σ′′′, Φ′′, Γ ⊢T ↓Πx : U1.?k[−−−→
xr/vr; x/x]
that was previously given directly by the rule pre-conditions (up to reduction of T). The
rest of the proof follows without any changes. The only remaining check to be performed

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
21
is the well-formedness of ?k[−−−→
xr/vr; x/x] that follows from rule K−meta using the rule pre-
condition Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢vi : Ti
i ∈{1 . . . r}.
Another reason for the complexity of the ET algorithm is the need to infer a dependent
type for the function f when its type is ﬂexible (a metavariable). We now show an example
of this scenario and an execution trace for the algorithm.
Example 3.10 (Inference of a maximally dependent type). Consider the following input,
where c1, c2, c3, P1, P2 are such that ⊢c1 : N and ⊢c2 : P1(c1) and c3 : P2(c1, c2):
{⊢?F : Type}, ∅, ∅⊢λf :?F .f c1 c2 c3
The rule (ET −ﬂexible) matches the input and since the argument c1 has type N, Σ is
extended as follows:
Σ = {
⊢?F : Type;
x : N
⊢?S :?T ;
x : N
⊢?T : Type}
Then ?F gets uniﬁed with Πx : N.?S obtaining the following substitution:
Φ = {⊢?F := Πx : N.?S : Type}
The new type for the head of the application, morally (f c1), represented as f (x := c1), is
?S[c1/x]. In the following call to (ET −ﬂexible), the argument c2 has type P1(c1). Σ is thus
extended as follows:
Σ = {
x : N; y : P1(c1)
⊢?U :?V ;
x : N; y : P1(c1)
⊢?V : Type;
x : N
⊢?S :?T ;
x : N
⊢?T : Type}
Then ?S[x/c1] is uniﬁed with Πy : P1(c1).?U[x/c1] obtaining
Φ = {
⊢?F := Πx : N.?S : Type;
x : N
⊢?S := Πy : P1(x).?U :?T ;
x : N
⊢?T := Type : Type}
The new type for the head of the application (f c1 c2) is ?U[c1/x; c2/y]. In the following
call to (ET −ﬂexible), the argument c3 has type P2(c1, c2). Σ is thus extended as follows:
Σ = {
x : N; y : P1(c1); z : P2(c1, c2)
⊢?Z :?W ;
x : N; y : P1(c1); z : P2(c1, c2)
⊢?W : Type;
x : N; y : P1(c1)
⊢?U :?V ;
x : N; y : P1(c1)
⊢?V : Type}
Then ?U[x/c1; y/c2] is uniﬁed with Πz : P2(c1, c2).?Z[x/c1; y/c2] obtaining
Φ = {
⊢?F := Πx : N.?S : Type;
x : N
⊢?S := Πy : P1(x).?U :?T ;
x : N
⊢?T := Type : Type;
x : N; y : P1(c1)
⊢?U := Πz : P2(x, y).?Z :?V ;
x : N; y : P1(c1)
⊢?V := Type : Type}
The ﬁnal instantiation for ?F is thus the maximally dependent type
Φ(?F ) = Πx : N.Πy : P1(x).Πz : P2(x, y).?Z : Type

22
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
( R⇑
⇝−match)
(Il : Π−−−→
xl : Fl.Π−−−−→
yr : Gr.s) ∈Env
(kj : Π−−−→
xl : Fl.Π
−−−−−→
yj
nj : T j
nj.Il −→
xl
−→
Mj
r ) ∈Env
j ∈{1 . . . n}
Σ ⇝Σ ∪{Γ ⊢?ui : Fi[−−−−−−−→
xi−1/?ui−1]}
i ∈{1 . . . l}
Σ ⇝Σ ∪{Γ ⊢?vi : Gi[−−−−→
xl/?ul; −−−−−−−→
yi−1/?vi−1]}
i ∈{1 . . . r}
Γ ⊢t : Il
−→
?ul
−→
?vr
R⇓
⇝t′
G′
i = Gi[−−−−→
xl/?ul]
i ∈{1 . . . r}
T ′j
i = T j
i [−−−−→
xl/?ul]
j ∈{1 . . . n}, i ∈{1 . . . nj}
M′j
i = Mj
i [−−−−→
xl/?ul]
j ∈{1 . . . n}, i ∈{1 . . . r}
Σ ⇝Σ ∪{Γ′ ⊢?1 : Type⊤}
Γ ⊢T : Π−−−−→
yr : G′
r.Πx : Il
−→
?ul −→
yr.?1[] R⇓
⇝T ′
(s, Φ(?1)) ∈elim(PTS)
Γ;
−−−−−−−−−→
yj
nj−1 : P j
nj−1 ⊢P j
nj
?≡T ′j
nj
U⇝
j ∈{1 . . . n}
Γ;
−−−−−→
yj
nj : P j
nj ⊢tj : T ′ −−→
M′j
r (kj
−→
?ul
−→
yj
nj) R⇓
⇝t′
j
j ∈{1 . . . n}
Γ ⊢
 
match t in Il return T
[k1 (
−−−−−→
y1
n1 : P 1
n1) ⇒t1 | . . . | kn (−−−−−−→
yn
nn : P n
nn) ⇒tn]
!
R⇑
⇝
 
match t′ in Il return T ′
[k1 (
−−−−−−→
y1
n1 : P ′1
n1) ⇒t′
1 | . . . | kn (−−−−−−→
yn
nn : P ′n
nn) ⇒t′
n]
!
: T ′ −→
?vr t′
Figure 1: Rule for pattern matching ( R⇑
⇝−match)
where
Σ = {
x : N; y : P1(c1); z : P2(c1, c2)
⊢?Z :?W ;
x : N; y : P1(c1); z : P2(c1, c2)
⊢?W : Type}
We conclude now the description of the reﬁnement algorithm in type inference mode.
The ﬁnal missing rule is the most complicated one and deals with pattern matching. It is
reported in Figure 1.
The rule has been slightly simpliﬁed: in the actual implementation of Matita the test
(s, Φ(?1)) ∈elim(PTS) is relaxed to accept elimination of inhabitants of non informative
data types in all cases under the restriction that the data type must be small. Intuitively,
smallness corresponds to the idea that the inhabitant of the data type would be non in-
formative even if declared in Type. Typical examples are empty types and the Leibniz
equality type. A precise deﬁnition of smallness together with the corresponding rules for
pattern matching can be found in [4].
Note that the return type T ′ is usually an anonymous function, beginning with lambda
abstractions. Thus the type inferred for the pattern match construct is a β-redex. In fact
the actual code of Matita post-processes that type ﬁring (r + 1) β-redexes.

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
23
Theorem 3.11 (Termination). The R⇑
⇝algorithm deﬁned by the set of rules presented in
this section including R⇓
⇝,
C⇝,
F⇝and
ET
⇝is terminating.
Proof. The proof is by structural induction of the syntax of terms. The rules ( C⇝−ok),
( R⇑
⇝−variable), ( R⇑
⇝−sort) and ( R⇑
⇝−constant) are base cases.
The ﬁrst one clearly
terminates if the uniﬁcation algorithm
?≡terminates, while the others terminate since Γ
and Env are ﬁnite and the test (s1, s2) ∈PTS is also terminating.
Now that we proved that all the rules for
C⇝, amounting to only one for the mono
directional reﬁner, terminate, we can consider the (R⇓
⇝−default) and ( F⇝−ok) as aliases
for R⇑
⇝, as if we were inlining their code.
By induction hypothesis R⇑
⇝(and R⇓
⇝being now an alias) terminates when called on
smaller terms. The rule ( R⇑
⇝−meta) terminates because Φ and Σ are ﬁnite, thus lookups
are terminating, and calls to R⇓
⇝are done on smaller terms, so the induction hypothesis
applies. The rule ( R⇑
⇝−letin) calls
F⇝, R⇓
⇝and R⇑
⇝on smaller terms, thus terminates by
induction hypothesis. The same holds for ( R⇑
⇝−lambda) and ( R⇑
⇝−product). To prove
that ( R⇑
⇝−appl) terminates we use the induction hypothesis on the ﬁrst premise and we
are left to prove that
ET
⇝terminates as well. Note that
ET
⇝calls R⇓
⇝and R⇑
⇝on proper
subterms of the n-ary application, thus the induction hypothesis applies and will be used
in the next paragraph.
We show ET terminates by induction on the list of arguments (i.e. the list of terms
after |▲) assuming that the input term T is a well typed type. Thanks to the correctness
property of R⇑
⇝, ( R⇑
⇝−appl) always passes to ET a well typed type. The rule (ET −empty)
clearly terminates. The recursive call in the rule (ET −prod) is on a shorter list of arguments,
thus is terminating, and the call to R⇓
⇝terminates by induction hypothesis.
The term
T[x/u′
1] is a well typed type thanks to the subject reduction property of CIC, and the
fact that the variable x and the term u′
1 have the same type (postcondition of R⇓
⇝, called
with expected type U1). The call to ▷whd is terminating because T is well typed and CIC
reduction rules, on well typed terms, form a terminating rewriting system.
The rule (ET −ﬂexible) terminates because of the same arguments. The only non obvious
step is that Πx : U1.?k[−−−→
xr/vr; x/x] is a well typed type. The metavariable ?k is declared in
Σ of type Type⊤, thus cannot be instantiated with a term. Moreover, since CIC is a full
PTS, the product Πx : U1.?k is well typed of sort Type⊤.
The recursive calls in the last rule ( R⇑
⇝−match) are always on smaller terms. We are
left to prove that the expected type (T ′ −−→
M′j
r (kj
−→
?ul
−→
yj
nj)) passed to the recursive call made
on the last line is indeed a well typed type. The term T ′ is obtained using R⇓
⇝, and we thus
know it is a function of type Π−−−−→
yr : G′
r.Πx : Il
−→
?ul −→
yr.?1. The arguments
−−→
M′j
r are as many as
expected and have the right types according to the environment Env (ﬁrst two lines) and
thanks to the fact that the substitutions M′j
i = Mj
i [−−−−→
xl/?ul] preserves their types. Finally,
the term (kj
−→
?ul
−→
yj
nj) has type Il
−→
?ul
−→
Mj
r that is the expected one. Thus (T ′ −−→
M′j
r (kj
−→
?ul
−→
yj
nj))
has type ?1 that is a well typed type according to Σ.

24
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
3.3. Implementation remarks. The choice of keeping Σ and Φ separate is important and
motivated by the fact that their size is usually very diﬀerent. While the number of proof
problems in Σ is usually small, the substitution Φ may record, step by step, the whole proof
input by the user and can grow to an arbitrary size. Each metavariable must be either
declared in Σ or assigned in Φ, thus to know if a metavariable belongs to Φ it is enough to
test if it does not belong to Σ. Knowing if a metavariable is instantiated is a very common
operation, needed for example by weak head normalization, and it must thus be possible to
implement it eﬃciently.
Another important design choice is to design the kernel of the system so that it handles
metavariables [4]. This enables to reuse a number of functionalities implemented in the
kernel also during the reﬁnement process, like an eﬃcient reduction machinery. Also note
that the extensions made to the type checker described in Deﬁnition 2.3 become dead code
when the type checker is called on ground terms, and thus do not increase the size of the
trusted code of the system.
Last, it is worth pointing out that the algorithm is mostly independent from the rep-
resentation chosen for bound variables. Matita is entirely based on De Bruijn indexes, but
the tedious lift function is mostly hidden inside reduction and only directly called twice in
the actual implementation of this algorithm. In particular it is necessary only to deal with
the types of variables that must be pulled from the context. This potentially moves the
type under all the context entries following the variable declaration or deﬁnition, thus the
type must be lifted accordingly.
3.3.1. Rules for objects. Objects are declarations and deﬁnitions of constants, inductive
types and recursive and co-recursive functions that inhabit the environment Env. Exactly
like terms, the user writes objects down using the external syntax and the objects need to
be reﬁned before passing them to the kernel for the ﬁnal check before the insertion in the
environment.
Deﬁnition 3.12 (Type checking for objects (Env ⊢WF)). The type checking algorithm
for CIC objects takes as input a proof problem Σ and a substitution Φ, all assumed to be
well formed, and an object o. It is denoted by:
Env ∪(Σ, Φ, o) ⊢WF
and states that o is well typed.
This algorithm is part of the kernel, and described in Appendix 8. It is the basis for
the construction of the corresponding reﬁnement algorithm for objects, that is speciﬁed as
follows.
Speciﬁcation 3.13 (Reﬁner for objects (R)). A reﬁner algorithm R for CIC objects takes
as input a proof problem Σ and a substitution Φ, all assumed to be well formed, and an
object o. It fails or returns an object o′, a proof problem Σ′ and substitution Φ′. It is
denoted by:
(Σ, Φ) ⊢o
R⇝o′ (Σ′, Φ′)
Precondition:
WF(Σ, Φ)

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
25
Postcondition (parametric in ≼):
WF(Σ′, Φ′)
∧
Σ′, Φ′ ≤Σ, Φ
∧
Env ∪(Σ′, Φ′, o′) ⊢WF
∧
o′ ≼o
Note that an object can be a block of mutually recursive deﬁnitions or declarations,
each one characterized by a diﬀerent type. Thus the
R⇝rule does not return a single type,
but a new object together with a new metavariable environment Σ’ and substitution Φ’.
When Σ′ is not empty, all the metavariables in Σ′ correspond to proof obligations to be
proved to complete the deﬁnition of the object, necessary to convince the system to accept
the object deﬁnition. This is especially useful for instance in the formalization of category
theory where deﬁnitions of concrete categories are made from deﬁnitions of terms (objects
and morphisms) together with proofs that the categorical axioms hold. In such deﬁnitions,
objects and functors are immediately fully speciﬁed, while the proof parts are turned into
proof obligations. Spiwack’s Ph.D. thesis [31] discusses this issue at length as a motivation
for a complete re-design of the data type for proofs in Coq. The new data type is essentially
the one used in this paper and it will be adopted in some forthcoming version of Coq. The
old data type, instead, did not take the Curry-Howard isomorphism seriously in the sense
that partial proofs were not represented by partial proof terms and the reﬁnement of an
object could not open proof obligations. This problem was already partially addressed by
Sozeau [29] where he added a new system layer around the reﬁner to achieve the behavior
that our reﬁner already provides.
( R⇝−axiom)
⊢T
F⇝T ′ : s
⊢axiom c : T
R⇝axiom c : T ′
( R⇝−deﬁnition)
⊢T
F⇝T ′ : s
⊢t : T ′ R⇓
⇝t′
⊢deﬁnition c : T := t
R⇝deﬁnition c : T ′ := t′
( R⇝−inductive)
⊢Π−−−→
xl : Ll.Ai
F⇝V ′
i
⊢V ′
i ▷whd Π−−−→
xl : L′
l.A′
i
⊢A′
i ▷whd Π−−−−−→
yri : R′
ri.si
)
i ∈{1 . . . n}
−−−→
xl : L′
l; −−−−→
In : V ′
n ⊢Ti,k
F⇝T ′
i,k : si,k
−−−→
xl : L′
l; −−−−→
In : V ′
n ⊢T ′
i,k ▷whd Π−−−−−−−→
zpi,k : Vpi,k.Vi,k
Σ ⇝Σ ∪{−−−→
xl : L′
l; −−−−−−−→
yj−1 : R′
j−1 ⊢?j : R′
j}
j ∈{1 . . . ri}
−−−→
xl : L′
l; −−−−→
In : A′
n; −−−−−−−→
zpi,k : Vpi,k ⊢Vi,k
?≡Ii −→
xl
−→
?ri
U=
⇝











i ∈{1 . . . n}
k ∈{1 . . . mn}
⊢


Π−−−→
xl : Ll. inductive
I1 : A1 := k1,1 : T1,2 | . . . | k1,m1 : T1,m1
with . . .
with In : An := kn,1 : Tn,1 | . . . | kn,mn : Tn,mn


R⇝


Π−−−→
xl : L′
l. inductive
I1 : A′
1 := k1,1 : T ′
1,2 | . . . | k1,m1 : T ′
1,m1
with . . .
with In : A′
n := kn,1 : T ′
n,1 | . . . | kn,mn : T ′
n,mn


The loop from 1 to n, ranges over all mutually inductive types of the block using the index
i (for inductive). The other loop, from 1 to mn, ranges over the mn constructors of the n-th
inductive type using index k (for constructor). Ti,k is the type of the k-th constructor of

26
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
the i-th inductive. Every inductive type in the block has the same number of homogeneous
parameters l of type Lα for some α in 1 . . . l, and ri extra arguments of type Rβ for some β
in 1 . . . ri. As explained in Section 2, homogeneous arguments are not abstracted explicitly
in the types of the constructors, thus their context includes not only the inductive types
−→
In but also the homogeneous arguments −→
xl. Note that in this rule we used In to mean the
n-th inductive, in contrast with the rest of the paper where the index n means the number
of homogeneous arguments, l here. The complete arity of the inductive types −→
V ′ is a closed
term. In fact that type is generated in an empty context in the ﬁrst premise. This makes
the context in which Ti,k is processed valid: there is no variable capture when −→
xl is put
before −→
In. Moreover the successful reﬁnement of Π−−−→
xl : Ll.Ai in the empty context grants
that the types of the homogeneous arguments do not depend on the inductive types −→
In.
The last three premises just check that the type of each constructor is actually a product
targeting the inductive type.
Whilst being already quite involved, this rule is only partial. It lacks the checks for
positivity conditions, that are only implemented by the kernel. Since the kernel of Matita
is able to deal with metavariables we can test for these conditions using directly the kernel
after the reﬁnement process. Nevertheless, when the inductive type fed to the kernel is
partial, the checks cannot be precise: all non positive occurrences will be detected, but
nothing will prevent the user from instantiating a missing part with a term containing a
non positive occurrence. One could label metavariables in a such a way that the uniﬁcation
algorithm refuses to instantiate them with a term containing non positive occurrences of
the inductive type, but our current implementation does not. Anyway, once the deﬁnition is
completed by the user, another call to the kernel is made, and all non positive occurrences
are detected.
Moreover, the kernel also checks that the sort si,k of the type of every constructor Ti,k
is properly contained in the sort of the corresponding inductive si. Finally, one should also
check that any occurrence of Ii in the types Ti,k of the constructors is applied to −→
xl. This
test is also omitted since it is performed by the kernel during the test for positivity.
( R⇝−letrec)
⊢Π
−−−−−→
xi
pi : T i
pi.T i
pi+1
F⇝T ′
i : si
⊢T ′
i ▷whd Π
−−−−−−→
xi
pi : T ′i
pi.T ′i
pi+1
−−−−→
fn : Tn;
−−−−−−→
xi
pi : T ′i
pi ⊢ti : T ′i
pi+1
R⇓
⇝t′
i







i ∈{1 . . . n}
⊢
 
let rec f1(
−−−−−→
x1
p1 : T 1
p1) : T 1
p1+1 := t1 and . . .
and fn(−−−−−→
xn
pn :T n
pn) : T n
pn+1 := tn
!
R⇝
 
let rec f1(
−−−−−→
x1
p1 :T ′1
p1) : T ′1
p1+1 := t′
1 and . . .
and fn(−−−−−−→
xn
pn :T ′n
pn) : T ′n
pn+1 := t′
n
!
As for inductive types, this rule is only partial: it lacks the checks for guardedness conditions
(termination or productivity tests), that are delegated to the kernel. We omit the rule for
co-recursive functions, since it is identical to the one presented above.

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
27
4. Bi-directional refinement
To obtain a bi-directional implementation of the reﬁner, we add new rules to the R⇓
⇝al-
gorithm. These ad-hoc rules for particular cases must take precedence over the generic
(R⇓
⇝−default) rule. The ad-hoc rules are responsible for propagating information from the
expected type towards the leaves of the term.
The new rule for lambda-abstraction is well known in the literature [24] and it is also
the only one implemented in Coq. The rule for let-in statements is given to allow the system
infer more concise types. The one for application of constructors is completely novel and it
takes advantage of additional knowledge on the constant parameters of an inductive type.
It is thus peculiar of the Calculus of (Co)Inductive Constructions. This is also the rule that,
according to our experience, mostly aﬀects the behavior of the reﬁner. It makes it possible
to reﬁne many more terms to be reﬁned in frequently occurring situations where, using a
mono directional algorithm, more typing information had to be given by hand.
Theorem 4.1 (Correctness). The new rules given in this section do not alter the correctness
of the R⇓
⇝algorithm w.r.t. its speciﬁcation for all admissible ≼relations that include the
identity for terms in the internal syntax. In particular, the algorithm is correct when the
identity relation is picked for ≼.
(R⇓
⇝−lambda)
Γ ⊢E ▷whd Πx : E1.E2
Γ ⊢T
F⇝T ′ : s
Γ ⊢T ′ ?≡E1
U=
⇝
Γ; x : T ′ ⊢t : E2
R⇓
⇝t′
Γ ⊢λx : T.t : E R⇓
⇝λx : T ′.t′
Note that to type t we push into the context the declared type for x and not its expected
type E1. This is to avoid displaying a confusing error message in case t is ill-typed, since
the user declared x to have type T, and not E1 (that in principle can be arbitrarily diﬀerent
from T).
(R⇓
⇝−letin)
Γ ⊢T
F⇝T ′ : s
Γ ⊢t : T ′ R⇓
⇝t′
Γ; x := t′ : T ′ ⊢u : E[t′/x] R⇓
⇝u′
Γ ⊢let (x : T) := t in u : E R⇓
⇝let (x : T ′) := t′ in u′
Where we denote by [t′/x] the operation of substituting all occurrences of t′ with x. Note
that this operation behaves as an identity up to conversion (since x holds the value t′).
Nevertheless, it enables the bi-directional type inference algorithm to propagate smaller
types towards the leaves and, according to our observation, it leads to more readable inferred
typed for sub-terms of u′.
Theorem 4.2 (Termination). The R⇑
⇝algorithm deﬁned by the set of rules presented above
with the addition of ( R⇓
⇝−letin) and ( R⇓
⇝−lambda) terminates.

28
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
Proof. The two functions terminate because all recursive calls are on smaller terms and
because ▷whd,
F⇝and
?≡terminate.
The next rule deals with applications of constructors to arguments and it is only trig-
gered when the expected type is an inductive type.
In that case the application must
be total.
In CIC, the types of constructors of inductive types are constrained to have
a particular shape. Up to reduction, their type must be of the form Πx1 : F1 . . . Πxn :
Fn.I x1 . . . xl tl+1 . . . tm where l is the number of uniform parameters of the inductive
type. Therefore the application of a constructor to a list u1 . . . un of arguments has type
I u1 . . . ul vl+1 . . . vm for some vs. Reversing the reasoning, once we know that the ex-
pected type for the application of a constructor is I u1 . . . ul vl+1 . . . vm we already know
that the ﬁrst l arguments of the application must be equal to u1 . . . ul up to conversion.
It is thus possible to propagate them following the bi-directional spirit. This is achieved
by the following (R⇓
⇝−appl−k) that calls a new function denoted by Et that consumes the
ﬁrst l arguments unifying them with the expected values. The remaining arguments are
consumed as in the generic case of applications.
(R⇓
⇝−appl−k)
Γ ⊢E ▷whd Il −→
vl −→
wn
Γ ⊢−→
tm
?≡−→
vl
Et
⇝−→
t′
l |▲−→
uo
(k : T) ∈Env
Γ ⊢T ▷whd
−−−−−→
Πxl : Sl.T ′
Γ ⊢k −→
t′
l : T ′[−−→
xl/t′
l] |▲−→
uo
ET
⇝r : R
Γ ⊢R
?≡Il −→
vl −→
wn
U=
⇝
Γ ⊢k −→
tm : E R⇓
⇝r
Note that if E does not reduce to an applied inductive type, the implemented algorithm
falls back to the standard rule for application.
The rule presented only propagates information related to uniform parameters. Uniform
parameters must be used consistently in every occurrence of the inductive type in the type
of its constructors and not only in the occurrence at the end of the product spine (i.e. in
the return type of the constructors). The variant of CIC implemented in Coq also considers
non uniform parameters. Non uniform parameters must be used consistently only in the
return type of the constructors and not in the premises. We do not consider non uniform
parameters in this paper, but we remark that the (R⇓
⇝−appl−k) rule is also valid when the
ﬁrst l parameters are non uniform.
Speciﬁcation 4.3 (Eat arguments (Et)). The
Et
⇝algorithm takes a list of arguments for an
application and a list of terms, and it veriﬁes that an initial preﬁx of the arguments is equal
to the given terms, up to uniﬁcation. It takes as input a proof problem Σ, a substitution Φ
and a context Γ, all assumed to be well formed, the list of arguments and the list of terms.
It fails or it returns the list of arguments split into the consumed ones and the ones yet to
be considered. It is denoted by:
(Σ, Φ) Γ ⊢t1 . . . tm
?≡v1 . . . vn
Et
⇝t′
1 . . . t′
n |▲u1 . . . ul (Σ′, Φ′)
Precondition:
WF(Σ, Φ, Γ)
∧
Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢vi : Ti
i ∈{1 . . . n}

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
29
Postcondition (parametric in ≼):
WF(Σ′, Φ′)
∧
Σ′, Φ′ ≤Σ, Φ
∧
Σ′, Φ′, Γ ⊢t′
i ↓vi
i ∈{1 . . . n}
∧
t′
1 . . . t′
n u1 . . . ul ≼t1 . . . tm
(Et−empty)
Γ ⊢−→
ul
?≡Et
⇝
|▲−→
ul
(Et−base)
Γ ⊢t1
R⇑
⇝t′
1 : T1
Γ ⊢t′
1
?≡v1
U=
⇝
Γ ⊢−→
tm
?≡−→
vn
Et
⇝−→
t′
n |▲−→
ul
Γ ⊢t1 −→
tm
?≡v1 −→
vn
Et
⇝t′
1
−→
t′
n |▲−→
ul
Theorem 4.4 (Termination). The R⇑
⇝algorithm deﬁned by the set of rules presented above
with the addition of ( R⇓
⇝−appl −k), (Et−empty) and (Et−base) terminates.
Proof. The rule (R⇓
⇝−appl −k) terminates because
?≡and ▷whd terminate and ET is called
on smaller terms. Moreover the term T ′[−−→
xl/t′
l] is a well typed type because Et grants that
−→
t′
l are convertible with −→
vl and thus have the same types. Also notes that all the calls to
R⇑
⇝made by Et are on sub-terms of the input of (R⇓
⇝−appl −k).
We thus show that Et terminates by induction on the second list of arguments (the
one between
?≡and
Et
⇝). Rule (Et−empty) is the base case and clearly terminates. Rule
(Et−base) terminates because R⇑
⇝and
?≡terminate and because the recursive call terminates
by induction hypothesis.
4.1. Remarks. We present here a simple but frequently occurring case that explains why
the bi-directional rule for application of constructors enables to reﬁne many more terms
w.r.t. the mono-directional algorithm. A more complicated example was already discussed
in the introduction and deals with dependent data types to represent the syntax of languages
with binders.
Consider the inductive type used to deﬁne the existential quantiﬁcation.
ΠT : Type.ΠP : T →Prop. inductive Ex : Prop :=
Ex intro : Πx : T.P x →Ex T P
Note that T and P are homogeneous arguments.
Example 4.5 (Use of (R⇓
⇝−appl−k)). Consider the conjecture ∃x : N.x > 0, encoded in
CIC as
Ex N (λx : N.x > 0)
Given a context Γ containing the assumption p stating that 2 > 0, one may want to use the
following proof term to prove the conjecture
t = Ex intro ?T ?P ?x p

30
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
A mono directional reﬁner encounters a hard uniﬁcation problem involving the type of p,
2 > 0, and its expected type.
{⊢?T : Type; ⊢?P : ?T →Prop; ⊢?x : ?T }, ∅, Γ ⊢2 > 0
?≡?P ?x
Clearly, the desired solution is to instantiate ?x with 2 and ?P with (λx : N.x > 0) obtaining
a proof term of type ∃x : N.x > 0. Unfortunately, this is not the only possible solution. An
undesired solution, but as reasonable as the correct one, is
Φ = {?T := N; ?x := 0; ?P := λx : N.2 > x}
under which the resulting proof term Φ(t) has type ∃x : N.2 > x, that is not the expected
one.
Why one should prefer the former to the latter is also unclear from a computer
perspective. Thanks to the polymorphism of CIC, another undesired and less expected
solution is also possible:
Φ′ = {?T := Prop; ?x := 2 > 0; ?P := λx.x}
The proof term Φ′(t) would then be of type ∃x : Prop.x, again diﬀerent from the desired
one.
Using the expected type, ?T and ?P are easily inferred looking at the homogeneous
argument of the expected type.
Φ′′ = {?T := N; ?P := λx : N.x > 0}
Then inferring ?x is easy. Applying Φ′′ to the right hand side of the uniﬁcation problem we
obtain:
2 > 0
?≡(λx : N.x > 0) ?x
Then it is suﬃcient to reduce the right hand side and then perform a simple, ﬁrst order,
uniﬁcation algorithm to obtain the desired instantiation for ?x.
The rule (R⇓
⇝−appl−k) is only ﬁred when the term to be reﬁned is syntactically the
application of a constructor.
Because of conversion, the term under analysis could be
reducible to an application of a constructor. However, we cannot reduce the term ﬁrst to
try to match the rule. The ﬁrst motivation is that terms in the external syntax may contain
placeholders (see Section 5) and may not be well typed. Duplication of placeholders and
substitution into them is not admitted. Moreover, reducing an ill typed term may lead to
divergence. Secondly, reduction of proof terms correspond to cut elimination that is known
to yield proofs terms of arbitrary size.
5. Extension to placeholders
We consider here the ﬁrst extension of our external syntax, obtained introducing linear
placeholders for missing terms and for vectors of missing terms of unknown length. The
latter are only accepted in argument position, even if we will enforce this only in the
reﬁnement algorithm and not in the syntax. The new syntax is obtained extending the
one given in Table 1 with the new productions of Table 2. Placeholders are also called
implicit arguments in the literature, but that terminology is ambiguous since it is also used
for arguments that can be entirely omitted in the concrete syntax.
In a concrete implementation, user deﬁned notations are used to further enlarge the
external syntax. User deﬁned notations behave as macros; macro expansion gives back a
term in the external syntax we consider here. In particular, thanks to user deﬁned notations,

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
31
t
::=
. . .
|
?
placeholder
|
_
?
arbitrarily many placeholder arguments
Table 2:
CIC terms syntax II - Placeholders
it is possible to entirely omit the typing information in binders, like in calculi typed `a la
Curry.
Omitted types are turned into placeholders during the macro expansion phase.
Implicit arguments can also be simulated by deﬁning notations that insert into applications
a ﬁxed number of placeholders or vectors of placeholders in appropriate positions.
A placeholder ? diﬀers from a metavariable ?i in the fact that it has no sequent associ-
ated to it. The intended associated sequent allows in ? occurrences of all variables in the
context of ?. Moreover, the type of ? is meant to be the one determined by the context.
This information is made explicit by the reﬁnement algorithm that turns each placeholder
into a corresponding metavariable.
Placeholders occur only linearly in the term (i.e. every occurrence of a placeholder is
free to be instantiated with a diﬀerent term). Non linear placeholders are not allowed since
two occurrences could be in contexts that bind diﬀerent set of variables and instantiation
with terms that live in one context would make no sense in the other one.
Similarly, substitution is not allowed on placeholders since a placeholder occurrence
does not have a corresponding explicit substitution.
For both previous reasons, reduction is not allowed on terms in the external syntax
that contain placeholders: the reduction, conversion and uniﬁcation judgements only make
sense on reﬁned terms.
Intuitively, a vector of placeholders can be instantiated by the reﬁner with zero or more
metavariables. In our algorithm we adopt a lazy semantics: vectors of placeholders can
only be used in argument position and a vector is expanded to the minimal number of
metavariables that make the application well typed. Bi-directionality, i.e. the knowledge
about the expected type for the application, is required for the lazy semantics. Indeed,
without the expected type, an expansion could produce a locally well typed application
whose inferred type will not match later on with the expected one.
We extend the R⇑
⇝, R⇓
⇝,
ET
⇝and
Et
⇝algorithms with new rules for single placeholders
and for vectors of placeholders.
Theorem 5.1 (Correctness). The
C⇝,
F⇝,
R⇑
⇝, R⇓
⇝,
ET
⇝, and
Et
⇝algorithms extended
with the set of rules presented in this section obey their speciﬁcation for all admissible
≼that include the ≼′ relation deﬁned as follows: t′ ≼′ t when t′ is obtained from t by
replacing single placeholders with terms and vectors of placeholders with vectors of terms.
In particular, the algorithms are correct w.r.t. ≼′.
Proof. Every admissible ≼that includes ≼′ also includes the identity. Thus we do not need
to re-establish the result on the rules given in the previous sections. Correctness of the new
rules given in this section is established by rule inspection.
( R⇑
⇝−placeholder)
Σ ⇝Σ ∪{Γ ⊢?l : Type⊤, Γ ⊢?k : ?l , Γ ⊢?j : ?k}
Γ ⊢? R⇑
⇝?j : ?k

32
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
(R⇓
⇝−placeholder)
Σ ⇝Σ ∪{Γ ⊢?k : T}
Γ ⊢? : T R⇓
⇝?k
(ET −
_
placeholder −0)
Γ ⊢t −−−−−−−−−−→
(xr := vr : Tr) : T |▲−→
un
ET
⇝v : V
Γ ⊢t −−−−−−−−−−→
(xr := vr : Tr) : T |▲
_
? −→
un
ET
⇝v : V
(ET −
_
placeholder +1)
Γ ⊢T ▷whd Πx1 : U1.T1
Γ ⊢t −−−−−−−−−−→
(xr := vr : Tr) : T |▲?
_
? −→
un
ET
⇝v : V
Γ ⊢t −−−−−−−−−−→
(xr := vr : Tr) : T |▲
_
? −→
un
ET
⇝v : V
The rule (ET −
_
placeholder −0) is meant to take precedence over (ET −
_
placeholder +1).
The second is applied when the ﬁrst one fails (local backtracking).
Theorem 5.2 (Termination). The R⇑
⇝algorithm deﬁned by the set of rules presented above
with the addition of ( R⇑
⇝−placeholder), ( R⇓
⇝−placeholder),
(ET −
_
placeholder −0) and (ET −
_
placeholder +1) terminates.
Proof. Rules ( R⇑
⇝−placeholder) and (R⇓
⇝−placeholder) terminate.
The proof that ET
terminates is, as before, by induction on the list of arguments that follow |▲.
The rule
(ET −
_
placeholder −0) terminates by induction hypothesis. The rule (ET −
_
placeholder +1)
deserves an accurate treatment. The check over T, asking it to be a product, is to avoid
divergence. Since the input T is a well typed type, also T1 is, and thus it admits a nor-
mal form T ′
1 in which x may occur. The recursive call does necessarily trigger the rule
(ET −product) that will substitute a metavariable ?j for x in T1. Thanks to the reduction
rules of CIC, reported in the appendix, substituting a variable for a metavariable declared
in Σ (and not in Φ) does not change the normal form, meaning that T ′
1[x/?j] ▷whd T ′
1[x/?j].
Thus the rule (ET −
_
placeholder +1) can be applied only a ﬁnite number of times, and the
number of products in T is an upper bound.
The next two rules for the
Et
⇝judgment follow the same schema of the ones for
ET
⇝.
(Et−
_
placeholder −0)
Γ ⊢−→
tm
?≡−→
vn
Et
⇝−→
t′
n |▲−→
ul
Γ ⊢
_
? −→
tm
?≡−→
vn
Et
⇝−→
t′
n |▲−→
ul
(Et−
_
placeholder +1)
Γ ⊢?
_
? −→
tm
?≡−→
vn
Et
⇝−→
t′
n |▲−→
ul
Γ ⊢
_
? −→
tm
?≡−→
vn
Et
⇝−→
t′
n |▲−→
ul
Theorem 5.3 (Termination). The R⇑
⇝algorithm deﬁned by the set of rules presented above
with the addition of (Et−
_
placeholder −0) and (Et−
_
placeholder +1) terminates.

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
33
Proof. The rule (Et−
_
placeholder −0) makes a recursive call on the same list of arguments
−→
vn but consumes a
_
? , and no other rule of the reﬁner adds one, so it can be repeated only a
ﬁnite number of times. The recursive call in the rule (Et−
_
placeholder +1) can trigger only
rules (Et−empty) and (Et−base). The former terminates immediately, the latter will do a
recursive call consuming one argument in −→
vn, and thus terminates.
Note that inlining the latter would lead to a rule whose termination is trivial to see,
but we preferred to present the algorithm in a more modular way.
Example 5.4 (Vector of placeholders). Assume a theorem τ ∈Env shows that ∀x : N.P x →
Q x. The proof context may contain a natural number y and optionally a proof H that y
validates P. Diﬀerent proofs or proof styles may use the same theorem τ in diﬀerent ways.
For example, one may want to perform forward reasoning, and tell the system to assume
(Q y) providing the following proof for it
y : N; H : P y ⊢τ H
Nevertheless, sometimes H is not known, and the user may want to tell the system he has
intention to use the theorem τ on y, and prove (P y) later.
y : N ⊢τ y
While the latter application is well typed, the ﬁrst is not, since the ﬁrst argument of τ must
be of type N. Nevertheless, the type of H depends on y, thus the term (τ ? H) would reﬁne
to the well typed term (τ y H) of type (Q y).
The vector of placeholders enables the system to accept both terms originally written by
the user. In the ﬁrst case (τ
_
? H) would expand to (τ ? H) thanks to (Et−
_
placeholder +1),
and reﬁne to (τ y H).
In the second case (τ
_
? y) would reﬁne to (τ y) thanks to
(Et−
_
placeholder −0). This suggests deﬁning (τ
_
? ) as a notation for the theorem τ, obtain-
ing a cheap implementation of what other systems call prenex implicit arguments: the ﬁrst n
arguments of an application whose head has a dependent type like Π−−−−→
xn : Tn.Π−−−−−−−→
ym : P(−→
xn).T
can be omitted, and are inferred thanks to the dependencies in the types of the m following
arguments. As a bonus, in case the user wants to pass one of the implicit arguments there
is no need to temporarily disable the mechanism, since the expansion of
_
? is computed on
the ﬂy and automatically adapts to its context.
6. Coercions
Coercions are explicit type casts. While the literature [20] considers them mostly as a device
to mimic sub-typing in a calculus lacking it, they have other interesting applications. The
reﬁner of Matita inserts coercions in three locations:
• around the argument of an application
• around the head of an application
• around the type of an abstraction
The ﬁrst case is the most common one, and is the one that can easily be explained in
terms of sub-typing. For example, if one applies an operation deﬁned over integers Z to an
argument lying in the type of natural numbers N, the system injects the argument into the

34
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
right type by means of the obvious, user declared, cast function mapping naturals into the
non negative fragment of Z.
The second case is handy in two situations. First when the head of the application
is implicit in the standard notation, like in 3x where the intended head constant is the
multiplication but in the input it happens to be 3. The second is when the head constant
has a non ambiguous interpretation as a function, but is not. For example a set may act as
its characteristic function.
The last case is recurrent when algebraic structures are encoded as dependently typed
records [25] embedding the type (or carrier) for the elements together with the operations
and properties deﬁning the structure.
In that case, one may want to state a theorem
quantifying over a structure G, say a group, and some elements in that group. However the
statement ∀G : Group.∀x, y : G.P(x, y) is ill-typed since G is a term (of type Group) but is
used as a type for x and y. The intended meaning is clear: x and y lie in the carrier type
of G. The system can thus insert around G the projection for the carrier component of the
Group record.
Deﬁnition 6.1 (Coercion set (∆)). A coercion set ∆is a set of pairs (c, k) where c is a
constant in Env and k is a natural number smaller than the arity of c (i.e. k points to a
possible argument of c)
In the literature the coercion set is usually represented as a graph. Given a coercion
(c, k) such that (c : Πx1 : T1 . . . Πxk : Tk . . . Πxn : Tn.T) ∈Env, Tk and T are nodes in
the graph, and c is an edge from Tk to T. Most coercion implementation, like the one of
Coq, Lego and Plastic, assume ∆to be a graph validating a property called coherence.
This property states that ∆is an acyclic graph with at most one path linking every pair of
nodes. This property enables to employ a straightforward algorithm to look for a sequence
of coercions linking two non adjacent nodes in the graph.
In Matita, for various reasons detailed in [34], ∆is not a graph, but a set of arcs for the
transitive closure of the graph. Every time a coercion c is declared by the user, and thus
added to ∆, the following set of automatically generated composite coercions is also added
to ∆.
{ci ◦c ◦cj|ci ∈∆∧cj ∈∆} ∪{c ◦cj|cj ∈∆} ∪{ci ◦c|ci ∈∆}
Of course the ◦operator here is partial, and only well typed composite coercions are actually
considered.
This design choice enables the coercion lookup operation to be single step,
since the set is already transitively closed. Moreover, since composite coercions are deﬁned
constants in Env, the term resulting after a cast is smaller if compared with the one obtained
inserting the corresponding chain of user declared coercions. Last, allowing k to diﬀer from
n is a peculiarity of Matita.
When k ̸= n the application of the coercion creates new
uninstantiated metavariables that correspond to proof obligations. This will be detailed
later on.
The last detail worth mentioning is that, all systems known to the authors with the
notable exception of Plastic [9], adopt some approximated representation for the nodes in the
coercion graph, usually the name of the head constant of the source and target types. This
results in a faster lookup in the coercion graph, but the coherence check is also strengthened.
In particular, in a calculus with dependent types, diﬀerent, but similar, coercions may not
be allowed to be declared. Matita drops the coherence check, or better changes it into a
warning, and enables the user to attach to coercions a priority: coercions from and to the
same approximation of types are all tried according to user deﬁned priorities.

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
35
Speciﬁcation 6.2 (Coercion lookup (↣−∆)). Given a context Γ, substitution Φ and
proof problem Σ, all assumed to be well formed, two types T1 and T2, this function returns
an explicit cast c ?1 . . . ?k . . . ?n for the metavariable of index k and its type T ′. It is
denoted by:
(Σ, Φ) Γ ⊢T1 ↣T2
∆
⇝k, c ?1 . . . ?k . . . ?n : T ′ (Σ′, Φ)
Precondition (parametric in ≈):
WF(Σ, Φ, Γ)
∧
(c, k) ∈∆
∧
(c : Πx1 : T1 . . . Πxk : Tk . . . Πxn : Tn.T) ∈Env
∧
Tk ≈T1
∧
T ≈T2
Postcondition:
WF(Σ′)
∧
Σ′, Φ, Γ ⊢c ?1 . . . ?k . . . ?n : T ′
We denoted by ≈the approximated comparison test used to select from ∆a coercion c
from T1 to T2. A proper deﬁnition of ≈is not relevant for the present paper, but we can
anyway say that Matita compares the ﬁrst order skeleton of types obtained by dropping
bound variables, metavariables and higher order terms, and that this skeleton can be made
less precise on user request. We will give an account of this facility in the example that will
follow.
The new metavariables ?1, . . . , ?n generated by the lookup operation are all declared in
the new proof problem Σ′. The number of metavariables to which c is applied to is deﬁned
when the coercion is declared and may be less than the arity of c. In the latter case T
is a product and the coercion casts its k-th argument to be a function. The position k of
the casted argument is user deﬁned as well. The coerced term has then to be later uniﬁed
with ?k.
Theorem 6.3 (Correctness). The
C⇝,
F⇝, R⇑
⇝, R⇓
⇝,
ET
⇝, and
Et
⇝algorithms extended with
the set of rules presented in this section obey their speciﬁcation where ≼′′ is the following
admissible order relation: t′ ≼′′ t when t′ is obtained from t by replacing single placeholders
with terms, vectors of placeholders with vectors of terms, and terms uk with terms convertible
to (c u1 . . . uk . . . un) where c is a coercion declared in ∆for its kth argument.
Proof. We do not need to re-establish correctness for the rules given in the previous sections
since ≼′′ is admissible and includes ≼′. Correctness of the new rules given in this section is
established by rule inspection as usual.
In the following rule the coercion c is applied to its argument t unifying it with ?k. The
returned term t′ can still contains metavariables: ?1 . . .?k−1 may appear in the type of ?k,
thus unifying ?k with t may instantiate them6, but ?k+1 . . .?n do not appear in the type
of ?1 . . .?k, and thus cannot be all instantiated. This rule is applied as a fall back in case
C⇝−ok fails.
6In the case of dependent types the uniﬁcation of the types is a necessary condition for the uniﬁcation of
the two terms, as claimed by Strecker [32].

36
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
( C⇝−coercion)
Γ ⊢T1 ↣T2
∆
⇝k, c −→
?m ?k
−→
?n : T ′
2
Γ ⊢?k
?≡t
U=
⇝
Γ ⊢T ′
2
?≡T2
U⇝
Γ ⊢t : T1
?≡T2
C⇝c −→
?m ?k
−→
?n
Correctness of ( C⇝−coercion). Since ?k is uniﬁed with t in the second premise of the rule,
by deﬁnition of uniﬁcation we have Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢?k ↓t, and thus c −→
?m ?k
−→
?n ≼′′ t. Moreover,
the postconditions of coercion lookup
∆
⇝grant that c −→
?m ?k
−→
?n has type T ′
2 that is later
uniﬁed with T2. Thus the postconditions of the uniﬁcation algorithm allow us to prove that
c −→
?m ?k
−→
?n has a type convertible with T2.
The
C⇝−coercion rule automatically takes care of the insertion of coercions around
arguments of an application and around the types of an abstraction.
The following extension to ET
⇝take cares of insertion around the head of an application.
(ET −coercion)
Σ ⇝Σ ∪{Γ ⊢?1′ : Type⊤, Γ ⊢?1 : ?1′}
Σ ⇝Σ ∪{Γ; x1 :?1 ⊢?2′ : Type⊤, Γ; x1 :?1 ⊢?2 : ?2′}
Γ ⊢t −→
vr : T
?≡Πx :?1.?2
C⇝c −→
ws
Γ ⊢wi : Wi
i ∈{1 . . . s}
Γ ⊢c −−−−−−−−−−−→
(xs := ws : Ws) : Πx :?1.?2 |▲u1 −→
un
ET
⇝v : V
Γ ⊢t −−−−−−−−−−→
(xr := vr : Tr) : T |▲u1 −→
un
ET
⇝v : V
Correctness of ET −coercion. Its correctness follows trivially from the correctness of ( C⇝
−coercion).
Theorem 6.4 (Termination). The R⇑
⇝algorithm deﬁned by the set of rules presented above
with the addition of ( C⇝−coercion) and (ET −coercion) terminates.
Proof. Rule ( C⇝−coercion) clearly terminates. The rule (ET −coercion) issues a recursive
call to
ET
⇝without consuming u1, but the only rule that can be triggered is (ET −product),
that will immediately consume u1.
Inlining (ET −product) would result in a rule that consumes some input and thus clearly
terminates, but would be way less readable.

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
37
6.1. Implementation remarks. Since we allow coercion arguments not to be inferred
automatically (like proof obligations) their type may depend on the coerced term (e.g. the
proof that the coerced integer is greater than zero has an instance of the coerced integer in
its type, and the corresponding metavariable will have index greater than k).
Example 6.5 (Coercion with side conditions). Consider the following coercion set, declar-
ing the coercion v to nel from vectors to non empty lists.
∆= {(v to nel, 3)}
The environment holds the following type for the coercion:
(v to nel : ΠA : Type.Πn : N.Πv : Vect A n.n > 0 →∃l : List A, length l > 0) ∈Env
Now consider the term t = (Vcons N 0 (Vnil N) 2) and the following coercion problem:
Γ ⊢Vect N (0 + 1) ↣(∃l : List N, length l > 0)
∆
⇝
3, v to nel ?1 ?2 ?3 ?4 : (∃l : List ?1, length l > 0)
Γ ⊢?3
?≡t
U=
⇝
Γ ⊢(∃l : List ?1, length l > 0)
?≡(∃l : List N, length l > 0)
U⇝
Γ ⊢t : Vect N (0 + 1)
?≡(∃l : List N, length l > 0)
C⇝v to nel ?1 ?2 ?3 ?4
where the ﬁnal proof problem and substitutions are:
Σ = {Γ ⊢?4 : ?2 > 0}
Φ = {Γ ⊢?1 := N : Type, Γ ⊢?2 := 0 + 1 : N, Γ ⊢?3 := t : Vect N (0 + 1)}
Note that ?4 is still in Σ, thus it represent a proof obligation the user will be asked to solve.
Also note that the following coercion could be declared as well, with a higher precedence.
It is useful since it does not open a side condition when the type of the coerced vector is
explicit enough to make the proof that it is not empty constant (not depending on Γ nor
on the vector but just on its type) and thus embeddable in the body of the coercion.
(nev to nel, ΠA : Type.Πn : N.Πv : Vect A (n + 1).∃l : List A, length l > 0) ∈Env
The system would thus try nev to nel ﬁrst, and fall back to v to nel whenever needed.
Also note that this last coercion can be indexed as a cast from (Vect
( + 1)) to
(∃l : List , length l > 0) or in a less precise way. For example the approximation of the
source type could be relaxed to (Vect
). This will force the system to try to apply this
coercion even if the casted term is a vector whose length is not explicitly mentioning +1,
but is something that uniﬁes with ?j + 1. For example the length 1 ∗2 would unify, since
its normal form is (0 + 1) + 1.
7. Comparison with related work on Type Inference
Type inference is a very widely studied ﬁeld of computer science.
Nevertheless to the
authors’ knowledge there is no precise account of a type inference algorithm for the full
CIC calculus in the literature.
The extension to the typing algorithm of CIC with explicit casts in [28] follows the
same spirit of our reﬁnement algorithm for raw terms. However the work by Saibi does not
handle placeholders nor metavariables, and the presentation is in fact quite distant from
the actual implementation in the Coq interactive prover.

38
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
Another work in topic is [22] where Norell describes the bi-directional type inference
algorithm implemented in the Agda interactive prover. He presents the rules for a core
dependently typed calculus enriched with dependent pairs.
Unfortunately he omits the
rules for its extension with inductive types. It is thus hard to tell if Agda exploits the type
expected by the context to type check inductive constructors as in rule (R⇓
⇝−appl−k).
Agda does not provide an explicit
_
? placeholder but uses the expected type to know when
it is necessary to pad an application with meta variables in order to reduce the arity of its
type. In our setting this is equivalent to the following transformation: every application
(f −→a ) is turned into (f −→a
_
? ) whenever its expected type is known (i.e. not a metavariable).
One aspect that allows for a direct comparison with Coq and Agda is the handling of
implicit arguments. In both Agda and Coq, abstractions corresponding to arguments the
user can freely omit are statically labelled as such. The systems automatically generate
fresh metavariables as arguments to these binders and the type inference algorithm even-
tually instantiates them. Both systems give the user the possibility to locally override the
implicit arguments mechanism. In Coq the user can preﬁx the name of a constant with the

curly braces. This escaping mechanism is required because many lemmas admit multiple
and incompatible lists of implicit arguments.
As an example, consider a transitivity lemma eqt : ∀x, y, z.x = y →y = z →x = z. When
used in a forward proof step the user is likely to pass as arguments a proof p that a = b and
a proof q that b = c like in (eqt p q) to put in his context the additional fact a = c. In that
case values for x, y and z are determined by the types of p and q. On the contrary if the
lemma is used in backward proof step to prove that a = c, no value for y can be inferred,
thus the user is likely to use the lemma as in (eqt b) and expect the system to open two
new goals: a = b and b = c. The two diﬀerent uses of eqt make it impossible to statically
attach to it a single list of implicit arguments and at the same time to never resort to an
escape mechanism to temporarily forget that list.
In Matita the user can simply use the
_
? placeholder, thus no escaping mechanism is re-
quired.
In fact the type inference algorithm described in this paper lets the user write
(eqt
_
? p q) in the ﬁrst case as well as (eqt
_
? c) in the second one.7
The lack of a complete and formal study of type inference for raw CIC terms is probably
due to the many peculiarities of the CIC type system, in particular inductive and dependent
types, explicit polymorphism and the fact that type comparison is not structural, but up to
computational equivalence. We thus try to position our work with respect to some of the
main approaches adopted by type inference algorithms designed for programming languages.
7.1. Greedy versus delayed constraint solving. The most notable example of type
inference algorithm based on constraint solving is the one adopted for the Agda system [22].
Agda is based on a dependently typed programming language quite similar to CIC, but is
designed for programming and not for writing proofs. The type inference algorithm collects
constraints and checks for their satisﬁability. Nevertheless, their solution is not recorded in
the terms. This enables the user to remove an arbitrary part of an already type checked
7A trailing
_
? is automatically added to any term used in backward proof step.

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
39
term and have the typing of its context not inﬂuenced by the term just removed. While
this “compositionality” property is desirable for programming in a language with dependent
types, it is not vital for proof systems, where one seldom edits by hand type checked terms.
A strong characteristic of constraint based type inference is precise error reporting, as
described in [33]. Even if it the heuristics adopted in Matita [27] to discard spurious error
reports are slightly more complex than the ones proposed by Stuckey, we believe that they
provide a similar precision.
Greedy algorithms [14], like the one presented in this paper, are characterized by a
very predictable behavior, at the cost of being forced to take early decisions leading to
the rejection of some possibly well typed terms. Also remember that uniﬁcation has to
take computation into account, and user provided functions are known to be total only if
they are well typed. Thus the resolution of type constraints cannot be delayed for long.
According to our experience, predictability compensates for the extra type annotations the
user is sometimes required to produce to drive the greedy algorithm towards a solution.
7.2. Uniﬁcation based versus local constraint solving. Many algorithms to infer a
polymorphic type for a program prefer to avoid the use of uniﬁcation [24] since uniﬁcation
variables may represent type constraints coming from distant, loosely related, sub-terms.
Moreover a bi-directional approach pushes the type constraints of the context towards sub-
terms, making it eﬀectively possible to drop uniﬁcation altogether. These approaches also
scaled up to types with some sort of dependency over terms, as in [15].
Interactive provers based on type theory are for (good and) historical reasons based on
the two twin approaches. A small kernel based on decision procedures type checks (place-
holder free) terms, and a reﬁner based on heuristics deals with terms with holes performing
type inference. Since the kernel is the key component of the system, the one that must be
trusted, the language is designed to allow the type checking algorithm to be as simple as
possible. Explicit polymorphism makes type checking CIC terms decidable while allowing
the same degree of polymorphism as Fω. These explicit type annotations are usually left im-
plicit by the user and represent long-distance constraints. In this context uniﬁcation seems
to be a necessary device. Moreover, the most characterizing feature of CIC is that types are
compared taking computation into account, and that types can contain terms, in particular
functions applications. Thus the kernel is equipped with a quite elaborate machinery to
compute recursive functions and unfold deﬁnitions. Type inference has to provide a similar
machinery, and possibly extend it to handle types containing metavariables. This extension
is commonly named higher order uniﬁcation, and it is a really critical component of an
interactive prover. Recent important developments [16] heavily rely on a user-extensible
uniﬁcation algorithm [5], using it as a predictable form of Prolog-like inference engine. In
other words, uniﬁcation can be employed to infer terms (content) while type inference is
employed to infer types and type annotations in the case of explicit polymorphism. For
these many reasons, we believe that developing type inference on top of uniﬁcation is a
sound decision probably necessary to scale to a rich type system like CIC.
8. Conclusion
In this paper we studied the design of an eﬀective reﬁnement algorithm for the Calculus of
(Co)Inductive Constructions. Its eﬀectiveness has been validated in all the formalizations
carried on using the Matita interactive theorem prover [11, 1, 2, 3], whose reﬁner is based

40
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
on the algorithm described in this paper. Once again we stress that the reﬁner component,
while not being critical for the correctness of the prover, is the user’s main interlocutor, and
is thus critical for the overall user’s experience.
This algorithm is also the result of the complete rewrite the Matita ITP underwent
in the last couple of years.
The reﬁner algorithm described in this paper amounts to
approximatively 1600 lines of OCaml code, calling the higher order uniﬁcation algorithm
that amounts to a bit less than 1900 lines. To give a term of comparison to the reader,
the kernel of Matita, written by the same authors, amounts to 1500 lines of data structures
deﬁnitions and basic operations on them, 550 lines of conversion algorithm and 1400 of
type checking. More than 300 lines of the type checking algorithm are reused by the reﬁner
for checking inductive types positivity conditions and recursive or co-recursive functions
termination or productivity.
On top of this reﬁnement algorithm all primitive proof commands have been reimple-
mented. In the old implementation they were not taking full advantage of the reﬁner, par-
tially for historical reasons, partially because it was lacking support for placeholder vectors
and bi-directionality was not always exploited. The size of the code is now 48.9% of what
it used to be in the former implementation. In particular, it became possible to implement
many proof commands as simple “notations” for lambda-terms in external syntax.
A particularity of this work is that the presented algorithm deals with completely raw
terms, containing untyped placeholders, whose only precondition is to be syntactically well
formed.
In addition it also supports a very general form of coercive sub-typing, where
inserting the explicit cast may leave uninstantiated metavariables to be later ﬁlled by the
user. This eased the implementation of subset coercions in the style of [29], but that topic
falls outside the scope of the present paper and is thus not discussed.
The algorithm could be enhanced adding more rules, capable of propagating more
typing information. For instance, a speciﬁc type forcing rule for β-redexes (suggested by a
referee) could be in the form
(R⇓
⇝−beta)
Γ ⊢U
F⇝U′ : s
Γ ⊢u : U′ R⇓
⇝u′
Γ; x : U′ ⊢t : E[u′/x] R⇓
⇝t′
Γ ⊢(λx : U.t) u : E R⇓
⇝(λx : U′.t′) u′
enabling the system to propagate the expected type to the abstraction (compare this rule
with (R⇓−letin)). In practice the advantage of this rule is limited, since it is quite infrequent
for a user to write β-redexes. A type forcing rule for pattern matching based on the same
principles, propagating the expected type to the return type of the match, could be of
greater value, since this construct is more likely to come from the user input.
We will
consider adding such rules in a future implementation.
The reﬁnement algorithm we presented already validates many desired properties, like
correctness and termination. Nevertheless we did not even state the relative completeness
theorem. In a simpler framework, admitting most general uniﬁers, one could have stated
that given an oracle for uniﬁcation, the algorithm outputs a well typed reﬁnement every
time it is possible and that any other reﬁnement is less general than the produced one.
Unluckily CIC is higher order and does not admit most general uniﬁers.
To state the
relative completeness theorem one has to make the oracle aware of the whole reﬁnement

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
41
procedure and the oracle has to guess a uniﬁer (or all of them) such that the remaining
reﬁnement steps succeed. This makes the theorem way less interesting. Alternatively one
would have to add backtracking to compensate for errors made by the oracle, and make the
algorithm distant from the implemented one, that is essentially greedy and backtracking
free.
The algorithm presented in the paper is clearly not relatively complete.
For ex-
ample, the rules given in Section 3 do not accept the term f c where c : N and f :
match ?1 in N return λx.Type [O ⇒N | S (x : N) ⇒N →N]. The term is however
reﬁneable, for instance by instantiating ?1 with S O. To obtain a relatively complete al-
gorithm, we could add additional rules based on the invocation of the uniﬁer on diﬃcult
problems. For instance, for the example just shown it would be suﬃcient to unify N →?2
with match ?1 in N return λx.Type [O ⇒N | S (x : N) ⇒N →N] for a fresh metavariable
?2. However, we know in advance that the eﬃcient but incomplete algorithm implemented
in Matita always fails on such diﬃcult uniﬁcation problems. The same holds for the similar
algorithm implemented in Coq. Therefore a relatively complete version of the algorithm
would remain only of theoretical interest.
The following weaker theorem, which establishes completeness on well typed terms only,
can be easily proved by recursion over the proof tree and by inspection of all cases under
the hypothesis that every pair of convertible terms are uniﬁed by the identity metavariable
instantiation.
Theorem 8.1 (Completeness for well typed terms). For all well formed Σ, Φ, Γ and for
all t and T such that Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t : T we have Γ ⊢t : T R⇓
⇝t.
Acknowledgments. We deeply thank Jacques Carette and the anonymous referees for
their many observations and corrections.

42
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
Appendix A. Syntax-directed type-checking rules
The following appendix is an extract of the paper [4] in which the reader can ﬁnd all the
details of the type checking algorithm implemented in the Matita interactive prover. A few
aesthetic changes have been made to the adopted syntax to increase its consistency with
respect to the syntax adopted in this paper. The main diﬀerences are summarised in the
following list:
• We use the membership relation over the PTS set to type sorts and products
• The check for the consistency of the metavariable local substitution has been inlined in
the rule
• A new generic judgement (r : T) ∈Env has been introduced to provide a more compact
syntax for the lookup of the type of a generic object into the environment
• We inlined several auxiliary functions that were used in the presentation of the typecheck-
ing rule for case analysis.
This was made possible by the following abuse of notation: Env, Σ, Φ, ∅⊢t1 ▷whd
Π−−−→
xi : Ti.tn+1 is a shortcut to mean that for all i ∈{1 . . . n}
Σ, Φ, Γ; x1 : T1; . . . ; xi−1 : Ti−1 ⊢ti ▷whd Πxi : Ti.ti+1 and Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢tn+1 ▷whd tn+1.
Moreover, the rule presented in [4] is more liberal than the one presented here that just
uses the test (s, s′) ∈elim(PTS) to check that a non informative data is never analyzed to
obtain an informative one. The actual rules used in the kernel and the reﬁner of Matita
also allow in every situation the elimination of inhabitants of singleton inductive types,
whose deﬁnition is given in [4].
In this section, I will be short for
Π−−−→
xl : Ul.inductive
I1
l : A1 := k1
1 : K1
1 . . . km1
1
: Km1
1
with . . .
with In
l : An := k1
n : K1
n . . . kmn
n
: Kmn
n
A.1. Environment formation rules. Environment formation rules (judgement Env ⊢
WF, function typecheck obj)
∅⊢WF
Env ⊢WF
d undeﬁned in Env
Env, Σ ⊢WF
Env, Σ, Φ ⊢WF
Env, Σ, Φ, ∅⊢T : S
Env, Σ, Φ, ∅⊢S ▷whd S′ where S′ is a sort
Env, Σ, Φ, ∅⊢b : T ′
Env, Σ, Φ, ∅⊢T ↓T ′
Env ∪(Σ, Φ, deﬁnition d : T := b) ⊢WF
Env ⊢WF
d undeﬁned in Env
Env, Σ ⊢WF
Env, Σ, Φ ⊢WF
Env, Σ, Φ, ∅⊢T : S
Env, Σ, Φ, ∅⊢S ▷whd S′ where S′ is a sort
Env ∪(Σ, Φ, axiom d : T) ⊢WF

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
43
Env ⊢WF
−→
fn undeﬁned in Env
Env, Σ ⊢WF
Env, Σ, Φ ⊢WF
Env, Σ, Φ, ∅⊢Ti : Si
Env, Σ, Φ, ∅⊢Si ▷whd S′
i where S′
i is a sort
Ti = Π
−−−−−→
xi
pi : T i
pi.T i
pi+1
Env, Σ, Φ, [f1 : T1; . . . ; fn : Tn;
−−−−−→
xi
pi : T i
pi] ⊢ti : T ′i
pi+1
Env, Σ, Φ, [f1 : T1; . . . ; fn : Tn;
−−−−−→
xi
pi : T i
pi] ⊢T i
pi+1 ↓T ′i
pi+1
)
i ∈{1 . . . n}
−→
tn guarded by destructors ([4], Sect. 6.3)
Env ∪



Σ, Φ,
let rec f1(
−−−−−→
x1
p1 : T 1
p1) : T 1
p1+1 := t1 and . . .
and fn(−−−−−→
xn
pn :T n
pn) : T n
pn+1 := tn


⊢WF
Env ⊢WF
−→
fn undeﬁned in Env
Env, Σ ⊢WF
Env, Σ, Φ ⊢WF
Env, Σ, Φ, ∅⊢Ti : Si
Env, Σ, Φ, ∅⊢Si ▷whd S′
i where S′
i is a sort
Ti = Π
−−−−−→
xi
pi : T i
pi.T i
pi+1
Env, Σ, Φ, [f1 : T1; . . . ; fn : Tn;
−−−−−→
xi
pi : T i
pi] ⊢ti : T ′i
pi+1
Env, Σ, Φ, [f1 : T1; . . . ; fn : Tn;
−−−−−→
xi
pi : T i
pi] ⊢T i
pi+1 ↓T ′i
pi+1
)
i ∈{1 . . . n}
−→
tn guarded by constructors ([4], Sect. 6.3)
Env ∪



Σ, Φ,
let corec f1(
−−−−−→
x1
p1 : T 1
p1) : T 1
p1+1 := t1 and . . .
and fn(−−−−−→
xn
pn :T n
pn) : T n
pn+1 := tn


⊢WF
Env ⊢WF
I1
l , . . . , In
l , k1
1, . . . , kmn
n
undeﬁned in Env
Env, Σ ⊢WF
Env, Σ, Φ ⊢WF
all the conditions in [4], Sect. 6.1 are satisﬁed
Env ∪(Φ, Σ, I) ⊢WF
A.2. Metasenv formation rules. Metasenv formation rules (judgement Env, Σ ⊢WF,
function typecheck metasenv)
Env, ∅⊢WF
Env, Σ ⊢WF
?i undeﬁned in Σ
Env, Σ, ∅, Γ ⊢WF
Env, Σ, ∅, Γ ⊢T : S
Env, Σ, ∅, Γ ⊢S ▷whd S′where S′ is a sort
Env, Σ ∪(Γ ⊢?i : T) ⊢WF

44
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
A.3. Subst formation rules. Subst formation rules (judgement Env, Σ, Φ ⊢WF, function
typecheck subst)
Env, Σ, ∅⊢WF
Env, Σ, Φ ⊢WF
?i undeﬁned in Σ and in Φ
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢WF
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T : S
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢S ▷whd S′ where S′ is a sort
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t : T ′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T ↓T ′
Env, Σ, Φ ∪(Γ ⊢?i : T := t) ⊢WF
A.4. Context formation rules. Context formation rules (judgement Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢WF,
function typecheck context)
Env, Σ, Φ, ∅⊢WF
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢WF
x is undeﬁned in Γ
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T : S
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢S ▷whd S′ where S′ is a sort
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ∪(x : T) ⊢WF
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢WF
x is undeﬁned in Γ
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T : S
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢S ▷whd S′ where S′ is a sort
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t : T ′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T ↓T ′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ∪(x : T := t) ⊢WF
A.5. Term typechecking rules. Term typechecking rules (judgement Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t : T,
function typeof)
(K−variable)
(x : T) ∈Γ
or
(x : T := t) ∈Γ
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢x : T
(K−sort)
(s1, s2) ∈PTS
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢s1 : s2
(K−meta)
(x1 : T1; . . . ; xn : Tn ⊢?i : T) ∈Σ
or
(x1 : T1; . . . ; xn : Tn ⊢?i : T := t) ∈Φ
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢ti : Ti[−−−−−−→
xi−1/ti−1]
i ∈{1 . . . n}
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢?i[t1; . . . ; tn] : T[−−−→
xn/tn]
(K−constant)
(r : T) ∈Env
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢r : T
(K−deﬁnition)
(Σ′, Φ′, deﬁnition d : T := b) ∈Env
or
(Σ′, Φ′, axiom d : T) ∈Env
Σ′ = ∅
Φ′ = ∅
(d : T) ∈Env

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
45
(K−letrec)



Σ′, Φ′,
let rec f1(
−−−−−→
x1
p1 : T 1
p1) : T 1
p1+1 := t1 and . . .
and fn(−−−−−→
xn
pn :T n
pn) : T n
pn+1 := tn


∈Env
Σ′ = ∅
Φ′ = ∅
1 ≤i ≤n
(fi : Π
−−−−−→
xi
pi : T i
pi.T i
pi+1) ∈Env
(K−letcorec)



Σ′, Φ′,
let corec f1(
−−−−−→
x1
p1 : T 1
p1) : T 1
p1+1 := t1 and . . .
and fn(−−−−−→
xn
pn :T n
pn) : T n
pn+1 := tn


∈Env
Σ′ = ∅
Φ′ = ∅
1 ≤i ≤n
(fi : Ti) ∈Env
(K−inductive)
(Σ′, Φ′, I) ∈Env
Σ′ = ∅
Φ′ = ∅
1 ≤p ≤n
(Ip
l : Π−−−→
xl : Ul.Ap) ∈Env
(K−constructor)
(Σ′, Φ′, I) ∈Env
Σ′ = ∅
Φ′ = ∅
1 ≤p ≤n
1 ≤j ≤mp
(kj
p : Π−−−→
xl : Ul.Kj
p) ∈Env
(K−lambda)
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T : S
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢S ▷whd S′
S′ is a sort or a meta
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ∪(n : T) ⊢u : U
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢λn : T.u : Πn : T.U
(K−product)
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T : s1
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ∪(n : T) ⊢U : s2
(s1, s2, s3) ∈PTS
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢Πn : T.U : s3
(K−letin)
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t : T ′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T : S
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T ↓T ′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ∪(x : T := t) ⊢u : U
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢let (x : T) := t in u : U[x/t]
(K−appl −base)
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢h : Πx : T.U
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t : T ′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T ↓T ′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢h t : U[x/t]
(K−appl −rec)
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢(h t1) t2 · · · tn : T
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢h t1 t2 · · · tn : T

46
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI
(K−match)
(Σ′, Φ′, I) ∈Env
Σ′ = ∅
Φ′ = ∅
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t : T
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T ▷whd Ip
l −→
ul
−→
u′
r
Ap[−−−→
xl/ul] = Π−−−−→
yr : Yr.s
Kj
p[−−−→
xl/ul] = Π
−−−−−−→
xj
nj : Qj
nj.Ip
l −→
xl −→
vr
j = 1 . . . mp
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢U : V
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢V ▷whd Π−−−−→
zr : Yr.Πzr+1 : Ip
l −→
ul −→
zr.s′
(s, s′) ∈elim(PTS)
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢λ
−−−−−−→
xj
nj : P j
nj.tj : Tj
j = 1, . . . , mp
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢Tj ↓Π
−−−−−−→
xj
nj : Qj
nj.U −→
vr (kp
j −→
ul
−→
xj
nj)
j = 1, . . . , mp
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢
match t in Ip
l return U
[kp
1 (
−−−−−−→
x1
n1 : P 1
n1) ⇒t1 | . . . |kp
mp (
−−−−−−−−→
xmp
nmp : P mp
nmp) ⇒tmp ] : U −→
u′
r t
A.6. Term conversion rules. Term conversion rules (judgement Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T ↓T ′,
function are convertible; ↓= means test eq only = true; ↓• means that the current rule must
be intended as two rules, one with all the ↓• replaced by ↓, the other with all the ↓• replaced
by ↓=)
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T =α T ′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T ↓= T ′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T ↓= T ′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T ↓T ′
Typeu ≤Typev
Typev ≤Typeu
are declared constraints ([4], Sect. 4.3)
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢Typeu ↓= Typev
Typeu ≤Typev
is a declared constraint ([4], Sect. 4.3)
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢Typeu ↓Typev
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢Prop ↓Typeu
lc = t1, . . . , tn
lc′ = t′
1, . . . , t′
n
for all i = 1, . . . , n
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢ti ↓• t′
i
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢?j[lc] ↓•?j[lc′]
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢T1 ↓= T ′
1
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ∪(x : T1) ⊢T2 ↓• T ′
2
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢Πx : T1.T2 ↓• Πx : T ′
1.T ′
2
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ∪(x : T) ⊢t ↓• t′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢λx : T.t ↓• λx : T ′.t′
In the rule above, no check is performed on the source of the abstractions, since we assume
we are comparing well-typed terms whose types are convertible.
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢h ↓• h′
for all i = 1, . . . , n
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢ti ↓= t′
i
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢h −→
tn ↓• h′ −→
t′
n

A BI-DIRECTIONAL REFINEMENT ALGORITHM FOR CIC
47
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t ↓• t′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢U ↓• U′
for all i = 1, . . . , mp
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢λ
−−−−−→
xi
ni : P i
ni.ti ↓• λ
−−−−−−→
xi
ni : P ′i
ni.t′
i
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢match t in Ip
l return U [kp
1 (
−−−−−−→
x1
n1 : P 1
n1) ⇒t1| . . . |kp
mp (
−−−−−−−−→
xmp
nmp : P mp
nmp) ⇒tmp] ↓•
match t′ in Ip
l return U [kp
1 (
−−−−−−→
x1
n1 : P ′1
n1) ⇒t′
1| . . . |kp
mp (
−−−−−−−−−→
xmp
nmp : P ′mp
nmp) ⇒t′
mp]
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t ▷whd t′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢u ▷whd u′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t′ ↓• u′
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢t ↓• u
In the previous rule, t′ and u′ need not be weak head normal forms: any term obtained
from t (respectively, u) by reduction (even non-head reduction) will do. Indeed, the less
reduction is performed, the more eﬃcient the conversion test usually is.
A.7. Term reduction rules. Term reduction rules.
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢(λx : T.u) t ▷β u[x/t]
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢let (x : T) := t in u ▷ζ u[x/t]
(∅, ∅, deﬁnition d : T := b) ∈Env
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢d ▷δ b
(Γ′ ⊢?i : T := t) ∈Φ
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢?i[u1 ; . . . ; un] ▷δ t[dom(Γ′)/−→
un]
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢
match kp
i
−→
tl
−→
t′
ni in Ip
l return U
[kp
1 (
−−−−−−→
x1
n1 : P 1
n1) ⇒u1| . . . |kp
mp (
−−−−−−−−→
xmp
nmp : P mp
nmp) ⇒ump] ▷ι ui[
−→
xi
ni/−→
t′
ni]



∅, ∅,
let rec f1(
−−−−−→
x1
p1 : T 1
p1) : T 1
p1+1 := t1 and . . .
and fn(−−−−−→
xn
pn :T n
pn) : T n
pn+1 := tn


∈Env
k ∈{1 . . . n}
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢fk u1 ...(ki
j −→
vnj)... um ▷µ tk[
−→
xk
m/u1, . . . , (ki
j −→
vnj), . . . , um]
Notice that (ki
j −→
vnj) must occur in the position of the recursive argument of fk.
This
implies that, for this reduction to be performed, fk must be applied at least up to its
recursive argument.

48
A. ASPERTI, W. RICCIOTTI, C. SACERDOTI COEN, AND E. TASSI



∅, ∅,
let corec f1(
−−−−−→
x1
p1 : T 1
p1) : T 1
p1+1 := t1 and . . .
and fn(−−−−−→
xn
pn :T n
pn) : T n
pn+1 := tn


∈Env
k ∈{1 . . . n}
Env, Σ, Φ, Γ ⊢
match fk −→
uq in Ip
l return U
[kp
1 (
−−−−−→
y1
n1 : P 1
n1) ⇒v1| . . . |kp
mp (
−−−−−−−−→
ymp
nmp : P mp
nmp) ⇒vmp] ▷ν
match tk[
−→
xk
q/−→
uq] in Ip
l return U
[kp
1 (
−−−−−→
y1
n1 : P 1
n1) ⇒v1| . . . |kp
mp (
−−−−−−−−→
ymp
nmp : P mp
nmp) ⇒vmp]
Notice that here q can be zero.
