Does Syntactic Knowledge help English-Hindi SMT ?
Taraka Rama,Karthik Gali,Avinesh PVS
Language Technologies Research Centre,

Abstract
In this paper we explore various parameter
settings of the state-of-art Statistical Ma-
chine Translation system to improve the
quality of the translation for a ’distant’ lan-
guage pair like English-Hindi.
We pro-
posed new techniques for efﬁcient reorder-
ing. A slight improvement over the base-
line is reported using these techniques.
We also show that a simple pre-processing
step can improve the quality of the trans-
lation signiﬁcantly.
1
Introduction
Using Statistical Machine Translation techniques
for translating between European languages has
been quite successful in the last few years.
MOSES(Koehn et al., 2007), the SMT tool kit is
used very frequently in the machine translation ex-
periments and also for deploying real time sys-
tems.
A glimpse of papers being published at
any major NLP conference shows that the tech-
niques have been widely popular not only between
linguistically related European languages but also
between English-Arabic and English-Chinese ,
which are linguistically distant pairs. There has
been some work done(Venkatapathy and Banga-
lore, ) on the English-Hindi Machine translation
but there is lot more to be explored. In this pa-
per we propose new reordering approaches for im-
proving the translation quality.
The translation
quality is evaluated using the widely popular Bleu
metric(Papineni et al., 2001). We compare our-
selves with the baseline score and report the im-
provements. The paper has a brief outline as fol-
lows. In Section 2 we identify the problem areas,
Section 3 elaborates on the approach we adopted,
Section 4 briefs about the data sets, Section 5 talks
about initial experiments with different Moses set-
tings. Section 6 gives a picture of the results and
the various results performed and in Section 7 we
make observations based on the experiments’ re-
sults and Section 8 discusses the future directions
to be taken and the new subareas to be explored.
2
Scope for Improvement
We compare the Bleu score of English-hindi with
English-German, English-French in Table 1. The
Bleu score for the English-French and English-
German language pairs were obtained from the
Statistical Machine Translation website1. For the
English-Hindi pair, the Bleu score is reported as
given in the Shared Task website2.
The differences in the sizes of the training sets
have to be kept in mind, when reporting the Bleu
score of the translated language pairs. The huge
difference in the Bleu scores of English-French
and English-Hindi is due to the sizes of the train-
ing corpora. When normalising the sizes of the
training corpora, we can observe that the real dif-
ference in the Bleu scores. At this point we only
have a single reference translation.
Ideally, the
system has to be compared against the multiple
refernce data sets and then Bleu score should be
an average of all the Bleu scores. One obvious rea-
son for the lower Bleu score is the linguistic dis-
tance between the two languages. The underlying
structural differences between the two languages
manifest themselves as a relatively low score. The
structural differences can be broken into smaller
subproblems and then can be addressed separately.
We have identiﬁed the following problem areas
1http://www.statmt.org/matrix/
2http://ltrc.iiit.ac.in/nlptools2008/resources2.php

Language-Pair
Bleu Score
English-French
31.36
English-German
25.36
English-Hindi
17.70
Table 1: Comparision of Bleu Scores for Various language Pairs
where there is a huge scope for improvization. The
most signiﬁcant difference is in the word order
(chunk order) of the two languages.
So the problem corresponding to this difference
is the issue of reordering.
This forms a major
weighting factor for the low Bleu score. Infact the
performance of the Moses, when it comes to word
to word translation is quite good. When we look
into the Unigram Bleu score the score is as high
as 60 which corroborates this claim. But there is a
problem of unknown words in the output in the tar-
get language. So the major thrust in the course of
our experiments was to tackle this issue of reorder-
ing. Nonethless, the problem of unknown word
translation is also examined.
3
Our Approach
Our hypothesis is that instead of trying to reorder
the target language ouput using POS tags or huge
language models or chunk language models, we
instead go for the rearrangement of the words in
the source language itself. The quality can also be
improved by using richer and huge language mod-
els. This in itself, is a costly procedure. Especially,
for a language like English which has syntactic
parsers of high quality, it is always desirable to tap
these existing resources. Our modelling goes as
follows. The core idea is that learning the reorder-
ing relations from the parse of the source language
sentence would fetch better results. The source
sentence is parsed and hence reordered by learning
the source-target reordering relations using POS
tags on both the sides. This scheme would ensure
that the transfer rules learnt are more generic and
hence the intution that they would improve the per-
formance of the system.
The second hypothesis is concerning the pres-
ence of the unknown words in the target language
output. Two possible ways are factored models
as given in(Koehn and Hoang, 2007) and using a
bilingual dictionary to translate the lemmas and if
the unknown word is a named entity then translit-
erate it. Factored models are designed to over-
come the limitations of the phrase-based transla-
tions. The factored models make use of lemmas,
POS tags and morphology to generate the surface
forms while translating. Recently, factored mod-
els are becoming famous and hence we opted out
to test the factored models using POS taggers and
morph analysers, which are available for both En-
glish and Hindi side. We toyed with the distor-
tion limit and we observed that when we allow un-
limited translations the Bleu score improved. But
the improvement was not so much. Mention the
Bleu score. Here again we found no signiﬁcant
improvement over the old models. The hypothesis
is falsiﬁed if the Bleu score shows no improve-
ment.
4
Data Sets and Baseline
We initially explored various parameters of the
MOSES to see how the quality improves.
The
training data for learning word alignments was
conducted on 7000 sentence parallel corpora pro-
vided in the Shared Task(taken from EILMT cor-
pus). We also went on to check how the accuracy
increases by increasing the size of the monolin-
gual corpus on which language model is trained.
For the baseline the following parameters were
adopted. The distortion limit was kept at 6 and
the lexicalised reordering models were trained by
using msd-bidirectional-fe.
The distortion limit
shows how often the phrases get reordered. The
MOSES has both a distance based reordering
model and a lexicalised reordering model. Lexi-
calised reordering model gives the orientation of
a phrase. The distortion limit is simply the abso-
lute of the difference of the last word of the pre-
viously translated English phrase and the position
of the ﬁrst word in the current phrase. The lan-
guage model was trained on the hindi side of the
training data set which has 7000 sentences. We
have taken a language model of order 5 which was
trained using SRILM toolkit(Stolcke, 2002). The
lexicalised reordering models give the orientation
of a particular phrase while training. Its either that
when the phrase is being translated if there a align-
ment point is found to the left of the current phrase

then the orientaton is mono otherwise if the next
alignment point is found to the right then the orien-
tation is swap. The models are trained bidirection-
ally and on both sides. The alignment heuristics
used were align-grow-diag-ﬁnal. Further details
can be obtained from (Och and Ney, 2003).
5
Initial Experiments
We observed that decreasing the maximum phrase
length does not improve the Bleu score. We pro-
ceeded to test if the lexicalised reordering models
really contribute to the Bleu score. We observed
that removing the lexicalised ordering decreases
the Bleu score. We also toyed with the distortion
limit parameter. We observed that allowing unlim-
ited distortions improves the Bleu Score. Hence
the distortion limit was always kept at -1 for al-
lowing unlimited reorderings. We have conducted
the following set of experiments.
Note that all
the experiments which we have conducted can be
categorised as pre-processing steps. The motive
was to examine if we can tap all the available rich
resources to do some pre-processing to achieve
improvement in the Bleu score. Apart from the
experiments with parser and bilingual dictionary
we also checked whether any other pre-processing
steps could improve the Bleu score.
At this stage we have gone for another factored
model experiment where, instead of guessing the
POS tag through the morph information we go
for direct lemma to lemma translation and morph-
morph translation. Then the morph information
and the lemma are used to guess the POS tag and
then the POS tags, morph and the lemma are used
to generate the surface forms. Although a sign-
ﬁcant improvement has been made still the Bleu
score was far away from the baseline. We used
the morphological analyzers developed as a part
of SHAKTI project(Bharati et al., 2003) to extract
the morph information and lemma and POS tags.
We also experimented by changing the maximum
phrase length to 3 and then 4 as given in(Koehn et
al., 2003). But there was no improvement made
in the translation.
We also experimented with
the Minimum Bayes Risk Decoder(Kumar et al.,
2004) whose ’Loss Function’ is based on the Bleu
scoring function itself.
6
Results
We tried out the following set of experiments.
The morph information guesses the POS tag, the
lemma is translated, lemma is also used to guess
the POS tag of the target side.
In the end the
guessed POS tag and the translated lemma are
used to generate the surface form.
The results
were not good enough and did not even reach the
base line. Next we tried outanother experiment us-
ing another conﬁguration of the factored models to
improve the translation. All this is in an attempt to
improve the translation of the verbs. The english
verbs either occur as a single form or with the aux-
illary verb preceding the main verb. In Hindi the
auxillary verbs follow the main verb in the form of
a copula at the end. For example the ”is” verb is
word aligned to ”heM” or ”hai” or ”thA”. We have
observed that the preposition reordering is ﬁne. In
all this experiments we assumed that the word to
word alignemnts are correct. This task has to be
addressed in a separate paper.
6.1
Learning reorderings from Parser
The objective was to incorporate as much as syn-
tactic information possible to affect the reordering.
So we tried to learn the rules of reordering which
govern the reorderings from the parallel corpus.
We wanted to tap the resources available for en-
glish as much as possible. Here we used Libin’s
dependency parser(Shen, 2006) to learn the struc-
ture of the english sentence. Then the target POS
order is taken to learn the word order rules. These
rules were then applied on the english training data
and then the training is done as usual. The follow-
ing type of rules have been learnt.
VB --- VB
(6)
(6)
IN
NN-1 --- NN1
IN
(4)
(5)
(4)
(5)
IN˜1_NN&_VB˜2 ==> NN&_IN˜1_VB˜2
We achieved the baseline’s score at this point.
At this point we used the additional hindi corpora
of 7,000 hindi sentences for training the language
model and could get a improvement of 0.65 over
the base line. When the dictionary was incorpo-
rated in the reordering model, there was a slight
improvement of 0.05 in the Bleu score.
6.2
Dictionary Experiments
The English-Hindi bilinugal dictionary was used
to translate the unknown words given by the sys-
tem. The root of the english words was simply
replaced by the corresponding hindi root as a part
of incorporating the dictionary. When the bilin-

System
Bleu Score
Baseline
17.70
Parser
17.70
Dictionary
17.75
Language Model
18.35
Table 2: Results of Dictionary and Parser Steps
System
Bleu Score
Baseline
17.70
Preprocessing
18.09
After Tuning
19.98
Table 3: Results of Preprocessing steps
gual dictionary was applied on the unknown words
on the tuned output there was no improvement in
the Bleu score over the baseline model. However
an increase in the Bleu score was observed when
the dictionary was used to replace the unknown
words in the output of the reordering phase. Ta-
ble 2 shows the results of this experiment. As ex-
pected when the language model was trained us-
ing additional corpora there was an increase in the
Bleu score.
6.3
Preprocessing Experiments
The initial experiment was to remove the end of
sentence markers. We only removed the end of
sentence markers of the declarative sentences. No
other type of end of sentence markers were re-
moved. This was done on the training, develop-
ment as well as the test set. The markers can be
added at the end after the translation is complete.
This experiment improved the Bleu score by 0.39
on test set. This experiment was conducted with-
out any tuning.
6.4
Tuning
Then we tuned our trained model parameters on
the development set and then tested the model on
the previously used test set. The tuning was done
using the Minimum Error Rate Training(Och,
2003) provided in MOSES tool kit itself. We used
the model which was trained on the data with the
end-of-sentence markers removed for declarative
sentences. The Bleu score observed was 19.98.
All these experiments were done on the language
model trained on the training model. More experi-
ments have to be conducted on the larger monolin-
gual corpora. Table 3 shows the results of the ex-
periments which involve the pre-processing steps.
7
Observations
In the course of our expriments, the following ob-
servations were made.
The Bleu score did not
show any signiﬁcant improvement when the parser
was used to reorder the sentences on the sources
side. This falsiﬁes our initial hypothesis that re-
ordering relations learnt from the parse would be
more generic and hence would improve the perfor-
mance. The other pre-processing techniques like
using a bilingual dictionary did not bring about
any change in the Bleu score. One interesting ob-
servation was that upon deleting the end of sen-
tence markers and storing them elsewhere the Bleu
score showed a asigniﬁcant rise from 17.70 to
18.09. This is a considerable improvement when
we consider the naivete of this pre-processing step.
An improvement of 12.8% on the initial baseline
was observed after the baseline model was tuned
on the development set and tested on the test set.
8
Future Directions
Based on the above initial experiments we believe
that reordering of the target language phrases im-
prove substantially by tapping the available re-
sources for English. These experiments are only
a ﬁrst step in improving the Bleu Score and much
more has to be achieved.
