Feature Based Task Recommendation in Crowdsourcing with Implicit
Observations
Habibur Rahman
University of Texas at Arlington

Lucas Joppa
Microsoft Research

Senjuti Basu Roy
New Jersey Institute of Technology

Abstract
We initiate the study of task recommendation problem
for citizen science crowdsourcing platforms, where we
leverage both implicit feedback and explicit features of
the tasks. We assume that we are given a set of work-
ers, a set of tasks, interactions (such as the number of
times a worker has completed a particular task), and the
presence of explicit features of each task (such as, task
location). We intend to recommend tasks to the workers
by exploiting implicit interactions, and the presence or
absence of explicit features in the tasks. We present two
alternative optimization problems,and propose respec-
tive solutions. We compare our solutions against multi-
ple state-of-the-art techniques using a real world large
citizen science dataset.
Introduction
Crowdsourcing platforms, such as Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk or Crowdﬂower, have recently gained immense pop-
ularity due to their elegant framework, where a task re-
quester can get work done by numerous virtual workers for
very low compensation. One common problem in these plat-
forms is that workers have to suffer huge latency to ﬁnd suit-
able tasks, which creates dissatisfaction and eventually leads
to the abandonment of the platform. Task recommendation
problems are studied in the crowdsourcing context, where
the objective is to recommend a set of tasks to each worker
such that these tasks are best suited for the workers (Geiger
and others 2014; Yuen and others 2012). In this work, we
aim at leveraging the task completion history of the workers
(referred to as implicit feedback) and augment that with ex-
plicit task characteristics or features to recommend tasks to
the workers. Our focus of investigation is limited to citizen
science crowdsourcing applications where the importance of
effective task recommendation is pivotal (Xue and others
2013). We focus on the crowdsourcing of biodiversity ob-
servations, where volunteer visit sites, observe species, and
report their ﬁndings via web applications. Currently, a vol-
unteer, upon identifying a species, uploads information into
the server specifying the details of the identiﬁcation. A com-
mon problem which frequently occurs in this scenario is in-
correct identiﬁcation. A reliable task recommender system
Copyright c⃝2016, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
can alleviate the problem. If we have historical data on how
many tasks a volunteer has successfully performed and those
observations are on what species and from which locations,
then we can lower the risk in incorrect identiﬁcation by ask-
ing volunteers to identify species they have prior experience
with.
Methodologies
Notations: W
=
⟨w1, w2, w3 . . . wnw⟩and T
=
⟨t1, t2, t3, . . . tnt⟩represents the set of workers and tasks re-
spectively. The relationship between workers and tasks is
represented by matrix Cnw×nt, where cwi represents the
number of times worker w has completed task i. The prefer-
ence matrix P is a boolean version of C, such that pwi = 1,
if cwi ≥1, otherwise pwi = 0. Ynt×nl represents the explicit
task feature matrix, where yil ∈{0, 1} denotes the absence
or presence of feature l for task i. Worker feature prefer-
ence matrix is denoted as Xnw×nl. Additionally, Unw×nf
and Vnt×nf are the two latent factor matrices, where U is
for the workers and V is for the tasks.
Formulation 1 - Feature Preference Model: We assume
that the reason that a particular worker has completed a par-
ticular task is because the worker has a hidden preference
over the task features which we want to uncover. As an ex-
ample, if locations are used as task features, we can learn
the preference of workers for different location, which can
be used for recommend new task to workers. Based on the
explicit knowledge of task feature matrix Y and worker task
completion matrix we learn the preference of each worker in
the feature space or X. Formally, we want to minimize the
following objective function.
M =
X
w,i
qwi(pwi −xwyi)2 + λ(∥X∥2)
(1)
X ≥0
(2)
qwi = 1 + α × cwi
(3)
Here, qwi is designed such that, the weight of positive sig-
nals is ampliﬁed. Q denotes the matrix representing the val-
ues of qwi for all workers and tasks. If a particular obser-
vation has high conﬁdence the system will choose xw such
that xwyi becomes close to 1. α is set to a positive value
indicating the conﬁdence for the positive signals over neg-
ative signals. By solving M, we get the solution for user
arXiv:1602.03291v2  [cs.AI]  7 Sep 2016

vector, xw = (Y tQwY + λI)−1Y tQwPw. Due to the non-
negativity constratint of X, we solve the following optimiza-
tion problem as ∥(Y tQwY +λI)xw −Y tQwPw∥2. We refer
to our algorithm as Feat-Based-NNLS or Feature Based
Non-Negative-Least Square.
Formulation 2: Latent Factor Model: We consider the
following objective function for task recommendation -
(4)
M =
X
w,i
qwi(pwi −uwvi)2
+ λ(∥U∥2 + ∥V ∥2 −
X
i,i′
vt
iv′
iSim(i, i′))
Here, the goal is to ﬁnd U and V such that it minimizes the
error, where λ is the regularization parameter. For any new
task, the predicted recommendation score is calculated by
multiplying Uw with Vi. To incorporate the task similarity
into the latent factor based formulation, we add a penalty
term in the equation. Our intuition is that if the similarity
between any two tasks is high, then they should also be sim-
ilar in the latent factor space. Our notion of task similarity
is deﬁned as sim(ti, tj) =
1
1+e−Y t
i Yj . The analytical solution
for U and V is given below.
uw = (V tQuV + λI)−1V tQwPw
(5)
vi = (U tQiU + λI)−1(U tQiPi + λ ∗0.5 ∗
nt
X
i′=1
Sim(i, i′)v′
i)
(6)
We solve the optimization problem by alternating and ﬁxing
U and V . This method is referred to as Implicit Factorization
with Task Similarity or IFTS.
Experiments
Dataset: We collected data from a popular citizen science
platform named Ebird 1. Ebird is a popular citizen science
platform for bird observations. We crawled all the observa-
tions from year 2012 and randomly choose a set of 5000
workers for our experiments leading to 1767 tasks with a
total number of 2.5 million observations. We used 294 loca-
tions as task features.Evaluation: We evaluate our methods
using a hold out test set. We randomly choose 90% of our
data as the training set and remaining 10% as the test set
which gives us the ground truth. All the results are an aver-
age of three runs.
Implemented
Baseline
Algorithms:
i)Implicit-ALS-Neg:
This
algorithm
is
imple-
mented according to (Lin and others 2014).The algorithm
uses alternating least square method considering negative
signals. If a worker has not completed a task then the total
number of times that task has been completed by other
users is considered as the weight of the negative signal. ii)
Feature-Based-Reg: We assume that the task-feature
matrix V is given to us. We solve the regularized regres-
sion (Wu and others 2006) problem (Cij −xiyj)2 + λ∥X∥2
to ﬁnd X.
1Ebird.org
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Precision
Recall
Feature-Based-NNLS
Feature-Based-Regression
Implicit-ALS-Negative
IFTS
Figure 1: PR Curve
Algorithm
MPR
Impl-ALS-Neg
17.3
Feat-Based-Reg
13.706
Feat-Based-NNLS 5.68
IFTS
6.87
Table 1: MPR
Evaluation Metrics: We use Mean Percentile Rank-
ing(MPR) proposed by
(Hu and others 2008) for evalu-
ating implicit feedback. The mathematical formula to cal-
culate MPR is
P
ij cijρij
P
ij cij . ρij is the percentile ranking of
the task j for worker i. Our recommendation is based
on the estimated Worker-Task Preference matrix, ˆP. For
Feat-Based-NNLS, ˆP
= XY , where X is Worker-
Feature matrix and Y is Task-Feature matrix. For IFTS,
ˆP = UV . We experimented with different values of α and
choose α = 50. We also use Precision Recall curve as our
second evaluation method. In this method, we want to eval-
uate our method based on how many task in the test set we
can correctly predict by taking only (t%) of the top-tasks.
We vary t (in an increment of 1%) in a continuous manner
and obtain PR curve.
Summary of Results: The objective of our empirical
study is to see how effective our proposed task recommen-
dation models are in comparison with the baseline models.
Our proposed algorithm Feature-Based-NNLS con-
vincingly outperforms the baseline algorithms in both MPR
and PR-Curve. The reason behind the worse performance of
Implicit-ALS-Negative is that the worker does not
choose tasks from a list of available task list, so a task that
hasn’t been attempted by the user really has no preference
rather than “negative preference”. IFTS also performs rea-
sonably well compare to other methods.
Related Work
Task recommendation with explicit observation is studied
in (Yuen and others 2012). We are the ﬁrst to treat worker-
task completion history as implicit observations and incor-
porate task feature information for recommendation. Works
in recommender systems such as (Forbes and Zhu 2011;
Nguyen and Zhu 2013; Koren 2008) mostly rely on explicit
feedback or content based feedback, whereas our model re-
lies on implicit feedback. This precludes direct adaptation of
their techniques.
Conclusion and Future Work
We initiate the study of the task recommendation problem
in citizen science based crowdsourcing applications, con-
sidering both implicit feedback and explicit features. We
formalize two optimization problems and present prelimi-
nary results. As ongoing research, we are investigating our
method’s validity on other datasets, as well as the general-
ity of our proposed solution outside citizen science applica-
tions.
