Estimating Galactic Distances From Images Using
Self-supervised Representation Learning
Md Abul Hayat
University of Arkansas
Fayetteville, AR 72701

Peter Harrington
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720

George Stein
Berkeley Center for Cosmological Physics
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720

Zarija Luki´c∗
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720

Mustafa Mustafa∗
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Berkeley, CA 94720

Abstract
We use a contrastive self-supervised learning framework to estimate distances to
galaxies from their photometric images. We incorporate data augmentations from
computer vision as well as an application-speciﬁc augmentation accounting for
galactic dust. We ﬁnd that the resulting visual representations of galaxy images are
semantically useful and allow for fast similarity searches, and can be successfully
ﬁne-tuned for the task of redshift estimation. We show that (1) pretraining on a
large corpus of unlabeled data followed by ﬁne-tuning on some labels can attain
the accuracy of a fully-supervised model which requires 2-4x more labeled data,
and (2) that by ﬁne-tuning our self-supervised representations using all available
data labels in the Main Galaxy Sample of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS),
we outperform the state-of-the-art supervised learning method.
1
Introduction
Sky surveys collect large amounts of data that can be used to glean information about the physical
model of the universe and its evolution. One signiﬁcant problem is determining 3D position of
each galaxy, since its distance from the Earth is not directly measurable as are the two other spatial
coordinates. Instead, one can measure the redshift of each galaxy (z) using its spectrum by looking
for the departure of spectral lines from their rest-frame position (we will call this “spec-z”). This
is precise, but is a very costly procedure, as taking a spectrum requires far longer exposure times
than making a photo-image of a galaxy. As a result, the vast majority of observed galaxies do not
have spec-z; instead, their redshifts are estimated from photometric data [2, 14], i.e. from images in a
few passbands (think of them as the astronomical version of RGB color space, generally with ∼5
channels). Historically, these “photo-z” estimates commonly relied on template ﬁtting [11] or linear
regression [7] as a function of the total ﬂux of each galaxy in different passbands, and neglected
∗Corresponding authors
Third Workshop on Machine Learning and the Physical Sciences (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
arXiv:2101.04293v1  [astro-ph.IM]  12 Jan 2021

structural details from the images themselves. Deep neural networks however, open up new and
exciting possibilities for learning photo-z’s from galaxy images using the limited number of spec-z
labels. Last year, a fully-supervised convolutional neural network (CNN) was used for this task [13],
showing signiﬁcantly lower errors than previous models. While encouraging, this approach requires
lots of labeled data.
Recent research shows that self-supervised learning techniques enable CNNs to build meaningful
visual representations without needing per-sample labels for any speciﬁc downstream task [9, 4, 6].
When labels are available for only a fraction of the full dataset, the representations built via self-
supervised training can then be ﬁne-tuned for the speciﬁc vision task, and this approach is able to
signiﬁcantly outperform fully-supervised training [5]. Similarly, recent results in semi-supervised
learning utilize a large body of unlabeled data to complement the labeled examples, and achieve
state-of-the-art performance in image classiﬁcation tasks as a result [17, 16].
In this work we demonstrate the advantage of self-supervised approaches for photometric redshift
estimation using data from SDSS2. As a ﬁrst step, we establish a new fully-supervised baseline on
this data. Then, using contrastive self-supervised pretraining, we show that such methods can build
meaningful visual representations which are useful for a variety of tasks. By pretraining on a large
corpus of unlabeled data followed by ﬁne-tuning on labels, we can achieve the same performance as
fully-supervised approaches which require 2-4x more labeled data. Finally, using the above approach
and ﬁne-tuning on the full labeled dataset, we establish a new image-based ML baseline on this
dataset.
2
Methods
We use data from SDSS, a major sky survey conducted on a 2.5-meter telescope at Apache Point
Observatory in New Mexico. In total, it provides photometric observations of roughly 1 billion
objects in the sky, and spectra for approximately 4 million objects (stars, galaxies, and quasars).
Galaxy labels. We closely follow the process of [13] in building the labeled portion of our training
dataset to enable direct comparison to their results. Using their SQL query on the skyserver.sdss.
org/CasJobs service, we pull samples from the Main Galaxy Sample in the 12th Data Release
(DR12; [1]) of the SDSS, ﬁltering for objects classiﬁed as ‘GALAXY’ with dereddened petrosian
magnitudes ≤17.8 and spectroscopic redshifts z ≤0.4. For us, this query returns 547,224 objects,
of which 502,977 are unique to use as labeled training examples. Executing a similar query on the
‘PhotoObjAll’ full photometric catalog of the SDSS, and removing duplicates which were already
included in our spectroscopic sample, gives an additional body of unlabeled training examples. We
imposed a cut at galactic latitude |b| = 15◦to remove samples with high extinction near the galactic
plane. We also excluded unlabeled samples with an estimated photometric redshift above 0.8 (as
estimated by [3]) to eliminate objects which are very likely too distant compared to the spectroscopic
sample. After imposing these cuts, our dataset of additional photometric samples contains 1,194,779
objects and is used for pre-training. The labeled training and validation dataset have 399,984 and
102,993 images respectively.
Galaxy images.
SDSS photometric images contain data in 5 passbands (ugriz), and come
background-subtracted, but are not de-reddened to account for galactic extinction. We use the
Montage3 tool to query the imagery catalog in SDSS Data Release 9 (DR9), based on equatorial
coordinates for each object in our dataset. We sampled a (0.012◦)2 patch of sky centered on each
object, and projected onto a 2D image with 1072 pixels to ensure the pixel scale is as close as possible
to the native pixel scale in the SDSS, 0.396 arcsec. In each image, we store the u, g, r, i, and z
passbands as 5 color channels. Note that during training of the self-supervised model we impose
random rotations and random jitter to each image before cropping out the central portion as a data
augmentation, so while our images contain 107 pixels per side, the CNNs in this work only view
samples of size 642, which is consistent with [13]. Galaxies with smaller redshift i.e. closer to our
galaxy may have a larger shape that goes beyond size 642, but number of such galaxies being really
small we limit the view to 642 for simplicity. Sample images (transformed into RGB color space) are
shown in Fig. 1.
Self-supervised Learning. Recent self-supervised models like SimCLR [4, 5] and MoCo [9, 6]
achieve success using a contrastive learning approach, which aims to build representations that are
2 https://www.sdss.org/
3 http://montage.ipac.caltech.edu/
2

z=0.070
z=0.038
z=0.069
z=0.196
z=0.055
z=0.049
z=0.101
z=0.232
z=0.111
z=0.124
Figure 1: Reference SDSS galaxies from the validation set (leftmost panels with redshift labels) and
the most similar galaxies from the training set (following 5 panels) identiﬁed through a self-supervised
similarity search. White squares outline the 642 pixels that are “seen” by the network.
invariant under various transformations (e.g., random crops, Gaussian noise, or color jitter). These
networks are trained with contrastive losses like NT-Xent as in [4] or InfoNCE in [12], which try to
maximize the similarity of two augmented versions of the same image while minimizing similarity
with augmented versions of other images.
In this work we use the MoCov2 framework [6], which employs randomized data augmentations
to produce two different views xq, xk of each training image. In each training step, the differing
views of each sample are passed through two independent networks, an encoder and a momentum
encoder, which have identical architectures. This yields representations q and k+ which represent
a “positive” pair of samples, while “negative” examples k−are retrieved from a queue containing
previous outputs of the momentum encoder on other augmented images. The encoder network is
trained via backpropagation using the InfoNCE loss
Lq,k+,{k−} = −log
exp(q · k+/τ)
exp(q · k+/τ) + P
k−exp(q · k−/τ),
(1)
where, τ ∈(0, 1) is a temperature parameter. InfoNCE assigns higher similarity scores between the
augmented views of the same image compared to augmented views from other images. Then, the
parameters θk of the momentum encoder network are updated using the encoder parameters θq with
momentum parameter m via
θk ←mθk + (1 −m)θq.
(2)
The momentum update and use of a queue allow many negative examples to be seen throughout
training without requiring massive batch sizes, making MoCo computationally efﬁcient [6]. Following
MoCov2, we set m = 0.999 and use the ResNet50 architecture [8] for the encoder and momentum
encoder networks. However, we remove the ﬁrst convolution and pooling layers in the ResNet
and replace them with a single stride=1 convolution with 5 input feature channels to match the
dimensionality of our dataset.
Data Augmentations. We create different views of training samples using the following data
augmentations:
• Galactic extinction: To model the effects of foreground galactic dust, we introduce artiﬁcial
reddening by sampling a E(B−V ) reddening value from U(0, 0.5) and applying the corresponding
per-channel extinction according to the photometric calibration from [15].
• Random rotate: The angle of rotation is sampled from U(0, 2π).
• Random jitter & crop: Two integers are sampled from U(−7, 7) to move (jitter) the center of the
image along each respective axis, then the jittered image is center-cropped to size 642.
• Gaussian noise: We sample a scalar from U(1, 3) and multiply it with the aggregate median
absolute deviation (MAD) of each channel (pre-computed over all training examples) to get a
3

2
5
10
20
30
50
80
Labeled data (percent)
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
MAD [10
2]
Pasquet et al. 2019
Supervised
Fine-tuned Self-Supervised
5
10
15
20
Labeled data (percent)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Equivalent amount of 
increase in labeled data
Figure 2: Our ﬁne-tuned self-supervised approach outperforms a supervised ResNet50 at different
fractions of training data (left). To achieve the same σMAD, the amount of labeled data needed for
the supervised approach is 2-4x higher than for the self-supervised approach (right).
per-channel noise scale γc. Then, we introduce Gaussian noise sampled from N(0, γc) for each
color channel.
3
Results
To evaluate the quality of our redshift estimates, we follow the statistics used in the literature [14, 13].
The prediction residual is deﬁned as ∆z = (zp −zs)/(1 + zs), where zp and zs correspond to
photometric and spectroscopic redshifts respectively. From this, we compute the MAD deviation
σMAD = 1.4826×MAD(∆z) where MAD is the median of |∆z−median(∆z)|, and the percent η of
“catastrophic” outliers with |∆z| > 0.05. To the best of our knowledge, [13] provide state-of-the-art
fully-supervised photometric redshift estimates, achieving σMAD = 0.00912 and η = 0.31 using all
of their labeled data. Their network is trained to be a classiﬁer over 180 bins of photometric redshifts
linearly spanning z = (0, 0.4). Their estimate is computed as zp = E(z) using the probability density
function given by the ﬁnal softmax layer, so we use the same protocol.
To properly evaluate our ResNet-based self-supervised approach, we also train fully-supervised
ResNet50s on de-reddened versions of our labeled samples. This is done with 2.5%, 6.25%, 12.5%,
25%, 37.5%, 62.5%, 75%, 87.5% and 100% of the training data, with a ﬁxed validation set. Our
ResNet50, with 100% of our labeled training data, sets a new benchmark on fully-supervised
estimation of photometric redshift with σMAD = 0.00890 (blue points in Fig. 2) and η = 0.304, a
marginal improvement over the previous work.
Self-supervised representations. After the contrastive learning phase, galaxies are passed through
the encoder network to obtain their 128 dimensional contrastive loss vectors. By computing the dot
products of a query vector with those of the unlabeled training samples, and sorting by the largest
values, galaxies are returned sorted by their similarity to the query. These results are depicted in Fig.
1, where the top 3 rows show examples of common galactic morphologies, while the bottom 2 have
identiﬁed a number of potential observational errors that unknowingly remained after the data quality
cuts were imposed. Such observational errors could be caused by foreground sources like satellites or
aircraft, or by cosmic rays, leading to artifacts like the bright green lines seen in some images. It is
beyond the scope of this paper, but our methodology could be used for galaxy similarity identiﬁcation
(see, for example, reference [10]), or for anomaly detection.
Self-supervised ﬁne-tuning. After self-supervised pre-training on our unlabeled dataset, we partition
the encoder network after the ﬁnal avgpool layer (yielding a convolutional stage followed by a
fully-connected layer). We ﬁne-tune these sections on the de-reddened labeled data with a 10x smaller
learning rate for the convolutional portion of the network, using the random rotations and random
jitter-crop augmentations. We ﬁnd that when ﬁne-tuning our self-supervised representations on the
fractions of the training dataset as explained above, we outperform the fully-supervised ResNet50
baseline for all fractions, as shown in Fig. 2. Our self-supervised network, ﬁne-tuned on 100% of
the labeled training data, outperforms both our fully-supervised baseline and the previous state-of-
the-art result with σMAD = 0.00825 and η = 0.209. Importantly, for the intermediate fractions of
the training dataset we ﬁnd that our self-supervised network achieves the equivalent accuracy of a
4

fully-supervised network while using 2-4x less labeled data (right panel in Fig. 2). We have also
conﬁrmed that the prediction bias ⟨∆z⟩, deﬁned as the mean of the residuals, is negligibly small in
our work (⟨∆z⟩< 10−4) as it was in [13].
4
Conclusion
In this work we have presented a ﬁrst effort in leveraging self-supervised learning to process unlabeled
photometric data, showing that the resulting visual representations are semantically useful and can be
ﬁne-tuned to surpass the performance of fully-supervised photometric redshift estimation models.
We demonstrate that our model performs well even in the case of limited data labels, which is
extremely valuable given the relative cost of acquiring spectroscopic measurements for a large sample
of galaxies. Upcoming large-scale sky surveys from the ground and space, like the Vera C. Rubin
Observatory4 and Euclid5, are projected to image tens of billions of galaxies over the next decade.
With those surveys in mind, our results show great promise for self-supervised learning methods to
assist in deriving more precise photometric redshift estimates, helping address fundamental physics
and cosmology questions on the nature and properties of dark energy, dark matter and gravity.
Broader Impact
As a component of this publication we intend to (pursuant to SDSS approval) publicly release our
processed version of galaxy images and redshift labels, as well as all networks used in this research.
Data we have pre-processed is immediately ready for different learning tasks and easy to manipulate
with e.g. python codes, which is not the case with the more complex SDSS data server. Our full
code release makes it straightforward to reproduce our results and build upon it. This reduces the
entry threshold for future machine learning explorations with this interesting data set, especially
for researchers with no background in astronomy, and for students who are not in top-tier research
universities.
