arXiv:1702.02367v1  [cs.CL]  8 Feb 2017
Iterative Multi-document Neural Attention for
Multiple Answer Prediction
Claudio Greco
Department of Computer Science
University of Bari Aldo Moro

Alessandro Suglia
Department of Computer Science
University of Bari Aldo Moro

Pierpaolo Basile
Department of Computer Science
University of Bari Aldo Moro

Gaetano Rossiello
Department of Computer Science
University of Bari Aldo Moro

Giovanni Semeraro
Department of Computer Science
University of Bari Aldo Moro

Abstract
People have information needs of varying complexity, which can be solved by an
intelligent agent able to answer questions formulated in a proper way, eventually
considering user context and preferences. In a scenario in which the user proﬁle
can be considered as a question, intelligent agents able to answer questions can be
used to ﬁnd the most relevant answers for a given user. In this work we propose
a novel model based on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks to answer questions with mul-
tiple answers by exploiting multiple facts retrieved from a knowledge base. The
model is evaluated on the factoid Question Answering and top-n recommendation
tasks of the bAbI Movie Dialog dataset. After assessing the performance of the
model on both tasks, we try to deﬁne the long-term goal of a conversational rec-
ommender system able to interact using natural language and to support users in
their information seeking processes in a personalized way.
1
Motivation and Background
We are surrounded by a huge variety of technological artifacts which “live” with us today. These
artifacts can help us in several ways because they have the power to accomplish complex and time-
consuming tasks. Unfortunately, common software systems can do for us only speciﬁc types of
tasks, in a strictly algorithmic way which is pre-deﬁned by the software designer. Machine Learning
(ML), a branch of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), gives machines the ability to learn to complete tasks
without being explicitly programmed.
People have information needs of varying complexity, ranging from simple questions about com-
mon facts which can be found in encyclopedias, to more sophisticated cases in which they need to
know what movie to watch during a romantic evening. These tasks can be solved by an intelligent
agent able to answer questions formulated in a proper way, eventually considering user context and
preferences.
Question Answering (QA) emerged in the last decade as one of the most promising ﬁelds in AI,
since it allows to design intelligent systems which are able to give correct answers to user questions

expressed in natural language. Whereas, recommender systems produce individualized recommen-
dations as output and have the effect of guiding the user in a personalized way to interesting or useful
objects in a large space of possible options. In a scenario in which the user proﬁle (the set of user
preferences) can be represented by a question, intelligent agents able to answer questions can be
used to ﬁnd the most appealing items for a given user, which is the classical task that recommender
systems can solve. Despite the efﬁcacy of classical recommender systems, generally they are not
able to handle a conversation with the user so they miss the possibility of understanding his contex-
tual information, emotions and feedback to reﬁne the user proﬁle and provide enhanced suggestions.
Conversational recommender systems assist online users in their information-seeking and decision
making tasks by supporting an interactive process [10] which could be goal oriented with the task of
starting general and, through a series of interaction cycles, narrowing down the user interests until
the desired item is obtained [17].
In this work we propose a novel model based on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks to answer questions
exploiting multiple facts retrieved from a knowledge base and evaluate it on a QA task. Moreover,
the effectiveness of the model is evaluated on the top-n recommendation task, where the aim of the
system is to produce a list of suggestions ranked according to the user preferences. After having
assessed the performance of the model on both tasks, we try to deﬁne the long-term goal of a
conversational recommender system able to interact with the user using natural language and to
support him in the information seeking process in a personalized way.
In order to fulﬁll our long-term goal of building a conversational recommender system we need to
assess the performance of our model on speciﬁc tasks involved in this scenario. A recent work which
goes in this direction is reported in [6], which presents the bAbI Movie Dialog dataset, composed
by different tasks such as factoid QA, top-n recommendation and two more complex tasks, one
which mixes QA and recommendation and one which contains turns of dialogs taken from Reddit.
Having more speciﬁc tasks like QA and recommendation, and a more complex one which mixes both
tasks gives us the possibility to evaluate our model on different levels of granularity. Moreover, the
subdivision in turns of the more complex task provides a proper benchmark of the model capability
to handle an effective dialog with the user.
For the task related to QA, a lot of datasets have been released in order to assess the machine reading
and comprehension capabilities and a lot of neural network-based models have been proposed. Our
model takes inspiration from [19], which is able to answer Cloze-style [22] questions repeating an
attention mechanism over the query and the documents multiple times. Despite the effectiveness
on the Cloze-style task, the original model does not consider multiple documents as a source of
information to answer questions, which is fundamental in order to extract the answer from different
relevant facts. The restricted assumption that the answer is contained in the given document does not
allow the model to provide an answer which does not belong to the document. Moreover, this kind
of task does not expect multiple answers for a given question, which is important for the complex
information needs required for a conversational recommender system.
According to our vision, the main outcomes of our work can be considered as building blocks for a
conversational recommender system and can be summarized as follows:
1. we extend the model reported in [19] to let the inference process exploit evidences observed
in multiple documents coming from an external knowledge base represented as a collection
of textual documents;
2. we design a model able to leverage the attention weights generated by the inference process
to provide multiple answers which does not necessarily belong to the documents through
a multi-layer neural network which may uncover possible relationships between the most
relevant evidences;
3. we assess the efﬁcacy of our model through an experimental evaluation on factoid QA and
top-n recommendation tasks supporting our hypothesis that a QA model can be used to
solve top-n recommendation, too.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes our model, while Section 3 summarizes the
evaluation of the model on the two above-mentioned tasks and the comparison with respect to state-
of-the-art approaches. Section 4 gives an overview of the literature of both QA and recommender
systems, while ﬁnal remarks and our long-term vision are reported in Section 5.
2

2
Methodology
Given a query q, an operator ψ : Q →D that produces the set of documents relevant for q, where
Q is the set of all queries and D is the set of all documents. Our model deﬁnes a workﬂow in which
a sequence of inference steps are performed in order to extract relevant information from ψ(q) to
generate the answers for q.
Following [19], our workﬂow consists of three steps: (1) the encoding phase, which generates mean-
ingful representations for query and documents; (2) the inference phase, which extracts relevant se-
mantic relationships between the query and the documents by using an iterative attention mechanism
and ﬁnally (3) the prediction phase, which generates a score for each candidate answer.
2.1
Encoding phase
The input of the encoding phase is given by a query q and a set of documents ψ(q)
=
{d1, d2, . . . , d|Dq|} ≡Dq. Both queries and documents are represented by a sequence of words
X = (x1, x2, . . . , x|X|), drawn from a vocabulary V . Each word is represented by a continuous
d-dimensional word embedding x ∈Rd stored in a word embedding matrix X ∈R|V |×d.
The sequences of dense representations for q and dj are encoded using a bidirectional recurrent
neural network encoder with Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) as in [19] which represents each word
xi ∈X as the concatenation of a forward encoding −→
hk ∈Rh and a backward encoding ←−
hk ∈
Rh. From now on, we denote the contextual representation for the word qi by ˜qi ∈R2h and the
contextual representation for the word dj,i in the document dj by ˜dj,i ∈R2h. Differently from
[19], we build a unique representation for the whole set of documents Dq related to the query q by
stacking each contextual representation ˜dj,i obtaining a matrix ˜Dq ∈Rl×2h, where l = |d1|+|d2|+
. . . + |d|Dq||.
2.2
Inference phase
This phase uncovers a possible inference chain which models meaningful relationships between the
query and the set of related documents. The inference chain is obtained by performing, for each
inference step t = 1, 2, . . . , T , the attention mechanisms given by the query attentive read and the
document attentive read keeping a state of the inference process given by an additional recurrent
neural network with GRU units. In this way, the network is able to progressively reﬁne the attention
weights focusing on the most relevant tokens of the query and the documents which are exploited
by the prediction neural network to select the correct answers among the candidate ones.
2.2.1
Query attentive read
Given the contextual representations for the query words (˜q1, ˜q2, . . . , ˜q|q|) and the inference GRU
state st−1 ∈Rs, we obtain a reﬁned query representation qt (query glimpse) by performing an
attention mechanism over the query at inference step t:
ˆqi,t = softmax
i=1,...,|q|˜q⊤
i (Aqst−1 + aq),
qt =
X
i
ˆqi,t˜qi
where ˆqi,t are the attention weights associated to the query words, Aq ∈R2h×s and aq ∈R2h are
respectively a weight matrix and a bias vector which are used to perform the bilinear product with
the query token representations ˜qi. The attention weights can be interpreted as the relevance scores
for each word of the query dependent on the inference state st−1 at the current inference step t.
3

2.2.2
Document attentive read
Given the query glimpse qt and the inference GRU state st−1 ∈Rs, we perform an attention
mechanism over the contextual representations for the words of the stacked documents ˜Dq:
ˆdi,t = softmax
i=1,...,l
˜D⊤
qi(Ad[st−1, qt] + ad),
dt =
X
i
ˆdi,t ˜Dqi
where ˜Dqi is the i-th row of ˜Dq, ˆdi,t are the attention weights associated to the document words,
Ad ∈R2h×s and ad ∈R2h are respectively a weight matrix and a bias vector which are used to
perform the bilinear product with the document token representations ˜Dqi. The attention weights
can be interpreted as the relevance scores for each word of the documents conditioned on both the
query glimpse and the inference state st−1 at the current inference step t. By combining the set
of relevant documents in ˜Dq, we obtain the probability distribution ( ˆd1,t, ˆd2,t, . . . ˆdl,t) over all the
relevant document tokens using the above-mentioned attention mechanism.
2.2.3
Gating search results
The inference GRU state at the inference step t is updated according to st
= GRU([rq ·
qt, rd · dt], st−1), where rq and rd are the results of a gating mechanism obtained by evaluat-
ing g([st−1, qt, dt, qt · dt]) for the query and the documents, respectively. The gating function
g : Rs+6h →R2h is deﬁned as a 2-layer feed-forward neural network with a Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
(ReLU) [12] activation function in the hidden layer and a sigmoid activation function in the output
layer. The purpose of the gating mechanism is to retain useful information for the inference process
about query and documents and forget useless one.
2.3
Prediction phase
The prediction phase, which is completely different from the pointer-sum loss reported in [19], is
able to generate, given the query q, a relevance score for each candidate answer a ∈A by using the
document attention weights ˆdi,T computed in the last inference step T . The relevance score of each
word w is obtained by summing the attention weights of w in each document related to q. Formally
the relevance score for a given word w is deﬁned as:
score(w) =
1
π(w)
l
X
i=1
φ(i, w)
where φ(i, w) returns 0 if σ(i) ̸= w, ˆdi,T otherwise; σ(i) returns the word in position i of the stacked
documents matrix ˜Dq and π(w) returns the frequency of the word w in the documents Dq related
to the query q. The relevance score takes into account the importance of token occurrences in the
considered documents given by the computed attention weights. Moreover, the normalization term
1
π(w) is applied to the relevance score in order to mitigate the weight associated to highly frequent
tokens.
The evaluated relevance scores are concatenated in a single vector representation z
=
[score(w1), score(w2), . . . , score(w|V |)] which is given in input to the answer prediction neural
network deﬁned as:
y = sigmoid(Who relu(Wihz + bih) + bho)
where u is the hidden layer size, Wih ∈Ru×|V | and Who ∈R|A|×u are weight matrices, bih ∈Ru,
bho ∈R|A| are bias vectors, sigmoid(x) =
1
1+e−x is the sigmoid function and relu(x) = max(0, x)
is the ReLU activation function, which are applied pointwise to the given input vector.
The neural network weights are supposed to learn latent features which encode relationships be-
tween the most relevant words for the given query to predict the correct answers. The outer sig-
moid activation function is used to treat the problem as a multi-label classiﬁcation problem, so that
each candidate answer is independent and not mutually exclusive. In this way the neural network
4

generates a score which represents the probability that the candidate answer is correct. Moreover,
differently from [19], the candidate answer A can be any word, even those which not belong to the
documents related to the query.
The model is trained by minimizing the binary cross-entropy loss function comparing the neural
network output y with the target answers for the given query q represented as a binary vector, in
which there is a 1 in the corresponding position of the correct answer, 0 otherwise.
3
Experimental evaluation
The model performance is evaluated on the QA and Recs tasks of the bAbI Movie Dialog dataset

Differently from [6], the relevant knowledge base facts, taken from the knowledge base in triple
form distributed with the dataset, are retrieved by ψ implemented by exploiting the Elasticsearch
engine and not according to an hash lookup operator which applies a strict ﬁltering procedure based
on word frequency. In our work, ψ returns at most the top 30 relevant facts for q. Each entity
in questions and documents is recognized using the list of entities provided with the dataset and
considered as a single word of the dictionary V .
Questions, answers and documents given in input to the model are preprocessed using the NLTK
toolkit [2] performing only word tokenization. The question given in input to the ψ operator is
preprocessed performing word tokenization and stopword removal.
The optimization method and tricks are adopted from [19]. The model is trained using ADAM [9]
optimizer (learning rate=0.001) with a batch size of 128 for at most 100 epochs considering the

is applied on rq and on rd with a rate of 0.2 and on the prediction neural network hidden layer
with a rate of 0.5. L2 regularization is applied to the embedding matrix X with a coefﬁcient equal to
0.0001. We clipped the gradients if their norm is greater than 5 to stabilize learning [14]. Embedding
size d is ﬁxed to 50. All GRU output sizes are ﬁxed to 128. The number of inference steps T is set to
3. The size of the prediction neural network hidden layer u is ﬁxed to 4096. Biases bih and bho are
initialized to zero vectors. All weight matrices are initialized sampling from the normal distribution
N(0, 0.05). The ReLU activation function in the prediction neural network has been experimentally
chosen comparing different activation functions such as sigmoid and tanh and taking the one which
leads to the best performance. The model is implemented in TensorFlow [1] and executed on an
NVIDIA TITAN X GPU.
METHODS
QA TASK
RECS TASK
QA SYSTEM
90.7
N/A
SVD
N/A
19.2
LSTM
6.5
27.1
SUPERVISED EMBEDDINGS
50.9
29.2
MEMN2N
79.3
28.6
JOINT SUPERVISED EMBEDDINGS
43.6
28.1
JOINT MEMN2N
83.5
26.5
OUR MODEL
86.8
30.0
Table 1: Comparison between our model and baselines from [6] on the QA and Recs tasks evaluated

Following the experimental design, the results in Table 1 are promising because our model out-
performs all other systems on both tasks except for the QA SYSTEM on the QA task. Despite the
advantage of the QA SYSTEM, it is a carefully designed system to handle knowledge base data in the
form of triples, but our model can leverage data in the form of documents, without making any as-
sumption about the form of the input data and can be applied to different kind of tasks. Additionally,
the model MEMN2N is a neural network whose weights are pre-trained on the same dataset with-
out using the long-term memory and the models JOINT SUPERVISED EMBEDDINGS and JOINT
MEMN2N are models trained across all the tasks of the dataset in order to boost performance. De-
5

spite that, our model outperforms the three above-mentioned ones without using any supplementary
trick. Even though our model performance is higher than all the others on the Recs task, we believe
that the obtained result may be improved and so we plan a further investigation. Moreover, the need
for further investigation can be justiﬁed by the work reported in [18] which describes some issues
regarding the Recs task.
Figure 1 shows the attention weights computed in the last inference step of the iterative attention
mechanism used by the model to answer to a given question. Attention weights, represented as red
boxes with variable color shades around the tokens, can be used to interpret the reasoning mechanism
applied by the model because higher shades of red are associated to more relevant tokens on which
the model focus its attention. It is worth to notice that the attention weights associated to each token
are the result of the inference mechanism uncovered by the model which progressively tries to focus
on the relevant aspects of the query and the documents which are exploited to generate the answers.
Question:
what
does
Larenz Tate
act
in
?
Ground truth answers:
The Postman, A Man Apart, Dead Presidents, Love Jones, Why Do Fools Fall in Love, The Inkwell
Most relevant sentences:
•
The Inkwell
starred actors
Joe Morton
,
Larenz Tate
,
Suzzanne Douglas
,
Glynn Turman
•
Love Jones
starred actors
Nia Long
,
Larenz Tate
,
Isaiah Washington
,
Lisa Nicole Carson
•
Why Do Fools Fall in Love
starred actors
Halle Berry
,
Vivica A. Fox
,
Larenz Tate
,
Lela Rochon
•
The Postman
starred actors
Kevin Costner
,
Olivia Williams
,
Will Patton
,
Larenz Tate
•
Dead Presidents
starred actors
Keith David
,
Chris Tucker
,
Larenz Tate
•
A Man Apart
starred actors
Vin Diesel
,
Larenz Tate
Figure 1: Attention weights ˜qi and ˜Dqi computed by the neural network attention mechanisms at
the last inference step T for each token. Higher shades correspond to higher relevance scores for the
related tokens.
Given the question “what does Larenz Tate act in?” shown in the above-mentioned ﬁgure, the model
is able to understand that “Larenz Tate” is the subject of the question and “act in” represents the
intent of the question. Reading the related documents, the model associates higher attention weights
to the most relevant tokens needed to answer the question, such as “The Postman”, “A Man Apart”
and so on.
4
Related work
We think that it is necessary to consider models and techniques coming from research both in QA and
recommender systems in order to pursue our desire to build an intelligent agent able to assist the user
in decision-making tasks. We cannot ﬁll the gap between the above-mentioned research areas if we
do not consider the proposed models in a synergic way by virtue of the proposed analogy between
the user proﬁle (the set of user preferences) and the items to be recommended, as the question and the
correct answers. The ﬁrst work which goes in this direction is reported in [11], which exploits movie
descriptions to suggest appealing movies for a given user using an architecture tipically used for QA
tasks. In fact, most of the research in the recommender systems ﬁeld presents ad-hoc systems which
exploit neighbourhood information like in Collaborative Filtering techniques [13], item descriptions
and metadata like in Content-based systems [5]. Recently presented neural network models [4,
3] systems are able to learn latent representations in the network weights leveraging information
coming from user preferences and item information.
In recent days, a lot of effort is devoted to create benchmarks for artiﬁcial agents to assess their
ability to comprehend natural language and to reason over facts. One of the ﬁrst attempt is the bAbI
[24] dataset which is a synthetic dataset containing elementary tasks such as selecting an answer
between one or more candidate facts, answering yes/no questions, counting operations over lists and
sets and basic induction and deduction tasks. Another relevant benchmark is the one described in
[7], which provides CNN/Daily Mail datasets consisting of document-query-answertriples where an
entity in the query is replaced by a placeholder and the system should identify the correct entity by
6

reading and comprehending the given document. MCTest [16] requires machines to answer multiple-
choice reading comprehension questions about ﬁctional stories, directly tackling the high-level goal
of open-domain machine comprehension. Finally, SQuAD [15] consists in a set of Wikipedia articles,
where the answer to each question is a segment of text from the corresponding reading passage.
According to the experimental evaluations conducted on the above-mentioned datasets, high-level
performance can be obtained exploiting complex attention mechanisms which are able to focus on
relevant evidences in the processed content. One of the earlier approaches used to solve these tasks
is given by the general Memory Network [23, 21] framework which is one of the ﬁrst neural network
models able to access external memories to extract relevant information through an attention mech-
anism and to use them to provide the correct answer. A deep Recurrent Neural Network with Long
Short-Term Memory units is presented in [7], which solves CNN/Daily Mail datasets by designing
two different attention mechanisms called Impatient Reader and Attentive Reader. Another way to
incorporate attention in neural network models is proposed in [8] which deﬁnes a pointer-sum loss
whose aim is to maximize the attention weights which lead to the correct answer.
5
Conclusions and Future Work
In this work we propose a novel model based on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks to answer questions with
multiple answers by exploiting multiple facts retrieved from a knowledge base. The proposed model
can be considered a relevant building block of a conversational recommender system. Differently
from [19], our model can consider multiple documents as a source of information in order to generate
multiple answers which may not belong to the documents. As presented in this work, common tasks
such as QA and top-n recommendation can be solved effectively by our model.
In a common recommendation system scenario, when a user enters a search query, it is assumed that
his preferences are known. This is a stringent requirement because users cannot have a clear idea
of their preferences at that point. Conversational recommender systems support users to fulﬁll their
information needs through an interactive process. In this way, the system can provide a personalized
experience dynamically adapting the user model with the possibility to enhance the generated pre-
dictions. Moreover, the system capability can be further enhanced giving explanations to the user
about the given suggestions.
To reach our goal, we should improve our model by designing a ψ operator able to return relevant
facts recognizing the most relevant information in the query, by exploiting user preferences and con-
textual information to learn the user model and by providing a mechanism which leverages attention
weights to give explanations. In order to effectively train our model, we plan to collect real dialog
data containing contextual information associated to each user and feedback for each dialog which
represents if the user is satisﬁed with the conversation. Given these enhancements, we should design
a system able to hold effectively a dialog with the user recognizing his intent and providing him the
most suitable contents.
With this work we try to show the effectiveness of our architecture for tasks which go from pure
question answering to top-n recommendation through an experimental evaluation without any as-
sumption on the task to be solved. To do that, we do not use any hand-crafted linguistic features
but we let the system learn and leverage them in the inference process which leads to the answers
through multiple reasoning steps. During these steps, the system understands relevant relationships
between question and documents without relying on canonical matching, but repeating an attention
mechanism able to unconver related aspects in distributed representations, conditioned on an encod-
ing of the inference process given by another neural network. Equipping agents with a reasoning
mechanism like the one described in this work and exploiting the ability of neural network models
to learn from data, we may be able to create truly intelligent agents.
6
