arXiv:1301.3537v1  [cs.AI]  16 Jan 2013
Learning Stable Group Invariant Representations
with Convolutional Networks
Joan Bruna, Arthur Szlam and Yann LeCun
Courant Institute
New York University
New Nork, NY, 10013

1
Introduction
Many signal categories in vision and auditory problems are invariant to the action of transformation
groups, such as translations, rotations or frequency transpositions. This property motivates the study
of signal representations which are also invariant to the action of these transformation groups. For
instance, translation invariance can be achieved with a registration or with auto-correlation measures.
Transformation groups are in fact low-dimensional manifolds, and therefore mere group invariance
is in general not enough to efﬁciently describe signal classes. Indeed, signals may be perturbed with
additive noise and also with geometrical deformations, so one can then ask for invariant representa-
tions which are stable to these perturbations. Scattering convolutional networks [1] construct locally
translation invariant signal representations, with additive and geometrical stability, by cascading
complex wavelet modulus operators with a lowpass smoothing kernel. By deﬁning wavelet decom-
positions on any locally compact Lie Group, scattering operators can be generalized and cascaded to
provide local invariance with respect to more general transformation groups [2, 3]. Although such
transformation groups are present across many recognition problems, they require prior information
which sometimes cannot be assumed.
Convolutional networks [4] cascade ﬁlter banks with point-wise nonlinearities and local pooling
operators. By remapping the output of each layer with the input of the following one, the trainable
ﬁlters implement convolution operators. We show that the invariance properties built by deep convo-
lutional networks can be cast as a form of stable group invariance. The network wiring architecture
determines the invariance group, while the trainable ﬁlter coefﬁcients characterize the group action.
Deep convolutional architectures cascade several layers of convolutions, non-linearities and pooling.
These architectures have the capacity to generate local invariance to the action of more general
groups. Under appropriate conditions, these groups can be factorized as products of smaller groups.
Each of these factors can then be associated with a subset of consecutive layers of the convolutional
network. In these conditions, the invariance properties of the ﬁnal representation can be studied
from the group structure generated by each layer.
2
Problem statement
2.1
Stable Group Invariance
A transformation group G acts on the input space X (assumed to be a Hilbert space) with a linear
group action (g, x) 7→g.x ∈X, which is compatible with the group operation.
A signal representation Φ : X −→Z is invariant to the action of G if ∀g ∈G , x ∈X , Φ(g.x) =
Φ(x) . However, mere group invariance is in general too weak, due to the presence of a much
larger, high dimensional variability which does not belong to the low-dimensional group. It is then
necessary to incorporate the notion of outer “deformations” with another group action ϕ : H ×
1

X −→X , where H is a larger group containing G. The geometric stability can be stated with a
Lipschitz continuity property
∥Φ(ϕ(h, x)) −Φ(x)∥≤C ∥x∥k(h, G) ,
(1)
where k(h, G) measures the “distance” from h to the invariance group G. For instance, when G is
the translation group of Rd and H ⊃G is the group of C2 diffeomorphisms of Rd, then ϕ(h, x) =
x ◦h and one can select as distance the elastic deformation metric k(h, G) := |∇τ|∞+ |Hτ|∞,
where τ(u) = h(u) −u [2].
Even though the group invariance formalism describes global invariance properties of the represen-
tation, it also provides a valid and useful framework to study local invariance properties. Indeed, if
one replaces (1) by
∥Φ(ϕ(h, x)) −Φ(x)∥≤C ∥x∥(∥hG∥G + k(h, G)) ,
(2)
where hG is a projection of h to G and ∥g∥G is a metric on G measuring the amount of transforma-
tion being applied, then the local invariance is expressed by adjusting the proportionality between
the two metrics.
2.2
Convolutional Networks
A generic convolutional network deﬁned on a space X = L2(Ω0) of square-integrable signals starts
with a ﬁlter bank {ψλ}λ∈Λ1, ψλ ∈L1(Ω0) ∀λ, which for each input x(u) ∈X produces the
collection
z(1)(u, λ) = x ⋆ψλ(u) =
Z
x(u −v)ψλ(v)dv , u ∈Ω0 , λ ∈Λ1 .
If the ﬁlter bank deﬁnes a stable, invertible frame, then there exist two constants a, A > 0 such that
∀x , a∥x∥≤∥z(1)∥≤A∥x∥,
where ∥z(1)∥2 = P
λ∈Λ1 ∥z(1)(·, λ)∥2. By deﬁning Ω1 = Ω0 × Λ1, the ﬁrst layer of the network
can be written as the linear mapping
F1 : L2(Ω0)
−→
L2(Ω1)
x(u)
7−→
z(1)(u, λ) .
z(1) is then transformed with a point-wise nonlinear operator M : L2(Ω) →L2(Ω) which is usually
non-expansive, meaning that ∥Mz∥≤∥z∥. Finally, a local pooling operator P can be deﬁned as
any linear or nonlinear operator
P : L2(Ω) −→L2(eΩ)
which reduces the resolution of the signal along one or more coordinates and which avoids “alias-
ing”. If Ω= Ω0 × Λ1, , ×Λk and (2J0, , 2Jk) denote the loss of resolution along each coordinate, it
results that eΩ= f
Ω0 × f
Λ1, , ×f
Λk, with |f
Ω0| = 2−αJ0|Ω0|, |f
Λi| = 2−αJi|Λi|, where α is an oversam-
pling factor. Linear pooling operators are implemented as lowpass ﬁlters φJ(u, λ1, , λm) followed
by a downsampling.
Then, a k-layer convolutional network is a cascade
L2(Ω0)
M◦F1
−→L2(Ω1)
P1
−→L2(f
Ω1)
M◦F2
−→L2(Ω2) · · ·
Pk
−→L2(f
Ωk) ,
(3)
which produces successively z(1), z(2), . . . , z(k).
The ﬁlter banks (Fi)i≤k, together with the pooling operators (Pi)i≤k, progressively transform the
signal domain; ﬁlter bank steps lift the domain of deﬁnition by adding new coordinates, whereas
pooling steps reduce the resolution along certain coordinates.
3
Invariance Properties of Convolutional Networks
3.1
The case of one-parameter transformation groups
Let us start by assuming the simplest form of variability produced by a transformation group. A
one-parameter transformation group is a family {Ut}t∈R of unitary linear operators of L2(Ω) such
2

that (i) t 7→Ut it is strongly continuous: limt→t0 Utz = Ut0z for every z ∈L2(Ω), and (ii)
Ut+s = UtUs. One parameter transformation groups are thus homeomorphic to R (with the addition
as group operation), and deﬁne an action which is continuous in the group variable. Uni-dimensional
translations Utx(u) = x(u −tv0), frequency transpositions Utx = F−1(Fx(ω −tω0)) (where F,
F−1 are respectively the forward and inverse Fourier transform) or unitary dilations Utx(u) =
2−t/2x(2−tu) are examples of one-parameter transformation groups.
One-parameter transformation groups are particularly simple to study thanks to Stone’s theorem [5],
which states that unitary one-parameter transformation groups are uniquely generated by a complex
exponential of a self-adjoint operator:
Ut = eitA , t ∈R .
Here, the complex exponential of a self-adjoint operator should be interpreted in terms of its spec-
tra. In the ﬁnite dimensional case (when Ωis discrete), this means that there exists an orthogonal
transform O such that if ˆz(ω) = Oz, then
∀z , Utz = O−1diag(eitω.ˆz(ω)) .
(4)
In other words, the group action can be expressed as a linear phase change in the basis which
diagonalizes the unique self-adjoint operator A given by Stone’s theorem. In the particular case of
translations, the change of basis O is given by the Fourier transform. As a result, one can obtain
a representation which is invariant to the action of {Ut}t with a single layer of a neural network:
a linear decomposition which expresses the data in the basis given by O followed by a point-wise
complex modulus. In the case of the translation group, this corresponds to taking the modulus of the
Fourier transform.
3.2
Presence of deformations
Stone’s theorem provides a recipe for global group invariance for strongly continuous group actions.
Without noise nor deformations, an invariant representation can be obtained by taking complex
moduli in a basis which diagonalizes the group action, which can be implemented in a shallow 1-
layer architecture. However, the underlying low-dimensional assumption is rarely satisﬁed, due to
the presence of more complex forms of variability.
This complex variability can be modeled as follows. If O is the basis which diagonalizes a given one-
parameter group, then the group action is expressed in the basis F−1O as the translation operator
Tsz(u) = z(u −s). Whereas the group action consists in rigid translations on this basis, by analogy
a deformation is deﬁned as a non-rigid warping in this domain: Lτz(u) = z(u −τ(u)), where τ is
a displacement ﬁeld along the indexes of the decomposition.
The amount of deformation can be measured with the regularity of τ(u), which controls how dis-
tant the warping is from being a rigid translation and hence an element of the group. This suggests
that, in order to obtain stability to deformations, rather than looking for eigenvectors of the in-
ﬁnitesimal group action, one should look for linear measurements which are well localized in the
domain where deformations occur, and which nearly diagonalize the group action. In particular,
these measurements can be implemented with convolutions using compactly supported ﬁlters, such
as in convolutional networks.
Let z(n)(u, λ1, . . . , λn) be an intermediate representation in a convolutional network, and whose
ﬁrst layer is fully connected. Suppose that G is a group acting on z via
g.z(n)(u, λ1, . . . , λn) = z(n)(u, λ1 + η(g), λ2, . . . , λn) ,
(5)
where η : G →Λ1. This corresponds to the idealized case where the transformation only modiﬁes
one component of the representation. A local pooling operator along the variable λ1, at a certain
scale 2J, attenuates the transformation by g as soon as |η(g)| ≪2J. It thus produces local invariance
with respect to the action of G.
3.3
Group Factorization with Deep Networks
Deep convolutional networks have the capacity to learn complex relationships of the data and to
build invariance with respect to a large family of transformations. These properties can be partly
explained in terms of a factorization of the invariance groups performed successively.
3

Whereas pooling operators efﬁciently produce stable local invariance, convolution operators pre-
serve the invariance generated by previous layers.
Indeed, suppose z(n)(u, λ1) is an interme-
diate representation in a convolutional network, and that G acts on z(n) via g.z(n)(u, λ1) =
z(n)(f(g, u), λ1 + η(g)). It follows that if the next layer is constructed as
z(n+1)(u, λ1, λ2) := z(n)(u, ·) ⋆ψλ2(λ1) ,
then G acts on z(n+1) via g.z(n+1)(u, λ1, λ2) = z(n)(f(g, u), λ1 + η(g), λ2), since convolutions
commute with the group action, which by construction is expressed as a translation in the coefﬁcients
λ1. The new coordinates λ2 are thus unaffected by the action of G.
As a consequence, this property enables a systematic procedure to generate invariance to groups
of the form G = G1 ⋊G2 ⋊. . . ⋊Gs, where H1 ⋊H2 is the semidirect product of groups. In
this decomposition, each factor Gi is associated with a range of convolutional layers, along the
coordinates where the action of Gi is perceived.
4
Perspectives
The connections between group invariance and deep convolutional networks offer an interpretation
of their efﬁciency on several recognition tasks. In particular, they might explain why the weight
sharing induced by convolutions is a valid regularization method in presence of group variability.
More concretely, we shall also concentrate on the following aspects:
• Group Discovery. One might ask for the group of transformations which best explains the
variability observed in a given dataset {xi}. In the case where no geometric deformations
are present, one can start by learning the (complex) eigenvectors of the group action:
U ∗= arg min
UT U=1 var(|Uxi|) .
When the data corresponds to a uniform measure on the group, then this decomposition
can be obtained from the diagonalization of the covariance operator Σ = E(xT x). In that
case, the real eigenvectors of Σ are grouped into pairs of vectors with identical eigenvalue,
which then deﬁne the complex decomposition diagonalizing the group action.
In presence of deformations, the global invariance is replaced by a measure of local invari-
ance. This problem is closely related to the sparse coding with slowness from [6].
• Structured Convolutional Networks. Groups offer a powerful framework to incorporate
structure into the families of ﬁlters, similarly is in [7]. On the one hand, one can enforce
global properties of the group by deﬁning the convolutions accordingly. For instance, by
wrapping the domain of the convolution, one is enforcing a periodic group to emerge. On
the other hand, one could further regularize the learning by enforcing a group structure
within a ﬁlter bank. For instance, one could ask a certain ﬁlter bank F = {h1, . . . , hn} to
have the form F = {Rθh0}θ, where Rθ is a rotation with an angle θ.
