SAIDS: A Novel Approach for
Sentiment Analysis Informed of Dialect and Sarcasm
Abdelrahman Kaseb and Mona Farouk
Computer Engineering, Cairo University
Giza, Egypt

Abstract
Sentiment analysis becomes an essential part
of every social network, as it enables decision-
makers to know more about users’ opinions
in almost all life aspects.
Despite its im-
portance, there are multiple issues it encoun-
ters like the sentiment of the sarcastic text
which is one of the main challenges of sen-
timent analysis. This paper tackles this chal-
lenge by introducing a novel system (SAIDS)
that predicts the sentiment, sarcasm and di-
alect of Arabic tweets. SAIDS uses its pre-
diction of sarcasm and dialect as known in-
formation to predict the sentiment.
It uses
MARBERT as a language model to generate
sentence embedding, then passes it to the sar-
casm and dialect models, and then the out-
puts of the three models are concatenated and
passed to the sentiment analysis model. Mul-
tiple system design setups were experimented
with and reported. SAIDS was applied to the
ArSarcasm-v2 dataset where it outperforms
the state-of-the-art model for the sentiment
analysis task. By training all tasks together,
SAIDS achieves results of 75.98 FPN, 59.09
F1-score and 71.13 F1-score for sentiment
analysis, sarcasm detection, and dialect iden-
tiﬁcation respectively. The system design can
be used to enhance the performance of any task
which is dependent on other tasks.
1
Introduction
Sentiment analysis (SA) is one of the main tasks in
the natural language processing (NLP) ﬁeld. It is
used for opinion mining which supports decision-
makers. Working on sentiment analysis starts rel-
atively early, for example, Pang et al. (2002) anal-
ysed the sentiment to positive and negative in movie
reviews. Following this paper, sentiment analysis
becomes one of the most important topics in NLP,
especially with the increasing number of reviews
on websites and social media platforms. Since then,
a lot of work has been done in English sentiment
analysis, while Arabic has relatively much less.
Since Abbasi et al. (2008) started their work on
Arabic SA, multiple researchers also began theirs.
Now there are well-known Arabic SA models like
(Alayba et al., 2018; Abdulla et al., 2013; Abu
Farha and Magdy, 2021; Elshakankery and Farouk,
2019). Of course, working with Arabic has many
challenges, one of the most challenging issues is
the complex morphology of the Arabic language
(Kaseb and Farouk, 2016; Abdul-Mageed, 2019).
Another challenge is the variety of Arabic dialects
(Abdul-Mageed, 2019). Moreover, one of the well-
known challenges in SA for all languages is sar-
casm, as the sarcastic person uses words and means
the opposite of it. For example, "I’d really truly
love going out in this weather!", does it reﬂect a
positive or negative sentiment? because of the sar-
casm, we cannot judge the sentiment correctly.
Several related works tackle English sarcasm de-
tection with sentiment analysis (Oprea and Magdy,
2020; Abercrombie and Hovy, 2016; Barbieri et al.,
2014). On the other hand, there are only a few
works on both sentiment and sarcasm in Arabic.
There are two shared tasks on sarcasm detection
(Ghanem et al., 2019), but for both sarcasm and sen-
timent there was only one shared task Abu Farha
et al. (2021) but each sub-task is independent,
meaning that participating teams can submit a dif-
ferent model for each task. Some participants used
the same model for both sentiment and sarcasm
(El Mahdaouy et al., 2021).
Instead of training sentiment independently of
sarcasm, this work introduces a new model archi-
tecture that works with multi-task training which
trains both at the same time. There are other addi-
tions to the proposed architecture; ﬁrstly, it trains
with dialect also. Secondly, the sarcasm and di-
alect that are initially predicted are used in the
prediction of the sentiment. In other words, the
sentiment model is informed by the sarcasm and
dialect model output. The contributions offered by
this work are:
arXiv:2301.02521v1  [cs.CL]  6 Jan 2023

• Design a novel model architecture that can be
used for a complicated task that is dependent
on another task, e.g. sentiment analysis which
is dependent on sarcasm detection.
• Investigate the design setups for the new ar-
chitecture and ﬁnd the best setup that could
be used.
• Train the model on ArSarcam-v2 dataset and
achieve the state-of-the-art results recorded as
75.98 FPN on sentiment analysis.
This paper is organized as follows Section 2
shows the related work on sentiment analysis, sar-
casm detection, and dialect identiﬁcation. Section
3 describes the dataset used in this work and shows
data statistics. Section 4 describes SAIDS model
and all the design setups. Section 5 shows the ex-
perimental results and ﬁnally section 6 concludes
the work.
2
Related Work
SAIDS works on three tasks sentiment analysis,
sarcasm detection, and dialect identiﬁcation. In
this section, the existing methods for each task are
discussed.
2.1
Sentiment Analysis
Arabic sentiment analysis started with Abbasi et al.
(2008) work. Since then, it is developed by multiple
researchers. In the beginning, the main focus was
on modern standard Arabic (MSA), but over time
the researchers start to focus on dialectal Arabic
(Mourad and Darwish, 2013; Kaseb and Farouk,
2021).
Regarding the datasets, based on Alyafeai et al.
(2021), there are more than ﬁfty datasets for senti-
ment analysis, including Elshakankery et al. (2021);
Kaseb and Farouk (2019); Kiritchenko et al. (2016);
Rosenthal et al. (2017); Elmadany et al. (2018)
datasets.
Because of the massive number of
datasets, there are a massive number of system
approaches for Arabic sentiments (Abu Farha and
Magdy, 2019; Alayba et al., 2018; El-Beltagy et al.,
2017). Based on Abu Farha and Magdy (2021)
comparative study, using the word embedding with
deep learning models outperform, the classical ma-
chine learning models and the transformer-based
models outperform both of them. There is a reason-
able number of Arabic transformer-based models
like AraBERT (Antoun et al., 2020) and MAR-
BERT (Abdul-Mageed et al., 2021) which are used
by most Arabic sentiment analysis papers.
2.2
Sarcasm Detection
Unlike Arabic sentiment analysis, Arabic sarcasm
detection has not gotten much attention yet. Only
a few research works tackle the problem and still
there is an obvious shortage of the Arabic sarcasm
datasets, like Karoui et al. (2017); Abu Farha et al.
(2022). Abbes et al. (2020) collected a dataset for
sarcastic tweets, they used hashtags to collect the
dataset for example #sarcasm. Then, they built
multiple classical machine learning models SVM,
Naive Bayes, and Logistic Regression, the best
F1-score was 0.73.
After that, Ghanem et al. (2019) organized a
shared task in a workshop on Arabic sarcasm detec-
tion. They built the dataset by collecting tweets on
different topics and using hashtags to set the class.
An additional step was added, by sampling some
of the datasets and manually annotating them. In
this shared task, eighteen teams were working on
sarcasm detection. Khalifa and Hussein (2019) was
the ﬁrst team and achieved a 0.85 F1-score.
Then Abu Farha et al. (2021) made two tasks
based on the ArSarcasm-v2 dataset; sentiment anal-
ysis and sarcasm detection. They have 27 teams par-
ticipating in the workshop, the top teams achieved
62.25 F1-score and 74.80 FPN for sarcasm detec-
tion and sentiment analysis respectively.
2.3
Dialect Identiﬁcation
Arabic dialect identiﬁcation is an NLP task to iden-
tify the dialect of a written text. It can be on three
levels, the ﬁrst level is to identify MSA, classical
Arabic (CA), and dialectical Arabic (McWhorter,
2004). The second level is to identify the dialect
based on ﬁve main Arabic dialects EGY, LEV,
NOR, Gulf, and MSA (El-Haj, 2020; Khalifa et al.,
2016; Sadat et al., 2014; Al-Sabbagh and Girju,
2012; Egan, 2010). The third level is to identify the
country-level dialect (Abdul-Mageed et al., 2020).
Regarding the datasets, there are datasets more
than twenty Arabic datasets labeled with dialect.
One of the most popular datasets is MADAR
(Bouamor et al., 2018) where the data is labeled
at the city-level for 25 Arab cities. Abdul-Mageed
et al. (2020) built a shared task to detect the dialect,
they published three different shared tasks. In the
2020 task, sixty teams participated, and the best

results were 26.78 and 6.39 F1-score in the country-
level and the city-level dialects respectively.
3
Dataset
ArSarcasm-v2 (Abu Farha et al., 2021) is the
main dataset used in this work, it was released
on WANLP 2021 shared task for two tasks sar-
casm and sentiment analysis. It has about 15k
tweets and is divided into 12k for training and
3k for testing, the same test set, as released on
WANLP 2021, was used. Each tweet was labelled
for the sentiment (positive (POS), neutral (NEU),
and negative (NEG)), sarcasm (true, and false),
and dialect (MSA, Egypt (EGY), Levantine (LEV),
Maghreb (NOR), and Gulf). The authors of the
dataset annotate it using a crowd-sourcing plat-
form. This dataset originally consisted of a combi-
nation of two datasets, the ﬁrst one is ArSarcasm
(Abu Farha and Magdy, 2020) and the second one
is DAICT (Abbes et al., 2020), Abu Farha et al.
(2021) merged the two datasets.
3.1
Dataset Statistics
In this subsection, we introduce some dataset statis-
tics that motivated us to work on SAIDS. The
ArSarcasm-v2 dataset has 15,548 tweets, 3000
tweets are kept for testing and the rest of the tweets
for training. Table 1 shows the number of exam-
ples for all task labels on the training set, as we
can see, most of the data is labeled as MSA and
non-sarcastic in dialect and sarcasm respectively.
Task
Label
Count
Sentiment
Positive
2,180
Neutral
5,747
Negative
4,621
Sarcasm
Sarcastic
2,168
Non-sarcastic
10,380
Dialect
MSA
8,562
EGY
2,675
Gulf
644
LEV
624
NOR
43
Total
12,548
Table 1: Number of labels of sentiment, sarcasm and
dialect on the training set
The relationship between sentiment labels and
both sarcasm and dialect independently can be
shown from Table 2. For the sentiment/sarcasm
part, we can see that about 90 percent of sarcastic
tweets are sentimentally labeled as negative, and
about 50 percent of non-sarcastic tweets are senti-
mentally labeled as neutral. On the other hand, for
the sentiment/dialect part, we can see that about 50
percent of MSA tweets are sentimentally labeled
as neutral and about 50 percent of EGY tweets are
sentimentally labeled as negative. From this table,
we can conclude that the information we can get
on sarcasm and dialect will beneﬁt the sentiment
analysis task.
POS
NEU
NEG
Non-sarcastic
2,122
5,576
2,682
Sarcastic
58
171
1,939
MSA
1,405
4,486
2,671
EGY
506
793
1,376
Gulf
121
259
264
LEV
142
197
285
NOR
6
12
25
Table 2: Cross tabulation between sentiment labels and
both sarcasm and dialect labels on the training set
Table 3 shows the percentage of sarcastic tweets
on each dialect. As the number of NOR tweets is
limited, its percentage is not reliable, so we can
see that Egyptians’ tweets are the most sarcastic.
This supports the facts from table 2 that most EGY
tweets are negative and most of the sarcastic tweets
are negative tweets.
Dialect
Sarcasm percentage
MSA
10.83 %
EGY
34.77 %
Gulf
24.38 %
LEV
22.12 %
NOR
34.88 %
Table 3: Percentage of sarcastic tweets for each dialect
on the training set
4
Proposed System
This section presents a detailed description of the
proposed system. SAIDS learns sentiment analy-
sis, sarcasm detection, and dialect identiﬁcation at
the same time (multi-task training), in addition, it
uses the sarcasm detection and dialect outputs as
an additional input to the sentiment analysis model
which is called "informed decision". SAIDS de-
cides the sentiment class using the information of

sarcasm and dialect class which are both outputs
itself. The main idea behind SAIDS is based on
analyzing the dataset statistics, as shown in section
3, which says that most sarcastic tweets are classi-
ﬁed as negative tweets and most MSA tweets are
classiﬁed as neutral tweets.
4.1
System Architecture
Figure 1 shows the SAIDS architecture. The ar-
chitecture consists of four main modules, the ﬁrst
module is MARBERTv2 (Abdul-Mageed et al.,
2021), it is a transformer-based model, its input
is the tweet, and its output is a sentence embedding
which is a vector of length 768. The second module
is the "Sarcasm Model", it is a binary classiﬁer for
sarcasm, its input is the sentence embedding, and
its output is two values one for sarcastic tweets and
another for non-sarcastic tweets. The third module
is the "Dialect Model", which is identical to the
"Sarcasm Model" except that it outputs ﬁve classes
(EGY, LEV, NOR, Gulf, and MSA). The fourth
module is the "Sentiment Model", it is a classiﬁer
for sentiment, its input is the concatenation of the
sentence embedding, sarcasm model outputs and
dialect model outputs.
Figure 1: SAIDS architecture
The loss function used is Cross-Entropy for sen-
timent and dialect. Of course, since sarcasm is
binary, we used binary Cross-Entropy for it.
4.2
Training Setups
This subsection describes the multiple setups that
were used to arrive at the best model performance.
The experiments carried out utilized multiple se-
tups regarding the architecture and the training
strategies.
Modules Architecture Multiple architectures
were tested for the "Sentiment Model", "Sarcasm
Model" and "Dialect Model". As a proof of concept
for the idea, we ﬁrst built a simple random forest
model in each task model (random forest version).
For the real scenario, we used multi-layer neural
network (MNN) models. The ﬁrst and the simplest
is one output layer model and zero hidden layers.
The second is one or two hidden layers, then the
output layer. The third is one or two hidden layers
the output of the module is the output of the hidden
layer, which means that "Sentiment Model" inputs
is not the output layer of the "Sarcasm Model" but
the last hidden layer of it. The fourth setup is to
concatenate the last hidden layer with the output
layer and then pass it to "Sentiment Model".
What Should Be Informed The SAIDS archi-
tecture Figure 1 shows that the "Sentiment Model"
inputs are "Sarcasm Model" and "Dialect Model"
outputs but we experimented with multiple settings
in this part; sentiment analysis informed of sarcasm
only, dialect only, and both sarcasm and dialect.
Limited Backpropagation We limited the back-
propagation over the dotted lines in Figure 1. It is
used to ensure that the "Sarcasm Model" and the
"Dialect Model" learn their main target correctly.
When the model predicts sentiment incorrectly, its
loss propagates directly to the MARBERTv2 model
via the solid line and does not propagate via the
dotted lines. Also, we evaluate SAIDS without lim-
iting backpropagation which means the loss prop-
agates everywhere, and with partial limiting. The
partial limiting can be only set when the "Sarcasm
Model" has hidden layers. We then limit the back-
propagation through the sarcasm model’s output
layer but propagate it through the hidden layers.
Activation Function The experiments were car-
ried out with Softmax as the activation function for
the output of all modules. However, for the sake
of comparison, we run the training without Soft-
max for the modules outputs, which means that the
values are not from one to zero.
Task By Task Training As we train all the three
tasks together with the same model, we experi-
mented to train the ﬁrst layer models, "Sarcasm
Model" and "Dialect Model", for some epochs
ﬁrst, then train the full system together for mul-
tiple epochs. The motivation behind this idea is
that as long as the ﬁrst layer models work correctly,
the sentiment analysis will correspondingly work
correctly. We train in multiple orders like alternat-
ing between ﬁrst layer models and full system and
so on.
Other Training Parameters In our experi-

ments, we built SAIDS and used the MARBERTv2
model provided by HuggingFace’s transformers li-
brary (Wolf et al., 2020). Most of the experiments
trained for ﬁve epochs except for a low learning
rate where it was twenty epochs. For the learning
rate, we used a range from 1e−4 to 1e−6. The se-
quence was truncated to a maximum length of 128
tokens. Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2015) was used as
an optimizer for all models.
5
Results
In this section, the results achieved with SAIDS
are discussed. For the sake of comparison, base-
lines were built for the system. To initially evaluate
the idea itself, a random forest model baseline was
built and compared with the random forest version
of SAIDS. Baselines for real scenario are baseline
one (B1) which is identical to BERTModelForSe-
quenceClassiﬁcation class in HuggingFace’s (Wolf
et al., 2020), which takes the MARBERTv2 sen-
tence embedding and passes it to the output layer
for classiﬁcation, and baseline two (B2) which uses
two hidden layers before the classiﬁcation layer, the
hidden layer size is equal to the "Sentiment Model"
hidden layer size, and baseline three (B3) which
uses a larger hidden layer size to match the total
number of trained parameters of SAIDS model.
For evaluation, we used the original metrics de-
scribed for the dataset (Abu Farha et al., 2021).
For sentiment analysis, the metric is the average of
the F1-score for the negative and positive classes
(FPN). For sarcasm detection, the metric is F1-
score for the sarcastic class only (FSar). For dialect
identiﬁcation, we used the weighted average of the
F1-score for all dialects (WFS).
5.1
Results of Different Training Setups
This subsection presents the results of the training
setups and describes the best setup that was chosen
for the proposed model. For each part of this sub-
section, every other setup was not changed to make
the comparison fair.
Modules Architecture As a proof of concept
for our system, the random forest (RF) model base-
line was compared with the informed random for-
est (IRF) which is the random forest version of
SAIDS. Table 4 shows that IRF outperforms RF
where the FPN is improved by 3 percent which is
due to the proposed architecture. The information
gained from the new inputs, "outputs of sarcasm
model" and "outputs of dialect model", was 5 and
4 percent respectively. This means that about 10
percent of the sentiment analysis decision came
from the newly added information.
Model
FPN
Random Forest
59.36
Informed Random Forest
62.34
Table 4: Performance comparison for the proof of con-
cept on the validation set
For the MNN architecture of the modules, multi-
ple numbers of hidden layers were trained. At each
experiment, all the modules have the same number
of hidden layers. Table 5 shows that using zero
hidden layers gives the best results. So no hidden
layer setup was used in SAIDS.
Model
FPN
0 Hidden Layer
75.23
1 Hidden Layer
74.90
2 Hidden Layer
74.89
Table 5: Performance comparison for the number of
hidden layers in modules on the validation set
What Should Be Informed Experiments were
also done to ﬁnd the best features to use while
analysing sentiment. Table 6 shows that using both
dialect and sarcasm is better than using only one
of them and of course better than not using any of
them which is the baseline. With a quick obser-
vation, it was found out that the dialect beneﬁts
the sentiment more than the sarcasm, this can be
obvious when speaking about MSA tweets because
most of them are labeled as neutral on sentiment.
Accordingly, sarcasm and dialect information was
used in SAIDS.
Model
FPN
Not Informed (B1)
72.40
Informed of sarcasm
73.67
Informed of dialect
74.41
Informed of sarcasm and dialect
75.23
Table 6: Performance comparison for what should be
informed on the validation set
Limited Backpropagation Experiments were
also done to ﬁnd the best path for backpropagation
to work with. "Full limit" is when the loss does not
propagate through the "Sarcasm model" and "Di-
alect Model", "Partial limit" is when it propagates

through some layers, and "Unlimited" is when it
propagates through all layers. The model was com-
posed of two hidden layers while running these
experiments. Table 7 shows that "Partial limit" gets
better results than the others, but on SAIDS we did
not use it as we used a no hidden layer setup, so we
used the "Full limit" backpropagation.
Model
FPN
Full limit
74.23
Partial limit
74.89
Unlimited
72.31
Table 7: Performance comparison for limiting back-
propagation on the validation set
Activation Function For the sake of compari-
son, the Softmax layer was removed from the out-
put layer of the model in the experiments. Table 8
compares both setups, it shows that, as expected,
using Softmax is better than not using it, as it quan-
tify the probability of being sarcasm or being a
certain dialect. So in SAIDS, Softmax was used on
each module.
Model
FPN
With Softmax
75.23
Without Softmax
72.15
Table 8: Performance comparison for the activation
function setting on the validation set
Task By Task Training Experiments were also
done with training the three tasks together at the
same time (All tasks), and multiple sets of the train-
ing sequence. The ﬁrst is one epoch of training for
sarcasm and dialect, and the rest for the full system
(Seq 1). The second is odd epochs for sarcasm and
dialect and even epochs for the full system (Seq
2). The third is two epochs of training for sarcasm
and dialect and the rest for sentiment only (Seq 3).
Table 9 shows that Seq 1 performs better than the
other sequences, so we used it for the ﬁnal model
training.
Model
FPN
All tasks
74.35
Seq 1
75.23
Seq 2
73.49
Seq 3
73.01
Table 9: Performance comparison for different model
training sequences on the validation set
Summary of Used Setups SAIDS used infor-
mation from sarcasm and dialect models, which
are both one classiﬁcation layer with no hidden lay-
ers, the sentiment loss does not propagate through
sarcasm and dialect models, and the Softmax ac-
tivation function was used on each model output.
The used training sequence was one epoch of train-
ing for sarcasm and dialect, and the rest epochs for
the full system.
5.2
Results comparison with literature
SAIDS was trained and compared to the baselines
we built and also the state-of-the-art models. Ta-
ble 10 shows that SAIDS outperforms the existing
state-of-the-art models on the sentiment analysis
task. SAIDS’s main task is sentiment analysis, the
sarcasm detection and dialect identiﬁcation are con-
sidered secondary outputs. Although the FSar score
for SAIDS is considerably high, it is ranked third
in the state-of-the-art models. On the other hand,
most works that achieve state-of-the-art results are
using different models for each task but in the pro-
posed architecture, one model is used for both. The
model also outputs the dialect, it achieves 71.13
percent on the weighted F1-score metric, but the
literature has not reported the dialect performance
so it is not included in the table.
Model
FPN
FSar
Baseline 1
71.60
58.41
Baseline 2
72.53
58.61
Baseline 3
73.11
58.62
El Mahdaouy et al. (2021)
74.80
60.00
Song et al. (2021)
73.92
61.27
Abdel-Salam (2021)
73.21
56.62
Wadhawan (2021)
72.55
58.72
SAIDS
75.98
59.09
Table 10: Performance comparison for the state-of-the-
art models and SAIDS on the test set
6
Conclusion
Sentiment analysis is an important system that is be-
ing used extensively in decision-making, though it
has different drawbacks like dealing with sarcastic
sentences. In this work, we propose SAIDS which
is a novel model architecture to tackle this prob-
lem. SAIDS essentially improves the sentiment
analysis results while being informed of sarcasm
and dialect of the sentence. This was achieved by
training on the ArSarcasm-v2 dataset which is la-

beled for sentiment, sarcasm, and dialect. SAIDS’s
main target is to predict the sentiment of a tweet. It
is trained to predict dialect and sarcasm, and then
make use of them to predict the sentiment of the
tweets. This means that while the model is pre-
dicting the sentiment, it is informed of its sarcasm
and dialect prediction. SAIDS achieved state-of-
the-art performance on the ArSarcasm-v2 dataset
for predicting the sentiment; 75.98 percent average
F1-score for negative and positive sentiment. For
sarcasm detection, SAIDS achieved a 59.09 percent
F1-score for the sarcastic class, whereas for dialect
identiﬁcation it achieved a 71.13 percent weighted
F1-score for all the dialects. We believe that this
model architecture could be used as a starting point
to tackle every challenge in sentiment analysis. Not
only sentiment analysis but also this is a general
architecture that can be used in any context where
the prediction of a task depends on other tasks. The
idea behind the architecture is intuitive, train for
both tasks and inform the model of the dependent
task with the output of the independent task.
