Normalization of Non-Standard Words in
Croatian Texts
Slobodan Beliga, Miran Pobar and Sanda Martinčić-Ipšić
Department of Informatics
University of Rijeka
Omladinska 14, 51000, Rijeka, Croatia

Abstract. This paper presents text normalization which is an integral
part of any text-to-speech synthesis system. Text normalization is a set
of methods with a task to write non-standard words, like numbers, dates,
times, abbreviations, acronyms and the most common symbols, in their
full expanded form are presented. The whole taxonomy for classiﬁcation
of non-standard words in Croatian language together with rule-based
normalization methods combined with a lookup dictionary are proposed.
Achieved token rate for normalization of Croatian texts is 95%, where
80% of expanded words are in correct morphological form.
Keywords: text normalization, non-standard words, text-to-speech
1
Introduction
Systems for speech synthesis carry out the conversion of arbitrary input text into
synthesized speech [7]. These systems consist of diﬀerent components which en-
able speech generation. One of the components of a TTS system is text normal-
ization that transforms non-standard text elements into their expanded form,
preparing them for further processing in the system (g2p conversion, prosody
generation, etc.). In most cases text normalization includes numbers, dates, time,
abbreviations, acronyms, diﬀerent symbols, currency, measurement units etc.
First problem in text normalization is detection of non-standard words (NSW).
Sometimes standard words and NSWs share the same written form pol -North
Pole, half and pol. - /political/. The second problem is writing the detected
NSWs in their full expanded form. For example, the abbreviation ’st.’ has to be
written as ’stoljeće’ (century) or as ’student’ depending on the context.
Common methods [12] for speech normalization are: hand-written rule-based
methods, lookup dictionary based method which uses predeﬁned dictionary for
normalization or semiautomatic approach which automatically expands a novel
abbreviation. Solutions for the text normalization for English [9,10,12], French
[5], Russian [13], Polish [6], German [2], Slovenian [8], Czech [16] have been
reported.
The main aim of this article is to present the problems of Croatian text
normalization and to propose algorithms for the normalization. The algorithms
arXiv:1503.08167v2  [cs.CL]  30 Mar 2015

2
Normalization of Non-Standard Words in Croatian Texts
are presented according to the proposed taxonomy of Croatian NSW and imple-
mented in Perl. The normalization results are presented and some ideas for future
work are stated. The paper concludes with discussion on possible integration of
proposed text normalization into the existing grapheme-to-phoneme conversion
[14] and speech generation modules of Croatian TTS synthesis systems [15].
2
Text Normalization
Normalization is the ﬁrst step in the text pre-processing of TTS [7]. The normal-
ization module is responsible for the identiﬁcation of a single NSW token and
for its transformation into expanded form. Usually NSWs are not listed in the
dictionary and there is no unique rule for their expansion or pronunciation [12].
Further, they are more ambiguous than standard words in meaning or pronunci-
ation. The ﬁrst problem is to identify all NSWs in Croatian and separate it from
standard words. The second problem is the transformation of detected NSW into
expanded form, suitable for the TTS system. These two problems are the most
obvious, but there are still some other issues to consider. For instance, when
is a punctuation mark an end of a sentence, and when is an abbreviation? For
example in the sentence ’Ivo je na natjecanju bio 3. i odlikovan je broncom.’ we
would read the number /3./ as ’the third’. But, how can the computer recognize
this sentence as one and not as two sentences?
3
Taxonomy of Normalization for Croatian Language
In most TTS systems text normalization is accomplished by using hand-written
rules that are deﬁned for particular domains of application [1,12]. Along with
rules [16], n-gram models [7,12], decision trees and weighted ﬁnite-state transduc-
ers [12] or lookup dictionaries (lists) of most frequent NSWs with their expanded
form [12] have been used. Listing all NSWs is tiring and it never ensures complete
success of normalization, i.e. it does not guarantee that some novel NSW from
the input text is also listed in the lookup dictionary. Therefore, we suggest the
taxonomy that classiﬁes all posible NSWs and therefore provides the complete
framework for text normalization problem for Croatian language.
The module initially classiﬁes NSWs as letters, numerals or combination as
shown in the main classiﬁcation tree in Fig. 1. It is important that the input
texts are written strictly according to orthographic rules, since the suggested
taxonomy is based on Croatian orthographic and grammatical rules. As we can
see the classiﬁcation tree branches: into the left tree for characters (Fig. 1), into
the middle tree for digits (Fig. 2) and into the right tree for combined alphanu-
meric characters (Fig. 2). NSW usually doesn’t carry information by which we
could easily interpret and expand it to the correct branch of the tree. So we
try to classify NSWs of same characteristics in one unique class. With suggested
classiﬁcation it is possible to retrieve algorithms that make normalization more
achievable and for certain classes the uniﬁed normalization algorithms are con-
structed. Instances within the certain class share common characteristics, like

Normalization of Non-Standard Words in Croatian Texts
3
Fig. 1. Classiﬁcation tree: main(left), characters(right).
ordinal and cardinal numbers. Hence, algorithms for numbers normalization can
be also applied to telephone numbers, dates and time. The Roman numbers are
easily confused with letters (such as /Ivan Pavao II./ and /čl. II./) but they are
expanded the same way as ordinal numbers.
Fig. 2. Classiﬁcation tree: numbers(left), combined charecters(right).
Abbreviations, acronyms, symbols, measurement units and similar NSWs can
apear in numerous forms and carry the meaning depending on the domain con-
tex. Each ﬁeld in science, culture or and society uses colloquial language, and its
own NSWs. It is common that NSWs have more than one meaning and conse-
quently more then one normalization form, based on the context. The normal-
ization of abbreviations is carried out by combination of lookup lists (dictionar-
ies) and some rules. Particularly complex group of NSW represent mixed semi-
otic sequences composed out of numbers and letters. Commonly they appear in

fag5.htm).

4
Normalization of Non-Standard Words in Croatian Texts
4
Implementation
The normalization algorithms are implemented in Perl. Perl is suitable for text
processing [11], because of many automated functions for solving problems of
lexical analysis and functions for text processing. The proposed solution is based
on the identiﬁcation of NSW by using regular expressions which classify the NSW
into correct class of the tree and writing it as an unambiguously pronaunceable
text.
Numbers are highly suitable for normalization, because it is easy to determine
how many ones, tens, hundreds, thousands they contain by the number of digits.
By dividing them consecutively, we get the numeric value for each place.Then
each digit is replaced with a word. Detailed review of number characteristics is
given in [4] as well as the detailed description of algorithms for normalization of
ordinal and cardinal numbers.
The numbers repeat the same pattern after every three digits. This fact
implies that numbers can be normalized in a group of three digits with common
characteristics. Once written, functions for expanding numbers of lower decadal
place can be applied to upper places as well. Algorithms for each number NSW
are based on the principle: search the root base according to the numeric values
of decadal places, then add suﬃx, which is determined by the values of lower
places.
The ordinal number /21./ belongs to the interval [11, 100⟩. Each digit is
decomposed according to its position and replaced by a written word: /21./ is
replaced by /dva+deset i prvi/. On the root base /dva/ we add suﬃx /deset/ and
with the conjunction /i/ add the word /prvi/. Using the same principle we get
the expanded forms of the ordinal numbers. Normalization of cardinal numbers
is carried out by the same principle, except the used suﬃxes are diﬀerent.
The rule of writing a dot after ordinal number is orthographically correct.
But, sometimes a year without the dot at the end in written. Such incorrect
form of writing is taken into consideration because many texts in newspapers,
on web portals and in various documents generated by computer contain the
years written without a dot at the end. Likewise, it is not necessary to write
zero in front of single-digit numbers of days or months.
The normalized form of date in Croatian standard language is written in
nominative, except for the month which is always written in genitive. The time
normalization is based on the same principle as cardinal numbers, only the in-
tervals of [0, 60] are considered and modiﬁed suﬃxes are used.
The normalization of abbreviations is carried out by lookup lists of the most
frequently used abbreviations with their associated expanded forms. There are
few common characteristics of abbreviations according to which we would for-
mulate unique rule for normalization. For ambiguous NSWs it is necessary to
use additional rule. For example, if the abbreviation /g./ comes after the ordinal
number, it signiﬁes a year /godina/, after cardinal is /gram/ and before or after
a proper name can be /gospodin/.
Acronyms are the subclasses of abbreviations. We suggest the following solu-
tion for acronyms: we detect them as NSW tokens, but we never write them in

Normalization of Non-Standard Words in Croatian Texts
5
their full expanded form, rather we write them as they are spelt. The acronym
/MMF/ is written as /ememef /. This is also a suitable solution for foreign and
ambiguous acronyms, as an example /DVD/ is written as /devede/ and the user
of the system judges the true meaning depending on the context: /Digital Video
Disc/ or /Dobrovoljno vatrogasno društvo/.
5
Results and Integration
The result of proposed Croatian text normalization are presented in terms of
token correctness calculated as percentage of recognized tokens (the number of
identiﬁed NSW in original text) divided with total tokens number (the number
of total NSW in original text). Similar measure (token error rate) has been
proposed in [13]. Moreover, the text normalization in Croatian is complex due
to the nature of Croatian language. Croatian is a highly ﬂective Slavic language
and words can have 7 diﬀerent cases for singular and 7 for plural, genders and
numbers. The measure of morphological correctness for evaluation of normalized
NSWs in Croatian text was set as the ﬂective correctness. It is the percentage of
morphologically correct tokens out of correctly recognized tokens (the number
of identiﬁed NSWs in original text).
The performance of Croatian text normalization was tested on the corpus of
selected Croatian texts. The text collection included 18 texts with 11K words
as shown in Table 1. Total number of NSWs in test text is 1728. The proposed
Croatian text normalization correctly detected 1648 tokens, which resulted with
95,37% overall token correctness. Among recognized tokens 1316 were in cor-
rect ﬂective form which resulted with 80% ﬂective correctness. The test texts
were collected according to their genre: educational, scientiﬁc, popular, news and
formal. The text topics were: chemistry, physics, history, recipes, ads, weather
reports, TV schedule, telephone directory for individuals and companies, road
and travel conditions, law and legislation, political and election reports, busi-
ness, exchange rates and currencies, etc. Fig. 3 presents the token and ﬂective
correctness calculated per each text genre.
Table 1. The results per text genre.
Number of texts
words
total
tokens
unrecog.
tokens
recog.
tokens
correct
tokens
(morpho.)
incorr.
tokens
(morpho.)
Educational 4
2714
272
24
248
92
156
Scientiﬁc 2
543
127
4
123
81
46
Popular 3
633
94
1
93
50
43
News 5
5814
982
2
980
933
47
Formal 4
1230
253
49
204
160
86
OVERALL 18
10934
1728
80
1648
1316
378

6
Normalization of Non-Standard Words in Croatian Texts
The problems with abbreviations, symbols, measurement units, acronyms,
etc. arise because they sometimes change depending on the context in which
they are written and therefore it is very diﬃcult to unify them in one algorithm.
Additionally sometimes they share the same graphical format with standard
words: /Na/ can be chemical element /natrij/ (sodium) or preposition /na/
(on), /C/ can be either Coulomb, carbon or simply the home number 5C in
address etc. For instance in presented test texts abbreviation /st./ was expanded
as student, century, senior, item and saint depending on the text genre, which
was determined in advance.
Correct interpretation of semantic context in which NSW appears is an im-
portant ﬁeld for our future research. Each scientiﬁc, cultural or social area uses
its own colloquial language. For this reason, the dictionaries of frequently used
abbreviations and symbols should be adapted to limited linguistic domain that
the system will use. The language is constantly changing and evolving. Conse-
quently, for the purposes of speech synthesis novelties in language should expand
and update the normalization module in order to keep pace with stratiﬁed time,
space and functionality. The second focus of our research will be morphological
generation of correct ﬂective form of normalized words, according to morphosyn-
tactic tags of neighboring words.
Fig. 3. Token and ﬂective correctness per text genre.
The proposed normalization can be easily integrated with existing grapheme-
to-phoneme conversion [14] and speech generation modules of TTS system [15]
which is under development. The fully integrated TTS system for Croatian can
be used for applications in assistive technology, spoken information retrieval or
simply as the reader.
6
Conclusion
This paper describes the normalization of non-standard words in Croatian texts
for the purposes of speech synthesis. The text normalization is highly complex if

Normalization of Non-Standard Words in Croatian Texts
7
we take into consideration the determination of correct gender, number and case
of the normalized words. The problem is also the fact that input texts are not
entirely written according to the orthographic principles of the Croatian stan-
dard language and the module for text normalization has to possess a certain
degree of tolerance in conducting its methods that make the systems even more
complex. The synthesized text is better and more complete if as many samples
as possible are expanded in the process of text pre-processing. For that purpose,
we suggested the taxonomy of Croatian NSWs which uniﬁes the normalization
procedures of Croatian texts. Algorithms for detection of samples for normaliza-
tion (ordinal and cardinal numbers, dates of numeral and combined forms, time,
abbreviations, acronyms and symbols) and algorithms for the normalization of
identiﬁed forms were constructed as the combination of programmed rules and
lookup dictionary in Perl. The proposed algorithms were tested on 18 texts of
diﬀerent genres: educational, scientiﬁc, popular, news and formal and overall
token rate of 95% and overall 80% of correct ﬂective forms were achieved. Inte-
gration of proposed text normalization into the existing grapheme-to-phoneme
conversion [14] and speech generation modules of TTS synthesis system [15] is
under development.
The language is constantly changing so some further eﬀorts should be in-
vested in continuous gathering of Croatian text, with diﬀerent topics and dis-
course for keeping the normalization procedure up to date. Further, the interpre-
tation of semantic context in which NSW appears should be addressed in future
research. And ﬁnally, the normalization should generate the correct morpholog-
ical form of expanded word.
