562 
YOUNG 
UAI2001 
Statistical Modelling in Continuous Speech Recognition (CSR) 
Steve Young 
Cambridge University Engineering Dept. 
Trumpington Street, Cambridge 
England CB2 1PZ 
sjyżeng.cam.ac.uk 
Abstract 
Automatic continuous speech recognition 
(CSR) is sufficiently mature that a variety 
of real world applications are now possible 
including large vocabulary transcription and 
interactive spoken dialogues. This paper re­
views the evolution of the statistical mod­
elling techniques which underlie current-day 
systems, specifically hidden Markov models 
(HMMs) and N-grams. Starting from a de­
scription of the speech signal and its parame­
terisation, the various modelling assumptions 
and their consequences are discussed. It then 
describes various techniques by which the ef­
fects of these assumptions can be mitigated. 
Despite the progress that has been made, the 
limitations of current modelling techniques 
are still evident. The paper therefore con­
cludes with a brief review of some of the more 
fundamental modelling work now in progress. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
The aim of this paper is two-fold. The first aim is 
to set out the basic framework for tbe statistical ap­
proach to speech recognition, identify its limitations 
and describe how they can be mitigated in practical 
implementations. The second aim is to indicate some 
of the directions in which new models might evolve. 
The foundations of modern speech recognition technol­
ogy were laid by Fred Jelinek and his team at IBM in 
the 1970's[l]. Reflecting the computational power of 
the time, initial development in the 1980's focussed on 
whole word small vocabulary applications[2]. In the 
early 90's attention switched to continuous speaker­
independent recognition. Starting with the artificial 
1000 word Resource Management task, the technology 
developed rapidly and by the mid-1990's, reasonable 
accuracy was being achieved for unrestricted dictation. 
Much of this development was driven by a series of 
DARPA and NSA programmes[3] which set ever more 
challenging tasks culminating most recently in systems 
for transcribing broadcast news programmes[4] and for 
transcribing spontaneous telephone conversations[5]. 
Although the basic framework for CSR has not 
changed significantly in the last ten years, the detailed 
modelling techniques developed within this framework 
have evolved to a state of considerable sophistication. 
The result has been steady and significant progress. 
The paper continues in section 2 with a brief review 
of this framework and its limitations. Then in sec­
tion 3, the major areas of refinement employed by to­
day's state-of-the-art systems are discussed. 
Despite the progress that has been made, the limi­
tations of current modelling techniques are still very 
evident and many researchers are investigating alter­
natives. section 4 of the paper therefore presents a 
selection of some of the work in progress on new mod­
els for CSR. section 5 then concludes. 
2 
BASIC MODELLING 
FRAMEWORK 
2.1 
PROBLEM FORMULATION 
The statistical formulation of the speeech recognition 
problem assumes that speech can be represented by 
a sequence of acoustic vectors Y 
= 
Y1 ... YT and 
that this sequence encodes a sequence of words W = 
w1 .. wK. The specific form of the acoustic vectors is 
chosen so as to minimise the information lost in the 
encoding and to provide the best match with the distri­
butional assumptions made by the subsequent acous­
tic modeling. In practice, a log spectral estimate1 is 
typically computed every 10msecs and then a trun­
cated cosine transformation is applied to smooth and 
1the frequency spectrum is usually warped non-linearly 
to match the resolution of the human ear. The mel and bark 
scales are common approximations used for this warping 

UA12001 
YOUNG 
563 
partially decorrelate the feature elements. In addi­
tion, first order (delta) and second-order (delta-delta) 
regression coefficients are appended in a heuristic at­
tempt to compensate for the conditional independence 
assumption made by the HMM-based acoustic mod­
els(see section 4.1). The result is a vector whose di­
mensionality is typically around 40 which has been 
partially but not fully decorrelated[6, Ch 5]. 
Recognition is then cast as a decoding problem m 
which we seek the word sequence w• such that2 
W* 
arg maxp(WIY) 
w 
arg maxp(YIW)p(W) 
w 
(1) 
(2) 
Here p(Y I W) is determined by an acoustic model and 
p(W) is determined by a language model. The CSR 
problem is thus reduced to designing and estimating 
appropriate acoustic and language models, and finding 
an acceptable decoding strategy for determining w·. 
2.2 
ACOUSTIC MODELLING 
Since the vocabulary of possible words might be very 
large, the words in W are decomposed into a sequence 
of basic sounds called base phones Q of which there 
will be around 45 distinct types in English. To al­
low for the possibility of multiple pronunciations, the 
likelihood p(YIW) can be computed over multiple 
pronunciations3 
where 
p(YIW) = LP(YIQ)p(QIW) 
(3) 
Q 
(4) 
and where p(Qkiwk) is the probability that word Wk is 
pronounced by base phone sequence Qk = q}klqCk) . .
.. 
In practice, there will only be a very small number of 
possible Qk for each Wk making the summation in eq 3 
easily tractable. 
Finally, each base phone q is represented by a continu­
ous density hidden Markov model (HMM) of the form 
illustrated in fig 1 with transition parameters { a;j} and 
output observation distributions { bj ()}. The latter are 
typically Gaussians and since the dimensionality of the 
acoustic vectors Yt is relatively high, the covariances 
are constrained to be diagonal. 
Given the composite HMM Q formed by concatenating 
all of the constituent base phones then the acoustic 
2In this paper p() is used to denote both a probability 
and a density, the context should indicate which is intended 
3Recognizers often approximate this by a max operation 
Figure 1: A simple HMM-based Phone Model 
likelihood is given by 
p(YIQ) = LP(X , YIQ) 
(5) 
X 
where X = x(O) .. x(T) is a state sequence through the 
composite model and 
The acoustic model parameters { a;j} and { bj ()} can 
be efficiently estimated from a corpus of training ut­
terances using EM. For each utterance, the sequence 
of baseforms is found and the corresponding compos­
ite HMM constructed. A forward-backward alignment 
is then used to compute state occupation probabilities 
(the E-step), the means and variances are then max­
imised via simple weighted averages (the M-step)[6, 
Ch 7]. Note that in practice the majority of the model 
parameters are used to model the output distributions 
and the transition parameters have little effect on ei­
ther the likelihood or the recognition accuracy. 
The above approach to acoustic modelling is often 
referred to as the beads-on-a-string model, so-called 
because all speech utterances are represented by con­
catenating a sequence of precomputed phone models 
together. 
2.3 
LANGUAGE MODELLING 
The probability of a word sequence W = w1 .. wK is 
p(W) = IIf=lp(wk lwk-l, Wk-2, ... , wi) 
(7) 
For large vocabulary recognition, the conditioning 
word history in eq 7 is usually truncated to n- 1 words 
to form an N- Gram language model 
p(W) = ITf=lp(wkiWk-I,Wk-2, ·
·
 · ,Wk-n+t) 
(8) 
where n is typically 2 or 3 and never more than 4. The 
n-gram probabilities are estimated from training texts 
by counting n-gram occurrences to form ML parame­
ter estimates. The major difficulty of this method is 
data sparsity which is overcome by a combination of 
discounting and backing-off[7, 8]. 

564 
YOUNG 
UAI2001 
2.4 
DECODING 
Decoding is performed, conceptually at least, by com­
piling a network of all vocabulary words in parallel 
within a loop. Each word is represented by the sub­
network of HMM phone models corresponding to all of 
its allowable pronunciations. For the case of a bigram 
(N=2) language model, the transition probabilities be­
tween words are just the bigram probabilities. Once 
compiled, the whole recognition network can be used 
in a conventional Viterbi decoder to compute the most 
likely state sequence for an unknown input utterance. 
Trace back through this sequence then yields the most 
likely phone and word sequence. 
In practice, however, decoding is more complex. Ad­
equate performance requires at least a trigram (N =3) 
LM. This means that the recognition network must 
be expanded to allow all possible N-1 word histories 
to be maintained. Also, as will be explained in the 
next section, a small set of 40 or so base phones is 
inadequate to deal with the variability found in natu­
ral language and in practice, phone set sizes of 10000 
or more are common with the choice of model be­
ing context-dependent. Thus, decoding is a complex 
search problem and decoder design continues to be a 
research issue[9] . 
Solutions to the decoding problem exploit sharing and 
pruning to limit the number of active hypotheses[lO]. 
A standard scheme for reducing search costs uses mul­
tiple passes over the data. The output of each pass is 
a lattice of word sequence hypotheses rather than the 
single best sequence. This allows the output of one 
recognition pass to constrain the search in the next 
pass. Initial passes can use simple models when the 
search space is large and later passes can use more re­
fined models when the search space is reduced. This 
multipass approach is also extremely convenient for 
research since it allows recognition experiments to be 
run on lattices rather than incurring the heavy com­
putational cost of repeated full decodes4. 
3 
THE STATE OF THE ART 
The previous section has summarised the basic frame­
work used by modern CSR systems. In doing so, a 
number of ill-found assumptions have been made such 
that a system built exactly as described would have 
rather poor performance. This section, examines these 
assumptions in more detail and describes technques 
used to mitigate them. 
4A recent alternative approach to decoding has been 
developed based on the systematic composition of weighted 
finite-state transducers[ll]. 
w 
(silence) 
Stop 
that 
(silence) 
Q 
sil 
oh 
th 
ae 
sil 
L 
sil sil-s+! s-l+oh t-oh+p oh-p+ th p-th+ae th-ae+t ae-t+sil sil 
M 
ml 
m23 
m94 
m32 
m34 
m984 
m763 
m2 
ml 
Figure 2: Context Dependent Phone Modelling 
3.1 
PHONOLOGICAL MODELLING 
The simple approach described in section 2.2 of de­
composing each vocabulary word into a sequence of 
base phones fails to capture the very large degree of 
context-dependent variation that exists in real speech. 
For example, the base form pronunciations for "mood" 
and "cool" would use the same vowel for "oo", yet in 
practice the realisations of "oo" in the two contexts 
are very different due to the influence of the preceding 
and following consonant. 
A simple way to mitigate 
this problem is to use a unique phone model for every 
possible context. To avoid the resulting data spar­
sity problems which would otherwise result, each of 
these logical phones L can be mapped to a reduced 
set of shared physical rnorlels M5• Using this context­
dependent phone decomposition , eq 3 conceptually be­
comes 
p(YIW) 
= l:p(YIM){Lp(MIL)(Lp(LIQ)p(QIW))} 
ѕf 
ĭ 
Q 
(9) 
and the process is illustrated in fig 2 where the no­
tation x-y+z denotes the base phone y spoken in the 
context of a preceding x and a following z. Notice that 
the context-dependence spreads across word bound­
aries and this is essential for capturing many impor­
tant phonological processes. For example, the [p] in 
"stop that" has its burst suppressed by the following 
consonant [th]6. 
In eq 9, most current systems map the base phones Q 
directly into the logical models L and then cluster L to 
form physical models M. Clustering typically operates 
at the state-level rather than the model level since it 
simplifies the tree computations and it allows a larger 
5Here it is a..'isumed that the context is determined by 
just the identity of the neighbouring phones. 
The result­
ing logical models are called triphones. 
However, further 
context can be included such as more distant neighbours, 
proximity to word boundaries, lexical stress, etc 
6Note that this use of cross-word context dependent 
models greatly complicates the decoder. 

UA12001 
YOUNG 
565 
t-ib+n 
l-ih+ng 
f-ih+l 
s-ih+l 
•••• 
t-ih-tn 
1 Tiesimilir 
+ 
states 
f-ih+l 
s-ih+l 
Figure 3: Formation of Tied-State Phone Models 
set of physical models to be robustly estimated. Fig 3 
illustrates how the physical models are constructed by 
tying the states of the logical models. 
The choice of which states to tie is made using decision 
trees[l2]. Each state position7 of each phone q has a 
binary tree associated with it. Each node of the tree 
carries a question regarding the context. 
To duster 
all states i of phone q, all states i of all of the logical 
models derived from q are collected into a single pool 
at the root node of the tree. Depending on the answer 
at each node, the pool of states is successively split 
until all states have trickled down to leaf nodes. All 
states in each leaf node are then tied. The questions 
at each node are selected from a predetermined set 
to maximize the likelihood of the training data given 
the final set of state-tyings. Fig 4 illustrates this tree­
based clustering. In the figure, the logical phones s­
aw+n and t-aw+n will both be assigned to leaf node 
3 and hence they will share the same central state of 
the representative physical model. 8 
The partitioning of states using phonetically-driven 
decision trees has several advantages. In particular, 
logical models which are required but were not seen 
at all in the training data can be easily synthesised. 
One disadvantage is that the partitioning can be rather 
coarse. This problem can be reduced using so-called 
soft-tying[l3]. In this scheme, a post-processing stage 
groups each state with its one or two nearest neigh­
bours and pools all of their Gaussians. Thus, the num­
ber of mixture weights in each state is increased whilst 
holding the total number of Gaussians in the system 
constant. 
Decision-tree tied-state context dependent modelling 
schemes can handle most of the phonological variation 
found in carefully articulated speech ( eg dictation). 
However, they fail to handle more radical phonolog-
7invariably each phone model has three states 
8The total number of tied-states in a large vocabulary 
speaker independent system typical ranges between 5000 
and 10000 states 
S· aw tn 
I 
l-awtn8 
I 
s-aw+l 
I 
I 
I 2 : 
etc 
I 
l 
!__ __ j 
R=cenlral·cons? 
base 
phone 
= aw 
states in each leaf node are tied 
Figure 4: Decision Tree Clustering 
ical variations such as the processes which lead to 
"going to" being realised as [g ax n ax] ( "gonna"). 
There have been a variety of attempts to handle this 
kind of problem within the beads-on-a-string frame­
work by allowing more variation between theW and 
L layers eg by using decision trees to generate context 
dependent pronunciations[l4, 15, 16]. However, none 
have been really successful. The essential problem is 
that expanding the set of possible pronunciations to 
give wider coverage of actual spoken forms, simultane­
ously increases confusibility with the result that recog­
nition error rates improve little. Linguists have argued 
that this is a fundamental flaw in the beads-on-a-string 
framework[17]. 
3.2 
IMPROVED DISTRIBUTIONAL 
MODELLING 
In practice, speech feature vectors are not Gaus­
sian and not uncorrelated. Furthermore, both intra­
speaker and inter-speaker variability introduces modes 
in the data. Almost all CSR systems compensate for 
this by using a mixture of Gaussians to represent each 
state distribution, thus 
M 
bj(yt) = I: CjmN(Yti f.Lm, 'Em) 
(10) 
m=l 
where the Cjm are the mixture weights. Since, as ex­
plained in the previous section, there are typically a 

566 
YOUNG 
UAI2001 
large number of these Gaussians9, each component 
variance :Em is constrained to be diagonaL 
The ability of mixtures of diagonal covariance Gaus­
sians to model correlation structure is limited. 
One 
way to improve covariance modelling without incurring 
unacceptable training data and run-time computation 
requirements is to transform the input feature vec­
tor. A much studied approach to this is to use Linear 
Discriminant Analysis (LDA) and its variants[18, 19] . 
LDA can also be used to prune out nuisance dimen­
sions from the feature vectors thereby reducing com­
putation and potentially increasing classification per­
formance. However, in practice, the gains achievable 
by LDA are variable , and more robust improvements 
have been obtained using Semi-tied Covariances[20] . 
This scheme decomposes each component covariance 
into the product "E 
= H-1 :E(H-1 )T where H is a 
transformation matrix and :E is diagonaL 
This has 
the property that 
logp(y; fim, "Em) = logp(Hy; J.l.m1 :Em)+ log IHI (11) 
Hence, if H is global, it can be applied as a transform 
to the speech data and the diagonal covariance Gaus­
sians estimated and computed in the normal way on 
the transformed data. Although there is no direct EM­
based reestimation for H, a simple iterative scheme is 
available [20]. For large systems with many Gaussians, 
a single global transformation may be inadequate to 
capture the different correlation structures. 
In this 
case, a set of transformations H{¢{m)) can be used, 
shared amongst all Gaussians via a partition function 
¢>(m) chosen to maximise the training data likelihood. 
More recently, Gales has shown that H can be factored 
into streams to allow a larger set of transformations to 
be synthesised[21]. 
Another approach to dealing with inaccurate model 
assumptions is to use a discriminative objective func­
tion such as Maximum Mutual Information (MMI) as 
the basis for parameter estimation [22]. For MMI, the 
objective function is 
.F(>.) =log 
PA(YIMw )P(W), 
(12) 
LwP>.(YiMw)P(W) 
where Mw is the composite model corresponding to 
the word sequence W and P(W) is the probability of 
this sequence. The summation in the denominator is 
taken over all word sequences W and it can be replaced 
by 
PA(YIMrec) = LP>.(YIMw)P(W) 
(13) 
w 
where Mrec encodes the full acoustic and language 
model used in recognition. 
9typically 10 to 32 Gaussians per state, and typically 
5000 to 10000 states in a system 
This 
objective 
function 
can 
be 
optimised 
using 
an 
extended 
form 
of 
Baum-Welch 
reestimation 
algorithm[23]. Furthermore, tractable approximations 
to the summations in the numerator and denominator 
terms of eq 12 can be computed from decoder gener­
ated lattices, where the numerator lattice is derived 
from a forced recognition of earh training utterance 
and the denominator is derived from applying the full 
recognition model to each training utterance[24, 25]. 
3.3 
NORMALISATION AND 
ADAPTATION 
One fundamental assumption of the statistical frame­
work is that the training data is representative of the 
unseen test data. 
In CSR. this is rarely true. Not 
only do speakers vary greatly but also the background 
noise conditions and transducer channel charact.erisics 
are highly variable. 
The solution to this problem is 
to normalise the input data as much as possible and 
then use unsupervised adaptation to adjust the model 
parameters. 
A very simple method of normalising for channel ef­
fects in off-line transcription applications is to sub­
tract the cepstral mean and scale the variance of each 
feature element to unity. The region of speech used to 
compute the needed averages is constrained by the ap­
plication but is typically the whole utterance or whole 
side of a conversation[26]. 
An effective form of speaker normalisation is to warp 
the frequency axis used in the front-end spectrum anal­
ysis in order to compensate for variations in vocal 
tract length[27, 26]. The optimal warping is found by 
searching for the scaling factor which maximises the 
log likelihood of the warped speech data. 
Whereas normalisation seeks to make the input speech 
closer to the models, adaptation seeks to modify the 
models to make them a better fit to the speech. There 
are two main approaches to adaptation. Firstly, the 
model parameters can be treated as random vari­
ables and estimated using traditional Bayesian MAP 
techniques[28]. 
The problem with this approach is 
that only those parameters for which there is adapta­
tion data are updated, also determining suitable pri­
ors can be difficult. The second and more widely used 
approach is to estimate transformations of the acous­
tic model parameters in a technique called Maximum 
Likelihood Linear Regression (MLLR) [29, 30, 31]. 
MLLR seeks to find an affine transform of the Gaussian 
means which maximises the likelihood of the adapta­
tion data, i.e. 
(14) 
where G = [b A] and 7Jm 
= [1 11-/]T. 

UAI2001 
YOUNG 
567 
Base Classes 
Figure 5: Regression Class Tree 
The key to the power of this adaptation approach is 
that a single transformation G can be shared across 
a set of Gaussian mixture components. 
When the 
amount of adaptation data is limited, a single trans­
form can be shared across all Gaussians in the system. 
A s  the amount of data increases, the HMM state com­
ponents can be grouped into classes with each class 
having its own transform. As the amount of data in­
creases further, the number of classes and therefore 
transforms increases correspondingly leading to better 
and better adaptation. 
The number of transforms is usually determined au­
tomatically using a regression class tree as illustrated 
in fig 5. Each node represents a regression class i.e. a 
set of Gaussian components which will share a single 
transform. For a given set of adaptation data, the tree 
is descended and the most specific set of nodes is se­
lected for which there is sufficient data (for example, 
the filled-in nodes in the figure). 
In addition to mean adaptation, variance adaptation 
is also possible. There are several approaches to this. 
Firstly, a separate unconstrained transform H can be 
used where 
:E-1 = C H-1 C' 
(15) 
m 
m 
m 
and where Cm is the Choleski factor of E,:;,l. 
The 
advantage of this form is that H can be estimated 
using the standard covariance reestimation formula. 
Secondly, instead of having a separate transform for 
the means and variances, a single constrained trans­
form can be applied to both, i.e. 
fi.m = Aflm + b 
'tm 
AEmA' 
(16) 
(17) 
This has no closed-form solution but an iterative solu­
tion is possible [32]. A key advantage of this form of 
adaptation is that the likelihoods can be calculated as 
£(y; 11, E, A, b)= N(Ay + b; 11, E)+ log(IAI) 
This means that the transform can be applied to the 
data rather than the HMM parameters which may be 
more convenient for some applications ( cf semi-tied co­
variances, section 3.2). 
In addition to the above, there are many variants. 
For example, multiple transforms can be used for each 
class[33, 34] and alternative objective functions can be 
used[35, 36]. 
3.4 
CONFUSION NETWORKS AND 
MODEL COMBINATION 
As noted in section 2.1, the goal of the statistical for­
mulation of the CSR problem is to find the most likely 
word sequence W. 
In the optimal case, this would 
yield the minimum sentence error rate whereas the 
pragmatic requirement is to minimise the word error 
rate (WER). 
A minimum word error rate decoding can be achieved 
by estimating word posterior probabilities. This can 
be done by converting the decoder lattice output into 
a confusion matrix. For each arc in the lattice, a pos­
terior probability can be computed using the forward­
backward algorithm 10. 
The lattice arcs can then be 
clustered to form a linear graph with the property 
that all parallel arcs form a confusion set and all paths 
through the graph pass through all nodes in the same 
order as in the lattice[37]. 
The minimum WER hy­
pothesis is then found by selecting the most likely arc 
in each confusion set. 
Confusion graphs can also be used to compute confi­
dence scores [38]. The direct use of the word posteriors 
tends to overestimate the probability of correct recog­
nition because the lattices from which they are derived 
only cover a fraction of the complete hypothesis space. 
Hence in practice some form of mapping is used ( eg de­
cision trees). 
The above sections have described a range of tech­
niques which can be used to improve the performance 
of a CSR system and these techniques can be com­
bined in various ways. 
Empirically it is often found 
that even where different system combinations lead to 
similar performance, the errors made by each individ­
ual system are different. Hence a recent trend in tran­
scription applications has been to combine the outputs 
of several decoders. A simple way of doing this is by 
voting[39]. However, combining the posteriors derived 
from confusion networks yields better performance[38]. 
10Note that in practice it necessary to scale-down the 
acoustic scores relative to the language model scores to 
avoid the posteriors being dominated by the most likely 
path. 

568 
YOUNG 
UAI2001 
3.5 
LANGUAGE MODELLING 
As described in section 2.3, the core of all current lan­
guage models is the word n-gram. The n-gram cap­
tures local syntactic and semantic dependencies and 
for many languages this is sufficient to cover a large 
fraction of the useful constraints. Its primary weak­
ness is that it is inevitably undertrained 11 and al­
though smoothing and backing-off procedures can mit­
igate this effect, data sparsity is always a problem. 
One way to reduce the effects of data sparsity is to in­
terpolate the word n-gram with a class-based language 
model[40]. A class-based LM maps all words into a rel­
atively small number of classes for which n-grams can 
be robustly estimated, i.e. 
(18) 
where it is assumed that every word maps to a unique 
class. 
The classes themselves { ci} can be deter­
mined automatically using an ML-based clustering 
algorithm[41]. Empirically it is found that 250 to 1000 
classes give the best performance. 
4 
WORK IN PROGRESS 
As the previous section has shown, there are many 
techniques which can compensate for the ill-found as­
sumptions of the HMM-based recognition framework. 
Furthermore, when these techniques are carefully in­
tegrated, the result in terms of performance can be 
very competitive. For example, the first pass of the 
HTK large vocabulary recogniser consists of simple 
tied-state cross-word triphones trained using maxi­
mum likelihood and a trigram language model. When 
applied to the March 2000 Hub512 evaluation data, the 
word error rate was 38.6%. However, with the addition 
of VTLN and MLLR adaptation, quinphone acoustic 
models, soft-tied states, semi-tied covariances, MMI 
training, 4-gram language model interpolated with tri­
gram class model, confusion graph scoring, and four­
way model combination, the error rate was reduced 
to 25.4%, i.e. a relative reduction of 34%[42]. This is 
a very demanding task, and no other system or ar­
chitecture has managed to come close to this level of 
performance. 
Despite this impressive performance there are three 
key assumptions in current CSR systems which con­
tinue to cause concern: 
• the frame-independence assumption whereby each 
11Consider that for n = 3, a 50k word vocabulary re­
quires more than 1014 trigrams to be estimated. 
12i.e. 
"Switchboard" and "Call Home", conversational 
speech over the telephone 
successive speech feature vector is assumed inde­
pendent 
• the beads-on-a-string model combination whereby 
phone-based HMMs are concatenated in sequence 
to form words and sentences 
• the n-gram language modelling which prevents 
modelling of long-range dependencies 
It is very easy to argue the case for each of these 
assumptions being a major limitation on the perfor­
mance of CSR systems. Nevertheless, they are all ex­
tremely resistent to improvement. The next few sec­
tions will provide some pointers to recent and current 
work which attempts to improve on these assumptions. 
4.1 
SEGMENT MODELS 
Attempts to weaken the frame-independence assump­
tion exploit the concept of a segment model whereby 
speech features are segment13 rather than frame-based 
(see [43] for a review). In this framework, a segment 
of frames y1 .
. . Yl representing phone q is modelled as 
P(Yt···Yt,llq) =P(YI···Ytll,q)p(llq) 
(19) 
where the first term on the right is the observation dis­
tribution and the second term is the segment duration 
distribution14. 
The characteristics of a segment model are determined 
by the form of the observation distribution. The sim­
plest form maps the segment into fixed regions ri and 
associates a specific distribution with each region 
where the mapping from frames to regions can be cho­
sen to maximise the likelihood. 
Rather than associating a distribution with each re­
gion, distributions can be parameterised to define tra­
jectories fa (t) through the segment. The probability 
of a segment is then 
Typically the trajectory defines the evolution of the 
intra-segment mean and this can be fixed as in [44] or 
linear as in [45]. Rather than integrating over all pos­
sible trajectories, it is usually more computationally 
convenient to find the most likely trajectory. 
13In this context, a segment is equivalent to a phone in 
the terminology of earlier sections. 
14Decoding requires that the durational term be i nte­
grated out, hence the computational complexity of segment 
models is significantly higher than conventional HMMs 

UAI2001 
YOUNG 
569 
Perhaps the most appealing form is the linear dynam­
ical system since this can be related to the dynamics 
of the underlying human production system 
where Xt is a state vector and Ut and Vt are Gaussian 
processes. This model, well-known, in control applica­
tions was introduced into speech by Digalakis[46]. It is 
also receiving renewed interest in the machine learning 
comrnunity[47]. In speech, parameters defining Ut and 
Vt are associated with each region of each segment. 
The probability of each segment is then computed via 
the innovation sequence { et} 
(23) 
In effect, Xt defines a hidden trajectory over the seg­
ment from which the observations Yt are derived. This 
has led to variety of derivatives some of which use 
articulator-based models for the trajectory Xt and non­
linear mappings from Xt into yt[48, 49] . 
Although much good work has been done on segment 
models, the results so far have been disappointing. 
One reason for this might be that more precise mod­
elling of segments simply exacerbates the errors caused 
by the beads-on-a-string assumption. 
4.2 ASYNCHRONOUS PARALLEL 
MODELS 
The beads-on-a-string model combined with context­
dependent phone models can handle the variations 
found in carefully articulated speech but it fails when 
significant phonological variation occurs as in every­
day spontaneous speech. Many phonological processes 
are more naturally expressed in terms of a hierarchy 
of parallel feature streams [17]. For example, when 
nasality from a nasal consonant colours a neighbour­
ing vowel, this would be modelled by differences in the 
timing of feature changes rather than as a substitution 
of one allophone for another. In this model, pronun­
ciation variability is due to asynchrony between fea­
ture changes, and although the feature tiers are asyn­
chronous they are nevertheless coupled. At the signal 
level, similar effects can be observed. Formants do not 
move synchronously and empirically there is support 
for separate modelling of frequency bands. 
Observations such as these have motivated study on 
good ways to model parallel asynchronous processes. 
These range from very loosely coupled Multi-band 
models where streams are modelled independently and 
synchronised at major (eg syllable) boundaries[50], to 
very tightly coupled models where multiple observa­
tion distributions share the same underlying Markov 
chain[6]. 
More recently, these parallel stream models have been 
generalised to allow the required degree of coupling 
to be learnt via the framework of factorial HMMs. A 
factorial HMM consists of L individual Markov chains 
or streams evolving in parallel and K observation dis­
tributions. At any time, metastate I of the model 
is determined by the state of each individual stream 
I 
= (i1, . .. , iL) and the observation Yt is composed 
of K components Yt = (yJ, .
.
.
 , yf). Metastates are 
conditionally independent given the previous metas­
tate, and observations are conditionally independent 
given the current metastate, i.e. 
p(JII) = nf=1PU1II) 
p(Ytll) = Tif=lP(Y.IJ) 
(24) 
(25) 
This structure provides a flexible framework for mod­
elling asynchronous processes but the state spaces need 
to be constrained to be tractable. Current schemes for 
doing this include a mixed-memory approximation[51] 
and parameter tying[52]. Training and decoding using 
these models is potentially very expensive but a simple 
sub-optimal Chain Viterbi scheme where each stream 
is aligned in turn keeping the other streams fixed has 
been shown empirically to be effective[53]. 
The practical application of parallel asynchronous 
HMM's is still in its infancy but there are several exist­
ing research efforts that might benefit from it including 
those working on hidden articulator models[54, 55] and 
those working on discriminative feature models[56]. 
Also, Hinton has shown how the framework of parallel 
HMMs can be extended further[57]. 
4.3 
LANGUAGE MODELLING 
As noted earlier, the main limitation of n-gram lan­
guage models is that they can only model local de­
pendencies. Thus, for example, in "the warden locked 
the cell door", "the warden" is a good predictor for 
"locked" whereas in "the warden with a limp locked 
the cell door", "a limp" is a poor predictor of "locked". 
Early attempts to extend statistical LMs to include 
longer range dependencies mostly focussed on trigger 
models whereby predictor words are counted if they 
lay anywhere within the history. Triggers can be con­
veniently combined with conventional n-grams using 
the Maximum Entropy framework (ME) which leads 
to solutions with the following exponential form[58] 
where hk denotes the history wk-l . . . of word Wk. 
The functions J;(wk, hk) are constraint functions, and 

570 
YOUNG 
UAI2001 
the Ai are chosen to ensure that the expected val­
ues of the J; wrt to p( w k J hk) matches the known 
marginals. For example, a bigram constraint would 
be fw1 ,w2(w, h) = 1 iff w = W2 and h ends in w1 , and 
the required marginal constraint would be given by 
the count #(w1 , w2)/#(w1 ) computed over the train­
ing data. Within this framework, triggers are easily in­
corporated as constraints of the form f w1 , ,2 ( w, h) = 1 
iff w = w2 and Wt E h. 
More explicit approaches t o  exploiting syntactic and 
semantic models use probabalistic parsers to uncover 
head words which can then be used as predictors[59] . 
Using ME, these can be combined with conventional n­
gram constraints[60]. This work is especially interest­
ing since it models longer range dependencies in a more 
principled way than triggers. In the longer term, the 
growing synergy between the statistical approaches to 
speech and computational linguistics should pay divi­
dends in this area. 
5 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has reviewed the statistical framework 
used to build continuous speech recognition systems 
and briefly described the most important refinements 
needed to endow such a system with state-of-the-art 
performance. The three key assumptions underlying 
current approaches are (a) frame-independence; (b) 
beads-on-a-string model combination; and (c) n-gram 
language modelling. The latter part of the paper has 
described work in progess which aims to improve upon 
these assumptions. So far , significant gains in perfor­
mance resulting from this newer work have been sadly 
lacking. However, as argued in [61] ,  it is important 
that such work continues even if it does mean increas­
ing error rates in the short term. 
Modern start-of­
the-art systems are impressive and they will improve 
further. Nevertheless, the three fundamental assump­
tions on which they are based must surely mean that 
they are climbing to a local maximum , and somewhere 
there are better solutions . . .
