GIVL: Improving Geographical Inclusivity of
Vision-Language Models with Pre-Training Methods
Da Yin1
Feng Gao2
Govind Thattai2
Michael Johnston2
Kai-Wei Chang1,2
1 University of California, Los Angeles
2 Amazon Alexa AI

South Asia
Festival
East Asia
Festival
Africa
Western
Wedding
Festival
Festival
Wedding
Performance Gap of 
and Western Scenarios
Baseline
GIVL
West non-West
West
non-West
11%
5%
66.8%
70.4%
Diverse Scenarios in
Different Regions
Wedding
Wedding
Figure 1. Scenarios around the world including festivals and weddings. Even the same scenarios have distinct visual characteristics across
regions (a.k.a. geographically diverse). Compared with prior Vision-Language Pre-trained Models (VLPs), GIVL achieves much better
performance on non-Western data in GD-VCR [48]. GIVL can also make the gap between Western and non-Western cases much closer.
Abstract
A key goal for the advancement of AI is to develop
technologies that serve the needs not just of one group
but of all communities regardless of their geographical re-
gion. In fact, a signiﬁcant proportion of knowledge is lo-
cally shared by people from certain regions but may not
apply equally in other regions because of cultural differ-
ences. If a model is unaware of regional characteristics, it
may lead to performance disparity across regions and re-
sult in bias against underrepresented groups. We propose
GIVL, a Geographically Inclusive Vision-and-Language
Pre-trained model. There are two attributes of geo-diverse
visual concepts which can help to learn geo-diverse knowl-
edge: 1) concepts under similar categories have unique
knowledge and visual characteristics, 2) concepts with sim-
ilar visual features may fall in completely different cate-
gories. Motivated by the attributes, we design new pre-
training objectives Image-Knowledge Matching (IKM) and
Image Edit Checking (IEC) to pre-train GIVL. Compared
with similar-size models pre-trained with similar scale of
data, GIVL achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) and more bal-
anced performance on geo-diverse V&L tasks.
1. Introduction
Vision-Language Pre-trained Models (VLPs) [9, 23, 24,
29, 52] have achieved remarkable performance on Vision-
Language (V&L) tasks including visual question answer-
ing [11, 12, 15], image-text retrieval [22], and image cap-
tioning [19, 27].
Pre-trained with large-scale corpora of
image-text pairs, e.g. COCO [27], OpenImages [21]. VLPs
are capable of learning multi-modal representations and can
be effectively ﬁne-tuned on downstream V&L tasks.
While VLPs can solve a broad range of V&L tasks, to
deploy VLPs in real-world applications, it is essential to
consider the geographical inclusivity1 of VLPs. Because of
geographic differences, images from different regions em-
body a large amount of knowledge that is locally shared but
cannot be applied in other regions, i.e. geographically di-
verse. For example, in Figure 1, the festivals in different
regions look different.
Ideally, a geographically inclusive VLP should be capa-
ble of achieving comparable performance over all the im-
ages, regardless of their origins. However, current VLPs
1We use regions as a proxy to estimate inclusivity of V&L models.
People in the same regions may have different cultures and traditions.
1
arXiv:2301.01893v1  [cs.CV]  5 Jan 2023

does not perform equally well on data from different re-
gions. For example, prior works [28,48] show that on geo-
diverse V&L tasks, there is nearly a 20% performance dis-
crepancy between Western and East Asian images when
current VLPs are applied. To combat such geographical
bias, we aim to design methods to make VLPs achieve more
balanced performance across regions.
One solution to mitigating bias is to obtain diverse task-
speciﬁc annotations for each region and ﬁne-tune VLPs on
the new annotations.
However, according to [17], most
Amazon MTurk annotators are from US and India, and may
be unfamiliar with the cultures of other regions. Thus, it
is unrealistic to obtain large-scale geo-diverse annotations
even in such a popular crowdsourcing platform.
Pre-training a uniﬁed VLP with large-scale unannotated
geo-diverse images and corresponding knowledge could
make the VLP a foundation to provide more generalizable
representations and help to transfer on comprehending im-
ages from various regions easier. In this paper, we propose
GIVL, a Geographically Inclusive Vision-and-Language
Pre-trained model. We focus on how to encourage GIVL
to better learn geo-diverse knowledge on images from
different regions during its pre-training stage.
We observe two attributes of geo-diverse visual concepts
that can contribute to learning geo-diverse knowledge:
A1:
Concepts under similar categories have unique
knowledge and visual characteristics. For example, tra-
ditional Western and Chinese festivals, like Christmas and
Chinese New Year in Figure 1, are held with different rit-
uals and their decoration style differs as well. It is neces-
sary for GIVL to learn the difference between their corre-
sponding knowledge and precisely distinguish these visual
concepts. On the other hand, Christmas and Chinese New
Year are both festivals. Learning the commonalities of vi-
sual concepts (e.g., both images in Figure 1 belong to the
same category “festival”) would help model connect West-
ern and non-Western concepts and contribute to more effec-
tive transfer on geo-diverse images.
A2: Concepts with similar visual features may lie in
completely different categories. In Figure 2, Chinese pa-
per cuttings share visual features (e.g., color, shape) with
red frisbee. Similarly. sugar cane and ﬂute share visual fea-
tures. However, these concepts are not related to each other.
Since geo-diverse images cover a broader range of visual
concepts, differentiating visually similar concepts given vi-
sual contexts is also essential.
To this end, besides common objectives Masked Lan-
guage Modeling (MLM) and Image-Text Matching (ITM)
for pre-training VLPs, we propose two additional pre-
training objectives, Image-Knowledge Matching (IKM)
and Image Edit Checking (IEC). IKM is used to learn
the alignment between images and corresponding textual
knowledge in Wikipedia. It requires GIVL to not only judge
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. Example of Chinese paper cuttings and red frisbee (left)
and sugar cane and ﬂute (right). Different visual concepts may
share similar visual characteristics, but they may have completely
different functionalities.
if the input textual knowledge matches input images, but
also identify whether the visual concepts described in input
knowledge falls into similar categories of the concepts in in-
put images. This encourages GIVL to learn corresponding
relationship between knowledge and images as well as rec-
ognize similarity among geo-diverse visual concepts. IEC
is proposed to identify whether a visual concept in input
image is replaced by another concept that is visually similar
but lies in an irrelevant category (see Fig.3 for an example).
It enables GIVL to capture nuances between visually simi-
lar concepts after the replacement given visual contexts.
Our contributions and empirical results are as follows:
• By considering the attributes of geo-diverse visual con-
cepts, we propose two novel V&L pre-training objec-
tives Image-Knowledge Matching (IKM) and Image
Edit Checking (IEC) that can greatly improve the geo-
graphical inclusivity of VLPs.
• Compared with similar-size VLPs pre-trained with
similar scale of data, GIVL2 achieves state-of-the-
art (SOTA) and more balanced performance over dif-
ferent regions on geo-diverse V&L tasks including
MaRVL [28], GD-VCR [48] and WIT Image-Text Re-
trieval [37]. For geo-diverse zero-shot image classi-
ﬁcation on Dollar Street dataset3, GIVL outperforms
VinVL [52] 26%.
2. Related Work
Vision-Language Pre-Trained Models (VLPs).
VLPs
[4, 9, 22–24, 26, 29, 35, 41, 52] are proposed to tackle tasks
that require understanding of both images and texts. Fol-
lowing the paradigm of pre-training language models [8,30,
32], in common practice, VLPs use Transformer [42] as the
backbone and pre-train them with large-scale image-caption
pairs. The commonly used image-text parallel data are from
multiple sources including COCO [27], Flickr30K [49],
Conceptual Captions [34] and OpenImages [21] datasets.
Currently, VLPs have achieved remarkable performance
on various V&L tasks including visual question answer-
ing [12, 15], visual reasoning [39], image captioning [27],
2Code and model checkpoint will be released.
3Dollar street dataset is available at https://github.com/
greentfrapp/dollar-street-images.
2

and image-text retrieval [27, 49]. Most recent works focus
on scaling up VLPs; this paper studies an orthogonal but
important concerns - how to leverage diverse knowledge to
improve inclusivity of VLPs.
Geographical Bias.
Geographical bias [7, 33, 43, 47] is
a severe problem in that AI applications have. Previous
works [28, 48] reveal the fact that on geo-diverse V&L
tasks, the performance gap between non-Western and West-
ern images is signiﬁcant when using VLPs. Similarly, ob-
ject recognition models’ performance greatly drops on non-
Western images [7, 33]. Researchers [7, 33, 43] ﬁnd that
one factor of the geographical bias is introduced by an im-
balanced distribution of training data with respect to geo-
graphical location. They [7] observe that COCO and Open-
Images, two widely used pre-trained corpora for VLPs, are
amero-centric and euro-centric. Another reason behind the
performance drop is that VLPs can understand basic visual
information in images from different regions, but are less
able to leverage geo-diverse knowledge and reason [48].
Geo-Diverse V&L Tasks.
GD-VCR [48] studies whether
a model can understand commonsense on geo-diverse im-
ages. V&L models are required to select the correct an-
swer from four answer choices given textual questions in-
volving geo-diverse commonsense and the corresponding
images. MaRVL [28] is another V&L task that requires
visual reasoning with cultural knowledge of images from
non-Western regions. It is formulated as a binary classiﬁca-
tion problem in which the model needs to judge whether a
sentence correctly describes two images from non-Western
regions. WIT image-text retrieval [3,37] is a standard mul-
timodal retrieval task on geo-diverse Wikipedia images.
3. Methods
In this section, we introduce the pre-training method
of GIVL in detail.
Section 3.1 provides preliminary of
GIVL pre-training method including the deﬁnition of visual
concept and category. Section 3.2 describes the four pre-
training objectives. Section 3.3 and 3.4 illustrate the process
of acquiring essential information used to construct input
contents for objectives Image-Knowledge Matching (IKM)
and Image Edit Checking (IEC). Speciﬁcally, Section 3.3
shows how to extract visual concept name from an image
caption and its category information from Wikipedia. Sec-
tion 3.4 shows how to locate visual concept to correspond-
ing detected objects in input image.
3.1. Preliminary
Deﬁnition of Visual Concept and Category.
Visual
concept is an object or scenario that an image mainly in-
volves. For example, Figure 3 shows the visual concept of
Chinese paper cuttings. Each speciﬁc visual concept cor-
responds to one general category. Each category covers
various visual concepts having particular shared character-
istics. For example, the category of visual concept Chinese
paper cuttings is art. The art category includes other vi-
sual concepts such as Jewish paper cuttings. The extraction
pipeline for visual concept and its category information will
be introduced in Section 3.3.
Pre-Training Corpus.
To improve the geographical in-
clusivity of VLPs, we use Wikipedia Image-Text (WIT)
dataset [37] as a primary source of geo-diverse images.
WIT contains 2.95M images in total4. We also incorpo-
rate 0.22M commonly used V&L pre-training images from
COCO [27], Flickr30k [49], and GQA. Images in WIT
dataset come with the corresponding Wikipedia sections
that include the corresponding knowledge of WIT images.
This knowledge5, such as customs and history, is usually
culturally related and not explicitly described in the images.
Such knowledge plays a crucial role in helping VLPs un-
derstand visual concepts in geo-diverse images more com-
prehensively.
Input for Pre-Training.
We organize the input for GIVL
pre-training as follows:
[CLS] c [SEP] k [SEP] t [SEP] v,
(1)
where c is either an image caption or a GQA question; k de-
notes the corresponding knowledge of the visual concept in
input image I; t is either tags of detected objects or a GQA
answer; v is a list of visual embeddings generated from in-
put image I by a ResNeXt-152 C4 detection model [52]. pv
is the name of the visual concept contained in image I.
3.2. Pre-Training Objectives for GIVL
We pre-train GIVL with four objectives: Masked Lan-
guage Modeling (MLM), Image-Text Matching (ITM),
Image-Knowledge Matching (IKM), Image Edit Checking
(IEC). We introduce each pre-training objective as follows.
3.2.1
MLM and ITM Objectives
Masked Language Modeling (MLM) is a learning objective
prevalently used in V&L pre-training. Given the context
of model inputs, GIVL needs to recover the tokens masked
by [MASK]. MLM loss LMLM is the average of all cross-
entropy loss with respect to the probability of predicting the
correct masked tokens given a vocabulary.
Image-Text Matching (ITM) is another commonly ap-
plied objective that enables GIVL to learn the alignment
between texts and images. Following VinVL [52], given
an input image I, we construct three types of input contents
4GIVL focuses on English-only V&L tasks. We only consider images
with English captions, which only occupy 30% out of the entire WIT.
5The knowledge of COCO, Flickr30K and GQA images is the ﬁrst sen-
tence in Wikipedia pages of the objects mentioned in captions.
3

[CLS]
[SEP]
[SEP]
[SEP]
Caption/Question
Knowledge
Tags/Answers
Visual Embeddings
Tags: Chinese paper cuttings, …, wall
…...
…...
…...
…...
…
𝓛!"!
𝓛#$!
𝓛#%!
𝓛#&'
Image-Text Matching (ITM)
Image-Knowledge Matching (IKM)
Image Edit Checking (IEC)
Masked Language Modeling (MLM)
Transformer
Replaced
Jewish paper cuttings knowledge: 
[MASK] paper cutting is a traditional 
form of …
Chinese paper cutting knowledge:
Chinese paper cuttings knowledge: The art 
of paper cutting in China may date back …
Replaced
Caption: [MASK] paper cuttings in a shop.
Figure 3. GIVL pre-training method with four pre-training objectives. The input image is about the visual concept Chinese paper cuttings.
The input knowledge is about Jewish paper cuttings rather than Chinese paper cuttings, but it is also the knowledge describing a visual
concept that shares a similar category with Chinese paper cuttings. Hence, for Image-Knowledge Matching (IKM) objective, the input
contents belong to Type 3. Also, the visual concept Chinese paper cuttings is replaced with a visually similar concept red frisbee. Thus,
for Image Edit Checking (IEC) objective, the input contents belong to Type 2.
for c and t. It is formulated as a 3-way classiﬁcation task,
yc,t ∈{0, 1, 2}, where 0 represents that c and t both match
the input image I; 1 means when t matches image I whereas
c mismatches the image I; 2 indicates c matches I but t mis-
matches I. ITM loss is the cross-entropy loss with respect
to the probability of predicting the type of input contents
upon [CLS] representation.
3.2.2
Image-Knowledge Matching (IKM)
We propose Image-Knowledge Matching (IKM) to assist
GIVL in learning knowledge of geo-diverse visual con-
cepts. With the help of IKM, we encourage GIVL to learn
the corresponding knowledge of the visual concepts and dis-
cover connections between geo-diverse visual concepts.
Although the visual characteristics of the geo-diverse vi-
sual concepts in GIVL’s pre-training corpus may be poles
apart, they could be clustered in similar categories. For ex-
ample, in Figure 1, the visual characteristics of traditional
Western and non-Western festivals are different, but these
scenarios all belong to the same category festival. Learn-
ing to identify category similarity can connect diverse visual
concepts under similar categories and generalize to under-
standing more relevant concepts across regions more sim-
ply. On the other hand, each of the visual concepts in simi-
lar categories associates with unique knowledge. Therefore,
it is also crucial for GIVL to precisely distinguish if input
knowledge aligns with the input image.
To this end, we construct the three types of input contents
and formulate IKM as a 3-way classiﬁcation task to enforce
GIVL to identify the input type:
• Type 1: k matches input image I;
• Type 2: k mismatches input image I and the visual
concept described by k does NOT fall into a similar
category of the visual concept pv in I;
• Type 3: k mismatches input image I but the visual con-
cept described by k falls into a similar category of the
visual concept pv in I.
To select knowledge k for Type 3 input in IKM, we need
to conduct two steps (i) extracting the name of visual con-
cept pv of input image I from its caption (for GQA data,
see supplementary) and (ii) looking for visual concepts un-
der similar categories. More details of extracting pv from
image caption and its category information will be intro-
duced in Section 3.3. After the visual concept name pv is
extracted from the caption, to ﬁnd a visual concept which
falls in the most relevant categories to pv, we randomly
sample 200 visual concepts as candidates. Then we select
the candidate concept that has the most semantically similar
category with pv’s category. Speciﬁcally, the sampled can-
didates are ranked by cosine similarity between text embed-
dings6 of their category names and the embedding of pv’s
category name. The process of selecting the most relevant
visual concept p∗is illustrated in Eq. (2),
p∗= arg max
pi
CosineSim(zpi, zpv),
(2)
where zpi is the embedding of i-th sampled visual con-
cept pi’s category, zpv is the embedding of pv’s category,
CosineSim denotes the function quantifying cosine simi-
larity between two embeddings. The corresponding knowl-
edge of p∗can be regarded as k in Type 3 input.
For preparing k in Type 2 input content, we ﬁrst set up a
threshold for the cosine similarity between the embeddings
of category names (τ = 0.3) to ﬁlter out the visual concepts
relevant with pv. Then we randomly pick one of the retained
visual concepts. The selected visual concept indicates the
one that has irrelevant category information with pv. Its
corresponding knowledge can be used as k in Type 2 input.
6We utilize FastText [2] embeddings pre-trained on Wikipedia. Phrase
embeddings are mean pooled embeddings of the words in the phrases.
4

First sentence of Wikipedia page of "Torii":
A torii (Japanese: 鳥居, [to.ɾi.i]) is a traditional Japanese 
gate most commonly found at the entrance of or within 
a Shinto shrine, where it symbolically marks ...
... ...    a     traditional     Japanese     gate     most     commonly     found      ... ...
amod
amod
advmod
advmod
acl
det
Figure 4. Steps to mine the category information of visual con-
cepts. The composition of the head noun (“gate”, root of parse
tree) and its modiﬁers (“traditional Japanese”, words with “amod”
relation with “gate”) can be treated as the category of torii (“tra-
ditional Japanese gate”).
IKM loss is a cross-entropy loss with respect to the prob-
ability of predicting the type of relationship between the in-
put image and knowledge upon [CLS] representation,
LIKM = −1
|D|
|D|
X
i=1
log p(yk
i |c, k, t, v),
(3)
where D indicates the entire pre-training corpus7 and yk
i is
the label for the input type in IKM.
3.2.3
Image Edit Checking (IEC)
To better differentiate visually similar but irrelevant con-
cepts, we propose another pre-training objective Image Edit
Checking (IEC). In geo-diverse setting, it is highly likely
that visual concepts share similar visual characteristics but
fall into completely different categories. For example, in
Figure 2, Chinese paper cuttings are red and circular, which
aligns with the visual characteristics of red frisbee. IEC is
designed to identify whether a speciﬁc visual concept pv in
input image I is replaced by another visually similar one in
an irrelevant category.
We consider two types of input contents for IEC:
• Type 1: Input image I remains the same;
• Type 2: The visual embedding of the visual concept
pv in input image I is replaced with the embedding of
another concept that is visually similar but falls into an
irrelevant category with pv.
In Figure 3, since the visual concept Chinese paper cuttings
is replaced with red frisbee, the input type is Type 28.
To prepare input contents of Type 2 data, we need to ac-
complish two steps (i) seeking the corresponding detected
objects of the visual concept pv in input image I from its
caption (ii) looking for visually similar concepts for re-
placement. The pipeline of locating visual concept pv is
introduced in Section 3.4. After the visual concept pv is lo-
cated, to select the proper visual concept for replacement in
7The proportion of Type 1, 2 and 3 input for IKM in D is 2 : 1 : 1.
8The proportion of Type 1 and 2 input for IEC in D is 1 : 1.
Type 2 input, we randomly sample 20 images, and then col-
lect the visual embeddings and tag names of all the detected
objects in the sampled images as candidates. The visual
concept for replacement is selected according to two crite-
ria: (i) its category is dissimilar9 with the category informa-
tion of concept pv and (ii) its visual embedding is closest to
pv’s visual embedding. We select irrelevant visual concepts
with pv to guarantee that the replacement is unreasonable
given the image context.
IEC loss is a binary cross-entropy loss with respect to the
probability of predicting whether the input image is modi-
ﬁed upon the [CLS] representation,
LIEC = −1
|D|
|D|
X
i=1
log p(yv
i |c, k, t, v),
(4)
where yv
i is the label for input type in IEC. The ﬁnal loss L
is the sum of all losses mentioned above:
L = LMLM + LIT M + LIKM + LIEC.
(5)
3.3. Acquiring Categories of Visual Concepts
Acquiring the categories of visual concepts is a prereq-
uisite step to construct GIVL inputs for IKM and IEC. We
ﬁrst need to extract the visual concept name pv in input im-
age I from its image caption. We achieve this by parsing the
caption with [31]. pv is the composition of the head noun
and its modiﬁers in the parse tree. For example, given a
caption “Chinese paper cuttings in a shop”, pv is Chinese
paper cuttings, which is composed of the head noun “cut-
tings” and its modiﬁers “Chinese paper” in its parse tree.
To acquire pv’s category, we then search for Wikipedia
with keyword pv. If pv is an entry of Wikipedia, we ﬁnd that
the category information can be usually found in the ﬁrst
sentence of Wikipedia introduction paragraph. As shown
in Figure 4, the category of torii (i.e., traditional Japanese
gate) is present in the ﬁrst sentence “A torii ... is a tradi-
tional Japanese gate most commonly ...” Then we notice
that the category name is the phrase consisting of the head
noun and its modiﬁers in the ﬁrst sentence. In this exam-
ple, the head noun of the ﬁrst sentence is “gate” and its
modiﬁer words are “traditional” and “Japanese”. The ﬁnal
concatenation, “traditional Japanese gate”, is the category
of torii. Though the category information mined with these
simple heuristics is imperfect, the extraction method is easy
to implement and efﬁcient in acquiring categories of large
quantities of visual concepts.
3.4. Locating Visual Concepts in Images
With a limited amount of object class labels, it is difﬁ-
cult for current object detectors to detect a geo-diverse vi-
9We use the cosine similarity between embeddings of the candidate
visual concept’s category and pv’s category. Any candidate concepts with
a similarity lower than 0.3 are treated as dissimilar ones.
5

Poster
Poster
Poster
Poster
Poster
Poster
Chinese 
Paper Cutting
Poster
Poster
Chinese 
Paper Cutting
Chinese 
Paper Cutting
Chinese 
Paper Cutting
1. Detect large object whose object tag is most
semantically similar to the visual concept
2. Replace the object tag with
visual concept mentioned in captions
3. Propagate the replacement on detected 
objects that share the same tag names
Figure 5. Steps to locate novel visual concepts in input images.
sual concept pv. Therefore, we introduce a simple approach
to efﬁciently locate the corresponding object given a visual
concept pv. We ﬁnd that a visual concept pv is commonly (i)
classiﬁed as a tag name that has similar semantics with pv’s
category, and (ii) its image patch occupies a large portion of
the image. To this end, we design heuristics to locate novel
visual concepts according to our empirical ﬁndings. First,
only the top-10 large detected objects from each image will
be considered. Second, we calculate the similarity between
their object tags and pv’s category. The one with the highest
similarity score will be treated as the object corresponding
to pv. We take Figure 5 as an example. The visual concept
pv to be located is Chinese paper cuttings. Suppose that one
of the Chinese paper cuttings (the object in top right corner)
is among top-10 large detected objects. Besides, its original
detected object tag is poster, which is the most semantically
similar to Chinese paper cuttings’s category. Hence, we can
replace its original object tag with Chinese paper cuttings as
it is the corresponding object we are looking for.
The method above only locates one visual concept per
image. However, it is possible that one image may contain
multiple identical visual concepts. For example, in Figure 5,
there are a couple of Chinese paper cuttings. To solve this
problem, we simply propagate the visual concept name of
Chinese paper cuttings to other objects that share the same
original detection labels.
4. Experiments
We conduct two sets of experiments to evaluate GIVL.
We ﬁrst evaluate GIVL on multiple geo-diverse V&L tasks
including zero-shot image classiﬁcation, V&L reasoning
and image-text retrieval. It helps us to verify the effective-
ness of GIVL under geo-diverse settings. On the other hand,
experiments on common V&L tasks are conducted to prove
the generalizability of GIVL’s pre-training method.
4.1. Baselines for Ablation Study
Five baselines are described below. For fair compari-
son, pre-training corpus, number of pre-training steps, and
Model
#Param
Acc.
Western/non-Western
Prior VLPs
VinVL∗
112M
1.21
1.77/1.01
VinVL [52]
112M
1.29
1.25/1.30
Ours
GIVL w/o LIKM
112M
21.37
25.31/20.37
GIVL w/o LIEC
112M
12.96
12.71/13.02
GIVL w/ CLIP
199M
18.04
22.89/16.82
GIVL-B
112M
20.35
23.93/19.45
GIVL
112M
27.25
31.65/26.15
Table 1. Results on geo-diverse zero-shot image classiﬁcation on
Dollar Street dataset. We also show the respective performance on
Western and non-Western images.
hyper-parameters are all identical to GIVL10. Since V&L
pre-training is extremely time consuming, all baselines are
pre-trained with 500K steps in ablation study.
GIVL w/o LIKM & GIVL w/o LIEC.
GIVL w/o LIKM
and GIVL w/o LIEC is the model pre-trained without
Image-Knowledge Matching (IKM) objective and Image
Edit Checking (IEC) objective, respectively. We demon-
strate the effectiveness of our proposed pre-training objec-
tives with these two baselines.
VinVL∗.
VinVL∗is pre-trained only with MLM and ITM
objectives as VinVL [52].
It also shares the same pre-
training corpus with GIVL. The only difference between
GIVL and VinVL∗is objectives. GIVL is pre-trained with
Image-Knowledge Matching (IKM) and Image Edit Check-
ing (IEC) but VinVL∗is not. Comparing GIVL and VinVL∗
can manifest the improvement by introducing IKM and IEC
objectives on geo-diverse V&L tasks. The comparison is
also fair for the pre-training methods of GIVL and VinVL
on common V&L tasks.
GIVL w/ CLIP.
Some recent VLPs utilize CLIP [32] as
the vision encoder. We replace object-level visual encoder
in GIVL with CLIP to check if it can further improve perfor-
mance. CLIP provides grid-level visual representation in-
stead of object-level’s. Therefore, IEC objective is removed
because it involves object-level replacements.
GIVL-B.
The only difference between GIVL and GIVL-
B is that the IKM objective of GIVL-B is a binary classiﬁ-
cation objective instead of 3-way classiﬁcation. For IKM,
it requires GIVL-B to identify whether the input knowledge
matches the image contents. GIVL-B doesn’t need to judge
whether the input knowledge describes a visual concept that
shares similar category with the concept in input image. The
comparison between GIVL and GIVL-B is able to demon-
strate the effect of incorporating category information for
learning the knowledge of geo-diverse visual concepts.
4.2. Results on Geo-Diverse Benchmarks
Geo-Diverse
Zero-Shot
Image
Classiﬁcation.
Geo-
diverse zero-shot image classiﬁcation is a downstream geo-
10Details of experimental setups are described in Appendix A.
6

Model
Data/Steps
#Param
Acc.
∆
Prior VLPs
ViLBERT [29]
3.3M/-
274M
66.53
10.87
VinVL [52]
5.65M/2M
112M
72.48
8.55
VinVL∗
3.17M/500K
112M
69.66
8.27
X-VLM† [51]
16M/-
216M
73.02
11.39
ALBEF† [23]
14M/-
210M
73.17
9.37
METER† [9]
4M/-
352M
73.47
8.86
Ours
GIVL w/o LIKM
3.17M/500K
112M
72.11
-
GIVL w/o LIEC
3.17M/500K
112M
68.58
-
GIVL w/ CLIP
3.17M/500K
199M
71.78
-
GIVL-B
3.17M/500K
112M
70.26
-
GIVL
3.17M/500K
112M
72.50
6.56
GIVL
3.17M/900K
112M
72.70
7.17
Table 2. Results on MaRVL testing set. We also show the perfor-
mance discrepancy ∆between NLVR2 and MaRVL. † denotes the
results reported in [54].
Model
#Param
Acc.
Non-West
∆
Prior VLPs
VisualBERT [29]
135M
53.95
-
10.42
ViLBERT [29]
274M
59.99
-
7.28
VinVL∗
112M
69.07
66.45
8.46
VinVL [52]
112M
70.20
66.78
11.04
Ours
GIVL w/o LIKM
112M
69.56
65.96
-
GIVL w/o LIEC
112M
69.89
66.92
-
GIVL w/ CLIP
199M
70.43
67.25
10.20
GIVL-B
112M
69.56
65.96
-
GIVL
112M
70.32
68.41
6.14
GIVL (1M)
112M
72.01
70.4
4.97
Table 3. Results on GD-VCR. We also show the results on all
the non-Western images in GD-VCR and discrepancy ∆between
Western and non-Western images.
diverse V&L task that directly evaluates the effectiveness
of the pre-training methods. We evaluate models on Dol-
lar Street dataset11. It is labeled with 127 classes, each of
which contains images around the world. For classiﬁcation
on one image, we compose 127 inputs, each of which is the
concatenation of one class name, the class’s corresponding
knowledge12, tag names and visual embeddings of the de-
tected objects. We compare the probability of predicting
that each class name matches the input image via ITM ob-
jective for all the 127 classes. The class with the highest
probability is treated as the ﬁnal classiﬁcation result.
As shown in Table 1, GIVL outperforms both VinVL
and VinVL∗by a signiﬁcant margin around 26%. GIVL
achieves 6%-20% improvement in ablation studies, demon-
strating the effectiveness of the proposed IKM and IEC
objectives.
We also ﬁnd that GIVL outperforms GIVL
w/ CLIP which involves a strong vision encoder. It fur-
ther demonstrates that object-level visual representations
and object-level pre-training objective IEC are effective for
11Images in Dollar Street are labeled with country information. The
proxy to categorize Western and non-Western countries is based on [16].
12The knowledge of each class sources from Wikipedia and Wordhoard.
learning geo-diverse visual concepts.
Multicultural Visual Reasoning (MaRVL).
Following
NLVR2 [39], MaRVL [28] is a V&L task that requires
models to identify whether a sentence correctly describes
the contents of two input images.
MaRVL images in-
volve diverse visual concepts in non-Western regions. Since
MaRVL13 is merely a testing set, following [28], we ﬁne-
tune models on NLVR2 training set and then select the best
checkpoint on the dev set of NLVR2 to evaluate on MaRVL.
From Table 2, we observe that GIVL outperforms the
ablated baselines pre-trained without our proposed objec-
tives IKM and IEC, respectively. Also, similar to the ob-
servations on Dollar Street dataset, compared with VinVL∗
pre-trained with the same corpus as GIVL, GIVL achieves
higher performance. It further demonstrates that the pre-
training objectives of GIVL can help VLPs learn geo-
diverse visual concepts better than VinVL.
We also compare GIVL with VLPs (i) 3× larger model
(METER) and (ii) pre-trained with 2 −5× larger corpus
(VinVL, X-VLM and ALBEF). GIVL achieves competitive
performance with much less data and smaller model size.
Additionally, we attach importance to the comparison of
GIVL between NLVR2 and MaRVL. [28] demonstrate that
the visual concepts in NLVR2 dataset are Western-centric.
A smaller performance gap between NLVR2 and MaRVL
means less bias against non-Western regions. We observe
that GIVL can achieve more balanced performance on both
datasets, while other VLPs including METER, X-VLM and
ALBEF have larger performance discrepancy.
Geo-Diverse Visual Commonsense Reasoning (GD-
VCR).
GD-VCR is a testing set to evaluate multi-modal
models’ ability to understand geo-diverse commonsense
knowledge in images. It is a multiple-choice QA task which
requires geo-diverse commonsense reasoning. We ﬁne-tune
models on VCR [50] training set and select the best check-
point on VCR’s dev set to evaluate on GD-VCR.
As shown in Table 3, GIVL outperforms all prior similar-
size VLPs models trained with similar number of images.
GIVL also outperforms all ablated baselines except for
GIVL w/ CLIP, which uses a much stronger visual encoder
and only achieves 0.1% subtle improvements. Besides, we
highlight the performance gap between Western and non-
Western data in GD-VCR. GIVL has signiﬁcantly smaller
gap than any of the ablated baselines. While GIVL w/ CLIP
has a marginal improvement over GIVL, the performance
gap of GIVL is 4.06% smaller than GIVL w/ CLIP.
Wikipedia Image-Text Retrieval (WIT).
WIT image-
text retrieval is a standard retrieval task on geo-diverse
13We use the translated English version of MaRVL dataset in [54].
7

Model
Data
#Param
I/R
T/R
Prior VLPs
LXMERT [41]
-
240M
14.28
14.86
VisualBERT [24]
-
135M
15.36
15.75
UNITER [4]
-
-
15.43
16.01
VL-BERT [38]
3.3M
-
15.11
16.09
ViLBERT [29]
3.3M
274M
15.40
16.93
VinVL [52]
5.65M
112M
27.78
28.65
VinVL∗
3.17M
112M
25.44
25.50
Ours
GIVL w/o LIKM
3.17M
112M
26.21
26.97
GIVL w/o LIEC
3.17M
112M
28.08
28.18
GIVL w/ CLIP
3.17M
199M
27.94
28.17
GIVL-B
3.17M
112M
29.97
29.86
GIVL
3.17M
112M
28.00
28.79
GIVL (1M)
3.17M
112M
29.98
30.79
Table 4. Results on WIT image-text retrieval task. I/R and T/R
denote image retrieval and text retrieval. The evaluation metric is

VL-T5+
VLMixer+
LXMERT+
ViLT+
SOHO
PixelBERT
UNITER+
ViCHA
ViLBERT+
Oscar+
VILLA+
VinVL*
GIVL
GIVL
(900K)
74.60
79.87
NLVR2
LXMERT+
GIVL
60.00
63.44
BUTD
UNIMO-
large+
VLP
CLIP-ViL+
SimVLM-base
(1.8B)+
VinVL*
GIVL
COCO Image Captioning
GQA
Oscar+
CLIP-ViL+
MDETR
VinVL*
135.1 136.5
134.8
134.2
116.5
VL-T5+
137.8
Oscar+
79.03
78.54
78.07
77.40
77.18
75.70
74.90
62.58
61.34
61.19
CIDEr
Acc.
Acc.
VILLA+
+: models with larger size than GIVL
or pre-trained with larger corpus than GIVL
Figure 6. GIVL performance on common V&L tasks. Complete
results are shown in Appendix B.
Wikipedia images14. Table 4 shows that GIVL achieves su-
perior performance comparing to baselines except GIVL-
B. Pre-trained with 1M steps, GIVL obtains SOTA perfor-
mance on WIT image-text retrieval task.
4.3. Results on Common V&L Benchmarks
Besides testing GIVL on geo-diverse V&L tasks, we
benchmark GIVL on common V&L task to investigate
whether the pre-training method of GIVL is competitive
among existing VLPs. We don’t expect GIVL to perform
the best among SOTA VLPs on these V&L benchmarks,
because they are annotated with Western-centric data and
SOTAs are trained with much larger similar data as well.
We aim to answer two questions. Q1: Is GIVL able to ob-
tain comparable performance with VLPs pre-trained with
similar scale of data? Q2: Can GIVL perform as strongly
as SOTA VLPs pre-trained with the same corpus?
To answer Q1, we evaluate GIVL on common V&L
benchmarks including NLVR2, GQA and COCO caption-
ing. For NLVR2, GIVL is able to beat 11 VLPs with much
more parameters and pre-trained with more data. For GQA,
GIVL performs better than most of the VLPs. For COCO
image captioning, it can even obtain close performance with
SimVLM-base, a VLP pre-trained with 1.8B images. Over-
all, even though GIVL is pre-trained with the corpus whose
14We use the translated English WIT retrieval data in [3].
Festival
Servant
Religion
Vegetable
GIVL
VinVL
GIVL
VinVL
GIVL
VinVL
Western
non-Western
GD-VCR
Dry Cloth
GIVL
VinVL
GIVL
VinVL
Western
non-Western
DS Zero-shot Classification
67.5
78.7
85.1
62.1
76.0
68.0
56.0
1.9
55.7
1.5
Figure 7. GIVL and VinVL’s performance on non-Western and
Western images related to geo-diverse categories.
domain is not similar with common V&L benchmarks, it
can still achieve competitive results. It demonstrates the ef-
fectiveness of GIVL pre-training method.
For Q2, we target on VinVL, a strong VLP that once
swept leaderboards of multiple V&L tasks. For fair compar-
ison, we reproduce the pre-training process of VinVL with
GIVL pre-training corpus. As mentioned in Section 4.1, we
denote the reproduced pre-training as VinVL∗. On above
three V&L datasets, the performance difference between
GIVL and VinVL∗is subtle. We argue that GIVL could
achieve equally good performance as VinVL on common
V&L benchmarks if it was pre-trained with VinVL corpus.
4.4. Qualitative Study on Geo-Diverse Categories
We showcase examples from GD-VCR and Dollar Street
dataset to better demonstrate GIVL’s advantages. As shown
in Figure 7, non-Western festivals, servants and religions
are quite different from those in Western regions. We ﬁnd
that GIVL’s performance gap on the images involving these
categories is signiﬁcantly smaller than VinVL on GD-VCR.
Moreover, GIVL’s performance on non-Western images is
5-8% higher than VinVL. For Dollar Street dataset, while
the overall performance of GIVL is around 30%, GIVL
can achieve above 55% accuracy when recognizing vegeta-
bles and drying clothes which greatly vary across data from
worldwide. GIVL even outperforms VinVL 50% on those
categories. GIVL’s strong performance on these highly geo-
diverse categories further demonstrates its effectiveness.
5. Conclusion
We propose GIVL, a geographically inclusive vision-
and-language pre-trained model. GIVL achieves strong and
more balanced results on multiple geo-diverse V&L tasks.
It can also produce competitive performance on common
V&L tasks. By proposing GIVL, we call upon researchers
to devise methods that can further improve geographical in-
clusivity of VLPs and popularize their applications for all.
8
