(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 2, No. 11, 2011 
148 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
A new approach of designing Multi-Agent Systems 
With a practical sample
Sara Maalal  
Team of Systems‟ Architecture, Laboratory of computing, 
Systems and Renewable Energy  
National and High School of Electricity and Mechanic 
ENSEM BP 8118, Oasis  
Casablanca, Maroc  
 
Malika Addou  
Team of Systems‟ Architecture Laboratory of computing, 
Systems and Renewable Energy  
Hassania School of Public  
Works EHTP BP 8108, Oasis  
Casablanca, Maroc  
 
 
Abstract—Agent technology is a software paradigm that permits 
to implement large and complex distributed applications [1]. In 
order to assist analyzing, conception and development or 
implementation phases of multi-agent systems, we’ve tried to 
present a practical application of a generic and scalable method 
of a MAS with a component-oriented architecture and agent-
based approach that allows MDA to generate source code from a 
given model. We’ve designed on AUML the class diagrams as a 
class meta-model of different agents of a MAS. Then we 
generated the source code of the models developed using an open 
source tool called AndroMDA. This agent-based and evolutive 
approach enhances the modularity and genericity developments 
and promotes their reusability in future developments. This 
property distinguishes our design methodology of existing 
methodologies in that it is constrained by any particular agent-
based model while providing a library of generic models [2]. 
Keyword- Software agents; Multi-agents Systems (MAS); Analysis; 
Software design; Modeling; Models; Diagrams; Architecture; 
Model Driven Architecture (MDA); Agent Unified Modeling 
Language (AUML); Agent Modeling Language (AML).  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Currently the computer systems are increasingly complex, 
often distributed over several sites and consist of software 
interacting with each other or with humans. The need for model 
human behavior in specific computer programs has prompted 
officials to use technology that affected the last decade and 
whose movements are very remarkable. In this context, 
designing multi-agent systems (MAS) is complex because they 
require the inclusion of several parts of the system which can 
often be approached from different angles. We must identify 
and analyze all system problems to find models for multi-
agents to implement and integrate them into a coherent system. 
This is the software engineering and well justifies the use of a 
method of analysis, design and development of multi-agents 
systems [2].  
This paper describes a practical example of a new generic 
model designed for modeling multi-agent systems and based on 
a class diagram, defining the different types of agents and 
meeting our needs for development and testing of MAS 
applications.  
II. 
MULTI-AGENT SYSTEMS 
A. Definitions 
 - An agent is a computer system within an environment and 
with an autonomous behavior made for achieving the 
objectives that were set during its design [3]. 
 - A multi-agents system is a system that contains a set of 
agents that interact with communications protocols and are able 
to act on their environment. Different agents have different 
spheres of influence, in the sense that they have control (or at 
least can influence) on different parts of the environment. 
These spheres of influence may overlap in some cases; the fact 
that they coincide may cause dependencies reports between 
agents [4].  
The MAS can be used in several application areas such as 
e-commerce, economic systems, distributed information 
systems, organizations... 
B. Types of agent 
Starting from the definitions cited above, we can identify 
the following agent types [5]: 
 
The reactive agent is often described as not being 
"clever" by itself. It is a very simple component that 
perceives the environment and is able to act on it. Its 
capacity meets mode only stimulus-action that can be 
considered a form of communication.  
 
The cognitive agent is an agent more or less intelligent, 
mainly characterized by a symbolic representation of 
knowledge and mental concepts. It has a partial 
representation of the environment, explicit goals, it is 
capable of planning their behavior, remember his past 
actions, communicate by sending messages, negotiate, 
etc..  
 
The intentional agent or BDI (Belief, Desire and 
Intention) is an intelligent agent that applies the model 
of human intelligence and human perspective on the 
world using mental concepts such as knowledge, 
beliefs, intentions, desires, choices, commitments. Its 
behavior can be provided by the award of beliefs, 
desires and intentions. 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 2, No. 11, 2011 
149 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
 
The rational agent is an agent that acts in a manner 
allowing it to get the most success in achieving the 
tasks they were assigned. To this end, we must have 
measure of performance, if possible objective 
associated with a particular task that the agent should 
run.  
 
The adaptive agent is an agent that adapts to any 
changes that the environment can have. He is very 
intelligent as he is able to change its objectives and its 
knowledge base when they change.  
 
The communicative agent is an agent that is used to 
communicate information to all around him. This 
information can be made of his own perceptions as it 
may be transmitted by other agents.  
 
Figure 1. Types of agents 
III. 
THE DESIGN METHODOLOGIES – STATE OF THE ART 
Building high quality software for real-world applications is 
a difficult task because of the large number and the flexibility 
of components but also because of the complexity of 
interconnections required. The role of software engineering is 
precisely that of providing methodologies that can facilitate 
control of this complexity. A methodology by definition can 
facilitate the process of engineering systems. It consists of 
guides that cover the entire lifecycle of software development. 
Some are technical guides; others are managing the project [6]. 
We‟ll name “method” the approach to use a rigorous 
process for generating a set of models that describe various 
aspects of software being developed using a well- defined 
notation. 
To this end, several software engineering paradigms have 
been proposed, such as object-oriented design patterns, various 
software architectures. These paradigms fail especially when it 
concerns the development of complex distributed systems for 
two reasons: the interactions between the various entities are 
defined in a too rigid way and there is no mechanism complex 
enough to represent the organizational structure system [7]. The 
paradigm of agents and multi-agent systems can be a good 
answer to these problems, because the agent-oriented 
approaches significantly increase our ability to model, design 
and build complex distributed systems [8]. 
There are many methodologies for analysis and design of 
multi-agent systems. We cite below some examples of existing 
methodologies [2]: 
 
The AAII methodology was developed based on the 
experience accumulated during the construction of BDI 
systems. In this methodology, we have a set of 
templates that, when they have been fully elaborated, 
define the specifications of agents such as desires, 
beliefs and intentions [9]. 
 
The first version of Gaia methodology, which modeled 
agents from the object-oriented point of view, was 
revisited 3 years later by the same authors in order to 
represent a MAS as an organized society of individuals 
[10]. In fact, the agent entity, which is a central 
element of the meta-model of Gaia, can play one or 
more roles. A role is a specific behavior to be played 
by an agent (or kind of agents), defined in term of 
permissions, responsibilities, activities, and interactions 
with other roles. When playing a role, an agent updates 
its behavior in terms of services that can be activated 
according to some specific pre- and post- conditions. In 
addition, a role is decomposed in several protocols 
when agents need to communicate some data. The 
environment abstraction specifies all the entities and 
resources a multi-agent system may interact with, 
restricting the interactions by means of the permitted 
actions [1]. 
The Gaia methodology gives the possibility to design 
MAS using an organizational paradigm and to traverse 
systematically the path that begins by setting out the 
demands of the problem and to lead to a fairly detailed 
and immediate implementation [9]. Gaia permits to 
design a hierarchical non-overlapping structure of 
agents with a limited depth. From the organizational 
point of view, agents form teams as they belong to a 
unique organization, they can explicitly communicate 
with other agents within the same organization by 
means of collaborations, and organizations can 
communicate between them by means of interactions. 
If 
inter-organization 
communication is 
omitted, 
coalitions and congregations may also be modeled [1]. 
However, this methodology is somewhat limited since 
we can describe MAS with different architectures of 
agents [9]. 
 
The main contribution of MESSAGE was the 
definition of meta-models for specification of the 
elements that can be used to describe each of the 
aspects that constitute a multi-agent system (MAS) 
from five viewpoints: organization, agents, goals/tasks, 
interactions and domain. MESSAGE adopted the 
Unified Process and centered on analysis and design 
phases of development [11]. 
 
INGENIAS starts from the results of MESSAGE and 
provides a notation to guide the development process 
of a MAS from analysis to implementation [12] [13].  
It is both a methodology and a set of tools for 
development of multi-agent systems (MAS). As a 
methodology, it tries to integrate results from other 
proposals and considers the MAS from five 
complementary 
viewpoints: 
organization, 
agent, 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 2, No. 11, 2011 
150 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
tasks/goals, interactions, and environment. It is 
supported by a set of tools for modeling (graphical 
editor), documentation and code generation (for 
different 
agent 
platforms). 
The 
INGENIAS 
methodology does not explicitly model social norms, 
although they are implicit in the organizational 
viewpoint. Organizational dynamics are not considered 
i.e., how agents can join or leave the system, how they 
can form groups dynamically, what their life-cycle is, 
etc [14]. The authors have developed an agent-oriented 
software tool called INGENIAS Development Kit 
(IDK) [15]. It allows to edit consistent models 
(according to INGENIAS specification) and to 
generate documented code in different languages such 
as JADE [16], Robocode, Servlets or Gracias Agents 
[1]. 
 
Multi-agent systems Software Engineering (MaSE) is a 
start-to-end methodology that covers from the analysis 
to the implementation of a MAS [17]. The main goal of 
MaSE is to guide a designer through the software life-
cycle from a documented speciﬁcation to an 
implemented agent system, with no dependency of a 
particular MAS architecture, agent architecture, 
programming language, or message-passing system. 
 
AUML (Agent Unified Modeling Language) is an 
evolving standard for a design methodology to support 
MAS. It is based on the UML methodology used with 
object oriented systems. This notation was proposed to 
adapt the UML‟s one in order to describe the agent-
oriented modeling [18]. 
 
 AUML provides tools for: 
Specification protocol of interaction between 
agents,  
Representation of the internal behaviour of an 
agent,  
Specification of roles, package interface agent, 
mobility, etc [2].  
 
 
The Agent Modeling Language (AML) is a semiformal 
visual modeling language for specifying, modeling and 
documenting systems that incorporate concepts drawn 
from multi-agents systems (MAS) theory [19]. 
 
ASPECS 
(Agent-oriented 
Software 
Process 
for 
Engineering Complex Systems) provides a holonic 
perspective to design MAS [20]. Considering that 
complex systems typically exhibit a hierarchical 
configuration, on the contrary to other methodologies, 
it uses holons instead of atomic entities. Holons, which 
are agents recursively composed by other agents, 
permit to design systems with different granularities 
until the requested tasks are manageable by individual 
entities. 
The goal of the proposed meta-model of ASPECS is to 
gather the advantages of organizational approaches as 
well as of those of the holonic vision in the modeling 
of complex system [1]. 
All these methodologies presented above are still quite 
recent. They are mainly focused on the analysis phase, whereas 
design and implementation phases are missing or are redirected 
to agent-oriented methodologies, which do not oﬀer enough 
tools to model organizational concepts. Therefore, there is still 
a gap between analysis and design, which must be speciﬁed 
clearly, correctly and completely [14]. 
Finally, the maturity of methodologies can be analyzed by 
the number of systems that have adopted them. Most of 
analyzed methodologies have associated applications that show 
their feasibility. These methodologies have been applied in 
different ﬁelds such as medical informatics [21], manufacturing 
[20] [22], and e-commerce [23]. MaSE and INGENIAS are the 
most used ones. Unfortunately, the number of real world 
applications that use agent-oriented methodologies is still low 
[1]. 
IV. 
THE MDA APPROACH 
The MDA (Model Driven Architecture) proposes a 
methodological framework and architecture for systems 
development that focuses first on the functionality and 
application behavior, without worrying about the technology 
with which the application will be implemented. The 
implementation 
of 
the 
application 
goes 
through 
the 
transformation of business models in specific models to a target 
platform (Fig.2). One research was done in this area as the 
dissertation of Jarraya T. [24] 
 
Figure 2. The MDA approach 
The 
business 
process independent 
of automation, 
which comes 
from the 
expression 
of need, is 
described as a "CIM" 
(Computation Independent 
Model). The detailed 
functional 
analysis, 
the 
heart 
of 
the process is 
concentrated 
in 
the "PIM" (Platform 
Independent Model), which, as its name suggests, is strictly 
independent 
of the 
technical 
architecture 
and the target 
language. 
The "PSM" (Platform Specific Model) is 
the 
model 
for engineering 
design obtained 
by transformation 
of PIM by projection on the target technical architecture. It is 
this model that is based on code generation [5]. 
The benefits to businesses on the MDA are primarily: 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 2, No. 11, 2011 
151 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
 
The fact that architectures based on MDA are ready 
for technological developments. 
 
The ease of integrating applications and systems 
around a shared architecture 
 
Broader interoperability for not being tied to a 
platform. 
One of the main tools of MDA, we have AndroMDA who 
takes as its input a business model specified in the Unified 
Modeling Language (UML) and generates significant portions 
of the layers needed to build, for example, a Java application 
[25]. AndroMDA's ability to automatically translate high-level 
business specifications into production quality code results in 
significant time savings when implementing Java applications. 
The diagram below maps various application layers to, for 
examples, Java technologies supported by AndroMDA [5]. 
 
Figure 3.  Application layers supported by AndroMDA 
 
Presentation Layer: AndroMDA currently offers two 
technology options to build web based presentation 
layers: Struts and JSF. It accepts 
UML activity 
diagrams as input to specify page flows and generates 
Web components that conform to the Struts or JSF 
frameworks. 
 
Business Layer: The business layer generated by 
AndroMDA consists primarily of services that are 
configured using the Spring Framework. These 
services are implemented manually in AndroMDA-
generated blank methods, where business logic can be 
defined. These generated services can optionally be 
front-ended with EJBs, in which case the services 
must be deployed in an EJB container (e.g.,JBoss). 
Services can also be exposed as Web Services, 
providing a platform independent way for clients to 
access their functionality. AndroMDA can even 
generate business processes and workflows for the 
jBPM workflow engine (part of the JBoss product 
line). 
 
Data Access Layer: AndroMDA leverages the 
popular 
object-relational 
mapping 
tool 
called Hibernate to generate the data access layer for 
applications. AndroMDA does this by generating Data 
Access Objects (DAOs) for entities defined in the 
UML model. These data access objects use the 
Hibernate API to convert database records into objects 
and vice-versa. AndroMDA also supports Enterprise 
Java Beans EJB3/Seam [26] for data access layer (pre-
release). 
 
Data 
Stores: Since 
AndroMDA 
generated 
applications use Hibernate to access the data, you can 
use any of the databases supported by Hibernate. 
The generation process of AndroMDA is as follows [5] : 
 
Figure 4.  Generation process of AndroMDA 
 
Preparation of the project in MagicDraw  
 
Preparing use cases        
 
Preparation of class diagram       
 
Preparation of state charts  
 
Code Generation  
 
Generating the database 
 
Deploy the application 
 
V. PROPOSED APPROACH 
 
Our approach is based on model driven architecture (MDA) 
which aims to establish the link between the existing agent 
architectures and models or meta-model multi-agent systems 
that we build based on AUML. Our idea is to offer a design 
methodology based on agents AUML notation for establishing 
a generic class diagram that the designer can use to design his 
system [3]. This diagram is considered as a meta-model which 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 2, No. 11, 2011 
152 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
is not generated by any tool and must be defined by the 
modeler himself. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  An AUML generic class diagram for a MAS 
Our approach has a lot of benefits, it allows: 
 
Reducing costs and development times for new 
applications.  
 
Improving quality of applications.  
 
Reducing complexity of application development.  
 
Ability to generate all the necessary components 
described.  
 
Modularity and reusability of the developments.  
 
Coercion by the MDA model.  
 
Generating a library of generic models. 
A. Description of the AUML generic Class Diagram 
 The diagram is conceived in three layers, each one is 
represented by a relationship between classes: A first part 
which is a relation between agent and its environment, a second 
part of specialisation of the agent class, and at the last part, a 
specialisation of the cognitive agent class [3]. 
 1- The first part 
 The first part consists of two important classes: 
- Environment, 
- Agent 
 
 
Environment is an important class on the diagram 
because it influences all the system. Environment‟s 
data is represented by two sections, Attributes and 
Perceptions. Attributes can be all the information that 
an environment should have, plus the following 
common information:  
 Deterministic when the next state of the 
environment is determined in a unique way 
by the current state and action of the agent, 
so the environment is deterministic. If the 
outcome is uncertain (especially if, as a result 
of action of the agent, the environment can 
evolve in different ways), we are in the non- 
deterministic case. 
 Static if the environment cannot change its 
state without the intervention of the agent. 
The environment is dynamic if its state can 
change without the action of the agent in the 
time interval between two perceptions of the 
agent. 
 Continuous if any portion of an environment 
state to another requires passing through a 
sequence of intermediate states, otherwise 
the environment is discrete. 
Perception is a section where the designer should 
determinate all environment perceptions, example: 
number of agents. 
 
Environment contains several functions allowing to 
start running, to perceive information from agents 
linked to it and to modify its state after each action 
from those agents, that is respectively Run(), 
Perceive() and ModifState(). 
 
 
Agent is the main class on the diagram that allows the 
designer to express all agent properties. The 
constructor of Agents takes three sections: Roles, 
Attributes 
and 
Perception. 
Roles 
are 
agent 
functionalities. Attributes are all information that an 
agent should possess. And finally Perception which is 
a section where the designer should determinate all 
agents‟ perceptions about his environment or the other 
agents. 
 
Agent contains several functions who allows starting 
running and perceiving information from environment 
or agents linked to it and to execute all its actions, that 
is respectively Run(), Perceive() and Act(). 
 The first part consists also of two important association 
classes: 
-Action, between agent and his environment. 
-Interaction, between agents. 
 
 
Action is an association class between agent and 
environment. It lists all possible actions that an agent 
can execute on his environment. 
 
 
Interaction is a reflexive association class between 
agents. Agent can request information by the 
getInformation() function and send it by the inform() 
function. Agent may also deal with some constraints 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 2, No. 11, 2011 
153 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
that it is possible to inform by the function 
informaboutConstraintes(). 
The 
acceptance 
of 
partnership is added also to the main functionalities 
of Agent by the function acceptPartnerShip(). 
 2- The second part 
 The second part represents a specialisation relation of the 
Agent class. It consists of three important classes: 
- Reactive agent, 
- Cognitive agent, 
- Communicative agent. 
 
 
Reactive agent is a type of agent. It possesses the 
same properties of the Agent class. 
 
 
Cognitive agent is another specialization of the Agent 
class. In this class, the designer should determinate the 
representations of the agent that he must have during 
its execution. The class possesses also one important 
function “Decide()” where agent can decide to execute 
an action or not according to his goals. 
 
 
Communicative agent is the last specialization of the 
Agent 
class. 
Like 
Cognitive 
agent 
class, 
Communicative agent class has representations but 
possesses a different function called “Communicate()” 
where agent must use to communicate his information 
to the other agents. 
 3- The third part 
 The third part represents a specialization relation of the 
Cognitive agent class. It consists of three important classes: 
- Adaptive agent, 
- Intentional agent, 
- Rational agent. 
 
 
Adaptive agent is a type of cognitive agent. It 
possesses the same properties of the Agent class, the 
knowledge base and the “Decide()” function. As 
mentioned in the types of agent section above, an 
adaptive agent is able to change its objectives and its 
knowledge base as and when these changes. This 
functionality 
is 
expressed 
by 
the 
“Change_information()” function. 
 
Intentional agent or BDI Agent is designed from the 
"Belief-Desire-Intention” model. It is a type of 
cognitive agent. In the same case of Adaptive Agent 
class, this class possesses the same properties of the 
Agent class, the knowledge base and the “Decide()” 
function. 
In this class, the designer should determinate the 
agent‟s beliefs represented by the Beliefs section. The 
beliefs of an agent are the information that the agent 
has on the environment and other agents that exist in 
the same environment. Beliefs may be incorrect, 
incomplete or uncertain, and because of that, they are 
different from knowledge of the agent, which is 
information still true. Beliefs can change over time as 
the agent by its ability to perceive or interact with 
other agents, collects more information. 
The designer should also determinate the agent‟s 
intentions represented by the Intentions section. The 
intentions of an agent are the actions it has decided to 
do to accomplish his goals. 
To choose the correct agent‟s beliefs from the 
incorrect 
ones, 
this 
class 
offers 
the 
“Revise_beliefs(Pres, Belief)” function which is based 
on the agent‟s knowledge base and his beliefs. Then, 
the “Generate_desires(Belief, int)” function comes to 
generate all the agent‟s desires that he may be able to 
accomplish at once. The desires of an agent 
representing all things the agent would like to see 
made. An agent may have conflicting desires, in 
which case he must choose between her desires a 
subset that is consistent. This subset consists of his 
desires is identified with the beliefs and the intentions 
of the agent. 
Another function comes after that, the “Filter(Belief, 
Generate_desires, int)” which filters all those elements 
above and gives the consistent beliefs, desires and 
intentions of the intentional agent. 
Finally, the agent can select his actions according to 
this 
filtration 
and 
execute 
them 
by 
the 
“Actions_selection(Filter)” function. 
 
 
Rational agent is the last specialisation of the 
Cognitive Agent class. Like Intentional Agent class, 
Rational Agent class has the Beliefs and the Intentions 
sections but possesses just one function called 
“Mesure_performance(Percept, Belief)” where agent 
must use to execute his actions as efficient as possible. 
This function is based both on his perceptions and his 
beliefs. 
B. The generic UML Class Diagram 
This generic AUML class diagram was subsequently 
converted into a generic class diagram based on UML notation. 
This transformation will allow the designer to easily use 
AndroMDA to generate the source code equivalent to its UML 
diagram [1]. 
The passage from AUML to UML was performed by 
following the steps below: 
 
1. Keep the same titles of classes and associations 
which constitute the AUML diagram. 
2. Assign roles, perceptions, intentions, beliefs and 
representations of each agent, and any possible 
additional attributes, in the attributes part of the 
UML class. 
3. Combine all methods or functions in the 
operations part of the UML class. 
We can obtain, in the end, the following result shown in 
Fig. 6: 
 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 2, No. 11, 2011 
154 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. An UML generic class diagram for a MAS 
 
Our approach can present one desadvantage. It is the 
complexity of generating a good code source by AndroMDA. 
The model developed at the design phase, should be reliable in 
order to build the application and realize its implementation 
without errors [5]. 
V. 
APPLICATION EXAMPLE 
A.  Description 
 Our proposed AUML class diagram was used for design of 
one multi-agent system for a Chat Application. This example is 
designed as follows [5]: 
 
Three reactive agents: These agents will be the chatters, 
the interest that these are reactive agents relies on the fact 
that an agent doesn't react before the declaration of the 
name of the receiver by the user of the application. 
Therefore an agent will react to get ready to catch the 
name and the message and to send it to the appropriate 
person. He will react also to clear the sent and the received 
message from their area in his interface. 
 
 We can respectively obtain the following AUML and UML 
diagrams corresponding to this example, shown in the Figures 
7 and 8: 
B. Realization 
To validate our model for this example, we‟ve tried to 
download AndroMDA with all the required dependencies 
(including all profiles referenced by models). Then, we 
generated our project « ChatAgents » by running « mvn 
org.andromda.maven.plugins:andromdaapp-maven 
plugin:3.4-SNAPSHOT:generate ». The result of this 
command is as follows: 
 
 
Figure 7. AUML Class diagram for a chat application 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. UML Class diagram for a chat application 
When we examine the various folders and files created by 
the andromdapp plug-in, we will notice files called pom.xml in 
various folders under ChatAgents. These files make up several 
Maven projects. In fact, the ChatAgents directory contains a 
hierarchy of Maven projects as shown below [5]. 
 
ChatAgents: This is the master project that controls 
the overall build process and common properties. 
 
mda: The mda project is the most important sub-
project of the application. It houses the ChatAgents 
UML model under the src/main/uml directory. The 
mda project is also where AndroMDA is configured 
to generate the files needed to assemble the 
application. 
 
common: The common sub-project collects resources 
and classes that are shared among other sub-projects. 
These include value objects and embedded values. 
 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 2, No. 11, 2011 
155 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
 
Figure 9 : ChatAgents project generation 
 
  ChatAgents 
  | 
  |-- mda 
  | 
  |-- common 
  | 
  |-- core 
  | 
  |-- web 
  | 
  +-- app 
 
core: The core sub-project collects resources and 
classes that use the Spring framework, optionally 
making use of Hibernate and/or EJBs under the hood. 
These include entity classes, data access objects, 
hibernate mapping files, and services. 
 
web: The web sub-project collects those resources 
and classes that make up the presentation layer. 
 
app: The app sub-project collects those resources and 
classes that are required to build the .ear bundle. 
By opening the file “ChatAgents.xml” in MagicDraw, we 
will 
be 
able to 
build various graphs of 
our 
model to 
generate then 
the 
source 
code 
of 
the 
entire 
application. Note that AndroMDA can't read MagicDraw 17 
models directly. Therefore, you can export it to another file 
format: EMF-UML2. 
After import of AndroMDA profiles to use for our 
application, we designed our class diagram as shown in Fig.10 
as follows [5]: 
The result of exporting our “ChatAgents” model to EMF-
UML2 
format 
is 
located 
in 
the 
folder C:/ChatAgents/mda/src/main/uml in explorer. Below his 
content: 
 
ChatAgents.xml: the MagicDraw 17 model file. 
 
ChatAgents.uml: ChatAgents model in EMF/UML2 
format. It's the file that will be processed by 
AndroMDA. 
 
10 files ending with .profile.uml: the different 
profiles used by ChatAgents.uml 
Following the definition of our model, the generation 
of application code is achieved by executing the command 
"mvn install", the result appears as in the figure [5]. 
Thus, 
the 
class “Chat.java” is 
created and 
can 
be 
easily accessed and modified by the developer where he has the 
ability to implement its operations in the generated code. 
We conducted this implementation and got the final result. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE 
The purpose of this paper is to demonstrate the feasibility of 
our approach to analyze, design and implement multi-agent 
systems. With AUML modeling and MDA, we can generate all 
the necessary components described by the class meta-model 
that we proposed. Which leads us to obtain a generic design 
based on SOA more or less reusable components using one of 
the most MDA tools used in development is AndroMDA [27]. 
In the future, we would like to model another application 
sample of our model but in a more complex form using 
cognitive or adaptive agents and in other platforms like C++, 
Web services, etc. It will help us to validate the efficacy of our 
proposed approach and lead us to consider it as a generic 
approach which can be adopted by every type of information 
system and used for any real world application. 
 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 2, No. 11, 2011 
156 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org 
Figure 10 : Class diagram built on MagicDraw 17 
 
Figure 11 : Code generation after definition model 
 
 
Figure 12. Chat application with three agents 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I would like to thank to my advisor Ms. M. Addou, Phd. for 
his invaluable guidance and many useful suggestions during 
my work on this paper. I would also like to express my 
gratitude to all those who gave me the possibility to complete 
this paper. 
 

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,  
Vol. 2, No. 11, 2011 
157 | P a g e  
www.ijacsa.thesai.org
