Compiling Possibilistic Networks : Alternative Approaches to
Possibilistic Inference
Raouia Ayachi
LARODEC Laboratory
ISG, University of Tunis
Tunisia, 2000

Nahla Ben Amor
LARODEC Laboratory
ISG, University of Tunis
Tunisia, 2000

Salem Benferhat
CRIL-CNRS
University of Artois
France, 62307

Rolf Haenni
RISIS
Bern University
Switzerland, CH-2501

Abstract
Qualitative
possibilistic
networks,
also
known as min-based possibilistic networks,
are important tools for handling uncertain
information in the possibility theory frame-
work.
Despite their importance, only the
junction tree adaptation has been proposed
for exact reasoning with such networks.
This paper explores alternative algorithms
using compilation techniques.
We ﬁrst
propose possibilistic adaptations of standard
compilation-based
probabilistic
methods.
Then, we develop a new, purely possibilistic,
method based on the transformation of the
initial network into a possibilistic base.
A
comparative study shows that this latter
performs better than the possibilistic adap-
tations of probabilistic methods. This result
is also conﬁrmed by experimental results.
1
INTRODUCTION
In possibility theory there are two diﬀerent ways to
deﬁne the counterpart of Bayesian networks. This is
due to the existence of two deﬁnitions of possibilistic
conditioning: product-based and min-based condition-
ing (Dubois and Prade, 1988). When we use the prod-
uct form of conditioning, we get a possibilistic network
close to the probabilistic one sharing the same features
and having the same theoretical and practical results.
However, this is not the case with min-based networks.
In this paper, we are interested in the inference prob-
lem in multiply connected networks, which is known
as a hard problem (Cooper, 1990).
More precisely,
we propose three compilation methods for min-based
possibilistic networks.
The compilation of Bayesian networks is always con-
sidered as an important area.
Recently, researchers
have been interested in various kinds of exact and ap-
proximate Bayesian networks inference algorithms us-
ing compilation techniques (Darwiche, 2003) (Chavira
and Darwiche, 2005) (Wachter and Haenni, 2007), etc.
Despite the importance of possibility theory, there is
no compilation that has been proposed for possibilis-
tic networks. This paper analyzes this issue by ﬁrst
adapting well-known compilation-based probabilistic
inference approaches, namely the arithmetic circuit
method (Darwiche, 2003) and the logical compilation
of Bayesian Networks (Wachter and Haenni, 2007).
Both of them are based on a network’s encoding into a
logical representation and a compilation into a target
compilation language, namely Π-DNNF. From there,
all possible queries are answered in polynomial time.
The third method exploits results obtained on one
hand in (Benferhat et al., 2002) that transforms a min-
based possibilistic network into a possibilistic knowl-
edge base, and on the other hand results obtained re-
garding compilation of possibilistic bases (Benferhat
et al., 2007) in order to assure inference in polytime.
This method that is purely possibilistic is ﬂexible since
it permits to exploit eﬃciently all the existing propo-
sitional compilers.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Sec-
tion 2 gives a brieﬂy background on possibility the-
ory, possibilistic logic, possibilistic networks and in-
troduces some compilation concepts. Section 3 is ded-
icated to possibilistic adaptations of compilation-based
probabilistic inference methods. Section 4 presents a
new inference method in possibilistic networks using
compiled possibilistic knowledge bases. Experimental
study is presented in Section 5.
2
BASIC CONCEPTS
2.1
POSSIBILITY THEORY
This subsection brieﬂy recalls some elements of possi-
bility theory, for more details we refer to (Dubois and
Prade, 1988). Let V = {X1, X2, ..., XN} be a set of

variables. We denote by DXi = {x1, .., xn} the domain
associated with the variable Xi. By xi we denote any
instance of Xi. Ωdenotes the universe of discourse,
which is the Cartesian product of all variable domains
in V .
Each element ω ∈Ωis called a state of Ω.
The notion of possibility distribution denoted by π is
a mapping from the universe of discourse to the unit
interval [0, 1]. To this scale, two interpretations can be
attributed, a quantitative one when values have a real
sense and a qualitative one when values reﬂect only an
order between the diﬀerent states of the world. This
paper focuses on the qualitative interpretation of pos-
sibility theory.
Given a possibility distribution π, we can deﬁne a map-
ping grading the possibility measure of an event φ ⊆Ω
by Π(φ) = maxω∈φπ(ω). Π has a dual measure which
is the necessity measure N(φ) = 1 −Π(¬φ).
Conditioning consists in modifying our initial knowl-
edge, encoded by a possibility distribution π, by the
arrival of a new certain piece of information φ ⊆Ω.
The qualitative interpretation of the scale [0, 1] leads
to the well known deﬁnition of min-conditioning (His-
dal, 1978), (Dubois and Prade, 1988):
Π(ψ | φ) =
 Π(ψ ∧φ)
if Π(ψ ∧φ) < Π(φ)
1
otherwise
(1)
2.2
POSSIBILISTIC LOGIC
Possibilistic logic (Dubois et al., 1994) handles quali-
tative uncertainty in a logical setting. A possibilistic
logic formula is a pair (p, a) where p is a propositional
formula and a its uncertainty degree which estimates
to what extent it is certain that p is true. The higher
is the weight, the more certain is the formula. A pos-
sibilistic knowledge base Σ is made up of a ﬁnite set
of weighted formulas, i.e.,
Σ = {(pi, ai), i = 1, .., n}
(2)
where ai is the lower bound on N(pi).
Each possibilistic knowledge base induces a unique
possibility distribution such that ∀ω ∈Ωand ∀
(pi, ai) ∈Σ:
πΣ(ω) =
 1
if ω |= pi
1 −max {ai : ω ⊭pi}
otherwise
(3)
where |= is propositional logic entailment.
2.3
POSSIBILISTIC NETWORKS
A min-based possibilistic network over a set of vari-
ables V , denoted by ΠGmin is composed of:
- a graphical component that is a DAG (Directed
Acyclic Graph) where nodes represent variables and
edges encode the links between the variables.
The
parent set of a node Xi
is denoted by Ui
=
{Ui1, Ui2, ..., Uim}.
For any ui of Ui we have ui =
{ui1, ui2, ..., uim} where m is the number of parents of
Xi. In what follows, we use xi, ui, uij to denote, re-
spectively, possible instances of Xi, Ui and Uij.
- a numerical component that quantiﬁes diﬀerent links.
For every root node Xi (Ui = ∅), uncertainty is repre-
sented by the a priori possibility degree Π(xi) of each
instance xi ∈DXi, such that maxxiΠ(xi) = 1. For the
rest of the nodes (Ui ̸= ∅) uncertainty is represented
by the conditional possibility degree Π(xi|ui) of each
instances xi ∈DXi and ui ∈DUi. These conditional
distributions satisfy the following normalization con-
dition: maxxiΠ(xi|ui) = 1, for any ui.
The set of a priori and conditional possibility degrees
in a min-based possibilistic network induce a unique
joint possibility distribution deﬁned by the following
chain rule:
πmin(X1, .., XN) = min
i=1..N
Π(Xi | Ui)
(4)
2.4
COMPILATION CONCEPTS
A target compilation language is a class of formulas
which is tractable for a set of transformations and
queries. Compilation languages are compared in terms
of their spatial eﬃciency via the succinctness crite-
ria and also in terms of the set of logical queries and
transformations they support in polynomial time (see
(Darwiche and Marquis, 2002) for more details).
Within the most eﬀective target compilation lan-
guages, we cite the Decomposable Negation Normal
Form (DNNF) (Darwiche, 2001). This language is uni-
versal and presents a number of properties (determin-
ism, smoothness, etc.) that makes it of a great interest.
It supports a rich set of polynomial-time logical opera-
tions. To deﬁne DNNF, the starting point is Negation
Normal Form (NNF) which is a set of propositional
formulas where possible connectives are conjunctions,
disjunctions and negations. A set of important prop-
erties may be imposed to NNF, such that:
- Decomposability: the conjuncts of any conjunction in
NNF do not share variables.
- Determinism: two disjuncts of any disjunction in
NNF are logically contradictory.
- Smoothness: the disjunct of any disjunction in NNF
mentions the same variables.
These properties lead to a number of interesting sub-
sets of NNF. Within these subsets, the language
DNNF (Darwiche, 2001) is one of the most eﬀective
target compilation languages that supports the decom-
posability.
We can also mention, the d-DNNF sat-

isfying determinism, sd-DNNF satisfying smoothness
and determinism, etc. Each compilation language sup-
ports some queries and transformations in polynomial
time. In what follows we are in particular interested
by conditioning and forgetting transformations (Dar-
wiche and Marquis, 2002).
3
POSSIBILISTIC ADAPTATIONS
OF COMPILATION-BASED
PROBABILISTIC INFERENCE
METHODS
There are several compilation methods which handle
the inference problem in probabilistic graphical mod-
els.
In this section, we ﬁrst propose an adaptation
of the arithmetic circuit method of (Darwiche, 2003).
Then we will study one of its variants proposed in
(Wachter and Haenni, 2007), namely the logical com-
pilation of Bayesian Networks.
DNNF has been introduced for propositional language.
Recall that in qualitative possibility theory, we basi-
cally manipulate two main operators Max and Min.
These operators fully make sense when we deal with
qualitative plausibility ordering.
Therefore, we pro-
pose to deﬁne concepts of Π-DNNF (resp. Π-d-DNNF,
Π-sd-DNNF) as adaptations of the DNNF language
(resp. d-DNNF, sd-DNNF) (Darwiche, 2001) in the
possibilistic setting (deﬁnition 1).
Deﬁnition 1. A sentence in Π-DNNF is a rooted
DAG where each leaf node is labeled with true, false
or variable’s instances and each internal node is la-
beled with max or min operators and can have arbi-
trarily several children. Roughly speaking, Π-DNNF is
the same as the classical DNNF although its operators
are max and min instead of ∨and ∧, respectively.
Example 1. Figure 1 depicts a sentence in Π-DNNF.
Consider the Min-node (root) in this ﬁgure. This node has
two children, the ﬁrst contains variables A, B while the
second contains variables C, D. This node is decomposable
since its two children do not share variables.
Figure 1: A sentence in Π-DNNF.
A sentence in Π-d-DNNF is a sentence in Π-DNNF
satisfying decomposability and determinism (viewing
∨and ∧as max and min operators, respectively). A
sentence in Π-sd-DNNF is a sentence in Π-DNNF sat-
isfying decomposability, determinism and smoothness.
3.1
INFERENCE USING POSSIBILISTIC
CIRCUITS
In (Darwiche, 2003), authors have focused on infer-
ence in compiled Bayesian networks. The main idea is
based on representing the network using a polynomial
and then retrieving answers to probabilistic queries by
evaluating and diﬀerentiating the polynomial.
This
latter itself is exponential in size, so it has been repre-
sented eﬃciently using an arithmetic circuit that can
be evaluated and diﬀerentiated in time and space lin-
ear in the circuit size.
In what follows, we propose
a direct adaptation of this method in the possibilis-
tic setting. Given a min-based possibilistic network,
we ﬁrst encode it using a possibilistic function fmin
deﬁned by two types of variables:
• Evidence indicators: for each variable Xi in the
network , we have a variable λxi for each instance
xi ∈DXi.
• Network parameters: for each variable Xi and its
parents Ui in the network, we have a variable
θxi|ui for each instance xi ∈DXi and ui ∈DUi.
fmin = max
x
min
(xi,ui)∼x λxiθxi|ui
(5)
where x represents instantiations of all network vari-
ables and ui ∼x denotes the compatibility relation-
ship among ui and x. The possibilistic function fmin
of a possibilistic network represents the possibility dis-
tribution and allows to compute possibility degrees of
variables of interest. Namely, for any piece of evidence
e which is an instantiation of some variables E in the
network, we can instantiate fmin as it returns the pos-
sibility of e, Π(e) (Deﬁnition 2 and Proposition 1).
Deﬁnition 2. The value of the possibilistic function
fmin at evidence e, denoted by fmin(e), is the result of
replacing each evidence indicator λxi in fmin with 1 if
xi is consistent with e, and with 0 otherwise.
Proposition 1. Let ΠGmin be a possibilistic network
representing the possibility distribution π and having
the possibilistic function fmin. For any evidence e, we
have fmin(e) = π(e).
Let ﬁgure 2 be the min-based possibilistic network
used throughout the paper.
The possibilistic function of the network in ﬁgure 2
has 8 terms corresponding to the 8 instantiations of
variables F, B, D. Two of these terms are as follows:

Figure 2: Example of ΠGmin.
fmin = max(min(λd1, λf1, λb1, θd1|f1,b1, θf1, θb1);
min
(λd1, λf2, λb1, θd1|f2,b1, θf2, θb1); · · · )
If the evidence e = (d1, b1) then fmin(d1, b1) is ob-
tained by applying the following substitutions to fmin:
λd1 = 1, λd2 = 0, λb1 = 1, λb2 = 0, λf1 = λf2 = 1. This
leads to Π(e) = 0.7.
The possibilistic function fmin is then encoded on a
propositional theory (CNF) using λxi and θxi|ui. For
each network variable Xi, the encoding contains the
following clauses:
λxi ∨λxj
(6)
¬λxi ∨¬λxj, i ̸= j
(7)
Moreover, for each propositional variable θxi|ui, the
encoding contains the clause:
λxi ∧λui1 ∧. . . ∧λuim ↔θxi|ui
(8)
The CNF encoding, denoted by Kfmin recovers the
min-joint possibility distribution (proposition 2).
Proposition 2. The CNF encoding Kfmin of a possi-
bilistic network encodes the joint distribution of given
network.
Once the CNF encoding is accomplished, it is then
compiled into a Π-DNNF, from which we extract the
possibilistic circuit ζp (deﬁnition 3) that implements
the encoded fmin.
Deﬁnition 3. A possibilistic circuit ζp encoded by a
Π-DNNF sentence ξc is a DAG in which leaf nodes
correspond to circuit inputs, internal nodes correspond
to max and min operators, and the root corresponds to
the circuit output.
As in the probabilistic case (Darwiche, 2003), this cir-
cuit can be used for linear-time inference. More pre-
cisely, computing the possibility degree of an event
consists on evaluating ζp by setting each evidence in-
dicator λx to 1 if the event is consistent with x, to 0
otherwise and applying operators in a bottom-up way.
This possibility degree corresponds exactly to the one
computed from the min-joint possibility distribution
(proposition 3). This method referred to Π-DNNFP F
is outlined by algorithm 1. Note that the suﬃx PF is
added to signify that this method uses a possibilistic
function (fmin) before ensuring the CNF encoding.
Algorithm 1: Inference using Π-DNNF (Π-DNNFP F )
Data: ΠGmin , instance of interest x, evidence e
Result: Π(x|e)
begin
Compilation into Π-DNNF
Encode ΠGmin into fmin using equation 5
EncodeCNF of ΠGmin into ξ using equations 6, 7, 8
Compile ξ into ξc
ζp ←Possibilistic Circuit of ξc
Inference
Applying Operators on ζp
Π(x, e) ←Root Value (ζp; (x,e))
Π(e) ←Root Value (ζp; e)
if Π(x, e) ≺Π(e) then Π(x|e) ←Π(x, e)
else Π(x|e) ←1
return Π(x|e)
end
Proposition 3. Let ΠGmin be a possibilistic network.
Let πmin be a joint distribution obtained by chain rule.
Then for any a ∈Da and e ∈DE, we have Π(A =
a|E = e) = Πmin(A = a|E = e) where Πmin(A =
a|E = e) is obtained from πmin using equation 1 and
Π(A = a|E = e) is obtained from algorithm 1.
The key point to observe here is that this approach
can handle possibilistic circuits of manageable size as
in the probabilistic case since some possibility values
may have some speciﬁc values; for instance, whether
they are equal to 0 or 1, and whether some possi-
bilities are equal. In this case, we can say that the
network exhibit some local structure.
By exploiting
it, the produced circuits can be smaller. In fact, the
normalization constraint relative to the initial network
will mean that we will have several values equal to 1.
Thus the idea is to make an advantage from such a
local structure which has a particular behavior with
the max operator in order to construct more compact
possibilistic circuits w.r.t. standard ones as stated by
the following proposition:
Proposition 4. Let Nbposs and Nbproba be the num-
ber of clauses in the possibilistic and probabilistic
cases, respectively. Then Nbposs ≤Nbproba.
Note that for particular situations where probability
values are 1 or 0, we have Nbposs = Nbproba, otherwise
Nbposs ≺Nbproba.
Example 2. To illustrate algorithm 1 we will consider
the min-based possibilistic network represented in ﬁgure 2.
We are looking for Π(f2|d1) with f2 as instance of inter-
est and d1 as evidence. First, we encode the network as
a possibilistic function and encode it on CNF. This lat-
ter is then compiled into Π-DNNF from which a possibilis-
tic circuit is extracted. The possibility degree Π(f2|d1) is
computed using this circuit in polynomial time.
For in-
stance, Π(f2, d1) is computed using ζp by just replacing

λf2 = λd1 = λb1 = λb2 = 1 and applying possibilistic
operators in a bottom-up way as shown in ﬁgure 3. Hence,
Π(f2|d1) = Π(f2, d1) = 0.4 since Π(f2, d1) = 0.4 ≺1.
Figure 3: Inference using the possibilistic circuit (ζp).
3.2
INFERENCE USING POSSIBILISTIC
COMPILED REPRESENTATIONS
DNNF plays an interesting role in compiling proposi-
tional knowledge bases. It has been used to compile
probabilistic networks.
More precisely in (Wachter
and Haenni, 2007), authors have been interested in
performing a CNF logical encoding of the probabil-
ity distribution induced by a bayesian network, then
a compilation phase from CNF to d-DNNF. In this
section, we propose to adapt this encoding in the pos-
sibilistic setting by taking into consideration the local
structure aspect. This allows to reduce the number
of additional variables comparing to the probabilistic
encoding. Let ∆be propositions linked to network’s
variables and let θ be propositions linked to the pos-
sibility distribution entries (equal to 1). We start by
looking at the possibility distribution encoding. The
logical representation of a network variable Xi is de-
ﬁned by: ψXi =
^
ui

^
θxi|ui∈ΩθXi |ui
 ui1 ∧· · ·∧uim ∧θxi|ui →xi

(9)
By taking the conjunction of all logical representations
of variables, we obtain the network’s representation ψ
as follows:
ψ =
^
Xi∈∆
ψXi
(10)
The CNF encoding, denoted by Kψ indeed recovers
the min-joint possibility distribution (proposition 5).
Proposition 5. Let πmin be the joint possibility dis-
tribution obtained using the chain rule with the mini-
mum operator and Π be the possibility degree computed
from a function fψ encoding the CNF. Then, we have
πmin(xi, ..., xj) = Π(xi, ..., xj), i.e.
fψ recovers the
min-joint possibility distribution πmin.
Comparing theoretically the probabilistic and the pos-
sibilistic case allows us to deduce the following propo-
sition:
Proposition 6. The possibilistic encoding of a pos-
sibilistic network given by Kψ (equation 10) is more
compact than the probabilistic encoding given in
(Wachter and Haenni, 2007).
In fact, the number of variables used in Kψ is less than
the one used in (Wachter and Haenni, 2007). In par-
ticular for parameters, our approach uses one variable
per diﬀerent weight, while in the probabilistic encoding
one variable per parameter.
For each clause in Kψ
there exists a clause of the same size in the probabilis-
tic encoding. The converse is false.
Once the qualitative network is encoded by Kψ, it is
compiled into a compilation language that supports
the transformations conditioning and forgetting and
the query possibilistic computation. This language is
Π-DNNF (proposition 7). Therefore, the CNF encod-
ing is ﬁrst compiled, and the resulting Π-DNNF is then
used to compute eﬃciently, i.e.
in polynomial time
a-posteriori possibility degrees (proposition 8). This
method referred to Π-DNNF is outlined by algo. 2.
Proposition 7. Π-DNNF supports conditioning, for-
getting and possibilistic computation.
Algorithm 2: Inference using Π-DNNF
Data: ΠGmin , instance of interest x, evidence e
Result: Π(x|e)
begin
Compilation into Π-DNNF
EncodeCNF of ΠGmin into ψ using equation 10
Compile ψ into ψc
p
Inference
v1 ←Explore Π-DNNF(x ∧e, ψc
p)
v2 ←Explore Π-DNNF(e, ψc
p)
if v1 ≺v2 then Π(x|e) ←v1 else Π(x|e) ←1
return Π(x|e)
end
Proposition 8. Let ΠGmin be a possibilistic network.
Let πmin be a joint distribution obtained by chain rule.
Then for any a ∈Da and e ∈DE, we have Π(A =
a|E = e) = Πmin(A = a|E = e) where Πmin(A =
a|E = e) is obtained from πmin using equation 1 and
Π(A = a|E = e) is obtained from algorithm 2.
Example 3. Let us illustrate algorithm 2. In fact, ψ of
the network of ﬁgure 2 is : ψ = ψF ∧ψB ∧ψD = {(θ1 ∨
f2) ∧(θ2 ∨b1) ∧(f2 ∨b2 ∨θ2 ∨d1) ∧(f2 ∨b1 ∨θ1 ∨d2) ∧
(f1 ∨b2 ∨θ3 ∨d2) ∧(f1 ∨b1 ∨θ4 ∨d2)} such as θ1, θ2, θ3
and θ4 correspond respectively to 0.8, 0.7, 0.4 and 0.2.
To compute Π(f2|d1), we should ﬁrst compute Π(f2, d1) us-
ing algorithm 3. The ﬁrst step is to check if we have at least

Algorithm 3: Explore Π-DNNF
Data: a set of instances x, compiled representation ψc
p
Result: Π(x)
begin
if ∀xi ∈x, θxi|Ui is not a leaf node then
Π(x) ←1
else
y= {xi | ∀, θxi|Ui is a leaf node ∀Ui ⊆x}
ψc
p|y ←Condition ψc
p on y
ψc
p↓|y ←Forget ∆from ψc
p|y
Applying Operators on ψc
p↓|y
Π(x) ←Root Value of ψc
p↓|y
return Π(x)
end
one θ as a leaf node. In this example, we have θd1|f2,b1
and θd1|f2,b2 as leaf nodes, hence conditioning should be
performed.
Then, a computation step is required by ap-
plying in a bottom-up way Min and Max operators on the
forgotten Π-DNNF. Therefore, Π(f2|d1) = Π(f2, d1) = 0.4.
4
NEW POSSIBILISTIC
INFERENCE ALGORITHM
In (Benferhat et al., 2002), authors have been inter-
ested in the transition of possibilistic networks into
possibilistic logic bases. The starting point is that the
possibilistic base associated to a possibilistic network
is the result of the fusion of elementary bases. Deﬁni-
tion 4 presents the transformation of a min-based pos-
sibilistic network into a possibilistic knowledge base.
Deﬁnition
4. A binary variable Xi of a possi-
bilistic network can be expressed by a local pos-
sibilistic
knowledge
base
as
follows:
ΣXi
=
{(¬xi ∨¬ui, αi) : αi = 1 −π(xi|ui) ̸= 0}.
The possi-
bilistic knowledge base of the whole network is: Σmin =
ΣX1 ∪ΣX2 ∪· · · ∪ΣXn.
In another angle, researchers in (Benferhat et al., 2007)
have focused on the compilation of bases under the
possibilistic logic policy in order to be able to process
inference from it in a polynomial time. The combi-
nation of these methods allows us to propose a new
alternative approach to possibilistic inference. This is
justiﬁed by the fact that the possibilistic logic reason-
ing machinery can be applied to directed possibilistic
networks (Benferhat et al., 2002).
The idea is to encode the possibilistic knowledge base
Σmin into a classical propositional base (CNF). Let
A = {a1, ..., an} with a1 ≻... ≻an the diﬀerent
weights used in Σmin.
A set of additional proposi-
tional variables, denoted by Ai, which correspond ex-
actly to the number of diﬀerent weights, are incorpo-
rated and for each formula φi, ai will correspond the
propositional formula φi∨Ai. Hence, the propositional
encoding of Σmin, denoted by KΣ is deﬁned by:
KΣ = {φi ∨Ai : (φi, ai) ∈Σmin}
(11)
The following proposition shows that the CNF encod-
ing KΣ recovers the min-joint possibility distribution.
Proposition 9. Let πmin be the joint possibility
distribution obtained using the chain rule with the
minimum-based conditioning and let KΣ be the propo-
sitional base associated with the possibilistic network
given by equation 11. Let φi be a propositional for-
mula associated with a degree ai.
Then ∀ω ∈Ω,
Π(ω) = 1 iﬀ{¬A1, ..., ¬An} ∧ω ∧KΣ is consistent.
Π(ω) = ai iﬀ{¬A1, ..., ¬Ai} ∧ω ∧KΣ is inconsistent
and {¬A1, ..., ¬Ai−1} ∧ω ∧KΣ is consistent.
The CNF encoding KΣ is then compiled into a target
compilation language in order to compute a-posteriori
possibility degrees in an eﬃcient way. Here, we are
interested in a particular query useful for possibilis-
tic networks, namely what is the possibility degree of
an event A = a given an evidence E = e?
There-
fore, we propose to adapt the algorithm given in (Ben-
ferhat et al., 2007) in order to respond to this query
as shown by algorithm 4. Proposition 10 shows that
the possibility degree computed using algorithm 4 and
the one computed using the min-based joint possibil-
ity distribution are equal. Note that this approach is
qualiﬁed to be ﬂexible since it takes advantage of exist-
ing propositional knowledge bases compilation meth-
ods (Benferhat et al., 2007). This method referred to
DNNF-PKB is outlined by algorithm 4.
Algorithm 4: Inference using DNNF
Data: ΠGmin , instance of interest x, evidence e
Result: Π(x|e)
begin
Transformation into KΣ
Transform ΠGmin into Σmin using deﬁnition 4
Transform Σmin into KΣ using equation 11
Inference
Kc
Σ ←Target(KΣ)
K ←Kc
Σ
StopCompute ←false
i ←1
Π(x|e) ←1
while (K ⊭Ai ∨¬e) and (i ≤k) and (StopCom-
pute=false) do
K ←condition (K, ¬Ai)
if K ⊨¬x then
StopCompute←true
Π(x|e) ←1-degree(i)
else
i ←i + 1
return Π(x|e)
end
Proposition 10. Let ΠGmin be a possibilistic net-
work.
Let πmin be a joint distribution obtained by

chain rule. Then for any a ∈Da and e ∈DE, we
have Π(A = a|E = e) = Πmin(A = a|E = e) where
Πmin(A = a|E = e) is obtained from πmin using equa-
tion 1 and Π(A = a|E = e) is obtained from Algo. 4.
Example 4. To illustrate algorithm 4 we will consider
the min-based possibilistic network represented in ﬁgure 2.
The
CNF
encoding
is
as
follows
:
KΣ
=
(d2 ∨f1 ∨b2 ∨A1) , (b1 ∨A2) , (d1 ∨f2 ∨b2 ∨A2) ,
(f2 ∨A3) , (d2 ∨f2 ∨b1 ∨A3) , (d2 ∨f1 ∨b1 ∨A4)
such
as
A1
(0.8),
A2
(0.6),
A3(0.3)
and
A4
(0.2)
are
propositional variables followed by their weights under
brackets.
Compiling KΣ into DNNF results in:
Kc
Σ =
((b2 ∧A2) ∧[(A3 ∧f1) ∨(f2 ∧[d2 ∨(A4 ∧d1)])]) ∨(b1 ∧
[[f2 ∧(d2 ∨(A1 ∨d1))] ∨[(f1 ∧A3) ∧(d1 ∨(A2 ∧d2))]]).
The computation of Π(f2|d1) using Kc
Σ
requires two
iterations. Therefore, Π(f2|d1) = 1 −degree(2) = 0.4.
Due to the compilation step, this algorithm runs in
polynomial time. Moreover, the number of additional
variables is low since it corresponds exactly to the
number of priority levels existing in the base.
5
COMPARATIVE AND
EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES
The paper analyzes three compilation-based methods,
namely DNNF-PKB, Π-DNNF and Π-DNNFP F . The
ﬁrst dimension that diﬀerentiates the three approaches
proposed in this paper is the CNF encoding. It consists
of specifying the number of variables and clauses per
approach.
The CNF of DNNF-PKB is based on encoding ¬x
where x is an instance of interest having a possibil-
ity degree diﬀerent from 1.
In Π-DNNF, we write
implications relative to instances having 1 as possi-
bility degree. We can notice that the local structure
in both methods is exploited in semantically diﬀerent
ways. In DNNF-PKB, the encoding uses the number
of diﬀerent weights as the number of additional vari-
ables while the Π-DNNF encoding uses the number of
the non-redundant possibility degrees diﬀerent from 1
in the distributions. Regarding the number of clauses,
both methods handle possibility degrees diﬀerent from
1. This leads us to the following proposition:
Proposition 11. The CNF encodings of DNNF-PKB
and Π-DNNF have the same number of variables and
clauses.
The CNF encoding of Π-DNNFP F is diﬀerent from
the ones of DNNF-PKB and Π-DNNF. Proposition 12
shows the diﬀerence between Π-DNNFP F and DNNF-
PKB in terms of number of variables and clauses.
Proposition 12. The number of variables and clauses
in Π-DNNFP F
is more important than those in
DNNF-PKB.
Indeed, in Π-DNNFP F , we associate propositional
variables not only to possibility degrees (parameters),
but also to each value xi of Xi. While in DNNF-PKB
only m new variables are added (one variable per dif-
ferent degree).
Let us now analyze these three approaches from ex-
perimental points of view.
Our experimentation is
performed on random possibilistic networks.
More
precisely, we have compared DNNF-PKB and Π-
DNNFP F on 100 possibilistic networks having from 10
to 50 nodes. As mentioned that the approaches focus
mainly on encoding the possibilistic network as a CNF
then compile it into the appropriate language, hence,
it should be interesting to compare the CNF param-
eters (the number of variables and clauses) and the
DNNF parameters (the number of nodes and edges)
for the two methods.
5.1
CNF PARAMETERS
First we propose to test the CNF encodings charac-
terized by the number of variables and the number of
clauses. Regarding DNNF-PKB, the number of addi-
tional variables correspond to the number of weights
which are diﬀerent. While in Π-DNNFP F , variables
are both those associated to the possibility degrees
of each distribution and those to variable’s instances.
The number of clauses for each method is related to
the CNF encoding itself. Figure 4 shows the results of
this experimentation. Each approach is characterized
by a curve for the average number of variables and a
curve for the average number of clauses.
It is clear
that the higher the number of nodes considered in the
possibilistic network, the higher the number of vari-
ables and clauses. Figure 4 shows that DNNF-PKB
has the lower number of variables and clauses com-
paring to Π-DNNFP F , which conﬁrms the theoretical
results detailed above.
Figure 4: CNF parameters.

5.2
DNNF PARAMETERS
Once we obtain the CNF encodings, it is important
to compare the number of nodes and edges for each
compiled base. Figure 5 represents the average size of
the compiled bases for the two methods in terms of
nodes and edges numbers. We remark that the num-
ber of nodes and edges depends deeply on CNF pa-
rameters.
More precisely, the number of nodes and
edges in DNNF-PKB is considered narrow comparing
to Π-DNNFP F . This can be explained by the lower
number of variables and clauses on CNFs and the lo-
cal structure which shrinks the sizes of compiled bases.
Comparing DNNF-PKB to Π-DNNFP F , the behavior
of DNNF-PKB is important.
Figure 5: DNNF parameters.
6
CONCLUSION
This paper proposes algorithms that ensure inference
in possibilistic networks using compilation techniques.
First, we have proposed possibilistic adaptations of
two compilation-based probabilistic methods, namely
Π-DNNFP F and Π-DNNF. Then we have developed a
new possibilistic inference method DNNF-PKB based
on a transformation phase from a possibilistic network
into a compiled possibilistic knowledge base. We the-
oretically show that DNNF-PKB and Π-DNNF share
the same number of variables and clauses even they
are based on diﬀerent computations in their inference
process since the ﬁrst is based on necessity degrees and
the second on possibility degrees. We have also shown
that DNNF-PKB is more compact than Π-DNNFP F
which proves the importance of the possibilistic setting
versus the probabilistic setting. All these results were
conﬁrmed by experimental results. A future work will
be to compare these algorithms with the well-known
junction tree propagation algorithm. Another future
work is to exploit results of this paper in order to infer
eﬃciently interventions in possibilistic causal networks
(Pearl, 2000) (Benferhat and Smaoui, 2007).
