arXiv:1005.4446v1  [cs.NE]  24 May 2010
Genetic Algorithms and the Art of Zen
Jack Coldridge and Martyn Amos
Department of Computing and Mathematics
Manchester Metropolitan University,
Manchester M1 5GD, UK

Abstract—In this paper we present a novel genetic algo-
rithm (GA) solution to a simple yet challenging commercial
puzzle game known as the Zen Puzzle Garden (ZPG). We
describe the game in detail, before presenting a suitable
encoding scheme and ﬁtness function for candidate solutions.
We then compare the performance of the genetic algorithm
with that of the A* algorithm. Our results show that
the GA is competitive with informed search in terms of
solution quality, and signiﬁcantly out-performs it in terms
of computational resource requirements. We conclude with
a brief discussion of the implications of our ﬁndings for game
solving and other “real world” problems.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Zen Puzzle Garden (ZPG) [16] is a one-player
puzzle game involving a Buddhist monk raking a sand
garden. It is inspired by Japanese garden design (for
example, the Komyozenji temple garden is shown in
Figure 1). One common feature of such gardens is a ﬂat
region of sand or small pebbles, which is raked into a
pattern. The ZPG is one example of a transport puzzle;
these are problems that involve the player moving entities
around a given domain (e.g., boxed around a warehouse),
starting at some initial conﬁguration, until they attain pre-
deﬁned goal conditions. Entities must move according to
the constraints of the puzzle, and may only move between
connected positions (that is, an entity may not be “lifted”
off the board and replaced at a position perhaps far from its
initial location). A graphical representation of the problem
may use vertices to represent the set of positions an entity
may occupy, with connecting edges determined either from
any explicitly named connections, or from those implied
by arrangement on the board or within a grid.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: We ﬁrst
describe related work in Section
III and give an in-
depth description of the problem in Section
III, before
describing two solution methods (genetic algorithm and
A*) for the ZPG in Section IV. Experimental results are
presented in Section V, before we conclude with a brief
discussion of the implications of our ﬁndings in terms of
broader applicability.
II. PREVIOUS WORK
Many transport puzzles require the player to make a trip
around a board between given start and end positions, and
puzzles may be extended via the introduction of objects or
Figure 1.
Komyozenji temple garden.
obstacles to the board, which must be collected or moved
to satisfy given constraints. A well-studied example of
the transport puzzle is Sokoban [5], [10]. In this game
the player takes control of a warehouse keeper whose job
it is to push boxes around a maze and into designated
target locations; only one box may be pushed at any one
time, and boxes may not be pulled. This challenge of
the puzzle is derived from this latter condition, since if
a box is pushed into a corner of any construction then
the game is lost. An example Sokoban puzzle is depicted
in Figure
2, with the “boxes” depicted as circles, and
the target region as a hatched area. Sokoban is known to
be NP-hard [5]. Various AI-based techniques have been
applied to its solution, including multi-agent systems [1],
abstraction and decomposition [2], embedding domain-
speciﬁc knowledge [11], and heuristic search [12]. The
applicability of such methods to ZPG is, however, not
clear, since the problem features additional complicating
factors (described in the next Section).
According to an in-depth search of the literature, no
attempts to automatically solve this particular problem
have been previously documented. We believe the genetic
algorithm (GA) [6] to be a good candidate method for
its solution. We therefore describe preliminary work on
applying this method to a new variant of the transport
problem. We present a comparison between the GA and

a “base-line”, search-tree-based method, in the hope that
this will motivate further study in the future.
Figure 2.
Example Sokoban problem.
III. THE ZEN PUZZLE GARDEN
The ZPG game takes place on a garden board comprised
of a two-dimensional grid of sand squares surrounded by
a perimeter region. Two of the boards supplied with the
game are partitioned into different sections separated by
path regions; these are not considered here. The objective
of the game is to move a monk character around the
garden, causing him to completely rake the available
surface. The monk always begins a game at the same point
on the perimeter, regardless of the board being played, and
the following rules apply:
• The monk may move freely around the perimeter
region.
• The monk may only move within the von Neumann
neighbourhood (i.e., no diagonal movements are al-
lowed).
• The perimeter is left by entering the sand on any un-
raked (i.e., empty) square.
• Vacating an empty sand square causes that square
to be permanently raked. The monk cannot move
from the perimeter onto an empty sand square and
then immediately back onto the perimeter, as this is
considered a “step back”.
• Once moving on sand, the monk continues to move in
a straight line until he encounters either the perimeter
(in which case he moves onto it), a raked square
or an object (in both cases, he stops moving). The
monk may not turn corners while moving. These two
rules are central to the challenge of the game – if the
monk could be moved on a square-by-square basis
then most boards would be trivial to solve.
• Moveable objects may only be pushed onto an empty
sand square. They may not be pushed off the garden
into the perimeter region. A single move pushes an
ornament one square, if possible. When pushing an
ornament the monk does not continue moving until
he is no longer able to, unlike normal movement.
Figure 3.
Example Zen Puzzle Garden board.
• The current game ends if the monk is moved into a
position such that he is in a “dead end” (i.e., unable
to make a legal move).
Objects may be one of three types:
• Rocks are placed in a ﬁxed position at the start of the
game, and may not be moved.
• Ornaments also start in the same place at the begin-
ning of each game. They may only be pushed into an
empty square, and not into the perimeter (see above).
• Leaves are coloured either yellow, orange or red, and
must be collected (i.e., moved over) in that order,
at which time they are removed from the board. An
orange or red leaf is classed as an immoveable object
until the preceding leaves have been collected.
An example board is depicted in Figure
3. In this
situation the monk is half-way through completing a
move, and will completely rake the current column before
moving onto the perimeter.
A puzzle board is completed when all initially empty
squares (i.e., any sand square not covered by either a rock
or an ornament) have been raked and the monk has stepped
onto the perimeter region. This last condition is necessary,
as a square is not considered to be raked until it has been
vacated.
Although a formal proof is beyond the scope of this
paper, previous work [4] suggests that the ZPG is NP-
complete. The authors study “pushing block” puzzles (like
Sokoban), and introduce variants in which blocks must
slide their maximal extent when pushed, and where a
player’s path must not cross itself. These variants are
demonstrated to be NP-hard, and future work will use this
work to formally establish the intractability of ZPG.
IV. TWO METHODS FOR THE ZPG
In this section we describe two solution methods for the
ZPG; a search-tree method and a genetic algorithm (GA).
We ﬁrst give a representation scheme for the game, before
describing a generic simulator we built for the game. We
then give details of the A* and GA algorithms.

Figure 4.
Graph-based representation of ZPG board.
A. Representation
In Figure
4, we show a graph-based representation
of the ZPG board. Perimeter tiles are represented by
coloured nodes, and sand tiles labelled according to their
coordinated on the board. Entities representing the player
and obstacles may occupy vertices on the graph or travel
(where allowed) along connecting edges between them.
Although not shown in Figure
4, the monk may move
freely between perimeter nodes (that is, the perimeter
subgraph is fully connected).
Standard game theory [19] deﬁnes a game tree as a
graph in which nodes represent game states, with each
branch corresponding to a move. The complete game tree
for a problem is the game tree starting at the initial
state and containing every possible move. Terminal nodes
represent the possible states that may end the game; either
a goal state or deadlock. The branching factor is the
number of children at each node; an exhaustive search
of the tree will follow every branch at every node and the
total number of vertices will increase exponentially to the
depth in the tree.
A game tree is an example of state-space search
whereby successive conﬁgurations or states of an in-
stance are considered, with the goal of ﬁnding a state
with a desired property. Figure
5 illustrates how this
representation can be applied to the Zen Puzzle Garden.
Obtaining a complete game tree for a problem can be very
computationally expensive [9], and has resulted in search
algorithms such as A* playing an important role in recent
research.
B. Simulator
Attempts to solve commercial games are often ham-
pered by
the
reluctance of the
authors to
release
commercially-sensitive source code. Therefore, in order
to test candidate scripts against game boards, we use the
same fundamental approach as Kendall and Spoerer[13],
which is to write a simpliﬁed version of the game engine.
This engine retains the essential characteristics of the game
in terms of its rules, but omits the graphical user interface
and other “playability” features. A representation of the
game state is modiﬁed by an external controller program,
and moves and their results may therefore be assessed
without access to the source of the main game itself. Care
Figure 5.
Partial ﬁrst three ply for a simple ZPG board.
is taken to ensure that all restrictions listed in Section 1 are
enforced. The same simulator is used by both the genetic
algorithm and informed search.
To determine the quality of a (partial) solution to a given
garden, the simulator includes an AreaFitness() method
to calculate and return a value describing how close it
is to a fullsolution. This method compares the unraked
(available) area of the garden before and after a given path
has been explored. By dividing the number of unraked
tiles after the path has traversed the garden by the initial
number of unraked tiles, a quality metric may be obtained.
As the value approaches zero the proportion of the garden
that has been raked rises, with a value of zero indicating
the path has covered all available tiles.
C. A* solution
The A* algorithm is an extensively studied best-ﬁrst
search method. It is best-ﬁrst in that it takes an informed
approach when deciding which node is most likely to
provide the least-cost distance to a goal state; the order
in which nodes are visited is determined by a distance-
plus-cost heuristic, given by f(x) = g(x) + h(x), where:
• g(x): The shortest distance from the root node to the
node being evaluated;
• h(x): The estimated distance from the node being
evaluated to a goal state.
The heuristic function should be optimistic in that it will
never overestimate the cost of a path from the root node
to a goal state; as the algorithm will never overlook the
possibility of a lower-cost path it is therefore admissible.

Figure 6.
Pseudo-code for A* algorithm.
Hart et al. [8] ﬁrst discussed this algorithm in 1968, then
calling it just Algorithm A. It has since been shown by
Dechter and Pearl [3] to be optimal in that it considers
fewer nodes than any other admissible search algorithm
with the same heuristic.
The A*
algorithm displays
characteristics of
the
breadth-ﬁrst search; it is complete in that it will always
return a solution if one exists, and it will also visit all
equal-cost vertices at a given depth before continuing
further along a path at greater cost. Many enhancements
have been made to the basic algorithm that allow it to be
tailored to the problem domain, such as iterative deepening
and pattern databases. These enhancements have provided
some impressive reductions in the search effort required
to solve challenging problems such as Rubik’s Cube [15].
The algorithm is implemented using a priority queue, the
ordering determined by the heuristic function, with a lower
value indicating a better candidate. The pseudo-code in
Figure 6 illustrates the basic operation of the algorithm.
The heuristic function comprises the distance from the
root node, g(x), given by the number of moves completed,
and the estimate h(x) is provided by the AreaFitness()
method described earlier.
The algorithm is implemented with a conditional loop
which polls the ﬁttest state from the open queue and
proceeds to create leaf nodes for each move available
from that state. As the nodes are created their quality is
analysed, and they are inserted into the queue accordingly.
Once the ﬁrst complete solution has been found the queue
is pruned of all nodes requiring a greater number of moves,
and only nodes with an move count less than or equal to
the best solution are inserted into the queue.
This process is repeated until all nodes in the queue
have been examined, at which point the solutions found are
analysed and the set of unique solutions returned. Pruning
reduces the completeness of the solution set generated by
the algorithm for solutions requiring more than the optimal
number of moves, but this behaviour is acceptable, as only
the optimal solutions are of interest in this investigation.
D. Genetic algorithm solution
Genetic algorithms [6] have been studied extensively
with respect to combinatorial optimisation problems. With
respect to the current problem, Hong et al. [9] discuss
the application of a genetic algorithms to game search
trees, speciﬁcally that of the Latin square problem devised
by Leonhard Euler. Mantere and Koljonen [17] perform a
similar analysis of the efﬁcacy of genetic algorithms for
devising and solving Sudoku problems.
When choosing the representation for our GA, we ﬁrst
consider the basic operation of the game. A successful
move consists of the selection of a point on the garden
perimeter and a transition onto the garden surface, fol-
lowed by zero or more in-move choices (the number of
choices to be made is only non-zero if a raked square or
object is encountered), leading to the monk ﬁnishing back
on the perimeter. If a choice of direction is required at a
raked square, then at most two options are available, as
the monk can neither move backwards nor onto the raked
square in front of him. If an ornament is encountered, then
the monk must choose a number of times (≥0) to push
it in the current direction.
For a rectangular board of dimension x × y, there are
C = 2x + 2y unique starting points on the perimeter,
ordered by starting at 1 at the north face of the upper-left
square and moving “clockwise” to the west face of the
same square. C is therefore a measure of the “circumfer-
ence” of the board. We assume that no move will contain
more than 20 direction choices or opportunities to push.
We deﬁne m as the maximum number of moves allowed.
A candidate solution is naturally made of a sequence of
clauses
(c1, p1,1, d1,1, d1,1, . . . , p1,8, d1,8), . . .
(ci, pi,1, di,1, . . . , pi,8, di,8), . . .
(cm, pm,1, dm,1, . . . pm,8, dm,8),
where each clause encodes a move, 1
≤
c
≤
C,
1 ≤pi,j < max(x, y) −1 and di,j ∈{1, 2}. Values for ci
encode a starting point on the board perimeter. Values for
pi,j encode a distance to push an object (if encountered).
We use an indirect encoding scheme for values of di,j to
encode direction choices, using the notion of available
moves. When a move is required, the list of available
moves is constructed and one of two chosen (remembering
that only two moves will be possible), according to the
value of di. This genome sequence therefore encodes a
“script” of moves, which is then fed into the simulator for
evaluation.
1) Fitness Function: The ﬁtness function is given be-
low. It accepts a sequence of moves, and returns the overall
ﬁtness of the sequence based on (a) its length, and (b) the
quality of the solution it encodes. Fitness values are in
the range 0 . . . 500. GENE LENGT H is equivalent to
m, above, and is set to a default value of 20. Moves
represents the number of valid moves executed. The ﬁrst

component of the ﬁtness function therefore rewards short
sequences.
fitness()
{
fitness=0 ;
fitness += (GENE_LENGTH-Moves)*
(200/GENE_LENGTH)
if (AreaFitness>0)
fitness += (1-AreaFitness)*200
else if (garden is full solution)
fitness += 300
else
fitness = 0
}
The second component of the ﬁtness value is calculated
by the AreaFitness() function; a complete solution gains
an absolute value of 300 for this component; if deadlock
is reached (i.e., the monk is unable to move) a value of
zero is awarded for this component.
V. RESULTS
We tested both methods on 24 different ZPG game
boards, including one engineered to have no solution. We
selected nine “retail” boards (supplied with the game,
labelled R1-R9) and constructed an additional 14 “test”
boards (T1-T14). We could not simply select all retail
boards, because we were restricted to using smaller boards
due to the resource limitations we imposed (an informed
search would be terminated if it either consumes more
that 100Gb of disc space or runs for longer than 72 hours).
Boards were selected/constructed in order to be “tractable”
in this sense, but we also ensured that the full range of
board features was represented in our test suite1
We initially ran both methods on 30 different ZPG
game boards. Of these, 15 were “retail” boards (i.e.,
supplied with the game), and 15 were hand-designed by
us. Of the latter, one “illegal” board was speciﬁcally
engineered to have no solution, in order to demonstrate
the exhaustive nature of the A* algorithm. The other 14
non-retail boards were designed to represent the range
of obstacles contained in all 64 retail boards. Of the
retail boards, eight were selected speciﬁcally because we
expected them to exceed (due to their size) the A* resource
limits that we impose; a search is terminated if it either
consumes more than 100GB of disc cache space, or if
it runs for longer than 72 hours. The 14 hand-designed
boards were designed to be “tractable” in this respect.
The A* algorithm was implemented in Java, using the
JGAP [18] Java package; it used a constant population
size, rank-based selection (with 95% of the population
considered for the next generation), and simple one-point
crossover. The parameter values used were as follows:
• Population size: 1000
• Generations: 100
1The board ﬁles, along with the code for the simulator, are available
on request from the corresponding author.
Instance
Optimum
GA best
GA av.
GA excess %
T1
3
3
3.38
12.67
R1
4
4
4
0
R2
4
4
4
0
T2
4
4
4.12
3.0
T3
4
4
4
0
T4
4
4
4.62
15.5
T5
4
4
4.24
6.0
R3
5
5
5.14
2.8
R4
5
5
5
0
R5
5
5
5
0
R6
5
5
5
0
T6
5
5
5.06
1.2
T7
5
5
5.94
18.8
T8
5
5
5.88
17.6
T9
5
5
5.76
15.2
T10
5
5
6.36
27.2
T11
5
5
5.08
1.6
R7
6
6
11.41
90.17
R8
6
6
6.7
11.67
T12
6
7
8.98
49.67
T13
6
6
6.06
1.0
R9
6
6
6.22
3.67
T14
6
9
9.57
59.5
Average
14.66
Table I
MOVE COUNT COMPARISON FOR A* AND GA.
• Chromosome length: 20
• Mutation rate: 0.07
The GA was run 50 times on each board. Neither A* nor
the genetic algorithm found valid solutions for the “illegal”
board, for which no solutions exist. The following results
therefore describe comparisons over 23 ZPG boards. In
Table 1, we ﬁrst show the results in terms of solution
quality. For each board, we give the the optimum number
of moves for completion (as found by A*), the length of
the best solution found by the GA, the average solution
length for the GA, and the average GA “quality overhead”
in terms of excess moves. The table is ordered by the
number of moves required by the optimal solution. We
observe that the GA fails to ﬁnd the optimal solution in
only two cases (T12 and T14), and solves to optimality
all of the retail boards tested (see graphical depiction of
quality results in Figure 7). Over all boards, on average
the GA ﬁnds solutions that require roughly 15% more
moves than the optimal solution.
We now consider the computational effort required
by each algorithm. We measure this in terms of board
evaluations required, as this is the only truly objective
metric. In addition, in order to ensure a fair comparison
we only consider boards where the GA ﬁnds the optimal
solution, so we discount boards T12 and T14. The results
are given in Table
II. The second column gives the
number of boards evaluated by A* to ﬁnd the optimal
solution. The third column gives the average number of
ﬁtness evaluations required by the GA to ﬁnd the optimal
solution, and the fourth shows this number as a proportion
of the number of A* evalutions (i.e., anything less than
100 shows an improvement over A*).
We observe that, with the exception of a single problem
instance (T2), compared to informed search the GA re-

Figure 7.
Graphical depiction of quality results.
Instance
A* evals.
Av. GA evals.
% of A*
T1
903,634
27000
2.99
R1
123,084
1000
0.81
R2
152,265
1000
0.66
T2
77,272
30000
38.82
T3
109,284
1000
0.92
T4
2,962,349
48000
1.62
T5
956,861
35000
3.66
R3
30,759,145
25000
0.08
R4
2,983,478
1000
0.03
R5
2,983,134
2000
0.07
R6
912,676
1000
0.11
T6
1,137,751
13000
1.14
T7
158,756,106
50000
0.03
T8
15,092,790
45000
0.3
T9
33,414,980
53000
0.16
T10
128,639,420
47000
0.04
T11
9,896,968
32000
0.32
R7
5,888,672
31000
0.53
R8
15,728,328
48000
0.31
T13
22,742,096
12000
0.05
R9
5,888,672
31000
0.53
Average
2.53
Table II
NUMBER OF EVALUATIONS FOR A* AND GA.
quires signiﬁcantly fewer evaluations to ﬁnd the optimum.
Over all boards, the GA requires, on average, under 3%
of the evaluations needed by A*. If we discount board T2,
this falls to 0.65%.
Board T2 contains only rocks, and it is not immediately
apparent from inspection why the GA struggles so much
with this particular instance. The board is shown in Figure
8; we note its small size, and relatively dense population
of rocks (21% of the board is occupied at the outset).
We believe that this density places signiﬁcant constraints
on possible solutions, which is why this board has by far
the smallest search space. It may be that, in cases such
Figure 8.
The “problematic” board T2.
as these, it is more efﬁcient to solve the instance using
informed search.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have described a novel genetic algo-
rithm solution to a block-based puzzle game. The game
poses signiﬁcant challenges in terms of the size of its
search space, but our solution is competitive with informed
search in terms of solution quality, and signiﬁcantly out-
performs it in terms of its computational resource require-
ments.
We presented the ZPG in order to both demonstrate
the efﬁcacy of a genetic algorithm solution, and to en-
courage further study of its properties. Inspired by [14],
we wish to investigate questions such as “Is it possible
to automatically generate hard and easy instances of
the problem?”, as well as considering the notion of an
aesthetically pleasing solution. In addition to providing
a useful testbed for new solution methods, the problem
domain has real signiﬁcance if we consider the problem
of mobile robotics, where a self-avoiding path must be

chosen whilst also considering possible obstacles and
moveable objects. Future work will focus on formally
establishing the difﬁculty of the ZPG game, as well as
further investigations into its solution.
