Accelerating Goal-Directed Reinforcement Learning by Model
Characterization
Shoubhik Debnath1, Gaurav Sukhatme2, Lantao Liu3
Abstract— We propose a hybrid approach aimed at im-
proving the sample efﬁciency in goal-directed reinforcement
learning. We do this via a two-step mechanism where ﬁrstly, we
approximate a model from Model-Free reinforcement learning.
Then, we leverage this approximate model along with a notion
of reachability using Mean First Passage Times to perform
Model-Based reinforcement learning. Built on such a novel
observation, we design two new algorithms - Mean First
Passage Time based Q-Learning (MFPT-Q) and Mean First
Passage Time based DYNA (MFPT-DYNA), that have been
fundamentally modiﬁed from the state-of-the-art reinforcement
learning techniques. Preliminary results have shown that our
hybrid approaches converge with much fewer iterations than
their corresponding state-of-the-art counterparts and therefore
requiring much fewer samples and much fewer training trials
to converge.
I. INTRODUCTION
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been successfully applied
to numerous challenging problems for autonomous agents to
behave intelligently in unstructured real-world environment.
One interesting area of research in RL which motivates
this work is goal-directed reinforcement learning problem
(GDRLP) [1] [2]. In GDRLP, the learning process takes place
in two stages. The ﬁrst stage focuses on solving the goal-
directed exploration problem (GDEP) which allows an agent
to determine a viable path from an initial state to a goal state
in an unknown or only partially known state space. The path
found in this stage need not be the optimal one. In the second
stage, the agent takes advantage of the previously learned
knowledge to optimize the path to the goal state. The two
stages iterate in order to converge to the action policy.
RL methods are generally divided into Model-Free (MF)
and Model-Based (MB) approaches. MF methods can learn
complex policies with minimal feature and policy engineering
work. However, the convergence of such methods might
require millions of trials and hence they are sample inefﬁcient
[3] [4]. MB methods require much smaller number of real-
world trials to converge but need an accurate model of real-
world physical system and the environment which might be
challenging to obtain [5]. Also, relying on an accurate model
1Shoubhik Debnath is with NVIDIA Corporation, Santa Clara, CA 95051,

2Gaurav Sukhatme is with the Department of Computer Science at the

3Lantao Liu is with the Intelligent Systems Engineering Department at

The paper was published in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
can be problematic because small glitches on the model may
lead to catastrophic consequences.
In this paper, we leverage the beneﬁts of both approaches
- MB and MF, with an aim to improve the sample efﬁciency
during the training process. We achieve this via a two-step
iterative learning mechanism. In the ﬁrst step, we learn an
approximate model of the physical system using an MF
scheme. Note that, our approach does not need to construct
an accurate model, instead a rough model with little cost is
sufﬁcient which is used to characterize the structure of the
problem. In the second step, we leverage this approximate
model along with the notion of reachability using Mean First
Passage Times (MFPT) where the result is used to guide
following MF exploration and learning.
Contribution: The main contributions of our work are:
• We propose a hybrid RL approach that introduces a
model-based characterization into the state-of-the-art RL
algorithms to improve sample-efﬁciency.
• The model-based characterization is achieved via a
model-based RL algorithm that is robust to an approxi-
mate model for learning complex policies.
We demonstrate our proposed method on two tasks related
to the path-planning domain in 2D and 3D simulation
environments respectively. The goal of the agent in both
tasks is to learn an optimal policy to reach a goal state from
a given start location. Our results show that the proposed
hybrid algorithms with model-based characterization were
able to learn the optimal policy in very few trials, thereby
improving the sample efﬁciency and accelerating the learning
process.
II. RELATED WORK
Earlier works have demonstrated various approaches to
solve goal-directed reinforcement learning problem. Braga
et al. presented a solution to solve GDRLP for an indoor
unknown environment. Firstly, using temporal difference
learning method, they ﬁnd an initial solution to reach the goal
and then improve upon the initial solution by employing a
variable learning rate [1]. Several earlier works also focused
on goal-directed exploration as it provides insight into the
corresponding RL problems. It has been proved that goal-
directed exploration with RL methods can be intractable,
therefore demonstrating that solving RL problems can be
intractable as well [6]. This work also presented that the
behavior of an agent followed a random walk until it reached
the goal for the ﬁrst time. Koenig et al. also studied the
effect of representation and knowledge on the tractability of
goal-directed exploration with RL algorithms [2]. However,
arXiv:1901.01977v1  [cs.LG]  4 Jan 2019

in our work, the primary focus is on the second stage of
GDRLP, where the aim is to accelerate the convergence to
optimal policy via model characeterization.
MF approaches in reinforcement learning can learn complex
policies but requires many trials to converge. The most
widely used model-free reinforcement learning might be
the Q-Learning [7] which is detailed in the next section.
Another model-free learning algorithm similar to Q-Learning
is SARSA [8]. The main difference between SARSA and Q-
Learning is that SARSA agent learns the action-value function
by following the policy it learned, while Q-Learning agent
learns the action-value function by following an exploitation
policy owing to the exploration/exploitation trade-off. On the
other hand, MB approaches can generalize to new tasks and
environments in fewer trials, however, an accurate model is
necessary. We recently also investigated reachability heuristics
and showed that computational performance for standard and
accurate MDP models can be improved [9].
Another interesting research direction focused on reducing
the size of problem space in MB approaches. Boutilier et al.
proposed structured reachability analysis of MDPs in order to
remove variables from problem description, thereby reducing
the size of MDP and eventually making it easier to solve [10].
It is therefore very intuitive to investigate approaches that
combine the advantages of MF and MB methods [11] [12].
There have also been multiple previous works that combined
the two paradigms. The primary objective of such methods
were to speed-up the learning process for MF reinforcement
learning approaches. A broad area of research including the
DYNA framework [13] [14] leveraged a learned model to
generate synthetic experience for MF learning.
Along similar direction, several prior works focused on
devising a model as an initialization for MF component
[15] [16]. One of the challenges that this leads to is the
inaccuracies in the model which cause the issue of model
bias. A suggested solution to overcome model bias is to
directly train the dynamics in a goal-oriented manner [17]
[18]. Our work is also motivated from this approach in order
to deal with model bias.
Unlike prior works on combining MB and MF reinforce-
ment learning methods, we integrate the beneﬁts of both
approaches - MB and MF, with an aim to improve the sample
efﬁciency during the training process. The primary objective
in this work is to incorporate a model-based characterization
using MFPT into a reinforcement learning algorithm (model-
free approaches like Q-Learning or RL frameworks like
DYNA), so that the characterization result can be used to
guide following MF exploration and learning. Our approach
differs from existing hybrid models in that, the method does
not need to construct an accurate model, and a rough model
with little cost is enough for capturing high-level features.
By comparing with state-of-the-art baseline approaches, our
evaluations reveal that the proposed hybrid algorithms are able
to learn optimal policy in very few trials with high sample
efﬁciency, and have signiﬁcantly accelerated the practical
learning process.
III. PRELIMINARIES
A. Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
Model-Based reinforcement learning needs to ﬁrst build
a model, and then use it to derive a policy. The underlying
mechanism is Markov Decision Process (MDP), which is a
tuple M = (S, A, T, R), where S = {s1, · · · , sn} is a set of
states and A = {a1, · · · , an} is a set of actions. The state
transition function T : S × A × S →[0, 1] is a probability
function such that Ta(s1, s2) is the probability that action
a in state s1 will lead to state s2, and R : S × A →R
is a reward function where Ra(s, s′) returns the immediate
reward received on taking action a in state s that will lead
to state s′. A policy is of the form π = {s1 →a1, s2 →
a2, · · · , sn →an}. We denote π[s] as the action associated
to state s. If the policy of a MDP is ﬁxed, then the MDP
behaves as a Markov chain [19].
To solve an MDP, the most widely used approach should
be value iteration (VI). The VI is an iterative procedure that
calculates the value (or utility in some literature) of each
state s based on the values of the neighbouring states that
s can directly transit to. The value V (s) of state s at each
iteration can be calculated by the Bellman equation shown
below
V (s) = max
a∈A
X
s′∈S
Ta(s, s′)

Ra(s, s′) + γV (s′)

,
(1)
where γ is a reward discounting parameter. The stopping
criteria for the algorithm is when the values calculated on two
consecutive iterations are close enough, i.e., maxs∈S |V (s)−
V ′(s)| ≤ϵ, where ϵ is an optimization tolerance/threshold
value, which determines the level of convergence accuracy.
Relevant to this work, the prioritized sweeping mechanism
is an important heuristic-based approach for efﬁciently solving
MDPs in order to further speed up the value iteration process
[20]. This heuristic evaluates each state and obtains a score
based on the state’s contribution to the convergence, and then
prioritizes/sorts all states based on their scores (e.g., those
states with larger difference in value between two consecutive
iterations will get higher scores) [21], [22]. Then immediately
in the next dynamic programming iteration, evaluating the
value of states follow the newly prioritized order.
Given a model, methods proposed for solving MDPs can be
easily extended to the context of MB learning methods [23].
The model-based characterization in our proposed approach
is also built on top of this notion.
B. Model-Free Reinforcement Learning
Model-free reinforcement learning aims at learning a policy
without learning a model. The most widely used model-
free reinforcement learning might be the Q-Learning [7],
which is a special algorithm of the Temporal Difference
(TD) learning [24]. This approach is able to compare the
expected utility of the available actions at a given state without
requiring a model of the environment. To learn the expected
utility of taking a given action a in a given state s, it learns

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 1. (a) Demonstration of simulation environment, with the agent’s
initial state (blue) and the goal state (red). Grey blocks are obstacles;
(b) Converged optimal policy (red arrows) and a trajectory completed
by the agent to reach the goal.; (c)-(f) Evolution of reachability
landscapes.
a action-value function Q(s, a). The Q-Learning rule is
Q(s, a) = Q(s, a) + α(r + γ max
a′∈A Q(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)), (2)
where, <s, a, r, s′> is an experience tuple, α is the learning
rate, and γ is the discount factor. After the action-value
function is learned, the optimal policy can be constructed by
greedily selecting the action with the highest action-value in
each state.
C. Synthesis of Model-based and Model-free
There are several frameworks that integrate the model-
based and model-free paradigms, with the most well known
architecture probably being DYNA [13], [14]. DYNA exploits
a middle ground, yielding strategies that are both more
effective than model-free learning and more computationally
efﬁcient than the certainty-equivalence approach. DYNA
architecture comprises of two phases. In the ﬁrst phase, the
agent carries out actions in the environment and performs
regular reinforcement learning to learn value function and
adjust the policy. It also uses the real experience to explicitly
build up the transition model T and/or the reward function R
associated with the environment. The second phase involves
planning updates where simulated experiences are used to
update policy and value function.
D. Mean First Passage Times
Before we elaborate on what we mean by model charac-
terization in our work, we will describe a key concept called
Mean First Passage Times (MFPT).
The ﬁrst passage time (FPT), Tij, is deﬁned as the number
of state transitions involved in reaching states sj when started
in state si for the ﬁrst time. The mean ﬁrst passage time
(MFPT), µij from state si to sj is the expected number of
hopping steps for reaching state sj given initially it was in
state si [25]. The MFPT analysis is built on the Markov chain,
and has nothing to do with the agent’s actions. Remember
that, when a MDP is associated to a ﬁxed policy, it then
behaves as a Markov chain [19].
Formally, let us deﬁne a Markov chain with n states and
transition probability matrix, p ∈IRn,n. If the transition
probability matrix is regular, then each MFPT, µij = E(Tij),
satisﬁes the below conditional expectation formula:
E(Tij) =
X
k
E(Tij|Bk)pik,
(3)
where, pik represents the transition probability from state
si to sk, and Bk is an event where the ﬁrst state transition
happens from state si to sk. From the deﬁnition of mean ﬁrst
passage times, we have, E(Tij|Bk) = 1 + E(Tkj). So, we
can rewrite Eq. (3) as follows
E(Tij) =
X
k
pik +
X
k̸=j
E(Tkj)pik.
(4)
Since, P
k pik = 1, Eq. (4) can be formulated as per the
below equation:
µij = 1+
X
k̸=j
pik∗µkj
⇒
X
k̸=j
pik∗µkj−µij = −1, (5)
Solving all MFPT variables can be viewed as solving a system
of linear equations






p11 −1
p12
..
..
p1n
p21
p22 −1
..
..
p2n
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
pn1
pn2
..
..
pnn −1












µ1j
µ2j
..
..
µnj






=






−1
−1
..
..
−1






.
(6)
The values µ1j, µ2j, ...., µnj represents the MFPTs calculated
for state transitions from states s1, s2, ...., sn to sj and
µjj = 0. To solve above equation, efﬁcient decomposition
methods [26] may help to avoid a direct matrix inversion.
IV. TECHNICAL APPROACH
In this work, we are interested in goal-directed autonomy,
where the agent is speciﬁed with a goal or terminal state to
arrive. Note, a Markov system is deﬁned as absorbing if from
every non-terminal state it is possible to eventually enter a
goal state [27]. We restrict our attention to absorbing Markov
systems so that the agent ﬁnally terminates at a goal.
A. Reachability Characterization using Mean First Passage
Times
The notion of MFPT allows us to deﬁne the reachability
of a state. By “reachability of a state" we mean that based
on current ﬁxed policy, how hard it is for the agent to transit
from the current state to the given goal/absorbing state. With
all MFPT values µij obtained, we can construct a reachability
landscape which is essentially a “map" measuring the degree
of difﬁculty of all states transiting to the goal.
Fig. 1 shows a series of landscapes represented in heatmap
in our simulated environment. The values in the heatmap

range from 0 (cold color) to 600 (warm color). In order to
better visualize the low MFPT spectrum that we are most
interested, any value greater than 600 has been clipped to 600.
Fig. 1(c)-1(f) show the change of landscapes as the learning
algorithm proceeds. Initially, all states except the goal state
are initialized as unreachable, as shown by the high MFPT
color in Fig. 1(c).
We observe that the reachability landscape conveys very
useful information on potential impacts of different states.
More speciﬁcally, a state with a better reachability
(smaller MFPT value) is more likely to make a larger
change during the MDP convergence procedure, leading
to a bigger convergence step. With such observation and
the new metric, we can design state prioritization schemes for
Value Iteration that we will use in our proposed approaches.
Algorithm 1: Mean First Passage Time based Q-Learning
(MFPT-Q)
1 Given states S, actions A, discount factor γ, learning rate α
and goal state s∗, calculate the optimal policy π
2 while true do
3
Select state s at random
4
Choose action a based on ϵ-greedy
5
Execute a at state s and get s′, r
6
Perform one-step tabular Q-Learning:
Q(s, a) = Q(s, a) + α[r + γ maxa′ Q(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)]
7
Update model details: transition probability Ta(s, s′) and
reward Ra(s, s′) based on count statistics
8
while true do
9
V = V ′
10
Calculate MFPT values µ1s∗, µ2s∗, · · · , µ|S|s∗by
solving the linear system as shown in Eq. (6)
11
List L := Sorted states with increasing order of MFPT
values
12
foreach state s in L do
13
Compute value update at each state s given policy
π: Q(s, a) =
P
∀s′∈S Ta(s, s′)

Ra(s, s′) + γV (s′)

V ′(s) = maxa∈A Q(s, a)
14
if maxsi |V (si) −V ′(si)| ≤ϵ then
15
break
B. Mean First Passage Time based Q-Learning (MFPT-Q)
Classic Q-Learning converges to the optimal solution
through the Q-Learning rule as shown in Eq. (2), which
essentially learns the state-action value function Q(s, a) that
represents the expected utility of the available actions at a
given state.
Our proposed hybrid algorithm, MFPT-Q, performs two
main operations involving a model-free and a model-based up-
date every iteration. Firstly, given an experience <s, a, r, s′>,
it builds an approximate model by updating the transition
function Ta(s, s′) and reward function Ra(s, s′). To update
Ta(s, s′), it uses the count statistics which basically refers to
the count of transitions occurring from state s to s′ followed
by normalization between 0 and 1.
The second step leverages the approximate model computed
earlier to perform a model-based update using MFPT-VI
algorithm (See lines 8-15 of Alg. 1). The MFPT-VI method
is built on a metric using the reachability (MFPT values)
since, the reachability characterization of each state reﬂects
the potential impact/contribution of this state. Hence, such
characterization provides a natural basis for state prioritization
while performing a version of value-iteration for Q values
during model-based update.
Note that, since the MFPT computation is relatively
expensive, and the purpose of using MFPT is to characterize
global and general (instead of ﬁne) features of all states, thus
it is not necessary to compute the MFPT at every iteration, but
rather after every few iterations. For those iterations between
two adjacent MFPT updates, the value of all states converge
from a “local reﬁnement" perspective. The computational
process of MFPT-Q is pseudo-coded in Alg. 1.
Algorithm 2: Mean First Passage Time based DYNA
(MFPT-DYNA)
1 Given states S, actions A, discount factor γ, learning rate α
and goal state s∗, calculate the optimal policy π
2 while true do
3
Select state s at random
4
Choose action a based on ϵ-greedy
5
Execute a at state s and get s′, r (real experience)
6
Perform one-step tabular Q-Learning:
Q(s, a) = Q(s, a) + α[r + γ maxa′ Q(s′, a′) −Q(s, a)]
7
Update model details: transition probability Ta(s, s′) and
reward Ra(s, s′) based on count statistics
8
i →0
9
while i < N do
10
s is a randomly allocated previously observed state
11
a is a random action previously carried out in s
12
Produce simulated experience to get s′, r
13
Q(s, a) = Q(s, a)+α[r+γ maxa′ Q(s′, a′)−Q(s, a)]
14
while true do
15
V = V ′
16
Calculate MFPT values µ1s∗, µ2s∗, · · · , µ|S|s∗by
solving the linear system as shown in Eq. (6)
17
List L := Sorted states with increasing order of MFPT
values
18
foreach state s in L do
19
Compute value update at each state s given policy
π: Q(s, a) =
P
∀s′∈S Ta(s, s′)

Ra(s, s′) + γV (s′)

V ′(s) = maxa∈A Q(s, a)
20
if maxsi |V (si) −V ′(si)| ≤ϵ then
21
break
C. Mean First Passage Time based DYNA (MFPT-DYNA)
Classic DYNA architecture balances between real and
simulated experience to speed up the training process. As
mentioned earlier, the agent learns a value function and
updates the policy using both sets of experiences. In addition,
the agent also learns a model of the environment using real
experiences. This notion of learned model in DYNA makes
it intuitive and easier to integrate our proposed model-based

characterization. Here we further extend this framework and
propose an upgraded hybrid algorithm - Mean First Passage
Time based DYNA (MFPT-DYNA).
Remember that the classic DYNA algorithm includes two
steps involving real experience and simulated experience.
For the simulated experience, we employ the classic DYNA
procedure where the simulation performs N additional
updates, i.e., it chooses N state-action pairs at random and
update state-action values according to the rule mentioned in
Eq. (2). (See lines 9-13 of Alg. 2.)
Different from the standard DYNA mechanism, our MFPT-
DYNA utilizes the real experience <s, a, r, s′> to build the
approximate model by updating state-action values according
to the rule mentioned in Eq. (2). Again, for updating Ta(s, s′),
it increments the count statistics for the transitions occurring
from state s to s′ followed by normalization between 0 and
1. It updates the Ra(s, s′) based on the reward r received
for taking action a in state s.
Analogous to the one mentioned in case of MFPT-Q, we
propose a model-based update using MFPT-VI algorithm.
The MFPT-VI algorithm leverages the approximate model
(represented by the transition and reward function) computed
earlier to perform a version of the value-iteration update for
Q values as shown in lines 14-21 of Alg. 2.
One advantage of this framework is the introduction of
model-based characterization by MFPT-VI. MFPT-VI very
well assesses the importance of states based on their MFPT
values and thus provides a natural basis for effectively
prioritizing states while updating state-action Q values. This
mechanism towards updating state-action Q values allow the
algorithm to converge with a very small number of iterations,
which practically decrease the overall training time by a
signiﬁcant margin. The evaluation details are presented in
Section V.
D. Time Complexity Analysis
Q-Learning and DYNA have a sample complexity
O(|S| log |S|), where |S| denotes the number of states in
order to obtain a policy arbitrarily close to the optimal one
with high probability [28] [29]. Calculation of the MFPT
needs to solve a linear system that involves matrix inversion
(the matrix decomposition has a time complexity of O(|S|2.3)
if state-of-the-art algorithms are employed [26], given that
the size of matrix is the number of states |S|). Therefore, for
each iteration, the worst-case time complexity for both the
MFPT-Q and MFPT-DYNA algorithms is O(|S|2.3). Note,
in practical applications, since the expensive MFPT is used
for summerizing global features, this part is usually used
sparsely (less frequently) which also saves much time for
computation.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we compare the performance of our pro-
posed MFPT-Q and MFPT-DYNA with their corresponding
baseline methods - Q-Learning and DYNA respectively. More
importantly, through the comparison, we wish to demonstrate
that our proposed feature characterization mechanism can be
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2.
(a) Demonstration of simulation environment, with the
agent’s initial state (pink) and the goal state (red). Green blocks are
obstacles; (b) A trajectory (blue) completed by the agent to reach
the goal.
used as a module to existing other popular frameworks (not
limited to Q or DYNA) in order to further speed up their
practical learning processes.
A. Experimental Setting
Task Details: We validated our method through numerical
evaluations with two types of simulation suites running on a
Linux machine.
For the ﬁrst task, we developed a simulator in C++ using
OpenGL. To obtain the discrete MDP states, we tessellate
the agent’s workspace into a 2D grid map, and represent
the center of each grid as a state. In this way, the state
hopping between two states represents the corresponding
motion in the workspace. Each non-boundary state has a total
of nine actions, i.e., a non-boundary state can move in the
directions of N, NE, E, SE, S, SW, W, NW, plus an idle
action returning to itself. A demonstration is shown in Fig. 1.
Such environmental setting allows us to better visualize the
characterized reachability landscape, with a small number of
states in 2D space.
For the second task, we developed a simulator in C++ using
ROS and Rviz [30]. The agent’s workspace is partitioned into
a 3D voxel map where the center of each voxel denotes a MDP
state. Each non-boundary state has a total of seven actions, i.e.,
a non-boundary state can move in the directions of N, E, S, W,
TOP, BOTTOM plus an idle action returning to itself. Such
a 3D environment setting is more complex compared to the
2D setting. Moreover, it can be leveraged to simulate various
robotic path-planning application scenarios like quadrotor
trajectory planning and demonstrate the practicality of our
proposed algorithms for such tasks. A demonstration of the
agent ﬂying in the 3D simulation environment is shown in
Fig. 2.
In both tasks, the objective of the agent is to reach a goal
state from an initial start location in the presence of obstacles.
The reward function for both setups is represented as high
positive reward at the goal state and -1 for other states. All
experiments were performed on a laptop computer with 8GB
RAM and 2.6 GHz quad-core Intel i7 processor.

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 3.
Statistics of computational time and number of iterations required to converge between the baseline methods and our proposed
algorithms, with changing numbers of states (x-axis) in the 2D simulation environment. (a) and (c) Variants of Q-Learning methods. (b)
and (d) DYNA variants. The thick green curve in two ﬁgures is the result of MFPT-based hybrid models.
Evaluation Methods: We are concerned about both com-
putational performance and real-world training performance.
Thus, we designed two evaluation metrics:
• For the ﬁrst metric, we look into the computational
costs of the proposed and baseline approaches where we
investigate the number of iterations required to converge
as well as the computational runtime used to generate
the result.
• For the second evaluation metric, we evaluate and
compare the actual time used for training and completing
a task. We do this because the robot needs to interact
with the real world, and the time spent on training
with the real world experience can be much more than
computational time cost. Unsurprisingly, such saving
also extends to other costs such as energy if the task
can be done more quickly.
B. 2D Grid Setup
In this setup, we compare our proposed algorithms with
their corresponding baseline algorithms in terms of their
computational runtimes as well as the numbers of iterations
required to converge.
Computational Time Cost: We compare the compu-
tational time taken by the algorithms as the number of
states change. The time taken by Q-Learning and MFPT-
Q algorithms to converge to the optimal solution (with the
same convergence error threshold) are shown in Fig. 3(a).
The results reveal that time taken by our proposed MFPT-Q to
converge is faster than Q-Learning when the number of states
are less than 5000. When the number of states exceed 5000,
Q-Learning takes lesser time to converge than our proposed
MFPT-Q. Fig. 3(b) compares the time taken by DYNA and
MFPT-DYNA. Here, we observe that our proposed MFPT-
DYNA takes more time to converge in comparison to DYNA.
The reason is due to the increased time taken for MFPT
calculation which dominates the time taken to converge in
the execution of MFPT-DYNA.
Number of Iterations: We then evaluate the number of
iterations taken by the algorithms to converge to the optimal
policy since it very well reﬂects the sample efﬁciency.
Fig. 3(c) compares the number of iterations taken by Q-
Learning and MFPT-Q, respectively. The plot clearly shows
that MFPT-Q takes much fewer iterations to converge in
comparison to the standard Q-Learning. Fig. 3(d) compares
the number of iterations taken by DYNA and MFPT-DYNA,
from which we can observe that MFPT-DYNA takes much
fewer itertations to converge than DYNA.
This also implies the remarkable merit of model-based
characterization via MFPT as means for faster convergence
in signiﬁcantly fewer iterations.
C. 3D Grid Setup
To evaluate with larger number of states as well as more
complex environments, we compare our proposed algorithms:
MFPT-Q and MFPT-DYNA in the 3D simulation environment.
Computational Time Cost: Fig. 4(a) presents the compu-
tational time taken by Q-Learning and MFPT-Q algorithms
to converge to the optimal solution. We can see that the
computational time cost trends are very similar to that of
the 2D case, where for a large number of states, the MFPT
variants take longer time than the baseline methods. We
attribute this to the fact that as the number of states increase,

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 4.
Comparisons of computational time and number of iterations required to converge between the baseline methods and our proposed
algorithms in the 3D simulation environments. (a) and (c) Variants of Q-Learning methods. (b) and (d) DYNA variants.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 5.
Agents progress during the training process via qlearning. (a) Policy learned after 500 trials; (b) Policy learned after 5000 trials;
(c) Policy learned after 50000 trials; (d) Optimal policy learned by the agent. A trajectory (blue) completed by the agent to reach the goal.
the time taken for MFPT calculation also increase which
dominates the computational time cost in the MFPT variants.
Number of Iterations: Similarly, we also compare the
number of iterations taken by Q-Learning and MFPT-Q, re-
spectively. As shown in Fig. 4(c), our proposed MFPT variant
converges in fewer trials compared to Q-Learning. Next, we
compare the number of iterations taken by DYNA and MFPT-
DYNA. Again, the advantage of our proposed hybrid RL
approach that introduces a model-based characterization into
DYNA, is clearly visible in Fig. 4(d), as the results show that
the MFPT-DYNA requires much smaller number of iterations
to converge compared to DYNA.
D. Training Runtime Performance
As previously discussed, the objective of RL for an agent
is to learn an optimal policy in a given environment in order
to reach a goal state from a given starting location. Here
we present our second evaluation metric that considers the
total time involved during the agent’s training process in the
simulation environment.
Fig. 5 shows the progress of an agent in the 3D environment
using Q-Learning. During the initial stages of the learning
process, the agent could hardly overcome the ﬁrst obstacle
as shown in Fig. 5(a). After 5000 trials, the agent could
overcome the ﬁrst obstacle, however was unable to overcome
the next one. At the end of the training process, the agent
learned the optimal policy using which it could overcome all
obstacles and reach the goal as shown in Fig. 5(d).
We trained an agent in the 3D environment under varying
voxel sizes. Fig. 6(a) shows that the agent takes much less
overall time to learn the optimal policy when MFPT-Q was
employed in comparison to classical Q-Learning. Similarly,
the agent takes much less time to learn and complete the task
using MFPT-DYNA in comparison to DYNA algorithm as
shown in Fig. 6(b).
Since, practically the training and learning efforts are
much more expensive and important than the computational
time cost, thus, these results reestablish the beneﬁts of our

(a)
(b)
Fig. 6.
Time required for agent’s training in the 3D environment.
(a) Variants of Q-Learning methods. (b) DYNA variants. The dark
blue bar in two ﬁgures is the result of MFPT-based hybrid models.
hybrid algorithms towards improving sample efﬁciency in
goal-directed reinforcement learning. Such faster convergence
and lesser training time is owing to the underlying mechanism
of model-based characterization via MFPT introduced to the
existing reinforcement learning schemes.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose a hybrid approach where we
introduced a new model-based characterization that can be
extended to reinforcement learning techniques in order to im-
prove its sample efﬁciency. We achieved this by synthesizing
the advantages of both model-free and model-based reinforce-
ment learning paradigms. The proposed hybrid framework can
further accelerate reinforcement learning approaches, via an
integration of the MFPT feature characterization mechanism.
The experimental results show the remarkable merit of model-
based characterization in our hybrid algorithms which learn
much faster with fewer samples in comparison to their state-
of-the-art reinforcement learning counterparts.
