UAI2001 
GILLISPIE & PERLMAN 
171 
Enumerating Markov Equivalence Classes of Acyclic Digraph Models 
Steven B. Gillispie 
Department of Radiology 
University of Washington, Box 356004 
Seattle, WA 98195-6004 
Abstract 
Graphical Markov models determined by acyclic 
digraphs (ADGs), also called directed acyclic 
graphs (DAOs), are widely studied in statistics, 
computer science (as Bayesian networks), 
operations research (as influence diagrams), and 
many related fields. 
Because different ADOs 
may determine the same Markov equivalence 
class, it long has been of interest to determine the 
efficiency gained in model specification and 
search by working directly with Markov 
equivalence classes of ADOs rather than with 
ADOs themselves. 
A computer program was 
written to enumerate the equivalence classes of 
ADG models as specified by Pearl & Verma's 
equivalence criterion. 
The program counted 
equivalence classes for models up to and 
including I 0 vertices. The ratio of numbers of 
classes to ADGs appears to approach an 
asymptote of about 0.2 67. 
Classes were 
analyzed according to number of edges and class 
size. By edges, the distribution of number of 
classes approaches a Gaussian shape. By class 
size, classes of size 1 are most common, with the 
proportions for larger sizes initially decreasing 
but then following a more irregular pattern. The 
maximum number of classes generated by any 
undirected graph was found to increase 
approximately factorially. 
The program also 
includes a new variation of orderly algorithm for 
generating undirected graphs. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
One of the central ideas of statistical science is the 
assessment of dependencies among stochastic variables. 
Graphical Markov models (OMMs) use graphs, either 
undirected, directed, or mixed, to represent multivariate 
dependencies in a parsimonious and computationally 
Michael D. Perlman 
Department of Statistics 
University of Washington, Box 354322 
Seattle, W A 98195-4322 
efficient manner. A GMM is constructed by specifying 
local dependencies for each variable, or vertex, of the 
graph in terms of its immediate neighbors, parents, or 
both, yet can represent a highly varied and complex 
system of multivariate dependencies by means of the 
global structure of the graph. The local specification 
permits efficiencies in modeling, inference, and 
probabilistic calculations. 
Acyclic digraphs (ADOs), also called directed acyclic 
graphs (DAOs), provide a particularly elegant framework 
for statistical modelling and analysis, both Bayesian and 
non-Bayesian (e.g., Lauritzen & Spiegelhalter 1988, 
Lauritzen et al 1990, Spiegelhalter & Lauritzen 1990). 
The recursive factorization form of the likelihood 
function associated with a given ADG model allows 
explicit Bayesian and likelihood inference for Gaussian 
and multinomial models, and also facilitates ADG model 
specification via elicitation of expert opinion. For these 
reasons, ADO models have been widely studied in 
statistics, computer science (as Bayesian networks), 
operations research (as influence diagrams), and many 
related fields (cf. Pearl 1988, Shachter & Kenley 1989, 
Neapolitan 1990, Whittaker 1990, Spiegelhalter et al 
1993, Edwards 1995, Jensen 1996, Lauritzen 1996). 
If no single ADG model is specified, model search 
procedures are necessary. 
Bayesian model selection 
algorithms seek out the ADO models with highest 
posterior probability, and subsequent inference proceeds 
conditionally on these selected models (Cooper & 
Herskovits 1992, Buntine 1994, Heckerman et a/ 1994, 
Madigan & Raftery 1994). 
Non-Bayesian model 
selection methods are similar, replacing posterior model 
probabilities by, for example, penalized maximum 
likelihoods (Chickering 1995). 
Heckerman et al ( 1994) highlighted a fundamental 
problem with this general approach. Several different 
ADGs may determine the same statistical model, i.e., may 
determine the same set of conditional independence 
restrictions among a given set of random variates, hence 
cannot be distinguished on the basis of data alone 

172 
GILLISPIE & PERLMAN 
UA12001 
regardless of sample size. Thus, the collection of all 
possible ADGs for a given set of variates naturally 
coalesces into one or more classes of Markov-equivalent 
ADGs, where all ADGs within a Markov equivalence 
class determine the same statistical model. 
In 
the worst case, the 
Markov equivalence class 
containing a given ADG may be superexponentially large. 
For example, if the skeleton (the underlying undirected 
graph) of the ADG is complete, then the equivalence class 
contains exactly n! ADGs. 
Model search and selection 
algorithms that ignore Markov equivalence may therefore 
be extremely inefficient. 
Treating each Markov 
equivalence class as a single model would overcome these 
difficulties. 
An essential graph (Andersson, Madigan, & Perlman 
1997) is a graphical representation of a Markov 
equivalence class that can have both directed and 
undirected edges. 
Each directed edge in the essential 
graph is oriented in the same direction in all members of 
the equivalence class. Each of the undirected edges will 
appear in different directions in at least two of the 
members 
of 
the 
class. 
Thus, 
the 
number 
and 
configuration of the undirected edges in an essential graph 
dictates the size of the associated Markov equivalence 
class. 
In a graph, let a, b, and c be different vertices. 
A v­
configuration is defined when a is connected to b and b to 
c, but a is not connected to c .  
Given the same v­
configuration, an immorality is defined when the two 
edges are directed so that both point toward the central b 
vertex. 
Verma & Pearl ( 1990, 1992) showed that two 
ADGs are Markov-equivalent if and only if they have the 
same skeleton and same immoral configurations. 
Using 
this characterization, several researchers have developed 
procedures for searching directly over the space of 
Markov equivalence classes (cf. Meek 1995, Chickering 
1996, Madigan et al 1996). 
It is of substantial interest, therefore, to determine the 
efficiency that can be gained in model specification and 
search by working directly with Markov equivalence 
classes of ADGs rather than with ADGs themselves. 
A 
fundamental question is simply enumerative: 
for n 
variates, what is the ratio r. of the number of Markov 
equivalence classes to the number of ADGs? If this ratio 
is small, especially if r. approaches 0 as n becomes very 
large, then substantial computational savings might be 
achieved. 
At this time, no formula is known for either the number of 
Markov equivalence classes or for their ratio r. to the 
number of ADGs. 
Robinson ( 1 971) found a recursive 
formula for the number of ADGs on n vertices; thus, 
given either of the two unknown quantities above the 
other can be computed. 
The enumerative question has 
been partially addressed by two independent researchers 
(Andersson, Madigan, & Perlman 1997; Volf & Studeny' 
1999). Both found the number of equivalence classes for 
n::;;S vertices via a combination of manual and computer 
methods. Neither study was able to make any predictions 
about the values for n:2:6. 
Steinsky (2000) found a 
recursive formula for the number of equivalence classes 
of size 1 only, and using a computer was able to calculate 
the ratio of the number of size 1 classes to total ADGs for 
n up to 200. The ratio appears to be approaching a limit, 
thus suggesting an asymptote of approximately 0.07325, 
and therefore a lower bound for r.. We report here the 
results of another attempt via computer to address this 
problem that computed the two quantities above for all 
n:::;Io. 
In what follows, we use the standard definitions for graph 
(always undirected) and digraph (directed graph), where 
no more than one edge is allowed between any two 
vertices and no edge is allowed to begin and end on the 
same vertex (no loops). The number of vertices (variates) 
will be symbolized as n. An acyclic digraph is a digraph 
where no directed path exists that leads from any vertex 
back to that same vertex. To orient a graph is to convert 
its undirected edges to directed ones. A labeled graph or 
digraph is one where each vertex is uniquely identified. 
An unlabeled graph or digraph is one where the 
identifiers have been removed. In general, there are more 
labeled graphs or digraphs than unlabeled ones, since 
removing the labels can make previously different graphs 
become indistinguishable. The degree of a vertex is the 
count of the number of edges connected to it. The terms 
skeleton, v-configuration, and immorality are as defined 
above. 
A complete bipartite graph is a graph whose set 
of vertices have been divided into two distinct subsets and 
where none of the vertices within each subset are 
connected to each other but every vertex in each subset is 
connected to every vertex in the other subset. A complete 
multipartite graph is defined similarly, but with the set of 
vertices possibly divided into more than two distinct 
subsets. 
2 
COMPUTER PROGRAM 
2.1 ALGORITHMS 
The goal of this investigation was to not only count the 
number of equivalence classes, but also to record their 
sizes. Thus the program needed to generate all ADGs and 
then sort them into their respective equivalence classes. 
According to the Verma & Pearl theorem (1990, 1992), 
no two ADGs in the same class can have different 
skeletons, therefore the work of the program could be 
performed on each skeleton separately. The first step then 
was to generate all of the labeled undirected graphs. 
But 
as these grow large in number very quickly, the program 
instead used unlabeled graphs. 
By multiplying the 
numeric results obtained for each unlabeled graph by the 
number of non-isomorphic ways the graph could be 
labeled, the program's effective speed was greatly 
increased. 
Methods for computing the number of unlabeled graphs 
have been found by Redfield (1927) and P6lya (1937). 
For graphs with 10 or fewer vertices, these numbers have 

UAI2001 
GILLISPIE & PERLMAN 
173 
been computed algebraically (Oberschelp 1967) and by 
computer (Stein & Stein 1967). 
The numerical results 
served as checks on the correctness of the program, but 
these methods only count the graphs and do not generate 
them. 
The unlabeled graphs were generated using an "orderly 
algorithm" as first described by Read (1978). An orderly 
algorithm generates a list of non-equivalent items in 
problems where isomorphic items must be eliminated, but 
does so without requiring comparison to the list of already 
generated items. This can greatly increase the speed of 
generating the list. 
The algorithm requires: 
(I) a 
canonical configuration for each item to be counted; (2) 
an ordering on the canonical configurations; and (3) an 
augmenting operation to create new items from a previous 
list in a generating sequence. In addition, three conditions 
on 
the 
augmenting 
operation, 
the 
canonical 
configurations, and the list order must be satisfied. The 
method used here generates a sequence of lists of graphs 
by number of edges (edge-augmentation), starting with 
zero edges (the single graph of n vertices). The coding of 
the graphs uses the upper-triangular portion of the 
adjacency matrix, appending the 011 binary bits listed by 
columns from 1 to n to form a binary integer. 
The 
canonical configuration is that which generates the largest 
integer, the list ordering is from largest to smallest, and 
the augmentation operation is to replace subsequent 1 s 
into the last sequence of Os in the coding (if one exists), 
starting with the largest 0. These methods together meet 
the necessary conditions for an orderly algorithm, 
according to the general problem theorem proved in Read 
( 1978). Parts of this scheme are not new (Read 1978; 
Colbourn & Read 1979), but this combination and the 
addition of the following rules greatly increase the speed 
of the canonical configuration testing and do not appear to 
have been described before. 
They follow easily by 
considering the adjacency matrix encoded as a binary 
number as just described and noting that otherwise a 
permutation of vertex labels would place more bits in 
higher columns of the adjacency matrix, or higher bits 
within the same column, generating a larger coding. 
1) The degree of the nth vertex must be maximal among 
the vertices. 
2) 
All zero-degree vertices must be in the lowest­
numbered columns. 
3) The (n-l)th vertex must have maximal degree among 
all of the vertices connected to the nth vertex; in cases of 
equality, it must have maximal degree when counting all 
other connected vertices. 
4) In a breadth-first listing of the vertex labels starting 
from the nth vertex, when a vertex is first encountered 
there should be no gap from highest to lowest in the 
current list of vertices. 
Each of these can be verified simply by scanning the cells 
of the adjacency matrix. 
In case of condition 4, this 
amounts to finding no 0 gaps in the vertical Jist of bits 
starting from the highest vertex and proceeding first 
vertically upward in vertex number and then successively 
horizontally to the left and vertically upward in vertex 
number. When none of these rules immediately eliminate 
a non-canonical configuration, the configuration must be 
tested explicitly by permutation of its vertices. But again, 
by hierarchically considering the vertices from highest to 
lowest in light of the above four rules, the number of 
permutations required for testing can be greatly reduced. 
To calculate the number of non-isomorphic labelli.ngs for 
each graph, the size of the automorphism group (as 
represented by labellings) for the graph was first 
determined. 
Representing relabellings of the graph as 
members of an algebraic permutation group, the 
automorphism group consists of the set of permutations 
which reproduce the original graph. 
This set of 
permutations was found by generating all possible 
permutations of labellings within all subsets of vertices 
having the same degree and then simply checking for 
duplicates according to the adjacency coding. Since this 
number generally involved only products of small 
factorials, the process proceeded quickly enough. Once 
the size of the automorphism group was known, the 
number of non-isomorphic labellings could then be 
computed using Lagrange's Theorem by dividing the 
automorphism group size into n!. 
This is because the 
automorphism group is a subgroup of the group of all 
permutations; since this larger group has size n! and since 
each coset of the automorphism group (a set of 
permutations producing the same result) is represented by 
a different graph labelling, the result is obtained. (See, 
for example, Hall (1976)). 
Since the distribution of graphs by edges is symmetric 
and the number of non-isomorphic labellings is identical 
for a graph and its complement, it was only necessary to 
generate the lower half of the set of unlabeled graphs by 
these methods and then produce the upper half by 
complementation. To facilitate the subsequent analysis, 
the generated graphs were saved in separate computer 
files according to both number of vertices and number of 
edges. 
In all, these three steps (graph generation, 
counting labellings, and complementation) together 
represented less than 2% of the total computer time 
required for the computations for the larger vertex sets. 
By the time the number of vertices has reached I 0, the 
percentage of directed graphs that are cyclic has climbed 
to 99.9%. 
Thus, generating all directed graphs and 
discarding the cyclic ones is impractical. An algorithm to 
directly generate all ADGs for a given graph has been 
published by Barbosa & Szwarcfiter (1999) and was used 
in the program. As each graph was initially read in for 
processing, a scan was performed to locate its v­
configurations. These represented possible positions for 
immoralities. Each possible position was encoded as a 
binary bit, which enabled the unique coding of every 
equivalence class on the skeleton due to the Verma & 
Pearl (1990, 1992) theorem. The maximum number of 
bits required was n (n-l)(n-2)16, representing the 
maximum possible number of choices of three different 
vertices, though the actual number encountered was 

174 
GILLISPIE & PERLMAN 
UA12001 
generally smaller. Then, as each ADG was generated, 
these positions only were checked for the existence of an 
immorality according to the current orientation of the 
edges and the equivalence class code was computed. 
This unique code was then used as a key into a red-black 
binary tree (e.g. Cormen, Leiserson, & Rivest 1990). [A 
red-black tree is a binary search tree that is kept balanced 
(thus ensuring O(log N) Search and Insert operations) by 
use of an additional color bit (red or black) at each node 
and certain rules maintained by operations in the Insert 
procedure.] 
A new node was created whenever a new 
code appeared and its class size count was incremented 
whenever a repeat appearance of the same code occurred. 
This made possible the acquisition of total number of 
ADGs, total number of classes and their distributions 
according to class size, as well as the maximum number 
of v-configurations and classes produced per skeleton. 
These were all recorded when the program ended. By 
changing the input set of skeletons given to the program, 
analyses could be done separately according to both 
number of vertices and number of edges. 
The total 
computer time required, using a mid-1990s-era, midrange 
minicomputer was nearly 2253 CPU hours for n=10, 
almost 7 hours for n=9, and less than 3 minutes for n=8; 
smaller vertices required only seconds or less of CPU 
time. 
2.2 VALIDATION 
The program was implemented in stages, beginning with 
a very simplistic but slow algorithm that replicated the 
known results previously obtained by other researchers 
(Andersson, Madigan, & Perlman 1997; Volf & Studeny' 
1999). 
Parts of the program were then progressively 
replaced with more sophisticated algorithms, but each 
time only replacing just enough to make the program run 
fast enough to achieve the next greater number of 
vertices, while still matching the previously found results. 
This 'bootstrapping' method helped provide assurance 
that the program was always working correctly, and als,o 
means that many of the smaller numbers were computed 
using multiple different algorithms. 
(The description 
above is of the final algorithm.) 
At each step of the 
program, obtained results were compared with previously 
known results. These included the number of unlabeled 
graphs (in total and by number of edges), the total number 
of labeled graphs by edges (multiplying by the number of 
computed labellings), the number of ADGs (in total and 
by number of edges), and the total number of equivalence 
classes of size I. 
3 
RESULTS 
The first result is simply the total number of equivalence 
classes by number of vertices. Table 1 shows these totals, 
along with the ratios of the numbers of classes to ADGs 
and the ratios of the counts of size 1 classes to the total 
class counts. 
n 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Table I: Equivalence Class Counts 
Equivalence classes 
1 
2 
11 
185 
8782 
1067825 
312510571 
212133402500 
326266056291213 
1118902054495975141 
CLIADG 
1.00000 
0.66667 
0.44000 
0.34070 
0.29992 
0.28238 
0.27443 
0.27068 
0.26888 
0.26799 
Cl/Cl 
1.00000 
0.50000 
0.36364 
0.31892 
0.29788 
0.28667 
0.28068 
0.27754 
0.27590 
0.27507 
Figure 1 shows the classes/ ADGs ratios plotted against 
the number of vertices. A crude fit of this curve shows 
that it can be closely approximated by an exponential 
curve with an asymptotic value of around 0.27. This can 
be compared with Steinsky's suggested asymptotic ratio 
of the size 1 equivalence classes to total ADGs of about 
0.07325: if the size 1 classes comprise 7% of the total 
ADGs then all of the classes together being 27% of the 
ADG totals is not unreasonable. 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
.9 
0.6 
... 
 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Vertices 
Figure 1: Ratios of Classes to ADGs by Vertices 
A closer examination of the curve in Figure 1 shows that 
it is not exactly exponential. If it were, the curve could be 
modeled by the equation ali' + r, with s a constant. 
Letting r. be the ratio on n vertices of equivalence classes 
to ADGs, this produces the recursive formula r.+I 
= r. -
(r •. 1 
- r.)ls. However, the numbers in Table 1 show that s 
is not constant and itself is approximately exponentially 
approaching an asymptotic value of 2. Even though the 
following coefficients have been selected partly for their 
simplicity, s can nevertheless be predicted reasonably 
well by the equation s. = 2 + 20/3 exp( -n/2). Using this 
formula for s. and the recursive formula above for r.+I> 
initialized with r9 and r10, the value of r. can be computed 
for any desired n and suggests that r. may be approaching 

-; 
UAI 2001 
GILLISPIE & PERLMAN 
175 
an asymptotic value of about 0.26714. 
But due to the 
uncertainty in selecting the model constants, only the first 
three significant digits are probably accurate, producing a 
conservative estimate of 0.267. 
In any event, while no 
theoretical proof yet exists that any of these numbers do 
actually approach asymptotic limits, these results suggest 
that the ratio of numbers of equivalence classes to ADGs 
does not approach zero as n approaches infinity but, 
instead, the two quantities scale identically as n becomes 
large. 
The numbers also suggest an asymptotic value of around 
0.274 for the ratio of counts of size I classes to total 
equivalence classes: a sizeable fraction. In other words, a 
significant percentage of equivalence classes have only a 
single member. 
d 
0 
'€ 
0 
p. 
0 
.... 
p., 
0.14 
0.12 
0.10 
0.08 
0.06 
0.04 
0.02 
0.00 
0 
5 
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
Edges 
Figure 2: Equivalence Classes by Edges (n=IO) 
As it was possible for the program to count the 
equivalence classes separately by number of edges, Figure 
2 shows the distribution of classes by edges for n=I 0. 
The shape matches a discretized Gaussian with a chi­
squared difference of 0.000162. 
As the distribution 
appears Gaussian-like, its mean should approach its 
median. Except for n=4, the median is predicted by the 
formula floor(n/2)*ceil(n/2) [where floor(x) is the largest 
integer less than or equal to x and ceil(x) is the smallest 
integer greater than or equal to x (its ceiling); they can 
also be thought of as rounding x down or up] 
or, 
equivalently, the maximum value of i(n-i) fori an integer. 
This suggests that not only can one predict the total 
number of equivalence classes for large n, but that it may 
also be possible to predict them by number of edges as 
well. 
30 .------------ 
25 
10 
5 
0ĤĥĦħĨĩĪ 
Class size 
Figure 3: Classes by Size (sizes 1-24; n=IO) 
The size of each equivalence class was also recorded by 
the program. 
Figure 3 shows a histogram of the 
percentage of classes detected sorted by class size, again 
for n=IO. (The figure shows class sizes up through size 
24; this size limit includes 99.08% of all of the n=IO 
classes, even though the maximum class size is n!, for the 
complete graph.) 
The distribution shows an interesting 
pattern, with the most common class having a single 
member, with sizes 2, 3, and 4 being the next most 
common, but then dropping off quickly. As the inverse of 
the 0.267 ratio is simply the mean of this distribution, or 
3.75, it is not surprising to see most of the distribution's 
weight appearing for the smallest class sizes. 
For n=IO, 
the total mean class size including all class sizes is 3. 731. 
Using just the first 24 classes shown in Figure 3, the mean 
is 3.344, showing that the classes in the long tail of the 
full distribution have only a small effect on the average 
class size. 
The pattern of the distribution shows that 
certain sizes appear more frequently than others. 
In 
particular, larger compound numbers occur more often 
than larger prime numbers. 
This is probably due to 
separate sets of undirected edges in the essential graph 
acting independently to produce class sizes that are 
products of the sizes of their independent components. 
The pattern shown in Figure 3 is not a fluke or simply 
noise: 
chi-squared differences between the 24-class 
distributions for n=l O  and those for n=9, 8, 7, and 6 are 
all less than 0.005. Thus, the distribution appears to have 
already closely approached an asymptotic limit. Though 
it is not apparent from the figure, the count of class size 
II is identically zero, but none of the others shown are. 
However, many other class sizes greater than 24 have no 
counts, so II is simply the first one where this appears 
(for n==IO). By considering the graph on n vertices using 
n-1 edges that connects the vertices together in a single 
chain, it can be seen that, when no immoralities occur, 
this graph will produce a class of size n. Thus every class 
size will eventually have some classes present in this 
distribution if n becomes large enough. 

176 
GILLISPIE & PERLMAN 
UA12001 
% 
Class size 
0 
Figure 4: Classes by Sizes and Edges (n=lO; sizes 1-24) 
Finally, Figure 4 shows a mesh plot of equivalence class 
percentages distributed according to both class size and 
number of edges for n=IO. The plot suggests that the two 
characteristics are acting independently; that is, that the 
distributions by edges are approximately Gaussian for any 
class size and the distribution of Figure 3 roughly occurs 
for any number of edges. 
Table 2: Maxima Per Skeleton 
n 
v-Configurations 
Classes 
1 
0 
1 
2 
0 
1 
3 
2 
4 
4 
6 
5 
9 
22 
6 
18 
104 
7 
30 
594 
8 
48 
3978 
9 
70 
30768 
10 
100 
257694 
The program also kept track of the maximum number of 
¥-configurations as well as the maximum number of 
classes produced by any single skeleton. Table 2 shows 
these values. It can be seen that the maximum number of 
v-configurations 
is 
indeed 
generally 
less 
than 
n(n-l)(n-2)16. In fact, the maximum occurs on the evenly 
divided complete bipartite graphs and thus can easily be 
calculated. 
After algebraic simplification, the result is 
(n-2)/2*floor(n/2)*ceil(n/2). 
The maximum number of 
classes 
occurs 
on 
a more 
complex 
(and 
as yet 
unpredicted) set of complete multipartite graphs. 
For 
n:<:>6, both maxima occur on the same complete bipartite 
graphs, but for n>6 the class maxima occur on graphs 
having more than two partitions of the vertices. While the 
maximum number of classes also remains unpredicted, it 
generally appears to be bounded above by (n-1)!. 
4 
IMPLICATIONS AND FUTURE 
DIRECTIONS 
Clearly, with an average equivalence class size less than 
four, large computational advantages seem unlikely to be 
achieved by working directly with Markov equivalence 
classes. On the other hand, since the average class size is 
so small, it may be reasonable for algorithms to consider 
examining all of the members of a class during a model 
search. 
The distribution of classes by size may also 
indicate directions for future algorithms, since the vast 
majority of the class sizes are less than or equal to 24, and 
even smaller size limits may be of use. 
Finally, the 
Gaussian distribution of classes by edges may be of use in 
predicting future sampling efforts. 
We hope that our results will stimulate further theoretical 
investigations into these and other questions concerning 
the combinatorial properties of equivalence classes of 
ADGs and other types of graphical Markov models.
