GitGraph - Architecture Search Space Creation through
Frequent Computational Subgraph Mining
Kamil Bennani-Smires
Artificial intelligence and machine learning group,
Swisscom

Claudiu Musat
Artificial intelligence and machine learning group,
Swisscom

Andreea Hossmann
Artificial intelligence and machine learning group,
Swisscom

Michael Baeriswyl
Artificial intelligence and machine learning group,
Swisscom

ABSTRACT
The dramatic success of deep neural networks across multiple ap-
plication areas often relies on experts painstakingly designing a
network architecture specific to each task. To simplify this process
and make it more accessible, an emerging research effort seeks
to automate the design of neural network architectures, using e.g.
evolutionary algorithms or reinforcement learning or simple search
in a constrained space of neural modules.
Considering the typical size of the search space (e.g. ~1010 can-
didates for a 10-layer network) and the cost of evaluating a single
candidate, current architecture search methods are very restricted.
They either rely on static pre-built modules to be recombined for
the task at hand, or they define a static hand-crafted framework
within which they can generate new architectures from the simplest
possible operations.
In this paper, we relax these restrictions, by capitalizing on the
collective wisdom contained in the plethora of neural networks
published in online code repositories. Concretely, we (a) extract
and publish GitGraph, a corpus of neural architectures and their
descriptions; (b) we create problem-specific neural architecture
search spaces, implemented as a textual search mechanism over
GitGraph; (c) we propose a method of identifying unique com-
mon subgraphs within the architectures solving each problem (e.g.,
image processing, reinforcement learning), that can then serve as
modules in the newly created problem specific neural search space.
KEYWORDS
Architecture search, neuroevolution, corpus creation
1
INTRODUCTION
The work of a deep learning practitioner is more repetitive than we
care to admit. A lot of the automation drive has focused on reducing
the amount of repetitive work office workers do. Typically, however,
this has not included AI researchers or data scientists. We automate
the repetitive work of the customer support agent [4] who gives the
same advice to hundreds of customers in need of a password reset.
In a similar fashion, we should help the deep learning practitioner
to avoid designing the same type of neural architecture every time
they need to turn one type of sequence into another. While this is
now a laborious manual process, attempts to automatically build
new architectures from basic components are increasingly gaining
traction.
Current automated neural architecture creation strategies rely on
extensive expert knowledge and heavy handed supervision. They
either use predefined modules [7] and the novelty lies in the re-
combination or they create new modules but within a very tightly
controled structure [14, 18]. The reason for this heavy-handed su-
pervision is that each step taken towards a better architecture is
costly. This constraint is independent of the search method used.
Whether it’s employing reinforcement learning [2, 18] or evolu-
tionary algorithms [14], for each change the system must evaluate
candidates and each evaluation means training a full network on a
usually complex task. The smaller the changes, the more candidates
need to be evaluated. The space of possible options is too large to
allow searching or evolving a full architecture from basic building
blocks like matrix additions or multiplications. Shortcuts are thus
necessary.
Neural evolution can be seen as a combination of two problems
- defining a neural module search space and creating a policy to
create that space. The question of finding the right policy has re-
ceived almost all the community’s attention [7, 14, 18], with the
search space receiving almost none. A notable exception is a recent
work on [10] that explicitly states that different domains require
different operators, that are subsequently combined to form neural
architectures.
We propose constructing the search space by using the known
architectures for similar tasks. Expert supervision can guide the
search and lower the network creation cost. In our view, however,
this supervision need not be a laborious task linked to the task at
hand. Instead, it can come from repositories of computation graphs
that have been published for the tasks similar to this one before.
This removes the need for handcrafted constraints built into the
evolution task itself. It also leverages a previously unused resource
- the network structures published by previous researchers.
As shown in figure 1, we split the task of search space definition
into three parts:
• Search for architectures that solve similar problems. This
step yields a collection of graphs.
• Common Subgraph Mining. Extract the neural modules and
combinations of modules that are common between the
found architectures. As shown in the corresponding task
arXiv:1801.05159v1  [cs.LG]  16 Jan 2018

Figure 1: Automated Architecture Search Space Definition
in Figure 1, we can directly mine combinations like convolu-
tion + Max pool + affine.
• Defining the Search Space by specifying which modules
are large, frequent and unique enough to be useful. These
subgraphs then become a toolbox of task-oriented modules.
The resulting task specific neural module toolbox becomes the
starting point to evolve new architectures.
A great example, present in B, regards the common task of treat-
ing images inputs. We found that there is a subgraph (also shown
in Figure 8b) that appears at least once in 30% or more of the dis-
tinct computational graphs for image-related tasks. This subgraph
is actually a combination of known modules. It is a convolution
operation followed by a Relu activation and Maxpooling, the result
is reshaped and eventually an affine transformation is performed
(weight multiplication and bias addition). This chain of operations
is "typical" when dealing with images.
The advantage of finding the computational graphs and the
common components for a task is twofold. Graphs that resemble
many others for the same task have a high likelihood of being a
good starting point in searching for a new architecture. In addition,
common components can be transformed into modules that can be
used as changes when searching for an architecture. We thus go
into a supervised learning approach, where we use the knowledge
of humans who manually devised the architectures previously to
create new ones.
In this paper we introduce GitGraph 1 - a dataset of TensorFlow
[1] computational graphs, alongside with the description of tasks
they are useful for. In addition to publishing the dataset, we make
three contributions:
• We show that GitGraph can be used to search for a problem
and define the neural search space. We show that there are
1https://www.mycloud.ch/s/S00E8129370EFE75830040072AD8203611E4F9971E1
enough distinct computational graphs for common problems
to make connections between them and extract common
components.
• We propose a method to identify frequent neural subgraphs.
• We show that by using common subgraphs as modules, we
can reduce the complexity of the resulting architectures by
up to 70%.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Architecture Search
A standard way of searching for a neural architecture is to build
one from nothing.[18] use reinforcement learning build convolu-
tion stacks for image-related problems and recurrent networks for
text-related ones. In [18] , they encoded the architecture of a neural
network as a string and used an RNN (the controller) to sample
architectures. This RNN is trained using REINFORCE [15] in order
to maximize the expected reward (accuracy on validation dataset)
of the architectures generated. Their method was applied in order
to generate a CNN architecture and a reccurent cell by creating by
hand one appropriate search space for each task. A known prob-
lem is the cost of the search, determined mostly by the number of
candidates that need to be evaluated. [18] limit the number of pos-
sibilities by imposing a rigid structure (e.g. a stack of convolutions).
In addition, they do not fully train the candidate networks. With
these constraints, they showed that state of the art results could
be obtained with learnt networks, but with a computational cost
10.000 times higher than training a single network.
MetaQNN [2] also generates CNN architectures based on rein-
forcement learning. The layer selection process is modeled as a
Markov Decision Process MDP , where each is state is defined as
tuple of relevant layer parameters such as the type of the layer
(Convolution , Pooling , Fully connected, Global Average Pooling,
2

SoftMax) associated with some parameters dependant on the type
(e.g. number of neurons in a fully connected layer, stride for con-
volution), the optimal architecture is found using Q-learning with
an epsilon-greedy strategy. Finally they sampled from the optimal
policy which is not deterministic (stopping at epsilon=0.1) 5 models
and ensemble them to make the predictions. [2] rely on the search
space when doing comparison with other networks : better perfor-
mance on networks that used only the same components as they
have in their search space.
[14], following in the footsteps of [9], replace reinforcement
learning with evolution strategies. The latter are shown to be a
viable alternative to gradient descent in neural architecture cre-
ation. Neuroevolution passes from learning weights of a predefined
architecture to learning the links between modules and the weights
attached to them jointly. However, it still relies on the existence of
modules that can be joined. The reinforcement or genetic evolution
of architectures have the advantage of coverage - if there is an ar-
chitecture that is superior for a task but unbeknown to the research
community at this point, there is hope that it will be found.
A distinct advantage of evolving using borrowed modules is their
improbable nature. As shown by NEAT [13], there is a tendency
for new architectures to go extinct from an evolving population
before they could realize their potential. We believe this effect can
be countered by adding whole blocks to the net, instead of their
individual components. In addition, neuroevolution has moved from
direct to indirect gene encodings, because of the growing size of
the networks. As shown in [12], the number of genes can be much
lower than the number of connections and neurons in the brain.
A compositional pattern producing network (CPPN) compresses
a pattern with regularities and symmetries into a relatively small
set of genes. By constructing a toolbox of task-oriented neural
modules, we also dissociate the number of mutations needed from
the number of actual connections in the resulting ANN.
Instead of building networks from basic building blocks like
additions and multiplications, the Neural Architect [7] searches a
space large, prebuilt modules to achieve the same outcome. The
downside of this approach is that the toolbox is universal, with
the same Relu, conv or affine layers used irrespective of the task.
The addition of a module that is useful to the task at hand can
only be done manually. Moreover, a data scientist or researcher’s
knowledge is needed to define which modules are useful and how
they can be combined. The Neural Architect is much faster than
the methods above, because of trying a small number of candidates
to get to a competitive final result.
A work that prioritizes the search space over the search policy
is the recently introduced search [10] based on domain specific
languages. Like the Neural Architect, Salesforce [10] introduced a
novel way of searching for neural architectures relying on human
supervision. The main improvement of their approach is the cre-
ation of a domain specific language (DSL). This contrasts strongly to
the standard toolbox that the Neural Architect uses and allows the
creation of architectures with modules that are especially created
for that task. They study the case of recurrent nets and show that a
very simple domain specific search space leads to good architectures.
For instance, when defining a DSL for recurrent networks, it will
contain 4 unary operators, 2 binary operators, and a single ternary
operator. This very specific choice is given by the researchers’ prior
knowledge of the structure of GRUs [3] and LSTMs [5]. The in-
tuition is that, once the search space is created, finding the right
search policy is feasible - the right quantity and combination of the
modules can be found with ease. We thus focus on the creation of
the initial search space, with the goal of automating this initial step
that is, for now, a human prerogative.
2.2
Frequent Subgraph Mining
To find the frequent neural modules for a chosen problem, we
employ methods typically used for subgraph mining. Given a graph
dataset D = G0,G1, fi.Gn, support(д) denotes the number of graphs
in D in which g is a subgraph. The problem of frequent subgraph
mining is to find any subgraph д s.t. support(д) >= minSup.
A well-known method is graph based Substructure pattern min-
ing, gSpan [16]. It finds all the frequent subgraphs without candi-
date generation and false positive pruning. Relying on Depth-First
search , it introduces two novel techniques DFS lexical order and
minimum DFS Code which makes the frequent subgraph mining
task solved efficiently.
Compared to gSpan [16], CloseGraph [17] aims to mine closed
frequent subgraphs. A graph g is closed in a database if there exists
no proper super graph of g that has the same support as g. Mining
closed subgraph helps to get rid off redudant subgraphs. The search
space is pruned by introducing two novel concepts: equivalent
occurence and early termination on top of gSpanś concepts. This
method is also highly effective it has been shown by the authors
that it outperforms gSpan [16] by a factor of 4 to 10 when the
frequent subgraphs are large.
2.3
Code Corpora
We apply the subgraph mining methods on a corpus of computa-
tional graphs published on GitHub 2 - GitGraph. While this is the
first corpus of its kind, GitGraph is conceptually similar to existing
code corpora from two points of view. Firstly - just like code cor-
pora, we are scraping a corpus from a publicly available resource
and thus we have to verify its properties like the amount of dupli-
cate contents. Secondly, the graphs themselves are derived from
Tensorflow code and thus, if a generic compiler becomes available,
a computational graph corpus could be obtained from the original
Tensorflow code. This would reduce the graph corpus building to a
code corpus building problem.
We have a keen interest in spotting duplicated graphs, as this may
affect the statistics extracted about the frequency of subgraphs. In
[11] they show that a large amount of code is duplicated on several
projects coming from the same open-source software eco-system.
The importance of this phenoma yield to different techniques that
had been developed to detect code duplication, These methods can
be token-based such as [8] or rely on abstract syntax trees [6] or
hash-based [11].
3
THE GITGRAPH CORPUS
3.1
Corpus Creation
The first contribution of this paper is the creation of a searchable
database of computational graphs along with a description of the
2www.github.com
3

100
101
102
103
104
105
number of nodes
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
image
text
reinforcement
(a) With duplicated graphs
100
101
102
103
104
105
number of nodes
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
image
text
reinforcement
(b) Without duplicated graphs
Figure 2: Distribution of nodes in the graphs per task
problem they solve. We checked out Github repositories of neural
networks written in Tensorflow 3. An observation led to a quick
progress in the corpus creation - creating automated compiling
routines is not necessary in a first instance. We can instead obtain
the computational graphs from the checkpoints .ckpt f iles that the
authors did not include in their .gitignore . We then stored the
graphs, alongside with the descriptions in the readme files and the
github descriptions in a non relational database, in this case Mon-
goDB. We use the search functionality of the database to retrieve
the graphs that are linked to specific problems or techniques, like
reinforcement learning. In its current version, GitGraph contains
6863 graphs in total, coming from 1449 repositories, for an average
of 4.73 graphs per repository.
A node in Tensorflow graph contains the operation performed,
from a set of standard operation such as addition, matrix multipli-
cation or convolution. It may also contain additional information
depending on the type of operation such as certain hyperparame-
ters values. The contents of the Tensorflow checkpoints cannot are
not compatible with the graph libraries used afterwards [16, 17].
A preprocessing phase is needed, where the graph definitions are
extracted from these files and cleaned. We convert the checkpoint
contents to Graph-tool 4 graphs. Graph-tool is a python library for
graph manpilation where the core algorithms and data structures
are written in C++ for fast computations.
The distribution of nodes is shown by the black "all" curve in
Figure 2 a. We can observe that most architectures contain between
102 and 103 nodes, with the smallest 20% having less than 102 and
the largest 20% more than 103 nodes.
3.1.1
Deduplication and Limitations. Many of the graphs are du-
plicates, due to multiple checkpoints for the same model and forked
repositories. To counter the effect that these duplicated graphs will
have on the subsequent analysis, we perform a deduplication step.
We only remove exact graph duplicates. To assess equality between
3www.tensorflow.org
4https://graph-tool.skewed.de
two nodes, we only factor in the type of operation, not any possible
additional information like hyperparameter values.
A fully duplicated architecture distorts the results when min-
ing frequent subgraphs. From a different point of view, it can be
interesting, since we believe people will tend to duplicate good
architectures. We do not explore this in the current work. Even
after the deduplication phase, it is still possible for two distinct
graphs to the same behavior. For example, stacking two times an
Affine Layer matrixmultiplication + additionof bias, without an
activation will result in the same behavior as only one affine layer.
We do not include this type of duplication in the analysis.
The deduplication leads to a subset of 2033 unique graphs from
the original 6863. We see the result of the deduplication in figure
2 b. Since the number of nodes varies wildly, we opt for a com-
plementary cumulative distribution function (CCDF) curve. The
values on the curves show the proportions of the graphs for which
the number of nodes exceeds a given threshold, represented by the
value on the X axis. We can observe from the difference between
Figures 2 a and b that, for the black curve, corresponding to all
the graphs, the shape of the CCDF curves stays almost unchanged
when the graphs are deduplicated.
3.2
Subgraph Mining Scope Definition
Defining the scope of the problem. If, for instance, someone is
interested in machine translation for Swiss German, we may not
find any prior researchers who tackled that specific problem. A rea-
sonable assumption is that neural architectures made for machine
translation or, in the best case for machine translation German are
similar to the given task.
To attract the interest of a varied audience, we focus on three
tasks, from three different domains of machine learning: image
processing, text processing and reinforcement learning. GitGraph
contains:
• For image : 139 graphs with duplicates , 80 without.
• For text : 77 graphs with duplicates, 29 without.
• For reinforcement : 283 with duplicates, 88 without.
4

We visualize the distribution of nodes in graphs linked to the
three chosen tasks before and after the deduplication step in figure
2 a. and b. The most important observation that can be drawn from
figure 2 a and b is that the shapes are remarkably similar. Removing
the duplicates had no major impact on the node distribution of the
graphs.
Unsurprisingly, the largest graphs are the ones that deal with
image processing. Text processing comes second, with the smallest
number of nodes being found in reinforcement learning tasks. An
important element that is visible 2 b. in the text task is that there
are graphs with 0 nodes. This is more visible after the deduplication
because they represent a higher proportion of the total number of
graphs.
We observe an interesting behaviour - for image oriented archi-
tectures, after deduplication we have a higher proportion of large
(more than 103 nodes). This shows that for every day tasks the
large architectures like Resnet may prove too much and researchers
favor smaller ones.
3.3
Graph Cleaning
After defining the datasets of unique graphs for each task, we
perform a sequence of preprocessing steps in order to focus only on
the core neural architecture. We remove the auxiliary discernible
components in order to make the graph lighter in terms of nodes.
We remove nodes that are not useful for the solving the central
problem, but are instead used for connected tasks. We thus:
• remove all nodes created by the optimizer including all the
subsequent gradient computation nodes.
• remove all nodes concerning saving/restoring variables as
well as summarization (visualisation on the tensorboard).
• remove the nodes used to initialize a variable
• reduce multiple nodes pertaining to a variables definition
to a single one. We remove assign and identity nodes, and
forward the edges directly to the variable node.
By doing so, we ensure that the subgraphs that are common to the
graphs resulting from the reduction phase are useful in computing
the core elements of the task. In the absence of reduction, a common
problem is that the common subgraphs are actually outside the
core. Instead of finding elements that can be then recombined into
a better atchitecture for the same task, we would mix core with
non-core modules, making the automated learning process slower
and more cumbersome instead of more streamlined.
4
FREQUENT SUBGRAPHS
The second contribution of this work is a method of mining reusable
neural modules. We focus on subgraphs that are repeated in the
published graphs in GitGraph. We define a common subgraph, for
a certain task, as one that appears in the graphs made for that task
more than a given threshold. As in the deduplication phase, we only
employ the type of operation within the node when computing the
node equalities.
We define a subgraph that is common at τ% for task T as one that
appears in a minimum of τ% of the graphs for task T. The higher
the maximum threshold of a subgraph, the more likely it is that
subgraph is actually relevant for the given task.
In Figure 3a we portray the number of distinct frequent sub-
graphs, for each support τ and each example task. For low τ values
the number of frequent subgraphs is very high and uninformative.
We thus plot the subgraph count for τ values above 30%. While for
image and text processing we notice the expected steady decrease
in the number of common subgraphs with the increase of τ, for re-
inforcement we notice that there are exactly 25 common subgraphs
for any τ below 70%. This high similarity between various distinct
reinforcement architectures is explained by multiple forking of the
same repository.
4.1
Subgraph Mining and Matching
The biggest common subgraphs are more informative than smaller
ones contained within them. The main goal of GitGraph is to find
neural components that reduce the complexity of the space when
creating neural evolution or search policies. We thus eliminate the
small common subgraphs that are contained within bigger ones
that are still common given the same value of τ.
CloseGraph is a GSpan [16] option that ensures that the sub-
graphs we mine are distinct and not mere variations of the same
one. The functioning of CloseGraph is the following. Let A-B-C
be the notation corresponding to a subgraph where node A is con-
nected to node B and node B is connected to node C. If, within
a set of graphs, the subgraph A-B-C is present kABC times and
graph A-B-C-D is present kABCD times, with kABC = kABCD, then
A-B-C is always present only in A-B-C-D. If a subgraph is only
present inside a bigger subgraph, then only the biggest subgraph
is returned. If kABC > kABCD, then A-B-C is also present outside
of A-B-C-D kABC−ABCD times. If kABC−ABCD > τ then we also
consider A-B-C a subgraph on its own. In order to this, once we
have all the frequent subgraph fetched by gSpan, we counted in how
many graphs they appear (unique count) without considering them
if they appear in a bigger subgraph returned by gSpan. The unique
count kABC −ksupersetABC is then compared to the threshold to
determine if the subgraph should be included in the returned set.
In figure 3b we portray the number of distinct frequent subgraph
after the subgraph reduction step for each support τ ranging from
30 to 100%. For image and text processing, the figure shows an
expected decrease in the number of subgraphs - from 123 to 38 for
images and from 46 to 18 for text.
In the special case of reinforcement - with τ = 30% we obtain 23
frequent subgraphs but only 1 remains after the subgraph reduction
- that is reused in almost all of the others. A counterintuitive aspect
that occurs at τ = 70% is that the number of subgraphs increases
from 1 to 5. This means that the only common subgraph for τ <=
60% actually occurs in less than τ = 70% of all the reinforcement
graphs. However, 5 parts of it are common forτ = 70% of the graphs,
which explains the unexpected jump in the number of common
subgraphs, with the increase of τ. These observations are thus
indicative of a low level of architectural changes in reinforcement-
oriented graphs.
4.2
Subgraph Size
The frequent subgraphs are meaningful, large chains, containing
tens of nodes. If they are replaced with single nodes, they can lead
5

30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
support (%)
0
25
50
75
100
125
number of subgraphs
image
text
reinforcement
(a) Before reduction
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
support (%)
0
10
20
30
40
number of subgraphs
image
text
reinforcement
(b) After reduction
Figure 3: Number of distinct frequent subgraphs given support
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
number of nodes
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
image
text
reinforcement
(a) Before reduction
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
number of nodes
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
image
text
reinforcement
(b) After reduction
Figure 4: Size of frequent subgraphs (in no of nodes) (min support = 30%)
to a significant reduction of the complexity of the network. We thus
do not show common subgraphs smaller than 3 nodes.
In figure 4a and 4b we show the number of nodes in the frequent
subgraphs, before and after the subgraph reduction respectively.
Each CCDF curve shows the percentage of distinct frequent sub-
graphs mined for this task with the size exceeding the threshold
on the abscissa.
The differences between the pairs of CCDF curves portray the
effect of the subgraph reduction. From the reinforcement curve in
Figure 4b we notice that the size of the common reinforcement sub-
graph discussed in the previous section is 30 nodes. This subgraph
is shown in Figure 10a. Without the reduction phase, this subgraph
would not have stood out so evidently.
For image and text analyses, roughly half of the frequent sub-
graphs have a size of between 3 and 5 nodes. The other half is
between 5 to 15 for image and 5 to 30 for text. We are primarily
interested in the larger graphs, since a simple operation in Tensor-
flow can spawn multiple nodes. For example, adding two constants
create 3 nodes: one node for each constant + one node for the addi-
tion operator. For text, we notice that roughly 20% of the reduced
common subgraphs are actually very long - having more than 25
nodes. A manual analysis of these nodes shows that they corre-
spond to commonly used recurrent units, like the LSTM in Figure
9a.
4.3
Graph Compositionality and Complexity
Reduction
We show that the subgraphs mined with the methods presented in
section 4.1 appear a large number of times in the original graphs.
This insight is proven by the large complexity reduction possible
through subgraph mining. This is an important element in building
a small yet effective architecture search space.
6

102
103
104
total count
293318192528110242037122713216163073215352617362223031411349831542
subgraph id
100
101
102
103
104
count per graph
(a) Image
101
102
103
104
total count
15
0
12
11
5
1
10
9
2
14
7
4
3
17
6
16
13
8
subgraph id
100
101
102
103
count per graph
(b) Text
Figure 5: Count presence (multiple time) for each frequent subgraphs after reduction
In Figure 5 we show the fine-grained picture of individual sub-
graphs. The low number of subgraphs in the considered problems,
after reduction, allows us to track each one individually. We opt
for this visualization technique to emphasize the large number of
occurrences some of these subgraphs have. The top figure indicates
for each subgraph how many time they appears in total, sum of
all the occurences of this frequent subgraphs. The bottom figure
shows for each subgraph the number of time it appears per graph.
As we can see some frequent subgraphs appears multiple times in
the same graphs with a high variability. Others, like subgraphs id
13 for image or 14 for text, appear the same number of time in each
graph.
Some examples are telling of the reusability potential of these
graphs as individualized modules. For the image-oriented task,
subgraph 12 containing 6 nodes has 28149 occurrences in total and
in the 26 distinct graphs in which this module appear the median
number of occurence per graph is 11. For text, the subraph 15 with
7 nodes has a total number of occurences of 9183 and in the 9
distinct graphs in which this graph occurs the median number of
occurence per graph is 756 . For reinforcement learning, there is a
single subgraph. It appears exactly once in each of the 59 dinstict
graphs it occurs in. However its size is so great (30 nodes) that it
actually eclipses the changes that each graph adds to this common
component. This naturally leads to the question of what gains are
achievable if the subgraphs are treated as individual nodes. We
address this in the following section.
Many subgraphs have occurrence outliers in Figure 5. These por-
tray the importance of using the found subgraphs as modules in the
architecture evolution or search. If the cost of reusing the subgraph
is low, it can be done a high number of times, thus mimicking the
human creators of existing architectures.
Alternatively, from the lack of variability in other subgraph oc-
currences, we discern the idea of layer and we get architectural
insights. For instance, if a subgraph is a convolution, we can deter-
mine, from its occurrence count, the usual number of convolutions
needed to solve the problem. We only show plots for image and
text, as for reinforcement there is a single subgraph, discussed pre-
viously and shown in 10a, that appears exactly once in each of the
59 dinstict graphs it occurs in.
4.3.1
Complexity Reduction. We inquire whether turning the
found subgraphs into individual nodes helps in reducing the com-
plexity of the neural search space. Currently, the GitGraph repos-
itory does not yet allow the creation of architectures using the
frequent submodules as building blocks, which we leave for future
7

image
text
reinforcement
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Figure 6: Distribution of node reduction on the whole data
work. We thus investigate the possible gains through a proxy - the
ratio of the number of nodes that are in frequent subgraphs, with
respect to the number of nodes found outside them. We use the
term complexity reduction to capture the ratio.
To reduce a graph, we replace each of its frequent subgraphs by
one node. We then compute the difference between the original
graph node count and that of the reduced graph. Finally, we normal-
ize by the original count to obtain a ratio of nodes that belong to
the frequent components. Figure 6 plots the complexity reduction
for the three studied tasks. The median reduction for the three tasks
ranges from 20 to 30%, with the highest value being recorded for
text.
This approach also allows us to identify the graphs where the
reduction is 0% or close to it. In some cases, these can contain
new concepts. In others, this can be a filter to identify mistakes -
for instance empty graphs or ones that have been included in the
analyses because of a failure of the TF-IDF based search method.
4.4
Generalization Capacity
A relevant critique of the analysis in the section above is that it is
descriptive and does not show the capacity of the subgraphs found
to generalize. The fact that a subgraph is found in 20% or more
of the data in one dataset does not, in itself, guarantee that for a
different set of graphs created for the same purpose will share these
subgraphs.
We thus create a new batch of tests to test the hypothesis that the
subgraphs found are general and lined to the task itself. For each
task, we create five different experiments in which we randomly
split the data into a ¨training¨set and a ¨test¨set, with the goal of seeing
whether the subgraphs mined from the graphs within the training
set will occur in the graphs within the test set. In each experiment,
we held 80% of the graphs as training and the remaining 20% for
testing. We performed the frequent subgraph mining, followed
by the addtional reduction only on the training dataset and we
computed the node reduction using these subgraphs on the test
dataset. We report the results for each experiment individually
in Figure 7. The median and variance change very little from the
previous experiment. This result upholds the one in the previous
section and shows the complexity reduction is achievable on unseen
graphs, for the same task.
5
CONCLUSION
We introduced GitGraph, the first corpus of neural computation
graphs. The first goal of GitGraph is to serve as a knowledge repos-
itory that allows for an automated search of neural architectures
that solve a specific problem. Using the search functionality, we
can obtain a set of distinct architectures for problems related to the
searched one. From the found architectures, in the form of compu-
tation graphs, we created a method of generating unique relevant
common subgraphs.
The main aim of finding problem-specific GitGraph common
subgraphs is to create a neural search space. Instead of searching or
using reinforcement or evolution strategies using the basic building
blocks, we reduce the complexity and cost of the subsequent neural
architecture creation policy by optimizing the search space itself.
We show that the GitGraph common subgraphs cover between
20 and 40% of the nodes in their source graphs. Given the ob-
tained complexity reduction, we believe they will be a basis for
large problem-specific modules in future automated neural creation
strategies.
