LunarNav: Crater-based Localization for Long-range
Autonomous Lunar Rover Navigation
Shreyansh Daftry, Zhanlin Chen, Yang Cheng, Scott Tepsuporn, Shehryar Khattak and Larry Matthies
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, USA
Pasadena, CA 91109

Brian Coltin, Ussama Naal, Lanssie Mingyue Ma and Matthew Deans
NASA Ames Research Center
Mountain View, CA 94043

Abstract—The Artemis program requires robotic and crewed
lunar rovers for resource prospecting and exploitation, con-
struction and maintenance of facilities, and human exploration.
These rovers must support navigation for 10s of kilometers
(km) from base camps. A lunar science rover mission concept
(“Endurance-A”) has been recommended by the new Decadal
Survey as the highest priority medium-class mission of the
Lunar Discovery and Exploration Program, and would be re-
quired to traverse approximately 2000 km in the South Pole-
Aitkin (SPA) Basin, with individual drives of several kilometers
between stops for downlink.
These rover mission scenarios
require functionality that provides onboard, autonomous, global
position knowledge (“absolute localization”). However, plane-
tary rovers have no onboard global localization capability to
date; they have only used relative localization, by integrating
combinations of wheel odometry, visual odometry, and inertial
measurements during each drive to track position relative to the
start of each drive.
At the end of each drive, a “ground-in-
the-loop” (GITL) interaction is used to get an absolute position
update from human operators in a more global reference frame.
As a result, autonomous rover drives are limited in distance
so that accumulated relative navigation error does not risk
the possibility of the rover driving into a “keep-out zone”; in
practice, drive limits of a few hundred meters are to be expected.
In this work, we summarize recent developments from the
LunarNav project, where we have developed algorithms and
software to enable lunar rovers to estimate their global position
and heading on the Moon with a goal performance of position
error less than 5 meters (m) and heading error less than 3◦,
3σ, in sunlit areas. This new capability will eliminate the need
for GITL interactions with human operators for lunar rover
global position estimation, which will substantially increase op-
erational productivity of lunar rovers and will reduce operations
costs. This will be achieved autonomously onboard by detecting
craters in the vicinity of the rover and matching them to a
database of known craters mapped from orbit.
The overall
technical framework consists of three main elements: 1) crater
detection, 2) crater matching, and 3) state estimation. In pre-
vious work, we developed crater detection algorithms for three
different sensing modalities. This paper builds on that work,
and focuses on the crater matching and state estimation aspects
of the problem. In particular, we developed two algorithms for
crater-based localization, and demonstrated them on datasets of
both real and simulated lunar data, in representative environ-
ments. Our results suggest that rover localization with an error
less than 5 m is highly probable during daytime operations.
978-1-6654-9032-0/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2. RELATED WORK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3. SYSTEM OVERVIEW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
4. REAL AND SIMULATED DATASETS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
5. TECHNICAL APPROACH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
7. DISCUSSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
BIOGRAPHY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1. INTRODUCTION
Long-range, autonomous lunar rover mobility is expected to
be part of human exploration and robotic science missions
to the Moon in the next decade and beyond.
Multiple
whitepapers and mission concept studies [1], [2], [3], [4],
[5] that addressed science that could be done with robotic
lunar rovers were submitted to the recent Planetary Science
and Astrobiology Decadal Survey (PSADS). The ﬁnal report
from PSADS [6] recommended a long-range lunar rover
mission concept called “Endurance-A” as the highest priority
medium-class mission for the Moon in the next decade. This
mission concept would traverse ∼2000 km in the South Pole
Aitken (SPA) basin to collect ∼100 kg of samples, which
would be returned to Earth by astronauts. NASA’s Artemis
program for returning astronauts to the Moon includes a con-
cept for a Lunar Terrain Vehicle (LTV) that would transport
astronauts over distances of up to 20 km without having to
stop to recharge batteries and would be capable of operation
remotely when astronauts are not present [7]. These rover
concepts would drive quickly compared to prior rovers: up
to 30 cm/s for robotic science rovers and probably much
faster for an LTV. They would also cover several kilometers
(km) per autonomous rover drive, compared to at most a few
hundred meters per drive for prior robotic science rovers.
All of these lunar rover mission concepts would require
knowledge of the rover’s position in a global reference frame.
Since they would operate far beyond line-of-sight from a
lander, they would need to obtain position knowledge inde-
pendently from the lander need to obtain position knowledge
from means other than navigation aiding from a lander. The
accuracy needed for rover global position knowledge is de-
batable, but on the order of 10 m is desirable for conﬁdence
1
arXiv:2301.01350v1  [cs.RO]  3 Jan 2023

that a rover will not stray into known hazards during long
periods of autonomous driving with no contact with human
operators.
Planetary rovers to date have all used onboard dead reckoning
for position estimation relative to the start of each day’s drive,
with global position updates obtained with the aid of humans
using rover images transmitted to Earth.
This would not
support these lunar rover mission concepts, because of un-
acceptably high requirements for communication with Earth
and for support from human operators on Earth.
Several
methods of onboard position estimation have been studied, as
reviewed in [8]: recognizing horizon landmarks, registering
local elevation maps created onboard with elevation maps
created from orbit, radio frequency navigation aiding from
one or more orbiters, and celestial navigation using measured
vectors to the Sun, the Earth, and the Moon’s core. These
methods have a variety of limitations, including position error
often on the order of 100 m or more, limited availability of
sufﬁciently high-resolution elevation maps from orbit, and
relatively long periods when orbiter(s) are not overhead to
provide RF navigation aiding.
An alternative approach is to use craters as landmarks, with
the rover automatically detecting craters in its vicinity and
matching them to known craters in a landmark database cre-
ated from orbital imagery. This approach has the advantage
that almost all sunlit areas of the Moon have been imaged
from orbit with enough resolution (∼0.5 m/pixel) to enable
mapping crater landmarks as small as 5 to 10 m in diam-
eter; moreover, the ShadowCam camera [9] on the Korean
Pathﬁnder Lunar Orbiter is expected to map permanently
shadowed regions with a resolution of ∼1.7 m/pixel, which
could enable mapping crater landmarks with diameters of
10 to 20 m. This approach to lunar rover localization was
introduced in [8], which described and evaluated algorithms
for detecting craters in the vicinity of a rover with point cloud
data from onboard lidar or stereo cameras, and/or with neural
net-based pattern recognition in monocular images.
Here,
we build on that work by presenting methods to match such
onboard crater detections to craters in the landmark database
and to update rover global position estimates with a sequence
of such detections as the rover moves. A related paper focuses
on crater-based localization in the dark and for permanently
shadowed regions [10]
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
discusses related work.
Section 3 describes LunarNav’s
overall crater-based localization system concept. Section 4
describes data sets of real and synthetic images obtained for
this work. Section 5 describes the technical approach and
two algorithms developed for the crater-based localization.
Results of quantitative performance evaluation for both algo-
rithms using multiple sensing modalities are shown in Section
6. These results show this approach to be very promising for
achieving the goal of rover localization on the lunar surface,
with an error less than 5m during daytime operations. Section
7 summarizes the results and outlines planned future work.
2. RELATED WORK
Methods for lunar rover localization were surveyed in [8];
here we give a brief recap of prior and an update on recent
related work. As noted in [8], applicable methods fall into
several classes:
• Registering onboard image or local map data to orbital
images or maps
• Using horizon features as landmarks
• Celestial measurements, potentially combined with other
measurements, such as accurate gravity vector measure-
ments
• Radiometric ranging from lunar orbit or Earth tracking
stations
Transferring rover images to Earth for human operators to
register them to orbital images has been the standard ap-
proach for Mars rover localization of Mars rovers [11]; this
can achieve accuracy on the scale of the resolution of the
orbital images, which is sub-meter scale for Mars and the
Moon. This is more difﬁcult to do when the sun angle varies
as much as it would in lunar rover missions, especially given
the high-contrast shadows on the Moon. This motivates using
craters as landmarks, because these can be detected reliability
independently of sun angle.
Algorithms to register local
elevation maps created onboard to elevation maps created
with orbital imagery are described in [12]. A limitation of
this approach for the Moon is that it requires high resolution
stereo imaging from orbit of the entire rover traverse, which
is not currently available.
The accuracy of localization methods based on horizon fea-
tures depends on the terrain relief, distance to the horizon
features, and resolution of the associated elevation map; in
favorable situations this can give errors < 50 m [13], but
this is not always available. Simulations of celestial navi-
gation methods show 1σ errors on the order of 100 m [14].
In principle, radio ranging between the rover and either a
lunar orbiter or Earth tracking stations can give meter-scale
position knowledge [15]; however, the orbiter infrastructure
needed for this is not in place and this would not provide
instant position updates or continuous service.
Automatic crater detection in orbital images has been done
to determine crater statistics for scientiﬁc purposes [16]
and to estimate the position of landers during descent to
highly craters asteroids [17]. Crater detection for lunar rover
localization was introduced in [8].
Using landmarks like
this for localization over long distances requires methods to
reliably correspond craters detected onboard with craters in
the landmark databased, despite errors in both onboard crater
detection and the orbital landmark map. The large literature
on “Simultaneous Localization and Mapping” (SLAM) is
applicable to this problem, and includes methods such as
particle ﬁlters and incremental batch optimization with crater
detection [18], [19].
These methods currently appear to
be the most promising approach to achieving lunar rover
global localization with the required accuracy and update
frequency.
3. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
System Concept
The LunarNav system concept requires creating a database
of crater landmarks from orbital images, as shown in Figure
1. This database would contain the position, diameter, and
estimated depth of each crater. Craters with diameters > 5
meters are mappable with LRO-NAC imagery, under most
orbital imaging conditions. Even in the youngest terrain on
the Moon, such craters occur with a frequency > 103 per
km2, or on average about 30 meters apart, and they occur
2

Hand drawn topography map of Apollo 11 site
Crater map from LROC NAC image over Apollo 11 site
Figure 1. Illustration of LunarNav’s overall system concept to recognize craters from surface images and match to the
crater map will help to localize rover globally
more frequently in older terrain [20], [21]. This would pro-
vide frequent landmarks that should be detectable at distances
of roughly 10 to 20 meters from the rover.
Robotic lunar rovers will carry a sensor suite for relative
localization and obstacle detection that includes wheel odom-
etry, an IMU, either stereo cameras or a lidar, and either a
sun sensor or a star camera for absolute heading measure-
ment. Assuming the availability of a star camera, which is
applicable for driving in sunlight and in shadow, gives 3-axis
attitude knowledge to a small fraction of a degree. With this,
the relative navigation sensor suite enables dead-reckoning
with position error that typically can be < 2% of distance
traveled. This provides a prior estimate of position that at all
times strongly constrains which crater(s) from the landmark
database are expected to be near the rover. Craters can then be
detected near the rover with a combination of 3D point cloud
data from stereo cameras or a lidar, image data from a camera,
or reﬂectance image data from a lidar. This enables detecting
craters with diameters roughly between 5 to 20 meters whose
near rims are roughly less than 20 meters from the rover.
Overall, these methods should enable reliable absolute local-
ization; given typical resolution characteristics of cameras,
stereo vision, and lidar, we estimate that it should be possible
to maintain a rover absolute position estimate with 3σ error <
5 meters at all times. Furthermore, in terms of computational
feasibility, crater-based localization is less expensive than
obstacle detection and needs to be done much less frequently
than obstacle detection, so any onboard computing system
that can do obstacle detection would also be able to do crater-
based localization.
Key Performance Parameters
Thorough performance evaluation of the LunarNav frame-
work was a function of many parameters, and depended
fundamentally on the ability to detect and localize individual
craters and to estimate their positions and diameters. This de-
pends on (1) crater size and distance from the rover, (2) rover
camera/lidar sensor parameters, including angular resolution,
range resolution, ﬁeld of view, and sensor height above the
ground, (3) lighting conditions, and (4) other characteristics
of terrain geometry, like slope. We distilled key performance
parameters (KPPs) in terms of the crater distribution, as
deﬁned in Table 1 and anticipated that craters with diameters
> 5 meters will be readily detectable from distances of at least
15 meters, in many but not necessarily all lighting conditions.
For example, detection probability (Pd) of 0.5 for 5 m craters
at 15 m range should be a conservative estimate.
With a
notional stereo camera system with angular resolution of 1
milliradian/pixel and binocular camera baseline of 30 cm, 3 σ
errors in estimating the position and diameter of such craters
should be < 2 m each.
Updates to rover position and heading will be obtained every
3

Table 1. Key Performance Parameters (KPP)
Performance Parameter 
Units 
State of the Art 
Threshold 
Value 
Project 
Goal 
KPP 1: Pd for 5 m craters at 15 m range to 
crater leading edge 
probability 
Nonexistent 
0.5 
0.7 
KPP 2: 3s error in estimated crater center 
position at 15 m range 
meters 
Nonexistent 
2 m 
1.5 m 
KPP 3: 3s error in estimated crater 
diameter at 15 m range 
meters 
Nonexistent 
2 m 
1.5 m 
KPP 4: Rover position estimation error, 3s 
meters 
2% of distance 
per 100 m 
10 m 
absolute 
5 m 
absolute 
KPP 5: Rover heading estimation error, 3s 
degrees 
5° 
5° 
3° 
time an onboard crater map is registered to the orbital map.
The precision of these rover position and heading estimates
will be a function of the precision of crater positions and
diameters in the onboard map, as well as detection and false
alarm probabilities (Pd and Pf) for onboard crater recogni-
tion. Quality of the onboard map will also depend on accu-
racy and precision of heading estimation and dead reckoning
between crater detections. Past experience suggests that dead
reckoned position error can be better than 2% of distance
traveled with visual odometry (2 m per 100 m) [22]. Rover
heading error should be bounded by about 5◦by a sun sensor,
< 1◦per 100 m using visual odometry, or < 0.01◦at all times
using a star camera. A star camera is the preferred heading
estimation solution for performance, but a sun sensor may
offer a lower cost solution with adequate performance for
predominantly sunlit scenarios. Combining this with errors in
crater center positions relative to the rover and crater position
errors of < 2 m in the orbital map should enable rover
position and heading estimation error to be conservatively
bounded by about 10 m and 5◦at all times.
Erroneous
crater detections (false alarms) will be ﬁltered out through a
combination of several techniques applied at different stages
of the estimation pipeline. Since the effect of false detections
is ultimately captured in rover position estimation error, a
separate key performance parameter is not speciﬁed for false
alarms. Performance modeling and evaluation throughout the
course of the project characterized how performance varies as
a function of these sensor parameters (See Section 6).
4. REAL AND SIMULATED DATASETS
We used both real and simulated sensor data to develop
and evaluate the performance of lunar rover navigation with
crater landmarks. Simulated data allowed testing with larger
data sets and over wider ranges of illumination conditions
than are practical with real data. For generating synthetic
lunar surface images, three different simulation tools were
initially considered: (1) RSIM - a simulator implemented in
the Gazebo environment at NASA Ames [23], (2) a lunar
surface simulation environment under development in JPL’s
DARTS lab to support the STMD/GCD “CADRE” task and
other applications [24], and (3) an open-source Blender based
computer graphics rendering engine [8]. RSIM had very low
sun elevation angles rendered into terrain maps for use in
simulating polar missions, and required changes to generalize
the functionality to arbitrary sun elevation angles was beyond
the scope of LunarNav timeline requirements. Similarly, the
DARTS-based simulator was not scheduled for completion in
the timeframe needed for LunarNav. Therefore, Blender was
used to create synthetic images. Synthetic lidar images were
generated similarly, by rendering 3D point clouds instead of
images; sun angle was considered irrelevant for lidar, so that
variable was ignored and we were able to use the higher
ﬁdelity RSIM. It is to be noted that both the Gazebo-based
and DARTS-based simulators have more general capability,
including simulating rover behavior, so this trade should be
re-evaluated for end-to-end simulation needs in future years.
Blender-based Lunar Scene Simulator
The Blender-based image scene simulation takes a lunar
digital elevation map (DEM), applies a custom texture map
to it, and creates a world model with a simulated sun as a
light source; within this model, a stereo camera pair is added
and the simulation generates locations for the cameras and
the sun. For each camera and sun location, Blender’s render
engine produces a synthetic image. This image is rendered
using a custom implementation of the Hapke radiometric
model [25], [26], [27] incorporated into the Blender’s path
tracing algorithm to simulate accurate lighting across the
surface.
The simulation has multiple parameters that can
be controlled, including sun position, camera extrinsic and
intrinsic parameters, image size, and a few others. Images
were were generated for craters with diameters ranging from
5 to 20 meters, with four different approach angles for each
crater. For each crater and approach angle, the stereo camera
was positioned at distances between 5 and 20 meters from
the crater near rim, at 1 meter spacing; for each location, an
image was rendered with a varied set of sun angles from 0◦
to 80◦from nadir. The ﬁnal dataset consisted of 1,792 stereo
pairs.
2.5D Simulation Environment for Long-range Traverse
To facilitate development of algorithms for crater matching
based localization, we constructed a 2.5D simulation environ-
ment that allows for independent unit testing of the different
localization algorithms.
This allowed us to quickly iter-
ate through different versions of the localization algorithms
and validate their effectiveness with ofﬂine Monte Carlo
4

60º ahead
crater shadowed
20º ahead
weaker shadow
60º behind
opposition effect
Figure 2. Simulated images with different sun zenith angles to illustrate effect on image contrast.
Figure 3. Illustration of the simulated environment used
for development and testing of localization algorithms.
Shown here is an example for a 600m x 600m region with
known orbital craters
simulations. In the simulated environment, the localization
algorithm receives two sets of craters as input: the known
craters detected from orbit and the ones observed by the rover
from the ground. The orbital craters are parameterized by
their size and location (x, y, diameter). Their craters sizes
are drawn from a truncated power-law distribution (α = 1,
diameter < 20), whereas their locations are drawn from a
uniform distribution.
The craters observed on the surface
by the rover are generated by perturbing the known orbital
craters according to a similar distribution of noise from crater
detection, with a zero-centered gaussian (σ = 3m) error in the
crater location and zero-centered gaussian (σ = 1m) error in
the crater size. Further, we also added the capability to mask
a percentage of either orbital or ground craters to simulate
false positives and false negatives in crater detection. Figure
3 shows an illustration of the simulated environment that was
Figure 4. Illustration of an instance from the LiDAR
simulation from RSIM.
used. Assuming the motion model with 2% noise, the rover
traverses within this simulated environment and observes
craters within a ﬁeld of view range (< 40m). The localization
algorithms then match the observed ground craters to the
orbital craters for localization.
Then, the estimated route
is compared against the ground truth route for evaluation.
The simulated environment can be extended to long-range
traversals and can be used to validate the effectiveness in
overcoming the baseline 2% of motion model noise.
Long-range LiDAR simulation using RSIM
To further simulate long-range traverses from real Lunar ter-
rain, we added a LiDAR simulation capability in RSIM [23],
a ROS2 and Gazebo based high-ﬁdelity simulation environ-
ment developed at NASA Ames to support the development
of the VIPER Rover [28]. RSIM models the VIPER lunar
rover structure, with the full CAD including rover kinematics,
dynamics, and 3D model. RSIM also contains a lunar terrain
model of the Nobile landing site, with 8k resolution. The
terrain includes rocks and crater distributions, shadowing,
and sun lighting.
The LiDAR sensor (also referred to as
5

Figure 5. Example Chang’e 3 Yutu rover images (left), an example stereo disparity map and 3D rendering (middle),
and orbital image showing the rover traverse (right). Stereo disparity is inversely proportional to range; in the
disparity map, bright pixels are close and dark are far.
Figure 6. The Chang’e 4 EDL Flight trajectory was recovered between 1000m and 100m above ground, using TRN
algorithm on the LCAM images.
the Velodyne Simulator), is forked from the Toyota Research
Institute Velodyne Simulator. This package contains a URDF
description and Gazebo plugins to simulate the Velodyne
laser scanners (our model is the HDL-32E). This Gazebo
plugin is based on the gazebo plugins ROS block laser, which
publishes PointCloud2 messages with the same structure
(x, y, z, intensity, ring) and simulates Gaussian noise. To
capture the point clouds from the LiDAR sensor, we created
a package that provides a ROS2 node that can subscribe to
the Velodyne lidar sensor mounted on the VIPER rover and
saves a snapshot to the desk. In addition to capturing the point
cloud, this node also outputs the position and orientation of
the rover with respect to the world origin. It also contains
scripts to visualize the point cloud and export it to other
formats. The ﬁnal datasets used were two discrete drives of
the VIPER rover in RSIM with LiDAR on the Nobile landing
site; both drives started the rover at the bottom-left corner of
the map (320m x 320m) and traversed diagonally along the
hypotenuse to the upper-right corner, took approximately 30-
32 steps of 10m each, with a change in orientation chosen
randomly between (-5 to 5 degrees) at each step.
Due to
the orientation change, the rover could not complete all the
steps as it would fall off the map since it was not driving in
a purely straight path with step-length: 10m, total steps: 35
and orientation change: 5 degrees at every waypoint. Figure
4 shows an illustration of an instance the LiDAR simulation
from RSIM.
Real Lunar data from Chang’e missions
For real sensor data, the original plan for to acquire a large-
scale dataset of LIDAR and stereo image data from an analog
site at the Cinder Lake crater ﬁeld near Flagstaff, Arizona.
This had to be postponed due to covid travel restrictions and
6

Figure 7. Comparison of (Left) Original resolution - 1.4 m/pixel vs (Right) Improved resolution – 0.2 m/pixel for the
orbital maps for the Chang’e 4 landing site.
Figure 8. Crater landmark map generation combining LRO-NAC images with higher resolution Chang’e LCAM
descent imagery. Large image is from LRO-NAC; smaller overlay and the expanded view on the right is from LCAM.
forest ﬁres; in lieu of this data, we decided to use real lunar
stereo images that were available from the “panoramic” cam-
eras (PCAM) on the Chang’e 3 [29] and Chang’e 4 [30] lunar
rover missions. Since this is actual lunar data, in important
ways it is better than the analogue stereo images that were
originally planned. The Chang’e missions’ rover data has
been publicly released 2.
The cameras for both missions
2https://moon.bao.ac.cn/
7

are identical; their FOV is 19.7◦x14.5◦, resolution are 2352
x 1728 pixels (color) and 1176 x 864 pixels (monochrome)
and stereo baseline length is 27 cm. A total of 168 pairs of
Chang’e 3 and 1174 pairs of Chang’e 4 PCAM images were
processed. A stereo camera self-calibration applied to this
data yielded good camera models for both data sets. Stereo
depth maps were computed from these images with good
results, as shown in Figures 5.
Ground truth labeling of craters in this imagery and regis-
tration of this imagery against orbital imagery was done to
prepare a dataset that was used for performance evaluations.
Towards this end, we studied the usefulness of the Chang’e
lander camera (LCAM) to obtain a high resolution and high
precision crater database.
The LCAM image sequences
(5000 images) were downloaded, and the Chang’e EDL ﬂight
trajectory was recovered between 1000m and 100m above
ground, using terrain relative navigation (TRN) and structure
from motion algorithms. Figure 6 shows visualization of the
recovered LCAM trajectory. Then, the LCAM images were
ortho-rectiﬁed to a coarser resolution LRO-NAC image map
(1 m/pixel) to obtain an ortho-image with higher resolution
of up to 20 cm/pixel around the lander. This process was
used to improve the resolution for a 100m x 100m region
around the Chang’e 4 lander as shown in Figure 7.
The
craters were detected from this high-resolution map and their
geographic locations, diameters, depths were extracted into a
crater database, as shown in Figure 8. This database was used
for rover localization algorithm development
5. TECHNICAL APPROACH
LunarNav’s technical approach consists of three main ele-
ments: 1) crater detection, 2) crater matching, and 3) state
estimation. In previous work, we developed crater detection
algorithms for three different sensing modalities [8]. This
paper builds on that work, and focuses on the crater-based
localization (i.e. crater matching and state estimation) aspect
of the problem. We will start with a brief review of how we
do crater detection, and then introduce two crater-matching
based localization algorithms that we developed: parametric
and non-parametric methods.
Each approach has both advantages and disadvantages; non-
parametric approaches like the particle ﬁlter make no assump-
tions about the probability distribution for rover location and
are robust in a wide variety of scenarios. However, the run-
time may be slow due to the large number of particles it
uses to represent the possible states of the rover. In contrast,
parametric approaches are faster and more computationally
efﬁcient because rover position uncertainty is represented by
closed-form mathematical expressions. Because the paramet-
ric approach makes certain assumptions about the distribution
of errors, it may be less robust compared to non-parametric
approaches.
Review of Crater Detection
Planetary rovers to date have all used stereo cameras for
terrain imaging and 3D perception [31]. Future rovers (to
Moon and Mars) might have LIDAR, either by itself or in
addition to one or more cameras. Thus, any combination of
these sensors could be used for crater detection. To cover this
set of options and to create a foundation for identifying the
best approach in the future, crater detection algorithms were
developed for three classes of technical approach: (1) Using
3D point clouds from LIDAR, (2) Using 3D point clouds
Figure 9. Overview of the Particle Filter framework.
Steps associated with a particle ﬁlter approach. (1) The
particles associated with the a posteriori function t-1 are
(2) sampled; and (3) propagated leading to the a priori
function P(Xt|Z(t−1)). Then, upon (4) observation in t,
we have the (5) a posteriori function P(Xt|Zt)in t.
from stereo vision, and (3) Using deep-learning based pattern
recognition with monocular images.
The original plan was to treat crater detection as a process
done independently from any knowledge of the crater land-
mark map and rover position; however, work last year showed
that more reliable crater detection results was achieved by
assuming approximate prior knowledge of rover position,
which is realistic in practice, and using that to allow the crater
detection process to invoke 3D models of craters expected
to be around the rover based on this prior knowledge. Such
approximate prior knowledge was used for the LIDAR- based
approach developed, but has not yet been carried over to the
other approaches. Geometric analysis methods was appointed
to the point clouds from LIDAR and stereo vision; machine
learning with neural nets was used for monocular images.
Results of quantitative performance evaluation with geomet-
ric analysis applied to simulated 3D point clouds from LI-
DAR show high reliability for detecting craters with a leading
edge within about 15 m from the rover.
The results also
suggested that rover localization with an error less than 5
m is highly probable. Somewhat simpler geometric analysis
methods were applied to simulated 3D point clouds from
stereo vision, which are noisier than LIDAR-based point
clouds. Stereo-based detection degraded at shorter range than
for LIDAR and obtained signiﬁcantly higher crater position
estimation error; nevertheless, rover localization with error
in the 5 m range still appears to be possible.
Monocular
appearance-based detection was done with a CNN-based
machine learning algorithm; this produced detection results
in image space, but did not produce 3D crater position and
size estimates.
Detection performance exceeded the other
two methods, making this a very promising approach for
future crater-based localization systems. See [8] for details
on the algorithms and performance characterization of crater
detection.
Crater-based Localization using Particle Filters
For non-parametric methods, we implemented a crater-based
localization algorithm based on Particle Filters [32], [33],
8

Figure 10. Formulating rover and orbital observations as gaussian mixture models. Using optimization to ﬁnd the best
match between two closed-form terrain models for localization.
Figure 11. Parametric loss function landscape of the gaussian mixture models.
where each particle represents a hypothesis for the rover
location, and the strength of the hypothesis is represented by
a measurement probability. Figure 9 illustrates a generalized
overview of the particle ﬁlter’s cycle in which we have, in the
ﬁrst layer, some particles represented by ellipsis of various
sizes. The size denotes the weight of a particle. The second
layer illustrates the result of the sampling process which can
lead to repeated particles. Upon sampling, the weights of
the particles lose their meaning and new measurements are
necessary as the third layer shows. In this layer, the particles’
weights are adjusted according to the used motion model
and a noise model applied to the sorted particles.
Upon
adjustments, we have an estimation for the next frame in the
sequence. The fourth layer shows the function representing
the updated particles. In this function, the height denotes
the weight of the measurement at a given point. The ﬁfth
layer shows the a posteriori probability function as the result
of the measurement step.
In this step, the particles are
properly weighted and prepared for the next iteration of the
localization cycle.
In our implementation, a large number of particles can be
used to approximate the distribution of the rover location
as the rover moves and detects the craters. To estimate the
location, the particles are moved according to the motion
model, then the measurement probabilities are updated by
comparing the ground craters with the orbital craters. Lastly,
the particles are re-sampled according to their measurement
probabilities to represent the new location distribution after
motion.
There are many possible formulations on how to update
the measurement probability given certain observations; we
reasoned that the geometric relationship between a set of
9

crater observations can be used to improve the accuracy of lo-
calization, instead of modeling each crater as an independent
observation. Therefore, we constructed a spatial formulation
where the measurement probability of each particle is rep-
resented by the average area Intersection Over Union (IoU)
distance [34] between the orbital and ground craters:
To account for missed detections, we adjust for the proba-
bility of new crater detection by using prior probability of
detection from previous data.
Crater-based based Localization using Parametric Matching
For parametric method-based localization, we assumed that
each crater is represented by a gaussian distribution, with
the location of the crater as the mean and the half of the
radius as the standard deviation. For orbital craters, the set of
craters can then be expressed using a gaussian mixture; and
this can also be independently formulated for ground craters.
Parametric matching based localization is formulated as the
problem of ﬁnding the translation between the two gaussian
mixtures that best matches these two distributions as shown in
10. The KL-divergence [35] measures the distance between
two distributions and can be used as the loss function. We
minimize the loss function with gradient-descent based meth-
ods to ﬁnd the best translation, which represents the location
(as illustrated in Figure 11).
Further, the Hessian around
the optimal solution can be used to estimate the standard
error, since KL-divergence is equivalent to the negative log-
likelihood.
6. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
LIDAR-based Localization on Simulation Environment:
We evaluated the particle ﬁlter and parametric localization al-
gorithms on a 400m x 400m simulated environment with 100
craters. An example of the traversal and localization results
are shown below in Figures 12-14. Over a large number of
simulated scenarios (n=50), both localization methods were
able to perform better than the relative localization baseline
of 2% noise motion model, with the particle ﬁlter performing
slightly better. Further, the particle ﬁlter converged at around
2m of error over long ranges, suggesting that crater landmarks
are valid features for accurate localization.
LIDAR-based Localization from Apollo 2 Landing Site:
We performed preliminarily tests of the particle ﬁlter and
parametric localization on craters detected from simulated
LIDAR point clouds. Here, we used the elevation map from
the Apollo 2 landing site to simulate a traversal of 20 steps
(with 1m/step) for crater detection.
In this scenario, two
craters (with diameter 6.20m and 14.76m) were manually
labeled as orbital craters.
The crater detection algorithm
matches observed candidate craters on the ground with the
two orbital craters, and the localization algorithm used the
location of the observed craters for localization, as shown in
Figure 15.
LIDAR-based Localization from Rumker Dome Landing Site:
Further, we evaluated the particle ﬁlter and parametric lo-
calization on LIDAR crater detected from a traverse through
the Rumker Dome region. This is a more complex scenario
compared to the Apollo 2 landing site, with 4 manually
labeled craters (with diameter 21.94m, 5.60m, 6.98m, 8.58m)
and 50 traversal steps (1m/step). According to the 2% motion
model baseline, our model is estimated to deviate 1m from
the ground truth. Our results (Figure 16) indicate an average
distance of 0.75m throughout the traverse, indicating that
crater landmarks are a reliable feature for more accurate
localization.
Stereo-based Localization on Chang’e 4 Landing Site
We integrated the particle-ﬁlter-based localization algorithm
with the stereo-based crater detection from FY21, and tested
it with the Chang’e rover stereo data.
The stereo crater
detection algorithm succeeds in detecting craters on the real
data when the assumptions of the algorithm [8] hold true;
for example, as shown in Figure 17 which demonstrated a
successful case of stereo-based crater detection on real Lunar
data.
However, the original crater detection makes two critical
assumptions which regularly do not hold in the Chang’e 4
dataset. It ﬁrst assumes that the entire crater is visible in the
image. Due to the small ﬁeld of view of the PCAM, this
is often not the case in the Chang’E imagery. The second
assumption is that the crater composes a relatively small
section of the image, since otherwise the ground plane will
not be detected correctly. This is also not the case with nearby
craters, in part due once again to the small camera ﬁeld of
view.
Figure 18 shows three example images where crater detection
currently fails. In the leftmost image, the algorithm success-
fully detects the as a crater candidate in the penultimate step
of the algorithm. However, it is ﬁltered out as not a crater
because the entire crater is not visible in the image, violating
an assumption behind the algorithm. In the middle image, the
crater is not entirely within the image. This case fails in step
three of the algorithm, earlier than the previous case, since the
critical near rim edge is not visible. Furthermore, since the
crater takes up almost the entirety of the image, the back wall
of the crater is detected as the ground plane. In the rightmost
image, the crater takes up a large section of the image, and
the crater’s back wall is detected as the ground plane, leading
the algorithm to fail. Additionally, the left and right edges
of the crater are not visible so this would likely fail in a later
step as well. Thus, the performance of the crater detection
did not generalize to the current dataset of craters visible in
Chang’e imagery. As a result, we were unable to benchmark
the performance of the particle ﬁlter on stereo modality.
7. DISCUSSION
The LunarNav project made the following accomplishments
and contributions to crater-based localization:
• Developed high-ﬁdelity simulation environments and
generated multiple datasets to support the development
and performance evaluation of lunar rover navigation
with crater landmarks
• Generated a high-resolution crater database of real Lunar
data from the Chang’e 4 landing site.
10

Figure 12. (Left) Example of particle ﬁlter performance on a simulated scenario, and (Right) Example of parametric
model performance on a simulated scenario.
Figure 13. (Left) Performance of particle ﬁlter and parametric model over different (n=50) simulated environments.
The red line indicates the 2% noise in motion model baseline, and the distribution of the relative error at the end of the
traversal for particle ﬁlter (Middle) and parametric model (Right) with the 2% motion model baseline in red.
Figure 14. Performance of localization algorithms with 25% (Left) and 50% (Right) of the orbital craters masked,
along with the 2% motion model baseline in red.
11

Figure 15. Illustration of the rover traverse for the Apollo 2 landing site showing the (left) simulated LiDAR point
cloud and (middle) DEM overlayed with the rover traverse. Note: Point cloud is color coded using elevation data.
(Right) An instance of particle ﬁlter illustration. Blue circles indicate craters, green arrow indicates estimated position,
red arrow indicates GT position, and black dots represent the distribution of particles.
Figure 16. Rumker Dome site localization algorithm performance. The particle ﬁlter converged at around 0.75m of
error, which is lower than the expected 2% (1m) motion model noise. The parametric method has an average error of
1.6m.
Figure 17. An example of a successful crater detection. (Left) original image; (b) disparity map overlayed with white
ellipse showing crater detection
12

Figure 18. Example images where the stereo-based crater detection algorithm fails.
• Raised the TRL of onboard crater detection capability
from 2 to 4 by successfully demonstrating crater detec-
tion algorithms on both simulated and real Lunar data.
• Raised the TRL of onboard, global (“absolute”) localiza-
tion capability from 2 to 4 by successfully demonstrating
crater-based localization algorithms on both simulated
and real Lunar data
• Completed software and dataset documentation (to ac-
company ﬁnal publication of this manuscript) to enable
seamless re-distribution and open-source release, for fu-
ture funded efforts and wide-spread use by the commu-
nity.
Remaining Gaps, Risks and Challenges to Flight Infusion
As mentioned in Section 1, the capability developed in this
project is intended for use in lunar rovers. No such missions
are currently in development, but robotic lunar science rover
mission concepts were strongly recommended by the PSADS
report; in particular, the Endurance-A robotic lunar science
rover mission concept was recommended as the highest pri-
ority medium-sized mission for the Moon.
This concept
involves traverse of roughly 2,000 km in several Earth years,
which requires onboard absolute position estimation; Lunar-
Nav capability would be enabling for this mission. The Lunar
Terrain Vehicle (LTV) envisioned for transporting astronauts
may also beneﬁt from having an option for autonomous
position estimation as developed by LunarNav. Some of the
potential challenges to ﬂight infusion falls into the following
main categories:
• The state of maturity of the LunarNav algorithms is at
intermediate TRLs; more maturation is required before it
is fully ready for infusion. In particular, the performance
of stereo-based crater localization needs to be improved
by adding robustness to a wide-range of operational
scenarios (partial crater visibility, variable crater shapes)
• LunarNav requires stereo cameras and/or a lidar onboard
the rover. For night operation, either headlights for the
stereo cameras or a lidar is required.
These sensors
are not fully developed at present.
Furthermore, the
majority of the work done in LunarNav focused on day-
time driving; further work needs to be done to extend this
capability to night-time and operations in permanently
shadowed regions.
• The computing load associated with crater-based local-
ization is expected to be less than that required for rover
obstacle avoidance. Since any autonomous lunar rover
would need obstacle avoidance, it is expected that the
necessary computing capability for LunarNav would be
available. Nevertheless, this aspect of system architec-
ture must be veriﬁed as being sufﬁcient.
• Validation and veriﬁcation (V&V) of crater-based local-
ization requires datasets with craters, either from lunar
analog terrain on Earth or from high ﬁdelity lunar terrain
simulators. There is a very limited amount of suitable
analog terrain available. The Cinder Lake Crater Field
planned for use in the LunarNav project is the only loca-
tion of any reasonable size in the U.S.; it is nevertheless
fairly small for this purpose, it has not been maintained
(i.e. it is partly overgrowth with vegetation), and access
to it is limited to spring and fall seasons, due to snow
in the winter, heat in the summer, and the possibility of
nearby forest ﬁres in the summer through early fall.
