53
Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in
Time Series Data
CHAINARONG AMORNBUNCHORNVEJ, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
IVAN BRUGERE, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
ARIANA STRANDBURG-PESHKIN, Max Planck Institute for Ornithology, Germany
DAMIEN R. FARINE, Max Planck Institute for Ornithology, Germany
MARGARET C. CROFOOT, University of California, Davis, USA
TANYA Y. BERGER-WOLF, University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
Behavior initiation is a form of leadership and is an important aspect of social organization that affects the
processes of group formation, dynamics, and decision-making in human societies and other social animal
species. In this work, we formalize the Coordination Initiator Inference Problem and propose a simple yet
powerful framework for extracting periods of coordinated activity and determining individuals who initiated
this coordination, based solely on the activity of individuals within a group during those periods. The proposed
approach, given arbitrary individual time series, automatically (1) identifies times of coordinated group activity,
(2) determines the identities of initiators of those activities, and (3) classifies the likely mechanism by which
the group coordination occurred, all of which are novel computational tasks. We demonstrate our framework
on both simulated and real-world data: trajectories tracking of animals as well as stock market data. Our
method is competitive with existing global leadership inference methods but provides the first approaches for
local leadership and coordination mechanism classification. Our results are consistent with ground-truthed
biological data and the framework finds many known events in financial data which are not otherwise reflected
in the aggregate NASDAQ index. Our method is easily generalizable to any coordinated time-series data from
interacting entities.
CCS Concepts: • Information systems →Spatial-temporal systems; Data mining; • Applied computing
→Sociology; Economics;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Leadership, Time series, Coordination, Influence
ACM Reference Format:
Chainarong Amornbunchornvej, Ivan Brugere, Ariana Strandburg-Peshkin, Damien R. Farine, Margaret C.
Crofoot, and Tanya Y. Berger-Wolf. 2018. Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time
Series Data. ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data. 12, 5, Article 53 (June 2018), 33 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3201406
This work was supported in part by the NSF grants III-1514126 (Berger-Wolf, Crofoot), III-1514174 (Crofoot), IOS-1250895
(Crofoot), SMA-1620391 (Crofoot) , CNS-1248080 (Berger-Wolf), and the David & Lucile Packard Foundation 2016-65130
(Crofoot).
Authors’ addresses: Chainarong Amornbunchornvej, University of Illinois at Chicago, 851 S Morgan St, Chicago, IL, 60607-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires

© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
1556-4681/2018/6-ART53 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3201406
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.
arXiv:1603.01570v2  [cs.SI]  23 Nov 2019

53:2
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
1
INTRODUCTION
Which zebra initiated the flight from a lion? Whom does the elephant herd follow to water? Who
is the trend-setter whose opinion many follow at the moment? (And is it the same person whether
it’s the opinion about the future of AI or the hottest lunch spot?) In all these scenarios, the initiator
might not be the one who is speaking the loudest or positioned at the front of the group after
the group has already agreed to follow [Dyer et al. 2009; Stewart and Scott 1947]. Thus, in order
to identify those initiators or trend-setters, we must also determine the moment of the group’s
decision to follow.
Coordination Initiator Inference Problem: An agreement of a group to follow a common
purpose is manifested by its coalescence into a coordinated behavior. The process of initiating
this behavior and the period of decision-making by the group members necessarily precedes
the coordinated behavior. Given time series of group members’ behavior, the goal is to
find these periods of decision-making and identify the initiating individual, if one
exists.
Initiating a group’s behavior is a form of leadership [Stueckle and Zinner 2008; Wilson 2009].
Leadership is an important aspect of the social organization, formation, and decision-making
of groups of people in online and offline communities, as well as other social animals. Under-
standing the dynamics of emerging leadership allows researchers to gain insights into how social
species make decisions. Until recently, many works defined leaders by their physical or behavioral
characteristics rather than by observing processes of interaction [Northouse 2016].
Fig. 1. A high-level overview of the proposed framework
The availability of data from physical proximity sensors, GPS, and the web opens up the possi-
bility of measuring leadership as the process of initiation in online activities, face-to-face human
interactions, animal populations, and aggregate social processes such as economic activity. This pa-
per presents the new computational problem of inferring leader identity in the context of successful
initiation of coordinated activities among groups of individuals or other entities, as well as proposes
the first automated method for unsupervised leader identification. The method uses only time series
activity data of entities, with no additional information. The proposed approach automatically
determines (1) the time interval of group coordination, (2) the time when the (possibly implicit)
decision for that coordinated activity was made, (3) the identity of the coordination initiator, and
(4) the mechanism by which the group came to follow the initiator.
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:3
1.1
Related work
Coordinating patterns of individual activity is a challenge that all social organisms face. Diverse
strategies–from democratic to dictatorial–have emerged to allow members of groups to reach con-
sensus [Conradt and Roper 2003]. Leadership plays a key role in organizing the collective (i.e. group)
behaviors of social organisms ranging from humans [Dyer et al. 2009] to hymenoptera [Weinstein
and Maelzer 1997]. It potentiates complex patterns of cooperation and conflict (e.g., lions [Heinsohn
and Packer 1995], hyaenas [Boydston et al. 2001], meerkat [Mares et al. 2012], chimpanzees [Gilby
et al. 2015], humans [Glowacki and von Rueden 2015]), organizes group movements [Couzin et al.
2005; Dyer et al. 2009], and may prevent free-riding [Hooper et al. 2010].
In the context of group behavior and decision-making in biology and sociology, leaders are
individuals who successfully induce a group of others to follow them to a common goal, state, or
behavior [Couzin et al. 2005; Petit and Bon 2010; Stueckle and Zinner 2008; Wilson 2009]. Biological
studies showed that leaders may be context-specific [Couzin et al. 2005; Wu and Sun 2014] and the
important initiators of particular group activities are not necessarily the individuals found at the
top of their group’s social dominance hierarchy [Brent et al. 2015; Strandburg-Peshkin et al. 2015].
Substantial interest currently exists in identifying leaders and determining how they influence the
behavior of others in their social environment. Previous work in several domains defined leadership
according to physical characteristics (e.g., size, sex [Wilson 2009]), positions in location-based social
networks [Pham and Shahabi 2016], rule-based models[Wu and Sun 2014], physical trajectory and
association patterns [Andersson et al. 2008; Lusseau and Conradt 2009].
Computationally, most previous work uses a global notion of leadership and creates a global,
static leadership ranking over the entirety of the input data [Bakshy et al. 2011; Goyal et al.
2008]. Other domain-specific methods infer leadership from implicit pairwise dyadic dominance or
leader-follower interactions [Andersson et al. 2008; Kjargaard et al. 2013; Pham and Shahabi 2016].
Some methods define an explicit network over the dyadic interactions or use a known network
topology [Sun and Tang 2011] and use network measures, such as PageRank and HITS, or cascade
size to identify leaders [Bakshy et al. 2011].
Leadership has also been studied in explicit social network settings. From a social network
perspective, leaders can be characterized as influential individuals who have many followers
that imitate the leader’s actions [Goyal et al. 2008], and, thus, successfully take a group from
one behavioral state to another. Much of the computational work has focused on the problem of
influence maximization (IM)–i.e. how individuals are able to maximize their impact on the behavior
of the group as a whole by iteratively affecting local network neighborhoods [Goyal et al. 2010;
Kempe et al. 2003]. This approach assumes that the network structure is known.
Alternatively, leadership can be viewed as the causal effect for the followers’ actions. Granger
Causality [Granger 1969] is one of the methods used for inferring cause and effect within a set of
time series. The idea is that if we can use time series Y to significantly improve the prediction of
the future activity of time series X, compared to using only the past information from X, then Y
Granger causes X. Certainly, this approach does not distinguish between a direct causality and
confounding effects. There is a large body of work using Granger Causality to infer temporal
dependency among time series [Arnold et al. 2007; Liu et al. 2009, 2012]. However, there is no
explicit work using Granger Causality to infer leaders in time series, though it is certainly a fruitful
direction to explore.
There is a clear gap between the biosociological definitions of leadership in group decision-making
and the existing computational approaches. Currently, there are no computational approaches that
(1) view leaders as initiators of group behavior change, which can (2) identify the timing of the
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:4
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
process of the change initiation and the group’s decision-making in (3) arbitrary contexts, under
(4) a variety of leadership models.
1.2
Our contributions
In our previous version of this paper in [Amornbunchornvej et al. 2017], we focus on the definition
of leadership as the initiation of coordinated activities. We aim to close the gap between the
biosociological view of the role of leaders in group decision-making, the computational formalism,
and the methodology.
Therefore, the first part of our contribution is establishing and formalizing this new computa-
tional problem of coordination initiation inference. We call it the Coordination Initiator
Inference Problem. Our formulation is a generalization of many related leadership inference
computational problems. We explicitly relate existing leadership and influence propagation prob-
lems as special cases of our formulation. The new formulation uses only the time series of individual
behavior as input, with no assumption of additional information such as demography, prior historic
data, dominance hierarchy, or a network structure. The problem formulation aims to identify differ-
ent local instances of behavior initiation, allows the identity of the initiator to be instance-specific,
and makes no assumption on the leadership or behavioral model.
Our additional contribution is in proposing a computational solution framework to this new
Coordination Initiator Inference Problem. We propose a general, scientifically grounded,
unsupervised, and extendable framework with few assumptions for identifying individuals who
lead a group to a state of coordinated activity (or, more generally, an entity that induces group
coalescence). Our framework is capable of:
• Detecting coordinated activity events: discovering coordination intervals and decision-making
periods leading to that coordination;
• Identifying initiators: identifying the initiators of this coordinated behavior, that is, the individ-
uals who succeeded in leading the group to coordination, specifically locally to each coordination
instance; and
• Classifying the group coordination model: characterizing the type of the group’s transition
behavior to coordination according to interpretable, dynamic models.
We demonstrate the framework’s ability to analyze leadership in coordinated activity on syn-
thetic and real datasets over several domains. We compare our framework with state-of-the-art
methods for leadership identification for the special cases of our problem where such methods are
applicable. For many instances of our new problem, there are no existing methods. We demonstrate
that existing solutions fail and do not extend to these instances. We use synthetic simulated data
to validate each aspect of the framework. We analyze two biological datasets – GPS tracks of a
baboon troop and video-tracking of fish schools – as well as stock market closing price data of
the NASDAQ index. The results are consistent with ground-truthed biological data. Moreover, the
framework finds many known events in financial data, which are not otherwise reflected in the
aggregate NASDAQ index. Our approach is easily generalizable to any coordinated activity in time
series data of interacting entities.
In addition, in this paper, we propose a new group activity classification method based on the
following network framework. We use it to classify group activity in a dataset of GPS tracking of
a troop of baboons. There are four group activities in the baboon dataset: sleeping, hanging-out,
coordinated non-progression, and coordinated progression. By using only the network density as a
feature, our simple classifier performed better than the state-of-the-art classifier method which
used 24 features in baboon activities classification task [Li et al. 2016].
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:5
1.3
Influence Maximization vs. Coordination Initiator Inference Problem
The Influence Maximization problem is closely related to Coordination Initiator Inference
Problem. In fact, successful Influence Maximization, where a large fraction of the population is
influenced, is a special case of Coordination Initiator Inference Problem. When the influence
is spread to a majority of the population, that population is now in a coordinated state, with
the decision period starting at the initiation of the influence and the initiators being that source
of influence. However, Coordination Initiator Inference Problem goes beyond Influence
Maximization in every aspect of the framework and can capture different models of decision-making,
coordinated activity, as well as repeated and context-specific dynamics of coordination.
• Coordination Model: In Influence Maximization, the majority of papers focus on Linear Thresh-
old and Independent Cascade models as main coordination mechanisms. However, there are
other models that can be represented as a coordination mechanism, such as Dictatorship and
Hierarchy models, as well as non-network based models at all. Our new problem formulation,
Coordination Initiator Inference Problem, generalizes to all types of models that can be
represented as a coordination mechanism. To recognize difference types of coordination mecha-
nisms, we also provide the model classification approach to classify these coordination models
based on some proposed features.
• Coordinated Activity: Influence Maximization focuses on only one kind of state changing,
which is an information spreading event. In a coordinated activity, any state that the group
coalesces to, a posteriori, is a coordinated state, and it may change from one time to another.
Coordinated activity can represent multiple types of coalesced states over multiple time points.
For example, a coordinated movement of animals to a feeding site is considered to be a coordinated
activity for that group, but so is sudden jumping up and down in agitation, or all looking in
the same direction, or all falling sick. And the coordinated movement can be different and look
different in the morning versus in the evening. In Coordination Initiator Inference Problem,
the problem focuses on not only which individuals initiate coordinated activities, but also when
coordinated activities occur, without the explicit prescription of the type of coordinated activity.
To analyze coordinated activities in time series, we provide a framework to detect coordination
intervals as well as initiators of these coordination events.
• Coordination Based on Context: The original Influence Maximization assumes that there is
only one coordination event of information spreading. However, in reality, information spreading
or coordination events can occur many times. For instance, within a day, a group of animals
can have many coordinated movement events to many places. Our work here aims to infer the
multiple coordination events, which might have different initiators.
2
PROBLEM FORMALIZATION
Given a collection of time series, we want to find initiators of highly coordinated patterns. To
formally state the Coordination Initiator Inference Problem, we need to formalize notions
of “coordination” and “initiation.”
First, we define an intuitive notion of a following relation, as “two individuals performing
the same sequence of actions (or generating time series values) with some fixed delay (Fig. 2).”
Formally:
Definition 2.1 (following relation). Let U = (®u1, . . . , ®ut, . . . ) and W = ( ®w1, . . . , ®wt, . . . ) be
m-dimensional, arbitrary-length time series. If for all t ∈N, there is a fixed time delay ∆t ∈Z+ ∪{0}
such that ®wt = ®ut+∆t , then U follows W denoted as W ⪯U . We denote W ≺U if ∆t > 0.
Lemma 2.2. Let U andW be time series such thatW ⪯U and U ⪯W , then U andW are equivalent
time series denoted U ≡W .
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:6
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
Fig. 2. (Left) The example of time series U follows Q. (Right) the following network w.r.t. U follows Q relation.
Proof. There are two cases when both W ⪯U and U ⪯W . First, W = U and U = W (that is,
∆t = 0 in both following relations). Clearly, W ≡U . Second, W ≺U with ∆tw > 0 and U ≺W
with ∆tu > 0. Then, by definition, ®wt = ®ut+∆tw and ®ut = ®wt+∆tu . Therefore, ®wt = ®wt+∆tw +∆tu . Thus,
if W ⪯U and U ⪯W then W ⪯W (and similarly U ⪯U ). Thus, the two time series are identical
periodic with a different starting point and therefore equivalent.
□
In periodic time series, such as a sine wave, we use Lemma 2.2. If we have two sine waves that
have the same frequency but different phase, then we consider them as a pair of time series that
follow each other, from which it can be concluded that they are equivalent. For instance, in Fig. 3,
U and W are two sine waves, which have the same frequency but different phase. Because U ≺W
with time delay ∆tU ≺W > 0 and W ≺U with ∆tW ≺U > 0 , by the second case in Lemma 2.2 above,
U ≡W .
Fig. 3. U and W are sine waves that have the same frequency but different phase. U follows W with time
delay ∆tW ≺U and W follows U with time delay ∆tU ≺W .
Lemma 2.3. The following relation is a partial order over time series [Ben Dushnik 1941].
Proof. Antisymmetry: if W ⪯U and U ⪯W , then W ≡U by Lemma 2.2. The following
relation is also trivially reflexive and transitive, which, by definition is a partial order.
□
Next, coordination, or intuitively “all individuals performing the same sequence of actions, at
possibly varying delays (Fig. 4),” is formally defined as:
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:7
Definition 2.4 (Coordination). Given a set of m-dimensional time series U = {U1, . . . ,Un}. The
set U is coordinated at time t if for every  n
2
 pairs Ui,Uj ∈U, either Ui ≺Uj or Uj ≺Ui. The
coordination interval is the maximal contiguous time interval [t1,t2] such that U is coordinated for
every t ∈[t1,t2].
Fig. 4. (Left) the example of coordination interval in time series where Q ≺U ≺V ≺W . (Right) the following
network w.r.t. these following relations. In this example, Q is an initiator.
Finally, the initiator is intuitively “an individual who first performs a sequence of actions, and
all other individuals follow,” formally defined as:
Definition 2.5 (Initiator). Let U = {U1, . . . ,Un} be a coordinated set of m-dimensional time
series within some coordination interval [t1,t2]. Then the time series L ∈U is the initiator time
series for the coordination interval if for each time series U ∈U \ {L}, L ≺U .
In Fig. 4, Q is an initiator of coordination. The coordination interval starts at the beginning of
W . We are now ready to precisely state the problem of identifying the individual who initiates a
coordinated behavior:
Problem 1: Coordination Initiator Inference Problem
Input
:Set U = {U1,U2, . . . ,Un} of time series.
Output:A coordination interval [t1,t2] and the initiator time series L ∈U that initiated the
coordination.
2.1
Useful observations
Let U be a coordinated set of time series and L ∈U be the initiator. Since U is a partial order set
and ∀Ui ∈U, L ≺Ui, then, by definition, L is the minimal element. Moreover, U is a linear order
set since for every pair Ui,Uj ∈U, either Ui ≺Uj or Uj ≺Ui.
Definition 2.6 (Following network). Let U = {U1, . . . ,Un} be a set of time series. The following
network G = (V, E) is defined as a directed graph where the set of nodes V has a one-to-one
correspondence to the set of time series U, and each edge in E represents a following relation
between two time series: ∀Ui,Uj ∈U the edge ei,j ∈E if Uj ≺Ui.
Recall that PageRank [Page et al. 1999] score, πi, of a node i in a network G is defined as follows:
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:8
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
πi = d
Õ
k ∈Nin
i
ek,iπk/|Nout
k
| + (1 −d)
(1)
Where πi ∈[0, 1], d ∈(0, 1] is a constant number, ek,i ∈{0, 1} is one if ek,i ∈E, Nin
i
is a set of
neighbor nodes of i such that k ∈Nin
i
if ek,i ∈E, and Nout
i
is a set of outgoing neighbor nodes of i
such that k ∈Nout
i
if ei,k ∈E.
Lemma 2.7. Let G = (V, E) be a following network of time series set U = {U1, . . . ,Un}. If Ui ⪯Uj
then πi ≥πj.
Proof. By transitivity, if Uj follows Ui then the followers of Uj are also the followers of Ui. Thus,
since ∀k ∈Nj,Uj ⪯Uk andUi ⪯Uj, then Nin
j
⊆Nin
i . Hence, πi−πj = d Í
k ∈Nin
i \Nin
j ek,iπk/|Nout
k
| ≥
0.
□
As a corollary of Lemma 2.7, since all the time series follow the initiator L within the coordination
interval [t1,t2], then L has the highest PageRank score in U during that coordination period.
Moreover, Lemma 2.7 allows us to infer the order of following among the time series within the
coordination period, as defined by the PageRank values.
2.2
Following relation with noise
Fig. 5. (Top-left) A time series Q, (bottom-left) a time series U , and (top-right) a time series V . In this example,
U partially follows Q, V partially follows U but V does not follow Q. The following network of these time
series is at the bottom-right of the figure.)
In real situations, Def. 2.1 requires the exact match, which rarely happens. Therefore, we provide
relaxation of following relation to deal with noise in realistic situations below.
Definition 2.8 (σ-following relation). Let U be a set of time series and sim : U × U →[0, 1]
be some similarity measure between two time series. For any pair of time series Ui,Uj ∈U, let
∆tmax = min argmax
∆t ∈Z
sim(Ui,1,Uj,1+∆t) whereUi,t ∈U represents a time seriesUi starting at time t,
and let simmax(Ui,Uj) = sim(Ui,1,Uj,1+∆tmax ). Then, for a threshold σ ∈(0, 1], if simmax(Ui,Uj) ≥
σ, then we have:
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:9
• if ∆tmax > 0 , then Ui ≺σ Uj,
• if ∆tmax < 0 , then Uj ≺σ Ui,
• if either ∆tmax = 0 or Ui ≺σ Uj and Uj ≺σ Ui, then Ui ≡σ Uj.
The difference between a following relation in Def. 2.1 and Def. 2.8 is that the notion of σ-
following relation lacks the transitivity property1. Fig 5 shows the example of three time series and
their σ-following relation with some unknown σ > 0.5. In this example, Q is similar to U and U is
similar to V greater than 0.5. However, Q and V are not similar at all. Therefore, the σ following
relation does not possess the transitivity property.
Next, we can define a notion of coordination by using σ-following relation as follows.
Definition 2.9 (σ-Coordinated set). Given a set of m-dimensional time series U = {U1, . . . ,Un}
and a similarity threshold σ ∈(0, 1]. The set U is σ-coordinated at time t if for every  n
2
 pairs
Ui,Uj ∈U, either Ui ≺σ Uj or Uj ≺σ Ui.
Definition 2.10 (σ-Coordination interval). The σ-coordination interval is the maximal con-
tiguous time interval [t1,t2] such that U is coordinated for every t ∈[t1,t2].
Even though an initiator of σ-Coordination interval is not a minimum element anymore due to
σ-following relation does not possess transitivity property, an initiator suppose to have a highest
number of followers. Hence, PageRank is still an appropriate measure for finding an initiator.
3
METHODS
In this section, we present a Framework for Leader Identification in Coordinated Activity (FLICA)
as the solution for the Coordination Initiator Inference Problem. On real data, the above
formalization is very restrictive, so we relax the exact following relation, and full coordination
to identify ‘following’ and partial ‘coordination’ in real applications. Furthermore, multiple coor-
dination events often exist within a set of real time series data. Constructing a single aggregated
network would not capture the dynamics of these events. Therefore, FLICA uses a dynamic network
approach.
Fig. 1 shows the framework overview. At each time step, we infer following relations to construct
a sequence of following networks. We then use network density to detect intervals of coordination,
and the time series of PageRank values to identify the initiators of these coordination intervals.
3.1
A working example
Fig. 6 presents a key example and a brief introduction to our framework, on real GPS trajectory
data of olive baboons (Papio anubis). Fig. 6(b)-6(c) show the leadership of movement of the group by
baboon ID3 (Black). Fig. 6(d) shows the ‘following’ network in the coordination interval. Individual
ID3 has the largest PageRank in the first two snapshots but the PageRank of individual ID1 (Blue)
surpasses ID3 when the network is ‘coordinated’ (e.g. moving together). If we measure the initiator
ranking after the network has coalesced, then we miss that ID3 initiated coordination and ‘built’
the network in the pre-coordination interval (to the left of the first dotted red line).
We now present each step of the computational framework of FLICA. We will discuss the
following relation inference in Section 3.2, the construction of the following network in Section 3.3,
identification of the coordination interval and the preceding decision-making period in Section 3.4,
the identification of the initiator in Section 3.5 and the details of model and parameter choices at
each step.
1This is similar to non-transitive dice: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nontransitive_dice
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:10
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
(b) t=50
(c) t=100
(d) t=250
Fig. 6. PageRank (top) and density (middle) of the ‘following’ network over time for an event of baboons’
movement which initiates by ID3. (Bottom) The locations of individuals over three different time steps
(t = 50, 100, 250), with the ‘following’ network, and PageRank indicated by node size.
3.2
Following relation inference
Given a pair of time series U ,Q, our task here is to find a following relation between U and Q.
However, we relax a notion of following relation in Def. 2.1 to allow some degree of distortion
between two time series that follows each other. A measures we need should satisfy two properties.
First, a measure must be able to identify common pattern between U and Q. A common pattern
might not happens in Q the same time as U and the common pattern might have some degree
of distortion. Second, a measure must be able to infer a time delay between common patterns in
U and Q. With these properties, for a (U ,Q) pair of time series, we use Dynamic Time Warping
(DTW) [Sakoe and Chiba 1978] to measure whether U follows Q. DTW is shown to perform better
than several other methods in inferring following relation in time series [Kjargaard et al. 2013]
and it is tolerant to noise [Shokoohi-Yekta et al. 2015]. Fig. 7 (Left) shows two time series, where
time-shifting Q ahead in time produces a better match to U , illustrated in the warping path in Fig. 7
(Right). Let PU,Q be a sequence of index pairs (i, j) which comprise the DTW optimal warping path
of (U ,Q). We compute the mean of the signed index difference over this sequence of index pairs:
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:11
Fig. 7. (Left) Toy time series showing U following Q with a time delay ∆t = 3. (Right) the optimal warping
path (yellow boxes) on the DTW dynamic programming matrix, shifting U backward in time onto Q.
s(PU,Q) =
Í
(i,j)∈PU,Q sign(j −i)
|PU,Q |
(2)
This function measures the extent of warping between two time series. If time series cannot be
shifted one-onto-the-other with a consistent positive or negative sign, |s(PU,Q)| ≈0, then there is
no following relation between U and Q. When s(PU,Q) is positive, Q follows U , otherwise, U follows
Q. In Fig. 7, s(PU,Q) ≈−3.
3.3
Dynamic following network inference
As shown in Section 3.1, a coordinated activity is dynamic in the aspect of who leads a group at
each time step. Using only summary statistics of static following network to represent the entire
coordinated activity cannot capture dynamics of coordinated activity. Therefore, we deploy a
dynamic network procedure to analyze coordinated activities in time series, which is a common
technique to deal with dynamics of data [Holme 2014].
In our setting, the set of n m-multidimensional time series D (e.g., a matrix of size [n × m × t∗]),
a window size parameter ω, and a window shift parameter δ (default is 0.1ω) are the inputs for our
framework.
Let the ith time interval be given by: w(i) = [(i −1) ×δ, (i −1) ×δ +ω]. For each w(i), we extract
a set of sub time series Qi from D. The Qi is the [n × m × ω] dimensional matrix of the time series
set. Then we construct a following network G = (V, E) as defined in Def. 2.6. The nodes represent
the time series from Qi and E is a set of edges between time series nodes such that if U ,W ∈Qi
and U follows W according to Eq. 2, then eU,W ∈E with the edge weight |s(PU,W )|. We calculate
a following network for each w(i) to construct a dynamic following network G∗= (V, E∗). The
pseudo code is given in Procedure 2.
3.4
Coordination intervals detection
Network density of the following network serves as the measure of the extent of coordination
over all time series pairs (by Def. 2.4, during the coordination interval every pair has a following
relation.) We can use this observation to identify times of approximate coordination.
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:12
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
Procedure 2: CreateDyFollowingNetwork
input :A set of time series D, a time window ω, and a window shift δ
output:An n × n × t∗adjacency matrix E∗.
K ←(t∗−ω)/δ ;
for i ←1 to K do
/* current time interval
*/
w(i) = [(i −1) × δ, (i −1) × δ + ω] ;
/* SubTimeSeries(D,w(i)) returns all sub time series in D within the interval
w(i)
*/
Qi ←SubTimeSeries(D,w(i));
E ←CreateFollowingNetwork(Qi) ;
/* Set all edges within the time interval [(i −1) × δ,i × δ] to be similar
*/
E∗
t ∈[(i−1)×δ,i×δ] ←E ;
end
Q ←SubTimeSeries(D, [K × δ,t∗]);
E ←CreateFollowingNetwork(Q) ;
E∗
t ∈[K×δ,t ∗] ←E ;
Fig. 8. A coordination event is a pair of intervals. We define the pre-coordination interval and coordination
interval using threshold λ on the network density time series.
Given a time series of network densities, denoted by d, over a dynamic following network G∗,
and a density threshold parameter λ, the time interval [ti,tj] is a λ-coordination interval if d(t) > λ
for all t ∈[ti,tj]. The pre-coordination interval of coordination [ti,tj] is the interval [tk,ti −1],
where the discrete derivative d(t) −d(t −1) ≥0 for all t ∈[tk,ti −1]. Together, these intervals are
one coordination event, represented by the 3-tuple of time indices I = (tk,ti,tj). The collection of
coordination events is a set C = {Il }. All complete event intervals [tk,tj] are mutually disjoint in C,
and |C| denotes the total number of 3-tuples. Fig. 8 illustrates the definition of a coordination event
as a pair of time intervals. To reduce the number of intervals generated near the threshold λ, we
apply a greedy merging of nearby coordination intervals (taking the range from the window size
ω).
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:13
3.5
Ranking comparison
On each coordination event I = (tk,ti,tj), let RI be some ranking of individuals within the pre-
coordination interval [tk,ti −1]. We focus on ranking within pre-coordination because this is the
interval where coordination is initiated. The global rank order of pre-coordination, denoted by ˆR, is
the average of all RI where I ∈C.
We measure initiator ranking according to three different methods: PageRank [Page et al.
1999], velocity convex hull (VCH), and position convex hull (PCH). Recall, that by Lemma 2.7, if U
follows V , then the PageRank of U is less than that of V . Thus, the initiator is expected to have the
highest PageRank. VCH measures how often an individual moves faster than others. It represents a
model of leadership for movement. This model can be found in many social species [Dyer et al.
2009; Stueckle and Zinner 2008]. PCH measures how often an individual moves to an area before
others. For example, in a flock model [Andersson et al. 2008], a leader is positioned at the front of
the group’s trajectory.
3.5.1
PageRank. PageRank is a standard method for measuring the importance of a node recur-
sively by the importance of the nodes linking to it. In a directed network where a link represents
a following relations between nodes, PageRank measures ‘following’ paths passing through a
particular node. Thus, it fits well with our definition of leadership.
PageRank returns a weight vector of length n, with a sum of 1. For each time step t, we cal-
culate PageRank for each static graph Gt within a dynamic following network G∗= (V, E∗).
Let R = (Rpr,1, . . . ,Rpr,t ∗) be a sequence of n-length PageRank Order vectors where Rpr,t =
argsort(PaдeRank(Gt)) such that R(i)pr,t represents the rank of individual i and R(i)pr,t < R(j)pr,t
if the PageRank value in Eq. 1 of i is greater than the value of j ( πi > πj.) The leader L at time t
is the individual who has the highest value of PageRank πL or R(L)pr,t = 1 . Note that argsort(•)
returns the index list of sorted values w.r.t. descending order.
3.5.2
Velocity Convex Hull. In the next two sections, the s-energy work by Chazelle [Chazelle
2011] motivates the use of the convex hull as the measure of the level of initiation of a state change
for the group. Chazelle showed that if every agent in a group remains within the convex hull of
its neighbors (even if the neighbors change) at each time step, then the system converges to an
equilibrium. Thus, to change the steady state, somebody needs to break out of the convex hull of
their neighbors. In the initial state, all individuals states such as velocity or position are inside the
group’s convex hulls of that state. Then after the group decides to change its state, some individuals
must step outside the group convex hull to make the change. Hence, by using convex hull analysis,
we can measure whether the initiators are also state changers. Specifically, we use convex hull (of
position and velocity) analysis to characterize leadership models.
The velocity convex hull measures the frequency with which the discrete time series derivative
(dQ/dt) associated with a node i is outside the bounds of the population’s discrete derivative
distribution (including node i) in the previous time step. In aggregate, a high rank of this measure
indicates which node first ‘moves’ in the group.
The convex hull can be computed on arbitrary m dimensions of a multidimensional time se-
ries, or their derivatives, jointly or independently. The convex hull function CH(•) returns an
m-dimensional surface represented as lines between points in the input data, which encompass all
other points.
Let V be a [n ×t −1]-sized matrix measuring individual velocity over time, on time series dataset
D, which is a [n × m × t∗]-sized matrix . For an individual i at time-step t, we define the following
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:14
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
indicator function: 2
VCH(V,i,t) =


1,
Vi,t > max(V∗,t−1)
−1,
Vi,t < min(V∗,t−1)
0,
otherwise
(3)
For time step j we output an n-length rank order vector as Rv,t = argsort((VCH(V,i,t))i=1...n).
3.5.3
Position Convex Hull. The position convex hull is analogous to velocity, except that our
indicator function measures an individual’s position relative to the convex hull containing the
population at the previous time step. Rather than look at velocity of initiation, this measure captures
an individual’s frequency of moving outside the geometric boundaries of the group in the time
series space, and close to the average heading of the group (e.g. in ‘front’ of the group).
We compute the convex hull function on time-step t, Ht = CH(D∗,∗,t), and also introduce the
heading vector of individual i: ®vi,t = (Di,∗,t−1, Di,∗,t), and the population heading vector: ®vt =
(1/n) Í
i=1..n ®vi,t. We define the function IN(A, B) to denote standard ‘B contains A’ spatial queries
between two geometry objects, and ∡( ®v1, ®v2) to measure the angle between two vectors ®v1 and ®v2.
Using these definitions, we define the position convex hull indicator function for individual i at
time t:
PCH(D,i,t) =


1,
¬IN(Di,∗,t,Ht−1), ∡(®vi,t, ®vt) ≤90◦
−1,
¬IN(Di,∗,t,Ht−1), ∡(®vi,t, ®vt) > 90◦
0,
otherwise
(4)
For time step t we output an n-length rank order vector as Rp,t = argsort((PCH(D,i,t))i=1...n).
3.6
Leadership model features
Let the global rank ordering of pre-coordination for PageRank be denoted by ˆRpr, for VCH by
ˆRv, and for PCH by ˆRp. To measure global leadership of pre-coordination in our framework, we
order individual nodes i based on initiation support with respect to one of these ranking methods,
R•,I , over all coordination events I ∈C. For example, Rpr,I is PageRank-rank-ordered list at the
coordination event I. If an individual i is at 1st rank at I, then (i, 1) ∈Rpr,I; i is an initiator. The
initiation support for a node i is the fraction of coordination events at which it was ranked 1 (by a
ranking measure R•):
sup•(i) =
{∀I ∈C (i, 1) ∈R•,I }

|C|
(5)
We use the Kendall rank correlation coefficient τ() [Kendall 1938] to compare event-local and
global rank-orders. To compare global and local rank orders, we use the mean Kendall rank
correlation over all coordination events against the global by Eq. 6. For example, corrv compares
local and global velocity-convex-hull-rank orders.
corr• =
Í
I ∈C τ( ˆR•,R•,I)
|C|
(6)
Similarly, we compute the mean Kendall correlation between local rankings associated with
different measures (e.g. VCH, PCH) by Eq. 7.
corr•,• =
Í
I ∈C τ(R•,I,R•,I)
|C|
(7)
2 We use ‘*’ subscript notation in matrices to indicate slicing in the dimension(s).
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:15
(a) Pattern order alignment
(b) Global shift alignment
Fig. 9. Dynamic Time Warping global vs. local example
corr• formalizes our intuition that leaders consistently move outside of the spatial extent (corrp),
or the distribution of velocity over the population (corrv). By comparing the global vs. local
correlation in rank ordering, we measure the stability of the global ranking is over time.
corr•,• measures the relationship between higher-order graph structure and simple time series
features. Using this measure, we can gain a better understanding of the high-level aspects of
initiating coordination. For example, we see whether changing velocity (corrv,pr), or position
(corrp,pr) within the group is correlated with network rank position.
3.7
Local vs. Global Matching
Our proposed framework uses local alignment on time series subsequences, rather than global
alignment on the full time series. Fig. 9 presents a motivation for this choice. Suppose we intend to
match sparse ‘following’ events represented as the pair of spikes with relatively low magnitude at
the end of the red and blue time series. In Fig. 9(a), the time series is shifted to match one of the
two patterns, depending on the cost. This forces a mismatch of the ‘following’ event. Similarly,
Fig. 9(b) has a low cost matching by shifting the entire time series at a constant rate. By matching
only local subsequences, we can recover both of these ‘following’ events.
4
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We evaluate our framework on eight synthetic movement trajectory models and three real datasets.
4.1
Simulation models
4.1.1
Dictatorship model (DM). In this model, we fix a single initiator who initiates movement
from initial positions of the population. At the start of the pre-coordination interval, the initiator
moves in a fixed direction and acceleration. Other individuals wait for a randomly sampled lag,
before following the initiator at a fixed acceleration (with sampled noise in the heading). After
a fixed duration of coordinated movement over the entire population, individuals decelerate at
random, until stopping. Fig. 10 (left) shows the example of DM. The Switching Dictatorship model
(DM-S) selects two fixed individuals over each trial: a single individual as an initiator during
pre-coordination, and another single individual as ‘initiator’ during coordination. Fig. 11 shows an
example of following-network-density time series of DM-S.
4.1.2
Hierarchical model (HM). This model is a variation of DM, where we fix a number of
individuals (n=4) to follow the previous individual in the sequence, after a sampled lag. The
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:16
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
Fig. 10. Examples of individual movements from Dictatorship and Hierarchical model. Nodes represent
individual positions and arrows represent directions of individual’s movement. (Left) in Dictatorship model,
everyone follows a leader L, while there is a hierarchy to follow for each individuals in Hierarchical model
(right).
Fig. 11. An example of following-network-density time series of Switching Dictatorship model . There are
two coordination events where individual A leads a group in both pre-coordination intervals while B leads a
group during coordination intervals.
remainder of individuals in the population follow exactly one of these high-ranking individuals,
allocated in decreasing proportion per rank. Fig. 10 (right) shows the example of HM. The Switching
Hierarchical model (HM-S), similarly to DM-S, selects unique pairs of individuals for each hierarchy
level, switching after the pre-coordination interval as in DM-S.
4.1.3
Event-based model (EM). This model is a variation of the Dictatorship model where each
coordination event has a different, unique initiator. For example, in one of our applications, a troop
of baboons may follow an initiator to a food source in the morning, and follow a different initiator
in the evening to the sleeping site. No existing methods can infer these two situations except our
framework. Fig. 12 shows an example of following-network-density time series of EM.
4.1.4
Initiator model (INIT-k). In this model, we fix k initiators who initiate movement from
random initial positions of the population. At the start of the pre-coordination interval, all initiators
move on a single target. Non-initiators move in randomly sampled directions with a fix velocity,
then follow their initiators after a random time lag. After the pre-coordination period, all individuals
move toward a single target, without following their initiators. The example of INIT-k model is at
Fig. 13. We run simulations for INIT-1 and INIT-4 initiator models.
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:17
Fig. 12. An example of following-network-density time series of Event-based model. There are two coordination
events where individual A leads a group in the first coordination event while B leads a group during the
second coordination event.
Fig. 13. Examples of individual movements from Initiator model. Nodes represent individual positions and
arrows represent directions of individual’s movement. (Left) during a pre-coordination interval, everyone
follows a leader L, while, during a coordination interval, everyone knows the direction and moves to the
destination directly without following a leader (right).
4.1.5
Crowd model (CM). This model [Wu and Sun 2014] is a collective movement model where
k (=4) informed individuals move toward a target, and the remaining (=16) uninformed individuals
move in a linear combination of a direction toward the group’s centroid, and the average direction
of the group. The example of CM is at Fig. 14.
4.1.6
Linear Threshold model (LT). This model [Kempe et al. 2003] initiates individual movement
by propagation of a linear threshold process on the dynamic network, defined by the k-nearest
neighbors at the current time-step. The model is parameterized by ρ, the proportion of these k
neighbors required to be infected in order to initiate movement. Once activated, the individual
follows a single initiator. The initial probability of activation for each individual is 0.5. We explore
the parameter space on combinations of: k ∈{3, 5, 10} and ρ ∈{0.25, 0.50, 0.75}. The example of
LT is at Fig. 15.
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:18
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
Fig. 14. Examples of individual movements from Crowd model. Nodes represent individual positions and
arrows represent directions of individual’s movement. (Left) at time t, everyone follows some directions
except informed individuals (T nodes) which moves directly to a target. Then, at time t +l (right), the group’s
direction, which is the average of individual’s directions, gradually changes toward the target.
Fig. 15. Examples of individual movements from Linear Threshold model. Nodes represent individual positions
and arrows represent directions of individual’s movement. (Left) at time t, only active individuals (orange
color) move toward an initiator L. Suppose k = 3 and ρ = 0.50, at time t, an inactive individual A has two
active individuals F1, F2 and L as its neighbors. Since 66% of A’s neighbors are activated, then, at time t + 1
(right), A is active and start moving toward L.
4.1.7
Independent Cascade model (IC). This model [Kempe et al. 2003] is another propagation
process similar to LT. At each time step, each active individual moves toward the initiator and
independently attempts to activate its k-nearest neighbors with the probability of ρ. If the individual
fails to activate a neighbor, it cannot attempt to activate the same neighbor again. We explore the
same sample parameter space as in the LT model.
4.1.8
Random model. In this model, there is no ‘following’ relations. At the start of the pre-
coordination interval, all individuals start moving to a fixed direction, independently of others in
the population. We expect the relative positions of individuals to yield some following relations
only by chance.
4.2
Synthetic trajectory simulation
For each of the above models, we generate a trial of synthetic data consisting of 20 individuals,
and 20 separate coordination events, for a total of 12,000 time-steps. Each coordination event has
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:19
pre-coordination and coordination intervals of 200 time-steps each. Following the coordination
interval is another 200 time steps of a post-coordination before repeating. We generate 100 trials
for each of models. In total, we have 2,700 simulation datasets.
4.3
Real datasets
4.3.1
Baboon trajectories. High-resolution GPS collars track 26 individuals of a troop of olive
baboons (Papio anubis) living in the wild in Mpala Research Centre, Kenya [Crofoot et al. 2015;
Strandburg-Peshkin et al. 2015]. The data consists of latitude-longitude location pairs for each
individual at one observation per second. We analyze a subset of 16 individuals whose collars
remained functional for a ten day period (419,095 time steps). In addition, in the first two days
of baboon tracking, there are four group activities labeling by experts: sleeping, hanging out,
coordinated progression, and coordinated non-progression [Li et al. 2016]. We show later that by
using only following network density as a feature to perform activity classification, we can get
high accurate results of activity prediction.
4.3.2
Fish schools trajectories. The movement of a fish school of golden shiners (Notemigonus
crysoleucas) are recorded by video in order to study information propagation over the visual fields
of fish [Strandburg-Peshkin and et al. 2013]. Each population contains 70 fish, with 10 trained,
labeled fish who are able to lead the school to feeding sites over 24 separate coordination events.
The task is to correctly identify trained fish by initiator ranking.
4.3.3
Stock closing-price time series. We collected daily closing price data for stocks listed in
NASDAQ, using Yahoo! Finance.3 These time series are from January 2000 to January 2016 (4169
time-steps). We remove symbols with a large amount of missing data, leaving a total of 1443
symbols in our dataset. Our analysis focuses on discovering large, known events and crises in an
unsupervised way, and to explore initiators and sectors involved in these coordination events.
4.4
Evaluation
For synthetic datasets, we use three evaluation approaches:
• Global leadership: For each method, we extract network and/or rank statistics over the entire
time series, and report only a single aggregate initiator ranking. We compare the known ground
truth ranking (used to generate the data) against the ranking of each method, reporting precision.
We measure precision of identifying the true initiator, on DM, LT, IC, and INIT-1 models. For the
HM model, we compare the exact top-4 ranking against the ground truth (order matters); The
evaluation is the same for CM and INIT-4 models, except the exact top-4 ranking constraint is
relaxed (i.e. we compare top-4 sets).
• Local leadership: For evaluation data in this case, we use the ground truth ranking for each
local coordination event, and the time intervals of each event. We report average precision over
each discovered pre-coordination interval. We evaluate the EM model using this approach. We
report only the FLICA result, since it is the only method capable of producing local ranking.
• Initiator leadership: For each coordination event, we measure the initiator of coordination
event before coordination occurs (e.g. in the pre-coordination interval). This individual may not
be highly ranked after coordination (see Fig. 6). We report the precision of global leadership
considering only the pre-coordination intervals. Since only FLICA identifies pre-coordination
intervals, we compare against other methods’ global leadership. This evaluation demonstrates
that global leadership is distinct from coordination initiation. We evaluate DM-S and HM-S
models using this approach.
3http://finance.yahoo.com/
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:20
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
4.5
Compared leadership methods
Table 1. Time complexities of leadership inference methods where n is a number of time series, ω is a time
window, and t∗is a length of time series.
Method
Input
Time complexity
FLICA
Time series
O(n2 × t∗× ω)
FLOCK [Andersson et al. 2008]
Trajectory
O(n2 × t∗)
LPD [Kjargaard et al. 2013]
Time series
O(n2 × t∗× ω3)
IM [Kempe et al. 2003]
Network
O(n2 × t∗)
Copula-Granger [Liu et al. 2012]
Time series
O(n × (ω × t∗)2)
We demonstrate the performance of our framework by comparing with previous works on
influence and leadership [Andersson et al. 2008; Kempe et al. 2003; Kjargaard et al. 2013] as well
as creating the Granger-Causality framework based on the work by Liu et al. [Liu et al. 2012] to
illustrate the potential of using Granger Causality to infer leaders in time series. These methods can
infer only global initiator ranking, while our proposed framework (FLICA) can detect individual
coordination events, handles switching initiator, and performs leadership model classification.
Therefore, we use the global leadership identification task to compare FLICA’s performance with
the prior works. We report the best results under varying parameters for competing frameworks.
The time complexity of each method is shown in Table 1.
First, the FLOCK model [Andersson et al. 2008] identifies leaders who move toward the norm
direction vector of the group and also in the front of the group. Second, LPD [Kjargaard et al. 2013]
creates an aggregate ‘following’ network from time-lag features. A node is scored by breadth-first
traversal on reversed ‘following’ edges. Visited neighbors’ contribution is inverse-proportional
to the geodesic distance. For the purposes of our simulation, we use sliding Euclidean distance
alignment (e.g. analogous to cross-correlation) because LPD does not scale to the size of our simu-
lations under DTW (see Table 1). Finally, for influence maximization (IM), we use the independent
cascade model for the 1-seed selection problem [Kempe et al. 2003], on the network derived from
[Andersson et al. 2008]. The network describes the probability of any individual A sharing the same
direction as B, and in the front of B.
For the Granger Causality method, we used the Copula-Granger approach that can be found in
[Liu et al. 2012] to infer a causal network. Then, we convert the causal network to be a following
network by designating X follows Y if the weight of Y Granger causes X is larger than the weight
of X Granger causes Y.
To make leadership comparison possible, we report the global leadership rank ordered list for each
method as follows. First, we create rank order lists for FLICA under PageRank. The FLOCK model,
however, does not have the explicit ranking score, so we rank individuals based on decreasing time
duration of leadership. Third, LPD assigns individuals with higher scores a higher rank. Finally,
since IM uses the probabilistic network of influence, we construct the realization of this influence
network. A node influences any node to which it has a directed path in the realized network. We
rank individuals based on the expectation of nodes influenced by that node over 1000 realized
networks. Lastly, for the Copula-Granger leadership framework, we use PageRank to evaluate the
leadership ranking on the following network we created from the causal network.
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:21
4.6
Sensitivity analysis
Typically, real-world datasets are noisy. The high degree of noise can affect results of leadership
inference. However, the effects of noise on leadership inference is unclear. Moreover, in our leader-
ship framework, the main parameter is the time window ω. Using the wrong value of time window
may affect the results as well. Hence, in this section, we consider the approach to measure the
robustness of our framework.
Fig. 16. An example of time series of following-network density. There are three coordination events where
individual A leads a group in first half of all coordination events while B leads a group after A for first and
second coordination events. The third coordination event has C leads the second half of the event.
4.6.1
Support of faction leading. To measure the accuracy of initiator inference, we use a support
value of being a leader of factions for each individual. A faction interval of L is defined as a sub-
coordinated interval within a coordination event such that L leads a group. Given F = {IL} is a set
of faction intervals where IL is a faction interval lead by L (The consecutive time interval that L
leads the group) and a time window ω, a coordination event Ek is defined to be a combined interval
of consecutive faction intervals. Specifically, if a faction interval Ii finishes at time t ′
i while Ij starts
at time tj ≤t ′
i + ω, then both Ii and Ij factions are in the same coordination event.
Definition 4.1 (Coordination event). Let F = {I} be a set of faction intervals and ω be a time
window. A coordination event Ek = [t1,t2] is a combined interval of consecutive faction intervals
from F . Any faction interval Ii = [ti,t ′
i ] that occurs before another faction Ij = [tj,t ′
j] are in the
same coordination event if t ′
i < tj ≤t ′
i + ω.
Given E = {Ek} is a set of coordination events and FL = {Ii} is a set of faction intervals lead by
L, the support value of an individual L leading factions is defined as follows.
sup(L) = |{E|E ∈E, ∃I ∈FL, I ⊆E}|
|E|
(8)
The support value, sup(L), tells us the level of consistency that L happens to initiate its faction for
any coordination event. If sup(L) ≈1, then it means L always initiates factions when coordination
events occur. In contrast, if sup(L) ≈0, then there is a low chance that L initiates any faction.
Moreover, we can calculate a confident value of having A’s and B’s factions in the same coordi-
nation event given that A’s faction occurs at the event as follows.
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:22
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
Conf(B|A) =
{E|E ∈E, ∃Ii ∈FA, ∃Ij ∈FB, Ii, Ij ⊆E}

|{E|E ∈E, ∃I ∈FA, I ⊆E}|
(9)
Fig. 16 shows the toy example of coordination events in the form of density time series of following
network. E = {[t1,t3], [t4,t6], [t7,t9]} is a set of coordination events. A set of faction intervals lead
by A is FA = {[t1,t2], [t4,t5], [t7,t8]}, a set of faction intervals lead by B is FB = {(t2,t3], (t5,t6]},
and a set of faction intervals lead by C is FC = {(t8,t9]}. The support values of A, B and C are
sup(A) = 1, sup(B) = 2/3, and sup(C) = 1/3 respectively. The confident values of having B’s
faction within a coordination event that has A’s faction is Conf(B|A) = 2/3. But Conf(A|B) = 1 and
Conf(A|C) = 1.
4.6.2
Simulation and accuracy measure.
• Initiator inference: To measure the performance of framework vs. noise w.r.t. the initiator
inference task, we use simulation datasets of movement time series within 2-dimensional space. A
simulation dataset contains trajectories of individuals that have multiple coordination events (e.g.
Fig. 16). Each type of simulation dataset contains different type and level of noises. The task is to
predict a support of each initiators as well as confident values. The performance of framework
is determined based on the error between ground truth and predicted values of support and
confident measures. If the framework performs well, the predicted support and confident value
of initiators should be close to the ground truth.
• Coordination interval inference: To measure the performance of framework vs. noise w.r.t.
the coordination interval inference task, we use simulation datasets of movement time series
within 2-dimensional space. we compared the predicted faction intervals of each initiators to the
ground truth directly. The result of comparison are reported in the form of true positive, false
positive, and false negative values. True positive will be counted at time step t when a predicted
and ground truth faction interval of initiator L occurs at time t. False positive will be counted
when the framework predicts that a time step t is within L’s faction but it is not. False negative
will be counted when the framework predicts that a time step t is not within L’s faction but it is.
4.6.3
Position and Direction noises. To measure the robustness of framework w.r.t. two tasks
above, we consider two types of noises: position noise and direction noise. For a direction noise,
instead of moving to a target direction at degree D compared to X-axis, an individual moves toward
a direction D + a. The direction noise a is drawn randomly from a normal distribution with zero
mean and γ standard deviation. For position noise, suppose (x,y) is the next position that an
individual should move to, with position noise, the actual position that the individual moves is
(x + b1,y + b2). The position noise b1,b2 are drawn randomly from a normal distribution with zero
mean and β standard deviation.
4.6.4
Time window sensitivity. A time window parameter ω is the main parameter of our leader-
ship framework. we report the performance of framework when the time window is vary from the
optimal time window. If the framework is robust, then it should perform well even when the time
window value is set significantly different from the optimal value.
5
RESULTS
5.1
Identifying leaders
In each simulation, we have the label of the true initiator(s). For each of the simulation trials, our
method identifies the ‘initiator’ and ‘rank ordered lists’ (see Section 4.4). We set a window size ω
by the TWIN heuristic [Sulo et al. 2010] on the network density, window shift size δ = 0.1ω, and
the λ threshold at the mean of the network density time series d(t).
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:23
Table 2. Precision of leadership identification on simulation models. (* indicates the std ≥0.1).
Models/Methods
FLICA
FLOCK
IM
LPD
Copula-Granger
DM
1
1
1
1
0.97*
HM (Top-4)
1
0.25
1
1
0.55*
LT
0.99
0.98*
0.99*
0.93*
0.07*
IC
1
1
1
0.99
0.45*
CM (Top-4)
1
1
1
0.99
0.69*
INIT-1
1
1
1
1
0.24*
INIT-4 (Top-4)
0.74*
0.35*
0.51*
0.21*
0.91*
DM-S
1
0
0.02*
0.25*
0.37*
HM-S (Top-4)
1
0
0.5
0.51
0.31*
EM
0.92
-
-
-
-
Random
0.01
0
0.01
0.17*
0.02*
Table 2 reports precision on PageRank rank ordered lists over all synthetic model simulations.
We compare against previous works–FLOCK [Andersson et al. 2008], IM [Kempe et al. 2003], LPD
[Kjargaard et al. 2013], and Copula-Granger Causality Inference models [Liu et al. 2012]–which
produce a single ranking over the entire trial.
The white rows in Table 2 report precision of leadership identification for a fixed initiator across
all coordination events (global leadership). Gray rows report precision of initiator leadership where
leaders change between pre-coordination and coordination intervals in the event (DM-S, HM-S), or
precision of local leadership where the initiator changes per coordination event (EM). The rows
labeled ‘Top-4’ report precision in identifying any of the multiple unordered initiators (CM, INIT-4)
or precision for the correct hierarchical order (HM, HM-S).
On the white rows, FLICA is robust across all simulation models, while FLOCK, IM, and LPD
perform well other than on INIT-4 simulations (e.g. with multiple initiators). However, in gray
rows (“initiator switching”) previous methods fail almost completely since they are unable to
detect leadership prior to coordination. When the coordination state is more prevalent than the
pre-coordination decision-point, ranking will favor an individual who happens to lead the dynamics
in the coordination state (but may not have initiated the state). For Copula-Granger framework, it
can infer correct initiators with high accuracy in Dictatorship model, while it fails for the most of
models except INIT-4. This indicates that the Copula-Granger approach has a potential to infer
leaders even though it is not designed to perform leadership inference.
The row reporting EM results is a special case of precision. Because we know each coordination
event has a unique initiator, ranking individuals across all coordination events will fail. Instead,
we report precision in identifying the initiator of each coordination event. Since previous work
generates only aggregate rankings, precision for these methods are not reported.
5.2
Case study: trained initiators in fish schools
We identify the top-k global initiators of the fish school trajectory dataset (see Section 4.3.2), where
we have the labels of ‘trained’ individuals expected to lead the school to feeding sites. Table 3
reports precision of identifying trained fish as initiators over 24 trials. The Initiator column is
precision of predicting a trained fish as a global initiator. The Top-4 rank column is precision of
identifying trained fish as the top-4 ranking individuals. Similar to the simulation models, FLICA
performs best overall, again suggesting that dynamic following network representation captures
‘following’ better than other features.
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:24
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
Table 3. Initiator identification precision in fish (* indicates the std ≥0.1).
Ranking
Initiator
Top-4 rank
FLICA
0.83*
0.61*
FLOCK [Andersson et al. 2008]
0.0
0.0
IM [Kempe et al. 2003]
0.0
0.02
LPD [Kjargaard et al. 2013]
0.17*
0.18*
Copula-Granger [Liu et al. 2012]
0.13*
0.10*
5.3
Case study: finding “initiators" of stock market events
We apply our leadership framework to stock market closing price data of the NASDAQ index. An
‘initiator’ in this context measures the extent that a stock increases or decreases in value before
a large group of other stocks (e.g. a coordinated group). We apply the framework without any
special consideration to the domain, only to qualitatively validate that we can discover known,
large events.
Fig. 17. (Top) NASDAQ ‘following’ network density and (Bottom) NASDAQ index value. Pre-coordination
and coordination intervals are shown in red and green, respectively. The framework detects many known
events in financial data (labeled above). Many of these events are not reflected in the NASDAQ index.
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:25
Fig. 17 shows the network density of the inferred ‘following’ network over time, where we
discover coordination events with λ threshold at the 75th percentile of the network density time
series. Pre-coordination and coordination intervals are shown in red and green, respectively. We
find significant economic events such as the 2000 tech collapse, and 9/11. More interestingly, we
discover known events which are reflected in the network density signal but not the NASDAQ
index. For example, we discover a technical econometric event, where the “TED Spread” (a surrogate
of national credit risk) begins fluctuating in July 2007, and a small market failure in August 2011.
Matching our intuition, the top-ranked companies in the coordination event associated with the
year 2000 collapse are primarily in IT and semiconductors, including eBay and SanDisk in the top
10.
Fig. 18. Comparison between time series of network density that generated from NASDAQ time series and
from random walk time series.
For the sanity check, we provided the results of the comparison between the following network
density of NASDAQ stock market and a random walk one in Fig. 18. We generated random-walk
time series from the original NASDAQ closing price time series. Both original and random-walk
versions shared the same distribution of difference between time steps, length, and the number of
time series.
For each time series of closing price X, we inferred the distribution DX of the differences between
the time steps. We created random-walk time series ˆX that starts as the same price as the original
time series, then we updated the next value of ˆX by normally sampling a different value from DX .
Hence, both X and ˆX share the same DX .
We found that our following network density of NASDAQ is different from the random-walk
one (Fig. 18). Moreover, random-walk network density does not have any coordination events. This
indicates that our network density can tell the difference between random-walk time series and the
actual dataset that contains coordination events.
5.4
Case study: baboon activity classification by following network density
In this section, we demonstrate that our coordination events, which defined by following network
density time series, corresponding to coordinated progression activity labeled by experts in baboon
dataset (see Section 4.3.1).
For each time step, a group of baboon has an activity label as either sleeping, hanging out,
coordinated progression, or coordinated non-progression. The group of baboons is considered to
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:26
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
Fig. 19. Baboon activities from first two days of tracking vs. following network density
have a sleeping label when they are at their home tree to sleep. Hanging out activity happens when
baboons stay around the same place without moving far away from the group. Coordinated pro-
gression is when a group of baboons having a strong coordinated movement to somewhere. Lastly,
in coordinated non-progression, a group has a weaker coordinated movement than coordinated
progression.
Fig. 19 shows the distribution of network density for each activity. Sleeping and hanging out
activities have low values of network density, which implies that the group rarely has following
relations. On the contrary, coordinated progression and coordinated non-progression have high
values of network density on average, which is similar to our coordination intervals. This result
illustrates that a following network density is informative with respect to the task of activity
classification.
In the dataset, there are two days of baboon activity labels. We used the first day data to train a
classifier to predict the second day activities as well as using the second day to train a classifier
to predict the first day activities. We used Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) as our classifier
and used only network density as a feature. We compared our result with Adversarial Sequence
Tagging (AST) [Li et al. 2016], with is the state-of-the-art method that performed activity labeling
classification in the same dataset. Our aim is to show that a following network density is informative
enough to make a simple classifier performs better than the state-of-the-art classifier method that
used 24 features in the group activity classification task.
Table 4. Activities classification prediction accuracy in first two days of baboon data.
Method
Baboon Day 1
Baboon Day 2
Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) + following network density
87.20%
70.82%
Adversarial Sequence Tagging (AST) [Li et al. 2016] + 24 features
77.30%
69.22%
The classification result is shown in Table 4. The accuracy results were calculated by the comple-
ment of hamming loss the same as [Li et al. 2016]. By using only following network density as a
feature, our simple classifier performs better than AST in both days.
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:27
5.5
Leadership model classification
Fig. 20. Comparison of feature spaces of leadership model classifications on simulations and real data
Recall, that we proposed several initiator rankings and ranking correlations (Section 3.6). Here,
we do leadership model classification on each simulation trial using the proposed features derived
from the rank correlations: corrp, corrv, corrp,pr, corrv,pr and suppr . A classifier takes these features
and produces a leadership model label, one per trial of the simulation model in the evaluation
hold-out. We use 10-fold cross validation on Random Forests [Ho 1998] over the 2700 total trials
and report mean precision and recall across folds. Table 5 reports the classification results for
each simulation model. We combine some models into a shared label because they share similar
characteristics when we project them into our feature spaces. For example, DM, and DM-S models
always have high corrv but low corrp.
Fig. 20 visualizes sub-spaces of the full feature-space. Fig. 20 (Top) shows the maximum support
(suppr ) over all individuals for this trial vs. the corrv (the rank correlation between global and local
VCH ranking) and corrp. The suppr axis (x-axis) describes how ‘dictatorial’ (e.g. consistent) the
leadership is across coordination events. DM therefore has high support, while EM (distinct leaders
per coordination event) has low suppr. The corrv and corrp axes describe consistency between
local and global convex hull rankings. HM has high velocity ranking because leaders accelerate in a
consistent sequence, yielding consistent individuals movement outside of the VCH in the previous
time step. The random model produces high corrp because relative positions within the group are
somewhat consistent. Therefore, a consistent set of individuals expand the PCH from the previous
time step.
Fig. 20 (Bottom-Right) reports the mean rank correlation between PageRank rank ordering,
against PCH and VCH ranking in each coordination event. At the origin (0, 0), ranking from the
inferred ‘following’ network is uncorrelated with time series feature rankings in position or velocity.
Following our intuition, the Random simulation has the lowest cross-domain feature correlation,
while DM and HM have highest correlation between these domains. As the simplest simulations,
DM and HM both dictate that leaders will have regular position (e.g. the front of the group), or
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:28
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
velocity (accelerating in sequence before others). Simulations such as CM, LT, IC have indirect
relationships between relative position and velocity vs. the following network ranking.
5.5.1
Baboon leadership model characterization. A key aspect of our simulation modeling is that
we can characterize real datasets according to how they map into these feature-spaces, compared to
synthetic models. We compute each rank correlations over high-confidence baboon events, labeled
“Baboon” in Fig. 20, thresholded at the 99th percentile of density. We observe that within different
sub-spaces, the baboon ranking is similar to Random or Linear Threshold, and has low maximum
support for global vs. local rank correlation features (e.g. corrp). We see this rank correlation
between both cross-domain axes (Fig. 20 (Bottom-Right)). This suggests that in aggregate, baboon
leadership is heterogeneous and context-driven, though overall closer to the Linear Threshold
influence model (as biologically expected). This analysis provides a strategy for hypothesis testing
and generation on contrasting time-scales and sub-spaces.
Table 5. Random forest classification of synthetic leadership models using proposed features
Model
Precision
Recall
F1-score
DM, DM-S
0.86
0.80
0.81
HM, HM-S
0.69
0.98
0.80
LT, IC, INIT-k
0.99
0.97
0.98
CM
0.75
0.94
0.80
EM
1
0.54
0.64
Random
0.98
0.95
0.97
5.6
Following network density perturbation in baboon and fish data
In this section, we provided the results of the network density changes when individuals are
removed from the datasets, either the high-rank ones or (uniformly) at random.
In the baboon dataset, we used leadership ranking during pre-coordination intervals to choose
the top-k rank individuals. In the fish datasets, we used leadership ranking to choose top-k ranked
individuals, which are also informed fish. For the randomly chosen individuals, we uniformly and
randomly chose k individuals from the population. We repeated the random choice process 100
times and report the average of these results.
Table 6 shows the average difference of the network density before and after removing k
individuals from the baboon dataset. In the ’High-Rank’ row, the network density decreases with
the removal of high-ranked individuals. In contrast, in the ’Random’ row, the network density is
largely unaffected by the uniformly random removal of the individuals.
Table 6. The average difference of network density between before and after removing k individuals on the
baboon dataset. We compare the case of removing high-rank individuals vs. random individuals. An element
in the table represents the difference between the original network density and the network density after
removing k individuals.
Number of Individuals being removed from 16 individuals (#k)
#1
#2
#3
#4
High-Rank
−5.45 × 10−03
−7.37 × 10−03
−9.65 × 10−03
−10.14 × 10−03
Random
0.057 × 10−03
−0.004 × 10−03
−0.504 × 10−03
0.002 × 10−03
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:29
Table 7. The average difference of the network density between before and after removing k individuals from
the fish data. We compare the case of removing high-rank individuals vs. random individuals. An element
in the table represents the difference between the original network density and the network density after
removing k individuals.
Number of Individuals being removed from 70 individuals (#k)
#2
#4
#6
#8
High-Rank
−20.26 × 10−04
−3.96 × 10−04
−2.45 × 10−04
−8.44 × 10−04
Random
−0.55 × 10−04
−0.04 × 10−04
−3.90 × 10−04
−3.88 × 10−04
In the fish data, Table 7 shows the results of the network density difference after removing k
individuals. In the ’High-Rank’ row, the network density decreases with the removal of high-ranked
individuals, albeit less so than in the baboon dataset. In the random case, the network density is
still largely unaffected by the uniformly random removal of the individuals.
The results above show that by removing high-rank individuals in both baboon and fish datasets,
the network density decreases significantly compared to randomly removed individuals. Moreover,
we found that removing high-rank individuals in the baboon dataset resulted in a larger decrease of
the network density than in the fish datasets. This suggests that baboons have a stronger following
hierarchy than schools of fish.
5.7
Sensitivity analysis
We conducted the sensitivity analysis based on Section 4.6 to demonstrate the robustness of our
framework. We used simulation datasets that have the time delay for following relations less than
30 time steps. Hence, the optimal time window ω is 30 time steps. In the initiator inference, the
results of loss values of the initiator-support prediction are shown in Fig. 21. Each cell in these
three sub figures represents a loss value which is the difference between the ground-truth and the
predicted value of the initiator support (Eq. 8). In general, unsurprisingly, the loss value increases
with noise.
Fig. 21 (below) illustrates that both the position and direction noise affect the prediction per-
formance. In top-left and top-right plots, they show that when we set the time window below the
optimal value (ω < 30), the loss of support inference is significantly higher than setting the time
window above the optimal time window. This suggest us to try to guess the possibly maximum
time delay in datasets and avoid setting the time window parameter below this value if the ground
truth regarding time delay is not available.
Fig. 22 shows the loss values of the initiator-confidence prediction. Each value in these three sub
figures represents a loss value, which is a difference between the ground-truth and the predicted
confidence values. Similar to the support result, higher levels of noise results in higher loss values.
Similarly, setting the time window below the optimal value also severely affects the framework
performance in confidence prediction.
In the coordination inference task, Fig. 23 shows the F1 scores of the coordination inference for
different levels of noise and time window sizes. Each value in these three sub figures represents the
F1 score of the prediction. Similar to the previous results in the initiator inference, higher levels
of noise reduce prediction performance. Setting the time window below the optimal value also
decreases the prediction performance severely.
In conclusion, when we increase the amount of noise in the datasets, the framework performance
decreases. Moreover, we found that if we set the time window parameter below the optimal, it
severely affects the framework performance in both initiator and coordination inference tasks. In
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

53:30
C. Amornbunchornvej et al.
Fig. 21. Loss values of prediction of the initiator support for different levels of noise and time window sizes. A
lower value implies a better prediction result.
contrast, when we set the time window above the optimal value, the framework performance drops
only slightly. The optimal time window is, then, a value above the possible highest time delay that
two individuals can follow each other in the dataset. This suggests that the users of our framework
should try to come with an educated guess of the possible values of time delays that are relevant
for the application context and set the time window parameter accordingly.
6
CONCLUSIONS
We narrow the gap between the biosociological view of leadership in group decision-making and
the computational approaches to leadership inference. The work presented in this paper formalizes
a new computational problem, namely Coordination Initiator Inference Problem, and
proposes the concrete, simple yet powerful, unsupervised general framework as a solution. The
framework is capable of (1) identifying events of coordinated group behavior, (2) identifying leaders
as initiators of these events, and (3) classifying the type of leadership process at play. We validate
the accuracy of our framework in performing all three of these tasks using 2,700 simulated datasets.
Since there are no methods for local leadership inference and leadership model classification, we
compared our framework with the state-of-the-art methods for global leadership identification. Our
method performance is consistently competitive and its abilities go beyond other approaches in all
datasets. We further show that the framework can provide insights on real-world data, including
data on collective animal movement and the economy. The methodology presented here is general
and applicable to a wide variety of domains where coordination across many individuals or entities
is observed. Moreover, our framework is highly flexible, and can easily be extended to incorporate
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, Vol. 12, No. 5, Article 53. Publication date: June 2018.

Coordination Event Detection and Initiator Identification in Time Series Data
53:31
Fig. 22. Loss values of prediction of the initiator confidence for different levels of noise and time window
sizes. A lower value implies a better prediction result.
other models of leadership or other features used in model classification, depending on the details
of the system being analyzed. For reproducibility, we provide our code and simulation datasets at
[Amornbunchornvej 2017].
