Finding Nontrivial Minimum Fixed Points in
Discrete Dynamical Systems
Zirou Qiu,1,2 Chen Chen,2 Madhav V. Marathe,1,2 S. S. Ravi,2,3
Daniel J. Rosenkrantz,2,3 Richard E. Stearns,2,3 Anil Vullikanti1,2 1
1Computer Science Dept., University of Virginia.
2Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative, University of Virginia.
3Computer Science Dept., University at Albany – SUNY.
Abstract
Networked discrete dynamical systems are often used to model the spread of contagions and decision-
making by agents in coordination games. Fixed points of such dynamical systems represent configura-
tions to which the system converges. In the dissemination of undesirable contagions (such as rumors and
misinformation), convergence to fixed points with a small number of affected vertices is a desirable goal.
Motivated by such considerations, we formulate a novel optimization problem of finding a nontrivial fixed
point of the system with the minimum number of affected vertices. We establish that, unless P = NP, there
is no polynomial time algorithm for approximating a solution to this problem to within the factor n1−ϵ for
any constant ϵ > 0. To cope with this computational intractability, we identify several special cases for
which the problem can be solved efficiently. Further, we introduce an integer linear program to address
the problem for networks of reasonable sizes. For solving the problem on larger networks, we propose
a general heuristic framework along with greedy selection methods. Extensive experimental results on
real-world networks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed heuristics.
Conference version. The conference version of the paper is accepted at AAAI-2022: Link.
1
Introduction
Discrete dynamical systems are commonly used to model the propagation of contagions (e.g., rumors, failures
of subsystems in infrastructures) and decision-making processes in networked games [26, 16]. Specifically,
the states of vertices in such dynamical systems are binary, with state 1 indicating the adoption of a contagion,
and state 0 otherwise. At each time step, the states of the vertices are updated using their local functions.
When the local functions are threshold functions, a vertex v acquires a contagion (i.e., v changes to state 1)
if the number of v’s neighbors that have adopted the contagion (i.e., v’s peer strength) is at least a given
threshold. Conversely, an individual’s adoption of a contagion is reversed (i.e., v changes to state 0) when
the peer strength is below the threshold [5]. Since its introduction by Granovetter ([15]), the threshold model
has been extensively studied in many contexts including opinion dynamics [3], information diffusion [9] and
the spread of social conventions and rumors [13, 32]. The threshold model also captures decision patterns in
networked coordination games [23].
1
arXiv:2301.04090v5  [cs.SI]  29 Mar 2024

One important stage of the system dynamics is the convergence of vertices’ states, where no individuals
change states further; this is similar to an equilibrium in a networked game [11, 12]. Such a stage is called
a fixed point of the dynamical system. Consider a scenario where a rumor is spreading in a community
under the threshold model; here, an individual v chooses to believe the rumor if the number of believers in
v’s social circle is at least the threshold of v. Given the undesirable nature of rumors, identifying fixed points
with minimum numbers of believers is desirable [27].
For some social contagions that are widely adopted in communities, it is often unrealistic to expect con-
tagions to eventually disappear spontaneously. One example is the anti-vaccination opinion, which emerged
in 1853 against the smallpox vaccine [29]. Even today, the anti-vaccination sentiment persists across the
world [28]. Such considerations motivate us to study a more realistic problem, namely determining whether
there are fixed points with at most a given number of contagion adoptions under the nontriviality constraint
that the number of adoptions in the fixed point must be nonzero. We refer to this as the nontrivial minimum
fixed point existence problem (NMin-FPE).
Nontrivial minimum fixed points of a system, which are jointly determined by the network structure and
local functions, provide a way of quantifying the system’s resilience against the spread of negative informa-
tion. In particular, the number of contagion adoptions in a nontrivial minimum fixed point provides the lower
bound on the number of individuals affected by the negative contagion. Further, when the complete absence
of a contagion is impractical, nontrivial minimum fixed points serve as desirable convergence points for con-
trol strategies [18]. Similarly in coordination games, one is interested in finding equilibria wherein only a
small number of players deviate from the strategy adopted by a majority of the players [23].
As we will show, the main difficulty of the NMin-FPE problem lies in its computational complexity. A
related problem is that of influence minimization (e.g., [31]). The main differences between the two problems
are twofold. First, the influence minimization problem is based on the progressive model where a vertex state
can only change from 0 to 1 but not vice versa. Second, the influence minimization problem aims to find
optimal intervention strategies (e.g., vertex/edge removal) to reduce the cascade size, while NMin-FPE aims
to find a minimum influenced group without changing the system. In this work, we study the NMin-FPE
problem on synchronous dynamical systems (SyDS) with threshold local functions, where the vertices update
states simultaneously in each time-step. Our main contributions are as follows:
1. Formulation. We formally define the Nontrivial Minimum Fixed Point Existence Problem (NMin-FPE)
from a combinatorial optimization perspective.
2. Intractability. We establish that unless P = NP, NMin-FPE cannot be approximated to within the factor
n1−ϵ for any ϵ > 0, even when the graph is bipartite. We also show that the NMin-FPE is W[1]-hard w.r.t.
the natural parameter of the problem (i.e., the number of vertices in state 1 in any nontrivial fixed point).
3. Algorithms. We identify several special cases for which NMin-FPE can be solved in polynomial time.
To obtain an optimal solutions for networks of moderate size, we present an integer linear program (ILP)
formulation for NMin-FPE. For larger networks, we propose a heuristic framework along with three greedy
selection strategies that can be embedded into the framework.
4. Evaluation. We conduct extensive experiments to study the performance of our heuristics on real-world
2

and synthetic networks under various scenarios. Our results demonstrate that the proposed heuristics
are effective, and the proposed method outperforms baseline methods significantly, despite the strong
inapproximability of NMin-FPE.
2
Related work
Fixed points.
Fixed points of discrete dynamical systems have been widely studied. Goles and Martinez
[14] show that for any initial configuration, a threshold SyDS always converges to either a fixed point or a cycle
with two configurations in a polynomial number of time steps. Barrett et al. [4] show that determining whether
a system has a fixed point (FPE) is NP-complete for symmetric sequential dynamical systems and that the
problem is efficiently solvable for threshold sequential dynamical systems. More recently, Chistikov et al. [10]
study fixed points in the context of opinion diffusion; they show that determining whether a system reaches a
fixed point from a given configuration is PSPACE-complete for SyDSs on general directed networks, but can
be solved in polynomial time when the underlying graph is a DAG. In Rosenkrantz et al. [24], we investigate
convergence and other problems for SyDSs whose underlying graphs are DAGs. In particular, we show that
the convergence guarantee problem (i.e., determining if a system reaches a fixed point starting from any
configuration) is Co-NP-complete for SyDSs on DAGs.
Influence minimization.
Existing works on influence minimization focus on reducing the prevalence via
control strategies. Yang, Li and Giua [30] study the problem of finding a k-subset of active vertices (i.e., an
initial configuration with at most k vertices in state 1) such that the converged influence value is minimized
and a target set of vertices are active. They provide an integer program of the problem and suggest two
heuristics. Wang et al. [27] propose a new rumor diffusion model and optimize blocking the contagion by
considering an Ising model. Zhu, Ni, and Wang [34] estimate the influence of vertices and minimize the
adoption of negative contagions by disabling vertices. Other approaches focus on blocking the spread via
vertex removal [20, 31, ?, 21] or edge removal [19, 18, 7, 22] and enhance network resilience [?].
Coordination games.
Agent decision-making in coordination games coincides with threshold-based cas-
cade of contagions. Adam et al. [1] study the best response dynamics of coordination games and analyze the
convergences and propose a new network resilience measure. Ramazi et al. ([23]) study both coordination
and anticoordination games and show that such games always reach equilibria in a finite amount of time.
Other aspects of equilibria in networked games (such as developing control strategies and determining the
existence of equilibria) have also been studied [33, 6, 2, 25].
3
Preliminaries and Problem Definition
We follow the definition of discrete dynamical systems from previous work [24]. A synchronous dynamical
system (SyDS) S over the Boolean domain B = {0,1} of state values is defined as a pair (GS,F) where (1)
GS = (V,E) is the underlying graph of S with n = ∣V ∣and m = ∣E∣, and (2) F = {f1,...,fn} is a collection
of functions for which fi is the local transition function of vertex vi ∈V,1 ≤i ≤n. In general, fi ∈F
3

specifies how vi ∈V updates its state throughout the evolution of S. In this work, we study SyDSs over
the Boolean domain with threshold functions as local functions. Following [5], We denote such a system by
(Bool,Thresh)-SyDS.
Update rules.
In (Bool,Thresh)-SyDSs, each vertex vi ∈V has a fixed integer threshold value τvi ≥0.
At each time step t ≥0, each vertex vi ∈V has a state value in B. While the initial state of any vertex vi
(at time 0) can be assigned arbitrarily, the states at time steps t ≥1 are determined by vi’s local function
fi. Specifically, vi transitions to state 1 at time t if the number of state-1 vertices in its closed neighborhood
N(vi) (which consists of vi and all its neighbors) at time t −1 is at least τvi; the state of vi at time t is 0
otherwise. Furthermore, all vertices update their states synchronously. When GS is a directed graph, a vertex
v transitions to state 1 at a time t ≥1 iff the number of state-1 in-neighbors of v (i.e., vertex v itself and those
from which v has incoming edges) is at least τv. Note that undirected networks are the primary focuses of
this work; we assume that GS is undirected unless specified otherwise.
Configurations and fixed points.
A configuration of S gives the states of all vertices during a time-step.
Specifically, a configuration C is an n-vector C = (C(v1),C(v2),...,C(vn)) where C(vi) ∈B is the state of
vertex vi ∈V under C. There are a total of 2n possible configurations a system S. During the evolution of the
S, the system configuration C changes over time. If S transitions from C to C′ in one time step, then C′ is the
successor of C. Due to the deterministic nature of (Bool,Thresh)-SyDSs, if C = C′, that is, the states of all
vertices remain unchanged, then C is a fixed point of the system. An example of a (Bool,Thresh)-SyDS
S = (GS,F) is shown in Figure 1. Note that given any configuration C, its successor C′ can be computed in
time that is polynomial in the number of vertices n. As shown in [14], starting from any initial configuration,
S converges either to a fixed point or a cycle consisting of two configurations within a number of transitions
that is a polynomial in n.
Transition
Transition
Transition
Figure 1: The evolution of a (Bool,Thresh)-SyDS S = (GS,F) where V (GS) = {vi ∶i = 1,...,5}. The
threshold values are shown in red: τ1 = 3,τ2 = 1,τ3 = 1,τ4 = 2, and τ5 = 2. State-1 vertices are highlighted
in blue. The system undergoes the following evolution: (1,0,0,0,0) →(0,1,1,0,0) →(0,1,1,1,0) →
(1,1,1,1,0), with the last configuration being a fixed point.
Constant-state vertices.
A vertex v ∈V is a constant-1 vertex if τv = 0, that is, given any configuration C,
the state of v is 1 in the successor C′ of C. Similarly, v is a constant-0 vertex if τv = deg(v) + 2.
4

3.1
Problem definition
Let S = (GS,F) be a SyDS and let C be a configuration of S. The Hamming weight of C, denoted by H(C),
is the number of 1’s in C. A minimum fixed point of S is a fixed point with the smallest possible Hamming
weight. Note that when a (Bool,Thresh)-SyDS S has no constant-1 vertices, the minimum fixed point of S
is trivially 0n. A nontrivial fixed point is a fixed point that is different from 0n. Our work focuses on finding
nontrivial minimum fixed points.
Definition 3.1. A nontrivial minimum fixed point of S is a nontrivial fixed point of minimum Hamming
weight.
We now provide a formal definition of the problem.
Nontrivial Minimum Fixed Point Existence (NMin-FPE)
Instance: A SyDS S = (GS,F) and a positive integer q.
Question: Is there a fixed point C of S with Hamming weight at least 1 and at most q?
We focus on the NP-optimization version of NMin-FPE which is to find a nontrivial minimum fixed point.
4
Computational Hardness of NMIN-FPE
In this section, we present an inapproximability result for NMin-FPE. Specifically, we show that NMin-
FPE cannot be poly-time approximated within a factor n1−ϵ for any constant ϵ > 0, unless P = NP. We also
establish that NMin-FPE is W[1]-hard, with the parameter being the Hamming weight of a fixed point. Under
standard hypotheses in computational complexity, our results rule out the possibility of obtaining efficient
approximation algorithms with provable performance guarantees and fixed parameter tractable algorithms
w.r.t. the Hamming weight for NMin-FPE.
Theorem 4.1. The problem NMin-FPE cannot be approximated to within a factor n1−ϵ for any constant
ϵ > 0, unless P = NP. This inapproximability holds even when the underlying graph is bipartite.
Proof. We first consider the case where 0 < ϵ < 1. The overall scheme of our proof is a reduction from
minimum vertex cover to NMin-FPE such that if there exists a poly-time factor n1−ϵ approximation algo-
rithm A for NMin-FPE, we then can use A to solve the Minimum vertex cover problem in polynomial
time, implying P = NP. Let M = ⟨GM,k⟩be an arbitrary instance of Minimum vertex cover (MVC) with
target size k, where nM = ∣V (GM)∣and mM = ∣E(GM)∣. Without loss of generality, we assume that GM
is connected. Moreover, observe when k = nM −1, MVC can be solved in polynomial time. Therefore, we
assume that k < nM −1.
Let A be a polynomial time factor n1−ϵ approximation algorithm for NMin-FPE, 0 < ϵ < 1, where n is
the number of vertices in the underlying graph. We build an instance S = (GS,F) of NMin-FPE for which
nS = ∣V (GS)∣and mS = ∣E(GS)∣. Let α = mM + nM + 1, and β = α⌈2/ϵ⌉. The construction is as follows.
5

1. The vertex set V (GS). Let X = {xu ∶u ∈V (GM)} and Y = {ye ∶e ∈E(GM)} be two sets of vertices
that corresponds to vertices and edges in GM, respectively. Let w,z be two additional vertices. Lastly,
we introduce a set of β vertices R = {r1,...,rβ}. Then V (GS) = X ∪Y ∪R ∪{w} ∪{z}.
We use notations xu ∈X, ye ∈Y , ri ∈R, w and z and to distinguish the five classes of vertices in GS.
2. The edge set E(GS). Let E1 = {(xu,ye) ∶u ∈V (GM) is incident to e ∈E(GM)} be the edge set such
that if a vertex u and an edge e are incident in GM, their corresponding vertices xu and ye are adjacent
in GS. Let E2 = {(ye,z) ∶ye ∈Y } be the edge set where vertex z is adjacent to all ye ∈Y . Let E3 =
{(xu,w) ∶xu ∈X} be the edge set such that w is adjacent to all xu ∈X. Let E4 = {(ri,ri+1) ∶ri ∈R,1 ≤
i ≤β −1}, that is, vertices in R form a path. Lastly, we introduce an additional edge (w,r1) to connect w
with an endpoint of the above path. The edge set of GS is then defined as E(GS) = ⋃4
i=1 Ei ∪{(w,r1)}.
3. Thresholds. The threshold τxu of each xu ∈X is deg(u) + 1 where deg(u) is the degree of vertex u in
GM. The thresholds τye of all ye ∈Y is 3. The thresholds of w and z are k + 1 and mM + 1, respectively.
Lastly, all ri ∈R have threshold 1.
This completes the construction of the NMin-FPE instance S = (GS,F) which clearly takes polynomial time
w.r.t. nM. The resulting graph GS has nS = nM + mM + β + 2 vertices and mS = nM + 3mM + β edges.
Furthermore, GS is bipartite. An example of reduction is shown in Figure 2. We now argue that GM has
a vertex cover of size at most k if and only if the algorithm A returns a non-zero fixed point of size at most
n1−ϵ
S α where α = mM + nM + 1.
(⇒) Let V ′ ⊆V (GM) be a vertex cover of size k. We can construct a fixed point I of S by setting (1) the
states of all ye ∈Y to 1, (2) for all u ∈V ′, the states of xu ∈X to 1, and (3) the state of vertex z to 1.
The number of 1’s in the resulting configuration I is mM + k + 1. We now show that I is a fixed point.
Let I′ be the successor of I. It is easy to see that the state of vertices in R ∪{w} remains 0 and state of
z remains 1 in I′. We consider the following two cases of the state of a vertex xu ∈X under I. If the
state of xu is 1, then since all ye’s have state 1, the input to xu’s local function is deg(xu) + 1 = τxu.
Thus, xu remains in state 1 under I′. If the state of xu is 0 under I, the input to xu’s local function is
deg(xu) < τxu and xu remains in state 0 under I′. It follows that I is a fixed point.
Let OPT(S) denote the Hamming weight of a nontrivial minimum fixed point of S which is at most
k + mM + 1 Let C be a fixed point returned by algorithm A. Since A have an approximation factor of
n1−ϵ, we have
H(C) ≤n1−ϵ
S
⋅OPT ≤n1−ϵ
S
⋅(k + mM + 1) ≤n1−ϵ
S
⋅α
(1)
(⇐) We prove the contrapositive. Suppose GM does not have a vertex cover of size at most k, we establish
the following two claims.
Claim 3.1.1. Under any fixed point C of S where the vertex w is in state 0, there exists a state-1 vertex
in X ∪Y ∪{z} if and only if all ye ∈Y ’s have state 1 under C.
The necessity of the claim clearly holds. We prove the contrapositive of the other direction. Suppose
there exists a vertex ye ∈Y with state 0 under C, let xu and xv be the two neighbors of ye. Observe
6

xu and xv must have state 0 since their thresholds are degrees plus one. Similarly, the vertex z also
has state 0 under C. As a result, all neighbors of xu and xv have state 0. By recursion, all vertices in
X ∪Y ∪{z} have state 0 under C. This concludes the claim.
Claim 3.1.2. For any non-zero fixed point C of S, all vertices in R must have state 1 under C.
Suppose there exists a non-zero fixed point C where at least one vertex ri ∈R has state 0. Since
τri = 1, ∀ri ∈R, it follows that all vertices in R and vertex w must have state 0 under C. We now
consider the states of other vertices under C. Given the τw = k+1, the number of state-1 vertices in X is
at most k. Note that however, since GM does not have a vertex cover of size k, under any combinations
of k state-1 vertices in X, there exists at least one vertex ye ∈Y such that both ye’s neighbors in X
have state 0 under C. Since τye = 3, ∀ye ∈Y , there must exist a vertex ye ∈Y with state 0 under C.
Follows from the Claim 3.1.1, C is a zero fixed point which yields the contraposition. This concludes
the proof of the claim.
By the claim above, we have OPT(S) ≥β = α⌈2/ϵ⌉. We now argue that n1−ϵ
S
⋅α < α⌈2/ϵ⌉. Let λ =
⌈2/ϵ⌉−2/ϵ, we then rewrite n1−ϵ
S
⋅α as
n1−ϵ
S
⋅α = (α
2
ϵ +λ + α + 1)1−ϵ ⋅α
(2)
where nS = nM + mM + β + 2 = α + α⌈2/ϵ⌉+ 1. Since nM ≥1 and 0 ≤ϵ < 1, we have α ≥2 and
2/ϵ + λ = ⌈2/ϵ⌉≥3. Thus,
α + 1 < α
2
ϵ +λ ≤(α −1) ⋅α
2
ϵ +λ
(3)
and it follows that
α
2
ϵ +λ + α + 1 < α
2
ϵ +λ+1
(4)
Since 1 −ϵ > 0,
(α
2
ϵ +λ + α + 1)1−ϵ ⋅α < (α
2
ϵ +λ+1)1−ϵα
= α( 2
ϵ +λ+1)(1−ϵ)+1
= α⌈2
ϵ ⌉−ϵλ−ϵ
< α⌈2
ϵ ⌉
Overall, we have n1−ϵ
S
⋅α < α⌈2/ϵ⌉≤OPT(S). Let C be the non-zero fixed point returned by A. It
follows immediately that H(C) > n1−ϵ
S
⋅α.
Since nS = nM + mM + β + 1 is polynomial w.r.t. nM, the algorithm A runs in polynomial time w.r.t.
nM. The reduction implies that if there exists such an algorithm A with approximation factor n1−ϵ for any
constant 0 < ϵ < 1, based on the Hamming weight of the fixed point returned by A, we can solve MVC in
polynomial time, implying P = NP. For the case where ϵ ≥1, note that the resulting approximation factor
7

n1−ϵ is less than any factor when 0 < ϵ < 1, thus, the inapproximability follows immediately. Overall, we
conclude that NMin-FPE cannot be approximated within a factor n1−ϵ for any constant ϵ > 0, unless P = NP,
and the hardness holds even when the underlying graph is bipartite.
∎
...
Reduction
Figure 2: An example of the reduction from MVC to NMin-FPE where GM and GS are graphs for MVC and
NMin-FPE, respectively.
Theorem (4.1) establishes a strong inapproximability result for NMin-FPE; it points out that even obtain-
ing an approximation guarantee that is slightly better than a linear factor is hard.
Parameterized Complexity of NMIN-FPE.
We now examine whether NMin-FPE is fixed-parameter tractable
(FPT) w.r.t. a natural structural parameter of the problem, namely the Hamming weight of a fixed point.
Theorem 4.2. The problem NMin-FPE is W[1]-hard w.r.t. to the natural parameter (i.e., the Hamming
weight of a fixed point) for (Bool, Thresh)-SyDSs.
Proof. We give a parameterized reduction from the Clique problem to NMin-FPE. Let ⟨GC,k⟩be an arbi-
trary instance of the clique problem, we construct a NMin-FPE instance ⟨S = (GS,F),q⟩by generating
a subdivision of GC. In particular, each edge e = (u,v) ∈E(GC) is transformed into two edges (xu,ye)
and (ye,xv) in E(GS), where (1) xu,xv ∈V (GS) correspond to the vertices u,v ∈V (GC), respectively,
and (2) ye ∈V (GS) corresponds to the edge e ∈E(GC). For clarity, we use X = {xu ∶u ∈V (GC)} and
Y = {ye ∶e ∈E(GC)} to denote the sets of two types of vertices in GS that correspond to vertices and edges
in GC, respectively. Subsequently, V (GS) = X ∪Y . The threshold of each ye ∈Y,e ∈E(GC) is 3, and
the threshold value of each xu ∈X,u ∈V (GC) is k. Lastly, we set q = k + k(k −1)/2 = k(k + 1)/2. This
completes the construction of the NMin-FPE instant. An example reduction is shown in Figure 3. To see that
this is a parameterized reduction, we remark that the reduction can be carried out in O(∣V (GC) + E(GC)∣)
time, which is fixed parameter tractable w.r.t. k. Furthermore, we have q < k3.
We now claim that there is a clique of size k in GC if and only if S has a fixed point C with Hamming
weight 1 ≤H(C) ≤q.
(⇒) Let V ′ ⊆V (GC) be the subset of vertices that form a k-clique in GC. We construct a fixed point C of
S by first setting vertices xu ∈X,∀u ∈V ′ to state 1. Furthermore, for each edge e = (u,v) ∈E(GC)
8

where u,v ∈V ′, we set the vertex ye ∈Y , which is the vertex that corresponds to e, to state 1. All other
vertices in V (GS) are set to state 0 under C. Note that the number of state-1 vertices in X are Y is k
and k(k −1)/2, respectively, thus, we have H(C) = k + k(k −1)/2 = k(k + 1)/2 = q.
We now claim that C is a fixed point. Let C′ be the successor of C. We first consider each vertex
xu ∈X. If the state of xu is 1 under C, then we have u ∈V ′ and by the construction above, xu has
exactly k −1 neighbors in state 1. Thus, τu is satisfied and xu remains state 1 under C′. On the other
hand, if xu is in state 0, then u is not in the k clique of GC, and xu would have no neighbors in state
1 under C. Thus, the state of xu remains 0 in C′. A similar argument can be made for each vertex
ye ∈V (GS). Overall, we conclude that C is a fixed point.
(⇐) We first prove the following claim.
Claim 3.2.1. Any non-zero fixed point C of S has Hamming weight at least q = k(k + 1)/2.
Let xu ∈X be a state-1 vertex under C. Since the threshold of xu is k, at least k −1 of its neighbors
are in state 1. Let ye be a state-1 neighbor of xu. Given that the threshold value of ye is 3, both of its
neighbors should also be in state 1 under C. Therefore, under any non-zero fixed point, the number
of xu ∈X in state 1 is at least k and the number of ye ∈Y in state 1 is at least k(k −1)/2. Thus, the
Hamming weight of C is at least k(k + 1)/2. This concludes the claim.
Now suppose there exists a fixed point C with 1 ≤H(C) ≤q, by the claim above, we must have
H(C) = q. Note that the equality in the claim 3.2.1 holds only when the number of state-1 xu ∈V (GS)
is exactly k and the number of state-1 ye ∈V (GS) is exactly k(k −1)/2, that is, the set of vertices
{u ∈V (GC),xu is in state-1 under C} form a k clique of GC.
Since clique is W[1]-hard w.r.t. the natural parameter k, the theorem follows immediately.
∎
Reduction
Figure 3: An example of the W[1]-hardness reduction from Clique to NMin-FPE where GC and GS are
graphs for Clique and NMin-FPE, respectively. Threshold values are placed next to vertices in GS
Theorem (4.2) implies that NMin-FPE is not FPT w.r.t. to the natural parameter. Note that this does not
exclude FPT results for other parameters, as we identify one such parameter in the next section.
9

5
Approaches for Solving NMIN-FPE
In this section, we consider several approaches for tackling the hardness of NMin-FPE. We start by identifying
special cases where the problem can be solved efficiently. We also present an integer linear programming
(ILP) formulation that can be used to obtain optimal solutions for networks of reasonable sizes. Then we
introduce a heuristic framework for NMin-FPE that is useful in obtaining good (but not necessarily optimal)
solutions in larger networks.
5.1
Efficient algorithms for special classes
Restricted classes.
We identify four special classes of problem instances where NMin-FPE can be solved in
polynomial time. Motivated by real-world scenarios, we consider the classic progressive threshold model [17],
where once a vertex changes to state 1, it retains the state 1 for all subsequent time-steps. We also investigate
special graph classes such as directed acyclic graphs and complete graphs.
Observation 5.1. Let S be a (Bool,Thresh)-SyDS. Given two configurations C1 and C2 of S, let C′
1
and C′
2 be the successors of C1 and C2, respectively. If C1 ⪯C2, then C′
1 ⪯C′
2.
Theorem 5.2. 4.1 For (Bool, Thresh)-SyDSs, NMin-FPE admits a polynomial time algorithm for any
of the following restricted cases:
1. There exists at least one vertex with τv = 0.
2. The SyDS uses the progressive threshold model.
3. The underlying graph is a directed acyclic graph.
4. The underlying graph is a complete graph.
Proof. Let S = (GS,F) be an arbitrary (Bool, Thresh)-SyDS.
Claim 4.1.1. If there exists a vertex v with τv = 0, then NMin-FPE can be solved in O(m + n) time.
Let V ′ = {v ∶v ∈V (GS),τv = 0} be the subset of vertices with thresholds 0. Let C1 be the config-
uration that consists of all 0’s. We consider the evolution of S from C1. Let Ci denote the successor of the
configuration Ci−1, i ≥2, that is, C2 is the successor of C1, C3 is the successor of C2, etc. Following from
the observation 5.1, we have Ci ⪯Ci+1, i ≥1. Since GS has a finite number of vertices, by recursion, S must
reach a fixed point, denoted by Ck, from C1 in O(n) transitions. The evolution of S from C1 to Ck can be
seen as a BFS process which takes O(m + n) time.
We now argue that Ck is a nontrivial minimum fixed point of S. It is easy to see that Ck is non-zero
since all vertices in V ′ must be in state 1 under Ck. Furthermore, for any non-zero fixed point C, we have
C1 ⪯C. Since C is a fixed point, the successor of C is C itself. Thus, by the observation 5.1, we have Ci ⪯C,
1 ≤i ≤k. It follows that all state-1 vertices in Ck are also in state 1 under C, and H(Ck) ≤H(C). This
concludes the claim 4.1.1.
10

For other cases below, we assume that τv > 0,∀v ∈V (GS) without losing generality.
Claim 4.1.2 . Under the progressive threshold model, NMin-FPE can be solved in O(mn + n2) time.
We label vertices in V (GS) from v1 to vn arbitrarily. The algorithm consists of n iterations. At the
ith iteration, 1 ≤i ≤n, we construct an initial configuration Ci by setting only vertex vi to state 1, and all
other vertices to state 0. We then evolve the system from Ci which always reaches to some fixed point C∗
i
in O(n) time-step, since no vertices can flip from state 0 back to state 1. By repeating the above process
for n iterations, we get a collection of n fixed points I = {C∗
1 ,C∗
2 ,...,C∗
n} (they are not necessarily unique).
Because of the progressive model, all n fixed points are non-zero. We remark that a fixed point with minimum
Hamming weight in I is a nontrivial minimum fixed point of the system, denoted by C∗. To see this, note that
given any non-zero fixed point C of S, if the state of some vi ∈V (GS) is 1 under C, then all state-1 vertices
in C∗
i must also be in state 1 under C, thus, H(C) ≥H(C∗
i ) ≥H(C∗).
As of running time, each iteration involves a full evolution of S from an initial configuration to a fixed
point which can be seen as a BFS process taking O(m + n) time. Thus, the overall running time is O(mn +
n2). We remark that if GS is connected, then the running time is O(mn). This concludes the proof of the
Claim 4.1.2.
Claim 4.1.3. NMin-FPE can be solved in O(mn + n2) time for S when GS is a directed acyclic graph.
We first establish that if all vertices have thresholds greater than 1, then S has no valid nontrivial minimum
fixed point (In particular, the only fixed point of the system is the configuration that consists of all 0’s). Given
any fixed point C of S, let v1 ∈V (GS) be a vertex with 0 in-degree. Note that such a vertex v1 must exist,
or else, GS has at least one directed cycle. Since τv1 ≥2 > d−
v1 + 1 where d−
v = 0 is the in-degree of v1, the
state of v1 is 0 under C, and the input from v1 to any one of its out-neighbors’ local functions is 0. Thus, we
can only consider the subgraph induced on V (GS) ∖{v1}. Note that the resulting subgraph is also acyclic.
Let v2 ∈V (GS) ∖{v1} be the next vertex with 0 in-degree. Similarly, v2 must also have state 0 under C. By
recursion, we conclude that all vertices have state 0 under C if all vertices have thresholds greater than 1.
Suppose there exists at least one vertex with a threshold equals to 1 (we have assumed that no vertices
have threshold 0) in S. The algorithm in finding a nontrivial minimum fixed point is shown in Algorithm 1.
We now prove its correctness. Let C be any non-zero fixed point of S. We claim that among all the vertices
with state 1 under C, one of them must have a threshold equal to 1. For contradiction, suppose all the state-1
vertices have thresholds at least 2. This implies that each state-1 vertex must have an in-neighbor who also
has state 1 under C. Since the graph is finite, the state-1 vertices form a cycle which contradicts GS being
acyclic. Thus, any non-zero fixed point C of S must contain at least one state-1 vertex with a threshold equal
to 1. Let v denote such a vertex, we then have H(C) ≤H(C∗
v ), where C∗
v is the fixed point reach from
the initial configuration with only v being in state 1. The correctness of the algorithm follows immediately.
Lastly, a full evolution of S from an initial configuration to a fixed point can be treated as a BFS process
which takes O(m + n) time, thus, the running time of the algorithm is O(mn + n2).
Claim 4.1.4. NMin-FPE can be solved in O(n2 + m) time for S when GS is a complete graph.
11

Let q be the number of distinct threshold values in S. We partition the vertex set V (GS) into q non-empty
subsets P = {V1,...,Vp}, such that two vertices have the same threshold if and only if they are in the same
subset Vi, 1 ≤i ≤q. Moreover, subsets are in ascending order by thresholds, that is, τu < τv if and only if
u ∈Vi, v ∈Vj and 1 ≤i < j ≤q. Given that GS is a complete graph, we make the following key observations.
First, under a configuration C, the number of state-1 vertices in the closed neighborhood of each vertex is
H(C). Second, if C is a fixed point and a vertex u ∈Vi, 1 ≤i ≤q is in state 1, then all vertices in the subsets
V1,...,Vi must be in state 1.
Under a configuration C, we call a state-1 vertex v unsatisfied if the number of state-1 vertices in v’s
closed neighborhood is less than τv, that is, H(C) < τv. Overall, the algorithm starts with a configuration
I of all 0’s and iteratively sets vertices to state 1 until a there are no unsatisfied vertices. Specifically, at an
iteration of the algorithm, let V ′ be the subset of unsatisfied vertices under I, and let τ ′ denote the smallest
threshold among all state-0 neighbors of vertices in V ′. We set the states of all vertices with thresholds at
most τ ′ to 1 under I and repeat the process until V ′ is an empty set. The detailed pseudocode is given in
Algorithm 2. The while loop (line 5) in Algorithm 2 consists of at most n iterations. The for loop from line 6
to 10 takes O(n) time since we never set the same vertex to state 1 twice. Furthermore, all other operations
from line 11 to 15 take O(n) time. Given that the system evolution at line 17 takes O(m + n) time, the
running time of the Algorithm 2 is O(n2 + m).
We now claim the correctness of the algorithm. Consider the configuration I (defined in the pseudocode)
after the termination of the while loop in the algorithm 2. It is easy to see that the thresholds of all state-1
vertices are satisfied under I. Follows from the monotonicity of threshold functions, S evolving from I will
always reach a non-zero fixed point I∗.
We argue that I∗is minimum. Let C be any non-zero fixed point, and let τC = max{τv ∣∀v ∈
V (GS),C(v) = 1} be the largest threshold over all state-1 vertices under C. Moreover, let τI = max{τv ∣∀v ∈
V (GS),I(v) = 1} be the largest threshold over all state-1 vertices under I. We must have τI ≤τC. For con-
tradiction, suppose τI > τC. Let Vj ∈P be the subset in the partition where τv = τC,∀v ∈Vj. Follows from
C being a fixed point, the while loop would have terminated when the states of all vertices in Vj are set to one
under I, implying that τI = τC which yields a contradiction. It follows that τI ≤τC. Since GS is a complete
graph, in any non-zero fixed point of S, if v ∈V (GS) has state 1, then all vertices u with τu ≤τv are in state
1. Subsequently, all state-1 vertices in I are also in state 1 under C. It follows immediately that all state-1
vertices in I∗are also in state 1 under C, implying H(I∗) ≤H(C). This concludes the claim 4.1.4.
∎
12

Algorithm 1: NMin-FPE DAG(S)
Input : A (Bool, Thresh)-SyDS S = (GS,F) where GS is a dag.
Output
:
A non-trivial minimum fixed point C∗
1 V ′ = {v ∶v ∈V (GS),τv = 1}
2 min h = ∣V (GS)∣+ 1
3 for each v ∈V ′ do
4
Cv ←the configuration where only v is in state 1
5
C∗
v ←the fixed point of S reached from Cv
6
if H(C∗
v ) < min h then
7
min h = H(C∗
v )
8
C∗= C∗
v
9
end
10 end
11 return C∗
Algorithm 2: NMin-FPE complete graphs(S)
Input : A (Bool, Thresh)-SyDS S = (GS,F); GS is a complete graph
Output
:
A non-trivial minimum fixed point C∗
1 P ←{V1,V2,...,Vp} ∶a partition of V (GS) such that two vertices have the same threshold iff they
are in the same subset, and τu < τv iff u ∈Vi, v ∈Vj and 1 ≤i < j ≤1.
2 V ′ ←V1
3 I ←a configuration that consists of all zeros
4 j = k = 1
5 while V ′ ≠∅do
6
for i from j to k do
7
for v ∈Vi do
8
I(v) = 1
▷Change the state of v to 1 under I
9
end
10
end
11
V ′ = {v ∈⋃k
l=1 Vl ∶H(I) < τv}
12
N′ = {u ∶∃v ∈V ′,(u,v) ∈E(GS),u ∉⋃k
l=1 Vl}
13
τ ′ = min{τu ∣u ∈N′}
14
j = k + 1
15
k = index of the subset Vk ∈P where τv = τ ′,∀v ∈Vk
16 end
17 I∗←the fixed point of S, evolved from I
18 return I∗
Fixed parameter tractability.
We further extend the solvability of NMin-FPE and establish that NMin-
FPE is fixed parameter tractable w.r.t. the number of vertices with thresholds greater than 1. Specifically, we
develop a quadratic kernelization algorithm that finds a nontrivial minimum fixed point in time O(2k+n+m).
Theorem 5.3. For (Bool, Thresh)-SyDSs, NMin-FPE is fixed parameter tractable w.r.t. the parameter k
which is the number of vertices with thresholds greater than 1.
Proof. Given an instance S = (GS,F), let k be the number of vertices with thresholds greater than 1. We
present an algorithm for finding a nontrivial minimum fixed point of S that runs in fpt-time w.r.t. k.
Let P = {CC1,CC2,...CCl} be the collection of subsets of vertices with thresholds equal to 1, such that
each subset CCi ∈P forms a maximally connected components that consists of only threshold-1 vertices;
l ≥1 is the number of such components. Observe that for each CCi,1 ≤i ≤l, if one vertex in CCi has state 1
under some fixed point C, then all vertices in CCi are in state 1 under C (with the possibility that some other
vertices outside of CCi are also in state 1). Let Ii be the configuration where Ii(v) = 1 if and only if v ∈CCi,
13

that is, all vertices in CCi are in state 1 and other vertices are in state 0 under Ii. By the monotonicity of the
threshold function, S evolving from Ii must reach a fixed point, denoted by Ci, 1 ≤i ≤l. Subsequently, we
have a collection {C1,C2,...,Cl} of fixed points (not necessarily unique) where each Ci corresponds a fixed
point reached from the initial configuration Ii, 1 ≤i ≤l. We remark that for any fixed point C, if there exists
a vertex v ∈CCi with state 1 under C, then H(C) ≥H(Ci) where equality holds only when C = Ci.
Now consider a nontrivial minimum fixed point C∗of S. Let V ∗= {v ∈V (GS) ∶C∗(v) = 1} be the set
of state-1 vertices under C∗. We distinguish between two cases, either (1) ∃CCi ∈P, s.t. V ∗∩CCi ≠∅, or
(2) ∀CCi ∈P, s.t. V ∗∩CCi = ∅. If ∃CCi ∈P, V ∗∩CCi ≠∅, by our previous remark, C∗= Ci.
Now suppose that ∀CCi ∈P, V ∗∩CCi = ∅, namely, all state-1 vertices under C∗have thresholds greater
than 1. We can then find such a C∗by removing vertices with thresholds equal to 1 in GS, leaving only the
following subgraph:
GS
′ = GS[V (GS) ∖
l
⋃
i=1
CCi]
of k vertices, where GS[V (GS)∖⋃l
i=1 CCi] is the subgraph induced on V (GS)∖⋃l
i=1 CCi. Since thresholds
of vertices in CCi 1 ≤i ≤l are 1, neighbors of vertices in CCi must have state 0 under C∗. Therefore, to find
an optimal solution C∗within the subgraph GS′, we need an additional constraint such that for each vertex
v ∈V (GS′) that is adjacent to vertices in CCi, 1 ≤i ≤l, v must have state 0.
Overall, our algorithm in finding a nontrivial minimum fixed point is as follows. First, we construct the
collection P = {CC1,CC2,....,CCi} of maximally connected component that consist of only threshold-1
vertices. Then, we compute the collection Q = {C1,C2,...Cl} of corresponding fixed points. Let C′ =
arg min{H(Ci) ∶Ci ∈Q} be a fixed point in Q of the minimum Hamming weight. Next, we construct the
subgraph GS′ and enumerate over all fixed points restricted to GS′ to find the an optimal fixed point, denoted
by C′′. Lastly, the algorithm returns arg min{H(C′),H(C′′)}. The correctness of the algorithm follows
immediately from our arguments above.
As of the running time, observe that P, Q and C′ can all be computed in O(n + m) time. Moreover,
since ∣V (GS′)∣= k, C′′ can be found in O(2k) time. Thus, the overall running time is then O(2k + n + m),
ftp w.r.t. k. This concludes the proof.
∎
5.2
Solving NMIN-FPE in general networks
We make the following assumptions without losing generality. As shown in Theorem 5.2, the problem NMin-
FPE can be solved efficiently when constant-1 vertices are presented in the system. To tackle the hardness
of the problem, we thus assume that there are no constant-1 vertices in the system. Furthermore, we assume
that the underlying graph is connected. Lastly, one can determine in polynomial time whether the only fixed
point of a threshold-SyDS is the trivial fixed point (by starting the system with all vertices set to state 1, and
the evolve the system). Therefore, the proposed heuristic does not explicitly consider this case and we assume
the system has at least one non-trivial fixed point.
14

An ILP formulation.
Given a (Bool, Thresh)-SyDS S = (GS,F), our ILP solves the NMin-FPE problem
by constructing a nonempty minimum-cardinality subset V ∗⊆V (GS) of vertices to set to state 1, and all
vertices not in V ∗to state 0, such that the resulting configuration is a fixed point of S. Let xv, v ∈V (GS),
be a binary variable where xv = 1 if and only if vertex v ∈V ∗. Let ∆= max deg(G) + 2 denote a constant
that is greater than the maximum degree of G. Let N(v), v ∈V (GS) denote the closed neighborhood of v.
Then an ILP formulation for NMin-FPE is defined as follows in (5). An optimal solution to the ILP yields a
set of state-1 vertices in a nontrivial minimum fixed point.
min
∑
v∈V (GS)
xv
(5a)
s.t.
τvxv ≤
∑
u∈N(v)
xu,
∀v ∈V (GS)
(5b)
∑
v∈V (GS)
xv ≥1
(5c)
∆⋅xv + τv ≥
∑
u∈N(v)
xu + 1,
∀v ∈V (GS)
(5d)
xv ∈{0,1},
∀v ∈V (GS)
(5e)
Proof. Under an optimal solution of the ILP, let V ∗= {v ∈V (GS) ∶xv = 1} be the subset of vertices v
whose variable xv is set to 1. Let C∗be the configuration where C∗(v) = 1 if and only if v ∈V ∗. We now
argue that C∗is a fixed point. For a state-1 vertex v under C∗, by the constraint (5b), the number of state-1
vertices in the closed neighborhood of v is at least τv, thus, v is fixed at state 1. For a vertex v with state 0, by
constraint (5d), we have τv > ∑u∈N(v) xu, that is, the number of state-1 vertices in the closed neighborhood
is less than τv and the state of v is fixed at 0. Overall, we conclude that C∗is a fixed point of S. Since V ∗is
minimum with ∣V ∗∣≥1, C∗is a nontrivial minimum fixed point.
By a similar argument, given a nontrivial fixed point C∗of S, the vertex set V ∗= {v ∈V (GS) ∶C∗(v) =
1} correspond to an optimal solution of the ILP that satisfies all the constraints. This concludes the proof.
∎
The greedy framework for heuristics.
As we have shown that NMin-FPE is hard to approximate, one
can only rely on heuristics to quickly find solutions for large networks. Given a (Bool, Thresh)-SyDS S =
(GS,F), we propose a general framework that iteratively constructs a fixed point by greedily setting vertices
to state 1. Specifically, the framework iterates over each vertex u ∈V (GS) and finds a fixed point seeded
at u, which is denoted as Cu. In Cu, we have (1) u is in state 1, and (2) the Hamming weight of Cu is
heuristically the smallest. The algorithm then returns a fixed point Cu with the smallest Hamming weight
over all u ∈V (GS) as shown in Algorithm 3.
We now introduce the greedy scheme to compute Cu,u ∈V (GS). Let Au ⊆V (GS) be a subset of state
1 vertices under Cu. The scheme constructs Cu by progressively adding vertices to Au, which effectively set
them to state 1. Overall, the scheme has the following two key steps: (1) the construction of Au terminates
when the fixed point condition is met. Specifically, (i) for each vertex v ∈Au, the threshold τv is satisfied, that
is, the number of v’s neighbors (including v itself) in Au is at least τv, and (ii) for each vertex v ∈V (GS)∖Au,
the number of v’s neighbors in Au is less than τv; (2) vertices are added to Au based on a greedy selection
15

Algorithm 3: NM1FPE(S)
Input : SyDS S = (GS,F)
Output
:
A fixed point C∗∈{0,1}n
1 best obj = ∣V (GS)∣
2 for u ∈V (G) do
3
Cu = Greedy Seeded NM1FPE(S, u)
4
if H(Cu) < best obj then
5
best obj = H(Cu)
6
C∗= Cu
7
end
8 end
9 return C∗
method specified by a heuristic. Under this framework, different heuristics can be obtained by using different
greedy selection strategies.
The fixed point condition.
We use a superscript to denote the iteration number. Initially, A(0)
u
contains only
u, and we actively add a new vertex to A(k)
u
in each iteration k ≥1. To determine if the fixed point condition
is met at the kth iteration, we maintain a value δ(k) that is the number of additional vertices that need to be
selected to satisfy the thresholds of vertices in A(k)
u
at the kth iteration. Heuristically, δ(k) = ∑v∈A(k)
u
˜τ (k)
v
where ˜τ (k)
v
= max{0,τv −∣A(k)
u
∩N(v)∣} is the residual threshold of v at the kth iteration. We can view ˜τ (k)
v
as the additional number of v’s neighbors that need to be selected to satisfy τv.
Given a vertex w ∈A(k)
u , we call w unsatisfied if ˜τw ≠0. Note that after adding a vertex v to A(k+1)
u
, v
decreases the residual thresholds of its unsatisfied neighbors in A(k)
u ; yet, v may remain unsatisfied. Further-
more, we might “passively” satisfy the thresholds of some other vertices that are not in A(k)
u . Let A′ denote
such a set of “passive” vertices. We define ϵ(k)
v
to be the decrease of δ(k) after selecting v and A′. Thus,
δ(k+1) for the next iteration is computed by δ(k+1) = δ(k) + ˜τv −ϵ(k)
v . Lastly, A(k+1)
u
= A(k)
u
∪{v} ∪A′. We
have the following proposition.
Proposition 5.4. The fixed point condition is met at the kth iteration of the algorithm if and only if δ(k) = 0.
The subroutine returns the fixed point Cu where a vertex v is in state 1 iff v ∈Au. The pseudocode of the
entire framework is presented under Algorithms 3 and 4.
Greedy selection strategies.
We now discuss a methodology for adding a new vertex v to A(k)
u . Observe
that under any nontrivial minimum fixed point, the subgraph induced by the state-1 vertices is connected.
Thus, only the unselected neighbors of unsatisfied vertices, denoted by B(k), are candidate vertices at the
kth iteration. Specifically, we greedily select a vertex v = arg minv∈B{obj(v)} into A(k)
u
where obj(v) is
an objective function specified by some heuristic. We now present objective functions for three heuristics.
Let ρ(k)
v
denote the number of unselected vertices that will be passively set to state 1 if v is set to state 1
at the kth iteration. The objective for the first heuristic GreedyFull is defined as obj1(v) = ˜τ (k)
v
+ ρ(k)
v
−
ϵ(k)
v
which considers v’s residual thresholds, the number of passive vertices, and the decrease of δ(k). The
objective functions of two other methods, namely GreedyNP and GreedyThresh, are simplifications of the
first heuristic with obj2(v) = ˜τ (k)
v
−ϵ(k)
v
and obj3(v) = ˜τ (k)
v
, respectively. To speed up the execution time, we
16

use pruning in the implementation of heuristics. Specifically, for each vertex u enumerated in the heuristic
framework, we keep track of the current optimal Hamming weight and actively terminate construction of Cu
if the accumulated Hamming weight of Cu is larger than the current optimal value. In addition, we examine
vertices in ascending order of their threshold values, thus heuristically attempting to find a small fixed point
faster. To further simplify the GreedyFull algorithm, we propose GreedySub, which only examines the
seeded fixed points for vertex v if they have never been set to state one under Cu for each vertex u that is
examined in previous iterations.
Algorithm 4: Greedy Seeded NM1FPE(S,u)
Input : SyDS S = (GS,F); vertex u ∈V (GS)
Output
:
A fixed point Cu seeded at vertex u
1 A′ ←The set of vertices being passively set to state 1 if s(u) = 1
2 Au ←{u} ∪A′
3 B ←{N(u) ∖Au}
▷Candidate vertices
4 D = {v ∈Au ∶˜τv ≠0}
▷Unsatisfied vertices
5 δ = max{0,τu −∣Au ∩N(u)∣}
6 while δ ≠0 do
7
v∗= arg minv∈B{obj(v)}
▷Greedy selection
8
δ = δ + ˜τv∗−ϵv∗
9
A′ ←The set of vertices being passively set to state 1 after selecting v∗
10
Au = Au ∪{v∗} ∪A′
11
Update sets B and D
12 end
13 Cu ←the configuration with v ∈V (GS) in state 1 iff v ∈Au
14 return Cv
The running time.
We first analyze the running time of Algorithm 4. Remark that computing the set of
vertices being passively put to state 1 takes O(m) time (line 1 and line 9) for each selected vertex. Further,
the set of candidate vertices and unsatisfied vertices can be found in O(n) time, corresponding to line 3, 4,
and 11 of Algorithm 4. If follows that the set of operations in line 1 to 5 and in line 8 to 11 take O(m) time,
given that GS is connected and n = O(m). Let q denote the running time of a single greedy selection process
at line 7. The running time of one iteration of the while loop at line 6 is then O(m + q). Lastly, since at most
n vertices can be selected into Au, the while loop at line 6 consists of O(n) iteration. It follows that the time
complexity of Algorithm 4 is O(nq + nm).
Algorithm (4), as a subroutine, is called exactly n times by Algorithm 3. Therefore, the time complexity
of the proposed framework is O(n2 ⋅q + n2m). Note that computing the objective values under the greedy
rules of GreedyNP/Thresh takes constant time, since both ˜τ (k)
v
and ϵ(k)
v
are precomputed for each iteration
k ≥1. As for GreedySub/Full, observe that their objective value involves finding the set of passive vertices
which takes O(m) time. Subseqeuntly, the time complexity of GreedyNP/Thresh and GreedySub/Full
are O(n2m) and O(n3m) respectively. We remark that via the pruning technique, the proposed algorithms
empirically run much faster on networks of reasonable sizes, in contrast to their theoretical time complexity.
17

6
Experimental Results
We conduct extensive experiments to investigate the performance of the heuristics under different experimen-
tal scenarios and stretch their performance boundaries. Overall, the results demonstrate high effectiveness of
the heuristics in real-world networks.
6.1
Experimental setup
Datasets. We select the networks based on their sizes, diversity and application areas. Overall, we evaluate
the heuristics on 13 real-world networks from various domains (listed in Table 1) and on Erd¨os R´enyi (Gnp)
random networks.
Dataset
Type
n
m
Max deg
router
Infrastructure
2,113
6,632
109
power
Infrastructure
5,300
8,271
19
twitch
Social
7,126
35,324
720
retweet
Social
7,252
8,060
1,884
lastfm
Social
7,624
27,806
216
arena
Social
10,680
24,316
205
gnutella
Peer-to-Peer
10,876
39,994
103
auto
Infrastructure
11,370
22,002
2,312
astroph
Coauthor
17,903
196,972
504
condmat
Coauthor
21,363
91,286
279
facebook
Social
22,470
170,823
709
google+
Social
23,613
39,182
2,761
Deezer
Social
28,281
92,752
172
Table 1: List of networks
Heuristics and baselines.
We evaluate the performance of the proposed greedy heuristics by comparing
with the following baselines: (1) DegDis: a minimization version of the selection method proposed in [8]; (2)
Random: select vertices randomly. We also consider other methods that select vertices with a smallest value
of the metrics: (3) Pagerank, (4) Distance (closeness centrality) which are also widely used by others as
baselines [31, 17].
Experimental scenarios.
We consider the following three cases in investigating the effectiveness of the
above natural heuristics. (1) Random thresholds, (2) Uniform thresholds, and (3) Gnp networks with increas-
ing sizes. The details of each setting are given in later sections.
Evaluation metric.
We use the approximation ratio γ = obj/OPT as the evaluation metric, where OPT
is the optimal objective (the Hamming weight of the fixed point) of a problem instance computed by solving
18

the proposed ILP using Gurobi, and obj is the objective value returned by a heuristics. We remark that γ ≥1
and an algorithm with a lower γ gives a better solution.
Machine and reproducibility.
All experiments were performed on Intel Xeon(R) Linux machines with
64GB of RAM. Our source code (in C++ and Python), documentation, and datasets are provided as supple-
mentary materials.
6.2
Experimental results
In this section, we present the results of the heuristics under three experimental scenarios.
Random thresholds.
We first study the scenario where threshold values of vertices are assigned randomly
in the range [3,deg(v)+1]. This construction guarantees that there are no constant-1 vertices, as the NMin-
FPE would become efficiently solvable in that case by Theorem 5.2. The random threshold assignment is a
way to cope with the incomplete knowledge of the actual threshold values of vertices [17].
The results are averaged over 10 initializations of threshold assignments, shown in Fig. 4 under the
log10 scale. Overall, we observe that the proposed Greedy family significantly outperforms other baselines.
Specifically, the averaged approximation ratios (over all networks) of GreedyFull/NP/Sub are less than
3, which is over 10 times better than those of baselines on most networks. Within the Greedy family, the
simplest heuristic GreedyThresh shows the lowest performance, with an averaged approximation ratio of
4.34. Nevertheless, we remark that this empirically constant ratio is significantly better than that of other
baselines. Further, GreedyThresh, which is the most efficient among all its counterparts, finds solutions in
minutes.
0
1
2
3
router
power
twitch
retweet
lastfm
arena
gnutella
auto
astroph
condmat
facebook
google+
deezer
log(γ)
GreedyFull
GreedyNP
GreedySub
GreedyThresh
DegDis
Pagerank
Distance
Random
Figure 4: The approximation ratios (lower is better) under random threshold setting. The y axis denotes
the approximation ratios of heuristics under the log10 scale. The results are averaged over 10 initializations
of threshold assignments.
Uniform thresholds.
We assign all vertices the same threshold τ > 3. We consider different values of
the uniform threshold τ to study how the heuristics perform. Note that as τ increases, more constant-0
vertices emerge in the system because their threshold values are larger than their degrees. Thus, the uniform-
threshold setting pushes the performance limits of algorithms by (1) setting the thresholds of vertices to be
indistinguishable and (2) introducing a considerable number of constant-0 vertices which makes it harder for
the heuristics to even find a feasible solution.
We first present analyses on instances of the same network with different uniform thresholds τ. Due
to page limits, we show results for the Google+ network in Fig. 5; the results are similar for all other net-
works where the Greedy family outperforms the other heuristics in terms of approximation ratios. In par-
ticular, the averaged ratios for heuristics in the Greedy family are all less than 3 for Google+ network, with
19

GreedyThresh having the highest averaged ratio (lower is better) of 2.41. We also observe when the uniform
threshold τ is large enough, many natural heuristics failed to even find a valid solution due to the presence of
a large number of constant-0 vertices. This experiment demonstrates the high effectiveness of the proposed
framework when vertices have indistinguishable thresholds.
Next, we fix the uniform threshold τ and analyze the heuristics across all networks. We have investigated
different values of τ from 3 to 20, where the Greedy family again outperforms the other heuristics on most
instances, producing results that are over 10 times better than baselines. Due to the page limit, we show the
results for τ = 8 in Fig. 6. Note we omit the results for networks power and peer because they have no
feasible solutions when τ = 8.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Uniform threshold τ
GreedyFull
GreedyNP
GreedySub
GreedyThresh
DegDis
Pagerank
Distance
Random
Figure 5: The approximation ratios (lower is better) of heuristics on google+ network under uniform
threshold setting. The y axis shows the approximation ratios of heuristics under the log10 scale. Results
of several heuristics (DegDis, Pagerank, Distance, Random) are absent for some instances because they
failed to find valid fixed points.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
router
twitch
lastfm
arena
auto
astroph
condmat
facebook
google+
deezer
GreedyFull
GreedyNP
GreedySub
GreedyThresh
DegDis
Pagerank
Distance
Random
Figure 6: The approximation ratios (lower is better) of heuristics on networks under uniform threshold
setting where τ = 8. The y axis shows the approximation ratios of heuristics under the log10 scale. Results
of several heuristics (DegDis, Pagerank, Distance, Random) are absent for some instances because they
failed to find valid fixed points.
Gnp networks.
We study the heuristics on Erd¨os R´enyi networks with sizes up to 1,000 where thresholds
are assigned randomly. We observe that the ratios of GreedyFull/NP/Thresh are all over 40, and the ratios
of GreedySub are as high as 148.48. We remark that in a gnp network, the state-1 vertices in a nontrivial
minimum fixed point are often surrounded by vertices with similar thresholds and similar degrees. Our results
suggest a limitation of the proposed framework, that is, when networks exhibit uniformity at the vertex level,
the heuristics might not correctly choose state-1 vertices to construct a minimum fixed point. Note that
such results are expected since NMin-FPE is hard to approximate. We remark that the Greedy family still
outperforms baselines on Gnp networks.
Efficiency.
Our results demonstrate that the proposed Greedy NP/Sub/Thresh are more efficient than the
ILP solver Gurobi for the tested scenarios. In Table 2, we show the runtime of Greedy NP/Sub/Thresh
and Gurobi solver on the two largest networks under the random threshold scenario.
The heuristics achieve high efficiency by the pruning technique. For some networks, Gurobi runs com-
parably fast, usually within 5 minutes. Nevertheless, Gurobi uses parallelization mechanisms such as mul-
20

tithreading (over 30 threads are used on each instance) whereas our heuristics achieve high efficiency while
executing in serial mode.
Network
GreedyNP
GreedySub
GreedyThresh
Gurobi
Google+
26.13s
263.64s
32.16s
1153.04s
Deezer
104.76s
395.89s
96.22s
794.89s
Table 2: Execution times of heuristics in seconds.
7
Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we study the NMin-FPE problem from both the theoretical and empirical points of view. We
establish the computational hardness of the problem and propose effective algorithms for solving NMin-FPE
under special cases and general graphs. Our results point to a new way of quantifying system resilience against
the diffusion of negative contagions and a new approach to tackle the influence minimization problem. One
limitation of the proposed heuristics is the cubic time complexity. Thus, a future direction is to develop more
efficient methods for solving NMin-FPE. Another promising direction is to approximate NMin-FPE under
restricted graph classes such as regular graphs. Lastly, we want to extend the model to multi-layer networks
and investigate problems in this new domain.
