Social Participation Ontology: community documentation,
enhancements and use examples
Renato Fabbri1, Henrique Parra Parra Filho2, Rodrigo Bandeira de Luna2, Ricardo
Augusto Poppi Martins3, Flor Karina Mamani Amanqui4, Dilvan de Abreu Moreira4
Osvaldo Novais de Oliveira Junior1,
1 S˜ao Carlos Institute of Physics, University of S˜ao Paulo, CP 369,

2 Cidade Democr´atica, Instituto Seva, S˜ao Paulo, SP, Brazil
3 National Secretariat of Social Participation, General Secretariat of the
Republic, Bras´ılia, Federal District, Brazil
4 Institute of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, University of S˜ao
Paulo, S˜ao Carlos, SP, Brazil
Abstract
Participatory democracy advances in virtually all governments and especially in South
America which exhibits a mixed culture and social predisposition. This article presents
the “Social Participation Ontology” (ops from the Brazilian name Ontologia de
Participa¸c˜ao Social) implemented in compliance with the Web Ontology Language
standard (owl) for fostering social participation, specially in virtual platforms. The
entities and links of ops were defined based on an extensive collaboration of specialists.
It is shown that ops is instrumental for information retrieval from the contents of the
portal, both in terms of the actors (at various levels) as well as mechanisms and
activities. Significantly, ops is linked to other owl ontologies as an upper ontology and
via foaf and bfo as higher upper ontologies, which yields sound organization and
access of knowledge and data. In order to illustrate the usefulness of ops, we present
results on ontological expansion and integration with other ontologies and data.
Ongoing work involves further adoption of ops by the official Brazilian federal portal
for social participation and ngos, and further linkage to other ontologies for social
participation.
1
Introduction
Easy access to social media is reshaping citizen participation in government affairs [1].
Information and communication technologies (icts) have exhibited such an impact on
the way individuals interact that it is giving birth to new organizational methods in
social movements. These changes can be observed, for example, in the 2010 Arab Spring
and the 2013 Brazilian protests. These events gathered millions of people and, although
recent, have shown direct and strong impact in governments and new laws, and the
forecast is an intensification of the process [2–4]. Concomitantly, electronic government
initiatives are flourishing, favored mainly by the ubiquity of Internet technologies (e.g.
html 5, node.js, open source browsers) and by the need for renewal of representative
democracy practices. These initiatives have taken place in various platforms, including
PLOS
1/19
arXiv:1501.02662v3  [cs.CY]  30 Oct 2017

usual social networks (e.g. facebook, twitter) and dedicated instances created by both
government and civil society parties [1,5–7]. A natural challenge arises: how to link
information produced into an unified knowledge base. This is being addressed, at the
technology level, by semantic web developments. Endorsed by World Wide Web
Consortium (w3c), current semantic web technologies include [8]:
• reasoning by means of ontological specifications;
• linking data from different sources (e.g. databases);
• organization of domain knowledge for coherent consideration.
Key among these technologies, ontologies are considered one of the pillars of the
semantic web. An ontology is usually defined as a formal specification of a shared
conceptualization [9]. They give meaning to data and are useful for datasets available
on the web to make them automatically retrievable and linkable with other datasets.
The w3c created the Web Ontology Language (owl) as a standard to represent
ontologies in the web. The second version of the language is called owl 2 and offers
greater expressive power [10].
In this context, to describe and give meaning to social participation, the “Common
Vocabulary of Social Participation” (vcps from the Brazilian name Vocabul´ario Comum
de Participa¸c˜ao Social) was proposed as a joint effort of Latin America academic, civil
and governmental groups [11]. Although started in 2012, a recent initiative for
ontological developments, it already yielded relevant material, including a public
preliminary owl ontology with a concise taxonomy. Also important are the reference
documents reporting results from a first working phase, from July to December, 2012.
As stated by the community, vcps was propelled by three goals: 1) to ease adoption of
the vocabulary; 2) to stimulate the creation of public tools to understand, visualize and
summarize how participation is happening; 3) to meet the need of participative
initiatives to open and link their data. It is important to notice that vcps, an ontology,
was called a vocabulary both to ease understanding of the general public and because it
started as a vocabulary. The present article presents the “Ontology of Social
Participation” (ops from the Brazilian name Ontologia de Participa¸c˜ao Social), based
on vcps, in which the term vocabulary was substituted by the term ontology for the
following reasons:
• The usage of the word “vocabulary” can lead to confusion is some situations as
ops is an owl ontology (not, for example, a skos vocabulary).
• Documentation seems inconsistent when an ontology is repeatedly called a
vocabulary.
• Ops is, in fact, an ontology, with a vocabulary, a taxonomic organization and
properties further relating the terms.
• This coherent naming is a prerequisite for academic acceptance and further formal
adoption by government instances, such as the Brazilian Federal Portal of Open
Data [12] and the Brazilian Federal Portal of Social Participation [13].
Also, the term common was dropped when ops was conceived, as the term is redundant
for an owl ontology. The vcps presented other difficulties, such as missing classes,
incorrect uri specifications (containing spaces), some logical flaws, and unnecessary
out-of-standards restrictions. This were all solved within ops (to the extent authors
were able to, of course).
Next section presents ops and modifications made from vcps to ops: class and
property names and labels, class restrictions and property axioms. Section 3 is dedicated
PLOS
2/19

to ops usage: dereferencing, sparql queries, a toy ops expansion, discursive example of
usage, and use cases from government, civil society and academic parties. Concluding
remarks are stated with future work, in Section 4. The Appendixes hold directions for
the scripts that are used to obtain ops, notes on restrictions that were in vcps but
withdrawn from ops and an inspection of the first-hand documentation about vcps
(reference textual documents, images, owl code, blog posts, discussions and etherpads).
2
OPS: the Ontology of Social Participation
This section makes considerations about ops label standardization and implemented
classes, properties and restrictions. Features present in Figure 1, but not present in
vcps, are fully described in Section 2.1. Examples of usage are addressed in Section 3.
2.1
Standardization and implemented features
Without explicit criteria, vcps uri was http://lumii.lv/ontologies/Corais.owl.
Ops uri was chosen to be http://purl.org/socialparticipation/ops for the
following reasons:
• This uri is directly related to the ontology name (ops).
• This uri, also an url, is independent from government and other political
associations. This is important to coalesce interested parties: the Brazilian
Federal Social Participation Portal [13], the Brazilian government repository of
vocabularies and ontologies [14], academic groups, ngos, and non-organized civil
society.
• Derived uris, when reached via http, can be redirected to where current
documentation is held, as it is hosted by http://purl.org.
Labels in the languages of interest should be written in label fields. Even so, we
advocate that ops class names should be friendly to users, bearing the attention not to
take the class name as the label or as a meaning restriction. For standardization, all
classes are written in CamelCase [15] in plain English to ease internationalization,
adoption and maturation. Labels are written in English, Portuguese and Spanish.
Accordingly, class names changed from vcps to ops received labels (rdfs:label) in
each language and a textual short explanation (rdfs:comment) in English. Table 1
exposes all classes is ops.
Ops property names fit headlessCamelCase [15] format, are readable in English (to
ease internationalization, adoption and maturation), and some of them have defined
domains and ranges. Table 2 is dedicated to ops properties, with labels in English,
Portuguese and Spanish.
In the first versions of ops, all properties yielded existential restrictions, except
ops:hasParticipationCharacteristic. Although such efforts were aimed at
handling a better defined ops, further developments and discussions revealed that these
restrictions made ops rigid, a bit more complicated, and was not of much help, at least
in this stage of ops development and adoption. The result is that all restrictions were
removed. Appendix B and Table 4 exposes all dropped restrictions from vcps to ops.
An inspection of vcps reveals a contradiction present in Figure S3-1: a role cannot
execute, initiate or support a cause. These are done by the social actor. Therefore, to
maintain vcps directions and obtain a sound ontology, ops:Role was removed from
ops. The result can be seen directly in Figures 1 and 2.
A comparison of the vcps owl code [16] with the diagram in Figure S3-1, which
reflects official vcps documentation, revealed that a class, two properties and three
PLOS
3/19

Figure 1. Diagram representation of the Ontology of Social Participation (ops).
Arrows with white heads indicate “is a” relations (subclass points to superclass).
Arrows with black heads indicate property relations from subject to object . All
property relations yield existential restrictions, with the exception of the “has
characteristic” property, that does not yield restriction. Upper ontologies bfo and foaf
are asserted through color (bfo) and dashed boxes (foaf).
PLOS
4/19

Table 1. Classes of the ops (Ontology of Social Participation). These are core concepts in the ontology. Along with the
taxonomic structure exposed in Figure 2, these classes are related by the properties in Table 2. In boldface is the vcps class
name “vcps:Espa¸co de A¸c~ao”, which caused original vcps owl to be pointed as corrupted by prot`eg`e (spaces are not
allowed in uris). Also, class vcps:Role was dropped as it yields logical problens in vcps.
OPS
class
name
VCPS
class name
pt-br label
es label
en label
definition
upper
ontology
classes
Person
Pessoa
Pessoa
Persona
Person
a person (social actor is a per-
son)
bfo:’Material
Entity’, foaf:Person
Organization
Organizacao
Organiza¸c˜ao
Organizaci´on
Organization
social actor is a group of in-
dividuals, organized formally
or informally (e.g. movements,
collectives)
bfo:’Material
Entity’,
foaf:Organization
Executor
Executor
Executor
Ejecutor
Executor
performs action directly and is
responsible for results
bfo:’Material
Entity’
Initiator
Iniciador
Iniciador
Iniciador
Initiator
originates cause, individually or
collaborativelly
bfo:’Material
Entity’
Supporter
Apoiador
Apoiador
Apoyador
Supporter
supports cause with resources
of any kind (e.g. cognitive, fi-
nancial, equipments)
bfo:’Material
Entity’
SocialActor
Ator
Ator Social
Actor Social
Social Actor
entity that might have a partic-
ipatory role
bfo:’Material
Entity’
Participation-
Characteristic
NivelDe-
Participacao
Caracter´ıstica de
Participa¸c˜ao
Caracter´ıstica de
Participaci´on
Participation
Characteris-
tic
the way the participation of the
specific actor is happening
bfo:’Dependent
Continuant’
Cause
Causa
Causa
Causa
Cause
the motivation for Action
bfo:’Dependent
Continuant’
Scope
Espa¸co de
A¸c˜ao
Escopo
Ambito
Scope
the scope os Action
bfo:’Dependent
Continuant’
Result
Resultados
Resultado
Resultado
Result
the result obtained with action
bfo:’Dependent
Continuant’
Solution
Solucao
Solu¸c˜ao
Soluci´on
Solution
solution achieved with Action
bfo:’Dependent
Continuant’
Problem
Problema
Problema
Problema
Problem
the problem that the Action
aims to solve
bfo:’Independent
Continuant’
Theme
Tema
Tema
Tema
Theme
the theme in focus by Action
bfo:’Independent
Continuant’
Action
Acao
A¸c˜ao
Acci´on
Action
what is done in terms os social
participation
bfo:’Processual
Entity’
dropped class
Papel
-//-
-//-
-//-
the role of the actor
-//-
restrictions were not implemented in vcps. These were fully implemented in ops before
all restrictions were removed. These are the missing class and properties (restrictions
missing in vcps and implemented in preliminary ops versions are exposed in
Appendix B):
• Class: ops:ParticipationCharacteristic.
• Property: ops:hasRole.
• Property: ops:composesSolution.
Ops is available online [17]. To ease navigation of the ontology by interested parties,
it is also available in the Webprotege interface [18]. The diagram of ops’ taxonomic
structure is exposed in Figure 2.
Upper ontologies usage with ops is under development and should receive a
dedicated article, as possibilities should be inspected carefully. Pertinent and already
used as upper ontologies for ops are foaf [19] (for linking and describing people and
things they do) and bfo [20] (“designed for use in supporting information retrieval,
analysis and integration in scientific and other domains” as stated on their
PLOS
5/19

Table 2. Properties of the ops (Ontology of Social Participation) along original vcps names. Only a few ranges were
established, and no domain, as these were not regarded as useful at time and, without them, ops can be used more freely.
OSP property name
VCPS property name
pt-br label
es label
en label
domain
range
theme
possuiTemaAssociado
tema
tema
theme
-//-
Theme
belongsTo
pertenceAoEspaco
pertence ao
pertence al
belongs to
-//-
Scope
action
possuiAcao
a¸c˜ao
acci´on
action
-//-
Action
supports
apoiaCausa
apoia
apoya
supports
-//-
-//-
contributesTo
compoeSolucao
contribui para
contribuye
para
contributes
to
-//-
-//-
executes
executaAcao
executa
ejecuta
executes
-//-
-//-
generates
geraCausa
gera
genera
generates
-//-
-//-
starts
iniciaCausa
inicia
inicializa
starts
-//-
-//-
solves
soluciona
soluciona
resuelve
solves
-//-
-//-
produces
produzResultado
produz
produce
produces
-//-
-//-
proposes
propoeSolucao
prop˜oe
propone
proposes
-//-
-//-
trait
temNivelDeParticipacao
tra¸co
rasgo
trait
-//-
-//-
dropped
temPapel
-//-
-//-
-//-
-//-
-//-
documentation). Properties were not related to upper ontologies as reasonable relations
are still being searched for. Upper ontologies classes related to each ops class are also
exposed in Table 1.
Figure 1 is a complete diagram of current ops: classes, properties and relations to
foaf and bfo. Actually, Figure 1 is more informative than the ops owl code, as
restrictions were removed and not all properties have defined domain and range.
Therefore, the diagram is an important source of relations envisioned by ops creators.
PLOS
6/19

Figure 2. A taxonomic tree of the Ontology of Social Participation (ops). This image
was rendered inside prot`eg`e, with the ops owl code. Figure 1 is more informative, but
this diagram is more standard and might be simpler for the newcomer. Note that the
taxonomic tree does not present any information about properties further linking these
classes. The prefixes snap: and span: are bfo specific for snapshot and
spanning-time.
PLOS
7/19

3
OPS usefulness
Ops is meant to be useful in at least two ways. First, as a systematization of what is
social participation to Latin America groups, as conceived by vcps. Second, as a mean
to ease linked data, and enable integration of various instances for social participation.
An indicative of this pertinence is opa, ocd, ontologiaa, and obs, ontologies that
already uses ops as upper ontology [21].
Ops usage might not be obvious at first. How is data linked? How is field knowledge
organized? Why and by whom? Core principles of ops utility can be understood by the
following observations:
• Different participation instances have social actors, actions being developed,
organizations involved, problems being tackled, etc. These can yield one
consistent database by means of ops usage.
• One can understand and share the mutually exclusive nature of being a paid or a
voluntary contributor by observing the expanded version of ops (see Section 3.3).
Also, noticing the fact that a mob can be very big or not, and that it can be
convoked or not by a network, can make the field conceptualization more clear for
a newcomer or ease discussions and problematization for senior researchers or
politicians.
• Other fields of human knowledge and practice also have agents, problems and so
forth. These can be linked to participatory data and ontologies by means of ops.
• Ops carry a conceptualization that is the product of contribution of many
specialists. In other words, put aside the linked data aspects, it is useful as an
organization of the knowledge related to the social participation field.
The rest of this section explores different ops uses: dereferencing, sparql queries,
expansion, fictional use cases that reflect its potential, and real use cases.
3.1
Usage of OPS through dereferencing
All ops classes and properties uris are accessible via http. A pubby [22] instance
delivers information like name, labels and relations to other classes and properties. As
an example, the uri http://purl.org/socialparticipation/ops/SocialActor
returns information about this class, as shown in Figure 3.
3.2
Usage of OPS through a SparQL endpoint
Linking multiple databases is an owl technology core purpose. The standard way to
access these data via ontologies is by using a sparql endpoint. Such endpoint delivers
data from a triplestore (a collection of rdf triples) or, with more experimental
technology, from relational database systems, such as a mysql server (e.g. via
ontop/quest [23]). Either way, the query is the same: the user or machine reaching the
endpoint uses the sparql protocol in order to retrieve information through semantic
criteria. Figure 4 is a schematic representation of obda (Ontology Based Database
Access), which is a common name for this multiple database access through ontologies.
Some examples of this usage can be given by sparql queries and concise
explanations:
• "select ?s where { ?s a ops:SocialActor }" or "select ?s2 where {
?s2 a ops:Person }" or "select ?s3 where { ?s3 a ops:Organization}":
the first query retrieves all social actors (returned in variable ?s), be each a person,
PLOS
8/19

Figure 3. Dereferencing an ops class: the uri is also an url, which, reached by http,
returns information for the user as shown. Also, if the client is not an html browser,
but a crawler or another type of linked data application, pubby delivers plain rdf, not
an user-friendly html.
Figure 4. Scheme of the common use of ontologies for multiple databases integration.
A user or application reaches a sparql endpoint. This endpoint, through ontologies,
delivers data from one or more databases. Nowadays, the most usual is to find only one
database available at an endpoint, and this database is usually duplicated and not
synchronized, but available as a (converted) triplestore. Even so, it is possible to access
multiple ontologies and it is desirable that the databases have synchronous access, i.e.
without need to convert data to rdf triples beforehand.
an organization, or something else; the second query retrieves all persons (variable
?s2); the third query retrieves all organizations (?s3). In a similar manner, one
can retrieve all roles played, all executers, all initiators and all supporters.
• "select ?s ?o where {?s ops:starts ?o}": this query retrieves all causes
(?o) and their initiators (?s) or whatever use of the ops:starts property is
taking place.
• "select ?s ?s2 ?o ?o2 where {?s a ops:Action .
?s ops:belongsTo ?o
PLOS
9/19

.
?s2 ops:executes ?s .
?s ops:produces ?o2}": this query retrieves all
Actions (?s) along their Action Fields (?o), their Executers (?s2) and their
Results (?o2).
Noteworthy is that while opa:Participant can be used to retrieve all participa.br
participants, ocd:Participant can be used to retrieve all cidade democr´atica
participants, and aa:User can be used to retrieve all aa participants; their upper
ontology class ops:SocialActor retrieves all of them and relates these entities directly
to the class of generic actors of social participation processes [21].
3.3
OPS expansion
Ops matches vcps online documentation [11] as strictly as possible while maintaining
logic coherence and most useful relations. In this context, to examplify the usefulness of
the conceptualization and possible additional classes, an expanded ops ontology is
presented in this section and is uploaded to webprotege [24]. Table 3 is dedicated to
these additional classes while Figure 5 exposes the resulting taxonomic structure.
The property ops:receivesFrom was added and has an inverse: ops:SocialActor
ops:paysTo ops:Executor. Also, the ops:DownloadedMob class is a defined class by
the existential restriction: ops:Mob ops:convoquedBy ops:Network, with a newly
defined property ops:convoquedBy.
This is one of the numerous ways by which ops might cope with further classes,
properties and restrictions. This particular expansion was chosen as an example by
direct observance of vcps documentation and recent social affairs, such as the Brazilian
protests.
Figure 5. A taxonomic diagram of an example expanded instance of ops.
ops:PaidExecutor is defined as being the subject of a ops:receivesFrom relation
with a ops:SocialActor; ops:DownloadedMob is defined by being the subject of a
ops:convoquedBy relation with a ops:SocialNetwork. The owl code is online for live
editing [24]. New classes added to this expanded version of ops are in Table 3
PLOS
10/19

3.4
Fictional examples of usage
The following fictional examples have the purpose of easing one to grasp why and how
ops can be used:
• Suppose that a public sparql endpoint unifies several participation instances by
means of ops (we will see in Section 3.5 that this is not really fictional). Thus,
the total number of participants is publicly available (|ops:SocialActor|). Also,
depending on the platforms involved, one can observe how many of these
participants are individuals (ops:Person), how many are organizations
(ops:Organization), and understand to which extent the corporative influence is
explicit. One can observe how many of the participants are the same in each
platform, and what roles they take, and make assumptions about how much the
society is really participating or if these processes are manipulated by few agents
(ops:SocialActor). One can also gaze upon the problems being discussed and
which solutions are being proposed, therefore easing the sense of what is being
considered important and valid as public discussions. This list of possibilities is
endless, specially when ops variations and expansions are considered.
• Suppose a person, has a new proposal for a participatory system that uses ops.
She can acquire a concise understanding of the conceptualization involved and
make very objective observations and deliver clear suggestions that relate directly
to the systems used or envisioned. She can make an ops variation or another
ontology, as a way to confront paradigms.
• Suppose there is a system for exhibiting indicators about social participation (e.g.
how effective it has been, how wide is the scope of interests). Instances that are
integrated by ops can be queried for information and, for example, this system
registers any organization involved as a social actor. Also, reflecting the expanded
ops exposed above, the system can register any mob involved, whose incidence
was recorded in the database as a DownloadedMob, as related to some social
network (the network might be unknown).
3.5
Real use cases
Ops is a recent ontology. Even so, some real use cases can be pointed, from which are
most notable:
• The undp consultant contract 2013/00056, project BRA/12/018, was profoundly
influenced by ops [21]. Within written products are other participatory ontologies,
such as opa, ocd, ontologiaa and obs, which relates directly to ops. Also, some
methods for analyzing ops related data and for resource recommendation were
delivered. These developments were done by the computational physics researcher
R. Fabbri (first author of the present article), in collaboration with other parties,
specially the Brazilian General Secretariat of the Republic, University of Bras´ılia
researchers, and free software parties. Data from three participatory instances
were triplified: participa.br, aa and cidade democr´atica; all related to ops. These
linked data resources are available in sparql endpoints and can be dereferenced,
in a similar fashion as done for ops. As these are all executed in research facilities,
they might lack maintenance and should be kept by a dedicated team.
• Another undp contract was responsible for some advances in information
technologies. A special case is a dedicated ops expansion [25].
PLOS
11/19

• The Brazilian Federal Data Processing Service (serpro) is triplifying participa.br
data (the Brazilian federal social participation portal). Is this process, they as
making direct use of ops [26].
• The linked data Brazilian community had some maturing related to ops beyond
the ontologies developed, undp development and documentation, serpro data
triplification, and vcps. Interested government, civil society and academic parties
circulated ops documentation for conceptual and technological goals [27,28].
PLOS
12/19

Table 3. New classes considered for an example expansion of the ops. The taxonomic organization of these classes within
ops can be observed in Figure 5. Further information is in Section 3.3.
new class
subclass of
description
further notes
SocialNetwork
Organization
a social structure made up of social
actors (such as individuals or orga-
nizations) and a set of dyadic ties
between these actors
–//–
ScaleFreeNetwork
SocialNetwork
a network whose connectivity fol-
lows a power law distribution
disjoint with ErdosRenyiNetwork
and GeographicNetwork. Usual so-
cial network structure
ErdosRenyiNetwork
SocialNetwork
also known as Binomial network,
this network sets, with equal propa-
bility, an edge between each pair of
nodes
disjoint with ScaleFreeNetwork and
GeographicNetwork.
Unusual so-
cial network structure
GeographicNetwork
SocialNetwork
a network whose connectivity is re-
lated to the distance of nodes in a
metric space
disjoint with both ScaleFreeNet-
work and ErdosRenyiNetwork. Un-
usual social network structure
SmallWorldNetwork
SocialNetwork
a network where most nodes can be
reached from other nodes with few
hops or steps
disjoint with GeographicNetwork.
Usual social network structure
InformalOrganization
Organization
an organization that is not formal-
ized
disjoint with Intitution
Mob
InformalOrganization
a crowd of individuals
–//–
GiantMob
Mob
a crowd with more than 10,000 in-
dividuals
–//–
DownloadedMob
Mob
a Mob convoqued by a network
this is a defined class, by being a
network and being the subject of
the relation convoquedBy with ob-
ject Network
Institution
Organization
a mechanism of social order that
governs a set of individuals
disjoint with InformalOrganization
PublicInstitution
Institution
an institution backed through public
funds and controlled by the state
disjoint with PrivateInstitution
PrivateInstitution
Institution
an institution backed through pri-
vate fundings and controlled by pri-
vate parties
disjoint with PublicInstitution
AcademicInstitution
Institution
an institution dedicated to educa-
tion and research, which grants aca-
demic degrees
–//–
NGO
Institution
a legally consituted corporation cre-
ated by natural or legal people
that operate independently from
any form of government
–//–
SpuriousInstitution
Institution
an institution that holds prominent
illegitimate or corrupt characteristcs
–//–
ExoticInstitution
Institution
an institution that does not fit pre-
vious classes or is characterized by
very unique traces
–//–
VoluntaryExecutor
Executor
an executor that receives no formal
reward for the tasks
disjoint with PaidExecutor
PaidExecutor
Executor
an Executor that receives formal re-
ward for the tasks accomplished
a defined class, being an Executor
and the subject of a receivesFrom
predicate with SocialActor as ob-
ject
PLOS
13/19

4
Concluding remarks and further work
Ops, based in vcps, yields initial steps in achieving an effective social participation
ontology. Community has registered activities and delivered reference documents,
including this present article which contains an organization of the community
foundational conceptualizations, ops diligent development, uses, upper ontologies and
expansion of the ontological structures.
On the practical side, the use of this ontology or related developments for the
Brazilian federal participation portal (participa.br [13]) is a desirable reality, as it
implies usage and good maintenance. Moreover, an ontology was done for participa.br,
based in the ops: the opa [21] (Ontology of participa.br). This is confluent with the
presidential Decree 8.243 that establishes a policy and commitment for social
participation [29]. In this context, presidential, ministerial and academic parties started
formalizing current legal participatory mechanisms (e.g. conferences, councils, forums,
public consultations, round tables) in ontological terms, which resulted in the Social
Library Ontology (obs from the Brazilian name Ontologia da Biblioteca Social) and the
Social Library Vocabulary (vbs from the Brazilian name Vocabul´ario da Biblioteca
Social). Hosting ontologies on Webprotege [30] have become central, as a way to share
specific ontologies in a friendly environment and to collect feedback.
Further work involves observing community manifestations about ops and this
article, accomplishing use by means of formal instances and civil society, and studying
upper ontologies for ops. The use of ops (or a variant) in different instances is being
tackled for the creation of social participation indicators and easing participation
processes. Academic texts dedicated to the new participation ontologies (ocd, obs,
ontologiaa, opa) which uses ops as an upper ontology should be written and submitted
to peer review for enhancements and quality assurance [21]. Data related to these
ontologies were found in relational databases and preliminary scripts were written to
make them available as rdf [31]. A sound linkage of this data and the consequent
incorporation to the Linked Open Data (lod [32]) cloud is planed for a near future.
This should make Brazilian participative structures and data more relevant to the Giant
Global Graph [33].
