Parcellation  of  fMRI datasets  with ICA and PLS 
- a data driven approach 
 
 
Yongnan  Ji1 , Pierre-Yves  Herv´e2, Uwe Aickelin1 , and Alain Pitiot2 
 
1     School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, 
Jubilee Campus, Wollaton Road,  Nottingham, NG8 1BB, U.K. 

2     Brain  and Body  Centre, University of Nottingham, 
University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, U.K. 
 
 
 
Abstract. Inter-subject parcellation of functional Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging  (fMRI)  data based  on a standard General Linear  Model (GLM)  
and spectral clustering was recently proposed as a means  to alleviate the 
issues associated with spatial normalization in fMRI. However, for all its 
appeal,  a  GLM-based  parcellation  approach introduces  its  own  biases, 
in  the form  of  a priori  knowledge  about  the shape  of Hemodynamic 
Response Function (HRF) and task-related signal changes,  or about the 
subject behaviour during  the task. 
In this paper, we introduce a data-driven version  of the spectral cluster- 
ing parcellation,  based  on Independent Component Analysis (ICA)  and 
Partial Least Squares  (PLS) instead of the GLM. First, a number  of in- 
dependent components are  automatically  selected. Seed voxels are then 
obtained from the associated ICA maps  and we compute the PLS latent 
variables between  the  fMRI  signal  of the seed  voxels  (which  covers  re- 
gional variations of the HRF) and the principal components of the signal 
across  all voxels. Finally, we parcellate all subjects data with a spectral 
clustering of the PLS  latent variables. 
We  present  results  of the application  of the proposed method  on  both 
single-subject and multi-subject fMRI datasets. Preliminary experimen- 
tal results, evaluated with intra-parcel variance of GLM t-values and PLS 
derived  t-values, indicate that this data-driven approach offers improve-  
ment in terms of parcellation  accuracy over GLM based  techniques. 
 
 
1 Introduction 
 
Inter-subject parcellation based on a standard General Linear Model (GLM) and 
spectral clustering was recently proposed as a means to alleviate the issues asso- 
ciated with spatial normalization in the analysis functional Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging (fMRI) datasets: lack of true anatomical correspondence,  inaccuracy  of 
the normalization process (see [1] for an in-depth overview), etc. In a parcellation 
framework,  voxels are first clustered into functionally homogeneous  regions or 
parcels. Then,  the parcellations are then homogenised  across subjects, so that 
statistics  can be carried  out  at the parcel  level rather than at the voxel level. 
Here we focus on the optimization of the first step of the parcellation scheme. 

 
2 
 
We present a data-driven, model-free, parcellation technique, based on Inde- 
pendent Component Analysis (ICA) and Partial Least Squares (PLS, [2]) instead 
of a GLM, so as to use more of the information contained within the fMRI time 
series. First, a number  of independent components are automatically selected. 
Seed voxels are then  obtained from the associated ICA maps  and  we compute 
the PLS latent variables  between the fMRI signal of the seed voxels (which cov- 
ers regional variations of the stimuli related BOLD responses) and the principal 
components of the signal across all voxels. Finally, we parcellate all subjects data 
with  a spectral  clustering  of the PLS  latent variables.  We also introduce  PLS 
t-values as an alternative way to validate parcellation results. 
We detail our  approach  in the following Section 2. Preliminary results are 
given in Section 3, where we also compare  them to GLM-based  parcellation. 
 
 
2 Materials  and  Methods 
 
2.1 Datasets  and Preprocessing 
 
We applied our method to two functional datasets: a single-subject fMRI exper- 
iment with a standard finger tapping task and a multi-subject experiment where 
volunteers were presented with hand  gestures or face expressions [3]. 
Single-subject data were acquired  on a Philips  Intera 1.5T with a TR  of 3s 
and  a sequential finger tapping task auditorily paced  with a metronome. The 
auditory signals were given every 0.6 seconds. The digit order of the tapping was 
1 - 3 - 2 - 4, repeated 6 times in each period,  with a 14.4 second rest between 
periods. The period of one on-and-off block was then 28.8 seconds. 
Multi-subject data, our main  concern  in this paper,  were acquired  from 25 
subjects viewing angry  gestures or expressions.  Scanning  was performed  on a 
Philips  Intera 1.5T,  with  TR=3s. During  the scan, four types of visual stimuli 
are given to the subjects, which are angry hand  gestures, neural  hand  gestures, 
angry facial expression and neural  facial expression. 
Both datasets were preprocessed with FSL for slice-timing, motion correction 
and registration [4, 5]. 
 
 
2.2 Independent Components  Selection 
 
For  the multi-subject  experiment,  we used FSL to decompose  the input fMRI 
data into independent components (ICs). We obtained between 30 and 60 ICs per 
subject, for a total of 1203 ICs. Here we propose to use a hierarchical  clustering 
approach, similar  in spirit  to Partner Matching  [6] as a means  to find the ICs 
that best capture the Blood Oxygen Level Dependent Haemodynamic (BOLD) 
response to the stimuli. This  method is based on the assumption that very few 
of the 1203 ICs contain information about the stimuli-related BOLD responses. 
Consequently, the task-related ICs should be more similar with each other than 
with the other ICs since they share the same source. We aim to group those ICs 
that correspond  to the response to the same task features in different subjects 

=
q
A
i
i
 
3 
 
together into one cluster. The other ICs which do not contain relevant (i.e. task- 
related) information should be grouped inside another cluster. 
We take those constraints into  account when design the similarity function 
to be used in our hierarchical  clustering. 
Let Na  and Nb   be the number  of ICs for subjects A and B respectively, with 
ICA  and  ICB   the ith IC of subject A and  jth IC of subject B. t = 1, . . . , T is 
i 
j 
the time index. Their  correlation coefficients is given by: 
 
A  
B 
PT   
1 (IC 
A 
(t) - ICi )(ICB 
B 
(t) - ICi  ) 
ρ(ICi  , ICj  ) = 
t 
PT 
A 
A   2 q 
T 
B
 
, 
(1) 
B   2 
t=1 (ICi  (t) - ICi   ) 
P
t=1 (ICi  (t) - ICi  ) 
 
The normalized  correlation coefficients ρnorm is: 
 
A  
B 
A 
B 
ρnorm(ICA , ICB) = ρ(ICi  , ICj  ) - mean(ρ(ICi  , ICj  )|j =1,2,...,Nb ) 
 
(2) 
i 
j 
std(ρ(ICA , ICB )| 
) 
i 
j   j=1,2,...,Nb 
 
Since the aim of the clustering is to put similar  ICs from different subjects 
into  one  cluster, all  the ICs  of the same  cluster  should  come  from  different 
subjects, therefore we need to set the similarity between ICs of the same subject 
to 0. The similarity between two ICs is finally defined as 
 
A  
B 
( 
0 
if A = B 
S(ICi  , ICj  ) = 
min(ρnorm(ICA 
B 
B 
A 
(3) 
i , ICj  ), ρnorm (ICj  , ICi  )) other wise . 
 
In  the case of the single-subject data, the ICs  representing BOLD  signals 
could not be selected by comparing  ICs across subjects as above. Therefore,  we 
manually picked those ICs that best matches the canonical HRF-convoluted task 
design from the 34 ICs produced  by FSL. 
 
 
2.3 Seed Selection 
 
In order  to calculate the PLS latent variables  that best capture the BOLD  re- 
sponse, a number of seeds representing different active regions should be selected. 
For instance, in a GLM-based parcellation approach, we could select as seeds the 
voxels with the largest t-values. Here, we pick them on the basis of the ICA re- 
sults. 
Within each IC map [5], the first seed is chosen as the voxel with the largest 
value.  The  second  seed is then  chosen,  amongst  the voxels at least  R  voxels 
away from the first seed voxel, as the voxel with the largest IC map value. The 
iterative process is repeated until all the seeds have been selected. 
In the multi-subject case, two IC maps  were used. We picked R = 6 voxels 
and obtained Nseed = 15 seeds for each map. In the single-subject data, 30 seeds 
were selected from each IC map with R = 6. 
 

PCA
PCA
PLS
PLS
1
 
4 
 
2.4 PCA/PLS  Feature Space for Parcellation 
 
Let  XV  ×T  = xij   denote  the data matrix,  where each  row corresponds  to  the 
fMRI signal of a given voxel. Then,  we propose to denoise the signal with PCA. 
We first center the signal at each voxel by substracting its mean, before decom- 
posing XV  ×T into PPCA and TPCA using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) 
as XV  ×T = PPCA T′ 
[7, 8]. T′ 
is the transpose of the PCA score matrix of 
X (the matrix whose columns are the Principal Components (PCs)  of the fMRI 
data), and PPCA is the PCA  loading matrix. Ranking  the PCs according to the 
variance they cover, the first few. PCs usually have exceptionally high variances. 
And the last PCs are slow-variant artefacts. These PCs  are considered as noise 
and removed. 
Let DT  ×Nseed  represent the fMRI signals of the seed voxels, where each col- 
umn  correspond  to the fMRI  signal  in a given seed. We  then  use the  PCs  in 
matrix TPCA for the prediction of D with Partial Least Square (PLS). The orig- 
inal design of PLS is to predict D with the components decomposed from TPCA 
and D as regressor. These components, the latent variables,  should contain the 
information from both TPCA and D.  Here PLS is used to calculate the time se- 
ries components that represent the individual  specific functional activity signals. 
We decompose TPCA into the product of TPLS and P′ 
with T′ 
TPLS = I. 
D is predicted as Dˆ  = TPLS BC′ , where the columns of TPLS , ti, i = 1, 2, ..., K , 
are the latent vectors of size T × 1. B is a diagonal  matrix with the “regression 
weights” as diagonal  elements and  C  is the “weight matrix” of the  dependent 
variables  [9]. 
Given TPCA and  D,  the latent vectors could be chosen in a lot of different 
ways. The canonical  way is to find the latent vectors that maximize the covari- 
ance between the columns of TPLS and D.  Specifically, the first latent vector is 
calculated  as t1  = TPCA w1    and  u1  = Dc1  with  the  constrains  that t′ t1  = 
1, 
w′  
′ 
1 w1   = 1 and t1 u1 be maximal.  Then first component is subtracted from TPCA 
and D, and the rest latent variables  are calculated iteratively as the above until 
TPCA  becomes a null matrix.  The  first  PLS  latent variables  are the signals  of 
interest. Let X0    be derived from X after the signal variance  has been revmoed: 
x0   = x/||x||, where x and x0    are the row vectors of X and X0 . We use the co- 
variances  between fMRI signals and latent variables,  ri  = X0 ti , as feature space 
for parcellation. 
 
 
2.5 Parcellation  method 
 
Following  Thirion  et al.[1], we chose spectral clustering for parcellation. This 
method represents the relationships between voxels as a graph  whose vertices 
correspond  to the voxels with  the functional  distance  between  voxels (GLM- 
based in their approach) associated to the edges. The complete distance matrix 
∆G   between all  pairs  of voxels is obtained by  integrating the local  distances 
along the paths in the graph.  Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) is applied to 
the centered square distance matrix ∆G . Finally,  they apply C-means clustering 
to the singular  vectors with largest singular  values. Please see [1] for details. 

 
5 
 
Here, rather than using GLM to define local distances, we use our ri ’s: 
d(v, w) = ||r(v) — r(w)|| = /
(r(v) — r(w))(r(v) — r(w))i , 
(4) 
 
where v and w are two neighbouring  voxels and r(v) = [r1 (v) r2 (v))...  rK (v)]. 
 
 
3 Results 
 
3.1 Intra-parcel  functional  homogeneity 
 
As in [1], we use  the intra-parcel  functional  variance  to assess the quality  of 
the parcellation. However,  instead of using  GLM  parameters to represent the 
functional information, we use GLM t-values and PLS t-values (described  below) 
for each regressor as functional features. Let N r be the number of regressors and 
f i ∈ RN  r×1  be the vector of t-values for voxel i. For any parcel p, the functional 
variance  of p, v(p), is: 
 
v 
N r 
u 
v(p) = u-
(std(f i ))2 , 
where,  f i = [f i  f i 
 
. . .  f i  
]i   and i ∈ p 
(5) 
t 
k 
k=1 
1       2 
N r 
 
The distribution of v(p) across all parcels is used to compare the accuracy  of 
the parcellations. 
 
 
PLS t-values Given a design matrix Y ∈ RT ×N r , where yk   ∈ RT ×1  is the kth 
column  of Y,  instead  of using  D,  the regressor  yk    is used  to calculate  latent 
variables  as in section 2.4. If rk  is the covariance  between the fMRI time series 
and the first latent variable,  then, 
r
√
T — 2 
t =  1 — r2 
 
 
(6) 
has a t-distribution with T —2 degrees of freedom. The null hypothesis of this test 
is that the signal of that voxel is not covariant with the PLS components. Thus, 
we can generate statistical maps  to represent the significance of the covariance 
between  the signals in each voxel and  the first  latent variable  calculated  from 
data and the kth regressor of the design matrix. 
 
 
3.2 Results on single-subject data 
 
As mentioned above in section 2.2, our automatic IC selection approach  cannot 
be  applied  to single  subject  data. Here,  we manually  selected  the IC  whose 
time course best matches the experiment design, to be used in the seed selection 
process. The fMRI signals of the whole brain are decomposed into PCs. It should 
be noted that the PCs  covering  the largest variance  in  X  are  not the most 
interesting signals in the fMRI dataset. Indeed  it appears  that the respiratory, 

  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
0.2 
 
 
0 
 
0.2 
 
0 
 
—0.2 
0 
50 
100 
The first latent variable 
—0.2 
0 
50 
100 
The second latent variable 
 
Fig. 1. First two PLS  components 
 
 
cardiac or instrumental artifacts may have a larger influence on the BOLD signal 
than the task. Such noise-related PCs are removed before the PLS step. 
In Fig. 1, the first two latent variables are shown. The shape of the first latent 
variable matches the experiment design. It can be considered as a subject-specific 
response model, which will allow a better detection of task-related activity. Based 
on the latent variables,  the whole brain  is parcellated into 600 parcels  using a 
spectral clustering as explained in section 2.5. The intra-parcel variances of GLM 
t-values and PLS t-values are used to compare parcellation results based on GLM 
and  PLS. Here, the bars illustrate the mean,  the first and  the third quartile of 
the t-values variance  of 600 parcels  from  each  method.  From  Fig.  2, we can 
see that with both functional measures,  spectral clustering with PLS increases 
the intra-parcel functional homogeneity. One latent variable  is optimal for the 
parcellation of this dataset. 
 
 
3.3 Results on multi-subject  data 
 
Using  the similarity matrix described  in  section 2.3  and  Ward’s linkage,  we 
grouped all the ICs into three clusters. The ICs in cluster 1 match the first and 
second  task regressors.  The  ICs  in cluster 2 match the third and  fourth task 
regressor.  Meanwhile,  in feature space,  these two clusters keep large distances 
from the rest of the ICs. There  are 20 ICs in cluster 1 from 19 subjects and  20 
ICs in cluster 2 from 20 subjects. For each subject we use the ICs from these for 
sampling  seed voxels. If a subject  doesn’t have an IC in cluster  1 or 2, we use 
the ICs that are closest to those clusters to sample the seeds. 
 
 
1.6 
 
1.4 
 
1.2 
 
1 
1.8 
 
1.6 
 
1.4 
 
1.2 
 
1 
 
0.8  
SC 
GLM     PLS1    PLS2    PLS3 
 
0.8  
SC 
GLM     PLS1    PLS2    PLS3 
 
Fig. 2. Comparison of Parcellation results from Spatial Clustering (SC), Spectral Clus- 
tering with GLM (GLM), Spectral Clustering with 1 PLS latent variable (PLS1), 2 PLS 
latent variable (PLS2) and 3 PLS  latent variable (PLS3) 

 
  
 
 
4 
 
3 
 
2 
 
1 
SC
GLM
PLS
 
7 
 
 
1.8 
 
1.6 
 
1.4 
 
1.8 
 
1.6 
 
1.4 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Comparison with GLM t—values 
 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Comparison with PLS t—values 
 
Fig. 3. Comparison of functional intra-parcel homogeneity 
 
 
All the datasets are then parcellated into 600 parcels.  The  functional vari- 
ances of GLM parcellation and  ICA-PLS  parcellation on 25 subjects are com- 
pared in Fig. 3. Subjects are split across the horizontal axis. The parcels respond 
to the stimuli  of angry  hand  gestures  are shown in Fig. 4. The  activation  and 
intra-parcel functional variance  are evaluated with GLM t-values. Similarly,  in 
Fig. 5, the parcellation results are evaluated with PLS t-values. 
 
 
4 Conclusion and  Future Work 
 
We presented a data driven  method for parcellation of fMRI data. Preliminary 
experimental results indicate that such approach  adapts to the variability of the 
BOLD  response  across subjects and  increase  the accuracy  of the parcellation. 
The cost of this improvement is the complexity of parcellation. Future work will 
tackle the homogenisation of those parcellations across different subjects. 
 
Acknowledgement   This  research  is funded  by  the European Commission  FP6 
Marie Curie Action Programme (MEST-CT-2005-021170). 
 
 
4 
 
3 
 
2 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Parcels respond  to stimuli.  Parcels with  average  GLM  t-values larger  than 2 
are shown. The first row shows activation. The second row shows intra-parcel variance. 
Three  columns  show the results from three parcellation methods. 
 

 
 
 
 
3 
 
2 
 
1 
SC
GLM
PLS
 
8 
 
8 
 
6 
 
4 
 
2 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Parcels respond  to stimuli. Parcels with average  PLS t-values larger than 3 are 
shown.
