Transactions of the SDPS: 
Journal of Integrated Design and Process Science 
XXXX 
DOI 10.3233/JIDXXXXXX 
http://www.sdpsnet.org 
Digital Engineering Transformation with Trustworthy AI 
towards Industry 4.0: Emerging Paradigm Shifts 
Jingwei Huang 
Department of Engineering Management and Systems Engineering, Old Dominion University 
Norfolk, VA 23529, USA 

Abstract Digital engineering transformation is a crucial process for the engineering paradigm shifts in the 
fourth industrial revolution (4IR), and artificial intelligence (AI) is a critical enabling technology in digital 
engineering transformation. This article discusses the following research questions: What are the 
fundamental changes in the 4IR? More specifically, what are the fundamental changes in engineering? 
What is digital engineering? What are the main uncertainties there? What is trustworthy AI? Why is it 
important today? What are emerging engineering paradigm shifts in the 4IR? What is the relationship 
between the data-intensive paradigm and digital engineering transformation? What should we do for 
digitalization? From investigating the pattern of industrial revolutions, this article argues that ubiquitous 
machine intelligence (uMI) is the defining power brought by the 4IR. Digitalization is a condition to 
leverage ubiquitous machine intelligence. Digital engineering transformation towards Industry 4.0 has three 
essential building blocks: digitalization of engineering, leveraging ubiquitous machine intelligence, and 
building digital trust and security. The engineering design community at large is facing an excellent 
opportunity to bring the new capabilities of ubiquitous machine intelligence and trustworthy AI principles, 
as well as digital trust, together in various engineering systems design to ensure the trustworthiness of 
systems in Industry 4.0. 
Keywords Industry 4.0, Fourth Industrial Revolution, digitalization, digital transformation, digital 
engineering, digital engineering transformation, paradigm shift, data science, digital technologies, 
uncertainties, trustworthiness, trustworthy AI systems 
1.
Introduction
The convergence of disruptive digital technologies, such as artificial intelligence (AI), Internet of
Things (IoT), cloud computing, high-speed wireless communication, and blockchain, among others, has 
driven the world into a new wave of a technology revolution, known as the “fourth industrial revolution” 
(4IR) (Schwab, 2017), also known as the “digital revolution” for the central role of digitalization in the 4IR. 
In 2011, Germany first launched their Industrie 4.0 initiative aiming at leveraging Cyber-Physical-Systems 
(CPS) to build smart factories and strengthen their leadership in manufacturing. The US launched a national 
Advanced Manufacturing program in 2014 and declared manufacturing to be a national priority. Recent 
Five-year Plans of China since the 2010s actively promote critical technologies towards 4IR. Industry 4.0 
(I4.0) is a term frequently used as an interchangeable term for 4IR; however, they have some subtle 
differences in their focuses. In this article, we use the 4IR to address the revolutionary change in paradigms 
and tools, and we use Industry 4.0 to address the targeted industrial systems (with manufacturing in the 
Accepted Version, To Be Published by IOS Press

2 
J Huang / Digital engineering transformation with trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts  
 
core as the fundamental component) in the 4IR. Briefly, Industry 4.0 is the target or goal, and the 4IR is the 
movement or process toward that goal. 
A defining feature of the fourth industrial revolution is digitalization. Associated with this feature, a 
pervasive and profound digital transformation is ongoing in almost every aspect of human society globally. 
Digital Engineering is the digital transformation in the field of engineering, and digital engineering 
transformation is at the center of 4IR. In 2018, the US DoD launched their Digital Engineering Strategy 
(US DoD, 2018; Zimmerman, Gilbert, & Salvatore, 2019). This strategy requires using and sharing formal 
models and digital data across engineering lifecycle and organizational boundaries through a trusted 
“authoritative source of truth”. This move will impact the US defense industry and propagate to other 
industry sectors and change how engineering is conducted. Digital engineering transformation is about 
engineering paradigm shifts in the 4IR, and AI is a critical enabling technology in the digital engineering 
transformation.  
AI has achieved remarkable progress in recent years. At the same time, the disruptive impacts and fast 
growth of applications of AI systems (particularly ML) also raise broad concerns about an AI system’s 
reliability, safety, security, privacy-preserving, fairness (or bias-free), explainability, traceability, 
transparency, and accountability, among other qualities. Research on those concerns has been ongoing 
under the umbrella of “Trustworthy AI” (AAAI Presidential Panel on Long-Term AI Future, 2009; EU AI 
HLEG, 2019; H. Liu et al., 2021; NSF, 2019; Stone et al., 2016; Wing, 2020). Trustworthy AI has two 
primary aspects: societal effects (ethics) and technical performance (dependability). The ethics of AI 
concerns the long-term impacts of AI on humans and human society. The central principle is to use AI for 
good or for purposes beneficial to humans. Dependability concerns the competency of AI systems on 
technical matters. Given the critical role of AI in the 4IR, the recent concerns about trustworthy AI also 
propagate into Industry 4.0 systems. The AI community has been striving for many decades to push the 
boundary of machine intelligence. The engineering community will bring AI technologies and ethical 
principles together to deliver trustworthy cyber-physical-social smart systems to human society. 
This article will discuss the following research questions: 
(1) What are the fundamental changes brought by the fourth industrial revolution?  
(2) More specifically, what are the fundamental changes in engineering? What is digital engineering? 
(3) What are the main uncertainties associated with the 4IR? What is trustworthy AI?  
(4) What are emerging engineering paradigm shifts in the 4IR? 
The contents of this article are organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the answer to the first question 
by investigating the patterns of the four industrial revolutions, focusing on the ongoing fourth revolution. 
Section 3 continues with the second question to discuss digital engineering transformation in the 4IR. 
Section 4 discusses the uncertainties in the 4IR and trustworthy AI. Section 5 discusses some open issues 
and focuses on the emerging engineering paradigm shifts. Finally, section 6 concludes the article.  
2. The Fourth Industrial Revolution 
What are the fundamental changes (including paradigm shifts and their profound impacts) brought by 
the fourth industrial revolution? Let us logically examine the patterns that emerged in industrial revolutions 
historically from the perspectives of technological triggers, paradigm shifts, and profound impacts. As 
illustrated in Figure 1, the fundamental changes of both the first industrial revolution (1IR) and the second 
industrial revolution (2IR) are the provision of energy (physical power) for industrial production. The 
fundamental changes of the third industrial revolution (3IR) and the fourth industrial revolution (4IR) are 
the provision of machine intelligence (brainpower) to explore and leverage information power in industries 
and human society. Both 1IR and 3IR are fundamental for inventing revolutionary new tools (the steam 
engine and the computer) to deliver physical and information power, respectively. Both 2IR and 4IR scale 
up the delivery of new powers (energy and information power) initiated in 1IR and 3IR, respectively.   
The 1IR is characterized as “mechanization.” The invention of the steam engine triggered the 1IR. 
Steam engines lead to the industrial operations paradigm shift from human manual labor to the broad use 
of machines in production. A representative example is frequently referred to as the first mechanical loom. 

 
J Huang / Digital Engineering Transformation with Trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts 
3 
 
The profound impact of the first industrial revolution is that the using steam-powered machines to replace 
human hands in production activities significantly improved the efficiency of production and released 
humans from heavy manual labor for more creative activities. 
The 2IR is characterized as “electrification.” The invention and use of electric power, together with the 
invention of assembly lines, triggered the second industrial revolution. The use of electricity makes power 
(energy) usage easy, flexible, free from the space-constraints, and easy to scale up or down. Without 
electricity, the idea of assembly lines could not have been realized. With easy access to electric power, the 
invention of assembly lines leads to skill specialization-based mass production. This change marks the 
industrial operations paradigm shift from early craft production and job production to much more 
productive mass production and the associated product standardization. The profound impacts of the second 
industrial revolution are mass production and flexible and scalable access to power (energy). 
 
 
Figure 1. Four waves of Industrial Revolutions and their profound impacts. Every wave was triggered by 
disruptive technologies and followed by paradigm shifts in industrial operations. 
 
The 3IR can be characterized as “informatization.” The invention and development of programmable 
general-purpose digital computers triggered the 3IR. The computer is the most powerful information 
processing tool in human history. The availability of this critical tool allows humans to explore and leverage 
the power of information, along with using matter and energy. The paradigm shift brought by the 3IR can 
be viewed in three aspects. First, with the broad applications of computers in control, such as the adoption 
of PLCs, DCS, and SCADA, many human-operated processes became automated or computer-aided 
processes. Secondly, information media was digitized (or computerized). Research reveals that 94% of 
information media became digital in 2007 (Hilbert & López, 2011). The digital forms of information allow 
information to be stored and read with computers. This machine-readable (and later machine-processable) 
property makes information flow largely automated and fast. The advantages of digital information make 
information a decisive success factor beyond other factors during the time of the 3IR.  This change leads to 
the third aspect of the paradigm shift - the business process transition from material, energy, and product 
centered to information centered. The fundamental impact of 3IR is the beginning of using machine 
intelligence to explore and leverage the power of information, which leads to new capabilities and 
significantly improved efficiency and effectiveness in industrial production and other human activities.  
1st Industrial Revolution
− Mechanization
Increasing Accessibility, Flexibility, and Scalability
Trigger: Steam Engine
Paradigm shift: Human/animal power -> steam power
human manual labor -> use of steam-powered machines 
Impact: Steam-powered machines significantly improve 
production efficiency and release humans from heavy manual 
labor. 
2nd Industrial Revolution
− Electrification
Trigger: Electric power; assembling lines
Paradigm shift: Steam power -> electric power;
craft production, job production -> mass production
Impact: Electric power makes energy delivery highly 
flexible and scalable and leads to the productive mass 
production.
3rd Industrial Revolution
− Informatization
Trigger: Computer and electronics
Paradigm shift: information media -> digitized; 
operation processes -> automated or computer-aided processes;
matter & energy centered  -> information centered.
Impact: Humans started to use machine intelligence (MI) to explore 
and  leverage information power, which leads to new capabilities 
and significantly improved efficiency and effectiveness.
4th Industrial Revolution
− Digitalization
Trigger: Digital technologies (IoT, 5/6G, AI, Cloud, blockchain, …) 
Paradigm shift: digitizing information  -> digitalizing everything of interest;
centralized and distributed computing & MI -> pervasive computing & MI;
information centered -> big data and machine intelligence centered.
Impact: The pervasive digitalization and ubiquitous machine intelligence 
(integrated capabilities from IoT, 5G/6G, cloud, and AI) lead to many cyber-
physical-social smart systems (CPS3) with innovative applications.
Energy
(Physical Power)
Machine Intelligence 
(Information Power)

4 
J Huang / Digital engineering transformation with trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts  
 
For this reason, the 3IR is also called the “information revolution,” and the period is called the 
“information age.” Since the start of the 3IR, many digital technologies, such as artificial intelligence, 
industrial robots, portable and then mobile computers, the Internet, wireless networks, mobile devices, and 
others, were developed and profoundly changed human society regarding how we work and live already. 
Those digital technologies prelude the next wave of technological revolution. 
The 4IR can be characterized as “digitalization.” The convergence of transformative and disruptive 
digital technologies, such as IoT, high-speed wireless communication, cloud computing, AI&ML, and 
blockchain, among others, trigged the 4IR.  
IoT, in a broader perspective, also named as “Internet of All Things” or “Internet of Everything,”  has 
four pillars: Internet of Things, Internet of Information, Internet of People, and Internet of Services 
(Kirkpatrick et al., 2013). In the future internet infrastructure, the physical things of interest (such as various 
machines, devices, buildings, roads, and other structures, even things of interest in the natural world), the 
abstract things (things in the digital world, such as information contents), people, organizations, and various 
processes of interest (examples include: service processes, or engineering processes, even social or natural 
processes of interest, such as climate change, environmental change, living things status change, pandemic 
monitoring, disease infection tracing, and others), anything of interest are interconnected, through future 
internet, operating with supports from 5G/6G wireless communication networks, cloud computing, and AI. 
In the rest of this paper, we refer term IoT in this broader sense of the Future Internet or Internet of 
Everything.  
IoT connects the physical world with the cyber world to form an integrated cyber-physical smart 
environment. With IoT through sensors and actuators, smart things in the physical world can be remotely 
located, monitored, and even controlled through the Internet. With mobile devices supported with 5G/6G 
wireless networks, people will have ubiquitous access to the Internet, smart things in the physical world, 
and the cloud services needed to handle those smart things. More importantly, people themselves become 
nodes of this Internet. This interconnected world, facilitated by IoT, 5G/6G, cloud computing, and AI&ML, 
is leading to numerous Cyber-Physical-Social Smart Systems (CPS3) (Huang, Seck, & Gheorghe, 2016), 
such as autonomous vehicles, smart factories, smart stores, smart cities, and others. A necessary condition 
to develop those smart systems is to digitalize things of interest to make them uniquely identifiable and 
machine-understandable; then, we can leverage AI&ML to exploit the unprecedented richness of 
information brought by the digital and connected world. 
The 4IR with those disruptive digital technologies is “leading to unprecedented paradigm shifts in the 
economy, business, society, and individually” (Schwab, 2017). The emerging paradigm shifts in the 4IR 
can be viewed from several related perspectives as follows.  
(1) Shift from digitizing information to digitalizing everything of interest, including artifacts (both 
abstract and physical), natural things, organizations, and processes (such as production and/or 
service processes, monitored natural processes, and others). 
(2) Shift from centralized and distributed provisioning of computing services and machine intelligence 
to pervasive provisioning of computing services and machine intelligence. 
(3) Shift from information-centered processes (developed in 3IR) to big data and machine intelligence-
centered processes.  
 
About the first shift, different from the 3IR, where information was digitized, in the 4IR, not only 
information (abstract artifacts) but also physical artifacts and natural living things of interest, as well as 
processes of interest, could be digitalized. Everything of interest, even humans, could have their digital 
counterparts (or “digital presence” as termed by (Schwab, 2017)). Such as, some devices or products will 
have their digital twins, and some artifacts will have their digital augmentations (the associated metadata, 
e.g., provenance).  In addition to artifacts, some processes of interest (no matter about production, service, 
or some natural processes such as climate change or regional ecosystem change, among others) could also 
be digitalized. This pervasive digitalization could be enabled by semantic web technology (a branch of AI) 
(Berners-Lee, Hall, Hendler, Shadbolt, & Weitzner, 2006; Berners-Lee, Hendler, & Lassila, 2001), RFID, 
IoT, and blockchain.  

 
J Huang / Digital Engineering Transformation with Trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts 
5 
 
The second shift can be seen from comparing how computing service was delivered before the 4IR. 
From many people using a single large computer, each person using a computer and then a laptop, till each 
computer was able to connect to the Internet with a wall jack, computing service was delivered in a 
“centralized”, “decentralized”, and then “distributed” approach. In the 4IR, we can use computers and 
interact with the world everywhere.  
About thirty years ago, Mark Weiser and Nicholas Negroponte had a debate at MIT Media Lab. 
Negroponte predicted that AI was going to be the leader for the next wave of computing, but Weiser argued 
it would be Ubiquitous Computing, characterized as “invisible” and “connection” (Weiser, 1996). Weiser’s 
vision, which can be found in a vivid illustration in his essay “Open House” (Weiser, 1996), is one of the 
original ideas about the Internet of Things. Interestingly, IoT and AI together become the major drivers for 
the 4IR. IoT extends the “nerves” of the Internet into the physical world, and AI is the “brain” of smart 
things interacting with the digitalized connected world. In addition to IoT and AI, wireless networks and 
cloud computing are critical contributors to the pervasive provisioning of computing and machine 
intelligence. 
First, of course, high-speed wireless communication is an essential infrastructure to facilitate the 
mobility of communication, computing, sensing, and delivery of all types of digital services without or 
significantly reducing the physical space constraints. Secondly, cloud computing enables ubiquitous on-
demand network access to a shared pool of computing resources, thus meeting scalable and elastic 
computing needs (Armbrust et al., 2009; NIST, 2011). Cloud computing is essential for handling the big 
data produced in the digital world and for the intensive computing required by AI applications, no matter 
where we are. 
This article uses term “ubiquitous machine intelligence” (uMI) to refer to the integrated capabilities 
enabled by the convergence of IoT, 5G/6G, AI&ML, and cloud computing. Interestingly, the role 
ubiquitous machine intelligence plays in meeting the needs of computing and machine intelligence is very 
similar to the role of electricity in 2IR, where electricity enables the mobility of power delivery needed in 
assembly lines and mass production. Here, ubiquitous machine intelligence makes computing services and 
machine intelligence pervasively accessible and provides the essential technology for various smart systems. 
For this reason, ubiquitous machine intelligence is regarded as the most fundamental change brought by the 
4IR. 
The third shift can be viewed through the following comparison. In the Industry 3.0, information flows 
and material flows were still separated; thus, information is long-delayed. In the 4IR, the pervasive 
digitalization and connectedness make the material and human flows associated with information flows; 
thus, real-time information about the material and human flows can be used for decision-making. There 
will be unprecedented rich information about the things of interest for decision making. Consequently, a 
decisive success factor in the era of 4IR will be the capability of leveraging ubiquitous machine intelligence 
to collect and extract information, discover knowledge from big data, and make smart decisions in the 
digital smart and connected environment (Huang, 2017).  
Finally, regarding the profound impact of the 4IR, similar to the 2IR that makes power (energy) easily 
accessible and leads to mass production, the 4IR makes information power (computing and machine 
intelligence) pervasively accessible and leads to various CPS3 with innovative applications. More 
specifically, in the 4IR, the pervasive digitalization and pervasive connectedness make data (minerals of 
information) available in an unprecedented scale and make computing services and machine intelligence 
(brainpower or information power) ubiquitously accessible and scale up. Furthermore, they are triggering 
and accommodating numerous innovative applications. Those disruptive technologies and their innovative 
applications are “fundamentally changing the way we live, work, and relate to one another.” They lead to 
“the transformation of entire systems, across (and within) countries, companies, industries and society as a 
whole” (Schwab, 2017). 

6 
J Huang / Digital engineering transformation with trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts  
 
3. Digital engineering transformation 
As discussed in the last section, digitalization is the central theme of the 4IR. As such, pervasive digital 
transformations are ongoing in almost every aspect of human society. Given the essential role of 
engineering in industries, the digitalization of engineering is at the core of 4IR. Digital engineering is the 
digitalized engineering, or the targeted digital form of engineering to be realized by the digitalization of 
engineering towards Industry 4.0.  
The US Department of Defense (DoD)  defines “digital engineering” as “an integrated digital approach 
that uses the authoritative source of system data and models as a continuum across disciplines to support 
lifecycle activities from concept through disposal” in their “Digital Engineering Strategy”  (US DoD, 2018; 
Zimmerman et al., 2019). As illustrated in Figure 2, the strategy targets five goals: (1) formalize the 
development, integration, and use of models, leading to a continuous end-to-end digital representation of 
the system of interest; (2) provide an enduring authoritative source of truth to share and exchange digital 
models, data, and other digital artifacts across boundaries of organizations and the engineering lifecycle; 
(3) incorporate technological innovation to improve the engineering practice; (4) establish a supporting 
infrastructure and environments; (5) transform culture and workforce to adopt and support digital 
engineering. Paper (Zimmerman et al., 2019) provides a comprehensive view of the US DoD’s efforts for 
digital engineering transformation. The implementation of this strategy will significantly change how 
engineering practice is conducted in the US DoD enterprise and propagate to industries in a broader range. 
 
 
Figure 2. The US DoD Digital Engineering Strategy. Picture from (US DoD, 2018) (Fig.3&4)   
 
From the perspective of engineering processes, the transformation from conventional engineering to 
digital engineering is illustrated in Figure 3. In the picture, from a general view, an engineering process is 
illustrated as a process model with inputs (left), outputs (right), enablers (bottom), and control (top). 
Digitalizing engineering artifacts, engineering processes, and engineering enterprises is the foundation for 
digital engineering transformation. Without digitalized artifacts, the applications of emerging digital 
technologies will be very limited, maybe in an ad hoc manner, or may need human or ad hoc devices as 
intermediate agents. As a result, the level of automation and autonomous functioning will stay at a slightly 
higher level than in Industry 3.0. On the other hand, with digitalized engineering artifacts and processes, 
we can broadly leverage machine intelligence and other digital technologies to conduct engineering in a 
digital, smart, and connected environment; thus achieving a new level of engineering, which is more 
effective and efficient as well as more trustworthy. Some advantages of digital engineering include: 
sharable knowledge and data across the engineering life cycle, increased explainability and transparency of 
engineering processes and products, fast integration of distributed engineering resources for a given mission, 
increased traceability and accountability, increased product traceability along supply chains, and quick 
adaption to the changing environment, among others. 

 
J Huang / Digital Engineering Transformation with Trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts 
7 
 
 
Figure 3. Digital engineering transformation from a process perspective  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Model perspective: operations in the digital engineering lifecycle (Huang et al., 2020) 
 
In digital engineering as shown in Figure 3, the inputs, outputs, enablers, and control are different from 
the conventional ones; correspondingly, the digital engineering operations will also significantly differ from 
the conventional ones. In the digital engineering transformation, along with the fast-paced digital 
technologies, “computational thinking” (Wing, 2006, 2012) is critical to the new engineering paradigms. 
Knowledge and skills in applied computing and relevant digital technologies have become necessary 
components in workforce development towards digital engineering. Figure 4 briefly describes operations 
in the digital engineering lifecycle from a model perspective. Some further discussion of digital engineering 
can be found in (Huang et al., 2020).  
Finally, AI is a critical enabling technology to advance digital engineering (Huang, Beling, Freeman, & 
Zeng, 2021). In addition to the broad applications of Machine Learning for modelling and prediction in 
engineering, another AI branch, knowledge representation and reasoning, particularly semantics technology, 
is a fundamental technology to support digitalization. For example, ontologies are used in MBSE (Madni 
& Sievers, 2018). AI also plays a critical role in the logical formalization in building and operating digital 
trust & security systems (Huang, 2018). We will discuss further in subsection 5.3. 
Engineering
Process
Products (energy, materials, parts,
end products, structures, data, …)
Services
Natural resources
Products & services from
other engineering processes
Engineering standards and regulations
Domain-specific enabling technologies
Enterprise with workforce of specialty
Digital Engineering
Process
Digitalized Products
(product + digital augmentation)
Digitalized Services
Natural resources
Digitalized Products & Services
from digital environment
Domain-specific enabling technologies
+ Digital technologies
Digital enterprise/workforce of (specialty 
+ Digital technologies skills)
Digital Transformation
Digitalizing engineering artifacts, processes and enterprises
Digitalized Engineering standards and regulations
Digitalizing engineering artifacts:
• Parts; Materials; Products;
• Devices;
• Models; Datasets;
• Software;
• Documents;
• …
Digitalizing engineering processes
• Actions; Functions;
• Manufacturing processes;
• Quality management processes;
• Environment management processes;
• …
Digitalizing enterprise
• Enterprise organizations;
• Job roles; Services;
• Policies;
• Supply-chain; 
• Customer-relations;
• …
Concept
Stage
Development
Stage
Production
Stage
Utilization/support
Stage
Retirement
Stage
Model 
creation.
Inputs: 
- Digital artifacts (DAs) 
in operating environment;
- Relevant data and 
models from downstream 
stages.
Inputs: 
- Digital artifacts from 
both upstream and 
downstream;
- Digital artifacts of 
external systems
Inputs:
- Digital artifacts  from 
both upstream and 
downstream;
- and from production 
environment.
Inputs:
- Digital artifacts from 
both upstream and 
downstream;
- and from operating 
environment.
Inputs:
- Digital artifacts 
from upstream;
- and from natural 
environment.
Model learning
Apply AI&ML for model building from big data coming from upstream and downstream engineering stages and environment.
Model integration
Interaction between 
digital models for both 
SysCon and systems in 
operating environment.
Interaction between 
digital models for both 
system components and 
external systems.
Interaction between 
digital models for both 
the system and 
systems in production 
environment.
Interaction between digital 
models for both the system 
and external systems in 
operating environment.
Interaction between 
digital models for the 
sys component and 
DAs in natural 
environment.
Model curation
Create model of models; maintain metadata for models; maintain model provenance; model update and propagation to downstream.
Model
sharing & use
Across lifecycle activities,; across the boundaries of disciplines and organizations
Model
Trustworthiness
Centralized standardization; decentralized standardization and mappings; distributed evolutionary fine-grained convergence;
model trustworthiness; model repeatability; Access Control; digital artifact intellectual property protection, …

8 
J Huang / Digital engineering transformation with trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts  
 
4. Harness uncertainties in the 4IR – A key: trustworthy AI systems 
The disruptive digital technologies in the 4IR not only offer transformative opportunities but also bring 
in uncertainties and have triggered broad concerns and research on systems trustworthiness. The focused 
concerns of trustworthiness have been shifting and expanding to cover new issues that pop up in the new 
technologies used in each generation of engineering systems. This section discusses the trustworthiness 
concerns of Industry 4.0 systems, starting from examining the evolution of the trustworthiness of 
engineering systems, then focusing on trustworthy AI systems – the pivotal component of Industry 4.0 
systems. 
Before we move to these topics, let us discuss the elementary concepts of trust first. We use trust 
explicitly or implicitly, even unaware of using it, in our daily life and work. However, what is trust exactly? 
There are many definitions of trust (Walterbusch, Gräuler, & Teuteberg, 2014). Our working definition of 
trust used in this article is as follows (Huang & Fox, 2006) - Trust is a mental state comprising (1) 
expectancy: the trustor expects a specific behaviour of the trustee, such as providing true information or 
effectively performing cooperative actions; (2) belief: the trustor believes that the expected behaviour will 
occur, based on the evidence of the trustee’s competence, good intention, and integrity; (3) willingness to 
take the risk: the trustor is willing to take the risk for (or be vulnerable to) that belief. In brief,   
 
Trust      =  
Expectation +  
Belief in that expectation +  
Willingness to take the risk for that belief. 
 
Trust can be regarded as a relation between a “trustor” (trusting party) and a “trustee” (trusted party) 
with respect to the properties of something provided/offered/conducted by the trustee. For example, a 
passenger (trustor) trusts an autonomous car (trustee) regarding the safety of driving on the streets. What is 
to be trusted is out of the control of the trustor. From the studies of trust, the factors leading to trust include 
the trustee’s ability, good intention (or benevolence, as some researchers called it) towards the trustor, and 
integrity (reflected by the principles and values guiding behaviours)(Mayer, Davis, & Schoorman, 1995). 
The roles of ability and good intention in the concept of trust are apparent. Integrity is the need for trust 
judgment with respect to the predictable behaviours of the trustee in situations that are out of watching by 
the trustor.  
According to Simon (Simon, 1997), a decision-making process in the real world is limited by “bounded 
rationality,” i.e., the “rational choice that takes into account the cognitive limitations of the decision maker 
- limitations of both knowledge and computational capacity.” In the real world, because we only have 
limited information/knowledge, limited computing capacity, and limited time available for decision-making, 
a decision has to be made partly based on bounded rational calculation and partly based on trust. As 
Luhmann addressed (Luhmann, 1979), trust, as “a basic fact of social life,” functions as a “reduction of 
complexity.” Without trust, social interactions, including the applications of technologies in engineering 
and business, will be extremely difficult. Because of trust, we do not need to verify everything before a 
decision making or action. Trust mechanisms (Huang & Nicol, 2013) play a critical role in harnessing the 
disruptive digital technologies toward trustworthy utilizations of them. 
4.1. 
Trustworthiness of systems 
Trustworthiness of a system is defined in (Schneider, 1999) as “assurance that a system deserves to be 
trusted—that it will perform as expected despite environmental disruptions, human and operator error, 
hostile attacks, and design and implementation errors.” In short (Avizienis, Laprie, Randell, & Landwehr, 
2004), systems trustworthiness is the “assurance that a system will perform as expected.” Trustworthiness 
is a relative concept and is dependent on what is expected. Trustworthiness is often characterized as a 
collection of the expected properties of a system to be trusted, as illustrated in Figure 5. The “assurance” 
can be achieved by various trust mechanisms implemented in engineering systems and in societal systems 
such as audits, certifications, regulations, and law enforcement. 

 
J Huang / Digital Engineering Transformation with Trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts 
9 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. The evolving trustworthiness properties as the evolution of systems with technologies  
and the sources of concerns 
 
In the following, we discuss the expected properties of trustworthiness of different generations of 
engineering systems and the sources of the concerns or threats to trustworthiness. Traditional systems are 
typically stand-alone systems (a physical system, a computer system, or a system embedded with computer 
systems) or just connected logically and internally within an organization rather than the Internet. As shown 
in the bottom part of Figure 5, the trustworthiness properties concerned with those traditional systems are 
mainly reliability, maintainability, availability, integrity, robustness, safety, and usability. Those properties 
together are referred to as dependability. The sources of concerns or the threats to the trustworthiness 
properties are mainly non-malicious faults caused by (1) errors introduced in systems design and 
development; (2) errors introduced in manufacturing and maintenance; (3) errors happened in system 
operations; (4) environmental disruptions, including natural disasters, environmental pollution, and gradual 
but irreversible environment change associated with climate change.   
In the middle part of Figure 5, enabled by Internet and wireless mobile communication, the networked 
industrial systems evolve to cyber-physical systems (CPS) (Lee, 2008; NSF, 2008; Rajkumar, Lee, Sha, & 
Stankovic, 2010), which use networked computing components to monitor, coordinate, control, and 
integrate physical systems and processes. The connectedness of systems naturally led to great challenges 
with respect to security and privacy, and correspondingly they become the central theme of systems 
trustworthiness   (Avizienis et al., 2004; Schneider, 1999). The threats to security and privacy are obviously 
from various malicious attacks and incompetent security defence. 
As illustrated in the upper part of Figure 5, trustworthiness for the systems in the 4IR involves concerns 
with trustworthy AI, pervasive security, and technical dependability. The issues in an AI system could 
trigger security issues and systems dependability issues; of course, security issues could also trigger systems 
dependability issues. The sources causing the systems trustworthiness issues are in three folds:  
Robustness
Reliability
Safety
Confidentiality
Usability
Resilience
Privacy
Ethicality
Fairness
Transparency
Maintainability
Accuracy
Explainability
Traceability
Reproducibility
Accountability
Malicious attacks
Cyber connectedness
Non-malicious faults
Trustworthiness(3)
Trustworthiness(2)
Trustworthiness(1)
AI Systems uncertainties
IoT Pervasive connectedness
Systems complexity & emergence 
Dependability
Trustworthy AI
Security
Pervasive
Security
Cooperability
M.C. Escher, Convex and Concave (1955)

10 
J Huang / Digital engineering transformation with trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts  
 
(1) The pervasive security issues caused by the pervasive connectedness facilitated by IoT:   the 
pervasive connectedness facilitated by IoT broadly extends the security and privacy concerns to 
every corner of the world where humans work and live. Without assured technologies and societal 
mechanisms, the Internet of Things can turn into “the Internet of Risky Things” (S. Smith, 2017), 
even the Internet of dangerous things. The threats to security and privacy in 4IR include malicious 
attacks and incompetent security defence as before but with a much larger attack/exposure surface. 
Additionally, the threats also include certain relevant societal mechanisms. For example, as Smith 
pointed out (S. Smith, 2017), some smart devices will last longer than their manufacturers and 
suppliers, and who will keep updating the systems or their embedded computing components? 
Without updates, a digital system will be vulnerable in the complex digital operating environment. 
(2) The uncertainties caused by AI systems: the fast growth and broad applications of AI systems or 
embedded AI components in various systems have triggered much concern in two aspects: technical 
competence (such as reliability and security) and ethical concern (such as transparency, bias towards 
groups of people, human-machine relations, and others). The next subsection will discuss this aspect. 
(3) systems complexity & emergence - the aforementioned two primary two factors together bring in 
high uncertainties and complexities into the systems in the 4IR. Complex systems typically exhibit 
strong emergence (unexpected emergent system behaviour and properties that were not anticipated 
in design and development, e.g., the US-Canada Northeast Blackout of 2003) (Adcock, Jackson, 
Fairley, Singer, & Hybertson, 2021).  
4.2. 
Trustworthy AI 
In the last decade, AI achieved remarkable advances. Just to name a few, AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016, 
2018), using deep neural networks-based reinforcement learning, won the world number one player of Go 
game, which is regarded as the most challenging board game for computers to win. AlphaGo’s achievement 
marks a new milestone of machine intelligence towards superhuman intelligence on specific tasks. 
Although it is still a pilot project and has no broader adoption yet, Waymo One, the commercial taxi service 
operating with level 4 autonomous vehicles, has been offered on the streets in a city (Waymo One, 2020). 
This service marks a new level of integrated intelligent capabilities of an AI system on a type of complex 
tasks which previously only humans could do. Another remarkable advance is Generative Adversarial 
Networks (GANs) (Creswell et al., 2018; Goodfellow et al., 2014, 2020). A GAN consists of a pair of deep 
neural networks, a generator, and a discriminator; together, they can generate realistic images and other 
contents as requested (see examples at https://thispersondoesnotexist.com/). GANs lead to many potential 
applications but also open the door for deepfake. 
For many decades, the AI community's focus has been on extending machine intelligence capabilities. 
Although the advances of AI today are still domain-specific (or narrow AI) rather than general AI, the 
remarkable achievements, the disruptive impacts, and the fast growth of applications of AI systems 
triggered concerns and research on trustworthy AI systems. The concerns are mainly from two perspectives. 
(1) Ethical AI, focusing on social effects, mainly ethical considerations, essentially, the profound effects 
AI systems bring to humans, human groups, and human society, and advocating using AI to benefit humans 
as a central principle. (2) Reliable AI, focusing on the technical performance, or dependability, concerning 
the competency of AI systems on technical matters. There is a broad range of expected properties of 
trustworthiness in AI systems.  
Ethical AI is an emerging interdisciplinary research field, gathering together researchers from a wide 
range of areas, including computer science, philosophy, sociology, anthropology, public policy, law, and 
others. Some thought leaders and researchers conducted pioneering work in the field. The Association for 
the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) organized a panel of leading AI researchers that 
conducted “Asilomar Study of Long-Term AI Futures” in 2008. The study explored a wide range of topics 
on societal impacts and guidance of AI research (AAAI Presidential Panel on Long-Term AI Future, 2009). 
The study assessed concerns and perspectives about disruptive outcomes of superhuman intelligence, 
explored ethical and legal issues associated with autonomous systems, and identified near-term AI research 

 
J Huang / Digital Engineering Transformation with Trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts 
11 
 
challenges and opportunities, including enhancing people’s privacy, enhancing human-AI collaboration 
and interaction, making ML and reasoning transparent to people, and preventing using AI for malevolent 
purpose. Continuing the effort to guide AI research for good, the AI100 2016 report (Stone et al., 2016) 
addressed that AI research is “shifting from simply building systems that are intelligent to building 
intelligent systems that are human-aware and trustworthy.” The report collectively presents the view and 
prospects of a panel of experts on the opportunities and challenges of AI and policy recommendations in 
eight selected AI application domains targeting people's lives in a typical North American city in 2030. 
They addressed challenges regarding how to build safe and reliable systems, gain public trust concerning 
safety, security, and privacy, make AI systems behave ethically and overcome bias, and how AI systems 
smoothly interact with humans. In the long term, ethical AI concerns the fundamental relations between AI 
systems and humans.  There are concerns about “technological singularity” or “intelligence explosion,” 
partially reflected by the dystopia depicted in fiction. Experts in the AI field believe those radical outcomes 
remain fictional and are not immediate threats; well, some thought leaders suggest “avoid strong 
assumptions regarding upper limits on future AI capabilities” (Future of Life Institute, 2017). Given AI’s 
profound impacts on human society, it is necessary to review AI systems' purposes, usages, and impacts 
and create principles and regulations for guiding AI research and development to avoid harming humans 
and human society. The 23 Asilomar principles (Future of Life Institute, 2017) and the EU HELG ethical 
AI guide (EU AI HLEG, 2019) reflect a broad range of concerns about ethical issues of AI systems. EU AI 
HELG defined trustworthy AI as three components: lawful AI, ethical AI, and robust AI. The guide 
proposed four ethical principles: (1) Respect for human autonomy; (2) Prevention of harm; (3) Fairness; (4) 
Explicability, covering transparency, auditability, traceability, and explainability.  On the ground of these 
four principles, the guide further proposed a list of seven requirements: (1) Human agency and oversight; 
(2) Technical robustness and safety, including security, accuracy, reliability, and reproducibility; (3) 
Privacy and data governance; (4) Transparency, including traceability, explainability, and communication; 
(5) Diversity, non-discrimination and fairness; (6) Societal and environmental wellbeing; (7) 
Accountability. The EU guide also discussed technical and non-technical methods to implement the 
requirements and proposed a list of questions used to assess the trustworthiness of AI systems. 
The ethics of AI studies what is right/wrong regarding the purpose and usages of AI, based on the 
profound effects AI systems bring to humans and human society. The central principle of ethical AI is about 
using AI to benefit humans and human society. In the upper part of Figure 5, ethicality is about the extent 
to which an AI system complies with this principle.  
As addressed by the AI100 2021 report (Littman et al., 2021), “AI systems and humans have 
complementary strengths;” thus, “combined, they can accomplish more than either alone.” Technically, it 
remains a challenge regarding how to team up humans and AI systems effectively. For the fundamental 
ethical principles of trustworthy AI (EU AI HLEG, 2019), no doubt human-AI teaming is the right direction 
to go, not only for maximizing capability and performance but also for ethical consideration. Cooperability 
is about the extent to which an AI system facilitates and supports human-machine teaming for complex 
problem-solving, including the channels or methods to enhance interactions and collaborations between 
humans and machines. Cooperability covers controllability; the latter is about the ability of an AI system 
that allows humans to monitor and control the system.  
Fairness is about whether an AI system fairly treats people of different groups regarding race, gender, 
age, cultural background, and others. Fairness received much attention in recent years when AI systems 
started being used for some life-changing scenarios, such as hiring decisions, financial credit evaluation, 
and judicial decisions (Mehrabi, et al., 2021). Fairness is a highly challenging topic for complex human 
societal reasons. Technically, fairness can be treated as bias-free. The recent deep learning progress 
reflected by GANs can be used to create real-like samples for balanced data in ML. 
Accountability is the availability and integrity of the identity of an entity that performed an operation in 
the AI system of concern. In simple, it is who (human operators or autonomous components in an AI system) 
did what and when and the responsibility for that. In the scenarios of a security incident, an accident, an 
error, or a system failure, accountability helps to identify the causes, make responsibility clear, and avoid 
future mistakes. 

12 
J Huang / Digital engineering transformation with trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts  
 
Transparency is about the extent to which how the AI system operates is transparent to various 
stakeholders, such as operators, business partners, auditors, and users. Transparency is a basis for ensuring 
ethicality, fairness, and privacy and facilitating controllability and cooperability. 
Explainability is the ability to explain the outcomes and processes of an AI system to humans. The major 
challenge is that in ML, neural networks have low-level coding for feature representation which is 
inherently hard to be explained in high-level knowledge. A very large number of parameters and complex 
structures of deep neural networks make the interpretability further harder. 
Traceability is about the ability to collect and document the provenance of the data used and produced, 
the models used and trained, and the operating processes of an AI system. Traceability is the basis for 
transparency and supports explainability. 
Reproducibility is about whether a model instance can be rebuilt with the same AI algorithm and data 
and whether an experiment or, more generally, a process running with an AI model can be 
reproduced.  Reproducibility is essential to science and engineering.  
Reliable AI reflects people’s concern about systems’ technical performance when more and more AI 
systems are used or embedded in a large engineering system in the 4IR. Naturally, this aspect of concern 
brings the focused attention partially back to more classical trustworthiness properties of engineering 
systems but with a focus on AI systems or AI components and their impact on the larger systems. This 
article uses the term “dependability” to cover all expected properties (for trustworthiness) on the technical 
performance aspect. The concept of dependability here is broader than what was defined in (Avizienis et 
al., 2004). Reliability is the probability of a system functioning without failure for a given period of time. 
Maintainability is about how easy to make a system maintain healthy, updatable, and upgradeable. 
Resilience is about the ability of a system to restore it to a working state when it is damaged in situations 
such as natural disaster events or cyber-attacks. Safety is about how safe to humans a system is. The broad 
use of AI components in engineering systems makes safety a significant concern. Accuracy is the measure 
of errors made by a model or system; in the context of ML, it is critical to have high accuracy for new data 
beyond the data used for training the model. In Systems Engineering, robustness is defined as “the degree 
to which a system or component can function correctly in the presence of invalid inputs or stressful 
environmental conditions”(ISO/IEC/IEEE, 2010). In ML, robustness is about the stable outcomes in the 
presence of perturbations in inputs and could be measured with sensitivity. In deep learning, lack of 
robustness is a critical cause for the possible deepfake by GANs. The general meaning of robustness is 
similar to resilience. In robustness, the perturbations are on a small scale. Usability is how easy a system is 
to be used, and usability is beyond human-machine interaction. Poor usability can lead to failures in many 
other properties in modern systems, including security and safety. 
Security is defined as the well-known definition of the CIA triad: Confidentiality (Prevention of 
unauthorized access to the protected resources or disclosure of the protected information), Integrity 
(absence of unauthorized alterations), and Availability (Readiness for correct services for authorized users). 
Some other interesting security properties can be defined on top of the CIA triad. For example, authenticity 
is the integrity of information content and its provenance (origin). Obviously, in the digital and connected 
environment, failures in security have broad impacts and can compromise other trustworthiness properties. 
Privacy is another big concern in AI. Since data is the fuel for AI systems, privacy concerns about whether 
the data gathering, holding, processing, usage, sharing, and governance respect people's privacy.  
As illustrated by Figure 5, the trustworthiness of AI systems is the new collection of concerns when the 
systems evolve into Industry 4.0 systems. Interestingly, on the other hand, the digitalization of engineering 
artifacts, processes, and enterprises in the 4IR could support achieving the expected trustworthiness 
properties of AI systems.  
In digital engineering transformation, it is an excellent opportunity for the engineering design 
community at large to bring the new capabilities of AI and the trustworthy AI principles together in various 
engineering systems design for human society to leverage the power of AI and at the same time to avoid or 
minimize the potential negative impacts. 

 
J Huang / Digital Engineering Transformation with Trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts 
13 
 
5. Open issues and discussion 
In previous sections, we have discussed the characteristics of 4IR and their fundamental impacts, digital 
engineering transformation - the manifestation of 4IR in engineering, and trustworthy AI - the leading 
technology in the digital transformation for I4.0. This section continues the discussion on some open issues 
in the direction of 4IR.  
5.1. 
What is the pattern of paradigm shifts?  
As discussed in section 2, digitalization in the 4IR is leading to paradigm shifts in almost every aspect 
of our society. What are the emerging new engineering paradigms? Engineering uses scientific principles 
to design, build, and operate engineering systems for solving real-world problems or meeting humans’ 
needs in a specific field, thus essentially sharing the paradigms in scientific research. A general pattern of 
scientific paradigm shifts can be illustrated as the following Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6. A view of paradigm shifts, based on Kuhn’s structure of scientific revolutions (Kuhn, 1962). 
According to Kuhn’s structure of scientific revolutions (Kuhn, 1962), in the period of “normal research” 
or “normal science,” a scientific community uses a dominant paradigm to conduct research and produce the 
main body of knowledge in that field. Then, the dominant paradigm may have crises for its deficiencies or 
limitations facing the new observations and/or new problems coming from the changing environment. To 
battle the crises and meet the new need(s), the disciple enters a period of “extraordinary research” (as named 
by Kuhn). In this period, new concepts, models, tools, methods, among others, will be created. If the new 
disciplinary components are incremental and can be integrated into the current paradigm, the paradigm will 
be updated, thus being a scientific evolution. Otherwise, the new components developed in “extraordinary 
research,” possibly together with the components from other disciplines, will contribute to the development 
of a new paradigm in a period of “pre-paradigm” (again, named by Kohn). In the “pre-paradigm” period, 
one or multiple paradigms will be formed and compete. Finally, the most accepted paradigm(s) will become 
the discipline's new dominant paradigm(s). This “paradigm shift” (Kohn) is a scientific revolution. After 
the transformation, the discipline enters again “normal research” period and starts a new life cycle.  
The above discussed pattern is revealed in the context of scientific research. It appears to be general, as 
we treat a scientific paradigm as a knowledge system that evolves in the environment. 
5.2. 
What is the fourth paradigm of scientific research?  
Jim Gray had a vision that scientific research is shifting to the fourth paradigm (data-intensive paradigm) 
after the empirical, theoretical, and computational paradigms (Gray, 2007; Hey, Tansley, & Tolle, 2009), 
as illustrated in Figure 7. The empirical paradigm is characterized as finding and describing patterns based 
on the observations of real-world phenomena, and the theoretical paradigm is characterized as building 
Normal Research
(Sci.&Engr.)
Pre-paradigm
Extraordinary Research
Dominant
paradigm
Crisis
Forming new paradigm;
competing  among
multiple paradigms
Creating new
concepts, models, 
methods, tools, …
Changing environment
New problems;
new opportunities
(technological and societal)
Paradigm shift
(scientific revolution)
Paradigm update
(scientific evolution)
New components
from other 
disciplines

14 
J Huang / Digital engineering transformation with trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts  
 
theories on mathematical models. The computational paradigm uses computer simulations to tackle the 
difficulty when the theoretical models become too complex to derive and prove propositions.  
 
 
Figure 7. Four Paradigms in Scientific Research, Slide from (Gray, 2007; Hey et al., 2009) 
 
The fourth paradigm reflects the scientific research in the new research environment with the big data 
produced from instruments and simulations, high demands of computing for knowledge discovery from big 
data, and emerging demands of data publishing and research work reproducibility. In the fourth paradigm, 
scientific research significantly focuses on knowledge discovery from big data and reproducible models 
and datasets sharing.  
It is essential to point out that a new paradigm does not mean entirely replacing existing paradigms. 
Instead, a new paradigm is established on the ground of existing paradigms. A new paradigm represents the 
focus shift and the new approach to address new problems in a new environment. Theoretical models are 
built on the ground of observations, and computational simulations are based on theoretical models. The 
fourth paradigm enhances and unifies the empirical, theoretical, and computational paradigms, on the 
ground of an unprecedented big data environment and the new technology for knowledge discovery from 
big data.  
Inspired by Jim Gray’s fourth paradigm, with the fast growth of big data in the last decade, data science 
has emerged as a new discipline. A NIST publication (NIST Big Data Public Working Group, 2019) pointed 
out that “data science is the fourth paradigm of science.”  However, it has been heavily focused on 
knowledge discovery from data. From the library and information science perspective, data curation and 
knowledge curation are among data science topics. Still, the needs emerging from the fourth paradigm are 
beyond just traditional curation and go much further into knowledge and data sharing with traceability, 
explainability, accountability, reproducibility, and interoperability.  
By the fourth paradigm, data-intensive science/engineering will emerge in various disciplines of 
science/engineering. (Data-intensive engineering is the manifestation of data science in the engineering 
field.)  In this paradigm shift, data science is the common core, shared by many domain-specific 
science/engineering disciplines that need knowledge discovery from big data and knowledge sharing. The 
combination of data science (the fourth paradigm) with each specific discipline will form many domain-
specific data-intensive science/engineering disciplines.  
5.3. 
What are the emerging new engineering paradigms? 
“Science is the systematic description of phenomena” (Richards, 1928). Science focuses on discovering 
the essential laws of nature. Engineering is “the application of science to the optimum conversion of the 
resources of nature to the uses of humankind” (R. J. Smith, 2022). On the one hand, there is an intersection 
between science and engineering, as engineering includes scientific research for discovering applied 

 
J Huang / Digital Engineering Transformation with Trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts 
15 
 
knowledge for engineering purposes. From this perspective, data-intensive engineering is the manifestation 
of the data-intensive paradigm of science in the digital and connected operating environment of the 4IR. 
On the other hand, engineering activities are beyond discovering new knowledge and focus more on the 
design, manufacturing (or construction), operating, and support of useful systems for human society, thus 
having much more complex interactions and relations with other systems in the operating environment, 
including human stakeholders. Given this complexity of engineering, the disruptive digital technologies, 
and the associated digital, connected, and smart environment in the 4IR, how should we conduct 
engineering? What are the new engineering paradigms in the 4IR? 
No doubt, the data-intensive paradigm of scientific research is a crucial one. It includes both aspects of 
knowledge discovery from data and knowledge sharing (including data). The current “data science” central 
theme has focused more on knowledge discovery from data. While “digital engineering” in the US DoD’s 
vision is more from the perspectives of model-based engineering and sharing of models and data. 
Interestingly, model-based engineering is an effort, like the development of theoretical and computational 
paradigms in science, to introduce models in engineering workflows, including traditionally informal 
activities such as requirement elicitation, requirement representation, system concept modelling, system 
design, among others. Certainly, modelling needs to be based on scientific knowledge as much as possible. 
Also, the availability and richness of data in the engineering environment and the fast progress of machine 
learning make it a powerful way to build models from data, leading to data-intensive engineering.        
However, given the complex interactions and relations between engineering, human society, and the 
operating environment, the data-intensive paradigm (that focuses on scientific discovery) alone is 
insufficient for tackling the complexity of engineering. The need for engineering paradigm shifts in the 4IR 
is driven by the engineering environment, the disruptive digital technologies, the associated higher social-
economic needs, and the new challenging problems, such as the trust issues of AI systems (as discussed in 
Section 4). In the landscape of the 4IR, the digital engineering transformation needs new concepts, models, 
tools, methods, theories, methodologies, technologies, and standards. 
As discussed in section 2, the 4IR has three aspects of paradigm shifts: digitalizing everything of interest, 
provisioning ubiquitous machine intelligence, and big data and machine intelligence-centred business 
processes. On the other hand, digitalization and ubiquitous machine intelligence also triggered broad 
concerns and potential issues of trustworthiness, as discussed in section 4. To put the above-discussed 
pieces together, we could have a relatively clear big picture in the direction of Industry 4.0, as illustrated in 
Figure 8, in which we need three interdependent essential building blocks for the digital transformation of 
engineering and industries: (1) digitalization of engineering; (2) leveraging ubiquitous machine intelligence; 
(3) building digital trust and security. 
Digitalization is a foundation to realize ubiquitous machine intelligence and needs to support digital 
trust. For this consideration, to digitalize a thing of interest (which could be an object or a process), we need 
the following four essential components: 
(1) Digital representation of the thing of interest in a standard form with well-defined semantics to make 
it universally accessible by different types of machines on different platforms. 
(2) A unique identifier of the thing of interest, which is a necessary component for traceability, 
verifiability, accountability, and explainability.  
(3) Associated metadata, such as provenance, in a standard form with well-defined semantics to enable 
the use of digital technologies to manipulate and operate the thing automatically. 
(4) Verifiable association of the unique identifier, the digital representation, and the metadata with the 
thing of interest. This association ensures the authenticity and integrity of the digital artifact. 
 
For the digitalization of engineering, basically, we need (i) to digitalize engineering artifacts, 
engineering processes, and enterprises; (ii) enable the sharing and interoperability of digitalized artifacts 
across the engineering lifecycle; (iii) to develop digital model-based engineering. Virtualization is a view 
from the perspective of operating with digitalized artifacts and processes.  
 

16 
J Huang / Digital engineering transformation with trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts  
 
 
Figure 8. Three essential building blocks for digital engineering towards Industry 4.0: digitalization of 
engineering, leveraging ubiquitous machine intelligence, and building digital trust & security. 
 
Digitalization needs to be realized with digital trust in design and supported by ubiquitous machine 
intelligence among digital technologies. Naturally, in this direction, what are enabling technologies for 
digitally modelling engineering artifacts, processes, and enterprises? Semantic web technology (a branch 
of AI) (Berners-Lee et al., 2006, 2001), RFID, IoT, and blockchain are essential. Also, directly related, 
intensive research on enterprise modeling and enterprise integration has been conducted since the 1990s 
and can be used to support model sharing across boundaries (Chen, Doumeingts, & Vernadat, 2008; Fox 
& Gruninger, 1998; Fox & Huang, 2005; Goranson, 2002; Vernadat, 2020). Enterprise modelling 
combined with digital identity management could form a basis for digitalizing engineering artifacts. 
Ontologies play an essential role in the digitalization of engineering with respect to artifacts, entities, 
organizations, various engineering activities and processes, among others (Ahmed, Kim, & Wallace, 
2006; Demoly, Kim, & Horváth, 2019; Dimassi et al., 2021; Fox, Barbuceanu, Gruninger, & Lin, 1998; 
Gruninger & Fox, 1995; H. M. Kim, Fox, & Grüninger, 1999; K.-Y. Kim, Manley, & Yang, 2006; Sirin, 
Coatanéa, Yannou, & Landel, 2013). 
The realization of ubiquitous machine intelligence, the second aspect of paradigm shifts in the 4IR, is 
on the top of digitalization. With digitalized engineering artifacts and processes, we can apply ubiquitous 
machine intelligence in engineering to design, build, and support smart products, provide smart services, 
build trustworthy supply chains, and conduct engineering intelligently. Consider the following examples. 
Machine learning has been broadly applied in additive manufacturing (Z. Jin, Zhang, Demir, & Gu, 2020; 
Meng et al., 2020; Wang, Tan, Tor, & Lim, 2020). In the digital, smart, and connected environment, 
unprecedented big data provide rich information for using AI in engineering operations. Condition-based 
maintenance or predictive maintenance are typical scenarios where AI&ML can be leveraged (Black, 
Richmond, & Kolios, 2021; Carvalho et al., 2019). Engineering involves many sequential decision making; 
with rich information about engineering systems’ status, reinforcement learning can be used to learn from 
simulations, experiments, routine operations, and generally experience for optimization, such as in mesh 
generation (Pan, Huang, Cheng, & Zeng, 2022), in manufacturing (Su, Huang, Adams, Chang, & Beling, 
2022), for engineering design (Dworschak, Dietze, Wittmann, Schleich, & Wartzack, 2022). Machine 
Digitalization of Engineering
Ubiquitous Machine Intelligence
Digital Trust & Security
•
Digital asset certification & verification
•
Digital asset access control
•
Digital trust mechanisms (Blockchain, IdM, digital C&V, 
traceability, transparency, accountability, …)
•
Digital asset governance
•
…
Industry 4.0
Engineering & Industries in the world
•
Systems Engineering
•
Manufacturing systems & networks
•
Supply-chain, Logistics, Transportation, …
•
Healthcare
•
…
•
Digitalization
•
Virtualization
•
Interoperability
•
Digitalizing engineering artifacts and processes, …
•
Digital model-based systems engineering 
•
Digital models and data sharing in engineering lifecycle
•
…
<Smart CPS> 
Smart factories
Autonomous vehicles
Smart cities 
Smart homes
…
•
AI & machine learning
•
Internet of Things
•
Cloud computing & Big Data
•
Augmented/Virtual Realty
•
…

 
J Huang / Digital Engineering Transformation with Trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts 
17 
 
learning can also be applied to even traditionally labour-intensive and time-consuming requirement 
elicitation process (Cheligeer et al., 2022; Mokammel et al., 2018). Essentially, engineering systems design 
starts with the environment (Zeng, 2004, 2015, 2020).  In the new engineering environment of the 4IR, 
many engineering systems become cyber-physical-social smart systems, and it is a challenging issue 
regarding how to design such systems (Horváth, 2022; Tavčar & Horvath, 2018). 
Digitalization brings to us not only advantages but also new issues, most significantly, trust and security 
issues with digital artifacts and those digital technologies. Some examples of those issues include how do 
we ensure the authenticity and integrity of digital artifacts, what are policies regarding who can access what, 
when to access and where to access, and how do we ensure traceability, transparency, accountability, and 
reproducibility, among others. We must develop proper digital mechanisms to address those issues. How 
could we achieve secure information sharing in digital engineering? As an example, a security policy 
integrating role-based access control and attribute-based access control (including security classification-
based mandatory access control) (Huang, Nicol, Bobba, & Huh, 2012; X. Jin, Sandhu, & Krishnan, 2012; 
Servos & Osborn, 2017) can help. Digital identity management and digital trust mechanisms (Huang & 
Nicol, 2013), particularly blockchain (Y. Liu et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2020), can support trust management 
of digital artifacts. Digital archives are critical to ensure data integrity and proof of existence (Vigil, 
Cabarcas, Buchmann, & Huang, 2013), and blockchain facilitates a new approach to distributed digital 
archives. Scientific computing integrity (Huang, 2018; Peisert, Cybenko, & Jajodia, 2015) can be further 
developed to support trusted engineering workflows.  
Digital Engineering is an emerging form of engineering in the digital revolution. Many issues and 
questions there need to be researched. Just name a few, in digitalization, should the standard forms for 
digital representation and augmentation be supported by a centralized standardization (such as creating 
international standards) or a distributed evolutionary standardization (such as many ontologies competing 
to be standards at a fine-grained level and evolving gradually and naturally)? How do we achieve 
trustworthy AI systems in 4IR? What are digital trust mechanisms for digital engineering? Many trust 
mechanisms used in cloud service (Huang & Nicol, 2013) are applicable to digitalized products, systems, 
and services, while still, what new mechanisms should be introduced? Should be the sharing of digital 
engineering models and data in a centralized way or distributed way? There are many issues and challenges 
ahead as we conduct engineering in a very different new digital environment (Coatanéa, Nagarajan, 
Panicker, & Mokhtarian, 2022; Horváth, 2022; Huang et al., 2020).  
5.4. 
What is next?  
Earlier in section 2, we discussed the journey of four industrial revolutions in human history. Potentially, 
what is next? Given the broad and profound impacts of digital engineering transformation on human society, 
a farther vision will help us to develop long-lasting engineering paradigm(s) and to better design and 
develop digital engineering systems.  
Fig. 9 illustrates the journey of industrial revolutions from passively following nature to actively 
exploiting nature and possibly achieving harmony between human society and nature. Let us start the 
discussion with the physical limits of computing. Computational power is the core of ubiquitous machine 
intelligence, the defining power we gain from the 4IR. However, with Moore’s law reaching its limit, the 
chips for CPUs have hit the ceilings of size and performance, particularly power consumption. The High-
Performance Computing (HPC) community has been striking hard to achieve an exascale computing system 
with power consumption within 20MW (Lucas et al., 2014). In the most recent Top500 List issued in June 
2022, the current fastest supercomputer frontier is the first exascale machine with 1.1 ExaFlop/s at 21MW. 
What we hope to beat Moore’s law are new computational technologies emerging in the horizon, such as 
new semiconductor materials, Quantum Computing, and DNA computing.  
Data centres are the most significant contributors to today’s computational power, and data centres also 
consume a tremendous amount of energy and have significant environmental footprints. For example, in 
the US, data centres consumed 1.8% of electricity in 2014 and were responsible for 0.5% of greenhouse 
emissions in 2018 (Siddik, Shehabi, & Marston, 2021). It has become more significant regarding how to 

18 
J Huang / Digital engineering transformation with trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts  
 
improve data centres’ sustainability. Microsoft’s Project Natick conducted a two years experiment and 
found that subsea data centres are feasible, reliable, more energy-efficient, and environmentally sound 
(Microsoft Research, 2020). 
 
 
Figure 9. The journey of human society through the industrial revolutions  
 
In a global context, since the first industrial revolution, economic growth has been associated with high 
environmental costs, including environmental pollution, overexploitation of natural resources, deterioration 
of ecosystems, loss of biodiversity, and global climate change. The problem is challenging because entities 
individually lack the motivation to behave environmental-friendly in the market economic mechanism due 
to environmental externalities. “Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” (UN WCED, 1987) It has 
become a consensus of the international community (IPCC, 2022; United Nations, 1992). According to the 
IPCC AR6 report (IPCC, 2022), global warming is speeding up - The increase in global surface temperature 
in 2011–2020 is 1.09 [0.95 to 1.20] °C higher than in 1850–1900, compared to the increase of 0.19 [0.16 
to 0.22] °C in 2003–2012. The trend of increase will reach or exceed 1.5°C in the near term, even for the 
very low greenhouse gas emissions scenario. Climate change has led to some irreversible impacts on the 
earth and is approaching a tipping point. This cross-century challenge has become urgent and needs the 
whole world to act collectively and immediately before it is too late. This global campaign appears geared 
towards the next industrial revolution for renewable natural resources, particularly renewable energy, 
reusable materials, and eco-environmental sound economies to achieve harmony between human activities 
and nature.  
In this direction, science, such as disciplines in biological and environmental sciences, energy science, 
and material science, among others, will be a scientific foundation to reveal facts and provide knowledge 
about sustainability. Engineering will bring scientific knowledge into the real world by developing 
technologies and designing innovative solutions for sustainability. Sustainability is a highly complex 
problem because it is across disciplinary domains, across industry sectors, across regional economies, 
across cultures, across human groups, across human generations, and across human society and natural 
systems. The solutions for sustainability need to be coordinated, comprehensive, and systematic.  Systems 
science and engineering will play a unique role in applying systems thinking and designing systematic 
mechanisms and solutions to address the complex problem of sustainability.  
With sustainability in mind, in today’s efforts for digital engineering transformation, we should take 
into account the need for sustainability in digital engineering systems design and development. For example, 
product provenance can help reuse and recycle after retirement. Particularly, it is critical to consider the 
sustainability of new digital technologies (Colorado, Velásquez, & Monteiro, 2020; Kellens et al., 2017; 
Paris, Mokhtarian, Coatanéa, Museau, & Ituarte, 2016). The consideration of sustainability in digitalization 
will give the emerging digital engineering paradigm(s) a long vision and better address future needs.  
Pre-industrial
I1.0
I2.0
I3.0
I4.0
Mechanization
1IR
2IR
Electrification
3IR
Informatization
4IR
Digitalization
5IR
Sustainablization?
Assembling lines;
Mass Production
Mechanized factories 
Automation;
Information-centered
I5.0 ?
Sustainable Development
Digitalized & connected;
Ubiquitous Intelligence;
Intelligence-centered 

 
J Huang / Digital Engineering Transformation with Trustworthy AI towards Industry 4.0: emerging paradigm shifts 
19 
 
6. Concluding Remarks 
This article investigated the opportunities and uncertainties in digital engineering transformation and 
discussed the open issues about the emerging engineering paradigm shifts. 
• 
From investigating the pattern appeared in industrial revolutions, this article revealed that 
ubiquitous machine intelligence is the defining power brought by the fourth industrial revolution. 
Digitalization is commonly recognized as the main theme of the 4IR and is also the foundation and 
necessary condition for the realization of ubiquitous machine intelligence.  
• 
Digital engineering, the digitalization of engineering, is at the core of the fourth industrial 
revolution. With the broad applications of ubiquitous machine intelligence, many innovative cyber-
physical-social smart systems will appear, and traditional engineering systems are also becoming 
digital smart and connected. The promising opportunities are also accompanied with uncertainties 
represented by trustworthiness concerns. Given AI as a critical enabling technology in the 4IR, 
trustworthy AI is a crucial field to ensure systems’ trustworthiness in Industry 4.0. 
• 
In the digital smart and connected environment, Digital Engineering needs new concepts, models, 
tools, methods, theories, methodologies, technologies, and standards. The emerging engineering 
paradigm shifts include but is beyond the data-intensive paradigm (or data-intensive engineering, 
the counterpart of data science). Digital engineering transformation towards Industry 4.0 has three 
essential building blocks: (1) digitalization, (2) leveraging ubiquitous machine intelligence, and (3) 
building digital trust and security. 
• 
Digitalization is much beyond digitization. Digitization aims to make artifacts machine-readable; 
digitalization aims to make the things of interest machine-understandable and virtually operatable. 
Digitalization of a thing of interest should include: (1) digital representation, (2) a unique identifier, 
(3) metadata including provenance, and (4) a verifiable association of the thing with the above three 
components. 
• 
The remarkable progress, disruptive impacts, and fast growth of real-world AI applications in the 
digital and connected environment have triggered concerns and research about the trustworthiness 
of AI systems. The engineering design community at large is facing an excellent opportunity to 
bring the new capabilities of ubiquitous machine intelligence and trustworthy AI principles, as well 
as digital trust, together in various engineering systems design to ensure the trustworthiness of 
systems in Industry 4.0. 
 
Digital engineering transformation is a crucial process for engineering paradigm shifts in the 4IR. Digital 
engineering, at the core of the 4IR, is an exciting and broad field to explore and will further lead to “the 
transformation of entire systems, across (and within) countries, companies, industries and society as a whole” 
(Schwab, 2017).
