arXiv:1901.07223v2  [cs.CV]  24 Jan 2019
DF-SLAM: A Deep-Learning Enhanced Visual SLAM System based on Deep
Local Features
Rong Kang∗1, Jieqi Shi∗2, Xueming Li1, Yang Liu1, and Xiao Liu2
1School of Digital Multimedia and Design Arts, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
China
2Megvii Co.

Abstract
As the foundation of driverless vehicle and intelligent
robots, Simultaneous Localization and Mapping(SLAM)
has attracted much attention these days. However, non-
geometric modules of traditional SLAM algorithms are lim-
ited by data association tasks and have become a bottleneck
preventing the development of SLAM. To deal with such
problems, many researchers seek to Deep Learning for help.
But most of these studies are limited to virtual datasets or
speciﬁc environments, and even sacriﬁce efﬁciency for ac-
curacy. Thus, they are not practical enough.
We propose DF-SLAM system that uses deep local fea-
ture descriptors obtained by the neural network as a substi-
tute for traditional hand-made features. Experimental re-
sults demonstrate its improvements in efﬁciency and stabil-
ity. DF-SLAM outperforms popular traditional SLAM sys-
tems in various scenes, including challenging scenes with
intense illumination changes. Its versatility and mobility ﬁt
well into the need for exploring new environments. Since
we adopt a shallow network to extract local descriptors and
remain others the same as original SLAM systems, our DF-
SLAM can still run in real-time on GPU.
1. Introduction
Traditional SLAM(Simultaneous Localization and Map-
ping) systems paid great attention to geometric information.
Based on the solid foundation of Multi-view Geometry, a lot
of excellent studies have been carried out. However, prob-
lems arise from none-geometricmodules in SLAM systems.
To track the location of cameras, researchers usually per-
form pixel-level matching operations in tracking threads
∗The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally to this paper.
and optimize poses of a small number of frames as local
mapping. No doubt that errors resulted by drift in pose es-
timation and map evaluation keep accumulating.
In the meanwhile, Deep Learning, a data-driven tech-
nique, has brought out rapid development in numerous com-
puter vision tasks such as classiﬁcation and matching. Such
achievements reﬂect that deep learning may be one of the
best choices to solve problems related to data association.
Therefore, more and more researchers believe that pixel-
level or higher level associations between images, the bot-
tleneck of SLAM systems we mentioned above, can also be
handled with the help of neural networks.
Deep learning has proved its superiority in SLAM sys-
tems. Many outstanding studies have employed it to replace
some non-geometric modules in traditional SLAM systems
[22, 21, 49, 26, 12]. These approaches enhance the overall
SLAM system by improving only part of a typical pipeline,
such as stereo matching, relocalization and so on. Some re-
searchers also attempt to use higher-level features obtained
through deep learning models as a supplement to SLAM
[37, 35, 1, 6, 15].These higher-level features are more likely
to infer the semantic content-object feature and improve the
capability of visual scene understanding. Moreover, end-
to-end learning models have also been proposed[51, 16].
These methods outperform traditional SLAM algorithms
under speciﬁc circumstances and demonstrate the potential
of deep learning in SLAM.
However, such combination of Deep learning and SLAM
have signiﬁcant shortcomings.
Most of Deep Learning
methods rely heavily on data used for training, which means
that they can not ﬁt well into unknown environments. For
example, we can not ensure whether the room we want to
explore is equipped with chairs and desks and cannot guar-
antee semantic priority of desks will help in this occasion.
What’s more, most Deep-Learning enhanced SLAM sys-
1

tems are designed to reﬂect advantage of Deep Learning
techniques and abandon the strong points of SLAM. As
a result, they may sacriﬁce efﬁciency, an essential part of
SLAM algorithms, for accuracy.
Last but not least,
some DL-based SLAM tech-
niques take traditional SLAM systems as their underlying
framework[49, 26, 12, 9] and make a great many changes
to support Deep Learning strategies. Too many replace-
ments may lead to loss of some useful features of the SLAM
pipeline and also make it hard for researchers to perform
further comparisons with existing studies, let alone migrate
these techniques to other SLAM systems. As a result, DL-
based SLAM is not mature enough to outperform traditional
SLAM systems.
Therefore, we make our efforts to put forward a simple,
portable and efﬁcient SLAM system. Our basic idea is to
improve the robustness of local feature descriptor through
deep learning to ensure the accuracy of data association be-
tween frames.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to use the
learned local feature descriptors as a substitute for the tradi-
tional hand-craft descriptors. Our method has advantages in
portability and convenience as deep feature descriptors can
directly replace traditional ones. The replacement is highly
operable for all SLAM systems and even other geometric
computer vision tasks such as Structure-from-Motion, cam-
era calibration and so on. The learned local feature descrip-
tors guarantee better performance than hand-craft ones in
actual SLAM systems [30] and achieve amazing improve-
ment in accuracy. Since we adopt a shallow neural net-
work to obtain local feature descriptor, the feature extrac-
tion module does not consume much time on GPU, and the
system can operate in almost real-time.
2. Related Work
Deep Learning enhanced SLAM. Deep learning is con-
sidered an excellent solution to SLAM problems due to
its superb performance in data association tasks. Part of
recent studies makes a straight substitution of an end-to-
end network for the traditional SLAM system, estimat-
ing ego-motion from monocular video[50, 27, 25] or com-
pleting visual navigation for robots entirely through neural
networks[51, 16]. Such works can hardly catch up with tra-
ditional methods in accuracy under test datasets. Neverthe-
less, since deep learning systems rely too much on training
data, the end-to-end system fails from time to time at the
face of new environments and situations. That’s to say the
model may hardly predict correct results when there exists
a big difference between training scenes and actual scenes.
To tackle such problems, some researchers focus on the
replacement of only parts of traditional SLAM systems
while keeping traditional pipelines unchanged[14, 45][20,
44, 42]. Such attempts are still in an embryonic stage and
do not achieve better results than traditional ones. One of
the possible explanation for their limited improvement is
that they also rely too much on the priority learned from
training data, especially when it comes to predicting depth
from monocular images. Thus, they are still subject to the
same limitation of end-to-end methods. We believe that the
experience-based system is not the best choice for geomet-
ric problems.
Other efforts are made to add auxiliary modules rather
than replace existing geometric modules. Semantic map-
ping and fusion[35, 28] make use of semantic segmentation.
They always take in poses provided by underlying SLAM
systems and output optimized 3D models. Such changes
are not involved in the optimization of original SLAM sys-
tems and cannot directly improve pose estimation modules.
Some other researchers separate key points belonging to
different items and process them differently [10]. These
constraints have outstanding performance especially when
the environment is dynamic. But they still avoid making
changes to the basic system. To combine higher-level infor-
mation tighter with SLAM pipelines, Detection SLAM and
Semantic SLAM[37] jointly optimize semantic information
and geometric constraints.
Early studies operate seman-
tic and geometric modules separately and merge the results
afterward[8, 34]. [1] incorporate semantic observations in
the geometric optimization via Bayes ﬁlter. Focusing on the
overall SLAM pipeline, [6, 15] formulate semantic SLAM
as a probabilistic model. These approaches extract object-
level information and add the semantic feature to the con-
straints of Bundle Adjustment. However, up to now, there
are still no convincing loss functions for semantic modules,
and there are also no outbreaking improvements. What’s
worse, since semantic SLAM add too much extra supervi-
sion to the traditional SLAM systems, the number of vari-
ables to be optimized inevitably increased, which is a great
challenge for the computation ability and the speed.
A simple but effective method is to directly improve the
module that limits the performance of traditional SLAM,
i.e., stereo matching between frames. Some of them cal-
culate similarity conﬁdence of local features[49, 26, 12],
resulting in the inability to use traditional matching strat-
egy, such as Euclidean distance, cosine distance and so
on. SuperPoint[9] trains an end-to-end network to extract
both local feature detectors and descriptors from raw im-
ages through one forward calculation. However, the efﬁ-
ciency of SuperPoint remains not veriﬁed as it only gives
out the result on synthetic and virtual datasets and has not
been integrated into a real SLAM system for evaluation.
Local feature descriptor. Parallel with the long history
of SLAM, considerable attempts have been made on local
features. Based on classical hand-craft local features like
SIFT [31], SURF [5], ORB [36], early combination of low-
level machine learning and local feature descriptors pro-
2

duce PCA-SIFT [19], ASD [43], BOLD [4], Binboost [40],
RFD [11], RMGD [13], GRIEF[23] etc. Some of these at-
tempts dedicate on dimensionality reduction and utilize var-
ious methods to map high-dimensional descriptors to low-
dimensional space. Thus they lose a great amount of infor-
mation on the raw image. Others make use of binary fea-
tures. Part of them enhance a traditional feature on speciﬁc
environments to ﬁt special requirements[23] and is lack of
mobility. Most of these studies put forward a new kind of
feature without further tests or applications.
Thanks to the booming of Deep Learning, researchers
have gone further. End-to-end networks consisting of mul-
tiple independent components[47, 9, 33, 32] can not only
give out local feature descriptors through one forward com-
putation but also extract local feature detectors.
Focusing only on descriptors, most researchers adopt
multi-branch CNN-based architectures like Siamese and
triplet networks. Multi-branch networks were ﬁrst proposed
to verify whether the handwritten signatures were consis-
tent in 1994 [7]. Experiments related to similarity measure-
ments further conﬁrm the superiority of this multi-branch
structure. As a result, Siamese and triplet networks turn
out to be the main architectures employed in local feature
descriptor tasks. MatchNet[17] and DeepCompare[48] are
typical Siamese networks. Each branch consists of a feature
network and a metric network which determines the similar-
ity between two descriptors. Thus the ﬁnal output is simi-
larity conﬁdence. Together with the metric learning layer,
[24] uses triplet structure and achieves better performance.
These achievements reveal the potential of triplet neural net-
work. However, these models prove to be not suitable for
traditional nearest neighbor search. Therefore, studies that
directly output local feature descriptors are derived.
Early research[38] only uses Siamese network and de-
signs a novel sampling strategy. L2Net [39] creatively uti-
lizes a central-surround structure and a progressive sam-
pling strategy to improve performance. These unique struc-
tures and training strategies can also extend to triplet. [29]
adopts the structure presented by L2Net and enhances the
strict hardest negative mining strategy to select closest neg-
ative example in the batch. [18] also uses the same struc-
ture but formulates feature matching as nearest neighbor re-
trieval. Thus, it directly optimizes a ranking-based retrieval
performance metric to obtain the model. It is worth to be
mentioned that [3] trains a shallow triplet network based
on random sampling strategy but performs better than some
deep structures like DeepDesc and DeepCompare, which
is an essential reference for our work. Similar to TFeat,
some researchers focus on the formation of a single branch.
DeepCD [46] proposes a new network layer, termed the
data-dependent modulation layer, to enhance the comple-
mentarity of local feature descriptors. Considering that the
geometric repeatability is not the only factor that inﬂuence
learned local features, AffNet [41] raises a novel loss func-
tion and training process to estimate the afﬁne shape of
patches. It trains local feature descriptor network based on
the afﬁne invariance to improve the performance of deep
descriptor.
3. System Overview
In our DF-SLAM system, learned local feature de-
scriptors are introduced to replace ORB, SIFT and other
hand-made features. We adopt the traditional and popu-
lar pipeline of SLAM as our foundation and evaluate the
efﬁciency and effectiveness of our improved deep-feature-
based SLAM system. The whole system incorporates three
threads that run in parallel: tracking, local mapping and
loop closing. Local feature descriptors are extracted as long
as a new frame is captured and added before the tracking
thread.
3.1. System Framework
Figure 1. System framework.
The framework of our system is shown in Fig.1. We de-
rive the tracking thread from Visual Odometry algorithms.
Tracking takes charge of constructing data associations be-
tween adjacent frames using visual feature matching. Af-
terward, it initializes frames with the help of data associ-
ations and estimates the localization of the camera using
the polar geometric constraint. It also decides whether new
keyframes are needed. If lost, global relocalization is per-
formed based on the same sort of features. Local Map-
ping will be operated regularly to optimize camera poses
and map points. It receives information constructed by the
tracking thread and reconstructs a partial 3D map. If loops
are detected, the Loop Closure thread will take turns to op-
timize the whole graph and close the loop. The frame with a
high matching score is selected as a candidate loop closing
frame, which is used to complete loop closing and global
optimization. None of these modules accept raw images as
inputs to reduce space consumption. Only sparse visual fea-
tures and inter-frame associations are recorded to support
pose estimation, relocalization, loop detection, pose opti-
3

mization and so on. Therefore, we believe that the local
feature is the cornerstone of our entire system.
As is shown in Fig.2, our ﬁrst step is to extract our in-
terested points. We utilize TFeat network to describe the
region around key points and generate a normalized 128-
D ﬂoat descriptor. Different from hand-made features, we
do not need a Gaussian Blur before feature-extraction but
take patches of raw images as our input directly. Features
extracted are then stored in every frame and passed to track-
ing, mapping and loop closing threads.
We adopt the method used in ORB-SLAM to perform
localization based on DBoW. This method measures the
similarity between two frames according to the similarity
between their features. As the deep feature descriptor is a
ﬂoat, the Euclidean distance is used to calculate the corre-
spondence. Apparently, the relocalization and loop closing
modules rely heavily on the local feature descriptors.
To speed up the system, we also introduce our Visual
Vocabulary. Visual Vocabulary is employed in numerous
computer vision applications. It extracts a big set of de-
scriptors from training sets ofﬂine and creates a vocabu-
lary structured as a tree. Descriptors are divided and in-
tegrated according to their characteristics. Thus, during the
matching step, a new descriptor could search along the tree
for its class much more quickly while ensuring accuracy,
which is ideal for practical tasks with real-time require-
ments. We trained the vocabulary, based on DBoW, using
the feature descriptors extracted by our DF methods. There-
fore, we could assign a word vector and feature vector for
each frame, and calculate their similarity more easily.
Figure 2. Overview of feature-based modules.
3.2. Feature Design
Many excellent studies have indicated the effectiveness
of CNN-based neural networks in local feature descriptor
designs. However, it’s a question of striking the right bal-
ance between efﬁciency and accuracy. Although the perfor-
mance becomes better and better as the number of convo-
lutional layers increases, time assumption prevents us from
adopting a deep and precise network. Instead, we make use
of a shallow but efﬁcient network to complete our task.
The architecture adopts a triplet network proposed by
TFeat[3]. There are only two convolutional layers followed
by Tanh non-linearity in each branch. Max pooling is added
after the ﬁrst convolutional layer to reduce parameters and
further speed up the network. A fully connected layer out-
puts a 128-D descriptor L2 normalized to unit-length as the
last layer of the network.
[3] forms triplets for training based on simple methods.
It randomly chooses a positive pair of patches that origi-
nate from the same label and a sampled patch from another
different label. This training strategy is too naive and can
hardly improve the performance of the model. Luckily, the
hard negative mining strategy proposed in HardNet[29] is
proved to be useful in experiments. We turned to it for help
and combined hard negative mining strategy with TFeat ar-
chitecture to make improvements1.
The sampling strategy selects the closest non-matching
patch in a batch by L2 pairwise distance matrix2. The ﬁrst
step is to generate a batch of matched local patches. Such
patches follow the rule that there is only one matching patch
for the speciﬁc anchor in a batch. To evaluate the similarity
of patches, we denote the distance matrix as D = {dij}.
Each element represents the distance between the ith anchor
patch descriptor and the jth positive patch descriptor.
Next, the hardest negative patch distance can be calcu-
lated according to the following rules:
dn = min(akmin, pjmin)
where akmin represents the nearest patch to anchor and
pjmin is the nearest one to positive.
Loss function is formulated as
Loss = 1
N
N
X
i=0
max(0, 1 + d(ai, pi) −dn)
where ai is anchor descriptor and pi is positive descrip-
tor.
4. Experiments
We perform several experiments to evaluate the efﬁ-
ciency and accuracy of our system and provide some quan-
titative results.
To give out an intuitive comparison, we
choose the open-source library of ORB-SLAM as our ba-
sis and test on public datasets.
All the experiments are
performed on a computer with Intel Core i5-4590 CPU
3.30GHz * 4 and GeForce GTX TITAN X/PCIe/SSE2 pro-
cessor.
1The combination is mentioned in HardNet and AffNet.
2The strategy is utilized in HardNet.
4

Figure 3. The architecture of TFeat.
4.1. Preprocess
Two of the most complicated preparations we made is to
create datasets for model training and to construct our visual
vocabulary.
Most of the existing patch-based datasets use the DoG
detector to extract points of interest. However, the local fea-
ture used in most SLAM systems are extracted by a FAST
detector and evenly distributed across the image. To ﬁt the
requirements of SLAM systems, we need to build patch
datasets for training in the same way as ORB-SLAM to en-
sure the efﬁciency of the network. We extract our patch
from HPatches images containing 116 scenes[2]. The patch
generation approaches are identical to HPatches except for
the way of local feature detection.
After we have successfully received our model, we start
another training procedure for visual vocabulary. We train
our bag of words on COCO datasets and choose 1e6 as the
number of leaves in the vocabulary tree. Since our descrip-
tor is a normalized ﬂoat vector, the leaf nodes are also nor-
malized.
4.2. System Performance
We evaluate the performance of our system in two differ-
ent datasets to show how well our system can ﬁt into differ-
ent circumstances. Since we never train our model on these
validation sets, the experiments also reveal the modality of
our system.
Note that there are many parameters, including knn test
ratio in feature matching, number of features, frame rate of
camera and others in the original ORB-SLAM2 system. To
ensure fairness, we use the same sort of parameters for dif-
ferent sequences and datasets. Such behavior also illustrates
how robust and portable our system is.
A. EuRoC Dataset
We evaluate the improved system in public EuRoC dataset,
that consists of 11 sequences variant in scene complexity
and sensor speed. The difﬁcult sequences with intense light-
ing, motion blur, and low-texture areas are challenging for
visual SLAM systems. As the ground truth of trajectory is
provided in EuRoC, we use root-mean-square error(RMSE)
Dataset
ORB-SLAM2
DF-SLAM
Improvement
MH 01
0.036
0.037
1.67%
MH 02
0.048
0.043
10.2%
MH 03
0.044
0.046
-4.9%
MH 04
0.112
0.063
43.9%
MH 05
0.061
0.042
30.7%
V1 01
0.087
0.086
0.6%
V1 02
0.065
0.064
1.2%
V1 03
0.078
0.065
15.5%
V2 01
0.062
0.058
7.3%
V2 02
0.057
0.058
-1.6%
V2 03
x
x
x
Table 1. Comparison between ORB-SLAM2 and DF-SLAM in
EuRoC dataset with loop closure added.
Dataset
ORB-SLAM2
DF-SLAM
Improvement
MH 01
0.038
0.036
4.3%
MH 02
0.047
0.050
-8.3%
MH 03
0.039
0.043
-10.6%
MH 04
0.147
0.060
58.9%
MH 05
0.059
0.044
25.3%
V1 01
0.087
0.086
1.5%
V1 02
0.097
0.069
28.7%
V1 03
0.189
0.114
39.8%
V2 01
0.071
0.068
2.6%
V2 02
0.114
0.102
10.1%
V2 03
x
x
x
Table 2. Comparison between ORB-SLAM2 and DF-SLAM in
EuRoC dataset without loop closure.
for the representation of accuracy and stability. As we have
mentioned above, we only change the threshold for feature
matching and remain everything else the same as the origi-
nal ORB-SLAM2 system, including the number of features
5

(a) DF-SLAM
(b) ORB-SLAM2
Figure 4. An example of MH 04 difﬁcult sequence in EuRoC dataset. Above:DL-SLAM Below:ORB-SLAM2
we extract, time to insert a keyframe, ratio to do knn test
during bow search period and so on. We also use the same
pair of thresholds for each sequence.
We operate our system on each sequence for ten times
and record both mean RMS errors for each data sequence
and variance of these tests. As is illustrated in Figure 4,
our method outperforms ORB-SLAM in MH sequences and
perform no worse than ORB-SLAM in V sequences. Note
that MH sequence is lack of loops and rely heavily on the
performance of features while V sequence will always oper-
ate global pose optimization, we can easily ﬁnd our method
outstanding.
What is more, considering the variance of each test, we
ﬁnd that our system is quite stable no matter the situation.
While the performance of ORB-SLAM2 may vary from
time to time, we remain steady in each test we run.
We hold that the ability to walk a long way without much
drift is a practical problem and matters a lot. We can never
make sure that the environment we need to reconstruct is
enough small and contains as many loops as we need to
optimize our map. To further verify the performance of
our system, we close the global bundle adjustment mod-
ule(Loop Closing Thread) and repeat the test we run. We
can easily ﬁnd that our method outperforms ORB-SLAM2
at all V sequences, which has proved that DL-SLAM is ac-
tually more stable and accurate especially when the camera
needs to go a long way without loops for global optimiza-
tion.
B. TUM Dataset
We further prove our robustness and accuracy on TUM
Dataset, another famous dataset among SLAM researchers.
The TUM dataset consists of several indoor object-
reconstruction sequences. Since most of the sequences we
used to make evaluation are captured by hand-holding cam-
eras, these datasets contain terrible twitter from time to
time. Such sequences are therefore excellent to test the ro-
bustness of our system.
(a) Track Lost
(b) Full Trajectory
Figure 5. Lost and Tracked sequence of fr1/desk. The camera
starts from right to left and turn around to the right side.
We still use the same pair of features as in EuRoC
datasets and other numerical features the same as ORB-
SLAM2. We are happy to ﬁnd that in TUM Datasets, where
other SLAM systems lose their trajectory frequently, our
system works well all the time. We take fr1/desk sequence
as an example in Fig 7, where ORB-SLAM2 lost seven
times at the same place in our entire ten tests and DF-SLAM
covers the whole period easily. Similar to EuRoC, we ﬁnd
that DF-SLAM achieves much better results than ORB-
SLAM2 among sequences that do not contain any apparent
loops, and perform no worse that ORB-SLAM2 when there
is no harsh noise or shake.
4.3. Runtime Evaluation
We measure the run-time of the deep feature extraction
using GeForce GTX TITAN X/PCIe/SSE2. A single for-
6

Dataset
ORB-SLAM2
DF-SLAM
Improvement
Tracked
fr1/desk
0.025
0.015
36.9%
3/10
fr1/desk2
0.028
0.021
24.5%
7/10
fr1/room
0.058
0.041
28.9%
10/10
fr2/desk
0.0089
0.0097
-9.8%
10/10
fr2/xyz
0.0038
0.0030
19.5%
10/10
fr3/ofﬁce
0.011
0.011
-0.7%
10/10
fr3/nst
0.022
0.012
45.4%
10/10
Table 3. Comparison between ORB-SLAM2 and DF-SLAM in
TUM dataset. Tracked Numer is number of tests not lost in to-
tal 10 tests(ORB-SLAM2/DF-SLAM).
ward pass of the model runs 7e-5 seconds for each patch
based on pytorch c++ with CUDA support. The time spent
on the feature extraction of one image is 0.09 seconds(1200
key points). Together with time to do tracking, mapping and
loop closing in parallel, our system runs at a speed of 10 to
15fps. We ﬁnd that since that our feature is much more ro-
bust and accurate, we can operate the whole system with
a smaller number of features without losing our position.
Therefore, there is still much space left for us to speed up
the entire system and move forward to real-time.
4.4. Local Feature Descriptor
Besides, we separately evaluate the performance of local
feature descriptor that we used in DL-SLAM.
We use evenly distributed FAST detector to build the
training dataset.
All training is done using pytorch and
stochastic gradient descent solver with the learning rate of
0.01, the momentum of 0.9 and weight decay of 0.0001.
We also use typical data augmentation techniques, such as
random rotation and crop, to improve the robustness of our
network.
We train our deep feature using different training strate-
gies on HPatch training set and test them on testing set
also provided by HPatch. We choose ORB and SIFT, two
of the most popular descriptors as a comparison. Learned
features outperform traditional ones in every task. Espe-
cially, HardTFeat HD shows a clear advantage over TFeat
in matching function, which demonstrates the superior-
ity of the strict hard negative mining strategy we use.
HardTFeat HD and HardTFeat HF are trained on different
datasets but show similar performance on both matching
and retrieval tasks.
5. Conclusion
We propose DF-SLAM system that combines robust
learned features with traditional SLAM techniques. DF-
SLAM makes full use of the advantages of deep learning
and geometric information and demonstrates outstanding
(a) The matching result on HPathes dataset.
(b) The retrieval result on HPathes dataset.
(c) The veriﬁcation result on HPatches dataset.
Figure 6. The matching result on HPathes dataset. TFeat stands for
the original TFeat network with simple training strategy. HardT-
Feat HD uses hard negative mining strategy, which is trained on
original HPatches dataset. HardTFeat HF is the model we trained
using FAST-based HPathces.
improvements in efﬁciency and stability in numerous ex-
periments. It can work stably and accurately even in chal-
lenging scenes. Our idea of making use of deep features
provides better data associations and is an excellent aspect
of doing further research on. The fantastic result proves the
success of our novel idea that enhancing SLAM systems
with small deep learning modules does lead to exciting re-
sults.
In future work, we will dedicate on the stability of
DF-SLAM to handle difﬁcult localization and mapping
7

problems under extreme conditions. The speed of deep-
learning-enhanced SLAM system is also within our con-
sideration. What’s more, we aim to design a robust local
feature detector that matches the descriptors used in our
system. Online learning is also an attractive choice to in-
crease the modality of our system. We even decide to make
use of global features to improve global bundle adjustment
and establish a whole system for DL enhanced SLAM sys-
tems. We believe that such combination can ﬁgure out a
great many non-geometric problems we are faced with and
promote the development of SLAM techniques.
