arXiv:1103.3735v1  [cs.IR]  19 Mar 2011
Reﬁning Recency Search Results with User Click Feedback
Taesup Moon
Wei Chu
Lihong Li
Zhaohui Zheng
Yi Chang

Yahoo! Labs, 701 First Avenue, Sunnyvale, CA, USA 94089
Abstract
Traditional machine-learned ranking systems for web search are often trained to capture
stationary relevance of documents to queries, which has limited ability to track non-stationary
user intention in a timely manner. In recency search, for instance, the relevance of documents
to a query on breaking news often changes signiﬁcantly over time, requiring eﬀective adaptation
to user intention. In this paper, we focus on recency search and study a number of algorithms
to improve ranking results by leveraging user click feedback.
Our contributions are three-
fold. First, we use real search sessions collected in a random exploration bucket for reliable
oﬄine evaluation of these algorithms, which provides an unbiased comparison across algorithms
without online bucket tests. Second, we propose a re-ranking approach to improve search results
for recency queries using user clicks. Third, our empirical comparison of a dozen algorithms
on real-life search data suggests importance of a few algorithmic choices in these applications,
including generalization across diﬀerent query-document pairs, specialization to popular queries,
and real-time adaptation of user clicks.
1
Introduction
Ranking a list of documents based on their relevance to a given query is the central problem in
various search applications of the Internet. Machine-learned ranking algorithms have been shown
highly eﬀective for generalizing to unseen data from labeled training data and have been very
successful especially in commercial Web search engines; see [18, 3, 4, 12, 6, 30, 23] and many
references therein for more reference.
Usually, such machine-learned ranking algorithms learn
a ranking function based on editorial judgments—relevance labels provided by human editors.
A critical assumption here is that the relevance of documents for a given query is more or less
stationary over time, and therefore, as long as the coverage of training set is broad enough, the
ranking function learned from the training set would be suﬃcient to generalize to unseen data in
the future. This assumption is often valid in web search, especially for popular queries like “yahoo”,
for which document relevance is indeed (almost) static.
However, there are other important categories of applications where document relevance to a
query may change over time. One such example is the recency ranking problem in web search: when
breaking news emerges, a document that used to be most relevant to a query may be superseded by
others that have more relevant information about the news; see Section 3 for a concrete example.
A key challenge for such problems is to track user intention in a timely fashion.
An interesting attempt was taken recently for tracking non-stationary document relevance [8].
The authors devised time-varying features that reﬂect freshness of documents and utilized recency
demoted labels provided by human editors that explicitly modify the relevance target values in the
training set. Their results showed an improvement of ranking qualities for time-sensitive queries.
However, their approach is still based on editorial judgments and so limited for two reasons. First,
obtaining high-quality training data is hard. Implementing more ﬁne-grained time-varying features,
such as features from the time series of clicks that can accurately follow the relevance drifts is
considerably subtle and complex since carefully testing and selecting good features is a long and
1

complicated process. Also, obtaining laborious recency demoted labels from human editors not
only is expensive, but also can be inaccurate in correctly representing the temporal variation of
document relevance. Second, even when we can come up with such complex and expensive data to
batch-train a ranking function, tracking actual user intention remains challenging due to the very
unpredictable nature of how user intention evolves over time.
In this paper, we investigate how to leverage user click feedback to complement and improve
such editorial-judgment based ranking systems.
Our rationale is that, particularly for recency
queries, instantaneous click trends on the top portion of the ranking list are important indicators
of document relevance. Such signals allow us to extract subtle information that may be hard for
human editors to foresee when they provide relevance judgments. In particular, we explicitly track
the click-through rate (CTR) of a query-document pair using a linear combination of extracted
features, including the editorial-judgment based ranking function’s score. Based on search results
returned by the current search engine, we propose a re-ranking approach to further improve search
results for recency queries. We use user click as labels for training the CTR models in either batch
or online mode.
In order to reliably evaluate and compare our algorithms, an “exploration bucket” was set up for
a small random portion of live traﬃc for recency-classiﬁed queries in a commercial search engine.
Within the bucket, the top URLs returned by the search engine was randomly shuﬄed. This bucket
is critical to the work reported in this paper for two reasons. First, it provides a mechanism for
exploration that is essential for interactive learning problems as the one considered in this paper
to get rid of evaluation bias (Section 2). Second, it allows us to obtain unbiased evaluation of
algorithms without the need for online bucket tests (Section 5.1).
This work extensively augments our preliminary results reported in an extended abstract [24],
and uses random exploration data to do unbiased evaluation on a dozen of algorithms that improve
ranking by leveraging user click feedback on a major web search engine.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We describe our exploration bucket in Section 2.
Using data in this bucket, we present a motivating example in Section 3, showing the necessity of
taking into account temporal variation of document relevance reﬂected in user click feedback. Our
methods are detailed in Section 4 and empirically evaluated using the exploration bucket data in
Section 5. We then discuss related work in Section 6 and conclude the paper in Section 7.
2
Exploration Bucket Data
As described in the previous section, we set up a bucket to collect exploration data from a small
portion of live traﬃc from a commercial search engine. The bucket started on Jan 29, 2010 and
ended on Feb 4, 2010. Throughout these days, we collected 399, 880 search sessions that contained
61,904 recency classiﬁed queries, after removing non-random sessions corrupted by business rules.
The ranked list for those queries were generated by the recency ranking function trained as described
in [8] and the ranking score for each query-document was recorded. For each session, we randomly
shuﬄed the top four results and logged the permutation id of each shuﬄed permutation (a total of
4! = 24 of them) and user clicks on the corresponding permuted ranking results.
The collected data is very sparse and long-tailed as shown in Figure 1, in which 92.4% of queries
were issued no more than 10 times and more than half of queries were issued just once. The reason
for this sparsity is that the recency query classiﬁer utilizes some language model to determine the
queries that are related to each other, which causes some recency-related idiosyncratic, less popular
queries—such as diﬀerent word orderings or typographically wrong queries—to be classiﬁed as
recency queries.
By doing the random shuﬄing, we are able to collect user click feedback on each document
without positional bias, and such feedback can be thought of as a reliable proxy on relevance of
documents. Note that the eﬀect on user experience of shuﬄing would not be as severe as that
2

0
5
10
15
20
25
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Impression Number
Percentage in Recency Queries 
Figure 1: Recency query impression.
for navigational queries, since the relevance diﬀerences of top-ranked documents to recency queries
would not be as dramatic as those for navigational queries. Also, we chose a reasonably small
number, 4, in order to limit the negative impact on user experience in the exploration bucket.
Another byproduct of our exploration bucket is that we can accurately observe the positional
biases of clicks. Speciﬁcally, for the top four URLs in each session, we can infer the original ranking
of the search engine simply by the recorded ranking scores. For each session, the URL with a highest
ranking score is called the “1st URL”. These URLs were displayed an equal number of times in all
four positions in the exploration bucket because of the random shuﬄing. We can then estimate the
aggregate Click-through rate (CTR) of the 1st URLs in each of the four positions, as depicted by
the blue line in Figure 2.1 Such nCTRs are marginal since we have taken all possible layouts (of
other URLs) into account, thanks to the uniform randomness in the exploration bucket. Similarly,
marginal nCTRs of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th URLs of all sessions are also plotted in Figure 2.
Interestingly, lines of these four marginal nCTRs are almost parallel to each other, which im-
plies the user click patterns follow the well-known power-law distribution.
The slope indicates
the intrinsic positional biases in the displayed layout of search results. To further illustrate the
conditional eﬀect on user click patterns, we also present the nCTRs of the original display or-
der. It corresponds to the steeper straight line of Figure 2, indexed by “Control” in cyan. We
observed that the nCTR of the 2nd URL at the 2nd position conditioned on the 1st URL at the
1st position is much lower than the marginal CTR of the 2nd URL at the 2nd position.
The
drop indicates a negative conditional eﬀect from the 1st URL at the 1st position. For the 3rd URL
at the 3rd position and the 4th URL at the 4th positions, we observed the similar conditional eﬀect.
The apparent positional biases shown in Figure 2 would be taken into account below in devising
our re-ranking algorithm. Moreover, the fact that the four lines other than the “Control” do not
cross each other shows that, on average, the original ranking is doing a decent job in ranking the
URLs also with respect to CTRs. However, in this paper, we show that we can do better than this
by re-ranking the URLs appropriately so that the overall CTRs of re-ranked results can be further
improved.
1To protect business-sensitive information, the paper only reports the normalized CTR or nCTR, which is the
CTR multiplied by a constant. We will use them interchangeably if there is no confusion.
3

1
2
3
4
−2.5
−2
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
Position on Log Scale
Normalized CTR on Log Scale
The 1st URL
The 2nd URL
The 3rd URL
The 4th URL
Control
Figure 2: Marginal nCTRs of four types of URL at the top four positions in exploration bucket,
along with the nCTRs on the original order as control. All are on logarithm scale.
3
Motivation
Before running into technical details, let us ﬁrst look at a concrete example found in exploration
bucket to illustrate our motivation, and then summarize the challenges that we confront in recency
search results. This example will be revisited in our discussion of experimental results.
As in [8, Section 4], recency queries are deﬁned to be time-sensitive queries that show non-
stationary temporal statistics compared to the past query logs. The query, “giant squid in Califor-
nia”, is a typical recency query, which appeared on February 1, 2010 and then disappeared after
two days in our exploration bucket data. Figure 3 shows the impression statistics of the query with
respect to time.2 This query is related to local news in California. At that time, a number of giant
squids weighing up to 60 pounds had swum into waters oﬀthe Californian coast and were caught
by sport ﬁshermen by the hundreds. To ﬁnd related materials of the local news, many people
submitted the query “giant squid in California” to search engines.
To study user click patterns on the URLs associated with the query, we again examined the
top four URLs in the exploration bucket. The four URLs were retrieved by the default ranking
function for recency queries in the search engine, which was trained on editorial judgments in batch
mode. The ranking generated by the search engine on the four URLs was:
1. foxnews.com/story/0,2933,290667,00.html
2. en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giant_Squid_(band)
3. metroactive.com/metro/03.29.06/squid-0613.html
4. youtube.com/watch?v=I3ENZDFkAow
2To avoid revealing business-sensitive data, we normalize the query submission number by multiplying it with a
positive number.
4

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Hours Starting from Monday, February 01, 2010 1:00:00 PM
Relative Submission Number
giant squid in california
Figure 3: Impression count in the exploration bucket of the query “giant squid in California”.
Based on their contents, the four web pages can be categorized as “a news story page”, “a
background knowledge page”, “a relevant page”, and “a video page”. As we randomly shuﬄed the
display order of the top 4 URLs in the exploration bucket, each URL had the same chance to be
displayed at each position. Therefore, position bias on clicks for these URLs was removed. The
nCTRs of the four URLs observed in our exploration bucket session data are presented in Figure
4. Clearly, although the initial nCTRs were similar, the “video” content ended up receiving most
clicks, while the “news story” was runner-up. This shows that while our recency ranking function
made a reasonable decision (by putting the “video” content within top 4), it yet failed to accurately
predict the ranking with respect to the users’ preference reﬂected in the CTR patterns on the URLs.
Moreover, we note that unless we actually see this click patterns, it would be extremely hard for
human editors to predict such relevance patterns.
Based on the above observations, two challenges are identiﬁed for the recency ranking problem.
• Relevance Drifting: As illustrated by the case above, document relevance may vary signiﬁ-
cantly over time. The above examples show the limitations of the editorial judgment based,
batch learning framework in tracking such temporal dynamics. In general, it is very diﬃcult
to design features that can correctly reﬂect the temporal variances of relevance and for editors
to predict the relevance labels before observing the actual user behaviors. How to rapidly
track such drift would be a major challenge of recency ranking.
• Data Sparsity: Due to the reason speciﬁed in Section 2, many recency queries have few
impressions. Hence, learning across queries (i.e., generalization) would be important.
In addition, we note that keeping track of dynamic content for recency queries to generate
reasonably good top documents is also a critical challenge, but, it is outside the scope of the paper.
In the present work, we rely on the baseline search engine to retrieve the most relevant documents,
and focus on improved re-ranking using click feedback.
5

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Hours Starting from Monday, February 01, 2010 1:00:00PM
Relative CTR
giant squid in california
 
 
youtube.com/watch?v=I3ENZDFkAow
foxnews.com/story/0,2933,290667,00.html
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giant_Squid_(band)
metroactive.com/metro/03.29.06/squid 0613.html
Figure 4: Hourly CTR of the top 4 URLs associated with the recency query “giant squid in
California”.
After the 30th hour, no more click of this query was observed in the exploration
bucket.
4
Our method
To address the two challenges in the previous subsection, we believe that it is helpful for a ranking
module to detect and track the non-stationarity of user interests reﬂected on the click patterns. The
example in Section 3 suggests that, when positional biases are removed, CTRs can be important
indicators of relevances of URLs, especially for recency queries. Moreover, as shown in Figure 2, it is
also important to remove positional biases and conditional eﬀects in CTR estimates for documents.

method.

query-document pairs is unnecessarily diﬃcult: similar to general Web search, it is more important
to get better estimates for high-quality documents for queries. Therefore, assuming that our original
ranking function retrieves reasonably good quality documents at the top, we propose a re-ranking

to address the challenges mentioned in Section 3 for recency queries:
• Relevance Drifting: In contrast to waiting for editorial judgments to update ranking results
for a recency query, our algorithm updates CTR estimates near real-time based on user click
feedback on the ranked list of documents. Not only does it avoid the expensive editorial
judgments, but it can also quickly adapt to the varying relevance and then maximize CTR.
• Data Sparsity: Our algorithm works in a common feature space shared by all query–document
pairs. It is then able to generalize click feedback of a pair to other pairs via feature values.
6

Furthermore, we will also show the beneﬁts of maintaining bias terms, or latent features,
dedicated to popular query–document pairs in the experimental results.

ever, this choice is justiﬁed, particularly for the recency ranking problem, for the following reasons.

learned ranking function for web search in practice. Second, our example in Section 3 shows that

evance judgments are diﬃcult to obtain. Third, our approach does not completely ignore editorial
judgments, because only the top portion of ranking result list is reﬁned. Since the baseline ranking
list is obtained based on editorial labels, traditional relevance-oriented metrics like NDCG (Nor-
malized Discounted Cumulative Gain) [16] are already reasonably high. Finally, it is worth noting
that our approach can also be used to maximize other metrics of interest such as session length or
revenue. With these reasonings, we now describe the setting and algorithm of our approach more
in detail.
4.1
Settings
We consider the following re-ranking framework, naturally modeled as a round-by-round process:
at round t,
1. A user arrives and types in a query qt.
2. The default recency ranking function generates an ordered list of s documents with highest
relevance scores. Then, our re-ranking function re-orders these s documents and present to
the user the re-ordered ranked list {ut,1, . . . , ut,s}.
3. The user then provides feedback rt = {ct,1, . . . , ct,s} on our re-ranking result, where ct,i = 1
if a user clicked on the document at potision i, and 0 otherwise.
4. Based on the user feedback rt, the re-ranking function is updated and is used for the next
round t + 1.
From above described process, we see that our re-ranking function is inherently an online algorithm
that updates its logic on the ﬂy from the sequential observation of click feedback. In order to
eﬃciently implement and update our re-ranking function, we implement a common feature vector
for every query-document pair, (q, u), and denote it as xqu ∈Rd. In our experiment, a total of d = 51
features were used. These features include regular query-speciﬁc (e.g., number of words in a query),
document-speciﬁc (e.g., spam classiﬁcation score of a document), and query-document-speciﬁc (e.g.,
number of times a query appears in a given document) features used in ordinary machine learned
ranking functions, and more importantly, the ranking score generated by the default, editorial
judgment-based recency ranking function. Our re-ranking function is then deﬁned to be a function

and the function gets updated based on observing users’ click feedback in an online fashion. The
detailed function form and update formula are described in the subsequent two sections.

algorithm to follow a greedy strategy: that is, it always ranks (for the present query at hand)

solely based on the user feedback for the algorithm’s ordered list.
While this greedy approach
is intuitively desirable, it can be detrimental in practice. This is because, as can be seen in the
interactive round-by-round process described above, the re-ranking algorithm obtains user feedback
only from the orderings that it has displayed to the user. Therefore, if an algorithm mistakenly
orders the documents, a greedy re-ranking strategy can prevent it from collecting user feedback for
7

other (potentially better) rankings and correcting its mistake to ﬁnd the most relevant document on

(a) “exploitation” — to display in the ﬁrst position most relevant documents to maximize re-ranking
quality (in our case, to maximize user clicks), and (b) “exploration” — to display documents for the
purpose of collecting data to further improvement. The exploration/exploitation tradeoﬀdescribed
above is a deﬁning characteristic of a class of problems known as bandit problems [27], which has
received considerable attention recently for Internet-related applications [25, 29].
In the following Section 4.2 and Section 4.3, we present the basic function form of our online
re-ranking function and its update formula provided the user feedback rt is given, respectively.
Then, in Section 4.4, we describe how we vary our scheme in order to cope with the explore/exploit
tradeoﬀexplained above and accelerate learning speed.
4.2

Although many alternatives exist, we choose our re-ranking function to be linear in the feature
vector xqu. This choice allows us to derive exact update rules and simplify the exposition. Other
non-linear models may also be used, although numerical approximation is unavoidable in general
when optimizing their model parameter. In particular, we have tried logistic regression and the
probit-based regression [13], and observed similar performance as the linear model.

(q, u) pair for re-ranking. Once the feature vector xqu of length d is given for a (q, u) pair, a linear

captures all variants useful in our experiments:

=
β⊤xqu + bq,u,
(1)
where the vector β ∈Rd contains the coeﬃcients shared by all query-document pairs, and bq,u ∈R
is a (q, u)-speciﬁc bias term. Both β and {bq,u} are to be learned by our algorithm.
Clearly, user click feedback on any query-document pair may be used to estimate β, which in

β in Equation 1 addresses the data sparsity challenge by allowing generalization across diﬀerent
queries and documents. However, a linear model in the features may not be suﬃciently accurate

to yield more accurate estimates. Due to these bias terms, it may appear that Equation 1 uses too
many free parameters. However, as will be cleared in the next subsection, we use regularization to
control the magnitude of these terms, so the bias terms will be essentially zero except for popular

estimate for popular (q, u), while for unpopular (q, u) (which suﬀer the data sparsity issue most)
we essentially use the linear estimate β⊤xqu. Such a dichotomy is done automatically within the
regularization framework.
4.3
Parameter Update Rule
This subsection addresses the problem of parameter updates for model (1). We ﬁrst describe how
to ﬁt the parameters if we are given a static set of data, then extend the update rule to the online
case when data arrive sequentially, and ﬁnally discuss a few practical issues when deploying the
update rules in large-scale ranking systems.
4.3.1
Batch Parameter Fitting
Suppose we are given a set D of t data in the form of {(qi, ui, ci)}i=1,2,...,t, where ci ∈{0, 1} is the
click feedback for (qi, ui) provided by the i-th user. Let P be the set of distinct (q, u) pairs observed
in D, and N = |P|. For brevity, denote the feature vector for the (qi, ui) pair as xi.
8

regression by using {ci}’s as targets: we seek the optimal parameters that minimize a regularized
square loss:
ft(β, {bq,u})
def
=
t
X
i=1

ci −β⊤xi −bqiui
2
+ λ1

β −β(0)

2
2 + λ2
X
(q,u)∈P

bqu −b(0)
qu

2
2,
(2)
where λ1 and λ2 are positive regularization parameters provided by uers, β(0) and b(0)
qu are the prior
values, and ∥· ∥2 is the ordinary ℓ2-norm. Here, regularization is applied to avoid over-ﬁtting and
to ensure numerical stability.
Since (2) is a least-squares problem with d+N many parameters, one may think it is intractable
to solve for the exact solution since the computation complexity is O((d+N)3) and N is often very
large. Fortunately, using matrix algebra, we can derive a closed-form solution for the minimizer of
(2), whose complexity is cubic in d and only linear in N.
Speciﬁcally, we partition the index set {1, 2, . . . , t} into I1 ∪I2 ∪· · · ∪IN, so that Ij contains
indices in D that corresponds to the j-th distinct (q, u) pair. For every j ∈{1, 2, . . . , N}, we deﬁne
the following quantities,
aj
def
=
λ2 + |Ij|,
bj
def
=
X
i∈Ij
xi,
dj
def
=
λ2b(0) +
X
i∈Ij
ci.
In addition, we deﬁne
A0
def
=
λ1I +
t
X
i=1
xix⊤
i ,
d0
def
=
λ1β(0) +
t
X
i=1
cixi.
Now the optimal solution to the least-squares problem must satisfy the ﬁrst-order optimality con-
dition:
∂ft(β, {bq,u})
∂β
=
0,
∂ft(β, {bq,u})
∂bj
=
0,
for each j ∈{1, . . . , N}. Solving this system of linear equations immediately gives the regularized
least-squares solution:
β∗
=

A0 −
N
X
j=1
a−1
j bjb⊤
j


−1 
d0 −
N
X
j=1
a−1
j djbj


(3)
b∗
j
=
a−1
j

dj −b⊤
j β∗
,
for each j ∈{1, 2, . . . , N}.
(4)
In other words, the complexity of solving the least-squares problem now becomes O(d3 + dN), a
substantial improvement over the O((d + N)3) complexity of the naive approach.
9

4.3.2
Online Parameter Updates
More importantly, the formulas above suggest that we only need to maintain a set of suﬃcient
statistics (A0, d0, aj, bj, and dj) to obtain the exact solution when a new data is added to the set
D, without the need to re-computing all quantities.
When a new example (qt+1, ut+1, ct+1) arrives, all these suﬃcient statistics can be updated
eﬃciently in an incremental fashion. In particular, let jt+1 be the index of (qt+1, ut+1) in P, then
O(d2) time is needed for the updates:
A0
←
A0 + xt+1x⊤
t+1
d0
←
d0 + ct+1xt+1
ajt+1
←
ajt+1 + 1
bjt+1
←
bjt+1 + xt+1
djt+1
←
djt+1 + ct+1.
With these updated suﬃcient statistics, we can now apply Equations 3 and 4 to compute the
exact solutions, which again requires O(d3 + dN) time. However, there are acceleration techniques
that can reduce the complexity to O(d2) and even O(d), as explained in the next subsection.
4.3.3
Implementation Issues in Practice
While the update rules derived above are reasonably eﬃcient, we would still like greater acceleration
for large d and large N, so that the response time of the whole re-ranking system can be further
reduced.
First of all, the most time-consuming part is the inversion of the matrix in Equation 3, which
takes O(d3) time. Fortunately, since every new data results in a rank-one update on the matrix,
A0 −PN
j=1 a−1
j bjb⊤
j , a straightforward variant of the famous Sherman-Morrison formula may be
applied to reduce the complexity to O(d2).
Second, we may also ignore oﬀ-diagonal elements of the matrix, A0 −PN
j=1 a−1
j bjb⊤
j , and so
inversion can be done very eﬃciently in O(d) time. According to our experience (not reported in
the present paper), this approximation is quite eﬀective, yielding a good tradeoﬀbetween solution
quality and time requirement.
Third, we note that it is unnecessary to update all N bias terms b∗
j every time a new exam-
ple arrives. In fact, these bias terms can be updated independently, provided that β∗is given.
Therefore, we may delay their updates until the moment they are used. Speciﬁcally, for a new
example (qt+1, ut+1, ct+1), we may only update b∗
jt+1, where jt+1 is the index of (qt+1, ut+1) in P.
This lazy-update trick completely removes the time dependency on N, a signiﬁcant improvement
when N is large.
Finally, we note that it may even be impossible and unnecessary to explicitly maintain a bias
term for every (q, u) pair, since only a small fraction of them are popular queries and thus are
expected to take advantage of those bias terms. A few techniques such as the hashing trick [20]
may be used to limit the eﬀective number of bias terms.
4.4
Variations of model
Given the model form and update formula in Section 4.2 and Section 4.3, there are a couple of
choices to try for our online re-ranking function, which we describe below.
Exploration and ǫ-greedy:
In Section 4.3, we did not describe how the click feedbacks for the
data D are collected. In order to explore rankings other than the output of our re-ranking model
and collect balanced click feedback in our data set D, we use ǫ-greedy strategy. The ǫ-greedy is
a simple strategy to handle the explore-exploit tradeoﬀdescribed in Section 4.1. It collects the
10

feedback from the randomly permuted ranking with probability ǫ and from the re-ranked result
by the function (1) with probability 1 −ǫ. Thus, by controlling ǫ, we can balance the exploration
and exploitation for our online learning, and our exploration bucket data enables us to realize this
strategy. More details on the methodology of using our exploration bucket data are described in
the next section.
Warm start:
When we are sequentially learning (β, {bqu}) as described in Section 4.3, we need
not learn them from scratch solely based on online learning (which is known as cold-start), but
learn a starting point from some already available click logs (i.e., warm-start). The eﬀectiveness
of such warm-start models could be critical in terms of improving the performance and learning
speed of our re-ranking function as presented in the next section.
Using clicks on multiple positions: In Section 4.3, we inherently assumed that the click feed-
back {ci}’s are the ones received by the user when the document was displayed in the ﬁrst position

sition 1, that is, ct,1 in the rt = {ct,1, . . . , ct,s} deﬁned in Section 4.1, but use clicks on multiple
positions for learning our re-ranking function.
In that case, we can enlarge the data set D to
{(qi, ui,p, ci,p)}p=1,...,s
i=1,2,...,t, and we introduce additional bias terms {bp}s
p=1 to correct the positional

=

(5)
while modifying the loss function as
ft(β, {bqu}, {bp}) def
=
t
X
i=1
s
X
p=1

ci,p −β⊤xi,p −bqi,pui,p −bp
2
+λ1

β −β(0)

2
2 + λ2
X
(q,u)∈Pt

bqu −b(0)

2
2 + λ3
s
X
p=2

bp −b(0)
p

2
2,
(6)
where λ3 and b(0)
p
are regularization coeﬃcient and prior for the positional bias terms {bp}. Note

learned by minimizing (6). In this way, we can utilize more click feedback than only using the
clicks on position 1 to learn the re-ranking function (1). In Section 5, we will show how useful this
approach is for building the warm start model described above. For the online updates, however,
in order to control the number of experiments to compare, we remain to use only the clicks at
the ﬁrst positions and use the loss function and update formula in Section 4.3 for all of the online
schemes in our experiments.
5
Experimental results
This section reports our experiments on various algorithms for recency search re-ranking using the
exploration bucket data described in Section 2. Section 5.1 describes an unbiased oﬄine evaluation
method we will adopt in the experiments. Section 5.2 describes a number of representative algo-
rithms for comparison. These algorithms are selected to demonstrate beneﬁts of various algorithmic
choices described in Section 4.4. Section 5.3 presents and analyzes the experiment results in details.
Finally, Section 5.4 revisits the query examined in Section 3, illustrating how our algorithm adapts
to user click feedback to re-rank the top documents and yield better results.
5.1
Unbiased Oﬄine Evaluation
A tricky part of our problem is that, unlike in supervised learning, it is hard to evaluate and compare
performance of algorithms using a static set of log data. The reason is that the click feedback in the
11

log depends on the ranking results that the user observed when the log was collected; consequently,
we do not know what that user might have clicked if the algorithm we evaluate ranked the results
diﬀerently. Fortunately, our exploration bucket data can be used for reliable oﬄine evaluation of
diﬀerent algorithms, including both batch or online ones.
We follow the “replaying” evaluation method studied by [22] for interactive applications like
the re-ranking problem considered here. First, we hold out the sessions for the latter three days
in the exploration bucket data and use it as a test set. The ﬁrst three days’ data may be used as
a training set for batch learning or warm start model described in Section 4.4. We then sort the

maintain two quantities, C and M, which are interpreted as the number of clicks at position 1 and
number of search sessions, respectively. Both C and M are initialized to 0.
1. We retrieve the t-th session in the test set, present the top s documents together with their
features to the re-ranking function.
2. The re-ranking algorithm then proposes to display one of the documents in the ﬁrst position
based on its re-ranking scores. We call it a “match” if this proposed document is the same
as the one displayed in the ﬁrst position in the retrieved test session.
3. If a match happens, we reveal the user feedback ct (1 for click and 0 otherwise) to the
algorithm, and perform the updates: C ←C + ct and M ←M + 1.
4. Otherwise, ct is not revealed, and the values of C and M are unchanged. Eﬀectively, this
session is ignored.

For each session in our test set, the probability that a match happens is 1/s for any ranking
algorithm, since the top s documents are randomly shuﬄed in our exploration bucket data. There-
fore, for a test set of L sessions, M equals L/s on average. In our experiments, since L is large,
M is almost constant across diﬀerent runs. The following key property justiﬁes the soundness of

to reliably compare and evaluate various algorithms oﬄine without the costs and risks of actually
testing them with live users.
5.2
Models
There are various options to leverage user click feedback to adjust a re-ranking function.
For
instance, one may expect better adaptation to user interest if a re-ranking system can adjust its
ranking function in real time based on user feedback; it may also be interested in understanding
how re-ranking performance is aﬀected by the CTR model, such as the ability to generalize (via
the linear features) and specialize (via the bias terms) in our model (1).
Below, we describe a few representatives, chosen carefully to demonstrate the beneﬁts of various
algorithmic choices. The methods are grouped into four categories.
1. The ﬁrst is a baseline that is based entirely on editorial judgments and does not leverage user
clicks at all:
• frmsc(baseline): We used the recency ranking function [8] deployed in our search
engine as a baseline. This function was trained using time-varying recency features and
recency demoted labels provided by human editors. This method does not use click
feedback.
12

data and then do not online update in the test phase. That is, the data D used in the update
formula of Section 4.3 only consists of the clicks in the ﬁrst position in the training set. Such
methods will be compared to their online-learning counterpart.
• batch(b): This is the linear model in (1) trained on the training set, and then deployed
on the test set without any online updates. Note that there is no positional biases in
the click feedback in the training set for this model due to the exploration bucket.
• batch(nb): This is the same as above, but does not use the bias terms in (1). In other

model is used to show the beneﬁts of the bias terms.
3. The third category contains online learning methods in Section 4.3 for re-ranking with ǫ-
greedy strategy mentioned in Section 4.4.
We realize the ǫ-greedy strategy in our online
learning method by utilizing the exploration bucket data again. That is, while we use the
exploration bucket data for an unbiased evaluation of performances of various schemes as in
Section 5.1, we use the data once more to incrementally train the online schemes, as in Section
4.3. More concretely, at time t, the click feedback at the ﬁrst position ct,1 is revealed to the
online schemes for the model updates, no matter whether there is a “match” or not for the
schemes so that the re-ranking function can observe the feedbacks for all possible randomly

that this is eﬀectively simulating the ǫ-greedy strategy with ǫ = 1 and a separate deployment
test bucket for evaluation. Also, a clear but subtle point is that we are revealing the click
feedback after the data point was used for the ‘replay’ evaluation so that we are not training
and testing with the same data point. Moreover, in practice, we note there is usually a time
delay between delivery of the ranking result and the receipt of user feedback. To make our
evaluation and online learning process closer to reality, we make the user feedback ct,1 is not
revealed to the re-ranking algorithm immediately. Rather, these signals are revealed every
ﬁve minutes (based on the time stamps of the test sessions) for our simulation.
Based on a few algorithmic choices, we tested following variations to see the eﬀect of online
schemes.
• online(b) and online(nb): These are the online algorithms that optimize the param-
eters in (1) incrementally based on user click feedback, with and without bias terms,
respectively. Note that both algorithms learn the parameters from scratch.
• online(b,ws) and online(nb,ws): These are the same as online(b) and online(nb)
but use warm-start initialization of the parameters.
Speciﬁcally, we used the batch-
learned parameters (in batch(b) and batch(nb), respectively) as β(0) and b(0)
qu in (1).
We set λ1 = λ2 = 10. These methods thus combine the prior knowledge extracted from
previous data with the ability to learn online.
• online(b,ws,w0): This method is similar to online(b,ws) except that the weight
vector β is ﬁxed to the warm-start β(0) learned by batch(b). Thus, this model performs
limited online updates and is useful to demonstrate the beneﬁts of online update of β.
• counting: Motivated by click models, this method maintains the ratio of cumulative
clicks and views for each document-query separately. This is an online learning model,
but does not utilize query–document features for generalization. It may suﬀer the “cold-
start” problem on the tailed queries.
Essentially, this scheme is equivalent to only
maintaining the bias terms for observed document-query pairs.
13

4. Batch learning of (warm-start) parameters in the previous two categories is trained on the
ﬁrst three days of exploration bucket data. However, although the exploration bucket gives

require such expensive data in order to build the batch model as a starting point for online
models. Therefore, we use the controlled log from non-exploration buckets (e.g., production
bucket) for the same period of time to build the batch models and compare them with the
models built from the exploration bucket. Note that the controlled log is very cheap to attain,
but have large positional biases in clicks, so it is not clear to see how well the batch models
trained on the controlled logs would perform. We include following three variations regarding
the batch model with the controlled log, which contained 485, 135 sessions from production
logs that overlaps with the ﬁrst three days of exploration bucket. 3.

positions in the controlled log.

using top four positions’ clicks in the controlled log. However, it ignores the position
biases, {bp}’s are all set to zero, so data from all four positions are not distinguished.

position biases and including nonzero {bp}’s as described in Section 4.4.
5.3
Experimental Results

algorithms

lift over frmsc
frmsc(baseline)
0.770
0%
batch(b)
0.877
13.90%
batch(nb)
0.849
10.26%
online(b)
0.875
13.64%
online(nb)
0.839
8.96%
online(b,ws)
0.901
17.01%
online(nb,ws)
0.851
10.52%
online(b,ws,w0)
0.891
15.71%
counting
0.872
13.25%

0.883
14.68%

0.856
11.17%

0.885
14.94%

in every 6-hour period for the algorithms. Only ﬁve algorithms are included in Figure 5 to ensure
legibility.
5.3.1
Results Analysis
A number of important observations are in order based on the results reported in Table 1 and
Figure 5.
3Note that the online methods described above may also be combined with warm-start models learned from control
logs. We do not include them for comparison in the paper to make the presentation of the results simple.
14

!"#$%
!"&%
!"&$%
!"'%
!"'$%
!"(%
!"($%
)%
)%
*%
+%
,%
$%
#%
&%
'%
(%
)!%
))%
)*%
)+%
),%
!"#$%&'()*+,-./0+
1$)+
-./012340567859%
34:1;%239%
<8678523=>09%

<86785283=>09%

measured for an approximately six-hour period.
First, the advantage of leveraging user click feedback is obvious from the lift of all algorithms
over the baseline that does not use click feedback at all. The click lift, which ranges from 8.96% to
17.01%, is statistically signiﬁcant given the size of our data set. Even the batch-learning methods
that do not perform online updates are quite strong, capable of achieving at least 10% lift.
Second, we can see the additional beneﬁts brought by the bias terms in both batch and online
algorithms. It is true in all cases that an algorithm is better than its counterpart without bias
terms. In the case between online(b,ws) and online(nb,ws), the bias terms account for about
6.49% lift.
Third, while batch algorithms have quite strong lift, greater lifts are achieved by algorithms
that adjust their re-ranking functions online. This beneﬁt is expected since the online algorithms
are able to extract more information from online click feedback, in addition to the batch-learned
models. In addition, it is worth pointing out a practically important fact that it is compatible to use
batch-learned models as warm-start models for online methods. Of all the algorithms in Table 1,
the greatest lift is achieved by online(b,ws)—the online method that uses batch-learned warm-
start models and bias terms. Even for the coeﬃcient vector β that is shared by all query-document
pairs, updating it online is still helpful, which is justiﬁed by the gap between online(b,ws) and
online(b,ws,w0). A larger gap is possible if the time span of our test data is larger.

bias terms are essentially zero except for popular query-document pairs, due to the regularization we

tail queries for which we observed one or few sessions. The result in Table 1 conﬁrms our conjecture:
the method counting which uses the bias terms alone for re-ranking yielded a lower click lift than
online(b,ws,w0) or online(b,ws). The reason is that the CTR model in counting can’t make
good prediction in “cold-start” situation and so little lift was achieved on the tailed queries.
Finally, our results suggest it is possible to use control log to build a competitive warm-
start model. It should be noted that the control log has much more data than the exploration
data, thus the strong performance.
However, position bias has to be considered when clicks
15

!"
#"
$"
%"
&"
'!"
'#"
'$"
'%"
'&"
#!"
()*+,#"
#+()*+,'!"
'!+()*+,'!!"
'!!+()*"
-./01"
234(35"

diﬀerent impressions.

We believe the performance of learning from controlled logs could be
further improved by advanced click models. We plan to investigate this direction in future work.
5.3.2
Lift Distribution
!"
#"
$"
%"
&"
'!"
'#"
'$"
'%"
'"()*+",-.*/"
#"()*+",-.*/"
0"()*+",-.*/"
$1"()*+",-.*/"
23456"
)7897."

diﬀerent lengths.
We now examine lift distribution over queries with diﬀerent impression and lengths, respectively.
Results of two representatives, batch(b) and online(b,ws), are reported.

We notice that the online(b,ws) model is doing very well on popular recency queries, whereas
the batch(b) model gives more lift on queries with less than 2 impressions. For queries with very
16

!"
#"
$"
%"
&"
'!"
'#"
()*'"
+,-./"()*"
'012345647-48"
.38-"
93:"**"
9-34"**"
9;4"**"
238<="
64>;4-"
Figure 8: Relative lift in percentage (%) over the baseline model (frmsc) on various click metrics.
limited impressions, e.g. less than 2, the online(b,ws) model cannot gain much advantage over
the batch(b) model. This problem might be mitigated when applying the online(b,ws) model to
larger traﬃc. This observation also suggests a practical solution, i.e. employing batch(b) models
for queries with scarce impressions while using online(b,ws) models for popular recency queries
only. It is expected that the online(b,ws) model achieves much more lift on popular recency
queries, since the batch(b) model cannot specialize well on such cases despite the relatively large
number of impressions. For example, the query “giant squids in California” was a popular recency
query. A batch(b) model well trained on historical click events still fails to foresee the popularity
and high relevance of the youtube video, whereas the online(b,ws) model does so correctly by
adapting to users’ click feedback; see Section 5.4 for more details of this example.

in two-word queries, the online(b,ws) model consistently outperforms the batch(b) model. The
results suggest the online re-ranking method is robust to queries of various lengths.
5.3.3
Comparison of Other Click Metrics
Although we have focused on training and evaluating our online re-ranking function based on

[26]:
• Query CTR is the average number of clicks for each query
• 1−Abandonment Rate is the probability of a session receiving a click
• Max RR (Reciprocal Rank) is the reciprocal rank of the highest ranked result clicked on
• Mean RR (Reciprocal Rank) is the average of clicked documents’ reciprocal ranks
• Min RR (Reciprocal Rank) is the reciprocal rank of the lowest ranked results clicked on.
Thus, for all metrics, higher values are assumed to indicate better ranking qualities.
17

5
10
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Hours Starting from Monday, February 01, 2010 1:00:00PM
Rescaled Function Value
 
 
youtube.com/watch?v=I3ENZDFkAow
foxnews.com/story/0,2933,290667,00.html
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giant_Squid_(band)
metroactive.com/metro/03.29.06/squid 0613.html
(a) Zoom-in plot
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Hours Starting from Monday, February 01, 2010 1:00:00PM
Rescaled Function Value
 
 
youtube.com/watch?v=I3ENZDFkAow
foxnews.com/story/0,2933,290667,00.html
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giant_Squid_(band)
metroactive.com/metro/03.29.06/squid 0613.html
(b) Whole period
Figure 9: Function values in the online model on the 4 URLs associated with the recency query
“giant squid in California”. Note that the URL of metroactive.com was replaced by another URL
(not shown here) after the 23rd hour.
In Figure 8, both batch and online models show signiﬁcant lifts over the frmsc baseline on
all click metrics listed above. Moreover, the online(b,ws) method consistently gives about 2%

18

a good surrogate to optimize, and also justiﬁes our choice of using click at the top position as user
feedback.
Ramark: We have done similar experiments on the non-recency queries as well, but our online
re-ranking scheme did not show too much gain for those queries as in the recency queries, of which
results are omitted here. The absence of improvements for non-recency queries is expected: the
relevance of documents with respect to such queries does not change dramatically over time, so the
re-ranking based on the click feedback may not be too diﬀerent from the original ranking.
5.4
Case Study
We now revisit our example query “giant squid in California” in Section 3 to illustrate how our
online re-ranking function can adapt to the click feedback quickly and track the best re-ranking.
Coincidentally, the query happened to only appear in our test set.
We ran our online model,
online(b,ws), on the test set, and recorded the function values of the 4 URLs. Figure 9(a) shows
the function values of 4 URLs for the ﬁrst 10 hours, and Figure 9(b) presents the entire temporal
curves for those function values in the lifetime of “giant squid in California”.
Since the initial re-ranking function online(b,ws) is (almost) identical to the ﬁxed one of
batch(b), we can see from Figure 9(a) that when the query appears around the 5th hour, batch(b)
orders the four URLs as
1. foxnews.com/story/0,2933,290667,00.html
2. youtube.com/watch?v=I3ENZDFkAow
3. metroactive.com/metro/03.29.06/squid-0613.html
4. en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giant_Squid_(band).
Note that this ranking is diﬀerent from the frmsc ranking presented in Section 3. That is, although
the batch(b) has not observed the query “giant squid in California” in its training set sessions,
from the sessions of other queries in the training set, it was able to predict based on the query–
document features that the “video” page will attract many clicks for the query and improve the
original ranking. Nonetheless, we see that it still fails to accurately predict the users’ click behaviors.
On the other hand, given the users’ click patterns in Figure 4, the online(b,ws) promptly
learns from them and put the “video” content with the highest CTR to the top rank within an
hour. The ranking was then maintained for the rest of the time. Then, after the 25th hours, when
the impression of the query quickly decreased toward 0 as shown in Figure 3, the function values
of online(b,ws) were kept intact as can be seen in Figure 9(b).
Thus, this example indeed illustrates how re-ranking algorithms may beneﬁt from user click
feedback to improve ranking results. Furthermore, by real-time adaption online(b,ws) can quickly
learn from users’ click patterns and outperforms not only the editorial-based batch recency ranking,
frmsc, but also the click-based batch re-ranking, batch(b), for recency queries.
6
Related work
As mentioned in Section 1, the machine-learned ranking framework has been extended to the
recency search problem.
Previous work [8] introduced query classiﬁers to detect time-sensitive
queries, implemented time-varying features that reﬂect document freshness, and recency demoted
labels provided by human editors. More recently, improvements are made by introducing additional
click related time-varying features [15, 9]. Algorithms studied in our work diﬀer from them in two
ways: (i) we use user click as training labels to gain further improvement; (ii) instead of ﬁxing the
19

ranking function and adjusting time-varying features, our features need not change over time, but
the parameters of the ranking function can be automatically adjusted in real time based on user
clicks.
Another related work [7] considered an online algorithm of slotting news direct display modules
for recency queries in the search results page but did not consider re-rankings of documents.
Using users’ click feedback to improve ranking quality of a search engine has been extensively
studied before. User behavior models (e.g., [10, 5, 14]) are developed based on click log data, whose
outputs were then used as features for batch-training a ranking function. However, it is not easy
to reﬂect temporal variations of document relevance in these works since the features were often
computed in an average sense.
A few other works also used click data to directly modify their ranking based on the inference
on the users’ relative preferences on rankings, but their settings or focuses are diﬀerent: the method
of [17] remained in the batch-learning mode and did not consider the temporal dimension of the
click data; [25] was similar in spirit to ours but did not consider strategies that generalize to tail
queries, and their results were based on simulated user clicks rather than real ones; ﬁnally, the
dueling bandit approach [29] required a special functionality of the retrieval system to interleave
two diﬀerent ranking results.
Taking temporal variation of relevance into account to produce better rankings has also been
considered in the past. [11] considered the temporal variations of document content and applied
that knowledge to improve search ranking, but did not utilize click feedback to directly reﬁne
the ranking. [19] devised a scheme to capture temporal dynamics of user ratings on items in a
collaborative ﬁltering problem, but focused rather on long-term dynamics and did not consider
the cold-start problem, which is critical to our recency ranking application give the large volume
of of tail queries. Personalized article recommendation on web portals is another closely related
problem. While models in earlier works (e.g., [1]) did not generalize, there have been eﬀorts on
generalization more recently, such as the LinUCB algorithm [21] that uses a similar linear model
as ours, and the warm-start solution by [2]. However, both work remain to maintain models for a
small number of articles/items, and so have not demonstrated capacities of learning with an almost
inﬁnitely large content pool, as in the space of query-document pairs in search domain. Another
diﬀerence is that their model was more item-speciﬁc, whereas our model consists of both global
model that applies to all queries and documents and speciﬁc bias term for each query-document
pair. As a similar, independent thread of work, [28] also considered the large-scale personalized
recommendation problem, but imposed a Bayesian framework, which is diﬀerent from our work.
7
Conclusions
In this work, we investigated various learning algorithms to re-ranking recency search results based
on real-time user feedback. Our contributions are three-fold. First, our evaluation method is novel
for web search—a random exploration bucket was used to collect user feedback, which not only
removed positional bias but also allowed one to reliably evaluate online learning algorithms oﬄine.
Second, we proposed a re-ranking approach to improve current search results for recency queries,
and carried out extensive empirical results for a dozen of variants. Third, we demonstrated the
need for using online learning as a ﬂexible machine learning paradigm to adapt a ranking system
to time-varying document relevance.
In future work, we would like to explore other options for correcting position biases and using
clicks on multiple positions, e.g., using multiplicative bias correction terms or using user click
models (e.g., [5]), so that we can eﬀectively increase the size of training data and thus may result
in faster learning speed in practice.
In this work we focused on ranking documents based on
individual document’s CTR estimate. It is also much more challenging to design algorithms for
the best permutation of a set of documents, in which interactions between documents can be taken
20

into account.
