Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 44 (2012) 491-532
Submitted 11/11; published 07/12
Riﬄed Independence for Eﬃcient Inference
with Partial Rankings
Jonathan Huang

James H. Clark Center
Stanford University, Stanford CA 94305, USA
Ashish Kapoor

Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond WA 98052-6399, USA
Carlos Guestrin

Gates Hillman Complex, Carnegie Mellon University,
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
Abstract
Distributions over rankings are used to model data in a multitude of real world settings
such as preference analysis and political elections. Modeling such distributions presents
several computational challenges, however, due to the factorial size of the set of rankings
over an item set. Some of these challenges are quite familiar to the artiﬁcial intelligence
community, such as how to compactly represent a distribution over a combinatorially large
space, and how to eﬃciently perform probabilistic inference with these representations.
With respect to ranking, however, there is the additional challenge of what we refer to as
human task complexity — users are rarely willing to provide a full ranking over a long list
of candidates, instead often preferring to provide partial ranking information.
Simultaneously addressing all of these challenges — i.e., designing a compactly repre-
sentable model which is amenable to eﬃcient inference and can be learned using partial
ranking data — is a diﬃcult task, but is necessary if we would like to scale to problems
with nontrivial size. In this paper, we show that the recently proposed riﬄed independence
assumptions cleanly and eﬃciently address each of the above challenges. In particular, we
establish a tight mathematical connection between the concepts of riﬄed independence and
of partial rankings. This correspondence not only allows us to then develop eﬃcient and
exact algorithms for performing inference tasks using riﬄed independence based represen-
tations with partial rankings, but somewhat surprisingly, also shows that eﬃcient inference
is not possible for riﬄe independent models (in a certain sense) with observations which do
not take the form of partial rankings. Finally, using our inference algorithm, we introduce
the ﬁrst method for learning riﬄed independence based models from partially ranked data.
1. Probabilistic Modeling of Ranking Data: Three Challenges
Rankings arise in a number of machine learning application settings such as preference anal-
ysis for movies and books (Lebanon & Mao, 2008) and political election analysis (Gormley
& Murphy, 2007; Huang & Guestrin, 2010). In many of these problems, it is of great interest
to build statistical models over ranking data in order to make predictions, form recommen-
dations, discover latent trends and structure and to construct human-comprehensible data
summaries.
c⃝2012 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
Modeling distributions over rankings is a diﬃcult problem, however, due to the fact that
as the number of items being ranked increases, the number of possible rankings increases
factorially. This combinatorial explosion forces us to confront three central challenges when
dealing with rankings. First, we need to deal with storage complexity — how can we com-
pactly represent a distribution over the space of rankings?1 Then there is algorithmic com-
plexity — how can we eﬃciently answer probabilistic inference queries given a distribution?
Finally, we must contend with what we refer to as human task complexity, which is a
challenge stemming from the fact that it can be diﬃcult to accurately elicit a full ranking over
a large list of candidates from a human user; choosing from a list of n! options is no easy task
and users typically prefer to provide partial information. Take the American Psychological
Association (APA) elections, for example, which allow their voters to rank order candidates
from favorite to least favorite. In the 1980 election, there were ﬁve candidates, and therefore
5! = 120 ways to rank those ﬁve candidates. Despite the small candidate list, most voters
in the election preferred to only specify their top-k favorite candidates rather than writing
down full rankings on their ballots (see Figure 1). For example, roughly a third of voters
simply wrote down their single favorite candidate in this 1980 election.
These three intertwined challenges of storage, algorithmic, and human task complexity
are the central issues of probabilistic modeling for rankings, and models that do not eﬃciently
handle all three sources of complexity have limited applicability. In this paper, we examine
a ﬂexible and intuitive class of models for rankings based on a generalization of probabilistic
independence called riﬄed independence, proposed in our recent work (Huang & Guestrin,
2009, 2010). While our previous papers have focused primarily on representational (storage
complexity) issues, we now concentrate on inference and incomplete observations (i.e., partial
rankings), showing that in addition to storage complexity, riﬄe independence based models
can eﬃciently address issues of algorithmic and human task complexity.
In fact the two issues of algorithmic and human task complexity are intricately linked
for riﬄe independent models. By considering partial rankings, we give users more ﬂexibility
to provide as much or as little information as they care to give. In the context of partial
ranking data, the most relevant inference queries also take the form of partial rankings. For
example, we might want to predict a voter’s second choice candidate given information about
his ﬁrst choice. One of our main contributions in this paper is to show that inference for
such partial ranking queries can be performed particularly eﬃciently for riﬄe independent
models.
The main contributions of our work are as follows:2
• We reveal a natural and fundamental connection between riﬄe independent models
and partial rankings. In particular, we show that the collection of partial rankings
over an item set form a complete characterization of the space of observations upon
1. Note that it is common to wonder why one would care to represent a distribution over all rankings if the
number of sample rankings is never nearly as large. This problem that the number of samples is always
much smaller than n! however, means that most rankings are never observed, limiting our ability to
estimate the probability of an arbitrary ranking. The only way to overcome the paucity of samples is to
exploit representational structure, which is very much in alignment with solving the storage complexity
issue.
2. This paper is an extended presentation of our paper (Huang, Kapoor, & Guestrin, 2011) which appeared
in the 2011 Conference on Uncertainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI) as well as results from the ﬁrst
author’s dissertation (Huang, 2011).
492

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
First 
Choice
Second 
Choice
Third
Choice
Fourth
Choice
Fifth 
Choice
# of 
votes
5
3
4
2
1
37
3
4
5
1
2
30
1
2
3
---
---
27
3
---
---
---
---
1198
4
1
3
---
---
15
1
3
---
---
---
302
3
1
2
5
4
186
Figure 1: Example partial ranking data (taken from the American Psychological Association
election dataset, 1980)
which one can eﬃciently condition a riﬄe independent model. As a result, we show
that when ranked items satisfy the riﬄed independence relationship, conditioning on
partial rankings can be done eﬃciently, with running time O(n·|H|), where |H| denotes
the number of model parameters.
• We prove that, in a sense (which we formalize), it is impossible to eﬃciently condition
riﬄe independent models on observations that do not take the form of partial rankings.
• We propose the ﬁrst algorithm that is capable of eﬃciently estimating the structure
and parameters of riﬄe independent models from heterogeneous collections of partially
ranked data.
• We show results on real voting and preference data evidencing the eﬀectiveness of our
methods.
2. Riﬄed Independence For Rankings
A ranking, σ, of items in an item set Ωis a one-to-one mapping between Ωand a rank
set R = {1, . . . , n} and is denoted using vertical bar notation as σ−1(1)|σ−1(2)| . . . |σ−1(n).
We say that σ ranks item i1 before (or over) item i2 if the rank of i1 is less than the
rank of i2.
For example, Ωmight be {Corn, Peas, Apples, Oranges} and the ranking
Corn|Peas|Apples|Oranges encodes a preference of Corn over Peas which is in turn pre-
ferred over Apples and so on. The collection of all possible rankings of item set Ωis denoted
by SΩ(or just Sn when Ωis implicit).
Since there are n! rankings of n items, it is intractable to estimate or even explicitly
represent arbitrary distributions on Sn without making structural assumptions about the
underlying distribution. While there are many possible simplifying assumptions that one can
make, we focus on an approach that we have proposed in recent papers (Huang & Guestrin,
2009, 2010) in which the ranks of items are assumed to satisfy an intuitive generalized notion
of probabilistic independence known as riﬄed independence. In this paper, we argue that
riﬄed independence assumptions are particularly eﬀective in settings where one would like
to make queries taking the form of partial rankings. In the remainder of this section, we
review riﬄed independence.
493

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
The riﬄed independence assumption posits that rankings over the item set Ωare gen-
erated by independently generating rankings of smaller disjoint item subsets (say, A and
B) which partition Ω, and piecing together a full ranking by interleaving (or riﬄe shuﬄing)
these smaller rankings together. For example, to rank our item set of foods, one might ﬁrst
rank the vegetables and fruits separately, then interleave the two subset rankings to form a
full ranking. To formally deﬁne riﬄed independence, we use the notions of relative rankings
and interleavings.
Deﬁnition 1 (Relative ranking map). Given a ranking σ ∈SΩand any subset A ⊂Ω, the
relative ranking of items in A, φA(σ), is a ranking, π ∈SA, such that π(i) < π(j) if and
only if σ(i) < σ(j).
Deﬁnition 2 (Interleaving map). Given a ranking σ ∈SΩand a partition of Ωinto disjoint
sets A and B, the interleaving of A and B in σ (denoted, τAB(σ)) is a (binary) mapping
from the rank set R = {1, . . . , n} to {A, B} indicating whether a rank in σ is occupied by A
or B. As with rankings, we denote the interleaving of a ranking by its vertical bar notation:
[τAB(σ)](1)|[τAB(σ)](2)| . . . |[τAB(σ)](n).
Example 3. Consider a partitioning of an item set Ωinto vegetables A = {Corn, Peas}
and fruits B = {Apples, Oranges}, as well as a full ranking over these four items: σ =
Corn|Oranges|Peas|Apples. In this case, the relative ranking of vegetables in σ is φA(σ) =
Corn|Peas and the relative ranking of fruits in σ is φB(σ) = Oranges|Apples. The inter-
leaving of vegetables and fruits in σ is τAB(σ) = A|B|A|B.
Deﬁnition 4 (Riﬄed Independence). Let h be a distribution over SΩand consider a subset
of items A ⊂Ωand its complement B. The sets A and B are said to be riﬄe independent
if h decomposes (or factors) as:
h(σ) = mAB(τAB(σ)) · fA(φA(σ)) · gB(φB(σ)),
for distributions mAB, fA and gB, deﬁned over interleavings and relative rankings of A and
B respectively. In other words, A and B are riﬄe independent if the relative rankings of
A and B, as well as their interleaving are mutually independent. We refer to mAB as the
interleaving distribution and fA and gB as the relative ranking distributions.
Riﬄed independence has been found to approximately hold in a number of real datasets
(Huang & Guestrin, 2012). When such relationships can be identiﬁed in data, then instead
of exhaustively representing all n! ranking probabilities, one can represent just the factors
mAB, fA and gB, which are distributions over smaller sets.
2.1 Hierarchical Riﬄe Independent Models
The relative ranking factors fA and gB are themselves distributions over rankings. To further
reduce the parameter space, it is natural to consider hierarchical decompositions of item sets
into nested collections of partitions (like hierarchical clustering). For example, Figure 2.1
shows a hierarchical decomposition where vegetables are riﬄe independent of fruits among
the “healthy” foods, and these healthy foods are, in turn, riﬄe independent of the subset of
desserts: {Doughnuts, M&Ms}.
494

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
{C,P,A,O,D,M}
{D,M}
Doughnuts, M&Ms
{C,P,A,O}
{C,P}
Corn, Peas
{A,O}
Apples, Oranges
Figure 2: An example of a hierarchy over six food items.
For simplicity, we restrict consideration to binary hierarchies, deﬁned as tuples of the
form H = (HA, HB), where HA and HB are either (1) null, in which case H is called a leaf,
or (2) hierarchies over item sets A and B respectively. In this second case, A and B are
assumed to form a nontrivial partitioning of the item set.
Deﬁnition 5. We say that a distribution h factors riﬄe independently with respect to a
hierarchy H = (HA, HB) if item sets A and B are riﬄe independent with respect to h,
and both fA and gB factor riﬄe independently with respect to subhierarchies HA and HB,
respectively.
Like Bayesian networks, these hierarchies represent families of distributions obeying a
certain set of (riﬄed) independence constraints and can be parameterized locally. To draw
from such a model, one generates full rankings recursively starting by drawing rankings of
the leaf sets, then working up the tree, sequentially interleaving rankings until reaching the
root. The parameters of these hierarchical models are simply the interleaving and relative
ranking distributions at the internal nodes and leaves of the hierarchy, respectively.
In general, the number of total parameters required to represent a hierarchical riﬄe
independent model can (as with Bayesian networks) still scale exponentially in the number
of items.
For example, the number of interleavings of p items with n −p items is
 n
p

.
It is often the case however, that much fewer parameters are necessary. For example, thin
models (Huang & Guestrin, 2012), in which the number of items factored out of the model at
each stage of the hierarchy is never more than a small constant k, can always be represented
with a (degree k) polynomial number of parameters. We will use |H| to refer to the number
of parameters necessary for representing a distribution which factors according to hierarchy
H.
By decomposing distributions over rankings into small pieces (like Bayesian networks
have done for other distributions), these hierarchical models allow for better interpretability,
eﬃcient probabilistic representation, low sample complexity, eﬃcient MAP optimization,
and, as we show in this paper, eﬃcient inference.
Example 6. In Figure 3(a), we reproduce the hierarchical structure that was learned using
a fully ranked subset of the APA data consisting of 5000 training examples in Huang and
Guestrin (2012). There were ﬁve candidates in the election: (1) William Bevan, (2) Ira
Iscoe, (3) Charles Kiesler, (4) Max Siegle, and (5) Logan Wright (Marden, 1995). Strikingly,
the structure that is learned using an algorithm (maximum likelihood) which knows nothing
about the underlying politics of the APA, has leaf nodes which correspond exactly to the
political coalitions that dominated the APA in the 1980 election — the research psychologists
495

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
A={12345}
B={1345}
C={2}
D={13}
E={45}
Research 
psychologists
Clinical 
psychologists
Community 
psychologists
(a) Hierarchical structure learned
via MLE using 5000 full rankings
from the APA dataset.
σ
fD(σ)
1|3
.50
3|1
.50
σ
fE(σ)
4|5
.48
5|4
.52
σ
fC(σ)
2
1.00
τ
mD,E(τ)
D|D|E|E
.28
D|E|D|E
.12
D|E|E|D
.12
E|D|D|E
.14
E|D|E|D
.12
E|E|D|D
.22
τ
mB,C(τ)
C|B|B|B|B
.14
B|C|B|B|B
.19
B|B|C|B|B
.25
B|B|B|C|B
.25
B|B|B|B|C
.18
(b) Riﬄe independent model parameters learned via MLE using
5000 full rankings from the APA dataset.
Figure 3: Example hierarchical model for the APA election. Candidates are enumerated
as: (1) William Bevan, (2) Ira Iscoe, (3) Charles Kiesler, (4) Max Siegle, and (5)
Logan Wright (Marden, 1995).
(candidates 1 and 3), the clinical psychologists (candidates 4 and 5), and the community
psychologists (candidate 2).
In Figure 3(b), we plot the corresponding parameter distributions that are learned via
maximum likelihood. There are three relative ranking distributions, each corresponding to a
political party, as well as two interleaving distributions (one for the interleaving of research
and clinical psychologists, and one for the interleaving of the community psychologist and all
remaining candidates). Since each parameter distribution is constrained to sum to 1, there
are a total of 11 free parameters.
2.2 Model Estimation
In this paper we estimate riﬄe independent models based on the methods introduced in our
earlier work. Given the hierarchial structure of a model, the maximum likelihood parameter
estimates of a hierarchical riﬄe independent model are straightforward to compute via fre-
quency estimates. But how to estimate the correct structure of a model is a more challenging
problem. The key insight lies in noticing that if two subsets A and B are riﬄe independent,
then for any i ∈A and j, k ∈B, the independence relation σ(i) ⊥(σ(j) < σ(k)) must hold.
Our structure learning algorithms operate by hunting for these ‘tripletwise’ independence
relations within the data. We defer interested readers to the details in (Huang & Guestrin,
2012).
496

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
Note that in our earlier work, we assumed that our algorithms have access to a dataset
consisting of i.i.d. full rankings provided by users. In the current work, we will relax our
assumptions by allowing for users to provide partially ranked data. One assumption through-
out, however, is that each user has a full ranking in mind over the items. In particular, our
current work does not address the incomplete ranking problem, in which users might not
have seen all of the items (we discuss possible extensions to the incomplete ranking setting
in Section 9.
3. Decomposable Observations
Given a prior distribution, h, over rankings and an observation O, Bayes rule tells us that
the posterior distribution, h(σ|O), is proportional to L(O|σ) · h(σ), where L(O|σ) is the
likelihood function. This operation of conditioning h on an observation O is typically com-
putationally intractable since it requires multiplying two n! dimensional functions, unless
one can exploit structural decompositions of the problem. In this section, we describe a de-
composition for a certain class of likelihood functions over the space of rankings in which the
observations are ‘factored’ into simpler parts. When an observation O is decomposable in
this way, we show that one can eﬃciently condition a riﬄe independent prior distribution on
O. For simplicity in this paper, we focus primarily on subset observations whose likelihood
functions encode membership with some subset of rankings in Sn.
Deﬁnition 7 (Subset observations). A subset observation O is a binary observation whose
likelihood is proportional to the indicator function of some subset of Sn — i.e.,
L(O|σ) =
 1
if σ ∈O
0
otherwise .
As a running example, we will consider the class of ﬁrst place observations throughout
the chapter (we will consider far more general observation models in later sections). The ﬁrst
place observation O =“Corn is ranked ﬁrst”, for example, is associated with the collection of
rankings placing the item Corn in ﬁrst place (O = {σ : σ(Corn) = 1}). We are interested in
computing the posterior h(σ|σ ∈O). Thus in the ﬁrst place scenario, we are given a voter’s
top choice and we would like to infer his preferences over the remaining candidates.
Given a partitioning of the item set Ωinto two subsets A and B, it is sometimes possible
to decompose (or factor) a subset observation involving items in Ωinto smaller subset obser-
vations involving A, B and the interleavings of A and B independently. Such decompositions
can often be exploited for eﬃcient inference.
Example 8.
• Consider the ﬁrst place observation
O = “Corn is ranked ﬁrst”,
which can be decomposed into two independent observations — an observation on the
relative ranking of Vegetables, and an observation on the interleaving of Vegetables and
Fruits:
497

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
– OA = “Corn is ranked ﬁrst among Vegetables”,
– OA,B = “First place is occupied by a Vegetable”.
To condition on O in this case, one updates the relative ranking distribution over
Vegetables (A) by zeroing out rankings of vegetables which do not place Corn in ﬁrst
place, and updates the interleaving distribution by zeroing out interleavings which do
not place a Vegetable in ﬁrst place, then normalizes the resulting distributions.
• An example of a nondecomposable observation is the observation
O = “Corn is in third place”.
To see that O does not decompose (with respect to Vegetables and Fruits), it is enough
to notice that the interleaving of Vegetables and Fruits is not independent of the relative
ranking of Vegetables. If, for example, an element σ ∈O interleaves A (Vegetables)
and B (Fruits) as τAB(σ) = A|B|A|B, then since σ(Corn) = 3, the relative ranking
of Vegetables is constrained to be φA(σ) = Peas|Corn. Since the interleavings and
relative rankings are not independent, we see that O cannot be decomposable.
Formally, we use riﬄe independent factorizations to deﬁne decomposability with respect
to a hierarchy H of the item set.
Deﬁnition 9 (Decomposability). Given a hierarchy H over the item set, a subset ob-
servation O decomposes with respect to H if its likelihood function L(O|σ) factors riﬄe
independently with respect to H.
When subset observations and the prior decompose according to the same hierarchy, we
can show (as in Example 8) that the posterior also decomposes.
Proposition 10. Let H be a hierarchy over the item set. Given a prior distribution h and
a subset observation O which both decompose with respect to H, the posterior distribution
h(σ|O) also factors riﬄe independently with respect to H.
Proof. Denote the likelihood function corresponding to O by L (in this proof, it does not
matter that O is assumed to be a subset observation — the result holds for arbitrary
likelihoods).
We use induction on the size of the item set n = |Ω|. The base case n = 1 is trivially
true. Next consider the general case where n > 1. The posterior distribution, by Bayes rule,
can be written h(σ|O) ∝L(σ) · h(σ). There are now two cases. If H is a leaf node, then
the posterior h′ trivially factors according to H, and we are done. Otherwise, L and h both
factor, by assumption, according to H = (HA, HB) in the following way:
L(σ) = mL(τAB(σ))·fL(φA(σ))·gL(φB(σ)), and h(σ) = mh(τAB(σ))·fh(φA(σ))·gh(φB(σ)).
Multiplying and grouping terms, we see that the posterior factors as:
h(σ|O) = [mL · mh](τAB(σ)) · [fL · fh](φA(σ)) · [gL · gh](φB(σ)).
To show that h(σ|O) factors with respect to H, we need to demonstrate (by Deﬁnition 5)
that the distributions [fL ·fh] and [gL ·gh] (after normalizing) factor with respect to HA and
498

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
HB, respectively. Since fL and fh both factor according to the hierarchy HA by assumption
and |A| < n since H is not a leaf, we can invoke the inductive hypothesis to show that the
posterior distribution, which is proportional to fL · fh must also factor according to HA.
Similarly, the distribution proportional to gL · gh must factor according to HB.
4. Complete Decomposability
The condition of Proposition 10, that the prior and observation must decompose with re-
spect to exactly the same hierarchy, is a suﬃcient one for eﬃcient inference, but it might at
ﬁrst glance seem so restrictive as to render the proposition useless in practice. To overcome
this limitation of “hierarchy speciﬁc” decomposability, we explore a special family of obser-
vations (which we call completely decomposable) for which the property of decomposability
does not depend speciﬁcally on a particular hierarchy, implying in particular that for these
observations, eﬃcient inference is always possible (provided that eﬃcient representation of
the prior distribution is also possible).
To illustrate how an observation can decompose with respect to multiple hierarchies over
the item set, consider again the ﬁrst place observation O =“Corn is ranked ﬁrst”. We argued
in Example 8 that O is a decomposable observation. Notice however that decomposability
for this particular observation does not depend on how the items are partitioned by the
hierarchy. Speciﬁcally, if instead of Vegetables and Fruits, the sets A = {Corn, Apples} and
B = {Peas, Oranges} are riﬄe independent, a similar decomposition of O would continue
to hold, with O decomposing as an observation on the relative ranking of items in A (“Corn is
ﬁrst among items in A”), and an observation on the interleaving of A and B (“First place is
occupied by some element of A”).
To formally capture this notion that an observation can decompose with respect to
arbitrary underlying hierarchies, we deﬁne complete decomposability:
Deﬁnition 11 (Complete decomposability). We say that a subset observation O is com-
pletely decomposable if it decomposes with respect to every possible hierarchy over the item
set Ω. We denote the collection of all possible completely decomposable (subset) observa-
tions as C. See Figure 4 for an illustration of the set C.
Conceptually, completely decomposable observations correspond to indicator functions
that are “as riﬄe independent as possible”. Complete decomposability is a guarantee for an
observation O that one can always exploit any available factorized structure of the prior
distribution in order to eﬃciently condition on O.
Proposition 12. Let H be any binary hierarchy over the item set. Given a prior h which
factorizes with respect to H, and a completely decomposable observation O, the posterior
h(σ|O) also decomposes with respect to H.
Proof. Proposition 12 follows as a simple corollary to Proposition 10.
Example 13. The simplest example of a completely decomposable observation is the uni-
form observation Ounif = SΩ, which includes all possible rankings and corresponds to a
uniform indicator function δunif over rankings. Given any hierarchy H, δunif can be shown
to decompose riﬄe independently with respect to H, where each factor is also uniform, and
hence Ounif is completely decomposable.
499

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
H1
H2
H3
H6
H5
H4
Completely 
Decomposable 
Observations
Figure 4: A diagram illustrating the collection of completely decomposable observations, C.
Each shaded region (labeled Hi) above represents the family of subset observations
over Sn which decompose with respect to the hierarchy Hi. The collection C can be
seen as the intersection over all such shaded regions, and subset observations which
lie inside of this intersection are ones for which conditioning can be performed in
linear time (in the number of model parameters).
The uniform observation is of course not particularly interesting in the context of Bayesian
inference, but on the other hand, given the stringent conditions in Deﬁnition 11, it is not
obvious that nontrivial completely decomposable observations can even exist. Nonetheless,
there do exist nontrivial examples (such as the ﬁrst place observations), and in the next
section, we exhibit a rich and general class of completely decomposable observations.
5. Complete Decomposability of Partial Ranking Observations
In this section we discuss the mathematical problem of fully characterizing the class of
completely decomposable observations. Our main contribution in this section is to show
that completely decomposable observations correspond precisely to partial rankings of the
item set.
Partial rankings.
We begin our discussion by introducing partial rankings, which allow
for items to be tied with respect to a ranking σ by ‘dropping’ verticals from the vertical bar
representation of σ.
Deﬁnition 14 (Partial ranking observation). Let Ω1, Ω2,. . . , Ωr be an ordered collection
of subsets which partition Ω(i.e., ∪iΩi = Ωand Ωi ∩Ωj = ∅if i ̸= j). The partial ranking
observation3 corresponding to this partition is the collection of rankings which rank items
3. As remarked by Ailon (2007), we note that “The term partial ranking used here should not be confused
with two other standard objects: (1) Partial order, namely, a reﬂexive, transitive anti-symmetric binary
500

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
in Ωi before items in Ωj if i < j. We denote this partial ranking as Ω1|Ω2| . . . |Ωr and say
that it has type γ = (|Ω1|, |Ω2|, . . . , |Ωr|). We denote the collection of all partial rankings
(over n items) as P.
Each partial ranking as deﬁned above can be viewed as a coset of the subgroup Sγ =
Sγ1 × Sγ2 × · · · × Sγr. Given the type γ and any full ranking π ∈SΩ, there is only one
partial ranking of type γ containing π, thus we will therefore equivalently denote the partial
ranking Ω1|Ω2| . . . |Ωr as Sγπ, where π is any element of Ω1|Ω2| . . . |Ωr. Note that this coset
notation allows for multiple rankings σ to refer to the same partial ranking Sγσ.
The space of partial rankings as deﬁned above captures a rich and natural class of
observations. In particular, partial rankings encompass a number of commonly occurring
special cases, which have traditionally been modeled in isolation, but in our work (as well
as recent works such as Lebanon & Laﬀerty, 2003; Lebanon & Mao, 2008) can be used in a
uniﬁed setting.
Example 15. Partial ranking observations include:
• (First place, or Top-1 observations): First place observations correspond to partial
rankings of type γ = (1, n −1). The observation that “Corn is ranked ﬁrst” can be
written as Corn|Peas,Apples,Oranges.
• (Top-k observations): Top-k observations are partial rankings with type γ = (1, . . . , 1, n−
k). These generalize the ﬁrst place observations by specifying the items mapping to the
ﬁrst k ranks, leaving all n −k remaining items implicitly ranked behind. For example,
the observation that “Corn is ranked ﬁrst and Peas is ranked second” can be written as
Corn|Peas|Apples,Oranges.
• (Desired/less desired dichotomy): Partial rankings of type γ = (k, n−k) correspond to
a subset of k items being preferred or desired over the remaining subset of n−k items.
For example, partial rankings of type (k, n−k) might arise in approval voting in which
voters mark the subset of “approved” candidates, implicitly indicating disapproval of the
remaining n −k candidates.
• (Ratings): Finally, partial rankings can come in the form of rating data where, for
example, restaurants are rated as, ⋆, ⋆⋆, or ⋆⋆⋆. A corresponding partial ranking
would thus “tie” restaurants that are rated with the same number of stars, while ranking
restaurants with more stars above restaurants with fewer stars.
• (Trivial observations): Partial rankings of type γ = (n) refer to trivial observations
whose likelihood functions are uniform on the entire space of rankings, SΩ. The trivial
observation for rankings of the item set Ω= {Corn, Peas, Apples}, for example, can
simply be written simply as Corn, Peas, Apples.
To show how partial ranking observations decompose, we will exhibit an explicit factor-
ization with respect to a hierarchy H over items. For simplicity, we begin by considering the
single layer case, in which the items are partitioned into two leaf sets A and B. Our factor-
ization depends on the following notions of consistency of relative rankings and interleavings
with a partial ranking.
relation; and (2) A ranking of a subset of Ω[which we discuss in Section 9 as incomplete rankings]. In
search engines, for example, although only the top-k elements of Ωare returned, the remaining n −k
are implicitly assumed to be ranked behind [and therefore, search engines return partial rankings].”
501

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
Deﬁnition 16 (Restriction consistency). Given a partial ranking Sγπ = Ω1|Ω2| . . . |Ωr and
any subset A ⊂Ω, we deﬁne the restriction of Sγπ to A as the partial ranking on items in
A obtained by intersecting each Ωi with A. Hence the restriction of Sγπ to A is:
[Sγπ]A = Ω1 ∩A|Ω2 ∩A| . . . |Ωr ∩A.
Given a ranking, σA of items in A, we say that σA is consistent with the partial ranking
Sγπ if σA is a member of the restriction of Sγπ to A, [Sγπ]A.
Deﬁnition 17 (Interleaving consistency). Given an interleaving τAB of two sets A, B which
partition Ω, we say that τAB is consistent with a partial ranking Sγπ = Ω1| . . . |Ωr (with
type γ) if the ﬁrst γ1 entries of τAB contain the same number of As and Bs as Ω1, and the
second γ2 entries of τAB contain the same number of As and Bs as Ω2, and so on. Given a
partial ranking Sγπ, we denote the collection of consistent interleavings as [Sγπ]AB.
For example, consider the partial ranking
Sγπ = Corn, Apples|Peas, Oranges,
which places a single vegetable and a single fruit in the ﬁrst two ranks, and a single vegetable
and a single fruit in the last two ranks. Alternatively, Sγπ partially speciﬁes an interleaving
AB|AB. The full interleavings A|B|B|A and B|A|B|A are consistent with Sγπ (by dropping
vertical lines) while A|A|B|B is not consistent (since it places two vegetables in the ﬁrst two
ranks).
Using the notions of consistency with a partial ranking, we show that partial ranking
observations are decomposable with respect to any binary partitioning (i.e., single layer
hierarchy) of the item set.
Proposition 18 (Single layer hierarchy). For any partial ranking observation Sγπ and any
binary partitioning of the item set (A, B), the indicator function of Sγπ, δSγπ, factors riﬄe
independently as:
δSγπ(σ) = mAB(τAB(σ)) · fA(φA(σ)) · gB(φB(σ)),
(5.1)
where the factors mAB, fA and gB are the indicator functions for consistent interleavings
and relative rankings, [Sγπ]AB, [Sγπ]A and [Sγπ]B, respectively.
The single layer decomposition of Proposition 18 can be turned into a recursive decom-
position for partial ranking observations over arbitrary binary hierarchies, which establishes
our main result. In particular, given a partial ranking Sγπ and a prior distribution which
factorizes according to a hierarchy H, we ﬁrst condition the topmost interleaving distribu-
tion by zeroing out all parameters corresponding to interleavings which are not consistent
with Sγπ, and normalizing the distribution. We then need to condition the subhierarchies
HA and HB on relative rankings of A and B which are consistent with Sγπ, respectively.
Since these consistent sets, [Sγπ]A and [Sγπ]B, are partial rankings themselves, the same
algorithm for conditioning on a partial ranking can be applied recursively to each of the
subhierarchies HA and HB. To be precise, we show that:
Theorem 19. Every partial ranking is completely decomposable (P ⊂C).
502

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
prcondition (Prior hprior, Hierarchy H, Observation Sγπ = Ω1|Ω2| . . . |Ωr)
if isLeaf(H) then
forall σ do
hpost(σ) ←
 hprior(σ)
if σ ∈Sγπ
0
otherwise
;
Normalize (hpost) ;
return (hpost);
else
forall τ do
mpost(τ) ←
 mprior(τ)
if τ ∈[Sγπ]AB
0
otherwise
;
Normalize (mpost) ;
f(φA) ←prcondition (fprior, HA, [Sγπ]A) ;
g(φB) ←prcondition (gprior, HB, [Sγπ]B) ;
return (mpost, fpost, gpost);
Algorithm 1: Pseudocode for prcondition, an algorithm for recursively conditioning a hi-
erarchical riﬄe independent prior distribution on partial ranking observations. See Deﬁnitions 16
and 17 for [Sγσ]A, [Sγσ]B, and [Sγσ]AB. The runtime of prcondition is O(n · |H|), where |H|
is the number of model parameters. Input: All parameter distributions of the prior hprior repre-
sented in explicit tabular form, and an observation Sγπ in the form of a partial ranking. Output:
All parameter distributions of the posterior hpost represented in explicit tabular form.
Since the proof of Theorem 19 is fairly straight forward given the form of the factoriza-
tion (Equation 5.1), it is deferred to the Appendix. As a consequence of Theorem 19 and
Proposition 12, conditioning on partial ranking observations can be performed eﬃciently.
See Algorithm 1 for details on our recursive conditioning algorithm.
What is the running time complexity of conditioning on a partial ranking? The recursion
of Algorithm 1 operates on each parameter distribution once, setting the probabilities of
the interleavings or relative rankings in each such distribution to either zero or not, then
normalizing. To decide whether to zero out a probability or not, one must check a partial
ranking for consistency against either an interleaving or relative ranking, which requires at
most O(n) time. Therefore, in total, Algorithm 1 requires O(n · |H|) time, where |H| is
the total number of model parameters. Notice that the complexity of conditioning depends
linearly on the complexity of the prior — whenever the prior distribution can be compactly
represented, eﬃcient inference for partial ranking observations is also possible. As we have
stated in Section 2, |H| can in general scale exponentially in n, but for thin chain models,
in which the number of items factored out of the model at each stage is never more than
a small constant k, verifying interleaving or relative ranking consistency can be performed
in constant time, implying that the conditioning operation is linear in the number of model
parameters, and guaranteed to be polynomial in n.
Example 20. In this example, we consider conditioning the APA distribution from Ex-
ample 6 on the observation O that “Candidate 3 is ranked in ﬁrst place,” which can also
be represented as the partial ranking O = 3|1, 2, 4, 5. Recall that candidate 3 was Charles
Kiesler, who was a research psychologist.
In Figure 5(a) we show again the structure and parameters of the prior distribution for
the APA election data, highlighting in particular the interleavings and relative rankings which
503

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
σ
fD(σ)
1|3
.50
3|1
.50
σ
fE(σ)
4|5
.48
5|4
.52
σ
fC(σ)
2
1.00
τ
mD,E(τ)
D|D|E|E
.28
D|E|D|E
.12
D|E|E|D
.12
E|D|D|E
.14
E|D|E|D
.12
E|E|D|D
.22
τ
mB,C(τ)
C|B|B|B|B
.14
B|C|B|B|B
.19
B|B|C|B|B
.25
B|B|B|C|B
.25
B|B|B|B|C
.18
(a) Structure and parameters of the prior distri-
bution (with consistent relative rankings and in-
terleavings highlighted).
σ
fD(σ)
1|3
0
3|1
1.00
σ
fE(σ)
4|5
.48
5|4
.52
σ
fC(σ)
2
1.00
τ
mD,E(τ)
D|D|E|E
.54
D|E|D|E
.23
D|E|E|D
.23
E|D|D|E
0
E|D|E|D
0
E|E|D|D
0
τ
mB,C(τ)
C|B|B|B|B
0
B|C|B|B|B
.22
B|B|C|B|B
.29
B|B|B|C|B
.29
B|B|B|B|C
.21
(b) Structure and parameters of the posterior dis-
tribution after conditioning.
Figure 5: Example of conditioning the APA hierarchy (from Example 6) on the ﬁrst place
observation that “Candidate 3 is ranked in ﬁrst place”.
are consistent with O. For example, of the possible interleavings of research psychologists
(D) with clinical psychologists (E), the interleavings that are consistent with O are those
which rank a research psychologist ﬁrst among the research and clinical psychologists. There
are therefore only three consistent interleavings: D|D|E|E, D|E|D|E, and D|E|E|D.
Conditioning on O sets all relative rankings and interleavings which are not consistent
with O to zero and normalizes each resulting parameter distribution. The resulting riﬄe
independent representation of the posterior distribution is shown in Figure 5(b).
5.1 An Impossibility Result
It is interesting to consider what completely decomposable observations exist beyond partial
rankings. One of our main contributions is to show that there are no such observations.
Theorem 21 (Converse of Theorem 19). Every completely decomposable observation takes
the form of a partial ranking (C ⊂P).
Together, Theorems 19 and 21 form a signiﬁcant insight into the nature of rankings,
showing that the notions of partial rankings and riﬄed independence are deeply connected.
In fact, our result shows that it is even possible to deﬁne partial rankings via complete
decomposability!
As a practical matter, Theorem 21 shows that there is no algorithm based on simple
multiplicative updates to the parameters which can exactly condition on observations which
do not take the form of partial rankings. The computational complexity of conditioning on
observations which are not partial rankings remains open. We conjecture that approximate
inference approaches may be necessary for eﬃciently handling more complex observations.
504

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
5.2 Proof of the Impossiblity Result (Theorem 21)
We now turn to proving Theorem 21. Since this proof is signiﬁcantly longer and less obvious
than the proof for its converse (Theorem 19), we sketch the main ideas that drive the proof
here and refer interested readers to details in the Appendix.
Recall that the deﬁnition of the linear span of a set of vectors in a vector space is the
intersection of all linear subspaces containing that set of vectors. To prove Theorem 21, we
introduce analogous concepts of the span of a set of rankings.
Deﬁnition 22 (rspan and pspan). Let X ⊂Sn be any collection of rankings. We deﬁne
pspan(X) to be the intersection of all partial rankings containing X. Similarly, we deﬁne
rspan(X) to be the intersection of all completely decomposable observations containing X.
More formally,
pspan(X) =
\
Sγσ:X⊂Sγσ
Sγσ,
and
rspan(X) =
\
O:X⊂O, O∈C
O.
For example, if X = {Corn|Peas|Apples, Apples|Peas|Corn}, it can be checked that
the only partial ranking of all three items containing both items of X is the entire set itself.
Thus pspan(X) = Corn, Peas, Apples.
Our proof strategy is to establish two claims: (1) that the pspan of any set is always
a partial ranking, and (2) that in fact, the rspan and pspan of a set X are exactly the
same sets.
Since claim (1) is a fact about partial rankings and does not involve riﬄed
independence, we defer all related proofs to the Appendix. Thus we have:
Lemma 23. For any X ⊂Sn, pspan(X) is a partial ranking.
Proof. See Appendix.
The following discussion will instead sketch a proof of claim (2). We ﬁrst show, however,
that Theorem 21 must hold if it is indeed true that claims (1) and (2) hold.
Proof. (of Theorem 21): Given some O ∈C, we want to show that O ∈P.
By claim
(2), rspan(O) = pspan(O).
Since O is an element of C, however, we also have that
O = rspan(O), and thus that O = pspan(O). Finally Lemma 23 (claim (2)) guarantees
that pspan(O) is a partial ranking, and so we conclude that O ∈P.
We now proceed to establish the claim that rspan(X) = pspan(X).
The following
proposition lists several basic properties of the rspan that we will use in several of the
proofs. They all follow directly from deﬁnition so we do not write out the proofs.
Proposition 24.
I. (Monotonicity) For any X, X ⊂rspan(X).
II. (Subset preservation) For any X, X′ such that X ⊂X′, rspan(X) ⊂rspan(X′).
III. (Idempotence) For any X, rspan(rspan(X)) = rspan(X).
One inclusion of our proof that rspan(X) = pspan(X) follows directly from the fact
that P ⊂C (Theorem 19):
505

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
formPspan(X)
X0 ←X; t ←0;
while ∃Sγπ, Sγ′π′ ∈Xt which disagree on the relative ordering of items a1, a2 do
Xt ←∅;
foreach Sγσ ∈Xt do
Add any partial ranking obtained by deleting a vertical bar from Sγσ between items
a1 and a2 to Xt;
t ←t + 1;
return (any element of Xt) ;
Algorithm 2: Pseudocode for computing pspan(X). formPspan(X) takes a set of partial
rankings (or full rankings) X as input and outputs a partial ranking. This algorithm iteratively
deletes vertical bars from elements of X until they are in agreement. Note that it is not necessary
to keep track of t, but we do so here to ease notation in the proofs. Nor is this algorithm the most
direct way of computing pspan(X), but again, it simpliﬁes the proof of our main theorem.
Lemma 25. For any subset of orderings, X, rspan(X) ⊂pspan(X).
Proof. Fix a subset X ⊂Sn and let π be any element of rspan(X). We would like to show
π to be an element of pspan(X). Consider any partial ranking Sγσ ∈P which covers X
(i.e., σ′ ∈Sγσ for all σ′ ∈X). We want to see that π ∈Sγσ. By Theorem 19, P ∈C,
and therefore, Sγσ ∈C. Since π ∈rspan(X), and σ′ ∈Sγσ for all σ′ ∈X, we conclude,
by deﬁnition of rspan, that π ∈Sγσ. Since this holds for any partial ranking covering X,
π ∈pspan(X).
What remains is the task of establishing the reverse inclusion:
Proposition 26. For any subset of orderings, X, rspan(X) ⊃pspan(X).
To prove Proposition 26, we consider the problem of computing the partial ranking span
(pspan) of a given set of rankings X. In Algorithm 2, we show a simple procedure based
on iteratively ﬁnding rankings in X which disagree on the pairwise ranking of two items,
and replacing those rankings by a partial ranking in which a vertical bar between those two
elements have been removed. We show that this algorithm provably outputs the correct
result.
Proposition 27. Given a set of rankings X as input, Algorithm 2 outputs pspan(X).
Proof. See Appendix.
As a ﬁnal step before being able to prove Proposition 26, we prove the following two
technical lemmas which relate the computation of the pspan in Algorithm 2 to riﬄed in-
dependence, and really form the heart of our argument. In particular, for a completely
decomposable observation O ∈C, Lemma 28 below shows how a ranking contained in O
can “force” other rankings to also be contained in O.
Lemma 28. Let O ∈C and suppose there exist π1, π2 ∈O which disagree on the relative
ranking of items i, j ∈Ω. Then the ranking obtained by swapping the relative ranking of
items i, j within any π3 ∈O must also be contained in O.
506

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
Proof. Let h be the indicator distribution corresponding to the observation O.
We will
show that swapping the relative ranking of items i, j in π3 will result in a ranking which is
assigned nonzero probability by h, thus showing that this new ranking is contained in O.
Let A = {i, j} and B = Ω\A. Since O ∈C, h must factor riﬄe independently according
to the partition (A, B). Thus,
h(π1) = m(τAB(π1)) · f(φA(π1)) · g(φB(π1)) > 0, and
h(π2) = m(τAB(π2)) · f(φA(π2)) · g(φB(π2)) > 0.
Since π1 and π2 disagree on the relative ranking of items in A, this factorization implies in
particular that both f(φA = i|j) > 0 and f(φA = j|i) > 0. Since h(π3) > 0, it must also
be that each of m(τAB(π3)), f(φA(π3)), and g(φB(π3)) have positive probability. We can
therefore swap the relative ranking of A, φA, to obtain a new ranking which has positive
probability since all of the terms in the decomposition of this new ranking have positive
probability.
Lemma 29 below provides conditions under which removing a vertical bar from one of
the rankings in X will not change the support of a completely riﬄe independent distribu-
tion. To illustrate with an example, consider a completely decomposable observation O
which contains the partial ranking Sγπ = Corn, Peas|Apples, Oranges as a subset. What
Lemma 29 guarantees is that, if, in addition, there exists any element ˜π in O which disagrees
with Sγπ on the relative ordering of, say, Peas and Oranges, then in fact the partial ranking
Sγ′π′ ⊂= Corn, Peas, Apples, Oranges (with the bar removed from Sγπ) must also be a
subset of O. Formally,
Lemma 29. Let Sγπ = Ω1| . . . |Ωi|Ωi+1| . . . |Ωk be a partial ranking on item set Ω, and
Sγ′π′ = Ω1| . . . |Ωi ∪Ωi+1| . . . |Ωk, the partial ranking in which the sets Ωi and Ωi+1 are
merged. Let a1 ∈∪i
j=1Ωj and a2 ∈∪k
j=i+1Ωj. If O is any element of C such that Sγπ ⊂O
and there additionally exists a ranking ˜π ∈O which disagrees with Sγπ on the relative
ordering of a1, a2, then Sγ′π′ ⊂O.
Proof. The key strategy in our proof of Lemma 29 is to argue that large subsets of rankings
must be contained in a completely decomposable observation O by decomposing rankings
into transpositions and invoking the technical lemma from above (Lemma 28) repeatedly.
See the Appendix for details.
We now can use Lemma 29 to show that the reverse inclusion of Proposition 26 also
holds, establishing that the two sets rspan(X) and pspan(X) are in fact equal and thereby
proving the desired result, that C ⊂P.
Proof. (of Proposition 26) At each iteration t, Algorithm 2 produces a set of partial rankings,
Xt. We denote the union of all partial rankings at time t as ˜Xt ≡S
Sγσ∈Xt Sγσ. Note that
˜X0 = X and ˜XT = pspan(X). The idea of our proof will be to show that at each iteration
t, the following set inclusion holds: rspan( ˜Xt) ⊂rspan( ˜Xt−1). If indeed this holds, then
507

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
after the ﬁnal iteration T, we will have shown that:
pspan(X) = ˜XT ,
(Proposition 27)
⊂rspan( ˜XT ),
(Monotonicity, Proposition 24)
⊂rspan( ˜X0),
(since rspan( ˜Xt) ⊂rspan( ˜Xt−1), shown below),
⊂rspan(X)
( ˜X0 = X, see Algorithm 2)
which would prove the Proposition.
It remains now to show that rspan( ˜Xt) ⊂rspan( ˜Xt−1). We claim that ˜Xt ⊂rspan( ˜Xt−1).
Let σ ∈˜Xt. If σ ∈˜Xt−1, then since ˜Xt−1 ⊂rspan( ˜Xt−1), we have σ ∈rspan( ˜Xt−1) and
the proof is done.
Otherwise, σ ∈˜Xt\ ˜Xt−1.
In this second case, we use the fact that
at iteration t, the vertical bar between Ωi and Ωi+1 was deleted from the partial rank-
ing Sγπ = Ω1| . . . |Ωi|Ωi+1| . . . |Ωk (which is a subset of ˜Xt−1) to form the partial ranking
Sγ′π′ = Ω1| . . . |Ωi ∪Ωi+1| . . . |Ωk. (which is a subset of ˜Xt). Furthermore, in order for the
vertical bar to have been deleted by the algorithm, there must have existed some partial
ranking (and therefore some full ranking ω′) that disagreed with Sγπ on the relative order-
ing of items a1, a2 on opposite sides of the bar. Since σ ∈˜Xt\ ˜Xt−1 we can assume that
σ ∈Sγ′π′.
We now would like to apply Lemma 29. Note that for any O ∈C such that ˜Xt−1 ⊂O,
we also have Sγπ ⊂O, since Sγπ ⊂˜Xt−1. An application of Lemma 29 then shows that
Sγ′π′ ⊂O and therefore that σ ∈O.
We have shown in fact that σ ∈O holds for any observation O ∈C such that ˜Xt−1 ⊂
O, and therefore taking the intersection of supports over all O ∈C, we see that ˜Xt ⊂
rspan( ˜Xt−1). Taking the rspan of both sides yields:
rspan( ˜Xt) ⊂rspan(rspan( ˜Xt−1)),
(Subset preservation, Proposition 24)
⊂rspan( ˜Xt−1).
(Idempotence, Proposition 24)
5.3 Going Beyond Subset Observations
Though we have stated all of our results so far for subset observations, we now comment
on what our theory would look like if we had considered general likelihood functions. In
order to avoid confusion, we here refer to a more general class of functions that we call com-
pletely decomposable functions, instead of the completely decomposable subset observations
of Deﬁnition 11.
Deﬁnition 30. A function h : Sn →R is called a completely decomposable function if it
factors riﬄe independently with respect to every hierarchy over the item set Ω. We denote
the collection of all possible completely decomposable functions as eC.
As we discuss, C and eC are very nearly the same. It is quite simple to restate Theorem 19
with respect to the general case of completely decomposable functions:
Theorem. Every partial ranking indicator function is a completely decomposable function.
508

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
Unfortunately, the proof of its converse (Theorem 21) does not easily generalize, and
instead can only be used to show that the support ({σ ∈Sn : h(σ) > 0}) of every completely
decomposable function is a partial ranking. It is natural, however, to suspect that a full
converse does indeed exist — that every completely decomposable function is proportional to
the indicator function of some partial ranking. In fact, this suspected converse only almost
holds. We have:
Theorem. If h is any completely decomposable function supported on a partial ranking
Sγπ = Ω1| . . . |Ωr where |Ωi| ̸= 2 for all i = 1, . . . , r, then h is proportional to the indicator
function on Sγπ.
Proof. See Appendix.
Example 31. For completely decomposable functions, it is not possible to do away with the
assumption that |Ωi| ̸= 2 for all i. As an example, the function deﬁned below as:
h(σ) =



2/3
if σ = Corn|Peas|Apples
1/3
if σ = Peas|Corn|Apples
0
otherwise
,
is supported on the partial ranking Sγπ = Corn, Peas|Apples (where |Ω1| = 2), and is not
proportional to any indicator function (i.e., it is not uniform on rankings which are not
assigned positive probability).
However, it is still possible to show that h is a completely decomposable function. To
prove so, it is necessary to establish only three things: that {Corn, Peas} and {Apples}
are riﬄe independent, that {Corn, Apples} and {Peas} are riﬄe independent, and that
{Peas, Apples} and {Corn} are riﬄe independent. For example, with respect to the parti-
tioning into sets A = {Corn, Apples} and B = {Peas}, we see that
h(σ) = m(τAB(σ)) · f(φA(σ)) · g(φB(σ)),
where:
m(τAB) =



2/3
if τAB = A|B|A
1/3
if τAB = B|A|A
0
if τAB = A|A|B
,
f(σA) =
 1
if σ{AC} = A|C
0
otherwise
,
g(σB) = 1.
Therefore, when |Ωi| = 2, it is possible to have completely decomposable functions which
are not uniform on their supports.
5.4 Conditioning on Noisy Observations
We conclude this section with a remark on handling noise in observations. While we have
assumed in this paper that observed partial rankings are always consistent with a user’s
underlying full ranking, there are situations in which one may wish to model a noisier
setting, where the partial rankings may be misreported with some small probability.
A
natural model that accounts for noise, for example, might be:
L(O|σ) =
 1 −ε
if σ ∈O
ε
|O|−1
otherwise .
(5.2)
509

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
If a prior distribution factorizes with respect to a hierarchy H, then conditioning on the
noisy likelihood of Equation 5.2 results in a posterior distribution which can be written
as a weighted mixture of the prior distribution and the posterior that would have resulted
from conditioning on a noise-free observation.
While each component of this posterior
distribution factorizes with respect to H, the mixture itself does not factor in general (and
should not factor according to our theory). As a result, iteratively conditioning on multiple
partial rankings according to the noisy likelihood function above would quickly lead to
an unmanageable number of mixture components. We therefore believe that approximate
inference methods for conditioning on multiple noisy partial ranking observations is a fruitful
area for further research.
6. Model Estimation from Partially Ranked Data
In many ranking based applications, datasets are predominantly composed of partial rank-
ings rather than full rankings due to the fact that for humans, partial rankings are typically
easier and faster to specify. In addition, many datasets are heterogeneous, containing partial
ranking of diﬀerent types. For example, in the American Psychological Assoication as well
as the Irish House of Parliament elections, voters are allowed to specify their top-k candidate
choices for any value of k (see Figures 7(a) and 7(b)). In this section we use the eﬃcient
inference algorithm proposed in Section 5 for estimating a riﬄe independent model from
partially ranked data. Because estimating a model using partially ranked data is typically
considered to be more diﬃcult than estimating one using only full rankings, a common prac-
tice (e.g., see Huang & Guestrin, 2010) has been to simply ignore the partial rankings in a
dataset. The ability of a method to incorporate all of the available data however, can lead
to signiﬁcantly improved model accuracy as well as wider applicability of that method. In
this section, we propose the ﬁrst eﬃcient method for estimating the structure and parameters
of a hierarchical riﬄe independent model from heterogeneous datasets consisting of arbitrary
partial ranking types. Central to our approach is the idea that given someone’s partial pref-
erences, we can use the eﬃcient algorithms developed in the previous section to infer his full
preferences and consequently apply previously proposed algorithms which are designed to
work with full rankings.
6.1 Censoring Interpretations of Partial Rankings
The model estimation problem for full rankings is stated as follows. Given i.i.d. training
examples σ(1), . . . , σ(m) (consisting of full rankings) drawn from a hierarchical riﬄe indepen-
dent distribution h, recover the structure and parameters of h.
In the partial ranking setting, we again assume i.i.d. draws, but that each training
example σ(i) undergoes a censoring process producing a partial ranking consistent with σ(i).
For example, censoring might only allow for the ranking of the top-k items of σ(i) to be
observed. While we allow for arbitrary types of partial rankings to arise via censoring, we
make a common assumption that the partial ranking type resulting from censoring σ(i) does
not depend on σ(i) itself.
510

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
6.2 Algorithm
We treat the model estimation from partial rankings problem as a missing data problem. As
with many such problems, if we could determine the full ranking corresponding to each ob-
servation in the data, then we could apply algorithms which work in the completely observed
data setting. Since full rankings are not given, we utilize an Expectation-Maximization (EM)
approach in which we use inference to compute a posterior distribution over full rankings
given the observed partial ranking. In our case, we then apply the algorithms from Huang
and Guestrin (2010, 2012) which were designed to estimate the hierarchical structure of a
model and its parameters from a dataset of full rankings.
Given an initial model h and a collection of training examples {O(1), O(2), . . . , O(m)}
consisting of partial rankings, our EM-based approach alternates between the following two
steps until convergence is achieved.
• (E-step): For each observation, O(i) = Sγ(i)π(i), in the training examples, we use
inference to compute a posterior distribution over the full ranking σ that could have
generated O(i) via censoring, h(σ|O(i) = Sγ(i)π(i)). Since the observations take the
form of partial rankings and are hence completely decomposable, we use the eﬃcient
algorithms in Section 5 to perform the E-step.
• (M-step): In the M-step, one maximizes the expected log-likelihood of the training
data with respect to the model. When the hierarchical structure of the model has been
provided, or is known beforehand, our M-step can be performed using standard meth-
ods for optimizing parameters. When the structure is unknown, we use a structural
EM approach, which is analogous to methods from the graphical models literature for
structure learning from incomplete data (Friedman, 1997, 1998).
Unfortunately, the (riﬄed independence) structure learning algorithm of Huang and
Guestrin (2010) is unable to directly use the posterior distributions computed from
the E-step. Instead, observing that sampling from riﬄe independent models can be
done eﬃciently and exactly (as opposed to, for example, MCMC methods), we simply
sample full rankings from the posterior distributions computed in the E-step and
pass these full rankings into the structure learning algorithm of Huang and Guestrin
(2010). The number of samples that are necessary, instead of scaling factorially, scales
according to the number of samples required to detect riﬄed independence (which
under mild assumptions is polynomial in n, Huang & Guestrin, 2010).
7. Related Work
Rankings and permutations have recently become an active area of research in machine
learning due in part to the hinge role that they play in information retrieval and preference
elicitation. Algorithms such as the RankSVM (Joachims, 2002) and RankBoost (Freund,
Iyer, Schapire, & Singer, 2003), for example, have been successful in the large scale ranking
problems that appear in web search. The main aims of our work diﬀer from these web
scale settings however — instead of seeking a single ‘optimal’ ranking with respect to some
objective function, we seek an understanding of a large collection of rankings via density
estimation. In the following, we outline two major lines of research which have inﬂuenced
our work.
511

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
7.1 Additive and Multiplicative Decompositions
Our paper builds in particular upon a thread of recent work on tractable models for per-
mutation data based on function decompositions. Kondor, Howard, and Jebara (2007) and
Huang, Guestrin, and Guibas (2008, 2009) considered additive decompositions of a distribu-
tion into a weighted sum of Fourier basis functions. These papers show that low-frequency
Fourier assumptions can often be eﬀective for coping with the representational complexity
of working with distributions over permutations. They show in particular that conditioning
prior distributions on the ‘low frequency’ likelihood functions that often arise in multiobject
tracking problems can be performed especially eﬃciently.
Unfortunately, low frequency assumptions are not as applicable for distributions deﬁned
over rankings, and to address ranking problems speciﬁcally,
Huang and Guestrin (2009,
2010) introduced the concept of riﬄed independence as a useful generalization of prob-
abilistic independence for rankings.
Using multiplicative decompositions based on riﬄed
independence, we showed that it is possible to learn the hierarchical structure of a model
given a fully ranked dataset. While our previous papers on the topic of riﬄed independence
focused more on problems related to eﬃciently representing distributions, the main focus of
our current paper lies in eﬃcient reasoning/inference and tackling human task complexity
by considering partial rankings.
It is interesting to note that while it is natural and eﬃcient to condition a Fourier based
representation on low-frequency observations (involving a very small number of items) such
as O =“Alice is in third place”, a multiplicative decomposition based on riﬄed independence
would not be able to eﬃciently condition on the same observation. On the other hand,
multiplicative decompositions allow us to condition on top-k observations eﬃciently (inde-
pendently of the size of k), whereas top-k observations would be diﬃcult to handle in a
Fourier theoretic setting (except for very small k).
7.2 Mallows Models
Our work also ﬁts into a larger body of research about the well known Mallows distribution
over rankings, parameterized by:
h(σ; φ, σ0) ∝φ−dτ(σ,σ0),
(7.1)
where the function dτ refers to the Kendall’s tau distance metric on rankings. A Mallows
distribution (Equation 7.1) can always be shown to be a special case of a hierarchical rif-
ﬂe independent model in which items are sequentially factored out of the model one by
one (Huang, 2011) (see Figure 6).
Mallows models (as well as other similar distance based models) have the advantage
that they can compactly represent distributions for very large n, and admit conjugate prior
distributions (Meila, Phadnis, Patterson, & Bilmes, 2007). Estimating parameters has been
a popular problem for statisticians — recovering the optimal σ0 from data is known as the
consensus ranking or rank aggregation problem and is known to be NP-hard (Bartholdi,
Tovey, & Trick, 1989). Many authors have focused on approximation algorithms instead.
Like Gaussian distributions, Mallows models tend to lack ﬂexibility, and so Lebanon and
Mao (2008) propose a nonparametric model of ranked (and partially ranked) data based
on placing weighted Mallows kernels on top of training examples, which, as they show, can
512

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
{Corn,Peas,Apples,Oranges,Doughnuts}
{Corn}
{Peas,Apples,Oranges,Doughnuts}
{Peas}
{Apples,Oranges,Doughnuts}
{Apples}
{Oranges,Doughnuts}
{Oranges}
{Doughnuts}
Figure 6: A Mallows model always factors according to what we refer to as a ‘chain’
structure in which items are factored out one by one.
The Mallows distribu-
tion over ﬁve items from our food item set with mode (or central ranking) at
σ0 = Corn|Peas|Apples|Oranges|Doughnuts, for example, must factor accord-
ing to the above hierarchical structure.
realize a far richer class of distributions, and can be learned eﬃciently. However, they do
not address the inference problem, and it is not immediately clear in many Mallows models
papers whether one can eﬃciently perform inference operations like marginalization and
conditioning in such models. Riﬄe independent models, on the other hand, encompass a
class of distributions which is both rich as well as interpretable, and additionally, we have
identiﬁed precise conditions under which eﬃcient conditioning is possible (the conditions
being that the observations take the form of partial rankings).
There are several recent works to model partial rankings using Mallows based models.
Busse, Orbanz, and Buhmann (2007) learned ﬁnite mixtures of Mallows models from top-
k data (also using an EM approach). Lebanon and Mao (2008), as we have mentioned,
developed a nonparametric model based on Mallows models which can handle arbitrary
types of partial rankings. In both settings, a central problem is to marginalize a Mallows
model over all full rankings which are consistent with a particular partial ranking. To do so
eﬃciently, both papers rely on the fact (ﬁrst shown in Fligner & Verducci, 1986) that this
marginalization step can be performed in closed form. This closed form equation of Fligner
and Verducci (1986), however, can be seen as a very special case of our setting since Mallows
models can always be shown to factor riﬄe independently according to a chain structure.
Speciﬁcally, to compute the sum over rankings which are consistent with a partial ranking
Sγσ, it is necessary to condition on Sγσ, and to compute the normalization constant of the
resulting function. The conditioning step can be performed using the methods that we have
described in this paper, and the normalization constant can be computed by multiplying
the normalization constant of each factor of the hierarchical decomposition. Thus, instead
of resorting to the more complicated mathematics of inversion combinatorics, our theory of
complete decomposability oﬀers a simple conceptual way to understand why Mallows models
can be conditioned eﬃciently on partial ranking observations.
513

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
Finally in recent related work, Lu and Boutilier (2011) considered an even more general
class of observations based on DAG (directed acyclic graph) based observations in which
probabilities of rankings which are not consistent with a DAG of relative ranking relations
are set to zero.
Lu and Boutilier show in particular that the conditioning problem for
their DAG-based class of observations is #P-hard. They additionally propose an eﬃcient
rejection sampling method for performing probabilistic inference within the general class
of DAG observations and prove that the sampling method is exact for the class of partial
rankings that we have discussed in this paper.
8. Experiments
In this section, we demonstrate our method for learning hierarchical riﬄe independent mod-
els from partial rankings on simulated data as well as real datasets taken from diﬀerent
domains. In all experiments, we initialize distributions to be uniform, and do not use ran-
dom restarts.
8.1 Datasets
In addition to roughly 5000 full rankings, the APA dataset has over 10,000 top-k rankings of
5 candidates. In previous work, we had used only the full rankings of the APA data (Huang
& Guestrin, 2010, 2012), but now we are able to use the entire dataset. Figure 7(a) plots,
for each k ∈{1, . . . , 5}, the number of ballots in the APA data of length k.
Likewise, the Meath dataset (Gormley & Murphy, 2007) which was taken from the 2002
Irish Parliament election has over 60,000 top-k rankings of 14 candidates. As with the APA
data, we had used only the full rankings of the Meath data in previous work, but here we use
the entire dataset. Figure 7(b) plots, for each k ∈{1, . . . , 14}, the number of ballots in the
Meath data of length k. In particular, note that the vast majority of ballots in the dataset
consist of partial rather than full rankings, with over half of the electorate preferring to list
only their favorite three or four candidates. We can run inference (Algorithm 1) on over
5000 top-k examples for the Meath data in 10 seconds on a dual 3.0 GHz Pentium machine
with an unoptimized Python implementation. Using ‘brute force’ inference, we estimate
that the same job would require roughly one hundred years.
We extracted a third dataset from a database of searchtrails collected by White and
Drucker (2007), in which browsing sessions of roughly 2000 users were logged during 2008-
2009. In many cases, users are unlikely to read articles about the same news story twice,
and so it is often possible to think of the order in which a user reads through a collection
of articles as a top-k ranking over articles concerning a particular story/topic. The ability
to model visit orderings would allow us to make long term predictions about user browsing
behavior, or even recommend ‘curriculums’ over articles for users. We ran our algorithms on
roughly 300 visit orderings for the eight most popular posts from www.huffingtonpost.com
concerning ‘Sarah Palin’, a popular subject during the 2008 U.S. presidential election. Since
no user visited every article, there are no full rankings in the data and thus there does not
even exist the option of learning using only the subset of full rankings.
514

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
1
2
3
4
5
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
number of candidates
number of votes
(a) APA election data
2
4
6
8
10 12
14
k
number of votes
0
20,000
10,000
(b) Irish election data
Figure 7: Histograms of top-k ballot lengths in the APA and Irish election datasets. Whereas
the majority of the electorate provided full rankings in the APA election data
(probably due to the fact that there were only ﬁve candidates), the vast majority
of voters in the Irish election data provided only their top-3 or top-4 choices.
{12345}
{2345}
{2}
{345}
{1}
{45}
{3}
(a) Structure
learned
using
only the subset of full rankings
(out of the 300 given training
examples)
{12345}
{2345}
{2}
{345}
{1}
{34}
{5}
(b) Structure learned using all
training examples after 1 itera-
tion of EM
{12345}
{1345}
{2}
{13}
{45}
Clinical
Community 
psychologists
Research
(c) Structure learned using all
training examples after struc-
tural convergence (3 iterations)
Figure 8: Structure learning with a subset of the APA dataset (300 rankings, randomly
sampled, including both full and partial rankings).
8.2 APA Structure Learning Results
Due to the unordinarily large number of full rankings in the APA data, the gains made by
additionally using partially ranked data are insigniﬁcant. To better illustrate the beneﬁts of
partial rankings, we subsampled a dataset of 300 rankings (including both full and partial
rankings) and present results with this smaller dataset. Performing structure learning using
only the full rankings of these 300 training examples (consisting of roughly 100 examples),
one obtains the structure in Figure 8(a), which can be seen to not match the ‘correct’
structure of Figure 3(a) which was learned using 5000 full rankings. Figures 8(b) and 8(c)
515

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
x 104
EM
Flat-EM
Uniform 
Fill-In
test log-likelihood
(a) Test set log-likelihood comparison
of our EM approach against the FlatEM
and Uniform Fill-In methods.
0
5
10
15
20
EM
Flat-EM Uniform 
Fill-In
training time (seconds)
(b) Training time comparison of our
EM approach against the FlatEM and
Uniform Fill-In methods.
-6
-5.8
-5.6
-5.4
-5.2
-5
x 104
k>0
k>1
k>2
k>3
test log-likelihood
(c) Test set log-likelihoods,
training
only with top-t rankings with t larger
than a ﬁxed k.
1
1.5
2
2.5
k>0
k>1
k>2
k>3
training time (seconds)
(d) Training times, training only with
top-t rankings with t larger than a ﬁxed
k.
Figure 9: APA experimental results — each experiment repeated with 200 bootstrapped
resamplings of the data
plot the results of our EM algorithm with the former displaying the resulting structure after
just a single EM iteration and the latter the result after structural convergence, which occurs
by the third iteration, showing that our method can learn the ‘correct’ structure given just
300 training examples.
We compared our EM algorithm against two alternative baseline approaches that we
refer to in our plots as FlatEM and Uniform Fill-in. The FlatEM algorithm is the same as
the EM algorithm above except for two details: (1) it performs conditioning exhaustively
instead of exploiting the factorized model structure, and (2) it performs the M-step without
sampling. The Uniform Fill-in approach treats every top-k ranking in the training set as
a uniform collection of votes for all of the full rankings consistent with that top-k ranking,
and is accomplished by using just one iteration of our EM algorithm.
In Figure 9(a) we plot test set loglikelihoods corresponding to each approach, with EM
and FlatEM having almost identical results and both performing much better than the
Uniform Fill-in approach. On the other hand, Figure 9(b), which compares running times
of the three approaches, shows that FlatEM can be far more costly (for most datasets, it
cannot even be run in a reasonable amount of time).
516

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
{0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7}
{5}
{0,1,2,3,4,6,7}
{0,1,2,3,4,7}
{6}
{7}
{0,1,2,3,4}
{0,2,3}
{1,4}
Log likelihood: -818.6579
1st iteration
(a)
{0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7}
{5}
{0,1,2,3,4,6,7}
{0,1,2,3,4,7}
{7}
{6}
{0,1,2,3,4}
{0,2,3}
{1,4}
Log likelihood: -769.2369
2nd iteration
(b)
{0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7}
{5}
{0,1,2,3,4,6,7}
{0,1,2,3,4,7}
{7}
{1,4,6}
{0,2,3}
Log likelihood: -767.2760
3rd iteration
(c)
Figure 10: Iterations of Structure EM for the Sarah Palin data with structural changes at
each iteration highlighted in red. Structural convergence occurs after just three
iterations. Note that this structure was discovered using only visit orders, and
that no text information from pages was incorporated in the learning process.
This ﬁgure is best viewed in color.
To verify that partial rankings do indeed make a diﬀerence in the APA data, we plot
the results of estimating a model from the subsets of APA training data consisting of top-k
rankings with length larger than some ﬁxed k. Figures 9(c) and 9(d) show the log-likelihood
and running times for k = 0, 1, 2, 3 with k = 0 being the entire training set and k = 3
being the subset of training data consisting only of full rankings.
As our results show,
including partial rankings does indeed help on average for improving test log-likelihood
(with diminishing returns).
8.3 Structure Discovery with EM with Larger n.
Our experiments have led to several observations about using EM for learning with partial
rankings. First, we observe that typical runs converge to a ﬁxed structure quickly, with no
more than three EM iterations. Figure 10 shows the progress of EM on the Sarah Palin
data, whose structure converges by the third iteration.
As expected, the log-likelihood
increases at each iteration, and we remark that the structure becomes more interpretable
— for example, the leaf set {0, 2, 3} corresponds to the three posts about Palin’s wardrobe
before the election, while the posts from the leaf set {1, 4, 6} were related to verbal gaﬀes
made by Palin during the campaign. Notice that this structure is discovered purely using
data about visit orders and that no text information was used in our experiments.
517

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
# of EM iterations before 
convergence
k
(a)
0
250
1000
4000
16000 64000
-2.88
-2.84
-2.8
-2.76
-2.72 x 104
test log-likelihood
# of partial rankings in training set 
(in addition to full rankings)
[Lebanon & Mao, ‘08]
EM with 
decomposable 
conditioning
(b)
Figure 11: (a): Number of EM iterations required for convergence if the training set only
contains rankings of length longer than k. (b): Density estimation from synthetic
data. We plot test loglikelihood when learning from 343 full rankings and between
0 and 64,000 additional partial rankings.
-4.9
-4.8
-4.7
-4.6
-4.5
x 10
4
-1.34
-1.32
-1.3
-1.28
-1.26
x 10
5
Ours
Ours
[LM’08]
[LM’08]
Ours
Ours
[LM’08]
[LM’08]
5000 training 
examples
25000 training 
examples
Full only
Mixed (Full+Partial)
Full only
Mixed (Full+Partial)
Test log-likelihood 
Figure 12: Density estimation from small (5000 examples) and large subsets (25000 exam-
ples) of the Meath data. We compare our method against the work by Lebanon
and Mao (2008) in two settings: (1) training on all available data and (2) training
on the subset of full rankings.
Secondly, the number of EM iterations required to reach convergence in log-likelihood
depends on the types of partial rankings observed. We ran our algorithm on subsets of
the Meath dataset, each time training on m = 2000 rankings all with length larger than
518

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
some ﬁxed k. Figure 11(a) shows the number of iterations required for convergence as a
function of k (with 20 bootstrap trials for each k).
We observe fastest convergence for
datasets consisting of almost-full rankings and slowest convergence for those consisting of
almost-empty rankings, with almost 25 iterations necessary if one trains using rankings of
all types.
Finally we remark that the model obtained after the ﬁrst iteration of EM is
interesting and can be thought of as the result of pretending that each voter is completely
ambivalent regarding the n −k unspeciﬁed candidates.
8.4 The Value of Partial Rankings
We now verify again with larger n that using partial rankings in addition to full rankings
allows us to achieve better density estimates. We ﬁrst learned models from synthetic data
drawn from a hierarchy, training using 343 full rankings plus varying numbers of partial
ranking examples (ranging between 0-64,000). We repeat each setting with 20 bootstrap
trials, and for evaluation, we compute the log-likelihood of a testset with 5000 examples.
For speed, we learn a structure H only once and ﬁx H to learn parameters for each trial.
Figure 11(b), which plots the test log-likelihood as a function of the number of partial
rankings made available to the training set, shows that we are indeed able to learn more
accurate distributions as more and more data in the form of partial rankings are made
available.
8.5 Comparing to a Nonparametric Model
Comparing the performance of riﬄe independent models to other approaches was not pos-
sible in previous work since we had not been able to handle partial rankings. Using the
methods developed in our current paper, however, we compare riﬄe independent models
with the state-of-the-art nonparametric estimator of Lebanon and Mao (2008) (to which we
hereby refer as the LM08 estimator) on the same data (setting their regularization parame-
ter to be C =1,2,5, or 10 via a validation set). Figure 11(b) shows (naturally) that when the
data are drawn synthetically from a riﬄe independent model, then our EM method signiﬁ-
cantly outperforms the LM08 estimator. We remark that in theory, the LM08 is guaranteed
to catch up in performance (under appropriate conditions) given enough training examples.
For the Meath data, which is only approximately riﬄe independent, we trained on subsets
of size 5,000 and 25,000 (testing on remaining data). For each subset, we evaluated our EM
algorithm for learning a riﬄe independent model against the LM08 estimator when (1)
using only full ranking data, and (2) using all data. As before, both methods do better
when partial rankings are made available.
For the smaller training set, the riﬄe independent model performs as well or better than
the LM’08 estimator. For the larger training set of 25,000, we see that the nonparametric
method starts to perform slightly better on average, the advantage of a nonparametric
model being that it is guaranteed to be consistent, converging to the correct model given
enough data. The advantage of riﬄe independent models, however, is that they are simple,
interpretable, and can highlight global structures hidden within the data.
519

Huang, Kapoor & Guestrin
9. Future Directions
There remain several possible extensions to the current work.
We list a few such open
questions and extensions in the following.
9.1 Inference with Incomplete Rankings
We have shown in this paper that one can exploit riﬄed independence structure to condition
on an observation if and only if it takes the form of a partial ranking. While the space of
partial rankings is both rich and useful in many settings, it does not cover an important class
of observations: that of incomplete rankings, which are deﬁned to be a ranking (or partial
ranking) of a subset of the itemset Ω. For example, Theorem 21 shows that the condition-
ing problem for pairwise observations of the form “Apples are preferred over Bananas” is
nondecomposable. Note that top-k rankings are considered to be “complete” rankings since
they implicitly rank all other items in the last n −k positions.
How then, can we tractably condition on incomplete rankings? One possible approach
is to convert to a Fourier representation using the methods from (Huang & Guestrin, 2012),
then conditioning on a pairwise ranking observation using the Fourier domain conditioning
algorithm proposed in (Huang et al., 2008). This Fourier domain approach would be use-
ful if one were particularly interested in low-order marginal probabilities of the posterior
distributions.
When the Fourier approach is not viable, another option may be to assume that the
posterior distribution takes on a particular riﬄe independent structure (in the same way
that mean ﬁeld methods from the graphical models literature would assume a factorized
posterior). The research question of interest is: which hierarchical structure should be used
for the purposes of approximating the posterior?
9.2 Reexamining Data Independence Assumptions
In this paper, we have assumed throughout that training examples are independent and
identically distributed.
However in practice these are not always safe assumptions as a
number of factors can impact the validity of both. For example, in an internet survey in
which a user must perform a series of preference ranking tasks in sequence, a concern is that
the user’s prior ranking tasks may bias the results of his future rankings.
Another source of bias lies in the reference ranking that may be displayed, in which the
user is asked to rearrange items by ‘dragging and dropping’. On the one hand, showing
everyone the same reference ranking may bias the resulting data. But on the other hand,
showing every user a diﬀerent reference ranking may mean that the training examples are
not exactly identically distributed.
Yet another form of bias lies in the partial ranking types that are reported in data. To
formulate our EM algorithm, we have assumed that a user’s preferences does not inﬂuence
whether he chooses to, say, report a full ranking instead of a top-3 ranking. In practice,
however, partial ranking types and user preferences are often correlated. In the Irish elec-
tions, for example, where there is typically only one Sinn Fein candidate, those who rank
Sinn Fein ﬁrst are typically more likely to have only reported their top-1 choice.
520

Efficient Inference With Partial Rankings
Understanding, identifying, and ﬁnally, learning in spite of the diﬀerent types of biases
that may occur in eliciting preference data remains a fundamental problem in ranking.
9.3 Probabilistic Modeling of Strategic Voting
It is interesting to consider the diﬀerences between the actual vote distributions considered in
this paper against the approximate riﬄe independent distributions. Take the APA dataset,
for example, in which the optimal approximation by a riﬄe independent hierarchy reﬂects
the underlying political coalitions within the organization. Upon comparison between the
approximation and the empirical distribution, however, some marked diﬀerences arise. For
example, the riﬄe independent approximation underestimates the number of votes obtained
by candidate 3 (a research psychologist) who ultimately won the election.
One possible explanation for the discrepancy may lie in the idea that voters tend to vote
strategically in APA elections, placing stronger candidates of opposing political coalitions
lower in the ranking, rather than revealing their true preferences. An interesting line of
future work lies in detecting and studying the presence of such strategic voting in election
datasets. Open questions include (1) verifying mathematically whether strategic voting does
indeed exist in, say, the APA election data, and (2) if so, why the strategic voting eﬀect is
not strong enough to overwhelm our riﬄed independence structure learning algorithms, and
(3) how strategic voting can manifest itself in partial ranking votes.
10. Conclusion
In probabilistic reasoning problems, it is often the case that certain data types suggest
certain distribution representations. For example, sparse dependency structure in the data
often suggests a Markov random ﬁeld (or other graphical model) representation (Friedman,
1997, 1998). For low-order permutation observations (depending on only a few items at a
time), recent work (Huang et al., 2009; Kondor, 2008) has shown that a Fourier domain
representation is appropriate.
For preference ranking scenarios, one must contend with
‘human task complexity’ — the diﬃculty involved for a human to rank a long list of items
and often leads to partially, instead of fully ranked data. In this paper, we have shown that
when data takes the form of partial rankings, then hierarchical riﬄe independent models are
a natural representation.
As with conjugate priors, we showed that a riﬄe independent model is guaranteed to
retain its factorization structure after conditioning on a partial ranking (which can be per-
formed in eﬃciently). Most surprisingly, our work shows that observations which do not
take the form of partial rankings are not amenable to simple multiplicative update based
conditioning algorithms. Finally, we showed that it is possible to learn hierarchical riﬄe
independent models from partially ranked data, signiﬁcantly extending the applicability of
previous work.
