PEAK: Explainable Privacy Assistant through
Automated Knowledge Extraction
Gonul Aycia,∗, Arzucan ¨Ozg¨urb, Murat S¸ensoyc, Pınar Yolumd
aComputer Engineering, Bogazici University, Turkey
bComputer Engineering, Bogazici University, Turkey
cAmazon Alexa AI, UK
dInformation and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University, The Netherlands
Abstract
In the realm of online privacy, privacy assistants play a pivotal role in empow-
ering users to manage their privacy effectively. Although recent studies have
shown promising progress in tackling tasks such as privacy violation detection
and personalized privacy recommendations, a crucial aspect for widespread
user adoption is the capability of these systems to provide explanations for
their decision-making processes. This paper presents a privacy assistant for
generating explanations for privacy decisions. The privacy assistant focuses
on discovering latent topics, identifying explanation categories, establishing
explanation schemes, and generating automated explanations. The gener-
ated explanations can be used by users to understand the recommendations
of the privacy assistant. Our user study of real-world privacy dataset of im-
ages shows that users find the generated explanations useful and easy to
understand. Additionally, the generated explanations can be used by privacy
assistants themselves to improve their decision-making. We show how this
can be realized by incorporating the generated explanations into a state-of-
the-art privacy assistant.
Keywords:
Privacy, explainability, personal assistant
∗Corresponding author

Preprint submitted to Elsevier
June 1, 2023
arXiv:2301.02079v2  [cs.AI]  31 May 2023

1. Introduction
Many of the computing systems we use today are facilitating and encour-
aging the sharing of information on a large scale. Billions of users on online
social networks (OSNs) are exchanging images, videos, and comments with
each other constantly. At the same time, we rely on the Internet of Things
(IoT) applications, such as smart home systems, for many everyday activ-
ities, which in return collect, store, and fuse our everyday data to provide
their services. On one hand, these systems have become extremely undeni-
ably beneficial, but on the other hand, people are finding it challenging to
manage their privacy while using them.
We understand privacy management as the task of handling who has
access to personal information, for what purposes, and in which context. It
includes protecting users from being adversely affected by information shared
about them, for example, information shared without their consent or aware-
ness on OSNs. Interestingly, the information that can violate a user’s privacy
can come from different sources and in different forms. It could be that users
post information about themselves that later causes them harm, such as los-
ing their job or being investigated due to controversial comments [31, 32]. Ad-
ditionally, others might post content about the user on the user’s profile page
without their knowledge or consent, such as tagging identifiable, geotagged
images [18].
The use of systems such as OSNs and IoT applications has become per-
vasive due to the provision of useful services, such as document sharing and
home entertainment, but users are increasingly concerned about their pri-
vacy and often self-censor or delete content after sharing [9]. The difficulty
in managing privacy is compounded by the discrepancy between users’ pref-
erences and their actual behavior [15], and the fact users must constantly
decide whether they want to share content or not. Due to the vast amount
of content, users often do not have the time to make informed decisions,
resulting in decision fatigue and making them prone to errors. Additionally,
various recent surveys conducted with users of online social networks indicate
that people do not even read the privacy policies that they accept [47, 1].
Privacy assistants can collaborate with users, offering valuable support
in the management of their privacy-related responsibilities [10, 8]. When
users engage in content sharing, thoughtful consideration regarding the in-
tended recipients and the required configuration of privacy settings becomes
essential [46]. Images are an important category amongst the various types
2

of content shared online. Recent research has focused on enabling users to
classify whether an image should be regarded as private or public [45]. This
classification can prove beneficial in preventing the unintentional sharing of
private images on OSNs. Given the personal and subjective nature of privacy,
where users’ perceptions of privacy may vary, it becomes imperative for an
assistant to deliver personalized responses concerning the privacy status of
images [19, 4]. To ensure the widespread acceptance of privacy assistants
among end users, establishing trust becomes crucial. One effective approach
to cultivate such trust is through the provision of explanations [30]. Conse-
quently, we tackle a novel challenge related to the interplay between explana-
tions and privacy: how can a privacy assistant explain the rationale behind
classifying a particular piece of content as either private or public?
This paper presents a privacy assistant PEAK that decides whether a
given image is private or not, and explains this decision to its user as well as
other privacy assistants. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first privacy
assistant that can explain why an image is considered private or public.
Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) suggests approaches that aid in
the comprehension of why and how a machine learning (ML) model arrives at
its prediction. There are various explanation methods with respect to visual
and textual explanations [40, 26, 25, 48]. For the image privacy prediction
task, an example of a visual explanation can be highlighting the most impor-
tant region in the image for the target class, whereas a textual explanation
can be a generated text such as “if a guitar had not been in the image, the
image would not have been public” [48]. A visual explanation can quickly
point out a potential privacy concern, however, it can be overwhelming for
users to understand underlying mechanisms since it may present many in-
tricate details [40, 26, 2, 12, 17]. Szymanski et al. [44] suggests that the
combination of visual and textual explanations improves understanding for
non-expert (without any software or domain knowledge) users. We propose
an explanation method that provides a visual representation accompanied
by a textual description.
PEAK utilizes automatically generated tags (descriptive keywords) of
images, explores latent topics from the tag sets, classifies images based on
image-topic associations, and ultimately generates human-understandable
explanations. An explanation involves presenting one or more topics related
to an image in a visual format, highlighting significant tags associating the
image to a certain topic, and providing a textual description detailing the
connections between the topics. PEAK derives these explanations from a
3

well-known image dataset for privacy where images are labeled as public or
private [50]. We perform a user study to gauge if participants actually find
the generated explanations useful and what factors of the explanation or the
image affect users’ understanding of the model decision. Furthermore, privacy
assistants may delegate some privacy decisions to their users to avoid failures
when they are uncertain. This generally improves the accuracy of privacy de-
cisions [4] but leads to increased cognitive overload for the user. An important
benefit of PEAK is that it enables privacy assistants to base their decisions
on explanations, resulting in fewer images to be delegated to users, thus re-
ducing the cognitive overload for users without compromising the accuracy
of privacy decisions. Minimizing extraneous cognitive load is important in
order to ensure sufficient cognitive resources are available for the remaining
delegated images [41]. Since the cognitive load of users increases with the
complexity of explanations and the number of topics, we are trading off the
comprehensibility for the expressiveness of the explanations in this work.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses our work
in relation to related work. Section 3 explains the mechanism of our privacy
assistant in detail. Section 4 develops our privacy assistant into a system that
can be readily used to explain the privacy labels of images. Section 5 presents
how to identify explanation categories and generate explanations. Section 6.1
evaluates our explanation model with a user study. Section 6.2 shows experi-
mental results of PEAK working in combination with privacy assistants. Fi-
nally, Section 7 concludes our work and outlines future directions.
2. Related Work
There are two bodies of research that are important for this work. The
first one is work on predicting whether an image is private or not (Section 2.1)
and the second one is work on explainability techniques (Section 2.2).
2.1. Image Privacy Prediction Approaches
In the literature, several studies on image privacy prediction make use
of descriptive keywords (tags) and visual features. Squicciarini et al. [43]
present a Tag-To-Protect (T2P) system that automatically recommends pri-
vacy policies based on the image tags. Their study shows that prediction
accuracy decreases when there are large tag sets and when the number of
tags per image increases. Tonge and Caragea [45] use deep visual semantics
(i.e. deep tags) and textual features (i.e. user tags) to develop a model that
4

predicts whether an image is private or public. Deep tags of images are the
top k predicted object categories extracted from pre-trained models. Using
user-created tags, they create deep visual features by adding highly corre-
lated tags to visual features extracted from the fully connected layer of the
pre-trained models. They use Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifiers with
pre-trained CNN architectures such as AlexNet, GoogLeNet, VGG-16, and
ResNet to extract features (tags). They find that a combination of user tags
and deep tags from ResNet with the top 350 correlated tags performs well
for privacy prediction, as adding the highly correlated tags improves predic-
tion performance. Kurtan and Yolum [19] propose an agent-based approach,
namely PELTE, which addresses the same problem with automatically gen-
erated image tags. The internal tag table stores the data of privacy labels
collected from images shared by the user. The external tag table stores the
data of images shared by the user’s friends. Their proposed system performs
well in predicting privacy, even though the personal assistant only has ac-
cess to a small amount of data. Ayci et al. [4] propose a personal privacy
assistant called PURE to preserve the privacy of its user. PURE is aware
of uncertainty by generating an uncertainty value for each prediction of a
given image, informing its user about it, and delegating decisions back to the
user if it is uncertain about its predictions. PURE is able to make personal-
ized predictions by using the personal data of its user. It is also risk-averse,
by incorporating the user’s risk of misclassification. Their experiments are
fruitful in analyzing the link between uncertainty and misclassification. They
show that PURE captures uncertainty well and performs better compared to
alternative models for quantifying uncertainty (i.e. Monte Carlo dropout [11]
and Deep Ensemble [20]). Although they demonstrate the success of using
descriptive keywords and visual features to predict image privacy, neither of
these approaches addresses capturing the explanations for the privacy pre-
dictions as we have done here. However, explaining the model predictions is
critical to understanding people’s privacy expectations and preferences. In
this study, we propose a novel methodology that uses descriptive keywords
to explore latent topics by topic modelling and provides explanation schemes
for predictions.
An important body of work uses taxonomies in classification. A taxonomy
categorizes content and user preferences based on certain characteristics and
attributes. It identifies important features and patterns in content. Orekondy
et al. [33] present a model for the privacy risk prediction task for images and
provide 68 privacy attributes such as nudity, passport and religion. Li et
5

al. [23] propose a method to find out what kind of visual content is pri-
vate. They develop a taxonomy with 28 categories such as nudity/sexual,
irresponsible to child and bad characters/unlawful/criminal. Zhao et al [51]
define a privacy taxonomy with 10 categories with the most commonly used
descriptive keywords for a certain category. For example, the descriptive key-
words of the category religion/culture include culture, religion, and spiri-
tual. Even though these studies propose inspiring taxonomies for privacy,
their approaches do not provide explanations for a particular image as to
why the image is labeled public or private, as we have done here.
2.2. Explanation approaches
Gilpin et al. [13] provide a broad perspective of explainable AI (XAI)
systems and identify three categories of approaches for providing explana-
tions in ML systems: processing, representation, and explanation-producing.
Processing involves emulating the data processing of an ML system to es-
tablish connections between input and output in order to justify emitted
choices. Representation refers to how the internal data structures and op-
erations of the network can be explained to gain insight into why confi-
dent choices are made. Explanation-producing refers to generating human-
understandable descriptions of the model’s behavior and decision-making
process. They suggest evaluating explanation-producing models by how well
they align with human expectations. The role of human evaluation in inter-
preting ML models is significant as it allows for assessing the reasonableness
of the explanations provided by the models. Riveiro and Thill [36] discuss
the need for human evaluations in the field of XAI, specifically about how
users interact with systems that generate explanations of AI systems. They
highlight a gap between user expectations and the explanations provided
by the system and suggest the need for more user-centered approaches to
designing explanations. A factual explanation provides information about
the reasons why a certain output was produced by an AI system, whereas
a counterfactual explanation suggests alternative outcomes that could have
occurred if the input to the system had been different. They find that fac-
tual explanations are appropriate when the system output aligns with user
expectations. However, when there is a mismatch between expectations and
output, neither factual nor counterfactual explanations are appropriate and
counterfactual explanations may not be sufficient on their own. The results
also suggest that the accuracy of the user’s mental model of the AI system
is connected to the effectiveness of the explanations provided and that fur-
6

ther exploration of the context and details of the global system model may
be useful in this regard. Langley [21] explores the concept of explainable
agency and its relationship with a normative and justified agency. The paper
emphasizes the importance of creating intelligent agents that are capable of
explaining their actions to humans in a way that aligns with human values
and norms. They suggest that this can be achieved by designing agents that
are able to reason about their own decisions and the reasons behind them,
and by providing explanations that are understandable and relevant to hu-
mans. The paper proposes a framework for developing such agents, which
involves incorporating normative principles into the agent’s decision-making
process and using explanations to justify the agent’s actions. They highlight
the importance of creating agents that are transparent, understandable, and
aligned with human values in order to ensure that humans can trust and
rely on them. Miller [29] examines studies of explainability within the scope
of philosophy, social and cognitive psychology, and cognitive science. Their
study provides various definitions of explainability, criteria for selecting ex-
planations, evaluating explanations, and useful insights for XAI. They define
the interpretability of a model as the degree to which the cause of a pre-
diction can be understood. In the context of AI, generating an explanation
that establishes a shared understanding of the decision-making process be-
tween an intelligent agent and a human observer is crucial. Justification is
provided by explaining why a decision is good. Arrieta et al. [3] provide an
overview of XAI by defining interpretability and explainability. They define
interpretability as the ability to explain meaning in a form that people can
understand. They associate explainability with an explanation as the inter-
face between a human and a decision-maker.
Interpretable Models: These models enhance the interpretability and trans-
parency of their decision-making processes. Linear Regression, Logistic Re-
gression, Decision Trees, Random Forest, and k-nearest neighbors provide
interpretable insights into their predictions. For instance, the Random For-
est model can be trained to predict whether a given image is public or private.
It enables us to trace and visualize the decision paths to understand which
features of the image had a major impact on privacy predictions.
While
this is important, since there can be thousands of features, it is not always
possible to understand the explanations.
Model-specific Methods: These explanation methods improve our under-
standing of how deep neural networks make decisions. The most popular
7

model-specific techniques include Saliency Map and Attention Map.
Si-
monyan et al. [40] propose methods for generating visualizations of Convolu-
tional Neural Networks (CNN) classification models trained on the ImageNet
dataset by utilizing numerical optimization of the input image. Even though
their proposed saliency map of a given image helps to identify the regions of
the image that are most discriminative with respect to the given class, it can
be limited in capturing all the important information that flows through a
deep neural network. Selvaraju et al. [38] present Gradient-weighted Class
Activation Mapping (Grad-CAM) method that generates visual explanations
for any CNN, regardless of its architecture. As a visual explanation for a
given image, Grad-CAM provides a heatmap that would have the greatest
impact on the output. Xiao et al. [49] propose a two-level attention model for
fine-grained classification tasks that can highlight discriminative regions at
different levels of abstraction in an image. The first level of attention involves
object-level filtering that selects relevant patches to feed into the classifier.
The second level of attention conducts part-level detection to detect the parts
of the classification. Since these methods are highly dependent on their archi-
tectures, their explanations cannot generalize well to different architectures
(i.e. not CNN). Additionally, the units of attention-based approaches are
not explicitly trained to provide human-understandable explanations. They
can be also vulnerable to adversarial examples, which have the potential to
deceive a model and flip the prediction (i.e. misclassification) by doing so.
Model-agnostic Methods: These explanation techniques can be applied
to any ML model, regardless of its architecture. Model-agnostic methods for
the binary classification task consider what features of the input have been
influential on the decision. Ribeiro et al. propose [35] the local interpretable
model-agnostic explanation model (LIME) that generates a new dataset con-
sisting of perturbed samples and the corresponding predictions of the black
box model. It then trains an interpretable model (e.g., Random Forest) on
this new dataset.
Lundberg et al.
[26] propose a model-agnostic feature
relevance explanation model (SHAP), that is based on a game theoretically
Shapley values [39]. This method computes the contribution of each feature
to the prediction output. Slack et al. [42] show that LIME is more prone to
being deceived compared to SHAP. LIME also may not be an appropriate
method for explaining image privacy predictions, as it may not be able to
effectively handle the complex relationships between features, where small
changes can have a big impact on the model’s predictions. Furthermore, the
8

method of perturbing the input used by LIME can be easily recognized by at-
tackers. On the other hand, SHAP explanations are based on Shapley values,
which can be difficult to interpret by non-expert users due to the highlighting
of the contributions of each feature. In addition, explanations may be more
difficult to understand when SHAP has a high-dimensional feature space.
Example-based Explanations: These explanations utilize specific exam-
ples from the dataset to understand how minor changes in a given image
would affect the model’s prediction and how the model made the predic-
tion for the image. Example-based explanations provide examples from the
dataset instead of displaying feature importance. Wachter et al. [48] propose
counterfactuals explanations that are a way of understanding the causal re-
lationship between inputs and the model’s predictions by simulating hypo-
thetical scenarios and analyzing how minor changes to the feature of a given
image affect the prediction. The conventional notion of “explanation” in the
AI literature involves explaining the internal state or logic of an algorithm
that leads to a decision, whereas counterfactual explanations focus on the ex-
ternal factors that led to that decision. This is a critical distinction since ML
algorithms can have millions of interrelated variables, making it difficult to
convey their behavior to non-expert users. Counterfactual explanations help
to interpret the predictions; however, multiple counterfactual explanations
can be generated for a given image. It can be challenging to decide which
one to use in this case.
Despite the fact that these methods can assist in providing explanations
for the model’s predictions, they can also encounter difficulties that can make
them unable to produce human-understandable explanations. For example,
explanations can include too many features or they may not be representative
of the model’s behavior.
An important work of explainability in conjunction with privacy, is by
Mosca and Such [30], where they develop an agent that uses computational
argumentation to resolve disputes and propose a text-based description of
the outcome of the argumentation, generated by the system. They suggest
a framework for generating explanations consisting of two types of explana-
tions: general and contrastive. A general explanation provides an overview of
the agent’s decision-making process, without providing specific details about
the reasons behind a particular decision. They are useful for giving users an
understanding of how the system works and what factors it considers when
making decisions. On the other hand, a contrastive explanation provides spe-
9

cific reasons for a particular decision and is intended to help users understand
how they might modify their behavior to achieve better outcomes. These
types of explanations are particularly useful for situations where the agent’s
decision might conflict with a user’s goals or preferences. While explaining
how the system operates is useful, that work does not provide an explanation
as to why a given piece of content is private or public. Our focus, on the
other hand, is on explaining to both end-users and personal assistants why a
given image can be considered public or private. PEAK is a model-agnostic
approach that can be applied to any ML model.
3. PEAK: Explainable Privacy Assistant
PEAK is a privacy assistant that explains privacy labels by generat-
ing human-understandable explanations. The generated explanations revolve
around topics (collections of related keywords) as these are intuitive and eas-
ier to understand for users. An image can belong to multiple topics with
varying degrees of relatedness, and these relationships can help understand
why an image is considered to be public or private. For end users, the most
important aspects of an explanation are simplicity and relevance. Hence, the
explanation is visual in nature and accompanied by a short explanatory text
describing the connections between the topics and the image. The explanation
is focused on the most important features of the image and associated topics,
rather than being an exhaustive analysis. In order to achieve this, only a sub-
set of the most relevant topics associated with an image are used to explain
why the image is classified as public or private. Ultimately, PEAK helps
OSN users by allowing them to understand why images have been identified
as private or public. Moreover, PEAK can aid privacy assistants in enhanc-
ing their performance on making privacy decisions (Section 6.2). Figure 1
shows the architecture of PEAK.
Figure 1: Architecture of PEAK
PEAK is composed of the following five stages:
10

1. The starting point for PEAK is a set of labeled public and private
images. The data could come from a user’s own history of personal
online images (i.e. both shared and not shared), or from a publicly
available dataset of labeled images.
2. The second stage involves assigning tags, i.e. descriptive keywords, to
each image. The generated tags are in plain language such as “tree”
or “baby”, and they can be provided by users themselves or generated
automatically by a tool such as Clarifai.
3. The next step is using the set of labeled and tagged images to perform
topic modelling, which is a technique used to extract latent (i.e. hid-
den) topics from textual information (i.e. the tags). Each image is as-
sociated with one or more topics and topics are constructed using two
criteria. First, tags within a single topic should be semantically related,
meaning images associated with the same topic should be described by
similar tags. Second, topics should be semantically distinct from each
other. In other words, there should not be too much overlap between
different topics. Finally, in order to make it easier to understand for the
user, we named the generated topics manually. For example, the topic
with the tags “tree”, “parks”, and “outdoors” was named Nature.
4. Once topics have been generated, the next stage involves training a
tree-based ML algorithm for binary image classification. In this case,
the generated topics serve as features of the images and the algorithm
uses image-topic relationships to predict whether a new image should
be classified as public or private. Additionally, the contributions of
each topic to the privacy decision (i.e. positive or negative effect) are
computed.
5. The final step is identifying explanation categories for images, which
essentially are image profiles with certain characteristics in terms of
topic contributions. For instance, there may be a single dominant topic
that pushes the prediction overwhelmingly in one direction. Based on
the topics’ contributions to privacy prediction, images are assigned to
one of four explanation categories we identified: Dominant, Opposing,
Collaborative, and Weak. Finally, for each explanation category, there
is a distinct textual and visual explanation pattern based on the image’s
topics and the relationships between topics.
11

For end users, it is important that any explanation generated by PEAK is
simple and easy to understand, i.e. no technical knowledge should be re-
quired. Ultimately, our aim is not to explain the technical process of the
classifier to the end user. Additionally, since many users do not actually
read long, complicated privacy policies, the explanation should be visually
understandable and supported by a short text.
Based on these constraints, we propose an explanation as to why an im-
age is considered public or private using a set of topics belonging to the
image. Each image can have one or more topics and these topics are shown
as a circle which is labeled with the topic name. Additionally, we identify
one or more tags linking this image to each topic and denote them in the
corresponding topic circle. The visual representation aims to explain that
the image is public or private because it is described by the displayed topics
and tags. Furthermore, the visualization is augmented with a short explana-
tory description using a predetermined language structure. The text is thus
supplementary and does not provide additional information.
(a) Image
(b) Generated Explanation
Figure 2: An example image annotated as private and its generated explanation by PEAK
Figure 2(a) displays an example of a private image. Figure 2(b) presents
the explanation generated by the PEAK method. The explanation shows the
image is classified as private because it is associated with topic Child and its
related tags. Whilst in this example only one topic is displayed, there can be
multiple topics contributing to the prediction. In that case, PEAK visually
represents only the most relevant topics and explains the relation between
these different topics.
12

4. Establishing Topics
We start walking through the steps outlined in Figure 1.
4.1. Generating Tags
To obtain our dataset of images (Step 1), we select a well-balanced sub-
set from the publicly available PicAlert dataset [50], which is widely used for
addressing the privacy prediction task in images [43, 45, 19, 4]. The PicAlert
dataset consists of Flickr images that have been labeled as either public or
private by a group of annotators. These annotations were provided by 81
users spanning an age range of 10 to 59 years and representing diverse back-
grounds. We consider an image as private if it has been labeled as such by at
least one annotator, and as public if all annotators have labeled it as public.
The subset we have chosen for our study comprises 32, 000 images, consisting
of 27, 000 Training images and 5, 000 Test images. In the subsequent stage of
our process, we utilize the Clarifai API1 in order to automatically generate a
set of 20 different tags for each image. The architecture of the general image
recognition model of Clarifai is convolutional neural networks such as Incep-
tionV2. Their model is trained on over 20 million images and uses 10, 000
concepts to identify objects in images and videos.
(a) Image
(b) Generated Tags
Figure 3: Example image and its generated tags by Clarifai
Figure 3(a) displays an example image and Figure 3(b) shows 20 different
tags generated by Clarifai. A qualitative assessment of the example image
shows it is captured well by the generated tags.
1https://clarifai.com/clarifai/main/models/general-image-recognition
13

4.2. Extracting Topics
Topic modelling is a technique that discovers latent topics within a col-
lection of textual information. It allows us to extract distinct topics from
an image’s generated tags. We employ the widely used Non-negative Ma-
trix Factorization (NMF) topic modelling technique [22] (Step 3). NMF is
an approximation to factorize a non-negative image-tag matrix X into non-
negative matrices W and H as illustrated in Figure 4. The W (features)
matrix denotes the degree to which an image belongs to a topic and the
H (components) matrix denotes the degree to which a tag belongs to each
topic. The W and H matrices are initialized randomly. The NMF algorithm
runs iteratively until it finds W and H matrices that minimize the Frobenius
norm of the matrix, that is, ∥X −W × H∥F. NMF is suitable for inter-
pretability (components are non-negative) and works better and faster for
short texts (a set of tags) compared to alternatives such as Latent Dirich-
let Allocation (LDA) [7]. In this study, we make use of the term weighting
method and we specifically employ the Term Frequency - Inverse Document
Frequency (TF-IDF) model to measure the presence of tags. TF-IDF allows
us to transform tags into numerical vectors in order to construct an image-tag
(X) matrix. We learn the tag vocabulary from the images and then trans-
form the images into a image-tag (X) TF-IDF matrix. Each row of the matrix
corresponds to an image, and each column represents a unique tag from the
images. The value in each cell of the matrix represents the TF-IDF weight
of the tag in the corresponding image. We build the NMF model for a given
number of topic (k) values, which generates an image-topic (W) matrix and
a topic-tag (H) matrix. Note that the number of topics k is an important
parameter to set, which we explain next.
Figure 4: Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) concept
14

4.3. Evaluation of Topics
Topics should be meaningful and interpretable for humans. One way of
realizing this is to ensure that the topics are coherent, which means topics
should be relatively different from each other (i.e. distinct) whilst images
within a certain topic should be described by similar keywords. Hence, we
can measure coherence based on two different criteria as follows:
(i) Intra-topic similarity: The average semantic similarity between all pairs
of the most associated N tags in the same topic. Hence, it is a mea-
sure of how similar a topic’s tags are to each other. For instance, the
most associated three tags with Topic Nature and Topic Child are
{tree, park, wood} and {child, baby, fun}, respectively. In our example,
both topics have high intra-topic similarity.
(ii) Inter-topic similarity: The average semantic similarity of the most as-
sociated N tags from different topics. Hence, it is a measure of how
much overlap there is between different topics’ tags. For example, the
associated tags with Topic Nature and Topic Child are clearly not over-
lapping, meaning they have a low inter-topic similarity.
We can evaluate the quality of the explored topics by calculating these two
measures of similarity. For good topic modelling, we want to 1) maximize
the intra-topic similarity, thus ensuring the topic is well-defined and the
associated tags are closely related to each other, and 2) minimize inter-topic
similarity, thereby ensuring the topics are distinct and the tags within each
topic are not closely related to the tags in the other topics.
In the NMF model, we set the number of topics based on the model’s
performance in terms of coherence. While calculating intra-topic and inter-
topic similarity, each tag is represented by word embedding vectors, namely
word2vec [27]. We represent tags as 300−dimensional vectors of the word2vec
model trained on Google News when calculating coherence2. The similarity
between two tag vectors is measured by the cosine similarity metric. Se-
mantically similar tags tend to be close to each other in the semantic space.
Intra-topic similarity values for 10 and 20 topics are 0.18 and 0.20, respec-
tively. Note that the cosine-similarity values between two vectors for this
model are generally low. For instance, the similarity between “person” and
2https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/
15

(a) Nature
(b) Child
(c) Performance
(d) Business
(e) Fashion
Figure 5: Tag clouds for Topics Nature, Child, Performance, Business, and Fashion
“people” is 0.51 and “tree” and “park” is 0.23. Hence, k = 20 is better in
terms of intra-topic similarity as the tags within a given topic are more re-
lated to each other. Additionally, inter-topic similarity values for 10 and 20
topics are 0.48 and 0.43, respectively. In this case, k = 20 is again a better
fit as the lower value indicates more distinct, i.e. better segregated, topics.
Thus, we set the number of topics to 20.
The topics extracted from NMF are nameless and thus not quickly un-
derstandable. Hence, we name the 20 topics manually since the names will
be used in the generated explanations. Figure 5 shows tag clouds of the top
20 tags for five different topics. The font size indicates relative significance,
i.e. the most descriptive tag is displayed as the largest. For instance, the top
five descriptive tags of the topic Nature are {tree, park, wood, nature, outdoors}.
Figure 6: Percentage of occurrence of each topic in private and public images
16

5. Generating Explanations from Topics
We use the Random Forest algorithm to make image privacy predictions
(Step 4). The question may arise whether certain topics might be more often
associated with public or private images. If so, that may make it relatively
easy to explain the privacy predictions. Figure 6 shows the share of each
topic associated with private and public images. Some topics such as People
are associated more frequently with the private class whereas others like Sky
are more often associated with the public class. However, despite some topics
being more frequently associated with a specific class, the topics ultimately
do not have an explicit class to which they belong. Therefore, a topic by itself
does not directly signal a certain class, and as such it is not straightforward
to generate an explanation for the decision by simply looking at a topic’s
class.
5.1. Computing the Contribution of Topics using the TreeExplainer Model
The TreeExplainer [25] is the implementation of the SHAP (SHapley
Additive exPlanations) approach [26], which can be used to understand how
an ML model arrived at its prediction. The TreeExplainer model provides
the computation of local explanations based on Shapley values in polynomial
time. The model computes the contribution of each feature to a prediction,
taking into account the interactions between features using tree-based models
such as the Random Forest algorithm. In this study, each feature corresponds
to a topic. Not all topics have an equal contribution to a class prediction: a
topic can push the prediction higher (positive SHAP value) or lower (negative
SHAP value), and their magnitude can differ. An ML model concludes its
prediction by taking into account the contribution of each topic. This is
useful in interpreting how the model works. One way to create explanations
would be to display all these values to the user. However, as the number
of topics increases, showing them all to the end user would be cumbersome
and confusing. Therefore, we start with the TreeExplainer output and then
interpret it to make it understandable for the end user.
We are interested in identifying topics that are useful in explaining the
content of the image at hand. For example, for a given image, a large positive
SHAP value might be assigned to a topic because the image is related to
that topic. But, it might also be the case that a large negative value is
assigned to a topic that is unrelated to the image. The latter shows the
model made a decision based on the fact that the image did not exhibit the
17

properties associated with this topic. While useful to understand the model,
this information is difficult to understand and may be unnecessary to show
to the user. Hence, we need to carefully decide how to use the SHAP values
when creating the explanations.
5.2. Identifying Explanation Categories of Images
Our privacy assistant generates human-understandable explanations by
first reducing the number of topics in the TreeExplainer model output. We
bring structure to the explanations through the use of categories, thereby
reducing complexity and making it easier to understand for users. We make a
distinction between explanations generated for end users and those for agents
as they have different needs. For end users, our explanation consists of two
components, namely a short, explanatory text and a visual representation of
the most important topics associated with the image. Utilizing both a textual
and a visual representation ensures the explanation is intuitive and easier
to understand. The image’s category remains a key input though as each
category has its own distinct explanatory text and visual representation. In
contrast, for agents, the sole explanation is the image category as no other
information is necessary.
First of all, following extensive manual work and analysis of the topics’
contributions to the decisions, three distinct image categories were identi-
fied, namely Dominant, Opposing, and Collaborative. Images not definitively
belonging to any of the three categories are grouped in a separate category
called Weak. Second, our approach generates explanatory text for each ex-
planation based on the explanation category. That is, the explanatory text
function has different patterns for different explanation categories in order to
explain the visual representation and the relations between topics. Third, our
explanation approach provides a visual representation to indicate whether the
image is public or private based on the topics and tags displayed. Depending
on the image’s explanation category, it visualizes one or more topics with the
related image tags in a circle labeled with the name of the topic(s).
The four explanation categories are further explained below and example
explanations are given.
Dominant: An image belongs to the Dominant category when the contribu-
tion of one topic is decisive for the class prediction. In this case, a topic makes
a relatively high contribution compared to all other topics of the image. To
determine whether a contribution is considered decisive for the prediction,
18

a lower bound (db) of 0.7 is used. Hence, when there is a topic whose con-
tribution exceeds this threshold, the image is considered to belong to the
Dominant category.
If the image is categorized as Dominant, the generated explanation for a
user contains only the dominant topic in both the text pattern and the visual
representation. The pattern of the explanatory text for the Dominant cate-
gory is as follows: “The generated explanation for the image being assigned
to the public/private class is that it is related to the topic x with the specific
tags”. Figure 7 shows an example of a Dominant image identified as private
by annotators. For this example, the contribution of the topic Child is 8.6
times larger than the topic with the next greatest contribution.
Figure 7: Example image annotated as private and its generated explanation with the
topic Child (Dominant category)
Opposing: The topics associated with an image do not always conclusively
point to whether the image should be classified as public or private, i.e. op-
19

posing signals exist. Hence, an image belongs to the Opposing category if it
has topics whose contributions to a class prediction are in opposite directions
and whose magnitudes are comparable and sufficiently large. The latter is
the case if the opposing contributions both exceed the lower bound (ob) of
0.2, i.e. the contributions need to be sufficiently large. When an image has
opposing topics whose contributions are in opposite directions, making a class
prediction can be difficult. Hence, when this is the case, the explanation to
the user should clearly indicate this and the pattern of the explanatory text
for the Opposing category is therefore as follows: “Even though it is related
to the topic x with the specific tags below (which signals the public/private
class), it is also related to the topic y and for that reason, it is classified
as private/public”. Figure 8 shows an example image identified as public
by annotators. The generated explanation explicitly mentions the opposing
topics, i.e. Child and Design. The reason why the image has ultimately been
classified as public is that Design’s contribution higher outweighs Child’s
contribution pushing the decision lower.
Collaborative: An image belongs to the Collaborative category if enough,
though not all, topics are decisively pushing the decision in the same direc-
tion. Unlike the Dominant category, there is no single decisive topic. Instead,
there are multiple topics whose combined collaborative contributions are de-
cisive in classifying the image. If the sum of the collaborative contributions
exceeds the Collaborative lower bound cb, equal to 0.8, the image belongs to
the Collaborative category. Finally, the presence of a topic (or topics) push-
ing the decision in the opposite direction (of the collaborative direction) does
not necessarily mean the image does not belong in the Collaborative category.
As long as those opposing contributions are relatively minor, the image is
still considered to be Collaborative rather than Opposing. The explanatory
text of the Collaborative category includes the top three collaborative topics
as follows: “The generated explanation for the image being assigned to the
public/private class is that it is related to the topics x, y, and z with these
specific tags”. Figure 9 shows an example image identified as private. The
generated explanation provides the topics People, Fashion, and Room (with
relevant tags), which all push the decision to be private.
Weak: Finally, it is also possible an image belongs to many topics with minor
contributions. Hence, it would not fall into any of the above three categories
and its class can therefore not be explained as clearly as the others. We
call this category Weak and generate an explanation containing only the
20

Figure 8: Example image annotated as public and its generated explanation with the
topics Design and Child (Opposing category)
top contributing topics, i.e. topics with relatively small contributions are not
shown. In doing so, our aim is to generate explanations with the most relevant
and influential topics for the decision. The explanatory text pattern for the
Weak category, shown in Figure 10, is the same as the explanatory text for
the Opposing category. Since none of the topics in this figure have a large
contribution to the decision, no decisive decision can be made.
5.3. Computing Explanations
Our method identifies four different explanation categories by utilizing the
contributions of topics on the decision. To evaluate the representativeness of
the topics extracted using NMF with the images, we trained a Random Forest
21

Figure 9: Example image annotated as private and its generated explanation with the
topics People, Fashion, and Room (Collaborative category)
classifier where the images are represented as TF-IDF vectors of these top-
ics. We evaluate the performance (accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score)
on the Test set separately for private and public image classes. This is critical
as the consequences of misclassifying a private image could be more severe
than misclassifying a public image. Our findings demonstrate that the classi-
fier achieves a precision of 87% and 89%, recall of 90% and 87%, and F1 score
of 89% and 88% for private and public classes, respectively. Overall, the clas-
sifier yields an accuracy of 88% on the Test set, indicating the NMF-extracted
topics are effective for privacy prediction. It achieves state-of-the-art perfor-
mance for image privacy prediction compared to existing approaches [45, 4].
We implement our methodology using Python. The implementation details
of this work are available at https://github.com/aycignl/peak.
Algorithm 1 shows how our proposed approach categorizes an image,
22

Algorithm 1: Generate Explanation for an Image
Input: img, a given image,
T ∈N, the number of topics,
topic vector ∈RT, stores the SHAP values of the associated
topics for img,
norm vector ∈RT, stores the normalized values of the
topic vector,
sorted vector ∈RN, stores the indexes of the first N topics
sorted by norm vector in descending order,
{db, ob, cb} ∈[0, 1], lower bounds of Dominant, Opposing,
and Collaborative categories, respectively,
TP and TG, topics and tags spaces, respectively,
i2t : Z+ →TG, index to topic function,
et: P∗×2TP × 2TP →P∗, explanatory text function,
im2t : I →2TG, image to tag function,
tp2t : TP →2TG, topic to tag function.
Output: explanation: P∗× P∗×2TP×TG
1 explanation ←(∅, ∅, ∅)
c sum+, c sum−←0, 0
c topics+, c topics−←[] , []
o topics+, o topics−←[] , []
2 if norm vector [sorted vector [1]] ≥db then
3
d topic ←i2t(sorted vector [1])
4
d tags ←im2t(img) ∩tp2t(d topic)
5
d topic tags ←(d topic, d tags)
6
explanation ←
(“dominant”, et(“dominant”, {d topic} , ∅), d topic tags)
7 else
8
for n = 1 to N do
9
if topic vector[sorted vector [n]] > 0 then
10
c sum+ ←c sum+ + norm vector[sorted vector [n]]
11
c topics+ ←c topics+ ∪{i2t(sorted vector [n])}
12
if norm vector[sorted vector [n]] ≥ob then
13
o topics+ ←o topics+ ∪{i2t(sorted vector [n])}
23

14
else if topic vector[sorted vector [n]] < 0 then
15
c sum−←c sum−+ norm vector[sorted vector [n]]
16
c topics−←c topics−∪{i2t(sorted vector [n])}
17
if norm vector[sorted vector [n]] ≥ob then
18
o topics−←o topics−∪{i2t(sorted vector [n])}
19
if |o topics+| ∈Z+ and |o topics−| ∈Z+ then
20
o topics tags+ ←
S|o topics+|
i=1
{(o topics+[i], im2t(img) ∩tp2t(cf topic+[i]))}
21
o topics tags−←
S|o topics−|
i=1
{(o topics−[i], im2t(img) ∩tp2t(cf topic−[i]))}
22
explanation ←
(“opposing”, et(“opposing”, o topics+, o topics−),
o topics tags+ ∪o topics tags−)
23
else if c sum+ ≥cb then
24
c topics tags ←
S3
i=1 {(c topics+[i], im2t(img) ∩tp2t(cl topic+[i]))}
25
explanation ←
(“collaborative”, et(“collaborative”, c topics+, ∅), c topics tags)
26
else if c sum−≥cb then
27
c topics tags ←
S3
i=1 {(c topics−[i], im2t(img) ∩tp2t(c topic−[i]))}
28
explanation ←
(“collaborative”, et(“collaborative”, ∅, c topics−), c topics tags)
29
else
30
w topics ←i2t(sorted vector [: 3])
31
w topics tags ←
S3
i=1 {(w topics[i], im2t(img) ∩tp2t(w topics[i]))}
32
explanation ←
(“weak”, et(“weak”, w topics, ∅), w topics tags)
24

Figure 10: Example image annotated as private and its generated explanation with the
topics People, Business, and Seaside (Weak category)
gives appropriate topics and tags to be used in the user explanation, and
ultimately generates an explanation (specific to each category) why the image
is classified as public or private. In this algorithm, T is the number of topics
associated with an image. topic vector is a vector containing the SHAP values
of the associated topics for the image. Additionally, we normalize these values
by dividing each value by the sum of the absolute values of all image topics
and storing the normalized values of topic vector in norm vector. In a final
step, the algorithm creates a sorted vector (sorted vector) containing the
first N topics of the norm vector, sorted in descending order.
db, ob, and cb are the respective lower bounds, as previously mentioned
in the category definitions, with regard to deciding whether a given image
belongs to the Dominant, Opposing, or Collaborative category. A number of
functions are needed in order to generate category-specific output explana-
tions, with TP and TG as respectively the topics and tags spaces, i.e. all
explored N topics and associated tags. The function i2t returns topic names
25

from the indexes of sorted vector, e.g. the first element is topic Child. The
function et is the explanatory text function that creates the text pattern used
in the explanation. It uses as input the image’s category and its explanation
topic(s), which are the most relevant topics for the prediction. For instance,
only the Dominant topic for Dominant images. The im2t function returns the
tags associated with a given image whilst the tp2t function returns the tags
associated with a given topic. The functions together are needed to ultimately
find the common tags associated with both the image and a certain topic. Fi-
nally, Algorithm 1 features as output explanation, which consists of three
components, namely the image’s category name, the generated explanatory
text from the et function and the explanation topic(s) with associated tags.
Several variables are initialized (line 1), starting with explanation. Ad-
ditionally, in order to be able to determine whether an image belongs to
the Collaborative category, the algorithm initializes two variables, namely
the total sum of the contributions of topics pushing the prediction higher
(i.e. c sum+) or lower (i.e. c sum−). Secondly, two variables used to store
the explanation topics for Collaborative images are initialized, respectively
c topics+ and c topics−for higher- and lower pushing topics. Finally, the
algorithm initializes two variables containing lists of topics that push the
prediction higher (i.e. o topics+) or lower (i.e. o topics−). These variables
are used to assess whether a given image belongs to the Opposing category.
Algorithm 1 first checks whether the image is in the Dominant cat-
egory. When there is a single topic whose contribution is disproportion-
ately high compared to the other topics, the image is deemed to be Domi-
nant. Hence, if the normalized value of the first topic in the sorted vector
(i.e. the topic with the largest contribution) is equal to or greater than the
Dominant’s bound, the image is considered Dominant (line 2). Then the
i2t function subsequently returns the Dominant topic name (d topic, line 3)
whilst its associated tags d tags are returned from the intersection of the
im2t and t2t functions (line 4). The two are then stored in d topic tags (line
5). Finally, the algorithm outputs the explanation using the generated inputs
(line 6).
If the image is not Dominant (line 7), variables for the Collaborative and
Opposing categories are constructed by cycling through each topic up to N
(line 8) and based on the direction of the topic’s contribution to the predic-
tion. If a topic is pushing the decision higher (line 9), then its normalized
value (i.e. its contribution) is added to c sum+ (line 10) and its name is
added to c topics+ (line 12). Additionally, if the topic’s normalized value is
26

equal to or greater than the Opposing’s bound, the topic is appended to the
o topics+ set (lines 12 −13). In contrast, if a topic is instead pushing the
decision lower (line 14), its value is added to c sum−(line 15) and its name
is appended to the c topics−set (line 16). Moreover, if the topic’s normal-
ized value is equal to or greater than the Opposing’s bound (line 17), the
topic is appended to the o topics−list (line 18). Once all topics of a given
image have been cycled through and the variables have been assigned values,
the algorithm is able to assign the image to a category (i.e. Collaborative or
Opposing) based on its features.
If the image has at least one topic pushing the decision sufficiently higher
(i.e. o topics+ contains a topic) and at least one topic pushing the decision
sufficiently lower (i.e. o topics−contains a topic), the image is categorized as
Opposing (line 19) and the algorithm outputs the appropriate explanation
using the most important topics and topic tags (lines 20-22).
If the image is not in the Opposing category, the algorithm instead checks
if its topics are acting in a collaborative manner. It first checks whether the
sum of all contributions pushing the decision higher (c sum+) is equal to
or greater than the Collaborative’s bound (line 23). If true, it means there
are enough topics pushing the decision decisively higher. The top three most
contributing topics (c topics+) and associated tags are subsequently returned
(lines 24 −25) and the explanation is outputted.
On the other hand, if
the image’s topics are not collaboratively pushing the decision higher, the
algorithm checks whether the opposite is true. Hence, if topics are together
pushing the decision decisively lower and c sum−is thus equal to or greater
than the Collaborative’s bound, the image is considered Collaborative and
the appropriate explanation is generated (lines 26 −28).
Finally, if the image does not belong to any of these categories, the al-
gorithm considers the image as Weak and an explanation featuring the most
relevant three topics and associated tags is generated (lines 29 −32). The
algorithm ultimately generates as output an explanation of why the image
has been classified as public or private.
6. Evaluation
We evaluate the performance of our proposed system in terms of its con-
tribution to preserving privacy using explanations.
27

6.1. User Study
We first aim to answer the following research question:
RQ1 Are the generated explanations by PEAK sufficient, satisfying, and
understandable for humans?
We perform an online user study to evaluate our proposed explanation model
in terms of sufficiency, satisfaction, and understanding. We conduct a pilot
study (with n = 5 participants) before the real study to test whether the
study is understandable. Based on the comments during the pilot, we im-
proved the initial description of the study and reworded one question.
Our user study has three phases. In the first phase, we present a plain
language statement that describes the study and a consent form. The second
phase is meant to explain the study over an example, wherein we show an
image, its generated explanation, and the three questions that will be asked
to the participant. Finally, in the third phase, each participant is exposed to
16 images with generated explanations in random order. Two of these images
deliberately provide irrelevant explanations so that we can differentiate the
participants that are attentive during the survey. Thus, these questions are
meant to filter out the participants who are not focused.
Such users are
removed from the analysis.
In order to examine our explanation model, we personalize the Explana-
tion Satisfaction Scale proposed by Hoffman et al. [14]. We ask participants
to rank the following questions:
1. This explanation that the algorithm produces has SUFFICIENT DE-
TAIL.
2. This explanation produced by the algorithm is SATISFYING.
3. From this explanation, I UNDERSTAND why an image has been iden-
tified as private or public.
Each factor is accompanied by a 5−point Likert scale (Strongly agree = 5,
Somewhat agree = 4, Neither agree nor disagree = 3, Somewhat disagree
= 2, Strongly disagree = 1). In the final phase, participants responded to
anonymously collected demographic questions (age, gender, and education
level) and optionally provided free-form text for comments/feedback. We
designed our user study using the Qualtrics online survey tool 3.
3https://www.qualtrics.com
28

6.1.1. Participants
A total of 57 participants responded to questions but we excluded 12 of
them who did not catch the check questions properly. 64% of the remaining
45 participants were male and 36% were female. 26 participants were between
25-34 years old, 14 were between 18-24, 4 were between 35-44, and 1 was
between 55-64. In terms of the highest degree of education, 19 of them had
a Master’s degree, 11 of them had Bachelor’s degree, 6 of them were High
school graduates, 5 of them attended Some college (1-4 years, no degree), 2
of them had Doctorate degree, and 2 of them had Professional school degree
(MD, DDC, JD, etc).
This demographic is well-balanced on gender, age
group, and education.
6.1.2. Results
Sufficient
Satisfying
Understandable
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Percentage of Answered Questions
Strongly agree
Somewhat agree
Neither agree nor disagree
Somewhat disagree
Strongly disagree
Figure 11: The answers for all questions
We show our results of the user study in Figures 11, 12 and 13, start-
ing with the results for all images, then looking at the public and private
29

classes specifically, and finally discussing the results for different explanation
categories.
The results for all images (Figure 11) are positive and show that the
generated explanations are useful for and make sense to humans. Participants
generally agreed the explanations were sufficiently detailed, they found the
explanations satisfactory, and they understood why the images were labeled
as private or public.
Firstly, explanations were deemed to be sufficiently detailed (M = 3.88, SD =
1.12) as over 70% of respondents answered they either “strongly agree” or
“somewhat agree”, with the result statistically significant (p-value < 0.05).
Moreover, only a low proportion of respondents indicated they “strongly dis-
agree”.
Secondly, explanations were generally seen as satisfactory (M = 3.62, SD =
1.28) by respondents, a statistically significant result at the 0.05 significance
level. More than 60% of participants answered in agreement and whilst there
was some disagreement reported, this was largely only “somewhat disagree”.
Finally, the explanations for why images were labeled as public or private
were generally deemed to be understandable by participants (M = 3.8, SD =
1.33), again statistically significant at the 0.05 level. Out of all three dimen-
sions, “strongly agree” was the most commonly given answer at over 40%
of respondents, followed by close to 30% of “somewhat agree” answers. The
range of answers was more varied however, as indicated by the larger stan-
dard deviation and a higher proportion of “strongly disagree” compared to
Sufficient and Satisfying.
Sufficient
Satisfying
Understandable
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Percentage of Answered Questions
Strongly agree
Somewhat agree
Neither agree nor disagree
Somewhat disagree
Strongly disagree
(a) Public
Sufficient
Satisfying
Understandable
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Percentage of Answered Questions
Strongly agree
Somewhat agree
Neither agree nor disagree
Somewhat disagree
Strongly disagree
(b) Private
Figure 12: The answers for the questions with respect to the classes
30

Figure 12 shows the distributions of answers for the survey questions
with respect to the public and private classes. Figure 12(a) indicates that
participants found the explanations for public images to be more sufficient,
more satisfying, and more understandable compared to the images labeled as
private. For all three dimensions, participants agreed (“strongly agree” and
“somewhat agree” combined) more frequently for public images as opposed
to private images.
Additionally, “strongly agree” was the most frequent
answer for public images in contrast to private images where “somewhat
agree” is the most commonly given answer. For private images, there was
more disagreement reported, with higher shares of “somewhat disagree” and
“strongly disagree”. For sufficiently detailed and satisfying, the differences
between public and private images are not that large but for understandable
there is quite a stark difference. For public images, more than half of re-
spondents strongly agreed the explanations were understandable whereas for
private images the share is only around 30% and nearly equal to the number
of “somewhat agree” answers. Moreover, more respondents disagreed, and
quite strongly so, for private images. A possible explanation for why par-
ticipants generally answered “strongly agree” more often for public images
across all three dimensions may be because privacy and what are considered
private images is subjective and more difficult to explain. Hence, respondents
agree less often and their responses vary more for private images compared
to public images.
Figure 13 shows the distributions of answers to assess sufficiency, sat-
isfaction, and understandability with respect to different categories (i.e.,
Dominant, Opposing, Collaborative, and Weak).
Figure 13(a) and 13(c)
demonstrate when an explanation has a decisive topic or is composed of like-
minded topics in the decision, participants agree that the explanations of
images belonging to such categories are sufficiently detailed and satisfying.
Additionally, participants understand why an image is identified as belong-
ing to a certain class (private or public). On the other hand, compared to
the Dominant and Collaborative categories, Figure 13(b) shows that partic-
ipants score understanding (M = 3.47, SD = 1.45) of the decision less when
an explanation has topics that have opposing forces in the decision. The
images in this category have Opposing topics in terms of the contribution to
the decisions. Thus, making a decision is not straightforward for the images
belonging to the Opposing explanation category when compared to the Dom-
inant and Collaborative categories. Moreover, Figure 13(d) shows the results
for the explanations of the images belonging to the Weak category. Even if
31

Sufficient
Satisfying
Understandable
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Percentage of Answered Questions
Strongly agree
Somewhat agree
Neither agree nor disagree
Somewhat disagree
Strongly disagree
(a) Dominant
Sufficient
Satisfying
Understandable
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Percentage of Answered Questions
Strongly agree
Somewhat agree
Neither agree nor disagree
Somewhat disagree
Strongly disagree
(b) Opposing
Sufficient
Satisfying
Understandable
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Percentage of Answered Questions
Strongly agree
Somewhat agree
Neither agree nor disagree
Somewhat disagree
Strongly disagree
(c) Collaborative
Sufficient
Satisfying
Understandable
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Percentage of Answered Questions
Strongly agree
Somewhat agree
Neither agree nor disagree
Somewhat disagree
Strongly disagree
(d) Weak
Figure 13: The answers for the questions with respect to the categories
participants are only moderately confident (M = 3.27, SD = 1.22) that the
explanations are satisfying, they agree on the sufficiency of the explanations
and understandability of a class decision based on the explanations. In light
of these results from the user study, we answer RQ1 as participants find
generated explanations by PEAK sufficient, satisfying, and understandable.
6.2. Enhancing Privacy Assistants
We also evaluate the performance of PEAK in terms of enhancing privacy
assistants. We aim to answer the following research question:
RQ2 Can the generated explanations of PEAK be used by personal assis-
tants to improve their decision making?
32

Figure 14: System overview schema of PEAK in combination with PURE
PEAK can help personal assistants to classify images that are difficult
to make a prediction about, e.g. low confidence predictions. It does so by di-
viding images into explanation categories, which allows it to uncover distinct
and hidden relationships between topics for each category. The explanation
categories are subsequently used to generate explanations for why an image
is considered public or private.
PEAK is used in conjunction with personal assistant PURE. PURE is a
personalized uncertainty-aware privacy assistant that helps its user to make
privacy decisions [4]. While PURE makes a prediction (i.e. public or pri-
vate) for each image, it also captures the ambiguity of privacy by calculating
a level of uncertainty for that prediction. PURE has access to a collection of
data that has been labeled by various annotators (i.e. PicAlert dataset). Us-
ing only the visual characteristics of images, PURE learns users’ privacy
preferences and creates a model. To make a privacy decision, PURE com-
pares the uncertainty level to a threshold level provided by the user, and
if the threshold is exceeded, PURE delegates the privacy decision to the
user. Otherwise, PURE uses its own prediction results (i.e. share or not
share). PURE is a useful approach because uncertain images are not de-
cided by the personal assistant, thus fewer mistakes are done. However, this
means the user has to decide on the uncertain images. PEAK allows pri-
vacy assistants to classify images accurately, ultimately resulting in fewer
images having to be delegated to the user. By doing so, the user can be
more efficient while making decisions for fewer images. Hence, PEAK de-
creases the cognitive load of the user. Ultimately, the decision-making of
the privacy assistants will have been improved without losing their perfor-
mance. In order to reduce the number of images delegated to the user to
33

decide on, PEAK is utilized for uncertain images, i.e. images PURE has
difficulty making a prediction about. PURE only uses PEAK’s privacy de-
cisions for certain class-category pairs for which PEAK performs well. For
images where PEAK does not perform well, PURE delegates the decision
back to the user. Hence, PEAK was not able to provide certainty for that im-
ages. Figure 14 shows the schema of PEAK in combination with PURE. A
user gives an image to her personal privacy assistant (PURE), which then
reports its privacy prediction (i.e. share or not share) for the given image
when certain about its prediction (1). When not certain, PURE first del-
egates the (uncertain) image to PEAK (2). In this case, PEAK classifies
the uncertain image and subsequently shares the decision and the generated
explanation with PURE (3). After receiving input from PEAK, PURE fi-
nalizes its decision whether to use PEAK’s prediction result (i.e. share or
not share) (4) or to delegate the privacy decision to the user (5).
When the uncertainty threshold, denoted as θ, is set to 0.7 by a user,
66% of the images can be classified with PURE, i.e. these are certain images
and accuracy of 96% is achieved [4]. The remaining 34% of images, a total
of 1695, are all uncertain images and these are delegated to the user by
PURE. Hence, if PEAK is able to improve on this percentage and reduce the
number of images delegated to the user whilst at the same time maintaining
similar accuracy, it avoids the cognitive overload in the user and successfully
improves upon PURE.
Dominant
Opposing
Collaborative
Weak
public
private
public
private
public
private
public
private
All
5
8
9
6
30
32
5
4
Uncertain
3
11
13
12
11
37
7
6
Table 1: Percentage (%) of all and uncertain images in the Training set that belong to the
explanation categories
Table 1 shows distribution of all and uncertain images in the Training set
across explanation categories. Firstly, it’s clear the Collaborative category is
the most important category since it comprises more than half of all images
(62%) whereas the other categories are featured in roughly similar frequen-
cies. In terms of privacy class, there is no clear bias towards either public or
private images with the difference at most 3% within each category. Look-
ing at only uncertain images, the Collaborative category is again the most
common at 48% of uncertain images, but there are much fewer public im-
ages compared to all images (11% versus 30%) and somewhat more private
34

images. A second difference for uncertain images is that there are more im-
ages in the Opposing category (25% compared to 15%). For the Dominant
and Weak categories, there are only limited differences between all and only
uncertain images. Finally, in contrast to all images, uncertain images more
frequently belong to the private class (66% compared to 50%).
Dominant
Opposing
Collaborative
Weak
public
private
public
private
public
private
public
private
All
86
88
90
56
98
93
80
72
Uncertain
54
86
85
55
91
91
70
73
Table 2: Explanation category and class-specific privacy prediction performance (% accu-
racy) of PEAK on all and uncertain images in the Training set
PURE decides whether to use the output of PEAK to make predic-
tions or to delegate decisions for uncertain images back to the user based
on two criteria, namely high and consistent performance of PEAK. Hence,
PEAK should perform well, i.e. accuracy should be greater than 0.85, and
model performance on both all and uncertain images should be consistent,
i.e. the difference in accuracy between the two groups should be less than
5%. Table 2 shows the privacy prediction performance of PEAK in terms
of explanation category and class pairs. Based on the defined criteria, there
are two Category-class pairs with high and consistent performance, namely
Dominant-private and Collaborative-private. Hence, for these images, PURE
will use the output of PEAK to make a privacy prediction.
The usefulness of PEAK should ultimately be determined based on
performance for the uncertain images in the Test data.
In the Test set,
Dominant-private and Collaborative-private images comprise 7% and 25%
respectively, capturing nearly one-third of all uncertain images. Additionally,
PEAK performs well as prediction accuracy is 94% and 93% for Dominant-
private and Collaborative-private, respectively. Hence, high accuracy that’s
broadly in line with the observed performance for the Training set. Overall,
for nearly a third of the uncertain images, PEAK yields high performance.
When PURE delegates the selected uncertain images to PEAK, fewer
images are delegated to the user whilst classification accuracy is not com-
promised. Based on the Test set, the number of images delegated to the
user is 23%, whereas it is 34% for PURE alone. Hence, it avoids cognitive
overload in the user that user input is no longer needed for 542 uncertain
images. It reduces the risk of errors and biases by asking the user less, so
35

a strong improvement due to PEAK. Moreover, given the high accuracy
for Dominant-private and Collaborative-private images, overall model per-
formance is high at 0.959, and nearly equal to PURE’s standalone accuracy
of 0.963.
Consequently, combining PURE with PEAK results in nearly
equal performance but for 77% of the data as opposed to 66% when it is only
PURE.
Finally, it’s worth adding that in general, making a prediction for private
images is by itself already challenging. However, PEAK is able to make
accurate predictions in an even more challenging situation, namely uncertain
private images. In doing so, PEAK is effective in reducing the number of
decisions delegated to the user whilst at the same time achieving convincing
privacy prediction performance. Hence, in view of these results, we answer
RQ2 positively, namely PEAK’s generated explanations can indeed be used
to improve personal assistants’ decision-making.
7. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a novel privacy assistant (PEAK) to under-
stand why a given image is considered public or private based on the char-
acteristics of the image. Our privacy assistant is able to discover 20 latent
topics from descriptive image tags using topic modelling and subsequently
makes privacy predictions based on the relationship between images and
their associated topics. We restrict the number of topics conservatively to
simplify explanations while keeping predictions as accurate as possible using
these topics. We manually map each topic to a single textual representa-
tion (i.e. topic name) in this paper only for presentation purposes. Each
topic is a proxy for a set of visual contexts that are referred to by a set
of tags composing the topic. This simple construct makes topics very flex-
ible due to their limited semantic constraints, unlike a single textual rep-
resentation of each topic. However, users can represent each topic using a
single textual representation as we do in this paper if it is more convenient
for their consumption. Moreover, our privacy assistant automatically gener-
ates explanations for privacy decisions. The privacy classifier achieves high
accuracy, demonstrating the effectiveness of the topic-based representation
of images. Furthermore, a user study shows the generated explanations are
found to be sufficiently detailed, satisfying, and understandable. Finally, our
results show that PEAK can improve the decision-making of personal as-
sistants by reducing the number of images delegated to the user whilst not
36

compromising on model performance.
An important direction for future work is to be able to get feedback
from users and update the explanations. In future work, we will deep dive
into the Weak explanation category by clustering. For instance, we can dis-
cover groups in the category by utilizing k-means or hierarchical clustering
algorithms [24, 16]. We can automatically generate tags using different mod-
els/tools as well as Clarifai. For instance, multi-modal deep learning models
such as CLIP [34] can predict which text snippets (or tags) are related to a
given image (and vice versa) using distances in the joint embedding space of
text and images. Given public and private images, we can extract all relevant
words in the proximity of the image embeddings and consider the most dis-
criminative words as tags with tag diversity in mind. Moreover, the generated
topics can be named manually or automatically. Various automated methods
are available for this purpose, such as selecting the most similar word to the
tags as the topic name. The similarity can be calculated using word embed-
dings of the tags or by utilizing an ontology like WordNet [28]. We leave
the task of automatically naming the generated topics as future work. As an
interesting line of future research, PEAK’s explanation categories could be
adapted to the Schwartz theory of basic values [37]. Another future direction
would be expanding our methodology to the classification of confidential doc-
uments since our approach is flexible and can work with text-based inputs
as well.
8. Acknowledgments
This paper significantly extends [5, 6], which present a general overview
of the ideas. The first author is supported by the Scientific and Techno-
logical Research Council of Turkey (T¨UB˙ITAK) and Turkish Directorate of
Strategy and Budget under the TAM Project number 2007K12 −873. This
research was partially funded by the Hybrid Intelligence Center, a 10-year
programme funded by the Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Sci-
ence through the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research, https:
//hybrid-intelligence-centre.nl.
9. Note to Reviewers
This section is not meant to be part of the paper. It describes differ-
ences between this paper and previously published work [6, 5]. [6] is a 2-page
37

extended abstract that mostly discusses the importance on privacy expla-
nations. [5] is a 5-page magazine article that outlines the methodology and
shows two example explanations that our approach could generate, while
discussing challenges. This paper provides the details as well as results that
have not appeared in those works. Only initial ideas from Section 3, 4.1, 4.2
and 5.1 have appeared before. Sections 2, 4.3, and 5.2 onward (including the
algorithm and all results) are new to this paper.
