Explainable Adaptive Tree-based Model Selection
for Time-Series Forecasting
Matthias Jakobs
Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning
and Artificial Intelligence
TU Dortmund University
Dortmund, Germany

Amal Saadallah
Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning
and Artificial Intelligence
TU Dortmund University
Dortmund, Germany

Abstract—Tree-based models have been successfully applied to
a wide variety of tasks, including time series forecasting. They
are increasingly in demand and widely accepted because of their
comparatively high level of interpretability. However, many of
them suffer from the overfitting problem, which limits their
application in real-world decision-making. This problem becomes
even more severe in online-forecasting settings where time series
observations are incrementally acquired, and the distributions
from which they are drawn may keep changing over time. In this
context, we propose a novel method for the online selection of
tree-based models using the TreeSHAP explainability method in
the task of time series forecasting. We start with an arbitrary set
of different tree-based models. Then, we outline a performance-
based ranking with a coherent design to make TreeSHAP able to
specialize the tree-based forecasters across different regions in the
input time series. In this framework, adequate model selection is
performed online, adaptively following drift detection in the time
series. In addition, explainability is supported on three levels,
namely online input importance, model selection, and model
output explanation. An extensive empirical study on various real-
world datasets demonstrates that our method achieves excellent
or on-par results in comparison to the state-of-the-art approaches
as well as several baselines.
Index Terms—Online Model Selection, Tree-based Models,
Time Series Forecasting, TreeSHAP, Explainability
I. INTRODUCTION
Time series forecasting has always been recognized as a
main component of informed decision-making across various
real-world applications, including but not limited to smart
manufacturing control, predictive maintenance, energy man-
agement, transport planning in smart cities, and financial in-
vestments [1]–[3]. However, due to the complex and dynamic
nature of time series data, forecasting is often considered to be
one of the most challenging tasks in time series analysis. Time
series data can contain sources of non-stationary variations and
are therefore susceptible to the concept drift phenomenon [4],
which further adds to the complexity of forecasting. There
have been numerous Machine Learning (ML) models sug-
gested for addressing this task. One option involves handling
the data as sequential observations either in an online or
streaming fashion [5]. Another approach is to utilize time
series embeddings that convert a group of target observations
into a feature space of k dimensions corresponding to the
observation’s past k-lagged values [6], [7].
Although various ML forecasting methods have been pro-
posed, it is widely recognized that none of them can uni-
versally apply to all applications. This limitation is a direct
consequence of the No Free Lunch theorem established by
Wolpert [8], which states that no learning algorithm can per-
form optimally for all learning tasks. Furthermore, even within
the same application, models exhibit varying performance over
time [6], [7], [9], [10], which can be attributed to the aforemen-
tioned difficulties in time series modeling [6], [11], [12]. It can
also be explained by the fact that different forecasting models
have expected areas of expertise or competence, referred to as
Regions of Competence (RoCs), distributed across different
regions of the input time series, which can lead to varying
relative performance in these regions [10]–[12]. The nature
of the forecasting application can provide a guideline for
selecting the adequate family of ML models to be applied.
With the increasing number of safety-critical scenarios, model
explainability is becoming more and more required [13]. In
this case, interpretable models per construction, such as tree-
based models, are favored [14], [15]. Still, adequate model
selection has to cope with the time-evolving nature of time se-
ries data that may be subject to the concept drift phenomenon.
However, most of the existing tree-based models, including
Decision Trees and their ensembles, such as Random Forests
and Gradient-boosted Trees, are restricted to operate in a static
manner in the ML literature, i.e., they do not take into account
changes in the time series [14], [16]–[18]. One possible way
to mitigate this issue is either to retrain them periodically in
a blind manner, i.e., without any knowledge or assumption
about the presence of concept drift, or to apply them together
with a drift detection mechanism that triggers their update in
an informed manner only when necessary [6], [11], [12].
More recently, the concept of Regions of Competence
(RoCs) has been used for model selection [7], [10]–[12], [19]
in the forecasting task. Different ways to determine these
RoCs have been proposed [7], [10], [11], including model-
type-independent approaches that use meta-learning by either
training meta-models to predict the performance of candidate
models on the most recent time series pattern of k-lagged
values [10] or at a particular test time [7], [19]. The selection
approaches in these works are performed online in a blind
arXiv:2401.01124v1  [cs.LG]  2 Jan 2024

manner at each time step, i.e., without taking into account
the occurrence of significant changes in either the time series
data or the performance of the candidate models. In [11],
a model-specific approach, in particular for Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs), was developed to compute RoCs. Although
the RoCs are updated in an informed manner following a
concept drift in the time series, the proposed method is specific
to a particular class of DNNs, namely Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs), and cannot be generalized to any family
of forecasting models as it is based on Grad-CAM [11], a
gradient-based heatmapping method for highlighting important
input regions in CNNs. The advantage of the developed
method is that it provides some visual explanations for the
reason for selecting a particular CNN at a particular test time.
Even though the model selection process is made explainable
via heatmaps generated by Grad-CAM, the candidate CNNs
themselves are considered black-box models that suffer from
lack of interpretability and transparency, thus limiting their
applicability in many real-world scenarios and their acceptance
by end-users [20], [21].
In this paper, we propose an explainable online adaptive
tree-based model selection strategy for time series forecasting.
The selection among candidate tree-based models is based
on the concept of RoCs, which are determined using Tree-
SHAP, which is a tree-based method for explaining individual
predictions by computing the contribution of each feature to
the prediction method in the form of Shapley values [22].
We devise a coherent design to make TreeSHAP able to
specialize the tree-based forecasters across different regions
in the input time series using a performance-based ranking
over a time-sliding window validation set. At each time step,
the distances between the recently observed window of time
series observations (i.e., lagged values used to compute the
forecast) and the pre-computed RoCs are determined. The
model corresponding to the RoC with the lowest distance is
selected to perform the forecasting. At test time, to account
for the potential emergence of new concepts in the data, the
pre-calculated RoCs are dynamically updated when a concept
drift is identified in the time series. This is achieved by shifting
the validation set, thereby enabling the computation of RoCs
that reflect the changing nature of the data. In addition, our
method supports explainability on three levels, namely, input
time series importance, model selection, and model output
explanation.
We carried out an extensive empirical evaluation of our
framework by applying it to 1032 real-world time series
datasets from diverse domains. The results obtained indicate
that our method outperforms state-of-the-art techniques for
online model selection and several baselines for time series
forecasting. It is worth mentioning that our experiments are
entirely reproducible, and we have made both the code and
how to access the datasets publicly available1. The main
contributions of this paper are thus summarized as follows:
• We present a novel method for online tree-based-model
1https://github.com/MatthiasJakobs/tsms
selection for time series forecasting by computing candi-
date models’ RoCs using an adaption of the TreeSHAP
method.
• We update the RoCs in an informed manner following
concept drift detection in the time series data.
• We exploit the RoCs to support explainability on three
levels, namely, input time series selection, model selec-
tion, and model output explanation.
• We provide a comparative empirical study with state-of-
the-art methods and discuss their implications in terms of
predictive performance and scalability.
II. RELATED WORK
Online single model selection has been revealed to be
challenging in the context of time series forecasting due to
the dynamic nature of the data [6] and the resulting time-
evolving models’ performance/competence [11]. Several tech-
niques have been proposed to choose the appropriate model
from a set of candidate models for a specific forecasting task.
These techniques can be classified into three primary families.
The first family involves approximating a posterior distribution
over each candidate’s expected error using parametric or non-
parametric estimation methods, such as Gaussian approxima-
tion [23] or Bayesian estimation [24]. However, these meth-
ods are not practical in forecasting contexts as they require
approximating continuous composite densities for the error
based on target and estimated time series values. The second
family of selection methods involves estimating the unseen
error of a given model through empirical evaluations, such as
using an independent validation or calibration dataset. Models
with the lowest estimated error are subsequently chosen [25].
However, the empirical error may in many cases not serve
as an accurate estimate of the true error [26]. The third
family of methods is based on the meta-learning paradigm,
where the selection of the appropriate method is decided by
another machine learning model that learns from previous
selection realizations characterized by a set of devised meta-
features [27]. Meta-learning has been established as a useful
tool for model selection in time series forecasting [6], [7],
[11].
More recently, the concept of Regions of Competence
(RoCs) has been used both for the selection of a single
model [11] and for the selection of ensemble members [7],
[10], [19] in the forecasting task. In [10], at test time, the
most similar pattern to the current input (i.e., in our case,
time series input sequence) is determined, and the model
with the smallest error is selected for prediction. In [7], [19],
meta-learning is used to build models capable of modeling
the competence of each of the ensemble members across
the input space. The authors frame their ensemble learning
as a ranking task, in which ensemble members are ranked
sequentially by their decreasing weight (i.e., the one predicted
to perform better is ranked first). Correlation among the output
of the base learners is used to quantify their redundancy. A
given learner is penalized for its correlation to each learner
already ranked. If it is fully correlated with other learners

already ranked, its weight becomes zero. Opposingly, if it is
completely uncorrelated with its ranked peers, it gets ranked
with its original weight. In the above methods, the meta-
models responsible for computing the RoCs are kept static
over time. Only distances or error comparisons are performed
online in a blind-manner at each time step, i.e., without taking
into account the occurrence of significant changes in either the
time series data or the performance of the candidate models.
In [11], RoCs are determined using performance gradient-
based saliency maps, which establish a mapping between the
input time series and the performance of the DNNs. A drift de-
tection mechanism in the data is deployed to update the RoCs.
These maps are inspired by class activation maps (Grad-CAM)
[28], which have been widely used as a visual explainability
tool in computer vision tasks. More recently, Grad-CAM has
been applied in the context of time series classification to
explain which time series features in which time intervals
are responsible for a given predicted class [29]. The authors
in [11] exploit the gradient maps to provide explanations for
the reason behind selecting a given CNN at a particular time
instant or interval. However, the computation of RoCs and the
resulting explanations are specific to CNNs and can not be
generalized to any other model. In addition, despite making the
model selection process explainable, the candidate CNNs are
still considered black-box models that lack interpretability and
transparency. This limitation restricts their usability in many
real-world situations and their acceptance among end-users
[20], [21].
Therefore, in this work, we focus on interpretable models
per construction, namely tree-based models, and we leverage
the RoCs concept to adapt them to the online forecasting
application through an adaptive model selection procedure.
III. METHODOLOGY
Our proposed method builds upon OS-PGSM, presented
in [11]. First, we will define the used notation. Second, we
describe Shapley values with a focus on TreeSHAP [22].
Third, we will reformulate the earlier method and highlight
the changes we propose to allow for the efficient selection of
tree-based models.
A. Preliminaries
In this work, we will focus on univariate time series
forecasting. Let X be a series of values, with X(t) denoting
the value at time step t. We use shift operator notation:
T kX(t) = X(t+k)
Note that we default to shifting to the right, forwards in time,
instead of backward in time. Additionally, we define the shift
operator on intervals as follows:
T (u:v)X(t) = (T uX(t), T u+1X(t), . . . , T vX(t))
For ease of notation, we further define
T (:v) := T (1:v),
T (−v:) := T (−v:0)
The goal of forecasting at time t is to predict the next H
values T (:H)X(t) from known L lagged values T (−L:)X(t).
B. Shapley values and TreeSHAP
Shapley values, originally proposed in Game Theory [30],
have become a popular method for explaining ML models in
recent years [31]. They attribute the outcome of a game, given
by a value function v, onto each player i who participates in
this game. In ML applications, the players are often chosen
as the features {i ∈N} of a specific data point x with an
optional label y.
Definition 1: The Shapley value ϕi with a defined value
function v is given by
ϕi(v) =
X
S⊆N\{i}
|N| −1
|S|
−1 v(x, y, S ∪{i}) −v(x, y, S)
|N|
One reason often stated for the use of Shapley values
in explaining machine learning models is due to desired
axioms for which Shapley values are the only solution [31].
We want to highlight one axiom that we will utilize later,
namely Linearity, which states that the Shapley value of a
linear combination of value functions is equal to the linear
combination of the individual Shapley values:
ϕi(va) + ϕi(vb) = ϕi(va + vb) ∀i ∈N
TreeSHAP [22] is a method to estimate Shapley values in
polynomial time if the models are tree-based. The method can
either compute Shapley values directly via the tree structure
(tree-dependent approach) or via a held-out set of data points
(interventional approach). We use the second approach since
the official reference implementation2 allows us to explain not
only the prediction but also the squared loss of tree-based
models, whereas the tree-dependent approach is limited to
explaining the prediction.
TreeSHAP defines, depending on the problem to be ex-
plained, two different value functions. Let g : RN →R be
a trained regression decision tree, which takes N features as
input. If the decision is to be explained, the value function is
defined by
vg,pred(x, S) =
E
X∼X[g(X | XS = xS)]
(1)
where X is a set of reference data, often referred to as
background data. We set the background data to be equal to
the training data for the trees in our experiments. The other
value function is used if we want to explain the squared loss
of a tree’s prediction and is defined by
vg,loss(x, y, S) =
E
X∼X[(g(X | Xs = xS) −y)2]
(2)
TreeSHAP implements an efficient, dynamic programming-
based algorithm to compute the Shapley values for one data-
point in polynomial time by going down the tree just once. By
leveraging the Linearity axiom, the computed Shapley values
of individual trees in an ensemble can be combined to give
the Shapley values of the ensemble [22].
2https://github.com/slundberg/shap

C. TreeSHAP Model Selection (TSMS)
Next, we present our approach, TreeSHAP Model Selection
(TSMS). Assume a model pool P = {f1, . . . , fM} of M
forecasters from which we want to choose the forecaster ˆf
that minimizes a loss L for a window T (−L:)X(t) and its
corresponding horizon T (:H)X(t) i.e.,
ˆf = arg min
i∈{1,...,M}
L

fi(T (−L:)X(t)), T (:H)X(t)
Each time series X is partitioned into three subseries
Xtrain, Xval and Xtest. The forecasters are first trained
on windowed segments of Xtrain. Afterwards, let R :=
{R1, . . . , RM} define each forecasters Region of Competence
(RoC) over Xval.
RoC Creation: A RoC is filled with subseries of data on
which the forecaster performed best in comparison to all other
forecasters. First, we partition Xval into nω chunks of size ω:
Xval,ω = { T (0:ω−1)X(1), T (0:ω−1)X(1+ω), . . . ,
T (0:ω−1)X(1+(nω−1)ω) }
with corresponding forecasting labels
Yval,ω = { T (:H)X(ω), T (:H)X(2ω), . . . , T (:H)X(nωω) }
For each pair (Xk
val,ω, Y k
val,ω) with k ∈{1, . . . , nω}, we find
the best performing forecaster ˆfk in terms of squared loss L:
ˆfk = arg min
i∈{1,...,M}
L(fi(Xk
val,ω), Y k
val,ω)
Next, we split each Xk
val,ω further into windows of size L
with a step size of one:
xval,ω,k = { T (0:L−1)Xk,(1)
val,ω, T (0:L−1)Xk,(2)
val,ω, . . . ,
T (0:L)Xk,(ω−L−H+1)
val,ω
}
yval,ω,k = { T (:H)Xk,(L)
val,ω, T (:H)Xk,(L+1)
val,ω
, . . . ,
T (:H)Xk,(N−H)
val,ω
}
Again,
we
consider
each
pair
(xp
val,ω,k, yp
val,ω,k)
and
compute
Shapley
values,
decomposing
the
loss
L( ˆfk(xp
val,ω,k), yp
val,ω,k) onto each input feature, resulting
in explanation ϕp
k ∈RL. Our aim is to add refined versions
of each xp
val,ω,k to the RoC of ˆfk to retain only the most
salient parts of the input that reduced the achieved loss
the most. Thus, to get a measure of saliency, we need to
invert the Shapley values so that large positive values now
indicate a large reduction of loss and vice versa. To refine,
we threshold −ϕp
k by a positive constant τ, setting every
explanation below the threshold to zero. We then use the
indices of consecutive, non-zero subsequences resulting from
the thresholding to extract subsequences of xp
val,ω,k if they
are longer than 2. For example, consider the thresholded
explanation −ϕ
=
(0, 0.5, 0.3, 0, 0.1, 0.2, 1.3) for some
sequence x. Then, we would extract x(5:7) and add it to the
Region of Competence. We decided to discard subseries of
size 2 and below since they do not reveal clear patterns and
thus add a lot of noise to the RoCs.
Model selection: During testing, for each new window
T (−L:)X(t)
test, the distance to all RoC members for all fore-
casters is evaluated, using Dynamic Time Warping (DTW).
We chose DTW because it allows us to have RoC members
of different lengths since DTW does not constrain its inputs to
have equal lengths. The forecaster ˆf, whose RoC R contains
the datapoint with the smallest DTW distance to T (−L:)X(t)
test
is chosen to forecast, i.e.,
ˆf = arg min
i∈{1,...,M}
min({DTW(T (−L:)X(t)
test, r) | r ∈Ri})
Over time, the distribution of data might change, which is
a phenomenon known and studied as concept drifts [4]. We
want our method to adapt to those changes by enriching the
Regions of Competence with novel concepts when we detect
such drifts. To account for drifts, we utilize the same concept
drift detection method using Hoeffding bounds presented in
[11], which monitors the deviation of the mean of the time
series [6]. Let (tstart, tend) be the first and last timestep of
the validation data range inside the entire time series X. Let
µ0 = E[T (tstart:tend)X] be the initial expected value over the
data. Then, for each new timestep j, j > tend to forecast, we
compute ∆j = |µj −µ0| with µj = E[T (tend+1:j)X]. The
Hoeffding bound states that after W observations of a random
variable with range r the true mean has diverged from 0 with
probability σ if
∆j >
r
r2ln(2/σ)
2W
where r encodes the range of the data, which we estimate
empirically, and W = j −tend + 1. We set the user-defined
parameter σ = 0.99 to be confident in concept drifts actually
occurring. Also, after each concept drift, we set µ0 = µj and
reset tstart and tend with the range of µj. Most importantly,
we create a new RoC for each forecaster from that data.
Afterward, we enrich the old RoCs with the newly created
RoCs to retain both old information as well as adapt to changes
in the data.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we aim to answer the following research
questions:
• Q1: How does TSMS perform against state-of-the-art
model selection methods for tree-based models and other
relevant baselines?
• Q2: What is the impact of the concept drift adaptation in
terms of performance and computational resources, com-
pared to both static pre-computation and blind periodic
recreation of the RoCs?
• Q3: How can TSMS in conjunction with tree-based
models serve explainability for time-series forecasting?

Name
Nr. of time series
Min. length
M4
548
251
tourism
100
252
Australian Electricity Demands
5
500
Dominick
100
251
Bitcoin
16
500
Pedestrian counts
63
500
KDD Cup
100
500
Weather
100
500
Total
1032
TABLE I
BREAKDOWN OF THE USED UNIVARIATE TIME-SERIES FROM THE
MONASH FORECASTING REPOSITORY [1].
Model family
Hyperparameters
Decision Tree
dmax ∈{4, 8, 16}
Random Forest
dmax ∈{2, 4, 6}
ntrees ∈{16, 32, 64}
Gradient Boosting Trees
dmax ∈{2, 4, 6}
ntrees ∈{16, 32, 64}
TABLE II
LIST OF ALL MODELS IN THE MODEL SELECTION POOL. THROUGH
COMBINATION OF THE LISTED HYPERPARAMETERS, THERE ARE 21
MODELS IN THE FINAL MODEL POOL.
A. Experimental Setup
We utilize 1032 univariate datasets from various appli-
cation domains, including financial, weather, and synthetic
data. These datasets are provided by the Monash Forecasting
Repository [1]. We process each time-series X by using the
first 50% for training, the following 25% for validation, and
the remaining 25% for testing. We normalize the entire time
series using mean and standard deviation estimated over the
training portion of the time series. Due to this way of splitting
the time-series, we discard series that are shorter than 250 to
allow enough training and validation data. Additionally, we
took a random subsample of length 500 for series that are
longer to limit computation time.
To create the model pool P, we train a total of 21 tree-
based models. We set L = 15 and H = 1 in our experiments
to allow for a larger context in terms of lags. The single models
consist of various parametrizations of Decision Trees, Random
Forests, and Gradient Boosting Trees from scikit-learn.
We vary the maximum tree depth dmax and (if available)
the number of ensemble estimators ntrees (details shown in
Table II). All experiments have been performed on consumer
hardware, namely on a 2022 MacBook Pro.
B. TSMS Setup and Baselines
To investigate the impact of drift detection on model per-
formance and runtime, we propose a total of three variants of
our method:
• TSMS: Our described method, using drift detection to
adapt the RoCs to changes in the time-series
• TSMS-St: Static variant where drift-detection is disabled.
RoCs are created at the beginning of the forecasting
process and remain unchanged over time
• TSMS-Per: A periodic, blind update of the RoCs. We
chose to update the RoCs automatically 10 times in total
over the length of Xtest at fixed, equally spaced intervals
Additionally, there are two hyperparameters in our method
that we tuned: ω, the size of larger, equal-size windows
during the RoC creation process, and τ, the threshold used
when refining the data points before addition to an RoC. We
conducted a hyperparameter search and found ω = 25 and
τ = 0.01 to perform very well.
Next, we shortly describe the baseline methods we compare
ourselves against:
• Exponential Smoothing ETS [32] and ARIMA [32]
which are included as simple, yet important baselines.
• KNN-RoC [10] computes static RoCs using a validation
set as input and the rank of the individual candidates
in the pool P on each interval as labels for a KNN
classifier, using DTW distance and for single model
selection K = 1, is used for comparison. The KNN
predicts which candidate should be selected at test time
• CNN and CNN-LSTM [33] are Convolutional Neu-
ral Network baselines with either a fully-connected or
LSTM-based forecaster after the features are extracted
• DETS [19] is an extension of SWE [3], which is an
ensemble method that weights the ensemble members
based on past performance. DETS extends this by se-
lecting a subset only and using a smoothing function on
the average over recent errors for weighting. We compare
against selecting the model with the largest weight
• ADE [7], [19] was recently developed for an online
dynamic ensemble of forecasters construction. A meta-
learning strategy is used that specializes base models
across the time series to determine their RoC (see Section
II). However, instead of selecting many models, we select
the best-performing model using the same principle.
Because of our use of tree-based model, we want to high-
light that we cannot compare ourselves to OS-PGSM [11]
because the authors utilize Grad-CAM [28], which only works
for Convolutional Neural Networks.
C. Performance Comparison Results
Table III shows a comparison between our method, in-
cluding its different variations, to the previously mentioned
baselines over 1032 datasets. We computed the average rank
achieved after measuring the loss using the RMSE score. As
can be seen, the drift-aware variant of TSMS achieves the
smallest average rank and outperforms other online-selection
baselines such as DETS, ADE, and KNN-RoC. For com-
parison, we also include the best-performing model from P,
denoted as Best-Single, and find that it also outperforms the
model-selection baselines, indicating that they are not able to
predict the performance of this single model on the test data
very well. TSMS is also able to outperform CNN-LSTM and

Method
Avg. Rank
Std Deviation
Wins
Losses
ETS
7.14
4.53
789 (740)
212 (209)
ADE
7.03
3.01
687 (601)
314 (218)
ARIMA
6.46
5.04
737 (679)
264 (200)
KNN-RoC
6.36
2.71
633 (578)
368 (221)
DETS
6.31
2.61
641 (596)
360 (295)
CNN
5.49
3.35
682 (638)
319 (314)
CNN-LSTM
4.85
2.68
602 (518)
399 (378)
TSMS-St
4.64
2.88
361 (279)
640 (427)
Best-Single
4.36
2.71
582 (502)
419 (414)
TSMS-Per
4.19
2.60
334 (240)
667 (482)
TSMS
4.13
2.49
- (-)
- (-)
TABLE III
COMPARISON (IN TERMS OF AVERAGE RANK ACHIEVED OVER 1032
DATASETS) BETWEEN OUR METHOD AND THE BASELINES. BEST-SINGLE
IS THE MODEL FROM P THAT PERFORMED BEST OVER ALL DATASETS.
Method
TSMS
TSMS-St
TSMS-Per
Runtime [s]
1.39 ± 1.28
0.41 ± 0.31
1.71 ± 1.28
TABLE IV
MEAN RUNTIME (IN SECONDS) PLUS/MINUS ONE STANDARD DEVIATION,
MEASURED OVER ALL DATASETS.
CNN while being more interpretable at the same time due to
our limitations of utilizing depth-restricted tree-based models.
We also ran a signed Wilcoxon rank test [34] on the wins and
losses and indicate the significant wins/losses in paranthesis
(significance level 0.05). The results clearly answer research
question Q1.
In comparison to two different versions of TSMS, namely
TSMS-St, which only creates the RoCs once at the start of in-
ference and keeps static, as well as TSMS-Per, where the RoCs
are blindly recreated, we find that an informed, i.e., based on
the detection of concept drifts, and infrequent recreation of the
RoCs leads to better results in terms of predictive performance.
We observe that the periodic approach is only slightly better in
terms of average ranking than the static approach, indicating
that a blind recreation of RoCs is in most cases not worth the
additional computational overhead. We additionally compare
the runtime of each variant over a set of all datasets and report
the average runtime, and its standard deviation, in Table IV.
Unsurprisingly, TSMS-St is, on average, the fastest method
since the RoC recreation procedure takes up most of the
runtime. The adaptive variant TSMS falls in between the
static and periodic variants, suggesting that the small trade in
runtimes is worthwhile for improving predictive performance.
With these insights, we provide answers for research question
Q2.
D. Explainability
In this part, we answer research question Q3 by showing
how TSMS supports explainability and covers multiple aspects
of the forecasting task:
• A1: Which input time series parts, i.e., lagged values, are
more relevant for the prediction, and how this relevance
evolves over time?
15
13
11
9
7
5
3
1
lag
−2.5
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Why was forecaster fi chosen?
Window to forecast
Closest RoC
Furthest RoC
15
12
9
6
3
0
lag
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Why did forecaster fi predict its output?
Feature intervals
Window to forecast
Ground Truth
Forecasted value
Closest RoC
Forecasted value
Furthest RoC
Shapley values
for prediction
Fig. 1. Visualization of A2 and A3 by investigating the closest and furthest
RoC members, in addition to Shapley values and feature decision boundaries.
• A2: Why a given model i is chosen to forecast the series
at time t?
• A3: Why a specific predicted value ˆx(t+1) is output by
the selected model at time instant t?
• A4: What is the impact of concept drift occurrence on
the pre-computed RoCs?
First, on the lower half of Figure 1, we can see the Shapley
values of the 15-time-lagged values used to forecast the
true value of the time series marked in blue. As mentioned
earlier, by swapping the value function used for estimating
Shapley values, we can explain both the achieved loss and
the prediction itself. For the prediction, the higher the bars
(in blue), the more important the lag information fed to the
forecasting model is.

15
12
9
6
3
0
lag
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Feature importance f7 on x(t) before drift
15
12
9
6
3
0
lag
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Feature importance f9 on x(t+19) after drift
Prediction before
Ground Truth
Shapley values
Prediction after
Fig. 2. Comparison of Shapley values for prediction before and after concept
drift where the chosen forecaster changes.
As can be seen, many lags among the 15 lags seem to be
irrelevant to predict the next value of the series. Surprisingly,
this information is sparse and not strongly condensed around
the most recent lags, in opposite to the assumption made by
most of the traditional state-of-the-art models, including the
Box-Jenkins ARIMA family of models [35]. This can be ex-
plained by the fact that these models assume the stationarity of
the time series-generating process and the absence of concept
drifts. So, once analyzed, lag information and contribution
in these models are kept fixed and restricted to the most
three to four recent lagged observations [3]. However, this
is not the case for many real-world scenarios. As can be
seen in Figure 2, the second most recent lag (lag 2) that
used to have very low importance for the prediction before
the occurrence of concept drift has become the most relevant
one after the detection of drift. This shift in the importance
of the input highlights the necessity of either triggering an
update of the model using retraining or switching to another
model that better handles the new dependence structure in the
data after the occurrence of concept drift. Figure 2 shows that
our framework ensures this update by switching to another
model after drift detection, which predicts the true value of
the series better. The prediction marked in red would be the
forecast value if we stuck to the old model after drift detection,
while the prediction marked in orange is the value output by
the model selected by our method, which is closer to the
true target value marked in green. Another potential insight
provided by the tree-based models in relation to understanding
the contribution of the lag information in the input time series
to the prediction is provided by the paths taken in each tree.
These paths enable the construction of boundaries around each
lag via each node split criterion. This means that changing
the input value anywhere between the yellow bars in Fig. 1
will have no effect on the models’ prediction, which helps in
understanding the robustness of the tree-based models. This
knowledge is also of great help to forecasting practitioners as
it helps them in conducting input change sensitivity analysis
which is required in many forecasting financial and trading
applications. This addresses the explainability aspect raised in
Question A1.
As previously explained, the reason for selecting forecaster
i at time t is because its RoC contains a subseries that is
the most similar to the current input pattern T (−L:)X(t) in
terms of Dynamic Time Warping. In Figure 1 (upper half),
we show the closest RoC marked in green to the current input
pattern T (−L:)X(t). Its corresponding forecaster is thus chosen
to forecast this data point. Examining the predictions of the
model with the furthest RoC shown in red in Figure 1 (lower
half) and the prediction of our selected model marked in green
validates our RoC-based selection as showing competence on
patterns similar to the input pattern in question reflects the
readiness of the model to process this pattern and output a
prediction based on it. Hence, the large deviation between the
RoC of the furthest model and the current pattern in Figure
1 on the upper half is reflected in its prediction shown in the
lower half. This answers the explainability aspect raised in
Question A2.
Next, we provide some insights into how our method can
help us to anticipate the model’s output. This is one of the
main important aspects of explainability as stated by Kim et
al. [36], who define explainability as the degree to which a
human can consistently predict the model’s result. In Figure
3, we visualize the RoC of the selected model f17, including
their subsequent values seen during RoC creation, which are
marked in a dotted line. A clear similarity between the output
forecast by the model and the values that are subsequent to the
RoCs sequences can be observed. The range of the subsequent
values helps us in estimating the expected forecast value by
the selected model on average. Comparing the predicted value
by the model with this estimated average can be considered a
debugging tool that helps us in detecting abnormal behavior
of the model or check for significant changes in the data. This
addresses the explainability aspect raised in Question A3.
To get a better understanding of the impact of drift detection,
we investigate two scenarios. First, shown in Fig. 4, is a
scenario where the drift detection was triggered but where
the same model that would have been chosen without a drift
was chosen regardless. Nevertheless, as can be seen in a
comparison between the middle and lower figures, in this case,
the closest RoC member did, in fact, change. The new closest

15
12
9
6
3
0
lag
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
15
12
9
6
3
0
lag
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Visualization of RoC for model f17
Ground Truth
Prediction
Closest RoC
member
Fig. 3. Visualization for R17
RoC member (shown in orange) much more resembles the
input in comparison to the previously closest RoC member
(shown in red), indicating that the enrichment of the RoCs
after the detected drift did adapt the RoCs to the time-changing
data.
Lastly, we consider a scenario where the chosen model did,
in fact, change after a drift was triggered. As can be seen in
Fig. 5, without enrichment of the RoCs, f13 would have been
chosen over f14 in this case. However, when investigating
the prediction (upper figure), the prediction of f16 (yellow)
is closer to the ground truth value (green) compared to the
prediction of f13 (red). Additionally, by investigating each
model’s RoC (middle and lower figure), it becomes clear that
f16 contains a member that resembles the input a lot more in
comparison to the closest member in R13. These observations
highlight the usefulness of the drift-aware adaptation of the
RoCs over time. This answers the research question A4.
E. Discussion and future work
The empirical results indicate that TSMS performs very
well in comparison to the tested baselines while simultane-
ously allowing insight into the decision-making process. We
argue that this combination is crucial when these methods
are to be applied in real-world settings, especially in safety-
critical applications where explainability and ML transparency
15
13
11
9
7
5
3
1
lag
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Datapoint to forecast
15
13
11
9
7
5
3
1
lag
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
R10 before drift
15
13
11
9
7
5
3
1
lag
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
R10 after drift
Change in closest subseries for model f10
Fig. 4.
Comparison of R10 before and after a drift. Closest RoC member
shown in orange and red, respectively.
are required. We showcased, moreover, that TSMS is able
to adapt well to changes in the underlying time series data
without the need to retrain every model in the pool.
In future work, we plan to extend our method to hybrid
model pools by using the most efficient Shapley value estima-
tion methods for each model family, such as TreeSHAP for
tree-based models, DeepSHAP [37] for Neural Networks, as
well as KernelSHAP [37] for remaining models. Additionally,
we plan to investigate the effect of other drift detection meth-
ods, especially in terms other than monitoring the deviation
of the time series mean value. Lastly, we want to enhance the

15
12
9
6
3
0
lag
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Prediction using selected models
15
12
9
6
3
0
lag
0.175
0.200
0.225
0.250
0.275
0.300
RoCs of f13 (best before drift)
15
12
9
6
3
0
lag
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
RoCs of f14 (best after drift)
Change in model selection after drift detection
Window to forecast
Ground truth
Prediction f13
Prediction f14
Closest in R13
RoC member
Closest in R14
Fig. 5. Comparison of R13 and R14 before and after a drift. Closest RoC
member shown in orange and red, respectively.
explainability aspects further by reducing the RoCs number to
the most important ones, which is highly important, especially
for long time series where the number of RoCs is expected to
grow very largely.
V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper introduces TSMS a novel method for online
adaptive model selection on a pool of tree-based models.
Through the use of Shapley values, we are able to gain insight
into its decision-making process, both for model selection,
as well as for the individual model predictions. We showed
the advantages of TSMS on 1032 real-world datasets, both in
terms of predictive performance as well as its explainability
aspects.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research has been funded by the Federal Ministry of
Education and Research of Germany and the state of North
Rhine-Westphalia as part of the Lamarr Institute for Machine
Learning and Artificial Intelligence
