Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
ASPeRiX, a First Order Forward Chaining
Approach for Answer Set Computing ∗
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
LERIA, University of Angers,
2 Boulevard Lavoisier,
49045 Angers Cedex 01, France

submitted 24 March 2014; revised 24 November 2014; accepted 25 February 2015
Abstract
The natural way to use Answer Set Programming (ASP) to represent knowledge in Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence or to solve a combinatorial problem is to elaborate a ﬁrst order logic
program with default negation. In a preliminary step this program with variables is trans-
lated in an equivalent propositional one by a ﬁrst tool: the grounder. Then, the proposi-
tional program is given to a second tool: the solver. This last one computes (if they exist)
one or many answer sets (stable models) of the program, each answer set encoding one
solution of the initial problem. Until today, almost all ASP systems apply this two steps
computation.
In this article, the project ASPeRiX is presented as a ﬁrst order forward chaining ap-
proach for Answer Set Computing. This project was amongst the ﬁrst to introduce an
approach of answer set computing that escapes the preliminary phase of rule instantiation
by integrating it in the search process. The methodology applies a forward chaining of
ﬁrst order rules that are grounded on the ﬂy by means of previously produced atoms.
Theoretical foundations of the approach are presented, the main algorithms of the ASP
solver ASPeRiX are detailed and some experiments and comparisons with existing systems
are provided.
KEYWORDS: Answer Set Programming, solver implementation, grounding on the
ﬂy, ﬁrst order, forward chaining.
1 Introduction
Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a very convenient paradigm to represent knowl-
edge in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and to encode combinatorial problems (Baral
2003; Niemel¨a 1999). It has its roots in nonmonotonic reasoning and logic program-
ming and has led to a lot of works since the seminal paper (Gelfond and Lifschitz
1988). Beyond its ability to formalize various problems from AI or to encode com-
binatorial problems, ASP provides also an interesting way to practically solve such
problems since some eﬃcient solvers are available. In few words, if someone wants
∗This work was supported by ANR (National Research Agency), project ASPIQ under the ref-
erence ANR-12-BS02-0003.
arXiv:1503.07717v2  [cs.LO]  16 Nov 2016

2
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
to use ASP to solve a problem, he has to write a logic program in term of rules in a
purely declarative manner in such a way that the answer sets (initially called stable
models in (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988)) of the program represent the solutions of
his original problem.
Illustration of ASP formalism Let us take two typical examples for which ASP
is suitable: the ﬁrst example is devoted to knowledge representation in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and the second one is a combinatorial problem.
KR problem This ﬁrst example deals with default reasoning on incomplete infor-
mation. It consists in describing knowledge about birds.
bird(titi).
ostrich(lola).
bird(X) ←ostrich(X).
fly(X) ←bird(X), not ostrich(X).
non fly(X) ←ostrich(X).
The meaning of the two ﬁrst rules is that we have two objects: titi which is a
bird and lola which is an ostrich. The meaning of the other rules is that an ostrich
is a bird, a bird which is not an ostrich ﬂies and an ostrich does not ﬂy. Here,
we are interested in deducing some properties about titi and lola. Intuitively, we
want that titi ﬂies, lola is a bird and lola does not ﬂy. Concerning the information
that lola does not ﬂy, let us notice that it is obtained by applying the last rule
since lola is an ostrich and, then, the next to last rule cannot be applied in pres-
ence of ostrich lola due to the part not of this rule, called default negation. Here,
there is only one answer set which contains all the deduced pieces of information:
{bird(titi), fly(titi), ostrich(lola), bird(lola), non fly(lola)}.
CSP problem The second example deals with the representation of a combinatorial
problem: possibles worlds are represented by nonmonotonic “guess” rules and choice
between these worlds is expressed by constraints. The problem is then to ﬁnd (at
least) one solution corresponding to a world verifying the constraints. This example
is about graph 2-coloring.
vertex(1).
vertex(2).
edge(1, 2).
red(X) ←vertex(X), not blue(X).
blue(X) ←vertex(X), not red(X).
←red(X), red(Y ), edge(X, Y ).
←blue(X), blue(Y ), edge(X, Y ).
This represents a graph with two vertices and an edge between them (three ﬁrst
rules). The two following rules are guess rules. The fourth (resp. ﬁfth) rule means
that a vertex which is not colored in blue (resp. red) has to be colored in red (resp.
blue). The two last rules are constraints. They mean that two adjacent vertices
can not have the same color. Here, we want to ﬁnd how the two vertices should be
colored (knowing that two colors are available). Intuitively, we have two solutions:

ASPeRiX
3
one with vertex 1 colored in blue and vertex 2 colored in red and the other one with
vertex 1 colored in red and vertex 2 colored in blue. This corresponds to the two
answer sets of the program: {vertex(1), vertex(2), edge(1, 2), blue(1), red(2)} and
{vertex(1), vertex(2), edge(1, 2), red(1), blue(2)}. However, let us note that, in this
kind of problem, we are often interested in ﬁnding one solution rather than ﬁnding
all the possible solutions (and the determination of only one answer set is enough).
As regards the form of the rules, we can notice that a program usually contains
diﬀerent kind of rules. The simplest ones are facts as (bird(titi).) or (vertex(1).) rep-
resenting data of the particular problem. Some ones are about background knowl-
edge as (bird(X) ←ostrich(X).). Some others can be nonmonotonic as (fly(X) ←
bird(X), not ostrich(X).) for reasoning with incomplete knowledge. In other cases,
especially for combinatorial problems, nonmonotonic rules can be used to encode
alternative potential solutions of a problem as (red(X) ←vertex(X), not blue(X).)
and (blue(X) ←vertex(X), not red(X).) expressing the two exclusive possibilities
to color a vertex in a graph. Last, special headless rules are used to represent con-
straints of the problem to solve as (←red(X), red(Y ), edge(X, Y ).), here, in order
to not color with red two vertices linked by an edge.
With the examples above we can point out that knowledge representation in ASP
is done by means of ﬁrst order rules. But, from a theoretical point of view, answer
set deﬁnition is given for propositional programs and the answer sets of a ﬁrst order
program are those of its ground instantiation with respect to its Herbrand universe
(i.e. without variables). The ﬁrst order program has to be seen as an intensional
version of the grounded propositional corresponding program.
ASP systems Concerning the ASP sytems, their main goal is how to compute
answer sets in an eﬃcient way. Let us recall some of their main features. Until
today, almost all systems available to compute the answer sets of a program follow
the architecture described in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Architecture of answer set computation
An ASP system begins its work by an instantiation phase in order to obtain a
propositional program (and, as said above, the answer sets of the ﬁrst order program
will be those of its ground instantiation). After this ﬁrst grounding phase realized
by a grounder the solver starts the real phase of answer set computation by dealing

4
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
with a ﬁnite, but sometimes huge, propositional program. The main goal of each
grounding system is to generate all propositional rules that can be relevant for a
solver and only these ones, while preserving answer sets of the original program.
Current intelligent grounders simplify rules as much as possible. Simpliﬁcations can
lead to compute the unique answer set of some programs (for instance, programs
that does not contain default negation) but it is no longer possible once the problem
is combinatorial. Anyway, the grounding phase is ﬁrstly and fully processed before
calling the solver.
For the grounder box we can cite Lparse (Syrj¨anen 1998) and Gringo (Gebser
et al. 2011), and for the solver box Smodels (Simons et al. 2002) and Clasp (Geb-
ser et al. 2012). A particular family of solvers are Assat (Lin and Zhao 2004),
Cmodels (Giunchiglia et al. 2006) and Pbmodels (Liu and Truszczynski 2005), since
they transform the answer set computation problem into a (pseudo) boolean model
computation problem and use a (pseudo) SAT solver as an internal black box. In
the system DLV (Leone et al. 2006), symbolized in Fig. 1 by the dash-line rectangle,
the grounder ((Calimeri et al. 2008) describes a parallel version) is incorporated
as an internal function. In the same way, WASP (Alviano et al. 2013) uses the DLV
grounder (Faber et al. 2012).
Grounding The main drawback of the preliminary grounding phase is that it may
lead to a lot of useless work as illustrated in the following examples.
The ﬁrst examples illustrate the fact that the separation between the instantiation
phase and the computation phase can prevent the (eﬃcient) use of information
relevant to the computation.
Example 1. Let P1a be the following ASP program:
P1a =











a ←not b.,
b ←not a.,
←a.,
p(0).,
p(X + 1) ←a, p(X).











Grounding of P1a is inﬁnite (if an upper bound for integers is not ﬁxed) while it
has a unique (and ﬁnite) answer set {b, p(0)}.
Let P1b be the following ASP program:
P1b =











p(1)., p(2)., . . . , p(N).,
a ←not b.,
aa(X, Y ) ←pa(X), pa(Y ), not bb(X, Y ).,
b ←not a.,
bb(X, Y ) ←pb(X), pb(Y ), not cc(X, Y ).,
pa(X) ←a, p(X).,
cc(X, Y ) ←aa(X, Y ), X < Y.,
pb(X) ←b, p(X).,
←a.











From the program P1b, current grounders generate roughly 2.5 × N 2 rules.
In both programs, because of the constraint (←a.) that eliminates from the
possible solutions every atom set containing a, it is easy to see that rules (p(X+1) ←

ASPeRiX
5
a, p(X).) for P1a and (pa(X) ←a, p(X).) for P1b are useless since they can never
contribute to generate an answer set of the corresponding program. In P1a these
useless rules are inﬁnite (p(X + 1) ←a, p(X).) while they are “only” large in P1b:
N rules with positive body containing a, like (pa(1) ←a, p(1).), and then, the N 2
rules with pa(X) in their positive body are useless too. In defense of the actual
grounders, their inability to eliminate these particular rules is not surprising since
the reason justifying this elimination is the consequence of a reasoning taking into
account the semantics of ASP. Thus, if we want to limit as much as possible the
number of rules and atoms to deal with, we have not to separate grounding and
answer set computing.
Example P1a is a typical situation for planning problems where step i+1 must be
generated only if the goal is not reached at step i. Such situations are not tractable
by grounders. That is the reason why the number of steps needed to reach the goal
(or at least the maximum number of allowed steps) is given as input of planning
problems (in ASP competition for example). Yet it is rather counterintuitive having
to know the step number to solve the problem before solving.
The next example illustrates that the grounding phase generates too much infor-
mation regarding the computation of one answer set.
Example 2. Let P2 be the program, as given in (Niemel¨a 1999), encoding a 3-
coloring problem on a N vertices graph organized as a bicycle wheel (see below). v
stands for vertex, e for edge, c for color, col for colored by, ncol for not colored by.
P2 =

















v(1)., . . . , v(N).,
c(red)., c(blue)., c(green).,
e(1, 2)., . . . , e(1, N).,
e(2, 3)., e(3, 4)., . . . , e(N, 2).,
col(V, C) ←v(V ), c(C), not ncol(V, C).,
ncol(V, C) ←col(V, D), c(C), C ̸= D.,
←e(V, U), col(V, C), col(U, C).

















.
From P2, current grounders generate about 18N rules. If N is even then P2 has
no answer set and if N is odd then it has 6 answer sets.
Suppose that P2 has an answer set in which there is col(1, red). Obviously, all the
N −1 constraints like (←e(1, U), col(1, red), col(U, red).) for all U ∈{2, . . . , N}
are necessary because they have to be checked. But, all the other constraints like (←
e(1, U), col(1, blue), col(U, blue).), and (←e(1, U), col(1, green), col(U, green).)
for all U ∈{2, . . . , N} can be considered as useless since vertex 1 is not colored by
blue or green. However, all these 2N −2 constraints have been generated. So, the
time consumed by this task is clearly a lost time and the memory space used by
these data could have been saved. Thus, if we are searching for a single answer set,
a lot of work would be done for nothing since the grounded program contains the
enumeration of all solutions when only one is searched.
The last exemple shows that when the number of solutions is very important
ASP solvers have more diﬃculty to ﬁnd one solution due to the grounding phase
generating a lot of information concerning all the solutions.
Example 3. Let P3 be the program, inspired from one given in (Niemel¨a 1999),
encoding the Hamiltonian cycle problem in a N vertices complete oriented graph. v

6
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
stands for vertex, a for arc, hc for in Hamiltonian cycle, nhc for not in Hamiltonian
cycle, s for start and r for reached.
P3 =





















s(1).,
v(1)., . . . , v(N).,
a(X, Y ) ←v(X), v(Y ).,
hc(X, Y ) ←s(X), a(X, Y ), not nhc(X, Y ).,
hc(X, Y ) ←r(X), a(X, Y ), not nhc(X, Y ).,
nhc(X, Y ) ←hc(X, Z), a(X, Y ), Y ̸= Z.,
nhc(X, Y ) ←hc(Z, Y ), a(X, Y ), X ̸= Z.,
r(Y ) ←hc(X, Y ).,
←v(X), not r(X).





















This program has (N −1)! answer sets. Whatever the number of desired solutions,
current grounders generate about 2N 2 rules with hc predicate as head and about
2N 3 rules with nhc predicate as head. Thus, even if we restrict our attention to the
computation of one answer set, all the ASP solvers preceded by a grounding phase
consume a huge amount of time when the graph has a few hundred vertices.
This previous example illustrates another strange phenomenon. Sometimes, solv-
ing a trivial problem, as ﬁnding one Hamiltonian cycle in a complete graph, is
impossible for ASP systems. This is very counterintuitive since, in whole general-
ity, in combinatorial problem solving the more solutions the problem has, the easier
it is to ﬁnd one of them. Again, the bottleneck for ASP systems seems to come from
the huge number of rules and atoms that are generated in ﬁrst, delaying and making
the resolution more diﬃcult than it should be.
Beyond these particular examples, the point to stress is that grounders generate in
extension all the search space (for all potential solutions) that they give then to the
solver. But, this is clearly not the approach of usual search algorithms. A classical
coloring algorithm does not ﬁrstly enumerate, in extension, all possible colorations
for every vertex in the graph. A ﬁnite domain solver makes choices by instantiating
some variables, propagates the consequences of these choices, checks the constraints
and by backtracking explores its search space. Following this strategy it instantiates
and desinstantiates variables describing the problem to solve all along its search
process. But, it does not build, a priori and explicitly, all the possible tuples of
variables and constraints representing the problem to solve. That is why we think
that if we want to use ASP to solve very large problems we have to realize the
grounding process during the search process and not before it.
Is is important to notice that few works advocate the grounding of the program
during the search of an answer set and not by a preprocessing. Some aim at solving
the grounding bottleneck by combining ASP to constraint programming: (Baselice
et al. 2005) proposes to reduce the memory requirements for a very speciﬁc class of
programs, i.e. multi-sorted logic programs with cardinality constraints, (Balduccini
2009) proposes an algorithm to make cooperate an ASP solver and a Constraint
Logic Programming solver in such a way that ASP is viewed as a speciﬁcation
language for constraint satisfaction problems and (Ostrowski and Schaub 2012) de-
scribes the Clingcon system which is a tight cooperation between the ASP solver
Clasp and the Constraint Programming solver GeCode. The theory solvers (mainly
arithmetic solvers) forbid instances that are in conﬂict with the constraints reduc-

ASPeRiX
7
ing by this way the size of the grounding image. Some others works use a forward
chaining of rules that are instantiated as and when required: GASP (Dal Pal`u et al.
2009) and ASPeRiX (Lef`evre and Nicolas 2009a; Lef`evre and Nicolas 2009b)) de-
veloped at the same time, and more recently OMiGA (Dao-Tran et al. 2012). They
are all based on the notion of computation given in (Liu et al. 2010). GASP is im-
plemented in Prolog and Constraint Logic Programming over ﬁnite domains. Each
rule instantiation and propagation is realized by building and solving a CSP. OMiGA
is implemented in Java and uses an underlying Rete network for instantiation and
propagation. ASPeRiX, which is the one presented in this article, is implemented in
C++. Instantiation and propagation are inspired by previous work realized on the
DLV grounder which is based on the semi-naive evaluation technique of (Ullman
1989).
Last, concerning a direct handling of ﬁrst order programs, let us note that there
exists some works (Gottlob et al. 1996; Eiter et al. 1997; Ferraris et al. 2007; Lin
and Zhou 2007; Truszczynski 2012) dealing with ﬁrst order nonmonotonic logic
programs. These works establish some relations between stable model semantics
and constraints systems or second order logic or circumscription but they are not
really concerned by the explicit computation of answer sets.
The present paper is an extended version of (Lef`evre and Nicolas 2009a; Lef`evre
and Nicolas 2009b). It details our approach of answer set computation that escapes
the preliminary grounding phase by integrating it in the search process and includes:
• theoretical foundations of the approach, “mbt ASPeRiX computation”, with
complete proofs; these computations are based on those of (Liu et al. 2010)
and include use of constraints and must-be-true propagation in order to guide
the search;
• a detailed description of the main algorithms;
• experimentations of the resulting system, ASPeRiX, and comparisons with
other similar systems and other “classical” ASP systems. Our methodology
is particularly well suited for:
— solving easy problems with a large grounding,
— ﬁnding only one answer set for a program whose search space is large and
proportional to the desired number of solutions,
— solving problems for which pre-grounding is impossible because domains
are inﬁnite or open, or because some pieces of knowledge come from outside
(distributed systems for example).
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we recall the theoretical back-
grounds about ASP necessary to the understanding of our work. In Section 3 we
present our ﬁrst order rule oriented approach of answer set computation and its
implementation in the solver ASPeRiX. In Section 4 experimental results are pre-
sented. We conclude in Section 5 by citing some new perspectives for ASP as a
result of our innovative approach. Proofs of theorems are reported in Appendix B.

8
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
2 Theoretical Background
In this section, we give the main backgrounds of ASP framework useful to the
understanding of this article.
Set V denotes the inﬁnite countable set of variables, set FS denotes the set of
function symbols, set CS denotes the set of constant symbols and set PS denotes
the set of predicate symbols. It is assumed that the sets V, CS, FS and PS are
disjoint and that the set CS is not empty. Function ar denotes the arity function
from FS to N∗and from PS to N which associates to each function or predicate
symbol its arity. Set T denotes the set of terms deﬁned by induction as follows:
• if v ∈V then v ∈T,
• if c ∈CS then c ∈T,
• if f ∈FS with ar(f) = n > 0 and t1, . . . , tn ∈T then f(t1, . . . , tn) ∈T.
A ground term is a term built over only the two last items of the previous deﬁnition.
The Herbrand universe is the set of all ground terms. Set A denotes the set of atoms
deﬁned as follows:
• if a ∈PS with ar(a) = 0 then a ∈A,
• if p ∈PS with ar(p) = n > 0 and t1, . . . , tn ∈T then p(t1, . . . , tn) ∈A.
A ground atom is an atom built over only ground terms. The Herbrand base denoted
A is the set of all ground atoms.
A normal logic program (or simply program) is a set of rules like
c ←a1, . . . , an, not b1, . . . , not bm.
n ≥0, m ≥0
(1)
where c, a1, . . . , an, b1, . . . , bm are atoms.
The intuitive meaning of such a rule is: ”if all the ai’s are true and it may be
assumed that all the bj’s are false then one can conclude that c is true”. Symbol
not denotes the default negation. A rule with no default negation is a deﬁnite rule
otherwise its is a nonmonotonic rule. A program with only deﬁnite rules is a deﬁnite
logic program. A program is a propositional program if all the predicate symbols are
of arity 0.
For each program P, we consider that the set CS (resp. FS and PS) consists
of all constant (resp. function and predicate) symbols appearing in P. These sets
determine the set of ground terms and the set of ground atoms of the program.
A substitution for a rule r ∈P is a mapping from the set of variables from r to
the set of ground terms of P. A ground rule r′ is a ground instance of a rule r if
there is a substitution θ for r such that r′ = θ(r), the rule obtained by substituting
every variable in r by the corresponding ground term in θ. The program P (with
variables) has to be seen as an intensional version of the program ground(P) deﬁned
as follows: given a rule r, ground(r) is the set of all ground instances of r and
then, ground(P) = S
r∈P ground(r). Program ground(P) may be considered as a
propositional program. Let us note that the use of function symbols leads to an
inﬁnite Herbrand universe, this point will be discussed in Section 3.5.

ASPeRiX
9
Example 4. The program
P4 =



n(1)., n(2).,
a(X) ←n(X), not b(X).,
b(X) ←n(X), not a(X).



is a shorthand for the program
ground(P4) =











n(1)., n(2).,
a(1) ←n(1), not b(1).,
b(1) ←n(1), not a(1).,
a(2) ←n(2), not b(2).,
b(2) ←n(2), not a(2).











For a rule r (or by extension for a rule set), we deﬁne:
• head(r) = c its head,
• body+(r) = {a1, . . . , an} its positive body and
• body−(r) = {b1, . . . , bm} its negative body.
The immediate consequence operator for a deﬁnite logic program P is TP : 2A →
2A such that TP (X) = {head(r) | r ∈P, body+(r) ⊆X}. The least Herbrand
model of P, denoted Cn(P), is the smallest set of atoms closed under P, i.e., the
smallest set X such that TP (X) ⊆X. It can be computed as the least ﬁx-point of
the consequence operator TP .
The reduct P X of a normal logic program P w.r.t. an atom set X ⊆A is the
deﬁnite logic program deﬁned by:
P X = {head(r) ←body+(r). | r ∈P, body−(r) ∩X = ∅}
and it is the core of the deﬁnition of an answer set.
Deﬁnition 1. (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988) Let P be a normal logic program and
X an atom set. X is an answer set of P if and only if X = Cn(P X).
For instance, the propositional program {a ←not b., b ←not a.} has two answer
sets {a} and {b}.
Example 5. Taking again the program P4, ground(P4) has four answer sets:
{a(1), a(2), n(1), n(2)},
{a(1), b(2), n(1), n(2)},
{a(2), b(1), n(1), n(2)},
{b(1), b(2), n(1), n(2)}
that are thus the answer sets of P4.
There is another deﬁnition of an anwer set for a normal logic program based on
the notion of generating rules which are the rules participating to the construction
of the answer set. These rules are important in our approach because they are
exactly the rules ﬁred in the ASPeRiX computation presented in the next section.
Deﬁnition 2. (Konczak et al. 2006) Let P be a normal logic program and X be
an atom set. GRP (X), the set of generating rules of P, is deﬁned as GRP (X) =
{r ∈P | body+(r) ⊆X and body−(r) ∩X = ∅}.
Deﬁnition 3. (Konczak et al. 2006) Let R be a set of rules. R is grounded if there
exists an enumeration ⟨ri⟩i∈[1..n] of the rules of R such that ∀i ∈[1..n], body+(ri) ⊆
head({rj | j < i}).

10
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
The next theorem is inspired by (Konczak et al. 2006). In (Konczak et al. 2006),
X is an answer set of a program P if and only if X = Cn(GRP (X)∅). It can be
reformulated by:
Theorem 1. (Konczak et al. 2006) Let P be a normal logic program and X be an
atom set. Then, X is an answer set of P if and only if X = head(GRP (X)) and
GRP (X) is grounded.
Special headless rules, called constraints, are admitted and considered equivalent
to rules like (bug ←. . . , not bug.) where bug is a new symbol appearing nowhere
else. For instance, the program {a ←not b., b ←not a., ←a.} has one, and only
one, answer set {b} because constraint (←a.) prevents a to be in an answer set.
When dealing with default negation, we call a literal an atom, a, or the negation
of an atom, not a. A literal a is said to be positive, and not a is said to be negative.
The corresponding atom a of a literal l is denoted by at(l). For a literal l where
at(l) = a, let us denote pred(l) the function such that pred(not a) = pred(a) = p
with p the predicate symbol of the atom a.
For purposes of knowledge representation, one may have to use conjointly strong
negation (like ¬a) and default negation (like not a) inside a same program. This is
possible in ASP by means of an extended logic program (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1991)
in which rules are built with classical literals (i.e. an atom a or its strong negation
¬a) instead of atoms only. Semantics of extended logic programs distinguishes in-
consistent answer sets from absence of answer set. But, if we are not interested in
inconsistent answer sets, the semantics associated to an extended logic program is
reducible to answer set semantics for a normal logic program using constraints by
taking into account the following conventions:
• every classical literal ¬x is encoded by the atom nx,
• for every atom x, the constraint (←x, nx.) is added.
By this way, only consistent answer sets are kept. In this article, we do not focus
on strong negation and literal will never stand for classical literal.
Let us note that one can also use some particular atoms for (in)equalities and
simple arithmetic calculus on (positive and negative) integers. Arithmetic opera-
tions are treated as a functional arithmetic and comparison relations are treated as
built-in predicates.
Finally, a program P is said to be stratiﬁed iﬀthere is a mapping strat from PS
to N such that, for each ground rule like (1), the two following conditions hold:
• strat(pred(c)) ≥strat(pred(ai)) for all i ∈[1..n]
• strat(pred(c)) > strat(pred(bj)) for all j ∈[1..m]
3 A First Order Forward Chaining Approach for Answer Set
Computing
3.1 ASPeRiX Computation
In this section, a characterization of answer sets for ﬁrst-order normal logic pro-
grams, based on a concept of ASPeRiX computation, is presented. This concept is

ASPeRiX
11
itself based on an abstract notion of computation for ground programs proposed
in (Liu et al. 2010). This computation fundamentally uses a forward chaining of
rules. It builds incrementally the answer set of the program and does not require the
whole set of ground atoms from the beginning of the process. So, it is well suited to
deal directly with ﬁrst order rules by instantiating them during the computation.
The only syntactic restriction required by this methodology is that every rule of a
program must be safe. That is, all variables occurring in the head and all variables
occurring in the negative body of a rule occur also in its positive body. Note that
this condition is already required by all standard evaluation procedures. Moreover,
every constraint (i.e. headless rule) is considered given with the particular head ⊥
and is also safe. For the moment we do not consider function symbols but their use
will be discussed in Section 3.5.
An ASPeRiX computation is deﬁned as a process on a computation state based
on a partial interpretation which is deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 4. A partial interpretation for a program P is a pair ⟨IN, OUT⟩of
disjoint atom sets included in the Herbrand base of P.
Intuitively, all atoms in IN belong to a search answer set and all atoms in OUT
do not.
The notion of partial interpretation deﬁnes diﬀerent status for rules.
Deﬁnition 5. Let r be a ground rule and I = ⟨IN, OUT⟩be a partial interpreta-
tion.
• r is supported w.r.t. I when body+(r) ⊆IN,
• r is blocked w.r.t. I when body−(r) ∩IN ̸= ∅,
• r is unblocked w.r.t. I when body−(r) ⊆OUT,
• r is applicable w.r.t. I when r is supported and not blocked.1
An ASPeRiX computation is a forward chaining process that instantiates and ﬁres
one unique rule at each iteration according to two kinds of inference: a monotonic
step of propagation and a nonmonotonic step of choice. To ﬁre a rule means to add
the head of the rule in the set IN.
Deﬁnition 6. Let P be a set of ﬁrst order rules, I be a partial interpretation and
R be a set of ground rules.
• ∆pro(P, I, R) is the set of all supported deﬁnite rules and supported unblocked
nonmonotonic rules from ground(P) \ R.
• ∆cho(P, I, R) is the set of all applicable nonmonotonic rules from ground(P)\
R.
It is important to notice that the two sets deﬁned above, like the set ground(P),
do not need to be explicitly computed. It is in accordance with the principal aim
of this work that is to avoid their extensive construction. When necessary, a ﬁrst-
order rule of P can be selected and grounded with propositional atoms occurring
1 The negation of blocked, not blocked, is diﬀerent from unblocked.

12
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
in IN and OUT in order to deﬁne a new (not already occurring in R) fully ground
rule member of ∆pro or ∆cho. Because of the safety constraint on rules this full
grounding is always possible. These mechanisms are speciﬁed in more details in
Subsection 3.3. The sets ∆pro and ∆cho are used in the following deﬁnition of an
ASPeRiX computation. Speciﬁc case of constraints (rules with ⊥as head) is treated
by adding ⊥into OUT set. By this way, if a constraint is ﬁred (violated), ⊥should
be added into IN and thus, ⟨IN, OUT⟩would not be a partial interpretation.
Deﬁnition 7. Let P be a ﬁrst order normal logic program. An ASPeRiX computa-
tion for P is a sequence ⟨Ri, Ii⟩∞
i=0 of ground rule sets Ri and partial interpretations
Ii = ⟨INi, OUTi⟩that satisﬁes the following conditions:
• R0 = ∅and I0 = ⟨∅, {⊥}⟩,
• (Revision) ∀i ≥1,
(Propagation) Ri = Ri−1 ∪{ri} with ri ∈∆pro(P, Ii−1, Ri−1)
and Ii = ⟨INi−1 ∪{head(ri)}, OUTi−1⟩
or (Rule choice) ∆pro(P, Ii−1, Ri−1) = ∅,
Ri = Ri−1 ∪{ri} with ri ∈∆cho(P, Ii−1, Ri−1)
and Ii = ⟨INi−1 ∪{head(ri)}, OUTi−1 ∪body−(ri)⟩
or (Stability) Ri = Ri−1 and Ii = Ii−1,
• (Convergence) ∃i ≥0, ∆cho(P, Ii, Ri) = ∅.
The computation is said to converge to the set IN∞= S∞
i=0 INi.
Example 6. Let P6 be the following program:











n(1).
n(X + 1) ←n(X), (X + 1) <= 2.
a(X) ←n(X), not b(X), not b(X + 1).
b(X) ←n(X), not a(X).
c(X) ←n(X), not b(X + 1).












ASPeRiX
13
The following sequence is an ASPeRiX computation for P6:
I0
= ⟨∅, {⊥}⟩
r1
= n(1). ∈∆pro(P6, I0, ∅)
I1
= ⟨{n(1)}, {⊥}⟩
r2
= n(2) ←n(1). ∈∆pro(P6, I1, {r1})
I2
= ⟨{n(1), n(2)}, {⊥}⟩
∆pro(P6, I2, {r1, r2}) = ∅
r3
= a(1) ←n(1), not b(1), not b(2). ∈∆cho(P6, I2, {r1, r2})
I3
= ⟨{n(1), n(2), a(1)}, {⊥, b(1), b(2)}⟩
r4
= c(1) ←n(1), not b(2). ∈∆pro(P6, I3, {r1, r2, r3})
I4
= ⟨{n(1), n(2), a(1), c(1)}, {⊥, b(1), b(2)}⟩
∆pro(P6, I4, {r1, r2, r3, r4}) = ∅
r5
= a(2) ←n(2), not b(2), not b(3). ∈∆cho(P6, I4, {r1, r2, r3, r4})
I5
= ⟨{n(1), n(2), a(1), c(1), a(2)}, {⊥, b(1), b(2), b(3)}⟩
r6
= c(2) ←n(2), not b(3). ∈∆pro(P6, I5, {r1, r2, r3, r4, r5})
I6
= ⟨{n(1), n(2), a(1), c(1), a(2), c(2)}, {⊥, b(1), b(2), b(3)}⟩
∆pro(P6, I6, {r1, r2, r3, r4, r5, r6}) = ∅
∆cho(P6, I6, {r1, r2, r3, r4, r5, r6}) = ∅
I7
= I6
The previous ASPeRiX computation converges to the set
{n(1), n(2), a(1), c(1), a(2), c(2)} which is an answer set for P6.
The following theorem establishes a connection between the results of any ASPeRiX
computation and the answer sets of a normal logic program.
Theorem 2. Let P be a normal logic program and X be an atom set. Then, X
is an answer set of P if and only if there is an ASPeRiX computation ⟨Ri, Ii⟩∞
i=0,
Ii = ⟨INi, OUTi⟩, for P such that IN∞= X.
Let us note that in order to respect the revision principle of an ASPeRiX com-
putation each sequence of partial interpretations must be generated by using the
propagation inference based on rules from ∆pro as long as possible before using
the choice based on ∆cho in order to ﬁre a nonmonotonic rule. Then, because of
the non determinism of the selection of rules from ∆cho, the natural implementa-
tion of this approach leads to a usual search tree where, at each node, one has to
decide whether or not to ﬁre a rule chosen in ∆cho. Persistence of applicability of
the nonmonotonic rule chosen to be ﬁred is ensured by adding to OUT all ground
atoms from its negative body. On the other branch, where the rule is not ﬁred,

14
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
the translation of its negative body into a new constraint ensures that it becomes
impossible to ﬁnd later an answer set in which this rule is not blocked.
Propagation can be improved by using “must-be-true”2 atoms: atoms which have
to be in the answer set to avoid a contradiction or, in other words, atoms already
determined to be in IN but which are not yet be proved to be in.
Example 7. Let (⊥←not b.) be a constraint whose body contains only one literal
not b with b ̸∈IN ∪OUT. In order to have an answer set, b must be in IN so that
the constraint is not applicable but b is not yet proved (it is not the head of a ﬁred
rule). Thus, one can only conclude that b must be true.
Must-be-true atoms can be used during the propagation step in order to reduce
the search space.
Example 8. Let (c ←a, b.) be a rule with a ∈IN and b ̸∈IN but b has been
determined to be a must-be-true atom. The rule may be ﬁred during the propagation
step but one can only conclude that the rule head c must be true (because b is not
yet proved).
Must-be-true atoms can also be used to reduce the size of ∆cho, the set of nom-
monotonic rules that can be chosen to be ﬁred.
Example 9. Let (c ←a, not d.) be a rule with a ∈IN and d ̸∈IN but d has been
determined to be a must-be-true atom. The rule may already be considered to be
blocked, even if d is not yet proved, and thus may be excluded from ∆cho.
Note that must-be-true atoms are ﬁrst used to improve propagation and choice
but have to be proved later, otherwise the computation can not lead to an answer
set.
Notions of partial interpretation, rule status and ASPeRiX computation can be
modiﬁed in order to consider these new elements.
Deﬁnition 8. Let P be a logic program. A mbt partial interpretation for P is a
triplet ⟨IN, MBT, OUT⟩of disjoint atom sets included in the Herbrand base of P.
Deﬁnition 9. Let r be a ground rule and I = ⟨IN, MBT, OUT⟩be a mbt partial
interpretation.
• r is supported w.r.t. I when body+(r) ⊆IN,
• r is weakly supported w.r.t. I when body+(r) ⊆(IN ∪MBT)
• r is blocked w.r.t. I when body−(r) ∩(IN ∪MBT) ̸= ∅,
• r is unblocked w.r.t. I when body−(r) ⊆OUT,
• r is applicable w.r.t. I when r is supported and not blocked.
Propagation is extended by Mbt-propagation: if some rule is weakly supported
and unblocked w.r.t. mbt partial interpretation ⟨IN, MBT, OUT⟩(but is not sup-
ported, i.e., does not belong to ∆pro), then the head of the rule can be added in
MBT set. And ∆cho, the set of rules that can be chosen, is restricted to the rules
that are not blocked w.r.t. mbt partial interpretation.
2 The term “must be true” is ﬁrst used in (Faber et al. 1999).

ASPeRiX
15
Deﬁnition 10. Let P be a set of ﬁrst order rules, I = ⟨IN, MBT, OUT⟩be a mbt
partial interpretation and R be a set of ground rules.
• ∆pro(P, I, R) = {r ∈ground(P) \ R | body+(r) ⊆IN and body−(r) ⊆OUT}
• ∆pro mbt(P, I, R) = {r ∈ground(P)\R | body+(r) ⊆IN ∪MBT, body+(r) ̸⊆
IN and body−(r) ⊆OUT}
• ∆cho mbt(P, I, R) = {r ∈ground(P) \ R | body+(r) ⊆IN, and body−(r) ∩
(IN ∪MBT) = ∅}
A mbt ASPeRiX computation is an ASPeRiX computation with this additional kind
of propagation and with the possibility to block a rule from ∆cho mbt instead of ﬁring
it (“Rule exclusion”). To block a rule is to add a constraint with the negative literals
of the rule body. If there is only one literal in the negative body, this constraint can
be expressed by adding an atom in MBT set (see Example 7). These possibilities
restrict rule choice in ∆cho mbt and thus forbid some computations: if a rule r is
blocked, computation can only converge to an answer set whose generating rules
do not contain r. Note that Convergence principle impose that, at the end of a
computation, no constraint is applicable and each atom from MBT set has been
proved (i.e., was moved from MBT to IN set).
Deﬁnition 11. Let P be a ﬁrst order normal logic program. A mbt ASPeRiX com-
putation for P is a sequence ⟨Ki, Ri, Ii⟩∞
i=0 of ground rule sets Ki and Ri and mbt
partial interpretations Ii = ⟨INi, MBTi, OUTi⟩that satisﬁes the following condi-
tions:
• K0 = ∅, R0 = ∅and I0 = ⟨∅, ∅, {⊥}⟩,
• (Revision) ∀i ≥1,
(Propagation) Ki = Ki−1,
Ri = Ri−1 ∪{ri} with ri ∈∆pro(P, Ii−1, Ri−1)
and Ii = ⟨INi−1 ∪{head(ri)}, MBTi−1 \ {head(ri)}, OUTi−1⟩
or (Mbt-propagation) Ki = Ki−1, Ri = Ri−1,
and Ii = ⟨INi−1, MBTi−1 ∪{head(ri)}, OUTi−1⟩
with ri ∈∆pro mbt(P, Ii−1, Ri−1)
or (Rule choice) ∆pro(P ∪Ki−1, Ii−1, Ri−1) = ∅,
∆pro mbt(P ∪Ki−1, Ii−1, Ri−1) = ∅,
Ki = Ki−1,
Ri = Ri−1 ∪{ri} with ri ∈∆cho mbt(P, Ii−1, Ri−1)
and Ii = ⟨INi−1 ∪{head(ri)}, MBTi−1 \ {head(ri)}, OUTi−1 ∪body−(ri)⟩
or (Rule exclusion) ∆pro(P ∪Ki−1, Ii−1, Ri−1) = ∅,
∆pro mbt(P ∪Ki−1, Ii−1, Ri−1) = ∅,
Ki = Ki−1, Ri = Ri−1
and Ii = ⟨INi−1, MBTi−1 ∪body−(ri), OUTi−1⟩
with ri ∈∆cho mbt(P, Ii−1, Ri−1) and |body−(ri)| = 1
or Ki = Ki−1 ∪{⊥←∪b∈body−(ri)not b.}, Ri = Ri−1 and Ii = Ii−1
with ri ∈∆cho mbt(P, Ii−1, Ri−1) and |body−(ri)| > 1

16
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
or (Stability) Ki = Ki−1, Ri = Ri−1 and Ii = Ii−1,
• (Convergence) ∃i ≥0, ∆cho mbt(P ∪Ki, Ii, Ri) = ∅and MBTi = ∅.
Mbt ASPeRiX computations characterize answer sets of a normal logic program.
Completeness and correctness are established by the following theorem.
Theorem 3. Let P be a normal logic program and X be an atom set. Then, X is
an answer set of P if and only if there is a mbt ASPeRiX computation ⟨Ki, Ri, Ii⟩∞
i=0,
Ii = ⟨INi, MBTi, OUTi⟩, for P such that IN∞= X.
Note that computations model only successfull branches of a search tree. On the
other hand, must-be-true atoms and rules blocking enable to prune failed branches
of the tree and to reduce non determinism of the search by restricting the possible
choices for the oracle (because some rules are explicitly excluded, and others are
blocked by must-be-true atoms). So, these new elements do not improve the number
of steps of a computation but they improve the number of steps needed to ﬁnd a
computation when there is no oracle to guide the search and, then, they make easier
the search of answer sets.
3.2 ASPeRiX Main Algorithm
Now, we are interested in the practical computation of an answer set. The ASPeRiX
algorithm, following the principle of mbt ASPeRiX computation seen in section 3.1,
is based on the construction of three disjoint atom sets IN, MBT and OUT during
the search for an answer set. It alternates two steps. On the one hand, a propagation
step which instantiates all supported and unblocked rules which may be built from
IN, MBT and OUT and ﬁres them, i.e. adds their head in IN (or MBT). On the
other hand, a choice step which forces or prohibits a nonmonotonic instantiated
applicable rule to be ﬁred during the next propagation step.
In order to treat the information more eﬃciently, the rules of a program P are
ordered following the strongly connected components (SCC) of the dependency
graph of P: the nodes of the dependency graph of a program P are its predi-
cate symbols and the arcs are deﬁned by {(p, q)|∃r ∈P, p = pred(head(r)), q ∈
pred(body+(r) ∪body−(r))}. The strongly connected components {C1, ..., Cn} are
ordered in such a way that if i < j then no node (i.e. predicate symbol) of Ci de-
pends of a node of Cj. A rule is said to belong to a SCC C if the predicate symbol
of its head is in the component C. Note that constraints are not really concerned
by ordering of rules but, for standardizing notations, constraints are considered to
belong to a unique component whose number is greater than that of the last SCC,
i.e., if Cn is the last SCC then constraints are considered to belong to Cn+1.
Example 10. (Example 6 continued)
The strongly connected components (SCC) of the graph of the program P6 are
C1 = {n}, C2 = {a, b} and C3 = {c} (Figure 2).
The ASPeRiX algorithm solves one by one the SCC {C1, ..., Cn} of a program
P by starting by C1. When no propagation nor choice can no longer be done on

ASPeRiX
17
n
c
a
b
Fig. 2. Dependency graph of P6
the current SCC, the predicate symbols of the SCC are said to be solved and
the SCC too. It means that nothing can be deduced anymore for those predicate
symbols. The atoms which are instances of the predicate symbols of the current
SCC and which are not in IN are implicitly added to OUT. Note that they are not
explicitly added to OUT because ground instances of a predicate are not known
(not computed): they could be inﬁnite and, even if ﬁnite, to compute and store
them is useless.
Rules of the program are instantiated on the ﬂy during the propagation phase and
the choice step. Hence the propositional program ground(P) which contains all the
instantiated rules of the program is never really computed. The propagation step
and the choice step are realized in the ASPeRiX algorithm thanks to the functions
γpro and γcho (which are selection functions in ∆pro ∪∆pro mbt and ∆cho mbt sets
used in the mbt ASPeRiX computation of Subsection 3.1). The γpro function searches
for a weakly supported unblocked rule amongst the current and next non-solved
SCC. So propagation operates on several components: each rule is ﬁred as soon as
possible to quickly detect a possible conﬂict. Rules instantiated by γpro are stored
in a set Subst = {subst(ri), ..., subst(rn)} during the answer set search to mark
the substitution of rules that have already been used. For each ﬁrst-order rule ri,
subst(ri) denotes the set of all substitutions θ such that θ(ri) has already been ﬁred.
And subst rule(ri) = S
θ∈subst(ri){θ(ri)} is the set of instantiated rules obtained
thanks to substitutions subst(ri). The notation is extended to a set R of ﬁrst-
order rules: subst rule(R) = S
ri∈R subst rule(ri). The γcho function chooses an
applicable rule in the current SCC when nothing can no longer be propagated. So
choice, unlike propagation, operates only on the current component. This strategy,
consisting of solving the SCC one after another, makes it possible to solve eﬃciently
stratiﬁed programs (or some stratiﬁed parts of programs).
Functions γpro and γcho are speciﬁed in more details in Subsection 3.3 and are
deﬁned informally as follows:
• γpro(P, S, S′, T, SCC, Subst): nondeterministic function which selects a rule
(or a constraint) r belonging to a SCC greater or equal to the current SCC in
the dependency graph of a program P such that body+(r) ⊆S∪S′, body−(r) ⊆
T and r ∈ground(P)\subst rule(P) or returns NULL if no such a rule exists.
• γcho(P, S, S′, T, SCC, Subst): nondeterministic function which selects a rule r
belonging to the current SCC in the dependency graph of a program P such
that body+(r) ⊆S, body−(r)∩(S ∪S′) = ∅and r ∈ground(P)\subst rule(P)
or returns NULL if no such a rule exists.

18
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
Algorithm 1: solve
1 Function solve(PR, PK, IN, MBT, OUT, SCC, Subst);
2 // search of one answer set for a program P = PR ∪PK
3 repeat//Propagation phase
4
r0 ←γpro(PR ∪PK, IN, MBT, OUT, SCC, Subst);
5
if r0 ̸= NULL then
6
if (body+(r0) ∩MBT) ̸= ∅then
7
MBT ←MBT ∪{head(r0)};
8
else
9
IN ←IN ∪{head(r0)};
10
if (head(r0) ∈MBT) then
11
MBT ←MBT\{head(r0)};
12 until r0 = NULL;
13 if ((IN ∪MBT) ∩OUT ̸= ∅) then //Contradiction detected
14
return no answer set;
15 else
16
r0 ←γcho(PR, IN, MBT, OUT, SCC, Subst);
17
if r0 ̸= NULL then //Choice point
18
stop ←solve(PR, PK, IN, MBT, OUT ∪body−(r0), SCC, Subst);
19
if stop = no answer set then
20
atoms ←{a|a ∈body−(r0), pred(a) ∈pred(SCC)};
21
if (|atoms| = 1) then
22
MBT ←MBT ∪atoms;
23
else
24
PK ←PK ∪{⊥←∪ai∈atoms not ai};
25
stop ←solve(PR, PK, IN, MBT, OUT, SCC, Subst);
26
return stop ;
27
else // The SCC is solved
28
if pred(MBT) ∩pred(SCC) = ∅then
29
if ¬last(SCC) then
30
return solve(PR, PK, IN, MBT, OUT, SCC + 1, Subst);
31
else
32
if γcheck(PK, IN, MBT, OUT, SCC) then // a constraint is
violated
33
return no answer set;
34
else // An answer set has been found
35
return IN;
36
else // a MBT atom can not be proved
37
return no answer set;

ASPeRiX
19
The function solve of Algorithm 1 speciﬁes the algorithm of the search of one
answer set for a program P. The set PK is the set of constraints (rules with the
symbol ⊥at their heads) of P and PR the other rules. By default, ⊥is into the set
OUT. Then, if a constraint is ﬁred, a contradiction is immediately detected since
⊥is added into the set IN and the sets IN and OUT are no longer disjoint. The
algorithm of the function solve computes one answer set (or none if the program is
incoherent) thanks to the variable stop which stops the search once an answer set
has been found. This algorithm may be easily extended to compute an arbitrary
number of answer sets. Let us note that, for sake of simplicity, the function solve
will return either a set (when there is an answer set) or the constant no answer set
if there is no answer set.
The main parts of the function solve are now described. Initially, IN = ∅,
MBT = ∅, OUT = {⊥}, SCC is the index of the ﬁrst SCC and Subst = ∅.
The propagation phase successively ﬁres each weakly supported and unblocked in-
stantiated rule r0. At each step, the call γpro(PR∪PK, IN, MBT, OUT, SCC, Subst)
selects and instantiates a unique unblocked rule r0 such that body+(r0) ⊆IN ∪
MBT (line 4). If such a rule exists, its head atom head(r0) must belong to the
answer set. This head atom is added into the set IN (line 9) if the positive body
of the rule is included in the set IN or added into the set MBT (line 7) otherwise
since at least one atom a of the positive body of the rule has not yet proved its
membership to the set IN (a ∈MBT but a /∈IN). Moreover, a head atom which
is added into IN must be deleted from MBT since a proof of its membership to
the answer set has been found (line 10). When there is no more unblocked rule r0
such that body+(r0) ⊆IN ∪MBT, (IN ∪MBT) ∩OUT = ∅is checked in order
to detect a contradiction (line 13). If no contradiction is detected, the algorithm
begins the choice step.
The choice point forces or forbids a nonmonotonic applicable rule to be ﬁred. The
call γcho(PR, IN, MBT, OUT, SCC, Subst) selects and instantiates a unique
applicable rule of PR whose head belongs to the current SCC (line 16). If such
a rule exists, r0 is forced to be unblocked and then will be ﬁred during the next
propagation phase: its negative body is added to the OUT set and function solve
is recursively called with its new parameters (line 18). If a recursive call to the
function solve detects a contradiction, the algorithm backtracks on the last choice
point on the rule r0 which has been forced to be ﬁred and blocks it (lines 19-25):
if a is the only atom of the negative body of r0 then a is added to the set MBT
(line 22) else a constraint including all the atoms of the negative body of r0 is added
to the program (line 24). More precisely, the only atoms of the negative body that
are considered are those with a predicate symbol belonging to the current SCC
because atoms from a lower SCC are already solved, i.e. they are in IN or OUT.
When there is no more choice point, the current SCC is solved (line 27) but it must
be checked that no atom of the MBT set has a predicate symbol in the current
SCC (line 28). If such an atom exists, MBT and OUT sets are not disjoint. Indeed,
if a SCC is solved, atoms which are instances of predicate symbols of the SCC
and which are not in IN are implicitly added to OUT. Then if a MBT atom is
an instance of a predicate symbol of the current SCC, a failure is observed and

20
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
the backtrack process continues (line 36). If the last SCC is solved, the set IN
represents an answer set of P if no constraint is applicable. This test is realized
thanks to the nondeterministic function γcheck (line 32) which is speciﬁed in more
details in Subsection 3.3 and is deﬁned informally as follows:
γcheck(P, S, S′, T, SCC): function which checks if there is any constraint c such
that body+(c) ⊆S, body−(c) ∩S = ∅and c ∈ground(P).
Example 11. The execution of the ASPeRiX algorithm for program P6 of Example 6
Fig. 3. The tree-shaped execution of the answer sets of program P6.

ASPeRiX
21
is represented by a tree in Figure 3. At the beginning IN = ∅, MBT = ∅, OUT =
{⊥} and the current SCC is the component C1 = {n}. After the ﬁrst propagation,
n(1) and n(2) are in IN thanks to the two rules (n(1).) and (n(2) ←n(1), (1+1) <=
2.). No choice point exists and the ﬁrst SCC is solved since the MBT set is empty.
The component C2 = {a, b} becomes the current SCC.
The ﬁrst choice is realized on the current SCC (choice point CP1): the rule
(a(1) ←n(1), not b(1), not b(2).) becomes unblocked by adding b(1) and b(2) into
the set OUT (left branch after choice point CP1). A new propagation phase shows
that a(1) and c(1) are in IN since (a(1) ←n(1), not b(1), not b(2).) and (c(1) ←
n(1), not b(2).) can be ﬁred. Then, a new choice is realized (choice point CP2) and
the rule (a(2) ←n(2), not b(2), not b(3).) is forced to be unblocked (left branch after
choice point CP2). The atom b(3) is added into the set OUT. A new propagation
phase shows that a(2) and c(2) are in IN since (a(2) ←n(2), not b(2), not b(3).)
and (c(2) ←n(2), not b(3).) can be ﬁred. The second SCC is solved since no other
rule is applicable and the MBT set is still empty. In the same way, no propagation
nor choice point is possible in the SCC C3 = {c}. Since no constraint is applicable,
a ﬁrst answer set is obtained: {a(1), a(2), c(1), c(2), n(1), n(2)}.
If another answer set is wished, the algorithm backtracks to the last choice point
on (a(2) ←n(2), not b(2), not b(3).) of the component C2 and blocks the rule (right
branch after choice point CP2) by adding a constraint (⊥←not b(2), not b(3).) into
PK. A new choice is realized (choice point CP3) and the rule (b(2) ←n(2), not a(2).)
is forced to be unblocked (left branch after choice point CP3) by adding a(2) into
the OUT set. During the propagation step, b(2) is added into the IN set since
(b(2) ←n(2), not a(2).) is ﬁred. The atom b(2) is then simultaneously in the sets
IN and OUT which leads to a contradiction.
The algorithm backtracks to the choice point (b(2) ←n(2), not a(2).) of the
component C2 (choice point CP3) and the rule is blocked by adding the atom
a(2) into the MBT set (right branch after choice point CP3). Since there is no
more possible choice and the MBT set contains an atom whose predicate symbol
is in the current SCC, this atom cannot be proved and this leads to a failure. The
algorithm backtracks to the ﬁrst choice point on (a(1) ←n(1), not b(1), not b(2).)
of the component C2 (choice point CP1) and blocks the rule and searches for a
new possible answer set (right branch after choice point CP1). The process keeps
going until the whole tree is computed when all the answer sets are required. Let
us note that when dealing with the computation of one answer set like explained
in the algorithm, only the ﬁrst branch is considered.
3.3 Functions γ
Functions γ have a crucial role in two important steps of the search of an answer set.
The function γpro is called during the propagation step in order to choose the rules
to ﬁre and then to add their heads into IN (or MBT). The function γcho is called
during the choice step in order to force or to forbid a rule to be ﬁred during the next
propagation step. The function γcheck is called during the veriﬁcation step in order
to verify that no constraint is applicable. Since the principle of the solver ASPeRiX

22
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
is to instantiate the rules on the ﬂy during the search of an answer set, functions
γ need to call a function instantiateRule which searches for a substitution for the
atoms of a rule. This function is detailed in its own Subsection 3.4.
Function γpro. The function γpro searches for a rule to ﬁre w.r.t. IN, MBT and
OUT sets. This function computes a complete instantiation of a rule such that
the positive body is in IN ∪MBT and the negative body is in OUT. The rule
to instantiate is chosen amongst a set of rules R consisting of rules that could
lead to new, unprocessed instances. These rules are those whose body contains
some predicate symbol of what we call an atom to propagate. Atoms to propagate
are atoms recently added into IN, MBT and OUT sets, and not yet used for
propagation phase. Thereby, when an atom a is added into IN or MBT (resp.
OUT) set, the rules containing pred(a) in their positive body (resp. negative body)
will be in the R set for the next call to γpro in order to propagate this atom,
i.e. to use its presence in IN or MBT (resp. OUT) for building new instances of
rules to be ﬁred. During the ﬁrst call of the function solve, atoms to propagate
are the facts of the program, and the set R contains all the rules which have some
predicate symbols of the facts in their positive body. During a call after a choice
point, atoms to propagate are those added into OUT during this choice point, and
the set R contains all the rules which have some predicate symbols of these atoms in
their negative body. During a call after the access to the next SCC, the predicate
symbols of the current SCC are solved and then all instances of these predicate
symbols that are not in IN are implicitly added into OUT. Atoms to propagate
are all these instances determined to be false, and then the set R contains all the
rules which have in their negative body some of these solved predicate symbols.
The Algorithm 2 of the function γpro chooses a ﬁrst-order rule r amongst the set R
(the ﬁrst one, line 5) and tries to ﬁnd a weakly supported unblocked instantiation of
the rule. It calls the function instantiateRule which returns this next instantiation
if any (line 6). If there is no more weakly supported unblocked instantiated rule
which may be extracted from r (line 7), γpro deletes from R the rule r and treats
the next rule. This process is repeated until a weakly supported unblocked rule is
found or there is no more rule in R. When a rule allows a substitution (line 10),
the latter is stored in Subst in order to ﬁnd some others at the next call to γpro.
Example 12. Example 11 is taken again. An answer set is searched after the choice
point on the rule (a(1) ←n(1), not b(1), not b(2).) (choice point CP1): the atoms
b(1) and b(2) are added into the set OUT in order to force the rule to be ﬁred
(left branch after choice point CP1). During the propagation step, many calls to
the function γpro are executed. During the ﬁrst call the set R consists of all the
rules containing in their negative body the predicate symbol b of the atoms b(1)
and b(2) that must be propagated. This set R then contains the rules (a(X) ←
n(X), not b(X), not b(X + 1).) and (c(X) ←n(X), not b(X + 1).) Arbitrarily, the
rule (a(X) ←n(X), not b(X), not b(X +1).) of the set R is chosen and a supported
unblocked instantiation (a(1) ←n(1), not b(1), not b(2).) is found. The function
γpro returns the instantiation of the rule and the solve function adds a(1) into IN.

ASPeRiX
23
Algorithm 2: γpro
1 Function γpro(P, IN, MBT, OUT, SCC, Subst);
2 R ←Set of rules (including constraints) containing predicate symbols to
propagate;
3 if R ̸= ∅then
4
repeat
5
r ←first(R);
/* Searching for an instantiation of the rule r with
body+(r) ⊆IN ∪MBT and body−(r) ⊆OUT
*/
6
θ ←instantiateRule(r, γpro, IN, MBT, OUT, subst(r));
7
if θ = NULL then
8
R ←R\{r};
9
until θ ̸= NULL or R = ∅;
10
if θ ̸= NULL then
/* An unblocked weakly supported instantiated rule is found
*/
11
subst(r) ←subst(r) ∪{θ};
12
return θ(r);
13
else
14
return NULL;
15 else
16
return NULL;
During the next call to γpro, the set R must contain, in addition to the previous
rules, any rule containing in its positive body the predicate symbol a of the atom
to be propagated a(1) (since a(1) has been added into IN). Since no rule respects
this condition, the set R still contains only the two previously added rules. The
function γpro searches for a new weakly supported unblocked instantiation of the
rule (a(X) ←n(X), not b(X), not b(X + 1).). No such instantiation is found and
the rule is deleted from the set R. The function γpro searches for a new weakly
supported unblocked instantiation of the rule (c(X) ←n(X), not b(X + 1).). The
instantiation (c(1) ←n(1), not b(2).) is then returned to the solve function which
adds c(1) into IN. Then during the next call to the function γpro, the set R must
be updated with the rules containing in their positive body the predicate symbol
c of the atom to propagate c(1). As previously, no rule respects this condition and
the set R still contains the only rule (c(X) ←n(X), not b(X + 1).). A new weakly
supported unblocked instantiation is sought but this rule leads to a failure. The
rule (c(X) ←n(X), not b(X + 1).) is then deleted from the set R which becomes
empty. Then the function γpro returns the value NULL and the propagation step
of the function solve stops.

24
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
Function γcho. The function γcho is executed when no rule can be ﬁred anymore
and there is some SCC to be solved. This function searches an applicable instanti-
ated rule belonging to the current SCC. The Algorithm 3 of function γcho is similar
to the algorithm of the function γpro. The function γcho searches for an applicable
instantiated rule amongst a set R of rules which have in their negative body at least
one predicate symbol from the current SCC (otherwise, if all predicate symbols from
negative body belong to previous SCC, they are already solved and then the rule
can be considered as a monotonic one and is only used for propagation). The func-
tion γcho chooses a rule in this set R before calling the function instantiateRule
searching for the next applicable instantiation for the considered rule. In a similar
way as the function γpro, the process is repeated until an applicable instantiated
rule is found for a rule of R or there is no more rule in R.
Algorithm 3: γcho
1 Function γcho(P, IN, MBT, OUT, SCC, Subst);
2 R ←Set of rule belonging to the current SCC such that the negative body
contains at least a predicate symbol not solved;
3 if R ̸= ∅then
4
repeat
5
r ←first(R);
/* Searching for an instantiation of the rule r with
body+(r) ⊆IN and body−(r) ∩(IN ∪MBT) = ∅
*/
6
θ ←instantiateRule(r, γcho, IN, MBT, OUT, subst(r));
7
if θ = NULL then
8
R ←R\{r};
9
until θ ̸= NULL or R = ∅;
10
if θ ̸= NULL then
/* An applicable instantiated rule is found
*/
11
subst(r) ←subst(r) ∪{θ};
12
return θ(r);
13
else
14
return NULL;
15 else
16
return NULL;
Example 13. Example 12 is taken again. After the ﬁrst SCC has been solved, a ﬁrst
choice is realized on the current SCC, C2 = {a, b}, by the function γcho. The rules of
this component which contains in their negative body at least one predicate symbol
a or b of C2 are added into the set R of the rules that may be chosen. Then, the rules
(a(X) ←n(X), not b(X), not b(X + 1).) and (b(X) ←n(X), not a(X).) are in R.
Arbitrarily, the function γcho searches for an applicable instantiation of the ﬁrst rule
of this set and a choice point on (a(1) ←n(1), not b(1), not b(2).) is returned to the

ASPeRiX
25
calling function solve (choice point CP1). After the propagation step, γcho searches
for a new applicable instantiation of the rule (a(X) ←n(X), not b(X), not b(X+1).)
and a choice point on (a(2) ←n(2), not b(2), not b(3).) is returned to the calling
function solve (choice point CP2). After a new propagation step, γcho searches in
vain a new applicable instantiation of the rule (a(X) ←n(X), not b(X), not b(X +
1).) This last rule is then deleted from the set R and γcho searches for an applicable
instantiation of the rule (b(X) ←n(X), not a(X).) which leads to a failure. The set
R is now empty and the function γcho returns NULL to the calling function solve
to mean that no other choice may be realized on the current SCC.
Function γcheck. The function γcheck is executed when no more choice point is
possible for the last SCC. This function veriﬁes that no constraint containing at
least one predicate symbol of the last SCC is applicable in order to determine if
the set IN is an answer set. The Algorithm 4 of the function γcheck is similar to
the algorithm of the function γcho. The function γcheck searches for an applicable
instantiated constraint amongst a set C of constraints whose negative body contains
at least a not-solved predicate symbol of the last SCC. The function γcheck chooses
a constraint in the set C and calls the function instantiateRule which searches
for an applicable instantiated constraint. If no instantiated constraint is applicable,
the algorithm returns false and the set IN is an answer set of the program. If a
constraint is applicable, the algorithm returns true which means there is a failure
on the branch (the search of answer sets keeps going on other branches if any).
3.4 Rule Instantiation
In this section is described the process of instantiation of a rule. This process is a
lazy one only called when needed. Since we only consider safe rules, the instantiation
of a rule is in fact the instantiation of its positive body. In a forward chaining
approach, the only rule instantiations of interest are those that lead to a not blocked
supported rule or an unblocked weakly supported rule. Hence, the rule instantiation
is mainly directed by the instantiated atoms already present in the sets IN and
MBT.
The algorithm used in the ASPeRiX solver and described below is inspired by the
previous work realized on the DLV grounder (Faber et al. 2012; Perri et al. 2007)
which is based on the semi-naive evaluation technique of (Ullman 1989). The goal
is to ﬁnd a substitution for all the literals of the body of a rule r thanks to the
atoms already in IN, MBT or OUT. To do this, a partial substitution θ is built as
possible values are found for the variables of the literals of the body of the rule r. It is
assumed that the literals l1, l2, . . . , ln of the body of the rule r are ordered following
a list [l1, l2, . . . , ln]: firstLiteral(r) (resp. lastLiteral(r)) corresponds to l1 (resp.
ln) and previousLiteral(r) (resp. nextLiteral(r)) corresponds to the literal which
precedes (resp. follows) the literal under consideration in the list. The substitution
calculus for a literal l of a rule r is realized thanks to the functions firstMatch
and nextMatch. These functions look for a substitution which has not already been
computed, i.e. not leading to a substitution for r present in the set subst(r) of all

26
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
Algorithm 4: Function γcheck
1 Function γcheck(P, IN, MBT, OUT, SCC);
2 C ←Set of constraints such that the negative body contains at least a
predicate symbol not solved;
3 if C ̸= ∅then
4
repeat
5
c ←first(C);
/* Searching for an instantiation of the constraint c such
that body+(c) ⊆IN and body−(c) ∩IN = ∅
*/
6
θ ←instantiateRule(c, γcheck, IN, MBT, OUT, ∅);
7
if θ = NULL then
8
C ←C\{c};
9
until θ ̸= NULL or C = ∅;
10
if θ ̸= NULL then
/* An applicable instantiated constraint is found
*/
11
return true;
12
else
13
return false;
14 else
15
return false;
substitutions θ such that θ(r) has already been ﬁred. If the literal l is positive,
a substitution such that the substituted atom is in the set IN (or IN ∪MBT)
is searched. If the literal is negative, (a) a substitution such that the substituted
corresponding atom is in the set OUT is searched if the goal is an unblocked rule or
(b) the non membership of the substituted atom to the set IN ∪MBT is checked
if the goal is a not blocked rule3.
In the functions firstMatch and nextMatch which follow, the parameter γ shows
if an unblocked weakly supported or not blocked supported rule is looked for.
• firstMatch(l, θ, γ, IN, MBT, OUT, subst) is a function which searches for
the ﬁrst possible substitution for a literal l w.r.t. the sets IN, MBT and
OUT, selection criterion γ (unblocked weakly supported or applicable rule)
and the current partial substitution θ. firstMatch returns true and updates
the partial substitution θ in case of success. Otherwise, the function returns
false.
• nextMatch(l, θ, γ, IN, MBT, OUT, subst) is a function which searches for the
next possible substitution for literal l given the already realized substitutions.
For a rule r, a free variable of a literal l is an occurrence of a variable X such that it
is its ﬁrst occurrence in the body of r when starting traversing the literal l. In other
3 In this case, the body of the rule is ordered in such a way that negative literals appear after the
positive literals containing their variables.

ASPeRiX
27
words, no other literal which precedes l in the body of r contains an occurrence of
the variable X. During the instantiation of a rule, a possible substitution is sought
for all the free variables of every traversed literal and the substitutions of the
previously calculated variables are kept. If a literal has no free variable, the validity
of the substitution w.r.t. the selection criterion γ is checked (i.e. the substituted
corresponding atom θ(at(l)) is in IN or IN ∪MBT if l ∈body+(r) and θ(at(l)) is
in OUT or θ(at(l)) is not in IN if l ∈body−(r)).
Example 14. Let (a(X, Y, Z) ←b(X, Y ), c(X, Y ), d(X, Z).) be a rule. The ordered
list of the body of the rule is [l1 = b(X, Y ), l2 = c(X, Y ), l3 = d(X, Z)] with:
• freeV ariables(l1) = {X, Y }
• freeV ariables(l2) = ∅
• freeV ariables(l3) = {Z}.
Function instantiateRule of Algorithm 5 speciﬁes the instantiation principles of
a rule for constant sets IN, MBT and OUT. This function is initialized with the
partial substitution θ which is the last found substitution (thanks to the function
lastSubstitution) for the rule r if any (line 2). If it is the ﬁrst attempt for the instan-
tiation of this rule, θ is empty (line 3) and the function searches a ﬁrst substitution
for the ﬁrst literal of the body of the rule r using the function firstMatch. Other-
wise, a substitution for r has already been computed (line 6), the function searches a
new possible substitution for the rule. For this, the function searches the next possi-
ble instance of the last literal of the rule r by deleting from θ the substitutions of the
free variables of this literal (thanks to the function freeV ariableSubstitutions) and
by calling the function nextMatch. During the execution of the main loop, the func-
tion ﬁrst checks if a substitution has been found for the current literal a (line 11).
If it is the case, it searches a ﬁrst substitution for the next literal of the rule body
respecting the partial substitution θ. When all the atoms have been considered,
a complete substitution is found (line 15). The function returns this substitution.
When the instantiation of a literal fails (i.e. there is no possible substitution for it),
the function backtracks on the previous literal (line 18) and updates θ by deleting
the substitutions of the free variables of this literal. Hence the function calls the
function nextMatch which searches the next possible instantiation for this literal.
The instantiation of a rule r fails when no more substitution is possible for the ﬁrst
literal (line 23).
Actually, the instantiation algorithm of a rule is slightly more complicated than
the Algorithm 5 since the atoms dynamically added into IN, MBT and OUT
sets during the answer set computation, called atoms to propagate, have to be
taken into account: if possible, each substitution has to be computed once and only
once. Hence ASPeRiX uses a queue called propagate IN (resp. propagate MBT and
propagate OUT) which contains the atoms to be added into the set IN (resp. MBT
and OUT). When all the instances of a rule r, for given sets IN0, MBT0 and OUT0,
have been generated, an atom to propagate ap whose predicate symbol p appears
in the body of the rule r is extracted. Now I1 = ⟨IN1, MBT1OUT1⟩denotes the
mbt partial interpretation obtained by adding ap into I0 = ⟨IN0, MBT0, OUT0⟩.

28
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
Algorithm 5: instantiateRule
1 Function instantiateRule(r, γ, IN, MBT, OUT, subst);
2 θ ←lastSubstitution(r);
3 if θ = ∅then
/* Searching for the first possible substitution of first
literal
*/
4
l ←firstLiteral(r);
5
matchFound ←firstMatch(l, θ, γ, IN, MBT, OUT, subst);
6 else
/* Searching for the next possible substitution of last
literal
*/
7
l ←lastLiteral(r);
8
θ ←θ\freeV ariableSubstitutions(l);
9
matchFound ←nextMatch(l, θ, γ, IN, MBT, OUT, subst);
10 while true do
11
if matchFound then
12
if l ̸= lastLiteral(r) then
13
l ←nextLiteral(r);
14
matchfound ←firstMatch(l, θ, γ, IN, MBT, OUT, subst)
15
else
/* A complete substitution is found
*/
16
return θ;
17
else
/* No substitution for literal l. Bactrack to previous
literal (if any) to find its next possible substitution
*/
18
if l ̸= firstLiteral(r) then
19
l ←previousLiteral(r);
20
θ ←θ\freeV ariableSubstitutions(l);
21
matchFound ←nextMatch(l, θ, γ, IN, MBT, OUT, subst);
22
else
23
return NULL;
The body of the rule is ordered in such a way that the ﬁrst literals are those whose
predicate symbol is the one of the atom to propagate ap (they are the literals
that might unify with ap). Then these literals whose predicate symbol is p are
successively marked and placed at the beginning of the rule. The marked literal
might only take the value of the atom to propagate ap whereas the following (non
marked) literals might take any values in I1. Then, if the instantiation of the ﬁrst
literal fails, it is unmarked, the next literal of predicate p becomes the ﬁrst literal
of the rule body and is marked in turn, and the instantiation of the rule is started
again. The unmarked literals might then take any values in I0 (which excludes the

ASPeRiX
29
values of ap already used) while the marked literal can only take the value of the
atom to propagate, and the non marked literals always take their values in I1. If
the instantiation of the ﬁrst literal fails and there is no other literal to be marked,
the instantiation of the rule fails.
Example 15. Let r0 be a rule and IN0, propagate IN and IN1 be sets of atoms
deﬁned as follow:
r0 = a(X + Y ) ←a(X), b(X, Y ), a(Y ).
IN0 = {b(1, 1), b(1, 2)}
propagate IN = {a(1)}
IN1 = {b(1, 1), b(1, 2), a(1)}
a(X + Y )
←
a(X),
a(Y ),
b(X, Y )
*** ﬁrst call to instantiateRule ***
(1.1)
a(1)
-
-
(l1 marked)
(1.2)
a(1)
a(1)
-
(1.3)
a(1)
a(1)
b(1, 1)
⇒complete instantiation
*** second call to instantiateRule ***
(2.1)
a(1)
a(1)
NO
(2.2)
a(1)
NO
-
(2.3)
NO
-
-
⇒failure
(2.4)
-
a(1)
-
(l2 marked)
(2.5)
NO
a(1)
-
⇒failure
Table 1. Decomposition of the instantiations of the rule r0 for the atom to propagate
a(1) (Example 15)
The atom a(1) has to be propagated by instantiating the rule r0. Table 1 shows
the diﬀerent steps of the instantiation. The literals to be marked (whose predicate
symbol is a) of the body of the rule are a(X) and a(Y ). These literals are placed
at the beginning of the body of r0 like this: [l1 = a(X), l2 = a(Y ), l3 = b(X, Y )]. In
Table 1, for clarity, the sequence of literals of the rule body is not changed when the
marked literal changes. But the marked literal (shown in bold) is processed ﬁrst,
which is the same. The ﬁrst attempt for an instantiation begins and for the ﬁrst
time with atom to propagate a(1). The literal l1 = a(X) is then marked and takes
as unique value that of the atom to propagate a(1) ((1.1) Table 1). Hence, value 1
is substituted to the variable X in θ. Then, the following literal in the body of the
rule, l2 = a(Y ), becomes the current literal and takes as value the ﬁrst amongst
those into IN1 which is also a(1). Hence, value 1 is substituted to the variable Y
in θ ((1.2) Table 1). Then the last literal, l3 = b(X, Y ), is reached. This literal has
no free variable and the membership into IN1 is simply checked for b(1, 1) which is
obtained from b(X, Y ) by substituting X and Y by the values in θ ((1.3) Table 1).
There is no more literal to consider then a complete substitution has been found.
The atom of the head a(X + Y ) takes the values of the substitution θ. Hence, the
forward chaining algorithm can add a(2) into the propagate IN queue.
Now, during a new instantiation attempt of the rule for the atom to propagate
a(1), the function restarts with the last substitution of the rule θ = {X/1, Y/1} in

30
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
order to ﬁnd a new substitution for the literal l3 = b(X, Y ). The second attempt
for an instantiation begins with atom to propagate a(1) for the second time. Since
b(X, Y ) has no free variable, there can be no other substitution than the current
one ((2.1) Table 1). The process then backtracks to the literal l2 = a(Y ) which
has no other substitution in IN1 (a(2) has been inferred after a(1) and is not into
the current set IN1) ((2.2) Table 1). Since literal l1 = a(X) can only take the
value a(1), it also fails ((2.3) Table 1). Since the last literal has failed, the literal
l2 = a(Y ) is now marked instead of a(X), and is instantiated with the atom to
propagate a(1). Hence, value 1 is substituted to the variable Y in θ ((2.4) Table 1).
Literal l1 = a(X) is unmarked and can only take the values of the atoms of IN0,
thus no substitution is possible. Hence the algorithm fails on the ﬁrst literal ((2.5)
Table 1). Since there is no more literal to be marked, the rule instantiation ends by
a failure for the atom to propagate a(1). The sets becomes as follow:
IN0 = {b(1, 1), b(1, 2), a(1)}
propagate IN = {a(2)}
IN1 = {b(1, 1), b(1, 2), a(1), a(2)}
a(X + Y )
←
a(X),
a(Y ),
b(X, Y )
*** third call to instantiateRule ***
(1.1)
a(2)
-
-
(l1 marked)
(1.2)
a(2)
a(1)
-
(1.3)
a(2)
a(1)
NO
(1.4)
a(2)
a(2)
-
(1.5)
a(2)
a(2)
NO
(1.6)
a(2)
NO
-
(1.7)
NO
-
-
⇒failure
(1.8)
-
a(2)
-
(l2 marked)
(1.9)
a(1)
a(2)
-
(1.10)
a(1)
a(2)
b(1, 2)
⇒complete instantiation
*** fourth call to instantiateRule ***
(2.1)
a(1)
a(2)
NO
(2.2)
NO
a(2)
-
(2.3)
-
NO
-
⇒failure
Table 2. Decomposition of the instantiations of the rule r0 for the atom to propagate
a(2) (Example 15 continued)
The next atom a(2) is extracted from the queue to propagate. The third attempt
for an instantiation of r0 begins with atom to propagate a(2) for the ﬁrst time.
Table 2 shows the diﬀerent steps of the instantiation. The literals a(X) and a(Y )
are again to be marked. The rule instantiation is restarted with the literal l1 = a(X)
which is the marked literal. The variable X is substituted by the value 2 since the
only allowed value is that of the atom to propagate a(2) ((1.1) Table 2). The current
literal is now l2 = a(Y ) where Y is substituted by the value 1 since a(1) is into IN1
((1.2) Table 2). The literal b(X, Y ) has no free variable and since the atom b(2, 1)
which respects the substitution θ = {X/2, Y/1} is not in IN1, the literal b(X, Y )
has no possible substitution ((1.3) Table 2). Then a new instantiation for l2 = a(Y )

ASPeRiX
31
is sought: its next possible value is 2 (since a(2) is in IN1) ((1.4) Table 2). Again,
since the atom b(2, 2) which respects the substitution θ = {X/2, Y/2} is not in
IN1, the literal b(X, Y ) has no possible substitution ((1.5) Table 2). The process
backtracks to the literal l2 = a(Y ) which has no possible value ((1.6) Table 2).
Hence, the process backtracks to the literal l1 = a(X) which has no possible value
since the only possible value was that of the atom to propagate a(2) ((1.7) Table 2).
Since the ﬁrst literal has failed, the process restarts by marking the second literal
a(Y ) (and unmarking the ﬁrst a(X)). The marked literal l2 = a(Y ) is processed
ﬁrst, it substitutes Y by the value 2 of the atom to propagate a(2) ((1.8) Table 2).
The unmarked literal l1 = a(X) may only take its values into IN0. The variable
X is then substituted by the value 1 ((1.9) Table 2). The literal l3 = b(X, Y ) has
no free variable and since b(1, 2) which respects the substitution θ = {X/1, Y/2}
is in IN1 a complete substitution is found ((1.10) Table 2). The atom a(X + Y )
of the head takes then the value of the substitution θ. Hence, the forward chaining
algorithm can add a(3) into IN1 and into propagate IN.
Then, during a new instantiation attempt of the rule r0, the atom to propagate
is still a(2). The process restarts from the last substitution θ = {X/1, Y/2} and
search for a new substitution for the literal l3 = b(X, Y ). A fourth attempt for an
instantiation begins with atom to propagate a(2) for the second time. Since b(X, Y )
has no free variable, there can be no other substitution than the current one ((2.1)
Table 2). The process then backtracks to the literal l1 = a(X) that has no other
substitution since the only possible values are those from IN0 (then neither the
atom to propagate a(2) nor a(3) appeared after a(2) are possible) ((2.2) Table 2).
The literal l2 = a(Y ) also fails since the marked literal only accepts the value of the
atom to propagate a(2) ((2.3) Table 2). Since there is no more literal to be marked,
the instantiation of the failing rule ends for this atom to propagate. The process
continues with the atom a(3) which also leads to a failure.
3.5 ASPeRiX language
The core language of ASPeRiX is that of normal logic programs (Gelfond and Lifs-
chitz 1988) with function symbols and true (or strong) negation without inconsistent
answer set. ASPeRiX also provides dedicated treatment of lists with built-in predi-
cates, as in DLV-complex (Calimeri et al. 2008), an extension of DLV with lists and
sets. On the other side, ASPeRiX does not provide aggregate atoms and optimiza-
tion statements (Buccafurri et al. 2000) which are accepted by the main current
systems.
One of the important issues in ASP is the treatment of function symbols. Un-
interpreted function symbols are important because they enable representation of
recursive structures such as lists and trees. But reasoning becomes undecidable if
no restriction is enforced. A lot of work has been made for identifying program
classes for which reasoning is decidable (Alviano et al. 2011; Alviano et al. 2010;
Calimeri et al. 2011; Lierler and Lifschitz 2009; Baselice and Bonatti 2010; Greco
et al. 2013).
The inherent diﬃculty with functions in general (and arithmetic in particular)

32
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
in the framework of ASP is that it makes the Herbrand universe inﬁnite in whole
generality. ASP grounders Lparse (Syrj¨anen 1998) and versions up to 3.0 of Gringo
(Gebser et al. 2007) accept programs respecting some syntactic domain restrictions
and are able to deal with some restricted versions of functions.
DLV grounder (Faber et al. 2012) and Gringo (since version 3.0) (Gebser et al.
2011) only require programs to be safe and can deal with all programs having a
ﬁnite instantiation. DLV guarantees ﬁnite instantiation for ﬁnitely ground programs
but membership in this class is not decidable. It integrates a Finite Checker module
which can check if a program belongs to a sub-class of ﬁnitely ground programs
(argument-restricted programs). For programs that are not member of this sub-
class, answer sets can be computed without preliminary check but ending is not
guaranteed.
ASPeRiX can deal with these programs and with some other programs whose in-
stantiation is inﬁnite but whose answer sets are ﬁnite. For example, the program P1a
from Section 1 is not ﬁnitely ground: intelligent instantiation of the program must
be ﬁnite to be ﬁnitely ground. The key points of intelligent instantiation are that
rules are instantiated with atoms appearing in head of rules of the program, and
simpliﬁcations are performed relatively to facts and rule heads of preceding compo-
nents of the dependency graph. In example P1a, choice between a and b makes both
possible for the grounder, and constraint has no eﬀect on intelligent instantiation of
the program. Thus, the grounding of rules from P1a will be the same with or with-
out the constraint (←a.): inﬁnite in both cases. ASPeRiX halts on P1a and is thus
able to halt on non ﬁnitely ground programs but it is not able to verify in advance
if answer sets are ﬁnite or not, and thus if computation will end or not. Never-
theless, ending can be guaranteed by means of command-line options specifying
the maximum allowed nesting level for functional terms and the biggest admissible
integer (DLV grounder provides similar possibilities). These restrictions ensure that
our computations always converge to an answer set if it exists. Formalizing the class
of programs for which ASPeRiX halts will be the subject of a forthcoming work.
4 Experimental results
Following Algorithm 1 of Section 3.2, the solver called ASPeRiX has been im-
plemented in C++ and is available at http://www.info.univ-angers.fr/pub/
claire/asperix.
There are two other ASP systems, GASP (Dal Pal`u et al. 2009) and OMiGA (Dao-
Tran et al. 2012), that realize the grounding of the program during the search of
an answer set.
GASP is an implementation in Prolog and Constraint Logic Programming over
ﬁnite domains of the notion of computation (see Section 3.1). The main ideas are
the same as those of ASPeRiX. Notable diﬀerences are the following. Well founded
consequences of the program are computed ﬁrst. Then propagation is close to ours.
GASP does not deal with must-be-true atoms but two special cases of propagation,
not treated by ASPeRiX, are implemented: (a) if the head of a rule is known to
be in OUT set and the body of the rule is satisﬁed except for one positive literal,

ASPeRiX
33
then this literal must be false (added to OUT) and (b) if, for some undeﬁned atom
a, there is no applicable rule whose head is a, then a can be added to OUT. For
each rule, instantiation and propagation are realized by building and solving a CSP
that determines atoms derivable from the rule. Representation of interpretations
uses Finite Domain Sets, such a data structure is eﬃcient to represent compactly
intervals but it need to code tuples (instances of predicates) by integers (very big
integers if domain is large and arity of predicate too). This representation impose
the set of ground terms of the program to be ﬁnite and thus function symbols are
excluded. On the other hand, GASP supports some cardinality constraints. To our
knowledge, GASP remained at the prototype stage and is no longer developed.
OMiGA is implemented in Java. Functional symbols (of non-zero arity) are not
supported. Principles of propagation and choice are the same as those of ASPeRiX
but implementation uses Rete algorithm for improving the speed of propagation.
First order rules are represented by a Rete network. Each node represents a literal
(or a set of literals) from the body of a rule or the atom of the head of a rule. It
stores all instances of the node that are true w.r.t. current partial interpretation.
Thereby all partial instantiations of rules are stored in the network. This lead to an
eﬃcient propagation regarding computation time, but memory space is sacriﬁed.
Dependency graph and solved predicates seems to be treated in a similar manner to
that of ASPeRiX. Current version (Weinzierl 2013) uses must-be-true propagation
and tries to introduce methods for conﬂict-driven learning of non-ground rules:
when a constraint is violated, a new constraint is built by unfolding of rules whose
ﬁring contributes to the conﬂict. This learned constraint is then transformed into
special rules so as to be used for propagation.
In the following we give some results of evaluation of ASPeRiX 0.2.5 highlighting
its adequacy to some particular problems. It is compared with Clingo (composed
by Gringo 3.0.5 and Clasp 1.3.10)
(Gebser et al. 2011; Gebser et al. 2012),
DLV Dec 16 2012 (Leone et al. 2006), GASP (june 2009) (Dal Pal`u et al. 2009)
and OMiGA Dec 3 2012 (Dao-Tran et al. 2012). Version without learning is used
for OMiGA because learning lowers its performances. All the systems have been run
on an Intel Core i7-3520M PC with 4 cores at 2.90GHz and about 4GB RAM,
running Linux Ubuntu 12.04 64 bits. For each instance of a problem, the memory
usage is limited to 3.000MB and computation time to 600 seconds. RunLim1.7 is
used for these limitations tasks. Tables of results use OoM (resp. OoT) to indicate
Out of Memory (resp. Out of Time). Results for GASP are only given for the ﬁrst
two examples, because it does not accept other tested programs.
Schur problem The Schur number problem is to partition N numbers into M
sets such that all of the sets satisfy: if x and y are assigned to the same set, then
x + y is not in the set. The following program (Dal Pal`u et al. 2009) is for M = 3
sets and N = 4 numbers.

34
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
PSchur−4 =

























number(1).,
number(2).,
number(3).,
number(4).,
part(1).,
part(2).,
part(3).,
inpart(X, 1) ←not inpart(X, 2), not inpart(X, 3), number(X).,
inpart(X, 2) ←not inpart(X, 1), not inpart(X, 3), number(X).,
inpart(X, 3) ←not inpart(X, 1), not inpart(X, 2), number(X).,
←number(X), number(Y ), part(P),
inpart(X, P), inpart(Y, P), inpart(Z, P),
T = Y + 1, X < T, Z = X + Y.

























The results are shown in Table 3 for M = 3. AS reports the number of answer
sets which are all computed. For all N ≥14, Schur-N has no answer set.
The program is a typical “guess and check” program. The seach space is expressed
by the three rules with inpart as head predicate, and constraint eliminates “bad
choices”. The grounding of the program is rather small but the search space is large.
The problem is very easy for Clingo and DLV but very hard for ASPeRiX and GASP.
Systems using grounding on the ﬂy have to repeat instantiation of the same rules
in each branch of the search tree. Moreover, constraints are not eﬃciently man-
aged by systems like ASPeRiX: it does not use constraints for propagation but only
checks if a constraint is violated. Compared to ASPeRiX, OMiGA performs well for
computation time, certainly because Rete network improve speed of instantiation
(partial instantiations are stored in the network) and the network remains rela-
tively small in such an example. This example illustrates a large class of programs
that ASPeRiX mismanage: programs with many choices and little propagation by
forward chaining.
Conversely, the following examples illustrate problems for which grounding on
the ﬂy is well adapted.
Birds problem Problem birds is a stratiﬁed program encoding a taxonomy about
ﬂying and non ﬂying birds. b stands for bird, f for flying, nf for nonflying, p for
penguin, sp for superpenguin, and o for ostrich.
Pbirds =



p(X) ←sp(X).,
b(X) ←p(X).,
b(X) ←o(X).,
f(X) ←b(X), not p(X), not o(X).,
f(X) ←sp(X).,
nf(X) ←p(X), not sp(X).,
nf(X) ←o(X).



We add to this program the atoms encoding N birds with 10% of ostriches, 20%
of penguins whose half of them are super penguins.
The unique answer set of such a program can be computed polynomially. ASPeRiX
uses only propagation step, without choice point, and grounders completely evaluate
the program so that the solver has nothing to do. Experimental results for birds
are comparable for ASPeRiX, Clingo, GASP and DLV. ASPeRiX has the best results
for CPU time, and DLV for memory usage (Figure 4 and 5). For such a problem,
the number of instantiated rules must be nearly the same for all systems. On the
other side, OMiGA system uses a very large amount of memory space, certainly due
to the Rete network which is designed to sacriﬁce memory for increased speed.
Unfortunately, memory gains expected by the ﬁrst order approach are lost.

ASPeRiX
35
ASPeRiX
Clingo
DLV
OMiGA
GASP
N = 1
AS = 3
time in sec
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
memory in MB
<2.0
<2.0
<2.0
20.0
4.4
N = 2
AS = 6
time in sec
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
memory in MB
<2.0
<2.0
<2.0
20.0
5.2
N = 3
AS = 18
time in sec
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.1
0.3
memory in MB
<2.0
<2.0
<2.0
20.0
6.3
N = 4
AS = 30
time in sec
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.2
1.0
memory in MB
<2.0
<2.0
<2.0
24.0
8.3
N = 5
AS = 66
time in sec
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.3
3.6
memory in MB
<2.0
<2.0
<2.0
50.0
8.3
N = 6
AS = 120
time in sec
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.4
11.0
memory in MB
<2.0
<2.0
<2.0
63.0
8.3
N = 7
AS = 258
time in sec
0.3
<0.1
<0.1
0.6
41.0
memory in MB
2.0
<2.0
<2.0
99.0
7.5
N = 8
AS = 288
time in sec
1.0
<0.1
<0.1
0.8
113.0
memory in MB
2.0
<2.0
<2.0
100.0
5.7
N = 9
AS = 546
time in sec
3.6
<0.1
<0.1
1.3
370.0
memory in MB
2.0
<2.0
<2.0
165.0
7.5
N = 10
AS = 300
time in sec
11.1
<0.1
<0.1
1.9
OoT
memory in MB
2.0
<2.0
<2.0
220.0
-
N = 11
AS = 186
time in sec
39.7
<0.1
<0.1
2.8
OoT
memory in MB
2.2
<2.0
<2.0
290.0
-
N = 12
AS = 114
time in sec
131.0
<0.1
<0.1
4.1
OoT
memory in MB
2.2
<2.0
<2.0
290.0
-
N = 13
AS = 18
time in sec
448.0
<0.1
<0.1
6.5
OoT
memory in MB
2.2
<2.0
<2.0
285.0
-
N = 14
AS = 0
time in sec
OoT
<0.1
<0.1
11.0
OoT
memory in MB
-
<2.0
<2.0
287.0
-
Table 3. Experimental results for Schur
Cutedge problem cutedge program is proposed in (Dao-Tran et al. 2012): given
a random graph with 100 vertices and N edges, each answer set is obtained by
deleting an edge and compute some transitive closure on the remaining edges.

36
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
Fig. 4. Time for birds
Pcutedge =











delete(X, Y ) ←edge(X, Y ), not keep(X, Y ).,
keep(X, Y ) ←edge(X, Y ), delete(X1, Y 1), X1! = X.,
keep(X, Y ) ←edge(X, Y ), delete(X1, Y 1), Y 1! = Y.,
reachable(X, Y ) ←keep(X, Y ).,
reachable(X, 98) ←reachable(X, Z), reachable(Z, 98).











Computing each answer set is only based on propagation, and the number of
answer sets equals the number of edges. The number of rules needed to compute
all answer sets is proportional to N 2 while the rule number needed to compute
one is proportional to N. But systems with pregrounding phase must generate all
ground instances of rules even if only one answer set is required. The results are
shown in Table 4. ASPeRiX has the best results for this program both for CPU
time and memory usage. OMiGA and Clingo use much more memory and are much
slower than ASPeRiX. As expected, memory usage of Clingo is independent of the
number of answer sets required and is close to the square of that used by ASPeRiX.
For its part, DLV quickly exceeds the time limit imposed.
Hamiltonian cycle problem The program P3 (see Example 3), Hamiltonian
cycle in a complete graph, is another easy problem with a lot of answer sets. Each
answer set is easy to compute but the whole instantiation is huge. Experiments
for the computation of one answer set in a graph with N vertices are represented
in Figures 6 and 7. ASPeRiX performs well on this example whereas OMiGA has
time and memory problems similar to that of Clingo and DLV. One more time, a
simple problem becomes intractable by systems with pregrounding phase because

ASPeRiX
37
ASPeRiX
Clingo
DLV
OMiGA
N = 2.8K
AS = 1
time in sec
<0.1
21
115
0.6
memory in MB
14.8
345
103
85
AS = 10
time in sec
0.2
21
226
1.8
memory in MB
14.8
345
103
200
AS = 100
time in sec
2.7
32
OoT
11.4
memory in MB
15.1
345
-
1042
AS = 500
time in sec
16
78
OoT
48
memory in MB
16.4
345
-
1050
AS = 1000
time in sec
36
123
OoT
84
memory in MB
18.0
345
-
1050
AS = all
time in sec
167
189
OoT
165
memory in MB
24.1
345
-
1050
N = 4.9K
AS = 1
time in sec
0.1
60
325
1
memory in MB
23.7
881
144
177
AS = 10
time in sec
0.5
63
OoT
3.7
memory in MB
23.8
881
-
425
AS = 100
time in sec
5.8
94
OoT
29
memory in MB
24.0
881
-
1100
AS = 500
time in sec
30.7
228
OoT
125
memory in MB
25.3
881
-
1150
AS = 1000
time in sec
67
373
OoT
245
memory in MB
27
881
-
1190
N = 5.9K
AS = 1
time in sec
0.1
94
465
1
memory in MB
28.5
1167
202
132
AS = 10
time in sec
0.8
94
OoT
5
memory in MB
28.6
1168
-
680
AS = 100
time in sec
7.6
114
OoT
41
memory in MB
29.1
1168
-
1135
AS = 500
time in sec
42
210
OoT
192
memory in MB
31.3
1168
-
1125
AS = 1000
time in sec
92
316
OoT
352
memory in MB
34.1
1168
-
1132
Table 4. Experimental results for cutedge

38
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
Fig. 5. Space for birds
they drown it in a lot of useless information so that memory used quickly becomes
prohibitive.
Hanoi problem Hanoi example illustrates a planning problem where the max-
imum number of allowed steps is given as input. NbD is the number of disks in
the problem and NbM is the maximum number of moves that are allowed to move
all disks from the ﬁrst rod to the third. The least value of NbM is the minimum
required to achieve the goal, then its value is gradually increased to evaluate its
impact. The complete program is given in Appendix A and experimental results
are shown in Table 5. ASPeRiX performances are (almost) independent of the given
number of moves: search, and therefore grounding, are stopped when a solution is
found. Conversely, grounders are quickly overwhelmed as they are obliged to fully
instantiate the program with all hypothetical (and unnecessary in this case) calcu-
lation steps4. This example cannot be computed by OMiGA due to restrictions on
the input language it accepts (function symbols are not supported).
Three coloring problem The program P2 (see Example 2), 3-coloring problem
on a graph organized as a bicycle wheel, poses no problem for Clingo and DLV
(cf. Table 6). But ASPeRiX and OMiGA have bad results on this example because
they are mismanaging constraints. Once a vertex is colored, say red, constraint
4 iClingo (Gebser et al. 2008) was created to address this speciﬁc problem. Some directives are
added to the program in order to incrementally instantiate some predicates of the program. But
it does not escape the grounding/solving separation, it only introduces some tools to control
the process.

ASPeRiX
39
ASPeRiX
Clingo
DLV
NbD = 4
NbM = 15
time in sec
<0.1
<0.1
< 0.1
memory in MB
-
-
-
NbM = 60
time in sec
<0.1
0.7
0.8
memory in MB
-
27
22
NbM = 100
time in sec
<0.1
1.5
3.6
memory in MB
-
54
51
NbM = 500
time in sec
<0.1
11.6
-
memory in MB
-
327
OoM
NbM = 1000
time in sec
<0.1
27
-
memory in MB
-
693
OoM
NbM = 2000
time in sec
<0.1
66
-
memory in MB
-
1523
OoM
NbM = 5000
time in sec
<0.1
-
-
memory in MB
-
OoM
OoM
NbM = 10000
time in sec
<0.1
-
-
memory in MB
-
OoM
OoM
NbM = 50000
time in sec
0.1
-
-
memory in MB
12.9
OoM
OoM
NbM = 100000
time in sec
0.3
-
-
memory in MB
23.9
OoM
OoM
NbD = 5
NbM = 31
time in sec
0.2
0.1
0.1
memory in MB
3.7
6.4
4
NbM = 50
time in sec
0.2
0.7
0.9
memory in MB
3.7
28
31
NbM = 100
time in sec
0.2
8.2
9.4
memory in MB
3.8
245
270
NbM = 500
time in sec
0.2
91
-
memory in MB
3.8
2055
OoM
NbM = 1000
time in sec
0.2
-
-
memory in MB
3.8
OoM
OoM
NbM = 5000
time in sec
0.2
-
-
memory in MB
4.8
OoM
OoM
NbM = 10000
time in sec
0.2
-
-
memory in MB
5.8
OoM
OoM
NbM = 50000
time in sec
0.4
-
-
memory in MB
14.4
OoM
OoM
NbM = 100000
time in sec
0.7
-
-
memory in MB
25
OoM
OoM
NbD = 6
NbM = 63
time in sec
4.7
0.6
1.1
memory in MB
10.3
24
29
NbM = 100
time in sec
4.7
9
-
memory in MB
10.3
272
OoM
NbM = 150
time in sec
4.7
83
-
memory in MB
10.3
1863
OoM
NbM = 200
time in sec
4.7
-
-
memory in MB
10.3
OoM
OoM
NbM = 500
time in sec
4.7
-
-
memory in MB
10.4
OoM
OoM
NbM = 1000
time in sec
4.7
-
-
memory in MB
10.5
OoM
OoM
NbM = 5000
time in sec
4.7
-
-
memory in MB
11.3
OoM
OoM
NbM = 10000
time in sec
4.8
-
-
memory in MB
12.4
OoM
OoM
NbM = 50000
time in sec
5
-
-
memory in MB
21
OoM
OoM
NbM = 100000
time in sec
5.6
-
-
memory in MB
31.7
OoM
OoM
Table 5. Experimental results for Hanoi tower problem

40
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
Fig. 6. Time for Hamiltonian cycle
(←e(V, U), col(V, C), col(U, C).) prohibits coloring adjacent vertices of the same
color. In propositional systems, unit propagation (or equivalent) works well and
allows to infer that adjacent vertices are not colored red. But ﬁrst-order approach
does not allow, in general case, to use unit propagation and thus, constraints are
mainly used for veriﬁcation and not for propagation. A lot of work remains on
these points. First-order constraints could instead allow more powerful propagation.
Suppose for example a constraint (←p(X, Y ), p(Y, Z).) and p(1, 2) is added in IN
set then, for all Z, p(2, Z) can be excluded at once from current solution, even if Z
values are potentially inﬁnite. But these opportunities are not exploited yet.
To sum up, ASPeRiX is eﬃcient to deal with stratiﬁed programs or simple prob-
lems whose instantiation is inﬁnite or huge but much of which is useless to compute
one speciﬁc answer set. On the other hand, the system is not competitive for more
combinatorial problems, with a large search space and few solutions, because propo-
sitional methods for propagation, heuristics, learning lemmas did not apply to the
ﬁrst order case.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented the ASPeRiX approach to answer set computation.
Our methodology deals with ﬁrst order rules following a forward chaining with
grounding process realized on the ﬂy and has been implemented in the ASP solver
ASPeRiX. This paper is the ﬁrst comprehensive document in which a survey of the
important techniques relevant to our approach is presented.
Starting from a short description of state-of-the-art ASP working principle, we

ASPeRiX
41
Fig. 7. Space for Hamiltonian cycle
have presented by many examples the main motivation of our approach: escaping
the bottleneck of the preliminary phase of grounding in which many state-of-the-art
systems fall. After a presentation of the theoretical foundations of ASP, we have
described by an ASPeRiX computation our ﬁrst order forward chaining approach for
answer set computing and have established the soundness and completeness of this
calculus w.r.t. the semantics of ASP (Proofs are reported in Appendix B). We have
then described in details the main algorithms of ASPeRiX and particularly those
which realize the selection of the ﬁrst order rules to be instantiated and applied
according to the current answer set in construction.
Our methodology allows very good performances for deﬁnite and stratiﬁed pro-
grams. It outperforms systems with a pregrounding phase for programs with large
grounding but much of it is unnecessary to solve the problem. On the other side,
performances quickly degrade for combinatorial problems with large search spaces,
especially if forward chaining propagation can not be exploited.
We have shown that our approach escapes the bottleneck of the preliminary
phase of grounding that is the only diﬃculty for some classes of programs. A direct
consequence of our new approach is that the use of symbolic functions in general
and arithmetic calculus in particular inside ASP is greatly facilitated.
The forward chaining with the grounding process realized on the ﬂy as an oper-
ational semantics emphasizes the programming aspect of ASP in which the answer
set is not only the result of a black box but the result of a process that may be
followed. This is interesting when dealing with knowledge coming from the web
and expressed in description logic since the structure of information uses rules that
are chained ones with the others (whereas this is not always the case for a pro-

42
Claire Lef`evre, Christopher B´eatrix, Igor St´ephan, Laurent Garcia
ASPeRiX
Clingo
DLV
OMiGA
N = 11
AS = 1
time in sec
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
0.3
memory in MB
<2
1
<1
45
N = 11
AS = all(6)
time in sec
3.4
<0.1
<0.1
7.7
memory in MB
1.8
1
<1
132
N = 101
AS = 1
time in sec
<0.1
<0.1
<0.1
OoT
memory in MB
3
1.5
1.1
-
N = 101
AS = all(6)
time in sec
OoT
<0.1
<0.1
OoT
memory in MB
-
1.8
1.4
-
N = 501
AS = 1
time in sec
1.6
<0.1
<0.1
OoT
memory in MB
8.8
3.3
3.3
-
N = 501
AS = all(6)
time in sec
OoT
<0.1
0.3
OoT
memory in MB
-
3.3
3.3
-
N = 1001
AS = 1
time in sec
13.3
<0.1
0.1
OoT
memory in MB
15.9
5.5
5.5
-
N = 1001
AS = all(6)
time in sec
OoT
<0.1
1.4
OoT
memory in MB
-
5.5
5.5
-
Table 6. Experimental time results for 3col
gram encoding a combinatorial problem). Moreover, when dealing with knowledge
expressed in description logic, one important issue is the ability to query the knowl-
edge base. The grounding process realized on the ﬂy will then allow to focus only
on the rules useful to ﬁnd an answer to the query. For this category of programs,
we think that our approach may be of great interest.
Furthermore, computing the answer sets of a program is a fundamental goal but
not an exclusive one. Debugging a program, controlling its behavior, introducing in
it some features coming from other programming languages may be of great interest
for ASP. We think that our methodology of answer set computing, guided by the
rules of the program, is the good starting point towards these new goals.
The ASPeRiX project is still in progress. Improvements at the algorithmic level
are underway by the development and implementation of backjumping and clause
learning techniques. On the other hand, we plan to fully respect the core language
ASP (Calimeri et al. 2014) by introducing, among others, minimization / maximiza-
tion and aggregates and extend it by introducing existentially quantiﬁed variables
in multi-head rules to encode fragments of Description Logics which are logical
formalisms for ontologies and the Semantic Web.

ASPeRiX
43
Tribute
In memory of the late Pascal Nicolas who was at the origin of this work. He sadly
passed away in 2010 but his enthusiasm, his passion for research and his great
humanity are still with us.
