How to ﬁnd a GSMem malicious activity via an AI approach
ZHU Wei-Jun, BAN Shao-Huan and FAN Yong-Wen
School of Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450001, China
Abstract: This paper investigates the following problem: how to ﬁnd a GSMem malicious activity eﬀectively.
To this end, this paper puts forward a new method based on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI). At ﬁrst, we use a large
quantity of data in terms of frequencies and amplitudes of some electromagnetic waves to train our models. And
then, we input a given frequency and amplitude into the obtained models, predicting that whether a GSMem
malicious activity occurs or not. The simulated experiments show that the new method is potential to detect a
GSMem one, with low False Positive Rates (FPR) and low False Negative Rates (FNR).
Keywords: Air-gapped Computers; GSMem; Artiﬁcial Intelligence
1
Introduction
Some cyber attacks have occurred during the last three years, which was viewed as impossible in the
traditional secure opinion. For examples, an air-gapped computer is no longer secure under some cyber
attacks. And there are a number of attack means that allow an attacker to theft information from an
air-gapped computer at present. A network weapon called suter, which is developed by the US army,
is employed to attack the air-gapped military computers. Using this technique, the Israelis successfully
invaded the Syrian air defense radar network and take over its control. As a result, the Israeli Air Force
successfully implemented the bombing.
The successful cases of cyber attacks further stimulate the rapid development of the air-gapped attack
technique. The new intrusion techniques are emerging. And this types of attacks has been developed
to theft data from a air-gapped computer using the thermal emission [1], electromagnetic radiation [2],
ultrasonic [3] [4], or USB devices [5], respectively. GSMem attack is one of the representative air-gapped
attacks. However, the existing Intrusion Detection (ID) techniques can hardly detect GSMem attacks.
To address this problem, we introduce a Machine Learning (ML) method to detect GSMem attacks. This
is the main contribution of this paper.
2
Preliminary
2.1
The GSMem Attack Model [2]
Air-Gapped computers are physically and logically isolated from any network. This section describes the
principle of GSMem attacks that can steal data from air-gapped computers. GSMem is a distributed
malware, which consists of the two parts. One is installed on an air-gapped computer, and it transmits
the signal. And the other runs in a mobile baseband processor, so that it can receive the signal. The
former is described as Launcher Module (LM), and the latter is called Receiver Module (RM).
Fig. 1 illustrates the core principle of a GSMem attack. The key steps can be depicted as follows.
1) The signal modulation program in LM converts the stolen information into a binary string.
2) The signal modulation program in LM periodically calls the Move Double Quadword Non-Temporal
(MOVNTDQ) instruction, which is one member of the CPU instruction sets of Single Instruction
Multiple Data (SIMD). These calls generate the electromagnetic waves in the GSM band which is
compatible with mobile basebands, according to the B-ASK modulation mode.
In this way, the
binary string is embedded into a sequence of GSM electromagnetic signals.
3) The signal modulation program in LM increases the amplitude of electromagnetic waves using mul-
tichannel memory architecture, since multichannel information can transmit the stronger electromag-
netic waves. And these ampliﬁed electromagnetic signals that carry the binary string will be emitted.
4) RM in a standard GSM mobile phone receives and decodes these emissions of electromagnetic signals,
resulting in data containing user privacy.
1
arXiv:1801.02440v2  [cs.CR]  16 Jan 2018

Fig. 1. schematic diagram for a GSMem attack
Fig. 2. The principle of the ML-based method for detecting GSMem attacks
2.2
The several ML approaches
A training set and a test set are needed using ML approaches. In this paper, we will employee the following
six ML approaches: Logistic Regression (LR), Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Machine (SVM),
Boosted Tree (BT), Back-Propagation Neural Networks (BPNN) and Naive Bayes Classiﬁer (NBC). See
Ref.[6] for more details on the various ML approaches. We do not expand it here due to limitation of
space.
3
The ML-based method for detecting GSMem attacks
Prof. Guri has given a great number of data on the frequency and the amplitude emitted by the electro-
magnetic waves [2], which indicate some normal cyber behaviors and the GSMem attacks. With these
data at hand, one can train the models that have an ability to predict more GSMem attacks. According
to the basic ML principle, we can design a new method for detecting GSMem attacks, as shown in Fig.
2.
2

Fig. 3. The Principle of the Experiment and Experimental Procedure
4
The Simulation Experiments
4.1
Experimental Objective
In section 4, we aim to explore the ability of the new method.
4.2
Experimental Platform
The used platform is the following one:
1) Hardware: Lenovo, Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-4790, 3.60 GHz, 8 GB RAM.
2) OS: Windows 7 64-bit.
3) Tools: GraphLab Create 3.0.1 [7] for running Logistic Regression, Random Forest, SVM and Boosted
Tree; JetBrains PyCharm 2016.1.4 [8] for running BP Neural Networks and Naive Bayesian Classiﬁer.
4.3
Experimental Procedure
According to the basic principle of the new method, we have employed the above tools to implement
LR, RF, SVM, BT, BPNN and NBC, respectively. The key steps are training and prediction. Fig. 3
illustrates the principle of our experiment and experimental procedure.
4.4
Experimental Results
Fig. 4 illustrates our experimental results. For all of the six ML-based algorithms, the best FNRs/FPRs
are depicted in this ﬁgure.
As shown in Fig. 4, both the SVM-based algorithm and the BT-based one hardly lead to false alarms
and leakage alarms. In comparison, it is easier for the RF-based algorithm to lead to false alarms and
leakage alarms. This discovery prompts us that the later or the stronger ML approaches do not necessarily
bring into the better performance in terms of GSMem detection.
5
Conclusions
The main result of this paper is Fig.2, illustrating a ML-based ID method. And the new method is
potential to detect actual GSMem attacks by rule and line. This is the beneﬁt of using the new method.
