A Decision-theoretic Approach to Detection-based Target Search with a
UAV
Aayush Gupta1, Daniel Bessonov2, Patrick Li3
Abstract— Search and rescue missions and surveillance re-
quire ﬁnding targets in a large area. These tasks often use
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) with cameras to detect and
move towards a target. However, common UAV approaches
make two simplifying assumptions. First, they assume that
observations made from different heights are deterministically
correct. In practice, observations are noisy, with the noise
increasing as the height used for observations increases. Second,
they assume that a motion command executes correctly, which
may not happen due to wind and other environmental factors.
To address these, we propose a sequential algorithm that
determines actions in real time based on observations, using
partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs). Our
formulation handles both observations and motion uncertainty
and errors. We run ofﬂine simulations and learn a policy. This
policy is run on a UAV to ﬁnd the target efﬁciently. We employ a
novel compact formulation to represent the coordinates of the
drone relative to the target coordinates. Our POMDP policy
ﬁnds the target up to 3.4 times faster when compared to a
heuristic policy.
I. INTRODUCTION
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are an indispensable
tool for search and rescue and can help ﬁnd targets in critical,
time sensitive missions [1]. However, these UAVs often fail
to ﬁnd the target when the uncertainty in the environment
is high [2]. The reason is that actions performed in real
environments have stochastic outcomes and the UAV does
not know its position and it cannot execute motions with
certainty.
When a drone issues a motion command in a certain
direction, it does not always execute correctly. In addition,
as the drone moves away from the ground, the ﬁeld of view
increases and the accuracy of the observation diminishes [3],
[4]. As shown in Figure 1, as the drone moves down, the
accuracy of the observation increases with the smaller ﬁeld
of view. This trade off between observation accuracy and
altitude has been well studied. In [3], the authors discuss
the trade-off between the range of visibility and observation
accuracy at different altitudes for a UAV. They provide
images to a human operator, so that he can move the UAV
remotely.
Problems such as these have been well studied in a branch
of AI called Reinforcement Learning. We can mathematically
*The drone used in this project was funded by Micron Foundation through
Saratoga High School IoT Club. This work was presented at IEEE IROS
2017.
1Saratoga High School, 20300 Herriman Ave, Saratoga, CA 95070

2Saratoga High School, 20300 Herriman Ave, Saratoga, CA 95070

3Saratoga High School, 20300 Herriman Ave, Saratoga, CA 95070

Fig. 1: The lower the altitude, the higher the conﬁdence and
smaller the ﬁeld of view of observations being made.
(a) MDP
(b) POMDP
Fig. 2: Left ﬁgure shows a MDP. Agent takes an action
which updates its state. Infrequently agent may get a reward
from the environment. The right ﬁgure shows a partially
observable Markov decision process (POMDP) which is like
a MDP except that the agent has a noisy access to its state
through its sensors.
formulate this as a sequential decision making problem,
where an agent has to make decisions at every time step using
the knowledge of the world with uncertain action outcomes.
The reward for acting correctly may not be reaped until many
time steps later. A common assumption is that environment
is observable, meaning that the agent knows where it is at
all times. The outcome of each action is stochastic and can
be captured using a transition model T(s′|s, a), which gives
the probability of transitioning to the next state s′ given that
action a is performed in state s. Transitions are typically
assumed Markovian, such that this probability depends only
on current state s and not previous states. In addition there is
a reward function R(s) which encodes the utility of being in
a certain state s. This formulation is called a Markov decision
process (MDP), and consists of states, actions, transition
model and reward function. The solution of an MDP is called
a policy π(s) and gives the action recommended for state s
[5].
A real environment is typically not fully observable due to
occlusions and sensor errors. The representation of such an
arXiv:1801.01228v1  [cs.AI]  4 Jan 2018

environment is called a partially observable Markov decision
process (POMDP). The agent does not know what state it
is in so it cannot execute the action recommended by the
optimal policy for that state. States are not observed directly,
and are probabilistically inferred through noisy observations.
As shown in Figure 2, in an MDP the system performs
an action based on its fully observable current state. In a
POMDP however, the system performs an action based on
the belief, which is a probabilistic distribution over possible
states.
There has been past work utilizing POMDPs for UAVs.
[4] uses POMDPs for the drones decision making for search
and rescue missions, with images as inputs. The authors state
that with traditional grid platforms, the altitude must be kept
constant. They partition the observation region into multiple
grid cells, and have the sensor observe multiple grid cells
depending on height. This grid-based representation of the
environment is useful to describe the presence of the target
in one grid cell [6]–[9]. With this representation, authors of
[2] show it is simple to compute the probability of missed
detections and false alarms as a function of height from
ﬁeld experiments. They also compare POMDP simulations
to greedy and potential based strategies. The authors of [10]
discuss the modiﬁcations of UAVs in military operations by
using POMDPs. They do not consider changes in height.
The POMDP is solved online during the ﬂight to take
into account the current landscape. [11]–[13] supplement
color recognition with thermal and/or radar data in order to
improve efﬁciency and accuracy of detection.
The problem with past work is the high dimensional state
space S, which translates to a large belief space B. In this
paper, ﬁrst we introduce the concept of Relative State Space
where the UAV does not keep track of absolute position of
target, but only its position relative to the target. Second,
we compare our POMDP derived policies to heuristic and
random policies. Finally, we do a grid search to minimize
search time by adjusting the parameters of the system such as
transition probability, observation probability, and maximum
reward.
II. OUR POMDP FORMULATION
We use POMDPs, which are generalized versions of
MDPs and model uncertainty in observations, in addition
to movement. In our model we specify probabilities for ob-
servation accuracy as a function of height above ground and
movement. We also specify a transition probability which
is the probability of transitioning correctly to the next state
after executing an action in the current state. Our POMDP
framework is parameterized by the n-tuple: {states, actions,
observations, beliefs, transition function, reward function,
discount factor} [2].
A. Reduced State Space
The set of all possible states includes every position
the drone could be in. States are parameterized by the n-
tuple S{X, Y, Z, B, D} where X, Y, Z refers to position
coordinates {1 ≤X, Y, Z ≤N}, B is whether the drone
is out of bounds, and D is whether the simulation is done.
A single target state is designated as the reward state, such
that any transition to the reward state delivers a reward. Our
Reduced State Space representation models the coordinates
of the drone relative to the reward coordinates. In detail, if
the absolute coordinates of the drone are (xd, yd, zd), and
the absolute coordinates of the reward are (xr, yr, zr), then
the state is represented by (x, y, z) = (xd −xr + cx, yd −
yr + cy, zd −zr + cz), where cx, cy, cz are constants that are
used to make all the coordinates positive. This formulation
is advantageous for several reasons: ﬁrst, uncertainty in the
reward location can be represented as an uncertainty in the
current state instead; second, the current absolute location
can be unknown because the location is only relative to
the reward. Finally, this formulation leads to signiﬁcant
memory saving, rather than using O(N 5) space to store the
coordinates of the reward and current state, only O(N 3)
(with a constant factor of 4) space is used, where N is
the size of the X, Y, and Z dimensions. For example, when
grid search size is 10, with absolute X coordinates there are
10 possible values for absolute state and 10 possible values
of target giving rise to N 2 = 100 possible x-coordinate
values in the state. With relative coordinates, there are only
2N −1 = 19 possible x-coordinate values in the state. Y
order computation is similar to X as described above, and
for Z, the order is always N because the reward is known to
be on level 1.
B. Actions
There are 7 possible actions, involving motion or ob-
servation taking: east, west, north, south, ascend, descend,
and look. In a non-stochastic world, north action moves the
drone in the positive Y direction, west moves in the positive
X direction, and ascend moves in positive Z direction.
Look doesnt move the current location. Instead, makes an
observation through a sensor reading.
C. Observations
Unlike traditional systems, our observations are simply
represented as a Boolean value representing whether or not
the object can be seen in the frame, with a corresponding
probability of accuracy. From the square of lowest height
Z = 1, the drone can only see one square (its current
square) with complete certainty. In general, at height Z,
the drone can see (2Z −1)2 squares with accuracy of
a = 1+OA
Z−1
2
, where OA is the observation accuracy that
varies from .7 ≤OA ≤1.0. With this equation, the accuracy
is more than half and the information is generally more
useful than no observation at all. Since observations are
reported with observation accuracy that is available to the
drone, the drone can calculate its precise Z coordinate. As a
result, the problem becomes a mixed observability Markov
decision process (MOMDP), a type of POMDP where the
drone knows its precise Z coordinate but does not know X
and Y coordinates.

D. Belief
Since the reward position relative to the drone is unknown,
the initial state is unknown. Therefore, our initial belief
of the current state is uniformly distributed over all states.
Due to our relativistic formulation, we can either consider
the system where the reward is known and the position
of the drone is not, or the system where the position of
the drone is exactly known and the reward is not. For
simplicity, we consider the system where the reward is
known and the position of the drone is not. As time pro-
gresses, the belief of the drone’s current state moves with
the perceived action taken, and is strengthened or weak-
ened by the presence of positive or negative observations.
Mathematically, if the probability of being in a certain
state S{X, Y, Z, B, D} is P(s), the new probability after
transitioning with action A and observation o is Pnew(s0) =
X+1
P
I=X−1
Y +1
P
J=Y −1
Z+1
P
K=Z−1
1P
B=0
P(S{I, J, K, B, 0})∗T(s0|s, a)∗
O(o|s), where T is the probability of transitioning to state
so after taking action a in state s and O is the probability
of observing o in state s.
E. Transition Function
When the drone attempts to execute an action, with the
exception of look, it is possible that it executes a different
action. We let the probability that the drone executes the
correct action be P. The remaining probability is equally
distributed over all of the 6 neighboring positions that are
within bounds. As the state transitions between different
coordinates, the belief updates accordingly.
F. Reward Function and Discount Factor
Every time the drone attempts to move out of bounds it
gets a reward of R1 = −1. Transitioning to the intended
target has a reward R0 = 10. Every time the drone executes
an action, including look, one time step passes and the ﬁnal
rewards value decreases proportionally to the discount factor
γ = .95. Mathematically, the ﬁnal reward value becomes
R = R0γT , where T is the number of time steps passed.
III. EXPERIMENTS
We use the Julia POMDP library from Stanford Intelligent
Systems Laboratory (SISL) for our simulations [14]. We
use the SARSOP solver to compute the optimal POMDP
policy. SARSOP is an approximate POMDP algorithm orig-
inally proposed by Kurniawati et. al in 2008 [15]. Besides
POMDPs, we coded two baseline policies for comparison:
A. Heuristic Policy
With this policy, the drone ascends till it sees the reward
the ﬁrst time, and every time it sees the reward thereafter, it
descends. When it stops seeing the reward, it checks the 8
neighboring squares at the same level until it sees a reward
again. When it oberserves a reward, it continues the descent.
To maintain a maximum amount of information, it looks at
every alternate turn. This policy models the thought process
of a human operator.
B. Random policy
With a random policy, the drone has a 10% chance of
descending, otherwise it moves randomly on the same level.
Fig. 3: Schematic showing workﬂow for POMDP formula-
tion, optimal policy determination and simulations.
C. Experimental Setup
Figure 3 shows the workﬂow to optimize the POMDP
policy through simulations. We use a 7x7x7 environment
grid in our simulation. We vary the parameters of the model
as follows: Reward is varied by an order of magnitude
between 10 and 1000, while transition probability is varied
between 0.76 to 1.0 with a spacing of 0.06. Similarly,
observation probability is varied between 0.76 to 1.0 with a
spacing of 0.06. Once we deﬁne our model, we run various
mathematical solvers to heuristically determine near optimal
policies through a SARSOP solver.
We run each policy solver for 2 hours and optimize a
policy which maps beliefs to actions. We then test this
policy on 10,000 simulations with random starting states.
The average reward from these runs is reported in the results
section. We load this optimal policy onto the drone and
query it during the ﬂight to return the optimal direction of
movement.
D. Drone Implementation
Our work uses the DJI F550, a hexacopter ﬁtted with
a 3DR Pixhawk Flight Control System and Raspberry Pi,
connected to a high deﬁnition (1080p) camera. Our setup has
the advantage of being programmable through the Raspberry
Pi, as well as being controlled by a remote transmitter. Our
drone is powered by a 3S lipo-cell battery, and a backup
portable charger for the Raspberry Pi. It can carry upto 4
pounds including its initial hardware, with a ﬂight time of
approximately 15 minutes [16]. Our drone is shown in Fig-
ures 4 and 5. It is equipped with a GPS and buzzer to notify
the operator of any possible errors prior or during ﬂight. We
use a FlySky FS-T6 remote transmitter and AT9 receiver to
begin the autonomous ﬂight, as well as to maintain a manual
override.
The Raspberry Pi 3 Model B is used to control all aspects
of autonomous ﬂight. Once the mission is started, a Python
control script launches the UAV into a vertical ascent. For the
current implementation, drone observations are hard-coded
and read from a text ﬁle, as opposed to processing sensor
data. This text ﬁle is parsed by a an update script written
in Julia. This script processes the observation, and in turn
determines and writes an action to the text ﬁle. The action is
then executed by the drone, after which the process repeats
until the reward is ultimately found.

Fig. 4: Our DJI F550 drone with labelled parts.
Fig. 5: Top view of our DJI F550 drone with labelled parts.
TABLE I: Proportion of time spent looking by the POMDP
policy as a function of observation accuracy for transition
probability = 0.88. As observations get more accurate, the
system relies more on them.
Observation
Accuracy
0.76
0.82
0.88
0.94
1.00
Look Proportion
0.00
0.03
0.10
0.18
0.21
TABLE II: Proportion of time spent looking by the POMDP
policy as a function of transition probability for observation
accuracy = .88. Generally, as movement gets more accurate,
the system relies less on observation.
Transition
Probability
0.76
0.82
0.88
0.94
1.00
Look Proportion
0.11
0.11
0.10
0.09
0.07
IV. RESULTS
In this section, we ﬁrst report on the actions choosen by
the POMDP policy. We next compare our POMDP policy to
a heuristic and random policy. Finally, we show the belief
for a sample run of the POMDP policy in simulation and on
the drone.
A. Comparison of POMDP to heuristic and random policy
We use a 7x7x7 environment grid in our simulations. We
vary transition probability and observation accuracy between
0.76 and 1. We compare the POMDP policy to heuristic and
random policies for different values of observation accuracy
TABLE III: Average reward and time taken by POMDP,
heuristic, and random policies over 1,000 simulations, vary-
ing observation probability and transition probability for R
= 10.
Policy
Average Reward
Average Time Steps
POMDP
3.41
25.202
Heuristic
1.317
85.26
Random
-2.112
142.05
Fig. 6: Heatmap showing time taken for POMDP, random
and heuristic policies with R=10 with variation in transition
probability on Y axis and observation probability on X axis.
Note that the colormaps for each heatmap has a different
range.
and transition probability. Table III shows average reward
and time taken by the policies assuming that each step
takes 1 second. Note that it is not possible to have an
exhaustive manual policy due to motion uncertainty. The
average POMDP reaches a reward 3.4 times faster than the
heuristic policy, and 5.7 times faster than the random policy.
In Figure 6, we note that POMDP policy consistently takes
less time. All the policies take less time when observation
and transition probabilities are high as the environment
is more certain, shown by the darker squares. In Figure
7(a) as transitions become more accurate, time to reward
decreases for all policies as expected. In Figure 7(b), we
can see the POMDP policy is robust regarding uncertainties
in observation and transitions, because time to destination
remains similar as observation accuracy decreases, unlike the
heuristic and random policies. We run 1,000 simulations for
each policy and set of parameters to obtain accurate values.
(a) Transition Accuracy Varying
(b) Observation Accuracy Varying
Fig. 7: Both ﬁgures show time taken for POMDP, random
and heuristic policies with R=10. The left ﬁgure varies tran-
sition probability while observation probability is 0.88. The
right ﬁgure varies observation probability while transition
probability is 0.88.

(a) Step 1
(b) Step 2
(c) Step 3
(d) Step 4
(e) Step 5
(f) Step 6
(g) Step 7
(h) Step 8
(i) Step 9
Fig. 8: Steps 1-9. The drone follows the simulated POMDP
policy under onboard software control moving to the left in
Step 2, and then moving right in Step 3. This is followed
by moving towards the user in Steps 4-6. Finally, the drone
moves to the right in Steps 7-9.
B. Sample POMDP policy run in simulation and on drone
In Figures 9 and 10, we show an example run of the
POMDP policy and walk through the example. A green cube
outline signiﬁes that the target was seen during a look action,
a red cube outline signiﬁes the target was not seen during a
look action, and a blue cube signiﬁes positions with non look
actions. A cube outline with center (X −.5, Y −.5, Z −.5) is
said to be at position (X, Y, Z). On the ground, squares with
center (X −.5, Y −.5) are said to be at position (X, Y ). In
addition, darker green squares signify a higher belief that the
current location is directly above the XY coordinate. Figure
8 shows a sample run on the drone.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
A common problem in application of POMDPs is their
computational complexity. We reduce variables by deﬁning
state relative to the UAVs own position, not absolute X
and Y coordinates. This leads to signiﬁcant memory saving;
rather than using O(N 5) space to store the coordinates of
the reward and current state, only O(N 3) space is used,
where N is the size of the X, Y, and Z dimensions. We
build a simulator to test our Reduced State Space formulation
for UAV policies performing target detection for search and
rescue and surveillance tasks. We show that our POMDP
policy ﬁnds the target 3.4 times faster as compared to a
heuristic policy. We show a sample run of the POMDP policy
where we are able to visualize the belief of the location of
the reward relative to the drone, and run the policy on a
drone.
In the future, we would like to expand our work in two
different directions. First, we would like to integrate the
camera sensor or a boolean sensor on our drone and take
actions based on real observations. Second, we would like
to do more experiments with other POMDP solvers such as
Partially Observable Monte Carlo Planning where we do not
learn a policy beforehand, but run simulations in real time
based on sensor data to determine the optimal action.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Prof. Mykel J. Kochenderfer at
Stanford Intelligent Systems Laboratory (SISL) for guidance
and Louis Dressel for paper review.
