Synergistic Team Composition
Ewa Andrejczuk
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Institute
(IIIA-CSIC)
Change Management Tool S.L
Barcelona, Spain

Juan A. Rodríguez-Aguilar
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Institute
(IIIA-CSIC)
Barcelona, Spain

Carme Roig
Institut Torras i Bages
L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain

Carles Sierra
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Institute
(IIIA-CSIC)
Barcelona, Spain

ABSTRACT
Eﬀective teams are crucial for organisations, especially in
environments that require teams to be constantly created
and dismantled, such as software development, scientiﬁc ex-
periments, crowd-sourcing, or the classroom.
Key factors
inﬂuencing team performance are competences and person-
ality of team members. Hence, we present a computational
model to compose proﬁcient and congenial teams based on
individuals’ personalities and their competences to perform
tasks of diﬀerent nature.
With this purpose, we extend
Wilde’s post-Jungian method for team composition, which
solely employs individuals’ personalities.
The aim of this
study is to create a model to partition agents into teams
that are balanced in competences, personality and gender.
Finally, we present some preliminary empirical results that
we obtained when analysing student performance. Results
show the beneﬁts of a more informed team composition that
exploits individuals’ competences besides information about
their personalities.
CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing →Empirical studies
in collaborative and social computing; •Computing
methodologies →Multi-agent systems; •Mathematics
of computing →Approximation algorithms;
Keywords
Team Formation, Approximation algorithms, humans
1.
INTRODUCTION
Some tasks, due to their complexity, cannot be carried out
by single individuals. They need the concourse of sets of peo-
ple composing teams. Teams provide a structure and means
of bringing together people with a suitable mix of individ-
ual properties (such as competences or personality). This
can encourage the exchange of ideas, their creativity, their
motivation and job satisfaction and can actually extend in-
dividual capabilities. In turn, a suitable team can improve
the overall productivity, and the quality of the performed
tasks. However, sometimes teams work less eﬀectively than
initially expected due to several reasons: a bad balance of
their capacities, incorrect team dynamics, lack of commu-
nication, or diﬃcult social situations. Team composition is
thus a problem that has attracted the interest of research
groups all over the world, also in the area of multiagent sys-
tems. MAS research has widely acknowledged competences
as important for performing tasks of diﬀerent nature [3, 12,
26, 32]. However, the majority of the approaches represent
capabilities of agents in a Boolean way (i.e., an agent either
has a required skill or not). This is a simplistic way to model
an agent’s set of capabilities as it ignores any skill degree.
In real life, capabilities are not binary since every individ-
ual (e.g. human or software) shows diﬀerent performances
for each competence. Additionally, the MAS literature has
typically disregarded signiﬁcant organizational psychology
ﬁndings (with the exception of several recent, preliminary
attempts like [19] or [2]). Numerous studies in organizational
psychology [7, 25, 36] underline the importance of personal-
ity traits or types for team composition. Other studies have
focused on how team members should diﬀer or converge in
their characteristics, such as experience, personality, level
of skill, or gender, among others [35], in order to increase
performance.
In this paper, we focus on scenarios where a complex
task requires the collaboration of individuals within a team.
More precisely, we consider a scenario, where there are mul-
tiple instances of the same complex task.
The task has a
task type and a set of competence requests with compe-
tence levels needed to solve the task.
We have a pool of
human agents characterized by gender, personality, and a
set of competences with competence levels. Our goal is to
partition agents into teams so that within a task all com-
petence requirements are covered (whenever possible) and
team members work well together. That is, each resulting
team is both proﬁcient (covers the required competences)
and congenial (balances gender and psychological traits).
We refer to these teams as synergistic teams.
We deﬁne
the synergistic value of a team as its balance in terms of
arXiv:1702.08222v1  [cs.AI]  27 Feb 2017

competence, personality and gender. Each synergistic team
works on the very same task.
This scenario is present in
many real-life settings, for instance a classroom or a crowd-
sourcing task. With this purpose, we design an algorithm
that uses a greedy technique both to match competences
with the required ones and at the same time to balance the
psychological traits of teams’ members.
This paper makes the following contributions. To start
with, we formalise the synergistic team formation problem
as the problem of partitioning a group of individuals into
teams with limited size. We provide an approximate local
algorithm to solve the team composition problem. We em-
pirically evaluate the algorithm using real data. Preliminary
results show that our algorithm predicts better the perfor-
mance of teams than the experts that know students’ social
situation, background and competences.
Outline. The remaining of this paper is structured as
follows.
Section 2 opens with an overview of the related
work.
Section 3 gives the personality background for our
model. Section 4 describes the synergistic team composi-
tion problem and Section 5 presents our algorithm to solve
the synergistic team composition problem. Then, Section 6
presents results of our algorithm in the context of team com-
position in the classroom. Finally, Section 7 discusses our
approach and future work.
2.
BACKGROUND
To the best of our knowledge, [18] is the only model that
considers both personality and competences while compos-
ing teams. There, the inﬂuence of personality on diﬀerent
task allocation strategies (minimizing either undercompe-
tence or overcompetence) is studied. Henceforth, this work
is the most relevant for us, however there are substantial
diﬀerences between our work and [18]. Firstly, authors do
not propose an algorithm to compose teams based on both
personality and competences. Secondly, gender balance is
not considered in their setting. Finally, [18] does not pro-
vide an evaluation involving real data (only an agent-based
simulation is presented).
The rest of the literature relevant to this article is divided
into two categories as proposed in [4]: those that consider
agent capacities (individual and social capabilities of agents)
and those that deal with agent personality (individual be-
haviour models).
Capacity. The capacity dimension has been exploited by
numerous previous works [3, 11, 12, 14, 24, 26, 29, 32]. In
contrast to our work, where the competences are graded, in
the majority of works agents are assumed to have multiple
binary skills (i.e., the agent either has a skill or not). For
instance, [26, 14] use agents’ capabilities to compose one k-
robust team for a single task. A team is k-robust if removing
any k members from the team does not aﬀect the completion
of the task. [3] uses competences and communication cost in
a context where tasks sequentially arrive and teams have to
be composed to perform them. Each task requires a speciﬁc
set of competences and the team composition algorithm is
such that the workload per agent is fair across teams.
Personality. In the team formation literature, the only
two models to our knowledge considering personality to com-
pose teams are [19] and [2]. [2] uses Belbin theory to obtain
human predominant roles (we discuss this method in Section
3). Additionally, the gender is not taken into account while
composing heterogeneous teams, which we believe may be
important for team congeniality. Regarding [19], Farhangian
et al. use the classical MBTI personality test (this method
is discussed in Section 3). They look for the best possible
team built around a selected leader. In other words, the best
team for a particular task is composed. Gender balance is
not considered in this setting. Finally, although [19]’s team
composition considered real data, the resulting teams’ per-
formance was not validated in any real setting (Bayesian
theory was used to predict the probability of success in var-
ious team composition conditions).
3.
PERSONALITY
In this section, we discuss the most prominent approaches
to measure human personality and we explain the details of
the method we have decided to examine.
Personality determines people’s behaviour, cognition and
emotion. Diﬀerent personality theorists present their own
deﬁnitions of personality and diﬀerent ways to measure it
based on their theoretical positions.
The most popular approach is to determine personality
through a set of questions. There have been several sim-
pliﬁed schemes developed over the years to proﬁle human
personality. The most populars are:
1. the Five Factor Model (aka FFM or “Big Five”), which
uses ﬁve broad dimensions to describe human person-
ality [13];
2. Belbin theory [6], which provides a theory on how dif-
ferent role types inﬂuence teamwork; and
3. the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) scheme de-
signed to indicate psychological preferences in how peo-
ple perceive the world and make decisions [10].
According to [30], FFM personality instruments fail to de-
tect signiﬁcant sex diﬀerences in personality structures. It
is also argued that the Big Five dimensions are too broad
and heterogeneous, and lack the speciﬁcity to make accurate
predictions in many real-life settings [9, 22].
Regarding Belbin theory, the results of previous studies
considering the correlation between team composition and
team performance are ambiguous.
Even though some re-
search shows weak support or does not show support for
this theory at all [8, 34, 28], it remains popular.
Finally, the MBTI measure consists of four dimensions
on a binary scale (e.g.
either the person is Extrovert or
Introvert).
Within this approach, every person falls into
one of the sixteen possible combinations of the four letter
codes, one letter representing one dimension. This approach
is easy to interpret by non-psychologists, though reliance on
dichotomous preference scores rather than continuous scores
excessively restricts the level of statistical analysis [15].
Having considered the arguments above, we have decided
to explore a novel method: the Post-Jungian Personality
Theory, which is a modiﬁed version of the Myers-Briggs
Type Indicator (MBTI) [10], the “Step II” version of Quenk,
Hammer and Majors [39]. The questionnaire to determine
personality is short, contains only 20 quick questions (com-
pared to the 93 MBTI questions). This is very convenient for
both experts wanting to design teams and individuals doing
the test since completing the test takes just a few minutes
(for details of the questionnaire, see [39, p.21]). Douglass J.
Wilde claims that it covers the same psychological territory
as MBTI [37].
In contrast to the MBTI measure, which
consists of four binary dimensions, the Post-Jungian Per-
sonality Theory uses the numerical data collected using the

questionnaire [38]. The results of this method seem promis-
ing, since within a decade this novel approach has tripled
the fraction of Stanford teams awarded national prizes by
the Lincoln Foundation [37].
The test is based on the pioneering psychiatrist Carl Gus-
tav Jung’s cognitive-mode personality model [23]. It has two
sets of variable pairs called psychological functions:
• Sensing / Intuition (SN) — describes the way of
approaching problems
• Thinking / Feeling (TF) — describes the way of
making decisions
and two sets of psychological attitudes:
• Perception / Judgment (PJ) — describes the way
of living
• Extroversion / Introversion (EI) — describes the
way of interacting with the world
For instance, for the Feeling-Thinking (TF) dimension, a
value between -1 and 0 means that a person is of the feel-
ing type, and a value between 0 and 1 means she is of the
thinking type. Psychological functions and psychological at-
titudes compose together a personality. Every dimension of
a personality (EI, SN, TF, PJ) is tested by ﬁve multiple
choice true/false questions.
4.
TEAM COMPOSITION MODEL
In this section we introduce and formalise our team com-
position problem.
First, section 4.1 introduces the basic
notions of agent, personality, competence, and team, upon
which we formalise our problem. Next, we formalise the no-
tion of task assignment for a single team and a single task,
and we characterise diﬀerent types of assignments. Sections
4.3 and 4.4 show how to evaluate the proﬁciency and con-
geniality degrees of a team.
Based on these measures, in
section 4.6 we formalise the synergistic team composition
problem.
4.1
Basic deﬁnitions
In our model, we consider that each agent is a human. We
characterise each agent by the following properties:
• A unique identiﬁer that distinguishes an agent from
others (e.g. ID card number, passport number, em-
ployee ID, or student ID).
• Gender. Human agents are either a man or a woman.
• A personality represented by four personality traits.
Each personality trait is a number between -1 and 1.
• A set of competences. A competence integrates knowl-
edge, skills, personal values, and attitudes that enable
an agent to act correctly in a job, task or situation [33].
Each agent is assumed to possess a set of competences
with associated competence levels. This set may vary
over time as an agent evolves.
Next, we formalise the above-introduced concepts.
Definition 1. A personality proﬁle is a vector ⟨sn, tf , ei, pj⟩∈
[−1, 1]4, where each sn, tf , ei, pj represents one personality
trait.
We denote by C = {c1, . . . , cm} the whole set of compe-
tences, where each element ci ∈C stands for a competence.
Definition 2. A human agent is represented as a tuple
⟨id, g, p, l⟩such that:
• id is the agent’s identiﬁer;
• g ∈{man, woman} stands for their gender;
• p is a personality proﬁle vector ⟨sn, tf , ei, pj⟩∈[−1, 1]4;
• l : C →[0, 1] is a function that assigns the probability
that the agent will successfully show competence c. We
will refer to l(c) as the competence level of the agent
for competence c. We assume that when an agent does
not have a competence (or we do not know about it),
the level of this competence is zero.
Henceforth, we will note the set of agents as A = {a1, . . . ,
an}. Moreover, We will use super-indexes to refer to agents’
components. For instance, given an agent a ∈A, ida will
refer to the id component of agent a. We will employ matrix
L ∈[0, 1]n×m to represent the competence levels for each
agent and each competence.
Definition 3
(Team). A team is any non-empty sub-
set of A with at least two agents.
We denote by KA =
(2A \ {∅}) \ {{ai}|ai ∈A} the set of all possible teams in
A.
We assume that agents in teams coordinate their activities
for mutual beneﬁt.
4.2
The task assignment problem
In this section we focus on how to assign a team to a
task. A task type determines the competence levels required
for the task as well as the importance of each competence
with respect to the others. For instance, some tasks may
require a high level of creativity because they were never
performed before (so there are no qualiﬁed agents in this
matter). Others may require a highly skilled team with a
high degree of coordination and teamwork (as it is the case
for rescue teams). Therefore, we deﬁne a task type as:
Definition 4. A task type τ is deﬁned as a tuple
⟨λ, µ, {(ci, li, wi)}i∈Iτ ⟩such that:
• λ ∈[0, 1] importance given to proﬁciency;
• µ ∈[−1, 1] importance given to congeniality;
• ci ∈C is a competence required to perform the task;
• li ∈[0, 1] is the required competence level for compe-
tence ci;
• wi ∈[0, 1] is the importance of competence ci for the
success of task of type τ; and
• P
i∈Iτ wi = 1.
We will discuss the meaning of λ and µ further ahead when
deﬁning synergistic team composition (see subsection 4.6).
Then, we deﬁne a task as:
Definition 5. A task t is a tuple ⟨τ, m⟩such that τ is
a task type and m is the required number of agents, where
m ≥2.
Henceforth, we denote by T the set of tasks and by T the
set of task types. Moreover, we will note as Cτ = {ci|i ∈Iτ}
the set of competences required by task type τ.
Given a team and a task type, we must consider how to
assign competences to team members (agents). Our ﬁrst,
weak notion of task assignment only considers that all com-
petences in a task type are assigned to some agent(s) in the
team:

Definition 6. Given a task type τ and a team K ∈KA,
an assignment is a function η : K →2Cτ satisfying that
Cτ ⊆S
a∈K η(a).
4.3
Evaluating team proﬁciency
Given a task assignment for a team, next we will mea-
sure the degree of competence of the team as a whole. This
measure will combine both the degree of under-competence
and the degree of over-competence, which we formally deﬁne
ﬁrst. Before that, we must formally identify the agents that
are assigned to each competence as follows.
Definition 7. Given a task type τ, a team K, and an
assignment η, the set δ(ci) = {a ∈K|ci ∈η(a)} stands for
the agents assigned to cover competence ci.
Now we are ready to deﬁne the degrees of undercompentence
and overcompetence.
Definition 8
(Degree of undercompentence).
Given a task type τ, a team K, and an assignment η, we
deﬁne the degree of undercompetence of the team for the task
as:
u(η) =
X
i∈Iτ
wi ·
P
a∈δ(ci) | min(la(ci) −li, 0)|
|{a ∈δ(ci)|la(ci) −li < 0}|
Definition 9
(Degree of overcompetence).
Given a task type τ, a team K, and an assignment η, we
deﬁne the degree of overcompetence of the team for the task
as:
o(η) =
X
i∈Iτ
wi ·
P
a∈δ(ci) max(la(ci) −li, 0)
|{a ∈δ(ci)|la(ci) −li > 0}|
Given a task assignment for a team, we can calculate its
competence degree to perform the task by combining its
overcompetence and undercompetence as follows.
Definition 10. Given a task type τ, a team K and an
assignment η, the competence degree of the team to perform
the task is deﬁned as:
uprof (η) = 1 −(υ · u(η) + (1 −υ) · o(η))
(1)
where υ ∈[0, 1] is the penalty given to the undercompetence
of team K.
Notice that the larger the value of υ the higher the impor-
tance of the competence degree of team K, while the lower
the value υ, the less important its undercompetence. The
intuition here is that we might want to penalize more the
undercompetency of teams, as some tasks strictly require
teams to be at least as competent as deﬁned in the task
type.
Proposition 1. For any η, u(η) + o(η) ∈[0, 1].
Proof. Given that (1) la(ci) ∈[0, 1] and li ∈[0, 1]; (2) If
min(la(ci) −li, 0) < 0 then max(la(ci) −li, 0) = 0; and (3)
If max(la(ci) −li, 0) > 0 then min(la(ci) −li, 0) = 0. Thus,
from (1–3) we have | min(la(ci)−li, 0)| + max(la(ci)−li, 0) ∈
[0, 1]. Let n = |{a ∈δ(ci)|la(ci) −li > 0}|, then obviously it
holds that n·(| min(la(ci)−li,0)|+max(la(ci)−li,0))
n
∈[0, 1] and as
|δ(ci)| ≤n then
P
a∈δ(ci)(| min(la(ci)−li,0)|+max(la(ci)−li,0))
n
∈
[0, 1] holds; and since P
i∈Iτ wi = 1 then
P
i∈Iτ wi ·
P
a∈δ(ci)(| min(la(ci)−li,0)|+max(la(ci)−li,0))
n
∈[0, 1];
Finally, distributing, this equation is equivalent to:
P
i∈Iτ wi
P
a∈δ(ci)(| min(la(ci)−li,0)|
n
+ P
i∈Iτ wi
P
a∈δ(ci)(max(la(ci)−li,0))
n
∈[0, 1] which in turn is
equivalent to u(η) + o(η) ∈[0, 1].
Function uprof is used to measure how proﬁcient a team
is for a given task assignment. However, counting on the
required competences to perform a task does not guarantee
that the team will succeed at performing it. Therefore, in
the next subsection we present an evaluation function to
measure congeniality within teams. Unlike our measure for
proﬁciency, which is based on considering a particular task
assignment, our congeniality measure will solely rely on the
personalities and genders of the members of a team.
4.4
Evaluating team congeniality
Inspired by the experiments of Douglass J. Wilde [37] we
will deﬁne the team utility function for congeniality ucon(K),
such that:
• it values more teams whose SN and TF personality
dimensions are as diverse as possible;
• it prefers teams with at least one agent with posi-
tive EI and TF dimensions and negative PJ dimen-
sion, namely an extrovert, thinking and judging agent
(called ETJ personality),
• it values more teams with at least one introvert agent;
• it values gender balance in a team.
Therefore, the higher the value of function ucon(K), the
more diverse the team is. Formally, this team utility func-
tion is deﬁned as follows:
ucon(K) =σSN(K) · σT F (K) + max
ai∈K ((0, α, α, α) · pi, 0)
+ max
ai∈K ((0, 0, −β, 0) · pi, 0) + γ · sin (π · g(K))
(2)
where the diﬀerent parameters are explained next.
• σSN(K) and σT F (K): These variances are computed
over the SN and TF personality dimensions of the
members of team K. Since we want to maximise ucon,
we want these variances to be as large as possible. The
larger the values of σSN and σT F the larger their prod-
uct will be, and hence the larger team diversity too.
• α: The maximum variance of any distribution over an
interval [a, b] corresponds to a distribution with the el-
ements evenly situated at the extremes of the interval.
The variance will always be σ2 ≤((b −a)/2)2. In our
case with b = 1 and a = −1 we have σ ≤1. Then,
to make the four factors equally important and given
that the maximum value for pi (the personality pro-
ﬁle vector of agent ai) would be (1, 1, 1, 1) a maximum
value for α would be 3α = ((1 −(−1))/2)2 = 1, as we
have the factor σSN · σT F , so α ≤0.33(3). For values
situated in the middle of the interval the variance will
be σ2 ≤(b−a)2
12
, hence a reasonable value for α would
be α =
√
(1−(−1))2)/12
3
= 0.19
• β: A similar reasoning shows that β ≤1.
• γ is a parameter to weigh the importance of a gen-
der balance and g(K) =
w(K)
w(K)+m(K). Notice that for
a perfectly gender balanced team with w(K) = m(K)
we have that sin (π · g(K)) = 1. The higher the value
of γ, the more important is that team ucon is gender
balanced. Similarly to reasoning about α and β, we
assess γ ≤1. In order to make this factor less impor-
tant than the others in the equation we experimentally
assessed that γ = 0.1 is a good compromise.
In summary, we will use a utility function ucon such that:
α = σSN (K)·σT F (SK)
3
, β = 3 · α and γ = 0.1.

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
Creative
General tasks
Structured
General tasks
Creative
Specialized tasks
Structured
Specialized tasks
Proﬁciency (λ)
Congeniality (µ)
Figure 1: Values of congeniality and proﬁciency with
respect to the task type.
4.5
Evaluating synergistic teams
Depending on the task type, diﬀerent importance for con-
geniality and proﬁciency should be given. For instance, cre-
ative tasks require a high level of communication and ex-
change of ideas, and hence, teams require a certain level
of congeniality. While, repetitive tasks require good proﬁ-
ciency and less communication.
The importance of proﬁ-
ciency (λ) and congeniality (µ) is therefore a fundamental
aspect of the task type. Now, given a team, we can combine
its competence value (in equation 1) with its congeniality
value (in equation 2) to measure its synergistic value.
Definition 11. Given a team K, a task type τ
=
⟨λ, µ, {(ci, li, wi)}i∈Iτ ⟩and a task assignment η : K →2Cτ ,
the synergistic value of team K is deﬁned as:
s(K, η) = λ · uprof (η) + µ · ucon(K)
(3)
where λ ∈[0, 1] is the grade to which the proﬁciency of team
K is important, and µ ∈[−1, 1] is the grade to which the
task requires diverse personalities.
Figure 1 shows the relation between the parameters λ and
µ. In general, the higher the λ, the higher importance is
given to the proﬁciency of a team. The higher the µ the
more important is personality diversity. Notice, that the µ
can be lower than zero. Having µ negative, we impose that
the congeniality value will be as low as possible (to maximize
s(K, η)) and so, team homogeneity is preferred. This situa-
tion may happen while performing tasks in unconventional
performance environments that have serious consequences
associated with failure. In order to quickly resolve issues, a
team needs to be proﬁcient and have team-mates who un-
derstand one another with minimum communication cost
(which is associated to homogeneity of a team).
4.6
The synergistic team composition problem
In what follows we consider that there are multiple in-
stances of the same task to perform. Given a set of agents
A, our goal is to split them into teams so that each team,
and the whole partition of agents into teams, is balanced
in terms of competences, personality and gender. We shall
refer to these balanced teams as synergistic teams, meaning
that they are both congenial and proﬁcient.
Therefore, we can regard our team composition problem
as a particular type of set partition problem. We will refer
to any partition of A as a team partition. However, we are
interested in a particular type of team partitions, namely
those where teams are constrained by size m as follows.
Definition 12. Given a set of agents A, we say that a
team partition Pm of A is constrained by size m iﬀ: (i) for
every team Ki ∈Pm, Ki ∈KA, max(m −1, 2) ≤|K| ≤
m + 1 holds; and (ii) for every pair of teams Ki, Kj ∈Pm
||Ki| −|Kj|| ≤1.
As |K|/m is not necessarily a natural number, we may
need to allow for some ﬂexibility in team size within a parti-
tion. This is why we introduced above the condition max(m−
1, 2) ≤|K| ≤m+1. In practical terms, in a partition we may
have teams diﬀering by one agent. We note by Pm(A) the
set of all team partitions of A constrained by size m. Hence-
forth, we will focus on team partitions constrained by some
size. Since our goal is to ﬁnd the most competence-balanced
and psychologically-balanced team partition, we need a way
to measure the synergistic value of a team partition, which
we deﬁne as follows:
Definition 13. Given a task t = ⟨τ, m⟩, a team parti-
tion Pm and an assignment ηi for each team Ki ∈Pm, the
synergistic value of Pm is computed by:
u(Pm, η) =
|Pm|
Y
i=1
s(Ki, ηi)
(4)
where η stands for the vector of task assignments η1, . . . ,
η|Pm|.
Notice that the use of a Bernoulli-Nash function over the
synergistic values of teams will favour team partitions whose
synergistic values are balanced.
Now we are ready to cast the synergistic team composition
problem as the following optimisation problem:
Definition 14. Given task t = ⟨τ, m⟩and set of agents
A the synergistic team formation problem (STFP) is
the problem of ﬁnding a team partition constrained by size
m, together with competence assignment for its teams, whose
synergistic value is maximal.
Formally, the STFP is the
problem of ﬁnding the partition in P ∈Pm(A) and the task
assignments η for the teams in Pm that maximises u(Pm, η).
5.
SOLVING STFP
In this section we detail an algorithm, the so-called Syn-
Team, which solves the synergistic team formation problem
described above. We will start from describing how to split
agents into a partition (see subsection 5.1). Next, we will
move on to the problem of assigning competences in a task
to team members (see subsection 5.2), so that the utility
of synergistic function is maximal. Finally, we will explain
SynTeam that is a greedy algorithm that quickly ﬁnds a
ﬁrst, local solution, to subsequently improve it, hoping to
reach a global optimum.
5.1
How do we split agents?
We note by n = |A| the number of agents in A, by m ∈N
the target number of agents in each team, and by b the
minimum total number of teams, b = ⌊n/m⌋. We deﬁne the
quantity distribution of agents in teams of a partition, noted
T : N × N →N × N ∪(N × N)2 as:
T(n, m) =













{(b, m)}
if n ≥m and n mod m = 0
{(n mod m, m + 1),
(b −(n mod m), m)}
if n ≥m and n mod m ≤b
{(b, m), (1, n mod m)}
if n ≥m and n mod m > b
{(0, m)}
otherwise
(5)

Note that depending on the cardinality of A and the de-
sired team size, the number of agents in each team may vary
by one individual (for instance if there are n = 7 agents in
A and we want to compose duets (m = 2), we split agents
into two duets and one triplet).
5.2
Solving an Assignment
There are diﬀerent methods to build an assignment. We
have decided to solve our assignment problem by using the
minimum cost ﬂow model [1]. This is one of the most fun-
damental problems within network ﬂow theory and it can
be eﬃciently solved.
For instance, in [27], it was proven
that the minimum cost ﬂow problem can be solved in O(m ·
log(n) · (m + n · log(n))) time with n nodes and m arcs.
Our problem is as follows: There are a number of agents in
team K and a number of competence requests in task t. Any
agent can be assigned to any competence, incurring some
cost that varies depending on the agent competence level of
the assigned competence. We want to get each competence
assigned to at least one agent and each agent assigned to
at least one competence in such a way that the total cost
(that is both undercompetence and overcompetence) of the
assignment is minimal with respect to all such assignments.
Formally, let G = (N, E) be a directed network deﬁned by
a set N of n nodes and a set E of e directed arcs. There are
four types of nodes: (1) one source node; (2) |K| nodes that
represent agents in team K; (3) |Cτ| competence requests
that form task type τ; and (4) one sink node.
Each arc
(i, j) ∈E has an associated cost pij ∈R+ that denotes
the cost per unit ﬂow on that arc. We also associate with
each arc (i, j) ∈E a capacity uij ∈R+ that denotes the
maximum amount that can ﬂow on the arc. In particular,
we have three kinds of edges: (1) Supply arcs. These edges
connect the source to agent nodes. Each of these arcs has
zero cost and a positive capacity uij which deﬁne how many
competences at most can be assigned to each agent.
(2)
Transportation arcs. These are used to ship supplies. Every
transportation edge (i, j) ∈E is associated with a shipment
cost pij that is equal to:
pij =
(
(lai(cj ) −lj ) · (1 −υ) · wj
if lai(cj −lj ) > 0
−(lai(cj ) −lj ) · υ · wj
if lai(cj −lj ) < 0
where v ∈[0, 1] is the penalty given to the undercompetence
of team K(see subsection 4.3 for the deﬁnition). (3) Demand
arcs.
These arcs connect the competence requests nodes
to the sink node. These arcs have zero costs and positive
capacities uij which equal the demand for each competence.
Thus, a network is denoted by (G, w, u, b). We associate
with each node i ∈N an integer number b(i) representing
its supply. If b(n) > 0 then n is a source node, if b(n) < 0
then n is a sink node. In order to solve a task assignment
problem, we use the implementation of [21] provided in the
ort-tools.1
Example.
Let us consider a team of three agents K = {a1, a2, a3}:
• a1 = ⟨id1, ‘woman′, p1, [l(c1) = 0.9, l(c2) = 0.5]⟩
• a2 = ⟨id2, ‘man′, p2, [l(c2) = 0.2, l(c3) = 0.8]⟩
• a3 = ⟨id3, ‘man′, p3, [l(c2) = 0.4, l(c4) = 0.6]⟩
1https://github.com/google/or-tools/blob/master/
src/graph/min_cost_flow.h
Figure 2:
An example of an assignment graph
G(N, E)
and task type τ containing four competence requests
{(c1, 0.8, 0.25), (c2, 0.6, 0.25), (c3, 0.6, 0.25), (c4, 0.6, 0.25)}.
The penalty given to undercompetence is equal to υ = 0.6.
Our goal is to assign agents to competence requests, so
that: (1) every agent is responsible for at least one compe-
tence, (2) every competence is covered by at least one agent,
(3) the overall “cost” in minimal. As shown in ﬁgure 4, we
build a graph out of n = 9 nodes that is: one source node
(N0), three agents nodes (N1 −N3), four competences nodes
(N4 −N7) and a sink node (N8). Next, we add edges: (1)
between source node N0 and all agent nodes N1 −N3 that
have a cost psi = 0 and capacity usi = 2 for all i as the max-
imum number of competences assigned to one agent cannot
be bigger than two if we want to make sure that all agents
are assigned to at least one competence; (2) between agent
nodes N1 −N3 and competence nodes (N4 −N7), where
each capacity uij = 1 and we calculate costs according to
the equation 5.2. For instance, the cost between N1 and N4
is equal to: (0.9−0.8)·(1−0.6)·0.25 = 0.01. We multiply all
costs by 1000 to meet the requirements of the solver (edges
need to be integer). Hence, the ﬁnal cost p14 = 10; (3) edges
between competence nodes N4 −N7 and sink node N8 that
have costs pjw = 0 and capacities ujw = 1 to impose that
each is assigned. Once the graph is built, we pass it to the
solver to get the assignment, and we get c1 and c2 assigned
to a1, c3 assigned to a2 and c4 assigned to a3.
5.3
SynTeam algorithm
Algorithm 1 shows the SynTeam pseudocode. Algorithm
1 is divided into two parts:
1. Find a ﬁrst team partition. This part of the algo-
rithm simply builds a partition by randomly assigning agents
to teams of particular team sizes. This part goes as follows.
Given a list of agents A, we start by shuﬄing the list so that
the order of agents in the list is random (line 1). Next, we
determine the quantitative distribution of individuals among
teams of size m using function T(|A|, m) as deﬁned in sec-
tion 5.1 (line 2). We start from the top of the shuﬄed list of
agents (line 3). For each number of teams (line 4), we deﬁne
a temporary set team to store a current team (line 5). We
add to team subsequent size agents from the shuﬄed list
of agents (line 7). We add the newly created team to the
team partition Pbest that we intend to build (line 10). When
reaching line 14, Pbest will contain a ﬁrst disjoint subset of
teams (a team partition).
2.
Improve the current best team partition. The
second part of the algorithm consists in improving the cur-

rent best team partition.
The idea is to obtain a better
team partition by performing crossovers of two randomly
selected teams to yield two better teams. In this part, we
took inspiration from simulated annealing methods, where
the algorithm might accept swaps that actually decrease the
solution quality with a certain probability. The probability
of accepting worse solutions slowly decreases as the algo-
rithm explores the solution space (as the number of itera-
tions increases). The annealing schedule is deﬁned by the
cooling rate parameter. We have modiﬁed this method to
store the partition with the highest synergistic evaluation
found so far. In detail, the second part works as follows.
First, we select two random teams, K1 and K2, in the cur-
rent team partition (line 15). Then we compute all team
partitions of size m with agents in K1 ∪K2 (line 19), and we
select the best candidate team partition, named PbestCandidate
(lines 19 to 26). If the best candidate synergistic utility is
larger than the utility contribution of K1 and K2 to the
current best partition Pbest (line 27), then we replace teams
K1 and K2 by the teams in the best candidate team parti-
tion (line 28). If the best candidate team partition utility is
lower, then we check if the probability of accepting a worse
solution is higher than a uniformly sampled value from [0, 1]
(line 29). If so, we replace teams K1 and K2 by the teams
in the best candidate team partition (line 30) and we lower
heat by a cooling rate. This part of the algorithm continues
until the value of heat reaches 1 (line 13). We also store the
best partition found so far (line 34) to make sure we do not
end up with worse solution. Finally, we return found best
partition PbestEver as well as the assignment η for each team.
6.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
6.1
Experimental Setting
“Institut Torras i Bages” is a state school near Barcelona.
Collaborative work has been implemented there for the last
5 years in their ﬁnal assignment (“Treball de S´ıntesi”) with
a steady and signiﬁcant increase in the scores and quality
of the ﬁnal product that students are asked to deliver. This
assignment takes one week and is designed to check if stu-
dents have achieved, and to what extent, the objectives set
in the various curricular areas. It is a work that encourages
teamwork, research, and tests relationships with the envi-
ronment. Students work in teams and at the end of every
activity present their work in front of a panel of teachers that
assess the content, presentation and cooperation between
team members. This is a creative task, although requiring
high level of competences.
6.2
Data Collection
In current school practice, teachers group students accord-
ing to their own, manual method based on the knowledge
about students, their competences, background and social
situation. This year we have used our grouping system based
only on personality (SynTeam with λ = 0, µ = 1) upon two
groups of students: ‘3r ESO A’ (24 students), and ‘3r ESO
C’ (24 students). Using computers and/or mobile phones,
students answered the questionnaire (described in section
3) which allowed us to divide them into teams of size three
for each class.
Tutors have evaluated each team in each
partition giving an integer value v ∈[1, 10] meaning their
expectation of the performance of each team. Each student
team was asked to undertake the set of interdisciplinary ac-
Algorithm 1:
SynTeam
Require: A
▷The list of agents
Require: T(|A|, m)
▷Quantitative team distribution
Require: Pbest = ∅
▷Initialize best partition
Require: heat = 10
▷Initial temperature for second step
Require: Cooling rate
▷Heating decrease
Ensure: (P, η)
▷Best partition found and best assignments
1: random.shuﬄe(A)
2: if T(|A|, m) ̸= (0, m) then
3:
index = 0
▷Used to iterate over the agent list
4:
for all (numberOfTeams, size) ∈T(|A|, m) do
5:
team = ∅
6:
for i ∈(0, . . . , (size −1)) do
7:
team = team ∪A[index]
8:
index = index + 1
9:
end for
10:
Pbest = Pbest ∪{team}
11:
end for
12:
ηbest = assign agents(Pbest)
▷see Subsection 5.2
13:
(PbestEver, bestValueEver) = (Pbest, u(Pbest, ηbest))
14:
while heat > 1 do
15:
(K1, K2) = selectRandomTeams(Pbest)
16:
(η1, η2) = assign agents({K1, K2})
17:
contrValue = u({K1, K2}, (η1, η2))
18:
(PbestCandidate, bestCandidatevalue) = (∅, 0)
19:
for all Pcandidate ∈Pm(K1 ∪K2) \ {K1, K2} do
20:
(η1, η2) = assign agents(Pcandidate)
21:
candidateValue = u(Pcandidate, (η1, η2))
22:
if candidateValue > bestCandidateValue then
23:
PbestCandidate = Pcandidate
24:
bestCandidateValue = candidateValue
25:
end if
26:
end for
27:
if bestCandidateValue > contrValue then
28:
Pbest = replace({K1, K2}, PbestCandidate, Pbest)
29:
else if P(bestCandidateValue, contrValue, heat)
≥random(0, 1) then
30:
Pbest = replace({K1, K2}, PbestCandidate, Pbest)
31:
end if
32:
ηbest = assign agents(Pbest)
33:
if bestValueEver < u(Pbest, ηbest) then
34:
PbestEver = Pbest
35:
end if
36:
heat = heat −Cooling rate
37:
end while
38:
return(PbestEver, assign agents(PbestEver))
39: end if
tivities (“Treball de S´ıntesi”) described above. We have col-
lected each student’s ﬁnal mark for “Treball de S´ıntesi” as
well as ﬁnal marks obtained for all subjects. That is: Cata-
lan, Spanish, English, Nature, Physics and Chemistry, So-
cial Science, Math, Physical Education, Plastic Arts, Tech-
nology. We have used a matrix provided by the tutors to
relate each subject to diﬀerent kinds of intelligence (that
in education are understood as competences) needed for
this subject.
There are eight types of human intelligence
[20], each representing diﬀerent ways of processing infor-
mation:
Naturalist, Interpersonal, Logical/Mathematical,
Visual/Spatial, Body/Kinaesthetic, Musical, Intrapersonal
and Verbal/Linguistic.
This matrix for each subject and
each intelligence is shown in ﬁgure 6.2.
Subjects are represented by rows and intelligences by columns
of the matrix in the order as provided above. Based on this
matrix we calculate values of intelligences for every student
by averaging all values obtained by her that are relevant for
this intelligence. For instance, for Body/Kinaesthetic intel-



0
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1


Figure 3:
Matrix matching Intelligence with sub-
jects (each row corresponds to a subject, each col-
umn to an intelligence)
ligence, we calculate an average of student marks obtained
in Nature, Physical Education, Plastic Arts and Technol-
ogy. An alternative way to measure students’ competences
level can be by calculating the collective assessments of each
competence (like proposed by [5]).
Finally, having competences (Intelligences), personality
and actual performance of all students, we are able to calcu-
late synergistic values for each team. We also calculate the
average of marks obtained by every student in a team to get
teams’ performance values.
6.3
Results
Given several team composition methods, we are interested
in comparing them to know which method better predicts
team performance. Hence, we generate several team rank-
ings using the evaluation values obtained through diﬀerent
methods. First, we generate a ranking based on actual team
performance that will be our base to compare other rank-
ings. Second, we generate a ranking based on the expert
evaluations. Finally, we generate several rankings based on
calculated synergistic values with varying importance of con-
geniality and proﬁciency. Since “Traball de S´ıntesi” is a cre-
ative task, we want to examine the evaluation function with
parameters µ > 0 and λ = 1 −µ. In particular, we want
to observe how the rankings change when increasing the im-
portance of competences.
Notice that teacher and actual
performance rankings may include ties since the pool of pos-
sible marks is discrete (which is highly improbable in case of
SynTeam rankings). Therefore, before generating rankings
based on synergistic values, we round them up to two digits
to discretize the evaluation space. An ordering with ties is
also known as a partial ranking.
Next, we compare teacher and SynTeam rankings with the
actual performance ranking using the standardized Kendall
Tau distance. For implementation details, refer to the work
by Fagin et al. [16, 17], which also provide sound mathemat-
ical principles to compare partial rankings. The results of
the comparison are shown in Figure 4. Notice that the lower
the value of Kendall Tau, the more similar the rankings. We
observe that the SynTeam ranking improves as the impor-
tance of competences increases, and it is best at predicting
students’ performance for λ = 0.8 and µ = 0.2 (Kendall Tau
equal to 0.15).
A standardised Kendall Tau distance for
teacher ranking is equal to 0.28, which shows that SynTeam
predicts the performance better than teachers, when compe-
tences are included (λ > 0.2). We also calculate the values of
Kendall Tau for random (0.42) and reversed (0.9) rankings
Figure 4: Comparison of Kendall-Tau distances be-
tween diﬀerent methods.
to benchmark teacher and SynTeam grouping methods. The
results show that both teachers and SynTeam are better at
predicting students’ performance than the random method.
7.
DISCUSSION
In this paper we introduced SynTeam, an algorithm for
partitioning groups of humans into competent, gender and
psychologically balanced teams.
To our knowledge, SynTeam is the ﬁrst computational
model to build synergistic teams that not only work well
together, but are also competent enough to perform an as-
signment requiring particular expertise.
We have decided to evaluate our algorithm in the context
of a classroom. Besides obvious advantages of observing stu-
dents work in person, this scenario gave us an opportunity
to compare our results with real-life, currently used practice.
The results show that SynTeam is able to predict team per-
formance better that the experts that know the students,
their social background, competences, and cognitive capa-
bilities.
The algorithm is potentially useful for any organisation
that faces the need to optimise their problem solving teams
(e.g. a classroom, a company, a research unit). The algo-
rithm composes teams in a purely automatic way without
consulting experts, which is a huge advantage for environ-
ments where there is a lack of experts.
Regarding future work, We would like to investigate how
to determine quality guarantees of the algorithm.
Additionally, there is a need to consider richer and more
sophisticated models to capture the various factors that in-
ﬂuence the team composition process in the real world. We
will consider how our problem relates to the constrained
coalition formation framework [31]. This may help add con-
straints and preferences coming from experts that cannot
be established by any algorithm, e.g.
Anna cannot be in
the same team with Jos´e as they used to have a romantic
relationship.
