arXiv:2101.00737v3  [cs.CL]  5 Aug 2021
Coreference Resolution: Are the eliminated
spans totally worthless?
Xin Tan*, Longyin Zhang, and Guodong Zhou*
School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China

Abstract. Up to date, various neural-based methods have been pro-
posed for joint mention span detection and coreference resolution. How-
ever, existing studies on coreference resolution mainly depend on mention
representations, while the rest spans in the text are largely ignored and
directly eliminated. In this paper, we aim at investigating whether those
eliminated spans are totally worthless, or to what extent they can help
improve the performance of coreference resolution. To achieve this goal,
we propose to reﬁne the representation of mentions with global spans
including these eliminated ones leveraged. On this basis, we further in-
troduce an additional loss term in this work to encourage the diversity
between diﬀerent entity clusters. Experimental results on the document-
level CoNLL-2012 Shared Task English dataset show that the eliminated
spans are indeed useful and our proposed approaches show promising re-
sults in coreference resolution.
Keywords: Coreference resolution · Representation learning · Document-
level cohesion analysis.
1
Introduction
As an important role in text understanding, coreference resolution is the task
of identifying and clustering mention spans in a text into several clusters where
each cluster refers to the same real world entity. With the increasing population
of neural networks, varied neural-based approaches have been proposed for coref-
erence resolution [23,4,5,12,25,13,10,11,9,8,24] so far. Among these studies, Lee
et al.[12] ﬁrst propose an end-to-end neural model apart from syntactic parsers.
After that, the coreference resolution task is much liberated from complicated
hand-engineered methods, and more and more studies [25,13,10,11,9] have been
proposed to reﬁne the coreference resolution model of Lee et al. [12]. In general,
neural-based studies usually perform coreference resolution in two stages: (i) a
mention detector to select mention spans from all candidate spans in a document
and (ii) a coreference resolver to cluster mention spans into corresponding entity
clusters. In this way, the manually annotated cluster labels are well employed
for both mention detection and clustering.
* Corresponding author

2
X. Tan et al.
Although previous studies have achieved certain success in coreference reso-
lution in recent years, these studies perform mention clustering heavily rely on
the mention representations selected at the ﬁrst stage for mention clustering,
while the rest spans in each piece of text are largely ﬁltered and directly elim-
inated. Considering that, we naturally raise the question: Are those eliminated
spans worthless for coreference resolution? On the one hand, the mention spans
selected by the mention scoring function are usually isolated with each other
in format. Besides, eliminating these “worthless” spans only depending on the
mention scoring function may aggravate the notorious error propagation prob-
lem in the pipeline workﬂow of coreference resolution. On the other, previous
studies improve the performance of coreference resolution either from feature
designing or model architecture perspectives, while the progress of improving on
data utilization remains hysteretic. As far as we know, these eliminated spans
have not been explored so far. Under this condition, we aim at increasing the
data utilization rate and investigating to what extent these eliminated spans can
help improve the performance of coreference resolution.
To achieve the above goal, based on the two-stage neural model of Lee et
al. [12], we propose a mention representation reﬁning strategy to well lever-
age the spans that highly related to the mention for representation enhancing.
Following this way, the contribution of our approach is two-fold: (i) using the
global spans (both mention spans and the eliminated spans) with high utiliza-
tion rate to provide auxiliary information for mention representation enhancing;
(ii) equipping the isolated mention representations with context-aware correla-
tions through the trade-oﬀamong global spans in the document. In addition, to
make full use of the annotated training instances, we utilize an additional loss
term to learn from both positive and negative samples to encourage the diver-
sity between diﬀerent entity clusters. Notably, we also explore the eﬀects of two
diﬀerent contextualized word embeddings (i.e., ELMo [17] and BERT [7]) in this
paper for comparison. Experimental results on the document-level CoNLL-2012
English dataset show that our way of reusing these eliminated spans is quite
useful for the coreference resolution task, and our approach shows promising
results when compared with previous state-of-the-art methods.
2
Background
Task Deﬁnition. Following previous studies [12,25,13,10,11,9,8], we cast the
task of coreference resolution as an antecedent selection problem, where each
span is assigned with an antecedent in the document. Speciﬁcally, given a span
i, the possible antecedents are Yi = {ǫ, 1, 2, ..., i −1} (i.e., a dummy antecedent
ǫ and all preceding spans). The non-dummy antecedent refers to the coreference
link between span i and its antecedent yi (yi ̸= ǫ). The dummy antecedent
denotes the coreference link between span i and ǫ, which represents two possible
scenarios: (i) span i is not an entity mention or (ii) span i is an entity mention
but not coreferent with any previous span.

Coreference Resolution: Are the eliminated spans totally worthless?
3
Baseline. In this work, the baseline model [12] we use for coreference resolution
learns a distribution P(yi) over the antecedents of each span i:
P(yi) =
eS(i,yi)
P
y′∈Y (i) eS(i,y′)
(1)
where S(i, j) represents a pairwise score for the coreference link between span i
and span j. And the pairwise coreference score S(i, j) is calculated based on the
mention scores of i and j (i.e., Sm
i
and Sm
j
which denote whether the spans i
and j are mentions or not) and the joint compatibility score of i and j (i.e., Sa
i,j
which denotes whether mention j is an antecedent of mention i or not). And the
ﬁnal pairwise coreference score is written as:
S(i, j) = Sm
i + Sm
j + Sa
i,j
(2)
Given the vector representation gi for each possible span i, the mention score
of span i and the antecedent score between spans i and j can be calculated as:
Sm
i
= Wm · FFNNm(gi)
(3)
Sa
i,j = Wa · FFNNa([gi, gj, gi ◦gj, φ(i, j)])
(4)
where gi is obtained via bidirectional LSTM models that learn context-dependent
boundary and head representations, Wm and Wa denote two learnable parameter
matrixes, ◦denotes the element-wise multiplication, FFNN(·) denotes a feed-
forward neural network, and the antecedent score Sa
i,j is calculated through
explicit element-wise similarity of each span, gi ◦gj, and a feature vector φ(i, j)
that encodes speaker and genre information from the metadata and the distance
between spans i and j.
3
Coreference Resolution with Enhanced Mention
Representation
Motivated by previous studies [12,25,11], we inherit the architecture that com-
bines mention detection and coreference scoring for coreference resolution. Par-
ticularly, as stated before, we propose to reuse the spans that are eliminated at
the mention detection stage to enhance the representation of mention spans for
better coreference resolution performance.
3.1
Mention Detection
At the mention detection stage, we take the text spans within a certain length
limitation as potential mention spans. Following previous studies, we take word-,
character- and context-level information for span representation [12]. Moreover,
we also incorporate the syntactic structural information (e.g. the path, siblings,
degrees, and category of the current node) for representation enhancing [11]:
si = [hbi, hei, ˆxi, fi]
(5)

4
X. Tan et al.
Input
PTR-NET
RNN-based Span Encoder
Fig. 1. Mention representation reﬁning for coreference resolution. Here, FMS and FAS
refer to the mention scoring function and antecedent scoring function respectively, and
ck denotes an independent entity cluster.
where hi is the contextual representation of input xi = [wi, ci] (wi means the
word embedding vector and ci means the character embedding vector). ˆxi is the
weighted sum of the word representations that contained in the span i, where
the attention weights are learned through the Head-ﬁnding attention mechanism,
and one can refer to [12] for the detailed process of calculating ˆxi. And fi denotes
the syntactic structural feature vector.
After that, we use a feedforward scoring function for mention determination
as Lee et al. [12] did:
Sm
i
= Wm · FFNNm(si)
(6)
Then, the spans that assigned with high attention scores are selected as the
resulting mention spans, noted by mi.
3.2
Coreference Resolving with Global Spans Perceived
After obtaining the mention representation, the following coreference scoring
stage aims to determine the antecedent for each mention. In order to reduce the
problem of error propagation in the pipeline workﬂow of coreference resolution,
we propose to further enhance the mention representation with context-aware
correlations. To achieve this, we propose to extract information from both men-
tions and all the eliminated spans to help reﬁne the obtained mention represen-
tations, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Concretely, we use a pointer net (PTR-NET) [21] in this work to extract
the context-aware information from the spans that are strongly related to the
current mention. More formally, we extract context information and project it
into a parallel mention vector space as:
ui,t = V T tanh(W1st + W2mi)
(7)
αi = softmax(ui)
(8)
m′
i =
X
αi,t · st, t ∈{1, ..., n}
(9)

Coreference Resolution: Are the eliminated spans totally worthless?
5
where st denotes the representation of the t-th span, mi refers to the represen-
tation of the i-th mention, V T , W1 and W2 are learnable parameter matrixes,
αi,t denotes the relevancy of each span, and m′
i denotes the context-aware repre-
sentation for the mention i in the parallel mention vector space. In this manner,
(i) the spans that strongly related to the current mention are well leveraged to
exploit context information and (ii) the correlations between eliminated spans
and mentions are well learned through the trade-oﬀamong spans in the text
during the attention calculation process.
After achieving the parallel mention representations mi and m′
i, we add a
gated model between them for information communication, corresponding to g
in Figure 1. And the enhanced mention representation is formulated as:
fi = δ(Wf[mi, m′
i])
(10)
m∗
i = fi ◦mi + (1 −fi) ◦m′
i
(11)
where fi is a learnable vector for information ﬁltering, ◦denotes the element-wise
multiplication, and m∗
i refers to the integrated mention representation.
Then, the pairwise antecedent score is calculated based on the integrated
mention pairs. Following previous work [12], the coreference score is generated
by summing up the mention score and the pairwise antecedent score as:
Sa
i,j = Wa · FFNNa([m∗
i , m∗
j, m∗
i ◦m∗
j,φ(i,j)])
(12)
S(i, j) = Sm
i + Sm
j + Sa
i,j
(13)
where Sa
i,j denotes the antecedent score between spans i and j, and S(i, j) de-
notes the ﬁnal coreference score.
4
Model Training
Previous studies usually cluster candidate mentions only depending on gold clus-
ter labels. Diﬀerently, based on the loss objective of Lee et al. [12], we introduce
an additional loss term to maximize the distance between diﬀerent entity clus-
ters to encourage the diversity. Concretely, we make the loss term learn from
both positive and negative samples, and the loss objective can be formulated as:
L = −log
N
Y
i=1
X
ˆy∈Y (i)∩GOLD(i)
P(ˆy) + log
N
Y
i=1
X
ˆy /∈Y (i)∩GOLD(i)
P(ˆy)
(14)
P(ˆy) =
eS(i,ˆy)
P
y′∈Y (i) eS(i,y′)
(15)
where S(i, ˆy) denotes the coreference score of the coreference link between span
i and its antecedent ˆy, and GOLD(i) denotes the set of entity mentions in the

6
X. Tan et al.
cluster that contains span i. If span i does not belong to any clusters, or if all
gold antecedents have been pruned, GOLD(i) equals {ε}. Through the proposed
approach, the training instances are well utilized to cluster entity mentions and
at the same time increase the diversity between diﬀerent mention clusters.
5
Experimentation
5.1
Experimental Settings
Datasets. We carry out several experiments on the English coreference reso-
lution data from the CoNLL-2012 Shared Task [18]. The dataset contains 2802
documents for training, 343 documents for validation, and 348 documents for
testing with 7 diﬀerent genres (i.e., newswire, magazine articles, broadcast news,
broadcast conversations, web data, conversational speech data, and the New Tes-
tament). Experimental data: https://cemantix.org/conll/2012/data.html.
Model Settings. We used three kinds of word representations for experimenta-
tion, i.e., (i) the ﬁxed 300-dimensional GloVe [16] vectors and the 50-dimensional
Turian [19] vectors, (ii) the 8-dimensional character embeddings learned from
CNNs, where the window sizes of the convolution layers were 3, 4, and 5 char-
acters respectively, and each layer consists of 50 ﬁlters, and (iii) two kinds of
1024-dimensional contextualized word representations provided by ELMo [17]
and BERT [7]. The model hyper-parameters were directly borrowed from Lee et
al. [12] for fair comparison.
Metrics. We report the Precision, Recall, and F1 scores based on three popular
coreference resolution metrics, i.e., MUC [20], B3 [1], and CEAFφ4 [14]. And
we report the averaged F1-score as the ﬁnal CoNLL score.
5.2
Experimental Results
In this paper, we select the model of Lee et al. [12] as our baseline system.
We borrow the system implemented by Kong and Fu [11] for experimentation
in two reasons: (i) Kong and Fu [11] incorporate varied syntactic structural
features (e.g., the path, siblings, degrees, and category of the current node) into
the model of Lee et al. [12] to better capture hierarchical information for span
representation. (ii) Their implemented system can well reduce computational
complexity whose training speed is 6 times faster than that of Lee et al. [12].
Moreover, we enhance their system by applying the ELMo embedding to it for
better comparison. We report the results of the original and enhanced baseline
systems of Kong and Fu [11] for performance comparison. Moreover, following
previous work, we also present the performances of recent systems for reference,
and the overall results are shown in Table 1.
From the results we can ﬁnd that (i) Comparing our approach (line 10) with
the baseline systems (lines 8 and 9), our method performs better on all the

Coreference Resolution: Are the eliminated spans totally worthless?
7
MUC
B3
CEAFφ4
Prec. Rec.
F1
Prec. Rec.
F1
Prec. Rec.
F1
Avg. F1
Wu et al. [24] ‡
88.6 87.4 88.0 82.4 82.0 82.2 79.9 78.3 79.1
83.1
Wiseman et al. [23]
77.5 69.8 73.4 66.8 57.0 61.5 62.1 53.9 57.7
64.2
Clark and Manning [5] 79.9 69.3 74.2 71.0 56.5 63.0 63.8 54.3 58.7
65.3
Clark and Manning [4] 79.2 70.4 74.6 69.9 58.0 63.4 63.5 55.5 59.2
65.7
Lee et al. [12]
78.4 73.4 75.8 68.6 61.8 65.0 62.7 59.0 60.8
67.2
Lee et al. [13] †
81.4 79.5 80.4 72.2 69.5 70.8 68.2 67.1 67.6
73.0
Zhang et al. [25]
79.4 73.8 76.5 69.0 62.3 65.5 64.9 58.3 61.4
67.8
Baseline [11]
80.5 73.9 77.1 71.2 61.5 66.0 64.3 61.1 62.7
68.6
Baseline [11] †
80.8 79.3 80.0 71.2 68.7 70.0 66.4 66.3 66.4
72.1
Ours †
81.8 80.0 80.9 72.6 70.0 71.3 68.1 67.9 68.0
73.4
-additional loss
80.9 80.6 80.8 70.6 70.6 70.6 67.2 67.9 67.5
73.0
Table 1. Performance comparison on coreference resolution. Sign “†” means the ELMo
representation is used and “‡” means the powerful Bert model is employed. Compared
with the enhanced baseline system, our performance improvements on F1 are statisti-
cally signiﬁcant with p < 0.05.
three metrics, which suggests the great eﬀectiveness of our proposed method
in utilizing all spans including the eliminated ones for coreference resolution.
And the contextualized ELMo also helps improve the performance to a certain
extent. (ii) Comparing our system with previous state-of-the-art methods, ours
outperforms most of the systems except the Bert-based model of Wu et al. [24].
(iii) Comparing our system under diﬀerent model settings (the last two lines)
we ﬁnd that the additional loss term we use can improve the performance of
coreference resolution to some extent, especially on the B3 indicator. The overall
results above indicate that our proposed methods are useful and can well increase
the utilization rate of the coreference resolution data.
5.3
Analysis on Context-Aware Word Representations
In this subsection, we present our insight on exploring a better pre-trained word
representation. More theoretically, we aim to ﬁgure out a question: Which kind
of context-aware embeddings is better for coreference resolution? With this in
mind, we employ two kinds of popular contextualized word representations (i.e.,
ELMo [17] and BERT [7]) for analysis. Brieﬂy review:
– ELMo. Peters et al. [17] hold the view that word representation should con-
tain rich syntactic and semantic information and be able to model polysemous
words. On this basis, they provide the contextualized ELMo for word repre-
sentation by training bidirectional LSTMs on a large-scale corpus.
– BERT. Devlin et al. [7] present two new pre-training objectives, i.e., the
“masked language model (LM)” for word-level representation and the “next
sentence prediction” for sentence-level representation. In essence, Bert achieves

8
X. Tan et al.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
ELMo
BERT
 
!"
 
#
 
 
Fig. 2. Performance comparison between ELMo and Bert on coreference resolution.
a good feature representation of words by running the self-supervised learning
method on the basis of massive training data.
Comparing the two kinds of contextualized word embeddings above: (i) ELMo
is better for feature-based methods, which transfers speciﬁc downstream NLP
tasks to the process of pre-training to produce the word representations, so
as to obtain a dynamic word representation that changes constantly according
to the context; (ii) Bert prefers ﬁne-tuning methods, which ﬁne-tunes network
parameters to produce better word representation for speciﬁc downstream NLP
tasks. Previous Bert-based work [24] has proven the great eﬀectiveness of ﬁne-
tuning the Bert model in coreference resolution. Diﬀerent from them, in this
work, we analyze the eﬀects of static features extracted by pre-trained LMs. To
achieve this, we employ ELMo and Bert models to generate static context-aware
embeddings and then apply them to the coreference resolution task. Performance
comparison between the two kinds of word vectors are detailed in Figure 2.
Usually, the context features generated by ELMo are known to be shallower
than that generated by Bert. But the results show that the Bert-based corefer-
ence resolution system performs relatively worse than the ELMo-based one. In
other words, the shallow-level features defeat deep-level ones in our coreference
resolution experiments. One possible reason for this result is that the ELMo-
based shallow context features are more easily understood and utilized by the
resolution system while the Bert-based deep context features could be too much
for the model to use directly. Nevertheless, ﬁne-tuning the Bert model can trans-
form the informative and complicated context information into a task-speciﬁc
one for better understanding, which explains the recent success in ﬁne-tuning
Bert for better coreference resolution [24].

Coreference Resolution: Are the eliminated spans totally worthless?
9
5.4
Case Study
To qualitatively analyze the mention representation reﬁning process, we provide
a visualization of the span pointing process, as shown in Figure 3. From the
example, there exit two entity clusters with diﬀerent background colors. Here,
we present the top three spans that are particularly relevant to each mention
(i.e., M1 and M2) for reference. Obviously, both mentions, M1 and M2, are pro-
nouns and they pay much attention to those spans that semantically related
to them (e.g., Violence between Israelis and Palestinians). However, most of
these spans with high scores are eliminated during the mention detection stage
in previous studies, which much hinders the interaction between mentions and
mention-related spans. Fortunately, in this work, the pointer mechanism [21] is
well utilized to detect these mention-related spans, and the selected spans are
reused for mention representation reﬁning. It is worth noting that mention rep-
resentation reﬁning is eﬀective especially for pronoun mentions with ambiguous
meanings, e.g., the two mentions its and them in the example. And the proposed
method can give these mentions more accurate context-aware representation for
better coreference resolution.
M2
Violence between 㼇Israelis and Palestinians㼉s 㼇continued㼉s in 㼇its㼉s third month, 
㼇though at a slightly reduced level overall㼉s. Israeli and Palestinian negotiators met 
separately at the White House with President Bill Clinton 㼇in hopes of s㼇restarting㼉 
direct negotiations between them for a final settlement.㼉s
M1
0.6312
0.0038
0.8665
0.0218
0.3466
0.1296
Fig. 3. Example of the mention-related span selection process, where text fragments of
the same color (“Violence ...” and “its” are colored in orange; “Israeli ...” and “them”
are colored in blue) belong to the same cluster. And the solid lines denote the scores
of the most possible three spans assigned for each mention.
6
Related Work
Before the population of neural networks, traditional machine learning meth-
ods have a long history in the coreference resolution task. In general, three
mainstream methods have been proposed: 1) Mention-pair models [15,2] to de-
termine if a pair of mentions are coreferent by training binary classiﬁers. 2)
Mention-ranking models [6,22,4] to score all previous candidate mentions for
current mention and select the most possible one as its antecedent. 3) Entity-
mention models [3,5,23] to determine whether the current mention is corefer-
ent with a preceding, partially-formed mention cluster. Although these methods

10
X. Tan et al.
have achieved signiﬁcant performance gains, they still suﬀer from one major
drawback: their complicated hand-engineered rules are diﬃcult to adapt to new
languages.
With the rapid spread of neural network in recent years, varied researchers
turned to neural-based methods. Lee et al. [12] proposed the ﬁrst end-to-end
neural-based system that liberates coreference resolution from the complicated
hand-engineered methods. Zhang et al. [25] proposed to improve the performance
of coreference resolution by using a biaﬃne attention model to score antecedents
and jointly optimize the two sub-tasks. Lee et al. [13] proposed an approxima-
tion of higher-order inference using the span-ranking architecture from Lee et
al. [12] in an iterative manner. Kong and Fu [11] proposed to improve the reso-
lution performance by incorporating various kinds of structural information into
their model. Kantor and Globerson [10] proposed to capture properties of en-
tity clusters and use them during the resolution process. Most recently, Fei et
al. [8] presented the ﬁrst end-to-end reinforcement learning based coreference
resolution model. Joshi et al. [9] and Wu et al. [24] proposed to improve the
performance of coreference resolution with the help of the state-of-the-art Bert.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we aim at increasing the data utilization rate and exploring the
value of those spans eliminated at the mention detection stage. On this ba-
sis, we proposed a mention representation reﬁning strategy where spans that
highly related to the mentions are well leveraged through a pointer network
for representation enhancing. Moreover, we introduced an additional loss term
to encourage the diversity between diﬀerent entity clusters. Notably, we also
performed experiments on diﬀerent contextualized word embeddings to explore
the eﬀectiveness of them on coreference resolution. Experimental results on the
document-level CoNLL-2012 Shared Task English dataset indicate that these
eliminated spans are indeed useful and our proposed approach can achieve much
better results when compared with the baseline systems and competitive results
when compared with most previous studies in coreference resolution.
