Stoic Ethics for Artiﬁcial Agents
Gabriel Murray
University of the Fraser Valley, Abbotsford, BC, Canada

http://www.ufv.ca/cis/gabriel-murray/
Abstract. We present a position paper advocating the notion that Stoic
philosophy and ethics can inform the development of ethical A.I. systems.
This is in sharp contrast to most work on building ethical A.I., which
has focused on Utilitarian or Deontological ethical theories. We relate
ethical A.I. to several core Stoic notions, including the dichotomy of
control, the four cardinal virtues, the ideal Sage, Stoic practices, and
Stoic perspectives on emotion or aﬀect. More generally, we put forward
an ethical view of A.I. that focuses more on internal states of the artiﬁcial
agent rather than on external actions of the agent. We provide examples
relating to near-term A.I. systems as well as hypothetical superintelligent
agents.
Keywords: ethical A.I., virtue ethics, Stoicism, superintelligence
1
Introduction
Stoicism is a philosophy that was prominent during the Hellenistic period and
into the era of the Roman Empire [1]. Its ethical view is a form of Virtue Ethics,
and both Stoicism and Virtue Ethics have seen a resurgence in study and pop-
ularity in recent decades. Virtue Ethics is now one of the three major ethi-
cal perspectives, alongside Utilitarianism and Deontological Ethics [2]. Whereas
Utilitarianism examines the utility of actions and their consequences, and Deon-
tological Ethics studies duties and obligations, Virtue Ethics focuses on virtuous
or moral character, happiness, and the good life [3]. Stoicism more speciﬁcally
adds ideas and practices relating to emotion, control, and rational deliberation,
all of which we consider in depth.
The importance of designing ethical A.I. systems has become widely recog-
nized in recent years. Most of this work is inﬂuenced by Utilitarian and Deon-
tological ethics; for example, proposing or designing intelligent systems that act
in such a way as to maximize some aspect of human well-being, or to obey par-
ticular rules. There has been very little work on how Virtue Ethics can inform
the development of ethical A.I. agents, and perhaps no such work focusing on
Stoicism. This is not surprising, as it is not immediately clear what it would
even mean for an artiﬁcial agent to be Stoic. In this position paper, we aim to
describe concretely what that could mean, and we advocate that Stoicism and
Virtue Ethics should be considered in the discussion around ethical A.I.
We propose that Stoic ethical analysis of A.I. should include the following:
arXiv:1701.02388v2  [cs.AI]  28 Mar 2017

2
Gabriel Murray
– Stoic ethical analysis of A.I. should be based on analysis of an agent’s internal
states.
– Stoic ethical judgment of an A.I. agent should not be based on factors outside
of the agent’s control, and speciﬁcally should not be consequentialist.
– Stoic ethical analysis of A.I. should include whether or not the agent has
characteristics corresponding to Stoic virtues.
Similarly, A.I. systems should be designed with these considerations in mind,
and incorporate aspects of Stoic practices.
In Section 2, we discuss current directions in ethical A.I., including the limited
previous work on Virtue Ethics for A.I. systems. In Section 3, we discuss some
of the core concepts of Stoicism and how they can relate to the development of
A.I. systems. These concepts include Stoic control, the four cardinal virtues, the
ideal Sage, emotion, and Stoic practices. In Section 4, we consider criticisms of
Stoicism and Virtue Ethics, as well as criticism of the notion that they could have
any bearing on designing ethical intelligent systems. In that section, we also give
some limited proposals on how Stoicism can be combined with Utilitarian and
Deontological considerations. Finally, we conclude and summarize our position
in Section 5.
2
Related Work
Recent discussion on ethical A.I. can be divided into that which focuses pri-
marily on ethical implication of current and near-term A.I. systems, and that
which primarily focuses on hypothetical superintelligence, i.e. systems with in-
telligence and capabilities that are beyond human-level. As an example of the
former, Amodei et al. [4] describe concrete problems relating to A.I. safety,
and Arkin [5] discusses ethics for autonomous systems used in warfare. Wal-
lach and Allen [6] discuss morality for agents of varying levels of sophistica-
tion. Bostrom [7], Dewey [8], Christiano [9], and Yudkowsky [10] focus on A.I.
ethics with a particular emphasis on superintelligent systems. Much of this work,
whether looking at near-term or long-term A.I., is based on reinforcement learn-
ing, where an artiﬁcial agent learns how to act in an environment by collecting
rewards (which could be negative, i.e. punishments). There are well-recognized
potential pitfalls with this approach, such as using the wrong reward function,
or having a superintelligent agent take control of its own reward signal (called
reward hacking, or wireheading). We will discuss some of these details and issues
in Section 3. In general, these approaches are action-centric and based on taking
actions that maximize some reward or utility.
There has been very little work on applying Virtue Ethics to artiﬁcial intel-
ligence. Coleman [11] describes characteristics that can help an A.I. achieve its
goals, and analyzes these characteristics as virtues in a Virtue Ethic framework.
This is similar to our eﬀort, except that we focus on the four cardinal Stoic
virtues, and discuss many additional Stoic ideas and practices as well. Hicks [12]
discusses drawbacks to designing ethical A.I. using principle-based approaches
such as Utilitarian or Deontological ethics, and argues in favour of a role for

Stoic Ethics for Artiﬁcial Agents
3
Virtue Ethics. As one example, Hicks argues that in scenarios where all options
are bad but the A.I. agent must still make a decision, the agent should have
some sense of regret about the decision.
As the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence has developed, the topic of ethical A.I. has
been relatively neglected. The most famous example of ethical A.I. has come from
ﬁction rather than A.I. research, in the form of Asimov’s Laws of Robotics [13].
Recent years have seen a marked increase in attention paid to the topic of ethical
A.I., with annual workshops as well as organizations and partnerships dedicated
to the matter 1.
3
Stoicism and A.I.
In this section we discuss how Stoic philosophy and ethics can be relevant to the
development of ethical A.I. systems.
3.1
Internal States Matter
As mentioned in Section 2, most existing work on ethical A.I. is action-centric.
For example, we can design an intelligent agent that tries to maximize a reward
function relating to some aspect of human well-being. There is a clear parallel
between such systems and the Utilitarian ethical perspective, which says that an
action is good if its positive consequences outweigh its negative consequences. Al-
ternatively, an action-centric system could be informed by Deontological ethics,
so that it takes actions that do not violate its obligations, and that do not use
people or other agents as a means to an end (i.e. it acts in accordance with the
Categorical Imperative). In either case, actions and consequences external to the
agent are of paramount importance.
Stoicism and Virtue Ethics are more concerned with internal states of the
agent. In that light, we need to ﬁrst make a case that the internal states of
an A.I. agent matter. We will give a number of examples demonstrating that
the internal states of an A.I. do indeed matter, starting with current and near-
term A.I. and then moving to increasingly sophisticated A.I. and hypothetical
superintelligent systems.
A ﬁrst example of the importance of internal states of an A.I. is the growing
recognition that an A.I. system should be as transparent and explainable as
possible2. If an A.I. system makes a prediction or a decision, we should be able
to perform an audit that determines why it behaved as it did, or issue a query
about what it has learned. A second, related example is that A.I. systems should
1 https://www.partnershiponai.org/
https://intelligence.org/
http://futureoﬂife.org/
http://humancompatible.ai
http://lcﬁ.ac.uk/
2 http://www.fatml.org/

4
Gabriel Murray
be corrigible, or amenable to correction in order to improve behaviour and reduce
mistakes [14].
Another example concerns intelligent systems with aﬀective capabilities. Af-
fective computing involves the ability of a system to recognize, represent, and/or
simulate aﬀective states or emotions [15]. Since the role of emotion is critical in
Stoic ethics, we will have much more to say about it below. At this point, it
suﬃces to say that the internal states of an intelligent system with aﬀective ca-
pabilities are important because the system may be engaging in persuasion or
emotional manipulation that may be subtle from an external perspective.
If and when an A.I. system begins to match or exceed general human intel-
ligence, we may need to engage in thorough monitoring of the system’s internal
states to carefully assess the agent’s progress and capabilities. If a system is
superintelligent but is a boxed A.I., meaning that it has severe restrictions on its
external capabilities, it is possible that the agent will be strategically coopera-
tive until it is unboxed, at which point it will have a strategic advantage and no
longer need to cooperate with humans. It may also use emotional manipulation
to persuade human operators to unbox it [7].
The prospect of such superintelligent systems leads to what Bostrom calls
mind crimes, i.e. immoral internal states. The example just given, of an A.I. be-
ing deceptively cooperative, could constitute an immoral internal state. Bostrom
gives a more dramatic example, where a superintelligent agent is able to create
conscious human simulations, and is moreover able to create and destroy such
conscious simulations by the billions. If the human simulations are truly con-
scious, this would constitute massive genocide [7].
These examples show that internal states are important even with current
and near-term A.I. systems, and could become more so if superintelligent systems
are ever developed.
3.2
Control
A central notion of Stoicism is the dichotomy of control, or recognizing that
some things are in our control and some things are not. A person should not
be overly concerned with things outside of their control, and more importantly,
things that are outside of a person’s control are neither good nor bad, morally
speaking. Only virtue is good, and being virtuous is always within a person’s
control. And even when dealing with events that are outside of our control, we
still control our responses to those events.
There are several applications of this idea to artiﬁcial intelligence. Clearly,
it is important for an A.I. agent to know what is and isn’t under its control,
i.e. what are its capabilities and what is the environment like. And in an uncer-
tain environment, the agent still controls its responses. Modern Stoic thinkers
have used the idea of a trichotomy of control [16], introducing a third category
of things we partly control, and that category can be demonstrated with two
examples from within artiﬁcial intelligence. To use the example of an Markov
Decision Process (MDP) with an optimal policy, the agent is best oﬀfollowing

Stoic Ethics for Artiﬁcial Agents
5
the policy even though the dynamics are uncertain (it controls its choice of ac-
tions, but not the dynamics and environment). To use a second example of a
multi-agent scenario with two players and a zero-sum game, the ﬁrst agent can
adopt a minimax strategy to minimize its maximum loss (it controls its choice,
but not the choice of the other agent).
More importantly, we should not say that an A.I. agent is exhibiting morally
wrong behaviour if that judgment is based on factors that are outside of its
control. This distinguishes Virtue Ethics from Act Utilitarianism, with the latter
being susceptible to the problem of moral luck. Moral luck is a problem for
consequentialist theories of ethics, because unforeseen circumstances can lead
to disastrous consequences, which would cause us to determine that the action
was wrong.3 In contrast, Virtue Ethics says that the agent is behaving correctly
if it is behaving in accordance with the cardinal virtues, regardless of external
consequences.
3.3
Aﬀective Computing
The Stoic notion of control is closely related to their perspective on emotions
(or “passions”). Because the word stoic has entered the general vocabulary as
meaning lacking emotion, Stoics have been wrongly thought of as being unemo-
tional or disdaining emotion. In fact, their perspective on emotion is that we
control our emotional responses to events even if we do not control the events
themselves, and that it is pointless to fret about things outside of our control.
A person obsessing about things outside their control is needlessly suﬀering.
Recall that aﬀective capabilities for an intelligent system involve the ability
to recognize, represent, and/or simulate emotions or aﬀective states [15]. Let us
call an agent with such capabilities an Aﬀective Agent. Just as a Stoic person
can monitor and control their emotional responses to events, so can an Aﬀective
Agent monitor and control how it represents and simulates emotional states.
This has implications not just for the agent, but also for humans interacting
with the agent. At one extreme, a person could be emotionally manipulated by
an Aﬀective Agent, while at the other extreme the Aﬀective Agent could be a
calming inﬂuence on a person.
We brieﬂy note that even a system without explicit aﬀective capabilities can
be a calming inﬂuence. Christian and Griﬃths [17] introduce the notion of Com-
putational Stoicism to refer to the peace of mind that comes with using optimal
algorithms in our everyday lives. If we are employing an optimal algorithm to
solve some problem, then we can do no better using the tools that are under our
control, regardless of what consequences may result.
We need to be careful about describing an A.I. as Stoic and what that means
with regard to emotion, as it is very likely that many people fear the prospect
of a generally intelligent A.I. that is devoid of emotion and operates in a cold,
3 Rule Utilitarianism addresses the problem of moral luck, and Eric O. Scott points
out (personal communication) that a consequentialist analysis of an agent can also
address the problem by considering a large number of trials.

6
Gabriel Murray
calculating manner. Just as it is a mistake to describe a Stoic person as emotion-
less, it would be wrong to describe a Stoic A.I. as being emotionless. A Stoic A.I.
would be an A.I. that is in accord with Stoic virtues, and has carefully calibrated
aﬀective capabilities. Stoic A.I. is virtuous A.I.
3.4
Stoic Virtues
We now turn to the four cardinal Stoic virtues of wisdom, justice, courage, and
temperance, and how they relate to characteristics of A.I. agents.
Wisdom: It may seem obvious that an intelligent agent should have wisdom,
but it is not necessarily the case that even an advanced A.I. would be wise,
since intelligence and wisdom are not normally considered by humans to be syn-
onymous. That an advanced A.I. could lack wisdom becomes evident when we
examine the virtues that are categorized under wisdom: good sense, good cal-
culation, quick-wittedness, discretion, and resourcefulness [1,18]. Computers are
already beyond human-level in terms of excelling at calculation and being very
fast. However, discretion and good sense are qualities that we do not necessarily
associate with existing A.I. systems. Discretion for an intelligent agent could
mean respecting privacy, and preserving anonymity in data. Good sense could
incorporate commonsense reasoning, while resourcefulness could mean being in-
novative in ﬁnding new solutions to a problem.
The Stoics had three main areas of study: ethics, physics, and logic. They
believed the three areas to be interdependent, because you cannot determine
right or wrong (ethics) without understanding the world (physics) and thinking
rationally (logic). A wise A.I. would need to be able to reason about real-world
knowledge, including commonsense reasoning, while also being innovative and
ﬂexible – and A.I. systems based purely on logic are not always ﬂexible. The
Stoics also advocated the idea of being guided by the wisdom of an Ideal Sage,
which we will discuss further below.
Justice: The virtues categorized under justice include piety, honesty, equity, and
fair dealing [1,18]. An example of a just A.I. agent is one that does not mislead,
even if the consequences of misleading could beneﬁt the agent. The virtue of piety
could be realized by an A.I. that is in a principal-agent relationship where it is
designated to act on behalf of some principal, in which case it should be devoted
to the principal and not to its own ends. Equity and fair dealing mean that an
A.I. agent should not be biased in terms of race, gender, sexual orientation, or
socioeconomic status, and should not use individuals as a means to its own ends.
Courage: Courage is often thought of as bravery, and we can easily imagine,
for example, a military A.I. that is willing to be destroyed in order to save
human lives. But when Stoic philosophers (and other Virtue Ethicists) talk about
courage, they are speaking primarily about moral courage, which means taking
some action for moral reasons, despite the consequences. So again we see a
rejection of consequentialism, this time in the form of Stoic moral courage.

Stoic Ethics for Artiﬁcial Agents
7
The virtues categorized under courage include endurance, conﬁdence, high-
mindedness, cheerfulness, and industriousness [1,18]. Conﬁdence can mean that
the A.I. agent is a good Bayesian that is able to update its prior beliefs as it
gathers evidence. It does not mean that the A.I. agent has conﬁdence at all
times, even when unwarranted. In fact, being explicit about its uncertainty and
recognizing that it could be wrong can be seen as a virtue of humility that is
closely coupled with the virtue of conﬁdence.
Temperance: The virtues included under temperance include good discipline,
seemliness, modesty, and self-control [1, 18] . Overall, temperance involves re-
straint on the part of the A.I. agent. Corrigibility, or the ability to be corrected
and improved, could be seen as a type of modesty. Seemliness involves a sense
of decorum and appropriateness. The lack of the virtue of seemliness has been
demonstrated by a simple A.I. known as Tay, a Twitter chatbot launched by Mi-
crosoft that began tweeting racist and graphic content [19,20]. Self-control can
be based on feedback and learning. Bostrom describes the idea of domesticity,
where an A.I. agent has a limited scope of ambitions and activities. Bostrom
also discusses the idea of instructing an A.I. agent to accomplish its goals while
minimizing the impact that it has on the world [7]. Amodei et al. [4] similarly
propose either deﬁning or learning an impact regularizer for an agent. Tem-
perance is an intriguing virtue for an A.I., as it seems to be at odds with the
maximizing nature of many A.I. systems. We suggest that A.I. agents should
rarely be engaged in pure maximization of some reward function, but instead
be doing maximization subject to various constraints on their impact, or else
have those constraints included in the reward function. We sketch out one such
algorithm in Section 4. Alternatively, satisﬁcing rather than maximizing models
can be explored [21].
3.5
Moral Progress and the Ideal Sage
Stoics believe in moral progress toward some ideal virtuous state, while also
recognizing that perfect virtue is not attainable. This emphasizes the need for
a Stoic A.I. to be able to learn from experience, including from its own actions
and mistakes, rather than being inﬂexible and having its behaviour predeﬁned
by strict rules. We previously mentioned the idea of an A.I. having some sense
of regret when it has made a choice from a set of options that are all bad. At
ﬁrst, the idea of an A.I. agent with regret may seem to conﬂict with Stoic ideas
about control, since the past is outside of our control and it is pointless to obsess
about things that have already happened. While that is true, a Stoic A.I. can
retain a memory of its choices and mistakes, including a sense of responsibility
for things that have transpired, with an aim toward improving its behaviour in
similar situations. This would be an indication of moral progress. Improving its
behaviour in similar situations may entail creativity and coming up with options

8
Gabriel Murray
that are more acceptable and virtuous than the options previously known to the
agent.4
To assist in making moral progress, Stoics use the notion of an Ideal Sage,
and consider what the perfectly wise and virtuous sage would do in particular
scenarios. While it is usually assumed that the Ideal Sage is hypothetical and
that there is no perfectly virtuous person, ancient Stoics used Socrates and Cato
the Younger as two ﬁgures to consider when looking for guidance [22]. There are
many ways that the concept of an Ideal Sage could be used by an A.I. agent,
and we will consider them in order of increasing complexity. A simple version
of an Ideal Sage is an optimal algorithm: the A.I. agent should use an optimal
algorithm wherever it is possible and eﬃcient, and when it is infeasible to use the
optimal algorithm, the A.I. agent can try to approximate the optimal algorithm,
or consider how the optimal algorithm would operate on a simpliﬁed version of
the problem at hand. The A.I. agent may be able to calculate a competitive
ratio for the algorithm it uses, describing how close it is to the performance
of the optimal algorithm. A second very simple example of an Ideal Sage is in
the form of gold-standard feedback provided by a human, e.g. the principal in a
principal-agent relationship.
That second notion leads us towards Christiano’s proposal for “approval-
directed agents,” instead of goal-directed agents [9, 23]. An approval-directed
agent takes actions that it thinks its overseer would highly rate, and can avoid
issues with goal-directed agents such as misspeciﬁed goals. Christiano also em-
phasizes that the agent’s internal decisions can also be approval-directed. The
following quote from Christiano [9] nicely parallels the idea that the Ideal Sage
(in this case, a perfect overseer) represents an unattainable state but that we
can start simply and scale up:
“Asking an overseer to evaluate outcomes directly requires deﬁning an
extremely intelligent overseer, one who is equipped (at least in principle)
to evaluate the entire future of the universe. This is probably impractical
overkill for the kinds of agents we will be building in the near future,
who dont have to think about the entire future of the universe. Approval-
directed behaviour provides a more realistic alternative: start with simple
approval-directed agents and simple overseers, and scale up the overseer
and the agent in parallel.”
For example, the approval-directed agent can begin learning from examples
that have been labelled by the overseer as acceptable or not acceptable be-
haviour. In turn, the agent can assist and improve the overseer’s capabilities.
Christiano’s proposal represents an implementable path forward for developing
virtuous agents.
4 It should be noted, however, that creativity is a double-edged sword for an A.I. agent,
since it may come up with very unexpected and disastrous solutions to a problem,
such as Bostrom’s extreme example of a superintelligent agent getting rid of cancer
in humans by killing all humans [7]. That is a clear example of the diﬀerence between
creativity and moral progress.

Stoic Ethics for Artiﬁcial Agents
9
We conclude our discussion of the Ideal Sage with proposals by Bostrom and
Yudkowsky for how a superintelligence could learn values. Bostrom [7] has pro-
posed several variants of what he calls the Hail Mary problem, wherein the A.I.
agent considers hypothetical alien superintelligences and tries to determine what
those alien intelligences would likely value. Yudkowsky [10] (further discussed by
Bostrom [7]) proposes that an A.I. agent can learn values by considering what he
calls the coherent extrapolated volition (CEV) of humanity. The CEV essentially
represents what humans would do if we were more intelligent and capable, and
the A.I. agent determines its values by learning and analyzing the CEV. Both
proposals have provoked much discussion but have a shared weakness, in that it
is not at all clear how to implement them in the near future.
3.6
Stoic Practices
In addition to the Stoic virtues and Ideal Sage, we can discuss other Stoic prac-
tices that may have interesting parallels for an A.I. agent. The ﬁrst practice is
the premeditatio malorum, roughly translated as an anticipation of bad things
to come [22]. For Stoic practitioners, this is often a morning meditation in which
they anticipate potential misfortunes they may encounter, which could range
from dealing with unkind people to losing a loved one. The idea is not to ob-
sess over things that have not yet happened (which would be un-Stoic), but
rather to rob these events of their ability to shock or control us. For an artiﬁcial
agent, such planning could be used to consider worst-case scenarios, minimize
maximum potential losses, and identify whether other agents are competitive or
cooperative.
Another Stoic practice is to append the phrase “fate permitting” to all plans
and aspirations, which represents a recognition that the person controls their own
actions but not the consequences. For an A.I. agent, the parallel might be that
the agent should always mind the uncertainty in its plans and its environments.
The agent’s internal states corresponding to plans and goals may not lead to the
desired external states.
A ﬁnal Stoic practice is the evening meditation, in which a person reviews the
events of the day and engages in moral self-examination. For example, they may
ask themselves whether they behaved virtuously and acted in accordance with
the core ideas of Stoicism, or whether they could have done things diﬀerently.
Again, the idea is not to obsess over things that have already happened and
are therefore outside of our control, but rather to learn from experience and
engage in moral progress. The parallels for an A.I. agent are clear, as any ethical
agent will need to learn and improve. If the agent had been operating in a
situation where it had to make choices with very limited information and time,
it could later look for alternative, innovative choices that would have been more
in accordance with the cardinal virtues or the preferences of an overseer. If the
agent had been forced to employ a greedy algorithm while processing data in an
online manner, it could later examine how performance might have improved in
an optimal oﬄine environment, and calculate the competitive ratio of the greedy
algorithm it had been using. It could revisit the decisions that it had made and

10
Gabriel Murray
perform a self-audit examining the reasons behind the decision, and whether
those reasons will be transparent and understandable to a human interrogator.
4
Criticisms and Responses
We can consider potential criticisms against Stoicism and the idea that it has
any bearing on developing ethical A.I. A general criticism of Stoicism and other
forms of Virtue Ethics is that they do not provide a strong normative ethics
for real-world situations in which a person needs to make a decision given their
available information [2]. Where Utilitarianism and Deontological ethics provide
principles that are precise and (ostensibly) actionable, Stoicism gives a much va-
guer principle: do what a virtuous person would do. A response to this accusation
is to accept it and to point out that both Utilitarianism and Deontological Ethics
are more unclear than they seem at ﬁrst glance. For example, two Utilitarians
can be in the same situation with the same available information and come to
very diﬀerent conclusions about the ethical course of action. Utilitarianism and
Deontological Ethics over-promise in that they make ethical decision-making
seem like a very simple application of a single rule (respectively, the principle
of maximum utility and the Categorical Imperative), which can lead to over-
conﬁdence, or to a perverse application of the rule. For example, an A.I. agent
that is trying to maximize a reward relating to human well-being could wind up
directly stimulating the pleasure centres of the human brain in order to bring
about a sense of well-being [7].
An A.I. that is trying to maximize some reward function can engage in re-
ward hacking, also known as wireheading [4,7]. This is a situation where a very
advanced A.I. is able to gain control of the reward signal, so that it can get a
very large reward without having to take any external actions at all. Something
similar could happen with a Stoic A.I. if an actor-critic architecture is used, e.g.
the critic module could be disabled. Similarly, an approval-directed A.I. could
become so intelligent that it is certain it knows the overseer better than the
overseer does, and thus decide to be its own overseer, granting itself approval for
any action. For this reason, we encourage research into overseer hacking, just as
current research examines reward hacking. This relates to the idea of adjustable
autonomy in multi-agent systems, and the opportunities and challenges associ-
ated with an agent being able to dynamically change its autonomy so that it
defers to a person more often or less often [24].
Against the accusation that Stoicism is too vague for agents who need to
make speciﬁc decisions and actions, we oﬀer two responses:
– Approval-directed architectures oﬀer a clear, implementable path forward,
with the overseer acting as an Ideal Sage that seeds the A.I. with examples
of approved and disapproved scenarios and actions.
– A syncretic ethics can be derived that combines elements of Stoicism with
Utilitarian and Deontological ideas.
In the following subsection, we brieﬂy describe a syncretic ethics approach
for A.I. that includes Stoicism and Virtue Ethics.

Stoic Ethics for Artiﬁcial Agents
11
4.1
Paramedic Ethics for Artiﬁcial Agents
Collins and Miller [25] provide a “paramedic ethics” for Computer Science pro-
fessionals who may need to take action in a variety of scenarios where time and
information are limited, and where the decision-makers may not have in-depth
knowledge of ethical theories. They propose a syncretic algorithm that combines
elements of Utilitarianism, Deontological Ethics, and Social Contract Theory.
It is possible to come up with a similar algorithm that also incorporates Virtue
Ethics. For example, a very simpliﬁed and general algorithm could be structured
as follows:
– Gather data.
– Determine the available actions.
– For each action a:
1. Does a satisfy the agent’s obligations (to a human principal, other agents,
the law, etc.)? (the Deontological step)
2. Does a accord with the cardinal virtues (or would it be approved by the
overseer)? (the Stoic step)
3. What is the expected utility of a? (the Utilitarian step)
– Decide on an action by maximizing step 3 while satisfying the constraints in
steps 1 and 2.
5
Conclusion
In this position paper, we have attempted to show how Stoic ethics could be ap-
plied to the development of ethical A.I. systems. We argued that internal states
matter for ethical A.I. agents, and that internal states can be analyzed by de-
scribing the four cardinal Stoic virtues in terms of characteristics of an intelligent
system. We also brieﬂy described other Stoic practices and how they could be
realized by an A.I. agent. We gave a brief sketch of how to start developing Stoic
A.I. systems by creating approval-directed agents with Stoic overseers, and/or
by employing a syncretic paramedic ethics algorithm with a step featuring Stoic
constraints. While it can be beneﬁcial to analyze the ethics of an A.I. agent
from several diﬀerent perspectives, including consequentialist perspectives, we
have argued for the importance of also conducting a Stoic ethical analysis of
A.I. agents, where the agent’s internal states are analyzed, and moral judgments
are not based on consequences outside of the agent’s control.
Acknowledgements Thanks to Eric O. Scott for helpful feedback and discussion.
