1
Fusion of Quadratic Time–Frequency Analysis and Convolutional
Neural Networks to Diagnose Bearing Faults Under Time-Varying
Speeds
Mohammad Al-Sa’d, Senior Member, IEEE, Tuomas Jalonen, Serkan Kiranyaz, Senior Member, IEEE, and
Moncef Gabbouj, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Diagnosis of bearing faults is paramount to reducing
maintenance costs and operational breakdowns. Bearing faults
are primary contributors to machine vibrations, and analyzing
their signal morphology offers insights into their health status.
Unfortunately, existing approaches are optimized for controlled
environments, neglecting realistic conditions such as time-varying
rotational speeds and the vibration’s non-stationary nature. This
paper presents a fusion of time-frequency analysis and deep
learning techniques to diagnose bearing faults under time-varying
speeds and varying noise levels. First, we formulate the bearing
fault-induced vibrations and discuss the link between their non-
stationarity and the bearing’s inherent and operational param-
eters. We also elucidate quadratic time-frequency distributions
and validate their effectiveness in resolving distinctive dynamic
patterns associated with different bearing faults. Based on this,
we design a time-frequency convolutional neural network (TF-
CNN) to diagnose various faults in rolling-element bearings.
Our experimental findings undeniably demonstrate the superior
performance of TF-CNN in comparison to recently developed
techniques. They also assert its versatility in capturing fault-
relevant non-stationary features that couple with speed changes
and show its exceptional resilience to noise, consistently sur-
passing competing methods across various signal-to-noise ratios
and performance metrics. Altogether, the TF-CNN achieves
substantial accuracy improvements up to 15%, in severe noise
conditions.
Index Terms—Bearing fault, damage detection, deep learning,
time-frequency analysis, variable speed.
I. INTRODUCTION
R
OTATING machinery, such as motors, gearboxes, wind
turbines, generators, and engines, is at the heart of
modern industrial applications [1]. Condition monitoring and
fault diagnosis of rotating machinery allow proactive mainte-
nance strategies and reduce economic and operational impacts
caused by unexpected failures [2]. Bearing faults constitute
a prominent category of irregularities in rotating machines;
thus, continuous monitoring is imperative [2], [3]. Fortunately,
This work was supported by Business Finland Amalia and NSF IUCRC
CBL project, and the Jenny and Antti Wihuri Foundation. (Corresponding
author: Mohammad Al-Sa’d.)
Mohammad Al-Sa’d, Tuomas Jalonen, and Moncef Gabbouj are with the
Faculty of Information Technology and Communication Sciences, Tampere

Mohammad Al-Sa’d is also with the Faculty of Medicine and the De-
partment of Clinical Neurophysiology at the University of Helsinki and

Serkan Kiranyaz is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Qatar

abnormal machine vibrations are largely a result of faulty bear-
ings, and analyzing their characteristics facilitates diagnosing
the bearing’s health condition [4], [5], [6], [7].
Deep learning techniques, such as Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs), are adequate to diagnose the bearing’s
condition by detecting irregularities in the vibration data [8],
[9], [10], [11]. Nevertheless, prevailing solutions are usually
tested under ideal conditions and often confined to fixed [12],
[13], [14] or slowly increasing/decreasing rotational speeds
[15], [16] that do not represent dynamic scenarios [4], i.e.,
time-varying changes. The vibratory profile of bearings under
time-varying rotational speeds is strictly non-stationary [17],
i.e., vibration is modulated by speed and characterized by a
time-varying spectral content [18], [19]. Therefore, classical
time- or frequency-domain representations are insufficient,
and one must adopt time-frequency (TF) tools to explore the
signal’s degrees of freedom [20]. Therefore, in this paper, we
propose to leverage synergies between TF analysis and deep
learning to diagnose bearing faults under highly time-varying
rotational speeds. The key contributions of this paper are:
• Quadratic time-frequency distributions are effective for
revealing distinctive dynamic patterns that are associated
with different bearing faults.
• A bearing fault diagnosis system fusing quadratic time-
frequency distributions and CNNs with robustness to
diverse noise levels and time-varying speed conditions.
• Precise identification of various bearing faults with
performance significantly surpassing recently developed
techniques about 15% gain in average accuracy.
Time-frequency representations (TFR) fall under two com-
plementary categories; linear and quadratic [18]. Linear TFRs,
such as short-time Fourier transform and continuous wavelet
transform, extend the signal’s spectrum to become time-
dependent [18]. Specifically, they use a set of basis functions
for decomposition and yield time-varying complex-valued
frequency representations [21]. The resolution of linear TFRs
is limited by the Heisenberg-Gabor uncertainty principle [21],
[22]. However, quadratic TFRs, derived from the Wigner-Ville
distribution (WVD), overcome this limitation by transform-
ing the signal’s time-varying auto-correlation function [18].
Nevertheless, this advantage is at the expense of reducing
accuracy by introducing artifactual patterns, named cross-
terms, that require filtering [23]. Fortunately, high-performing
distributions are designed to achieve the best trade-off between
arXiv:2401.01172v3  [cs.LG]  19 Jan 2026

2
Outer race
Ball
Inner race
Cage
Fig. 1. A rolling element bearing example. The bearing’s outer race, inner
race, balls, and cage are illustrated. Redrawn from [39].
accuracy and resolution [23].
The utility of linear TFRs was found useful for analyzing
various faults in rolling-element bearings [24], [25], [26] and
for classifying their health states [27], [28], [29]. Nonetheless,
most experiments were conducted with limited speed profiles
and were confined to constant [29], [30], fixed levels [28],
or slowly varying speeds with limited range [31]. Besides,
some studies focused on analyzing the extracted features rather
than reporting validated classification results [24], [26], [32].
Moreover, quadratic TFRs were utilized in only a few studies
using elementary distributions [33], [34], [35], although there
are better high-performing alternatives such as the compact
kernel distribution, smoothed-pseudo Wigner-Ville distribu-
tion, and the extended modified B-distribution [23]. In fact, a
recent review reveals that the literature is dominantly focused
on developing post-processing techniques for quadratic TFRs
rather than utilizing more advanced representations [36]. Con-
sequently, there is a need for fusing high-performing quadratic
TFRs with deep learning techniques to build a precise tool for
diagnosing non-stationary bearing faults.
II. METHODOLOGY
The role of a ball bearing is to reduce friction and to provide
support for both radial and axial loads [37]. This is achieved
by enclosing the steel rollers with two races to enable load
transmissions [37]; see Fig. 1. Fatigue in bearings introduces
spalling, a common type of damage that primarily occurs on
the races and the rolling elements, and changes the machine’s
vibratory profile [38]. Under time-varying rotational speeds,
this fault-induced alteration becomes dynamic and co-varies
with the motor’s speed. In other words, speed modulates the
vibrations and makes them non-stationary, i.e., characterized
by time-varying spectra. Therefore, we combined TF analysis
and deep learning techniques to develop a precise tool for
diagnosing non-stationary faults in bearings.
A. Signal model
The bearing vibrations, captured by accelerometers mounted
on the horizontal and vertical axes of the bearing’s housing,
can be generally modeled by:
x(t) = s(t) + α η(t) ,
(1)
where x(t) = [xx(t), xy(t)]T holds noisy vibrations recorded
by the accelerometers mounted on the x and y directions,
s(t) = [sx(t), sy(t)]T contains the bearing’s noise-free vibra-
tions in both directions, η(t) = [ηx(t), ηy(t)]T holds indepen-
dent and identically distributed white Gaussian noise signals
with zero mean and unit variance, and α = [αx, αy]T are
factors that control the amount of noise-induced degradation
based on a predefined signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in decibels
(dB) and are calculated as follows:
α =
s
10−SNR/10 1
T
Z T
0
s2(t) dt ,
(2)
where T is the time duration of the signals in s(t). The bearing
noise-free vibrations are comprised of healthy patterns (ran-
dom or deterministic) and fault-induced amplitude-modulated
oscillations [40], [41], [42], i.e.:
s(t) = h(t) + f(t) ,
(3)
f(t) = A sin(2πfct)
|
{z
}
Amplitude modulation
K−1
X
k=0
e−βfct
| {z }
Fault impulses
∗
(t) δ

t −
k
ffault(t)

|
{z
}
Pulse frequency modulation
,
(4)
where h(t) holds the bearing normal vibration (healthy patterns),
f(t) is the fault-specific waveform, A is the fault amplitude, fc is the
bearing resonance frequency, β is the damping characteristic factor,
∗
(t) denotes convolution in time, δ(t) is the Dirac function, ffault(t)
denotes the time-varying fault characteristic frequency, and K is the
number of fault impulses, or knocks, within the signal duration T.
The characteristic frequencies that appear in the vibration signal of a
faulty bearing, assuming a stationary outer race and a rotating inner
race, are mainly the ball pass frequency of the inner race, ball pass
frequency of the outer race, and ball spinning frequency, which are
expressed by [43]:
f (Inner)
fault
(t) = n
2

1 + Dr
Dp cos(θ)

fr(t) ,
(5)
f (Outer)
fault
(t) = n
2

1 −Dr
Dp cos(θ)

fr(t) ,
(6)
f (Ball)
fault (t) = Dp
Dr
 
1 −
Dr
Dp cos(θ)
2!
fr(t) ,
(7)
where n is the number of rolling elements, Dr is the rolling element
diameter, Dp is the pitch diameter, θ denotes the contact angle, i.e.,
the angle of load from the radial plane, and fr(t) is the motor’s
time-varying rotational frequency, i.e., number of rotations per second
(rpm/60).
The bearing fault vibrations, expressed in Eq. (4), are comprised of
three parts: amplitude modulation (AM), fault-induced impulses, and
pulse frequency modulation (PFM); see Figs. 2a-2c for an example.
First, the PFM component encodes the fault time-varying frequency
which, by examining Eqs. (5)-(7), depends on the bearing’s geometry,
the fault location, the motor’s rotational speed, and the contact angle.
Specifically, the bearing’s geometry and the location of the fault
are responsible for defining the fault’s base harmonics, the motor’s
rotational speed shifts the base spectrum in a time-dependent manner,
and variations in the contact angle due to misalignment, thermal
growth, excessive bolt tightening, and pitting/peeling in the bearing
races induce further frequency disruptions [44]. Moreover, the fault
impulses in Eq. (4) express the rolling element rattlings that depend
on the bearing geometry and emerge with the frequency defined
by the PFM. Finally, the AM component carries the frequency-
modulated impulses to the bearing’s resonance frequency. Altogether,
the vibration signal of a faulty bearing, under time-varying rotational
speed conditions, is strictly non-stationary and mandates TF tools for
analysis and processing.

3
(a) Time-varying rotational speed.
(b) The resultant vibration signal.
(c) The signal’s frequency representation.
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
(d) The signal’s WVD.
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
(e) The signal’s CKD.
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
(f) The signal’s Spectrogram.
Fig. 2. Example synthetic bearing vibration signal with an inner race fault following Eq. (4). (a) shows the linearly changing rotational speed in red and
its pulse frequency modulation (PFM) encoding in black, (b) depicts the generated vibration signal, (c) illustrates its power spectrum, and (d)-(f) show the
compact kernel distribution (CKD) high accuracy, compared to the Wigner-Ville distribution (WVD), and its high resolution, compared to the Spectrogram,
when representing the vibration signal in the time-frequency domain. The signal model parameters are set to fs = 1 kHz, T = 5 seconds, A = 1, fc = 250
Hz, β = 0.1, n = 9, Dr = 7.9 mm, Dp = 38.5 mm, θ = 0°, and fr(t) is a triangular wave rising from 100 rpm to 500 rpm and back to 100 rpm. The
CKD parameters are set to c = 1, D = 0.1, E = 0.1, and the Spectrogram is computed at full resolution using a 0.3 seconds Hamming window. The TFRs
are plotted on a logarithmic scale to ease visualizing the fault-induced waveforms around the bearing’s resonance at 250 Hz (-3 dB to 2.2 dB).
B. Quadratic time-frequency representation
A time-frequency representation (TFR), obtained by a time-
frequency distribution (TFD), describes the vibrations spectra through
time [18], i.e., it reveals the vibrations’ joint temporal and spectral
evolution [23]. Let z(t) = [zx(t), zy(t)]T be the analytic associate
of the vibration signals in x(t) obtained via the Hilbert transform,
such that:
z(t) = x(t) + jH {x(t)} ,
(8)
where H { · } is the Hilbert transform and j = √−1. The Wigner-
Ville distribution (WVD) of z(t) is defined as [23]:
Wz(t, f) = F
τ→f

z

t + τ
2

z∗
t −τ
2
 
,
(9)
where Wz(t, f) holds the WVDs of the signals in z(t),
F
τ→f { · }
denotes the Fourier transform (FT) from lag τ to frequency f, and
z∗(t) is the complex conjugate of z(t) [45]. The WVD is optimal
for mono-component linear frequency modulated signals, but when
analyzing other signal types, it is known to suffer from interference
patterns, named cross-terms, because of its bilinear nature [23]. The
cross-terms severity can be reduced by a TF smoothing kernel γ(t, f)
such that:
ρz(t, f) = γ(t, f) ∗∗
(t,f) Wz(t, f) ,
(10)
where ρz(t, f) holds smoothed TFDs and ∗∗
(t,f) denotes the convolu-
tion in time and frequency. This expression can be written in a more
convenient space, called the Doppler-lag domain, where convolutions
become multiplications [18], i.e.:
ρz(t, f) = F
t←ν
−1

F
τ→f

g(ν, τ)Az(ν, τ)

,
(11)
g(ν, τ) = F
τ←f
−1

F
t→ν

γ(t, f)

,
(12)
Az(ν, τ) = F
t→ν

z

t + τ
2

z∗
t −τ
2
 
,
(13)
where
F
t←ν
−1 { · } denotes the inverse FT from Doppler ν to time
t, g(ν, τ) is the Doppler-lag kernel, and Az(ν, τ) is the ambiguity
function (AF). The Doppler-lag kernel’s role is to mitigate the WVD
cross-terms while concurrently preserving the resolution of its auto-
terms, which encapsulate the genuine content [21]. Employing a
compact kernel distribution (CKD) stands out as a highly effective
method for accomplishing this critical task [23]. Besides, it is more
suitable for resolving the vibration waveforms of faulty bearings in
the TF domain when compared to the WVD and Spectrogram; see
Figs. 2d-2f. The CKD utilizes a separable compact support kernel that
is comprised of two parts operating independently in the Doppler-lag
domain such that:
g(ν, τ) = G(ν) G(τ) ,
(14)
G(ν) = exp

c +
c D2
ν2 −D2

: |ν| < D ,
(15)
G(τ) = exp

c +
c E2
τ 2 −E2

: |τ| < E ,
(16)
where G(ν) and G(τ) are the independent Doppler and lag kernels,
respectively, D ∈[0, 1] and E ∈[0, 1] are the kernel normalized cut-
offs along the Doppler and lag axes, respectively, and c > 0 defines
the shape of the kernel.

4
Fig. 3.
Frequency analysis of the rotational speeds in the KAIST dataset.
The motor speed exhibits variations at two distinct frequencies: 8 Hz and
9.15 Hz, with a maximum rate of change of 10 Hz as it includes 99.6%
of the total power spectrum, covering nearly all rapid speed changes. The
power spectrum is estimated by the nonuniform FT because of the speed’s
inconsistent acquisition rate, averaged across the classes and dataset files, and
plotted along with its 68.3% confidence interval. Frequency scaling uses a 12.5
Hz sampling frequency which is the reciprocal of the shortest acquisition time.
C. Bearing fault diagnosis
1) Dataset description:
This study utilizes an open-access
dataset collected at the Korean Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology (KAIST) [46]. The dataset focuses on diagnosing bearing
faults under time-varying motor speeds. The conducted experiments
include vibration signals captured at 25.6 kHz by accelerometers
installed on the x- and y-axes of a bearing housing [46]. Faults were
induced in the bearing, and vibration data was recorded for four
distinct health states: Normal, Outer, Inner, and Ball, delineating a
typical bearing function and three common faults. In total, 35 minutes
of multi-sensor data was collected for each of the four classes.
2) Data processing and representation: The accelerometer
waveforms were first downsampled to 20 kHz using a finite impulse
response anti-aliasing lowpass filter with delay compensation, which
resulted in 42M samples for each sensor and bearing state. After that,
we divided the signals’ temporal course into smaller segments with no
overlap to prevent any unintended data leakage when training and/or
testing the fault diagnosis system. However, selecting an appropriate
segment length requires careful consideration. On one hand, it must
be sufficiently small to provide an ample number of samples for
training while minimizing additional complexities stemming from the
motor’s variable speed. On the other hand, it should be broad enough
to encompass intricate patterns and capture class-specific features. We
decided 0.1 seconds was suitable because the motor speed changes
at a maximum rate of 10 Hz, as illustrated by the frequency analysis
in Fig. 3. This segment length yields 21K segments for each sensor
and bearing state. Moreover, we generated the TFR of each segment
as follows: (1) form the signal’s AF by Eq. (13); (2) multiply the AF
with the compact support kernel (c = 1, D = 0.1, and E = 0.1)
to suppress cross-terms; (3) revert the filtered AF to the TF domain
using Eq. (11); (4) downsample the resultant TFR from 2000×2000
to 128 × 128 to reduce computational complexity (see Fig. 4 which
demonstrates the CKD of an example segment for all the bearing
health states); and (5) standardize the TFR to have zero mean and
unit variance.
3) Time-frequency Convolutional Neural Network (TF-
CNN): We developed a lightweight CNN architecture in a systematic
manner, named TF-CNN, that accepts the standardized TFRs coming
from both accelerometers (input size: 128 × 128 × 2). The input
TFRs undergo processing through five convolutional blocks, each
comprising a convolutional layer for feature extraction employing
a ReLU activation function to address non-linear effects, and a
max-pooling layer of size 2 × 2 for summarizing the features. The
convolutional layer in the first block has a kernel size of 5×5, while
subsequent layers utilize kernels sized at 3×3. The features extracted
from the final convolutional block are flattened and directed through
a dense layer housing 128 nodes activated by ReLU. Subsequently,
they traverse a dropout layer with 0.4 rate and a classification layer
comprising 4 nodes with a Softmax activation function to transform
the network’s outputs to probabilities.
4) Experiment settings: We trained and tested the TF-CNN
model in a 5-fold cross-validation fashion to accurately assess its
capacity for generalization. Specifically, the 84K samples (four
classes each containing 21K segments) were partitioned into five
equally sized and shuffled stratified folds. Within this process, one
fold served as the test set, while the remaining four were utilized
for training. This procedure was iterated five times, and the training
process extended across 150 epochs using an Adam optimizer to
minimize categorical cross-entropy. We set the batch size to 100
and the learning rate to 10−5 for epochs 0 to 100, followed by a
reduced rate of 10−6 for the rest of the epochs. Finally, we tested
the model using the weights learned at the last epoch (no early
stopping). In this study, we experimented with clean vibration signals
and those degraded by noise at 5 dB, 0 dB, and -5 dB SNRs. Despite
the varying noise levels, we utilized the same TF-CNN architecture
and training configurations. Additionally, we compared the TF-
CNN to two techniques recently developed for the KAIST dataset;
PIResNet [47] and an efficient time-domain CNN (T-CNN) [4]. These
comparisons are largely for testing the value of representing the
vibration signals in the TF domain via quadratic TFDs.
5) Performance evaluation and analysis: We evaluated the
diagnosis of multiple bearing faults in a one-versus-all fashion,
converting the original multi-class problem into a series of binary
classification tasks. We quantified the models’ efficacy in each task
by accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score, and then averaged these
measures across all tasks. Moreover, the TF-CNN was assessed using
t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) and Gradient-
weighted Class Activation Mapping (Grad-CAM) to allow an un-
derstanding of its predictions when presented with new vibration
signals. Specifically, t-SNE reduces data dimensionality by grouping
similar samples and separating dissimilar ones [48], and Grad-CAM
generates a distribution with high values for pixels that contributed
more to the network’s decision [49]. In general, with a sufficiently
extensive training set, if these techniques show genuine learning, one
may infer the model’s adequacy for unseen samples.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Evaluation of bearing fault diagnosis
Table I illustrates the testing performance of the TF-CNN model
and compares it to the two competing methods (T-CNN [4] and
PIResNet [47]) across different SNR levels. The results reveal a
consistent superiority of the proposed model over the other techniques
across all metrics and SNR levels. Additionally, they show that the
boost in performance becomes more pronounced when the level of
noise increases in the vibration signal. For instance, when utilizing
clean data, the TF-CNN outruns PIResNet and T-CNN with 2.2% and
1.6% point gains in accuracy, respectively. Nonetheless, these gains
increase to approximately 19% and 15% when dealing with severely
degraded vibration signals at -5 dB. This anticipated improvement
in performance can be attributed to the uniform distribution of noise
within the TF lattice. Consequently, quadratic TFRs are well-suited to
unveil distinctive patterns associated with the different bearing faults
while concurrently mitigating the influence of noise.
Moreover, the TF-CNN’s confusion matrices are presented in Fig. 5
and suggest that: (1) the Inner fault state is the simplest to predict as
it has the least drop in successful predictions; from 21,000 for clean
signals to 20,776 for noisy signals at -5 dB; (2) the Normal and Outer
classes interlace at -5 dB because heavy noise masks their distinct
TF signatures; (3) a mild misclassification exists at -5 dB among the
Normal and Ball classes; and (4) by analyzing the confusion matrices’
progression through the increasing levels of noise, there is a slight
performance imbalance among the classes at -5 dB. Specifically,
the Normal and Outer states have less successful predictions when
compared to the other classes. This observation suggests that intricate
TF details are required to distinguish these two states.

5
(a) Normal vibrations (Normal).
(b) Inner race fault (Inner).
(c) Outer race fault (Outer).
(d) Bearing ball fault (Ball).
Fig. 4. The CKD of the first vibration segment from the sensor mounted on the y-direction with no noise. The representations’ magnitudes are plotted on a
logarithmic scale to ease visualization (-3 dB to 0 dB).
Normal Outer
Inner
Ball
Predicted labels
Normal
Outer
Inner
Ball
True labels
20998
2
0
0
1
20999
0
0
0
0
21000
0
1
0
2
20997
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
(a) Clean data (no added noise).
Normal Outer
Inner
Ball
Predicted labels
Normal
Outer
Inner
Ball
True labels
20851
126
0
23
143
20835
0
22
0
0
21000
0
20
28
2
20950
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
(b) SNR = 5 dB.
Normal Outer
Inner
Ball
Predicted labels
Normal
Outer
Inner
Ball
True labels
20051
691
19
239
661
20264
3
72
7
2
20989
2
255
85
20
20640
5000
10000
15000
20000
(c) SNR = 0 dB.
Normal Outer
Inner
Ball
Predicted labels
Normal
Outer
Inner
Ball
True labels
17208
2509
166
1117
2455
18266
88
191
64
81
20776
79
935
166
88
19811
5000
10000
15000
20000
(d) SNR = -5 dB.
Fig. 5. The testing confusion matrices from all folds when dealing with (a) clean, and (b)-(d) noisy vibration signals.
TABLE I
THE MACRO-AVERAGED TESTING PERFORMANCE. THE RESULTS ARE
5-FOLD AVERAGED (± STANDARD DEVIATIONS), AND THE BEST
OUTCOMES ARE IN BOLD. THE PIRESNET RESULTS ARE DRAWN FROM
THE REPORTED SINGLE-TRIAL BEST-PERFORMING CONFUSION MATRICES
IN [47]; HENCE, SOME STANDARD DEVIATIONS ARE MISSING.
Model
SNR
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1-Score
PIResNet [47] Clean 97.78 ± 0.18
98.0 ± N/A
98.0 ± N/A
98.0 ± N/A
T-CNN [4]
Clean
98.4 ± 0.3
98.4 ± 0.3
98.4 ± 0.3
98.4 ± 0.3
TF-CNN
Clean 99.99 ± 0.01 99.99 ± 0.01 99.99 ± 0.01 99.99 ± 0.01
PIResNet [47]
5 dB
90.26 ± 0.18
90.5 ± N/A
90.5 ± N/A
90.5 ± N/A
T-CNN [4]
5 dB
91.2 ± 0.3
91.3 ± 0.4
91.2 ± 0.4
91.2 ± 0.4
TF-CNN
5 dB
99.57 ± 0.05 99.57 ± 0.05 99.57 ± 0.05 99.57 ± 0.05
PIResNet [47]
0 dB
81.28 ± 0.36
81.6 ± N/A
81.6 ± N/A
81.6 ± N/A
T-CNN [4]
0 dB
84.0 ± 0.3
84.0 ± 0.2
84.0 ± 0.3
84.0 ± 0.3
TF-CNN
0 dB
97.55 ± 0.12 97.55 ± 0.12 97.55 ± 0.12 97.55 ± 0.12
PIResNet [47] -5 dB 71.67 ± 0.20
72.3 ± N/A
72.0 ± N/A
72.2 ± N/A
T-CNN [4]
-5 dB
75.3 ± 0.5
75.1 ± 0.7
75.3 ± 0.6
75.2 ± 0.7
TF-CNN
-5 dB 90.55 ± 0.16 90.51 ± 0.17 90.55 ± 0.17 90.52 ± 0.17
B. The t-SNE and Grad-CAM analysis
A two-dimensional representation of the TF-CNN learned features
is illustrated in Fig. 6 using t-SNE. The results validate the model’s
ability to learn state-relevant features in case of clean or noisy
vibration data. Specifically, Figs. 6a and 6b show clear inter-class
separation among all classes while Fig. 6c depicts a slight overlap
between the Normal and Outer classes. Nonetheless, this overlap
escalates when heavy noise is introduced as shown in Fig. 6d.
Moreover, the t-SNE results reveal that the Normal and Outer states
are the most alike when degraded with heavy noise, while the
Inner and Ball classes are the most distinct from the rest. These
observations are aligned with the findings in Fig. 5 and justify the
slight performance imbalance at -5 dB. We hypothesize that this
alikeness is linked to the characteristic frequency of outer race faults
being the lowest among the faults observed. This particular frequency
characteristic causes their harmonics to sway less from the resonance
of the bearing. Consequently, in the TF domain, outer race faults
tend to overlap more with the normal state, and substantial noise can
significantly obscure their distinguishing marks.
Furthermore, Fig. 7 illustrates the Grad-CAM outcomes for all the
classes along with the rotational speeds for the first 8 seconds of clean
vibrations. The visualizations validate our claim that the diagnosis
of bearing faults is beyond the scope of basic harmonic analysis. In
particular, they underscore the necessity for dynamic features derived
from the joint TF domain and indicate apparent limitations when
using time-only or frequency-only representations. Additionally, the
results showcase the versatility of the proposed model in acquiring
fault-relevant non-stationary features, i.e., important descriptors are
extracted from regions that evolve in time and frequency; see Figs.
7b-7d. Finally, by associating the rotational speed profiles with
the highlighted TF regions, one notes a moderate correspondence
between the region’s frequency support and the motor’s speed, i.e., the
regions are temporally coupled with the rotational speeds. However,
the outcomes also demonstrate a need for improving the proposed
model’s attention to generate predictions with higher correlations to
the operating variable speeds.
C. The misclassifications link to speed
The connection between the TF-CNN false decisions at 0 dB
SNR and the motor rotational speed is explored in Fig. 8. First,
the temporal locality of the model’s misclassifications is presented
in Fig. 8a for all the classes. The locale is overlaid on the rotational
speed profile for the entire 35 minutes of data, i.e., all the testing
data from all the folds. Moreover, Fig. 8b shows the motor speed
probability distribution given false predictions and compares it to
the speed’s unconditional distribution (baseline) for all the bearing
health states. Interestingly, the results reveal that misclassifications
are most likely to occur at speeds below 1,200 RPM (the lower 1/3
of the entire speed range) where 70%, 100%, 69%, and 73% of all

6
(a) Clean data (no added noise).
(b) SNR = 5 dB.
(c) SNR = 0 dB.
(d) SNR = -5 dB.
Fig. 6. The t-SNE analysis of the first testing set, using the model’s last layer features, when processing (a) clean, and (b)-(d) noisy signals.
(a) Normal vibrations (Normal).
(b) Inner race fault (Inner).
(c) Outer race fault (Outer).
(d) Bearing ball fault (Ball).
Fig. 7.
The Grad-CAM maps and rotational speeds for the first 8 seconds of clean data. The results are formed as follows: (1) generate the Grad-CAM
distributions for every segment (0.1 seconds of data); (2) concatenate the results of the first 80 segments in the temporal direction (8 seconds of data); (3)
smooth the concatenated results with a 1-second moving average filter; and (4) threshold the smoothed distributions to show their 68.3% confidence interval.
misclassifications exist for the Normal, Inner, Outer, and Ball classes,
respectively. Additionally, the conditional distributions show that the
median speed for which the TF-CNN fails to predict the bearing
health state correctly is 1,046 for Normal, 840 for Inner, 974 for
Outer, and 992 for the Ball state.
The observed skewness towards low speeds can be attributed to the
spectral signature of fault-induced vibrations being very close to the
bearing’s resonance. In other words, the frequency of fault-induced
harmonics varies less at those speeds; hence, their TFRs are more
likely to be misidentified. Moreover, the constructive accumulation of
fault-induced impulses, as described in Eq. (4), is linearly dependent
on the rotational speed, i.e., the envelope of the fault signal co-varies
with the speed; see Fig. 2b for illustration. Consequently, the ubiquity
of the fault signal becomes obscure at severe noise conditions and
low operational speeds. These conjectures are aligned with the t-SNE
analysis in Fig. 6 and anticipate an increase in the fault-conditioned
median speed at lower SNR levels. We verified this prediction at -
5 dB SNR and found that the median speed is 1,252 for Normal
(20% increase), 900 for Inner (7% increase), 1,314 for Outer (35%
increase), and 1,244 for the Ball state (25% increase).
IV. CONCLUSIONS
Bearing faults are major irregularities in rotating machines and
they are the main cause of vibration. Analyzing the vibration’s mor-
phology can provide indicators to determine the bearing’s health state.
However, current fault diagnosis techniques are designed to operate
in highly constrained environments and neglect real-life conditions,
e.g., time-varying speeds and the vibration’s non-stationary nature.
This study presented a fusion between time-frequency analysis and
deep learning techniques to diagnose bearing faults under highly
time-varying rotational speeds and multiple noise levels. First, we
modeled the bearing fault-induced vibrations in a general manner
and discussed their dynamic spectral evolution. We justified the
vibration’s non-stationary behavior and elucidated its association with
the bearing’s inherent properties, including its operational parameters
such as rotational speed. Moreover, we discussed time-frequency
analysis using high-performing quadratic distributions and showed
their effectiveness in resolving the vibration waveforms of faulty
bearings in comparison to conventional tools, e.g., the Wigner-Ville
distribution and the Spectrogram. After that, we designed a CNN
network based on the time-frequency compact kernel distribution to
diagnose various faults in rolling-element bearings. The experimental
results demonstrated the superiority of our method over recently
developed techniques. For instance, they showed that quadratic time-
frequency distributions are well-suited to unveil distinctive dynamic
patterns associated with the different bearing faults while concur-
rently mitigating the influence of noise. Additionally, they empha-
sized the versatility of the proposed model in acquiring fault-relevant
non-stationary features that are temporally coupled with the rotational
speed. In brief, the proposed solution has achieved a remarkable
robustness to noise and significant gains in accuracy reaching up
to 15% in severe noise conditions.
Our future research directions include testing for other faults, in-
corporating attention mechanisms, employing post-processing meth-
ods, and fusing time-frequency tools with more advanced deep
learning techniques such as Operational Neural Networks [50], [51].
