arXiv:1401.1800v1  [physics.hist-ph]  8 Jan 2014
G¨odel, Tarski, Turing and the conundrum of free will
Chetan S. Mandayam Nayakar and R. Srikanth
Poornaprajna Institute of Scientiﬁc Research, Sadashivnagar, Bangalore and
Raman Research Institute, Sadashivnagar, Bangalore
The problem of deﬁning and locating free will (FW) in physics is studied. On basis of logical
paradoxes, we argue that FW has a meta-theoretic character, like the concept of truth in Tarski’s
undeﬁnability theorem.
Free will exists relative to a base theory if there is freedom to deviate
from the deterministic or indeterministic dynamics in the theory, with the deviations caused by
parameters (representing will) in the meta-theory. By contrast, determinism and indeterminism do
not require meta-theoretic considerations in their formalization, making FW a fundamentally new
causal primitive. FW exists relative to the meta-theory if there is freedom for deviation, due to
higher-order causes. Absolute free will, which corresponds to our intuitive introspective notion of free
will, exists if this meta-theoretic hierarchy is inﬁnite. We argue that this hierarchy corresponds to
higher levels of uncomputability. In other words, at any ﬁnitely high order in the hierarchy, there are
uncomputable deviations from the law at that order. Applied to the human condition, the hierarchy
corresponds to deeper levels of the subconscious or unconscious mind. Possible ramiﬁcations of our
model for physics, neuroscience and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) are brieﬂy considered.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Informally speaking, FW is the power to choose one alternative from many. We think that we have it. Yet its
existence and nature have been debated for over two thousand years by philosophers, scientists and theologians [1, 2].
Free will is, arguably, a familiar stranger. One basic diﬃculty here is its paradoxical nature: FW incorporates two
opposing notions: freedom and control. On the one hand, freedom suggests indeterminism; while control suggests
intent and determinism. From this perspective, FW is an oxymoron. There are some easy questions to ask about it
that are hard to answer:
1. What is FW? Physicists typically treat it as unpredictability or uncorrelatedness with some past data. By this
criterion, uncontrolled or unreasonable behavior would qualify as free, and thus does not work. On the other
hand, if control and predictability are the requirements, then the altruism of a saint and the selﬁsh actions of a
materialist are equally predictable, though intuitively, the former is the one we would deem free. The relevant
question here is: how to deﬁne FW?
2. Does it exist is the world? Introspection suggests that we are free in the sense that we could have done other
than what we did. But unless FW is well deﬁned, this intuitive feeling may well be illusory!
3. Is it compatible with the laws of physics? The answer to this would depend on those to the above two questions!
4. What is its neurological basis, if FW exists? Here again, the answer depends on the answer to the above three.
This article addresses the ﬁrst three questions above. The last is dealt with by us elsewhere [3]. There are three
broad metaphysical positions on FW: Compatibilism, which holds that determinism is compatible with FW. A person
may choose freely and yet an omniscient being may possess foreknowledge of that choice.
The opposite view is
incompatibilism, according to which FW and determinism are incompatible. Two divergent incompatibilist views are
hard determinism, which rejects FW in favor of determinism, and libertarianism, which rejects determinism in favor
of FW. To the determinist, free will is at best illusory. The variety of FW that arguably poses the greatest challenge
is the liberatarian one, and it is this that we consider in this work.
The remaining article is structured as follows. In Section II, we brieﬂy review the current status of free will in
quantum mechanics. In Section III, we present the Weak Free Will paradox, which is concerned with question of
the compatibility of FW with the laws of physics. A recapitulation of a model of FW we developed in Ref. [4] in
response to the Weak Free Will paradox is presented in Section IV. The Strong Free Will paradox, the argument that
the only causal primitives in Nature are indeterminism and indeterminism, is presented in Section V. In response to
the latter paradox, FW is proposed in Section VI as an inﬁnite causal hierarchy of meta-laws, where higher-order
laws can cause deviations in lower-order ones. The orders of the hierarchy are then diﬀerentiated by diﬀerent levels of
uncomputability in Section VII. A justiﬁcation for this association is presented in Section VIII. The fuller implications
for neuroscience, physics and AI are discussed in Section IX. Finally, we conclude in Section X.

2
II.
QUANTUM MECHANICS AND FW
Quantum mechanics, by introducing the new paradigm of intrinsic randomness provided fresh impetus to the FW
debate.
At ﬁrst it seems that quantum indeterminism provides room to accomodate free will.
Yet, randomness
also means loss of control [5]. Two kinds of freedom are sometimes discerned: that of experimenters who choose
measurement settings, and of particles that decide the measurement outcome [6]. T’ Hooft [7] proposes identifying
FW with freedom to modify the initial state of a system.
Reconsideration of randomness in light of quantum nonlocality has provided new insights. Gisin [8] has argued
that the Many-Worlds interpretation [9] of quantum mechanics is incompatible with quantum nonlocality and the
existence of FW. The Conway-Kochen FW Theorem [10, 11] proves that given the violation of Bell-type inequality
and relativistic time-ordering, the assumption of freedom of choice of settings by observers implies a similar ‘free
will’ on the part of particles, i.e., independence from all past information (with ‘past’ deﬁned as the past light
cone or all complement of the future light cone). Particle outcomes are then acts of creation or becoming rather
than pre-determinate values [12]. The claim [10, 11] that the freedom of experimenters and the violation of Bell-
type inequalities rule out covariant stochastic dynamical explanations of quantum nonlocality was disputed by others
[13, 14]. A reconciliation of these two positions can be brought about by the observation [12, 15] that whereas ‘collapse’
of the nonlocal wavefunction leading to correlated outcomes is not covariant, still the ‘cloud of future events’ is. Hall
[16] has reﬁned the notion of FW discussed in the Free Will theorem, by obtaining a trade-oﬀbetween the freedom
of observers or measurement independence and the freedom of particles or indeterminism in measurement outcomes.
Suarez [17] has argued that assuming freedom of the experimenter in a measurement conﬁguration where two
observers perform a Bell inequality test [18], such that each considers her/his own measurement as having been
performed ﬁrst, then time-ordering of physical causation must be given up. Outcomes are then controlled by an
immaterial agency outside space-time that determines the order of outcomes without aﬀecting the probabilities, given
by the Born rule. By this argument, FW and randomness can coexist [19].
III.
THE WEAK FW PARADOX
Consider world W governed by deterministic physical law, L. All objects in W evolve according to L. The pair
(W, L) constitute theory T . By determinism, the physical state ψt at time t of an inanimate agent (e.g., a particle)
and the physical law determine the state ψt+1 at subsequent time t + 1: ψt+1 = L(ψt). Free will seems to entail for a
conscious agent X in W, that in general,
ψt+1 ̸= L (ψt) ,
(1)
meaning that X’s behavior is not captured by L. We may consider replacing L by a probabilistic law L′ such that
Ψt+1 = L′ (Ψt) ,
(2)
where Ψt+1 is a random variable representing probabilitistic evolution, characterized by mean µ and standard deviation
σ. By the Law of Large Numbers, the sample mean ⟨Ψt+1⟩(n) of the random variable Ψt+1, over n trials satisﬁes
lim
n→∞Pr
⟨Ψt+1⟩(n) −µ
 > ǫ

= 0,
(3)
In other words, it is exponentially unlikely that the agent X will, over many trials, choose atypical sequences. There
is thus long-run determinism and on that scale, lack of freedom.
Thus libertarian FW is compatible with neither a deterministic nor indeterministic physical law. This is the Weak
Free Will paradox. We conclude that, libertarian FW, if it exists for an agent X, must be a supra-physical commodity
that causes deviations from the laws of the world physical W in which X (physically) lives. Causality is no longer
closed under physics in a world where FW exists. Otherwise– if free-willed action were explainable by L–, then there
is no deviation by deﬁnition, and FW must be illusory.
The quantum homeostatis hypothesis [17] is another response to the Weak Free Will paradox. According to it, a
conscious agent may exert FW by controlling the order of outcomes, without contradicting the probability law Eq.
(2). In order not to deviate from the long term distribution required by L′, periods of deliberate, conscious action
must be compensated by other periods of uncontrolled behavior (e.g., sleep).
IV.
FREE WILL AS THE POWER OF MIND OVER MATTER
A proposal that incorporates will-driven deviations from the physical law, as required in our resolution of the Weak
Free Will paradox, is the Freedom-Understanding-Nature (FUN) model [4]. An agent is assumed to be equipped

3
with two possibly opposing faculties: Nature (N), determined by physical law L via brain (limbic) dynamics, genetic
proclivities and instinctual drives, and Understanding (U), determined by higher cortical faculties of morality and
compassion. Here N is a manifestation of L from which will-driven deviations may occur. For example, N may
manifest as a psycho-somatic desire that urges the agent to procure a physical object, while U may advise restraint.
Freedom (F) is an immaterial resource that empowers X to deviate choice C away from the option urged on by N
towards the one advised by U. This deviation cannot be captured by a Hamiltonian dynamics or a mechanical model,
since these exist within L. The base-law of the deviation corresponds to the known physical law (here N), but the
parameters of deviation (here ϕ and possibly U) are associated with the meta-law. Together the meta-law (which
encompasses L) and parameters associated with it consistute the meta-theory.
Free will is the power to conform to U, deviating from N if necessary. A simple mathamatical model: suppose
agent X is faced with a two-valued choice “0” or “1”. U and N are represented by random variables ˆU and ˆN that
take values in dichotomic choice space of Ω≡{0, 1}. Let U advise option “0” whereas N urges X towards option
“1” with a ‘strength’ ν. The eventual choice C of the agent is represented by random variable ˆC, which is a convex
combination of ˆU and ˆN, with the weight assigned to U determined by the freedom parameter ϕ (where 0 ≤ϕ ≤1),
representing F. Thus:
ˆC ≡(1 −ϕ)

1 −ν
ν

+ ϕ

1
0

=

ϕ + (1 −ϕ)(1 −ν)
(1 −ϕ)ν

(4)
In Eq. (4), the larger is ϕ, the more can C deviate from N towards U. If freedom is maximal, i.e., ϕ = 1, then the
agent behaves deterministically (mathematically, ˆC is pure), demonstrating that FW is distinct from unpredictability
in this model. We note that ˆC becomes more random as ϕ drops from 1.
Free will Φ is quantiﬁed as a measure of closeness of ˆU to ˆC normalized by the distance of ˆU from ˆN.
Φ =

⃗C · ⃗U

|⃗U −⃗N|,
(5)
where ⃗C ( ⃗N) is a vector representation of ˆC ( ˆN) and | · | denotes trace distance. By deﬁnition, 0 ≤F ≤1. For Eq.
(4), we ﬁnd
Φ = ϕ
2 (ϕ + (1 −ϕ)(1 −ν))|1 −2ϕ|.
(6)
We may thus think of FW Φ as innate freedom F (represented by ϕ) expressed physically when there is a conﬂict
between U and N. The greater the conﬂict, the greater the potential for this expression. Here innateness means that
F is a part of the meta-theory (or higher-order theory), while its expression is at the base, physical level.
V.
THE STRONG FW PARADOX
That libertarian FW produces deviations from the base law, only tells how FW acts. It does not clarify what this
commodity is. We now attempt to deﬁne FW as the resource that can produce such deviations. The Strong Free Will
paradox, given here, is concerned with the question of whether these deviations themselves are lawful according to
a higher law. Suppose agent X is faced with a situation that presents a choice. By our resolution of the Weak Free
Will paradox, in free choice, physical causation fails in W in that X may deviate from the physical law L. X has
FW relative to W. The parameters of this deviation are not governed by L, and therefore are objects that live in the
extended world W +. One now considers whether these parameters themselves are lawful or free-willed. For agent X
to have genuine FW, these deviation parameters should have been freely chosen.
One possibility is that there there are deterministic laws L+ in W + that explain the causes that produce the
deviation on the base law L. We then have:
ψ+
t+1 = L+  ψ+
t

,
(7)
where ψ+
j is the extended version of ψj, obtained by adding elements from W +. For example, suppose W + includes
the physical objects in W as well as other more abstract, mental objects. Then ψt represents the state of agent X’s
body at time t, then ψ+
t is that of his body-mind at that time. Here ψt+1 is implicitly determined by L+ acting on the
enhanced state ψ+
t . In this case, there is no FW in W +, and in an absolute sense, no FW at all, since the deviations
from L are deterministically determined by the higher law L+. Another possibility is that there is a probabilistic law
L+′ that governs the W + objects, but here again there is no FW, as argued in Section III. By the Weak Free Will
paradox, which is adapted to W + agency, there is FW only if there can be deviations from law L+.

4
The causes (or parameters) of these deviations are objects that live in a yet higher world W ++. It is clear that
the above argument relativizes, i.e., one can recursively apply the above argument, shifting the level from W + to
W ++, and beyond. If this recursion is ﬁnite, then although there is FW in the sense of the Weak Free Will paradox
till that causal depth, still there is none beyond.
What remains just above that depth is either determinism or
indeterminism. In other words, the Strong Free Will paradox is the argument that the only fundamental causal
primitives are determinism and indeterminism. There is no room for any primitive like FW, which is seen ultimately
to be a hierarchical interplay of these two primitives.
The quantum homeostatis hypothesis [17] and the FUN model [4], which provide a resolution to the Weak Free Will
paradox, do not appear to get past the Strong Free Will paradox. In the former case, the Strong Free Will argument
applies to the resource by which an agent controls the ordering of outcomes, and in the FUN model, it applies to the
freedom paramter ϕ.
VI.
FREE WILL AS INFINITE META-THEORETIC CONSTRUCT
We propose that the response to the Strong Free Will paradox is to simply embrace it! We suggest that it is in the
nature of Consciousness that it can support the above causal recursion to any depth. For convenience, let the base
(physical) laws L now be denoted by L(0) and the corresponding physical world W in which they operate, by W (0).
The usual laws of physics are order-0 laws, which govern the behavior of order-0 objects, which are physical objects,
denoted λ(0), such as the physical component (body) of sentient agents like humans. The physical state of such a
being is denoted ψ(0).
Volition- or will-driven deviations (if they exist) from the order-0 laws are caused, according to Eq. (1), by order-1
objects in L+, which we denote now by L(1). These objects, denoted by λ(1), live in the larger world W +, denoted by
W (1). We have W (0) ⊂W (1), λ(0) ∈W (0) and λ(1) ∈W (1) −W (0). The extended state of the free-willed being X is
ψ(1) ∈W (1) such that ψ(0) = ψ(1)∩W (0). Similarly, will-driven deviations from L(1) dynamics are attributed to causes
λ++ ≡λ(2) ∈W ++ ≡W (2). The law L(1) is a meta-law for L(0) in that it is law that is about and governs L(0). The
objects in W (1) and the axioms of L(1) thus constitute a meta-theory T (1) for the base theory T (0) ≡(W (0), L(0)).
At each level j (a positive integer), the pair (W (j), L(j)) constitute the order-j meta-theory T (j). Formally, this
system of meta-theories T (j), can be continued indeﬁnitely. The meta-theoretic construction of FW is the assertion
that at each level j, FW at that level is expressed as the possibility of deviation from L(j) caused by order-(j+1)
objects λ(j+1) ∈W (j+1). Relative FW exists at level K if there are deviations from all L(j) with j < K. If there are
no deviations in L(K), then there is no FW beyond order-K. We propose the existence of absolute FW exists in the
sense that relative FW exists for all ﬁnite K. In other words, no matter how deep we go tracking down causes, the
causes of these causes, the causes of causes of causes, and so forth, although our explanatory power may increase, still
there remain unexplained deviations.
We note that determinism and indeterminism lack this meta-theoretic character in that they can be described
within a given level (say L) of the dynamics. Free will then is a new causal primitive, in addition to determinism and
indeterminism. But although it is not logically necessary for indeterminism to be meta-theoretic, still it may be a
function of higher-order causes. It diﬀers from free will at the same order in not being correlated with the immediately
higher order meta-theory. Thus indeterminism is just freedom without the will. Quantum ﬂuctations are then order-0
freedom, while sentient beings who deviate from ˆN in the FUN model possess (at least) order-0 free will.
If no such correlated parameter is evident in the meta-theory, then there is freedom alone, and to ensure that
causality holds, we conclude that the causes lie in meta-theoretic depths farther down. This is a subtle but socially
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the free will of sentient agents and the freedom of particles. Although there is no logical
necessity to do so, we propose that all indeterminism is freedom in the above sense.
A problem that merits further study is the question of how the diﬀerent meta-theories T (j) may be demarcated.
One may consider that T (0) corresponds to predicate logic, and T (j) (j > 0) correspond to higher-order logics [20].
An example of a demarcation that doesn’t work is the proposal that T (0) is classical mechanics and T (1) quantum
mechanics, the idea being that quantum mechanics causes deviations from classical behavior.
We venture that
quantum mechanics, and thus also classical mechanics, belong in T (0), the base physical theory. Intuitively, this is
because quantum mechanics can be considered as a modiﬁcation over an indeterministic generalization of classical
mechanics. Although this modiﬁcation is responsible for peculiarities like quantum nonlocality, it does not seem to
endow quantum mechanics with more explanatory power, as we clarify below.

5
VII.
COMPUTABILITY AND CAUSALITY
We suggest that the diﬀerent levels of theory T (0), the meta-theory T (1), the meta-meta-theory T (2), etc. are
distinguished in diﬀerent levels of computability that they support. Computability, which is the capacity to eﬀectively
solve a problem, is a topic studied in mathematical logic and computer science. Computability theory is concerned
with the question of whether an algorithm or eﬀective procedure exists to solve a problem. It is known that there
exist algorithmically uncomputable problems, e.g., the halting problem for computer programs (formally: Turing
machines) [21]. One can conceive qualitatively more powerful computers (formally: oracle machines) that can solve
these problems, but must contend with their own halting problem. One can continue this exercise, to build a hierarchy
of ever more powerful oracle-machines and ever harder uncomputable problems. We propose that the diﬀerent T (j)’s
correspond to the diﬀerent rungs in this hierarchy.
We can now make precise the sense in which FW is said to exist in this model. In computation theory, an oracle for
problem A is a hypothetical device that given any instance of A returns the answer in ﬁnite time. If a Turing machine
with access to this oracle can solve every instance of problem B, then B is Turing-reducible to A. In other words, if
A is computable, then so is B. If similarly, A is reducible to B, then A and B are equivalent. A Turing-degree is the
set of all problems that are mutually Turing-equivalent.
The set of all computable problems is a Turing degree, which quantiﬁes the level of its algorithmic unsolvability.
A higher Turing degree is the set of problems Turing-equivalent to the halting problem, for example, the problem
of whether a statement can be proved from the axioms of set theory. This latter set is not solvable (with Turing
machines).
One can construct higher Turing degrees by relativizing the proof of the halting theorem for Turing
machines to Turing machines with oracles.
Thus the diﬀerent meta-theories correspond to diﬀerent Turing degrees, with a higher-order theory being of higher
Turing degree. The move from T (j) to T (j+1) is equivalent to a Turing jump [22], i.e., produces a unit shift in the
Turing degree.
By this criterion, since the quantum version of Turing machine is not more powerful than a classical machine from
a computability perspective (and even computational complexity perspective), quantum mechanics belongs to the
same-order theory as classical mechanics, namely T (0). On the other hand, a deterministic hidden variable theory for
quantum mechanics is a likely candidate for T (1). For one, it can deterministically explain deviations from classical
mechanics in terms of hidden variables. Further, the ability to manipulate this subquantum information leads to
super-Turing power in a computational complexity sense (solving NP-complete problems in polynomial time) [23].
Our assertion of absolute FW above can now be re-stated thus: it exists in the sense that the problem of determining
an agent’s free choice is of inﬁnite Turing degree, i.e., for every oracle machine at ﬁnitely high order, there will be
uncomputable residual deviations in a model of free choice.
In other words, FW is not just uncomputable, but
inﬁnitely so!
The ﬁrst hint that the this linking between causality and computability is an appropriate direction to proceed is
the observation that the notion of proof in G¨odel’s incompleteness theorem [24] and of truth in Tarski’s undeﬁnability
theorem [25], are, in some ways, similar meta-theoretic concepts. G¨odel incompleteness may be considered as an
avatar of Turing uncomputability [21], as we show in Section VIII.
VIII.
TRUTH, PROOF AND FREEDOM
Imagine a human agent X equipped with the usual cognitive apparatuses of a physical brain and something else
called mind. The physical aspect of X lives in world W (0) governed by physical law L(0), while the higher aspects of
ψ(j) are attributed to the mind entity. Now T (0) naturally determines a model of computation, and correspondingly
the limits of computational complexity and computability, in the world W (0). If T (0) is the physical world, then the
relevant model is Turing machines (TMs) or their equivalent. All TMs, including the TMs representing agents X, Y, Z
et al. that live in W (0), can be enumerated according to a ﬁxed scheme, e.g., G¨odel numbering or Turing numbering.
We denote the corresponding numbers X, Y , Z and so on.
We now present a proof of G¨odel’s theorem via the uncomputability of a problem that is equivalent to the halting
problem [21]. Suppose algorithm A exists that can predict in ﬁnite time agent X’s binary choice upon input i:
A(X; i) =

0 ⇐⇒X(i) = 0
1 ⇐⇒X(i) = 1 ,
(8)
i.e., the machine outputs 0 (1) if X outputs 0 (1) acting on input i. We construct the following program:
R(p) =

1 ⇐⇒A(p; p) = 0
0 ⇐⇒A(p; p) = 1,
(9)

6
where p is a positive integer. By construction, R exists if A does. Applying A to R we have from Eqs. (8) and (9):
A(R; p) =

1 ⇐⇒A(p; p) = 0
0 ⇐⇒A(p; p) = 1.
(10)
We obtain a contradiction when we set p = R, which is an instance of the diagonal argument, ﬁrst pioneered by
Cantor. The conclusion is that a general, sound predictive algorithm A is logically impossible because it would help
create an algorithm that is so powerful that, knowing its own future, it could act contradictory to its own prediction.
Therefore, if the system F of reasoning embodied by TMs in consistent, then to avoid the contradiction, A(R; R)
loops inﬁnitely. Therefore, R(R) is undecidable within F– a G¨odel sentence for the system. How do we, as human
beings reading this, know this truth of an algorithmically undecidable statement like R(R)? Can the human mind
therefore be more powerful than TMs? According to a much debated anti-mechanist view due to Lucas [26, 27] and
Penrose [28, 29], it is.
An objection [30] is based on G¨odel’s second incompleteness theorem. The reasoning that led us to the claim that
“If F is consistent, then R(R) is non-terminating” can itself be programmed into the action of a TM. Thus if F is
in fact consistent, then the proof of its own consistency must be uncomputable, in order that R(R) be unprovable
in F. In this objection to the anti-mechanist view of the mind, even if human agents were consistent, they would be
unable to establish this, and thus attain to a meta-mathematical comprehension of what TMs can’t. To this view,
the following counter-objection may be given: Suppose a large number n of persons toss a fair coin each, assuming
that humans are consistent if a head turns up, and that we are inconsistent otherwise. Then it follows that if it so
happens that human beings are consistent, the understanding that R(R) is non-terminating would make the mind
will be more powerful than TMs in the case of those people in the group for whom (n/2 in number, with exponentially
high probability) a head turns up! Clearly, we wouldn’t want to power of the mind to depend the whim of a coin! (On
the other hand, if humans happen to be inconsistent, then the above argument fails.) Thus it seems that objections
based on consistency of F do not satisfactorily undermine the anti-mechanist view.
Another criticisim [31] is that it may not be possible to humanly construct a G¨odel sentence for something so
complicated as the TM representing a human being. However this objection seems to assume that the human may
in principle be more powerful than a TM, but not in practice. The claim for the disputing the anti-mechanist view
should, it would seem, not depend on limitations imposed on human beings like mortality, emotionalism, fatigue,
etc., unless it can be demonstrated that such a factor will necessarily (logically) intervene to prevent a human from
computing the G¨odel sentence in question.
Yet another objection to the anti-mechanist view is due to Whiteley [32], which is that humans would themselves
be prone to a G¨odel sentence, not unlike TMs. Consider the following predicate formula, formalized suitably:
P(ξ) ≡“ξ cannot consistently believe this statement.”
Now P(X) is true or false. If true, then X does not believe P(X) when presented with it, making him incomplete
for disbelieving a true statement. If P(X) is false, then ¬P(X) is true; in other words, he believes a false statement,
making him inconsistent. To avoid inconsistency, we select for him to be incomplete. This is just an informal version
of G¨odel’s theorem, with disbelief [33] self-referenced, rather than unprovability (Actually, presenting P(X) to X
creates a double self-reference: in X and in the resulting statement [34]). According to this objection, humans have
similar limitations as those attributed to machines on basis of G¨odel’s theorem.
P(X) can be consistently believed by agent Y , and P(Y ) by X. Now imagine that Y believes P(X) and informs
this statement to X. As predicted X is unable to believe P(X), being consistent. When Y asks him if he believes
P(X), X replies in the negative. When Y asks him why, X says that he cannot say exactly why, but somehow P(X)
feels unconvincing. Now Y happens to be a mathematician, and explains G¨odel’s theorem to X enlightening X as to
why X is unable to believe P(X). X is now able to reﬂect upon the nature of his understanding and the limitations
imposed by the theorem. He trusts Y enough to know that Y wouldn’t believe P(X) unless it were true. He then has
an ‘Ah ha’ moment, and decides that P(X) is true after all. His brain still disbelieves P(X), but somehow he knows
that P(X) is true, though maybe he can’t help acting as if it were false. If X could not have this Ah-ha moment,
he could well be a machine, and in social terms, he must be some kind of zombie or dull-witted person, not a normal
human! Thus, the power of intuitive grasp seems to be that X can supply his own meta-theory on the ﬂy, and it
is this power to meta-jump that seems to come from nowhere but the nature of consciousness, and divides man and
machine!
In other words, X is able to meta-straddle: he can both believe and disbelieve P(X) simultaneously, without being
inconsistent because these states occur at two diﬀerent layers: the disbelief at W (j) (possibly j = 0) and the belief at
W (j+1). (Here we may recollect moments where our eyes/brain are deluded by an optical illusion which we know is
illusory; or when we know that something is false at a higher level, and yet can’t help believing it!) This conclusion is
consistent with our demarcation of the meta-theories T (j) in terms of uncomputability occurring in the theory [34].

7
Now it is conceivable that the reasoning that led us to the conclusion that if X intuits the G¨odel sentence, and
then meta-straddles, can itself be formalized or equivalently mechanized somehow, for example having a multi-tape
TM with a denial on the lower tape, and acceptance on a higher tape that accesses an oracle. So this order-1 oracle
machine will be our new model for agent X. However, one can construct a Whitely sentence P (1)(X) for X modelled
as an oracle-1 machine, and repeat the above argument, for X perceiving the truth of this sentence. Relativizing
this procedure, we construct ever more powerful oracle machines, going up the jump hierarchy, and iterating farther
into transﬁnite ordinals, and even uncountable regular cardinals [22]. In each case, X modeled as these machines still
makes the intuitve jump, because if it didn’t, we would call it a (higher-order) zombie. Whereas the very character
of a machine must be changed as we climb up the jump hierarchy, the consciousness of X seems essentially to be
the same thing, as it jumps up or hops outside endlessly. It has the magical inﬁnitely, meta-expansive plasticity that
seems to be the essence of conscious understanding, as against mechanized assimilation by an automaton.
IX.
MIND AND MAGIC: POSSIBLE RAMIFICATIONS FOR AI, PHYSICS AND NEUROSCIENCE
Without going into details, we may assume that the relation between the physical aspect and the mind of human
agents is causal both ways, i.e., that each inﬂuences the other. We may deduce that there are oracles located in the
brain, that serve as gateways through which λ(1) and higher inﬂuences can ﬂow into the physical system, to produce
deviations from L(0) laws, giving rise to free will in the physical plane. Since our conscious actions are arguably
not more powerful than TMs, it follows that the inﬂuence of these brain oracles must occur at a subconscious or
unconscious level. Therefore, the only failsafe way to access this super-Turing computational capacity involved in a
person’s free choice is to present the person with the choice, and allow him to react spontaneously. To use a Biblical
allusion, there was no way to compute what Adam’s reaction would be to the injuction forbidding him to eat the
apple in the forest of Eden, except by putting him physically in the forest and forbidding him! From a computational
perspective, every instance of free choice is a miracle! These observations have various ramiﬁcations discussed below.
Our model leads naturally to a Cartesian mind-body dichotomy, where the mind is indeﬁnitely layered into increasing
levels of uncomputability. Since the conscious body/mind is no more powerful than TMs, the entirety of the human
Consciousness cannot be consciously grasped through a ﬁnitary reasoning process, and must be done intuitively.
From the perspective of the physical world, the actions of a free-willed agent are not always predictable, without
being random. Mathematically, free choice can be described probabilistically as in Eq. (4) of the FUN model, where
probability arises through unknowability. Any AI algorithm or neural network system, being no more powerful than
Turing machines, can never in general simulate a free choice of human or presumably even an animal or, in general,
any entity ‘viviﬁed by a soul’. Thus Consciousness, of which intuitive thought and FW are aspects, must also be also
unsimulable, in contradistinction to the premise of Strong AI.
It seems possible that phenomena like savantism or the pattern recognition in the brain make use of the higher
computational capacity attributed to the subconscious mind in our model. There must be something special in the
structure of the brain that allows an interface with a subconscious oracle, a point that we discuss elsewhere [3]. We
venture that the above phenomena are windows on that structure.
The free-willed human being is not an isolated entity, but part of the universe. If FW has the above implications
for the physics of the human brain, this must have some implications, signiﬁcant or otherwise, for the physics of
the universe at large. If we extrapolate the above of hierarchy of laws to the large scale, then the grand uniﬁed
theory (GUT), when discovered, will be simply be the tip of an indeﬁnite hierarchy of meta-theories. We can then
ask whether a notion of FW can, in a sense, be considered on a larger, cosmological scale. Perhaps spontanenous
symmetry breaking and even the Big Bang, were possibly free choices by the ‘mind of the universe’. Finally, given
the greater computability supported the higher-order laws, it is impossible for physical laws to ‘compute’ them into
existence. Thus the Big Bang may well be the ‘ground zero’ of a Bigger Bang followed by a Turing cascade!
X.
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS
We highlighted the logical paradoxes encountered in deﬁning FW and understanding its role in physics. We highlight
our main conclusions. A principal conclusion is that like the concept of truth in Tarski’s undeﬁnability theorem, free
will is also meta-theoretic: it correlates freedom to deviate from physical law in a base theory to parameters of ‘will’
in a meta-theory. Next, we pointed out that this meta-theoretic coupling must be continued inﬁnitely in order to
construct the FW that we intuitively associate with sentient agents. Third, the meta-theories are shown to correspond
to a hierarchy of uncomputability. A consequence is that free will is uncomputable to inﬁnite degree, in the sense
that for a meta-theory at any ﬁnite order, there will deviations from its laws that are uncomputable in it. We justify
this link between causality and computability by revisiting self-referential logical paradoxes that serve as the basis

8
for theorems of G¨odel-Tarski kind. Finally, we present a reﬁnement of an anti-mechanist argument for consciousness
based on these theorems.
[1] L. Zagzebski. Free will and foreknowledge, in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by E. N. Zalta (2011), URL
plato.stanford.edu/entries/free-will-foreknowledge/.
[2] T.
O’Connor.
Free
will,
in
Stanford
Encyclopedia
of
Philosophy,
edited
by
E.
N.
Zalta
(2010),
URL
plato.stanford.edu/entries/freewill/.
[3] H. Hanaan and R. Srikanth, On the neurological basis of free will: Locating the G¨odel oracle (2013), under preparation.
[4] Chetan S. Mandayam Nayakar, S. Omkar, R. Srikanth. Consciousness, Libertarian Free Will and Quantum Randomness, in
Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Consciousness and the Self (Eds. S. Menon, A. Sinha and B. V. Sreekantan) pp 307-323
(Springer 2014).
[5] V. Vedral, New Scientist 18 November, 55 (2006).
[6] A. Zeilinger (2006), interview in Die Weltwoche, Ausagabe 48/05.
[7] G. ’t Hooft (2007), quant-ph/0701097.
[8] N. Gisin (2010), arXiv:1011.3440.
[9] H. Everett, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 454 (1957).
[10] J. Conway and S. Kochen, Found. Phys. 36, 1441 (2006), arXiv:quant-ph/0604079.
[11] J. Conway and S. Kochen, Amer. Math. Soc. 56, 2 (2008).
[12] N. Gisin, arXiv:1002.1392 (2010).
[13] R. Tumulka, Found. Phys. 37, 186197 (2007).
[14] S. Goldstein, D. V. Tausk, R. Tumulka, and N. Zanghi (2007), arXiv:0905.4641.
[15] A. Suarez (2010), arxiv:1002.2697.
[16] M. J. W. Hall, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 250404 (2010).
[17] A. Suarez (2008), arxiv:0804.0871.
[18] J. F. Clauser, M. A. Horne, A. Shimony, and R. A. Holt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 23, 880 (1969).
[19] A. Suarez (2010), arxiv:1006.2485.
[20] H. B. Enderton (Stanford University, 2008).
[21] M. Davis, Computability and Unsolvability (Dover, 1982).
[22] R. A. Shore and T. A. Slaman, Math. Res. Lett. 6, 711722 (1999).
[23] A. Valentini, Pramana - J. Phys. 59, 269 (2002).
[24] K. G¨odel, Monatshefte f¨ur Mathematik und Physik 38 (1931).
[25] A. Tarski, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 4 (1944).
[26] J.
Megill,
in
Internet
Enclopedia
of
Philosophy,
edited
by
J.
Fieser
and
B.
Dowden
(2012),
URL
www.iep.utm.edu/lp-argue.
[27] J. R. Lucas, The Freedom of the Will (Oxford University Press, 1970).
[28] R. Penrose, The Emperor’s New Mind (Oxford University Press, 1989).
[29] R. Penrose, Shadows of the Mind (Oxford University Press, 1994).
[30] H. Putnam, in Dimensions of Mind. A Symposium, edited by S. Hook (London: Collier-Macmillan, 1960).
[31] P. Benacerraf, Monist 51, 9 (1967)).
[32] C. Whiteley, Philosophy 37, 61 (1962).
[33] D. M. Mackay, Mind 69, 31 (1960).
[34] R. Srikanth, Uncomputability, causality and cognition (2013), under preparation.
