Creative AI Through Evolutionary Computation
Risto Miikkulainen
Te University of Texas at Austin
and Cognizant Technology Solutions
ABSTRACT
Te main power of artiﬁcial intelligence is not in modeling what
we already know, but in creating solutions that are new. Such
solutions exist in extremely large, high-dimensional, and complex
search spaces. Population-based search techniques, i.e. variants of
evolutionary computation, are well suited to ﬁnding them. Tese
techniques are also well positioned to take advantage of large-
scale parallel computing resources, making creative AI through
evolutionary computation the likely ”next deep learning”.
ARTICLE
In the last decade or so we have seen tremendous progress in Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence (AI). AI is now in the real world, powering
applications that have a large practical impact. Most of it is based
on modeling, i.e. machine learning of statistical models that make
it possible to predict what the right decision might be in future
situations. For example, we now have object recognition, speech
recognition, game playing, language understanding, and machine
translation systems that rival human performance, and in many
cases exceed it [8, 9, 20]. In each of these cases, massive amounts
of supervised data exists, specifying the right answer to each input
case. With the massive amounts of computation that is now avail-
able, it is possible to train neural networks to take advantage of the
data. Terefore, AI works great in tasks where we already know
what needs to be done.
Te next step for AI is machine creativity. Beyond modeling there
is a large number of tasks where the correct, or even good, solutions
are not known, but need to be discovered. For instance designing
engineering solutions that perform well at low costs, or web pages
that serve the users well, or even growth recipes for agriculture
in controlled greenhouses are all tasks where human expertise is
scarce and good solutions diﬃcult to come by [4, 7, 11, 12, 18].
Methods for machine creativity have existed for decades. I believe
we are now in a similar situation as deep learning was a few years
ago: with the million-fold increase in computational power, those
methods can now be used to scale up to real-world tasks.
Evolutionary computation is in a unique position to take ad-
vantage of that power, and become the next deep learning. To see
why, let us consider how humans tackle a creative task, such as
engineering design. A typical process starts with an existing design,
perhaps an earlier one that needs to be improved or extended, or a
design for a related task. Te designer then makes changes to this
solution and evaluates them. S/he keeps those changes that work
well and discards those that do not, and iterates. It terminates when
a desired level of performance is met, or when no beter solutions
can be found—at which point the process may be started again
from a diﬀerent initial solution. Such a process can be described
as a hill-climbing process (Figure 1a). With good initial insight it
is possible to ﬁnd good solutions, but much of the space remains
unexplored and many good solutions may be missed.
Interestingly, current machine learning methods are also based
on hill-climbing. Neural networks and deep learning follow a gradi-
ent that is computed based on known examples of desired behavior
[14, 22]. Te gradient speciﬁes how the neural network should be
adjusted to make it perform slightly beter, but it also does not have
a global view of the landscape, i.e. where to start and which hill to
climb. Similarly, reinforcement learning starts with an individual
solution and then explores modiﬁcations around that solution, in
order to estimate the gradient [21, 26]. With large enough networks
and datasets and computing power, these methods have achieved
remarkable successes in recent years.
However, the search landscape in creative tasks is likely to be less
amenable to hill climbing (Figure 1b). Tere are three challenges:
(1) Te space is large, consisting of too many possible solutions
to be explored fully, even with multiple restarts; (2) the space is
high-dimensional, requiring that good values are found for many
variables at once; and (3) the space is deceptive, consisting of multi-
ple peaks and valleys, making it diﬃcult to make progress through
local search.
Evolutionary computation, as a population-based search tech-
nique, is in a unique position to meet these challenges. First, it
makes it possible to explore many areas of the search space at once.
In eﬀect, evolution performs multiple parallel searches, not a sin-
gle hill-climb. By itself such parallel search would result in only
a linear improvement, however, the main advantage is that the
searches interact: if there is a good partial solution found in one
of the searches, the others can immediately take advantage of it as
well. Tat is, evolution ﬁnds building blocks, or schemas, or step-
ping stones, that are then combined to form beter comprehensive
solutions [5, 10, 17].
Tis approach can be highly eﬀective, as shown e.g. in the mul-
tiplexer benchmark problem [13]. Multiplexers are easy to design
algorithmically: the task is to output the bit (among 2n choices)
speciﬁed by an n-bit address. However, as a search problem in the
space of logical operations they grow very quickly, as 22n+2n
. Tere
is, however, structure in that space that evolution can discover and
utilize eﬀectively. It turns out that evolution can discover solutions
in extremely large such cases, including the 70-bit multiplexer (i.e.
n = 6) with a search space of at least 2270 states. It is hard to con-
ceptualize a number that large, but to give an idea, imagine having
the number printed on a 10pt font on a piece of paper. It would
take light 95 years to traverse from the beginning to the end of that
number.
Second, population-based search makes it possible to ﬁnd solu-
tions in extremely high-dimensional search spaces as well. Whereas
it is very diﬃcult to build a model with high-order interactions be-
yond pairs or triples, the population represents such interactions
arXiv:1901.03775v2  [cs.NE]  22 Feb 2020

(a) Search Space Appropriate for Hill-Climbing
(a) Search Space in a Creative Domain
Figure 1: Challenge of Creative Problem Solving.
Human design process as well as deep learning and reinforcement
learning can be seen as hill-climbing processes.
Tey work well as long as the search space is relatively small, low-
dimensional, and well behaved. However, creative problems where solutions are not known may require search in a large,
high-dimensional spaces with many local optima. Population-based search through evolutionary computation is well-suited
for such problems: it discovers and utilizes partial solutions, searches along multiple objectives, and novelty. (Image credit:
http://deap.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/benchmarks.html)
implicitly, as the collection of actual combinations of values that
exist in the good solutions in the population. Recombination of
those solutions then makes it possible to collect good values for a
large number of dimensions at once.
As an example, consider the problem of designing an optimal
schedule for metal casting [3]. Tere are variables for number of
each type of object to be made in each heat (i.e. melting process).
Te number of objects and heats can be grown from a few dozen,
which can be solved with standard methods, to tens of thousands,
resulting in billion variables. Yet, utilizing an initialization process
and operators customized to exploit the structure in the problem, it
is possible to ﬁnd good combinations for them, i.e. ﬁnd near-optimal
solutions in a billion-dimensional space. Given that most search
and optimization methods are limited to six orders of magnitude
fewer variables, this scaleup makes it possible to apply optimization
to entire new category of problems.
Tird, population-based search can be adapted naturally to prob-
lems that are highly deceptive. One approach is to utilize multiple
objectives [2]: if search gets stuck in one dimension, it is possible
to make progress among other dimensions, and thereby get around
deception. Another approach is to emphasize novelty, or diversity,
of solutions in search [25]. Te search does not simply try to maxi-
mize ﬁtness, but also favors solutions that are diﬀerent from those
that already exist. Novelty can be expressed as part of ﬁtness, or a
separate objective, or serve as a minimum criterion for selection,
or as a criterion for mate selection and survival [1, 6, 15, 16, 19].
For instance, in the composite novelty method [23], diﬀerent
objectives are deﬁned for diﬀerent aspects of performance, and
combined so that they specify an area of search space with useful
tradeoﬀs. Novelty is then used as the basis for selection and sur-
vival within this area. Tis method was illustrated in the problem
of designing minimal sorting networks, which have to sort a set
of n numbers correctly, but also consist of as few comparator el-
ements as possible (which swap two numbers), and as few layers
as possible (where comparisons can be performed in parallel). Te
search space is highly deceptive in that ofen the network structure
needs to be changed substantially to make it smaller. Combining
multiple objectives and novelty results in beter solutions, and ﬁnds
them faster, than traditional evolution, multiobjective evolution,
and novelty search alone. Te approach has already found a new
minimal network for 20 inputs [24], and is now being extended to
larger networks.
To conclude, evolutionary computation is an AI technology that
is on the verge of a breakthrough, as a way to take machine creativ-
ity to the real world. Like deep learning, it can take advantage of the
large amount of compute that is now becoming available. Because
it is a population-based search method, it can scale with compute
beter than other machine learning approaches, which are largely
based on hill-climbing. With evolution, we should see many appli-
cations in the near future where human creativity is augmented
by evolutionary search in discovering complex solutions, such as
those in engineering, healthcare, agriculture, ﬁnancial technology,
biotechnology, and e-commerce, resulting in more complex and
more powerful solutions than are currently possible.
