Bias in Data-driven AI Systems -
An Introductory Survey
Eirini Ntoutsia, Pavlos Fafaliosb, Ujwal Gadirajua, Vasileios Iosiﬁdisa,
Wolfgang Nejdla, Maria-Esther Vidalc, Salvatore Ruggierid, Franco Turinid,
Symeon Papadopoulose, Emmanouil Krasanakise, Ioannis Kompatsiarise,
Katharina Kinder-Kurlandaf, Claudia Wagnerf, Fariba Karimif, Miriam
Fernandezg, Harith Alanig, Bettina Berendth, Tina Kruegeli, Christian Heinzei,
Klaus Broelemannj, Gjergji Kasnecij, Thanassis Tiropanisk, Steﬀen Staaba,k,l
Article Type:
Overview
Abstract
AI-based systems are widely employed nowadays to make decisions that have far-reaching
impacts on individuals and society. Their decisions might aﬀect everyone, everywhere and
anytime, entailing concerns about potential human rights issues. Therefore, it is necessary
to move beyond traditional AI algorithms optimized for predictive performance and embed

bInstitute of Computer Science, FORTH-ICS, Greece
cTIB Leibniz Information Centre For Science and Tecnhnology, Hannover, Germany
dKDDLAB, Dipartimento di Informatica, Universit`a di Pisa, Italy
eInformation Technologies Institute, CERTH, Thessaloniki, Greece
fGESIS Leibniz Institute for the Social Sciences, Cologne, German
gKnowledge Media Institute, The Open University, Milton Keynes, UK
hFaculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, TU Berlin, Germany, and Department of
Computer Science, KU Leuven, Belgium
iInstitute for Legal Informatics, Leibniz University of Hanover, Germany
jInnovation Lab, SCHUFA Holding AG, Wiesbaden, Germany
kElectronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, UK
lIPVS, Universit¨at Stuttgart, Germany
1
arXiv:2001.09762v1  [cs.CY]  14 Jan 2020

ethical and legal principles in their design, training and deployment to ensure social good
while still beneﬁting from the huge potential of the AI technology. The goal of this survey
is to provide a broad multi-disciplinary overview of the area of bias in AI systems, focusing
on technical challenges and solutions as well as to suggest new research directions towards
approaches well-grounded in a legal frame. In this survey, we focus on data-driven AI, as a
large part of AI is powered nowadays by (big) data and powerful Machine Learning (ML)
algorithms. If otherwise not speciﬁed, we use the general term bias to describe problems
related to the gathering or processing of data that might result in prejudiced decisions on
the bases of demographic features like race, sex, etc.
Introduction
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) algorithms are widely employed by businesses, governments, and
other organisations in order to make decisions that have far-reaching impacts on individuals
and society.
Their decisions might inﬂuence everyone, everywhere and anytime, oﬀering
solutions to problems faced in diﬀerent disciplines or in daily life, but at the same time
entailing risks like being denied a job or a medical treatment. The discriminative impact
of AI-based decision making to certain population groups has been already observed in a
variety of cases. For instance, the COMPAS system for predicting the risk of re-oﬀending
was found to predict higher risk values for black defendants (and lower for white ones) than
their actual risk (Angwin, Larson, Mattu, & Kirchner, 2016) (racial-bias). In another case,
Google’s Ads tool for targeted advertising was found to serve signiﬁcantly fewer ads for high
paid jobs to women than to men (Datta, Tschantz, & Datta, 2015) (gender-bias). Such
incidents have led to an ever increasing public concern about the impact of AI in our lives.
Bias is not a new problem rather “bias is as old as human civilization” and “it is hu-
man nature for members of the dominant majority to be oblivious to the experiences of other
groups”.1 However, AI-based decision making may magnify pre-existing biases and evolve
new classiﬁcations and criteria with huge potential for new types of biases.
These con-
stantly increasing concerns have led to a reconsideration of AI-based systems towards new
approaches that also address the fairness of their decisions. In this paper, we survey recent
technical approaches on bias and fairness in AI-based decision making systems, we discuss
their legal ground2 as well as open challenges and directions towards AI-solutions for societal
good. We divide the works into three broad categories:
• Understanding bias. Approaches that help understand how bias is created in the society
and enters our socio-technical systems, is manifested in the data used by AI algorithms,
and can be modelled and formally deﬁned.
• Mitigating bias. Approaches that tackle bias in diﬀerent stages of AI-decision making,
namely, pre-processing, in-processing and post-processing methods focusing on data
1Fei-Fei Li, Chief-Scientist for AI at Google and Professor at Stanford (http://fortune.com/longform/
ai-bias-problem/).
2The legal discussion in this paper refers primarily to the EU situation. We acknowledge the diﬃculty of
mapping the territory between AI and the law as well as the extra complexity that country-speciﬁc legislation
brings upon and therefore, we believe this is one of the important areas for future work.
2

UNDERSTANDING BIAS
Socio-technical causes of bias
•Data generation
•Data collection
•Institutional bias
Bias manifestation in data
•Sensitive features & causal inferences
•Data representativeness
•Data modalities
•Similarity-based
•Causal reasoning
•Predicted outcome
•Predicted & actual outcome
•Predicted probabilities & 
actual outcome
Fairness definition
MITIGATING BIAS
Pre-processing
•Instance class modification
•Instance selection
•Instance weighting
In-processing
•Classification model adaptation
•Regularization / Loss function s.t. constraints
•Latent fair classes
Post-processing
•Confidence/probability score corrections
•Promoting/demoting boundary decisions
•Wrapping a fair classifier on top of a black-box baselearner
ACCOUNTING FOR BIAS
Bias-aware data collection
•Bias elicitation: individual assessors, mathematical 
pooling, group elicitation, consensus building
•Crowdsourcing
Describing and modelling bias
•Description and causal logics
•Ontological formalisms and reasoning
Explaining AI decisions
•Model explanation by approximation
•Inherently interpretable models
•Local behaviour explanation
LEGAL ISSUES
Regulations provisions
•Data accuracy (GDPR)
•Equality, prohibition of 
discrimination (CFR-EU)
Are data modifications legal?
•Intellectual Property issues
•Legal basis for data/model 
modification
Application of existing rules
•Applicability to algorithmic 
decision-making
•Limited scope of anti-
discrimination law. Indirect 
discrimination
Figure 1: Overview of topics discussed in this survey.
inputs, learning algorithms and model outputs, respectively.
• Accounting for bias. Approaches that account for bias proactively, via bias-aware data
collection, or retroactively, by explaining AI-decisions in human terms.
Figure 1 provides a visual map of the topics discussed in this survey.
This paper complements existing surveys that either have a strong focus on machine
ethics, such as (Yu et al., 2018), study a speciﬁc sub-problem, such as explaining black box
models (Guidotti et al., 2019; Atzmueller, 2017), or focus in speciﬁc contexts, such as the
Web (Baeza-Yates, 2018), by providing a broad categorisation of the technical challenges
and solutions, a comprehensive coverage of the diﬀerent lines of research as well as their
legal grounds.
We are aware that the problems of bias and discrimination are not limited to AI and that
the technology can be deployed (consciously or unconsciously) in ways that reﬂect, amplify
or distort real world perception and status quo. Therefore, as the roots to these problems
are not only technological, it is naive to believe that technological solutions will suﬃce.
Rather, more than technical solutions are required including socially acceptable deﬁnitions
of fairness and meaningful interventions to ensure the long-term well-being of all groups.
These challenges require multi-disciplinary perspectives and a constant dialogue with the
society as bias and fairness are multifaceted and volatile. Nevertheless, as the AI technology
penetrates in our lives, it is extremely important for technology creators to be aware of bias
and discrimination and to ensure responsible usage of the technology, keeping in mind that
a technological approach on its own is not a panacea for all sort of bias and AI problems.
Understanding Bias
Bias is an old concept in Machine Learning (ML), traditionally referring to the assumptions
made by a speciﬁc model (inductive bias) (Mitchell, 1997). A classical example is Occam’s
3

razor preference for the simplest hypothesis. With respect to human bias, its many facets
have been studied by many disciplines including psychology, ethnography, law, etc. In this
survey, we consider as bias the inclination or prejudice of a decision made by an AI system
which is for or against one person or group, especially in a way considered to be unfair. Given
this deﬁnition, we focus on how bias enters AI systems and how it is manifested in the data
comprising the input to AI algorithms. Tackling bias entails answering the question how
to deﬁne fairness such that it can be considered in AI systems; we discuss diﬀerent fairness
notions employed by existing solutions. Finally, we close this section with legal implications
of data collection and bias deﬁnitions.
Socio-technical causes of bias
AI relies heavily on data generated by humans (e.g., user-generated content) or collected
via systems created by humans. Therefore, whatever biases exist in humans enter our sys-
tems and even worse, they are ampliﬁed due to the complex sociotechnical systems, such
as the Web.3 As a result, algorithms may reproduce (or even increase) existing inequalities
or discriminations (Karimi, G´enois, Wagner, Singer, & Strohmaier, 2018). Within societies,
certain social groups may be disadvantaged, which usually results in “institutional bias”
where there is a tendency for the procedures and practices of particular institutions to op-
erate in ways in which some social groups are being advantaged and others disadvantaged.
This need not be the result of conscious discrimination but rather of the majority following
existing norms. Institutional racism and sexism are common examples (Chandler & Mun-
day, 2011). Algorithms are part of existing (biased) institutions and structures, but they
may also amplify or introduce bias as they favour those phenomena and aspects of human
behaviour that are easily quantiﬁable over those which are hard or even impossible to mea-
sure. This problem is exacerbated by the fact that certain data may be easier to access
and analyse than others, which has caused, for example, the role of Twitter for various
societal phenomena to be overemphasized (Tufekci, 2014). Once introduced, algorithmic
systems encourage the creation of very speciﬁc data collection infrastructures and policies,
for example, they may suggest tracking and surveillance (Introna & Wood, 2004) which then
change or amplify power relations. Algorithms thus shape societal institutions and potential
interventions, and vice versa. It is currently not entirely clear, how this complex interaction
between algorithms and structures plays out in our societies. Scholars have thus called for
“algorithmic accountability” to improve understanding of the power structures, biases, and
inﬂuences that algorithms exercise in society (Diakopoulos, 2015).
How is bias manifested in data?
Bias can be manifested in (multi-modal) data through sensitive features and their causal
inﬂuences, or through under/over-representation of certain groups.
3The Web Science Manifesto - By Web Scientists. Building Web Science. For a Better World, https://
www.webscience.org/manifesto/
4

Sensitive features and causal inﬂuences
Data encode a number of people characteristics in the form of feature values. Sensitive char-
acteristics that identify grounds of discrimination or bias may be present or not. Removing
or ignoring such sensitive features does not prevent learning biased models, because other
correlated features (also known as redundant encodings) may be used as proxies for them.
For example, neighbourhoods in US cities are highly correlated with race, and this fact has
been used for systematic denial of services such as bank loans or same-day purchase delivery.4
Rather, including sensitive features in data may be beneﬁcial in the design of fair models
(Zliobaite & Custers, 2016). Sensitive features may also be correlated with the target feature
that classiﬁcation models want to predict. For example, a minority’s preference for red cars
may induce bias against the minority in predicting accident rate if red cars are also preferred
by aggressive drivers. Higher insurance premium may then be set for red car owners, which
disproportionately impacts on minority members. Simple correlation between apparently
neutral features can then lead to biased decisions. Discovering and understanding causal
inﬂuences among variables is a fundamental tool for dealing with bias, as recognised in the
legal circles (Foster, 2004) and in medical research (Grimes & Schulz, 2002). The interested
reader is referred to the recent survey on causal approaches to fairness in classiﬁcation models
(Loftus, Russell, Kusner, & Silva, 2018).
Representativeness of data
Statistical (including ML) inferences require that the data from which the model was learned
be representative of the data on which it is applied. However, data collection often suﬀers
from biases that lead to the over- or under-representation of certain groups, especially in big
data, where many data sets have not been created with the rigour of a statistical study, but
they are the by-product of other activities with diﬀerent, often operational, goals (Barocas
& Selbst, 2016). Frequently occurring biases include selection bias (certain individuals are
more likely to be selected for study), often as self-selection bias, and the reverse exclusion
bias; reporting bias (observations of a certain kind are more likely to be reported, which
leads to a sort of selection bias on observations); and detection bias (a phenomenon is more
likely to be observed for a particular set of subjects). Analogous biases can lead to under-
or over-representations of properties of individuals, e.g., (Boyd & Crawford, 2012). If the
mis-represented groups coincide with social groups against which there already exists social
bias such as prejudice or discrimination, even “unbiased computational processes can lead to
discriminative decision procedures” (Calders & Zliobaite, 2013). Mis-representation in the
data can lead to vicious cycles that perpetuate discrimination and disadvantage (Barocas
& Selbst, 2016).
Such “pernicious feedback loops” (O’Neil, 2016) can occur with both
under-representation of historically disadvantaged groups, e.g., women and people of colour
in IT developer communities and image datasets (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018), and with
over-representation, e.g., black people in drug-related arrests (Lum & Isaac, 2016).
4Amazon doesn’t consider the race of its customers. Should It? https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/
2016-amazon-same-day/
5

Data modalities and bias
Data comes in diﬀerent modalities (numerical, textual, images, etc.) as well as in multimodal
representations (e.g., audio-visual content). Most of the fairness-aware ML approaches re-
fer to structured data represented in some ﬁxed feature space. Data modality-speciﬁc ap-
proaches also exist, especially for textual data and images. Bias in language has attracted
a lot of recent interest with many studies exposing a large number of oﬀensive associations
related to gender and race on publicly available word embeddings (Bolukbasi, Chang, Zou,
Saligrama, & Kalai, 2016) as well as how these associations have evolved over time (Kutuzov,
Øvrelid, Szymanski, & Velldal, 2018). Similarly for the computer vision community where
standard image collections like MNIST are exploited for training, or oﬀ-the-shelf pre-trained
models are used as feature extractors, assuming the collections comprise representative sam-
ples of the real world. In reality, though, the collections can be biased as many recent studies
have indicated. For instance, (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018) have found that commercial facial
recognition services perform much better on lighter male subjects than darker female ones.
Overall, the additional layer of feature extraction that is typically used within AI-based
multimodal analysis systems makes it even more challenging to trace the source of bias in
such systems.
How is fairness deﬁned?
More than 20 diﬀerent deﬁnitions of fairness have appeared thus far in the computer science
literature (Verma & Rubin, 2018; Zliobaite, 2017); and some of these deﬁnitions and others
were proposed and investigated in work on formalizing fairness from other disciplines, such
as education, over the past 50 years (Hutchinson & Mitchell, 2019). Existing fairness deﬁni-
tions can be categorized into: (i) “predicted outcome”, (ii) “predicted and actual outcome”,
(iii) “predicted probabilities and actual outcome”, (iv) “similarity based” and (v) “causal
reasoning” (Verma & Rubin, 2018). “Predicted outcome” deﬁnitions solely rely on a model’s
predictions (e.g., demographic parity checks the percentage of protected and non-protected
groups in the positive class). “Predicted and actual outcome” combine a model’s predic-
tions with the true labels (e.g., equalized odds requires false positive and negative rates to
be similar amongst protected and non-protected groups). “Predicted probabilities and ac-
tual outcome” employ the predicted probabilities instead of the predicted outcomes (e.g.,
good calibration requires the true positive probabilities between protected and non-protected
groups to be the same). Contrary to deﬁnitions (i)-(iii) that only consider the sensitive
attribute, “similarity based” deﬁnitions also employ non-sensitive attributes (e.g., fairness
through awareness states that similar individuals must be treated equally). Finally, “causal
reasoning” deﬁnitions are based on directed acyclic graphs that capture relations between
features and their impact on the outcomes by structural equations (e.g., counterfactual fair-
ness (Kusner, Loftus, Russell, & Silva, 2017) constructs a graph that veriﬁes whether the
attributes deﬁning the outcome are correlated to the sensitive attribute).
Despite the many formal, mathematical deﬁnitions of fairness proposed over the last
years the problem of formalising fairness is still open as well as the discussion about the
merits and demerits of the diﬀerent measures. (Corbett-Davies & Goel, 2018) show the
statistical limitations of prevailing mathematical deﬁnitions of fairness and the (negative)
6

eﬀect of enforcing such fairness-measures on group well-being and urge the community to
explicitly focus on consequences of potential interventions.
Legal issues of bias and fairness in AI
Taking into account the variety of bias creation in AI systems and its impact on society,
the question arises whether the law should provide regulations for non-discriminatory AI-
based decision making. Generally speaking, existing EU regulation comes into play when
(discriminatory) decisions have been taken, while provisions tackling the quality of selected
data are rare. For the earlier, the control of discriminatory decisions, the principle of equality
and the prohibition of discrimination (Art. 20, 21 EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, Art.
4 Directive 2004/113 and other directives) apply. However, these provisions only address
discrimination on the basis of speciﬁc criteria and require prima facie evidence of a less
favourable treatment on grounds of a prohibited criterion, which will often be diﬃcult to
establish (Hacker, 2018). For the latter, the control of the quality of the selected data, with
respect to “personal data” Art. 5 (1) GDPR,5 stipulates “the principle of data accuracy”
which, however, does not hinder wrongful or disproportionate selection. With respect to
automated decision-making (Art. 22 GDPR), recital 71 only points out that appropriate
mathematical or statistical procedures shall be used and that discriminatory eﬀects shall be
prevented. While the eﬀectiveness of Art. 22 GDPR is uncertain (Zuiderveen Borgesius,
2018) it provides some safeguards, such as restrictions on the use of automated decision-
making, and, where it is used, a right to transparency, to obtain human intervention and to
contest the decision. Finally, some provisions in area-speciﬁc legislation can be found, e.g.,
Art. 12 Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 for European statistics.
Mitigating Bias
Approaches for bias mitigation can be categorised into: i) pre-processing methods focusing
on the data, ii) in-processing methods focusing on the ML algorithm, and iii) post-processing
methods focusing on the ML model. We conclude the section with a discussion on the legal
issues of bias mitigation.
Pre-processing approaches
Approaches in this category focus on the data, the primary source of bias, aiming to produce
a “balanced” dataset that can then be fed into any learning algorithm. The intuition behind
these approaches is that the fairer the training data is, the less discriminative the resulting
model will be. Such methods modify the original data distribution by altering class labels
of carefully selected instances close to the decision boundary (Kamiran & Calders, 2009) or
in local neighbourhoods (Luong, Ruggieri, & Turini, 2011), by assigning diﬀerent weights
to instances based on their group membership (Calders, Kamiran, & Pechenizkiy, 2009) or
by carefully sampling from each group. These methods use heuristics aiming to balance
the protected and unprotected groups in the training set; however, their impact is not well
5The General Data Protection Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR), https://gdpr-info.eu/
7

controlled despite their eﬀorts for minimal data interventions. Recently, (Calmon, Wei, Vin-
zamuri, Ramamurthy, & Varshney, 2017) proposed a probabilistic fairness-aware framework
that alters the data distribution towards fairness while controlling the per-instance distortion
and by preserving data utility for learning.
In-processing approaches
In-processing approaches reformulate the classiﬁcation problem by explicitly incorporating
the model’s discrimination behaviour in the objective function through regularization or
constraints, or by training on latent target labels. For example, (Kamiran, Calders, & Pech-
enizkiy, 2010) modify the splitting criterion of decision trees to also consider the impact
of the split w.r.t. the protected attribute. (Kamishima, Akaho, Asoh, & Sakuma, 2012)
integrate a regularizer to reduce the eﬀect of “indirect prejudice” (mutual information be-
tween the sensitive features and class labels). (Dwork, Hardt, Pitassi, Reingold, & Zemel,
2012) redeﬁne the classiﬁcation problem by minimizing an arbitrary loss function subject to
the individual fairness-constraint (similar individuals are treated similarly). (Zafar, Valera,
Gomez-Rodriguez, & Gummadi, 2017) propose a constraint-based approach for disparate
mistreatment (deﬁned in terms of misclassiﬁcation rates) which can be incorporated into
logistic-regression and SVMs. In a diﬀerent direction, (Krasanakis, Xiouﬁs, Papadopoulos,
& Kompatsiaris, 2018) assume the existence of latent fair classes and propose an iterative
training approach towards those classes which alters the in-training weights of the instances.
(Iosiﬁdis & Ntoutsi, 2019) propose a sequential fair ensemble, AdaFair, that extends the
weighted distribution approach of AdaBoost by also considering the cumulative fairness of
the learner up to the current boosting round and moreover, it optimises for balanced error
instead of overall error to account for class imbalance.
While most of the in-processing approaches refer to classiﬁcation, approaches for the un-
supervised case have also emerged recently, for example, the fair-PCA approach of (Samadi,
Tantipongpipat, Morgenstern, Singh, & Vempala, 2018) that forces equal reconstruction
errors for both protected and unprotected groups. (Chierichetti, Kumar, Lattanzi, & Vas-
silvitskii, 2017) formulate the problem of fair clustering as having approximately equal rep-
resentation for each protected group in every cluster and deﬁne fair-variants of classical
k-means and k-medoids algorithms.
Post-processing approaches
The third strategy is to post-process the classiﬁcation model once it has been learned from
data. This consists of altering the model’s internals (white-box approaches) or its predic-
tions (black-box approaches). Examples of the white-box approach consist of correcting the
conﬁdence of CPAR classiﬁcation rules (Pedreschi, Ruggieri, & Turini, 2009), probabilities
in Na¨ıve Bayes models (Calders & Verwer, 2010), or the class label at leaves of decision trees
(Kamiran et al., 2010). White-box approaches have not been further developed in recent
years, being superseded by in-processing methods. Examples of the black-box approach aim
at keeping proportionality of decisions among protected vs unprotected groups by promot-
ing or demoting predictions close to the decision boundary (Kamiran, Mansha, Karim, &
Zhang, 2018), by diﬀerentiating the decision boundary itself over groups (Hardt, Price, &
8

Srebro, 2016), or by wrapping a fair classiﬁer on top of a black-box base classiﬁer (Agarwal,
Beygelzimer, Dud´ık, Langford, & Wallach, 2018). An analysis of how to post-process group-
wise calibrated classiﬁers under fairness constraints is given in (Canetti et al., 2019). While
the majority of approaches are concerned with classiﬁcation models, bias post-processing
has been deemed as relevant when interpreting clustering models as well (Lorimer, Held, &
Stoop, 2017).
Legal issues of mitigating bias
Pertinent legal questions involve whether modiﬁcations of data as envisaged by the pre-and
in-processing approaches, as well as altering the model in the post-processing approach,
could be considered lawful. Besides intellectual property issues that might occur, there is no
general legal provision dealing with the way data is collected, selected or (even) modiﬁed.
Provisions are in place mainly if such training data would (still) be personal data. Modi-
ﬁcations (as well as any other processing) would need a legal basis. However, legitimation
could derive from informed consent (provided that speciﬁc safeguards are met), or could rely
on contract or legitimate interest. Besides, data quality could be relevant in terms of war-
ranties, if a data provider sells data. A speciﬁc issue arises when ‘debiasing’ involves sensitive
data, as under Art. 9 GDPR special category data such as ethnicity often requires explicit
consent (Kilbertus et al., 2018). A possible solution could be Art. 9(2)(g) GDPR which
permits processing for reasons of substantial public interest, which arguably could be seen
in ‘debiasing’. The same grounds of legitimation apply when altering the model. However,
contrary to data modiﬁcation, data protection law would arguably not be applicable here, as
the model would not contain personal data, unless the model is vulnerable to conﬁdentiality
attacks such as model inversion and membership inference (Veale, Binns, & Edwards, 2018).
Accounting for Bias
Algorithmic accountability refers to the assignment of responsibility for how an algorithm is
created and its impact on society (Kaplan, Donovan, Hanson, & Matthews, 2019). In case of
AI algorithms the problem is aggravated as we do not codify the solution, rather the solution
is inferred via machine learning algorithms and complex data. AI accountability has many
facets, we focus below on the most prominent ones that account for bias either proactively,
via bias-aware data collection, or retroactively by explaining AI decisions in human terms;
furthermore, we discuss the importance of describing and documenting bias by means of
formalisms like ontologies.
Proactively: Bias-aware data collection
A variety of methods are adopted for data acquisition to serve diverse needs; these may
be prone to introducing bias at the data collection stage itself, e.g., (Morstatter, Pfeﬀer,
& Liu, 2014). Proposals have been made for a structured approach to bias elicitation in
evidence synthesis, including bias checklists and elicitation tasks that can be performed
either by individual assessors and mathematical pooling, group elicitation and consensus
9

building or hybrid approaches (Turner, Spiegelhalter, Smith, & Thompson, 2009). However,
bias elicitations have themselves been found to be biased even when high quality assessors
are involved and remedies have been proposed (Manzi & Forster, 2018).
Among other methods, crowdsourcing is a popular approach that relies on large-scale
acquisition of human input for dealing with data and label scarcity in ML. Crowdsourced
data and labels may be subject to bias at diﬀerent stages of the process: task design and
experimental setup, task decomposition and result aggregation, selection of workers and
the entailing human factors (Hube, Fetahu, & Gadiraju, 2019; Karger, Oh, & Shah, 2011;
Kamar, Kapoor, & Horvitz, 2015). Mitigating biases in crowdsourced data becomes harder
in subjective tasks, where the presence of varying ideological and cultural backgrounds of
workers means that it is possible to observe biased labels with complete agreement among
the workers.
Describing and modeling bias using ontologies
Accounting for bias not only requires understanding of the diﬀerent sources, i.e., data, knowl-
edge bases, and algorithms, but more importantly, it demands the interpretation and de-
scription of the meaning, potential side eﬀects, provenance, and context of bias. Usually
unbalanced categories are understood as bias and considered as sources of negative side
eﬀects. Nevertheless, skewed distributions may simply hide features or domain character-
istics that, if removed, would hinder the discovery of relevant insights. This situation can
be observed, for instance, in populations of lung cancer patients. As highlighted in diverse
scientiﬁc reports, e.g., (Garrido et al., 2019), lung cancer in women and men has signiﬁcant
diﬀerences such as aetiology, pathophysiology, histology, and risk factors, which may impact
in cancer occurrence, treatment outcomes, and survival. Furthermore, there are speciﬁc orga-
nizations that collaborate in lung cancer prevention and in the battle against smoking; some
of these campaigns are oriented to particular focus groups and the eﬀects of these initiatives
are observed in certain populations. All these facts impact on the gender distribution of the
population and could be interpreted as bias. However, in this context, imbalance reveals
domain speciﬁc facts that need to be preserved in the population, and a formal description
of these uneven distributions should be provided to avoid misinterpretation. Moreover, as
any type of data source, knowledge bases and ontologies can also suﬀer from various types
of bias or knowledge imbalance. For example, the description of the existing mutations of
a gene in a knowledge base like COSMIC,6 or the properties associated with a gene in the
Gene Ontology (GO),7 may be biased by the amount of research that has been conducted in
the diseases associated with these genes. Expressive formal models are demanded in order
to describe and explain the characteristics of a data source and under which conditions or
context, the data source is biased.
Formalisms like description and causal logics, e.g., (Besnard, Cordier, & Moinard, 2014;
Dehaspe & Raedt, 1996; Kr¨otzsch, Marx, Ozaki, & Thost, 2018; LeBlanc, Balduccini, & Ven-
nekens, 2019), allow for measuring and detecting bias in data collections of diverse types, e.g,
online data sets (Pitoura et al., 2017) and recommendation systems (Serbos, Qi, Mamoulis,
6https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic
7http://geneontology.org/
10

Pitoura, & Tsaparas, 2017). They also enable the annotation of statements with trustwor-
thiness (Son, Pontelli, Gelfond, & Balduccini, 2016) and temporality (Ozaki, Kr¨otzsch, &
Rudolph, 2019), as well as causation relationships between them (LeBlanc et al., 2019). On-
tologies also play a relevant role as knowledge representation models for describing universe
of discourses in terms of concepts such as classes, properties, and subsumption relationships,
as well as contextual statements of these concepts. NdFluents (Gim´enez-Garc´ıa, Zimmer-
mann, & Maret, 2017) and Context Ontology Language (CoOL) (Strang, Linnhoﬀ-Popien,
& Frank, 2003), represent exemplar ontology formal models able to express and combine di-
verse contextual dimensions and interrelations (e.g., locality and vicinity). Albeit expressive,
existing logic-based and ontological formalisms are not tailored for representing contextual
bias or diﬀerentiating unbalanced categories that consistently correspond to instances of
a real-world domain. Therefore, expressive ontological formalisms are demanded to repre-
sent the contextual dimensions of various types of sources, e.g., data collections, knowledge
bases, or ontologies, as well as annotations denoting causality and provenance of the rep-
resented knowledge. These formalisms will equip bias detection algorithms with reasoning
mechanisms that not only enhance accuracy but also enable explainability of the meaning,
conditions, origin, and context of bias. Thus, domain modelling using ontologies will support
context-aware bias description and interpretability.
Retroactively: Explaining AI decisions
Explainability refers to the extent the internal mechanics of a learning model can be explained
in human terms. It is often used interchangeably with interpretability, although the latter
refers to whether one can predict what will happen given a change in the model input
or parameters. Although attempts to tackle interpretable ML have existed for some time
(Hoﬀman & Klein, 2017), there has been an exceptional growth of research literature in
the last years with emerging keywords such as explainable AI (Adadi & Berrada, 2018)
and black box explanation (Guidotti et al., 2019).
Many papers propose approaches for
understanding the global logic of a model by building an interpretable classiﬁer able to
mimic the obscure decision system. Generally, these methods are designed for explaining
speciﬁc models, e.g., deep neural networks (Montavon, Samek, & M¨uller, 2018). Only few
are agnostic to the black box model (Henelius, Puolam¨aki, Bostr¨om, Asker, & Papapetrou,
2014). The diﬃculties in explaining black boxes and complex models ex-post, have motivated
proposals of transparent classiﬁers which are interpretable on their own and exhibit predictive
accuracy close to that of obscure models. These include Bayesian models (Li & Huan, 2017),
generalized additive models (Lou, Caruana, Gehrke, & Hooker, 2013), supersparse linear
models (Ustun & Rudin, 2016), rule-based decision sets (Lakkaraju, Bach, & Leskovec,
2016), optimal classiﬁcation trees (Bertsimas & Dunn, 2017), model trees (Broelemann &
Kasneci, 2019) and neural networks with interpretable layers (Zhang, Wu, & Zhu, 2018).
A diﬀerent stream of approaches focuses on the local behavior of a model, searching for
an explanation of the decision made for a speciﬁc instance (Guidotti et al., 2019). Such ap-
proaches are either model-dependent, e.g., Taylor approximations (Kasneci & Gottron, 2016),
saliency masks (the image regions that are mainly responsible for the decision) for neural
network decisions (Ma, Yu, & Yue, 2015), and attention models for recurrent networks (Choi
et al., 2016), or model-agnostic, such as those started by the LIME method (Ribeiro, Singh,
11

& Guestrin, 2016). The main idea is to derive a local explanation for a decision outcome
on a speciﬁc instance by learning an interpretable model from a randomly generated neigh-
bourhood of the instance. A third stream aims at bridging the local and the global ones by
deﬁning a strategy for combining local models in an incremental way (Pedreschi et al., 2019).
More recent work has asked the fundamental question What is an explanation? (Mittelstadt,
Russell, & Wachter, 2019) and reject such usage of the term ‘explanation’, criticizing that it
might be appropriate for a modelling expert, but not for a lay man, and that, for example,
humanities or philosophy have an entirely diﬀerent understanding of what explanations are.
We speculate that there are computational methods that will allow us to ﬁnd some mid-
dle ground. For instance, some approaches in ML, statistical relational learning in particular
(Raedt, Kersting, Natarajan, & Poole, 2016), take the perspective of knowledge represen-
tation and reasoning into account when developing ML models on more formal logical and
statistical grounds. AI knowledge representation has been developing a rich theory of ar-
gumentation over the last 25 years (Dung, 1995), which recent approaches (Cocarascu &
Toni, 2016) try to leverage for generalizing the reasoning aspect of ML towards the use of
computational models of argumentation. The outcome are models of arguments and counter-
arguments towards certain classiﬁcations that can be inspected by a human user and might
be used as formal grounds for explanations in the manner that (Mittelstadt et al., 2019)
called out for.
Legal issues of accounting for bias
While data protection rules aﬀect both the input (data) and the output (automated decision)
level of AI decision-making, anti-discrimination laws, as well as consumer and competition
rules, address discriminatory policies primarily from the perspective of the (automated) deci-
sion and the actions based on it. However, the application of these rules to AI-based decisions
is largely unclear. Under present law and the principle of private autonomy, decisions by
private parties normally do not have to include reasons or explanations. Therefore, a ﬁrst
issue will be how existing rules can be applied to algorithmic decision-making. Given that a
decision will often not be reasoned (hence the reasons will be unknown), it will be diﬃcult
to establish that it was made on the basis of a biased decision-making process (Mittelstadt
et al., 2019).
Even if bias can be proven, a second issue is the limited scope of anti-discrimination
law. Under present law, only certain transactions between private parties fall under the
EU anti-discrimination directives (Liddell & O’Flaherty, 2018). Moreover, in most cases AI
decision-making instruments will not directly use an unlawful criterion (e.g., gender) as a
basis for their decision, but rather a “neutral” one (e.g., residence) which in practice lead
to a less favourable treatment of certain groups. This raises the diﬃcult concept of indirect
discrimination, i.e., a scenario where an “apparently neutral rule disadvantages a person or
a group sharing the same characteristics” (Liddell & O’Flaherty, 2018). Finally, most forms
of diﬀerential treatment can be justiﬁed where it pursues a legitimate aim and where the
means to pursue that aim are appropriate and necessary. It is unclear whether the argument
that AI-based decision making systems produce decisions which are economically sound can
be suﬃcient as justiﬁcation.
12

Future directions and conclusions
There are several directions that can impact this ﬁeld going forward. First, despite the large
number of methods for mitigating bias, there are still no conclusive results regarding what
is the state of the art method for each category, which of the fairness-related interventions
perform best, or whether category-speciﬁc interventions perform better comparing to holistic
approaches that tackle bias at all stages of the analysis process. We believe that a system-
atic evaluation of the existing approaches is necessary to understand their capabilities and
limitations and also, a vital part of proposing new solutions. The diﬃculty of the evaluation
lies on the fact that diﬀerent methods work with diﬀerent fairness notions and are applica-
ble to diﬀerent AI models. To this end, benchmark datasets should be made available that
cover diﬀerent application areas and manifest real-world challenges. Finally, standard evalu-
ation procedures and measures covering both model performance and fairness-related aspects
should be followed, in accordance to international standards like the IEEE - ALGB-WG -
Algorithmic Bias Working Group8.
Second, we recognize that “fairness cannot be reduced to a simple self-contained math-
ematical deﬁnition”, “fairness is dynamic and social and not a statistical issue”.9
Also,
“fair is not fair everywhere” (Sch¨afer, Haun, & Tomasello, 2015) meaning that the notion
of fairness varies across countries, cultures and application domains. Therefore, it is im-
portant to have realistic and applicable fairness deﬁnitions for diﬀerent contexts as well as
domain-speciﬁc datasets for method development and evaluation. Moreover, it is important
to move beyond the typical training-test evaluation setup and to consider the consequences
of potential fairness-related interventions to ensure long-term wellbeing of diﬀerent groups.
Finally, given the temporal changes of fairness perception, the question of whether one can
train models on historical data and use them for current fairness-related problems becomes
increasingly pressing.
Third, the related work thus far focuses mainly on supervised learning. In many cases
however, direct feedback on the data (i.e., as labels) is not available. Therefore alternative
learning tasks should be considered, like unsupervised learning or Reinforcement Learning
(RL) where only intermediate feedback is provided to the model. Recent works have emerged
in this direction, e.g., (Jabbari, Joseph, Kearns, Morgenstern, & Roth, 2017) examine fairness
in the RL context where one needs to reconsider the eﬀects of short-term actions on long-term
rewards.
Fourth, there is a general trend in the ML community recently for generating plausi-
ble data from existing data using Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) in an attempt
to cover the high data demand of modern methods, especially DNNs. Recently, such ap-
proaches have been used also in the context of fairness (Xu, Yuan, Zhang, & Wu, 2018),
i.e., how to generate synthetic fair data that are similar to the real data. Still however, the
problem of representativeness of the training data and its impact on the representativeness
of the generated data might aggravate issues of fairness and discrimination. In the same
topic, recent work revealed that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, i.e., intentional
perturbations of the input examples, and therefore there is a need for methods to enhance
8https://standards.ieee.org/project/7003.html
9https://www.wired.com/story/ideas-joi-ito-insurance-algorithms/
13

their resilience (Song et al., 2018).
Fifth, AI scientists and everyone involved in the decision making process should be aware
of bias-related issues and the eﬀect of their design choices and assumptions. For instance,
studies show that representation-related biases creep into development processes because the
development teams are not aware of the importance of distinguishing between certain cate-
gories (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018). Members of a privileged group may not even be aware
of the existence of (e.g., racial) categories in the sense that they often perceive themselves
as “just people”, and the interpretation of this as an unconscious default requires the voice
of individuals from underprivileged groups, who persistently perceive their being “diﬀerent”.
Two strategies appear promising for addressing this cognitive bias: try to improve diversity
in development teams, and subject algorithms to outside and as-open-as-possible scrutiny,
for example by permitting certain forms of reverse engineering for algorithmic accountability.
Finally, from a legal point of view, apart from data protection law, general provisions
with respect to data quality or selection are still missing. Recently an ISO standard on
data quality (ISO 8000) was published, though not binding and not with regard to decision-
making techniques. Moreover, ﬁrst important steps have been made, e.g., the Draft Ethics
Guidelines for trustworthy AI from the European Commission’s high-level Expert group on
AI or the European parliament resolution containing recommendations to the Commission on
Civil Law Rules on Robotics. However, these resolutions are still generic. Further interdisci-
plinary research is needed to deﬁne speciﬁcally what is needed to meet the balance between
the fundamental rights and freedoms of citizens by mitigating bias, while at the same time
considering the technical challenges and economical needs. Therefore, any legislative proce-
dures will require a close collaboration of legal and technical experts. As already mentioned,
the legal discussion in this paper refers to the EU where despite the many recent eﬀorts,
there is still no consensus for algorithmic fairness regulations across its countries. Therefore,
there is still a lot of work to be done on analysing the legal standards and regulations at a
national and international level to support globally legal AI designs.
To conclude, the problem of bias and discrimination in AI-based decision making systems
has attracted a lot of attention recently from science, industry, society and policy makers, and
there is an ongoing debate on the AI opportunities and risks for our lives and our civilization.
This paper surveys technical challenges and solutions as well as their legal grounds in order
to advance this ﬁeld in a direction that exploits the tremendous power of AI for solving real
world problems but also considers the societal implications of these solutions. As a ﬁnal note,
we want to stress again that biases are deeply embedded in our societies and it is an illusion
to believe that the AI and bias problem will be eliminated only with technical solutions.
Nevertheless, as the technology reﬂects and projects our biases into the future, it is a key
responsibility of technology creators to understand its limits and to propose safeguards to
avoid pitfalls. Of equal importance is also for the technology creators to realise that technical
solutions without any social and legal ground cannot thrive and therefore multidisciplinary
approaches are required.
14

Acknowledgement
This work is supported by the project “NoBias - Artiﬁcial Intelligence without Bias”, which
has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro-
gramme, under the Marie Sk lodowska-Curie (Innovative Training Network) grant agreement
no. 860630.
