Predicting Illness for a Sustainable Dairy Agriculture:
Predicting and Explaining the Onset of Mastitis in Dairy Cows
Cathal Ryan,1,2 Christophe Gu´eret3, Donagh Berry,4,2
Medb Corcoran3, Mark T. Keane,1,2 Brian Mac Namee1,2
1School of Computer Science, University College Dublin, Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland
2VistaMilk, Science Foundation Ireland Research Centre
3Accenture Labs, Dublin
4Teagasc, Animal & Grassland Research and Innovation Centre, Moorepark, Fermoy P61 P302, Co. Cork, Ireland
Abstract
Mastitis is a billion dollar health problem for the mod-
ern dairy industry, with implications for antibiotic re-
sistance. The use of AI techniques to identify the early
onset of this disease, thus has signiﬁcant implications
for the sustainability of this agricultural sector. Current
approaches to treating mastitis involve antibiotics and
this practice is coming under ever increasing scrutiny.
Using machine learning models to identify cows at risk
of developing mastitis and applying targeted treatment
regimes to only those animals promotes a more sustain-
able approach. Incorrect predictions from such models,
however, can lead to monetary losses, unnecessary use
of antibiotics, and even the premature death of animals,
so it is important to generate compelling explanations
for predictions to build trust with users and to better
support their decision making. In this paper we demon-
strate a system developed to predict mastitis infections
in cows and provide explanations of these predictions
using counterfactuals. We demonstrate the system and
describe the engagement with farmers undertaken to
build it.
Introduction
If agriculture is to have a future it needs to be sustainable;
for the dairy sector this requires zero-carbon farming (using
pasture rather than indoor systems) and minimising the use
of antibiotics (to avoid resistances arising). Artiﬁcial intelli-
gence (AI) has a major role to play in these efforts (see, for
example, the UN AI for Good initiative), and our work has
focused on a major animal health problem, mastitis, for dairy
farms (which costs US$19-32B per annum (Oskoueian et al.
2016)). Current approaches to handling mastitis involve the
administration of large quantities of antibiotics, which is not
sustainable (Oskoueian et al. 2016). The proliferation of sen-
sors on modern dairy farms, and the data that they generate,
offers an opportunity to more sustainably address the masti-
tis issue. Data collected from farms can be used to build ma-
chine learning models that proactively identify cows likely
to develop mastitis (Anglart et al. 2020), enabling farmers to
treat those cows in targeted ways.
Copyright © 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Predicting a cow’s likelihood to develop mastitis, how-
ever, has signiﬁcant consequences. If infections are missed
then farmers will lose signiﬁcant income through discarded
milk (Halasa et al. 2007) and this may even lead to increased
chances of early culling of a cow (Hogeveen, Huijps, and
Lam 2011). If healthy cows are ﬂagged as mastitis risks,
farmers are likely to forego milking income and administer
antibiotics unnecessarily. Farmers can also use the output of
a prediction model to gain insights about how to improve
the health status of their herd by identifying contributors to
mastitis infection. This opportunity, and the signiﬁcant con-
sequences of actions taken by farmers based on model out-
put, mean it is very important that the output of prediction
models used is explainable.
In this paper we describe a machine learning model built
to predict the propensity of a cow to develop mastitis, and
an approach based on counterfactuals to generate explana-
tions of the predictions made by the model. Moreover, we
describe how engagement with stakeholders in the farming
community guided the design of this system, particularly in
identifying features that could actually be impacted and ap-
propriate levels of change for use in the counterfactual sys-
tem. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach with
worked examples and suggest directions for future work.
Related Work
Machine learning has been applied to the agricultural do-
main for tasks ranging from grass growth prediction (Kenny
et al. 2019), to grass phenotype identiﬁcation (Narayanan
et al. 2020), to disease detection within cows (Mammadova
and Keskin 2015). In the latter case predicting mastitis has
received a signiﬁcant amount of attention from researchers
with approaches based on simple statistical models (eg.
(Khatun et al. 2018)) and more sophisticated approaches
using machine learning (e.g. (Sun, Samarasinghe, and Jago
2010)). Approaches can be distinguished by the type of in-
put data they use, with some using simple features describ-
ing cows and aggregate milking behaviour (Anglart et al.
2020) and others using much more precise information such
as measurements of milk yield at the level of an individ-
ual quarter of a cow’s udder (Kamphuis et al. 2010). In
this problem domain, there are considerable costs to miss-
arXiv:2101.02188v2  [cs.LG]  7 Jan 2021

Figure 1: Proportion of infections found by sub-clinical mas-
titis prediction model at different time horizons.
prediction: potentially infected cows may need to be quar-
antined, their milk cannot be used and expensive antibiotic
treatment may be required. So, model predictions need to be
coupled with compelling explanations to allow farmers to
make actionable decisions.
Recent reviews of explainable AI have argued for the
use of counterfactuals to explain the causal importance of
different features involved in a model’s predictions (Adadi
and Berrada 2018; Miller 2019). For example, if the model
makes a prediction that “Cow #42 will remain healthy” and
the vet/farmer asks “why?”, then the explanation module can
provide a counterfactual explanation saying
If cow #42 had a somatic cell count of 150 and a protein
percentage of 5% she would be likely to succumb to
mastitis.
This information enables the end-user to assess whether they
think the critical differences between the proposed predic-
tion and the counterfactual explanation warrant acceptance
of the model’s directions.
The growth in research interest in counterfactuals is
largely driven by computational, psychological and legal
reasons. Computationally, many methods generate coun-
terfactuals by perturbing features of the original instance
(Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017), or nearest unlike
neighbor (Keane and Smyth 2020); which can be seen as a
follow on from the popular LIME methods (Guidotti et al.
2019; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2018). Psychologically,
it has been shown that people can readily and naturally un-
derstand the causal roles of features using counterfactuals
(Miller 2019; Byrne 2019; Byrne 2007). Legally, it has been
argued that counterfactuals are GDPR compliant meeting
the requirements for explaining automated decision-making
(Grath et al. 2018).
Predicting Mastitis
We have developed a propensity model that uses the record
of milking on a particular day, a history of recent milkings,
and details of the cow herself to predict the likelihood that a
cow will develop sub-clinical mastitis in the next 7 days. To
build this model we use a dataset originating from 7 different
research farms located around Ireland. This dataset contains
details of over 2,300 cows over a period of 10 years and in-
cludes aspects of each cow’s history including milk record-
ings, infection history, and genetic details. Milk recording
data is the richest data source and includes the volume of
milk yielded when a cow was milked; characteristic of that
milk including fat, lactose and protein content; and somatic
cell count (SCC) recorded from the collected milk, which
is a useful indicator of mastitis (Sharma, Singh, and Bhad-
wal 2011). Milk yield is available twice per day; fat, lactose,
and protein content of milk and SCC are measured approxi-
mately every 7 days.
Based on the raw data available, we generate a set of fea-
tures describing a cow on a particular day that form the basis
of prediction. The milk yield and milk characteristic data
form multi-variate time series describing a cow’s history
from which multiple features could be generated—for ex-
ample minimum, maximum, mean, and skewness values of
each variable over histories of 15 and 30 days. Any feature
included in our prediction model, however, has the potential
to be included in the counterfactual explanations generated
to describe predictions. Including a model based on a large
number of features derived from time series, however, could
lead to contradictory and inactionable counterfactual expla-
nations, such as the following, being generated:
If Cow #42 had a lower mean yield over the last 15
days and a higher minimum yield over the last 15 days
she would be likely to succumb to mastitis
Therefore, in our model for each milk characteristic (e.g.
yield and lactose content), we use only the values from the
current day (or the most recent values) plus a single histor-
ical aggregate: skewness over the last 30 days. The features
used in the model are shown in the ﬁrst column of Table 1.
The model trained is a gradient boosting model and we use
data from 2010–2018 to train it, and data from 2018–2019
to evaluate it. Figure 1 illustrates the ability of the model to
correctly predict sub-clinical mastitis cases at different time
horizons from 1 day in advance to 7 days in advance (mea-
sured using the hold-out test set described above). Domain
experts informed us that capturing 70% of infections at least
1 day in advance of their onset would lead to a model more
useful than current approaches. The model trained achieves
this from 5 days in advance.
Generating Useful Counterfactuals
Given a trained binary classiﬁcation model f(. . .), counter-
factuals represent a hypothetical input vector x′ giving the
output f(x′) = y′ where y′ is the positive class. This vec-
tor x′ is derived from an actual vector x as a set of small
changes ∆x to apply to x to change a negative class outcome
f(x) = y into y′. That is, we seek to optimize ∆x under the
constraint f(x + ∆x) = y′. In our implementation, ∆x is
found using the COBYLA (Powell 1994) constrained opti-
mization approach. We use a Manhattan distance weighted
feature-wise with the inverse median absolute deviation, as
it promotes sparsity and is more robust to outliers.
For our use-case the positive class is a prediction that a
cow will succumb to sub-clinical mastitis so we seek to pro-
vide support for explaining why a given cow is predicted not
to succumb to sub-clinical mastitis. Considering that users

Feature Name
Actionable
Actionable Time
Conﬁdence
Size of Change
Somatic cell count (SCC)
No
Very high
Yield
Yes
Low
2 kg
Fat percentage
Yes
1-2 days
Low
0.05 percentage units
Protein percentage
Yes
1-2 days
Low
0.05 percentage units
Lactose percentage
No
Low
Urea
Yes
Low
Body condition score (BCS)
Yes
2 weeks
Very high
0.25 units
Weight
Yes
1 week
Medium
10 kg
Genetic merit
Yes
5 years
Very high
Parity
No
Very high
Days since calving
No
Very high
Calendar month
No
Low
Infections for this lactation stage (farm)
No
Very high
Infections for this lactation stage (cow)
No
Very high
Infections for this cow
No
Very high
Proportion of cows infected per farm
and calving year
No
Very high
Table 1: The features used in the model and an indication of whether or not they are actionable and can be used to build
conﬁdence. For those that are actionable, the time within which changes can be made, and the level of change that is appropriate
to suggest, also are provided.
ﬁnd explanations more useful when only a small number of
changes appear (Keane and Smyth 2020) we set a constraint
to change no more than 3 features of the model. We further
take a number of additional and domain-speciﬁc constraints
into account as outlined in Table 1. These were established
through consultation with a group of domain experts (farm-
ers and animal health experts). For some of the features a
minimum magnitude of change is imposed as, for instance, it
is not meaningful to ask for milk yield to be changed by 0.1
litre per milking. All of the features come with an indication
of actionability and conﬁdence. The latter is, to the best of
our knowledge, new to applied research on counterfactuals.
Some features that are not actionable for the farmers could
be still relevant to report on in the counterfactual in order
to build conﬁdence and trust in the model. The best exam-
ple is somatic cell count (SCC): there is little the farmer can
do about this metric in the short term but it is part of their
own mental model for mastitis. Surfacing this feature as part
of the explanation for the predicted outcome is expected to
contribute to building a trust relationship between the farmer
and the prediction system.
Worked Example
We use the predictions made on our hold-out test set to
demonstrate the ability of the system developed to predict
mastitis and generate useful counterfactual explanations. We
randomly sampled 10,000 test instances predicted to be
healthy with a high prediction score (greater than 0.8) and
generated counterfactual explanations for each of these pre-
dictions with the system described in the previous section.
Figure 2 summarises the prediction scores for the original
model predictions and the prediction scores of counterfac-
tual instances generated. We can see that the new counter-
Figure 2: Probability Changes
factual instances consistently result in low prediction scores.
Table 2 shows a sample of the counterfactuals generated
(values in parentheses are those associated with the coun-
terfactuals). The following text would be used to present the
ﬁrst counterfactual to a farmer:
If cow #42 had an increase of one and a half units with
respect to Yield she would be likely to succumb to mas-
titis.
We can see that only features marked as actionable or conﬁ-
dence building are changed, and that the changes are in the
units speciﬁed as actionable.
Conclusions & Future Work
In this paper we demonstrate a system built to predict masti-
tis in cows and generate explanations of its predictions using

Feature Changed
∆Feature
Prediction Score
Yield
1.5
0.979 (0.368)
Fat
1
0.979 (0.192)
Table 2: Original versus counterfactual example
a counterfactual approach. We took input from stakeholders
to understand which features could be actionable and which
would help build conﬁdence in the system’s predictions. We
demonstrate the ability of this system to create meaningful
explanations while keeping the number of changes to the
original data as small as possible. We are currently present-
ing this system to farmer focus groups for feedback.
