Image Data Augmentation Approaches: A
Comprehensive Survey and Future directions
*Corresponding author(s)
1st Teerath Kumar*
CRT-AI, ADAPT Research Centre
School of Computing,
Dublin City University, Ireland;

2nd Alessandra Mileo
INSIGHT & I-Form Research Centre
School of Computing,
Dublin City University, Ireland;

3rd Rob Brennan
ADAPT Research Centre
School of Computer Science,
University College Dublin, Ireland;

4th Malika Bendechache
ADAPT & Lero Research Centres,
School of Computer Science,
University of Galway, Ireland;

Abstract—Deep learning algorithms have demonstrated re-
markable performance in various computer vision tasks, however,
limited labeled data can lead to overﬁtting problems, hindering
the network’s performance on unseen data. To address this
issue, various generalization techniques have been proposed,
including dropout, normalization, and advanced data augmen-
tation. Among these techniques, image data augmentation -
which increases the dataset size by incorporating sample di-
versity - has received signiﬁcant attention in recent times. In
this survey, we focus on advanced image data augmentation
techniques. We provide an overview of data augmentation,
present a novel and comprehensive taxonomy of the reviewed
data augmentation techniques, and discuss their strengths and
limitations. Furthermore, we provide comprehensive results of
the impact of data augmentation on three popular computer
vision tasks: image classiﬁcation, object detection, and semantic
segmentation. For results reproducibility, the available codes of
all data augmentation techniques have been compiled. Finally, we
discuss the challenges and difﬁculties, as well as possible future
directions for the research community. This survey provides
several beneﬁts: i) readers will gain a deeper understanding of
how data augmentation can help address overﬁtting problems,
ii) researchers will save time searching for comparison results,
iii) the codes for the data augmentation techniques are available
for result reproducibility, and iv) the discussion of future work
will spark interest in the research community.
Index
Terms—Computer
vision,
Data
Augmentation,Deep
learning, Image classiﬁcation, Object detection, Semantic seg-
mentation, Survey Data Augmentation
This research was supported by Science Foundation Ireland under grant
numbers 18/CRT/6223 (SFI Centre for Research Training in Artiﬁcial intelli-
gence), SFI/12/RC/2289/P 2 (Insight SFI Research Centre for Data Analyt-
ics), 13/RC/2094/P 2 (Lero SFI Centre for Software) and 13/RC/2106/P 2
(ADAPT SFI Research Centre for AI-Driven Digital Content Technology).
For the purpose of Open Access, the author has applied a CC BY public
copyright licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from
this submission.
I. INTRODUCTION & MOTIVATION
Deep learning models have gained popularity and achieved
tremendous progress in computer vision (CV) tasks such as
image classiﬁcation [11], [55], [67], [75], [78], [79], [118],
[125], object detection [46], [54], , image segmentation [82],
[87], [89], [95] and medical imaging [6], [113]–[116], [139].
This advancement has been propelled by various deep neural
network architectures, powerful computation resources and
extensive availability of data [123]. Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) have demonstrated remarkable performance
in CV tasks among all deep learning models. CNNs learn
different features of an image by applying the convolution
operation with the input image and kernel. The initial layers of
CNN learn low-level features (e.g. edges, lines) while deeper
layers learn more structured and complex features. The success
of CNNs has stimulated the interest to use them for CV tasks.
In addition to CNNs, Vision Transformers (ViT) [30] are also
gaining popularity and have been widely used in deep learning
for CV tasks.
However, these algorithms are data-intensive and often
suffer from the overﬁtting problem [119] - where the model
performs well on training data but poorly on test data (unseen
data). The issue is exacerbated when large amounts of data
are not available, which can occur due to privacy concerns or
the need for time-consuming and expensive human labeling
tasks [79], [123]. Despite the existence of large datasets such
as ImageNet [25], overﬁtting remains a challenge because the
standard training process only learns the important regions,
but fails to learn less important features that are necessary for
generalization [162]. Moreover, adversarial attacks [57], [97],
[168] pose a threat to the accuracy of CNNs, where small,
invisible perturbations added to the input image can fool the
network and cause it to fail to identify the correct features in
arXiv:2301.02830v4  [cs.CV]  12 Mar 2023

an image.
To address these challenges, data augmentation is often
applied, not just in CV tasks, but also in a range of domains
such as audio [3], [12], [72], [80], [102], [106], [126], [140]
and text [7], [39], [93], [124]. This survey will speciﬁcally
focus on the CV domain.
Regularization is an effective method for generalizing Con-
volutional Neural Network (CNN) models from both architec-
tural and data perspectives. Various forms of regularization
have been developed, including Data Augmentation [170],
Dropout [132], Batch Normalization [63], Transfer Learn-
ing [122], [153], and Pre-training [32]. Among these, Image
Data Augmentation [170] has proven to be a useful form of
regularization in several studies [76], [125], [170]. This tech-
nique expands the dataset by altering the sample’s appearance
or ﬂavor [170] to provide a more diverse range of views.
However, performing Image Data Augmentation directly on
image data can increase the risk of overﬁtting and biases,
making it both important and challenging, as discussed further
in Section IV.
Generally, Image Data Augmentation addresses two primary
problems in CNN models. The ﬁrst problem is a shortage of
data or limited data, which can result in overﬁtting. Image
Data Augmentation provides a solution by feeding the model
with various scenarios of an image, making the model more
generalized and allowing for the extraction of more informa-
tion from the original dataset. The second problem relates to
labeling, where the original dataset has a label for each sample.
Augmenting the sample preserves the label of the original
sample and assigns it to the augmented sample.
Numerous surveys have been conducted on the topic of
image data augmentation. For example, Wang et al. explored
and compared several traditional data augmentation techniques
in their work
[109], but this study was limited to image
classiﬁcation tasks only. In another study, Wang et al. re-
viewed the available data augmentation approaches for face
recognition
[146]. Khosla et al. brieﬂy discussed warping
and oversampling-based data augmentation approaches in their
work [68]. However, the authors did not provide a comprehen-
sive taxonomy or a thorough evaluation of the techniques they
discussed. Shorten et al. presented a comprehensive survey on
image data augmentation in their work
[123]. The authors
proposed a novel taxonomy, discussed future directions, and
addressed the challenges associated with data augmentation.
However, the survey lacked an evaluation of image data
augmentation for various computer vision tasks. Additionally,
as the study is three years old, it may not include the latest
state-of-the-art augmentation methods such as cutmix and grid
mask. . Recently, Yang et al. conducted a survey on data
augmentation in computer vision tasks [158]. However, their
study only covered a few data augmentation methods and did
not provide any code compilation for result reproducibility.
Another study by Xu proposed a novel taxonomy for image
data augmentations [157], but did not evaluate the techniques
discussed. This paper presents an extended taxonomy for
data augmentation and reviews state-of-the-art techniques. The
source code used in this study is available for result repro-
ducibility. It should be noted that this survey does not cover
data augmentations based on generative adversarial networks
(GANs) due to out of the scope of this paper. But we redirect
the reader to [133], [161] for more details about GAN-based
data augmentations.
The followings are our contributions:
• A comprehensive image data augmentation taxonomy is
presented.
• An extensive survey of state-of-the-art data augmentation
techniques, complete with visual examples, is provided.
• The performance of state-of-the-art data augmentation
techniques is evaluated and compared for several com-
puter vision tasks.
• The challenges of data augmentation are highlighted and
future directions are identiﬁed.
• The available codes for data augmentations, following the
proposed taxonomy, are compiled for result reproducibil-
ity and made available at 3.
The above contributions provide the following beneﬁts:
• A better understanding of data augmentation working
mechanism to ﬁx the overﬁtting problem.
• Our comprehensive analysis and comparison between
the existing data augmentation techniques will save re-
searchers time searching this ﬁeld.
• Facilitates result reproducibility by providing the source
code for the different data augmentation techniques in-
vestigated.
• Future work will spark interest in the research commu-
nity.
II. TAXONOMY AND BACKGROUND
The proposed taxonomy, presented in Figure 2, classiﬁes
data augmentation into two main branches: Basic and Ad-
vanced data augmentations. The former encompasses fun-
damental techniques for data augmentation, while the latter
encompasses more complex techniques. The speciﬁcs of each
data augmentation method are thoroughly discussed in subse-
quent sections.
A. Basic Image Data Augmentations
This section describes basic image data augmentation meth-
ods and their classiﬁcations. They are classiﬁed as below:
• Image Manipulation
– Geometric Manipulation
– Non-Geometric Manipulation
• Image Erasing
– Erasing
1) Image Manipulation: Image manipulation refers to the
changes made in an image with respect to its position or color.
Positional manipulation is made by adjusting the position of
the pixels while color manipulations are made by altering
the pixel values of the image. Image manipulation is further
3https://github.com/kmr2017/Advanced-Data-augmentation-codes

Fig. 1. Overﬁtting problem: On the left side, overﬁtting is explained in terms of accuracy, after the inﬂation point (red dotted line), the training accuracy is
increasing but validation accuracy is decreasing. On the right side, alternatively in terms of loss, training loss is decreasing but validation loss is increasing
after the red dotted line. The ﬁgure is taken from the source 2https://www.baeldung.com/cs/ml-underﬁtting-overﬁtting
divided into two main categories. Each of them is discussed
below:
Geometric Data Augmentation: Geometric data augmen-
tation encompasses modiﬁcations to the geometric attributes
of an image, including its position, orientation, and aspect
ratio. This technique involves transforming the arrangement of
pixels within an image through a variety of techniques such
as rotation, translation, and shearing. Figure 3 illustrates the
most commonly employed geometric augmentations. These
methods are widely used in the domain of computer vision
to diversify the training data and improve the resilience of
models to diverse transformations. The utilization of geometric
data augmentation has become a critical component in the
development of robust computer vision algorithms. Each of
the geometric data augmentations is discussed below:
(i) Rotation: Rotation data augmentation involves rotating
an image by a speciﬁed angle within the range of 0 to 360
degrees. The precise degree of rotation is a hyperparame-
ter that requires careful consideration based on the nature
and characteristics of the dataset. For instance, in the
MNIST [27] dataset, rotating all digits by 180 degrees,
transforming a right-rotated 6 results into a 9, would not
be a meaningful transformation. Therefore, a thorough
understanding of the dataset is necessary to determine the
optimal degree of rotation and achieve the best results.
(ii) Translation: Translation data augmentation involves
shifting an image in any of the upward, downward, right,
or left directions, as illustrated in Figure 3, in order
to provide a more diverse representation of the data.
The magnitude of this type of augmentation must be
selected with caution, as an excessive shift can result in
a substantial change in the appearance of the image. For
example, translating a digit 8 to the left by half the width
of the image could result in an augmented image that
resembles the digit 3. Hence, it is imperative to consider
the nature of the dataset when determining the magnitude
of the translation augmentation to ensure its efﬁcacy.
(iii) Shearing: Shearing data augmentation involves shifting
one part of an image in one direction, while the other
part is shifted in the opposite direction. This technique
can provide a new and diverse perspective on the data,
thereby improving the robustness of a model. However,
excessive shearing can cause signiﬁcant deformation of
the image, making it difﬁcult for the model to accurately
recognize the objects within it. It is therefore important
to consider the amount of shearing applied to the data
carefully in order to avoid over-augmenting the images
and introducing unwanted noise. In this way, shearing can
be a powerful tool for enhancing the generalization ability
of computer vision models, while avoiding the potential
drawbacks of over-augmentation. For example, applying
excessive shearing on cat image during data augmentation
may result in a distorted, stretched appearance, hindering
the ability of a model to correctly classify the image as
a cat. It is crucial to ﬁnd a balance between the amount
of shearing applied and the desired level of diversity, as
excessive shearing can introduce signiﬁcant noise.
Non-Geometric Data Augmentations The non-geometric
data augmentation category focuses on modiﬁcations to the
visual characteristics of an image, as opposed to its geomet-
ric shape. This includes techniques such as noise injection,
ﬂipping, cropping, resizing, and color space manipulation, as
illustrated in Figure 4. These techniques can help improve the
generalization performance of a model by exposing it to a
wider variety of image variations during training. However, it
is important to consider the trade-off between augmenting the
data and preserving the integrity of the underlying information
in the image. The following section outlines several classical
non-geometric data augmentation approaches.
(i) Flipping: Flipping is a type of image data augmentation
technique that involves ﬂipping an image either horizon-
tally or vertically. The efﬁcacy of this method has been
demonstrated on various widely-used datasets, including
cifar10 and cifar100 [74]. However, care must be taken

Image Data Augmentations
Basic Image Data Augmentations
Advanced Image Data Augmentations
Image Manipulation
Image Erasing
Image Mixing
Auto Augment
Neural Style Transfer
Feature Augmentation
Single Image Mixing
•
Local Augment
•
Self-Aug
•
SalfMix
•
KeepAugment
•
CutThumbnail
•
AutoAugment
•
Fast AutoAug
•
Faster AutoAug
•
Local Patch
with RL
And many more
Multi-Images Mixing
•
Mixup
•
CutMix
•
SaliencyMix
•
RSMDA
•
PuzzleMix
•
SnapMix
And many more
Geometric 
Manipulation
•
Rotation
•
Translation
•
Shearing
Non-Geometric 
Manipulation
•
Flipping
•
Cropping 
•
Noise injection
•
Color Space
•
Jitter
•
Kernel
Reinforcement 
Learning Based
Non-Reinforcement 
Learning Based
•
FeatMatch
•
Feature Space 
(FS) Aug
•
Dataset Aug in 
FS
And many more
Erasing
•
Cutout
•
Random 
Erasing
•
Hide-and-Seek
•
GridMask
•
RandAug
•
ADA
And many more
Neural Style 
Transfer
•
STaDA
•
Style Aug
•
StyPath
And many more
Feature Aug
Fig. 2. Image data augmentation taxonomy. Note: All image data augmentation names are not added in this taxonomy due space limit. However, all relevant and remaining image data augmentations are
discussed as per taxonomy. The remaining sub-type of categories are discussed in the text.

Fig. 3. Overview of the geometric data augmentations.
when applying this technique, as the outcome may depend
on the nature of the dataset. For instance, the horizontal
ﬂipping of the digit ”2” in the Urdu digits dataset [67]
may result in the appearance of the digit ”6”. As such,
the choice of ﬂipping must be made carefully to ensure
that the desired level of augmentation is achieved without
introducing signiﬁcant noise into the data.
(ii) Cropping and resizing: Cropping is a common pre-
processing data augmentation technique that can be ap-
plied randomly or to the center of the image. This
technique involves trimming the image and then resizing
it back to its original size, preserving the original label
of the image. However, caution must be exercised when
using cropping as a data augmentation method, as it may
result in misleading information for the model, such as
cropping the upper or lower part of the digit ”8” and
making it appear as the digit ”0”.
(iii) Noise Injection: Noise injection is a data augmentation
technique that has been demonstrated to enhance the
robustness of neural networks in learning features and
defending against adversarial attacks. As shown in the
survey of nine datasets from the UCI repository [123],
the use of noise injection has resulted in impressive
performance improvements.
(iv) Color Space: The manipulation of individual channel
values within an image, also known as photometric aug-
mentation, is a type of data augmentation that can help
control the brightness of the image. Image data typically
consists of three channels: Red (R), Green (G), and Blue
(B) and has dimensions of Height (H) x Width (W) x
Channels (C). By altering the values of each channel
separately, this technique can prevent a model from
becoming biased towards speciﬁc lighting conditions. The
most straightforward approach to perform color space
augmentation involves replacing a single channel within
the image with a randomly generated channel of the
same size, or with a channel ﬁlled with either 0 or 255.
The utilization of color space manipulation is commonly
observed in photo editing applications, where it is used
to adjust the brightness or darkness of the image [123].
Fig. 4. Overview of the non-geometric data augmentations.
(v) Jitter: Jitter is a technique of data augmentation that
involves randomly altering the brightness, contrast, sat-
uration, and hue of an image. The four hyperparameters,
i.e., brightness, contrast, saturation, and hue, can be
adjusted by specifying their minimum and maximum
range. However, it is important to carefully select these
ranges as improper adjustments can negatively impact the
image’s content. For example, increasing the brightness of
X-Ray images used for lung disease detection can result

in the whitening and blending of the lungs in the X-Ray,
hindering the diagnosis of the disease.
(vi) Kernel Filter: Kernel ﬁltering is a form of data augmen-
tation that enhances or softens the image. This is achieved
by applying a window, with a speciﬁed size of n x n,
containing a Gaussian-blur or an edge ﬁlter to the image.
The Gaussian-blur ﬁlter serves to soften the image, while
the edge ﬁlter sharpens its edges either horizontally or
vertically.
2) Image Erasing Data Augmentations: The data aug-
mentation technique of image erasing involves the process of
removing speciﬁc parts of an image and replacing them with
either 0, 255, or the mean of the entire dataset. This type of
data augmentation includes various methods such as cutout,
random erasing, hide-and-seek, and grid mask, each with their
unique implementation and purpose.
(i) Cutout : The Cutout data augmentation method involves
the random removal of a sub-region within an image,
which is then ﬁlled with a constant value such as 0
or 255, during the training phase. This approach has
been shown to result in improved performance on widely
used datasets [29]. An illustration of the Cutout data
augmentation process is provided in Figure 16.
(ii) Random erasing : Random Erasing (RE) [170] randomly
erases the sub-region in the image similar to cutout. But
the main difference is, it randomly determines whether
to mask out region or not and also determines the aspect
ratio and size of the masked region. RE demonstration
for different tasks is shown in ﬁgure 5.
Fig. 5. Random erasing examples for different tasks [170].
(iii) Hide-and-Seek The process of hide-and-seek data aug-
mentation [129] involves dividing an image into uniform
squares of random size and then randomly removing a
speciﬁed number of these squares. This technique aims to
force neural networks to learn relevant features by hiding
important information. A different view of the image is
presented at each epoch, as depicted in ﬁgure 6. It is
important to note that while this technique has been found
to be effective in certain applications, it may also result
in the removal of important information which could
negatively impact the performance of the model.
Fig. 6. An example of Hide-and-Seek augmentation [129].
(iv) GridMask Data Augmentation The GridMask data aug-
mentation technique [15] aims to address the challenges
associated with randomly removing regions from images.
This process, which can completely erase objects or strip
away context information, requires a trade-off between
the two. To resolve this, GridMask creates a uniform
masking pattern and applies it to images as demonstrated
in ﬁgure 7.
Fig. 7.
This ﬁgure shows the procedure of GridMask augmentation. They
produce a mask and then multiply it with the input image. Image is taken
from [15].

B. Advanced Image Data Augmentations
The ﬁeld of computer vision has seen a surge in interest
regarding data augmentation techniques in recent times. This
has led to the development of a wide range of innovative
methods for augmenting image data, such as mixing im-
ages in novel ways, using reinforcement learning, feature-
based augmentation, and style-based augmentation. To better
understand these advancements, advanced data augmentation
techniques have been classiﬁed into different major categories.
These categories provide a useful framework for surveying
the current state of the ﬁeld and identifying areas for further
research and development.
1) Image Mixing Data Augmentations: Image mixing data
augmentation has gained popularity in computer vision re-
search in recent years. This technique involves blending one or
more images, including the same image, resulting in improved
deep neural network model accuracy. We categorize image
mixing data augmentation into two sub-categories: single
image mixing and non-single image mixing. We compare the
effectiveness of these sub-categories on benchmark datasets
(such as CIFAR10, CIFAR100, IamgeNet etc), as shown in
table II-B5, II, VII, VIII and II-B5.
Single Image Mixing Data Augmentations: A single-
image mixing technique uses only one image and mixes a sin-
gle image from different mixing points of view. Recently, there
has been a lot of work done on single-image augmentation,
such as LocalAugment, SelfAugmentation, SalfMix, and many
more. The description of each SOTA single image mixing data
augmentation has been discussed below.
(i) Local Augment: Kim et al. [71] proposed a technique
called LocalAugment, which involves dividing an image
into smaller patches and applying different types of data
augmentation to each patch. The purpose of this technique
is to increase diversity in local features, which could help
reduce bias and improve generalization performance of
neural networks. While this approach does not preserve
the global structure of an image, it provides a rich
set of local features that can beneﬁt neural network
training. Figure8 and 9 provide visual representations of
the LocalAugment technique. Although LocalAugment
technique can generate diverse local features of an image,
it may not be well-suited for certain types of images that
have complex global structures requiring preservation of
global spatial relationships. Therefore, it may have some
limitations, which should be taken into account while
using this technique for image mixing data augmentation.
(ii) Self-Augmentation:This
work
[121]
proposes
self-
augmentation, where a random region of an image is
cropped and pasted randomly in the image, improving the
generalization capability in few-shot learning. Moreover,
the self-augmentation combines regional dropout and
knowledge distillation- knowledge from the trained large
network is transferred to a small network.The process
demonstrated in the ﬁgure 10.
Fig. 8.
An example of Global and Local Rotation Image, the example is
taken from [71].
Fig. 9. Comparison of LocalAugment with CutOut, MixUp etc, example is
taken from [71].

Fig. 10. An example of self augmentation, image is taken from [121]
(iii) SalfMix: This work [20] focuses on whether it is pos-
sible to generalize neural networks based on single-
image mixed augmentation. For that purpose, it proposes
SalfMix, the ﬁrst salient part of the image is found
to decide which part should be removed and which
portion should be duplicated. Most salient regions are
cropped and placed into non-salient regions. This process
is deﬁned and compared with other techniques in ﬁgure
11.
Fig. 11. Conceptual comparison between SalfMix method and other single
image-based data augmentation methods, the example is taken from [20].
(iv) KeepAugment KeepAugment [47] is introduced to pre-
vent distribution shift which degrades the performance of
neural networks. The idea of KeepAugment is to increase
ﬁdelity by preserving the salient features of the image
and augmenting the non-salient region. Preserved features
help to increase diversity without shifting the distribution.
KeepAugment is demonstrated in ﬁgure 12.
(v) You Only Cut Once You Only Cut Once (YOCO) [51] is
introduced with the aim of recognizing objects from par-
tial information and improving the diversity of augmen-
tation that encourage neural networks to perform better.
YOCO makes two pieces of image and augmentation is
applied on each piece, then each piece is concatenated
for an image and YOCO shows impressive performance
and compared with SOTA augmentations, sometimes it
outperforms them. It is easy to implement, has no pa-
rameters, and is easy to use. The YOCO augmentation
Fig. 12.
This image shows the example of KeepAugment with other
augmentations, courtesy [47].
process is shown in ﬁgure 13.
Fig. 13. An example of YOCO augmentation, image is taken from [51].
(vi) Cut-Thumbnail: Cut-Thumbnail [156] is a novel data
augmentation, that resizes the image to a certain small
size and then randomly replaces the random region of
the image with the resized image, aiming to alleviate
the shape bias of the network. The advantage of Cut-
thumbnail is, that it not only preserves the original image
but also keeps it global in the small resized image. On Im-
ageNet, it shows impressive performance using resnet50.
Overall, the cut-thumbnail process and its comparison are
shown in ﬁgure 15 and ﬁgure 14, respectively.
Fig. 14. Comparison between existing data augmentation methods with Cut-
Thumbnail, the example is from [156].
Multi-Images Mixing: Multi-Images Mixing data augmen-
tation uses more than one image and applies different mixing
strategies. Recently, many researchers have explored a lot
of Multi-Images Mixing strategies and still, it is a very
attentive topic for many researchers. Recently work has in-
cluded Mixup, CutMix, SaliencyMix, and many more. Each

Fig. 15.
This image shows an example of reduced images that are called
thumbnails. After reducing the image to a certain size of 112×112 or 56×56,
The dog is still recognizable even though lots of local details are lost,
courtesy [156].
of the relevant non-single image mixing data augmentation
techniques is discussed below.
(i) Mixup: Mixup blends two images based on the blending
factor (alpha) and the corresponding labels of these
images are also mixed in the same way. Mixup data aug-
mentation [163] consistently improved the performance
not only in terms of accuracy but also in terms of ro-
bustness. Experiments on ImageNet-2012 [119], CIFAR-
10, CIFAR-100, Google commands 4 and UCI datasets 5
showed impressive results on SOTA methods. Further
demonstration and comparison are shown in the ﬁgure 16.
(ii) CutMix : CutMix tackles the issues of information loss
and region dropout [162]. It is inspired by cutout [29],
where any random region is ﬁlled with 0 or 255, while
in cutmix instead of ﬁlling the random region with 0 or
255, the region is ﬁlled with a patch from another image.
Correspondingly, their labels are also mixed proportion-
ally to the number of pixels mixed. It is compared with
other methods and shown in ﬁgure 16.
Fig. 16. Overview of the Mixup, Cutout, and CutMix, Example is from [162].
(iii) SaliencyMix: This technique addresses the problem of
cutmix and argues that ﬁlling a random region of the
image with a patch from another will not guarantee that
patch has rich information and thereby mixing labels of
unguaranteed patches leads the model to learn unnec-
essary information about the patch [141]. To deal with
that issue, saliencyMix ﬁrst selects the salient part of the
image and pastes it to a random region or salient or non-
salient of another image. It is shown in ﬁgure
17 and
ﬁgure 18.
4https://research.googleblog.com/2017/08/
launching-speech-commands-
dataset.html
5http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/index.php
Fig. 17. An example of SaliencyMix augmentation, image is taken from [141].
Fig. 18.
This image shows the proposed SaliencyMix data augmentation
procedure, courtesy [141]
(iv) RSMDA: Random Slices Mixing Data Augmentation:
RSMDA [77] addresses issues of feature losing in sin-
gle image erasing data augmentation. RSMDA gets the
slices of one image and mixes them with another image
alternatively and the corresponding labels are also mixed
accordingly. This work further investigates three different
strategies of RSMDA; row-wise slice mixing, column-
wise slice mixing and randomness of both. Row-wise
slice mixing has shown superior performance. Demon-
stration of each of the slices mixing strategy is in ﬁg-
ure 19.
(v) Puzzle Mix: This article [70] proposes a puzzle mix data
augmentation technique that focuses on using explicitly
salient information and basic statistics of image wisely
with the aim of breaking the misleading supervision
of neural networks over existing data augmentations.
Furthermore, the demonstration is shown and compared
with relevant methods in ﬁgure 20.
(vi) SnapMix: The article [60] proposes the Semantically
Proportional Mixing (SnapMix) that utilises class activa-
tion map (CAM) to reduce the label noise level. SnapMix
creates the target label considering the actual salient
pixel taking part in the augmented image, which ensures
semantic correspondence between the augmented image
and mixed labels. The overall process is demonstrated
and compared with closely matching augmentations in
the ﬁgure 21.
(vii) FMix: This article proposes the FMix [52], a kind of
mixed sample data augmentation (MSDA), that utilises
the random binary masks. These random binary masks
are acquired by applying a threshold to low-frequency
images that are obtained from the Fourier space. Once
the mask is obtained, one color region is applied to input
one and another color region is applied to another input.
The overall process is shown in ﬁgure 22.
(viii) MixMo: This paper [112] focuses on the learning of
multi-input multi-output via sub-network. The main mo-

Fig. 19. RSMDA three different strategies. Image is taken from [77].
Fig. 20. A visual comparison of the mixup methods. Puzzle Mix ensures to
contain sufﬁcient target class information while preserving the local statistics
of each in, the example is from [70].
Fig. 21. A visual comparison of Mixup, CutMix, and SnapMix. The ﬁgure
gives an example where a label generated by SnapMix is visually more
consistent with the mixed image semantic structure compared to CutMix and
Mixup, courtesy [60].
Fig. 22.
Example masks and mixed images from CIFAR-10 for FMix,
example is from [52].
tivation of the paper is to replace direct hidden summing
operations with more solid mechanisms. For that purpose,
it proposes MixMo, which embeds M inputs into the
shared space, mixes and passes these to a further layer
for classiﬁcation. Moreover, the overall process is demon-
strated in ﬁgure 23:
Fig. 23. This image shows the overview of MixMo augmentation, the image
is taken from [112].
(ix) StyleMix: This paper [59] targets previous approaches
problems that are unable to differentiate between content
and style features, approaches such as mixup based data
augmentations. To remedy this problem, it proposes two
approaches styleMix and StyleCutMix, this is the ﬁrst

work that separately deals with content and style fea-
tures of images very carefully and it showed impressive
performance on popular benchmark datasets. The overall
process is deﬁned and compared with SOTA approaches
in ﬁgure 24.
Fig. 24.
A Visual comparison of StyleMix [59] and StyleCutMix with
Mixup [163] and CutMix [162], example is from [59].
(x) RandomMix: This work [94] improves generalization
capability by proposing randomMix, which randomly
selects augmentation from a set of image mixing aug-
mentations and applies it to images, enabling the model to
look at diverse samples. This method showed impressive
results over SOTA image mixing methods. The overall
demonstration is shown in ﬁgure 25.
Fig. 25. An illustrative example of RandomMix, image is taken from [94].
(xi) MixMatch: MixMatch data augmentation technique is
very useful in semi-supervised learning. MixMatch [10]
augments single image K times and passes all K num-
ber of images to a classiﬁer, averages their prediction
and ﬁnally, their predictions are sharpened by adjusting
their distribution temperature term. It is demonstrated in
ﬁgure 26.
Fig. 26.
Diagram of the label guessing process used in MixMatch, cour-
tesy [10].
(xii) ReMixMatch: In this work [9], an extension of Mix-
Match [10] is proposed to make prior work efﬁcient by
introducing distribution alignment and augmentation an-
choring. The distribution alignment task aims to minimize
the gap between the marginal distribution of predictions
on unlabeled data and the marginal distribution of ground
truth labels. On the other hand, augmentation anchoring
feeds multiple strongly augmented versions of the input
into the model and encourages each output to be close
to the prediction for a weakly-augmented version of the
same input. The process is illustrated in ﬁgure 27.
Fig. 27.
Anchoring augmentation. It makes predictions on strong augmen-
tations of the same image (blue) using the forecast for a weakly enhanced
image (green, centre), courtesy [9].
(xiii) FixMatch: Fixmatch [130] is a method for improving the
performance of semi-supervised learning (SSL). It ﬁrst
assigns pseudo-labels to unlabeled images that have a
predicted probability above a certain threshold, and then
trains the model to match these labels using cross-entropy
loss on a strongly augmented version of the image. The
process is illustrated in Figure 28.
(xiv) AugMix: The work proposed in [56] presents Augmix,
a data augmentation technique that aims to reduce the
distribution gap between training and test data. Augmix
applies M random augmentations to an input image, each
with a random strength, and merges the resulting images

Fig. 28. This image shows the procedure of FixMatch, image is taken from
[130].
to produce a new image that spans a wider area of
the input space. The process is illustrated in Figure 29,
where three branches perform separate augmentations
and additional operations are added to increase diversity.
The resulting images are then mixed to produce a ﬁnal
augmented image, which is effective in improving model
robustness.
Fig. 29.
An overall procedure of AugMix augmentation and example is
from [56].
(xv) Simple Copy-Paste is a Strong Data Augmentation
Method, for Instance Segmentation: The proposed
approach in this work [43] involves copying and pasting
instances from one image to another to create an aug-
mented image. This simple technique has shown promis-
ing results and is easy to implement. Figure 30 illustrates
the process, where instances from two images are pasted
onto each other at different scales.
Fig. 30. Image augmentation performed by simple Copy-Paste method, image
courtesy [43].
(xvi) Improved Mixed-Example Data Augmentation: Re-
cently, label non-preserving data augmentation techniques
based on linear combinations of two examples have
demonstrated promising results. In this paper [135], the
authors investigate two research questions: (i) the rea-
sons behind the success of these methods and (ii) the
signiﬁcance of linearity in data augmentations. Figure 31
illustrates the overall process.
Fig. 31. A visual comparison of linear methods and generalized augmentation
performed by Improved Mixed-Example, image is taken from [135].
(xvii) Random image cropping and patching (RICAP): Ran-
dom Image Cropping and Patching (RICAP) [137] is a
new data augmentation technique that cuts and mixes
four images rather than two images. The key idea behind
RICAP is to crop patch from each of the four images
and then mixes these patch to create augmented image.
The labels of the images are also mixed in proportion to
the area of the patcehs. This technique showed impres-
sive performance on popular datasets i.e. CIFAR10, CI-
FAR100, and imageNet. RICAP demonstration is shown
in ﬁgure 32.
(xviii) Cutblur: This article [159] explores and analyses ex-
isting data augmentation techniques for super-resolution
and proposes another data augmentation technique for
super-resolution, named cutblur that cuts high-resolution
image patches and pastes to corresponding low-resolution
images and vice-versa. Cutblur shows impressive perfor-
mance on several super-resolution benchmark datasets.
Furthermore, the process is illustrated in ﬁgure 33 and
34.
(xix) ResizeMix: Mixing Data with Preserved Object In-
formation and True Labels :
The ResizeMix [111]
method directly cuts and pastes the source data in four
different ways to target the image. These four different
ways include salient part, non-part, random part or resized
source image to patch, as shown in the ﬁgure 35. It
addresses two questions:

Fig. 32.
A conceptual explanation of the RICAP data augmentation, the
example is from [137].
Fig. 33.
An Schematic illustration of CutBlur operation, image is taken
from [159].
• How to obtain a patch from the source image?
• where to paste the patch from the source image in the
target image?
Furthermore, it was found that saliency information is
not important to promote mixing data augmentation.
ResizeMix is shown in the ﬁgure 35.
(xx) ClassMix:
Segmentation-Based
Data
Augmenta-
tion for Semi-Supervised Learning : This research
work [104] proposes novel data augmentation for semi-
supervised learning for semantic segmentation task. It
showed that traditional data augmentations are not ef-
Fig. 34. A visual comparison between High resolution, low resolution and
CutBlur, courtesy [159].
Fig. 35. A visual representation of different cropping manners from the source
image and different pasting manners to the target image, image is taken from
[111].
fective for image semantic segmentation as they are for
image classiﬁcation. The proposed data augmentation
named ClassMix, augments the training sample by mix-
ing unlabeled samples, by exploiting network prediction
while taking into account object boundaries. It showed
a massive performance gain on two common semantic
segmentation datasets for semi-supervised learning. The
overall process is shown in the ﬁgure 36.
Fig. 36.
In a visual representation classMix augmentation, two images are
sampled then based on the predictions of each image a binary mask is created.
The mask is then used to mix the images and their predictions, he image is
taken from [?].
(xxi) Context Decoupling Augmentation for Weakly Su-
pervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS): This arti-
cle [134] addresses the problem of traditional data aug-
mentation techniques for WSSS, increasing the same con-
textual data semantic samples does not add much value
in object differentiation, i.e. in image classiﬁcation, “cat”
recognition is due to the cat itself and its surrounding
context, these both contexts discourages model to focus

only on the cat. To tackle that issue, this work proposes
a novel data augmentation, named Context Decoupling
Augmentation (CDA). CDA increases diversity of the
speciﬁc object and it guides the network to break the
dependencies between object and contextual information.
In this way, it also provides augmentation and the network
focuses on object(s) only rather than object(s) and its
contextual information. A comparison of traditional data
augmentation and CDA is shown below in the ﬁgure 37.
Fig. 37. A visual representation of the difference between the conventional
augmentation approach and context decoupling augmentation (CDA), image
is taken from [134].
(xxii) ObjectAug: Object-level Data Augmentation for Se-
mantic Image Segmentation: This article [164] ad-
dresses the problem of mixing image-level data augmen-
tation strategies, which failed to work for segmentation
as object and background are coupled and boundaries of
objects are not augmented due to their ﬁxed semantic
bond with the background. To mitigate this problem, this
article [164] proposes a novel approach named Objec-
tAug, object-level augmentation for semantic segmenta-
tion. First, it separates object(s) and backgrounds from an
image with the help of semantic labels then each object
is augmented using popular data augmentation techniques
such as ﬂipping and rotating. Pixel changes due to these
data augmentations are restored using image inpainting.
Finally, the object(s) and background are coupled to
create an augmented image. Experimental results suggest
that ObjectAug has shown performance improvement for
segmentation tasks. Furthermore, ObjectAug is shown in
the ﬁgure 38.
2) AutoAugment: The goal of this technique is to ﬁnd
the data augmentation policies from training data. It solves
the problem of ﬁnding the best augmentation policy as a
discrete search problem. It consists of a search algorithm and
a search space. Furthermore, these techniques are classiﬁed
into two sub-categories based on reinforcement learning and
non-reinforcement learning.
• Reinforcement learning data augmentation
Fig. 38.
ObjectAug can perform various augmentation methods for each
object to boost the performance of semantic segmentation. The left husky
is scaled and shifted, while the right one is ﬂipped and shifted. Thus,
the boundaries between objects are extensively augmented to boost their
performance, the example is from [164].
• Non-Reinforcement learning data augmentation
Reinforcement Learning data augmentations: Reinforce-
ment learning data augmentation techniques generalize and
improve the performance of deep networks in an environment.
(i) AutoAugment: This work [23] automatically ﬁnds the
best data augmentation rather than manual data aug-
mentation. To address the limitations of manual search-
based data augmentation, this article proposes autoaug-
ment, where search space is designed and has policies
consisting of many sub-policies. Each sub-policy has two
parameters one is the image processing function and
the second one is the probability with magnitude. These
sub-policies are found using reinforcement learning as a
searching algorithm. The overall process is demonstrated
in ﬁgure 39.
Fig. 39.
A visual overview of the sub-policies from ImageNet using
AutoAugment, example is from [23].
(ii) Fast AutoAugment: Fast Autoaugment [90] addresses
the problem of autoaugment, autoaugment takes a lot
of time to ﬁnd the optimal data augmentation strategy.
To reduce the searching time, fast auto augment ﬁnds

more optimal data augmentations using an efﬁcient search
strategy based on density matching. It reduces the higher
order of training time compared to autoaugment. The
overall procedure is shown in ﬁgure 40.
Fig. 40. An overall procedure of augmentation search by Fast AutoAugment
algorithm, courtesy [90].
(iii) Faster AutoAugment: This article proposes a faster
autoaugment [53] policy intending to ﬁnd effective data
augmentation policies very efﬁciently. Faster autoaug-
ment is based on a differentiable augmentation searching
policy and additionally, it not only estimates gradients
for many transformation operations having discrete pa-
rameters but also provides a mechanism for choosing
operations efﬁciently. Moreover, it introduces a training
objective function with aim of minimising the distance
between original and augmented distribution, which is
also differentiable. Parameters of augmentations are up-
dated during backpropagation. The Overall process is
deﬁned in ﬁgure 41:
(iv) Reinforcement Learning with Augmented Data: This
paper proposes Reinforcement Learning with Augmented
Data (RAD) [84], easily pluggable and enhances the
performance of RL algorithms by targeting two issues i)
learning data efﬁciency and ii) generalisation capability
for new environments. Furthermore, it shows traditional
data augmentation techniques enable RL algorithms to
outperform complex SOTA tasks for pixel-based control
and state-based control. Overall process is demonstrated
in ﬁgure 42:
(v) Local Patch AutoAugment with Multi-Agent Collab-
oration:
This is the ﬁrst work [91] that ﬁnds data
augmentation policy for patch level using reinforce-
ment learning, named multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL). MARL starts by dividing images into patches
and jointly ﬁnds the optimal data augmentation policy
for each patch. It shows competitive results on SOTA
benchmarks. Overall process is deﬁned in ﬁgure 43:
(vi) Learning Data Augmentation Strategies for Object
Detection: This work [171] proposes to use autoaug-
ment that learns the best policies for object detection.
It ﬁnds the best operation and optimal value. Moreover,
it addresses two key issues of augmentation for object
detection,
Fig. 41.
An Overview of the Faster AutoAugment augmentation, image is
taken from [53].
Fig. 42.
An overview of different augmentation investigated in RAD, the
example is from [84].
Fig. 43. An illustration of different automated augmentation policies, cour-
tesy [91].

a) Classiﬁcation learned policies can not directly be ap-
plied for detection tasks, and it adds more complexity
to deal with bounding boxes if geometric augmenta-
tions are applied.
b) Most researchers think it adds much less value com-
pared to designing new network architecture so gets
less attention but augmentation for object detection
should be selected carefully.
Some sub-policies for this data augmentation are shown
below:
Fig. 44.
Different data augmentation sub-policies explored, image is taken
from [171].
Sub-policy 1. (Color, 0.2, 8), (Rotate, 0.8, 10)
Sub-policy 2. (BBox Only ShearY, 0.8, 5)
Sub-policy 3. (SolarizeAdd, 0.6, 8), (Brightness, 0.8, 10)
Sub-policy 4. (ShearY, 0.6, 10), (BBox Only Equalize, 0.6,8)
Sub-policy 5. (Equalize, 0.6, 10), (TranslateX, 0.2, 2)
(vii) Scale-aware Automatic Augmentation for Object De-
tection: This work [18] proposes a new data augmen-
tation for object detection named scale aware autoAug,
ﬁrst, it deﬁnes a search space where image level and box
level data augmentation are prepared for scale invariance,
secondly, it also proposes a new search metric named
Pareto scale balance for search augmentation effectively
and efﬁciently. Some examples of data augmentation are
shown in ﬁgure 45.
Fig. 45.
Example of scale-aware search space which includes image level
and box-level augmentation, the example is from, [18].
3)
Non-Reinforcement Learning data augmentations:
In auto-agument category, there are some approaches that do
not require any reinforcement learning algorithm to ﬁnd the
best data augmentation, we refer to them as non-reinforcement
learning data augmentation. We categorise a few of them as
discussed below.
(i) RandAugment: Previous optimal augmentation ﬁnding
uses reinforcement or some complex learning strategy
that takes a lot of time to ﬁnd. RandAugment augmen-
tation [24] removes obstacles of a separate searching
phase, which makes training more complex and con-
sequently adds computational cost overhead. To break
this, randaugment applies randomly N number of data
augmentations with M magnitude of all augmentations.
Some visualisation is demonstrated in the ﬁgure 46:
Fig. 46. Example images augmented by RandAugment, image is taken from
[24].
(ii) RangeAugment RangeAugment [98] is a data aug-
mentation technique that aims to improve upon the

shortcomings of existing approaches like AutoAugment
and RandAugment. These methods use manually-deﬁned
ranges of magnitudes for each type of data augmentation,
which can result in sub-optimal policies. In contrast,
RangeAugment learns efﬁcient ranges of magnitudes for
each augmentation and composite data augmentation by
introducing an auxiliary loss based on image similarity.
This loss is designed to control the magnitude ranges,
resulting in more effective and optimal policies. The
process of RangeAugment is illustrated in Figure 47.
Fig. 47. RangeAugment with neural network training [98].
(iii) ADA: Adversarial Data Augmentation for Object
Detection: Data augmentation for object detection has
improved performance but it is difﬁcult to understand
whether these augmentations are optimal or not. This
article [8] provides a systematic way to ﬁnd optimal
adversarial perturbation of data augmentation from an
object detection perspective, that is based on game-
theoretic interpretation aka Nash equilibrium of data.
Nash equilibrium provides the optimal bounding box pre-
dictor and optimal design for data augmentation. Optimal
adversarial perturbation refers to the worst perturbation of
ground truth, that forces the box predictor to learn from
the most difﬁcult distribution of samples. An example is
shown in ﬁgure 48.
Fig. 48.
Annotation distribution types. Adversarial augmentation chooses
bounding boxes that are as distinct from the truth as possible while yet
containing crucial object characteristics. The example is taken from [8].
(iv) Deep CNN Ensemble with Data Augmentation for
Object Detection: This article [49] proposes a new vari-
ant of the regions with convolutional neural network (R-
CNN) model with two core modiﬁcations in training and
evaluation. First, it uses several different CNN models
as ensembler in R-CNN, secondly, it smartly augments
PASCAL VOC training examples with Microsoft COCO
data by selecting a subset from Microsoft COCO datasets
that are consistent with PASCAL VOC. Consequently, it
increases the dataset size and improves the performance.
The schematic diagram is shown in the ﬁgure 49.
Fig. 49.
The proposed schematic diagram. The example is taken from [49].
(v) Robust and Accurate Object Detection via Adversarial
Learning: This article [16] ﬁrst shows classiﬁer perfor-
mance gain from different data augmentations when it
is ﬁne-tuned to object detection tasks and suggests that
the performance in terms of accuracy or robustness is not
improving. The article provides a unique way of exploring
adversarial samples that helps to improve performance.
To do so, it augments the example during the ﬁne-
tuning stage for object detectors by exploring adversarial
samples, which is considered as model-dependent data
augmentation. First, it picks the stronger adversarial sam-
ple from detector classiﬁcation and localization layers
and ensures the augmentation policy remains consistent.
It showed signiﬁcant performance gain in terms of ac-
curacy and robustness on different object detection tasks.
Furthermore, the robustness and accuracy of the proposed
method are shown in ﬁgure 50.
(vi) Perspective Transformation Data Augmentation for
Object Detection: This article [145] proposes a new
data augmentation for objection detection named perspec-
tive transformation that generates new images captured
at different angles. Thus, it mimics images as if they
are taken at a certain angle where the camera can not
capture those images. This method showed effectiveness
on several object detection datasets. An example of the
proposed data augmentation is shown in ﬁgure 51.
(vii) Deep Adversarial Data Augmentation for Extremely
Low Data Regimes: This article [165] addresses the
issue of extremely low data regimes-labeled data is very
less, no unlabeled data at all. To deal with that problem, it

Fig. 50. Overview of Robust and Accurate Object detection via adversarial
learning. In the top image, it improves object detector accuracy on clean im-
ages. In middle, improves the detector’s robustness against natural corruption,
and at the bottom, it improves the robustness against cross-dataset domain
shift. The image is taken from [18].
Fig. 51. Perspective transformation data augmentation. An example image is
taken from [145]
proposes a deep adversarial data augmentation (DADA),
where data augmentation is formulated as a problem of
training class conditional and supervised GAN. Further-
more, it also introduces new discriminator loss with aim
of ﬁtting data augmentation where real and augmented
samples are forced to participate equally and be consistent
in ﬁnding decision boundaries.
4) Feature augmentation: Feature augmentation is another
category of data augmentation, where images are transformed
into embedding or representation then data augmentation is
performed on the embedding of the image. Recently a few
works have been done in this area, we selectively highlight
the work in a precise way.
(i) FeatMatch: Feature-Based Augmentation for Semi-
Supervised Learning : This work [81] presents a novel
approach of data augmentation in features space for SSL
inspired by an image-based SSL method that uses a com-
bination of augmentations of the images and consistency
regularization. Image-based SSL methods are restricted to
only conventional data augmentation. To break this end,
the feature-based SSL method produced diverse features
from complex data augmentations. One key point is, these
advanced data augmentations exploit the information
from both intra-class and inter-class representations ex-
tracted via clustering. The proposed method only showed
signiﬁcant performance gain on min-Imagenet such as an
absolute 17.44% gain on miniImageNet, but also showed
robustness on samples that are out-of-distribution. More-
over, the difference between image-level and feature-level
augmentation and consistency is shown in ﬁgure 52.
Fig. 52.
An overview of featMatch augmentation applied on images and
features. Image is taken from [21].
(ii) Dataset
Augmentation
in
Feature
Space:
This
work [28] ﬁrst used encoder-decoder to learn represen-
tation, then on representation apply different transforma-
tions such as adding noise, interpolating, or extrapolating.
The proposed method has shown performance improve-

ment on both static and sequential data. Moreover, a
demonstration of this augmentation is shown in ﬁgure 53.
Fig. 53.
Overview of interpolation and extrapolation between handwritten
characters. Original characters are shown in bold. Image is taken from [28].
(iii) Feature Space Augmentation for Long-Tailed Data :
This paper [21] proposed the novel data augmentation in
feature space to address the long-tailed issue and uplift
the under-represented class samples. The proposed ap-
proach ﬁrst separates class-speciﬁc features into generic
and speciﬁc features with the help of class activation
maps. Under-represented class samples are generated
by injecting class-speciﬁc features of under-represented
classes with class-generic features from other confusing
classes. It enables diverse data and also deals with the
problem of under-represented class samples. It has shown
SOTA performance on different datasets. It is demon-
strated in ﬁgure 54.
Fig. 54.
Left: limited but well-spread data. Right: Without sufﬁcient data.
Image is taken from [21].
(iv) Adversarial Feature Augmentation for Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation: Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) showed promising results in unsupervised do-
main adaptation to learn target domain features indistin-
guishable from the source domain. This work [143] ex-
tends GAN by contributing: i) it forces feature extractor to
be domain-invariant ii) To train it via data augmentation
in feature space, named feature augmentation. This work
explores data augmentation at the feature level with GAN.
(v) Understanding data augmentation for classiﬁcation:
when to warp? : This paper [154] investigates the data
augmentation advantages on image space and feature
space during training. It proposed two approaches i)
data warping which generates extra samples in image
space using data augmentations and ii) synthetic over-
sampling, which generates samples in feature space. It
also suggests that it is possible to apply general data
augmentation techniques in feature space if reasonable
data augmentations for data are known.
5) Neural Style Transfer: It is another category of data
augmentation, which can transfer the artist style of one image
to another without changing semantics at a high level. It brings
more variety to the training set. The main objective of this
neural style transfer is to generate a third image from two
images, where one image provides texture content and another
provides high-level semantic content. We explore some of the
SOTA augmentations for the sub-category.
(i) STaDA: Style Transfer as Data Augmentation : This
work [169] thoroughly evaluated different SOTA neural
style transfer algorithms as data augmentation for image
classiﬁcation tasks. It shows signiﬁcant performance gain
on Caltech 101 [38] and Caltech 256 [48] datasets. Fur-
thermore, it also combines neural style transfer algorithms
with conventional data augmentation methods. A sample
of this augmentation is shown in ﬁgure 55.
Fig. 55. Overview of the original image and two stylized images by STaDA.
Image is taken from [169].
(ii) Style Augmentation: Data Augmentation via Style
Randomization: This work [66] proposed a novel data
augmentation named style augmentation (SA) based on
style neural transfer. SA randomizes the color, contrast,
and texture while maintaining the shape and semantic
content during the training. This is done by picking
an arbitrary style transfer network for randomizing the
style and by getting the target style from multivariate
normal distribution embedding. It improves performance
in three different tasks: classiﬁcation, regression, and
domain adaptation. The style augmentation sample is
shown in ﬁgure 56.
Fig. 56. Overview of Style augmentation applied to an image. The shape is
preserved but the style, including color, texture, and contrast is randomized.
Image is from [66].

(iii) StyPath: Style-Transfer Data Augmentation for Ro-
bust Histology Image Classiﬁcation: This paper [22]
proposes a novel pipeline for Antibody Mediated Rejec-
tion (AMR) classiﬁcation in kidneys based on StyPath
data augmentation. StyPath is data augmentation that
transfers style intending to reduce bias. The proposed
augmentation is much faster than SOTA augmentations
for AMR classiﬁcation. Some samples are shown in
ﬁgure 57.
Fig. 57. Comparison of content and random initialization. Authors observe
that output images initialized as the noise appeared distorted and discolored
and failed to retain the content ﬁdelity. Image is from [22].
(iv) A Neural Algorithm of Artistic Style : This work [42]
introduces an artiﬁcial system (AS) based on a deep
neural network that generates artistic images of high
perceptual quality. AS creates neural embedding then it
uses the embedding to separate the style and content of
the image and then recombines the content and style of
target images to generate the artistic image. The sample
is shown in ﬁgure 59
(v) Neural Style Transfer as Data Augmentation for
Improving COVID-19 Diagnosis Classiﬁcation : This
work [58] shows the effectiveness of a cycle GAN, which
is mostly used for neural style transfer, augments COVID-
19 negative x-ray image to convert into a positive COVID
image to balance the dataset and also to increase the
diversity of the dataset. It shows that augmenting the
images with cycle GAN can improve performance over
several different CNN architectures. A sample of this
augmentation is shown in ﬁgure 58.
III. RESULTS
In this section, we provide the detailed result for various
Computer Vision tasks such as image classiﬁcation, object
detection, and semantic segmentation. The main purpose is
to show the effect of the data augmentation in CV different
tasks and to do so, we compile results from various SOTA
data augmentation works.
Fig. 58. Overview of generating synthetic COVID images from the healthy
category. As the no of epochs grows the quality of the synthetic images
improves. An example is from [58].
Fig. 59.
Overview of the styled image by the neural algorithm. Image is
from [42].
A. Image Classiﬁcation
In this section, we present the result of several SOTA
data augmentation methods for supervised learning and semi-
supervised learning. Both are discussed below:
1) supervised learning results: In supervised learning, we
have data on a large quantity that is fully labeled and we use
this data to train the neural network (NN) model. In this sec-
tion, we compile and compare the results from several SOTA
data augmentation methods and put them in two different ta-
bles as shown in table II-B5 and table II. In table II-B5 results,
+ sign shows traditional data augmentations such as ﬂipping,
rotating, and cropping, have been used along with the SOTA
augmentation methods. The used datasets are CIFAR10 [74],
CIFAR100 [74] and ImageNet [26], and the used networks
are wideresnet ﬂavours [55], pyramid network ﬂavours and
several popular resnet ﬂavours [55]. Accuracy is the evaluation
metric used to compare the different algorithms used. The
higher the accuracy, the better. As it can be in table II-B5 and
table II, each data augmentation has signiﬁcantly improved the
accuracy.
2) Semi-supervised
learning:
Semi-supervised
learning
(SSL) is when we have a limited labeled data but unlabeled
data is available on the large scale. Labeling the unlabeled
data is tedious, time-consuming, and costly [79], [155]. To
avoid these issues, SSL is used. There are several techniques

Accuracies
Method
CIFAR10
CIFAR10+
CIFAR100
CIFAR100+
ResNet-18 (Baseline)
89.37
95.28
63.32
77.54
ResNet-18 + CutOut
90.69
96.25
65.02
80.58
ResNet-18 + Random Erasing
95.28
95.32
-
-
ResNet-18 + CutMix
90.56
96.22
65.58
80.58
ResNet-18 + SaliencyMix
92.41
96.35
71.27
80.71
ResNet-18 + GridMask
95.28
96.54
-
-
ResNet-50 (Baseline)
87.86
95.02
63.52
78.42
ResNet-50 + CutOut
91.16
96.14
67.03
78.62
ResNet-50 + CutMix
90.84
96.39
68.35
81.28
ResNet-50 + SaliencyMix
93.19
96.54
75.11
81.43
WideResNet-28-10 (Baseline) [141]
93.03
96.13
73.94
81.20
WideResNet-28-10 + CutOut [29]
94.46
96.92
76.06
81.59
WideResNet-28-10 + Random Erasing
96.2
96.92
81.59
82.27
WideResNet-28-10 + GridMask
96.13
97.24
-
-
WideResNet-28-10 + CutMix
94.82
97.13
76.79
83.34
WideResNet-28-10 + PuzzleMix
-
-
-
83.77
WideResNet-28-10 + SaliencyMix
95.96
97.24
80.55
83.44
Note: + sign after dataset name shows that traditional data augmentation methods have been used
TABLE I
BASELINE PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF VARIOUS AUGMENTATION ON CIFAR10 AND CIFAR100 DATASETS.
of SSL, but recently, data augmentation is employed with
the limited labeled data to increase the diversity of the data.
Data augmentation with SSL has increased the performance
on different datasets and NN architectures. The used dataset
are CIFAR10, CIFAR100, SVHn [103] and Mini-ImageNet.
Several SSL techniques are used such as pseudoLabel, SSL
with memory, label propagation, mean teacher, etc. We com-
pile the results from many SOTA SSL methods with data
augmentation and present them in this work. The effect of
the data augmentation has also been shown with the different
number of samples in SSL as shown in table III, table IV, and
table V.
B. Object detection
In this section, we discuss the effectiveness of various
image data augmentation techniques on the frequently used
COCO2017 [92], PASCAL VOC [35], VOC 2007 [33], and
VOC 2012 [34] datasets, which are commonly used for object
detection tasks. We compile results from various SOTA data
augmentation methods and put them in three different tables as
shown in the table II-B5, VII, and VIII. FRCNN along with
synthetic data gives the best mAP accuracy on VOC 2007
dataset as shown in table VII. Several classical and automatic
data augmentation methods have shown promising perfor-
mance using different SOTA models on the PASCAL VOC
dataset as shown in table II-B5. The DetAdvProp achieves the
highest score outperforming AutoAugment [23] on PASCAL
VOC 2012 dataset as shown in the table VIII. The scores are
in terms of mean average precision (mAP), average precision
(AP) at the intersection over union (IOU) of 0.5 (AP50), and
AP at IOU of 0.75 (AP75) metrics.
C. Semantic Segmentation
This subsection includes semantic segmentation results on
PASCAL VOC and CITYSCAPES datasets, most frequently
used in several research papers. In table IX and table X,
we compiled the effectiveness of validation set results on the
different datasets with the effect of SOTA data augmentations
on the semantic segmentation task. The results are reported
in the term of mean intersection over union (mIoU) as the
accuracy on the Cityscape dataset and PASCAL VOC dataset
as shown in table IX and table X, respectively. We found
performance gains on a few metrics such as mIoU and mAP,
with several semantic segmentation models: deeplabv3+ [160],
DeepLab-v2 [104], Xception-65 [160], ExFuse [166] and
Eff-L2 [172] . It has been observed that incorporating data
augmentation techniques can enhance the performance of
semantic segmentation models. Notably, advanced image data
augmentation methods have demonstrated greater improve-
ments in performance compared to traditional techniques.
Table IX and table X provide evidence of this improvement.
The traditional data augmentations including rotation, scaling,
ﬂipping, and shifting [164].
IV. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
A. Current approaches
It is proven that if we provide more data to the model,
it improves model performance [50], [136]. A few current
tendencies are discussed by Xu et al.
[157]. Among these,
one way is to collect the data and label it manually, but it
is not an efﬁcient way to do this. Another efﬁcient way is
to apply data augmentation, the more data augmentations we
apply, the better improvement we get in terms of performance
but to a certain extent. Currently, image mixing methods and
autoaugment methods are successful for image classiﬁcation
tasks, scale aware based auto augment methods are showing
promising results in detection tasks and semantic segmentation
tasks. But these data augmentation performances can vary
with the number of data augmentation applied, as it is known

CIFAR-10
CIFAR-100
ImageNet
Augmentation
Accuracy (%)
Model
Accuracy (%)
Model
Accuracy (%)
Model
Cutout [29]
97.04
WRN-28-10
81.59
WRN-28-10
77.1
ResNet-50
Random Erasing [170]
96.92
WRN-28-10
82.27
WRN-28-10
-
-
Hide-and-Seek [129]
95.53
ResNet-110
78.13
ResNet-110
77.20
ResNet-50
GridMask [15]
97.24
WRN-28-10
-
-
77.9
ResNet-50
LocalAugment [71]
-
-
95.92
WRN-22-10
76.87
ResNet-50
SalfMix [20]
96.62
PreActResNet-101
80.11
PreActResNet-101
-
-
KeepAugment [47]
97.8
ResNet-28-10
-
-
80.3
ResNet-101
Cut-Thumbnail [156]
97.8
ResNet-56
95.94
WRN-28-10
79.21
ResNet-50
MixUp [163]
97.3
WRN-28-10
82.5
WRN-28-10
77.9
ResNet-50
CutMix [162]
97.10
WRN-28-10
83.40
WRN-28-10
78.6
ResNet-50
SaliencyMix [141]
97.24
WRN-28-10
83.44
WRN-28-10
78.74
ResNet-50
PuzzleMix [70]
-
-
84.05
WRN-28-10
77.51
ResNet-50
FMix [52]
98.64
Pyramid
83.95
Dense
77.70
ResNet-101
MixMo [112]
96.38
WRN-28-10
82.40
WRN-28-10
-
-
StyleMix [59]
96.44
PyramidNet-200
85.83
PyramidNet-200
77.29
PyramidNet-200
RandomMix [94]
98.02
WRN-28-10
84.84
WRN-28-10
77.88
WRN-28-10
MixMatch [10]
95.05
WRN-28-10
74.12
WRN-28-10
-
-
ReMixMatch [9]
94.71
WRN-28-2
-
-
-
-
FixMatch [130]
95.69
WRN-28-2
77.04
WRN-28-2
-
-
AugMix [56]
-
-
-
-
77.6
ResNet-50
Improved Mixed-Example [135]
96.02
ResNet-18
80.3
ResNet-18
-
-
RICAP [137]
97.18
WRN-28-10
82.56
ResNet-28-10
78.62
WRN-50-2
ResizeMix [111]
97.60
WRN-28-10
84.31
WRN-28-10
79.00
ResNet-50
AutoAugment [23]
97.40
WRN-28-10
82.90
WRN-28-10
83.50
AmoebaNet-C
Fast AutoAugment [90]
98.00
SS(26 2×96d)
85.10
SS(26 2×96d)
80.60
ResNet-200
Faster AutoAugment [53]
98.00
SS(26 2 × 112d)
84.40
SS(26 2×96d)
75.90
ResNet-50
Local Patch AutoAugment [91]
98.10
SS(26 2 × 112d)
85.90
SS(26 2×96d)
81.00
ResNet-200
RandAugment [24]
98.50
PyramidNet
83.30
WRN-28-10
85.00
EfﬁcientNet-B7
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF THE VARIOUS IMAGE ERASING AND IMAGE MIXING AUGMENTATIONS FOR IMAGE CLASSIFICATION PROBLEMS. WRN
AND SS STAND FOR WIDERESNET AND SHAKE-SHAKE, RESPECTIVELY.
that the combined data augmentation methods show better
performance than single one [108], [158].
B. Theoretical aspects
There is no theoretical support available to explain why
speciﬁc augmentation is improving performance and which
sample(s) should be augmented, as the same aspect has been
discussed by Yang et al [158] and Shorten et al [123]. Like
in random erasing, we randomly erase the region of the
image - sometime may erase discriminating features, and the
erased image makes no sense to a human. But the reason
behind performance improvement is still unknown, which is
another open challenge. Most of the time, we ﬁnd the optimal
parameters of the augmentation through an extensive number
of experiments or we choose data augmentation based on our
experience. But there should be a mechanism for choosing the
data augmentation with theoretical support considering model
architecture and dataset size. Researching the theoretical as-
pect is another open challenge for the research community.
C. Optimal number of samples generation
It is a known fact, as we increase data size, it improves
the performance [50], [123], [136], [158] but it is not a case
- increasing the number of samples will not improve perfor-
mance after a certain number of samples
[78]. What is the
optimal number of samples to be generated, depending on the
model architecture and dataset size, is a challenging aspect to
be explored. Currently, researchers perform many experiments
to ﬁnd the optimal number of sample generation [78]. But it
is not feasible way as it requires time and computational cost.
Can we devise a mechanism to ﬁnd an optimal number of
samples, which is an open research challenge?
D. Selection of data augmentation based on model archi-
tecture and dataset
Data augmentation selection depends on the nature of the
dataset and model architecture. Like on MNIST [27] dataset,
geometric transformations are not safe such as rotation on 6
and 9 digits will no longer preserve the label information.
For densely parameterized CNN, it is easy to overﬁt weakly
augmented datasets, and for shallow parameterized CNN, it
may break generalization capability with data augmentation.
It suggests, while selecting the data augmentation, the nature
of the dataset and model architecture should be taken into
account. Currently, numerous experiments are performed to
ﬁnd model architecture and suitable data augmentation for a
speciﬁc dataset. Devising a systematic approach to select the
data augmentation based on dataset and model architecture is
another gap to be ﬁlled.
E. Augmentations for spaces
Most of the data augmentation approaches have been ex-
plored on the image level - data space. Very few research
works have explored data on feature level - feature space. The
challenge here arises, in which space should we apply data

TABLE III
COMPARISON ON CIFAR-10 AND SVHN. THE NUMBER REPRESENTS ERROR RATES ACROSS THREE RUNS.
CIFAR-10
SVHN
Method
40 labels
250 labels
1,000 labels
4,000 labels
40 labels
250 labels
1,000 labels
4,000 labels
VAT [101]
-
36.03 ± 2.82
18.64 ± 0.40
11.05 ± 0.31
-
8.41 ± 1.01
5.98 ± 0.21
4.20 ± 0.15
Mean Teacher [138]
-
47.32 ± 4.71
17.32±4.00
10.36±0.25
-
6.45±2.43
3.75±.10
3.39±0.11
MixMatch [10]
47.54±11.50
11.08±.87
7.75±.32
6.24±.06
42.55±14.53
3.78±.26
3.27±.31
2.89±.06
ReMixMatch [9]
19.10±9.64
6.27±0.34
5.73±0.16
5.14±0.04
3.34±0.20
3.10±0.50
2.83±0.30
2.42±0.09
UDA
29.05±5.93
8.76± 0.90
5.87± 0.13
5.29± 0.25
52.63±20.51
2.76± 0.17
2.55± 0.09
2.47± 0.15
SSL with Memory [17]
-
-
-
11.9±0.22
-
8.83
4.21
-
Deep Co-Training [110]
-
-
-
8.35± 0.06
-
-
3.29 ±0.03
-
Weight Averaging [5]
-
-
15.58 I 0.12
9.05± 0.21
-
-
-
-
ICT [142]
-
-
15.48 I 0.78
7.29± 0.02
-
4.78 I 0.68
3.89 ±0.04
-
Label Propagation [64]
-
-
16.93 ± 0.70
10.61 ± 0.28
-
-
-
-
SNTG [96]
-
-
18.41 ± 0.52
9.89 ±0.34
-
4.29± 0.23
3.86 ±0.27
-
PLCB [4]
-
-
6.85 ±0.15
5.97± 0.15
-
-
-
-
II-model [120]
-
53.02 ±2.05
31.53 ± 0.98
17.41± 0.37
-
17.65 ±0.27
8.60± 0.18
5.57± 0.14
PseudoLabel [85]
-
49.98 ±1.17
30.91 ±1.73
16.21 ± 0.11
-
21.16± 0.88
10.19 ± 0.41
5.71± 0.07
Mixup [163]
-
47.43 ± 0.92
25.72 ± 0.66
13.15 ± 0.20
-
39.97 ± 1.89
16.79 ± 0.63
7.96 ±0.14
FeatMatch [81]
-
7.50 ±0.64
5.76 ±0.07
4.91± 0.18
-
3.34± 0.19
3.10± 0.06
2.62 ±0.08
FixMatch [130]
13.81±3.37
5.07±0.65
-
4.26±0.05
3.96±2.17
2.48±0.38
2.28±0.11
-
SelfMatch [69]
93.19±1.08
95.13±0.26
-
95.94±0.08
96.58±1.02
97.37±0.43
97.49±0.07
-
TABLE IV
COMPARISON ON CIFAR-100 AND MINI-IMAGENET. THE NUMBER REPRESENTS ERROR RATES ACROSS TWO RUNS.
CIFAR-100
mini-ImageNet
Method
400 labels
4,000 labels
10,000 labels
4,000 labels
10,000 labels
II-model [120]
-
-
39.19± 0.36
-
-
SNTG [96]
-
-
37.97± 0.29
-
-
SSL with Memory [17]
-
-
34.51± 0.61
-
-
Deep Co-Training [110]
-
-
34.63± 0.14
-
-
Weight Averaging [5]
-
-
33.62± 0.54
-
-
Mean Teacher [138]
-
45.36 ±0.49
36.08± 0.51
72.51± 0.22
57.55 ± 1.11
Label Propagation [64]
-
43.73 ±0.20
35.92 ±0.47
70.29± 0.81
57.58 ±1.47
PLCB [4]
-
37.55 ±1.09
32.15 ±0.50
56.49 ±0.51
46.08 ± 0.11
FeatMatch
-
31.06 ± 0.41
26.83 ± 0.04
39.05 0.06
34.79±0.22
MixMatch
67.61±1.32
-
28.31±0.33
-
-
UDA
59.28±0.88
-
24.50±0.25
-
-
ReMixMatch
44.28±2.06
-
23.03±0.56
-
-
FixMatch
48.85±1.75
-
22.60±0.12
-
-
augmentation, data space, or feature space? It is another inter-
esting aspect that can be explored. For the current approaches,
it seems like it depends on the dataset, model architecture, and
task. Currently, approaches are conducting experiments in data
space and feature space and then selecting the best one [154].
It is not the optimal way to ﬁnd data augmentation for speciﬁc
space. It is still an open challenge to be solved.
F. Open research questions
Despite the success of data augmentation techniques in dif-
ferent Computer Vision tasks, it still failed to solve challenges
in SOTA data augmentation techniques. After thoroughly
reviewing SOTA data augmentation approaches, we found
several challenges and difﬁculties, which are yet to be solved,
as it is listed below:
• In image mixing techniques, label smoothing has been
used. It makes sense whatever portion of images is mixed,
corresponding labels should be mixed accordingly. To
the best of our knowledge, none has explored label
smoothing for image manipulation and image erasing
subcategories - where the image part is lost. For example,
if the image portion is randomly cut out in cutout data
augmentation, the corresponding label should be mixed.
It is an interesting open research question.
• Currently, data augmentation is performed without con-
sidering the importance of an example. All examples
may not be difﬁcult for the neural network to learn,
but some are. Thus, augmentation should be applied to
those difﬁcult examples by measuring the importance
of the examples. How neural network behave if data
augmentation is applied to those difﬁcult examples?
• In image mixing data augmentations, if we mix more
than two images salient parts, that are truly participating
in augmentation unlike RICAP [137], what is its effect
in terms of accuracy and robustness against adversarial
attacks? Note, the corresponding labels of these images
will be mixed accordingly.
• In random data augmentation under the auto augmen-

TABLE V
COMPARISON OF TEST ERROR RATES ON CIFAR-10 & SVHN USING WIDERESNET-28 AND CNN-13.
Approach
Method
CIFAR-10 (Nl=4000)
SVHN(Nl=1000)
WideResNet-28
Supervised
20.26 ± 0.38
12.83 ± 0.47
Pseudo
PL [85]
17.78 ± 0.57
7.62 ± 0.29
Labeling
PL-CB [4]
6.28 ± 0.3
-
II Model [83]
16.37 ± 0.63
7.19 ± 0.27
Mean Teacher [138]
15.87 ± 0.28
5.65 + 0.47
VAT [101]
13.86 ± 0.27
5.63 ± 0.20
Consistency
VAT + EntMin [101]
13.13 I 0.39
5.35 + 0.19
LGA + VAT [65]
12.06 ± 0.19
6.58 ± 0.36
Regularization
ICT [142]
7.66 ± 0.17
3.53 ± 0.07
MixMatch [10]
6.24 ± 0.06
3.27 ± 0.31
UDA
5.29 ± 0.25
2.46 ± 0.17
ReMixMatch (Berthelot et al. 2020)
5.14 ±0.04
2.42 ± 0.09
FixMatch [130]
4.26 ± 0.05
2.28 ± 0.11
CL
8.92 ± 0.03
5.65 ± 0.11
Pseudo
CL+FA [90]
5.51 0.14
2.90 ± 0.19
Labeling
CL+FA [90]+Mixup [163]
5.09 ± 0.18
2.75 ± 0.15
CL+RA+Mixup [163]
5.27 ± 0.16
2.80 ± 0.188
CNN-13
Pseudo Labeling
TSSDL-MT
9.30 ± 0.55
3.35 ± 0.27
LP-MT
10.61±0.28
-
Ladder net [117]
12.36±0.31
-
MeanTeacher [138]
12.31 ± 0.24
3.95 ± 0.19
Temporal ensembling [83]
12.16 ± 0.24
4.42 ± 0.16
Consistency
VAT [101]
11.36 ± 0.34
5.42
Regularization
NATEntMin [101]
10.55 ± 0.05
3.86
SNTG [96]
10.93 ± 0.14
3.86 ± 0.27
ICT [142]
7.29 ± 0.02
2.89 ± 0.04
Pseudo
CL
9.81 ± 0.22
4.75 ± 0.28
Labeling
CL+RA
5.92 ± 0.07
3.96 ± 0.10
tation category, the order of augmentations has not been
explored. We believe it has a signiﬁcant importance. What
are the possible ways to explore the order of existing
augmentations such as ﬁrst traditional data augmentations
and then image mixing or weight-based?
• Finding an optimal and an ordered number of data
augmentation, and the optimal number of samples to be
augmented are open challenges. For example, in randAug
method, there are N optimal number of augmentations
found but it is not known how many, in which order and
what samples should be augmented?
V. CONCLUSION
This survey provides a comprehensive overview of state-of-
the-art (SOTA) data augmentation techniques for addressing
overﬁtting in computer vision tasks due to limited data. A
detailed taxonomy of image data augmentation approaches
is presented, along with an overview of each SOTA method
and the results of its application to various computer vision
tasks such as image classiﬁcation, object detection, and seman-
tic segmentation. The results for both supervised and semi-
supervised learning are also compiled for easy comparison
purposes. In addition, the available code for each data augmen-
tation approach is provided to facilitate result reproducibility.
The difﬁculties and challenges of data augmentation are also
discussed, along with promising open research questions that
have the potential to further advance the ﬁeld. This survey is
expected to beneﬁt researchers in several ways: (i) a deeper
understanding of data augmentation, (ii) the ability to easily
compare results, and (iii) the ability to reproduce results with
available code.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by Science Foundation Ireland
under grant numbers 18/CRT/6223 (SFI Centre for Research
Training
in
Artiﬁcial
intelligence),
SFI/12/RC/2289/P 2
(Insight
SFI
Research
Centre
for
Data
Analytics),
13/RC/2094/P 2
(Lero
SFI
Centre
for
Software)
and
13/RC/2106/P 2 (ADAPT SFI Research Centre for AI-
Driven Digital Content Technology). For the purpose of Open
Access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright
licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising
from this submission.
