Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
1 
 
Automated Synthesis of Steady-State Continuous Processes using Reinforcement Learning 
Quirin Göttla,*, Dominik G. Grimmb,c,d, Jakob Burgera, 
 
Abstract 
Automated flowsheet synthesis is an important field in computer-aided process engineering. The present work 
demonstrates how reinforcement learning can be used for automated flowsheet synthesis without any heuristics of 
prior knowledge of conceptual design. The environment consists of a steady-state flowsheet simulator that contains 
all physical knowledge. An agent is trained to take discrete actions and sequentially built up flowsheets that solve 
a given process problem. A novel method named SynGameZero is developed to ensure good exploration schemes 
in the complex problem. Therein, flowsheet synthesis is modelled as a game of two competing players. The agent 
plays this game against itself during training and consists of an artificial neural network and a tree search for 
forward planning. The method is applied successfully to a reaction-distillation process in a quaternary system. 
 
Keywords 
Automated Process Synthesis; Flowsheet Synthesis; Artificial Intelligence; Machine Learning; Reinforcement 
Learning. 
 
Author affiliations 
aTechnical University of Munich, Campus Straubing for Biotechnology and Sustainability, Laboratory of 
Chemical Process Engineering, Schulgasse 16, 94315 Straubing, Germany 
bTechnical University of Munich, Campus Straubing for Biotechnology and Sustainability, Bioinformatics, 
Schulgasse 22, 94315 Straubing, Germany 
cWeihenstephan-Triesdorf University of Applied Sciences, Petersgasse 18, 94315 Straubing, Germany 
dTechnical University of Munich, Department of Informatics, Bolzmannstr. 3, 85748 Garching, Germany 
 

 
1 
Introduction 
In chemical engineering, process synthesis can be defined as the act, where one invents the structure and operating 
levels for a new chemical manufacturing process 1.. Computer-aided process synthesis has been an important field 
of chemical engineering for decades 2.. There exists a vast amount of methods in computer-aided process synthesis, 
in which the roles of human and computer are quite different and vary in their proportions. On one end of the 
spectrum, humans invent flowsheets, provide mechanistic models of apparatus and physico-chemical properties, 
and employ computers solely in simulations to evaluate and check the invented designs. On the other end of the 
spectrum, there is automated flowsheet synthesis, which we call rather human-aided process synthesis by a 
computer. Therein, the structure of the process and operating levels are chosen autonomously by the computer 
based on input by the human (typically a problem statement and the physico-chemical property data).  
Siirola 3. classified automated flowsheet synthesis into three categories: superstructure optimization, evolutionary 
modification and systematic generation. In superstructure optimization, a large flowsheet structure (the 
superstructure) is set up in a way, so that a large set of process alternatives can be obtained by removing parts of 
that structure 4., 5.. An objective function or cost function is defined and the optimal configuration for the 
flowsheet is determined by an optimization algorithm that uses decision variables to remove parts of the 
superstructure. Evolutionary modification works as follows: A process flowsheet is devised (by any method at 
hand), analyzed and changed in one or more ways repeatedly to improve it. The changes are continued until no 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
2 
 
further improvement in the flowsheet can be made 6.. Systematic generation creates a flowsheet sequentially by 
adding process units. The decision process is usually based on heuristics, which are based on prior knowledge. 
Alternatively, it is possible to derive heuristics, by comparing many flowsheets systematically with the help of a 
computer 7.. Prominent examples of the systematic generation approach are the expert systems 8., 9.. Sometimes 
two of the three categories are combined in hybrid synthesis methods 10., 11.. For further reading, concerning the 
state-of-the-art of automated process synthesis, we refer to current review articles 12., 13..  
In the present work, a novel machine-learning (ML) based method for automated process synthesis in the category 
systematic generation is introduced. As ML and artificial intelligence (AI) are rapidly expanding fields, a lot of 
research focuses on applying these kind of techniques in computer-aided process engineering 14.-18.. In the area 
of process synthesis, ML is for example applied to create surrogate models for reducing computational time in 
simulation and optimization 19.-21.. AI offers however more potential, as stated by Dimiduk et al. 16.: "Or, how 
can one best apply the newest advances in ML and AI to improve MPSE [materials, processes, and structures 
engineering] results? Speculating still further, why are there no emerging AI-based engineering design systems 
that recognize component features, attributes, or intended performance to make recommendations about directions 
for final design, manufacturing processes, and materials selections or developments?" The type of ML techniques, 
that could address these kind of problems, seems to be reinforcement learning (RL). The objective of RL is to 
teach an agent, which could for example consist of an artificial neural network (ANN), to master a given task 
through repeated interactions with its environment 22., 23.. RL is already applied in process engineering, however 
almost exclusively in process control 24.. Among rare exceptions are Zhou et al. 25., who employed RL to set 
experimental conditions for the optimization of chemical reactions. Khan and Lapkin 26. used a RL approach to 
identify promising processing routes in hydrogen production. 
Outside process engineering, many authors have proven that RL serves as powerful tool to master difficult 
problems like winning the board games of Go and Chess by training an agent only through self-play and RL 27.,  
28.. In the present work, similar techniques are employed to train an agent to come up with good process flowsheets 
on its own. It solves process synthesis problems using systematic generation and adds process units sequentially 
and in a constructive way to a flowsheet. The agent is trained without any prior knowledge or heuristics. Through 
repeated process simulation during the training phase of RL, the agent develops artificial process engineering 
intuition. The present work is structured as follows: The problem framework and a basic process engineering 
example problem are defined and explained first. A novel RL method, the agent’s structure and the training 
procedure are explained afterwards in detail. In the Results section, it is shown that the basic process engineering 
problem is solved by the method, proving the concept to work. 
2 
Experimental 
2.1 
RL framework 
The general RL framework for flowsheet synthesis for an agent that has zero prior knowledge is shown in Figure 
1. The flowsheet is set up and evaluated in the environment. For reasons of time, cost and safety, the environment 
is not a real chemical site, but a process simulator (here: a steady-state process simulator). The environment is 
partially observable: the agent is able to observe the sate s comprising the flowsheet connectivity (which process 
unit is connected to which) and the stream table that results from the process simulation. Internal states of the 
process units (e.g. the temperature on some stage of some distillation column) are not part of that state and thus 
not observable for the agent. The possible actions that the agent can perform on the environment are adding new 
process units to the flowsheet, setting operational parameters of these units if applicable, adding recycles, or 
terminating the flowsheet synthesis. As feedback, the agent obtains a reward by the environment, which is 
generally an improvement in some cost function that is evaluated in the simulator (e.g. net present value of the 
process). 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
3 
 
 
Figure 1. Scheme of the RL framework for flowsheet synthesis using only discrete decisions without prior 
knowledge. 
Zero prior knowledge of the agent means that it does not know any property data, thermodynamic model or process 
unit model a priori. Further, neither process engineering heuristics nor any other rule-based schemes are available. 
Thus, the agent initially takes entirely random actions on the environment. Gradually, it learns better decision 
policies based on the reward it obtains from the environment. Of course, substantial amounts of physical 
knowledge have to be supplied somehow to the overall framework. This happens exclusively in the environment: 
models of thermodynamic properties and the process units have to be supplied by the (human) engineer. Great 
attention has to be paid to this step, because the agent might exploit every "loophole" in the models. Think of an 
azeotrope that is not modeled properly in the thermodynamics. The agent will eventually learn to select a purely 
distillation-based separation if it looks economic, even though it is not feasible in practice due to the azeotrope. 
The described framework is quite general. Different types of simulators could be used, as well as different types 
of agents with various RL methods. In the present work, a subclass of problems is considered: flowsheet synthesis 
using only discrete decisions without placing recycle streams. This means that the agent solely decides on placing 
process units one after another, and if necessary on their discrete task. For example, the agent can decide to place 
a distillation column with the task to separate two components by a sharp split. It does not specify any continuous 
operation parameter of the unit, as these are specified by its task (the conversion of task to continuous parameter 
is done by the environment automatically). The reason for this limitation is two-fold. On the one hand, a robust 
simulation environment can be defined (cf. below). On the other hand, the used RL methods are native in discrete 
decision spaces. They would require computationally expensive extensions for continuous decision spaces. Despite 
the limitation to discrete decisions, interesting design problems can be considered as will be described below. 
2.2 
Environment of the case studies 
We chose a steady-state flowsheet simulation as the environment. Starting point is one or more feed stream(s) 
specified by a human engineer. In its actions, the agent is allowed to place a process unit to any open stream (a 
stream that has no destination yet). After each action, the flowsheet is simulated and a stream table is determined. 
For the proof of concept in the present work, we kept the environment simple. The processes operate in a model 
system of four compounds A, B, C and D. The system is zeotropic, thus can be separated by distillation only. If 
the mixture is fed to a reactor filled with catalyst, the following reaction is observed: 
A + B → C + D.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
The possible actions of the agent are grouped as follows: 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
4 
 
a) Place a distillation column with a perfectly sharp split. The boiling order is ABCD. Thus, the agent has 
three discrete options called D1 (split A - BCD), D2 (split AB - CD) and D3 (split ABC - D). 
b) Place a reactor (denoted as action R). The reactor is a continuous stirred tank reactor with the conversion 
of A given by a kinetic of first order in A and B: 
𝑛̇A
in −𝑛̇A
out = 5
kmol
hr 𝑥A
out𝑥B
out. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
Therein, "out" and "in" specify quantities at the reactor outlet and inlet, respectively. The variables 𝑛̇𝑖 and 
𝑥𝑖 denote component 𝑖’s molar flow rate and mole fraction, respectively. The conversion of the other 
components B, C and D is calculated by the stoichiometry of Reaction (1). 
c) Place a mixer for mixing two streams. This action is denoted as M. 
d) Terminate the flowsheet synthesis by action T. 
The actions D1, D2, D3 and R can be applied to any single open stream, whereas M requires two open streams as 
input. If more than two streams have to be mixed, the agent could select multiple mixers in a cascade. Implications 
for more complex problems (more components, detailed apparatus models, complex thermodynamics) are given 
in the Discussion section.  
The net present value is used to evaluate the obtained processes. Since the degree of detail in its calculation is not 
relevant for the presented methodology and the process models are rather basic, a rather simple scheme is used to 
calculate the net present value:  
NPV = ∑
𝐼𝑢+ (10a) ∑
𝑐𝑜
𝑜∈𝑂
𝑢∈𝑈
.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
It combines the investment costs 𝐼𝑢 of every unit 𝑢 with the yearly operational cash flows 𝑐𝑜 multiplied with 10 
years (a factor that lumps the period of depreciation and the interest rates). The investment costs of the units are 
assumed flat and independent of size and operation parameters, as these quantities are not provided by the model. 
The yearly operational cash flows 𝑐𝑜 consider only cost and revenues from all open material streams 𝑜 leaving the 
process. Further operational costs of the units (e.g. steam cost for the distillation) are neglected for simplicity. The 
cash flows of the open streams are calculated as follows. If a stream contains a pure component 𝑖:  
𝑐𝑜= 𝑛̇𝑖∙𝑝𝑖∙8000
hr
a ,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) 
where 𝑛̇ 𝑖 is its molar flowrate in kmol/hr and 𝑝𝑖 is the price of component 𝑖. If an open stream is not pure then its 
yearly cash flow is: 
𝑐𝑜= ∑
𝑛̇𝑖∙min( 𝑝𝑖, 0) ∙8000
hr
a
𝑖∈{A,B,C,D}
.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5) 
The minimum function ensures that the cash flow of mixed streams is never positive. If the stream contains a 
compound of negative price 𝑝𝑖 (e.g. a hazardous compound for which disposal has to be paid), then the cash flow 
becomes negative. The values/costs of the feed stream(s) are not considered explicitly in the formulas, as they are 
constant and therefore have no influence on finding the optimal process. However, the agent may select the trivial 
process of placing no process unit at all. In this case, any feed is an open stream leaving the process and is included 
in the determination of the net present value. In the examples of the present work, two different cases of the cost 
parameters 𝐼𝑢 and 𝑝𝑖 are discussed to demonstrate the interchangeability of the cost function. The used parameters 
are listed in Table 1 in the Results section.  
2.3 
SynGameZero method and agent structure 
Preliminary Analysis. There are numerous methods for solving the RL problem defined in the framework of 
Figure 1. Let us start with some general analysis of the problem. The observed state of the environment consists 
of a list of process units in the flowsheet, their connectivity and a stream table as a result of the process simulation. 
This observed state fulfils the Markov property, i.e. it is sufficient for solving the flowsheet simulation and the 
solution is independent from the history of state. This means that future decisions of an optimal agent could be 
based on the presently observed state alone. The environment behaves fully deterministic, i.e. starting from a 
certain state and applying a certain action leads always to the same successor state. Thus, an agent can reliably use 
look-ahead planning methods to evaluate a sequence of actions. It is not trivial to reward the agent after every 
placement of a new process unit with an immediate and constructive reward. For example, think of a multi-step 
separation sequence that only works successfully after a recycle has been closed. After placing the first unit of the 
sequence, a constructive reward is hard to determine. Further, if the agent "forgets" to close the recycle and 
terminates the flowsheet synthesis, the process simply does not work. Which was the unit that caused the process 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
5 
 
ultimately to fail? In this case, it is not even possible to reward or punish individual actions constructively after 
the flowsheet synthesis has been completed. Consequently, we suggest not rewarding every single action, but 
rather looking only at the final flowsheet and using its value (e.g. net present value) as the reward for the agent. 
This means that the flowsheet always has to be finished before rewards can be obtained during training of the 
agent. The observed state contains continuous variables (e.g. the concentration of some compound in some stream), 
thus there is an infinite number of possible states. This makes the use of look-up tables (i.e. if state is exactly equal 
to ... then do ...) ineffective. Instead, functions are used by the agent to calculate actions and other quantities from 
the observed state. Here, ANNs can be used as function approximators. The parameters of the ANNs are learnt 
during the training phase. Two functions are used by the agent of the present work: a policy function and a value 
function. The policy function (variable 𝝅) outputs suggestions for the next actions. The value function (variable 
𝑣) outputs the estimated state value that is the expected reward of the final flowsheet when following the policy 
starting from the present observed state. To exploit both functions, policy-based learning in an actor-critic setup 
22., 23. is usually used.  
Without going into details, we have naively tried out a setup in which the policy was a vector with a probability 
distribution for selecting one from all allowed actions for the present state. The value function 𝑣 was the net present 
value of the final flowsheet to be expected when following that policy. Using an actor-critic method, we have tried 
to learn an optimal policy. 𝑣 was employed as a baseline for the critic. We have quickly discovered that this 
approach is not constructive. It suffers from fast convergence to local optima, e.g. it produces flowsheets that are 
only better than highly similar ones. This result is not surprising given the characteristics of the flowsheet problem. 
As there is no information for the agent on the maximum possible reward, it is not able to determine, whether the 
learnt policy is a global or a local optimum. Further, flowsheet synthesis is a complex task where one has to think 
several steps ahead, almost comparable with playing a strategic game like chess where certain moves may pay off 
only many moves later. In order to suggest breakthrough process units (winning moves in chess), good exploration 
schemes are necessary during training to avoid following only beaten tracks. Therefore, the present work follows 
a more sophisticated approach to RL for flowsheet synthesis: we embed the flowsheet synthesis into a competitive 
two-player game leading to an advantageous learning performance. We call this method SynGameZero (Flowsheet 
Synthesis in a Game Environment with Zero Knowledge) and describe it systematically in the following. The 
method has a couple of tuning parameters. The values for these parameters are given later in the Results section in 
Table 2 along the application examples. 
State representation. The state of a flowsheet is stored into the flowsheet matrix 𝑭. The construction of 𝑭 from 
the simulation results of the environment is explained along Figure 2. Every stream in the flowsheet refers to one 
row of 𝑭. 𝑭 has a fixed number 𝑁𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 of rows and if there are less streams in the flowsheet, the remaining rows 
are filled with zeros (𝟎1×𝑁 in Figure 2 refers to a row vector of 𝑁 zero entries). The number 𝑁𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 is an upper 
limit for the size of the flowsheet (i.e. the number of streams). If the matrix is full then the process synthesis will 
end automatically. This limitation is due to technical reasons. In practice 𝑁𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 has to be chosen large enough 
to accommodate the optimal flowsheet comfortably. Every row of  𝑭 is composed of a set of row vectors that are 
explained along the first row in Figure 2 for stream 1 (reactor input) of the shown flowsheet. 𝒗1 contains the molar 
fractions of all compounds followed by the total molar flow rate of stream 1. The vector 𝒖1 specifies the process 
unit at the streams destination. In the present case study, it has 𝑁𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡= 4 + 𝑁𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 entries. The first four entries 
refer to distillation splits D1, D2, D3 and reactor R, respectively. The last 𝑁𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 entries are relevant if the 
stream’s destination is a mixer. The entry for the corresponding unit is set to 1 and all other entries are set to 0. In 
case of the mixer, the (4 +  𝑘)th entry is set to one, indicating that the other stream to the mixer is stream 𝑘. If no 
unit is connected to stream 𝑖, then 𝒖𝑖 is set to 𝟎1×𝑁𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡 . For example, 𝒖1 in Figure 2 indicates that stream 1’s 
destination is a reactor R. The last four vectors of each row contain information on the subsequent streams that 
leave the process unit and the streams destination. Let us say these are streams 𝑚 and 𝑛. The first and the third of 
the four vectors are copies of 𝒗𝑚 and 𝒗𝑛, respectively. The second and fourth vector are pointers to the numbers 
𝑚 and 𝑛, respectively. They are vectors with 𝑁𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 entries, all of them 0 but the 𝑚-th or 𝑛-th entry, respectively, 
which are 1. If there is no destination process unit (see e.g. streams 3 or 4) or the process unit has only one output 
stream (see e.g. stream 1), then all four or the latter two vectors are filled with zeros, respectively. In the present 
work, only units with up to two output streams are considered, but of course it would be possible to extend the 
flowsheet matrix 𝑭 to represent units with more output streams by increasing the length of each line. 
There are many other possibilities for state representation including much more compact ones without redundant 
information. However, the representation above offers a couple of features that we believe are advantageous for 
RL: Discrete variables describing the flowsheet structure (such as type of process units and stream numbers) are 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
6 
 
encoded as a single 1 in a vector of zeros rather than in single integer scalars. This method avoids that two different 
flowsheet structures are falsely considered similar by the function approximation that takes 𝑭 as input. By 
repeating the stream information of unit outlets, the states of the input and output streams of a unit are related to 
each other. This captures that these streams are also closely linked in the environment via the unit’s performance.  
 
Figure 2. Construction of flowsheet matrix 𝑭 along an example flowsheet. 𝑭 contains the information of the stream 
table combined with structural information on the flowsheet. See text for an explanation of the nomenclature. 
Competitive two-player game. The task of creating a profitable flowsheet is modelled as a two-player game. 
Each player obtains the same feed stream(s) and tries to create a more profitable flowsheet than the opponent does. 
The game is turn-based and at each turn, the active player selects one action and applies its flowsheet. Both players 
are always able to see their own and the opponents flowsheet. The game ends when both players have completed 
their flowsheets (either by using the termination action or if the flowsheet matrix 𝑭 is full). The winner is the 
player with the flowsheet that has a larger net present value. If both players’ flowsheets are equal in net present 
value, then the player that has completed the synthesis first wins the game. The winner obtains the reward 𝑟 =  1, 
the loser 𝑟 = −1. The agent is trained to master this game through self-play and RL. This means that the agent 
plays against itself and switches back and forth between the roles of player 1 and player 2 during the game. This 
setup enables using a modified version of the efficient training techniques to master the game of Go as proposed 
by Silver et al. 27., 28.. This will be explained in more detail below. After the training is complete and the agent 
has to solve a concrete problem, it will simply play another game against itself and select the winning flowsheet. 
Agent structure. The agent consists of an ANN and a tree search. The ANN’s outputs are used as inputs in the 
tree search that imitates a planning process. The structure of the ANN is depicted in Figure 3. The ANN receives 
the state vector 𝒔 as input, which is constructed as concatenation of all rows of the flowsheet matrices 𝑭𝟏 (current 
player) and 𝑭𝟐 (waiting player). Further, a vector 𝒈 is concatenated. It has the length of one row of 𝑭𝟐 and flags 
whether the waiting player has already completed his/her flowsheet. 𝒈 contains either only zeros (flowsheet of the 
waiting player is not completed) or only ones (flowsheet of the waiting player is completed). The ANN consists 
of one input layer, 𝑁𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 fully connected hidden layers. Every hidden layer has 𝑁𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 nodes with ReLu-activation 
29.. 
The ANN’s output layer is fully connected and has two parts. On the one hand, there is a policy head that outputs 
the vector 𝝅 of length 𝑁𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛. Every entry corresponds to a probability with which the corresponding action should 
be executed by the agent. A softmax activation 30. is used to ensure that 𝝅 has entries in the range [0,1] and sums 
up to 1. In the example of the present work, there are three distillation splits, one reactor and every stream can be 
mixed with any one of the remaining 𝑁𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥−1 ones. As the flowsheet can consist of up to 𝑁𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 open streams 
and one termination action is needed, there are 𝑁𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛= (𝑁𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥(4 + 𝑁𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥−1) + 1) theoretical actions. The 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
7 
 
policy might suggest infeasible actions, i.e. placing a unit at a stream that does not yet exist or is already connected 
to another unit. Therefore, the policy head 𝝅 is filtered. Entries that correspond to infeasible actions are set to 0. 
The remaining entries are scaled with a common factor, so that the resulting filtered vector 𝒑 also sums up to 1. 
On the other hand, there is a value head that outputs a scalar 𝑣. Its output is generated using a tanh-activation 30. 
to ensure a value in the range [1, −1]. 𝑣 can be interpreted as an estimate of the reward at the end of the game for 
the current player.  
 
Figure 3. Structure of the agent’s ANN in the SynGameZero method. The ANN has an actor-critic architecture. It 
calculates from the state input 𝒔 both a policy vector 𝝅 and a scalar value 𝑣. To obtain 𝒑, infeasible actions are 
filtered out of the vector 𝝅. 
To improve its performance, the agent does not always select the action with the highest entry in 𝒑. Instead, 𝒑 and 
𝑣 are used as the basis for a tree search to plan several actions in advance. The tree search imitates a typical human 
planning process that is made before finally deciding on an action. To avoid extensive computations, the tree 
search is adaptive in depth and does not use a full enumeration of all actions. Only promising actions are explored, 
where the values of 𝒑 and 𝑣 are used to quantify the word promising. The tree search is explained along Figure 4 
and an example in which the agent (for the sake of simplicity) has only three possible actions named T, D1 and R, 
say terminating flowsheet synthesis, placing a distillation column on the first open stream, or placing a reactor on 
the first open stream. The tree consists of nodes and branches. The nodes 𝑛∈{I, II, III … } correspond to states of 
the two-player game. The branches (𝑛, 𝑎) correspond to the action 𝑎 that the current player takes at node 𝑛. The 
origin of the tree is the root node I. In Figure 4, the root node I corresponds to the beginning of the game when 
both players have an empty flowsheet. The current player is the one who takes the next action. His/her flowsheet 
is shown in the left half of the nodes. Since the game is turn-based, the order of the two flowsheets is switched 
after every action. Each node is either an explored node (e.g. node I in Figure 4) or an unexplored leaf node (e.g. 
node III). A node is explored if and only if the corresponding state vector 𝒔 is known. To explore an unexplored 
leaf node, i.e. to obtain its state vector 𝒔, the respective action has to be applied to the flowsheet of the current 
player in the parental node and the flowsheet simulation has to be evaluated. For example, if node III in Figure 4 
has to be explored, then action D1 (adding a distillation column) has to applied to the left flowsheet in node I. The 
resulting flowsheet is evaluated by flowsheet simulation yielding the flowsheet matrix 𝑭𝟐 of the state of node III. 
The flowsheet matrix 𝑭𝟏 of the state in node III is equal to 𝑭𝟐 of the state in node I. Whenever a node is explored, 
it is checked whether it is terminal, i.e. a node in that both flowsheets are terminated (e.g. node V in Figure 4). The 
termination of a flowsheet may be caused either by the action T (terminate) or by a full flowsheet matrix. If at least 
one player has a non-terminated flowsheet (for example node VIII), the node is not terminal. In this case, the 
branches of all feasible actions and the corresponding (unexplored) leaf nodes are added to the tree below that 
node.  

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
8 
 
 
Figure 4. Example tree search at the beginning of the game (flowsheets of both players empty) with three possible 
actions {T, D1, R}. Unexplored leaf nodes are shown with dotted frames. Terminated flowsheets and terminal 
nodes are marked with bold frames. The order of the two flowsheets is switched after every action. The current 
player is the one who takes the next action. His/her flowsheet is shown in the left half of the nodes.  
Four variables (𝑁𝑛,𝑎, 𝑊𝑛,𝑎, 𝑄𝑛,𝑎, 𝑃𝑛,𝑎) are stored for every branch (𝑛, 𝑎) in the tree. The variable 𝑁𝑛,𝑎 counts how 
often this branch has been taken during the tree search. The variable 𝑊𝑛,𝑎 is the sum of all estimated and obtained 
rewards beneath that branch and 𝑄𝑛,𝑎 is defined as 𝑊𝑛,𝑎/𝑁𝑛,𝑎. The values of 𝑃𝑛,𝑎 are set to the corresponding value 
of the vector 𝒑 that is obtained by feeding the state 𝒔 of the node 𝑛 into the ANN. These variables are updated 
while the tree is constructed. They also guide both the extension of the tree and the final decision of the agent. A 
new tree is initialized only once at the beginning of every game. A root node with the state vector of two empty 
flowsheets is placed (cf. node I in Figure 4) and explored. The variables 𝑁𝑛,𝑎, 𝑊𝑛,𝑎 and 𝑄𝑛,𝑎 are set to 0 for the 
resulting branches, while the values of 𝑃𝑛,𝑎 are obtained as described above. The tree search proceeds then in four 
steps:  
Step 1 Select. The algorithm starts at the root node and runs down one path through the tree until it arrives at a 
leaf node or a terminal node 𝑛𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚. At each node 𝑛, the algorithm greedily selects to follow the branch (𝑛, 𝑎)  
that maximizes 𝑄𝑛,𝑎+ 𝑈𝑛,𝑎(𝛼). 𝑈𝑛,𝑎(𝛼) is defined as follows: 
𝑈𝑛,𝑎(𝛼) = 𝑃𝑛,𝑎
√∑
𝑁𝑛,𝑏
𝑏∈𝐴
𝑁𝑛,𝑎+1    
if 𝑄𝑛,𝑎> 𝛼, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6) 
𝑈𝑛,𝑎(𝛼) = 0  
 
 
if 𝑄𝑛,𝑎≤𝛼,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(7) 
where 𝐴 is the set of all actions. If there are two or more branches, that maximize 𝑄𝑛,𝑎+ 𝑈𝑛,𝑎(𝛼), the branch 
among them with the largest value of 𝑃𝑛,𝑎 is taken. To enhance exploration, the above greedy selection policy is 
replaced during training for the root node (and only the root node) by an 𝜀-greedy policy 22.. With a probability 
of 𝜀, an entirely random (i.e. uniform distribution) branch is selected. With a probability of (1 −𝜀), the algorithm 
selects the branch using the above greedy policy that maximizes  𝑄𝑛𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡,𝑎+ 𝑈𝑛𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡,𝑎(𝛼). In the present work, 𝜀 is 
constant and equal to 0.2. 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
9 
 
 
 
Step 2 Explore and/or Evaluate. If the node 𝑛𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚 that was found in Step 1 is an unexplored leaf node, then it 
is explored and the resulting state vector 𝒔 is stored in 𝑛𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚. Two cases might occur: 
Case 1: The node 𝑛𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚 is terminal. The winner of the game is determined by determining the net present value 
of both flowsheets. The reward is determined for the current player of the node 𝑛𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚 and stored in the variable 
𝑉 for Step 3. 
Case 2: The node 𝑛𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚 is not terminal. In this case, the state vector 𝒔 of the node 𝑛𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚 is fed into the ANN. 
The value 𝑣 that is calculated by the ANN, is stored in the variable 𝑉 for Step 3. 
Step 3 Backup. Starting at the node 𝑛𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚 that was found in Step 1, the algorithm runs back upwards the tree 
until the root node. For every branch (𝑛̃, 𝑎̃) passed on the way, the following updates are made to the branch 
variables: 
𝑁𝑛̃,𝑎̃ = 𝑁𝑛̃,𝑎̃ + 1,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(8) 
𝑊𝑛̃,𝑎̃ = 𝑊𝑛̃,𝑎̃ + 𝑡𝑉, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(9) 
𝑄𝑛̃,𝑎̃ = 𝑊𝑛̃,𝑎̃/𝑁𝑛̃,𝑎̃. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10) 
Herein, 𝑉 is the value that has been stored in Step 2. The variable 𝑡 takes into account that the agent switches 
players after every action when playing against itself. If 𝑉 has been determined at a node where player one is the 
current player, then 𝑉 is added (𝑡 =  1) at all branches that represent actions of player one. At the other branches, 
which represent actions of player two, 𝑉 is subtracted (𝑡 = −1). The opposite is done, when 𝑉 has been 
determined at a node where player two is the current player. 
Step 4 Play. Steps 1-3 are repeated 𝐾 times as a loop, before the agent finally decides on an action at the root node 
of the tree. The decision is based on a probability vector 𝒚 with one entry for every feasible action at the root. The 
entry for action 𝑎 is calculated by  
𝑦𝑎=
𝑁𝑛𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡,𝑎
∑
𝑁𝑛𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡,𝑏
𝑏∈𝐴
.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(11) 
During training, the decision is made by randomly selecting an action using the vector 𝒚 as probability distribution. 
After training, the moves are chosen greedily by always selecting the action 𝑎𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑦 with the largest 𝑁𝑛,𝑎. If there 
are two or more branches that maximize 𝑁𝑛,𝑎, then the algorithm selects the branch among them with the largest 
value for 𝑃𝑛,𝑎. After the action is applied to the environment, the tree is shifted downwards. The node that is 
reached by the selected action 𝑎𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑦  becomes the new root node. The tree is cut off above. The values of the 
branch variables are retained.  
The tree search algorithm is briefly interpreted in the following. The algorithm generally selects actions with large 
values of 𝑁𝑛,𝑎. 𝑁𝑛,𝑎 counts how often the branch has been taken during the selecting in Step 1. For success of the 
algorithm, it is therefore crucial to select promising actions in Step 1. This selection is based substantially on the 
value of 𝑄𝑛,𝑎+ 𝑈𝑛,𝑎(𝛼). 𝑄𝑛,𝑎 is an estimate of the action value of action 𝑎 at node 𝑛. The action value is the state 
value 𝑣 of the game situation for the current player after he/she has selected the action 𝑎. The state value 𝑣 can 
only be determined with exact certainty at a terminal node. At other nodes, it is estimated by the ANN. In the 
backup (Step 3), the best available guess for 𝑣 is backed up along the search path to improve the estimation of 
𝑄𝑛,𝑎. Using Equations (9) and (10), 𝑄𝑛,𝑎 is the average of the best available guesses for the state values 𝑣 of all 
explored nodes below the branch (𝑛, 𝑎). If the path selection in Step 1 would only depend on 𝑄𝑛,𝑎, then a wrong 
estimate of 𝑄𝑛,𝑎 at the beginning of the tree search might lead to inefficient exploration. Therefore, the function 
𝑈𝑛,𝑎(𝛼) is also considered. This function is large for actions 𝑎 that have a large value 𝑃𝑛,𝑎 but a small value 𝑁𝑛,𝑎 
compared to ∑
𝑁𝑛,𝑏
𝑏∈𝐴
. These actions are favored by the ANN, but have not been explored so far. If these 
promising actions would not be explicitly considered using 𝑈𝑛,𝑎(𝛼), they might be overlooked by chance at the 
beginning of the tree search. Later in the tree search, if such an action has turned out to be not constructive (the 
estimate 𝑄𝑛,𝑎 falls below the threshold 𝛼 that is typically chosen rather low, e.g. -0.9), then the exploration 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
10 
 
function 𝑈𝑛,𝑎(𝛼) is no longer considered. This ensures that shortsighted recommendations of the ANN do not bias 
the tree search on the long run. 
2.4 
Training 
The goal of the agent training is to adjust the parameters of the ANN, so that the ANN ideally predicts the 
consequences of a potential action up till the end of the game. The ideal ANN should output a value 𝑣 that correctly 
predicts the chances of the current player to win the game. The output 𝒑 should be ideally a sharp distribution with 
a maximum at the action that maximizes the chances to win the game. The training procedure for approaching 
such behavior is outlined in the following. At the start of the training procedure, the ANN is initialized with random 
weights. In training, the agent plays a large number 𝑁𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑠 of games against itself. The given feed stream(s) in the 
games can be varied randomly to obtain an agent that is able to solve a broad class of problems. For example, if 
an agent is desired that can separate a quaternary mixture for all possible feed compositions, then the feed 
compositions should be broadly sampled in the entire composition space during the training process. At the 
beginning of every game, the search tree is initialized with the given feed(s). Then the agent plays the game until 
the end (both players terminated their flowsheets). Thereby, every decision that had been made in Step 4 of the 
tree search is stored. Stored are the state vector 𝒔 at the root and the vector 𝒚 of the decision. After finishing the 
game, the decision data is augmented by the final reward 𝑟 that has been obtained at the end of game. The tuples 
of the form (𝒔, 𝒚, 𝑟) are stored in a memory of size 𝑁𝑚𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑦. The oldest tuples are replaced in the memory, if the 
memory is full. After every game, a batch of 𝑁𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ tuples is sampled randomly out of the memory. With this 
batch, the parameters of the ANN are optimized using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) 31.. Two optimization 
steps are performed. The first one with respect to the loss function 𝑙1 and the second one with respect to the loss 
function 𝑙2:  
𝑙1 = (𝑣−𝑟)2,   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(12)  
𝑙2 = ∑
(𝜋𝑖−𝑦𝑖)2
𝑁𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
𝑖=1
.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(13) 
2.5 
Implementation 
The flowsheet simulation, the agent, and the training were implemented with the programming language Python. 
For the ANN, the methods from the package Tensorflow (version 1.9.0) 30. were used. The SGD steps were 
performed using the Adam optimizer 30. with a learning rate 𝛽, cf. Table 2. The gradients are transformed by the 
function tensorflow.clip_by_global_norm 30. (with the argument ’clip_norm’ equal to 5), which prevents the 
gradients of growing too large and causing instabilities during training.  
3 
Results and Discussion 
3.1 
Results 
3.1.1 
Preliminary remarks 
The results are shown along the quaternary system (A+B+C+D) and the process units described in the above 
subsection about the environment. Two case studies are done, which differ in the cost function and the number of 
feed streams. The cost function and number of feed streams were varied to obtain some variation in the results. 
The parameters for the cost functions are given in Table 1. The numerical tuning parameters of the algorithms are 
listed in Table 2.  
Table 1. Investment costs 𝐼𝑢 for distillation D, reactor R and mixer M, and prices 𝑝𝑖 of compounds A, B, C, D 
used in the determination of the net present value in the present work. 
 
𝐼D / k€ 
𝐼R / k€ 
𝐼M / k€ 
𝑝A / k€/kmol 
𝑝B / k€/kmol 
𝑝C / k€/kmol 
𝑝D / k€/kmol 
Case 1 
10000 
10000 
1000 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Case 2 
10000 
10000 
1000 
-0.125 
-0.125 
2 
2 
 
 
 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
11 
 
Table 2. Numerical tuning parameters used in the examples. 
 
𝑁𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑠 
𝑁𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 
𝑁𝑚𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑦 
𝑁𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ 
𝑁𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟 
𝑁𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 
𝐾 
𝛼 
𝛽 
Case 1 
5000 
10 
256 
32 
2 
32 
20 
-0.9 
0.0001 
Case 2 
20000 
10 
256 
32 
2 
64 
40 
-0.9 
0.0001 
 
The composition of the feed streams in the example problems are not fixed. Instead they are varied randomly to 
check the agent’s performance over a wide range of feed compositions. To evaluate the success of the training the 
following procedure is used. One benchmark flowsheet is defined. This could be for example an educated guess 
by a human. Further, an evaluation set of 1000 problems is created. These problems differ in the composition of 
the feed stream(s) that are determined randomly. The trained agent synthesizes flowsheets for all 1000 problems. 
The flowsheets provided by the agent are compared to the respective benchmark flowsheets using the net present 
value. It is expected to design flowsheets that have the net present value of the benchmark flowsheets or a better 
one (the benchmark might not be the optimal flowsheet for all possible feed compositions). The success rate of the 
agent is defined using the following metrics. 
𝑅1 =
𝑁𝑠
1000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(14) 
𝑅2 =
∑
𝑤𝑗
𝑏𝑗
1000
𝑗=1
1000   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(15) 
𝑅3 =
∑
𝑤𝑗
𝑏𝑗
𝑗𝜖𝛬
|𝛬|   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(16) 
𝑅4 =
∑
𝑤𝑗
𝑏𝑗
𝑗𝜖𝛤
|𝛤|   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(17) 
𝑁𝑠 is the number of problems for which the agent reached at least the net present value of the benchmark flowsheet. 
𝑅1 is the overall success rate. 𝑤𝑗 is the net present value of the agent’s flowsheet and 𝑏𝑗 the net present value of 
the benchmark flowsheet in problem 𝑗, respectively. Thus, 𝑅2 is the average of the agent’s net present value relative 
to the benchmark. 𝛬 is the set of all problems, where the agent performed at least as good as the benchmark (|𝛬| 
is the number of elements in 𝛬). 𝛤 is the set of all other problems, i.e. where the agent performed worse than the 
benchmark (|𝛤| is the number of elements in 𝛤). Thus, 𝑅3 and 𝑅4 are similar to 𝑅2 but they measure how well the 
agent succeeded or how bad it failed, respectively. 
3.1.2 
Case 1 
In Case 1, there is one single feed stream and all components have the same prices. For most feed compositions, a 
reactor does not increase the value of stream and a distillation sequence should provide the most profitable process. 
During the training, random quaternary and ternary feed mixtures out of the following feed types were selected: 
[𝑥A; 𝑥B; 𝑥C; 𝑥D], [0; 𝑥B; 𝑥C; 𝑥D], [𝑥A;  0; 𝑥C; 𝑥D], [𝑥A; 𝑥B;  0; 𝑥D], [𝑥A; 𝑥B; 𝑥C;  0]. The mole fractions of the 
non-zero components were chosen randomly. The total molar flow rate of the feed was always set to 1 kmol/hr. 
Figure 5 shows examples (as training is a stochastic process) for the flowsheet that is proposed by the agent at 
different stages during training. 
For evaluation of the trained agent, the benchmark flowsheet of three distillation columns as shown in the right 
panel of Figure 5 is defined. The training procedure was repeated 5 times. Each time, the resulting agent surpassed 
an overall success rate 𝑅1 = 0.98.  

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
12 
 
 
Figure 5. Illustrative example for the evolution of the agent during the training process in Case 1. Flowsheets 
proposed by the agent to separate an equimolar quaternary mixture are shown.  
3.1.3 
Case 2 
In Case 2, the cost function is changed so that A and B have a negative price. C and D are high-value products. 
Thus, it is worth to react A and B to C and D. Four different feed situations are considered. Situation 1 considers 
two feed streams of the types: [𝑛̇ A; 𝑛̇B;  0;  0] , [0;  0; 𝑛̇C; 𝑛̇D]. Situation 2 considers two feed streams of the types: 
[𝑛̇A;  0; 𝑛̇C;  0], [0; 𝑛̇B;  0; 𝑛̇ D]. Situation 3 considers one feed stream of the type: [𝑛̇A;  0; 𝑛̇C; 𝑛̇D]. Situation 4 
considers one feed stream of the type: [0; 𝑛̇B; 𝑛̇C; 𝑛̇D]. For every game during training, one of the four situations 
is selected randomly. The given molar flowrates 𝑛̇𝑖 are sampled randomly out of [0.2,1.2]
kmol
hr . 
In Figure 6 we show examples (as training is a stochastic process) for the flowsheets that were proposed by the 
trained agent, depending on the feed situation. The panels 1), 2), 3) and 4) refer to feed situations 1, 2, 3 and 4, 
respectively.  
 
Figure 6. Example for the flowsheets proposed by the trained agent after the training process. The panels 1), 2), 
3) and 4) refer to feed situations 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively. 
The evolution of the agent during the training process for situation 1 (feed streams: [𝑛̇A; 𝑛̇ B;  0;  0], [0;  0; 𝑛̇C; 𝑛̇ D]) 
is shown in Figure 7. The rows correspond to different stages of training. The right panel shows an example for 
the flowsheet that was proposed by the agent at this stage. The left panel shows a 3D plot of three highlighted 
entries of the vector 𝒑 (which depends on the ANN’s output 𝝅) at the beginning of the flowsheet synthesis, i.e. the 
ANN’s suggestions for the very first action. The data is plotted over possible process feeds. Since the space of 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
13 
 
process feeds is 4-dimensional, we restrict us for the sake of illustration to a 2-dimensional subspace in which 
 𝑛̇ A = 𝑛̇B holds in the AB feed stream and  𝑛̇ C = 𝑛̇D holds in the CD feed stream. Action 1 is mixing both feed 
streams. Action 2 is placing a distillation column of type D3 at the CD feed stream. Action 3 refers to placing a 
reactor R at the AB feed stream. 
At the beginning of the training, the actions of the agent are random. The suggested probabilities of the three 
highlighted actions are small as they are not significantly larger than the probabilities of any other feasible action 
(there are 10 feasible actions for the move). None of the shown actions is selected by the agent. Through feedback 
during training, the ANN favors (as first action) placing a distillation column that splits C and D at the CD feed 
stream (Action 2) after 2,000 training steps. After 6,000 training steps, the agent has learnt to complete the reaction 
part of the flowsheet before distillation is done. At the shown training example, the agent prioritizes mixing (Action 
1) before reaction. At the end of training, the agent has learnt that bypassing the reactor with the products C and 
D yielding a higher conversion. C and D are separated only later together with the reactor outlet. 
 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
14 
 
 
Figure 7. Example for the evolution of the agent during the training process for situation 1. The 3D plots show 
the value of three highlighted actions of the ANN’s output vector 𝒑 over a subset of the feed space (𝑛̇ A = 𝑛̇B,
𝑛̇C = 𝑛̇D) for the first action of the agent. Action 1 is mixing both feed streams. Action 2 is placing a distillation 
column of type D3 at the CD feed stream. Action 3 refers to placing a reactor R at the AB feed stream. 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
15 
 
The agent’s performance is evaluated individually for all four feed situations. The flowsheets that are shown in 
Figure 6 are defined as the respective benchmark flowsheets. The training process was repeated 5 times. Table 3 
shows the average of the performance metrics. 
In situation 1, the agent meets or beats the benchmark in 84 % of the cases. In the successful cases, the possible 
gain over the benchmark is not large (𝑅3 = 1.12), indicating that the benchmark is already quite good. Although the 
agent is worse than the benchmark in 16 % of the cases, its average net present value is still slightly better than the 
benchmark’s (𝑅2 > 1). In situation 2, the agent is almost always as good as the benchmark. At the cases, in which 
it is worse, it is only slightly worse. This indicates that there are several flowsheets with very similar net present 
values. Thus, the performance of the agent is still quite good. In the situations 3 and 4, there is either A or B 
missing in the process. Thus, there is no use for a reactor. The optimal flowsheets are distillation sequences for 
separating the ternary mixtures. The trained agent solves the problems in these situations without any difficulty. 
Table 3. Average performance metrics as defined in Equations (14)-(17) for 5 training processes in Case 2. The 
metrics are evaluated individually for the feed situations 1-4. The corresponding benchmark flowsheets are shown 
in Figure 6. 
 
Situation 1 
Situation 2 
Situation 3 
Situation 4 
𝑅1 
0.84 
0.99 
1 
1 
𝑅2 
1.08 
1.13 
1 
1 
𝑅3 
1.12 
1.13 
1 
1 
𝑅4 
0.88 
0.99 
- 
- 
 
3.2 
Discussion 
The present work shows an RL-based approach to train an agent to solve basic flowsheet synthesis problems 
without the use of prior knowledge or heuristics. The agent consists of an ANN and a tree search in which the 
planning process is modelled within a two-player game. This setting allows the usage of a modified version of the 
training algorithm of Silver et al. 27., 28.. The trained agent mostly succeeds at the given problems, by combining 
discrete actions to synthesize a flowsheet using systematic generation. To assess the efficiency of the approach, 
the total number of possible flowsheets for a fixed feed composition has to be determined as follows for a matrix 
size of (𝑁𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥= 10). To the first stream, one could connect three distillation columns, one reactor or a mixer to 
one of the streams 2 to 9 (not to stream 10, as this would result in a new stream 11, which exceeds the size of the 
flowsheet matrix). Additionally it is possible to let the stream leave the process, which results in 13 possibilities. 
For the second stream one arrives at 12 possibilities (as mixing to stream 1 was already counted in beforehand). 
This calculation can be continued until stream 8 (6 possibilities). At stream 9 there is only the possibility of placing 
a reactor or letting that stream leave the process (distillation columns are not possible as the state matrix can only 
contain one more stream). At stream 10 no unit can be placed, therefore this stream leaves the process. This results 
into 2 ∙13! 5!
⁄
 possibilities, which is slightly above 100 million different flowsheets. This does not even count in 
that the feed compositions are sampled from a continuous range and therefore the state space for the agent is 
infinitely big (of course an engineer knows that sometimes different feed compositions can be approached by the 
same flowsheets, but the agent certainly has to learn this first). The tree size cannot exceed 2 ∙𝐾∙𝑁𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑥 (which 
is equal to 800 for Case 2). In the examples, the trees contained actually only an average of around 200-300 
flowsheets in every training step, many of them visited several time from step to step. It is estimated that the 
number of total distinct flowsheets visited during the tree search is significantly smaller than 4 million.   The ANN 
of the agent shows clear learning behavior, cf. Figure 7. Thus, it can be concluded that the winning flowsheets are 
not found by luck through massive enumeration in the tree search. 
The process units and possible processes that were considered in the training are few in number and very basic in 
their modelling. This is enough for a proof-of-concept of the presented approach. However, the examples have 
several limitations that have to overcome in future work: 
First, a larger number of process units and chemical compounds would require a larger flowsheet matrix. This 
would blow up both the agents input and the action space. The present work’s representation of state and actions 
is mostly not scalable to very large problems. Alternative formulations and techniques might have to be used or 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
16 
 
developed. This may include feature extraction and convolutions for large inputs or the use of hierarchical agent 
decision structures like hierarchical neural networks 22.. 
Second, only processes without recycles were considered. Recycles are not a problem for the agent’s structure or 
the RL method. They are just additional discrete action possibilities. Contrary, recycles are rather challenges for 
the simulation environment. Processes with recycles remain hard to simulate in automated fashion, although novel 
simulation methods let us be optimistic 32., 33.. Besides robustness, another challenge arises from recycles. If one 
would formulate the process units as we did in the present work (sharp splits in the distillation), then flowsheets 
with recycles would become infeasible or at least would make the simulation very stiff. Thus, the tasks of the 
process units have to be defined in a more tolerant way. 
Another increase of complexity is the introduction of continuous parameters of the process units (e.g. pressures, 
temperatures, other specifications). This would lead to a hybrid discrete-continuous action space or at least to 
parametrized action spaces with discrete actions on a top level with subordinate continuous parameters. The 
algorithm of the present work only operates in a discrete action spaces and is not suited for these types of problems. 
There is already research on mixed action spaces in RL models 34.-36., however it is not straightforward to 
integrate these methods in our framework. Again, different agent structures or different ANN structures might be 
advisable for this type of problem. 
The presented SynGameZero method that models the RL problem as a two-player game improved the efficiency 
of the RL significantly in the present work. It has two advantages: On the one hand, it eliminates the absolute value 
of the environment’s native reward function (here: net present value). On the other hand, it has strong exploration 
abilities. Especially for player two who starts second, there is a strong motivation to explore novel actions instead 
of losing the game by just copying the actions of player one. This is because player two has the systematic 
disadvantage to lose the game if it is tied. During the training examples of the present work, player two lost the 
majority of all games as expected due to this disadvantage. However, it could be often observed that player two 
wins more games during the training phases is when new breakthrough actions are learnt. This indicates that these 
actions were found first by player two. Player one adopts these actions quickly by observing player two and 
benefits therefore as well. These beneficial features make the SynGameZero method certainly attractive also for 
other planning processes beyond chemical engineering. 
4 
Conclusion 
A novel framework for automated synthesis of flowsheets was presented. The framework enables using RL for 
flowsheet synthesis. The physical knowledge of the chemical system and the process units is provided via process 
simulation. An agent without any prior knowledge or heuristics is successfully trained using RL to synthesize 
flowsheets by sequentially placing process units to an initially empty flowsheet. The net present value of the 
process is used as reward. 
For the training of the agent, a novel RL method called SynGameZero was developed to efficiently master RL 
planning problems that have discrete action spaces and many local optima and, thus require good exploration 
schemes. The method models the RL problem as a turn-based game in that two-player compete to synthesize the 
best flowsheet. The method combines an ANN with classical actor-critical structure with an adaptive tree search 
for forward planning. Using relative instead of absolute rewards and systematic disadvantages of one of the players 
ensure good exploration abilities. 
The framework and the SynGameZero method were tested in example synthesis problems. Therein, process 
simulations with four chemical compounds and simple short-cut models for the process units (reactor, distillation 
column and mixers) were evaluated. The agent’s actions comprise placing a process unit or terminating the 
synthesis. The successfully trained agents of the examples demonstrate that both the overall framework for process 
synthesis by RL and the SynGameZero method work satisfactorily. 
The presented approach for automated flowsheet synthesis is promising. In future work, extensions to more 
complex synthesis tasks should be studied. This includes, on the one hand, extensions of the process problems 
(e.g. larger processes, more process units, continuous parameters, recycles,…). On the other hand, improvements 
and extensions of the RL algorithm (e.g. hierarchical decisions, hybrid or parameterized action spaces, feature 
extraction) will be necessary to keep up with the process problems. 
 

Preprint submitted to Frontiers of Chemical Science and Engineering 
17
