Hindawi 
 
Complexity 
 
An adaptive data-driven approach to solve 
real-world vehicle routing problems in 
logistics 
Emir Žunić 1,2  Dženana Đonko 1  Emir Buza 1 
1 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, University of Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
2 
Info Studio d.o.o. Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 
 
Correspondence should be addressed to Emir Žunić 

ORCID: 0000-0003-1950-7816 
Google Scholar: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=FN3kxnQAAAAJ&hl=hr 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/emir-zunic/ 
Tel: +387 61 858 695 
 
Abstract 
Transportation occupies one-third of the amount in the logistics costs, and accordingly transportation systems 
largely influence the performance of the logistics system. This work presents an adaptive data-driven innovative 
modular approach for solving the real-world Vehicle Routing Problems (VRP) in the field of logistics. The work 
consists of two basic units: (i) an innovative multi-step algorithm for successful and entirely feasible solving of 
the VRP problems in logistics, (ii) an adaptive approach for adjusting and setting up parameters and constants of 
the proposed algorithm. The proposed algorithm combines several data transformation approaches, heuristics 
and Tabu search. Moreover, as the performance of the algorithm depends on the set of control parameters and 
constants, a predictive model that adaptively adjusts these parameters and constants according to historical data 
is proposed. A comparison of the acquired results has been made using the Decision Support System with 
predictive models: Generalized Linear Models (GLM) and Support Vector Machine (SVM). The algorithm, 
along with the control parameters, which using the prediction method were acquired, was incorporated into a 
web-based enterprise system, which is in use in several big distribution companies in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
The results of the proposed algorithm were compared with a set of benchmark instances and validated over real 
benchmark instances as well. The successful feasibility of the given routes, in a real environment, is also 
presented. 
Keywords   Vehicle routing problem  Multi-step algorithm  Data-driven approach  Parameter setting problem 
 Real-world constraints in logistics  
 

Hindawi 
2 
 
1 Introduction 
Since logistics advanced in the 1950s [1], numerous studies were carried out within various application 
domains. Due to the trend of nationalisation and globalisation in recent decades, the importance of logistics 
management has been growing in various domains. For industries, logistics help to optimise the existing 
production and distribution processes based on the same resources through management techniques for 
promoting the efficiency and competitiveness of enterprises. The essential element in a logistics chain is the 
transportation system, which connects separated activities. Transportation occupies one-third of the amount in 
the logistics costs, and transportation systems largely influence the performance of the logistics system. 
Transportation is required over within the whole production procedure, starting from manufacture, delivery to 
the end consumer, and even return of goods. Only an excellent coordination between each component would 
maximize the benefits. Without well-developed transportation systems, logistics could not bring its advantages 
into full play. In logistics, such transportation system could provide better efficiency, reduce operation costs, and 
promote service quality [2]. The successful solving of vehicle routing problems can significantly improve 
company’s operations in the field of transportation. 
The vehicle routing problem is a generalization of the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), which is one of 
the most studied optimization problems. The problem is concerned with a travelling salesman who has a task to 
visit a set of cities in the shortest possible path, having that each city is visited only once, and that the starting 
city must be the finishing city as well. It is necessary to find the shortest route, which fulfils the previous 
condition [3]-[5]. When the previously defined problem is concerned with more than one travelling salesman, 
having that all of them are in the same city, then the Vehicle Routing Problem at its starting state is defined. It is 
necessary to find a set of shortest possible routes for the travelling salesmen, such that each city is visited by 
only one salesman. This variant of the problem is called the Multiple Travelling Salesman Problem – MTSP [6]. 
MTSP is similar to the basic form of the VRP. There are two main reasons why VRP is one of the most studied 
problems in the academic community. Those are two characteristics which VRP has, and which TSP lacks [7]. 
Firstly, there are still no algorithms which are as successful in solving the VRP problem as the most successful 
algorithms for solving the TSP problem are. Secondly, VRP is a problem set exceptionally applicable in practice. 
Various difficulties occurring in companies that deal with transport and logistics formulated with different 
variants of the VRP. 
To get the entire effect in practice, the approach and model (algorithm) presented in this paper for solving the 
real-world VRP should be adequately applied and validated in real conditions. Many facts indicate that to use 
this approach in practice, in the area of freight and logistics, it is important to consider various factors dependent 
on many parameters, primarily the number of served customers, and whether the sold/delivered goods are 
packages or pieces. This directly affects the way of storing the goods and loading the vehicles, through various 
natural limitations, such as the fact that some customers often have to use the same vehicle due to the 
temperature or other conditions; the realistic duration of unloading the goods at the delivery points; calculating 
the costs of transport routes; dependence on the loading and vehicle types; legal limits on the maximum service 
duration of a vehicle and a driver, and others. The human mind, and therefore the transport managers in 
companies in real-world situations create transportation routes by forming independent clusters to which vehicles 
are joined, from the available vehicle fleet. However, this approach which is based on regions cannot take into 
the consideration all the mentioned factors when creating the transportation routes, in a way that satisfies all the 
constraints. Most of the available software solutions operate on the same principle, i.e., grouping the customers 
into the clusters (regions), having the possibility to further bind multiple adjacent regions that lie in the same 
route. This clustering approach is often unable to solve complex problems that occur in practical applications in 
logistics, resulting in the unfeasible routes. It does not provide the best solution, especially in the cases of larger 
cities, where it is extremeley difficult to define logical and completely separated customers’ regions. Clustering 
approach also falls into the performance issues, caused by many delivery points, an extremely heterogeneous 
vehicle fleet, and a lot of different constraints that need to be fulfilled. Therefore, based on the mentioned facts, 
the purpose of this work is divided into two parts: (i) solving the complex real-world VRP in logistics using the 
proposed innovative multi-step algorithm, while meeting all of the appointed realistic constraints, (ii) adjusting 
the parameters and constants of the given model and algorithm by using the historical data, on an adaptive way. 
The proposed algorithm for solving the complex real-world VRP is based on the principle of penalization, and as 
such, uses numerous constants and parameters that are additionally adjusted using the historical data. Hence, this 
approach is “data­driven”. Transportation routes which are the final result of these two interconnected entities, 
are mostly feasible from the practical point of view, which is the most important point for any company that 
wants to successfully create the best possible transportation route. Therefore, this paper presents the application 
of a new innovative approach and concept for solving VRP using the real data of one of the largest distribution 
companies in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Dataset is public and stored at 4TU.ResearchData and available for use 

Hindawi 
3 
 
to other researchers, as the new benchmark data ([8]-[9]). The validation of this approach was first done upon the 
standardized benchmark data, then upon the actual routes of the mentioned distribution company. 
In more details, in this work we present and propose a multi-step algorithm that solves the real-world VPR. 
The algorithm implements four successively connected steps, comprising several data transformation methods, 
heuristics, and the Tabu search. The main goal of the proposed algorithm is to solve the real-world VRP 
problems in logistics with minimal cost, while meeting all of the realistic constraints. The proposed algorithm 
consists of a number of control parameters and constants, and hereby, we also present the prediction model for 
adaptively setting up and adjusting the parameters according to the historical data. In this way the suggested 
approach of solving the VRP problem acquires a more adaptive character. A comparison of the acquired result 
was made using the realized decision support system for the analysed prediction models: The Generalized Linear 
Models (GLM) and Support Vector Machine (SVM). A comparison has been made between the results of the 
proposed algorithm with a set of benchmark instances, also results over real benchmark data have been presented 
which also contain additional realistic information and constraints. The proposed model and concept, along with 
the managing parameters which were acquired using the proposed prediction method, was incorporated into the 
web-based enterprise system which is in productional use in the real sector. In the example of the distribution 
company and its realistic data used in this paper, all the transportation routes obtained by the proposed approach 
in the testing period lasting for three months, were completely feasible, respecting all of the restrictions and 
constraints. The financial savings obtained by using these routes are considerable in the area of transportation of 
the given company, and in this way, the proposed approach is successfully validated in practice. 
Based on a detailed overview of the state-of-the-art which is presented in the next section (Section 2), and 
analysis of real problems of optimizing transport routes, an area for proposing a new, modular approach and 
algorithm for adaptive solving of the complex VRP problems with realistic constraints, has been observed. The 
third section (3.1) contains a detailed description of the proposed multi-step algorithm, which consists of several 
steps which are incorporated in a single unique unit. The proposed algorithm for solving the VRP problem 
consists of its constants and control parameters. The third section (3.2) also presents an innovative approach for 
adjusting the given parameters. Discussion of the results has first been done on standardized input datasets, and 
afterwards on an real dataset of one of the biggest distribution company in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The given 
data has been available to other researchers as well. At the end, results of part of the system responsible for 
adjusting the control parameters, have been discussed. All of the aforementioned discussions of results are 
described and explained in more detail in section four, as well as successful feasibility of the given routes in real-
world environment. Section five presents conclusions of the work and guidelines for further research in this 
scientific field. 
2 Related work 
As stated in [10], the transportation of the product is a significant component of the total product cost (10%). 
The routing problem complexity increases exponentially when the number of customers or vehicles increases. 
Even for smaller instances, manual routing is becoming a difficult task for humans, and software based solutions 
can provide better performance than an experienced worker. Many algorithms for heuristic solving of the vehicle 
routing problem were described in the literature. Various approaches that use modern and recently introduced 
algorithms are described In [11] state of the art and problem review is given. The paper makes a reference to 277 
articles that present different approaches to solving the vehicle routing problem published between 2009 and 
2015. 
The vehicle routing problem mostly includes various real-world constraints. All those constraints have to be 
taken into consideration a feasible solution to real-world usage. 
The most famous constraints are time windows. The time window represents the time interval when the 
customer can be served. In paper [12] authors presented a mathematical model for the vehicle routing problem 
with access time windows, a version of the VRP suitable for planning delivery routes in a city with accessibility 
restriction, which bans the access of freight vehicles to central urban areas in many European cities. They used 
the model to find exact solutions to small problem instances based on a case study and then compare the 
performance over larger instances of a modified savings algorithm, a genetic algorithm, and a Tabu search 
procedure. The results do not show a clear prevalence of any of them, but confirming the significance of those 
additional costs and externalities. In [13] the adaptive memetic algorithm for minimizing distance in vehicle 
routing problem with time windows (VRPTW) is described. In [14], different metaheuristic approaches for 
solving VRPTW are described, such as Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) or 

Hindawi 
4 
 
Artificial Bee Colony (ABC). In [15] a hybrid of ACO and Firefly algorithm (FA) for solving vehicle routing 
problems is given. The VRPTW has been further tested. In [16], the improved simulated annealing algorithm is 
described. 
The vehicle capacity is an important constraint used in real-world examples. In [17] improved K-nearest 
neighbour algorithm is used to solve capacitated VRP (CVRP). In [18] an improved simulated annealing for the 
CVRP is described. In [19], an Evolutive Tabu-Search approach is used for CVRP. 
The number of depots varies for different companies. When more than one depot is in usage, the problem is 
called a multi-depot vehicle routing problem (MDVRP). In [20] an improved ACO algorithm is used for multi-
depot green VRP. Enhanced differential evolution algorithms for solving MDVRP are used in [21]. In [22] 
discrete FA is used to solve asymmetric multi-depot VRP. In [23] other approaches and literature review for 
multi-depot vehicle routing problem is described. 
One of the most important realistic constraints is fuel consumption, whether it is logistics of the own vehicle 
fleet or outsourced logistics. Outsourced logistics operation to third-party logistics has attracted more attention in 
the past several years. However, very few papers analysed fuel consumption model in the context of outsourcing 
logistics. In paper [24] authors presented a hybrid Tabu search algorithm for a real-world open vehicle routing 
problem involving fuel consumption constraints. Experiments in this paper were conducted on instances based 
on real road data of Beijing, China, considering that outsourced logistics plays an increasingly important role in 
China’s freight transportation. 
In literature and practice, many other constraints are considered, such as heterogeneous fleet VRP [25], city 
VRP [26], etc. In [27], a taxonomic review of the vehicle routing problem is given with different approaches and 
a methodology for classifying the literature. Often, the problems of transport optimization have a dynamic 
interpretation. Ride-sharing services are transforming urban mobility by providing timely and convenient 
transportation to anybody, anywhere, and anytime. However, most of the mathematical models do not fully 
address the potential of ride-sharing. Authors in paper [28] presented a more general mathematical model for 
real-time high-capacity ride-sharing that (i) scales to large numbers of passengers and trips, and (ii) dynamically 
generates optimal routes with respect to online demand and vehicle locations. The algorithm applied to fleets of 
autonomous vehicles and also incorporates rebalancing of idling vehicles to areas of high demand. This 
framework is general and can be used for many real-time multivehicles, multitask assignment problems. 
From the aspect of practical application in logistics, it is always important to do all the necessary 
pre­treatments which lead to the optimal transportation routes, satisfying all the constraints. In paper [29], the 
authors presented a multi-phase hybrid approach with clustering, dynamic programming, and a heuristic 
algorithm to solve a collaborative multiple-centre vehicle routing problem (CMCVRP). CMCVRP is a multi-
constraint combinatorial and game optimization issue containing both vehicle routing optimization and profit 
distribution procedures. The CMCVRP is generally used to study the logistics network structure adjustment from 
a non-optimal network structure to a collaborative multiple DCs network optimization structure. The 
optimization of CMCVR can effectively improve vehicle loading rate and reduce the crisscross transportation 
phenomenon. Designing a reasonable profit distribution mechanism is a critical step in CMCVR optimization. 
Collaboration can be organized through a negotiation process by a logistics service provider. On the other hand, 
the study [30] establishes a linear optimization model to minimize the total cost of a two-echelon logistics joint 
distribution network. An improved ant colony optimization algorithm integrated with the genetic algorithm is 
presented to serve customer clustering units and resolve the model formulation by assigning logistics facilities. 
Collaborative two-echelon logistics joint distribution network can be organized through a negotiation process via 
logistics service providers or participants existing in the logistics system, which can effectively reduce the 
crisscross transportation phenomenon and improve the efficiency of the urban freight transportation system. 
As it can be observed, all heuristic algorithms contain parameters that must be set for the algorithm to 
provide a quality and usable solution. This makes the parameter-setting problem a significant research area 
because the results of the algorithm significantly depend on the parameter values. In the majority of the cited 
research papers, a fact has been mentioned which indicates that every real-world VRP problem is a slightly bit 
different from the VRP problem that is the most similar to it. That is affected by two sets of parameters (control), 
among other things: (i) certain realistic constraints and input data constants, and (ii) constants of the used 
algorithm.  
Each company that requires an implementation of the VRP has its constraints that are defined by the business 
policy of the given company. That is why the literature often states that constraints and restrictions in these types 
of problems are non-standard. Lee describes one of these problems in great detail in [31], along with a solution 
proposal on a concrete realized example. Data Mining (DM) techniques and methods are also often used for 
adjusting the realistic constraints of the VRP, as well as Machine Learning (ML) algorithms, and other methods 

Hindawi 
5 
 
such as Fuzzy logic or Neural Networks (NN). There are several available papers which describe the application 
of statistical methods for these causes. Some kinds of interesting real examples are presented in papers [32]-[33]. 
An especially interesting example of the classic application of real data is presented in research [34] where the 
term data-driven solving of the VRP problem is introduced. This work also mentions for the first time an 
additional phase, which can be used in a real environment, and that is the human-computer interaction phase, 
which enables that the end user has the possibility of manual processing and modification of the suggested 
routes. No matter how perfect the algorithm seems, there are always real situations that are impossible to predict 
and classify in advance, and that is why that possibility is needed in practical systems.  
Each of the analysed approaches and algorithms for solving the VRP problem, including the one presented in 
this work, consists of certain constants and control parameters. Those parameters and constants are used to 
determine certain weight factors, punitive factors by individual criteria, depending on the importance of the 
criteria for the result of the real situation of vehicle routing and others. In literature, this approach is known as 
the Parameter Setting Problem (PSP). The most interesting work on this topic was presented by Calvet et al. 
[35] in which they describe a statistical approach for setting the parameters for metaheuristic algorithms, and 
which is applied to the VRP problems. 
3 Proposed adaptive data-driven approach 
The key element in the supply chain is the transportation system that unites different, spatially and 
temporally separated activities. The transportation includes one-third of logistics costs and significantly affects 
the performances of the logistic system. Distribution companies usually have problems where they are not able 
to optimize their transportation activities in the best possible way and therefore lose considerable financial 
resources. Two basic units are presented in this paper (Figure 1): 
 
a multi-step algorithm, that is able to optimally solve real-world and extremely complex VRP 
problems, satisfying most of the constraints that can occur in practice (section 3.1), 
 
a proposed algorithm consists of appropriate constants and parameters that can be set based on 
historical value, so the second part of this section (section 3.2) presents data-driven approach for 
setting the control parameters of the proposed algorithm. 
This two-component model could be represented as a diagram seen in Figure 1. In addition to historical data, 
the other data are also taken into consideration, such as Global Positioning System (GPS) and Geographic 
Information System (GIS) data. 
 
Figure 1: Proposed data-driven approach for adaptive solving the vehicle routing problem 
Transportation routes obtained this way are optimal from the algorithmic point of view and completely 
feasible in a real environment, which is the most important fact, from the aspect of the practical application of 
such systems. The transportation costs are significantly reduced, routes are feasible, and customers of the 
company are more satisfied as their requirements are fulfilled by using this multi­component approach on the 
real example of the distribution company. 

Hindawi 
6 
 
3.1 Multi-step algorithm for solving real-world VRP problems in logistics 
The proposed algorithm that solves the heterogeneous fleet vehicle routing problem with time windows 
(HVRPTW), and satisfies realistic constraints, consists of four steps, or rather two steps, one intermediate step 
and one post-step (Pseudocode 1). In the first step, the initial solution to the problem is created, which is 
improved in later steps. A modification of the heuristic Clarke-Wright algorithm was implemented. After that, 
the second step (intermediate step) strives to decrease the number of routes. The solution which is the result of 
the second step serves as an initial solution to the local search based on Tabu search, or the third step. After Tabu 
search, the fourth step (post-step) optimizes the order of customers within each acquired route. Before that, the 
transformation of input data, time windows of customers and time distances is done, which enables the duration 
of unloading at each customer to become equal to 0 and simplifies the problem. The algorithm also solves the 
problem where some customers cannot be serviced by certain vehicles from the fleet (Site-Dependent Vehicle 
Routing Problem - SDVRP), which is one of the most commonly used realistic constraints in practice. 
Pseudocode 1: Steps of the proposed algorithm 
/* Pre-step (3.1.1) */ 
  ConnectingToTheDatabase (connection); 
  DataInitialization(customersList, vehiclesList, depot, sdvrpConstraints); 
  PreparationOfTheInputData(customersList, vehiclesList, depot, sdvrpConstraints); 
  TimeWindowsTranspformations(customersList); 
  RoutesInitialization(customersList, routes); 
/* First step (3.1.2) and (3.1.3) */ 
// initial solution becomes optimal routes 
  ClarkeWrightSavingsAlgorihm(routes, vehiclesList); 
  AssigningVehiclesToRoutes(routes, vehiclesList); 
/* Second step (3.1.4) */ 
  initialSolution = ReducingTheNumberOfRoutes(routes, customersList, vehiclesList); 
/* Third step (3.1.5) */ 
// the initial solution marked as the initialSolution becomes the optimal routes 
  TabuSearch(initialSolution, customersList, vehiclesList, sdvrpConstraints); 
/* Fourth step (3.1.6) */ 
  RoutesOptimization(); 
  RoutesOptimization2Customers(); 
  RoutesOptimization3Customers(); 
  InverseTransformation(customersList, initialSolution); 
/* Final step */ 
// the result of the fourth step is the optimal list of routes by vehicle is RouteResList 
  StoreOptimalRoutesInTheDatabase(RouteResList); 
Before the description of the proposed algorithm, the formulations of the basic concepts as well as the 
problem will be briefly introduced:  
Route – this implies a row of customers and a vehicle which travels that route. The route has much more 
data and characteristics, but it is derived from these two, which means that the route is defined by a row of 
customers and one vehicle. 
Solution – one solution is a set of routes where each customer is in exactly one route. The solution depends 
on the order of each customer in a transport route of a corresponding vehicle. The time of arrival at the customer 
is determined so that it is the earliest possible time (meaning that time is always equal to the start of the time 
window or it is equal to the time that was necessary to get to the previous customer). The time of arrival at the 
first customer is equal to the start of his time window, or it is equal to the start of the time window of the vehicle 
increased by the time necessary for the vehicle to arrive at the warehouse of the first customer.  
Realistic constraints which are covered in the proposed algorithm and approach – a lot of the constraints 
which could be met in the real environment are included in the proposed four-steps algorithm and approach. 
Some of them are as follows: a large number of the customers with their time-windows included, heterogeneous 

Hindawi 
7 
 
fleet of vehicles, working hours of each vehicle, working hours of the drivers as well, working hours of the 
depot, site-dependent constraints, blocking roads for each vehicle in the fleet, vehicle limitations per weight and 
volume (capacity), vehicle filling mode when goods are sold at the unit level (article), dynamic calculation of the 
cost depending on the weight of the goods the vehicle is transporting, possibility of multiple and divided 
travelling for each vehicle, reasonable period of execution of algorithm for normal use in real situations, and 
other. 
Route cost – this implies the number of kilometers multiplied by the cost per kilometer of the vehicle driving 
that route. That is the real route cost. Different penalties are added to that. Sometimes it is allowed for a route not 
to meet certain constraints, and for each constraint that is not met punishment points (penalties) are added, which 
increase when the violation of each of the constraints increases.  
The real route cost     is equal to: 
 
         
(1) 
  – total distance of route travelled measured in kilometres, 
   – cost in monetary unit per kilometre for the vehicle driving that route. 
This definition implies that only the variable cost of the vehicles is to be considered. In real examples, there 
are fixed costs as well, which can be described as the cost of each of the vehicles (cumulative amortization, 
registration, maintenance, tires, vehicle insurance and others) per day. The fixed cost can also include driver cost 
(one or more of them that are necessary for delivery) for each vehicle separately. If the fixed vehicle cost is taken 
into consideration as well, then the real route cost changes as follows: 
 
              
(2) 
  – total distance of route travelled measured in kilometres, 
   – cost in monetary unit per kilometre of vehicle driving that route, 
    – fixed cost of the vehicle traveling the given route. 
Cost    mostly depends on the fuel consumption of the vehicle  , while cost     includes vehicle 
amortization costs, driver costs, and others. Route delays happen when a vehicle is unable to service one or more 
customers until the end of the time window. If the vehicle arrives before the time window to a customer, it waits 
for delivery until the start of the time window and then starts delivering.  
This delay does not represent route delay. instead, it is used in the context where the stated delays are added, 
and legally essential drivers' breaks for every vehicle during the workday are obtained. The mentioned delays, if 
they exist, can be combined with the longest unloading at the customer, and that way necessary drivers' breaks 
are respected. The penalty for route delay    is the sum of the delays at all of the customers of that route 
(presented in minutes) multiplied with the constant               
 
                                  
 
 
(3) 
   – the end time of servicing the  -th customer, 
   – the end of the time window of the  -th customer. 
The penalties for overloading in volume or weight are calculated by taking into account the percentage of the 
excess, so that 1 [m3] of excess costs bigger vehicles less, considering that in percentages, for bigger vehicles, it 
affects the problem of exceeding the given constraint less.  
The penalty for volume    is equal to the quotient of the excess in cubic meters and maximum volume, 
which the vehicle driving the route can carry multiplied with the constant                        . 
 
                                      
 
          
(4) 
   – the ordered volume of the  -th customer, 
   – maximum volume [m3] which the vehicle driving the route can carry. 

Hindawi 
8 
 
The weight is penalized analogously as volume, the penalty    is acquired when the relative excess is 
multiplied with the constant                        . 
 
                                      
 
          
(5) 
   – the ordered weight of the  -th customer, 
   – maximum weight [kg] which the vehicle driving the route can carry. 
 
Given that there are certain constraints in which some customers cannot be serviced by certain vehicles 
(SDVRP), the route cost also includes the penalty for the violation of those conditions. The penalty for 
customers in the wrong vehicles     is equal to: 
 
                               
(6) 
                        – constant which defines how many penalties are added for one customer in 
the wrong vehicle, 
  – number of customers in the route that cannot be serviced by the vehicle of this route. 
The route cost also includes the     penalty, which presents the cost increase for vehicles when they are 
transporting a bigger weight. In real examples of solving the VRP, it has been established that it is necessary to 
deliver the merchandise to the end customers as soon as possible, given that the consumption of fuel (and other 
vehicle parts) is significantly larger when the vehicle is transporting a greater amount of merchandise (measured 
in weight). That is the reason why the parameter     was introduced. It strives to primarily service closer 
customers, especially those who, in percentages, have a greater impact on the total weight of the whole route due 
to the weight.     can be presented with the following equation: 
 
                        
   
 
  
  
 
(7) 
              – constant which presents the coefficient of cost increase when the vehicle is transporting its 
maximum weight,  
   – cost of the vehicle   which is travelling the route, 
   – distance travelled to the  -th customer, 
   – the weight ordered by the  -th customer, 
   – maximum weight which the vehicle travelling the route can transport. 
In laboratory conditions, this fact is completely disregarded, and the route is primarily considered optimal if 
customers farther away from the warehouse are serviced first. However, from the aspect of practical application, 
the given statement is different. If there are customers in a city that is farther away from the warehouse, and a 
customer (or several) that is very close to the warehouse, but whose ordered weight is, for example, 20% of the 
total weight of the given route, in laboratory observations the observed vehicle will transport the necessary 20% 
of route weight from the customer (near the warehouse) to the city and back. Taking into account the fact that the 
vehicles travelling the routes can be large trucks (with a great transport capacity) and the routes long (several 
hundred kilometres), then the consumption of fuel in those cases can be larger than in the case where the given 
customer is serviced among the first (at the start of the route), during departure from the warehouse itself. The 
given modification decreases the real route cost created using the proposed algorithm. This is one of the 
contributions of this paper that has not been studied in more detail in other scientific papers. 
The total route cost  , marked as     , is the sum of the real cost and all of the listed penalty costs.  
 
                                            
(8) 
The cost is calculated this way during the third step of the proposed algorithm (which will be explained in 
greater details later on), which is conceivably the most important for the optimality of the overall algorithm. 
During the first step and mid-step of the algorithm delays and route, overloads are not allowed, so those penalties 
are equal to 0. Also, given that there are no vehicles during the first step of the route,     is overlooked. Taking 
that into account, the cost during the first step is           , and during the second step        
       . 

Hindawi 
9 
 
Solution cost – solution cost is the sum of route costs which that solution entails. 
 
             
 
    
                
   
 
(9) 
Now that the main terms and their definitions have been stated, the formulation of the problem for the 
implemented algorithm can be given as well: for the given set of customers and their orders, vehicles and their 
characteristics, time constraints related to the servicing of customers, time constraints related to the working 
hours of each of the vehicles, time constraints related to the warehouse (where all deliveries start and end at 
one warehouse), constraints related to which vehicle can service which customer, as well as other realistic 
constraints, it is necessary to find a set of routes and to assign a vehicle to each route, so that the solution cost 
             is minimized. Ideally, the real cost     will be minimal, and all the other costs related to 
penalizing the violation of one or more of the constraints will be equal to zero.  
3.1.1 Pre-step – Data initialization and Transformations 
Before the transformation of customers’ time windows, as is shown in Figure 2, two other types of 
modifications/transformations are done. The first type relies on the fact that the proposed algorithm has the 
possibility of defining two additional warehouse parameters: 
     – the start of the warehouse’s working time (depot’s time window), which is the time when the 
warehouse is available for use. More precisely, the given time is the earliest time the vehicles can leave the 
warehouse. 
     – the end of the warehouse’s working time (depot’s time window). More precisely, the given time is the 
last time the vehicles can return to the warehouse after they have serviced the customers from the given route.  
Based on the two parameters, the working time of the warehouse, as well as the working time of the vehicles 
themselves, can be controlled, which presents a complex option (generalization) of this constraint. That is 
included and explained in a later step of the proposed algorithm. The given parameters are taken into account so 
that the time windows of each of the customers are corrected through the following iterations:  
 
The difference   –     is calculated for each customer, where    represents the start of the time window 
for the customer  , and     represents the time distance from depot to customer  . 
 
If the difference   –         , is given, then the start of the time window of the customer is set to the 
value            . Otherwise the value    does not change for customer  . 
 
The sum       , is calculated for each customer, where    presents the end of the time window for 
customer  , and     presents the time distance from customer   to the depot. 
 
If the sum             is given, then the end of the time window for customer   is set to the value 
           . Otherwise the value    does not change for customer  . 
The second transformation is based on the fact how the proposed algorithm is supposed to perform multiple 
deliveries to the customers in the situations when customer cannot be serviced by a valid vehicle in one delivery 
while not simultaneously violating SDVRP constraints. In order to meet those constraints, the algorithm 
performs the following iterations during this pre-step of data preparation: 
 
For each customer, a set of available vehicles that can service them are checked, and then they are 
stored into a list of vehicles available to the customer 
 
From the list of vehicles available to each customer a comparison is made between the volume and 
transport capacity of the vehicle and the volume and weight of the customer’s order 
 
If the list of available vehicles to the customer contains vehicles, whose volume and transport capacity 
are greater or equal to those of the volume and weight ordered by the customer, the iteration for that 
given customer is stopped, and the next customer is reviewed 
 
If the list of available vehicles to the customer does not contain vehicles whose volume and transport 
capacity are greater or equal the volume and weight of the customer’s order, several sub-iterations are 
done within this iteration: 
 
For each allowed vehicle for multiple deliveries, the profitability of the allowed vehicle for the 
given customer is calculated the following way: 

Hindawi 
10 
 
 
                                   
     
        
(10) 
 
The vehicle which is most profitable is chosen, and the number of travels of the given vehicles 
to the customer is equal to      
  
   
  
    , and those routes are created in advance. The 
remaining part of the order      
  
   
  
     of the customer remains a candidate for routing 
in the following steps of the proposed algorithm. The start of the working time of the most 
profitable vehicle      is set to the value: 
 
    
              
     
          
  
      
     
   
      
(11) 
 
The unloading time for the customer   
  which will be used in the following steps of the 
proposed algorithm is equal to: 
 
  
   
  
      
     
   
  
(12) 
 
The time window of the customer for use in later steps of the algorithm is equal to: 
 
  
             
   
  
               
(13) 
 
When all customers are checked, the iterations are stopped 
Besides the listed transformations, other data preparations are done before the start of the algorithm’s 
execution. The listed preparations of the algorithm’s input data will be explained later in the following sections 
of this work.  
Transformation maps the current problem into a different problem which can be proven to be the same as the 
first but is more simple to realize. This pre-step only change the algorithm’s input data related to time. After the 
transformation is done, the unloading time for each customer is 0, and the time distances between the customers 
have increased.  
The implemented transformation is published in the work of the authors Liu and Shen [36], and it can be 
implemented if the distances meet the triangle inequality theorem, which is true for real-world problems of 
transport route optimization. Time distances for every two customers increase for half the unloading duration of 
those customers (intuitively, half the unloading time for each customer is assigned to the time distance to that 
customer, and the other half is assigned to the time distance from that customer). Time distances for each 
customer from the depot increase for half the unloading time of that customer. After that, time windows change 
as well, so that half the unloading time for that customer is added to the start of the time windows for each 
customer and the end of the time window decreases by half the unloading time for that customer. Meaning:  
 
           
    
             
             
     
    
         
       
   
(14) 
where               and    are unloading times of the customer, time distance from depot to customer  , start 
of the time window and end of the time window of the customer  , in that order.     is the time distance of the 
customers   and  , and           ,      and    
    
   are the new values of od             and         after the 
transformation, in that order.  
After these changes are implemented, the unloading times for each of the customers    are equal to 0. The 
newly acquired time distances between the customers are stored into a new matrix              , and all of 
the data related to the customers, with an exception of the unloading times, are changed in the list of customers. 
The unloading times only change after the routes are made, locally at the customers of the routes, so that it is 
possibly to return the data to an initial state using inverse transformation (so that the value of unloading duration 
is not lost).  

Hindawi 
11 
 
The implemented transformation is not completely the same as in the mentioned research. Instead, it is 
adjusted to be accurate in this case. The difference is that the work assumes that the delivery starts in the time 
window, and does not necessarily have to end in the time window, which is not accurate in the algorithm 
presented in this work. Also, in the mentioned work, the working time of the warehouse is changed in this step as 
well and considering that the given modification was done in the pre-step of the proposed algorithm, it is not 
done again in the transformation step. 
The problem must stay the same, and after the algorithm is executed, and before the final print out of the 
results, an inverse transformation is done as well, so that all data is returned to the initial state understandable to 
the end-users. The inverse transformation is easily derived from the transformation (where quantity was added, it 
is now reduced for that amount, and where it was reduced by a certain amount, it is now added). 
3.1.2 First step – Generating of initial routes using Clarke and Wright savings 
algorithm 
Clarke-Wright heuristic (or Clark and Wright savings algorithm) starts with one route created for each 
customer. Every route goes from the warehouse to the customer and back to the warehouse. After that, savings 
are calculated for every two customers with the following formula:                         . It shows 
savings measured in distance travelled, when two routes, whose end customers are    and   , are merged. This 
means that vehicle after servicing customer   , instead of going to the warehouse, it now goes directly to 
customer    and goes to the warehouse after. That way savings are acquired. It is often assumed that the 
distances of the VRP satisfy the triangle inequality theorem,                  , for all indexes              
  . In those cases, all of the savings are clearly non-negative.  
After all savings are calculated, they are sorted in descending order. After that, the following is done in the 
series of iterations (Pseudocode 2):  
 
The largest savings that have not been observed are taken.  
 
It is checked whether the observed customers are in different routes and whether the end customers 
(first or last) are in their routes. If at least one of these is not satisfied, the iteration is done. 
 
If the weight of the route exceeds the capacity  , the iteration is done.  
 
Two routes are merged by merging the observed customers. 
After these iterations are finished, the current set of routes is the result of the Clarke and Wright savings 
algorithm. This algorithm was originally written for the CVRP but has been later implanted on other variants of 
the VRP. It is mostly modified in a way where other conditions, which need to be met for this variant of the 
VRP, are checked while merging routes. For example, with the VRPTW, besides checking other conditions (for 
route capacity), it would be sufficient to also check whether the new route is feasible concerning time 
constraints.  
As it was said, the initial solution is created in the first step. From the main version of the Clarke and Wright 
algorithm, other versions have been derived over time, some of which give better results. One of those was 
formed in 1999, in the work of Liu and Shen [36], and that version is implemented in the proposed algorithm. 
The main difference, from the main version, is that it not only observes the possibility of merging two routes but 
also observes the possibility of inserting a route between two customers on a different route. Besides that, the 
insertion of an inverse route between two customers of a different route (a reversed route is acquired by 
reversing the order of servicing customers), is observed as well. Given that one route can be inserted between 
two customers of a different route, savings cannot be calculated in advance, as is the case with the general 
algorithm. Therefore the algorithm is slightly different as well. The initial solution is acquired the same way, but 
the iterations are performed differently. In each iteration, two routes are merged. Of all the merging possibilities, 
the one with the highest savings is selected and executed. 
During the selection of the routes, each pair of routes that can be merged is observed, taking into account that 
the new route needs to meet these conditions: weight, volume and time of arrival at the customer. The first step 
does not allow for a route to have a weight larger than the constant                        , which is 
set to the value of the largest vehicle's weight capacity. Also, it is not allowed for a route to have a volume 
greater than the constant                        , which is set to the value of the largest vehicle's 
volume capacity. Each overrun is calculated assuming that the largest vehicle will be driving each route. On the 
other hand, in the first step, the proposed route would have to depend on the available fleet of vehicles. To take 

Hindawi 
12 
 
into account the vehicles, route cost, which up to now only depended on the travelled distance, now depends on 
the fleet of vehicles. The route cost is equal to the distance travelled multiplied by the variable cost of the 
cheapest vehicle that can drive that route (by capacity).  
Pseudocode 2: Generating of initial routes using Clarke and Wright savings algorithm 
while(num_of_iterations--){ 
  double maxSavings = - CONSTANT; int maxI,maxJ,maxK; bool inverted; 
  for(int i = 0; i < routes.size()-1; i++){ 
    Route *r2 = routes[i]->GetInvertedRoute(); 
    for(int j = i+1; j < routes.size(); j++){ 
      for(int k = -1; k < 0 || k < (routes[i]->customers.size()); k++){ 
          if(routes[i]->IsItPossibleToInsertRouteToThePlace(routes[j],k) &&  
    maxSavings < routes[i]->ModifiedSavings(routes[j],k) –  
            TotalDifferencConstraintsPerVehicles (routes[i], routes[j], vehicles.size())){ 
maxI = i; maxJ = j; maxK = k; inverted = false;  
maxSavings = routes[i]->ModifiedSavings(routes[j],k); 
          } 
      } 
      for(int k = -1; k < 0 || k < (routes[j]->customers.size()); k++){ 
          if(routes[j]->IsItPossibleToInsertRouteToThePlace (routes[i],k) &&  
    maxSavings < routes[j]->ModifiedSavings(routes[i],k) –  
            TotalDifferencConstraintsPerVehicles (routes[i], routes[j], vehicles.size())){ 
maxI = j; maxJ = i; maxK = k; inverted = false;  
maxSavings = routes[j]->ModifiedSavings(routes[i],k); 
          } 
      } 
      Route *r = routes[j]->GetInvertedRoute(); 
      for(int k = -1; k < 0 || k < (routes[i]->customers.size()); k++){ 
          if(rute[i]->IsItPossibleToInsertRouteToThePlace(r,k) &&  
    maxSavings < routes[i]->ModifiedSavings(r,k) –  
            TotalDifferencConstraintsPerVehicles (routes[i], routes[j], vehicles.size())){ 
maxI = i; maxJ = j; maxK = k; inverted = true;  
maxSavings = routes[i]->ModifiedSavings(r,k); 
          } 
      } 
      for(int k = -1; k < 0 || k < (routes[j]->customers.size()); k++){ 
          if(routes[j]-> IsItPossibleToInsertRouteToThePlace(r2,k) &&  
    maxSavings < routes[j]->ModifiedSavings(r2,k) –  
            TotalDifferencConstraintsPerVehicles (routes[i], routes[j], vehicles.size())){ 
maxI = j; maxJ = i; maxK = k; inverted = true;  
maxSavings = routes[j]->ModifiedSavings(r2,k); 
          } 
      } 
    } 
  } 
  if(maxSavings < 0.01) break; 
  if(!inverted) 
      routes[maxI]->InsertRouteToThePlace(routes[maxJ],maxK); 
  else 
      routes[maxI]-> InsertRouteToThePlace(routes [maxJ]->GetInvertedRoute(),maxK); 
  routes.erase(routes.begin()+maxJ); 
} 

Hindawi 
13 
 
When it comes to the SDVRP problem, a new term (constant) was introduced in the first step, which shows 
the similarity between routes and which is affected by constraints related to which vehicle cannot service which 
customer. During implementation and testing of the algorithm, it can be noticed that customers, who cannot be 
serviced by a certain vehicle are in several different routes, so that vehicle cannot travel any of those routes. It 
happened regularly that a set of routes cannot be travelled by an available fleet of vehicles. That’s why the 
algorithm allows the option to reduce the savings by a number (constant)                  which shows how 
similar routes are in terms of constraints, and increases the chance that two routes with similar constraints are 
merged. Taking into account the number                 , the algorithm tends to put all of the customers that 
cannot be serviced by a certain vehicle into the same route, so that only one route cannot be travelled by that 
vehicle. The number                  is obtained, so that for each pair of customers, where one customer is in 
one route and the other is in the second route, 1 is added to each of the differences in constraints of those two 
customers. This is one of the secondary contributions of this paper. 
Each customer has information for each vehicle, regarding whether it can be served by them. Each vehicle, 
which can serve only one of two customers, represents the difference. After the number of differences is 
calculated, that number is divided by the sum of the number of customers in those two routes (which normalizes 
this penalty) and is multiplied by the constant, which often had the value 3. After the highest savings amount is 
determined, if it's possible to obtain savings by merging (there is a chance that no two routes can be merged), the 
routes are merged (if the highest savings amount was obtained when a reversed route was inserted into another, 
the reversed one is inserted). That way, after each iteration, two routes are merged, and the number of routes 
decreases by 1. If it is not possible to merge any two routes to obtain savings, the algorithm terminates. 
3.1.3 First step – Assignment of vehicles to the routes 
If it is not possible to merge two routes to obtain savings (the savings will be negative), then the step 
terminates. The current set of routes is the solution. Because the routes do not have their vehicles yet, in the 
following step vehicles are assigned to the routes using a brute-force approach. 
All possible permutations of vehicle assignments are observed, and the one with the minimal cost is chosen 
(Pseudocode 3). The number of permutations increases rapidly, and this method is used when the number of 
available vehicles in the fleet is less than 10-15 (the number of permutations is reasonable, based on 
experimental measurements). For fleets with a vehicle count greater than 10-15, vehicle assignment is done 
using the greedy algorithm where the number of permutations quickly increases. First, the vehicle with the 
lowest cost is assigned to the longest route, from the vehicles with a capacity large enough to travel that route. In 
following iterations, a vehicle with the smallest cost is assigned to a route. If the number of routes is greater than 
the number of vehicles, a necessary amount of fictitious vehicles is included. A fictitious vehicle has cost larger 
than the other vehicles. Its cost is a constant                        , and its capacity is represented 
using two constants:                         and                        . 
Pseudocode 3: Assignment of vehicles to the routes 
double costBestAssignment = CONST_BIG_NUMBER; 
// additionalVehicle is added if there aro no enough vehicles in the fleet 
for(int i = 0; i < routes.size(); i++){ 
  currentAssignment[i] = i; 
} 
do{ 
 
  vector<Route*> currentAssignment; 
  for(int i = 0; i < routes.size(); i++){ 
    if(currentAssignment[i] < vehicles.size()) 
      currentSolution.push_back(new Route(routes[i]-> customers, vehicles[currentAssignment[i]],true)); 
    else 
      currentSolution.push_back(new Route(routes[i]->customers,additionalVehicle,true)); 
  } 
  double currentCost = SolutionCost(currentSolution); 
  if(currentCost < bestCost){ 
     for(int i = 0; i < routes.size(); i++){ 

Hindawi 
14 
 
       bestAssignment[i] = currentAssignment[i]; 
     } 
     costBestAssignment = currentCost; 
  } 
  for(int i = 0; i < routes.size(); i++){ 
    for(int j = 0; j < routes[i]->customers.size(); j++){ 
      delete currentSolution[i]->customers[j]; 
    } 
    delete currentSolution[i]; 
  } 
} while(next_permutation(currentAssignment, currentAssignment+routes.size())); 
for(int i = 0; i < routes.size(); i++){ 
  if(bestAssignment[i] < vehicles.size()) 
    routes[i] = new Route(routes[i]->customers, vehicles[bestAssignment[i]], true); 
  else 
    routes[i] = new Route(routes[i]->customers,additionalVehicle,true);  
} 
The following step of the algorithm needs to remove this vehicle (because if it does not, then the algorithm 
does not return a valid solution). In practice, a great cost of this vehicle forces the second step to remove it, and 
if it does not succeed in removing it, then it is intuitive and impossible to find the solution with a real fleet of 
vehicles. 
3.1.4 Second step (intermediate step) – Route elimination 
When the solution cost is observed by taking into account the number of routes, it can be noticed that the 
lower the number of routes is, the lesser the solution cost is as well. Even though that does not always have to be 
the case, the heuristic algorithms for the VRPTW always assume that the solution with the smaller number of 
routes (or used vehicles) is more optimal than the solution with a greater number of obtained routes (or used 
vehicles), and the cost is only observed when two solutions have the same number of routes (or used vehicles in 
the routing plan). One of the possible reasons, why this is the case, is because every route has its cost, which is 
independent of variable cost (fixed cost), and so it is better to have a smaller number of routes. In the case of the 
HVRPTW problem, which is most commonly found in real-world examples; this is not the case, considering that 
different vehicles travel the routes, the number of routes do not mean much.  
After the first step of the algorithm has returned a set of routes, this step of the algorithm attempts to decrease 
the number of routes. The solution with fewer routes is accepted only if the cost is less or equal to the initial cost. 
The idea of route elimination was taken from the work of Braysy et al [37]. Route elimination is done using a 
constant number of iterations, and in each of the iterations the following is done (Pseudocode 4): 
 
Chooses one permutation using the current set of routes.  
 
Using the first route, permutation respectively tries to put each customer into another route. 
 
If it succeeds in putting all of the customers in other routes, and the cost of the newly obtained solution 
is less than the cost of the solution before, the route is removed from the permutation and the previous 
step is done. If it does not succeed in doing that and obtaining lesser cost, then all of the customers are 
put in the initial route and the next iteration is done.  
Pseudocode 4: Route elimination 
while(num_of_iterations --){ 
  vector<int> randPermutation = RandomPermutation(currentSolution.size()); 
  for(int i = 0; i < randPermutation.size(); i++){ 
    vector<Route*> routeCopy = currentSolution; 
    for(int j = 0; j < routeCopy.size(); j++){ 
      routeCopy[j] = new Route(currentSolution[j]->customers, currentSolution[j]->routeVehicle,true); 
    } 

Hindawi 
15 
 
    double totalConsumption = 0; 
    bool possible = true; 
    for(int k = 0; k < routeCopy[randPermutation[i]]->customers.size(); k++){ 
      double minConsumption = CONSTANT; 
      int route_number = -1, place = -1; 
      for(int u = 0; u < routeCopy.size(); u++){ 
        if(u != randPermutation[i]){ 
          for(int v = -1; v == -1 || v < routeCopy[u]->customers.size(); v++){ 
            if(routeCopy[u]->IsItpossibleToAddCustomer(routeCopy[randPermutation[i]]->customers[k],v) 
                && minConsumption > routeCopy[u]-> AdditionalConsumptionWithCustomerAtPlace 
                (routeCopy[randPermutation[i]]-> customers[k],v)){ 
                    minConsumption = routeCopy[u]-> AdditionalConsumptionWithCustomerAtPlace  
                        (routeCopy[randPermutation[i]]->customers[k],v); 
                    route_number = u; 
                    place = v; 
            } 
          } 
        } 
      } 
      if(route_number == -1){ 
        possible = false; 
        break; 
      } 
      routeCopy[route_number]-> 
          InsertRouteToThePlace(new Route(routeCopy[randPermutation[i]]->customers[k]),place); 
      totalConsumption += minConsumption; 
    } 
    double savings = currentSolution[randPermutation[i]]->RouteCost(); 
    if(possible && (savings - totalConsumption > 0)){ 
      routeCopy.erase(routeCopy.begin()+randPermutation[i]); 
      currentSolution = routeCopy; 
      break; 
    } 
  } 
} 
Each permutation has a chance to be chosen with equal probability, and the way of choosing permutations is 
explained in the book of Skiena [38]. When a customer is put in a different place, all possible places where that 
customer can be put are checked, and the one with the smallest cost is selected. If, in the end, the total sum of 
costs of rearranging customers is less or equal to the cost of the route that is removed, the removal of the route is 
approved, and the next route in the permutation is observed. That route is now the first route of the permutation.  
3.1.5 Third step – Tabu search 
Tabu search, created by Fred W. Glover in 1986 [39] and formalized in 1989 [40]-[41], is a metaheuristic 
search method employed as a local search method used for mathematical optimization. Local search is a method 
of solving problems of combinatorial optimization which start from one solution, and in a series of iterations, in 
each iteration, it goes from one solution to a solution in the neighbourhood of that solution. The neighbourhood 
of the solution presents solutions which are, in some way, similar to that solution and is most often obtained like 
other solutions which can be obtained from the current solution through some form of modification. 
Naive local search always chooses the best solution from the neighbourhood of the solution, but doing so can 
cause repetitions of the solutions (one of the possibilities is that the search finds two solutions that are the best 
solutions in that neighbourhood). Tabu search solves that problem by forbidding some solutions from the 
neighbourhood, which prevents the repetition.  

Hindawi 
16 
 
Those solutions can be forbidden by remembering the list of forbidden solutions, or, as is the case with this 
algorithm, by remembering the component of the solution that is forbidden. The proposed algorithm forbids a 
customer to be in a route a certain number of times after ending up in that route. That way, all solutions which 
have the customer in that route are forbidden. That way, it is forbidden for solutions to start repeating 
themselves, and the algorithm tends not to repeat even similar solutions so that it can enter a different area of 
possibility when it comes to solutions. 
After the previous part is finished, the third step starts, which is the Tabu search with the current solution as 
the initial solution. The main idea was taken from the work [42], and the algorithm was continuously improved.  
The Tabu search procedure, which has a fixed number of iterations, is started. The current solution changes 
in each iteration. The whole time, the best solution (to the current iteration) is memorized, and in each iteration, 
it is checked whether the current solution is better than the previous one, and if it is, then the current solution 
becomes the best solution. At the end of the iterations, the best solution becomes optimal (Pseudocode 5).  
For the neighbourhood of solutions, two operators which modify the solution are used: RELOCATE and 
SWAP. The procedure will be briefly explained in the following text.  
The operator RELOCATE removes a customer from their route and relocates them to a different route. All 
possible combinations are observed, and the one with the highest savings is selected. The algorithm goes through 
multiple iterations, one iteration for each customer. In every iteration, the following is done for customer  : 
 
The savings   are calculated for the cost, in the case where the customer   would be relocated from 
their route.  
 
For each route except the one   is in, the following is done:  
 
The place where the customer   would be relocated to, which gives the least cost  , is found. 
 
If     is the biggest so far, this relocation and the savings are memorized as the highest.  
After all of the iterations are done, the relocation which gave the highest savings is performed, provided 
those savings are higher than 0. Solutions which have overruns in terms of weight and volume, as well as delays, 
are permitted, but additional penalty points exist for not meeting certain constraints, as it is described in the 
definition of the solution cost, at the beginning of this section. For each customer, the number of places where 
the customer can be relocated to, is approximately equal to the number of customers, considering that the 
customer can be relocated behind every customer, except the ones from their route and it can also be relocated to 
the start of each route except for its current route (so the number of possible places is        , where   is 
the number of customers,   is the number of routes, and   is the number of customers in the current route of the 
customer). If there are   customers, every one of the removed customers can be relocated to approximately   
places. Therefore, every solution has       solutions in its neighbourhood when the RELOCATE operator is 
used, and that also determines the time complexity of the operator.  
The SWAP operator exchanges two customers from different routes. Similarly to the previous operator, 
every two customers, who are not from the same route, are observed, as well as the savings, which would be 
obtained should the relocation be performed. In the end, two customers who give the highest savings are chosen. 
If those savings are greater than 0, the exchange is performed. The number of possible customer relocations 
depends on the number of routes and the number of customers per route. Considering that the number of routes 
is always at least 3, and the number of customers per route is mostly approximately equal for every route, each 
customer can be relocated with at least     of the rest of the customers (because their route does not have more 
than     customers). So there are at least                  possible relocations (every customer relocates 
with at least     others, and is divided by 2 because each relocation is counted 2 times). Therefore, for each 
solution, there are       other solutions that can be obtained by relocating two customers.  
Following the presented methods and the operators, in each iteration, the proposed algorithm observes 
how RELOCATE and SWAP can be changed and improves the solution. The method, which gives the best 
solution and is not forbidden in terms of the set constraints, is selected. 
The algorithm has characteristics of Tabu search in a way that it forbids the customer to enter the same route 
twice in a short amount of iterations. That is achieved by keeping a list (matrix) in which rows represent 
customers, and columns represent routes (called                  and which store the value of how many 
subsequent iterations a certain customer is forbidden from entering a certain route, while combinations which are 
not allowed during calculation of cost are not taken into account. 

Hindawi 
17 
 
Pseudocode 5: Tabu search - simplified view 
Initialization tabu_list; 
Initialization x; // initial solution of this step 
Set_of_the_solutions X = Ø; 
while (stopping_criteria != true){ 
    X={y|y not in tabu_list or addition_criteria(y) == true}; 
    If(X == Ø) exit_from_the_loop; 
    x = choose_the_best_solution(X); 
    update_tabu_list(); 
    update_addition_criteria(); 
} 
Every time a customer enters a route, with the operation RELOCATE, the assigned value to that customer 
and that route becomes equal to the constant TABU, which represents the number of following iterations in 
which that customer will not be able to enter that route. Every time the SWAP operation happens, and two 
customers enter new routes, the values in the matrix                  which represent those two customers and 
their new routes are set to value       . The SWAP operation is not executed only when both customers are 
forbidden from entering routes, which they would otherwise enter. After selecting the modified solution with the 
highest savings, the operator is executed. Then, when the operator RELOCATE is applied, the vehicles are 
assigned to their routes again, using the greedy algorithm. The routes are sorted by length first, and vehicles are 
sorted by travelled kilometres. Afterwards, the cheapest vehicle from the fleet, which can travel that route in 
terms of capacity (weight and volume) is assigned to the longest route, and that vehicle becomes unavailable. 
The process is then continued, and the longest route gets assigned the cheapest available vehicle in terms of 
capacity which can travel, and the process continues with the third-longest and the rest of the routes until all 
iterations are completed. Before the assignment is done, solution cost is memorized, and if the solution cost is 
greater after the assignments, the routes are assigned to the vehicles like they were before, and the new 
assignment is cancelled. 
Each 1000th iteration, all possibilities when it comes to the assignment of vehicles to routes are checked, and 
the best one is chosen. Given that checking all possibilities is a demanding operation, it is not possible to try all 
the possibilities from every iteration, and that is why vehicles are usually assigned using the greedy algorithm 
described earlier. This is one of the secondary contributions of this paper. 
Also, the proposed algorithm tries to research a greater area of solutions and strives to find more diverse 
solutions. It does that by calculating how many times the pair (customer, route) appeared in the solution (how 
many times the route had that customer). That is stored in the table                   , and if the cost in the 
transition is positive, the number of times the customer was in the route multiplied by the appropriate constants 
is added to the cost. Intuitively, this means that only when the current solution does not have a better solution 
than itself in its neighbourhood, during the calculation of the transition cost, the solutions which appeared less up 
until that moment are preferred, so that the algorithm has a more diverse search. The idea given in [42] is that for 
each pair (customer  , route  ) the best solution in which that pair appears in (in which customer   is in route  ) 
is memorized as well. When it happens that a solution   cannot be the next solution because customer   cannot 
enter route   because of                 , two options are considered:  
 
The solution cost   is not observed at all, which is the simplified form. 
 
The solution cost   is calculated, and if that cost is less than the minimal cost so far, in which customer 
  and route   participate, then the solution   is chosen.  
The second form presents a modification of the standard Tabu search.  
3.1.6 Fourth step (post-step) – Improvements within each route 
The fourth step of the whole modular algorithm additionally strives to optimize each route separately. Given 
that the previous step (Tabu search) relocates the customers between different routes, situations often occur 
where routes which are the result of the third step can be additionally improved, and in a way where customers 
are relocated from one location to another, within the same route. Besides that, considering that the algorithm is 
conceived to solve practical problems, where the route cost directly depends on the weight of the merchandise 

Hindawi 
18 
 
the vehicles are transporting and delivering to each customer, with permutations of the customer within each 
route, this fact can be fixed. 
This statement can be especially noticed when a part of a certain route is located in one city, and the other 
part in another city, which is farther away from the warehouse.  
The fourth step could be described in the following way, in terms of iterations (Pseudocode 6):  
 
Take one customer from the route and try to relocate him to every place in the same (his) route. 
 
Calculate the route cost for every customer relocation. 
 
If the newly calculated route cost is less than the route cost before the relocation of the customer, the 
route becomes optimal. Otherwise, the optimal route is the initial route in this step, and the customer is 
returned to the starting position in the route. 
Pseudocode 6: Improvements within each route 
for(int i = 0; i < num_of_iterations; i++){ 
  int customer = -1; 
  int place = -1; 
  double theLowestCost = RouteCost(); 
  for(int j = 0; j < customers.size(); j++){ 
    vector<Customer*> newRoute; 
    for(int r = 0; r < j; r++){ 
      newRoute.push_back(customers[r]); 
    } 
    for(int r = j+1; r < customers.size(); r++){ 
      newRoute.push_back(customers[r]); 
    } 
    for(int k = 0; k <= newRoute.size(); k++){ 
 
      newRoute.insert(newRoute.begin()+k,customers[j]); 
      Route *r = new Route(newRoute,routeVehicle,true); 
      double routeCost = r->RouteCost(); 
      if(routeCost < theLowestCost) 
 
  customer = j; place = k; theLowestCost = routeCost; 
      for(int u = 0; u < r->customers.size(); u++){ 
        delete r->customers[u]; 
      } 
      delete r; 
      newRoute.erase(newRoute.begin()+k); 
    } 
  } 
  if(customer == -1){ 
    break; 
  } 
  Customer *k = customers[customer]; 
  ExcludeCustomer(customer); 
  InsertRouteToThePlace(new Route(k),place-1); 
} 
Iterations are finished when there are no possible customer relocations (of one customer) within the same 
route that decrease the whole route cost. This, of course, implies that all the set constraints are met. Considering 
that the listed operations are not complex nor demanding in terms of time since they only consider the route cost 
calculation after permutating the customer, the possibility for additional improvement is noticed, for example, if 
the same procedure is executed for two or three consecutive customers within the same route. In that case, there 
is an attempt to relocate two consecutive customers to different sequences, and if the cost is smaller than before, 
that route becomes optimal, otherwise, after relocating customers one by one (the previously described 

Hindawi 
19 
 
procedure), the initial route is chosen. There is a small probability that improvements can be achieved if more 
than three consecutive customers are permutated. For each of the obtained routes, the algorithm terminates at 
those iterations that relocate three consecutive customers. This way of improvement within each route presents 
one of the contributions of this paper. 
3.2 Data-driven approach for adjusting the control parameters of the 
proposed algorithm 
The previous section presents a modular algorithm, which is able to solve real-world VRP with a great 
number of various realistic constraints. The proposed algorithm consists of control parameters (constants) which 
are listed in the following text.  
                        and                         – During the first step, vehicles 
are not assigned to routes. However, it is still not permitted for routes to have a total weight that is greater than 
the weight of the largest vehicle in the fleet, and analogously, routes cannot have a total volume greater than the 
volume of the largest vehicle travelling that route. These two constants represent those two values which no 
route can exceed. 
                        – This constant represents the cost per kilometre of the fictitious vehicle, 
which is added to the solution when a route cannot be travelled by any real vehicles. That can happen when the 
number of routes is greater than the number of vehicles or when a route is overloaded in terms of volume or 
weight. The most common value of this parameter is equal to 2. 
                     – This constant represents the number of iterations of Tabu search. It is 
currently set through the input parameter of the algorithm, and its most common value is 25000.  
                and                 – During the greedy assignment of vehicles, after each 
iteration of Tabu search, it is allowed for the vehicle to be overloaded in terms of weight and volume by the 
values                 and                . The most commonly set value for the parameter 
                is 50 [kg], and for                 it is 0.1 [m3]. 
     – Constant related to the execution of the Tabu Search algorithm. The most commonly set value of 
this constant is 30.  
             – Penalization constant of a one minute delay for the customer. The most commonly set 
value of this parameter is 0.5 [CurrencyUnit/min]. 
       – Constant which enables a better search of the solution area. The most commonly set value is 
0.001. 
                         – Constant which penalizes the customer in the vehicle which cannot 
service them (SDVRP). This parameter is very important meeting the constraints and its most common value is 
400.  
               – Constant which is used in the cost increase due to the weight the vehicle is carrying. It 
represents the coefficient of cost increase when the vehicle is transporting the maximum weight. The set value is 
0.2.  
                        – Constant which penalizes the overload of a vehicle in volume. It 
represents the cost increase when the volume is overloaded by 100%. The most commonly set value is 400.  
                        – Constant which penalizes the overload of a vehicle in weight. It 
represents the cost increase when the weight is overloaded by 100%. The most commonly set value is 400.  
Which routes will be obtained as a result, how much the total cost will be, and whether all the set constraints 
will be met, all depend on the values of the given parameters. The primary goal with real-world VRP is to not 
violate any of the set constraints. Following that, some of the listed control parameters will be set in a way that is 
described in the following text, using several prediction methods and algorithms, which use historical data. In 
short, the whole idea of parameter adjustment can be presented as on the Figure 2. 

Hindawi 
20 
 
 
Figure 2: Control parameter adjustment approach using historical data 
Based on all the parameters that can influence the final result, several fundamental ones, which are 
memorized for every route, have been isolated, during testing and in production use of several distribution 
companies, which deal with product distribution from their warehouses to the delivery locations (markets, shops, 
supermarkets, and others). That way, a knowledge base, which is updated every day, is created, and the primary 
goal of this step of the system is to adjust the control parameters and constants, which are an integral part of the 
system, according to that historical data. With that, the whole approach gets an adaptive character, because the 
algorithm is improved in time, in a way the parameters, which enable obtaining the minimal cost of the transport 
route, are adjusted automatically while meeting all of the set constraints at the same time.  
Attributes which are isolated as those that affect the obtained routes are: 
 
number of customers 
 
number of available vehicles 
 
number of different available types of vehicles 
 
number of different cities 
 
the total number of constraints related to which customer cannot be serviced by which vehicle 
 
the total number of articles ordered [items] 
 
the total volume of all articles ordered [m3] 
 
the total weight of all articles ordered [kg] 
 
the total duration of time windows of all the customers [min] 
 
whether all set constraints are met (1 – yes, 0 – no) 
The goal attributes which affect the obtained routes and total cost, and which represent the control 
parameters of the implemented algorithm are: 
 
                
 
                 
 
             
 
                         
 
               
 
                        
 
                        
Each of these parameters is separately set. First, the pre-processing of the data was done, and only the data, 
which meets all the constraints (value 1 in the given column), was selected from history. After, the redundant 
attributes were removed. Using the Attribute Importance option (step), the importance of the input attributes, for 
every goal attribute, was determined. For attribute importance, Minimum Descriptor Length (MDL) algorithm 
was used. Before that, normalization of the attributes was done so that the attribute values were rounded up to 
one decimal. After pre-processing and preparation of the input data, the regression model is created for 
determining the goal attributes. The model is identical for every goal attribute. The proposed model for one 
parameter is shown on Figure 3. 

Hindawi 
21 
 
 
Figure 3: Proposed regression model for one parameter 
Two algorithms were used for the regression: 
 
Generalized Linear Models (GLM) 
 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) 
These two regression models were selected for several reasons. The advantage of SVM over other methods is 
that it provides better predictions with unseen test data, provides simple optimal solutions for the problem in 
training, and there are fewer parameters for optimization in comparison with other methods. The execution speed 
is not so crucial for the problem that it is used for, and so the disadvantages of the SVM regression method can 
be ignored. The GLM algorithm for regression was chosen because it represents a generalization of linear 
regression and is often used in cases when the output variables do not have a normal distribution. Given that the 
input data are associated with linear dependence, the choice of the GLM regression algorithm was a logical one. 
After that, the Decision Support System was made, which, based on the obtained results for both of the listed 
algorithms for each attribute, chooses the one that gives better results by the obtained indicator Predictive 
Confidence [%], and the same is used for the goal attribute during new routing.  
The following section lists the obtained results for this part of the control parameter adjustment of the 
algorithm, the obtained results of the whole proposed VRP modular algorithm on standard data sets, as well as 
actual data sets, in great detail.  
4 Discussion and comparison of results 
This section will be divided into four subsections: 
 
(4.1) analysis of the obtained results on standardized input data, 
 
(4.2) analysis of the results on real-world benchmark data, 
 
(4.3) analysis of the control parameter adjustment results of the proposed algorithm (from Section 3.2), 
 
(4.4) practical significance of the proposed approach.  
4.1 Analysis of the obtained results on standardized benchmark data 
For VRP with time windows, some data instances have become standard over time and using such data every 
VRP algorithm is tested and validated. First, in 1987, in [43] Solomon published a set of VRPTW instances, 
which contain 25, 50, and 100 customers. For a long time, these instances proved to be a challenge for scientists, 
and there were not any instances with more customers. For the last 20 years, as algorithms for more delivery 
sites have been developed, there has been a need for instances with more customers. In 2005, Gehring and 
Homberger [44] created a new set of instances consisting of 200, 400, 600, 800, and 1000 customers each. They 
generated their instances in the same way Solomon created his. All of the instances are found on the web-page 
[45]. Optimal solutions are updated regularly on the mentioned page. Those solutions were used in the first 
method of testing the proposed algorithm of this work.  
Solomons’ instances consist of   vehicles in the fleet, where   is always equal to one-quarter of the number 
of customers in the instance, capacity of the vehicles  , information about the depot and customers. Every 
customer   has his coordinates    and   , ordered weight   , start and end of the time window    and   , and the 
unloading time   . Coordinates    and    are given for the depot and time window    and   . Distances between 
customers and the depot are calculated based on the coordinates for customers  , and   distance is equal to the 
Euclidean distance of the dots          and         . The time distances are equal to the path distances. Solomon 

Hindawi 
22 
 
created 6 different sets of instances: R1, R2, C1, C2, RC1 and RC2. In R-sets, the coordinates of the customers 
were chosen at random, from a defined interval, so the customers are evenly distributed everywhere. In C-sets 
the customers are clustered, which means that in several places, a greater number of customers is present. RC 
sets are something between the sets R and C, the customers are not evenly distributed, and they are not 
completely clustered either. In sets 1, the time windows were chosen from a smaller interval when compared to 
sets 2. That way, the number of customers per vehicle is significantly greater in sets 2, and with that, the number 
of routes is smaller. In Solomons’ instances, the first goal of the optimization was the number of routes, then the 
total distance travelled by the vehicles. In this case, the smaller the number of routes is, the more optimal the 
solution is, and if two solutions have the same number of routes, the one with less distance travelled is optimal.  
Table 1: Testing results for Solomons’ instances 
Instance 
Optimal 
solution 
(cost) [44] 
Proposed 
ALGORITHM 
solution (cost) 
From the 
optimal 
[%] 
Number of 
vehicles 
optimal [44] 
Number of 
vehicles 
ALGORITHM 
Comments 
c101 
828,94 
828,94 
0 
10 
10 
All constraints met 
c201 
591,56 
591,56 
0 
3 
3 
All constraints met 
r101 
1650,8 
1657,26 
0,0646 
19 
18 
All constraints met, cost slightly 
greater but one vehicle less used. 
r201 
1252,37 
1225,14 
-0,2723 
4 
5 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
rc101 
1696,95 
1637,62 
-0,5933 
15 
17 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
rc201 
1406,94 
1375,93 
-0,3101 
4 
5 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
c104 
824,78 
842,61 
2,162 
10 
10 
All constraints met and an 
identical number of vehicles used. 
r103 
1292,68 
1229,76 
-4,87 
13 
15 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
rc102 
1554,75 
1554,92 
-0,63 
12 
13 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
rc207 
1061,14 
1013,35 
-4,5 
3 
5 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
 
Each of the 6 listed sets of instances contains 8-12 instances which are generated in the same way. For the 
algorithm testing, two have been taken from each group. Considering that the first criteria of Solomons’ 
instances is the number of routes, and the main idea of the algorithm presented in this work is to minimize the 
cost while meeting all of the set constraints, for some instances the algorithm found a solution with optimal cost, 
but with a greater number of routes (Table 1). 
Table 2: Results of testing on instances for 200 and 400 customers 
Instance 
Optimal 
solution 
(cost) [44] 
Proposed 
ALGORITHM 
solution (cost) 
From the 
optimal 
[%] 
Number of 
vehicles 
optimal [44] 
Number of 
vehicles 
ALGORITHM 
Comments 
c1_2_1 
2704,57 
2704,57 
0 
20 
20 
All constraints met 
c2_2_1 
1931,44 
1983,82 
0,5238 
6 
6 
All constraints met 
r1_2_1 
4784,11 
4961,81 
1,777 
20 
23 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
r2_2_1 
4483,16 
3827,98 
-6,5518 
4 
8 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
rc1_2_1 
3602,8 
3606,78 
0,0398 
20 
23 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
rc2_2_1 
3099,53 
3169,49 
0,6996 
6 
8 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
c1_4_1 
7152,02 
7152,29 
0,0027 
40 
40 
All constraints met 
c2_4_1 
4116,05 
4109,9 
-0,0615 
12 
15 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
r1_4_1 
10372,31 
10400,66 
0,2835 
40 
40 
All constraints met 
r2_4_1 
9210,15 
9456,51 
2,675 
8 
9 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
rc1_4_1 
8573,96 
8580,71 
0,0675 
36 
38 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
rc2_4_1 
6682,37 
6679,99 
-0,0238 
11 
12 
All constraints met, but a greater 
number of vehicles used. 
 
The algorithm was tested on Homberger and Gehring instances with 200 and instances with 400 customers. 
On instances with 200 customers, there was no significant difference when compared to Solomons’ instances 

Hindawi 
23 
 
with 100 customers. Some instances have an improved solution in terms of cost, but the number of vehicles 
(routes) is greater compared to the optimal solution. From a practical viewpoint, the given solutions are optimal 
because they decrease the cost for the company. The optimality of the solution slightly decreases as the number 
of customers increases, but even for 400 customers (instance rc2_4_1), a better solution in terms of cost, and 
which meets all the given constraints, is obtained (Table 2).  
The execution time of the implemented algorithm for Solomons’ instances was up to a maximum of 1 [s]. 
The execution time was greater for instances with a greater number of customers, and so the execution of the 
algorithm for instances with 200 customers was up to a maximum of 5 [s], while for instances with 400 
customers it was up to 200 [s]. One-third of the total execution time fell on the first step of the algorithm; the 
second step lasted for a negligibly short period of time, while the third step took up about 2/3 of the remaining 
execution time of the algorithm. The algorithm was executed on a laptop, with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-3210M 

4.2 Analysis of the results on real-world benchmark data 
The proposed algorithm can meet constraints that are not defined in standardized data sets, as it is explained 
in great detail in previous sections. Because of that, testing of the given algorithm was done on real data from 
one of the biggest distribution company in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The data which was used for testing and 
which will be mentioned in the following text is placed on the 4TU.ResearchData [8] to be available as a new 
real-world benchmark dataset for the rest of the researchers. 
Ten different days for which it was necessary to create the optimal transport routes, which meet all of the set 
constraints, were used for testing. Results are shown in Table 3. From the presented results, it can be concluded 
that in 9 out of 10 cases, all of the realistic constraints, which can be strictly defined and which can significantly 
aggravate the process of finding an optimal solution, are met. Only in one case, the constraint regarding the 
volume of one vehicle was violated, but the given overrun is equal to (0,004 / 3,15) * 100 = 0,13% of the 
permitted vehicle volume, which can be practically ignored. For the given day, the vehicles were filled up in 
terms of volume by 94,61%. 
Another thing which can be concluded is that a small number of available vehicles (7 or 8), where most of 
the vehicles are different (different types and forms of vehicles, with different characteristics), which 
significantly aggravates the process of finding an optimal solution. The optimality of the solution primarily 
depends on the set constraints, and then on the number of customers and an available fleet of vehicles. Following 
that, it can be noticed that the solution cost with 94 customers is 1,5 greater than the solution cost for a route 
with 115 customers.  
Table 3: Results of testing on real data of a distribution company 
Instance 
code [8] 
Number of 
customers 
ALGORITHM 
solution cost 
Number of 
available 
vehicles 
Number of 
vehicles used 
Number 
of depots 
Comments 
19062018 
107 
124,848 
8 
5 
1 
All constraints met 
14062018 
119 
174,167 
8 
6 
1 
All constraints met 
13062018 
78 
166,557 
8 
6 
1 
All constraints met 
12062018 
110 
136,453 
8 
5 
1 
All constraints met 
07062018 
129 
176,774 
8 
7 
1 
All constraints met 
05062018 
124 
150,113 
8 
6 
1 
All constraints met 
30052018 
94 
225,582 
6 
6 
1 
All constraints met 
29052018 
115 
154,49 
7 
6 
1 
All constraints met 
28052018 
101 
254,256 
7 
7 
1 
Volume exceeded by 0,004 
[m3] for vehicle A69-O-649! 
08052018 
91 
116,134 
7 
5 
1 
All constraints met 
 
The execution of the algorithm is mainly affected by the number of customers. The total execution time of 
the algorithm ranges approximately from 300 to 500 [s]. It can be noticed that the given time is somewhat longer 
compared to the algorithm execution on standardized input data. That can be explained with a rather complex set 
of data with a great set of additional constraints. One-third of the total execution time fell on the first step of the 
algorithm, the second step lasted for a negligibly short period, while the third step took up about 2/3 of the 
remaining execution time of the algorithm. The algorithm was executed on a laptop, with an Intel(R) Core(TM) 

Hindawi 
24 
 
Table 4: Results of testing on real data of a distribution company – divided delivery 
Instance 
code [8] 
Number of 
customers 
ALGORITHM 
solution cost 
Number of 
available 
vehicles 
Number of 
vehicles used 
Number 
of depots 
Comments 
18012018 
91 
189,632 
7 
6* 
1 
All constraints met. 
 (*) Because of the SD constraint 
vehicle J92-T-826, which can only 
service customer 139007, created 
two routes during the day, and the 
orders of customer 139007 are 
divided into two deliveries. In 
accordance with that, the working 
time of the vehicles are updated for 
vehicles which are found in more 
than one routing respectively.  
*An asterisk marks the fact that one vehicle made 2 deliveries (routes) in one day 
The obtained results of the optimal routes were respected in real-life in a way that the drivers of the given 
distribution company successfully respected the presented routes, and managed to fully satisfy them. Given that 
the proposed algorithm supports the possibility of divided delivery for customers that cannot be serviced by one 
delivery (because of the set constraints), an actual input data set is available on the mentioned 
4TU.ResearchData weblink [8], for which the algorithm calculated a cost shown in Table 4.  
 
Figure 4: Example of divided delivery 
The multiple deliveries shown are most noticeable on a graphic display for one of the used vehicles. On 
Figure 4, the left picture shows the first delivery and return of the vehicle to the depot, while the right picture 
shows another delivery for the given vehicle. The red colour marks the depot, while the customers have 
enumerated blue labels that mark the sequence of delivery for each of the customers.  
Figure 5 shows an example of a typical delivery for one vehicle. The obtained optimal routes are shown on 
the map in order, where the order of servicing each customer is shown with a marker.  
 
Figure 5: Example of a typical delivery for one vehicle 

Hindawi 
25 
 
From the visual representation of the delivery, on the geographical map, it can be concluded that customers 
which have larger orders are serviced first, which is explained in greater detail in the introduction of Section 3.1.  
4.3 Analysis results of control parameter adjustment of the proposed 
algorithm 
As it was mentioned earlier, for every one of the control parameters, an independent regression model is 
created, with two regression algorithms: GLM and SVM. After obtaining the results, for each parameter, a 
Decision Support System, which determined the predicted value of the algorithm with Predictive 
Confidence based on the regression results, was created. To enrich the knowledge database of the control 
parameters, the algorithm was started 5632 times with all of the constraints met for a variety of different days 
and input parameters. The given data, which was used for testing and validation of the prediction model, is 
placed on the 4TU.ResearchData [9] to be available to the rest of the researchers.  
Table 5: Comparative results of the used regression models 
Parameter [9] 
GLM Predictive Confidence [%] 
SVM Predictive Confidence [%] 
                
92,039 
96,642 
                
82,193 
90,45 
             
85,059 
89,707 
                         
92,044 
96,647 
               
81,883 
90,286 
                        
89,673 
92,003 
                        
90,309 
92,976 
 
For each control parameter, a comparison of the Predictive Confidence [%] results was done, which, for the 
given input data set, is shown in Table 5. From the presented results it can be concluded that better prediction 
results were given for every SVM control parameter than for the GLM algorithm, and that is why the 
implemented Decision Support System preferred the prediction results of the SVM algorithm.  
The obtained Attribute Importance segment in the prediction model helps determine the value of every one 
of the input attributes for the goal control parameter. The average value of the input parameters for the output 
control variables, as well as their order, based on the given value, is shown in Table 6.  
Table 6: Attribute importance results 
Parameter [9] 
Rank 
Importance 
                     
1 
0,871 
                          
2 
0,861 
                       
3 
0,796 
                         
4 
0,758 
                          
5 
0,747 
             
6 
0,741 
                           
7 
0,727 
             
8 
0,582 
                         
9 
0,303 
 
Analysis of the average values of the effect the input attributes have on every one of the control parameters 
concludes that the input parameters affect the resulting prediction control parameters in the order presented in 
Table 6. The achieved results are as expected because the routing was exceptionally complex with strict 
constraints when using actual data with a smaller number of available vehicles. This was especially affected by 
the fact that an average of 8 vehicles was available for routing, and seven of those were of different types and 
varieties, which significantly affected the results and the complexity of the algorithm execution. Based on that, 
the conclusion arises that those parameters are the most important ones in adjusting the control parameters of the 
algorithm. Also, what can be concluded is that the time windows of customers are of great importance to control 
parameters, which significantly affects the complexity of the solution search. 
The parameter which, according to Table 6, has the least significance in adjusting the values of control 
parameters is the number of constraints, in terms of which customer cannot be serviced by which vehicle. The 
given number is presented in the form of a summarized indicator. If it were presented in the form of a ratio, of 

Hindawi 
26 
 
the customer to the number of vehicles which can service that customer, then the significance of that parameter 
would increase, and it could be the most important one. 
For every one of the control parameters, the given results are presented graphically as well. For example, 
results for the parameter                 are shown in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6: Predictive Confidence [%] comparison results for one control parameter 
Also, it is possible to observe the comparison of Residual (Residual is the difference between the expected 
and predicted value of the dependent variable) for every one of the control parameters. An example of the 
comparison for the parameter                 is shown in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7: Residual comparison 
The previous picture shows that for each attribute, except for the mentioned Predictive Confidence indicator, 
it is possible to obtain a multitude of other parameters (they primarily refer to the values of prediction errors) 
based on which it is possible to perform other comparisons and choose the model which meets all of the 
expectations and needs.  
4.4 Practical significance of the proposed approach 
No matter which of the approaches and methods are used for solving VRP in real conditions, there is always 
a risk that the given routes are not entirely feasible. Primarily this depends on the accuracy of the set parameters, 
input data and limitations. This work aims to present how some of the basic data required for solving and 
applying VRP can be set in a real environment. Practically feasible routes are the only ones that companies are 
interested in. In case the routes they get are not completely implemented a new level of insecurity in the 
operation of the implemented algorithm and model arises. 
Table 7. Practical significance of the proposed approach (comparison results) 
 
Average number  
of used vehicles 
Average distance 
[km] 
Percentage of route feasibility 
in realistic environment 
BEFORE introducing the 
proposed approach 
55/10 = 5,5 
129,761 
79,65% 
AFTER introducing the 
proposed approach 
57/10 = 5,7 
137,915 
99,14% 
 
As a practical conclusion of all the presented results, it can be concluded that the proposed approach has 
always tried to use smaller vehicles, while the bigger ones (with the much higher cost, for example, one of the 
biggest and most expensive vehicle in the dataset [8] labelled 875­M­523) were only included when necessary, 
or rather when it was not possible to serve all the customers using smaller vehicles. Even in this case, the bigger 

Hindawi 
27 
 
vehicle was used for serving fewer customers, with relatively smaller distances from the depot, to minimize its 
cost. 
According to the comparative results presented in Table 7, it can be concluded that the feasibility of the 
routes has significantly increased (about 20%) by introducing the previously described approach. On the other 
hand, two vehicles more were used in 10 days during the routing, and the routing costs, as well as the total 
distance, have been slightly increased. However, the feasibility of the routes in realistic circumstances is the 
most important criterion. Even if the routes are optimal but not feasible, the transport processes of the company 
are much more difficult, so they increase the costs because there are some customers not being served as it was 
planned. On the other hand, it distorts one important factor, the company reputation, even more, which can result 
in a decreased number of satisfied customers, cancellations of the principals, and finally, it can result in the 
closure of the company itself. Therefore, this work takes on a strategic epithet and is crucial for every company 
that transports the goods. 
5 Conclusions and Future research 
This work presents a complex vehicle routing problem in the field of logistics with time windows and a set of 
real constraints, as well as a modular algorithm which adaptively solves that problem. The proposed algorithm 
consists of four steps. In the first step, an initial solution to the problem is created. It uses a modification of the 
heuristic Clarke-Wright algorithm. After that, the second intermediate step strives to decrease the number of 
routes. The result (routes) of the second step serves as an initial solution for the local Tabu search, which is the 
third step. After Tabu search, the fourth step (post-step) strives to optimize the sequence of customers within 
each of the previous routes. Before that, to significantly simplify the problem, the transformation of input data 
(time windows of customers and time distances) is performed. This enables the delivery time at each customer to 
become 0. Besides that, warehouse and vehicle working times are transformed in the pre-step, as well as a 
delivery division in the cases where one customer cannot be serviced by a certain vehicle only once. 
The proposed algorithm consists of constants and control parameters, which are determined in a unique way 
using the knowledge base from historical data, based on the Generalized Linear Models and Support Vector 
Machine regression model. Both models make up the inputs in the Decision Support System, whose main task is 
to determine the best values for each of the algorithm’s attributes, using the previously mentioned regression 
models. The stated procedure of the approximation of the best values of the control parameters for the given 
input data set is done in the phase of data preparation for each routing. The given procedure of pre-processing 
the algorithm’s parameters gives an adaptive character to the whole approach. 
The presented modular, adaptive approach can solve real-life VRP problems with several hundred delivery 
locations while meeting all of the set real-life constraints. Testing of the algorithm was done in two phases. The 
first testing was done using standardized data sets, where the implemented algorithm showed highly satisfying 
results. For some input data sets the proposed algorithm produced better results, up to 6,5% compared to the 
currently existing optimal solutions. For other routings it produced slightly less good results (never more than 
3% than the optimal) compared to the current optimal solution of the given instances. The second type of testing 
was done on an actual data set, which was also published on the web link to serve other scientists in their 
researches and comparisons. For those data sets, the algorithm mostly managed to meet all of the very strict set 
constraints, and despite the minimal cost, the execution time of the algorithm was satisfactory from the aspects 
of a real-life application. The algorithm also has the ability of adaptability through automatic self-adjustment of 
the control parameters so that it is better and more advanced with every routing.  
The approach and this algorithm is in use in some of the biggest distribution companies, as an implemented 
web-based enterprise system. The system enables human-computer interaction by allowing the subsequent 
manual modification of the obtained transport routes. It enables a graphic representation of the routes and 
comparison of the results. Results also showed that proposed improvements are increased by approximately 20% 
in the execution of the obtained routes in a real environment. In this way, the company is assured of the quality 
of the generated transportation routes and their customers have confidence in the delivery. 
Based on the detailed description of the individual sections, it can be concluded that the contribution of this 
work is reflected in several ways. The basic contribution is based on the proposal of a modular, data-driven 
approach for successfully solving the vehicle routing problem that can be applied to the real cases in the field of 
logistics. An innovative, predictive and adaptive method of setting up and adjusting the parameters and constants 

Hindawi 
28 
 
used in the implementation of VRP algorithms which is based on the historical data is presented. The proposed 
approach, aside from the prediction model for the used parameters and constants also consists of the multi-step 
algorithm that is able to solve complex real-world VRP problems, accepting some of the constraints and facts 
that are not taken into consideration in other scientific papers in this scientific field. These are essential for the 
practical usage, feasibility and cost effectiveness of the resulting transportation routes in a realistic environment. 
These innovative segments of the proposed algorithm are also one of the contributions to this work, which are 
emphasized in a detailed description of the algorithm itself. In addition, the contribution of this work is also 
reflected in the fact that the real benchmark dataset is published to other researchers for further analyses and 
experiments. A practical contribution is reflected in the implementation of the web-based, easy-to-use system 
based on the proposed approach, with the possibility of the subsequent modification of the obtained 
transportation routes included. The system is being used by several of the largest distribution companies in 
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The resulting transportation routes are completely feasible, which results in financial 
and other benefits of the very companies using it. 
Future research can be based on using Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS) or Simulated Annealing for the 
third step of the algorithm. Also, the third step could use a hybrid approach, which combines multiple 
metaheuristic algorithms during the local search. Another improvement could be decreasing the run-time of the 
algorithm’s operators. One idea used in several of the mentioned scientific works relies on the approach of not 
observing all the possible combinations and choosing the best one, but rather only observing those combinations 
in which two geographically close routes can be swapped. Besides geographical location for certain parameter 
adjustments GPS data, weather conditions and delivery times can be used. 
Data Availability 
The data used to support the findings of this study have been deposited in the online repositories: 
[1] https://doi.org/10.4121/uuid:598b19d1-df64-493e-991a-d8d655dac3ea 
[2] https://doi.org/10.4121/uuid:97006624-d6a3-4a29-bffa-e8daf60699d8 
Conflicts of Interests 
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.
