Towards Modeling and Influencing
the Dynamics of Human Learning
Ran Tian∗
UC Berkeley
Masayoshi Tomizuka
UC Berkeley
Anca D. Dragan
UC Berkeley
Andrea Bajcsy
UC Berkeley
ABSTRACT
Humans have internal models of robots (like their physical capabili-
ties), the world (like what will happen next), and their tasks (like a
preferred goal). However, human internal models are not always
perfect: for example, it is easy to underestimate a robot’s inertia.
Nevertheless, these models change and improve over time as hu-
mans gather more experience. Interestingly, robot actions influence
what this experience is, and therefore influence how people’s inter-
nal models change. In this work we take a step towards enabling
robots to understand the influence they have, leverage it to better
assist people, and help human models more quickly align with real-
ity. Our key idea is to model the human’s learning as a nonlinear
dynamical system which evolves the human’s internal model given
new observations. We formulate a novel optimization problem to
infer the human’s learning dynamics from demonstrations that
naturally exhibit human learning. We then formalize how robots
can influence human learning by embedding the human’s learn-
ing dynamics model into the robot planning problem. Although
our formulations provide concrete problem statements, they are
intractable to solve in full generality. We contribute an approxima-
tion that sacrifices the complexity of the human internal models we
can represent, but enables robots to learn the nonlinear dynamics
of these internal models. We evaluate our inference and planning
methods in a suite of simulated environments and an in-person user
study, where a 7DOF robotic arm teaches participants to be better
teleoperators. While influencing human learning remains an open
problem, our results demonstrate that this influence is possible and
can be helpful in real human-robot interaction.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Artificial intelligence.
KEYWORDS
robot influence, human internal model, dynamics of human learning
ACM Reference Format:
Ran Tian, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Anca D. Dragan, and Andrea Bajcsy. 2023.
Towards Modeling and Influencing the Dynamics of Human Learning. In

to code: https://sites.google.com/berkeley.edu/midle.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a

HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, SE
© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/23/06...$15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
𝑓𝐿
Robot influence
𝜃H
𝑡+1
Dynamics of human learning
𝜋𝑅𝑥𝑡, 𝜃H
𝑡
𝑓𝐿
𝜃H
𝑡
Figure 1: Human teleoperates a new robot; they update their
internal model by acting and observing outcomes. Planning
with human learning dynamics, the robot influences the hu-
man’s internal model to help them be a better teleoperator.
Proceedings of Human Robot Interaction (HRI ’23). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
12 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
INTRODUCTION
Imagine your first time controlling a robot arm to perform daily
living tasks like throwing away trash or stirring a pot of soup.
Initial interactions with the robot are tough: you aren’t familiar
with the robot’s dynamics so your motions are jerky and imprecise.
In other words, your internal model of the robot is incorrect. And
robot dynamics are not the only thing we, humans, have incorrect
internal models of. We might not fully understand the world’s
dynamics (e.g., result of pouring lemon juice into cream) or our
own preferences (e.g., only liking something after trying it).
However, over time, our internal models evolve with our experi-
ences. As you control the robot, you start to understand how it will
move; as you try different things, you learn what you like. Since the
robot is part of the world, the robot’s actions and their outcomes
become part of these experiences. In other words, robot actions
inevitably influence the change in a human’s internal model.
In this work, we advocate that robots should understand and
use this influence. First, collaborative tasks require understanding
what people are trying to do in order to assist them. Prior work has
shown that inferring a human’s internal model is critical for assis-
tance [38]; in turn, we argue that if this model changes over time,
tracking this change will enhance assistance. Further, purposefully
influencing a change in the human’s internal model opens the door
for teaching: robot actions that are optimized to quickly align the
human’s understanding with reality. For instance, as an operator
controlling the robot (Figure 1), this means you quickly understand
how the robot works and can do the task independently.
A key challenge towards this is modeling how humans learn;
without a proper model of this, the robot cannot plan to change
the human’s internal model. Although we do not know the precise
functional form of how people learn, we observe that a human’s
arXiv:2301.00901v1  [cs.RO]  2 Jan 2023

HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, SE
Ran Tian, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Anca D. Dragan, and Andrea Bajcsy
understanding of the robot or the world changes as a function of
what they observe. For example, at first you may mistakenly believe
that the robot doesn’t experience any inertia. However, as soon as
you gesture to move the robot forward, you see the robot lagging
behind. This observation controls the evolution of your internal
robot physics model. The same holds true for your internal model of
the world and personal preferences. In other words, we can model
human learning as a dynamical system where the hu-
man’s internal model is the state, and the observations—
which the robot can influence—evolve the internal model.
Of course, this does not prescribe the functional form of the dy-
namical system. One idea is to draw on computational cognitive
science work to define this function. A predominant lens is that of
probabilistic models [12], which posits that humans perform some
form of approximate Bayesian inference based on the observations
they receive. In reality, people have been shown to have a plethora
of cognitive biases which deviate from perfect Bayesian inference:
they might use gradient information [53], might not process the en-
tire observation due to sensory overload [28], or exhibit systematic
bias like over- or under- estimation [39]. Instead of committing to
a specific model, in our work we treat this as a general dynamics
learning problem, which has roots in controls and robotics [21]. We
leverage demonstrations which naturally exhibit human learning
(e.g., humans teleoperating a robot they have never interacted with
before), to fit a human learning model under the assumption that
observed human actions are approximately optimal given their cur-
rent internal model. This enables flexibility of capturing different
possible learning updates, at the cost of being domain-specific.
Although the most general model learning problem remains
computationally intractable, we introduce a tractable approxima-
tion that is readily solvable via gradient-based optimization, and
is compatible with neural network representations of the human
learning dynamics. Leveraging our approximate dynamics model
of human learning, we formalize robot influence over the human’s
internal model as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) where the hu-
man’s internal model is part of the state and the human’s learning
dynamics are part of the transition function. The solution yields
robot actions that change the human’s internal model by changing
the human’s observations in a way that rewards the robot.
We run experiments with simulated humans to study the fidelity
of the inferred human learning dynamics and investigate robot
teaching and assistance in settings where the human’s understand-
ing of robot physics, motion preferences, or goals can be influenced.
Finally, we conduct a user study with a Kinova Jaco 7DOF robot
arm and find that our method can help teach humans to be better
teleoperators. Overall, while influencing human learning remains
an open problem, we are excited to have taken a step in this domain
via a principled yet tractable learning and planning method.
2
RELATED WORK
Inferring human preferences and beliefs. A large body of work
has focused on learning human reward functions via inverse rein-
forcement learning (IRL) [19, 22, 31]. This includes inferring hu-
man driving preferences [34, 40], desired exoskeleton gaits [25],
intended goals [17], motion preferences [35], and human under-
standing about physics [38]. A key assumption in these works is
that people have static internal models of preferences or physics. In-
stead, we are interested in learning a dynamic model of how humans
change their preferences, goals, and understanding of physics.
Models of human learning for robot decision-making. Prior
works in robotics model human learning as Bayesian inference
when updating goals or preferences [8, 14, 16], a linear Gaussian
system when updating trust [7], gradient-based IRL when learning
rewards [4], or as a multi-armed bandit algorithm when updating
preferences [6]. Instead of assuming a known model of how people
learn, in this work we seek to learn a model of how humans learn.
Most related to our work is [39] which learns a model of how
people estimate the state of the world. In this work, we propose a
generalization where the human is not estimating world state, but
updating their preferences, goals, and internal physics model. This
induces a significantly harder model learning problem, for which
we propose a tractable approximation.
Cognitive theories of human learning. Models of human infer-
ence have been extensively studied in both computational cognitive
science [2, 13] and psychology [36, 50]. While human cognition
can be broadly modeled at three levels (computational, algorith-
mic, and hardware) [27], most relevant to us are the algorithmic
works. [13] posits that modeling human reasoning as “implement-
ing” an exact Bayesian posterior or a gradient-based point estimate
are both compatible with probabilistic models of human cognition,
and are a potential source of rational process models [45]. Further,
[42] finds evidence that humans may update their forward models
using the models’ prediction error as loss functions. Inspired by
these works, our simulated human experiments leverage exact and
approximate probabilistic inference models, and we study if our
flexible, learning-based method can effectively recover such models.
Robot influencing human behavior. While there are many ways
a robot can influence humans (e.g., through nonverbal cues, ap-
pearance, visuals, or curriculum design [1, 37, 39, 41, 46]), we focus
on robot influence through physical action [30]. A common ap-
proach towards this models human-robot interaction as a game
[15, 23, 32, 40, 44, 48]. While these approaches can capture reactions
from the human, they do not address the internal learning prob-
lem: over repeated interactions, the human may not have learned
anything and is only reacting. Alternatively, model-free methods
learn a latent representation of the human’s policy and then lever-
age the latent dynamics to influence the human [33, 54]. Here the
human’s internal model is implicitly captured by the latent rep-
resentation, and the internal model evolves between interaction
episodes. In contrast, in our work the human’s internal model is an
explicit parameterization (e.g., high-dimensional parameterization
like dynamics) and the human internal model can evolve continu-
ously during an interaction episode. This enables robot behaviors
like teaching the human the correct internal model, which would
otherwise not be possible with implicit, latent representations.
3
MODELING HOW HUMANS LEARN & ACT
We begin by mathematically modelling the dynamics of human
learning, before diving into how the robot can infer this dynamics
model and use it influence the human’s internal model evolution.

Towards Modeling and Influencing
the Dynamics of Human Learning
HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, SE
Notation. Let 𝑥∈R𝑛be the state of the world including the robot
(e.g., robot end-effector position, objects, etc.). Both the human and
robot can take actions, 𝑢H ∈R𝑚and 𝑢R ∈R𝑚respectively, that
affect the next state. Let the deterministic world dynamics be
𝑥𝑡+1 = 𝑓(𝑥𝑡,𝑢𝑡
H,𝑢𝑡
R).
(1)
Human internal model. We model the human as having an in-
ternal parameter vector, 𝜃H, which captures a latent aspect of the
task that the human is uncertain about but continuously learns
about. Going back to our motivating example where the human
teleoperates a robot, 𝜃H can model the human’s current estimate of
the robot’s physical properties, like its inertia. Or, 𝜃H could model
the human’s current preferences for teleoperation: they start off
wanting to move the robot to one goal, but then change their mind
to a new goal after realizing it is easier to reach. Regardless of what
𝜃H represents, it is important to remember that it is time-varying
and that it evolves as a function of what the human observes.
Human policy: acting under the internal model. In our work,
we model the human actions as driven by some reward function,
𝑅H(𝑥,𝑢H;𝜃H), which depends on the current state, the human’s
action, and their internal parameter 𝜃H. Following prior works
[2, 24, 52, 55], we treat the human as a noisily-optimal actor:
P(𝑢H | 𝑥;𝜃H) = 𝑒𝑄H(𝑥,𝑢H;𝜃H)  ∫
˜𝑢
𝑒𝑄H(𝑥, ˜𝑢;𝜃H)𝑑˜𝑢
−1
,
(2)
where the optimal state-action value is denoted by 𝑄H(𝑥,𝑢H;𝜃H)
and 𝑥is the current state, 𝑢H is the human action, and 𝜃H the
human’s current parameter estimate.
We make two simplifying assumptions in this model. First, the
human does not explicitly account for the actions 𝑢R the robot
could take. Instead, the human reacts to the current state 𝑥, which
implicitly captures the effect of any robot actions that change the
state. This models scenarios where the human is doing the task on
their own, or where the human is not aware of how the robot is
providing guidance. Second, when the human plans their action,
we assume that they separate the estimation of 𝜃H from policy
generation and they plan with their current estimate.
Dynamics of human learning: updating the internal model.
As the human acts in the environment, they receive new observa-
tions: they may see the next state, including that of the robot’s, or
experience how much they enjoy something (i.e. observe “reward
signal”). This naturally lets the human update their understanding
of the robot, physical aspects of the world, or their preferences.
Leveraging our core idea, we model the human’s learning process
as a nonlinear dynamical system over the human’s internal model
parameter. Let 𝜃0
H be the human’s initial internal model, and 𝑥0:𝑡
and 𝑢0:𝑡
H be the state and action history until timestep 𝑡and 𝑥𝑡+1
be the resulting state at the next timestep, possibly including the
influence of robot actions. Given the initial parameter estimate, the
state and action history, and next state data, the human evolves their
internal model to the next estimate, 𝜃𝑡+1
H . Let the true dynamics of
the human’s learning process be:
𝜃𝑡+1
H
= 𝑓𝐿(𝜃0
H,𝑥0:𝑡+1,𝑢0:𝑡
H ).
(3)
Here we are faced with the question “What 𝑓𝐿models how the
human learns?” Instead of committing to a specific model, here we
take a robotics perspective and view this question as an instance of
a dynamics learning problem. By looking to human data, we aim
to learn an approximate 𝑓𝐿model that is domain-specific.
4
INFERRING THE DYNAMICS OF HUMAN
LEARNING
In this section we focus on inferring the dynamics of human learn-
ing by leveraging demonstrations which naturally exhibit human
learning: for example, initial trials of a human teleoperating a robot
they have never interacted with before. We assume these demon-
strations contain only the state and action histories and do not
contain ground-truth human internal model data (since this is not
possible in practice). However, we do assume that the observed
actions are coupled with the human’s internal model, allowing us
to leverage demonstrations to infer the dynamics of the human’s
internal model. Given this dataset, we seek to fit a nonlinear model
to represent the dynamics of human learning,
𝑓𝜙
𝐿≈𝑓𝐿,
(4)
where 𝜙are the parameters of the approximate model. In the follow-
ing sections, we formalize inferring 𝑓𝜙
𝐿as a maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) problem and propose a tractable approximation.
4.1
Formalizing the Inference Problem
Let D𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑜:= {(x, uH)𝑖}𝑁
𝑖=0 be a collection of 𝑁demonstrations
containing state and human action trajectories of length 𝑇time
steps. We want to infer the parameter of the human’s learning
dynamics, 𝜙, and the initial human parameter estimate, 𝜃0
H, which
maximizes the likelihood of the observed demonstrations. We for-
mulate this inference via the constrained optimization problem:
max
𝜙,𝜃0
H
∑︁
(x,uH) ∈D𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑜
𝑇−1
∑︁
𝑡=0
log
h
P(𝑢𝑡
H | 𝑥𝑡;𝜃𝑡
H)
i
,
(5)
s.t.
𝜃𝑡+1
H
= 𝑓𝜙
𝐿(𝜃0
H,𝑥0:𝑡+1,𝑢0:𝑡
H ),
(6)
where P(𝑢𝑡
H | 𝑥𝑡,𝜃𝑡) is the human action likelihood from Equa-
tion (2) and the constraint ensures that the human’s internal param-
eter evolves according to the human’s learning dynamics model.
4.2
Solving the Inference Problem
Unfortunately, the inference problem in Equation (5) is intractable
to solve directly for two main reasons. First, recall that the human’s
internal model 𝜃H of their preferences, dynamics, or goals, changes
over time. This means that at each timestep the human is gener-
ating data 𝑢H under a possibly different 𝜃H. In other words, the
human acts under a new action policy P(𝑢𝑡
H | 𝑥𝑡;𝜃𝑡
H) at each 𝑡, re-
quiring us to solve an entirely new reinforcement learning problem
to obtain the action policy at each time step along the inference
horizon. In the case where 𝜃H is a continuous, high-dimensional
parameter (e.g., physical properties of the robot dynamics), this is
intractable to compute per-timestep. Secondly, even if we could
obtain the human’s policy infinitely fast, our optimization problem
still requires searching over the the high-dimensional space of 𝜙
and 𝜃H. Gradient-based optimization is a natural choice, but we
need to be able to compute the gradient of the MLE objective and,
therefore, differentiate through 𝑄H with respect to 𝜃H.

HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, SE
Ran Tian, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Anca D. Dragan, and Andrea Bajcsy
In the following subsections, we introduce several approxima-
tions to arrive at a tractable solution to the inference problem. Our
key idea is to use a linear-quadratic (LQ) approximation of the
physical dynamics and the human reward. This enables us to derive
a closed-form expression of the human policy as a function of 𝜃𝑡
H
at any time and yields a differentiable inference objective.
4.2.1
Linear-Quadratic approximation. We take inspiration from
infinite-horizon linear-quadratic (LQ) control [20] and assume that
the human’s reward is quadratic and their model of the physical
dynamics is linear. Let the linear physical dynamics be:
𝑥𝑡+1 = 𝑓(𝑥𝑡,𝑢𝑡
H,𝑢𝑡
R ≡0) ≈𝐴𝑥𝑡+ 𝐵𝑢𝑡
H
(7)
where 𝐴∈R𝑛×𝑛, 𝐵∈R𝑛×𝑚are matrices governing the physical
dynamics. Note that in the human’s mind, the robot is not exerting
any control effort, and hence 𝑢R ≡0. Let the human’s reward be
approximated by a quadratic function:
𝑟H(𝑥,𝑢H;𝜃H) ≈−𝑥⊤𝑄𝑥−𝑢⊤
H𝑅𝑢H,
(8)
where the matricies 𝑄∈R𝑛×𝑛and 𝑅∈R𝑚×𝑚tradeoff the state
reward (e.g., how much reward the human gets for reaching a state)
and the action reward (e.g., how much effort the human wants to
exert), respectively. Note that 𝜃H enters in different ways depending
on what the human is learning about. For example, if 𝜃H encodes
reward weights (i.e., the human’s preferences about how to do
a task), then 𝜃H := (𝑄, 𝑅). If the parameter encodes a human’s
goal state, then 𝜃H ∈Θ ⊂R𝑛and the human’s reward function
regulates the human towards their desired goal: 𝑟H(𝑥,𝑢H;𝜃H) ≈
−(𝑥−𝜃H)⊤𝑄(𝑥−𝜃H) −𝑢⊤
H𝑅𝑢H. Finally, if 𝜃H encodes aspects of
the physical dynamics that the human is estimating, then 𝜃H :=
(𝐴, 𝐵) from the dynamics in Equation (7), and governs how the
human imagines the physical dynamics evolving.
4.2.2
Closed-form 𝑄H. Recall that the human plans a policy us-
ing their current estimate 𝜃H; at every step, 𝜃H changes, resulting
in a new policy. In general, obtaining the exact 𝑄H-value via dy-
namic programming in continuous state, action, and 𝜃H-spaces is
computationally demanding. However, under our infinite-horizon
LQ-approximation the human’s 𝑄H-value is:
𝑄H(𝑥,𝑢H;𝜃H) = 𝑟H(𝑥,𝑢H;𝜃H) −(𝑥′)⊤𝑃𝜃H (𝑥′)
(9)
where the instantaneous reward is quadratic from Equation (8) and
𝑥′ is the next physical state as a result of applying 𝑢H from state
𝑥. Note that −(𝑥′)⊤𝑃𝜃H (𝑥′) is the infinite-horizon optimal value
where 𝑃𝜃H is the well-known positive-definite fixed point of the
discrete-time algebraic Riccati equation (DARE) [3]:
𝑃= 𝐴⊤𝑃𝐴−𝐴⊤𝑃𝐵(𝑅+ 𝐵⊤𝑃𝐵)−1𝐵⊤𝑃𝐴+ 𝑄.
(10)
Obtaining 𝑃𝜃H also yields the optimal human action: 𝑢∗
H(𝑥;𝜃H) =
−𝐾𝜃H𝑥where 𝐾𝜃H = (𝑅+ 𝐵⊤𝑃𝜃H𝐵)−1𝐵⊤𝑃𝜃H𝐴. Note that in all of
the equations above, 𝜃H enters differently depending on what the
human’s internal model represents.
4.2.3
Closed-form human policy. In general, obtaining the human
policy in Equation (2) is computationally intractable in continuous
action spaces due to the integral over 𝑢H. However, plugging in
our closed-form 𝑄H, we see that the exponent is quadratic in 𝑢,
allowing us to take a Gaussian integral [49]. Overall, this yields a
closed-form human policy (see full derivation in Appendix A.1.):
P(𝑢H | 𝑥;𝜃H) = |H|1/2(2𝜋)−𝑚H/2𝑒𝑄H(𝑥,𝑢H;𝜃H)−𝑄H(𝑥,𝑢∗;𝜃H).
(11)
4.2.4
Representing the dynamics of human learning. Finally, we
are faced with the question of how to functionally represent the
dynamics of human learning; for example, we could take inspiration
from computational cognitive science and model 𝑓𝜙
𝐿as Bayesian
inference [12]. Instead of committing to a specific functional form,
in this work we seek a model that has the potential to capture a
broad range of “learning algorithms” that the human could use
to update their internal parameter. Recently, self-attention based
transformer models [51] have shown success at predicting high-
dimensional sequential tasks [18], at the cost of being domain-
specific. Inspired by this, we represent 𝑓𝜙
𝐿as a transformer encoder
where 𝜙are the weights of the neural network. At each time step
𝑡, a collection of the state 𝑥𝑡, the human’s action 𝑢𝑡
H, and the next
state 𝑥𝑡+1 are fed into an encoder to extract embeddings which
are fed into a transformer encoder that predicts the human’s next
internal model. Training details are in Appendix A.3.
4.2.5
Deriving an efficient, gradient-based solution. To optimize the
transformer-based model of human learning dynamics, we need
the gradient of our inference objective with respect to the neural
network parameters. Here a key challenge lies in the human’s pol-
icy gradient because it requires differentiating through the DARE
function, which is non-obvious. However, we leverage recent work
[10] to obtain the relevant closed-form Jacobians, enabling us to ef-
ficiently infer the parameters of 𝑓𝜙
𝐿via gradient-based optimization.
More details on this approach are in Appendix A.2.
5
INFLUENCING HUMAN LEARNING WITH
ROBOT ACTIONS
Inferring how humans learn presents an opportunity for human-
robot interaction. For example, when a human teleoperator is mis-
taken about the robot’s inertia, it may take them many interactions
to learn and become better. Instead, could the robot influence the
human so that their understanding improves faster? Here, we math-
ematically formalize this influence by embedding the approximate
dynamics model of human learning into robot planning.
Formalizing the Influence Problem. We formalize the robot in-
fluence problem as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) where the
human’s internal model parameter is part of the state. Our MDP
is a tuple < 𝑆,𝑈R,𝑇,𝑟R > where the state 𝑠= (𝑥,𝜃H) ∈𝑆is the
joint physical state and human internal model parameter and the
robot’s actions are 𝑢R ∈𝑈R. The stochastic state transition function
is defined as 𝑇(𝑠𝑡+1 | 𝑠𝑡,𝑢𝑡
R) := Í
𝑢H P(𝑢H | 𝑠𝑡) ˜𝑓(𝑠𝑡,𝑢𝑡
R,𝑢𝑡
H,𝑠𝑡+1)
which accounts for the human policy from Equation (2). Impor-
tantly, ˜𝑓(𝑠𝑡,𝑢𝑡
R,𝑢𝑡
H,𝑠𝑡+1) is a deterministic function that evolves 𝑥𝑡
via the physical dynamics 𝑓from Equation (1) and the human’s
internal model parameter 𝜃𝑡
H via the human learning dynamics
𝑓𝜙
𝐿from Equation (6). Finally, the robot optimizes its reward func-
tion 𝑟R(𝑠,𝑢R,𝑢H;𝜃∗) where 𝜃∗is the robot’s true internal model
parameters (e.g., the robot’s true physical dynamics). Note that

Towards Modeling and Influencing
the Dynamics of Human Learning
HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, SE
because 𝑠= (𝑥,𝜃H), the robot’s reward depends on the human’s
time-varying internal model, 𝜃H, at each timestep.
The robot seeks an optimal policy 𝜋∗
R which maximizes it’s re-
ward in expectation over the human’s action sequence, uH:
𝜋∗
R = arg max
𝜋R EuH
h ∞
∑︁
𝑡=0
𝑟R(𝑠𝑡,𝑢𝑡
R,𝑢𝑡
H;𝜃∗)
i
s.t. 𝑇(𝑠𝑡+1 | 𝑠𝑡,𝑢𝑡
R),
(12)
Because human’s internal model parameter 𝜃𝑡
H is part of the state
and the state transition function 𝑇(𝑠𝑡+1 | 𝑠𝑡,𝑢𝑡
R) includes the in-
ferred dynamics model of human learning, 𝜋∗
𝑅should automatically
influence the human’s internal model if it yields higher reward.
Computing Solutions to the Influence Problem The presence
of the human’s nonlinear learning dynamics 𝑓𝜙
𝐿in the transition
function results in a nonconvex optimization problem. To obtain
the optimal robot policy, we would have to solve the MDP either
exactly with dynamic programming (which suffers from the curse
of dimensionality) [3] or approximately via receding-horizon con-
trol (which requires trading off optimality with computational effi-
ciency) [5]. To achieve both long-horizon reasoning and efficient
runtime performance, we use a Dyna-style algorithm [47] that uses
the samples generated by the transition 𝑇(𝑠𝑡+1 | 𝑠𝑡,𝑢𝑡
R) to train 𝜋∗
𝑅
using model-free learning (Proximal Policy Optimization [43]).
6
SIMULATED HUMAN EXPERIMENTS
We want to test two aspects of our approach: our ability to infer
the dynamics of human learning and the effectiveness of our robot
influencing algorithm. To fully validate both, we need access to the
ground-truth human learning dynamics (𝑓𝐿). For this reason, we
first perform a series of simulation experiments with simulated hu-
mans. We explore two shared autonomy contexts: a robot teaching
a human about physics-based robot dynamics (Section 6.1) and a
robot that implicitly influences human objectives, like their goal or
motion preferences (Section 6.2).
Similar to prior work in shared autonomy [9, 17, 26, 29], the robot
combines the human’s commanded action, 𝑢H, with the robot’s
planned guidance, 𝑢R, and executes the action:
𝑢= 𝛼· 𝑢R + (1 −𝛼) · 𝑢H
(13)
where 𝛼∈[0, 1] trades off how much guidance the robot can exert.
In all experiments, we use 𝛼= 0.5. To generate human demon-
strations and infer the human learning dynamics, we simulate a
suite of human learners (see 6.1.1 and 6.2.1). In each experimental
environment we collect 50 demonstrations for model learning. We
randomize the initial state of the robot for each demonstration, and
randomize the robot actions during each interaction.1
gradient human
threshold human
Figure 2: Our inference problem lets us learn to predict 𝜃𝑡
H.
1We randomize 𝑢R to diversely cover how human’s internal model changes.
6.1
Teaching Physical Dynamics
We focus on shared autonomy settings where the human knows
the task objective (e.g., control a robot arm to follow a path), but
they learn about the true robot dynamics (e.g., inertia). We want to
understand how the human learns about the physical robot dynam-
ics, and if a robot that actively teaches the human about its physics
can help the human quickly improve their task performance.
6.1.1
Dynamics of human learning. Motivated by computational
cognitive science models [13], we simulated two types of human
learners: gradient-based learners and threshold learners. All hu-
mans update their internal model via Equation (3), but the structure
of 𝑓𝐿takes various forms. After observing a new state-action pair
(𝑥𝑡,𝑢𝑡), the gradient-based learner updates their parameter𝜃𝑡
H ac-
cording to a gradient-ascent update rule: 𝑓grad
𝐿
:= 𝜃𝑡
H + 𝜂∇𝜃H𝑃(𝑢𝑡|
𝑥𝑡;𝜃𝑡
H) where𝜂∈R+ is the step size. Note that𝑢𝑡is the observed, to-
tal executed control, possibly combining 𝑢R and 𝑢H. Intuitively, this
learner can be viewed as doing gradient-based maximum likelihood
estimation of their latent parameter, similarly to prior IRL methods
[55]. The threshold learner also uses a gradient-based learning rule,
but only updates their internal parameters if they observe a “large
enough” change: 𝑓thresh
𝐿
:= 𝜃𝑡
H + 𝜂1|∇𝑃(𝑢𝑡|𝑥𝑡,𝜃𝑡
H) |>𝜖

∇𝜃H𝑃(𝑢𝑡|
𝑥𝑡,𝜃𝑡
H)
 where 1 is an indicator determining if the magnitude of
the gradient is deemed large enough to induce a learning update
and 𝜖is a threshold parameter.
6.1.2
Human internal model. In all experiments, the simulated
humans are learning about the robot’s physical dynamics and thus
𝜃H encodes various aspects from Equation (7).
6.1.3
Simulated environments. Figure 3 shows our simulated envi-
ronments, all or which have continuous state and action spaces.
(1) Lunar Lander. The human controls the Lunar Lander’s engines
to change its tilt. The human wants to keep the lander upright dur-
ing its descent. Let the state be the tilt angle with respect to the
ground and tilt angular velocity 𝑥= (𝜓,𝜔) and 𝑢be the engine
force. The dynamics are 𝑥𝑡+1 = 𝐴𝑥𝑡+ 𝐵𝑢𝑡where the ground-truth
dynamics are 𝐴∗= [1, 0.2; 0, 1], 𝐵∗= [0; 0.5]. Here, the human’s in-
ternal model represents the control matrix 𝜃H := 𝐵, which depends
on the human’s inertia estimate.
(2) Robot Arm Teleoperation. The human controls the end-effector
of a 7DOF robot arm via hand gestures (see Figure 3). They want to
control the robot to reach a series of known goals, 𝑥𝑔. However, one
of the robot motors is slightly defective, causing the robot to con-
sistently lag in one direction. Let the state be the robot end-effector
position 𝑥= (𝑝𝑥, 𝑝𝑦, 𝑝𝑧) and the control𝑢be linear velocity. The ro-
bot’s end-effector dynamics can be described by the goal-dependent
system2 : 𝑥𝑡+1 = 𝐴𝑥𝑡+𝐵

𝑢𝑡−sign(𝑥𝑡−𝑥𝑔) ⊙𝑤

where 𝑤is the bias
induced by the defective robot motor and ⊙is the Hadamard prod-
uct. Intuitively, this describes a dynamical system that consistently
experiences lag in the 𝑥-direction. The ground-truth dynamics are
𝐴∗= 𝐼3×3, 𝐵∗= diag(0.4, 0.4, 0.4), and 𝑤∗= [−0.15, 0, 0]⊤. The hu-
man’s internal model is 𝜃H := (𝐵,𝑤), which captures their system
responsiveness and bias estimates.
2Although this system is nonlinear, since the robot knows the human’s goal at each
time step, the dynamics can be approximated by a linear system 𝑥𝑡+1 = 𝐴𝑥𝑡+ 𝐵˜𝑢𝑡,
where 𝑥0 is the system state at that time step and ˜𝑢𝑡:= 𝑢𝑡−sign(𝑥0 −𝑥𝑔) ⊙𝑤.

HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, SE
Ran Tian, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Anca D. Dragan, and Andrea Bajcsy
Robot Arm Teleoperation
Lunar Lander
Gradient Human
Threshold Human
passive learn
random
oracle
active teach (ours)
Robot Arm Teleoperation
robot automatically  
stops teaching!
higher 𝜃H error; 
robot keeps teaching
Gradient Human
Threshold Human
Lunar Lander
robot automatically  
stops teaching!
robot eventually  
stops teaching!
Figure 3: (left) Visualization of both simulation environments. (right) Mean and standard deviation of human internal model
error, robot effort, and human action optimality for both dynamics teaching environments, and both simulated humans.
6.1.4
Human objective. We assume the human always knows the
objective, and their reward function is quadratic as in (8). For Lunar
Lander the human was rewarded for keeping the lander upright
and stable (𝜓= 0, 𝜔= 0), and for Robot Arm they were rewarded
for reaching all the goals and tracking the path shown in Figure 3.
6.1.5
Robot objective. The robot objective is to align human’s in-
ternal model with the true robot dynamics model while minimally
intervening. Mathematically, the robot’s reward function is:
𝑟R(𝑠,𝑢R,𝑢H;𝜃∗) = −||𝜃H −𝜃∗||2
2 −||𝑢−𝑢H||2
2,
(14)
where the true dynamics are 𝜃∗:= 𝐵∗in the Lunar Lander envi-
ronment and 𝜃∗:= (𝐵∗,𝑤∗) in the Robot Arm setting.
6.1.6
Baselines. We compare our method where the robot actively
teaches by planning with the inferred learning dynamics 𝑓𝜙
𝐿(Active
Teach) to a robot that teaches with the true learning dynamics 𝑓𝐿
(Oracle), no robot intervention (Passive Learn), and a robot that
randomly perturbs the human actions (Random).
6.1.7
Hypotheses. H1: We can learn to predict 𝜃𝑡
H well by maxi-
mizing the MLE objective. H2: Active Teach outperforms Passive
Learn and Random in aligning the human’s internal model. H3:
Robot stops intervening when the human’s internal model is well-
aligned.
6.1.8
Results. For H1, we study the relationship between the MLE
objective in (5) and our inferred model’s (𝑓𝜙
𝐿) ability to predict 𝜃H.
Figure 2 shows these curves for both the Robot Arm and Lunar
Lander environments over 50 epochs. We see that across both
gradient and threshold human learners, the log likelihood of the
human’s actions increases (shown in pink) while the 𝜃H prediction
error decreases (shown in blue), supporting H1.
Figure 3 shows the human’s internal model error, the robot’s ef-
fort, and the difference between the human’s action and the optimal
action in the Robot Arm Teleoperation and the Lunar Lander
environment for both types of human learners. We see that across all
environments, our method performs comparably to Oracle model,
and is able to align the human’s internal model of the robot’s dy-
namics with the true dynamics significantly faster than Passive
Learn or Random (supporting H2). Interestingly, in all but one
setting does the robot automatically stop teaching the human since
the human’s internal model is sufficiently correct (supporting H3).
The one exception is in the Robot Arm Teleoperation environ-
ment with the threshold human. Since this human doesn’t learn
when the gradient is too small, the robot must continue to exert
effort to maximize its reward.
6.2
Implicitly Influencing Human Objectives
We now turn to scenarios where the human has an accurate un-
derstanding of the robot’s dynamics, but their objective (i.e., their
reward function 𝑟H) can be changed by the robot. Specifically, we
study how assistive robots can implicitly influence human motion
preferences and desired goals. Importantly, in this setting influenc-
ing or teaching the human is not explicitly in the robot’s objective:
the robot simply wants to perform the desired task with minimal
assistance. Thus, getting the human to want to reach a goal or
change their preferences should be an emergent behavior of robots
planning with the dynamics of human learning.
6.2.1
Dynamics of human learning. We simulate3 the gradient hu-
man learner from 6.1.1 and introduce a new human, the Bayesian
learner4 which is inspired by probabilistic models of cognition
[13, 50]. This human’s learning produces a full posterior, 𝑏𝑡+1(𝜃H),
over the model parameters given a state-action observation, and
the dynamics of learning are: 𝑓Bayes
𝐿
∝𝑃(𝑢𝑡| 𝑥𝑡,𝜃H)𝑏𝑡(𝜃H).
6.2.2
Human internal model. Since the human’s objectives are
influenceable, we model 𝜃H as a reward parameter encoding the
motion preferences 𝜃H := (𝑄, 𝑅) or a desired goal state 𝜃H ∈Θ.
6.2.3
Simulated environments. We assume the human knows the
physical robot dynamics (the bias-free RobotArm dynamics from
6.1.3), but can have their reward influenced by new observations.
(1) Goal Influence. The human wants to teleoperate the robot
to put an object in one of the three trays (upper left Figure 4).
However,the human doesn’t notice that only one of the trays is
empty enough. Unlike the human, the robot’s sensors detect that
only one of the trays is empty. We investigate if the robot can
3While we simulate the human as changing their reward, but the human’s reward
could be viewed as static while their subgoals change Nonetheless, it will be common
for a robot to not fully represent this hierarchy.
4Bayesian humans act under their belief: P(𝑢H | 𝑥) = Í
𝜃H 𝑏(𝜃H)P(𝑢H | 𝑥,𝜃H).

Towards Modeling and Influencing
the Dynamics of Human Learning
HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, SE
influence the human to change their preferences about which tray
(i.e., goal location) to place their object in.
(2) Preference Influence. The human wants to teleoperate the
robot to pick up a cup on the table. Their initial preference is to
move the robot’s end-effector in a straight line from start to the cup
(lower left Figure 4). However, the robot knows that grasps tend
to fail with this kind of motion. Instead, the robot knows that first
moving directly above the can and then straight down to grasp has
a higher chance of success. We investigate if the robot can influence
the human to change their preferences about how to reach the cup.
6.2.4
Human objective. In all simulations the human has a qua-
dratic cost function (from (8)). In Goal Influence the simulated
human receives reward for moving the robot end-effector to their
desired tray, and in Preference Influence the human receives
reward according to their current preference matricies, (𝑄, 𝑅).
6.2.5
Robot objective. We implement an assistive robot that wants
to help the human perform the task while minimally intervening.
However, we assume that the robot knows best: the robot knows
which goal or reward weights lead to success. Let 𝜃∗capture this
aspect of the robot’s reward. In the Goal setting the robot’s reward
𝑟R(𝑠,𝑢R,𝑢H;𝜃∗) = −(𝑥−𝜃∗)⊤𝑄(𝑥−𝜃∗) −𝑢⊤𝑅𝑢−||𝑢−𝑢H||2
2 and in
Preference the robot’s reward parameter is 𝜃∗= (𝑄∗, 𝑅∗), yielding
𝑟R(𝑠,𝑢R,𝑢H;𝜃∗) = −𝑥⊤𝑄∗𝑥−𝑢⊤𝑅∗𝑢−||𝑢−𝑢H||2
2 where 𝑢is the
combined human and robot action from Equation (13).
6.2.6
Baselines. We implement our method where the robot as-
sists the human and plans with the inferred dynamics of human
learning (Learning Assist). We compare to a robot assisting with
the ground-truth dynamics of human learning (Oracle), robot as-
sistance that is unaware that humans learn (Static Assist), and a
robot that randomly perturbs the human actions (Random).
6.2.7
Hypotheses. H4: Learning Assist aligns the human’s mental
model faster. H5: Assistance that accounts for human learning enables
the human-robot team to achieve higher reward under the true 𝜃∗.
6.2.8
Results. Figure 4 shows the human’s internal model error, ro-
bot effort, and task cost (i.e., just the task-component of 𝑟R, negated)
for both environments. Because the Learning Assist robot knows
that the human’s internal model can be changed, it automatically
exerts higher effort early on to align the human’s internal model
with it’s own, resulting in less long-term assistance and lower task
cost (supporting H4 and H5). In contrast, the Static Assist robot
is not aware that the human can change their mind, and thus does
not exert enough effort to influence the human’s internal model.
After repeatedly incurring task cost because the two agents are at
odds with each other, the Static Assist robot “gives up” and starts
executing the human’s control directly: in other words, 𝑢= 𝑢H.
7
USER STUDY: TEACHING TO
TELEOPERATE
So far we conducted experiments with simulated human behavior,
allowing us to analyze the quality of our inferred human learning
dynamics model, and the robot’s ability to influence simulated
humans. Here we investigate if we can infer the dynamics of real
human learning, and enable robots to influence real users.
Goal Influence (Bayesian human)
Preference Influence (gradient human)
static assist
random
oracle
learning assist (ours)
𝑏0(𝜃H)
𝜃∗
𝜃H
0
𝜃∗
Figure 4: (left) Environments for influencing human objec-
tives. (right) Internal model error, robot effort, and task cost.
We focus on scenarios where the robot’s physical dynamics are
different from what the human is used to; for example, perhaps the
human was used to teleoperating a robotic wheelchair, but is now
teleoperating a robotic arm. As they interact with the robotic arm,
they will naturally learn about the new robot dynamics. In our IRB-
approved user study, we investigate if a robot can actively teach
a human the physical dynamics and improve their teleoperation
performance faster than if the human does the task on their own. In
other words, we aim to understand if a robot can align the human’s
internal model with the robot’s.
Experimental Setup. We designed a teleoperation task where the
human controls a 7DOF Jaco robot arm through a webcam-based
gesture interface (Figure 1). The participant uses their index finger
to indicate how the end-effector should move parallel to the tabletop.
The task is to move the end-effector to reach four goals on the table
in a counter-clockwise pattern, tracing out a diamond pattern. All
participants experience a familiarzation task where they perform
the task unassisted, with the default robot dynamics in order to
understand the gesture interface. In software, we then simulate two
“new” robots, each with different physical properties.
Independent Variables. We manipulated the robot strategy with
two levels: no-teaching and active-teaching. The robot either let the
human do the task on their own, or it modified the human’s input
to teach them about the physical robot dynamics via Equation (12).
We also manipulate the robot physical dynamics with two levels:
end-effector dynamics bias in x-direction and bias in y-direction.
Dependent Measures. A challenge in evaluating our experiment
is that we do not have access to the human’s ground-truth internal
model. As a proxy, we measure human action optimality distance:
|| ˆ𝑢𝐻−𝑢∗||2
2. Intuitively, the better the human understands the
robot, the more optimally they should be able to control it to reach
the goals. Since we cannot directly measure a human’s internal
understanding, we instead look at their actions to measure their
deviation from the optimal action under the robot’s true physics.
We also measured subjective measures via a Likert scale survey.
Hypotheses. H6: Participants in the active teaching condition be-
come optimal teleoperators faster than passively learning on their own.

HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, SE
Ran Tian, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Anca D. Dragan, and Andrea Bajcsy
passive learn
active teach (ours)
Human Action Optimality Distance
Participant Trajectories
User Study: Quantitative & Qualitative Results
early on robot teaches 
by exaggeration
later humans 
more optimal
early & late suboptimality 
w/ passively learning
start
end
start
end
Figure 5: (left) Avg. human action optimality distance and
95% confidence interval. (right) Dashed line is desired path.
Participant trajectories reveal that an active teaching robot
initially exaggerates the dynamics bias to teach the human.
H7: Participants feel they learned to teleoperate faster and understood
the robot dynamics better in the active teaching condition.
Participants. We recruited two groups of participants from the
campus community: the first for providing data for inferring the
dynamics of human learning (12 participants; 2 female, 10 male,
age 18-34, all with technical backgrounds), and the second for the
user study (10 participants; 1 female, 8 male, 1 non-binary, age
18-34, all with technical backgrounds). For inferring the human
learning dynamics, all participants learned to teleoperate the robot
unassisted and we counterbalanced the robot physical dynamics.
Procedure. A within-subjects design is challenging, since humans
who experience one condition will learn about the robots and then
carry over that experience to the next condition. To study the effect
of this confound, each participant experienced a combination of
robot strategy and physical dynamics conditions, but in a random
order. For example, one group of participants would interact with
the (active-teaching, bias-x) condition and then (no-teaching, bias-y)
condition. Thus, each participant experiences both robot strategies
and biases. We counterbalance the order in which the participants
experience the combination. All participants experienced a familiar-
ization round at the start and between each experimental condition,
to “reset” their mental model of the robot. Each participant gave 3
demonstrations per condition, each lasting ∼1 minute.
Quantitative Results. Figure 5 shows how human action opti-
mality distance varies over time with each robot strategy. We con-
ducted an ANOVA with robot strategy and stage (first or second
half of interaction) as factors and robot physical dynamics as ran-
dom effect. We found a significant main effect of the robot strategy
(𝐹(1, 19) = 12.943, 𝑝= 0.001) and a marginal interaction effect
between the robot strategy and the interaction stage (𝑝= 0.098),
so we did not run a post-hoc analysis. However, we hypothesize
that this marginal interaction effect comes from the fact that early-
stage changes in robot behavior (induced by either robot strategy)
influences the human’s later-stage action optimality. Ultimately,
the quantitative results indicate a significant improvement in the
human’s action optimality when the robot actively teaches them
compared to when the human passively learns (supporting H6).
Qualitative & Subjective Results. On the right of Figure 5 we
visualize the executed trajectories from all participants in the active-
teaching (orange) and no-teaching (grey) conditions. The high-
lighted trajectories are two representative examples, the color gra-
dient indicates time along the trajectory, and the dashed line is
the desired path. When participants passively learn on their own,
their trajectories are consistently suboptimal, weaving around the
optimal path. In contrast, in the active teaching condition, the initial
portion of the trajectory exhibits the robots teaching behavior: the
robot intentionally exaggerates the dynamics bias to change the hu-
man’s internal model faster. After this initial exaggerated deviation,
the human trajectory is closer to optimal compared to the passive
learning trajectory at comparable timesteps (see Appendix A.4 for
a detailed visualization of human and robot actions).
We also ran an ANOVA on the Likert survey questions. Survey
questions investigated perceived performance improvements (e.g.,
“By the end of the interaction, it was easy to control the robot to
do the task.”) and robot understanding (e.g., “By the end of the
interaction, I understood the robot’s physical properties.”). Across
all questions, we did not find a significant effect of the robot strategy
(rejecting H7). What we found surprising was that even though
participants were quantitatively performing better in the teaching
condition, they did not perceive an improvement in performance
(𝑝= 0.689) nor in their understanding of the robot physics (𝑝=
0.299). We hypothesize that this could be because participants only
interacted with each robot strategy for one minute, making the
differences hard to notice. In the future, investigating longer-term
interactions with the robot would shed light on the disconnect.
8
CONCLUSION
In this work we took a step towards enabling robots to understand
the influence that they have over human internal models. We do
this by modeling human learning as a nonlinear dynamical system
that evolves as a function of new observations that the robot can
influence. We propose a tractable method for inferring approxi-
mate human learning dynamics from demonstrations that naturally
exhibit human learning, and propose how robots can influence hu-
man learning by embedding the approximate dynamics into robot
planning. Our experimental results indicate that robot influence is
possible and can help humans learn better internal models.
Limitations & Future Work. A strength and limitation of our
approach is representing the dynamics of human learning via a
transformer. As a general function approximator, it poses no as-
sumptions on the structure of the human’s learning dynamics; in
fact, we are excited that our results indicate that it is possible to
infer a useful model of human learning from real data, without prior
assumptions. However, since neural networks require abundant
human data, they are not appropriate for low-data settings and
may fail when encountering humans that are out of distribution. A
further limitation is that if the person is not noisily-optimal as in
(2) and has a specific bias (e.g., myopia), then the transformer will
learn parameters that compensate for this; in turn, this could lead
the robot to influence the human in unintended ways. In the future
we are excited to combine the strengths of data-driven models and
cognitive science models of human learning. While our user study
relies on an “average” dynamics model of human learning trained

Towards Modeling and Influencing
the Dynamics of Human Learning
HRI ’23, March 13–16, 2023, Stockholm, SE
from all participants’ data, humans may exhibit unique ways of
learning. Inferring personalized learning dynamics is an exciting
future direction, and pre-trained models of humans could serve as
a useful starting point for adapting to new humans. Finally, while
the LQ approximation enables tractable inference, extensions into
non-LQ settings will unlock more settings (e.g., autonomous cars).
