1 
 
Hardware Acceleration for Boolean Satisfiability Solver by 
Applying Belief Propagation Algorithm 
Te-Hsuan Chen and Ju-Yi Lu 
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA 

 
ABSTRACT 
Boolean satisﬁability (SAT) has an extensive application 
domain in computer science, especially in electronic design 
automation applications. Circuit synthesis, optimization, and 
verification problems can be solved by transforming original 
problems to SAT problems. However, the SAT problem is known 
as an NP-complete problem, which means there is no efficient 
method to solve SAT problems. Therefore, the design of an 
efficient SAT solver to enhance the performance is always desired. 
In this paper, we proposed a hardware acceleration method for 
Boolean SAT problems. By surveying the properties of SAT 
problems and the decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) 
codes, a special class of error-correcting codes (ECCs), we 
discover that both of them are constraint satisfaction problems 
(CSPs). The belief propagation algorithm (BPA) has been 
successfully applied to the decoding of LDPC, and the 
corresponding decoder hardware designs are extensively studied. 
Therefore, we proposed a belief propagation based algorithm to 
solve SAT problems. With this algorithm, the SAT solver can be 
accelerated by hardware. A software simulator is implemented to 
verify the proposed algorithm and the performance improvement 
is estimated. Our experiment results show that time complexity 
does not increase with the size of SAT problems and the proposed 
method can achieve at least 30× speedup compared to MiniSat.    
Keywords 
SAT, Boolean Satisfiability,  Belief Propagation Algorithm. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Boolean satisﬁability (SAT) is a class of problems that 
establishes if there exist an assignment to variables of a Boolean 
formula that evaluates it to true [1]. This Boolean formula is 
usually in the conjunctive normal form (CNF), which is an 
expression of a conjunction (AND, ⋀) of clauses. Each clause is a 
disjunction (OR, ⋁) of literals, and each literal is either a variable 
or its negation (NOT, ¬ ). SAT has an extensive application 
domain. In logic design, synthesis, optimization and verification, 
many problems, such as placement and route, test pattern 
generation, and equivalence checking, and model checking, etc., 
can be expressed as variables whose values are in the set 
{𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒, 𝑓𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒} or {1,0}.  
The SAT problem is the first known NP-complete decision 
problem [2], which means that there is no efficient algorithm to 
solve SAT problems. Although theoretically, finding the set of 
assignment can be achieved by exhaustively trying all the possible 
assignments, this method becomes infeasible quickly as the 
number of literals and clauses increases. The set of algorithms that 
can solve SAT problems are called SAT solvers. However, due to 
the NP-complete nature of SAT, how to solve SAT problems 
within a reasonable time becomes an important issue. Much 
research has been conducted to improve the efficiency of SAT 
solvers, but no algorithm so far can efficiently solve all SAT 
instances.  
The goal of this paper is using hardware to accelerate SAT 
solvers. The approaches to solve the SAT problem have divided 
into software solvers, which solving the problem using computer 
simulation, and hardware solver, to implement Verilog code 
running on FPGA or virtual machine [7][10][11]. For hardware 
SAT solver, the main two categories are instance-specific 
(instance dependence) and application-specific. In this work, we 
try to implement an instance-specific model, which is more 
resource efficient to accommodate on a single FPGA.  
To satisfy a CNF, i.e. to find a set of value that makes the 
CNF=1, each clause must be 1 too. Therefore, each clause 
represents a constraint that must be satisfied simultaneously. A 
constraint 
satisfaction 
problem 
(CSP) 
consists 
of 
three 
components, 𝑋, 𝐷, and 𝐶 [3]: 
1. 
𝑋 is a set of variables, {𝑋1, 𝑋2, … , 𝑋𝑛 }. 
2. 
𝐷 is a set of domains, {𝐷1, 𝐷2, … , 𝐷𝑛 }, one for each 
variable. 
3. 
𝐶 is a set of constraints that specify allowable 
combinations of values. 
Each domain 𝐷𝑖 consists of a set of allowable values, 
{𝑣1, 𝑣2, … , 𝑣𝑘 } for variable 𝑋𝑖. Each constrain 𝐶𝑖 consists of a pair 
〈𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑝𝑒, 𝑟𝑒𝑙〉, where 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑝𝑒 is a tuple of variables that participate 
in the constrain and 𝑟𝑒𝑙 is the relation that defines the values that 
those variables can take on. A problem is solved when each 
variable has a value that satisfies all constraints on the variable. 
From the definition of the CSP, it can be found that Boolean 
SAT is a special case of the CSP, where the set of domains is 
{𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒, 𝑓𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒} or {1,0} and the constraints are defined by a set of 
clauses that must be satisfied simultaneously.   
Error correction codes (ECC’s) provide one of the most cost-
effective ways to achieve noise protection. By applying the ECC 
to data, errors can be corrected or detected.  An (n, k) code maps a 
binary k-tuple called a message block to a binary n-tuple called a 
codeword block. Usually, message and codeword blocks are 
represented in vector forms so the mapping is defined by a set of 
matrix multiplications. The decoding of a special class of ECC, 
low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [4], is a constraint 
satisfaction problem. The parity-check equations are specially 
designed equations that are equal to zero if all the inputs are 
correct.  
The goal of decoding LDPC codes is to find a set of input 
assignments such that all the parity-check equations are equal to 
0. Therefore, the decoding of LDPC codes is actually a CSP. Each 
symbol of the codeword is a variable; each parity check 

2 
 
corresponds to a constraint in CSP. Besides, the domain of the 
variables is limited to {𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑒, 𝑓𝑎𝑙𝑠𝑒} or {1,0}  in LDPC codes. 
Therefore, the decoding of LDPC codes can be modeled as a SAT 
problem.  
In the decoding of LDPC codes, the procedure can be 
illustrated by a bipartite graph which contains two types of nodes: 
variable nodes and parity-check nodes, and use iterative belief 
propagation decoding method to find solutions [8][9]. Since both 
the decoding of LDPC codes and SAT solvers are CSPs, and the 
decoding of LDPC codes can be accomplished by specific 
designed hardware. Here comes the question: can we extend the 
LDPC algorithm, belief propagation algorithm (BPA), to solve 
SAT problems so that a SAT solver can be speeded up by 
hardware? In this paper, we show that BPA can also be applied to 
SAT solvers since both of them solve CSPs. It is also possible a 
hardware circuit using similar architecture can also be used to 
accelerate SAT solvers. Therefore we propose a method to utilize 
a hardware based on LDPC decoder to improve the speed to SAT 
solvers. 
1.1 Contribution 
Our main contribution in this paper is (1) applying the 
algorithm of decoding LDPC codes, to CNF-based SAT problems, 
(2) evaluating the proposed modified BPA by a simulator written 
in C/C++, (3) estimating the time that is need by the proposed 
SAT solver and comparing it with MiniSat [5].  
1.2 Organization  
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a quick 
review on the LDPC codes and the belief propagation algorithm. 
A SAT solving algorithm based on the belief propagation 
algorithm is proposed in section 3. Section 4 provides the 
experimental results. Section 5 discusses the related work and 
Section 6 gives the conclusion.    
2. LOW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK CODE 
Originally proposed in 1962 by Robert Gallager [4] and re-
discovered by David MacKay in 1996 [6], LDPC codes with 
iterative 
decoding 
algorithms 
have 
performance 
closely 
approaching Shannon channel capacity. LDPC codes went 
unnoticed until the 1990s because the hardware could not support 
effective decoder implementations. However with MacKay’s 
research and the development of semiconductor technology, the 
hardware implementation of LDPC codes became feasible.  
A LDPC code is a linear block code for which the parity 
check matrix of interest has a low density of ones. A LDPC code 
can be represented by matrices. Assume that C is the codeword set 
of a (n, k) binary linear block code. If a k × n matrix G is its 
generation matrix, then 𝐶= {𝑥⃑∙𝐺|𝑥⃑𝜖{0,1}𝑘}  for any length-k 
message 𝑥⃑. An m × n matrix H is its parity check matrix, if 𝐶=
{𝑐⃑|𝑐⃑𝜖{0,1}𝑛, 𝑐⃑∙𝐻𝑇= 0 } where 𝑐⃑ is a codeword of C. In other 
words, an LDPC code is designed to satisfy that for every 
codeword 𝑐⃑∈𝐶, this equation 𝑐⃑∙𝐻𝑇= 0 always holds.  
LDPC codes can also be represented by using graphs. A 
parity-check matrix H can be associated with a graph called 
bipartite graph. This graph contains two set of nodes: variable 
nodes and check nodes (v-nodes and c-nodes). The rule for 
constructing the graph is that a c-node i is connected to a v-node j 
whenever element hij in H is a 1. For example, let the parity-check 
matrix H be a 3×4 matrix 
𝐻= [
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
] 
The corresponding bipartite graph is shown in Figure 1. There are 
4 v-nodes and 3 c-nodes in this example.  
v1
v2
v3
v4
c1
c2
c3
 
Figure 1: Example of bipartite graph. 
 
Besides, a cycle of length l in a bipartite graph is a path 
comprised of l edges from a node back to the same node. For 
example the bipartite Graph of Fig. 1 has a cycle of length 6. 
Short cycles are usually considered bad in graphs used for 
iterative decoding based on “message passing;” they increase the 
dependence of information being received at each node during 
message passing which may lead to latch-up problems. LDPC 
codes depend on a message passing decoding algorithm called 
belief propagation algorithm (BPA) or sum-product algorithm 
(SPA). The BPA is an efﬁcient decoding algorithm which 
iteratively decodes LDPC code based on belief propagation. BPA 
decodes data with the probability computation of received signals 
based on the characteristic of the channel. The input bit 
probabilities are called the a priori probabilities for the received 
bits because they were known in advance before running the 
LDPC decoder. Besides, two sets of probabilities computation are 
handled in the decoder. One is related to the decoding criterion 
which determines the value of a received bit from the value of a 
received signal. The sets of probabilities are referred to as 
posterior probabilities.  
v4
c2
c3
v1
v2
v3
c1
r1,1
q2,1
q3,1
  
v4
v1
v3
q2,1
c2
c3
v2
c1
r2,2
r3,2
 
              (a)                                             (b) 
Figure 2: Iterative update of the BPA: (a) from a check node 
to a variable node, (b) form a variable node to a check node. 
 
The other probability is related to the satisfaction of each 
check sum given the received signal on each bit. BPA decoding 
can decode the data by iterative update in these two sets of 
probabilities until the satisfaction of the received bits is 
determined by the ﬁrst sets of probabilities in the parity-check 
equations. The goal of the decoder is to find the maximum a 
posteriori probability (MAP) for each codeword bit. In other 
words, the aim of SPA is to maximize the probability that all 
parity-check constraints are satisfied for each codeword bit. 

3 
 
 
Figure 3: BPA for decoding ECC. 
 
Figure 2 illustrate the basic concept of the BPA. Figure 2(a) 
is a part of a bipartite graph; it only shows nodes and edges that 
connected to a parity-check c1. Here the relation between c1 and v1, 
v2, and v3 is: 𝑐1 = 𝑣1 𝑣2 𝑣3 where  is XOR. To satisfy 
this parity-check, v1, v2, and v3 must be all 0’s or only two of them 
are 1’s. The BPA handles two sets of probabilities. The first set is 
related to the decoding criterion. These quantities are defined and 
iterative computed in the BPA:  
(1) 𝑟𝑖,𝑗(𝑘) : The probability 𝑐𝑖= 1  given 𝑣𝑗= 𝑘 and 
probabilities of other variables, 𝑞𝑖𝑗’s.  
(2) 𝑞𝑗,𝑖(𝑘) : The probability 𝑣𝑗= 𝑘 when all parity checks 
involving 𝑣𝑗 except 𝑐𝑖 are satisfied.  
For example, 𝑟1,1(1)  is the probability of 𝑐1 =1 given the 
information 𝑞2,1 and 𝑞2,1. Note that since 𝑐1 = 𝑣1 𝑣2 𝑣3 if 
𝑞2,1 and 𝑞2,1 are high, i.e. the probability that 𝑣2 and 𝑣3 are 1’s 
are high, the probability that 𝑣1 = 0 must be high to satisfy 𝑐1 =
0.  
On the other hand, for the v-node, Figure 2(b) is a partial 
graph that shows all the parity-check nodes that use v2. The v-
node v2 receives the information of probabilities that satisfy all the 
parity-checks that v2 involves in and then uses this information to 
update its probability. For example, in Figure 2(b) 𝑣2 passes its 
probability to 𝑐1 by using the information form 𝑐1 and 𝑐3. 
Another set of probability that is related to the decoding 
criterion is also calculated. It is denoted as 𝑄𝑗, representing the 
probability that all checks involving jth bit are satisfied. This 
probability is also called pseudo-posterior probability.  
There are five steps in the BPA shown in Figure 3 [12]. The 
original algorithm is designed for a communication system 
assuming signals are modulated in binary phase-shift keying 
(BPSK) where logic 1 is modulated as -1 voltage and logic 0 is 1 
voltage. The noise is assumed to be additive white Gaussian noise 
(AWGN).  The general form of the BPA is as follows: 
3. BELIEF PROPAGATION FOR SAT 
This section we discuss the proposed Belief Propagation 
Algorithm for SAT problem (BPA-SAT) for SAT problems. In 
3.1 we discuss the adopted modification on the Belief Propagation 
to apply on the SAT solver. In 3.2 we provide an overview of 
proposed BPA-SAT and some detail implementation.  
3.1 Adaption on BPA-SAT 
BPA can be adopted on SAT problem once we treat the 
check nodes as the clauses, and variable nodes as literal. Also, the 
initialization of the probability is less important than the 
conventional BPA, because there is no prior information about the 
literal assignment. 
1. 
Initialization: in the SAT problem, the initial values of 
literals are all set to 0.5 to show no bias of the assignment 
without any prior information. 
2. 
Pass information from clauses to literals: Since the 
operators in the CNF clauses are OR, which is 𝑐1 = 𝑣1 +
𝑣2 + 𝑣3 , 𝑟1,1(1)  represents the probability of 𝑐1  is true 
giventhe 𝑣1 = 0, and the probability of 𝑣2, 𝑣3. Therefore the 
modified equation is: 
𝑟1,1(0) = 𝑃(𝑐1 = 1|𝑣1 = 0,  𝑞⃑) 
𝑞⃑ represents the vector of 𝑞𝑖,𝑗(1). 
3. 
Pass information from literals to clauses: We neglect the 
multiplication on (1 −𝑝𝑗) or 𝑝𝑗, because the initial values 
should not affect the value since they don’t contain useful 
information.  
𝑞𝑗,𝑖(1) = 𝛼
∏
(𝑟𝑖′,𝑗(1))
𝑖′∈{ℎ𝑖𝑗≠0&𝑖≠𝑗}
 
4. 
Compute the posteriori probability: Same as above, 
remove the multiplication on (1 −𝑝𝑗) or 𝑝𝑗. 
𝑄𝑗(1) = 𝛽
∏
(𝑟𝑖,𝑗(1))
𝑖∈{ℎ𝑖𝑗≠0}
 
1. 
Initialize: For all i and j such that bit 𝑣𝑗 is included in 
parity check 𝑐𝑖, i.e. ℎ𝑖𝑗≠0 
𝑝𝑗= 𝑃(𝑟𝑗= −1|𝑐𝑗= 𝑦𝑖) =
1
1 + 𝑒
2𝑦𝑖
𝜎2
 
𝑞𝑗,𝑖(0) = 1 −𝑝𝑗 
𝑞𝑗,𝑖(1) = 𝑝𝑗 
 
2. 
Pass information from check nodes to variable nodes 
𝑟𝑖,𝑗(0) = 1
2 + 1
2
∏
(1 −2𝑞𝑗′,𝑖(1))
𝑗′∈{ℎ𝑖𝑗≠0&𝑖≠𝑗}
 
𝑟𝑖,𝑗(1) = 1 −𝑟𝑖,𝑗(0) 
3. 
Pass information from variable nodes to check nodes 
𝑞𝑗,𝑖(0) = 𝛼∙(1 −𝑝𝑗) ∙
∏
(𝑟𝑖′,𝑗(0))
𝑖′∈{ℎ𝑖𝑗≠0&𝑖≠𝑗}
 
𝑞𝑗,𝑖(1) = 𝛼∙(𝑝𝑗) ∙
∏
(𝑟𝑖′,𝑗(1))
𝑖′∈{ℎ𝑖𝑗≠0&𝑖≠𝑗}
 
𝛼=
1
𝑞𝑗,𝑖(0) + 𝑞𝑗,𝑖(1) 
4. 
Compute the posteriori probability  
𝑄𝑗(0) = 𝛽∙(1 −𝑝𝑗) ∙
∏
(𝑟𝑖,𝑗(0))
𝑖∈{ℎ𝑖𝑗≠0}
 
𝑄𝑗(1) = 𝛽∙(𝑝𝑗) ∙
∏
(𝑟𝑖,𝑗(1))
𝑖∈{ℎ𝑖𝑗≠0}
 
𝛽=
1
𝑄𝑗(0) + 𝑄𝑗(1) 
 
5. 
Compute the hard decisions 
𝑣̂𝑗= {0 
1
𝑖𝑓 𝑄𝑗(0) > 𝑄𝑗(1)
𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
 
6. 
Repeat if the syndrome is not 0 

4 
 
3.2 BPA-SAT overview 
Figure 4 is the flow chart of the whole BPA-SAT. There are 
two loop in BPA-SAT, the inner loop is the core algorithm of 
BPA-SAT, which iteratively calculates 𝑟𝑖,𝑗(1), 𝑞𝑖,𝑗(1), and 𝑄𝑗(1). 
The outer loop is the break-and-restart mechanism to prevent 
BPA-SAT running forever, and randomly assign another start 
point (initial value set). 
Start
Compute r
Compute q
Compute Q
SAT?
Max Iter?
Random 
restart
End: 
Solution is found
End: 
Solution is NOT found
Max restart?
Initialize q
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y
 
Figure 4: Flow chart of the BPA for CNF-based SAT 
problems 
 
4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULT 
In this section we present an evaluation of completeness and 
speedup of our belief propagation for SAT problem. The 3SAT 
benchmarks in SATLIB [12] are ran on our BPA for SAT 
simulator. For the speedup, we compares the  estimated execution 
time of BPA for SAT running on FPGA Xilinx Virtex 2 
XC2V6000-5 and the real execution time of MiniSat solver 

processor. 
4.1 Completeness 
In this sub-section we investigate the completeness of the 
BPA-SAT. In our experiment, all the instances in the benchmark 
are satisifiable, completeness is defined as the fraction of 
testbench instance that can be solved by the BPA-SAT.  
Figure 5 examines the completeness of BPA for SAT. All the 
benchmark set are satisifiable. Benchmark uf20-91 indicates the 
literal number 20 and clause number 91. It shows that BPA for 
SAT has a worse solving ability when the problem size become 
larger. After adopting the random restart mechanism, there is only 
an average 5% improvement. Therefore, how to improve the 
completeness will be the main issue in the future works.  
Moreover, the ECC decoder where BPA works well has the 
literal-clause ratio greater than 1, while the literal-clause ratio of 
SAT problem are typically smaller than 0.25. This fundamental 
difference is believed to be a crucial factor of the incompleteness 
in the proposed BPA for SAT. 
 
 
Figure 5: The completeness of BPA-SAT. 
 
4.2 Execution iteration & Speedup Evaluation 
To estimate the speedup of the algorithm, we take the FPGA 
Xilinx Virtex 2 XC2V6000-5 as reference model. Based the 
experimental result of [13], the desired FPGA computation ability, 
second per iteration (SPI) can be calculated in equation below: 
𝑆𝑃𝐼=
𝐶𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ
𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑔ℎ𝑝𝑢𝑡× 𝐼𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛=
3969
1417𝑀× 15 
= 1.86 × 10−7𝑠𝑒𝑐/𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 
In [13], the 𝐶𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑑 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ is the bandwidth the FPGA can 
execute in parallel in a single iteration. The 𝐼𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 is the 
experimental result of the iteration number. 
Therefore the estimated speedup can be derived as below: 
𝐒𝐩𝐞𝐞𝐝𝒖𝒑=  𝑻𝒎𝒊𝒏𝒊𝒔𝒂𝒕/𝑻𝒆𝒙𝒆𝒄= 𝑻𝒎𝒊𝒏𝒊𝒔𝒂𝒕/(𝒊𝒕𝒆𝒓𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏× 𝑺𝑷𝑰)  (1) 
𝑇𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑠𝑎𝑡 is the average running time for the MiniSat solver to 
solve a single SAT instance. 𝑇𝑒𝑥𝑒𝑐 is the estimated execution time 
of BPA for SAT to running on FPGA. 
 
Figure 6: Average iteration and the estimated speedup. 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
32.37 38.21
30
83.26 178.131078.671932.1
15406.13
7991.27
44095.23
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0.E+00
5.E+03
1.E+04
2.E+04
2.E+04
3.E+04
3.E+04
4.E+04
4.E+04
5.E+04
5.E+04
Speedup
Iteration
Speedup

5 
 
Figure 6 takes a closer look on every solved instance to find 
the relation between propagation iteration and the scale of the 
SAT problem. The blue histogram indicates the average iteration 
of the solved instances. The line chart represents the average 
speedup compared with the execution time of MiniSat SAT 
solver. The average iteration number of all the solved instance 
doesn’t show any trend of growth as the growth of the problem 
size, which imply the constant timing complexity regardless of the 
scale of the SAT problem.  
The line chart comes from the equation (1). The speedup 
grows in exponential, because the execution time of MiniSat 
grows in exponential. The spike on uf200-860 is caused by the 
large standard deviation when the sample number is small. This 
chart indicates the main advantage of adopting the BPA on SAT: 
the iteration of propagation is independent to the size of the SAT 
problem. Also, as mentioned above, each computation of r and q 
only depends on the previous iteration result of q and r, which can 
be implemented in parallel easily with a buffer storing its previous 
value. Moreover, the sparse literal-clause matrix release the 
competing of the shared memory issue, which is applicable to 
implement on both FPGA, GPU, or even ASIC devices to reduce 
the synthesis timing overhead. 
5. RELATED WORK 
Application-specific architecture is the mainstream in 
hardware accelerating SAT problem to avoid the time-consuming 
FPGA synthesis time. [10][11] both implemented Boolean 
Constraint Propagation computation in parallel. For the storage on 
the literal-clause instance, the former stored the data using 
embedded DRAM, while the latter relied on the modern FPGA’s 
Block RAM (BRAM). Both of them relied on Input/Output Queue 
to provide parallel value assignment. The intensive BCP 
computation was done in parallel by partitioning clause set into 
several subset. The synchronization scheme is also proposed to do 
the conflict detection in serial. In this type of architecture, the 
problem size can be very large. For latter one, since the size of 
BRAM is the only constraint of this hardware implementation, the 
capacity can be extended to 64K variables and 176K clauses. 
Skliarova et al. [7] implemented the application-specific 
architecture by storing the whole literal-clause matrix into the 
FPGA block. The inference, conflict-detection, and backtracking 
are implemented based on the orthogonal matrix multiplication, 
which all the computations are done in hardware implementation, 
while the backstracking process is supported by the stack memory 
handled by software. 
6. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, a belief propagation algorithm for CNF-based 
SAT problems (BPA-SAT) has been presented. The BPA-SAT is 
based on the belief propagation algorithm (BPA) that is used in 
the decoding of a class of error-correcting codes, low-density 
parity-check (LDPC) codes. Since BPA can be implemented with 
hardware, the BPA-SAT solver can be accelerated by hardware. 
Furthermore, the experimental results show that the time 
complexity of the BPA-SAT does not increase with the size of 
SAT problems. Therefore, the speed solver does not degrade 
dramatically as the size of the CNF increases. The main issue, 
completeness, of this algorithm is also investigated. The 
completeness decreases significantly as the size of the CNF 
increases. The experimental results and our estimation show that 
for the instants that the BPA-SAT can solve, BPA-SAT can 
achieve 30× to 44k× speedup compared to a state-of-art SAT 
solver, MiniSat. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] Wagner, I., Bertacco V., Post-Silicon and Runtime 
Verification for Modern Processors, Springer (December 3, 
2010) 
[2] Cook, S. A., “The Complexity of Theorem-Proving 
Procedures,” Proceedings of the third annual ACM 
symposium on Theory of computing, pp.151-158, 1971 
[3] Russell, S., and Norvig, P., Artificial Intelligence: A Modern 
Approach, Prentice Hall; 3 edition (December 11, 2009) 
[4] Gallager, R. G., Low Density Parity Check Codes.   
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963. 
[5] Een, N., Sörensson N., An extensible sat-solver. In SAT,  
pp.502–518, 2003 
[6] MacKay, D. J. C.,  and Neal, R. M., “Near Shannon Limit 
Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes,” 
Electronics Letters, 1996 
[7] Skliarova, I., and de Brito Ferrari, A. "Reconfigurable 
hardware SAT solvers: a survey of systems," Computers, 
IEEE Transactions on , vol.53, no.11, pp. 1449- 1461, Nov. 
2004 
[8] Moon, T. K., Error Correction Coding: Mathematical 
Methods and Algorithms, John Wiley & Sons, Jun 6, 2005 - 
800 pages 
[9] Lin, S., and Costello D, J., Error Control Coding: 
Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd, Pearson-Prentice Hall, 
2004 - 1260 pages 
[10] Davis, J.D., Tan, Z., Yu, F., and Zhang, L., "A Practical 
Reconfigurable 
Hardware 
Accelerator 
for 
Boolean 
Satisfiability solvers," Design Automation Conference, 2008. 
DAC 2008. 45th ACM/IEEE , vol., no., pp.780-785, 8-13 
June 2008 
[11] Zhao, Y., Malik, S., Moskewicz, M., and Madigan, C., 
"Accelerating Boolean satisfiability through application 
specific processing," System Synthesis, 2001. Proceedings. 
The 14th International Symposium on , vol., no., pp. 244- 
249, 2001 
[12] SATLIB 
- 
The 
Satisfiability 
Library. 
Available 
http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~hoos/SATLIB/index-ubc.html 
[13] Chen, X., Kang, J., Lin, S., and Akella, V., "Memory System 
Optimization for FPGA-Based Implementation of Quasi-
Cyclic LDPC Codes Decoders," Circuits and Systems I: 
Regular Papers, IEEE Transactions on , vol.58, no.1, pp.98-
111, Jan. 2011
