arXiv:1006.5188v1  [cs.AI]  27 Jun 2010
Feature Construction for
Relational Sequence Learning
Nicola Di Mauro, Teresa M.A. Basile, Stefano Ferilli, and Floriana Esposito
Universit`a degli Studi di Bari, Dipartimento di Informatica, 70125 Bari, Italy

Abstract. We tackle the problem of multi-class relational sequence learn-
ing using relevant patterns discovered from a set of labelled sequences.
To deal with this problem, ﬁrstly each relational sequence is mapped
into a feature vector using the result of a feature construction method.
Since, the eﬃcacy of sequence learning algorithms strongly depends on
the features used to represent the sequences, the second step is to ﬁnd an
optimal subset of the constructed features leading to high classiﬁcation
accuracy. This feature selection task has been solved adopting a wrap-
per approach that uses a stochastic local search algorithm embedding a
na¨ıve Bayes classiﬁer. The performance of the proposed method applied
to a real-world dataset shows an improvement when compared to other
established methods, such as hidden Markov models, Fisher kernels and
conditional random ﬁelds for relational sequences.
Key words: Relational Sequence Learning, Feature Construction/Selection,
Stochastic Local Search, Statistical Relational Learning.
1
Introduction
Sequential reasoning is a fundamental task of intelligence. Indeed, sequential
data may be found in a lot of contexts of the every day life. From a computer
science point of view, sequential data may be found in many applications such
as video understanding, planning, computational biology, user modelling, speech
recognition, etc. The sequences are the simplest form of structured patterns and
diﬀerent methodologies have been proposed to face the problem of sequential
pattern mining, ﬁrstly introduced in [1], with the aim of capturing the existent
maximal frequent sequences in a given database. One of the many problems
investigated concerns assigning labels to sequences of objects. However, some
environments involve very complex components and features. Thus, the classical
existing data mining approaches, that look for patterns in a single data table,
have been extended to the multi-relational data mining approaches that look for
patterns involving multiple tables (relations) from a relational database. This has
led to the exploitation of a more powerful knowledge representation formalism
as ﬁrst-order logic.
Indeed, sequential learning techniques may be classiﬁed by the language they
adopt to describe sequences. On the one hand we ﬁnd algorithms adopting a

2
Nicola Di Mauro, Teresa M.A. Basile, Stefano Ferilli, and Floriana Esposito
propositional language, such as hidden Markov models (HMMs) [2], allowing
both a simple model representation and an eﬃcient algorithm; on the other hand
probabilistic relational systems are able to elegantly handle complex and struc-
tured descriptions where, on the contrary, an atomic representation could make
the problem intractable to propositional sequence learning techniques. The aim
of this paper is to propose a new probabilistic algorithm for relational sequence
learning [3].
A way to tackle the task of learning discriminant functions in relational
learning corresponds to reformulate the problem into an attribute-value form
and then applying a propositional learner [4]. The reformulation process may
be obtained adopting a feature construction method, such as mining frequent
patterns that can then be successfully used as new Boolean features [5–7]. Since,
the eﬃcacy of learning algorithms strongly depends on the features used to rep-
resent the sequences, a feature selection task should be very useful. The aim
of feature selection is to ﬁnd an optimal subset of the input features leading to
high classiﬁcation performance, or, more generally, to carry out the classiﬁcation
task in a optimum way. However, the search for a variable subset is a NP-hard
problem. Therefore, the optimal solution cannot be guaranteed to be acquired
except when performing an exhaustive search in the solution space. The use of
a stochastic local search procedure allows one to obtain good solutions without
having to explore the whole solution space. Algorithms for feature selection can
be divided into two categories: wrapper and ﬁlter methods [8]. When the fea-
ture selection algorithm embeds a classiﬁer and selects subsets of features guided
by their predictive power predicted by the classiﬁer, it is using a wrapper ap-
proach. The ﬁlter approach selects the features adopting a preprocessing step
using heuristics based on the intrinsic characteristic of the data and ignoring the
learner.
In this paper we propose a new algorithm, named Lynx1 for relational se-
quence learning that in the ﬁrst step it adopts a classical feature construction
approach. As we will see in the following, here the features are not considered as
Boolean but we are able to associate a probability to each constructed feature. In
the second step, the system adopts a wrapper feature selection approach, that
uses a stochastic local search (non-exhaustive) procedure, embedding a na¨ıve
Bayes classiﬁer to select an optimal subset of the constructed features. In par-
ticular, the optimal subset of patterns is searched using a Greedy Randomised
Search Procedure (GRASP) and the search is guided by the predictive power of
the selected subset computed using a na¨ıve Bayes approach.
Hence the focus of the paper is on combining probabilistic feature construc-
tion and feature selection for relational sequence learning. The aim is to show
that the proposed approach is comparable to other purposely designed proba-
bilistic approaches for relational sequence learning.
The outline of the paper is as follows. After discussing related work in Sec-
tion 2, we present the Lynx algorithm in Section 3. In particular we will brieﬂy
present the description language, followed by the description of the feature con-
1 LYNX is public available at http://www.di.uniba.it/∼ndm/lynx/.

Feature Construction for Relational Sequence Learning
3
struction and feature selection proposed methods. Before concluding the paper
in Section 5, we experimentally evaluate Lynx on a real-world dataset.
2
Related Work
As already pointed out, the problem of sequential pattern mining is a central one
in a lot of data mining applications and many eﬀorts have been done in order
to propose purposely designed methods to face it. Most of the works have been
restricted to propositional patterns, that is, patterns not involving ﬁrst order
predicates. One of the early domains that highlights the need to describe with
structural information the sequences was the bioinformatics. Thus, the need to
represent many real world domains with structured data sequences became more
unceasing, and consequently many eﬀorts have been done to extend existing
or propose new methods to manage sequential patterns in which ﬁrst order
predicates are involved. Related works may be divided into two categories. In
the ﬁrst category there are work belonging to the Inductive Logic Programming
area [9], that reformulate the initial relational problem into an attribute-value
form, by using frequent patterns as new Boolean features, and then applying
propositional learners. To the second category belong all the systems purposely
designed to tackle the problem of relational sequence analysis falling into the
more speciﬁc Statistical Relational Learning area [10] where probabilistic models
are combined with relational learning.
This work may be correlated to that in [7], where the authors presented one
of the ﬁrst Inductive Logic Programming feature construction method. They
ﬁrstly construct a set of features adopting a declarative language to constraint
the search space and to ﬁnd discriminant features. Then, these features are used
to learn a classiﬁcation model with a propositional learner.
In [11] are presented a logic language, SeqLog, for mining sequences of logical
atoms, and the inductive mining system MineSeqLog, that combines principles
of the level-wise search algorithm with the version space in order to ﬁnd all
patterns that satisfy a constraint by using an optimal reﬁnement operator for
SeqLog. SeqLog is a logic representational framework that adopts two operators
to represent the sequences: one to indicate that an atom is the direct successor
of another and the other to say that an atom occurs somewhere after another.
Furthermore, based on this language, the notion of subsumption, entailment and
a ﬁx point semantic are given.
These work even if may be correlated to our work, they tackle into account
the feature construction problem only. Here, however we combine a feature con-
struction process with a feature selection algorithm maximising the predictive
accuracy of a probabilistic model. Systems very similar to our approach are those
that combine a probabilistic models with a relational description such as logical
hidden Markov models (LoHHMs) [12], Fisher kernels for logical sequences [13],
and relational conditional random ﬁelds [14] that are purposely designed for
relational sequences learning.

4
Nicola Di Mauro, Teresa M.A. Basile, Stefano Ferilli, and Floriana Esposito
In [13] has been proposed an extension of classical Fisher kernels, working
on sequences over ﬂat alphabets, in order to make them able to model logical
sequences, i.e., sequences over an alphabet of logical atoms. Fisher kernels were
developed to combine generative models with kernel methods, and have shown
promising results for the combinations of support vector machines with (logical)
hidden Markov models and Bayesian networks. Successively, in [12] the same
authors proposed an algorithm for selecting LoHMMs from data. HMM [2] are
one of the most popular methods for analysing sequential data, but they can be
exploited to handle sequence of ﬂat/unstructured symbols. The proposed logical
extension [15] overcomes such weakness by handling sequences of structured
symbols by means of a probabilistic ILP framework.
Finally, in [14] an extension of conditional random ﬁelds (CRFs) to logical
sequences has been proposed. In the case of sequence labelling task, CRFs are
a better alternative to HMMs that makes it relatively easy to model arbitrary
dependencies in the input space. CRFs are undirected graphical models that
instead of learning a generative model, such as in HMMs, they learn a discrim-
inative model designed to handle non-independent input features. In [14], the
authors lifted CRFs to the relational case by representing the potential func-
tions as a sum of relational regression trees learnt by a relational regression tree
learner.
3
Lynx: a relational pattern-based classiﬁer
This section ﬁrstly brieﬂy reports the framework for mining (multi-dimensional)
relational sequences introduced in [16] to manage patterns in which more than
one dimension is taken into account. That framework has been used in Lynx due
to its general logic formalism for representing and mining relational sequences.
Over that framework Lynx implements a probabilistic pattern-based classiﬁer. In
particular, after introducing the representation language, the Lynx system along
with its feature construction capability, the adopted pattern-based classiﬁcation
model, and the feature selection approach will be presented.
3.1
The language
As a representation language we used a ﬁrst-order logic that we brieﬂy review.
The ﬁrst-order alphabet consists of a set of constants, a set of variables, a set
of function symbols, and a non-empty set of predicate symbols. Both function
symbols and predicate symbols have a natural number (its arity) assigned to it.
A term is a constant symbol, a variable symbols, or an n-ary function symbol f
applied to n terms t1, t2, . . . , tn.
An atom p(t1, . . . , tn) (or atomic formula) is a predicate symbol p of arity
n applied to n terms ti. Both l and its negation l are said to be literals (resp.
positive and negative literal) whenever l is an atomic formula.
A clause is a formula of the form ∀X1 . . . ∀Xn(L1 ∨. . .∨Li ∨Li+1 ∨. . .∨Lm)
where each Li is a literal and Xj, j = 1, . . . , n, are all the variables occurring in
the literals. The same clause may be written as L1, . . . ←Li, . . . Lm.

Feature Construction for Relational Sequence Learning
5
Clauses, literals and terms are said to be ground whenever they do not contain
variables. A Datalog clause is a clause with no function symbols of non-zero arity;
only variables and constants can be used as predicate arguments.
A substitution θ is deﬁned as a set of bindings {X1 ←a1, . . . , Xn ←an}
where Xi, 1 ≤i ≤n is a variable and ai, 1 ≤i ≤n is a term. A substitution
θ is applicable to an expression e, obtaining the expression eθ, by replacing all
variables Xi with their corresponding terms ai.
Lynx includes the multi-dimensional relational framework, and the corre-
sponding pattern mining algorithm, reported in [16] that here we brieﬂy recall.
A 1-dimensional relational sequence may be deﬁned as an ordered list of
Datalog atoms separated by the operator <: l1 < l2 < · · · < ln.
Considering a sequence as an ordered succession of events for each dimen-
sion, ﬂuents have been used to indicate that an atom is true for a given event.
For the general case of n-dimensional sequences, the operator <i has been in-
troduced to express multi-dimensional relations. Speciﬁcally, (e1 <i e2) denotes
that the event e2 is the successor event of e1 on the dimension i. Hence, A
multi-dimensional relational sequence may be deﬁned as a set of Datalog atoms,
concerning n dimensions, where each event may be related to another event by
means of the <i operators, 1 ≤i ≤n.
In order to represent multi-dimensional relational patterns, the following di-
mensional operators have been introduced. Given a set D of dimensions, ∀i ∈D:
<i (next step on dimension) indicates the direct successor on the dimension i;
✁i (after some steps on dimension) encodes the transitive closure of <i; and ⃝n
i
(exactly after n steps on dimension i) calculates the n-th direct successor.
Hence, a multi-dimensional relational pattern may be deﬁned as a set of Dat-
alog atoms, regarding n dimensions, in which there are non-dimensional atoms
and each event may be related to another event by means of the operators <i,
✁i and ⃝n
i , 1 ≤i ≤n.
The background knowledge B contains the deﬁnitions of the operators ⃝k
i
and ✁i used to prove the dimensional operators appearing in the patterns. Given
S a multi-dimensional relational sequence, in the following we will indicate by
Σ the set of Datalog clauses B ∪U, where U is the set of ground atoms in S. In
order to calculate the frequency of a pattern over a sequence it is important to
deﬁne the concept of sequence subsumption.
Deﬁnition 1 (Subsumption). Given Σ = B ∪U, where U is the set of atoms
in a sequence S, and B is a background knowledge. A pattern P subsumes the
sequence S (P ⊆S), iﬀthere exists an SLDOI-deduction of P from Σ.
An SLDOI-deduction is an SLD-deduction under Object Identity [17]. In the
Object Identity framework, within a clause, terms that are denoted with diﬀerent
symbols must be distinct, i.e. they must represent diﬀerent objects of the domain.
3.2
Feature Construction via pattern mining
The ﬁrst step of the Lynx system corresponds to a feature construction process
obtained by mining frequent patterns from sequences. The algorithm for fre-

6
Nicola Di Mauro, Teresa M.A. Basile, Stefano Ferilli, and Floriana Esposito
quent multi-dimensional relational pattern mining is based on the same idea of
the generic level-wise search method, known in data mining from the Apriori
algorithm [18]. The level-wise algorithm makes a breadth-ﬁrst search in the lat-
tice of patterns ordered by a specialization relation ⪯. The search starts from the
most general patterns, and at each level of the lattice the algorithm generates
candidates by using the lattice structure and then evaluates the frequencies of
the candidates. In the generation phase, some patterns are taken out using the
monotonicity of pattern frequency (if a pattern is not frequent then none of its
specializations is frequent).
The generation of the frequent patterns is based on a top-down approach. The
algorithm starts with the most general patterns. Then, at each step it tries to spe-
cialise all the potential frequent patterns, discarding the non-frequent patterns
and storing the ones whose length is equal to the user speciﬁed input parameter
maxsize. Furthermore, for each new reﬁned pattern, semantically equivalent pat-
terns are detected, by using the θOI-subsumption relation [17], and discarded.
In the specialization phase, the specialization operator under θOI-subsumption
is used. Basically, the operator adds atoms to the pattern.
The background knowledge The algorithm uses a background knowledge
B (a set of Datalog clauses) containing the sequence and a set of constraints,
similar to that deﬁned in SeqLog [11], that must be satisﬁed by the generated
patterns. In particular, some of the constraint included in B are (see [16] for
more details):
– maxsize(M): maximal pattern length;
– minfreq(m): this constraint indicates that the frequency of the patterns must
be larger than m;
– type(p) and mode(p): denote the type and the input/output mode of the
predicate’s arguments p, respectively. They are used to specify a language
bias indicating which predicates can be used in the patterns and to formulate
constraints on the binding of variables;
– negconstraint([p1, p2, . . . , pn]): speciﬁes a constraint that the patterns must
not fulﬁll, i.e. if the clause (p1, p2, . . . , pn) subsumes the pattern then it must
be discarded;
– posconstraint([p1, p2, . . . , pn]): speciﬁes a constraint that the patterns must
fulﬁll. It discards all the patterns that are not subsumed by the clause
(p1, p2, . . . , pn);
– atmostone([p1, p2, . . . , pn]): this constraint discards all the patterns that
make true more than one predicate among p1, p2, . . . , pn;
– key([p1, p2, . . . , pn]): it is optional and speciﬁes that each pattern must have
one of the predicates p1, p2, . . . pn as a starting literal.
Frequency, Support and Conﬁdence Given a set of relational sequences D
deﬁned over a set of classes C, then the frequency of a pattern p, freq(p, D), corre-
sponds to the number of sequences s ∈D such that p subsumes s. The support of

Feature Construction for Relational Sequence Learning
7
a pattern p with respect to a class c ∈C, suppc(p, D) corresponds to the number
of sequences s ∈D whose class label is c. Finally, the conﬁdence of a pattern p
with respect to a class c ∈C is deﬁned as confc(p, D) = suppc(p, D)/freq(p, D).
The reﬁnement step The reﬁnement of patterns is obtained by using a re-
ﬁnement operator ρ that maps each pattern to a set of specialisations of the
pattern, i.e. ρ(p) ⊂{p′|p ⪯p′} where p ⪯p′ means that p is more general of p′
or that p subsumes p′. In particular, given the set D of dimensions, the set F
of ﬂuent atoms, the set P of non-ﬂuent atoms, for each i ∈D, the reﬁnement
operator for specialising the patterns is deﬁned as follows:
adding a non-dimensional atom
– the pattern S is specialised by adding a non-dimensional atom;
adding a dimensional atom
– the pattern S is specialised by adding the dimensional atom (x <i y);
– the pattern S is specialised by adding the dimensional atom (x ✁i y);
– the pattern S is specialised by adding the dimensional atom (x ⃝n
i y).
The dimensional atoms are added if and only if there exists a ﬂuent atom
referring to its starting event. The length of a pattern P is equal to the number
of non-dimensional atoms in P.
For each specialisation level, before to start the next reﬁnement step, Lynx
records all the obtained patterns. Hence, it could happens to have in the ﬁnal
set a pattern p that subsumes a lot of other patterns in the same set. However,
the subsumed patterns may have a diﬀerent support, contributing in diﬀerent
way to the classiﬁcation model.
3.3
Pattern-based Classiﬁcation
After having identiﬁed the set of frequent patterns, now the task is how to use
them as features in order to correctly classify unseen sequences. Let X be the
input space of relational sequences, and let Y = {1, 2, . . ., Q} denote the ﬁnite
set of possible class labels. Given a training set D = {(Xi, Yi)|1 ≤i ≤m}, where
Xi ∈X is a single relational sequence and Yi ∈Y is the label associated to Xi,
the goal is to learn a function h : X →Y from D that predicts the label for each
unseen instance.
Let P, with |P| = d, be the set of constructed features obtained in the ﬁrst
step of the Lynx system (the patterns mined from D). For each sequence Xk ∈X
we can build a d-component vector-valued x = (x1, x2, . . . , xd) random variable
where each xi ∈x is 1 if the pattern pi ∈P subsumes the sequence xk, and 0
otherwise.
Using the Bayes’ theorem, if p(Yj) describes the prior probability of the class
Yj, then the posterior probability p(Yj|x) can be computed from p(x|Yj) by
p(Yj|x) =
p(x|Yj)p(Yj)
PQ
i=1 p(x|Yi)p(Yi)
.
(1)

8
Nicola Di Mauro, Teresa M.A. Basile, Stefano Ferilli, and Floriana Esposito
Given a set of discriminant functions gi(x), i = 1, . . . , Q, a classiﬁer is said
to assign the vector x to the class Yj if gj(x) > gi(x) for all j ̸= i. Taking
gi(x) = P(Yi|x), the maximum discriminant function corresponds to the maxi-
mum a posteriori (MAP) probability. For minimum error rate classiﬁcation, the
following discriminant function will be used
gi(x) = ln p(x|Yi) + ln P(Yi).
(2)
Here, we are considering a multi-class classiﬁcation problem involving discrete
features, multi-class problem in which the components of the vector x are binary-
valued and conditionally independent. In particular, let the component of the
vector x = (x1, . . . , xd) be binary valued (0 or 1). We deﬁne
pij = Prob(xi = 1|Yj) i=1,...,d
j=1,...,Q
with the components of x being statistically independent for all xi ∈x. In this
model each feature xi gives us a yes/no answer about the pattern pi. However,
if pik > pit we expect the i-th pattern to subsume a sequence more frequently
when its class is Yk than when it is Yt. The factors pij can be estimated from
the training examples as frequency counts, as follows
pij = Prob(xi = 1|Yj)
= supportYj(pi) i=1,...,d
j=1,...,Q
.
In this way, the constructed features pi may be viewed as probabilistic features
expressing the relevance for the pattern pi in determining the classiﬁcation Yj.
By assuming conditional independence we can write P(x|Yi) as a product of
the probabilities of the components of x. Given this assumption, a particularly
convenient way of writing the class-conditional probabilities is as follows:
P(x|Yj) =
d
Y
i=1
(pij)xi(1 −pij)1−xi
(3)
Hence, the Equation 2 yields the discriminant function
gj(x) = ln p(x|Yj) + ln p(Yj) =
ln
d
Y
i=1
(pij)xi(1 −pij)1−xi + ln p(Yj) =
d
X
i=1
ln
 (pij)xi(1 −pij)1−xi
+ ln p(Yj) =
d
X
i=1
xi ln
pij
1 −pij
+
d
X
i=1
ln(1 −pij) + ln p(Yj)
(4)

Feature Construction for Relational Sequence Learning
9
The factor corresponding to the prior probability for the class Yj can be esti-
mated from the training set as
p(Yi) = |{(X, Y ) ∈D s.t. Y = Yi}|
|D|
, 1 ≤i ≤Q.
The minimum probability of error is achieved by the following decision rule:
decide Yk if gk(x) ≥gj(x) for all j and k, where gi(·) is deﬁned as in Equation 4.
Let we note that this discriminant function is linear in the xi and thus we can
write
gj(x) =
d
X
i=1
αixi + β0,
(5)
where αi = ln(pij/(1 −pij)), and β0 = Pd
i=1 ln(1 −pij) + ln p(Yj). Recall that
we decide Yi if gi(x) ≥gk(x) for all i. The magnitude of the weight αi in gj(x)
indicates the relevance of a subsumption for the pattern pi in determining the
classiﬁcation Yj. This is the probabilistic characteristic of the features obtained
in the feature construction phase, opposed to the Boolean feature.
3.4
Feature Selection with stochastic local search
After having constructed a set of features, and presented a method to use those
features to classify unseen sequences, now the problem is how to ﬁnd an optimal
subset of these features that optimise the prediction accuracy. The optimisation
problem of selecting a subset of features (patterns) with a superior classiﬁcation
performance may be formulated as follows. Let P be the constructed original set
of patterns, and let f : 2|P| →R a function scoring a selected subset X ⊆P.
The problem of feature selection is to ﬁnd a subset b
X ⊆P such that
f( b
X) = max
Z⊆P f(Z).
An exhaustive approach to this problem would require examining all 2|P| possible
subsets of the feature set P, making it impractical for even low values of |P|.
The use of a stochastic local search procedure allows us to obtain good solutions
without having to explore the whole solution space.
Given a subset P ⊆P, for each sequence Xj ∈X we let the classiﬁer ﬁnds
the MAP hypothesis adopting the discriminant function reported in Eq. 2:
bhP (Xj) = arg max
i
gi(xj),
(6)
where xj is the feature based representation of the sequence Xj obtained using
the patterns P. Hence the initial optimisation problem corresponds to minimise
the expectation
E[1bhP (Xi)̸=Yi]

10
Nicola Di Mauro, Teresa M.A. Basile, Stefano Ferilli, and Floriana Esposito
where 1bhP (Xi)̸=Yi is the characteristic function of the training example Xi, de-
ﬁned as
1bhP (Xi)̸=Yi =

1 if bhP (Xi) ̸= Yi
0 otherwise
Finally, given D the training set with |D| = m and P a set of features
(patterns), the number of classiﬁcation errors made by the Bayesian model is
errD(P) = mE[1bhP (Xi)̸=Yi].
(7)
GRASPFS Consider a combinatorial optimisation problem, where one is given
a discrete set X of solutions and an objective function f : X →R to be min-
imised and seeks a solution x∗∈X such that ∀x ∈X : f(x∗) ≤f(x). A
method to ﬁnd high-quality solutions for a combinatorial problem is a two steps
approach consisting of a greedy construction phase followed by a perturbative
local search [19]. The greedy construction method starts the process from an
empty candidate solution and at each construction step adds the best ranked
component according to a heuristic selection function. Then, a perturbative local
search algorithm, searching a local neighborhood, is used to improve the candi-
date solution thus obtained. Advantages of this search method are the much
better solution quality and fewer perturbative improvement steps to reach the
local optimum.
Greedy Randomised Adaptive Search Procedures (GRASP) [20] solve the
problem of the limited number of diﬀerent candidate solutions generated by a
greedy construction search method by randomising the construction method.
GRASP is an iterative process combining at each iteration a construction and
a local search phase. In the construction phase a feasible solution is built, and
then its neighbourhood is explored by the local search.
Algorithm 1 reports the GRASPFS procedure included in the Lynx system
to perform the feature selection task. In each iteration, it computes a solution
S ∈S by using a randomised constructive search procedure and then applies a
local search procedure to S yielding an improved solution. The main procedure
is made up of two components: a constructive phase and a local search phase.
The constructive search algorithm used in GRASPFS iteratively adds a so-
lution component by randomly selecting it, according to a uniform distribution,
from a set, named restricted candidate list (RCL), of highly ranked solution
components with respect to a greedy function g : S →R. The probabilistic
component of GRASPFS is characterised by randomly choosing one of the best
candidates in the RCL. In our case the greedy function g corresponds to the er-
ror function errD(P) previously reported in Eq. 7. In particular, given errD(P),
the heuristic function, and S, the set of feasible solutions,
s = min{errD(S)|S ∈S}
and
s = max{errD(S)|S ∈S}

Feature Construction for Relational Sequence Learning
11
Algorithm 1 GRASPFS
Input: D: the training set; P: a set of patterns (features); maxiter: maximum number
of iterations; errD(P): the evaluation function (see Eq. 7)
Output: solution bS ⊆P
bS = ∅, errD(bS) = +∞
iter = 0
while iter < maxiter do
α = rand(0,1)
/* construction */
S = ∅; i = 0
while i < n do
S = {S′|S′ = add(S, A)}
s = max{errD(T )|T ∈S}
s = min{errD(T )|T ∈S}
RCL = {S′ ∈S|errD(S′) ≤s + α(s −s)}
select the new S, at random, from RCL
i ←i + 1
/* local search */
N = {S′ ∈neigh(S)|errD(S′) < errD(S)}
while N ̸= ∅do
select S ∈N
N ←{S′ ∈neigh(S)|errD(S′) < errD(S)}
if errD(S) < errD(bS) then
bS = S
iter = iter + 1
return bS

12
Nicola Di Mauro, Teresa M.A. Basile, Stefano Ferilli, and Floriana Esposito
are computed. Then the RCL is deﬁned by including in it all the components S
such that
errD(S) ≥s + α(s −s).
The parameter α controls the amounts of greediness and randomness. A value
α = 1 corresponds to a greedy construction procedure, while α = 0 produces
a random construction. As reported in [21], GRASP with a ﬁxed nonzero RCL
parameter α is not asymptotically convergent to a global optimum. The solution
to make the algorithm asymptotically globally convergent, could be to randomly
select the parameter value from the continuous interval [0, 1] at the beginning of
each iteration and using this value during the entire iteration, as we implemented
in GRASPFS. Hence, starting from the empty set, in the ﬁrst iteration all the
subsets containing exactly one pattern are considered and the best is selected for
further specialisation. At the iteration i, the working set of patterns S is reﬁned
by trying to add a pattern belonging to P \ S.
To improve the solution generated by the construction phase, a local search is
used. It works by iteratively replacing the current solution with a better solution
taken from the neighbourhood of the current solution while there is a better
solution in the neighbourhood. In order to build the neighbourhood of a solution
S, neigh(S), the following operators have been used. Given P the set of patterns,
and S = {p1, p2, . . . , pt} ⊆P a solution:
add: S →S ∪{pi} where pi ∈P \ S;
remove: S →S \ {pi} ∪{pk} where pi ∈S and pk ∈P \ S.
In particular, given a solution S ∈S, the elements of the neighborhood
neigh(S) of S are those solutions that can be obtained by applying an elementary
modiﬁcation (add or remove) to S. Local search starts from an initial solution
S0 ∈S and iteratively generates a series of improving solutions S1, S2, . . .. At
the k-th iteration, neigh(Sk) is searched for an improving solution Sk+1 such
that errD(Sk+1) < errD(Sk). If such a solution is found, it is made the current
solution. Otherwise, the search ends with Sk as a local optimum.
4
Experiments
Experiments have been conducted on protein fold classiﬁcation, an important
problem in biology since the functions of proteins depend on how they fold up.
The dataset, already used in [13, 12, 14] is made up of logical sequences of the
secondary structure of protein domains. The task is to predict one of the ﬁve
most populated SCOP folds of alpha and beta proteins (a/b): TIM beta/alpha-
barrel (c1), NAD(P)-binding Rossmann-fold domains (c2), Ribosomal protein L4
(c23), Cysteine hydrolase (c37), and Phosphotyrosine protein phosphatases I-like
(c55). The class of a/b proteins consists of proteins with mainly parallel beta
sheets (beta-alpha-beta units). Overall, the class distribution is 721 sequences
for the class c1, 360 for c2, 274 for c23, 441 for c37 and 290 for c55.

Feature Construction for Relational Sequence Learning
13
Conf.
Lynx
Folds
Mean
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0.95
w/o GRASPFS 0.84 0.88 0.83 0.83 0.85 0.76 0.85 0.81 0.82 0.80
0.826
w GRASPFS
0.88 0.92 0.88 0.88 0.89 0.84 0.93 0,87 0.90 0.93 0.878
1.0
w/o GRASPFS 0.89 0.94 0.84 0.92 0.94 0.88 0.91 0.89 0.88 0.87
0.896
w GRASPFS
0.94 0.97 0.93 0.95 0.95 0.93 0.93 0.97 0.90 0.94 0.942
Table 1. Cross-validated accuracy of Lynx with and without feature selection on two
values for the conﬁdence.
As in [14], we used a round robin approach [22], treating each pair of classes
as a separate classiﬁcation problem, and the overall classiﬁcation of an example
instance is the majority vote among all pairwise classiﬁcation problems.
Table 1 reports the experimental results of a 10-fold cross-validated accuracy
of Lynx. Two experiments have been conducted, one with a conﬁdence level
equal to 0.95 and the other with a conﬁdence level of 1.0. In particular, given
the training data D, we imposed that confc(p, D) = 0.95 (resp. confc(p, D) = 1).
For each experiment, Lynx has been applied on the same data with and without
feature selection. In particular, we applied the classiﬁcation on the test instances
without applying GRASPFS in order to have a baseline accuracy value. Indeed, as
we can see, the accuracy grows when GRASPFS optimises the feature set, proving
the validity of the method adopted for the feature selection task. Furthermore,
the accuracy level grows up when we mine patterns with a conﬁdence level equal
to 1.0 corresponding to save jumping emerging patterns2 only. This proves that
jumping patterns have a discriminative power greater than emerging patterns3
(when the conﬁdence level is equal to 0.95).
As as second experiment we compared Lynx on the same data to other statisti-
cal relational learning systems, whose cross-validated accuracies are summarised
in Table 2. In particular, LoHHMs [12] were able to achieve a predictive accuracy
of 75%, Fisher kernels [13] achieved an accuracy of about 84%, TildeCRF [14]
reaches an accuracy value of 92.96%, while Lynx obtains an accuracy of 94.15%.
Hence, we can conclude that Lynx performs better than established methods on
real-world data.
System
Accuracy
LoHMMs [12]
75%
Fisher kernels [13]
84%
TildeCRF [14]
92.96%
Lynx
94.15%
Table 2. Cross-validated accuracy of LoHHMs, Fisher kernels, TildeCRF and Lynx
2 A jumping emerging pattern is a pattern with non-zero support on a class an a zero
support on all the other classes, i.e. with a conﬁdence equal to 1.
3 An emerging pattern is a pattern with a grow rate greater that 1.

14
Nicola Di Mauro, Teresa M.A. Basile, Stefano Ferilli, and Floriana Esposito
5
Conclusions
In this paper we considered the problem of multi-class relational sequence learn-
ing using relevant patterns discovered from a set of labelled sequences. We ﬁrstly
applied a feature construction method in order to map each relational sequence
into a feature vector. Then, a feature selection algorithm to ﬁnd an optimal sub-
set of the constructed features leading to high classiﬁcation accuracy has been
applied. The feature selection task has been solved adopting a wrapper approach
that uses a stochastic local search algorithm embedding a na¨ıve Bayes classiﬁer.
The performance of the proposed method applied to a real-world dataset shows
an improvement when compared to other established methods.
