arXiv:2101.01676v1  [cs.LO]  5 Jan 2021
Dynamic Preference Logic meets Iterated Belief
Change: Representation Results and Postulates
Characterization
Marlo Souzaa,1, Renata Vieirab, ´Alvaro Moreirac
aInstitute of Mathematics and Statistics, Federal University of Bahia - UFBA
Av. Adhemar de Barros, S/N, Ondina - Salvador-BA, Brazil
bFaculty of Informatics, Pontiﬁcal Catholic University of Rio Grande do Sul - PUCRS
Av. Ipiranga, 6681 - Porto Alegre-RS, Brazil
cInstitute of Informatics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul- UFRGS
Av. Bento Gon¸calves, 9500 - Porto Alegre-RS, Brazil
Abstract
AGM’s belief revision is one of the main paradigms in the study of belief change
operations. Recently, several logics for belief and information change have been
proposed in the literature and used to encode belief change operations in rich and
expressive semantic frameworks. While the connections of AGM-like operations
and their encoding in dynamic doxastic logics have been studied before by the
work of Segerberg, most works on the area of Dynamic Epistemic Logics (DEL)
have not, to our knowledge, attempted to use those logics as tools to investigate
mathematical properties of belief change operators. This work investigates how
Dynamic Preference Logic, a logic in the DEL family, can be used to study
properties of dynamic belief change operators, focusing on well-known postulates
of iterated belief change.
Keywords:
Dynamic Epistemic Logic, Dynamic Preference Logic, Belief
Revision
1. Introduction
Belief Change is the multidisciplinary area that studies how a doxastic agent
comes to change her mind after acquiring new information. The most inﬂuential
approach to Belief Change in the literature is the AGM paradigm [1].
˚Corresponding author

0List of Abbreviations: DEL - Dynamic Epstemic Logic, DPL - Dynamic Preference Logic,
SOS- System of Spheres, OCF - Ordinal Conditional Function, m.e. - modally equivalent,
PDL - Propositional Dynamic Logic, DDL - Dynamic Doxastic Logic.
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Received: date / Accepted: date

AGM deﬁnes belief change operations by structural constraints on how the
beliefs of an agent should change. However, it has been argued in the litera-
ture, that belief change operations should be deﬁned by means of changes in
the agent’s epistemic state - understood as more than the currently held (un-
conditional) beliefs but including also the agent’s dispositions to believe [2, 3].
Aiming to extend the AGM framework to account for this idea, several works
have established what became known as Iterated Belief Change.
While the rational constraints for changes in an agent’s mental attitudes
have been well-investigated in areas such as Epistemology and Logic, e.g., [1, 4],
the integration of belief change within the logics of beliefs and knowledge is
a somewhat recent development. The ﬁrst of such attempts was proposed by
Segerberg [5, 6] with his Dynamic Doxastic Logic (DDL).
This shift from the extra-logical characterisation of belief change to its in-
tegration within a representation language has important expressiveness con-
sequences. It also allows for the exploration of established results from Modal
Logic to construct applications of the AGM belief change theory.
The work of
Segerberg, Lindstr¨om, and Rabinowicz on DDL [5, 7], for example, show that
the dynamics of introspective and higher-order beliefs poses problems to the
AGM framework as they are not compatible with the AGM postulates. Their
analysis of the diﬀerence between reasoning about the state in which beliefs are
held (the point of evaluation) and reasoning about the state in which certain
things are believed (the point of reference) corresponds directly to the analy-
sis of the Ramsey Conditional Test by Baltag and Smets [8] in the context of
Dynamic Epistemic Logic.
Such integration has also proven to be fruitful in
the area of Interactive Epistemology. Reny [9], for example, shows that if the
agent is allowed to revise her beliefs, backward induction is not supported by the
common belief of rationality. Further, Board [10] shows that the framework of
extensive-form epistemic games extended with belief change is a rich framework
for unifying diﬀerent competing notions in the area.
As such, it is clear that incorporating belief change within epistemic and
doxastic logics may provide useful theoretical insights on the phenomena related
to belief dynamics, as the fact that the variety of doxastic attitudes may give
rise to a variety of belief change operations satisfying their formal properties.
However, the investigation of the mathematical properties satisﬁed by these
belief change operators is rarely pursued by these works.
Recently, Girard [11, 12] proposes Dynamic Preference Logic (DPL) to study
generalisations of belief revision a la AGM [11, 12]. Some works have integrated
well-known belief change operators within this logic [11, 13, 14, 15] and have
used them to study the dynamic behaviour of attitudes such as Preferences,
Beliefs, and Intentions. Often, it is unclear whether these dynamic logics can
be used to express the desirable properties of the belief change operators they
study.
Souza et al. [16] have demonstrated that belief change postulates can be
encoded within DPL, showing that any belief change operator satisfying these
postulates induce the validity of some axioms in their corresponding dynamic
logic. This result allows the use of DPL as a language to reason about classes
2

of Belief Change operators. However, the authors were not able to completely
characterise the postulates within DPL, i.e., to provide axioms in the dynamic
logic that guarantee the satisfaction of such postulates by the corresponding
belief change operator.
In this work, we study the relationship between the iterated belief change
postulates satisﬁed by belief change operators and the axioms valid in DPL
using these operators. We provide generalisations of some known iterated belief
change postulates to the context of relational preference models and provide
representations of these postulates within DPL, which completely characterise
them.
The representation results obtained in our work highlight which relation-
changing operators over a given class of preference models can be considered to
provide the semantics of the logic, in a similar sense as to how frame properties
can be deﬁned by means of modal axioms for relational semantics.
We point out that in this work, we choose to employ our preference mod-
els as opposed to Grove’s Systems of Spheres to study belief and its changes.
The reason for this is that, ﬁrstly, preference-like models are more general
structures and have been extensively studied as models for non-monotonic rea-
soning, conditional logics, and mental attitudes, as variant notions of belief
[17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 8]. By employing these models to study belief change opera-
tors, we may generalise our results and the insights obtained with our study to
change operations for other mental attitudes and diverse dynamic phenomena.
The following are the main contributions of our work: (i) Theorem 52, which
proves that we can combine the axiomatisations obtained for each postulate
satisﬁed by a class of operators, resulting in a sound axiomatisation of the logic
induced by this class of operators, and (ii) the representation results for the
iterated belief change postulates provided in Propositions 26, 30, 33, 36, 39, 43,
45, and 47.
Theorem 52 also establishes a method for deriving axiomatizations of dy-
namic operators in DPL. Our method is diﬀerent from the ones proposed by
Van Benthem and Liu [22], and by Aucher [23], which are based on Propositional
Dynamic Logic without iteration. It uses the extensively studied postulates from
Belief Change to derive an axiomatisation of the logic with a given operation.
As such, our method applies to a wider class of dynamic belief change opera-
tors, including those that cannot be encoded using Propositional Dynamic Logic
programs, e.g., Ramachandram et al.’s [24] Lexicographic Contraction.
This work is an extended version of the work presented at the 8th Brazilian
Conference on Intelligent Systems - BRACIS 2019 [25] and includes several
developments that resulted from questions left open in our original work, as
well as those from discussions during the event. As the main new developments
not present in the BRACIS paper we list:
• the correction of the generalised postulates pDP1aq, pDP1bq, pDP2aq, and
pDP2bq to account for the changes in the strict part ă of the preference
relation;
• the correction of the generalised postulate pRec1q to exclude unwanted links
3

between ␣ϕ and ϕ worlds, consistent with Nayak et al.’s [26] original pRecq
postulate, in Deﬁnitions 25, 29 and 38;
• the extension of our analysis to postulates for iterated belief contraction,
namely Chopra et al.’s [27] pCR1q - pCR4q and Ramachandran et al.’s [24]
pLCq, in Propositions 26, 30, 43, 45 and 47;
• an extended presentation and discussion of DPL and the results related
to this logic which are important to our characterisation and discussions,
in Section 3;
• a better formalisation of the semantics of DPL, in Deﬁnition 17, which
allows us to interpret the representation results in Section 4 as constraints
on the class of models used to interpret the language;
• generalisations of all results showing that the representation results can
be used to deﬁne satisfaction of the analysed postulates within any class
of preference models, in Section 4;
• the proof that the original postulates cannot be represented within DPL,
exempliﬁed by Fact 23 which can be restated for all the other postulates
studied in this work;
• a more general soundness result for the resulting axiomatisation, in Theo-
rem 52, showing a stronger relationship between proof systems and models
for the logic.
This work is structured as follows: in Section 2, we discuss AGM belief
change and the results and postulates in the literature of dynamic and iterated
belief change; in Section 3, we introduce DPL, a logic in the tradition of Dynamic
Epistemic Logic recently applied to study belief change; in Section 4 we present
our main results: we investigate the relationship between the iterated belief
change postulates satisﬁed by belief change operators and the axioms valid in
DPL, as well as providing generalisations of some postulates of belief change for
the context of relational preference models. In Section 5, we discuss the related
work, and ﬁnally, in Section 6, we present our ﬁnal considerations. Proofs of
the main results in this work can be found in the Appendix.
2. Preliminaries
Let us consider a logic L “ xL, Cny where L is the logical language and
Cn : 2L Ñ 2L is a consequence operator. In AGM’s approach, the belief state
of an agent is represented by a belief set, i.e. a consequentially closed set B Ď L,
with B “ CnpBq of L-formulas.
In this framework, a belief change operator is any operation ‹ : 2L ˆL Ñ 2L
that, given a belief set B and some information ϕ, changes the belief set in
some way. AGM investigated three basic belief change operators: expansion,
contraction, and revision. Belief expansion blindly integrates a new piece of
4

information into the agent’s beliefs. Belief contraction removes a currently be-
lieved sentence from the agent’s set of beliefs, with minimal alterations. Finally,
belief revision is the operation of integrating new information into an agent’s
beliefs while maintaining consistency.
Among these basic operations, only expansion can be univocally deﬁned.
The other two operations are deﬁned by a set of rational constraints or postu-
lates, usually referred to as the AGM postulates or the G¨ardenfors postulates.
These postulates deﬁne a class of suitable change operators representing diﬀer-
ent rational ways in which an agent can change her beliefs. Let B Ď L be a
belief set and α, β P L L-formulas. For the revision operation (˚), the authors
introduce the following postulates:
pR1q B ˚ α “ CnpB ˚ αq
pR2q α P B ˚ α
pR3q B ˚ α Ď CnpB Y tαuq
pR4q If ␣α R B, then B ˚ α “ CnpB Y tαuq
pR5q B ˚ α “ CnptKuq iﬀ$ ␣α
pR6q If $ α Ø β then B ˚ α “ B ˚ β
pR7q B ˚ pα ^ βq Ď CnppB ˚ αq Y tβuq
pR8q If ␣β R B ˚ α, then CnppB ˚ αq Y tβuq Ď B ˚ pα ^ βq
Belief expansion, contraction, and revision are interconnected by the pro-
perties known as Levi and Harper identities [1].
While the AGM approach is independent of the supporting logic’s syntax,
it lacks a clear semantic interpretation for its operations. Grove [28] provided
one such interpretation using a possible-world semantics, based on Lewis’ [29]
spheres.
Grove’s model for the operation of belief revision has clariﬁed the
meaning of belief change operations and has become a necessary tool for the
development of new methods and operations in the area, such as the iterated
belief operations we will discuss later.
A Grove system of spheres (SOS) is a pair S “ xW, ďy where W is a set of
models for the logic L and ď Ď W ˆ W satisﬁes the following conditions1: piq
ď is connected, piiq ď is transitive, and piiiq for any S Ď W, if S ‰ H, then
exists x P S minimal in ď in regards to S.
Given a system of spheres S “ xW, ďy, we say that the set of models of a
formula ϕ P L is the set JϕK “ tw P W | w (L ϕu, and for a set of models
Γ Ď W we say the set of minimal models of Γ is:
MinďΓ “ tw P Γ | Ew1 P Γ s.t. w1 ď w ^ w ę w1u
Grove shows that for any belief revision operator ˚ satisfying the AGM pos-
tulates pR1q - pR8q and any belief set B, there is a system of spheres SB “ xW, ďy
such that w P MinďW iﬀw ( B and JB ˚ ϕK “ MinďJϕK.
1Grove also requires the property of Universality that W is a complete class of models for
the logic L.
5

If we take a SOS as representing an agent’s belief state, however, we can
view a revision operation ˚ as an operation that changes a system of spheres
SB “ xW, ďy into a system SB˚ϕ “ xW, ď˚ϕy.
In that case, we can thus
characterise AGM’s revision operators by the pFaithq postulate below [26]:
pFaithq
if JϕK ‰ H, MinďJϕK “ Minď˚ϕW
Similarly, AGM introduce a set of postulates pC1q - pC8q to deﬁne the be-
lief change operation of contraction, which we will omit in this work. More
importantly for us, Grove also shows that for any belief contraction opera-
tor 9´ satisfying the AGM postulates pC1q - pC8q and any belief set B, there
is a system of spheres SB “ xW, ďy such that w P MinďW iﬀw ( B and
JB 9´ϕK “ MinďW Y MinďJ␣ϕK.
As before, if we take a SOS as representing an agent’s belief state, we can
view a contraction operation 9´ as an operation that changes a system of spheres
SB “ xW, ďy into a system SB 9´ϕ “ xW, ď 9´ϕy. In that case, we can characterise
AGM’s contraction operators by the pGRq postulate below:
pGRq Minď 9´ϕW “ MinďW Y MinďJ␣ϕK.
In the following, we will usually denote by ď‹ϕ the resulting relation of
performing a belief change operation, denoted by some operation symbol ‹ such
as ´ or ˚, with input ϕ over a relation ď or, more formally, on a SOS S “ xW, ďy.
While AGM [1] does not commit to a single logic, in this work, we will focus on
propositional classical logic as an object language.
2.1. Iterated Belief Revision
AGM belief change says very little about how to change one agent’s beliefs
repeatedly. In fact, it has been observed that the AGM approach allows some
counter-intuitive behaviour in the iterated case.
One example of such behavior is the following situation [3]: suppose we are
introduced to a lady X who sounds smart and looks rich, so we believe that
X is smart and X is rich. Moreover, since we profess to no prejudice, we also
maintain that X is smart even if found to be poor and, conversely, X is rich even
if found to be not smart. Now, we obtain some evidence that X is not smart,
and we remain convinced that X is rich. Still, it would be strange for us to say,
“If the evidence turns out false, and X turns out smart after all, we would no
longer believe that X is rich”. If we currently believe that X is smart and rich,
then evidence ﬁrst refuting then supporting that X is smart should not change
our opinion about X being rich. Strangely, the AGM postulates do permit such
a change of opinion.
Belief Change is a continuous process in that new information can always
be accommodated into the agent’s epistemic state, and successive pieces of in-
formation must be incorporated in a principled and coherent manner.
This
fact is implicitly recognized by AGM, as evidenced by postulates pR7q and pR8q,
although the authors do not discuss iteration of change explicitly.
To our knowledge, Spohn [2] was one of the ﬁrsts to consider this problem.
Spohn [2] argues for deﬁning belief changes over the agent’s belief state, and
6

not only over the agent’s held beliefs. Further, the result of a change must be
an epistemic state in itself, and this is particularly important, argues the author
if we consider repeated epistemic changes. Otherwise, we could not determine
the resulting state of a successive change from the initial belief state and the
acquired information. To provide an appropriate account for dynamic belief
change, the author proposes his semantic framework of Ordinal Conditional
Functions.
Spohn’s work inﬂuenced several authors, in particular Darwiche and Pearl [3],
who propose the further constraints on AGM’s belief change operators to ac-
count for epistemic consistency across repeated changes. The authors’ proposal
can be thought of as encoding Spohn’s explicitly deﬁned conditional statements
within AGM’s framework and establishes constraints (or postulates) that gov-
ern how the agent’s conditional beliefs are changed. Importantly, the authors
present their postulates in terms of both syntactic structures (sets of formulas)
and semantic structures (Grove’s spheres), which allows us to contrast their pos-
tulates with those works based on the AGM framework and with those based
on OCF. Here, we focus on the semantic characterisation of these postulates,
presented below.
pDP1q If w, w1 P JϕK, then w ď‹ϕ w1 iﬀw ď w1
pDP2q If w, w1 R JϕK, then w ď‹ϕ w1 iﬀw ď w1
pDP3q If w P JϕK and w1 R JϕK, then w ă w1 implies w ă‹ϕ w1
pDP4q If w P JϕK and w1 R JϕK, then w ď w1 implies w ď‹ϕ w1
Nayak et al. [26] argue that the DP postulates are over-permissible, in the
sense that they allow revision operators with undesirable properties, such as
Boutilier’s [30] Natural Revision, which is criticized by Darwiche and Pearl [3]
themselves as having counter-intuitive behaviour.
Then, Nayak et al. [26] propose the operation of Lexicographic Revision,
which can be characterised by the postulates pDP1q, pDP2q, and pRecq below.
The axiom of recalcitrance states that if two pieces of information ϕ and ψ are
consistent with each other, then if we obtain the information ϕ and, later, the
information ψ, there are no grounds to discard ϕ. In terms of changes in the
relation of a SOS, this can be stated as:
pRecq If w P JϕK and w1 R JϕK, then w ă‹ϕ w1.
Deﬁnition 1. Let ď Ď W ˆ W be a total pre-order over W and ϕ a proposi-
tional formula. The lexicographic revision of ď by information ϕ is the relation
ď˚ϕĎ W ˆ W satisfying postulates pDP1q, pDP2q and pRecq.
2.2. Iterated Belief Contraction
While iterated belief revision has been extensively studied, iterated belief
contraction has received far less attention in the literature. AGM [1] show a deep
connection between revision and contraction on the single-shot case, by means
of the Levi and Harper identities, in the sense that these operations are inter-
deﬁnable. It is not clear, however, how this connection can be extended to the
7

iterated belief change. In fact, several works on iterated belief contraction stem
from trying to establish a connection between iterated revision and contraction.
Particularly, Chopra et al. [27] investigating the role of AGM’s recovery
principle [1] for iterated contraction, propose iterated contraction postulates in
the light of Darwich and Pearl’s postulates for iterated revision. The authors
state their postulates in terms of Grove’s SOS as:
pCR1q If w, w1 R JβK then w ď w1 iﬀw ď‹β w1
pCR2q If w, w1 P JβK then w ď w1 iﬀw ď‹β w1
pCR3q If w P J␣ϕK and w1 P JϕK, then w ă w1 implies w ă‹ϕ w1
pCR4q If w P J␣ϕK and w1 P JϕK, then w ď w1 implies w ď‹ϕ w1
Nayak et al. [31] propose several iterated contraction operators and analyse
their properties. Among them, we highlight Lexicographic Contraction, which
the authors describe as a dual form of Nayak et al.’s Lexicographic Revision.
To deﬁne this operator, the authors propose postulate pLCq which changes the
agent’s belief state in a manner such that the plausibility attributed to each
possible world w is determined solely by their relative position according to the
worlds satisfying ϕ (or ␣ϕ), if w satisﬁes ϕ (␣ϕ). This is equivalent to state
that an agent maintains a conditional belief Bpξ | ψq2 if, and only if, this belief
is independent of the agent’s attitude towards ϕ, i.e. she also holds the belief
that Bpξ | ψ ^ ϕq and Bpξ | ψ ^ ␣ϕq.
pLCq Let ξ be a member of tϕ, ␣ϕu and ξ the other. If w ( ξ and w1 ( ξ,
then w ď‹ϕ w1 iﬀthere is a chain w1, ă w2, ¨ ¨ ¨ ă wn of worlds in JξK of
maximal length which ends in w, and there is a chain w1
1, ă w1
2, ¨ ¨ ¨ ă w1
k
of worlds in JξK which ends in w1 and n ď k.
We point out that Lexicographic Contraction, as deﬁned by [31, 32] is a
contraction operation constructed on the basis of their proposed Generalised
Harper Identity (GHI). By its relation with GHI, lexicographic contraction is a
contraction operation based on degrees of plausibility of the possible worlds -
encoded in Grove’s spheres. This is particularly clear in the fact that the ax-
iomatic characterisation of this operation in [24] can only be achieved by means
of the richer framework of degrees of belief. This connection will be important
in deﬁning Lexicographic Contraction for preference models in Section 3. With
the postulate pLCq, the authors deﬁne the operation of lexicographic contraction.
Deﬁnition 2. Let ď Ď W ˆ W be a total pre-order over W and ϕ a propo-
sitional formula. The lexicographic contraction of ď by information ϕ is the
relation ď´ϕĎ W ˆ W satisfying postulates pDP1q, pDP2q and pLCq.
In this work, we explore how the properties (or postulates) discussed in this
section can be encoded inside DPL, i.e. how we can guarantee that a given
2Bpξ | ψq stands for the belief that ψ conditionally entails ξ, also denoted as ψ ñ ξ in the
literature related to non-monotonic reasoning.
8

dynamic operator of the logic satisﬁes one of these postulates. In order to do
this, in the following section we introduce DPL based on the work of Girard [11]
and Souza [33].Lexicographic Revision and Lexicographic Contraction will be
explored in this work as examples to illustrate other application of our results.
3. Dynamic Preference Logic
Preference Logic (or Order Logic, as named by Girard [11]) is a modal logic
complete for the class of transitive and reﬂexive frames. It has been applied to
model a plethora of phenomena in Deontic Logic [21], Logics of Preference [34],
Logics of Belief [8], etc.
Dynamic Preference Logic (DPL) [11] is the result
of “dynamifying” Preference Logic, i.e., extending it with dynamic modalities.
This logic is one example among several Dynamic Epistemic Logics, and it is
particularly interesting for its expressiveness, allowing the study of dynamic
phenomena of attitudes such as Beliefs, Obligations, Preferences etc.
We begin our presentation with the language and semantics of Preference
Logic, which we will later “dynamify”. Let’s introduce the language of Prefer-
ence Logic.
Deﬁnition 3. Let P be a set of propositional letters. We deﬁne the language
LďpPq by the following grammar (where p P P):
ϕ ::“ p | ␣ϕ | ϕ ^ ϕ | Aϕ | rďsϕ | răsϕ
We will often refer to the language LďpPq simply as Lď, by supposing the
set P is ﬁxed. Also, we will denote the language of propositional formulas, i.e.,
the language removing all modal formulas from LďpPq, by L0pPq or simply L0
Deﬁnition 4. A well-founded preference model is a tuple M “ xW, ď, vy where
W is a set of possible worlds, ď is a a reﬂexive, transitive relation over W, s.t
its strict part (ă) is well-founded3, and v : P Ñ 2W a valuation function.
In such a model, the accessibility relation ď represents an ordering of the
possible worlds according to the preferences of a certain agent. As such, given
two possible worlds w, w1 P W, we say that w is at least as preferred as w1 if
w ď w1.
The interpretation of the formulas over these models is deﬁned as usual. The
A modality is a universal modality4 satisﬁed iﬀall worlds in the model satisfy
its argument. The rďs modality is a box modality on the accessibility order ď.
3A relation R Ď W ˆ W is said well-founded if there is no inﬁnite descending chains, i.e.,
for any H ‰ S Ď W , MinďS ‰ H.
4In this work, we understand the worlds as epistemically possible worlds, not metaphysi-
cally possible. While formally this diﬀerence is irrelevant, philosophically it is of importance.
9

The răs modality is the strict variant of rďs. They are interpreted as:
M, w ( p
iﬀ
w P vppq
M, w ( ␣ϕ
iﬀ
M, w * ϕ
M, w ( ϕ ^ ψ
iﬀ
M, w ( ϕ and M, w ( ψ
M, w ( Aϕ
iﬀ

M, w ( rďsϕ
iﬀ

M, w ( răsϕ
iﬀ

As usual, we will refer as Eϕ to the formula ␣A␣ϕ, meaning ‘it is possibly
true that ϕ’, and as xďyϕ (xăyϕ) to the formula ␣rďs␣ϕ (␣răs␣ϕ), meaning
‘in a possible situation at least as (strictly more) preferable as the current one,
ϕ holds,’ as commonly done in modal logic.
For simplicity, in this work, we will refer to well-founded preference models
only as preference models. Notice, however, that in the literature, e.g., [11],
preference models need not be well-founded.
Given a preference model M and a formula ϕ, we use the notation JϕKM,
as also deﬁned for systems of spheres, to denote the set of all the worlds in M
satisfying ϕ, or only JϕK when the model is clear from the context. The notation
MinďX denotes the ‘most preferred worlds in X’ in the model, i.e., the minimal
elements in a set of possible worlds X, according to the (pre-)order ď.
As the concept of most preferred worlds satisfying a given formula ϕ will be
of great use in modelling diﬀerent notions of belief (and diﬀerent belief change
operations) in this logic, we deﬁne a formula encompassing this exact concept:
µϕ ”def ϕ ^ ␣xăyϕ.
It is easy to see that µϕ deﬁnes exactly the set of minimal worlds satisfying
ϕ.
Proposition 5. [13] Let M “ xW, ď, vy be a preference model and ϕ P Lď a
formula. For any w P W, M, w ( µϕ iﬀw P MinďJϕKM.
Notice that Preference Logic is highly expressive. It is well known [35, 11,
13, 33] that we can deﬁne unconditional and conditional preferences, i.e. the
notions of ‘the agent prefers that ϕ’ and ‘in the case of ψ, the agent would
prefer that ϕ’. In the context of Belief Change, we can interpret this preference
as belief and, as such, we can encode in this logic, as previously done by [35, 13],
the notion of conditional belief as
Bpϕ|ψq ”def Apµψ Ñ ϕq
and unconditional belief as
Bpϕq ”def Bpϕ|Jq.
These encodings preserve the usual notion of conditional belief as the “the
most plausible worlds satisfying ϕ also satisfy ψ”.
10

Corollary 6. Let M “ xW, ď, vy be a preference model, w P W be a possible
world, and ϕ, ψ P Lď be preference formulas.
M, w ( Bpψ | ϕq
iﬀ
MinďJϕK Ď JψK
Souza [33] provided the axiomatisation depicted in Figure 1 below for the
logic and showed that it is weak-complete [36] for Preference Logic restricted to
well-founded models.
Figure 1: Axiomatization for Preference Logic
CP
All axioms from Classical Propositional Logic
Kď :
rďspϕ Ñ ψq Ñ prďsϕ Ñ rďsψq
Tď :
rďsϕ Ñ ϕ
4ď :
rďsϕ Ñ rďsrďsϕ
Kă :
răspϕ Ñ ψq Ñ prăsϕ Ñ răsψq
Wă :
răsprăsϕ Ñ ϕq Ñ răsϕ
ăď1:
rďsϕ Ñ răsϕ
ăď2:
răsϕ Ñ răsrďsϕ
ăď3:
răsϕ Ñ rďsrăsϕ
ăď4:
rďsprďsϕ _ ψq ^ răsψ Ñ ϕ _ rďsψ
KA :
Apϕ Ñ ψq Ñ pAϕ Ñ Aψq
TA :
Aϕ Ñ ϕ
4A :
Aϕ Ñ AAϕ
BA :
ϕ Ñ A␣A␣ϕ
A ď:
Aϕ Ñ rďsϕ
pNecessitationq
$ ϕ ñ $ lϕ,
with l P trďs, răs, Au
pModus Ponensq
Γ $ ϕ and Γ $ ϕ Ñ ψ
ñ
Γ $ ψ
3.1. A Logic of Iterated Belief Change
We will now reintroduce some of the belief change operations presented in
Section 2 as transformations of preference models.With this, we will dynamify
Preference Logic by introducing dynamic modalities in the language to represent
the execution of a belief change operation in the agent’s epistemic state.
We start with lexicographic revision of an epistemic state by a formula ϕ,
which consists of making each world satisfying ϕ strictly more preferable than
those not satisfying it, while maintaining the order otherwise.
Deﬁnition 7. [11] Let M “ xW, ď, vy be a preference model and ϕ P L0. We
say the model Mòϕ “ xW, ďòϕ, vy is the result of the lexicographic revision of
M by ϕ, where
w ďòϕ w1 iﬀ
$
’
&
’
%
w ď w1 and w, w1 P JϕK, or
w ď w1 and if w, w1 R JϕK, or
w P JϕK and w1 R JϕK
11

Figure 2: Reduction axioms for the Lexicographic Revision
rò ϕsp
Ø
p
rò ϕs␣ψ
Ø
␣rò ϕsψ
rò ϕspψ ^ ξq
Ø
rò ϕsψ ^ rò ϕsξ
rò ϕsAψ
Ø
Aprò ϕsψq
rò ϕsrďsψ
Ø
ϕ Ñ rďspϕ Ñ rò ϕsψq^
␣ϕ Ñ pApϕ Ñ rò ϕsψq ^ rďsp␣ϕ Ñ rò ϕsψqq
rò ϕsrăsψ
Ø
ϕ Ñ răspϕ Ñ rò ϕsψq^
␣ϕ Ñ pApϕ Ñ rò ϕsψq ^ răsp␣ϕ Ñ rò ϕsψqq
$ ψ
ñ
$ rò ϕsψ
We can now introduce the modality ròϕs in the language of Lď, where ròϕsψ
is read as “after the lexicographic revision by ϕ, ψ holds”.
Deﬁnition 8. We deﬁne the language of Preference Logic extended with Lex-
icographic Revision, denoted by Lďpòq, as the language constituted of all for-
mulas of Lď as well as any formula rò ϕsψ s.t. ϕ P L0 and ψ P Lďpòq. More
yet, let M “ xW, ď, vy be a preference model, w P W and ϕ a formula of L0
M, w ( ròϕsψ
if
Mòϕ, w ( ψ
.
Liu [13] has shown that Preference Logic extended with Lexicographic Revi-
sion is completely axiomatised by the axioms for Preference Logic extended by
the reduction axioms and rules depicted in Figure 2. The authors obtain such
axiomatization using a Propositional Dynamic Logic (PDL) [37] codiﬁcation of
Lexicographic Revision to derive the axioms [22].
A PDL program is a regular expression over some set of symbols representing
basic relations in some interpretation set. Fisher and Laudner [37] introduced
PDL programs in their propositional variation of Pratt’s [38] Dynamic Logic to
represent computer programs. Van Benthem and Liu [22] have used them to
encode belief change operators. For space constraints, we do not include in this
paper a detailed explanation about PDL programs. We refer the reader to [39]
for more details.
As for Lexicographic Revision, we can provide axiomatisations for Prefer-
ence Logic extended with other belief change operations using their codiﬁcation
in PDL. However, since some operations cannot be represented as PDL pro-
grams, this strategy is not viable for all known belief change operations. To
give an example of such an operation, let’s deﬁne Lexicographic Contraction as
a transformation on preference models. Later on, in Section 4, we will provide
a method to derive an axiomatization for Preference Logic extended with Lex-
icographic Contraction that does not relies on PDL encoding of belief change
operators.
To encode Lexicographic Contraction in DPL, we need to be able to encode
the notion of a chain of worlds of a given size i all of which satisfy a formula ϕ,
a notion connected to that of degree of belief, denoted by dgϕpiq:
12

Deﬁnition 9. Let M “ xW, ď, vy be a preference model, ϕ a formula of L0,
and i P N a natural number. We deﬁne the formula dgϕpiq as:
dgϕpiq “
#
ϕ
if i “ 1
ϕ ^ xăy dgϕpi´1q
if i ą 1
The maximal natural number i, such that dgϕpiq is satisﬁed by some world
w in a model M, called the implausibility degree of w in M, is the size of the
maximal chain of ϕ-worlds ending with the world w.
Lemma 10. [33] Let M “ xW, ď, vy be a preference model, ϕ a formula of L0
and w P W. M, w ( dgϕpiq, i ą 1 iﬀthere is a chain of worlds of w1 ă w2 . . . ă
wi, such that, wj P JϕK, for all j “ 1..i, w1 P MinďJϕK, and wi “ w. Also, if
M, w ( µ dgϕpiq, then there is no other chain of ϕ-worlds ending in w of greater
size.
Notice that the operation of lexicographic contraction, as characterised by
Ramachandran et al. [24], is not closed for preference models (see Deﬁnition 2).
The reason for this is that their characterisation assumes the pre-order over the
possible worlds is total. In fact, in the case of preference models, the axioms
pDP1q and pLCq are incompatible, since they may result in loss of transitivity.
As such, we propose the following modiﬁcation for preference models.
pLC1q: Let ξ, χ be members of tϕ, ␣ϕu - not necessarily distinct. If w ( ξ
and w1 ( χ, then w ď‹ϕ w1 iﬀthe maximal length of a chain of ξ-worlds
which ends in w is smaller or equal to the maximal length of a chain of
χ-worlds which ends in w1.
Notice that postulate pLC1q is rather strong compared to the original pLCq
postulate. The reason for this is that pLC1q is an amalgamation of three postu-
lates, namely (LC), and the modiﬁcations of (DP1), (DP2) below.
pDP11q If w, w1 P JϕK, then w ď‹ϕ w1 iﬀthe maximal length of a chain of
ϕ-worlds which ends in w is smaller or equal to the maximal length of a
chain of ϕ-worlds which ends in w1.
pDP21q If w, w1 R JϕK, then w ď‹ϕ w1 iﬀthe maximal length of a chain of
␣ϕ-worlds which ends in w is smaller or equal to the maximal length of a
chain of ␣ϕ-worlds which ends in w1.
From a philosophical point of view, lexicographic contraction is a contrac-
tion operation based on degrees of plausibility of the possible worlds - encoded
in Grove’s spheres.
As such, based on degrees of plausibility alone, pDP11q
and pDP21q (and thus pLC1q) are justiﬁed modiﬁcations for preference models,
since they imply that in the resulting epistemic state comparability between the
worlds is determined by their degree of plausibility.
With postulate pLC1q we can deﬁne a lexicographic contraction operator over
preference models - which coincides with Ramachandran et al.’s [24] on Grove
models.
13

Deﬁnition 11. Let M “ xW, ď, vy be a preference model and ϕ a formula of
L0. We say the model Móϕ “ xW, ďóϕ, vy is the lexicographic contraction of M
by ϕ, where:
w ďóϕ w1 iﬀ
$
’
’
’
&
’
’
’
%
w P JµdgϕpiqK and w1 P JµdgϕpjqK
i ď j, or
w P Jµdg␣ϕpiqK and w1 P Jµdg␣ϕpjqK
i ď j, or
w P JµdgϕpiqK and w1 P Jµdg␣ϕpjqK
i ď j, or
w P Jµdg␣ϕpiqK and w1 P JµdgϕpjqK
i ď j
Again, we can introduce the modality róϕs in the language of Lď, where
róϕsψ is read as “after the lexicographic contraction by ϕ, ψ holds”.
Deﬁnition 12. We deﬁne the language of Preference Logic extended with Lex-
icographic Contraction, denoted by Lďpóq, as the language constituted of all
formulas of Lď as well as any formula ró ϕsψ s.t. ϕ P L0 and ψ P Lďpóq. More
yet, let M “ xW, ď, vy be a preference model, w P W and ϕ a formula of L0
M, w ( róϕsψ
if
Móϕ, w ( ψ
While the axiomatisations provided in the literature for the other belief
change operators were constructed by means of PDL representations of these
operations, this technique cannot be applied to Lexicographic Contraction due
to the simple fact that this operation is not regular.
Fact 13. Lexicographic Contraction cannot be encoded by means of PDL pro-
grams
To provide an axiomatisation for this operation, Souza [33] shows that if we
restrict the logic’s semantics to consider only models with chains of a maximum
ﬁnite size then an axiomatisation can be achieved by means of the PDL repre-
sentation of Lexicographic Contraction. Later in Section 4, we will employ a
new technique, not based in PDL, to derive an axiomatisation for the extended
language, which does not require such a drastic restriction in its semantics.
3.2. A General Notion of Dynamic Operator
We deﬁne a dynamic operation on a preference model as any operation that
takes a preference model and a propositional formula and changes only the
preference relation of the model. Let ModpLďq denote the class of all preference
models for the language Lď, with the syntax given in Deﬁnition 3.
Deﬁnition 14. Let ‹ : ModpLďq ˆ L0 Ñ ModpLďq, we say ‹ is a dynamic
operator on preference models if for any preference model M “ xW, ď, vy and
propositional formula ϕ P L0, ‹pM, ϕq “ xW‹, ď‹, v‹y, with W‹ “ W and
v‹ “ v.
We limited our dynamic operators not to change the set of possible worlds or
valuations. This limitation is justiﬁed by the fact that we are considering belief
changing operators, i.e., mental actions which change the plausibility the agent
14

attributes to each epistemically possible world, not creating any new epistemic
certainty (knowledge) nor having eﬀects on the world.
Given a dynamic operator ‹, we extend the language Lď with formulas r‹ϕsξ.
Deﬁnition 15. Let ‹ be a symbol for dynamic operators. We deﬁne the lan-
guage Lďp‹q as the smallest set containing Lď and all formulas r‹ϕsξ, with
ϕ P L0 and ξ P Lďp‹q.
As for the case of DPL of Lexicographic Revision and DPL of Lexicographic
Contraction (c.f. Deﬁnitions 8 and 12) presented before, the formulas of Lďp‹q
must be interpreted over a preference model and a dynamic operator that de-
scribes the changes in the model.
As such, we will introduce the notion of
dynamic preference model containing these two ingredients.
Deﬁnition 16. A dynamic preference model, or simply a dynamic model, is a
tuple xM, ‹y, where M P ModpLďq is a preference model and ‹ : ModpLďq ˆ
L0 Ñ ModpLďq is a dynamic operator.
In the deﬁnition above, ‹ is used both as a symbol denoting a dynamic
operator, seem as a function, and also as a symbol in the object logic language.
With that, we can deﬁne how formulas in the language Lďp‹q are interpreted.
Deﬁnition 17. Let D “ xM, ‹y be a dynamic model, with M “ xW, ď, vy,
w P W be a possible world, and ξ P Lďp‹q be a dynamic preference formula.
We deﬁne the satisﬁability of ξ by w in D, denoted by D, w ( ξ, as follows:
D, w ( p
if w P vppq
D, w ( ϕ ^ ψ
if D, w ( ϕ and D, w ( ψ
D, w ( ␣ϕ
if D, w * ϕ
D, w ( Aϕ
if, for all w1 P W : D, w1 ( ϕ
D, w ( rďsϕ
if, for all w1 P W s.t. w1 ď w : D, w1 ( ϕ
D, w ( răsϕ
if, for all w1 P W s.t. w1 ă w : D, w1 ( ϕ
D, w ( r‹ϕsψ
if D1, w ( ψ, where D1 “ x‹pM, ϕq, ‹y
As usual, we say ξ is valid in D, denoted by D ( ξ, if for all w P W, D, w ( ξ,
and that ξ is valid, denoted ( ξ, if it is valid for any dynamic preference model
D.
Since in this work we investigate axiomatisations that characterise classes of
dynamic operators, we will need to deﬁne the notion of a formula been valid on
a class of dynamic models. For that, we deﬁne the notion of a class of dynamic
models, which will be used in Section 4, similarly to how classes of frames are
connected to modal axioms in correspondence theory for Modal Logic [36].
Deﬁnition 18. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models and C a
class of dynamic operators closed over M, i.e., for any ϕ P L0, ‹pM, ϕq Ď M for
each ‹ P C. We denote by D “ xM, Cy the class of dynamic models xM, ‹y s.t.
M P M and ‹ P C.
15

If D is a class of dynamic models and ξ P Lďp‹q is a dynamic preference
formula, we will often say ξ is satisﬁable in D if there is some dynamic model
D P D in which ξ is satisﬁable. Similarly, we will say that ξ is valid in D if for
any D P D, D ( ξ.
4. Iterated Belief Change and DPL
In this section, we investigate the relationship between the postulates satis-
ﬁed by iterated belief change operators discussed in Section 2 and the axioms
satisﬁed in DPL using these operators. In other words, given an iterated belief
change postulate P, we investigate which validities are induced in the logic of
Lďp‹q if we consider only classes of models in which the dynamic operators
satisfy postulate P. More yet, we study how to characterise this postulate in
DPL, i.e., which axioms should be introduced in the axiomatization of DPL
that imply that the models of this logic must satisfy P.
We examine Darwiche and Pearl’s pDP1q-pDP4q [3], as well as Nayak et al’s
pRecq [26], for iterated belief revision, and Chopra et al’s pCR1q-pCR4q [27] and
Ramachandran et al’s pLCq [24] for iterated belief contraction. Other postulates
in the literature can be easily encoded in the same way based on our results.
The proofs of the results presented in this section are given in the Appendix.
First, it is easy to see that for any dynamic operator ‹, the extended logic
must satisfy some basic principles.
Proposition 19. The following reduction axioms and rule are valid, for any
propositional symbol p P P, propositional formula ϕ P L0 and formula ξ P Lďp‹q.
r‹ϕsp
Ø
p
r‹ϕspξ1 ^ ξ2q
Ø
r‹ϕsξ1 ^ r‹ϕsξ2
r‹ϕs␣ξ
Ø
␣r‹ϕsξ
r‹ϕsAξ
Ø
Ar‹ϕsξ
$ ξ
ñ
$ r‹ϕsξ
As in Souza’s axiomatisation for DPL [33], we do not require Uniform Sub-
stitution as a rule in our proof systems. This is an important characteristic
of our proof systems, and quite common in dynamic epistemic logics [40]. If
Uniform Substitution was included in the system, it would be possible to derive
$ r‹ϕsξ Ø ξ for any ξ P Lďp‹q and ϕ P L0, i.e., the dynamic modality would be
frivolous. Without Uniform Substitution, r‹ϕsξ Ø ξ can only be derived by the
axioms in Proposition 19 if ξ P L0, i.e., ξ is a propositional formula. This is con-
sistent with the interpretation that our dynamic operators are mental actions
and, thus, do not change the propositional (or ontic) properties of the worlds in
a model.
We wish to investigate which properties are induced in the dynamic logic,
given the postulates satisﬁed by a given dynamic operator ‹. First, we study the
characterisation of iterated belief revision postulates in DPL, then we extend
this study to iterated belief contraction postulates. Further, we show how these
characterisations can used to derive axiomatisations for a logic deﬁned over
classes of models satisfying a set of iterated belief change postulates.
16

4.1. Postulates for Iterated Belief Revision in DPL
First, let us consider the basic postulate deﬁning belief revision operations,
namely the postulate of pFaithq which indicates that the dynamic operation ‹
is an AGM belief revision operator.
Proposition 20. Let C be a class of dynamic operators ‹ satisfying pFaithq
and M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models. The following axiom schema
is valid in xM, Cy, for any propositional formula ϕ P L0.
Eϕ
Ñ
µϕ Ø r‹ϕsµJ
Postulate pFaithq states that after a revision by some information ϕ, the
minimal elements of the agent’s belief state are exactly the most plausible ϕ-
states. As such, the axiom schema in Proposition 20 states that, if a proposition
ϕ is satisﬁable in a model M, for any minimal ϕ-world w in M, it holds that
after change by the dynamic operator ‹, w is a minimal world of the resulting
model, and vice-versa.
We can also show that the axiom schema of Proposition 20 completely char-
acterises the postulate pFaithq in DPL. In the results below, we will often denote
a class of dynamic model xM, t‹uy simply by xM, ‹y.
Proposition 21. Let D “ xM, ‹y be a class of dynamic models. The axiom
schema in Proposition 20 is valid in D, for any propositional formula ϕ P L0
iﬀfor each M “ xW, ď, vy P M, s.t. ‹pM, ϕq “ xW, ď‹ϕ, vy, if JϕK ‰ H, then
MinďJϕK “ Minď‹ϕW, i.e., ‹ satisﬁes pFaithq in M.
While pFaithq is the basic postulate for AGM revision, it does not imply any
constraints on the iterated properties of the operation. To characterise iterated
belief revision in DPL, we will consider the logic characterisation of Darwiche
and Pearl’s pDP1q-pDP4q [3] postulates, as well as Nayak et al.’s pRecq [26].
Postulate DP1. Let’s start with postulate pDP1q, as presented in Section 2.
pDP1q If w, w1 P JϕK, then w ď‹ϕ w1 iﬀw ď w1
It is easy to see that this property implies the following validities in the logic
deﬁned by the operators satisfying it.
Proposition 22. Let C be a class of dynamic operators ‹ satisfying pDP1q and
M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models. The following axiom schemata
is valid in xM, Cy for any ϕ P L0 and ξ P Lďp‹q.
r‹ϕsrďsξ
Ñ
pϕ Ñ rďspϕ Ñ r‹ϕsξqq
r‹ϕsrăsξ
Ñ
pϕ Ñ răspϕ Ñ r‹ϕsξqq
rďsr‹ϕsξ
Ñ
pϕ Ñ r‹ϕsrďspϕ Ñ ξqq
răsr‹ϕsξ
Ñ
pϕ Ñ r‹ϕsrăspϕ Ñ ξqq
Notice that pDP1q establishes a bidirectional relationship between the prefer-
ence relations ď and ď‹ϕ by a double implication. Each side of this implication
is captured in the axiom schemata in Proposition 22, where the ﬁrst axiom
17

states that if there is two ϕ-world w, w1 s.t. w1 ď‹ϕ w, and w1 satisﬁes ξ, then
there is some ϕ-world w2 satisfying r‹ϕsξ and w2 ď w. This ﬁrst axiom of
Proposition 22 generalises the requirement that if w ď‹ϕ w1 then w ď w1 in
pDP1q, while the third axiom states the opposite direction of this relation. The
second and fourth axioms are variations that express the changes in the strict
part ă of the preference relation.
Proposition 22 provides a representation of the postulate pDP1q as a DPL
axiom schemata induced, in the extended logic, by operations ‹ that satisfy
this postulate. However, The logical characterisation of the postulate, i.e., that
if the logic satisﬁes a certain set of axioms, then the dynamic operator must
satisfy pDP1q, as established for pFaithq in Proposition 21, cannot be achieved
in DPL. The reason for this is that the language is not expressive enough to
distinguish every world in the model. As such, there may be worlds in a model
that are “modally equivalent” (m.e.) [36], in the sense that they satisfy exactly
the same formulas, and there is no way to express in the logic any relation that
diﬀerentiates these worlds. As such, it is easy to construct dynamic operators
that are equivalent, in the sense that the logics generated by them are the same.
Fact 23. There are two dynamic operators ‹, ˚ : ModpLďq ˆ L0 Ñ ModpLďq
s.t. for any class of preference models M, s.t. both ‹ and ˚ are closed over M,
and formula ξ P Lďp‹q, ξ is satisﬁable in xM, ‹y iﬀξ is satisﬁable in xM, ˚y,
but ‹ does not satisﬁes pDP1q while ˚ does.
It is easy to see from the proof of Fact 23 (c.f. the Appendix) and from
the axioms presented in Proposition 22 that some dynamic operators may fail
to satisfy pDP1q and yet preserve all conditional beliefs regarding the new in-
formation ϕ. In fact, they satisfy Darwiche and Pearl’s original formulation of
postulate pDP1q based on conditional beliefs [3].
Proposition 24. Let D “ xM, ‹y be a class of dynamic models satisfying the
axiom schemata in Proposition 22. For any propositional formulas ϕ, ψ P L0
s.t. D ( ϕ Ñ ψ and any dynamic preference formula ξ P Lďp‹q, it holds that
D ( r‹ψsBpξ | ϕq Ø Bpr‹ψsξ | ϕq
The reason for this is that the semantic formulation of pDP1q is rooted in the
identities of the worlds in the model, not in the information they hold. More
accurately, pDP1q assumes that for every pair of worlds w, w1 in the model, there
is some proposition ξ that only one of them satisﬁes. As such, Fact 23 points
out that the DP postulates based on Grove’s model need to be generalised to
our models. We then deﬁne the notion of DP1-compliance in a certain class of
models, meaning that a dynamic operator ‹ behaves as to preserve the agent’s
beliefs conditioned to the new information ϕ.
Deﬁnition 25. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models, and let
‹ : ModpLďq ˆ L0 Ñ ModpLďq be a dynamic operator.
We say ‹ is DP1-
compliant in regards to M, or M-DP1-compliant, if, for any preference model
M “ xW, ď, vy P M, any propositional formula ϕ P L0, and any possible worlds
w, w1 P W satisfying ϕ, it holds:
18

pDP1aq if w ď‹ϕ w1(w ă‹ϕ w1) then, for any piece of information ξ P Lďp‹q
s.t. D, w ( r‹ϕsξ, there is some world w2 P JϕK s.t. D, w2 ( r‹ϕsξ and
w2 ď w1(w2 ă w1);
pDP1bq if w ď w1 (w ă w1 ) then, for any piece of information ξ P Lďp‹q
s.t. D, w ( r‹ϕsξ, there is some world w2 P JϕK s.t. D, w2 ( r‹ϕsξ, and
w2 ď‹ϕ w1 (w2 ă‹ϕ w1)
where D “ xM, ‹y. If M “ ModpLďq, we say ‹ is DP1-compliant.
Deﬁnition 25 states that no information contained in the worlds satisfying ϕ
is lost due to a belief change regarding ϕ, similar to what pDP1q tries to encode
for Grove models. With this generalisation, we can characterise DP1-compliance
in DPL.
Proposition 26. Let D “ xM, ‹y be a class of dynamic models. The axioma-
tisation presented in Proposition 22 is valid in D iﬀ‹ is M-DP1-compliant.
In the light of Propositions 24 and 26, it is easy to see that the notion of
M-DP1-compliance is, in fact, an adequate generalization of pDP1q to preference
models, as observed in the Fact below.
Fact 27. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models, ‹ : ModpLďq ˆ
L0 Ñ ModpLďq be a M-DP1-compliant dynamic operator, and D “ xM, ‹y.
For any propositional formulas ϕ, ψ P L0 s.t. D ( ϕ Ñ ψ and any dynamic
preference formula ξ P Lďp‹q, it holds that
D ( r‹ψsBpξ | ϕq Ø Bpr‹ψsξ | ϕq
Notice that for models in which every world has a characteristic formula,
Deﬁnition 25 implies that the dynamic operator ‹ satisﬁes pDP1q. In other words,
if we consider only Grove models and operators closed over Grove models, pDP1aq
and pDP1bq taken together are equivalent to pDP1q.
Fact 28. Let M be a class of preference models s.t.
for any M P M and
any possible world w in M there is a characteristic formula ξw P LďpPq, s.t.
M, w1 ( ξw iﬀw1 “ w and let ‹ : ModpLďq ˆ L0 Ñ ModpLďq be a dynamic
operator closed over M. It holds that ‹ is M-DP1-compliant iﬀfor any M P M,
any propositional formula ϕ and worlds w, w1 P JϕK it holds that w ď w1 iﬀ
w ď‹ϕ w1.
Postulate DP2. Similar results can be achieved for the other postulates, i.e., we
can provide characterisations of the other postulates by means of DPL axioms.
Next, we provide characterisation for DP2.
Deﬁnition 29. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models, and let
‹ : ModpLďq ˆ L0 Ñ ModpLďq be a dynamic operator.
We say ‹ is DP2-
compliant in M, or M-DP2-compliant, if, for any preference model M “ xW, ď
, vy P M, any propositional formula ϕ P L0 and any possible worlds w, w1 P W
not satisfying ϕ, it holds:
19

pDP2aq if w ď‹ϕ w1 (w ă‹ϕ w1) then for any piece of information ξ P Lďp‹q
s.t. D, w ( r‹ϕsξ there is some world w2 R JϕK s.t. D, w2 ( r‹ϕsξ and
w2 ď w1 (w2 ă w1);
pDP2bq if w ď w1 (w ă w1) then for any piece of information ξ P Lďp‹q
s.t. D, w ( r‹ϕsξ there is some world w2 R JϕK s.t. D, w2 ( r‹ϕsξ and
w ď‹ϕ w2 (w ă‹ϕ w2)
where D “ xM, ‹y. If M “ ModpLďq, we say ‹ is DP2-compliant.
As before, Deﬁnition 29 states that no information contained in the worlds
satisfying ␣ϕ is lost due to a belief change regarding ϕ, similar to what pDP2q
encodes for Grove models. It is easy to see that for models without proposition-
ally indiscernible worlds, this condition is equivalent to pDP2q, similar to proven
in Fact 28. More yet, we can characterise the DP2-compliance using DPL.
Proposition 30. Let D “ xM, ‹y be a class of dynamic models. The following
axiom schemata is valid in D for any ϕ P L0 and ξ P Lďp‹q iﬀ‹ is M-DP2-
compliant.
r‹ϕsrďsξ
Ñ
p␣ϕ Ñ rďsp␣ϕ Ñ r‹ϕsξqq
r‹ϕsrăsξ
Ñ
p␣ϕ Ñ răsp␣ϕ Ñ r‹ϕsξqq
rďsr‹ϕsξ
Ñ
p␣ϕ Ñ r‹ϕsrďsp␣ϕ Ñ ξqq
răsr‹ϕsξ
Ñ
p␣ϕ Ñ r‹ϕsrăsp␣ϕ Ñ ξqq
Notice that, given the structural similarities between postulates pDP1q and
pDP2q, the axioms presented in Proposition 30 are similar to those presented in
Proposition 22 and also have similar interpretations.
Similar to Facts 28 and 27, it is easy to see that our generalisation of pDP2q
implies pDP2q for Grove-like models, namely those with characterising formulas,
and preserves of incompatible conditional beliefs.
Fact 31. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models, ‹ : ModpLďq ˆ
L0 Ñ ModpLďq be a M-DP2-compliant dynamic operator, and D “ xM, ‹y.
For any propositional formulas ϕ, ψ P L0 s.t. D ( ϕ Ñ ␣ψ and any dynamic
preference formula ξ P Lďp‹q, it holds that
D ( r‹ψsBpξ | ϕq Ø Bpr‹ψsξ | ϕq
Postulate DP3. Similarly, we can generalise the postulate pDP3q. This postulate
states that no ␣ϕ-world gets promoted after acquiring information that ϕ, or
in other words, that all conditional belief consistent with ϕ is maintained.
Deﬁnition 32. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models, and let ‹ :
ModpLďqˆL0 Ñ ModpLďq be a dynamic operator. We say ‹ is DP3-compliant
in M, or M-DP3-compliant, if for any preference model M “ xW, ď, vy P M,
any propositional formula ϕ P L0, and any possible worlds w, w1 P W, it holds
that:
20

pDP3aq if w P JϕK, w1 R JϕK and w ă w1, then for any information ξ P Lďp‹q
s.t. D, w ( r‹ϕsξ there is some world w2 P JϕK s.t. D, w2 ( r‹ϕsξ and
w2 ă‹ϕ w1.
where D “ xM, ‹y. If M “ ModpLďq, we say ‹ is DP3-compliant.
As before, we can characterise DP3-compliance using DPL.
Proposition 33. Let D “ xM, ‹y be a class of dynamic models. The following
axiom schema is valid in D for any ϕ P L0 and ξ P Lďp‹q iﬀ‹ is M-DP3-
compliant.
r‹ϕsrăspϕ Ñ ξq
Ñ
␣ϕ Ñ răsr‹ϕspϕ Ñ ξq
As for pDP1q and pDP2q, our generalisation of pDP3q does encode the idea
behind the original postulate. This property may be observed in Fact 34, an
interpretation of Darwiche and Pearl’s [3] syntactic form of pDP3q into DPL.
Fact 34. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models, ‹ : ModpLďq ˆ
L0 Ñ ModpLďq be a M-DP3-compliant dynamic operator, and D “ xM, ‹y. For
any propositional formula ϕ P L0 and dynamic preference formula ξ P Lďp‹q, it
holds that
D ( Bpϕ | r‹ϕsξq Ñ r‹ϕsBpϕ | ξq
Postulate DP4. Similarly, we can generalise the postulate pDP4q to the following
condition:
Deﬁnition 35. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models, and let ‹ :
ModpLďqˆL0 Ñ ModpLďq be a dynamic operator. We say ‹ is DP4-compliant
in M, or M-DP4-compliant, if for any preference model M “ xW, ď, vy P M,
any propositional formula ϕ P L0, and any possible worlds w, w1 P W, it holds
that:
pDP4aq if w P JϕK, w1 R JϕK and w ď w1, then for any information ξ P Lďp‹q
s.t. D, w ( r‹sξ there is some world w2 P JϕK s.t. D, w2 ( r‹ϕsξ and
w2 ď‹ϕ w1.
where D “ xM, ‹y. If M “ ModpLďq, we say ‹ is DP4-compliant.
Again, we can characterise DP4-compliance.
Proposition 36. Let D “ xM, ‹y be a class of dynamic models. The following
axiom schemata is valid in D for any ϕ P L0 and ξ P Lďp‹q iﬀ‹ is M-DP4-
compliant.
r‹ϕsrďspϕ Ñ ξq
Ñ
␣ϕ Ñ rďsr‹ϕspϕ Ñ ξq
As before, our generalisation of pDP4q also encodes the idea behind the orig-
inal postulate.
Fact 37. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models, ‹ : ModpLďq ˆ
L0 Ñ ModpLďq be a M-DP4-compliant dynamic operator, and D “ xM, ‹y. For
any propositional formula ϕ P L0 and dynamic preference formula ξ P Lďp‹q, it
holds that
D ( ␣Bp␣ϕ | r‹ϕsξq Ñ ␣r‹ϕsBp␣ϕ | ξq
21

Postulate REC. Below we provide a characterisation in DPL for Nayak et al.’s
[26] Recalcitrance, or pRecq.
Deﬁnition 38. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models, and let
‹ : ModpLďq ˆ L0 Ñ ModpLďq be a dynamic operator. We say ‹ is M-Rec-
compliant, if, for any preference model M “ xW, ď, vy P M, any propositional
formula ϕ P L0, and any possible worlds w, w1 P W, it holds that:
pRec1q if w P JϕK and w1 R JϕK, then w1 ę‹ϕ w and for any information
ξ P Lď s.t. D, w ( r‹ϕsξ there is some world w2 P JϕK s.t. D, w2 ( r‹ϕsξ
and w2 ď‹ϕ w1.
where D “ xM, ‹y. If M “ ModpLďq, we say ‹ is Rec-compliant.
From this encoding, we obtain the following characterisation.
Proposition 39. Let D “ xM, ‹y be a class of dynamic models. The following
axiom schemata is valid in D for any ϕ P L0 and ξ P Lďp‹q iﬀ‹ is M-Rec-
compliant.
r‹ϕsrăsξ
Ñ
p␣ϕ Ñ Apϕ Ñ r‹ϕsξqq
ϕ
Ñ
pr‹ϕsrďsϕq
Similar to Nayak et al. [26]’s pRecq, our pRec1q postulate guarantees the max-
imal preservation of an adopted belief ψ in all conditions that do not contradict
it.
Fact 40. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models, ‹ : ModpLďq ˆ
L0 Ñ ModpLďq be a M-Rec-compliant dynamic operator, and D “ xM, ‹y. For
any propositional formula ϕ P L0, and dynamic preference formula ξ P Lďp‹q,
it holds that
D ( Epϕ ^ r‹ϕsξq Ñ r‹ϕsBpϕ | ξq
4.2. Postulates of Iterated Belief Contraction in DPL
Regarding the postulates for iterated belief contraction, we present DPL
characterisations for Chopra et al.’s [27] pCR1q - pCR4q, and Ramachandran et
al.’s [24] pLCq. Let us begin with the representation of Grove’s [28] characteri-
sation of contraction in DPL, as presented in Section 2.
Proposition 41. Let C be a class of dynamic operators satisfying pGRq and
M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models. The following axiom schema is
valid in xM, CpGRqy, for any propositional formula ϕ P L0 and formula ξ P Lďp‹q.
pµ␣ϕ _ µJq
Ø
r‹ϕsµJ
Notice that Chopra et al.’s [27] pCR1q - pCR4q are variants of Darwiche and
Pearl’s [3]’s pDP1q-pDP4q. In fact, pCR1q is the same postulate as pDP2q and pCR2q
is the same as pDP1q, while pCR3q and pDP3q, and pCR4q and pDP4q are structurally
similar. In fact, we know that pCR3q and pCR4q are dual forms of pDP3q and pDP4q,
respectively [41]. Since DP1- and DP2-compliance have already been deﬁned, we
will only focus on pCR3q and pCR4q. As for pDP4q and pDP4q, our generalisation
of postulates pCR3q and pCR4q also satisfy the original syntactic postulates of
Chopra et al.’s [27]. Since these results are very similar to Fact 34 and Fact 37,
we omit the results about the suitability of our generalised postulates.
22

Contraction Postulate CR3. We can deﬁne the notion of CR3-compliance of a
dynamic operator in regards to a class of preference models based on the notion
of DP3-compliance.
Deﬁnition 42. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models, and let
‹ : ModpLďq ˆ L0 Ñ ModpLďq be a dynamic operator. We say ‹ is M-CR3-
compliant, if, for any preference model M “ xW, ď, vy P M, any propositional
formula ϕ P L0, and any possible worlds w, w1 P W, it holds that:
pCR3aq if w R JϕK, w1 P JϕK and w ă w1, then for any information ξ P Lď
s.t. D, w ( r‹ϕsξ there is some world w2 R JϕK s.t. D, w2 ( r‹ϕsξ and
w2 ă‹ϕ w1
where D “ xM, ‹y. If M “ ModpLďq, we say ‹ is CR3-compliant.
Hence, similarly to DP3-compliance, we can characterise CR3-compliance.
Proposition 43. Let D “ xM, ‹y be a class of dynamic models. The following
axiom schemata is valid in D for any ϕ P L0 and ξ P Lďp‹q iﬀ‹ is M-CR3-
compliant.
r‹ϕsrăsp␣ϕ Ñ ξq
Ñ
ϕ Ñ răsr‹ϕsp␣ϕ Ñ ξq
Contraction Postulate CR4. As pCR4q is similar variation of pDP4q, it is easy to
deﬁne the notion of CR4-compliance.
Deﬁnition 44. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models, and let
‹ : ModpLďq ˆ L0 Ñ ModpLďq be a dynamic operator. We say ‹ is M-CR4-
compliant, if, for any preference model M “ xW, ď, vy P M, any propositional
formula ϕ P L0, and any possible worlds w, w1 P W, it holds that:
pCR4aq if w R JϕK, w1 P JϕK and w ď w1, then for any information ξ P Lď
s.t. D, w ( r‹ϕsξ there is some world w2 R JϕK s.t. D, w2 ( r‹ϕsξ and
w2 ď‹ϕ w1.
where D “ xM, ‹y. If M “ ModpLďq, we say ‹ is CR4-compliant.
Again, it follows that for models without propositionally indiscernible worlds,
this condition is equivalent to pDP4q.
Proposition 45. Let D “ xM, ‹y be a class of dynamic models. The following
axiom schemata is valid in D for any ϕ P L0 and ξ P Lďp‹q iﬀ‹ is M-CR4-
compliant.
r‹ϕsrďsp␣ϕ Ñ ξq
Ñ
ϕ Ñ rďsr‹ϕsp␣ϕ Ñ ξq
Contraction Postulate LC. Finally, we can represent Lexicographic Contraction
in DPL. Notice that pLCq states how the preference relation must be changes
in terms of the maximal chains of worlds in the model that either satisfy ϕ or
satisfy ␣ϕ. As such, we deﬁne the notion of LC-compliance. In Deﬁnition 46
notice that postulate pLC1q is the same postulate proposed in Section 3 with a
slight diﬀerence in presentation to account for the notion of satisfaction of a
formula in a dynamic model D.
23

Deﬁnition 46. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models, and let
‹ : ModpLďq ˆ L0 Ñ ModpLďq be a dynamic operator. We say ‹ is M-LC-
compliant iﬀfor any preference model M “ xW, ď, vy P M, any propositional
formula ϕ P L0 and any possible worlds w, w1 P W, it holds that:
pLC1q Let ξ, χ be members of tϕ, ␣ϕu - not necessarily distinct. If D, w ( ξ
and D, w1 ( χ, then w ď‹ϕ w1 iﬀthe maximal length of a chain of worlds
in JξK which ends in w is smaller or equal than to the maximal length of
a chain of worlds in JχK which ends in w1.
where D “ xM, ‹y. If M “ ModpLďq, we say ‹ is LC-compliant.
We can, then, provide axioms to encode LC-compliance in DPL. Notice that
the axioms below simply state that the result of an LC-compliant operator on
a model order the worlds based on the length of the maximal ϕ and ␣ϕ chains
in the model5, as stated in postulate pLC1q.
Proposition 47. Let D “ xM, ‹y be a class of dynamic models. The following
axiom schemata is valid in D, for all n P N, ϕ P L0, and ξ P Lďp‹q if ‹ is
M-LC-compliant.
5Remember that M, w ( µdgξpiq iﬀthere is a maximal chain of ξ-worlds ending in w,
according to Lemma 10.
24

r‹ϕsrďsξ
Ñ
n
ľ
i“1
n
ľ
j“i
µdgϕpjq Ñ Apµdgϕpiq Ñ r‹ϕsξq^
n
ľ
i“1
n
ľ
j“i
µdg␣ϕpjq Ñ Apµdg␣ϕpiq Ñ r‹ϕsξq^
n
ľ
i“1
n
ľ
j“i
µdgϕpjq Ñ Apµdg␣ϕpiq Ñ r‹ϕsξq^
n
ľ
i“1
n
ľ
j“i
µdg␣ϕpjq Ñ Apµdgϕpiq Ñ r‹ϕsξq
r‹ϕsrăsξ
Ñ
n
ľ
i“1
n
ľ
j“i`1
µdgϕpjq Ñ Apµdgϕpiq Ñ r‹ϕsξq^
n
ľ
i“1
n
ľ
j“i`1
µdg␣ϕpjq Ñ Apµdg␣ϕpiq Ñ r‹ϕsξq^
n
ľ
i“1
n
ľ
j“i`1
µdgϕpjq Ñ Apµdg␣ϕpiq Ñ r‹ϕsξq^
n
ľ
i“1
n
ľ
j“i`1
µdg␣ϕpjq Ñ Apµdgϕpiq Ñ r‹ϕsξq
r‹ϕsrďsξ
Ð
pµdg␣ϕpnq _ µdgϕpnqq ^
n
ľ
i“1
Apµdgϕpiq Ñ r‹ϕsξq^
n
ľ
i“1
Apµdg␣ϕpiq Ñ r‹ϕsξq
r‹ϕsrăsξ
Ð
pµdg␣ϕpnq _ µdgϕpnqq ^
n´1
ľ
i“1
Apµdgϕpiq Ñ r‹ϕsξq^
n´1
ľ
i“1
Apµdg␣ϕpiq Ñ r‹ϕsξq
For guidance in comparing our generalised postulates to the original ones
proposed for Grove’s systems of spheres, we list all postulates discussed in this
work with the corresponding generalization in Table 1.
4.3. Deriving axiomatisations for DPL by Iterated Belief Change Postulates
In the following, we investigate how we can derive sound axiomatisations for
the logic Lďp‹q, given the postulates satisﬁed by ‹. First, let us properly deﬁne
the notion of a logic induced by classes of dynamic preference models and by
sets of axioms as proposed earlier.
Deﬁnition 48. Let D “ xM, Cy be a class of dynamic models and ‹ a symbol
for dynamic operators, we call the logic of D, or the logic deﬁned by D, as the
set
LogpDq “ tϕ P Lďp‹q | D ( ϕu
25

Table 1: Original postulates and corresponding postulates for preference models.
Postulate
Original work
Corresponding postulates
pFaithq
[28]
–
pDP1q
[3]
pDP1aq and pDP1bq (Deﬁnition 25)
pDP2q
[3]
pDP2aq and pDP2bq (Deﬁnition 29)
pDP3q
[3]
pDP3aq (Deﬁnition 32)
pDP4q
[3]
pDP4aq (Deﬁnition 35)
pRecq
[26]
pRec1q (Deﬁnition 38)
pGRq
[28]
–
pCR1q
[27]
pDP2aq and pDP2bq (Deﬁnition 29)
pCR2q
[27]
pDP1aq and pDP1bq (Deﬁnition 25)
pCR3q
[27]
pCR3aq (Deﬁnition 42)
pCR4q
[27]
pCR4aq (Deﬁnition 44)
pLCq
[24]
pLC1q (Deﬁnition 46)
It is easy to see that the logic deﬁned by a class of dynamic operators can
be constructed from the logics induced by each operator individually.
More
generally, we have the following.
Proposition 49. Let M Ď ModpLďq be a class of preference models and C “
tCi | i P Iu a family of classes of dynamic operators indexed by some set I,
which are closed over M.
LogpxM,
ď
iPI
Ciq “
č
iPI
LogpxM, Ciyq
Proposition 49 implies that the logic deﬁned by a class of dynamic models
D “ xM, Cy is completely determined by each individual dynamic operator
‹ P C.
As such, if we wish to study the properties of, say, DP1-compliant
operators over a class of preference models M using DPL, it suﬃces to study the
properties of each individual DP1-compliant operator over this class of models.
Now, we will concern ourselves with the logic deﬁned by a set of axioms - or a
proof system. This will allow us to investigate the properties of soundness and
completeness for DPL.
Deﬁnition 50. Let A Ă Lďp‹q be a set of formulas (or axioms). We deﬁne the
logic of A, or deﬁned by the system A, denoted LogpAq, as the smaller set of
formulas containing A that is closed by modus ponens and necessitation rules,
i.e., (i) if ϕ, ϕ Ñ ψ P LogpAq then ψ P LogpAq and (ii) if ψ P LogpAq then
lϕ P LogpAq, with l P tA, rďs, răs, r‹ϕs for any ϕ P L0u. We call A an axiom
system for LogpAq.
With that, we can deﬁne the notions of an axiomatisation, or of a proof
system, being sound or complete, as usual.
26

Deﬁnition 51. Let A Ă Lďp‹q be a set of formulas and D a class of dynamic
models. We say that
• A is sound in regards to D, if LogpAq Ď LogpDq
• A is complete in regards to D, if LogpDq Ď LogpAq
It is easy to see that the union of sound axiomatisations for a set of classes
of dynamic models results in a sound axiomatisation for the intersection of such
classes.
Theorem 52. Let M be a class of preference models, C “ tCi | i P Iu be a family
of classes of dynamic operators, which are closed over M, and A “ tAi | i P Iu a
family of sound axiom systems for C, i.e., LogpAiq Ď LogpxM, Ciyq, both indexed
by some set I.
Logp
ď
iPI
Aiq Ď LogpxM,
č
iPI
Ciq
In Theorem 52, we prove that we can combine the axiomatisations that
represent each postulate (presented in Propositions 19, 22, 30 33 and so on) into
a single axiomatisation that is sound to the class of operators that satisfy all
postulates at once. As such, we can use the results in this section to obtain sound
logics for classes of dynamic operators, such as the logic deﬁned by Darwich and
Pearl’s Iterated Belief Revision [3] operators or Nayak et al.’s Lexicographic
Revision operators [26].
Notice that, while we were able to characterise Iterated Belief Change pos-
tulates in DPL, in Propositions 26, 30, 33, 36, 39, 41, 43 and 45, this does not
guarantee that the resulting logic is complete. In fact, it is not easy to obtain a
completeness result for the axiomatisations since, given the semantics of DPL
based on dynamic models, one such proof would require the construction of a
dynamic model serving as counter-example for any non-theorem of the logic.
While the technique of ﬁltrated canonical models, as used by Souza to prove
completeness for Preference Logic [33], does indicate ways to the construction
of such model, it is not clear how to translate the obtained ﬁltrated canonical
model into a dynamic model.
More yet, even if we obtain complete axiomatisations for some postulates,
it is not clear whether we can obtain a general completeness result for the
conjoined axiomatisations, such as done in Theorem 52 for soundness.
In the light of Theorem 52, we can apply the results obtained in Proposi-
tions 19, 22, 30 and 39 to obtain an axiomatisation to DPL of Lexicographic
Revision.
Corollary 53. Preference Logic extended with lexicographic revision is soundly
27

axiomatised by the axiomatization of Lď extended by the axioms and rules below.
rò ϕsp
Ø
p
rò ϕspψ ^ ξq
Ø
rò ϕsψ ^ rò ϕsξ
rò ϕs␣ξ
Ø
␣rò ϕsξ
rò ϕsAξ
Ø
Arò ϕsξ
r‹ϕsrďsξ
Ñ
pϕ Ñ rďspϕ Ñ r‹ϕsξqq
r‹ϕsrăsξ
Ñ
pϕ Ñ răspϕ Ñ r‹ϕsξqq
rďsr‹ϕsξ
Ñ
pϕ Ñ r‹ϕsrďspϕ Ñ ξqq
răsr‹ϕsξ
Ñ
pϕ Ñ r‹ϕsrăspϕ Ñ ξqq
r‹ϕsrďsξ
Ñ
p␣ϕ Ñ rďsp␣ϕ Ñ r‹ϕsξqq
r‹ϕsrăsξ
Ñ
p␣ϕ Ñ răsp␣ϕ Ñ r‹ϕsξqq
rďsr‹ϕsξ
Ñ
p␣ϕ Ñ r‹ϕsrďsp␣ϕ Ñ ξqq
răsr‹ϕsξ
Ñ
p␣ϕ Ñ r‹ϕsrăsp␣ϕ Ñ ξqq
r‹ϕsrăsξ
Ñ
p␣ϕ Ñ Apϕ Ñ r‹ϕsξqq
ϕ
Ñ
pr‹ϕsrďsϕq
$ ξ
ñ
$ r‹ϕsξ
It is not diﬃcult to see that the complete axiomatisation presented in Fig-
ure 2 at Section 3 is a simpliﬁcation of the axiomatisation of Corollary 53 ob-
tained using our method. The same stands for axiomatisations for Lexicographic
Contraction (Proposition 47), when compared to the one obtained by Souza [33]
for ﬁnite models with chains of a bounded size.
5. Related Work
To our knowledge, the work of Segerberg [5] is the ﬁrst to propose the inte-
gration of belief revision operations within an epistemic logic, with his proposal
of Dynamic Doxastic Logic (DDL). This integration is important because it al-
lows one to analyse the eﬀects of introspection, and other related phenomena, in
the logic of belief change. A famous example of such interaction is the analysis
of Moore sentences in the logic of belief change, which shows that AGM’s pos-
tulates are incompatible in the face of introspection [7]. In this work, Segerberg
provides a set of axioms , which corresponds to encodings within his logic of
AGM’s postulates for belief change. Our work is linked to that approach by
investigating these correspondences for dynamic belief change, based on iter-
ated belief change postulates, instead of AGM belief change, as pursued by
Segerberg.
In the context of DDL, Cantwell [42] deﬁnes some iterated belief revision
operators as change operations in hypertheories [7] and he shows how these
operations can be axiomatically characterised in DDL. Our work diﬀers from
his in that we analyse how some well known-postulates can be characterised
in our logic and not how to encode speciﬁc constructions. Our logic also has
the advantage of being more expressive because it can encode some notion of
degrees of belief [33], which cannot be expressed in DDL.
Another trend of research on using modal logics to study (and axiomatise)
iterated belief change operators or policies is the work on Dynamic Epistemic
28

Logics.
Inspired by Rott [43], Van Benthem [14] proposed the codiﬁcation
of some iterated belief revision operators within a Dynamic Epistemic Logic
(DEL). This work was further extended by Girard [11], Liu [13], and Souza et
al. [15] who studied the use of DPL to encode several (relational) belief revision
policies. Similarly, Baltag and Smets [8] used a logic similar to DPL to encode
diﬀerent notions for knowledge and belief, based on Board’s work [10]. These
authors show how diﬀerent iterated belief revision operators can be simulated
using DEL action models and product update.
Further, Girard and Rott [12] propose a DPL for studying belief revision.
The authors encode several iterated belief revision policies using General Dy-
namic Dynamic Logic [44] and show that reduction axioms can be obtained for
them in the same fashion as [22].
In the related literature, all these works following the DEL tradition deﬁne
operations semantically in their logic and either provide axiomatisations by
means of crafting the axioms or by encoding these operations using a variation
of dynamic logic to obtain reduction axioms. These works are informed by well-
known results in the area of belief change to choose appropriate operations and
then encode these operations in their logics.
On the other hand, our work investigates how DPL can be used to char-
acterise properties of dynamic belief change operators, instead of applying the
characterisation in Belief Change theory to construct a logic. To our knowl-
edge, our work is the ﬁrst to do so for dynamic belief change operators. While
other work, such as that of Darwiche and Pearl’s [3] and of Jin and Thielscher
[45] and others, have investigated semantic characterisation of iterated belief
change postulates, these characterisations have been pursued in an extra-logical
framework, i.e., outside of the object language used to the specify the agent’s be-
liefs. As discussed before, these move to specifying belief change has important
consequences on the expressiveness of the theory.
Our work is also connected to that of Souza et al. [46, 47] that uses the con-
nection between preference models and Liu’s priority graphs [13] to belief change
postulates as structural properties on transformations in priority graphs. How-
ever, These authors show that transformations on priority graphs are a limited
representation for changes of dynamic operators and some of the well-known
postulates of the area cannot be encoded using them. How our generalisations
can be connected to that work is still an open topic of research.
It seems
doubtful that we can establish signiﬁcant connections between our axiomatic
characterisations and the structural constraints imposed by postulates in the
realisation of dynamic operators as transformations in priority graphs.
As far as we know, the only work that investigates the encoding of postulates
from Belief Change as axioms of a logic is the work of Segerberg [5, 6] on DDL.
In [6], the author axiomatizes the logic DDL and proves the completeness of
the logic in regards to an SOS-based semantics, showing thus that their axioms
are accurate representations of AGM’s postulates within their logic.
While
Segerberg’s work is very similar to ours in intent, the authors do not consider
iterated belief change postulates and their representation in the logic - the main
focus of our work.
Notice that, while DDL could, in principle, be used as
29

a foundation for our study, this logic is less expressive than DPL. Also, by
choosing to employ DPL instead of DDL as a foundational logic, our work can
be connected to the work representing diﬀerent mental attitudes in this logic
[34, 21, 20] allowing the application of theoretically founded dynamic operators
to dynamic phenomena for diﬀerent mental attitudes.
6. Final Considerations
This work has investigated representation results for well-known iterated
belief change postulates using the framework of Dynamic Epistemic Logics.
We have provided a set of axioms that encode these postulates within DPL
and shown that, as a result of the higher expressiveness of preference models
in comparison to Grove’s SOS, a characterisation of these postulates in DPL
cannot be obtained.
Further, we have provided a generalisation of the postulates using preference
models (Deﬁnitions 25, 29, 32, 35, 38, 42, 44, and 46) that coincide with the
studied postulates in the class of models similar to Grove’s spheres (Facts 28,
27, 31, 34, 37, and 40), and shown that our encoding characterises these gener-
alised postulates (Propositions 26, 30, 33, 36, 39, 43, 19, and 47). Finally, we
have shown (Theorem 52) that we can obtain a sound axiomatisation for DPL
interpreted over a class of dynamic models by aggregating the axioms for each
postulate satisﬁed by all dynamic operators in that class.
We use the proposed axioms to obtain an axiomatisation of Preference Logic
extended with dynamic modalities for Lexicographic Revision (Corollary 53)
and Lexicographic Contraction (Proposition 47). We wish to point out that,
while our work is concerned with single-agent belief changes, our results can be
trivially extended to private changes in the multi-agent case.
Our results generalise previous semantic-based postulates by demonstrating
are intrinsically linked to the structure of the model on which they are based,
i.e., Grove’s system of spheres for classical propositional logic. To avoid ter-
minological confusion, we point out that our results are concerned with belief
change operations deﬁned on well-founded preference models, which we simply
call preference models in this work, and they may not be valid if one considers all
preference models, since some belief change operators may not be well-deﬁned
on non-well-founded models [12, 33].
A question that may arise from our work is whether the generalisation of
Belief Change postulates from the semantic framework of Grove’s systems of
spheres to preference models is relevant from an epistemological point of view.
We point out both that preference models have been extensively studied as mod-
els for non-monotonic reasoning and conditional logics [17, 18, 48] and to model
diﬀerent mental attitudes, such as Preferences [11, 19], Goals and Desires [20],
and Obligations [21], and diﬀerent notions of Belief [8].
It is of notice that preference models can be used to represent and reason
about nested conditionals (or sets of conditionals), as those studied in condi-
tional logics [49, 35], which can represent introspective beliefs and their dynam-
30

ics. These conditionals cannot be expressed by means of Grove models, as these
models are injective, in the sense used by Friedman and Halpern [48].
The reader may also argue whether Modal Logic is an adequate framework
to study belief change. We point out that, ﬁrstly, modal analysis of belief and
other mental attitudes abound in the literature and have proven to be a fruitful
and powerful framework to study attitudes such as beliefs [50, 51, 52]. Also,
as De Rijke [53] points out, Dynamic Logic is a standard tool to reason about
states and transitions between states, two fundamental notions for any notion
of change or dynamics, and can be analysed through well-established tools from
Modal Logic. As such, theories based on Dynamic Logic can be easily connected
to well-established modal analysis of mental attitudes in the literature, providing
a rich framework to study dynamic phenomena.
While we have proved in this work that the axiomatisations provided are
complete characterisations of the investigated postulates, by means of our pro-
posed generalisations, we were not able to provide results about the complete-
ness of the logic obtained by extending preference logic with a given dynamic
operator characterised by a set of postulates. Inasmuch as the obtained axioma-
tisation is indeed complete for the example studied, i.e., Lexicographic Revision,
it is still unclear if this will always be the case. Completeness results are not a
trivial topic in Modal Logic and it is not clear that a general result guaranteeing
completeness of the derived axiomatisation in regards to the extended logic can
be obtained.
As future work, we aim to investigate how these characterisations can be
connected to syntactic representations of belief change operations. It is well
known that dynamic operators can be encoded by means of transformations on
priority graphs, a connection already studied by Liu [13], Souza et al. [15] and
others. Souza et al. [46, 47] have shown that some postulates - as originally
deﬁned in Iterated Belief Change - cannot be encoded by means of transforma-
tions on priority graphs unless we restrict our semantics to only consider some
speciﬁc classes of preference models. We aim to investigate if the same holds
for our generalisations and, if so, for which kind of models such a syntactic
characterisation of iterated belief change postulates can be achieved.
Funding
This study was ﬁnanced in part by the Coordena¸c˜ao de Aperfei¸coamento de
Pessoal de N´ıvel Superior - Brasil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001.
