arXiv:2301.03099v1  [cs.AI]  8 Jan 2023
Fully Dynamic Online Selection through Online Contention Resolution Schemes
Vashist Avadhanula*, Andrea Celli1, Riccardo Colini-Baldeschi2,
Stefano Leonardi3, Matteo Russo3
1Department of Computing Sciences, Bocconi University, Milan, Italy
2 Core Data Science, Meta, London, UK
3Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy

Abstract
We study fully dynamic online selection problems in an ad-
versarial/stochastic setting that includes Bayesian online se-
lection, prophet inequalities, posted price mechanisms, and
stochastic probing problems subject to combinatorial con-
straints. In the classical “incremental” version of the problem,
selected elements remain active until the end of the input se-
quence. On the other hand, in the fully dynamic version of the
problem, elements stay active for a limited time interval, and
then leave. This models, for example, the online matching of
tasks to workers with task/worker-dependent working times,
and sequential posted pricing of perishable goods. A success-
ful approach to online selection problems in the adversarial
setting is given by the notion of Online Contention Resolution
Scheme (OCRS), that uses a priori information to formulate
a linear relaxation of the underlying optimization problem,
whose optimal fractional solution is rounded online for any
adversarial order of the input sequence. Our main contribu-
tion is providing a general method for constructing an OCRS
for fully dynamic online selection problems. Then, we show
how to employ such OCRS to construct no-regret algorithms
in a partial information model with semi-bandit feedback and
adversarial inputs.
1
Introduction
Consider the case where a ﬁnancial service provider receives
multiple operations every hour/day. These operations might
be malicious. The provider needs to assign them to human
reviewers for inspection. The time required by each reviewer
to ﬁle a reviewing task and the reward (weight) that is ob-
tained with the review follow some distributions. The distri-
butions can be estimated from historical data, as they depend
on the type of transaction that needs to be examined and on
the expertise of the employed reviewers. To efﬁciently solve
the problem, the platform needs to compute a matching be-
tween tasks and reviewers based on the a priori information
that is available. However, the time needed for a speciﬁc re-
view, and the realized reward (weight), is often known only
after the task/reviewer matching is decided.
A multitude of variations to this setting are possible. For
instance, if a cost is associated with each reviewing task, the
total cost for the reviewing process might be bounded by a
budget. Moreover, there might be various kinds of restric-
tions on the subset of reviewers that are assigned at each
*Research performed while the author was working at Meta.
time step. Finally, the objective function might not only be
the sum of the rewards (weights) we observe, if, for example,
the decision maker has a utility function with “diminishing
return” property.
To model the general class of sequential decision prob-
lems described above, we introduce fully dynamic online se-
lection problems. This model generalizes online selection
problems (Chekuri, Vondr´ak, and Zenklusen 2011), where
elements arrive online in an adversarial order and algorithms
can use a priori information to maximize the weight of the
selected subset of elements, subject to combinatorial con-
straints (such as matroid, matching, or knapsack).
In the classical version of the problem (Chekuri, Vondr´ak,
and Zenklusen 2011), once an element is selected, it will af-
fect the combinatorial constraints throughout the entire input
sequence. This is in sharp contrast with the fully dynamic
version, where an element will affect the combinatorial con-
straint only for a limited time interval, which we name ac-
tivity time of the element. For example, a new task can be
matched to a reviewer as soon as she is done with previ-
ously assigned tasks, or an agent can buy a new good as
soon as the previously bought goods are perished. A large
class of Bayesian online selection (Kleinberg and Weinberg
2012), prophet inequality (Hajiaghayi, Kleinberg, and Sand-
holm 2007), posted price mechanism (Chawla et al. 2010),
and stochastic probing (Gupta and Nagarajan 2013) prob-
lems that have been studied in the classical version of on-
line selection can therefore be extended to the fully dynamic
setting. Note that in the dynamic algorithms literature, fully
dynamic algorithms are algorithms that deal with both adver-
sarial insertions and deletions (Demetrescu et al. 2010). We
could also interpret our model in a similar sense since ele-
ments arrive online (are inserted) according to an adversarial
order, and cease to exist (are deleted) according to adversar-
ially established activity times.
A successful approach to online selection problems is
based on Online Contention Resolution Schemes (OCRSs)
(Feldman, Svensson, and Zenklusen 2016). OCRSs use a
priori information on the values of the elements to formu-
late a linear relaxation whose optimal fractional solution up-
per bounds the performance of the integral ofﬂine optimum.
Then, an online rounding procedure is used to produce a so-
lution whose value is as close as possible to the fractional re-
laxation solution’s value, for any adversarial order of the in-

put sequence. The OCRS approach allows to obtain good ap-
proximations of the expected optimal solution for linear and
submodular objective functions. The existence of OCRSs for
fully dynamic online selection problems is therefore a natu-
ral research question that we address in this work.
The OCRS approach is based on the availability of a pri-
ori information on weights and activity times. However, in
real world scenarios, these might be missing or might be
expensive to collect. Therefore, in the second part of our
work, we study the fully dynamic online selection problem
with partial information, where the main research question
is whether the OCRS approach is still viable if a priori in-
formation on the weights is missing. In order to answer this
question, we study a repeated version of the fully dynamic
online selection problem, in which at each stage weights are
unknown to the decision maker (i.e., no a priori informa-
tion on weights is available) and chosen adversarially. The
goal in this setting is the design of an online algorithm with
performances (i.e., cumulative sum of weights of selected
elements) close to that of the best static selection strategy in
hindsight.
Our Contributions
First, we introduce the fully dynamic online selection prob-
lem, in which elements arrive following an adversarial or-
dering, and revealed one-by-one their weights and activ-
ity times at the time of arrival (i.e., prophet model), or
after the element has been selected (i.e., probing model).
Our model describes temporal packing constraints (i.e.,
downward-closed), where elements are active only within
their activity time interval. The objective is to maximize the
weight of the selected set of elements subject to temporal
packing constraints. We provide two black-box reductions
for adapting classical OCRS for online (non-dynamic) se-
lection problems to the fully dynamic setting under full and
partial information.
Blackbox reduction 1: from OCRS to temporal OCRS.
Starting from a (b, c)-selectable greedy OCRS in the clas-
sical setting, we use it as a subroutine to build a (b, c)-
selectable greedy OCRS in the more general temporal setting
(see Algorithm 1 and Theorem 1). This means that competi-
tive ratio guarantees in one setting determine the same guar-
antees in the other. Such a reduction implies the existence
of algorithms with constant competitive ratio for online opti-
mization problems with linear or submodular objective func-
tions subject to matroid, matching, and knapsack constraints,
for which we give explicit constructions. We also extend the
framework to elements arriving in batches, which can have
correlated weights or activity times within the batch, as de-
scribed in the appendix of the paper.
Blackbox reduction 2: from temporal OCRS to no-α-
regret algorithm. Following the recent work by Gergatsouli
and Tzamos (2022) in the context of Pandora’s box prob-
lems, we deﬁne the following extension of the problem to the
partial-information setting. For each of the T stages, the al-
gorithm is given in input a new instance of the fully dynamic
online selection problem. Activity times are ﬁxed before-
hand and known to the algorithm, while weights are chosen
by an adversary, and revealed only after the selection at the
current stage has been completed. In such setting, we show
that an α-competitive temporal OCRS can be exploited in
the adversarial partial-information version of the problem, in
order to build no-α-regret algorithms with polynomial per-
iteration running time. Regret is measured with respect to the
cumulative weights collected by the best ﬁxed selection pol-
icy in hindsight. We study three different settings: in the ﬁrst
setting, we study the full-feedback model (i.e., the algorithm
observes the entire utility function at the end of each stage).
Then, we focus on the semi-bandit-feedback model, in which
the algorithm only receives information on the weights of the
elements it selects. In such setting, we provide a no-α-regret
framework with ˜O(T 1/2) upper bound on cumulative regret
in the case in which we have a “white-box” OCRS (i.e., we
know the exact procedure run within the OCRS, and we are
able to simulate it ex-post). Moreover, we also provide a no-
α-regret algorithm with ˜O(T 2/3) regret upper bound for the
case in which we only have oracle access to the OCRS (i.e.,
the OCRS is treated as a black-box, and the algorithm does
not require knowledge about its internal procedures).
Related Work
In the ﬁrst part of the paper, we deal with a setting where
the algorithm has complete information over the input but is
unaware of the order in which elements arrive. In this con-
text, Contention resolution schemes (CRS) were introduced
by Chekuri, Vondr´ak, and Zenklusen (2011) as a powerful
rounding technique in the context of submodular maximiza-
tion. The CRS framework was extended to online contention
resolution schemes (OCRS) for online selection problems
by Feldman, Svensson, and Zenklusen (2016), who provided
constant competitive OCRSs for different problems, e.g. in-
tersections of matroids, matchings, and prophet inequalities.
We generalize the OCRS framework to a setting where ele-
ments are timed and cease to exist right after.
In the second part, we lift the complete knowledge as-
sumption and work in an adversarial bandit setting, where at
each stage the entire set of elements arrives, and we seek
to select the “best” feasible subset. This is similar to the
problem of combinatorial bandits (Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi
2012), but unlike it, we aim to deal with combinatorial se-
lection of timed elements. In this respect, blocking bandits
(Basu et al. 2019) model situations where played arms are
blocked for a speciﬁc number of stages. Despite their con-
textual (Basu et al. 2021), combinatorial (Atsidakou et al.
2021), and adversarial (Bishop et al. 2020) extensions, re-
cent work on blocking bandits only addresses speciﬁc cases
of the fully dynamic online selection problem (Dickerson
et al. 2018), which we solve in entire generality, i.e. adver-
sarially and for all packing constraints.
Our problem is also related to sleeping bandits (Klein-
berg, Niculescu-Mizil, and Sharma 2010), in that the adver-
sary decides which actions the algorithm can perform at each
stage t. Nonetheless, a sleeping bandit adversary has to com-
municate all available actions to the algorithm before a stage
starts, whereas our adversary sets arbitrary activity times for
each element, choosing in what order elements arrive.

2
Preliminaries
Given a ﬁnite set X ⊆Rn and Y ⊆2X , let 1Y ∈{0, 1}|X|
be the characteristic vector of set X, and co X be the convex
hull of X. We denote vectors by bold fonts. Given vector x,
we denote by xi its i-th component. The set {1, 2, . . . , n},
with n ∈N>0, is compactly denoted as [n]. Given a set X
and a scalar α ∈R, let αX := {αx : x ∈X}. Finally, given
a discrete set X, we denote by ∆X the |X|-simplex.
We start by introducing a general selection problem in the
standard (i.e., non-dynamic) case as studied by Kleinberg
and Weinberg (2012) in the context of prophet inequalities.
Let E be the ground set and let m := |E|. Each element e ∈E
is characterized by a collection of parameters ze. In gen-
eral, ze is a random variable drawn according to an element-
speciﬁc distribution ζe, supported over the joint set of pos-
sible parameters. In the standard (i.e., non-dynamic) setting,
ze just encodes the weight associated to element e, that is
ze = (we), for some we ∈[0, 1].1 In such case distributions
ζe are supported over [0, 1]. Random variables {ze : e ∈E}
are independent, and ze is distributed according to ζe. An in-
put sequence is an ordered sequence of elements and weights
such that every element in E occurs exactly once in the se-
quence. The order is speciﬁed by an arrival time se for each
element e. Arrival times are such that se ∈[m] for all e ∈E,
and for two distinct e, e′ we have se ̸= se′. The order of
arrival of the elements is a priori unknown to the algorithm,
and can be selected by an adversary. In the standard full-
information setting the distributions ζe can be chosen by an
adversary, but they are known to the algorithm a priori. We
consider problems characterized by a family of packing con-
straints.
Deﬁnition 1 (Packing Constraint). A family of constraints
F = (E, I), for ground set E and independence family I ⊆
2E, is said to be packing (i.e., downward-closed) if, taken
A ∈I, and B ⊆A, then B ∈I.
Elements of I are called independent sets. Such family of
constraints is closed under intersection, and encompasses
matroid, knapsack, and matching constraints.
Fractional LP formulation
Even in the ofﬂine setting, in
which the ordering of the input sequence (se)e∈E is known
beforehand, determining an independent set of maximum
cumulative weight may be NP-hard in the worst-case (Feige
1998). Then, we consider the relaxation of the problem
in which we look for an optimal fractional solution. The
value of such solution is an upper bound to the value of
the true ofﬂine optimum. Therefore, any algorithm guar-
anteeing a constant approximation to the ofﬂine fractional
optimum immediately yields the same guarantees with re-
spect to the ofﬂine optimum. Given a family of packing con-
straints F = (E, I), in order to formulate the problem of
computing the best fractional solution as a linear program-
ming problem (LP) we introduce the notion of packing con-
straint polytope PF ⊆[0, 1]m which is such that PF :=
co ({1S : S ∈I}) . Given a non-negative submodular func-
tion f : [0, 1]m →R≥0, and a family of packing constraints
1This is for notational convenience. In the dynamic case ze will
contain other parameters in addition to weights.
F, an optimal fractional solution can be computed via the
LP maxx∈PF f(x). If the goal is maximizing the cumula-
tive sum of weights, the objective of the optimization prob-
lem is ⟨x, w⟩, where w := (w1, . . . , wm) ∈[0, 1]m is a
vector specifying the weight of each element. If we assume
access to a polynomial-time separation oracle for PF such
LP yields an optimal fractional solution in polynomial time.
Online selection problem. In the online version of the prob-
lem, given a family of packing constraints F, the goal is se-
lecting an independent set whose cumulative weight is as
large as possible. In such setting, the elements reveal one
by one their realized ze, following a ﬁxed prespeciﬁed order
unknown to the algorithm. Each time an element reveals ze,
the algorithm has to choose whether to select it or discard it,
before the next element is revealed. Such decision is irrevo-
cable. Computing the exact optimal solution to such online
selection problems is intractable in general (Feige 1998), and
the goal is usually to design approximation algorithms with
good competitive ratio.2 In the remainder of the section we
describe one well-known framework for such objective.
Online contention resolution schemes. Contention resolu-
tion schemes were originally proposed by Chekuri, Vondr´ak,
and Zenklusen (2011) in the context of submodular function
maximization, and later extended to online selection prob-
lems by Feldman, Svensson, and Zenklusen (2016) under
the name of online contention resolution schemes (OCRS).
Given a fractional solution x ∈PF, an OCRS is an online
rounding procedure yielding an independent set in I guar-
anteeing a value close to that of x. Let R(x) be a random
set containing each element e independently and with prob-
ability xe. The set R(x) may not be feasible according to
constraints F. An OCRS essentially provides a procedure to
construct a good feasible approximation by starting from the
random set R(x). Formally,
Deﬁnition 2 (OCRS). Given a point x ∈PF and the set of
elements R(x), elements e ∈E reveal one by one whether
they belong to R(x) or not. An OCRS chooses irrevocably
whether to select an element in R(x) before the next element
is revealed. An OCRS for PF is an online algorithm that
selects S ⊆R(x) such that 1S ∈PF.
We will focus on greedy OCRS, which were deﬁned by Feld-
man, Svensson, and Zenklusen (2016) as follows.
Deﬁnition 3 (Greedy OCRS). Let PF ⊆[0, 1]m be the fea-
sibility polytope for constraint family F. An OCRS π for PF
is called a greedy OCRS if, for every ex-ante feasible solu-
tion x ∈PF, it deﬁnes a packing subfamily of feasible sets
Fπ,x ⊆F, and an element e is selected upon arrival if, to-
gether with the set of already selected elements, the resulting
set is in Fπ,x.
A greedy OCRS is randomized if, given x, the choice of
Fπ,x is randomized, and deterministic otherwise. For b, c ∈
[0, 1], we say that a greedy OCRS π is (b, c)-selectable if,
for each e ∈E, and given x ∈bPF (i.e., belonging to a
2The competitive ratio is computed as the worst-case ratio be-
tween the value of the solution found by the algorithm and the value
of an optimal solution.

down-scaled version of PF),
Prπ,R(x) [S ∪{e} ∈Fπ,x
∀S ⊆R(x), S ∈Fπ,x] ≥c.
Intuitively, this means that, with probability at least c, the
random set R(x) is such that an element e is selected no
matter what other elements I of R(x) have been selected
so far, as long as I ∈Fπ,x. This guarantees that an ele-
ment is selected with probability at least c against any ad-
versary, which implies a bc competitive ratio with respect
to the ofﬂine optimum (see Appendix A for further details).
Now, we provide an example due to Feldman, Svensson, and
Zenklusen (2016) of a feasibility constraint family where
OCRSs guarantee a constant competitive ratio against the
ofﬂine optimum. We will build on this example throughout
the paper in order to provide intuition for the main concepts.
Example 1 (Theorem 2.7 in (Feldman, Svensson, and Zen-
klusen 2016)). Given a graph G = (V, E), with |E| = m
edges, we consider a matching feasibility polytope PF =
n
x ∈[0, 1]m : P
e∈δ(u) xe ≤1, ∀u ∈V
o
, where δ(u) de-
notes the set of all adjacent edges to u ∈V. Given b ∈[0, 1],
the OCRS takes as input x ∈bPF, and samples each edge e
with probability xe to build R(x). Then, it selects each edge
e ∈R(x), upon its arrival, with probability (1 −e−xe)/xe
only if it is feasible. Then, the probability to select any edge
e = (u, v) (conditioned on being sampled) is
1 −e−xe
xe
·
Y
e′∈δ(u)∪δ(v)\{e}
e−xe′
= 1 −e−xe
xe
· e−P
e′∈δ(u)∪δ(v)\{e} xe′ ≥1 −e−xe
xe
· e−2b
≥e−2b,
where the inequality follows from xe
∈
bPF, i.e.,
P
e′∈δ(u)\{e} xe′ ≤b−xe, and similarly for δ(v). Note that
in order to obtain an unconditional probability, we need to
multiply the above by a factor xe.
We remark that this example resembles closely our in-
troductory motivating application, where ﬁnancial transac-
tions need to be assigned to reviewers upon their arrival.
Moreover, Feldman, Svensson, and Zenklusen (2016) give
explicit constructions of (b, c)-selectable greedy OCRSs for
knapsack, matching, matroidal constraints, and their inter-
section. We include a discussion of their feasibility poly-
topes in Appendix B. Ezra et al. (2020) generalize the above
online selection procedure to a setting where elements arrive
in batches rather than one at a time; we provide a discussion
of such setting in Appendix C.
3
Fully Dynamic Online Selection
The fully dynamic online selection problem is characterized
by the deﬁnition of temporal packing constraints. We gen-
eralize the online selection model (Section 2) by introduc-
ing an activity time de ∈[m] for each element. Element e
arrives at time se and, if it is selected by the algorithm, it re-
mains active up to time se + de and “blocks” other elements
from being selected. Elements arriving after that time can
be selected by the algorithm. In this setting, each element
e ∈E is characterized by a tuple of attributes ze := (we, de).
Let Fd := (E, Id) be the family of temporal packing fea-
sibility constraints where elements block other elements in
the same independent set according to activity time vector
d = (de)e∈E. The goal of fully dynamic online selection is
selecting an independent set in Id whose cumulative weight
is as large as possible (i.e., as close as possible to the ofﬂine
optimum). We can naturally extend the expression for pack-
ing polytopes in the standard setting to the temporal one for
every feasibility constraint family, by exploiting the follow-
ing notion of active elements.
Deﬁnition 4 (Active Elements). For element e ∈E and
given {ze}e∈E, we denote the set of active elements as
Ee := {e′ ∈E : se′ ≤se ≤se′ + de′}.3
In this setting, we don’t need to select an independent set
S ∈F, but, in a less restrictive way, we only require that for
each incoming element we select a feasible subset of the set
of active elements.
Deﬁnition 5 (Temporal packing constraint polytope). Given
F = (E, I), a temporal packing constraint polytope Pd
F ⊆
[0, 1]m is such that Pd
F := co ({1S : S ∩Ee ∈I, ∀e ∈E}) .
Observation 1. For a ﬁxed element e, the temporal polytope
is the convex hull of the collection containing all the sets
such that S ∩Ee is feasible. This needs to be true for all
e ∈E, meaning that we can rewrite the polytope and the
feasibility set as Pd
F = co
 T
e∈E {1S : S ∩Ee ∈F}

, and
Id = T
e∈E {S : S ∩Ee ∈I}. Moreover, when d and d′
differ for at least one element e, that is de < d′
e, then Ee ⊆
E′
e. Then, Pd
F ⊇Pd′
F , Id ⊇Id′.
We now extend Example 1 to account for activity times.
In Appendix B we also work out the reduction from stan-
dard to temporal packing constraints for a number of exam-
ples, including rank-1 matroids (single-choice), knapsack,
and general matroid constraints.
Example 2. We consider the temporal extension of the
matching polytope presented in Example 1, that is
Pd
F =


y ∈[0, 1]m :
X
e∈δ(u)∩Ee
xe ≤1, ∀u ∈V, ∀e ∈E


.
Let us use the same OCRS as in the previous example, but
where “feasibility” only concerns the subset of active edges
in δ(u) ∪δ(v). The probability to select an edge e = (u, v)
is
1 −e−xe
xe
·
Y
e′∈δ(u)∪δ(v)∩Ee\{e}
e−xe′ ≥1 −e−xe
xe
· e−2b ≥e−2b,
which is obtained in a similar way to Example 1.
The above example suggests to look for a general reduc-
tion that maps an OCRS for the standard setting, to an OCRS
for the temporal setting, while achieving at least the same
competitive ratio.
3Note that, since for distinct elements e, e′, we have se′ ̸= se,
we can equivalently deﬁne the set of active elements as Ee :=
{e′ ∈E : se′ < se ≤se′ + de′} ∪{e}.

Algorithm 1: Greedy OCRS Black-box Reduction
Input: Feasibility families F and Fd, polytopes PF
and Pd
F, OCRS π for F, a point x ∈bPd
F;
Initialize Sd ←∅;
Sample R(x) such that Pr [e ∈R(x)] = xe;
for e ∈E do
Upon arrival of element e, compute the set of
currently active elements Ee;
if (Sd ∩Ee) ∪{e} ∈Fπ,y then
Execute the original greedy OCRS π(x);
Update Sd accordingly;
else
Discard element e;
return set Sd;
4
OCRS for Fully Dynamic Online Selection
The ﬁrst black-box reduction which we provide consists
in showing that a (b, c)-selectable greedy OCRS for stan-
dard packing constraints implies the existence of a (b, c)-
selectable greedy OCRS for temporal constraints. In partic-
ular, we show that the original greedy OCRS working for
x ∈bPF can be used to construct another greedy OCRS
for y ∈bPd
F. To this end, Algorithm 1 provides a way of
exploiting the original OCRS π in order to manage temporal
constraints. For each element e, and given the induced sub-
family of packing feasible sets Fπ,y, the algorithm checks
whether the set of previously selected elements Sd which
are still active in time, together with the new element e, is
feasible with respect to Fπ,y. If that is the case, the algo-
rithm calls the OCRS π. Then, if the OCRS π for input y
decided to select the current element e, the algorithm adds it
to Sd, otherwise the set remains unaltered. We remark that
such a procedure is agnostic to whether the original greedy
OCRS is deterministic or randomized. We observe that, due
to a larger feasibility constraint family, the number of in-
dependent sets have increased with respect to the standard
setting. However, we show that this does not constitute a
problem, and an equivalence between the two settings can
be established through the use of Algorithm 1. The follow-
ing result shows that Algorithm 1 yields a (b, c)-selectable
greedy OCRS for temporal packing constraints.
Theorem 1. Let F, Fd be the standard and temporal pack-
ing constraint families, respectively, and let their corre-
sponding polytopes be PF and Pd
F. Let x ∈bPF and
y ∈bPd
F, and consider a (b, c)-selectable greedy OCRS π
for Fπ,x. Then, Algorithm 1 equippend with π is a (b, c)-
selectable greedy OCRS for Fd
π,y.
Proof. Let us denote by ˆπ the procedure described in Algo-
rithm 1. First, we show that ˆπ is a greedy OCRS for Fd.
Greedyness. It is clear from the setting and the construc-
tion that elements arrive one at a time, and that ˆπ irrevoca-
bly selects an incoming element only if it is feasible, and
before seeing the next element. Indeed, in the if statement
of Algorithm 1, we check that the active subset of the el-
ements selected so far, together with the new arriving ele-
ment e, is feasible against the subfamily Fπ,x ⊆F. Con-
straint subfamily Fπ,x is induced by the original OCRS
π, and point x belongs to the polytope bPd
F. Note that
we do not necessarily add element e to the running set
Sd, even though feasible, but act as the original greedy
OCRS would have acted. All that is left to be shown is
that such a procedure deﬁnes a subfamily of feasibility
constraints Fd
π,x ⊆Fd. By construction, on the arrival
of each element e, we guarantee that Sd is a set such that
its subset of active elements is feasible. This means that
Sd ∩Ee ∈Fπ,x ⊆F. Then,
Sd ∈Fd
π,x :=
\
e∈E
{S : S ∩Ee ∈Fπ,x}.
Finally, Fπ,x ⊆F implies that Fd
π,x ⊆Fd, which shows
that ˆπ is greedy. With the above, we can now turn to
demonstrate (b, c)-selectability.
Selectability. Upon arrival of element e ∈E, let us con-
sider S and Sd to be the sets of elements already selected
by π and ˆπ, respectively. By the way in which the con-
straint families are deﬁned, and by construction of ˆπ, we
can observe that, given x ∈bPd
F and y ∈bPF, for all
S ⊆R(y) such that S ∪{e} ∈Fπ,y, there always exists a
set Sd ⊆R(x) such that (Sd ∩Ee)∪{e} ∈Fπ,x. This es-
tablishes an injection between the selected set under stan-
dard constraints, and its counterpart under temporal con-
straints. We observe that, for all e ∈E and x ∈bPd
F,
Pr

Sd ∪{e} ∈Fd
π,x
∀Sd ⊆R(x), Sd ∈Fd
π,x

=
Pr

(Sd ∩Ee) ∪{e} ∈Fπ,x ∀Sd ⊆R(x), Sd ∩Ee ∈Fd
π,x

.
Hence, since for greedy OCRS π and y ∈bPF, we have
that Pr [S ∪{e} ∈Fπ,y ∀S ⊆R(y), S ∈Fπ,y] ≥c, we
can conclude by the injection above that
Pr

(Sd ∩Ee) ∪{e} ∈Fπ,x
∀Sd ⊆R(x), Sd ∩Ee ∈Fπ,x

≥c.
The theorem follows.
We remark that the above reduction is agnostic to the
weight scale, i.e., we need not assume that we ∈[0, 1] for
all e ∈E. In order to further motivate the signiﬁcance of
Algorithm 1 and Theorem 1, in the Appendix we explic-
itly reduce the standard setting to the fully dynamic one for
single-choice, and provide a general recipe for all packing
constraints.
5
Fully Dynamic Online Selection under
Partial Information
In this section, we study the case in which the decision-
maker has to act under partial information. In particular,
we focus on the following online sequential extension of
the full-information problem: at each stage t ∈[T ], a de-
cision maker faces a new instance of the fully dynamic

online selection problem. An unknown vector of weights
wt ∈[0, 1]|E| is chosen by an adversary at each stage t,
while feasibility set Fd is known and ﬁxed across all T
stages. This setting is analogous to the one recently stud-
ied by Gergatsouli and Tzamos (2022) in the context of
Pandora’s box problems. A crucial difference with the on-
line selection problem with full-information studied in Sec-
tion 4 is that, at each step t, the decision maker has to de-
cide whether to select or discard an element before observ-
ing its weight. In particular, at each t, the decision maker
takes an action at := 1Sd
t , where Sd
t
∈Fd is the fea-
sible set selected at stage t. The choice of at is made be-
fore observing wt. The objective of maximizing the cumu-
lative sum of weights is encoded in the reward function
f : [0, 1]2m ∋(a, w) 7→⟨a, w⟩∈[0, 1], which is the
reward obtained by playing a with weights w = (we)e∈E. 4
In this setting, we can think of Fd as the set of super-arms
in a combinatorial online optimization problem. Our goal is
designing online algorithms which have a performance close
to that of the best ﬁxed super-arm in hindsight.5 In the analy-
sis, as it is customary when the online optimization problem
has an NP-hard ofﬂine counterpart, we resort to the notion
of α-regret. In particular, given a set of feasible actions X,
we deﬁne an algorithm’s α-regret up to time T as
Regretα(T ) := α max
x∈X
( T
X
t=1
f(x, wt)
)
−E
" T
X
t=1
f(xt, wt)
#
,
where α ∈(0, 1] and xt is the strategy output by the online
algorithm at time t. We say that an algorithm has the no-α-
regret property if Regretα(T )/T →0 for T →∞.
The main result of the section is providing a black-box re-
duction that yields a no-α-regret algorithm for any fully dy-
namic online selection problem admitting a temporal OCRS.
We provide no-α-regret frameworks for three scenarios:
• full-feedback model: after selecting at the decision-maker
observes the exact reward function f(·, wt).
• semi-bandit feedback with white-box OCRS: after taking a
decision at time t, the algorithm observes wt,e for each el-
ement e ∈Sd
t (i.e., each element selected at t). Moreover,
the decision-maker has exact knowledge of the procedure
employed by the OCRS, which can be easily simulated.
• semi-bandit feedback with oracle access to the OCRS: the
decision maker has semi-bandit feedback and the OCRS is
given as a black-box which can be queried once per step t.
Full-feedback Setting
In this setting, after selecting at, the decision-maker gets
to observe the reward function f(·, wt). In order to achieve
performance close to that of the best ﬁxed super-harm in
hindsight the idea is to employ the α-competitive OCRS de-
signed in Section 4 by feeding it with a fractional solution
4The analysis can be easily extended to arbitrary functions lin-
ear in both terms.
5As we argue in Appendix D it is not possible to be competitive
with respect to more powerful benchmarks.
Algorithm 2: FULL-FEEDBACK ALGORITHM
Input: T , Fd, temporal OCRS ˆπ, subroutine RM
Initialize RM for strategy space Pd
F
for t ∈[T ] do
xt ←RM.RECOMMEND()
at ←execute OCRS ˆπ with input xt
Play at, and subsequently observe f(·, wt)
RM.UPDATE(f(·, wt))
xt computed by considering the weights selected by the ad-
versary up to time t −1.6
Let us assume to have at our disposal a no-α-regret algo-
rithm for decision space Pd
F. We denote such regret min-
imizer as RM, and we assume it offers two basic opera-
tions: i) RM.RECOMMEND() returns a vector in Pd
F; ii)
RM.UPDATE(f(·, w)) updates the internal state of the re-
gret minimizer using feedback received by the environment
in the form of a reward function f(·, w). Notice that the
availability of such component is not enough to solve our
problem since at each t we can only play a super-arm at ∈
{0, 1}m feasible for Fd, and not the strategy xt ∈Pd
F ⊆
[0, 1]m returned by RM. The decision-maker can exploit the
subroutine RM together with a temporal greedy OCRS ˆπ by
following Algorithm 2. We can show that, if the algorithm
employs a regret minimizer for Pd
F with a sublinear cumu-
lative regret upper bound of RT , the following result holds.
Theorem 2. Given a regret minimizer RM for decision
space Pd
F with cumulative regret upper bound RT , and an
α-competitive temporal greedy OCRS, Algorithm 2 provides
α max
S∈Id
T
X
t=1
f(1S, wt) −E
" T
X
t=1
f(at, wt)
#
≤RT .
Since we are assuming the existence of a polynomial-
time separation oracle for the set Pd
F, then the LP
arg maxx∈Pd
F f(x, w) can be solved in polynomial time
for any w. Therefore, we can instantiate a regret minimizer
for Pd
F by using, for example, follow-the-regularised-leader
which yields RT ≤˜O(m
√
T) (Orabona 2019).
Semi-Bandit Feedback with White-Box OCRS
In this setting, given a temporal OCRS ˆπ, it is enough to
show that we can compute the probability that a certain
super-arm a is selected by ˆπ given a certain order of ar-
rivals at stage t and a vector of weights w. If that is the
case, we can build a no-α-regret algorithm with regret upper
bound of ˜O(m
√
T) by employing Algorithm 2 and by in-
stantiating the regret minimizer RM as the online stochastic
mirror descent (OSMD) framework by Audibert, Bubeck,
and Lugosi (2014). We observe that the regret bound ob-
tained is this way is tight in the semi-bandit setting (Audib-
ert, Bubeck, and Lugosi 2014). Let qt(e) be the probability
6We remark that a (b, c)-selectable OCRS yields a bc competi-
tive ratio. In the following, we let α := bc.

Algorithm 3: SEMI-BANDIT-FEEDBACK ALGO-
RITHM WITH ORACLE ACCESS TO OCRS
Input: T , Fd, temporal OCRS ˆπ, full-feedback
algorithm RM for decision space Pd
F
Let Z be initialized as in Theorem 3, and initialize
RM appropriately
for τ = 1, . . . , Z do
Iτ ←

(τ −1) T
Z + 1, . . . , τ T
Z
	
Choose a random permutation p : [m] →E, and
t1, . . . , tm stages at random from Iτ
xτ ←RM.RECOMMEND()
for t = (τ −1) T
Z + 1, . . . , τ T
Z do
if t = tj for some j ∈[m] then
xt ←1Sd for a feasible set Sd
containing p(j)
elsext ←xτ
Play at obtained from the OCRS ˆπ executed
with fractional solution xt
Compute estimators ˜fτ(e) of
fτ(e) :=
1
|Iτ |
P
t∈Iτ f(1e, wt) for each e ∈E
RM.UPDATE

˜fτ(·)

with which our algorithm selects element e at time t. Then,
we can equip OSMD with the following unbiased estimator
of the vector of weights: ˆwt,e := wt,eat,e/qt(e). 7 In order to
compute qt(·) we need to have observed the order of arrival
at stage t, the weights corresponding to super-arm at, and
we need to be able to compute the probability with which
the OCRS selected e at t. This the reason for which we talk
about “white-box” OCRS, as we need to simulate ex post
the procedure followed by the OCRS in order to compute
qt(·). When we know the procedure followed by the OCRS,
we can always compute qt(e) for any element e selected at
stage t, since at the end of stage t we know the order of
arrival, weights for selected elements, and the initial frac-
tional solution xt. We provide further intuition as for how to
compute such probabilities through the running example of
matching constraints.
Example 3. Consider Algorithm 2 initialized with the OCRS
of Example 1. Given stage t, we can safely limit our atten-
tion to selected edges (i.e., elements e such that at,e = 1).
Indeed, all other edges will either be unfeasible (which im-
plies that the probability of selecting them is 0), or they were
not selected despite being feasible. Consider an arbitrary
element e among those selected. Conditioned on the past
choices up to element e, we know that e ∈at will be fea-
sible with certainty, and thus the (unconditional) probability
it is selected is simply qt(e) = 1 −e−yt,e.
Semi-Bandit Feedback and Oracle Access to OCRS
As in the previous case, at each stage t the decision maker
can only observe the weights associated to each edge se-
7We observe that ˆwt,e is equal to 0 when e has not been selected
at stage t because, in that case, at,e = 0.
lected by at. Therefore, they have no counterfactual infor-
mation on their reward had they selected a different feasi-
ble set. On top of that, we assume that the OCRS is given
as a black-box, and therefore we cannot compute ex post
the probabilities qt(e) for selected elements. However, we
show that it is possible to tackle this setting by exploiting a
reduction from the semi-bandit feedback setting to the full-
information feedback one. In doing so, we follow the ap-
proach ﬁrst proposed by Awerbuch and Kleinberg (2008).
The idea is to split the time horizon T into a given num-
ber of equally-sized blocks. Each block allows the decision
maker to simulate a single stage of the full information set-
ting. We denote the number of blocks by Z, and each block
τ ∈[Z] is composed by a sequence of consecutive stages
Iτ. Algorithm 3 describes the main steps of our procedure.
In particular, the algorithm employs a procedure RM, an al-
gorithm for the full feedback setting as the one described
in the previous section, that exposes an interface with the
two operation of a traditional regret minimizer. During each
block τ, the full-information subroutine is used to compute
a vector xτ. Then, in most stages of the window Iτ, the de-
cision at is computed by feeding xτ to the OCRS. A few
stages are chosen uniformly at random to estimate utilities
provided by other feasible sets (i.e., exploration phase). Af-
ter the execution of all the stages in the window Iτ, the al-
gorithm computes estimated reward functions and uses them
to update the full-information regret minimizer.
Let p : [m] →E be a random permutation of elements in
E. Then, for each e ∈E, by letting j be the index such that
p(j) = e in the current block τ, an unbiased estimator ˜fτ(e)
of fτ(e) :=
1
|Iτ |
P
t∈Iτ f(1e, wt) can be easily obtained by
setting ˜fτ(e) := f(1e, wtj). Then, it is possible to show that
our algorithm provides the following guarantees.
Theorem 3. Given a temporal packing feasibility set Fd,
and an α-competitive OCRS ˆπ, let Z = T 2/3, and the full
feedback subroutine RM be deﬁned as per Theorem 2. Then
Algorithm 3 guarantees that
α max
S∈Id
T
X
t=1
f(1S, wt) −E
" T
X
t=1
f(at, wt)
#
≤˜O(T 2/3).
6
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper we introduce fully dynamic online selection
problems in which selected items affect the combinatorial
constraints during their activity times. We presented a gen-
eralization of the OCRS approach that provides near opti-
mal competitive ratios in the full-information model, and no-
α-regret algorithms with polynomial per-iteration running
time with both full- and semi-bandit feedback. Our frame-
work opens various future research directions. For example,
it would be particularly interesting to understand whether a
variation of Algorithms 2 and 3 can be extended to the case
in which the adversary changes the constraint family at each
stage. Moreover, the study of the bandit-feedback model re-
mains open, and no regret bound is known for that setting.
