arXiv:1801.00688v1  [cs.CV]  2 Jan 2018
Electronic Letters on Computer Vision and Image Analysis 16(2):17-20, 2017
Learning audio and image representations with
bio-inspired trainable feature extractors
Nicola Strisciuglio∗
∗Johann Bernoulli Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Groningen, Netherlands
This work was carried out at the University of Groningen (Netherlands) and at the University of Salerno (Italy)
Received 24th Jul 2017; accepted 24th Nov 2017
Abstract
Recent advancements in pattern recognition and signal processing concern the automatic learning of
data representations from labeled training samples. Typical approaches are based on deep learning and
convolutional neural networks, which require large amount of labeled training samples. In this work, we
propose novel feature extractors that can be used to learn the representation of single prototype samples in
an automatic conﬁguration process. We employ the proposed feature extractors in applications of audio and
image processing, and show their effectiveness on benchmark data sets.
1
Introduction
Since when very young, we can quickly learn new concepts, and distinguish between different kinds of object
or sound. If we see a single object or hear a particular sound, we are then able to recognize such sample or even
different versions of it in other scenarios. For example, if one sees an iron chair and associates the object to the
general concept of “chairs”, he will be able to detect and recognize also wooden or wicker chairs. Similarly,
when we hear the sound of a particular event, such as a scream, we are then able to recognize other kinds of
scream that occur in different environments. We continuously learn representations of the real world, which we
then use in order to understand new and changing environments.
In the ﬁeld of pattern recognition, traditional methods are typically based on representations of the real world
that require a careful design of a suitable feature set (i.e. a data representation), which involves considerable
domain knowledge and effort by experts. Recently, approaches for automated learning of representations from
training data were introduced. Representation learning aims at avoiding engineering of hand-crafted features
and providing automatically learned features suitable for the recognition tasks. Nowadays, widely popular
approaches for representation learning are based on deep learning techniques and convolutional neural networks
(CNN). These techniques are very powerful, but are computationally expensive and require large amount of
labeled training data to learn effective models for the applications at hand.
In this paper we report the main achievements included in the doctoral thesis titled ‘Bio-inspired algorithms
for pattern recognition in audio and image processing’, in which we proposed novel approaches for represen-
tation learning for audio and image signals [5].

Recommended for acceptance by Anjan Dutta and Carles S´anchez
http://dx.doi.org/10.5565/rev/elcvia.1128
ELCVIA ISSN:1577-5097
Published by Computer Vision Center / Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain

18
Electronic Letters on Computer Vision and Image Analysis 16(2):17-20, 2017
feature
extraction
pre-processing
feature
selection
model
training
classiﬁcation/rejection
feature
learning
input
data
decision
Figure 1: Overview of a pattern recognition system. The input data are pre-processed and then features are
computed to extract important properties from such data. The features to be computed can be determined by
an engineering process or can be learned from the data (representation learning). Feature selection procedures
can be employed to determine a sub set of discriminant features that are then used to train a classiﬁer, which
determines a model of the training data. Such model is then used in the operating phase of the system, while a
classiﬁer takes decisions on the input data.
2
Motivation and contribution
Motivated by the fact that we can learn effective representations of a new category of objects or sounds from
a single example and successively generalize to a wide range of real-world samples, we studied the possibility
of learning data representations from small amounts of training samples. We investigated the design of feature
extractors that can be automatically trained by showing single prototype samples, and employed them into
pattern recognition systems to solve practical problems.
We proposed representation learning techniques for audio and image processing based on novel trainable
feature extractors. The design and implementation of the proposed feature extractors are inspired by some
functions of the human auditory and visual systems. The structure of the proposed feature extractors is learned
from training samples in an automatic conﬁguration step, rather than ﬁxed a-priori in the implementation [5].
We employed the newly designed methodologies into systems for audio event detection and classiﬁcation in
noisy environments and for delineation of blood vessels in retinal fundus images. The contributions of this
work can be listed as: a) novel bio-inspired trainable feature extractors for representation learning of audio
and image signals, respectively called COPE and B-COSFIRE; b) a system for audio event detection based on
COPE feature extractors; c) the release of two data sets of audio events of interest mixed to various background
sounds and with different signal to noise ratios (SNR); d) a method for delineation of elongated and curvilinear
patterns in images based on B-COSFIRE ﬁlters; e) feature selection mechanisms based on information theory
and machine learning approaches.
3
Methods
We introduced a novel approach for representation learning, based on trainable feature extractors. We extended
the traditional scheme of pattern recognition systems with feature learning algorithms (dashed box at the top of
Figure 1), which construct a suitable representation of training data by automatic conﬁguring a set of feature
extractors.

Electronic Letters on Computer Vision and Image Analysis 16(2):17-20, 2017
19
We proposed trainable COPE (Combination of Peaks of Energy) feature extractors for sound analysis, that
can be trained to detect any sound pattern of interest. In an automatic conﬁguration process performed on a
single prototype sound pattern, the structure of a COPE feature extractor is learned by modeling the constel-
lation of peak points in a time-frequency representation of the input sound [10]. In the application phase, a
COPE feature has high value when computed on the same sound used for conﬁguration, but also to similar or
corrupted versions of it due to noise or distortion. This accounts for generalization capabilities and robustness
of detection of the patterns of interest. The response of a COPE feature extractor is computed as the combi-
nation of the weighted score of its constituent constellation of energy peaks. For further detail we refer the
reader to [10]. For the design of COPE feature extractors, we were inspired by some functions of the cochlea
membrane and the inner hair cells in the auditory system, which convert the sound pressure waves into neural
stimuli on the auditory nerve. We employed COPE feature extractors together with a multi-class Support Vector
Machine (SVM) classiﬁer to perform audio event detection and classiﬁcation, also in cases where sounds have
null or negative SNR.
We proposed B-COSFIRE (that stands for Bar-selective Combination of Shifted Filter Responses) ﬁlters for
detection of elongated and curvilinear patterns in images and apply them to the delineation of blood vessels in
retinal images [1, 8]. The B-COSFIRE ﬁlters are trainable, that is their structure is automatically conﬁgured
from prototype elongated patterns. The design of the B-COSFIRE ﬁlters is inspired by the functions of some
neurons, called simple cells, in area V1 of the visual system, which ﬁre when presented with line or contour
stimuli. A B-COSFIRE ﬁlter achieves orientation selectivity by computing the weighted geometric mean of the
output of a pool of Difference-of-Gaussians (DoG) ﬁlters, whose supports are aligned in a collinear manner.
Rotation invariance is efﬁciently obtained by appropriate shiftings of the DoG ﬁlter responses. For further
detail we refer the reader to [1].
After conﬁguring a large bank of B-COSFIRE ﬁlters selective for vessels (i.e. lines) and vessel-endings (i.e.
line-endings) of various thickness (i.e. scale), we proposed to use several approaches based on information
theory and machine learning to select an optimal subset of B-COSFIRE ﬁlters for the vessel delineation task [7,
9]. We indicate this procedure with the dashed box named ‘feature learning’ in Figure 1. We consider the
selected ﬁlters as feature extractors to construct a pixel-wise feature vector which we used in combination with
a SVM classiﬁer to classify the pixels in the testing image as vessel and non-vessel pixels.
4
Experiments and Results
We released two data sets for benchmark of audio event detection and classiﬁcation methods, namely the
MIVIA audio events [3] and the MIVIA road events [2] data sets. We reported baseline results (recognition
rate of 86.7% and 82% on the two data sets) by using a real-time method for event detection that is based on
an adaptation of the bag of features classiﬁcation scheme to noisy audio streams [3, 2]. The results that we
achieved by using COPE feature extractors show a considerable improvement with respect to the ones of the
bag of features approach. We obtained a recognition rate of 95.38% on the MIVIA audio event and of 94%
(with standard deviation on cross-validation experiments equal to 4.32) on the MIVIA road event data sets.
We performed t-Student tests and observed a statistically signiﬁcant improvement of the recognition rate with
respect to baseline performance on both data sets.
We evaluated the performance of the proposed B-COSFIRE ﬁlters on four data sets of retinal fundus images
for benchmarking of blood vessel segmentation algorithms, namely the DRIVE, STARE, CHASE DB1 and
HRF data sets. The results that we achieved (DRIVE: Se = 0.7655, Sp = 0.9704; STARE: Se = 0.7716,
Sp = 0.9701; CHASE DB1: Se = 0.7585, Sp = 0.9587; HRF: Se = 0.7511, Sp = 0.9745) are higher than the ones
reported by many state-of-the-art methods based on ﬁltering approaches. The ﬁlter selection procedure based
on supervised learning that we proposed in [9] contributes to a statistically signiﬁcant increase of performance
results, which are higher than or comparable to the ones of other methods based on machine learning techniques.
We extended the application range of the B-COSFIRE ﬁlters to aerial images for the delineation of roads and
rivers, natural and textured images [4], and to pavement and road surface images for the detection of cracks and

20
Electronic Letters on Computer Vision and Image Analysis 16(2):17-20, 2017
damages [6]. The results that we achieved are better than or comparable to the ones achieved by existing meth-
ods, which are usually designed to solve speciﬁc problems. The proposed B-COSFIRE ﬁlters demonstrated
to be effective in various applications and with different types of images (retinal fundus photography, aerial
photography, laser scans) for delineation of elongated and curvilinear patterns.
We studied the computational requirements of the proposed algorithms in order to evaluate their applicability
in real-world applications and the fulﬁllment of real-time constraints given by the considered problems. The
MATLAB implementation of the proposed algorithms are publicly released for research purposes*.
5
Conclusions
In this work, we proposed novel trainable feature extractors and employed them in applications of sound and
image processing. The trainable character of the proposed feature extractors is in that their structure is learned
directly from training data in an automatic conﬁguration process, rather the ﬁed in the implementation. This
provides ﬂexibility and adaptability of the proposed methods to different applications. The experimental results
that we achieved, compared to the ones of other existing approaches, demonstrated the effectiveness of the
proposed methods in various applications.
This work contributes to the development of techniques for representation learning in audio and image
processing, suitable for domains where there is no availability of large amount of labeled training data.
