1
DiPSeN: Differentially Private Self-normalizing
Neural Networks For Adversarial Robustness in
Federated Learning
Olakunle Ibitoye, Member, IEEE, M. Omair Shaﬁq, Member, IEEE, and Ashraf Matrawy, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—The need for robust, secure and private machine
learning is an important goal for realizing the full potential of
the Internet of Things (IoT). Federated learning has proven to
help protect against privacy violations and information leakage.
However, it introduces new risk vectors which make machine
learning models more difﬁcult to defend against adversarial
samples.
In this study, we examine the role of differential privacy
and self-normalization in mitigating the risk of adversarial
samples speciﬁcally in a federated learning environment. We
introduce DiPSeN, a Differentially Private Self-normalizing Neu-
ral Network which combines elements of differential privacy
noise with self-normalizing techniques. Our empirical results on
three publicly available datasets show that DiPSeN successfully
improves the adversarial robustness of a deep learning classiﬁer
in a federated learning environment based on several evaluation
metrics.
Index Terms—Federated Learning, Differential Privacy, Ad-
versarial Samples, Resilience, Self-normalizing Neural Networks
(SNN).
I. INTRODUCTION
F
EDERATED learning [1] is a recent trend in privacy
preserving machine learning in which multiple client
devices collaboratively participate in a machine learning pro-
cess without revealing their private data. Each client device
maintains a local model, while a master device aggregates the
local models from the client devices. Federated learning is a
promising solution to the several privacy concerns which limit
the acceptability of the Internet of Things (IoT).
While federated learning seeks to solve the problem of
privacy violation and information leakage in machine learn-
ing (ML), other common challenges such as security and
robustness still remain prevalent in federated learning. In this
study, we explore the problem of ML robustness in a federated
learning setting. ML models are known to be vulnerable to
adversarial samples. Adversarial samples are specially crafted
data samples, which are designed to alter the training or
inference pipelines of a machine learning system in order to
impact the reliability of the machine learning system [2].
Various techniques such as adversarial training [3] have
been proposed for defending against adversarial samples.
Many of these solutions do not address the distributed and
autonomous nature of federated learning. Hence, in this study,
we propose a technique for defending against adversarial
samples, that is suited for a federated learning environment.
Olakunle Ibitoye, M.Omair Shaﬁq, and Ashraf Matrawy are with Carleton
School of Information Technology.
Our study combines two techniques - differential privacy
and self-normalization - and evaluates their combined effec-
tiveness in improving the adversarial robustness of neural
networks in a federated learning environment.
Normalizaton is a technique used in neural networks to
dampen the oscillations that occur in the distribution of activa-
tions at the output of each neuron or node. When normalization
is applied, a neural network model’s ability to generalize is
signiﬁcantly improved and the training time is reduced as a
result of normalization during the back propagation process.
Also, the neural network becomes more resilient to vanishing
and exploding gradients as a result of the normalization
process. A Self-normalizing Neural Network (SNN) [4] is
a type of deep learning model that maintains the stability
of the network during the gradient descent process. A self
normalizing neural network replaces the standard activation
functions in a typical neural network with a speciﬁc activation
function known as the scaled exponential linear unit (SELU).
Differential Privacy involves the addition of random noise
to a data sample to produce anonymity. A differentially private
algorithm must provide guarantee that the result of analysis on
a certain dataset remains unchanged even if a particular record
was absent from the dataset.
We combine the two concepts - differential privacy, and self-
normalization - to implement a neural network model that is
more robust to adversarial samples. Both concepts respectively
address two elements that are known to cause neural network
models to be vulnerable to adversarial samples; sensitivity
and invariance. Both elements are further discussed in section
IV-A.
Our Contributions in this paper are as follows: For our
ﬁrst contribution, we introduce a neural network model
termed ”DiPSEN” which demonstrates increased robustness
to adversarial robustness in a federated learning setting.
For our second contribution we demonstrate that adversar-
ial robustness can be improved without signiﬁcantly increasing
the computational overhead of the neural network training and
inference. We consider this an important criteria for applying
federated learning in an IoT environment due to the resource
constraint nature of client participants in a federated learning
setting.
In our third and ﬁnal contribution, we demonstrate that
our approach is useful in an heterogeneous environment which
is typical to IoT environment, by using heterogeneous data
samples, including a combination of images and network
trafﬁc data. Our results show DiPSEN improves adversarial
arXiv:2101.03218v1  [cs.LG]  8 Jan 2021

2
robustness with heterogeneous datasets, which are typical for
a federated learning environment.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Adversarial Machine Learning
A machine learning model can be represented as a function
f(x) that maps an input X into an output y, where input
X is a vector of numerical values, and output y is either
a real number
or a label. Since our study here focuses on
a classiﬁcation model, we discuss adversarial examples in
the context of a neural network classiﬁcation model. Given
a classiﬁer f : X 7→{1, ..., k} where X ∈Rn. The output
of the model is the highest probability from a probability
distribution across the labels. The model output could thus
be deﬁned as a vector y which represents the scores such
that yk(x) ∈[0, 1]and PK
k=1 yk(X) = 1, and such that
f(x) = argmaxk∈Kyk(x).
An adversary may induce a wrong prediction from this
model by crafting a carefully constructed input x′ which is
known as an adversarial sample. The adversarial sample is
generated by introducing a small perturbation α to the input
x such that x + α = x′.
B. Differential Privacy
The primary goal of differential privacy (DP) in machine
learning is to preserve the privacy of the training data by
adding some form of noise to induce uncertainty in the data
distribution [5]. A typical mechanism for achieving differential
privacy as proposed by Dwork et al. [6] approximates a
deterministic function f : D →R which is calibrated to the
sensitivity of f. In our study, the framework for generating the
differential privacy noise follows two steps. First, the param-
eters for the additive noise are carefully selected following a
Gaussian distribution. A sequential composition of bounded-
sensitivity functions is then approximated. More details are
provided in section VI-D and in Algorithm 1 below.
C. Self-normalizing Neural Networks
Neural networks with deep architectures have been known
to experience gradient decay, resulting in poor performance.
During stochastic gradient descent, the distribution of the
weights ”W” in the neural network as well as the outputs ”x”
of each layer are known to vary signiﬁcantly for every iteration
of the stochastic gradient descent process. As a result of the
variations, the training process becomes very unstable, hence
resulting in saturated activations and consequently introducing
the problem of vanishing gradients. Klambauer et al [4]
proposed the Self-normalizing Neural Networks (SNN) which
is a variant of the ANN that uses a Scaled Exponential Linear
Unit (SELU) activation function. The scaled exponential linear
unit is shown as:
selu(x) =
 x
if x > 0
αx −α
if x <= 0 .
With the SELU activation function, the mean of the activa-
tion output is kept at zero and the variance is kept at one. This
allows for deeper neural network architectures to be trained
without suffering signiﬁcant gradient decay.
D. Federated Learning
In a federated learning setting, we have a number of clients
C1, ...Cn who jointly train a machine learning model θg while
keeping their individual data private. Each of the clients Ci
receives the same initialized copy of the global model θg from
a central server or aggregator A who initializes the global
model θg and broadcasts it to the client participants. Each
client device C1, C2, ...Cn stores the model on the device as
a local model θl and then trains their respective local model
θl1, ...θln, using their own respective private data D1, ...Dn,.
The federated learning process begins with a round of
learning t in which the aggregator A broadcasts θg to only a
few selected client participants. C1, ...Ctn. The clients update
their respective local models from θt
li to ˆθt
li and send it back to
the aggregator. The aggregator then updates the global model
θg using a speciﬁc aggregation algorithm such as Federated
Averaging (FedAvg) ∆[1] .
Multiple rounds of training are conducted until the global
model is fully trained. The global model represents an average
of the knowledge embodied in all the client devices depending
on the aggregation algorithm which was used. In this study, we
explore the FedAvg [1], which simply computes the average of
the parameters of each of the individual updated local models.
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
Defending against adversarial samples in a federated learn-
ing environment is quite challenging due to the distributed
and autonomous nature of federated learning. One of the most
effective defences against adversarial samples is adversarial
training proposed by Madry et al [7].
Adversarial training is usually undertaken as a mimax
optimization problem, which updates the weights of the model
with regards to the adversarial sample. The approach of
adversarial training is to conduct a robust optimization [8],
the effectiveness of which depends on the ability to ﬁnd the
worst case adversarial sample, and make the model robust
to this sample. Sinha et al. [9] have proven that the task of
ﬁnding this worst possible adversarial sample is a very difﬁcult
optimization task to achieve.
Adversarial training is impractical in a federated learning
setting for some obvious reasons. First, since the data cannot
be inspected, it is impossible to set the appropriate bounds
for p-norm to perform adversarial training. Secondly, adver-
sarial training requires signiﬁcant compute compute resources,
which is not often feasible on the client participant devices.
Thirdly, adversarial training was primarily designed for In-
dependent and Identically distributed (IID) data [10] which
the distributed and autonomous nature of federated learning
schemes usually do not provide [7].
In our previous work [11], we showed that self-normalizing
properties of neural networks was a provable means of achiev-
ing adversarial robustness. Our previous approach does not
apply in this case, since in a federated learning scheme,
the training data is not centralized, but distributed across
several clients. Hence, we investigate adversarial robustness in
a different context. Compared to our previous work, in this new
study, we combine self-normalization with differential privacy
noise to improve robustness against adversarial samples.

3
Fig. 1: DiPSeN Architecture
IV. OUR PROPOSED SOLUTION - DIPSEN
In this study, we propose a Differentially Private Self-
normalizing Neural Network, which we term as DiPSeN.
Our solution works by combining a differential privacy noise
layer, with a self-normalizing layer, to improve adversarial
robustness.
A. Methodology
Our model f(x) has a scoring function denoted as Q(x)
which maps the input x to a probability distribution of labels
y. The adversarial vulnerability of the model f(x) is based on
the unbounded sensitivity of Q(x) to changes in the inputted x
measured according to the p-norm change [12]. The excessive
invariance of the model further contributes to the adversarial
vunerability of the model [13]. Our goal is to reduce both
the sensitivity of scoring function Q(x), and the invariance
of the model f(x). To reduce the sensitivity of the scoring
function, we add a differentially private noise layer drawn
from a Gaussian distribution as shown in Fig. 1. To reduce the
invariance in the model parameters, we stabilize the model by
adding a self-normalizing layer to the architecture.
B. Differentially Private Noise Layer
The connection between differential privacy (DP) and ad-
versarial robustness was studied by Lecuyer et al. [12], who
demonstrated that a classiﬁer which satisﬁes DP with respec-
tive to atomic units such as pixels, can be leveraged for
adversarial robustness.
For our study, we incorporate a noise layer that satisﬁes
differential privacy requirements. The noise layer generates a
noise input with zero mean, using the Gaussian distribution.
A Gaussian noise distribution is preferably selected since it
inherently has lower variance, compared to other distribution
such as laplace distribution, based on our objective of further
reducing the invariance in the subsequent layers. As shown in
Fig. 1, the noise layer is placed directly after the ﬁrst hidden
layer. Similar to the work of [12], the noise distribution is
directly proportional to the sensitivity of the scoring function
Q(x) from the output of the ﬁrst hidden layer. The result is
a randomized scoring function ˆQ(x) with an output that is
less sensitive to changes in the input, unlike the initial scoring
function which was highly sensitive. To further reinforce the
model to the vulnerability effects of invariance, we apply a
selu layer to the subsequent layers, which we discuss in the
next subsection IV-C.
C. SELU layer
Our goal in adding the SELU layer is to mitigate the
excessive invariance which is known to cause adversarial
vulnerability in our neural network model. The intuition be-
hind self-normalization is to keep the mean and the variance
as close to 0 and 1 respectively throughout each layer of
the neural network. The SELU layer comprises of a Scaled
Exponential Linear Unit (SELU) activation function followed
by an AlphaDropout layer [4] which randomly sets the neurons
to a speciﬁed value instead of a zero value which is typical
for the standard dropout, enabling us to retain the mean and
variance at 0 and 1 respectively. For initializing the weights,
a Lecun Uniform Initializer [14] is utilized.
V. THREAT MODEL
Fig. 2 below depicts our threat model for this study. Our
study considers an adversary who alters the inference data
to craft adversarial samples with the intent of misleading the
machine learning model into making a wrong prediction. This
is termed an evasion attack which occurs during the prediction
phase of machine learning and differs from a poisoning attack
which occurs during the training phase in which the adversary
seeks to poison the training data.
Our study assumes an untargeted attack. Untargeted attacks,
typically aim to reduce the overall accuracy of the global
model without any speciﬁc misclassiﬁcation outcome. This
differs from a targeted attack in which the adversary’s aim
is to achieve a speciﬁc misclassiﬁcation outcome on selected
examples, even though the global model maintains a good
accuracy for the majority of other samples.
For our study, we assume a white box attack, with the adver-
sary being able to inspect and observe the model parameters
during the entire attack process. We consider that a federated
learning scheme could have three possible scenarios in which
the adversary could have knowledge about the model parame-
ters. Firstly, the adversary may have a complete knowledge of
the current deep learning model, and can observe or inspect the
model parameters during the training and prediction phases.
This is known as a white box attack. A second possibility is an
orange-box attack, in which the adversary only has access to a
stale version of the deep learning model. The third possibility
is a black-box attack, meaning that the adversary is unable
to observe the model parameters at any stage and has no
knowledge about the model.

4
Fig. 2: Threat Model
VI. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Details, overall architecture of the experimental setup
The experiments were carried out on a local deep learning
workstation with processor details - Intel(R) core(TM) i7-

of 500 Gb SSD and 32GHz DDR4 Random Access Memory
(RAM). For the software, the code was written in Python 3.7
using the Pycharm integrated development Environment and
with the Anaconda data science distribution. The deep learning
model was implemented using Tensorﬂow V2 machine learn-
ing framework with the inbuilt keras API. All experiments
were run locally using a separate command line console for
each experiment. All tools, frameworks and datasets utilized
are open source or publicly available.
The adversarial samples and the federated learning parties
were generated using the IBM adversarial Robustness Toolbox
(ART) [15] and federated learning [16] frameworks respec-
tively.
B. Neural Network Model and Federated learning Scheme
We build a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model,
intialized it at the aggregator and broadcasted to the client
participants. The CNN model consists of one input layer, two
hidden layers and one fully connected (Dense) layer. Each
hidden layers consist of a convolution layer and a pooling
layer for extracting hidden representations from the dataset.
The noise layer is applied after the ﬁrst hidden layer while
the Self-normalizing layer is added after the second hidden
layer as shown in Fig. 1.
The federated learning setting is shown in Fig. 2. For the
experiment, we implemented a federated learning scheme with
one aggregator, and 200 client participants or nodes. The
aggregator itself does not participate in the training process
but initiates the parameters of the model and sends a copy
of the model to a randomly selected number of clients to
participate in the ﬁrst round. The client participants update
their local copy of the model and send the updated version
to the aggregator who aggregates the parameters of each
clients model. The aggregator then sends the updated model
to another selected number of clients to participate in the
second round. The process continues until an accurate model
is obtained.
C. Dataset, feature engineering and data pre-processing
We use three datasets for our study. One image classiﬁcation
dataset, one ﬁngerprint biometric dataset and one network
trafﬁc dataset. For the ﬁrst image dataset, the MNIST dataset
[17] is used which contains 60,0000 training examples and
10,000 test examples. Each instance of the dataset represents
an image which consists of 28 X 28 pixels and is loaded
as a matrix with values ranging from 0-255. After loading
the dataset, the images are scaled to values between 0 and 1
by dividing the matrix by 255. All included features for the
MNIST dataset are used in building the neural network model.
The second image dataset is the Sokoto Conventry Fin-
gerprint dataset (SocoFing) [18] which is a biometric ﬁnger-
print. The dataset consists of 6000 ﬁngerprint images from
600 African datasets and contains unique attributes of each
participant in the study. The labels for the dataset include
gender, hand and ﬁnger name. It also includes synthetically
altered versions with three different levels of alteration for
obliteration, central rotation, and z-cut. Each of the sample in
the dataset is a (28x28) px grey-scale pixel image of one of
the ten digits 0 - 10. Hence the input vector into our neural
network model has a shape (28x28x28) pixels.
The third dataset is the CTU-13 dataset [19] which is a
network trafﬁc dataset of botnet trafﬁc consisting of real botnet
trafﬁc combined with background trafﬁc and normal trafﬁc.
The original CTU-13 dataset contains 16 features out of which
we use 6 features which are considered most relevant to the
study. The remaining features were omitted since they had less
impact on the output and were likely to result in overﬁtting of
the model. The dataset was standardized by scaling them to
values between 0 and 1. To prepare the CTU-13 dataset for the
convolution layer, the dataset was reshaped into 3 dimensions
to represent a shape of (28,28,1).

5
Algorithm 1: DiPSEN Algorithm Details
Initialize θt at Server
Initialize number of hidden layers L, weights w;
Add input layer, activation layer, dropout layer
for i in L - 1 do
Add DP Noise Layer;
gt ←1/L(P gt(xi) + N(0, S2
f.σ2)
Add SELU Layer;
g(Ω) = (µ, v)|µ ∈[µmin, µmax], v ∈[vmin, vmax]
end
Add output layer, softmax activation layer
for each training round t = 1,2,3... do
Select m = C ∗K clients, C ∈(0, 1) clients
Download θt to each client k
for each client k ∈m do
Wait for Client to synchronize
Aggregate local model
end
end
D. Algorithmic details, and complexity
The pseudocode for our solution is presented in Algorithm 1
which illustrates the steps taken to build the model and initiate
the federated learning across the multiple clients and aggregate
the various local models at the server end. The parameters
for the neural network model are grouped into a single input
θ with respect to the loss function L. The Gaussian noise
distribution is represented as N(0, S2
f.σ2)) with a mean of 0
and a standard deviation of S2
fσ. The SELU layer is shown
to map the mean and variance of the activation in each layer
with the mapping that maintains (µ, v) and (µ, v) as close to
0 as possible. The complexity of the algorithm is simpliﬁed
by restricting it to a real-valued function.
E. Generating The Adversarial Samples
We generate our adversarial samples using the Adversarial
Robustness Toolbox (ART) [15] framework which is provided
by IBM and is made available for public use.
The ﬁrst method we use in generating the adversarial
examples for the IoT dataset is the Fast Gradient Sign Method
(FGSM). This method performs a one step gradient update
along the direction of the sign of gradient for every input in
the dataset. [20]. The second method is the Basic Iteration
method (BIM) which runs a ﬁner optimization of the FGSM
with minimal smaller changes for multiple iterations [3]. In
each iteration, the each feature of the input values is clipped to
avoid too large a change on each feature. The third method is
the Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) which is also a variation
of the FGSM attack but omits the random start feature of the
FGSM [7]. All three methods are model dependent methods
and rely on the model gradient.
In our experiments, we craft the adversarial examples with
the intent of misleading the classiﬁer without any speciﬁc
target labels being speciﬁed. The epsilon number represents
the maximum perturbation for the adversarial attack and in
our experiment, we select an epsilon of 0.3.
VII. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH
In this section we evaluate the effectiveness of a differ-
entially private self-normalizing neural network on the ad-
versarial robustness of deep learning models. Our evaluation
criteria are carefully selected with regards to crucial require-
ments in a federated learning setting. Firstly, we bear in
mind that federated learning datasets are typically non -IID
and often times heterogeneous data samples. Our evaluation
dataset thus consists of three types of datasets: a baseline
MNIST image classiﬁcation, ﬁngerprint biometric detection
dataset, and a network intrusion detection dataset. Since the
client participants in a federated learning environment are
often resource constraint, we evaluate out solution based on
the power consumption attributes. Finally, we evaluate our
solution based on the impact of the noise on the prediction
accuracy. We answer the following three questions in our
evaluation steps.
• What is the impact of the additional layers on the model
accuracy?
• How effective is our solution for resource constrained
devices?
• Does our solution scale across different domains such as
image classiﬁcation and network security?
A. Approach
In carrying out this study, we utilize a four-step approach.
First, we implement a deep learning classiﬁer in a federated
learning scheme using a Convolution Neural Network (CNN)
model. We evaluate the accuracy of the CNN model using
three datasets. The resultant accuracy from the CNN model is
what we term the ’Basic CNN Accuracy”.
Next, we enhance the CNN model by adding a DP noise
layer, and a SELU layer. This enhanced CNN model is our
proposed solution which we refer to as ”DiPSEN”. We eval-
uate the classiﬁcation accuracy of DiPSEN with adversarial
free samples. The resultant accuracy from this improved model
with adversarial free samples is what we term the ”Baseline
Accuracy”. The intent of this step is to verify that the two
additional layers do not negatively impact on the accuracy of
the model.
In the third step, we measure the computational overhead of
DiPSEN. This is an important metric since the client devices
in a federated learning setting are assumed to be regular day
to day devices such as IoT devices, with limited computing
power. The intent of this step is to determine if the two
additional layers - the dp noise layer and the SELU layer
- contribute to an excessive computational overhead, which
would make our solution impracticable in an IoT environment.
In the fourth step, we generate adversarial samples and then
evaluate the adversarial robustness of DIPSEN. We compare
the results with the basic CNN model. We evaluate the
adversarial robustness across three heterogeneous datasets to
verify the applicability of our solution with heterogeneous data
samples.

6
B. Evaluation Metrics
We use ﬁve classiﬁcation metrics in our evaluation to
determine the accuracy of the classiﬁer. These are accuracy
(acc), precision (pre), recall (re), F-1 score (f1) and support
(sup). The computational overhead is evaluated based on the
average time per training step.
VIII. RESULTS
A. Basic CNN Accuracy
In the ﬁrst subsection, we conduct an evaluation of a deep
learning classiﬁer using a basic CNN model with all three
datasets. We establish that the CNN model accurately predicts
the various class labels for each dataset. Our result in table
VIII-A shows that the CNN model achieves an accuracy of
97%, 82% and 92% on the MNIST, SocoFing and CTU-
13 datasets respectively. This indicates that the CNN model
performs well on a variety of datasets without any adversarial
samples.
TABLE I: Basic CNN Model Accuracy
S/N
Dataset
acc
pre
rec
f1
sup
1
MNIST(Image)
97%
96%
96%
97%
97%
2
SocoFing(Biometrics)
82%
82%
82%
83%
82%
3
CTU-13(Botnet)
92%
93%
93%
93%
93%
B. DIPSEN Baseline Accuracy
In the previous experiment, we established a functional
CNN model, with high accuracy across all three datasets.
In this second step, we implemented the additional layers
to the basic CNN model namely the DP noise layer and
the SELU layer, which were aimed at providing adversarial
robustness. We term this new model as ”DiPSEN” which is
our proposed solution for improving adversarial robustness.
We evaluated the impact of the added layers that made up
DiPSEN and compared with the basic CNN model in terms
of accuracy. The results shown in Fig. 3 indicate that the
additional layers for adversarial robustness do not adversely
impact the classiﬁcation accuracy of DiPSEN. We ﬁnd that the
classiﬁcation accuracy of our DiPSEN solution is comparable
to that of the basic CNN model.
MNIST
SocoFIng CTU-13
20
40
60
80
100
Dataset
Accuracy (%)
CNN
DiPSeN
Fig. 3: DiPSeN Baseline Accuracy
C. Computational Overhead of DiPSEN vs basic CNN model.
In the third step, we compare the computational overhead
of DiPSEN with the computational overhead of a basic CNN
model. We ﬁnd that DiPSEN does not signiﬁcantly add to
the computational overhead required for training the neural
network model. Our evaluation of the basic CNN computa-
tional overhead using our Intel(TM) Core i7 processor with
GPU RTX 2070 takes an average of 9.6s, 11.5s and 4.8s
per training step for the MNIST, SocoFing and CTU-13
datasets respectively. With DiPSEN, a slight increase of 0.9%
increased overhead on average with 98% conﬁdence interval
is observed across all three datasets. As such, DiPSEN does
not signiﬁcantly degrade performance of the neural network
training.
MNIST
SocoFIng CTU-13
0
5
10
Dataset
Computation Overhead (sec)
CNN
DiPSeN
Fig. 4: Computational Overhead
D. Adversarial Robustness of DiPSEN compared to basic
CNN model.
In the fourth and ﬁnal step, We generated adversarial
samples using the three adversarial attack methods described
in section VI-E namely FGSM, BIM and PGD. we then
compared the adversarial robustness of our proposed solution
- DiPSEN, with the adversarial robustness of the basic CNN
model by. The adversarial robustness is evaluated by testing
the prediction accuracy of the models using the generated
adversarial samples. The results shown in Fig. 5a, 5b and
5c show that DiPSEN has an improved adversarial robustness
compared to the basic CNN model. A summary table of all
results is shown in Fig. 6.
IX. RELATED WORK
Some solutions proposed Byzantine-resilient defenses as
one approach to defend against adversarial samples using
mean estimation [21]. The study performed by Fang et al.
[22] demonstrated that this approach was ineffective against
model poisoning attacks with the context of federated learning.
Other approaches include the use of data shufﬂing [23]. This
approach was also tested for model poisoning attacks, and does
not apply to federated learning since the data is distributed and
private for each participating client.
Another approach for creating robustness in neural network
models, involves the randomization of the model [24]. By
randomizing the model, some element of noise is introduced to
the model which creates a smoothing effect on the prediction

7
FGSM
BIM
PGD
0
20
40
60
80
100
Attach Method
Accuracy (%)
FGSM
BIM
PGD
0
20
40
60
80
100
Attach Method
Accuracy (%)
FGSM
BIM
PGD
0
20
40
60
80
100
Attach Method
Accuracy (%)
CNN DiPSeN
(a) MNIST Dataset
(b) SocoFing Dataset
(c) CTU-13 Dataset
Fig. 5: Adversarial robustness of CNN vs. DiPSEN.
function. This has been shown to empirically result in a
more robust model. Other best effort defenses include model
distillation [25] and gradient masking [26]. Most of these
defenses have been proven to be insufﬁcient in various ways,
and none of them has been proven to defend against adversarial
samples in federated learning. The most similar to our work is
the study by [12] which adopts elements of differential privacy
to achieve differential adversarial robustness.
Data sanitization methods [27] have been proposed specif-
ically for data poisoning attacks, with the aim of removing
suspected poisoned or anomalous data from the training set.
Other defenses have improved on data sanitization to incorpo-
rate advanced techniques such as robust statistics [28]. Since
data sanitization requires access to the client data which is not
feasible in a federated learning setting, this defense technique
is not suitable. A similar defense technique to data sanitization
is network pruning [29] which removes activation units that
have not been active on clean data. This method also requires
data access to dataset which is representative of the global
dataset.
From our literature review, we discovered that no researcher
has evaluated the impact of differential privacy noise with self-
normalization on the robustness of neural networks in a feder-
ated learning scheme. Our study goes further by expanding the
context to heterogeneous dataset samples within the context of
IoT network security. Hence our study is novel and offers a
useful contribution in understanding the security of machine
learning and artiﬁcial intelligence in IoT network security.
X. DISCUSSION
What deﬁnes an adversarial robust model? The challenge
of ﬁnding an adversarial sample is an optimization problem
in which the adversary attempts to ﬁnd a very small change
to the input x that will result in a change to the prediction
label. This optimization problem is further challenged by the
fact that there is a constraint regarding the amount of change
that the adversary can make to input x. The amount of allowed
change to the input x is measured by the p-norm of the change
and is represented as ∥α∥p = (Pn
i=1 |α|p)1/p. For a given p-
norm ∥α∥p, a data sample X ∈Rn, and a given model f(x)an
adversary, an adversary is said to have successfully crafted an
adversarial sample if they can compute α such that f(x)+α ̸=
f(x). An adversarial sample is usually a plausible input, such
as a data sample which appears valid, while resulting in a
wrong prediction output. An adversarially robust model must
then be a model whose output is insensitive to small changes
in the input x.
How does differential privacy noise improve adversar-
ial robustness? The relationship between differential privacy
noise and adversarial robustness has been explored in previous
works [12]. Our approach leverages on this with additional
steps to account for the limitations in a federated learning
setting. Adversarial samples rely on perturbations which are
generated and added to the original data sample. These pertur-
bations are carefully computed using constrained optimization
methods such as fast gradient sign method [30] in a manner
that maximizes the loss function subject to a norm constraint.
Our approach begins primarily with transforming the scoring
function of our neural network model into a randomized
scoring function. This is intended to reduce the sensitivity
of the scoring function to perturbed inputs, or adversarial
samples.
How does self-normalization improve adversarial ro-
bustness? We complement the differential private noise layer
with a self-normalizing layer. The self-normalizing layer in-
corporates a scaled exponential linear unit (SELU) activation
function which has been shown to elicit three distinct prop-
erties. First, the SELU activation function sets to control the
average learning rate (u) of the network using negative and
positive values. Secondly, The SELU maintains a ﬁxed point in
the neural network with the aid of a continuous curve. Thirdly,
the saturation region dampens the variance alpha (learning
rate) and the positive slope augments the alpha (learning rate).
These three properties help to reduce the invariance of the
neural network model [4].
Limitations of our study Our solution combines the
randomization effects of differential privacy noise with the
stabilization effects of the SELU layer to produce a more
adversarial robust neural network model. As a potential limita-
tion in our study, the prediction becomes randomized, thereby
introducing a different problem of intepretability to the neural
network model. This will be explored in a future study.

8
Fig. 6: Summary table of results
XI. CONCLUSION
In a typical Internet of Things (IoT) environment, federated
learning helps to protect against information leakage and
privacy violations. However, the distributed and autonomous
nature of federated learning makes it difﬁcult to defend against
adversarial samples.
We introduced a solution termed ”DiPSEN” which com-
bines a differential privacy noise layer with a self-normalizing
layer. The addition of a noise layer randomizes the scoring
function, making it less sensitive to perturbed inputs. The
self-normalizing (SELU) layer helps reduce the invariance of
the model. We demonstrate that both factors help improve the
adversarial robustness of the model. We further demonstrate
that our solution is effective across heterogeneous datasets,
and computationally effective for resource constrained devices,
thereby making it suitable for application in a typical IoT
environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) through
the NSERC Discovery Grant program.
