AI-driven Inverse Design System for Organic Molecules 
Seiji Takeda1*, Toshiyuki Hama1, Hsiang-Han Hsu1, Toshiyuki Yamane1, Koji Masuda1, 
Victoria A. Piunova2, Dmitry Zubarev2, Jed Pitera2, Daniel P. Sanders2, and Daiju Nakano1 
1IBM Research ‒ Tokyo, Shinkawasaki, Kawasaki, Japan 
2IBM Research ‒ Almaden, San Jose, California, U.S. 
 

Abstract 
Designing novel materials that possess desired properties is a central need across many manufacturing 
industries. Driven by that industrial need, a variety of algorithms and tools have been developed that 
combine AI (machine learning and analytics) with domain knowledge in physics, chemistry, and materials 
science. AI-driven materials design can be divided to mainly two stages; the first one is the modeling stage, 
where the goal is to build an accurate regression or classification model to predict material properties (e.g. 
glass transition temperature) or attributes (e.g. toxic/non-toxic). The next stage is design, where the goal 
is to assemble or tune material structures so that they can achieve user-demanded target property values 
based on a prediction model that is trained in the modeling stage. For maximum benefit, these two stages 
should be architected to form a coherent workflow. Today there are several emerging services and tools for 
AI-driven material design, however, most of them provide only partial technical components (e.g. data 
analyzer, regression model, structure generator, etc.), that are useful for specific purposes, but for 
comprehensive material design, those components need to be orchestrated appropriately. Our material 
design system provides an end-to-end solution to this problem, with a workflow that consists of data input, 
feature encoding, prediction modeling, solution search, and structure generation. The system builds a 
regression model to predict properties, solves an inverse problem on the trained model, and generates novel 
chemical structure candidates that satisfy the target properties. In this paper we will introduce the 
methodology of our system, and demonstrate a simple example of inverse design generating new chemical 
structures that satisfy targeted physical property values. 
1. Introduction 
Innovation in material science is a key driving force for the advancement of all manufacturing industries 
(i.e., those making automobiles, aircraft, solar cells, healthcare devices, pharmaceuticals, and so on). 
Industrial product design relies on available materials, so freedom of the product design is severely 
restricted by the variety of available materials. In order to release product design from restrictions due to 

material availability and performance, and realize more drastic product diﬀerentiation, eﬃcient design of 
novel materials possessing user-demanded properties is of primary importance. 
Todayʼs material development process is well-known to stand on myriad repeats of experimental and 
computational trial-and-error processes that are based on the knowledge, experience, and intuition of 
human subject-matter-expert (SME). However, it should be noticed that the number of todayʼs existing 
materials is only on the order of 109 and the estimated number of theoretically configurable materials is 
much more than 1060 (Bohacek et al., 1996). In addition to this extra vast white space, the overwhelmingly 
increasing volume of documents and papers about material science have already exceeded what SME can 
explore. For the purpose of accelerating the speed of material development − a process that typically 
ranges as long as 10 to 20 years − and also boosting the freedom of material design beyond human 
knowledge and bias, AI has started to play a key role in materials design, often referred as “Cheminformatics” 
or “Materials Informatics”. The advent of AI has been drastically changing the practice of material design. 
Various AI approaches are applied to each functional block in the general workflow of material design (see 
Figure 1). At the data preparation step, natural language processing (NLP) ‒ based AI performs data 
extraction to generate a structured table, and also to generate a knowledge graph (KG), that is used to 
identify word-based “hypothesis” useful in designing materials (Choi et al., 2018). In the design process, 
AI-driven automated design algorithms can generate a lot of candidates rapidly with extended design 
freedom. At the simulation step, some kinds of physical simulation can be accelerated by shortcutting 
iterative steps using AI predictions. Finally, in experimental validation, the synthetic lab process is enhanced 
by reinforcement learning with robotics (Li et al., 2018). The focus of the present paper is the AI-driven 
automated design of materials. 
 
 
Figure 1. Diagram of general AI-driven material design. AI functions are described by blue-colored 
characters. This paper focuses on “AI-driven auto design” at the top right. 

The ultimate goal of AI-driven automated design is to develop a system that can generate and 
enumerate material candidate structures that have never existed and that are most likely to possess user-
demanded target properties. The methodology to achieve this goal can be divided into two sequential  
stages: (i) a modeling stage, where the goal is to build an accurate regression or classiﬁcation model to 
predict material properties (e.g. glass transition temperature) or attributes (e.g. toxic/non-toxic); and (ii) 
a design stage, assembling or tuning material structures by directly manipulating molecular structures so 
that they might possess, based on the trained prediction model, user-demanded target property values (see 
Figure 2). Related research works, tools, and services in the above stages will be introduced below. 
 
Figure 2. Two stages in material design by AI. Even though not exactly same, those concepts are mostly 
shared in many methodologies in Cheminformatics. 
 
    In the modeling stage, a machine learning or analytics model is trained by a suﬃcient amount of 
material data, that is a set of pairs of chemical structure and chemical/physical properties, in order to build 
a regression or classiﬁcation model as accurately as possible. In this stage, feature encoding of chemical 
structures is the key. Especially for organic molecules, various types of feature vector are reported. The 
most popular feature encoding is the Morgan ﬁngerprint, which captures a moleculeʼs graph topological 
features by one-hot encoding the appearance of substructures included in a molecule (Rogers et al., 2010). 

A more powerful encoding for molecules is Graph Convolutional Neural Network (GCNN) (Faber et al., 
2017). There are various versions of GCNN, but their common concept is to iterate summation of 
neighboring feature vectors deﬁned on each atom in a molecule, then the ﬁnal feature vector is given by 
summation (plus some non-linear operation) of all the atom-wise feature vectors (Duvenaud et al., 2015; 
Gilmer et al., 2017; Altae-Tran et al., 2017). The 3-D molecular structure is well encoded by Coulomb 
Matrix which encodes inter-atom Coulomb forces in a molecule (Rupp et al., 2012; Montavon et al., 2012; 
Montavon et al., 2013). For model construction, regression models are mostly built by deep neural networks 
(DNN) (Pyzer-Knapp et al., 2015), but some classical non-linear models (e.g. Kernel Ridge Regression) 
also give reasonable prediction results. Most of research work and existing services in this area are focusing 
on how to increase the accuracy of those prediction models.  
    In the design stage, material structures are computationally built with reference to a prediction model 
trained in the modeling stage. Several diﬀerent approaches exist. The most popular is virtual screening 
(VS). A large number of chemical structures with unknown properties are thrown into the prediction model, 
and only the ones predicted to possess desired properties are selected as candidates (Hachmann et al., 2011; 
Gomez-Bombarelli et al., 2016; Pyzer-Knapp et al., 2015; Pyzer-Knapp et al., 2016). The set of chemical 
structures with unknown properties is called “virtual library”, computationally generated in an exhaustive 
manner mostly using genetic algorithms that repeat structural manipulation on chemical graphs (e.g., 
replacing one atom with another, making/breaking a ring, adding/removing a branch) (Virship et al., 2013). 
The VS approach is useful when users can spare the substantial computational resources required for 
training models and creating a virtual library large enough (typically more than 106-109 molecules) to 
include some promising candidates; but considering its exhaustive search concept, it is not necessarily the 
best option. The other important approach is inverse design, which solves an inverse problem on the 
prediction 
model, 
and 
directly 
generates 
molecular 
structures 
that 
satisfy 
user-demanded 
physical/chemical properties. In contrast to VS, an exhaustive design approach, the inverse design approach, 
ideally, generates only promising structures. A remarkable example of this approach is SMILES-based 
generative model leveraging variational autoencoder (VAE) (Gomez-Bombarelli et al., 2017, Guimaraes et 
al., 2018). SMILES (Simpliﬁed Molecular Input Line Entry System) is a form enabling one to describe a 
chemical structure by using only ASCII strings (Daylight, 1997). The authors constructed a VAE that 
encodes input SMILES corresponding to one chemical structure to a point in latent space, which is decoded 
to SMILES identical to the input one. The latent space is connected to another neural network layer having 
output nodes corresponding to target properties. After training by a dataset (pairs of SMILES and target 
properties), solution candidates are searched for in the latent space by the descent method and found 
solution points are decoded to SMILES strings. 
    Some of technical components included in the above methods are packaged and available as tools or 
webservices (Deepchem; Polymer Genome; Chainer Chemistry; MOLGEN, etc). Those tools provide very 
powerful functions for speciﬁc purposes (e.g. property prediction, structure generation, etc.), but for the 
purpose of comprehensive organic material design, technical components should be architected so that they 

can combine into a coherent workﬂow from the start: ingest material data relevant to the goal; develop a 
regression model; and generate material candidates. In order to realize that purpose, we developed a 
comprehensive inverse design system for small organic molecules, that can provide end-to-end AI-driven 
material inverse design. In this report we will introduce the fundamental methodology implemented in our 
system. 
2. Methods 
The fundamental workflow of our approach consists of (0) data input, (1) feature encoding, (2) property 
prediction, (3) solution search, and (4) structure generation, that are sequentially connected (see Figure 
3). First, a data set with table format listing pairs of chemical structures (SMILEs format) and target 
properties is input as a training dataset. Chemical structures are encoded to a set of feature vectors so that 
a regression model can be built to predict target properties. This process corresponds to the Modeling stage. 
Once a model with enough accuracy is built, the Design stage begins. A user inputs a requested property 
or properties, then the system performs the solution search algorithm to identify feature vector candidates 
that can satisfy the request. Finally, the feature vector candidates are decoded to concrete chemical 
structures by the structure generation algorithm. In this section, a detailed expression of each method is 
described. 
 
Figure 3. The fundamental workflow of our system. Starting with Data input, technical components are 
sequentially connected to Structure Generation. The blue-colored and orange-colored arrows correspond 
to Modeling stage (build property prediction models) and Design stage (inverse design of chemical 
structures) respectively. 
 

2.1 Feature Encoding 
Feature vector for chemical structure is required to satisfy four important demands. First, like the feature 
vector in any industrial domain, it should capture the objectʼs features well so the prediction model can be 
as accurate as possible. Second, it should not be deﬁned preliminarily by limited human  experience or 
knowledge but instead in an automatic data-driven manner. A frequent request from the industrial side is 
that they want to explore materials concepts beyond the area governed by their experience-based “common 
sense”.  Third, the feature vector should be one from which chemical structures can be generated 
(corresponding to “Structure Generation” in Figure 3). Finally, it is desirable that the feature vector is 
interpretable so that users can review, evaluate its adequacy, and adjust it manually if needed. 
    To satisfy the above requirements, we deﬁne substructure-based feature vectors. When we regard a 
molecule as a graph structure in which atoms and bonds correspond to nodes and edges, a substructure 
corresponds to a subgraph. The smallest substructure is an atom, and the largest is the molecule itself. The 
concept of our feature encoding is to count number of substructures included in each molecule and use that 
array of numbers as a feature vector. First, substructures included in the all molecules in the input dataset 
are exhaustively identiﬁed with limited maximum size (e.g. the maximum number of bonds in each 
substructure should be three). For each molecule, the identiﬁed substructures are counted, and the 
numbers are arrayed as a vector. An example for two molecules is shown in Figure 4. This approach may be 
less powerful than GCNN or Coulomb Matrix on the aspect of model accuracy.  However, it has some 
advantages; the most important is that concrete chemical structures can be assembled from the vector 
values in the “Structure Generation” process, and second, the conﬁgured feature vector is completely 
interpretable. 
 
Figure 4. Example to identify and count substructures included in each molecule. Some of substructures 
are not common for the given molecular set (in this case, “N” and “CC”). 

 
     The above method is for only a molecular structure, but when a user needs to ingest additional 
numerical information, simple concatenation works well. In case that the experimental condition also needs 
to be modeled (e.g. predict a polymer glass transition temperature from monomer structure and 
polymerization conditions), the quantitative condition values (e.g. heating temperature, injection speed, 
etc) should be arrayed and concatenated to the molecular feature vector. 
2.2 Property Prediction 
Using the above feature vector, the system builds a regression model to predict target properties. The model 
should be selected depending on material type and target properties. No particular kind of regression need 
be used, but common regressions such as kernel ridge regression generally provide adequate accuracy. In 
case that multiple properties are targeted, models are independently built for each property, but in case of 
using a DNN, a network with multiple outputs can be an option. 
    One diﬀerence from other machine learning tasks is that a DNN is not necessarily the best option. The 
reason is that in material industries generally the number of available data is much smaller (typically on the 
order of 101 to 103) than the case of object recognition, speech recognition, text mining and so on, and 
therefore the high representative power of a DNN can bring on the problem of over ﬁtting. The main 
exceptions are where target properties are low-level (i.e. atomistic level properties such as energy bandgap, 
not mesoscopic molecular level or macroscopic functional level such as luminescent eﬃciency), so that the 
properties of a myriad number of molecules can be quickly calculated by physical simulation (e.g., DFT 
simulation) (Pilania et al., 2013; Mannodi-Kanakkithodi et al., 2016). 
2.3 Solution Search 
After the prediction model is built, a user can set target property values, and the Design stage runs. First, 
the system generates feature vector candidates that satisfy user-set target properties. Due to non-linearity 
and complexity of the prediction model, it is difficult or impossible to obtain a direct inverse function of it, 
therefore the system exploits a search algorithm instead of directly solving an inverse function. The plane 
of a prediction model has multiple peaks of local minima and its search space is discrete, so gradient 
methods are not appropriate. We therefore use the Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm with a 
penalty term for molecular constraints as described later. PSO is a powerful and common meta-heuristic 
optimization algorithm in which virtual “particles” move around to search out solution candidates. Each 
particle iteratively changes position and velocity to minimize the loss function given by the prediction model. 
    A crucial point is that the chemically feasible feature vectors distribute on a substantially narrowed 
manifold that is defined by relationship between the feature vectorʼs elements. Some constraints can be 
checked explicitly. For example, the number of heavy atoms is limited by the number of substructures (e.g. 
number of atoms [O] included in a molecule should be greater than or equal to the number of substructures 

[-OH] included in the same molecule).  
Other constrains are implicit and complicated. The system checks the realizability of a connected graph 
from the substructures given by a feature vector. In the realizability check, difference of atom symbols and 
bond types are ignored and only graph structures of the substructures are considered. Degree frequency 
(the number of vertex of 1, 2, 3, and 4 degree) is counted for the graph structures, and the graph realizability 
of the degree frequency is checked. Since all the feasible degree frequencies of connected graphs up to 
given size can be enumerated before the solution search, the system checks if the counted degree frequency 
reaches one of the feasible degree frequencies with additional vertices. The graph realizability is only a 
necessary condition of the feasibility, but it is important to screen out some infeasible feature vectors in the 
solution search considering the huge computational cost of the next phase, Structure Generation.  
2.4 Structure Generation 
The feature vector candidates discovered out in the Solution Search are decoded to concrete molecular 
structures. For each feature vector, a graph generation algorithm is exploited to assemble molecular 
structures that satisfy values of feature elements (i.e. the number of substructures, atoms, rings, etc). 
Molecular structures are generated by connecting atoms and screened by the number of substructures 
assigned by the feature vector. Of importance is to generate structures both exhaustively (without omission) 
and eﬃciently (without isomorphic duplication). A simple process to exhaustively connect atoms leads to 
divergent combination patterns of atoms, in which most of molecules are isomorphic duplications. In order 
to make the process eﬃcient, it is important to prune generation paths and avoid the duplications. 
We applied McKayʼs canonical construction path algorithm (McKay, 1998), which is also used in 
MOLGEN (Kerber al. al., 1998) and OMG (Peironcely et al., 2012), with some modiﬁcation. McKayʼs 
algorithm computes canonical labeling (Hartke and Radcliﬀe, 2009) for graphs in generation steps to judge 
whether the graph can be further grown or not from the viewpoint of isomorphism. Graphs are grown by 
repeating a generation step to add a new vertex to extendable vertices of a current graph (see Figure 5) in 
a depth ﬁrst manner starting from an initial single vertex. At each generation step, a canonical labeling of a 
current graph is computed. The labeling algorithm assigns ordinals to all the vertices uniquely among the 
isomorphic graphs, which gives a unique construction order of vertex addition for obtaining the graph. If a 
new vertex to add coincides with the last vertex in the construction order, the generation step continues. 
Otherwise, the generation step terminates immediately because its construction path generates only a 
duplicated isomorphic graph.  
Graph structures of rings and fused rings are predeﬁned, and all the variations are generated by 
replacing the vertices with available atoms avoiding isomorphic patterns. They are treated as a single vertex 
in the generation step. Only when a new vertex is added to them, they are restored to original graph 
structures. Since the canonical labelling is a bottleneck of the graph generation and its computation time 
depends on the size of a graph, it greatly improves performance to treat a ring structure as a single vertex 
when possible. 

The numbers of substructures, atoms and rings in the feature elements are updated every time a new 
vertex is added to the current graph in the generation step. If they satisfy the values of the feature vector, a 
molecular structure of the graph is stored. The satisﬁability of the feature vector in the future generation 
steps along the current construction path is also checked considering the remaining atoms and the required 
number of sub-structures, and the generation step terminate if there is no satisﬁability.  
 
Figure 5. McKayʼs canonical construction path to generate graph structures. At each time a vertex is added 
to the current graph, a label is calculated. 
 
3. Demonstration 
In this section we demonstrate the inverse design of new molecular structures that can satisfy target 
properties following the steps described above. 
3.1 Data 
For training the system, we used a dataset extracted from the QM9 Dataset (Irwin and Shoichet, 2005; 
http://zinc15.docking.org/). QM9 is a small organic molecules dataset consisting of 134k molecular 
structures and associated properties. Each molecular structure is conﬁgured by up to 9 heavy atoms with 
limited atom types (C, O, N, F). Properties include geometric, energetic, electronic, and thermodynamic 
properties calculated by DFT theory at the  B3LYP/6-31G(2df,p) level. For simplicity of demonstration, 
we use a smaller 1,000 molecule (1k) dataset regularly extracted from QM9, and focus on a physical 
property; LUMO energy (e LUMO ). The distribution of e LUMO of the extracted data is shown in Figure 6. 
Some of the chemical structures randomly selected from the arrowed area are also shown. A tendency is 
observed that triangular or squared rings increase, and aromatic rings decrease with increase of e LUMO value. 

In this demonstration, we try to design new chemical structures that independently satisfy the three ranges; 
0.038 ≤𝜀'()* ≤0.042 (Ha), −0.02 ≤𝜀'()* ≤0.002 (Ha), -0.042 ≤𝜀'()* ≤−0.038 (Ha). 
 
Figure 6. LUMO energyʼs distribution of the 1,000 (1k) dataset (a). Randomly selected chemical structures 
of each arrowed area are exhibited in (b). 
 
3.2 Feature Encoding 
The system encodes molecular structures in the 1k dataset to feature vectors. As described in 2.1, feature 
vectors are generated by counting number of components included in each molecule. For comparison we 
generate 6 types of diﬀerent feature vectors by varying components to count. Common components to 
count are {heavy atoms, rings, aromatic rings}. Each component includes sub-components, for example 
{heavy atoms} includes {C, N, O, …}. We call the feature made of this component set “Feature 0”. We also 
add a set of substructures including 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 bonds to generate Feature 1, Feature 2, Feature 3, 
Feature 4, Feature 5, respectively (see Figure 7 (a)). Here, it should be noticed that the number of bonds 
means the number of edges between atoms in graph representation, not a single nor double nor triple bond 
as in chemistry. Substructures to count are automatically identiﬁed referring to the 1k dataset. Concrete 
components including the substructures are shown in Figure 7 (b). The number of each component 
corresponds to each element of the feature vectors.  As is shown in this ﬁgure, with an increase of bond 
number, substructure patterns get more complex including branches and rings, therefore those feature 
vectors are expected to have higher representing power. As to aromatic rings, pre-deﬁned aromatic patterns 

are counted only for 5, 6, and 7 membered rings. Dimensions of feature vectors of Feature 0, Feature 1, 
Feature 2, Feature 3, Feature 4, and Feature 5 are 13, 32, 97, 380, 1370, and 4356, respectively. Those 
dimensions will be reduced by feature selection in the regression process. 
 
Figure 7. Components included in each feature vector is exhibited in the blue-edged box (a). 
Subcomponents of each component are exhibited in (b). 
3.3 Property Prediction 
Using the above feature sets, the system builds regression models to predict e LUMO by exploiting three 
regression methods; Lasso, Ridge, and Kernel Ridge with varying hyperparameters. For each regression 
with a assigned hyperparameter set, the 1k dataset is used for training by 10-fold cross validation, in which 
the model accuracy is evaluated by R2 (decision coeﬃcient) value. In Lasso regression, the hyper parameter 
a (L1 penalty term) is swept from 10-4 to 102 with logarithmic increment. In Ridge regression, the hyper 
parameter b (L2 penalty term) is swept from 10-4 to 102 with logarithmic increment. In Kernel Ridge 
regression, we ﬁxed the kernel to RBF (Radial Basis Function) and swept hyper parameters a (L2 penalty 
term) and g (width of RBF kernel) from 10-4 to 102 and 10-3 to 102 respectively with logarithmic increment. 
    R2 obtained by using the 6 feature sets and the 3 models are plotted in Figure 8. Each R2 is an average 
value on the 10-fold cross validation. As is shown, in any model there is a tendency that the model accuracy 
increases as the feature set gets plentiful, but it saturates when the feature set includes substructures having 
more than 2 bonds. From the viewpoints of accuracy and feature vector dimension, we select Feature 2 (97-
dimension) and the Kernel Ridge regression model as the ﬁnal prediction model. The regression results of 
this model are shown in Figure 9. 
 

 
Figure 8. Accuracy of prediction model as a function of Feature setʼs index defined in Figure 7, and three 
types of regression models. 
 
Figure 9. Regression result to predict LUMO energy. Kernel Ridge regression model with Feature 2 was 
used. Yellow circles represent the targeted area for inverse design process. 
3.4 Solution Search 
By using the prediction model, the system runs the solution search algorithm, PSO with chemical constraint, 
to search out feature vector candidates satisfying the three target value ranges. The search space (range of 
feature vectorʼs elements) is automatically set considering the original dataʼs distribution. After running 
the PSO using 1000 particles, we obtained 30 feature vectors (the number to obtain can be set arbitrarily) 
for each target e LUMO value range. To compare the feature distributions, we performed PCA (Primary 
Component Analysis) on feature vectors, and plotted them on two-dimensional space (see Figure 10). As 
shown, it is observed that feature vectors searched out for the three e LUMO values ranges are distributing 

with some degree of divergent proﬁle. This conﬁrms that the PSO algorithm successfully searched out 
solutions in divergent areas.  
 
Figure 10. Distribution profile of 1st and 2nd principle components of feature vectors. Blue plots represent 
the original dataset. Red, black, and yellow plots represent searched out feature vectors for each LUMO 
energy. 
3.5 Structure Generation 
Finally, chemical structures are automatically generated from each feature vector candidate by running the 
generation algorithm described in 2.4. Despite constraining the search space by a penalty term in PSO, 
some of the feature vector candidates still include conﬂicting feature element values. Generation process 
using such an infeasible feature vector fails. The generation success rate ranges from 10-50%, depending 
on target propertyʼs type and values, model accuracy, etc. For the three ranges 0.038 ≤𝜀'()* ≤0.042 
(Ha), −0.02 ≤𝜀'()* ≤0.002 (Ha), -0.042 ≤𝜀'()* ≤−0.038 (Ha), we obtained 4, 6, and 5 feasible 
feature vectors out of 30, respectively. From each feasible feature vector, 1 to 10 chemical structures are 
generated. Part of the generated structures are shown in Figure 11. Searching the original 1k dataset, it is 
conﬁrmed that they are not included in the dataset, which means a set of “brand new” chemical structures 
were automatically invserse-designed by the system. 
 

 
Figure 11. Example of the automatically generated chemical structures satisfying the three targeted LUMO 
energy values; (a) 0.038 ≤𝜀'()* ≤0.042 (Ha), (b) −0.02 ≤𝜀'()* ≤0.002 (Ha), and (c) −0.042 ≤
𝜀'()* ≤−0.038 (Ha). 
 
 
4. Limitation and Customization 
The methodology introduced in this paper supports only the most fundamental algorithms that are common 
for organic material applications. In order to make the system more powerful for each material domain, 
user-deﬁned domain speciﬁc customizations will be required. For example, the simplest is to set structural 
rules in the generation algorithm (e.g. forbidden to include some user-deﬁned substructures). Another 
example is to concatenate user-deﬁned feature vectors (e.g. polymerization conditions) to the automatically 
generated feature vectors. Further advanced customization calls for functional level improvement; generate 
feature vectors for 3-dimensional conformation, etc. Those advanced customizations can be achieved by 
collaboration with domain-experts. More complex features may also be required to represent and sample 
other classes of materials, such as inorganic crystals.  Also, in this approach synthetic accessibility or 
chemical relevance of structures are not considered. If SME can score structures for synthetic accessibility, 
and set those values as corresponding target properties, they can be considered in the modeling stage. 
5. Tool in Service 
The methodology and algorithms described in this paper are implemented as a comprehensive material 
design tool in the format of a Python package. Some of the low-level functions are developed by open source 
packages: RDKit (https://www.rdkit.org/) for manipulating and drawing chemical structures, Scikit-learn 

(https://scikit-learn.org/stable/) for common regression models. Each of the building blocks (e.g. feature 
encoder) in the workflow are treated to be single or multiple microservices which are composed as Python 
modules. These modules are communicated and integrated automatically to provide an end-to-end material 
design service. The tool is deployed on the cloud and is accessible for our client users. By harnessing the 
power of scalable cloud resources and services, our material design platform eliminates the hurdles that 
accompany traditional material discovery tools: hardware requirements, installation troubles, version 
compatibility, and required feature/security updates. Today the tool is powered by JupyterHub 
(https://jupyterhub.readthedocs.io/en/stable/#) which enables worldwide lab members to create 
individual workspaces via a generally used web browser. Documentations in HTML format narrative text 
and live code bases greatly improve information exchange and sharing. 
In the near future, the platform will be expanded by implementing a full Web application with 
interactive console and REST API where the modules described above are combined into a framework 
which automates common tasks and where interactive documentation are generated by Swagger UI. 
 
 
Figure 12. Architecture of our system. Functional components are provided as Python modules (yellow 
boxes). Those modules are automatically orchestrated by workflow building modules. This tool set works 
by itself as demonstrated in this paper, but additional customization enhances the functions for specific 
material domains. 
6. Summary 
In this paper, we introduced the fundamental methodology of our automated material design system. In 
this methodology, technical components are architected to be sequentially integrated so that they comprise 
an end-to-end workﬂow; feature encoding, property prediction, solution search, and structure generation. 
We also demonstrated to inverse-design new molecular structures that satisfy the targeted LUMO energies. 

The system is deployed on cloud and provided to our client users across broad material domains; 
engineering polymer, drug, color material, etc.
