Gabora, L. (2015). The silver lining around fearful living.  
Psychology Today (online). https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/mindbloggling/201502/the-
silver-lining-around-fearful-living-0 
 
 
 
 
The Silver Lining Around Fearful Living 
 
 
Liane Gabora 
 
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia 
Okanagan Campus, Arts Building, 333 University Way, Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, CANADA 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper discusses in layperson’s terms human and computational studies 
of the impact of threat and fear on exploration and creativity. A first study 
showed that both killifish from a lake with predators and from a lake without 
predators explore a new environment to the same degree and plotting 
number of new spaces covered over time generates a hump-shaped curve. 
However, for the fish from the lake with predators the curve is shifted to the 
right; they take longer. This pattern was replicated by a computer model of 
exploratory behavior varying only one parameter, the fear parameter. A 
second study showed that stories inspired by threatening photographs were 
rated as more creative than stories inspired by non-threatening photographs. 
Various explanations for the findings are discussed. 
 
 
 
 
We are so intimately connected to the world we live in. Not just with what is immediately 
around us, but also with what is happening on the other side of the globe. We can 
instantly communicate with people of all cultures, and even see their homes and villages 
on Google maps. It’s fascinating. But if you think back to when you knew so much less 
about the world it seemed so tantalizingly full of wonder and possibility. It seems there is 
a tradeoff between that sense of mystery and how much you know. This got me thinking: 
one good thing about fear, other than it stops you from doing stupid, dangerous stuff, is 
that can hold you back from learning the facts inside out, which may help keep that 
creatively inspiring sense of wonder alive.  
 
A STUDY OF THE IMPACT OF THREAT ON EXPLORATORY BEHAVIOR 
 
These ideas date back to a study I carried out as a graduate student with killifish from 
two lakes: one with killifish predators and one without killifish predators. The fish were 
caught and put into a relatively small section of a large tank until they had acclimatized. 
This small section was separated from the rest of the tank by a door that was initially 
shut. The larger section contained objects that were unfamiliar to them. 
 

2 
 
When the door was opened 
and the fish were allowed to leave 
their “comfort zone” and enter the 
unfamiliar portion of the tank, both 
groups explored it equally 
thoroughly, first increasing and then 
decreasing the amount of 
exploration, and in the end covering 
the same amount of territory. When I 
plotted exploration over time I got a 
hump-shaped curve, and the total 
area under the curve was the same 
for both groups, as illustrated in 
Figure 1. However, there was a big 
difference between them: the fish 
from the lake with predators took a 
lot longer to explore their new 
surroundings than the fish from the 
lake without predators. 
 
 
I wrote a little computer program called “Explorer” in which there were two 
competing desires: the desire to explore a new environment and the desire to avoid fear 
(Gabora & Colgan, 1990). Unless the fear was at the maximum level, Explorer would 
always explore a new environment until it had covered it entirely. It’s exploration level 
would first increase as it “conquered” its fear and then decrease as there was less new 
territory to cover, just like what I observed with the killifish, as illustrated in Figure 2. But 
the higher the fear level was, the more slowly the curve rose and fell. Just by changing 
the fear parameter I got graphs that mirrored those of the two populations of killifish. 
 
I spent many long hours 
watching those fish, and sometimes 
I felt sad for the ones from the lake 
with predators, thinking about how 
their past experiences held them 
back. But meanwhile I myself was 
slowly getting to find the town I was 
living in a little to “known” and 
predictable. I remembered how 
when I had first arrived in that town, 
the roads and alleys I now knew so 
well had had a mystique about them. 
It had seemed they could lead 
anywhere, and that feeling of 
possibility was creatively inspiring. 
That’s how I started thinking there is 
a tradeoff, loosely put, between 
knowledge and potentiality. It’s a 
theme that, in various ways, I’ve 
been exploring ever since. 
 
Figure 1. Total number of grid lines crossed by five 
fish from by Fish Lake (no predators) and Lake 
Opinicon (predators) per minute of exposure to a 
new environment. 
Figure 2. Exploration curves generated by two runs 
of the Explorer computer model. The difference 
between curve 1 (the Fish Lake-like curve) and 
Curve 2 (the Lake Opinicon-like curve) was due to 
varying one parameter which represented amount 
of fear. 

3 
A STUDY OF THE IMPACT OF THREAT ON CREATIVE WRITING 
 
A student of mine, Sean Riley, thought it would be interesting to test the hypothesis that 
situations that are demanding, threatening, or involve conflict, put one in a more creative 
state of mind. There was indirect evidence in the literature that this is the case. For 
example, it had been shown that individuals who are in the midst of conflict set broader 
and more inclusive cognitive categories (De Dru, Carsten & Nijstad, 2008). Creativity is 
also positively correlated with group conflict (Troyer & Youngreen, 2009) anxiety 
(Carlsson, 2002). There was also some indication that negative affect leads to greater 
creative output (Akinola & Mendes, 2008). 
 
We tested the hypothesis that threatening situations put one in a more creative 
state of mind by conducting a study with 60 participants, students at the University of 
British Columbia (Riley & Gabora, 2012). First the participants viewed a series of 
photographs and rated each one with respect to how threatening they found it. Next they 
then wrote two short stories: one based on the photograph they rated as most 
threatening, and the other based on the photograph they rated as least threatening.  
 
The creativity level of the stories was assessed by multiple judges, all published 
authors of works of fiction, who were naïve as to the purpose of the study and who were 
not shown or told about any of the photographs. What we found was that the stories 
based on threatening pictures were rated significantly higher in creativity than the stories 
based on non-threatening pictures. 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
So here in my own lab we had evidence that even just looking at threatening pictures 
enhances creative output! Why would this be? 
 
My own inclination is to explain it in terms of potentiality. The non-threatening 
photographs depicting situations that would likely continue to unfold along predictable, 
mundane paths. In contrast, the threatening photographs depicting situations where 
there are a wide variety of possible outcomes, ranging from death to ‘happily ever after’, 
and a greater variety of feelings that would be generated by these different outcomes. 
Another way of saying this is that the potentiality of threatening situations is higher -- 
there is more at stake -- and having something at stake is vital to good story telling. 
 
Another way to explain this is in terms of the role of the creative process in 
reconciling potentially stressful inconsistencies in our worldview (Curl, 2008; Gabora, 
1999). We want to believe that the world is just and fair, and that we, and those we 
empathize with, are deserving of, and will in the end receive, just and fair treatment. A 
threatening stimulus confronts and contradicts this view of how the world operates. In 
response, we tap into our creative potential and hone in on an explanation for the 
threat’s existence. This is done in an attempt to reconcile the worldview dichotomy, and 
impose a sense of meaning and understanding as to why this negative reality exists, 
ultimately forging a new and cohesive worldview structure. 
 
This is related to Freud’s belief that when we are thwarted and in a negative 
emotional state, we need to find solutions, so we are more inclined, form strong 
associations and make deep connections. Because of the way our mind encodes 
information as distributed patterns of activation, this enables more overlapping of 

4 
concepts previously thought to be unrelated, and is conducive to creativity (Gabora, 
2000). Thus there is a positive correlation between negative affect and creativity (Akinola 
& Mendes, 2008). 
 
These explanations may not be mutually exclusive, and there could be a grain of 
truth to them all. Whatever explanation you choose, it seems to be the case that there 
may be a silver lining to threatening situations. In processing them you work something 
out or come to some kind of acceptance, and if you do this through music or words or 
the tools of an artist you may be left with a gift, a creative “precipitate” of this 
transformative process.
