The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
Anubrata Das∗, Houjiang Liu, Venelin Kovatchev and Matthew Lease
aSchool of Information, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Natural Language Processing
Misinformation
Disinformation
Explainability
Human-AI Teaming
A B S T R A C T
Misinformation threatens modern society by promoting distrust in science, changing narratives in
public health, heightening social polarization, and disrupting democratic elections and ﬁnancial
markets, among a myriad of other societal harms. To address this, a growing cadre of professional
fact-checkers and journalists provide high-quality investigations into purported facts. However,
these largely manual eﬀorts have struggled to match the enormous scale of the problem. In
response, a growing body of Natural Language Processing (NLP) technologies have been
proposed for more scalable fact-checking. Despite tremendous growth in such research, however,
practical adoption of NLP technologies for fact-checking still remains in its infancy today.
In this work, we review the capabilities and limitations of the current NLP technologies for
fact-checking. Our particular focus is to further chart the design space for how these technologies
can be harnessed and reﬁned in order to better meet the needs of human fact-checkers. To do
so, we review key aspects of NLP-based fact-checking: task formulation, dataset construction,
modeling, and human-centered strategies, such as explainable models and human-in-the-loop
approaches. Next, we review the eﬃcacy of applying NLP-based fact-checking tools to assist
human fact-checkers. We recommend that future research include collaboration with fact-checker
stakeholders early on in NLP research, as well as incorporation of human-centered design
practices in model development, in order to further guide technology development for human
use and practical adoption. Finally, we advocate for more research on benchmark development
supporting extrinsic evaluation of human-centered fact-checking technologies.
1. Introduction
Misinformation and related issues (disinformation, deceptive news, clickbait, rumours, and information credibility)
increasingly threaten society. While concerns of misinformation existed since the early days of written text (Marcus,
1992), with recent development of social media, the entry barrier for creating and spreading content has never been
lower. Moreover, polarization online drives the spread of misinformation that in turn increases polarization (Cinelli,
Pelicon, Mozetič, Quattrociocchi, Novak and Zollo, 2021a,b; Vicario, Quattrociocchi, Scala and Zollo, 2019). Braking
such a vicious cycle would require addressing the problem of misinformation at its root.
Fields such as journalism (Graves, 2018b; Graves and Amazeen, 2019; Neely-Sardon and Tignor, 2018) and
archival studies (LeBeau, 2017) have extensively studied misinformation, and recent years have seen a signiﬁcant
growth in fact-checking initiatives to address this problem. Various organizations now focus on fact-checks (e.g.,
PolitiFact, Snopes, FactCheck, First Draft, and Full Fact), and organizations such as the International Fact-Checking
Network (IFCN)1 train and provide resources for independent fact-checkers and journalists to further scale expert
fact-checking.
While professional fact-checkers and journalists provide high-quality investigations of purported facts to inform
the public, human eﬀort struggles to match the global Internet scale of the problem. To address this, a growing
body of research has investigated Natural Language Processing (NLP) to fully or partially automate fact-checking
(Guo, Schlichtkrull and Vlachos, 2022; Nakov, Corney, Hasanain, Alam, Elsayed, Barrón-Cedeño, Papotti, Shaar and
Da San Martino, 2021a; Zhou and Zafarani, 2020; Zeng, Abumansour and Zubiaga, 2021; Graves, 2018a). However,
even state-of-the-art NLP technologies still cannot match human capabilities in many areas and remain insuﬃcient
to automate fact-checking in practice. Experts argue (Arnold, 2020; Nakov et al., 2021a) that fact-checking is a
complex process and requires subjective judgement and expertise. While current NLP systems are increasingly better
at addressing simple fact-checking tasks, identifying false claims that are contextual and beyond simple declarative
∗Corresponding author
ORCID(s): 0000-0002-5412-6149 (A. Das); 0000-0003-0983-6202 (H. Liu); 0000-0003-1259-1541 (V. Kovatchev);
0000-0002-0056-2834 (M. Lease)
1https://www.politifact.com/,
https://www.snopes.com/,
https://www.factcheck.org/,
https://firstdraftnews.
org/, https://fullfact.org/, and https://www.poynter.org/ifcn/, respectively.
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 30
arXiv:2301.03056v1  [cs.CL]  8 Jan 2023

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
statements remains beyond the reach for fully automated systems (Chen, Sriram, Choi and Durrett, 2022; Fan, Piktus,
Petroni, Wenzek, Saeidi, Vlachos, Bordes and Riedel, 2020). For example, claims buried in conversational systems,
comment threads in social media community, and claims in multimedia contents are particularly challenging for
automated systems. Additionally, most fact-checking practitioners desire NLP tools that are integrated into the existing
fact-checking workﬂow and reduce latency (Nakov et al., 2021a; Graves, 2018b; Alam, Shaar, Dalvi, Sajjad, Nikolov,
Mubarak, Da San Martino, Abdelali, Durrani, Darwish, Al-Homaid, Zaghouani, Caselli, Danoe, Stolk, Bruntink and
Nakov, 2021b).
In this literature review, we provide the reader with a comprehensive and holistic overview of the current state-
of-the-art challenges and opportunities to more eﬀectively leverage NLP technology in fact-checking. Our objectives
in this work are twofold. First, we cover all aspects of the NLP pipeline for fact checking:
task formulation, dataset
construction, and modeling approaches. Second, we emphasize the human-centered approaches that seek to augment
and accelerate human fact-checking, rather than supplant it. In contrast, prior literature reviews (Zeng et al., 2021;
Guo et al., 2022; Oshikawa, Qian and Wang, 2020) either provide an overview of the existing approaches or capture
the details of only a speciﬁc part of the fact-checking pipeline (Kotonya and Toni, 2020a; Hardalov, Arora, Nakov and
Augenstein, 2021; Hanselowski, AvineshP.V., Schiller, Caspelherr, Chaudhuri, Meyer and Gurevych, 2018; Demartini,
Mizzaro and Spina, 2020).
Furthermore, we argue that it is important to extend the review of NLP technologies for fact-checking from
modeling development to the area of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) because technology design should reﬂect
user needs so that its development can be better integrated in the real-world use context (Graves, 2018a; Lease, 2020;
Kovatchev, Smith, Lee, Traynor, Aguilera and Devine, 2020; Nakov et al., 2021a; Micallef, Armacost, Memon and
Patil, 2022; Juneja and Mitra, 2022). Speciﬁcally, we point the reader towards Section 7 where we propose concrete
directions for future work.
Current challenges are largely due to the relatively early stage of development of the automated fact-checking tech-
nology. Speciﬁcally, current studies tend to adopt an intrinsic evaluation of components of the fact-checking pipeline
rather than an end-to-end extrinsic evaluation of the entire fact-checking task. Moreover, component-wise accuracies
may remain below the threshold required for practical adoption. Furthermore, while the research community’s focus
on prediction accuracy has yielded laudable improvements, human factors (e.g., usability, intelligibility, trust) have
garnered far less attention or progress yet are crucial for practical adoption.
Such limitations have implications for future research. First, practical use of NLP technologies for fact-checking
is likely to come from hybrid, human-in-the-loop approaches rather than full automation. Second, as the technology
matures, end-to-end evaluation becomes increasingly important to ensure practical solutions are being developed to
solve the real-world use-case. To this end, new benchmarks that facilitate the extrinsic evaluation of automated fact-
checking applications in practical settings may help drive progress on solutions that can be adopted for use in the wild.
Finally, to craft eﬀective human-in-the-loop systems, more cross-cutting NLP and HCI integration could strengthen
design of fact-checking tools, so that they are accurate, scalable, and usable in practice. Toward this end, it may
be fruitful to collaborate more with stakeholders early on in NLP research and incorporate human-centered design
practices in developing models.
We have written this article with diﬀerent audiences in mind. For researchers and fact-checkers who are new to
automated fact-checking, this article provides a comprehensive overview of the problem. We discuss the challenges,
the state-of-the-art capabilities, and the opportunities in the ﬁeld, and we emphasize how machine learning and natural
language processing can be used to combat disinformation. We recommend researchers new to this topic read the
article in its entirety, following the logical structure of sections. Other readers who have more experience in the
ﬁeld may already be familiar with some of the concepts that we discuss. For them, this paper oﬀers a novel human-
centered perspective of automated fact checking and a discussion on how that perspective can aﬀect system design,
implementation, and evaluation. To facilitate the use of the paper by more experienced readers, we provide a quick
overview of the content covered in each section.
• Section 2 introduces the automated fact-checking pipeline. We provide an overview of the process for human
fact-checkers and for automated solutions.
• Section 3 discusses the task formulation: the goals and formal deﬁnitions of diﬀerent sub-tasks in fact checking.
• Section 4 describes the process of dataset construction, presents the most popular corpora for automated fact
checking, and outlines some limitations of the data.
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
Figure 1: Fact-checking pipeline
• Section 5 reviews approaches for automating fact checking. We discuss general NLP capabilities (Section 5.1),
explainable approaches (Section 5.2), and human-in-the-loop (Section 5.3) approaches for fact-checking.
• Section 6 surveys existing tools that apply NLP for fact-checking in a practical, real-world context. We argue
that the human-centered perspective is necessary for the practical adoption of automated solutions.
• Section 7 provides future research directions in the context of human-centered fact checking. We discuss the work
division between human and AI for mixed-initiative fact-checking in Section 7.1. In Section 7.2 we propose a
novel concept for measuring trust and a novel human-centered evaluation of NLP to assist fact-checkers.
• We conclude our literature review with Section 8.
2. Fact-Checking Pipeline
The core idea behind automated fact-checking is enabling AI to reason over available information to determine the
truthfulness of a claim. For successful automation, it is essential ﬁrst to understand the complex process of journalistic
fact-checking that involves human expertise along with skilled eﬀort towards gathering evidence and synthesizing
the evidence. Additional complexity comes from the need to process heterogeneous sources (e.g., information across
various digital and non-digital sources). Data is also spread across diﬀerent modalities such as images, videos, tables,
graphs, among others. Moreover, there is a lack of tools that support eﬀective and eﬃcient fact-checking workﬂows
(Graves, 2018a; Nakov et al., 2021a; Arnold, 2020).
Graves (2017) breaks down the practical fact-checking mechanism for human fact-checkers into multiple steps
such as a) identifying the claims to check, b) tracing false claims, c) consulting experts, and d) sharing the resulting
fact-check. A growing body of AI literature — speciﬁcally in NLP — focuses on automating the fact-checking process.
We synthesize several related surveys (Guo et al., 2022; Nakov et al., 2021a; Graves, 2018a; Zeng et al., 2021;
Micallef et al., 2022) and distinguish four typical stages that constitute the automated fact-checking technology pipeline
(illustrated in Figure 1). Note that the pipeline we describe below closely follows the structure of Guo et al. (2022),
though the broader literature is also incorporated within these four stages:
• Claim Detection, Checkworthiness, and Prioritization: Claim detection involves monitoring news and/or
online information for potentially false content to fact-check. One must identify claims that are potentially
falsiﬁable (e.g., purported facts rather subjective opinions) (Guo et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2021). Moreover,
because it is impractical to fact-check everything online given limited fact-checking resources (human or
automated), fact checkers must prioritize what to fact-check (Arnold, 2020). NLP researchers have sought to
inform such prioritization by automatically predicting the "checkworthiness" of claims (Nakov et al., 2021a).
Additionally, to avoid repeated work, fact-checkers may consult existing fact-checking databases before judging
the veracity of a new claim (claim matching (Zeng et al., 2021)). We see claim matching as a part of prioritizing
claims, as fact-checkers would prioritize against checking such claims.
• Evidence Retrieval: Once it is clear which claims to fact-check, the next step is to gather relevant, trustworthy
evidence for assessing the claim (Guo et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2021).
• Veracity Prediction: Given the evidence, it is necessary to assess it to determine the veracity of the claim (Guo
et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2021).
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
• Explanation: Finally, for human use, one must explain the fact-checking outcome via human-understandable
justiﬁcation for the model’s determination (Graves, 2018a; Kotonya and Toni, 2020a; Guo et al., 2022).
In the subsequent sections, we discuss each of the tasks above in the context of existing NLP research in automated
fact-checking. Some other steps (for example, detecting propaganda in text, click-bait detection) are also pertinent to
fact-checking but do not directly ﬁt into the stages described above. They are brieﬂy discussed in Section 3.5.
3. Task Formulation for Automated Fact-Checking
Modern Natural Language Processing is largely-data driven. In this article, we distinguish task formulation
(conceptual) vs. dataset construction (implementation activity, given the task deﬁnition). That said, the availability
of a suitable dataset or the feasibility of constructing a new dataset can also bear on how tasks are formulated.
3.1. Claim Detection, Checkworthiness, and Prioritization
Fact-checkers and news organizations monitor information sources such as social media (Facebook, Twitter, Reddit,
etc.), political campaigns and speeches, and public addresses from government oﬃcials on critical issues (Arnold,
2020; Nakov et al., 2021a). Additional sources include tip-lines on end-to-end encrypted platforms (such as WhatsApp,
Telegram, and Signal) (Kazemi, Garimella, Shahi, Gaﬀney and Hale, 2021b). The volume of information on various
platforms makes it challenging to eﬃciently monitor all sources for misinformation. Zeng et al. (2021) deﬁne the claim
detection step as identifying, ﬁltering, and prioritizing claims.
To identify claims, social media streams are often monitored for rumors (Guo et al., 2022). A rumour can be
deﬁned as a claim that is unveriﬁed and being circulated online (Zubiaga, Aker, Bontcheva, Liakata and Procter, 2018).
Rumours are characterized by the subjectivity of the language and the reach of the content to the users (Qazvinian,
Rosengren, Radev and Mei, 2011). Additionally, metadata related to virality, such as the number of shares (or retweets
and re-posts), likes, or comments are also considered when identifying whether a post is a rumour (Zhang, Cao, Li,
Sheng, Zhong and Shu, 2021a; Gorrell, Kochkina, Liakata, Aker, Zubiaga, Bontcheva and Derczynski, 2019). However,
detecting rumours alone is not suﬃcient to decide whether a claim needs to be fact-checked.
For each text of interest, the key questions fact-checking systems need to address include:
1. Is there a claim to check?
2. Does the claim contain veriﬁable information?
3. Is the claim checkworthy?
4. Has a trusted source already fact-checked the claim?
Regarding the ﬁrst criterion — is there a claim — one might ask whether the claim contains a purported fact or
an opinion (Hassan, Arslan, Li and Tremayne, 2017a). For example, a statement such as “reggae is the most soulful
genre of music” represents personal preference that is not checkable. In contrast, “<NAME> won a gold medal in the
Olympics” is checkable by matching <NAME> to the list of all gold medal winners.
Whether the claim contains veriﬁable information is more challenging. For example, if a claim can only be veriﬁed
by private knowledge or personal experience that is not broadly accessible, then it cannot be checked (Konstantinovskiy,
Price, Babakar and Zubiaga, 2021). For example, if someone claims to have eaten a certain food yesterday, it is probably
impossible to verify beyond their personal testimony.
As this example suggests, the question of whether the claim contains veriﬁable information depends in large part
on what evidence is available for veriﬁcation. This, in turn, may not be clear until after evidence retrieval is performed.
In practice fact-checkers may perform some preliminary research, but mostly try to gauge checkworthiness only based
on the claim itself.
In addition, this consideration is only one of many that factors into deciding whether to check a claim. Even a claim
that may appear to be unveriﬁable may still be of such great public interest that it is worth conducting the fact-check.
Moreover, even if the fact-check is conducted and ultimately indeterminate (i.e., evidence does not exist either to verify
or refute the claim), simply showing that a claim’s veracity cannot be determined may still be a valuable outcome.
A claim is deemed checkworthy if a claim is of signiﬁcant public interest or has the potential to cause harm (Nakov,
Da San Martino, Elsayed, Barrón-Cedeño, Míguez, Shaar, Alam, Haouari, Hasanain, Babulkov et al., 2021b; Hassan,
Li and Tremayne, 2015). For example, a claim related to the eﬀect of a vaccine on the COVID-19 infection rate is more
relevant to the public interest and hence more checkworthy than a claim about some philosopher’s favorite food.
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
Claims, like memes, often appear several times and/or across multiple platforms (in the same form or with
slight modiﬁcation) (Leskovec, Backstrom and Kleinberg, 2009; Nakov et al., 2021a; Arnold, 2020). Fact-checking
organizations maintain a growing database claims which have already been fact-checked. Thus, detected claims are
compared against databases of already fact-checked claims by trusted organizations (Shaar, Martino, Babulkov and
Nakov, 2020; Shaar, Alam, Da San Martino and Nakov, 2021a). Comparing new claims against such databases helps
to avoid duplicating work on previously fact-checked claims. This step is also known as claim matching (Zeng et al.,
2021).
Reports from practitioners argue that if a claim is not checked within the ﬁrst few hours, a late fact-check
does not have much impact on changing the ongoing misinformation narrative (Nakov et al., 2021a; Arnold, 2020).
Moreover, limited resources for fact-checking make it crucial for organizations to prioritize the claims to be checked
(Borel, 2016). Claims can be prioritized based on their checkworthiness (Nakov, Da San Martino, Barrón-Cedeño,
Zaghouani, Míguez, Alam, Caselli, Kutlu, Strub and Mandl, 2022; Nakov et al., 2021b). Nakov et al. (2022) note that
checkworthiness is determined based on factors such as
1. How urgently a claim needs to be checked?
2. How much harm can a claim cause (Alam et al., 2021b; Alam, Dalvi, Shaar, Durrani, Mubarak, Nikolov,
Da San Martino, Abdelali, Sajjad, Darwish and Nakov, 2021a; Shaar, Hasanain, Hamdan, Ali, Haouari, Nikolov,
Kutlu, Kartal, Alam, Da San Martino, Barrón-Cedeño, Míguez, Beltrán, Elsayed and Nakov, 2021b)?
3. Would the claim require attention from policy makers for addressing the underlying issue?
Note that estimating harms is quite challenging, especially without ﬁrst having a thorough understanding and measures
of harm caused by misinformationNeumann, De-Arteaga and Fazelpour (2022).
The spread of a claim on social media provides another potential signal for identifying public interest (Arnold,
2020). In the spirit of doing “the greatest good for the greatest number”, viral claims might be prioritized highly because
any false information in them has the potential to negatively impact a large number of people. On the other hand, since
fairness considerations motivate equal protections for all people, we cannot serve only the majority at the expense of
minority groups (Ekstrand, Das, Burke, Diaz et al., 2022; Neumann et al., 2022). Moreover, such minority groups may
be more vulnerable, motivating greater protections, and may be disproportionately impacted by mis/disinformation
(Guo et al., 2022). See Section 3.6 for additional discussion.
3.2. Evidence Retrieval
Some sub-tasks in automated fact-checking can be performed without the presence of explicit evidence. For
example, the linguistic properties of the text can be used to determine whether it is machine-generated (Wang, 2017;
Rashkin, Choi, Jang, Volkova and Choi, 2017). However, assessing assessing claim veracity without evidence is clearly
more challenging (Schuster, Schuster, Shah and Barzilay, 2020).
Provenance of a claim can also signal information quality; known unreliable source or distribution channels are
often repeat oﬀenders in spreading false information2. Such analysis of provenance can be further complicated when
content is systematically propagated by multiple sources (twitter misinformation bots) (Jones, 2019).
It is typically assumed that fact-checking requires gathering of reliable and trustworthy evidence that provides
information to reason about the claim (Graves, 2018a; Li, Gao, Meng, Li, Su, Zhao, Fan and Han, 2016). In some
cases, multiple aspects of a claim needs to be checked. A fact-checker would then decompose such a claim into distinct
questions and gather relevant evidence for the question (Borel, 2016; Chen et al., 2022). From an information retrieval
(IR) perspective, we can conceptualize each of those questions as an “information need” for which the fact-checker must
formulate one or more queries to a search engine (Bendersky, Metzler and Croft, 2012) in order to retrieve necessary
evidence.
Evidence can be found across many modalities, including text, tables, knowledge graphs, images, and videos.
Various metadata can also provide evidence and are sometimes required to assess the claim. Examples include context
needed to disambiguate claim terms, or background of the individual or organization from whom the claim originated.
Retrieving relevant evidence also depends on the following questions (Singh, Das, Li and Lease, 2021):
1. Is there suﬃcient evidence available related to a claim?
2. Is it accessible or available in the public domain?
3. Is it in a format that can be read and processed?
2https://disinformationindex.org/
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
As noted earlier in Section 3.1, the preceding claim detection task involves assessing whether a claim contains veriﬁable
information; this depends in part on what evidence exists to be retrieved, which is not actually known until evidence
retrieval is performed. Having now reached this evidence retrieval step, we indeed discover whether suﬃcient evidence
exists to support or refute the claim.
Additionally, evidence should be trustworthy, reputable (Nguyen, Kharosekar, Lease and Wallace, 2018b; Lease,
2018), and unbiased (Chen, Khashabi, Yin, Callison-Burch and Roth, 2019a).
Once evidence is retrieved, stance detection assesses the degree to which the evidence supports or refutes the
claim (Nguyen, Kharosekar, Krishnan, Krishnan, Tate, Wallace and Lease, 2018a; Ferreira and Vlachos, 2016; Popat,
Mukherjee, Yates and Weikum, 2018). Stance detection is typically formulated as a classiﬁcation task (or ordinal
regression) over each piece of retrieved evidence. Note that some works formulate stance detection as an independent
task (Hanselowski et al., 2018; Hardalov et al., 2021).
3.3. Veracity Prediction
Given a claim and gathered evidence, veracity prediction involves reasoning over the collected evidence and the
claim. Veracity prediction can be formulated as a binary classiﬁcation task (i.e., true vs. false) (Popat et al., 2018;
Nakashole and Mitchell, 2014; Potthast, KIESELJ et al., 2018), or as a ﬁne-grained, multi-class task following the
journalistic fact-checking practices (Augenstein, Lioma, Wang, Lima, Hansen, Hansen and Simonsen, 2019; Shu,
Mahudeswaran, Wang, Lee and Liu, 2020; Wang, 2017). In some cases, there may not be enough information available
to determine the veracity of a claim (Thorne, Vlachos, Christodoulopoulos and Mittal, 2018).
Note that fact-checking is potentially a recursive process because retrieved evidence may itself need to be fact-
checked before it can be trusted and acted upon (Graves, 2018a). This is also consistent with broader educational
practices in information literacy3 in which readers are similarly encouraged to evaluate the quality of information
they consume. Such assessment of information reliability can naturally integrate with the veracity prediction task in
factoring in the reliability of the evidence along with its stance (Nguyen et al., 2018b; Guo et al., 2022).
3.4. Explaining Veracity Prediction
While a social media platform might use automated veracity predictions in deciding whether to automatically block
or demote content, the use of fact-checking technology often involves a human-in-the-loop, whether it is a platform
moderator, a journalist, or an end-user. When we consider such human-centered use of fact-checking technologies,
providing an automated veracity prediction without justifying the answer can cause a system to be ignored or distrusted,
or even reinforce mistaken human beliefs in false claims (the “backﬁre eﬀect” (Lewandowsky, Ecker, Seifert, Schwarz
and Cook, 2012)). Explanations and justiﬁcations are especially important given the noticeable drop in performance of
state-of-the-art NLP systems when facing adversarial examples (Kovatchev, Chatterjee, Govindarajan, Chen, Choi,
Chronis, Das, Erk, Lease, Li et al., 2022). Consequently, automated fact-checking systems intended for human-
consumption should seek to explain their veracity predictions in a similar manner to that of existing journalistic
fact-checking practices (Uscinski, 2015). A brief point to make is that much of the explanation research has focused
on explanations for researchers and engineers engaged in system development (types of explanations, methods of
generating them, and evaluation regimens). In contrast,we emphasize here explanations for system users.
Various types of explanations can be provided, such as through
1. evidence attribution
2. explaining the decision-making process for a fact-check
3. summarizing the evidence
4. case-based explanations
Evidence attribution is the process of identifying evidence or a speciﬁc aspect of the evidence (such as paragraphs,
sentences, or even tokens of interest) (Thorne et al., 2018; Popat et al., 2018; Shu, Cui, Wang, Lee and Liu, 2019; Lu
and Li, 2020). Furthermore, the relative importance of the evidence can also justify the fact-checking outcome (Nguyen
et al., 2018a). Alternatively, a set of rules or interactions to break down parts of the decision-making process can also
serve as an explanation (Gad-Elrab, Stepanova, Urbani and Weikum, 2019; Nguyen et al., 2018b). Such formulation
focuses more on how the evidence is processed to arrive at a decision. Explaining the veracity can also be formulated
as a summarization problem over the gathered evidence to explain a fact-check (Atanasova, Simonsen, Lioma and
Augenstein, 2020a; Kotonya and Toni, 2020b). Finally, case-based explanations can provide the user with similar,
human-labeled instances (Das, Gupta, Kovatchev, Lease and Li, 2022).
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_literacy
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
3.5. Related Tasks
In addition to tasks that are considered central to the automated fact-checking pipeline, some additional tasks bear
mentioning as related and complementary to the fact-checking enterprise. Examples of such tasks include propaganda
detection (Da San Martino, Cresci, Barrón-Cedeño, Yu, Pietro and Nakov, 2020), clickbait detection (Potthast, Köpsel,
Stein and Hagen, 2016), and argument mining (Lawrence and Reed, 2020). Furthermore, some tasks can be formulated
independent of the fact-checking pipeline and utilized later to improve individual fact-checking sub-tasks. For example,
predicting the virality of social media content (Jain, Garg and Jain, 2021) can help improve claim detection and claim
checkworthiness. Similarly, network analysis on fake news propagation (Shao, Ciampaglia, Flammini and Menczer,
2016) can help in analyzing provenance.
With an eye toward building more human-centered AI approaches, there are also some tasks that could be applied
to help automate parts of the fact-checking process. For example, claim detection might be improved via an URL
recommendation engine for content that might need fact-checking (Vo and Lee, 2018). Additionally, fact-checkers
could beneﬁt from a predicted score for claim diﬃculty (Singh et al., 2021). In terms of evidence retrieval and
veracity prediction, one might generate fact-checking briefs to aid inexpert fact-checkers (Fan et al., 2020). Instead
of summarizing the evidence in general (Section 3.4), one might instead summarize with the speciﬁc goal of decision
support (Hsu and Tan, 2021).
3.6. Key Challenges
Most work in automated fact-checking has been done on veracity prediction, and to a lesser extent, on explanation
generation. Recently, we have seen more attention directed towards claim detection and checkworthiness. In contrast,
work on evidence retrieval remains less developed.
Claim Detection Guo et al. (2022) points out several sources of biases in the claim check-worthiness task. Claims
could be of variable interest to diﬀerent social groups. Additionally, claims that might cause more harm to marginalized
groups compared to the general population may not get enough attention. Ideally, models identifying check-worthiness
need to overcome any possible disparate impact.
Similar concerns appear in the report by Full Fact (Arnold, 2020). One of the criteria for selecting a claim for fact-
checking across several organizations is “Could the claim threaten democratic processes or minority groups?” However,
such criterion may be at odds with the concerns of virality. Fact-checking organizations often monitor virality metrics
to decide which claims to fact-check (Arnold, 2020; Nakov et al., 2021a). Nevertheless, if a false claim is targeted
towards an ethnic minority, such claims may not cross the virality thresholds.
Prioritizing which claims to fact-check requires attention to various demographic traits: content creators, readers,
and subject matter. Claim check-worthiness dataset design can thus beneﬁt from consideration of demographics.
Evidence Retrieval Evidence retrieval has been largely neglected in the automated fact-checking NLP literature. It
is often assumed that evidence is already available, or, coarse-grained evidence is gathered from putting the claims into
a search engine (Popat et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2018a). However, Hasanain and Elsayed (2022) show in their study
that search engines optimized for relevance seldom retrieve evidence most useful for veracity prediction. Although
retrieving credible information has been studied thoroughly in IR (Clarke, Rizvi, Smucker, Maistro and Zuccon,
2020a), more work is needed that is focused on retrieving evidence for veracity assessment (Lease, 2018; Clarke,
Rizvi, Smucker, Maistro and Zuccon, 2020b).
Veracity Prediction and Explanation A critical challenge for automated systems is to reason over multiple sources
of evidence while also taking source reputation into account. Additionally, explaining a complex reasoning process is
a non-trivial task. The notion of model explanations itself is polysemous and evolving in general, not to mention in the
context of fact checking. As explainable NLP develops, automated fact-checking tasks also need to evolve and provide
explanations that are accessible to human stakeholders yet faithful to the underlying model. For example, case-based
explanations are mostly unexplored in automated fact-checking, although working systems have been proposed for
propaganda detection (Das et al., 2022).
In many NLP tasks, such as machine translation or natural language inference, the goal is to build fully-automated,
end-to-end solutions. However, in the context of fact-checking, state-of-the-art limitations suggest the need for humans-
in-the-loop for the forseable future. Given this, automated tooling to support human fact-checkers is crucial. However,
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
understanding the fact-checker needs and incorporating those needs in the task formulation has been largely absent
from the automated fact-checking literature, with a few notable exceptions (Nakov et al., 2021a; Demartini et al., 2020).
Future research could beneﬁt from greater involvement of fact-checkers in the NLP research process and shifting goals
from complete automation toward human support.
4. Dataset Construction
Corresponding to task formulation (Section 3), our presentation of fact-checking datasets is also organized around
claims, evidence, veracity prediction, and explanation. Note that not all datasets have all of these components.
4.1. Claim detection and claim check-worthiness
Claim detection datasets typically contain claims and their sources (documents, social media streams, transcripts
from political speeches) (Guo et al., 2022). One form of claim detection is identifying rumours on social media, where
datasets are primarily constructed with text from Twitter (Zubiaga et al., 2018; Qazvinian et al., 2011) and Reddit
(Gorrell et al., 2019; Lillie, Middelboe and Derczynski, 2019). Some works provide the claims in the context they
appeared on social media (Zhang et al., 2021a; Ma, Gao, Mitra, Kwon, Jansen, Wong and Cha, 2016). However,
several studies note that most claim detection datasets do not contain enough context. As the discussion of metadata
in Section 3 suggests, broader context might include: social media reach, virality metrics, the origin of a claim, and
relevant user data (i.e., who posted a claim, how inﬂuential they are online, etc.) (Arnold, 2020; Nakov et al., 2021a).
Claim check-worthiness datasets (Nakov et al., 2021b; Shaar et al., 2021b; Barrón-Cedeño, Elsayed, Nakov,
Da San Martino, Hasanain, Suwaileh, Haouari, Babulkov, Hamdan, Nikolov et al., 2020; Atanasova, Barrón-Cedeño,
Elsayed, Suwaileh, Zaghouani, Kyuchukov, Da San Martino and Nakov, 2018; Konstantinovskiy et al., 2021; Hassan
et al., 2015) ﬁlter claims from a source (similar to claim detection, sources include social media feeds and political
debate transcripts, among others) by annotating claims based on the checkworthiness criteria (mentioned in the section
3.1). Each claim is given a checkworthiness score to obtain a ranked list. Note that claim detection and checkworthiness
datasets may be expert annotated (Hassan et al., 2015) or crowd annotated (Nakov et al., 2021b; Shaar et al., 2021b;
Barrón-Cedeño et al., 2020; Atanasova et al., 2018; Konstantinovskiy et al., 2021)4.
The datasets discussed above do not capture multi-modal datasets, and few do. One such dataset is r/Fakeddit
(Nakamura, Levy and Wang, 2020). This dataset contains images and associated text content from Reddit as claims.
Misinformation can also spread through multi-modal memes, and tasks such as Facebook (now Meta) Hateful Memes
Challenge (Kiela, Firooz, Mohan, Goswami, Singh, Ringshia and Testuggine, 2020) for hate speech suggest what might
be similarly done for misinformation detection.
4.2. Evidence
Early datasets in fact-checking provide metadata with claims as the only form of evidence. Such metadata include
social media post properties, user information, publication date, source information (Wang, 2017; Potthast et al., 2018).
As discussed earlier in Section 3.2, such metadata does not contain the world knowledge necessary to reason about a
complex claim. To address the above limitations, recent datasets consider external evidence (Guo et al., 2022).
Evidence is collected diﬀerently depending upon the problem setup. For artiﬁcial claims, evidence is often retrieved
from a single source such as Wikipedia articles (Thorne et al., 2018; Jiang, Bordia, Zhong, Dognin, Singh and Bansal,
2020; Schuster, Fisch and Barzilay, 2021). Domain limited evidence for real-world claims is collected from problem-
speciﬁc sources, such as academic articles for scientiﬁc claims (Kotonya and Toni, 2020b; Wadden, Lin, Lo, Wang, van
Zuylen, Cohan and Hajishirzi, 2020), or speciﬁc evidence listed in fact-checking websites (Vlachos and Riedel, 2014;
Hanselowski, Stab, Schulz, Li and Gurevych, 2019). Open-domain evidence for real-world claims is usually collected
from the web via search engines (Popat et al., 2018; Augenstein et al., 2019).
Recently, there has been more work considering evidence beyond free text. Such formats include structured or semi-
structured forms of evidence. Sources include knowledge bases for structured form of evidence (Shi and Weninger,
2016) and semi-structured evidence from semi-structured knowledge bases (Vlachos and Riedel, 2015), tabular data
(Chen et al., 2019a; Gupta, Mehta, Nokhiz and Srikumar, 2020), and tables within a document (Aly, Guo, Schlichtkrull,
Thorne, Vlachos, Christodoulopoulos, Cocarascu and Mittal, 2021).
Additionally, there are some retrieval-speciﬁc datasets that aim at retrieving credible information from search
engines (Clarke et al., 2020b). However, such tasks don’t incorporate claim checking as an explicit task.
4Some of these datasets, such as the CheckThat! datasets, are partially crowd and partially expert annotated.
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
4.3. Veracity Prediction
Evidence retrieval and veracity prediction datasets are usually constructed jointly. Note, in some cases, evidence
may be absent from the datasets. Veracity prediction datasets usually do not deal with claim detection or claim
checkworthiness tasks separately. Instead, such datasets contain a set of claims that are either artiﬁcially constructed
or collected from the internet.
Artiﬁcial claims in veracity prediction datasets are often limited in scope and constructed for natural language
reasoning research (Aly et al., 2021; Thorne et al., 2018; Schuster et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2020; Chen, Wang, Chen,
Zhang, Wang, Li, Zhou and Wang, 2019b). For example, FEVER (Thorne et al., 2018) and HoVer (Jacovi and Goldberg,
2021) obtain claims from Wikipedia pages. Some datasets also implement subject-predicate-object triplets for fact-
checking against knowledge bases (Kim and Choi, 2020; Shi and Weninger, 2016).
Fact-checking websites are popular sources for creating veracity prediction datasets based on real claims. Several
datasets obtain claims from either a single website or collect claims from many such websites and collate them (Wang,
2017; Hanselowski et al., 2018; Augenstein et al., 2019; Vlachos and Riedel, 2014). Note that such claims are inherently
expert annotated. Other sources of claims are social media (Potthast et al., 2018; Shu, Sliva, Wang, Tang and Liu,
2017), news outlets (Horne, Khedr and Adali, 2018; Gruppi, Horne and Adalı, 2021; Nørregaard, Horne and Adalı,
2019), blogs, discussions in QA forums, or similar user-generated publishing platforms (Mihaylova, Nakov, Màrquez,
Barrón-Cedeño, Mohtarami, Karadzhov and Glass, 2018).
Additionally some fact-checking datasets target domain-speciﬁc problems such as scientiﬁc literature (Wadden
et al., 2020), climate change (Diggelmann, Boyd-Graber, Bulian, Ciaramita and Leippold, 2020), and public health
(Kotonya and Toni, 2020b). Most datasets are monolingual but recent eﬀort have started to incorporate multi-lingual
claims (Gupta and Srikumar, 2021; Barnabò, Siciliano, Castillo, Leonardi, Nakov, Da San Martino and Silvestri, 2022).
Early datasets focus on a binary veracity prediction - true or false (Mihalcea and Strapparava, 2009). Recent datasets
often adopt an ordinal veracity labeling scheme that mimics fact checkering websites (Vlachos and Riedel, 2014; Wang,
2017; Augenstein et al., 2019). However, every fact-checking website has a diﬀerent scale for veracity, so datasets
that span across multiple websites come with a normalization problem. While some datasets do not normalize the
labels (Augenstein et al., 2019), some normalize them post-hoc (Kotonya and Toni, 2020a; Gupta and Srikumar, 2021;
Hanselowski et al., 2019).
4.4. Explanation
While an explanation is tied to veracity prediction, only a few datasets explicitly address the problem of explainable
veracity prediction (Atanasova et al., 2020a; Kotonya and Toni, 2020b; Alhindi, Petridis and Muresan, 2018). Broadly
in NLP, often parts of the input is highlighted to provide an explanation for the prediction. This form of explanations
is known as extractive rationale (Zaidan, Eisner and Piatko, 2007; Kutlu, McDonnell, Elsayed and Lease, 2020).
Incorporating the idea of the extractive rationale, some datasets include a sentence from the evidence along with
the label (Thorne et al., 2018; Hanselowski et al., 2018; Wadden et al., 2020; Schuster et al., 2021). Although such
datasets do not explicitly deﬁne evidence as a form of explanation in such cases, the line between evidence retrieval and
explanation blurs if the evidence is the explanation. However, explanations are diﬀerent from evidence in a few ways.
Particularly, explanations need to be concise for user consumption, while evidence can be a collection of documents
or long documents. Explanations are user sensitive. Consequently, evidence alone as a form of explanation might have
some inherent assumption about the user that might not be understandable for diﬀerent groups of users (e.g., experts
vs. non-experts).
4.5. Challenges
Claims Checkworthiness datasets are highly imbalanced, i.e., the number of checkworthy claims are relatively low
compared to non-checkworthy claims (Williams, Rodrigues and Novak, 2020). Datasets are also not generalizable
due to their limited domain-speciﬁc context (Guo et al., 2022). Additionally, while existing datasets cover various
languages such as English, Arabic, Spanish, Bulgarian, and Dutch, they are primarily monolingual.
Consequently,
building multilingual checkworthiness predictors is still challenging. Much of the data in check-worthiness datasets is
not originally intended to be used in classiﬁcation. The criteria used by diﬀerent organizations when selecting which
claims to check is often subjective and may not generalize outside of the particular organization.
Some annotation practices can result in artifacts in the dataset. For example, artiﬁcially constructed false claims,
such as a negation-based false claim in FEVER, can lead to artifacts in models (Schuster et al., 2021). Models do not
generalize well beyond the dataset because they might overﬁt to the annotation schema (Bansal, Nushi, Kamar, Lasecki,
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
Weld and Horvitz, 2019). One way to identify such blind spots is by using adversarial datasets for fact-checking. Such
a setting is incorporated in FEVER 2.0 (Thorne and Vlachos, 2019).
Datasets constructed for research may not always capture how fact-checkers work in practice. This leads to
limitations in the algorithms built on them. For example, interviews with fact-checkers report that they tend to consider
a combination of contents of the posts and associated virality metrics (indicating reach) during fact-checking (Arnold,
2020). However, most fact-checking datasets do not include virality metrics.
Evidence Retrieval Some datasets have been constructed by using a claim verbatim as a query and taking the
top search results as evidence. However, some queries are better than others for retrieving desired information.
Consequently, greater care might be taken in crafting eﬀective queries or otherwise improving evidence retrieval such
that resulting datasets are more likely to contain quality evidence for veracity prediction. Otherwise, poor quality
evidence becomes a bottleneck for the quality of the models trained at the later stages in the fact-checking pipeline
(Singh et al., 2021).
Veracity Prediction A key challenge in veracity prediction datasets is that the labels are not homogeneous across
fact-checking websites and normalizing might introduce noise.
Explanation Some datasets include entire fact-checking articles as evidence and their summaries as the form of
explanation (Atanasova et al., 2020a; Kotonya and Toni, 2020b). In such cases, “explanation” components assume an
already available fact-checking article. Instead, providing abstractive summaries and explaining the reasoning process
over the evidence would be more valuable.
Data Generation Recent years have seen an increasing interest in the use of data generation and data augmentation
for various NLP tasks (Liu, Swayamdipta, Smith and Choi, 2022; Hartvigsen, Gabriel, Palangi, Sap, Ray and Kamar,
2022; Dhole, Gangal, Gehrmann, Gupta, Li, Mahamood, Mahendiran, Mille, Srivastava, Tan et al., 2021; Kovatchev,
Smith, Lee and Devine, 2021). The use of synthetic data has not been extensively explored in the context of fact-
checking.
5. Automating Fact-checking
NLP research in automated fact-checking has primarily focused on building models for diﬀerent automated fact-
checking tasks utilizing existing datasets. In the following section, we highlight the broad modeling strategies employed
in the literature, with more detailed discussion related to explainable methods for automated fact-checking.
5.1. General NLP Capabilities
Claim Detection and Checkworthiness While claim detection is usually implemented as a classiﬁcation task only,
claim checkworthiness is typically implemented both as ranking (Nakov et al., 2021a) and classiﬁcation task (Zeng
et al., 2021). As discussed earlier in the task formulation Section (3.1), the broad task of claim detection can be
broken down into sub-tasks of identifying claims, ﬁltering duplicate claims, and prioritizing claims based on their
checkworthiness. Another instance of identifying claims is detecting rumors in social media streams.
Some early works in rumor detection focus on feature engineering from available metadata the text itself (Enayet
and El-Beltagy, 2017; Aker, Derczynski and Bontcheva, 2017; Zhou, Jain, Phoha and Zafarani, 2020). More advanced
methods for claim detection involve LSTM and other sequence models (Kochkina, Liakata and Augenstein, 2017).
Such models are better at capturing the context of the text (Zubiaga, Liakata, Procter, Wong Sak Hoi and Tolmie,
2016). Tree-LSTM (Ma, Gao and Wong, 2018) and Hierarchical attention networks (Guo, Cao, Zhang, Guo and Li,
2018) capture the internal structure of the claim or the context in which the claim appears. Additionally, graph neural
network approaches can capture the related social media activities along with the text (Monti, Frasca, Eynard, Mannion
and Bronstein, 2019).
Similarly, early works in claim-checkworthiness utilize support vector machines using textual features and rank
the claims in terms of their priorities (Hassan et al., 2017a). For example, Konstantinovskiy et al. (2021) build a
classiﬁcation model for checkworthiness by collapsing the labels to checkable vs. non-checkable claim. They build
a logistic regression model that uses word embeddings along with syntax based features (parts of speech tags, and
named entities). Neural methods such as LSTM performed well in earlier checkworthiness shared tasks (Elsayed,
Nakov, Barrón-Cedeño, Hasanain, Suwaileh, Da San Martino and Atanasova, 2019). Additionally, Atanasova, Nakov,
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
Màrquez, Barrón-Cedeño, Karadzhov, Mihaylova, Mohtarami and Glass (2019b) show that capturing context helps
with the checkworthiness task as well. Models such as RoBERTa obtained higher performance in the later edition of the
CheckThat! shared task (Williams et al., 2020; Martinez-Rico, Martinez-Romo and Araujo, 2021) for English language
claims. Fine-tuning such models for claim detection tasks has become more prevalent for claim checkworthiness in
other languages as well (Hasanain and Elsayed, 2020; Williams et al., 2020).
Filtering previously fact-checked claims is a relatively new task in this domain. Shaar et al. (2020) propose an
approach using BERT and BM-25 to match claims against fact-checking databases for matching claims with existing
databases. Additionally, ﬁne-tuning RoBERTa on various fact-checking datasets resulted in high performance for
identifying duplicate claims (Bouziane, Perrin, Cluzeau, Mardas and Sadeq, 2020). Furthermore, a combination of
pretrained model Sentence-BERT and re-ranking with LambdaMART performed well for detecting previously fact-
checked claims (Nakov et al., 2021b).
Evidence Retrieval and Veracity Prediction Evidence retrieval and veracity prediction in the pipeline can be
modeled sequentially or jointly. Similar to claim detection and checkworthiness models, early works use stylistic
features and metadata to arrive at veracity prediction without external evidence (Wang, 2017; Rashkin et al., 2017).
Models that include evidence retrieval often use commercial search APIs or some retrieval approach such as TF-IDF,
and BM25 (Thorne et al., 2018). Similar to question-answering models, some works adopt a two-step approach. First
a simpler model (TF-IDF or BM-25) is used at scale and then a more complex model is used for re-ranking after the
initial pruning (Thorne et al., 2018; Nie, Wang and Bansal, 2019; Hanselowski et al., 2019). Additionally, document vs.
passage retrieval, or 2-stage “telescoping” approaches, are adopted where the ﬁrst stage is retrieving related documents
and the second stage is to retrieve the relevant passage. Two stage approaches are useful for scaling up applications
as the ﬁrst stage is more eﬃcient than the second stage. For domain speciﬁc evidence retrieval, using domain-bound
word embeddings has been shown to be eﬀective (Zeng et al., 2021).
The IR task is not always a part of the process. Instead, it is often assumed that reliable evidence is already available.
While this simpliﬁes the fact-checking task so that researchers can focus on veracity prediction, in practice evidence
retrieval is necessary and cannot be ignored. Moreover, in practice one must contend with noisy (non-relevant), low
quality, and biased search results during inference.
As discussed earlier in Section 3.3, assessing the reliability of gathered evidence may be necessary. If the evidence is
assumed to be trustworthy, then it suﬃces to detect the stance of each piece of evidence and then aggregate (somehow)
to induce veracity (e.g., perhaps assuming all evidence is equally important and trustworthy). However, often one
must contend with evidence “in the wild” of questionable reliability, in which case assessing the quality (and bias) of
evidence is an important precursor to using it in veracity prediction.
Veracity prediction utilizes textual entailment for inferring veracity over either a single document as evidence
or over multiple documents. Dagan, Dolan, Magnini and Roth (2010) deﬁne textual entailment as “deciding, given
two text fragments, whether the meaning of one text is entailed (can be inferred) from another text.” Real-world
applications often require reasoning over multiple documents (Augenstein et al., 2019; Kotonya and Toni, 2020b;
Schuster et al., 2021). Reasoning over multiple documents can be done either by concatenation (Nie et al., 2019) or
weighted aggregation (Nguyen et al., 2018b). Weighted aggregation virtually re-ranks the evidence considered to ﬁlter
out the unreliable evidence (Ma, Gao, Joty and Wong, 2019; Pradeep, Ma, Nogueira and Lin, 2021). Some approaches
also use Knowledge Bases as the central repository of all evidence (Shi and Weninger, 2016). However, evidence is
only limited to what is available in the knowledge base (Guo et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2021). Moreover, a fundamental
limitation of knowledge bases is that not all knowledge ﬁts easily into structured relations.
Recent developments in large language models help extend the knowledge base approach. Fact-checking models
can rely on pretrained models to provide evidence for veracity prediction (Lee, Li, Wang, Yih, Ma and Khabsa, 2020).
However, this approach can encode biases present in the language model (Lee, Bang, Madotto and Fung, 2021).
An alternative approach is to help fact-checkers with downstream tasks by processing evidence. An example of
such work is generating summaries over available evidence using BERT (Fan et al., 2020).
Limitations With the recent development of large, pre-trained language models and deep learning for NLP, we see
a signiﬁcant improvement across the fact-checking pipeline. With the introduction of FEVER (Thorne et al., 2018;
Thorne, Vlachos, Cocarascu, Christodoulopoulos and Mittal, 2019; Aly et al., 2021) and CheckThat! (Nakov et al.,
2021b) we have benchmarks for both artiﬁcial and real-life claim detection and veriﬁcation models. However, even
the state-of-the-art NLP models perform poorly on the benchmarks above. For example, the best performing model on
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
FEVER 2018 shared task (Thorne et al., 2018) reports an accuracy of 0.675. Models perform worse on multi-modal
shared task FEVEROUS (Aly et al., 2021): the best performing model reports 0.56 accuracy score6. Similarly, the best
checkworthiness model only achieved an average precision of 0.65 for Arabic claims and 0.224 for English claims in
the CheckThat! 2021 shared task for identifying checkworthiness in tweets (Nakov et al., 2021b). On the other hand,
the best performing model for identifying check-worthy claims in debates reports 0.42 average precision. Surprisingly,
Barrón-Cedeño et al. (2020), the top performing model for checkworthiness detection, report an average precision of
0.806 (Williams et al., 2020). . For the fact-checking task of CheckThat! 2021 (Nakov et al., 2021b), the best performing
model reports a 0.83 macro F1 score. However, the second-best model only reports a 0.50 F1 score. Given this striking
gap in performance between the top system vs. others, it would be valuable for future work to benchmark systems on
additional datasets in order to better assess the generality of these ﬁndings.
It is not easy to make a direct comparison between diﬀerent methods that are evaluated in diﬀerent settings and
with diﬀerent datasets (Zeng et al., 2021). Moreover, the pipeline design of automated fact-checking creates potential
bottlenecks, e.g., performance on the veracity prediction task on most datasets is dependent on the claim detection task
performance or the quality of the evidence retrieved. Extensive benchmarks are required to incorporate all of the prior
subtasks in the fact-checking pipeline systematically (Zeng et al., 2021).
Much of AI research is faced with a fundamental trade-oﬀbetween working with diverse formulations of a problem
and standardized benchmarks for measuring progress. This trade-oﬀalso impacts automated fact-checking research.
While there exist benchmarks such as FEVER and the CheckThat!, most models built on those benchmarks may
not generalize well in a practical setting. Abstract and tractable formulations of a problem may help us develop
technologies that facilitate practical adoption. However, practical adoption requires signiﬁcant engineering eﬀort
beyond the research setting. Ideally, we would like to see automated fact-checking research continue to move toward
increasingly realistic benchmarks while incorporating diverse formulations of the problem.
5.2. Explainable Approaches
Although the terms interpretability and explainability are often used interchangeably, and some times deﬁned to be
so (Molnar, 2020), we distinguish interpretability vs. explainability similar to (Kotonya and Toni, 2020a). Speciﬁcally,
interpretability represents methods that provide direct insight into an AI system’s components (such as features and
variables), often requiring some understanding of the speciﬁc to the algorithm, and often built for expert use cases
such as model debugging. Explainability represents methods to understand an AI model without referring to the actual
component of the systems. Note that, in the task formulation section, we have also talked about explaining veracity
prediction. The goal of such explanation stems from fact-checker needs to help readers understand the fact-checking
verdict. Therefore, explaining veracity prediction aligns more closely with explainability over interpretability. When
the distinction between explainability vs. interpretability does not matter, we follow Vaughan and Wallach (2020) in
adopting intelligibility (Vaughan and Wallach, 2020) as an umbrella term for both concepts.
Sokol and Flach (2019) propose a desiderata for designing user experience for machine learning applications.
Kotonya and Toni (2020a) extend them in the context of fact-checking and suggest eight properties of intelligibility:
actionable, causal, coherent, context-full, interactive, unbiased or impartial, parsimonious, and chronological.
Additionally, there are three dimensions speciﬁcally for explainable methods in NLP (Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020):
1. Readability: are explanations clear?
2. Plausibility: are explanations compelling or persuasive?
3. Faithfulness: are explanations faithful to the model’s actual reasoning process?
In comparison with the available intelligibility methods in NLP (Wiegreﬀe and Marasovic, 2021), only a few
are applied to existing fact-checking works. Below, we highlight only commonly observed explainable fact-checking
methods (also noted by Kotonya and Toni (2020a)).
Attention-based Intelligibility Despite the debate about attention being a reliable intelligibility method (Jain and
Wallace, 2019; Wiegreﬀe and Pinter, 2019; Serrano and Smith, 2019; Bibal, Cardon, Alfter, Wilkens, Wang, François
and Watrin, 2022), it remains a popular method in existing deep neural network approaches in fact-checking. Attention-
based explanations are provided in various forms:
1. highlighting tokens in articles (Popat et al., 2018)
5https://fever.ai/2018/task.html
6https://fever.ai/task.html
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 12 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
2. highlighting salient excerpts from evidence utilizing comments related to the post (Shu et al., 2019)
3. n-gram extraction using self-attention (Yang, Pentyala, Mohseni, Du, Yuan, Linder, Ragan, Ji and Hu, 2019)
4. attention from diﬀerent sources other than the claim text itself, such as the source of tweets, retweet propagation,
and retweeter properties (Lu and Li, 2020)
Rule discovery as explanations Rule mining is a form of explanation prevalent in knowledge base systems (Gad-
Elrab et al., 2019; Ahmadi, Lee, Papotti and Saeed, 2019). These explanations can be more comprehensive, but as noted
in the previous section, not all statements can be fact-checked via knowledge-based methods due to limitations of the
underlying knowledge-base itself. Some approaches provide general purpose rule mining in an attempt to address this
limitation (Ahmadi, Truong, Dao, Ortona and Papotti, 2020).
Summarization as explanations Both extractive and abstractive summaries can provide explanations for fact-
checking. Atanasova et al. (2020a) provides natural language summaries to explain the fact-checking decision. They
explore two diﬀerent approaches - explanation generation and veracity prediction as separate tasks, and joint training
of the both. Joint training performs worse than single training. Kotonya and Toni (2020b) combine abstractive and
extractive approaches to provide a novel summarization approach. Brand, Roitero, Soprano, Rahimi and Demartini
(2018) show jointly training prediction and explanation generation with encoder-decoder models such as BART (Lewis,
Liu, Goyal, Ghazvininejad, Mohamed, Levy, Stoyanov and Zettlemoyer, 2020) results in explanations that help the
crowd to perform better veracity assessment.
Counterfactuals and adversarial methods Adversarial attacks on opaque models help to identify any blind-spots,
biases and discover data artifacts in models (Ribeiro, Wu, Guestrin and Singh, 2020). Shared task FEVER 2.0 (Thorne
et al., 2019) asked participants to devise methods for generating adversarial claims to identify weaknesses in the fact-
checking methods. Natural language generation models such as GPT-3 can assist in formulating adversarial claims.
More control over the generation can come from manipulating the input to natural language generation methods
and constraining the generated text within original vocabulary (Niewiński, Pszona and Janicka, 2019). Atanasova,
Wright and Augenstein (2020b) generate claims with n-grams inserted into the input text. Thorne and Vlachos (2019)
experiment with several adversarial methods such as rule-based adversary, semantically equivalent adversarial rules
(or SEARS) (Ribeiro, Singh and Guestrin, 2018), negation, and paraphrasing-based adversary. Adversarial attacks
are evaluated based on the potency (correctness) of the example and reduction in system performance. While methods
such as SEARS and paraphrasing hurt the system performance, hand-crafted adversarial examples have higher potency
score.
Interpretable methods (non-BlackBox) Some fact-checking works use a white-box or inherently interpretable
model for fact-checking. Nguyen et al. (2018b,a) utilize a probabilistic graphical model and build an interactive
interpretable model for fact-checking where users are allowed to directly override model decisions. Kotonya,
Spooner, Magazzeni and Toni (2021) propose an interpretable graph neural network for interpretable fact-checking
on FEVEROUS dataset (Aly et al., 2021).
Limitations Intelligible methods in NLP and speciﬁcally within fact-checking are still in their infancy. Analysis of
Kotonya and Toni (2020a) shows that most methods do not fulﬁll the desiderata mentioned earlier in this section.
Speciﬁcally, they ﬁnd that none of the existing models meet the criteria of being actionable, causal, and chronological.
They also highlight that no existing method explicitly analyzes whether explanations are impartial. Some forms
of explanations, such as rule-based triplets, are unbiased as they do not contain sentences or contain fragments of
information (Kotonya and Toni, 2020a).
Some explainable methods address a speciﬁc simpliﬁed formulation of the task. For example, Kotonya and Toni
(2020b); Atanasova et al. (2020a) both assume that expert-written fact-checking articles already exist. They provide
explanations as summaries of the fact-checking article. However, in practice, a fact-checking system would not have
access to such an article for an unknown claim.
In the case of automated fact-checking, most intelligible methods focus on explaining the outcome rather than
describing the process to arrive at the outcome (Kotonya and Toni, 2020a). Moreover, all of the tasks in the fact-
checking pipeline have not received equal attention for explainable methods. Kotonya and Toni (2020a) also argue
that automatic fact-checking may beneﬁt from explainable methods that provide insight into how outcomes of earlier
sub-task in the fact-checking pipeline impact the outcome of later subtasks.
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 13 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
Most explainable NLP works evaluate explanation quality instead of explanation utility or faithfulness. Jacovi
and Goldberg (2020) argue for a thorough faithfulness evaluation for explainable models. For example, even though
attention-based explanations may provide quality explanations, they may not necessarily be faithful. Moreover, expla-
nation utility requires separate evaluation by measuring whether explanations improve both i) human understanding
of the model (Hase and Bansal, 2020) and ii) human eﬀectiveness of the downstream task (Nakov et al., 2021a).
Additionally, most intelligible methods establish only one-way communication from the model to humans. Instead,
explanations might improve the model and human performance by establishing a bidirectional feedback loop.
5.3. Human-in-the-loop Approaches
Human-in-the-loop (HITL) approaches can help scale automated solutions while utilizing human intelligence for
complex tasks. There are diﬀerent ways of applying HITL methods, e.g., delegating sub-tasks to crowd workers
(Demartini, Trushkowsky, Kraska, Franklin and Berkeley, 2013; Demartini, Difallah and Cudré-Mauroux, 2012;
Sarasua, Simperl and Noy, 2012), active learning (Settles, 2009; Zhang, Lease and Wallace, 2017), interactive machine
learning (Amershi, Cakmak, Knox and Kulesza, 2014; Joachims and Radlinski, 2007), and decision support systems
where humans make the ﬁnal decision based on model outcome and explanations (Zanzotto, 2019).
While HITL approaches in artiﬁcial intelligence are prevalent, only a few recent works employ such approaches
in fact-checking. HITL approaches are predominantly more present in the veracity prediction task than other parts of
the pipeline. For example, Demartini et al. (2020) propose a HITL framework for combating online misinformation.
However, they only consider hybrid approaches for two sub-tasks in the fact-checking pipeline: a) claim check-
worthiness and b) truthfulness judgment (same as veracity prediction). Below, we discuss the existing HITL approaches
by how the system leverages human eﬀort for each sub-task in the fact-checking pipeline.
Claim Detection, Checkworthiness, and Prioritization Social media streams are often monitored for rumors as
a part of the claim detection task (Guo et al., 2022). Farinneya, Abdollah Pour, Hamidian and Diab (2021) apply an
active learning-based approach at the claim detection stage for identifying rumors on social media. In-domain data is
crucial for traditional supervised methods to perform well for rumor detection (Ahsan, Kumari and Sharma, 2019), but
in real-world scenarios, suﬃcient in-domain labeled data may not be available in the early stages of development. A
semi-supervised approach such as active learning is beneﬁcial for achieving high performance with fewer data points.
Empirical results shows that Tweet-BERT, along with the least conﬁdence-based sample selection approach, performs
on par with supervised approaches using far less labeled data (Farinneya et al., 2021).
Similarly, Tschiatschek, Singla, Gomez Rodriguez, Merchant and Krause (2018) propose a HITL approach that
aims to automatically aggregate user ﬂags and recommend a small subset of the ﬂagged content for expert fact-checking.
Their Bayesian inference-based approach jointly learns to detect fake news and identify the accuracy of user ﬂags over
time. One strength of this approach is that the algorithm improves over time in identifying users’ ﬂagging accuracy.
Consequently, over time this algorithm’s performance improves. This approach is also robust against spammers. By
running the model on publicly available Facebook data where a majority of the users are adversarial, experiments show
that their algorithm still performs well.
Duke’s Tech & Check team implemented HITL at the claim check-worthiness layer (Adair and Stencel, 2020). To
avoid ﬂagging false check-worthy claims, a human expert would sort claims detected by ClaimBuster (Hassan, Zhang,
Arslan, Caraballo, Jimenez, Gawsane, Hasan, Joseph, Kulkarni, Nayak et al., 2017b), ﬁlter out the ones deemed more

prioritize the claims to check through an additional level of ﬁltering. Currently, several published fact-checks on

Note that the CheckThat! (Nakov et al., 2021b; Shaar et al., 2021b; Barrón-Cedeño et al., 2020; Atanasova, Nakov,
Karadzhov, Mohtarami and Da San Martino, 2019a) is a popular shared task for claim detection, check-worthiness, and
prioritization tasks. However such shared tasks often have no submissions that employs HITL methodologies. Shared
tasks for HITL approaches could encourage more solutions that can complement the limitations of model-only based
approaches.
Evidence Retrieval and Veracity Prediction Most work in HITL fact-checking caters to veracity prediction, and
only a few consider evidence retrieval as a separate task. While there is a body of literature on HITL approaches in
information retrieval (Chen and Jain, 2013; Demartini, 2015), we know of no work in that direction for fact-checking.
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 14 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
Shabani, Charlesworth, Sokhn and Schuldt (2021) leverage HITL approaches for providing feedback about claim
source, author, message, and spelling (SAMS). Annotators answer four yes/no questions about whether the article has
a source, an author, a clear and unbiased message, and any spelling mistake. Furthermore, this work integrates the
features provided by humans in a machine learning pipeline, which resulted in a 7.1% accuracy increase. However,
the evaluation is performed on a small dataset with claims related to Covid-19. It is unclear if this approach would
generalize outside of the domain. Moreover, further human eﬀort can be reduced in this work by automating spell-
check and grammar-check. SAMS could be quite limited in real life situations as most carefully crafted misinformation
often looks like real news. Model generated fake news can successfully fool annotators (Zellers, Holtzman, Rashkin,
Bisk, Farhadi, Roesner and Choi, 2020), and thus SAMS might also fail to ﬂag such fake news.
Qu, Barbera, Roitero, Mizzaro, Spina and Demartini (2021a) and Qu, Roitero, Mizzaro, Spina and Demartini
(2021b) provide an understanding of how human and machine conﬁdence scores can be leveraged to build HITL
approaches for fact-checking. They consider explicit self-reported annotator conﬁdence and compute implicit con-
ﬁdence based on standard deviation among ten crowd workers. Model conﬁdence is obtained from bootstrapping
(Efron and Tibshirani, 1985) ten diﬀerent versions of the model and then computing standard deviation over the scores
returned by the soft-max layer. Their evaluation shows that explicit crowd and model conﬁdence are poor indicators
of accurate classiﬁcation decisions. Although the crowd and the model make diﬀerent mistakes, there is no clear
signal that conﬁdence is related to accuracy. However, they show that implicit crowd conﬁdence can be a useful
signal for identifying when to engage experts to collect labels. A more recent study shows that a politically balanced
crowd of ten is correlated with the average rating of three fact-checkers (Allen, Arechar, Pennycook and Rand, 2020).
Gold, Kovatchev and Zesch (2019) also ﬁnd that annotations by a crowd of ten correlate with the judgments of three
annotators for textual entailment, which is utilized by veracity prediction models.
A series of studies show that the crowd workers can reliably identify misinformation (Roitero, Soprano, Fan, Spina,
Mizzaro and Demartini, 2020a; Roitero, Soprano, Portelli, Spina, Della Mea, Serra, Mizzaro and Demartini, 2020b;
Soprano, Roitero, La Barbera, Ceolin, Spina, Mizzaro and Demartini, 2021). Furthermore, Roitero et al. (2020b) show
that crowd workers not only can identify false claims but also can retrieve proper evidence to justify their annotation.
One weakness of this study is that it only asks users to provide one URL as evidence. However, in practice, fact-
checking might need reasoning over multiple sources of information. Although these studies do not propose novel
HITL solutions, they provide suﬃcient empirical evidence and insights about where crowd workers can be engaged
reliably in the fact-checking pipeline.
Nguyen et al. (2018b) propose joint modeling of crowd annotations and machine learning to detect the veracity of
textual claims. The key strength of the model is that it assumes all annotators can make mistakes, which is a possibility
as fact-checking is a diﬃcult task. Another strength is that this model allows users to import their knowledge into the
system. Moreover, this HITL approach can collect on-demand stance labels from the crowd and incorporate them in
veracity prediction. Empirical evaluation shows that this approach achieves strong predictive performance. A follow-up
study provides an interactive HITL tool for fact-checking (Nguyen et al., 2018a).
Nguyen, Weidlich, Yin, Zheng, Nguyen and Nguyen (2020) propose a HITL system to minimise user eﬀort and cost.
Users validate algorithmic predictions but do so at a minimal cost by only validating the most-beneﬁcial predictions
for improving the system. This system provides a guided interaction to the users and incrementally gets better as users
engage with it.
It is important to note that research on crowdsourcing veracity judgment is at an early stage. Diﬀerent factors such
as demographics, political leaning, criteria for determining the expertise of the assessors (Bhuiyan, Zhang, Sehat and
Mitra, 2020), cognitive factors (Kaufman, Haupt and Dow, 2022), and even the rating scale (La Barbera, Roitero,
Demartini, Mizzaro and Spina, 2020) led to diﬀerent levels of alignment with expert ratings. Bhuiyan et al. (2020)
outline research directions for designing better crowd processes speciﬁc to diﬀerent types of misinformation for the
successful utilization of crowd workers.
Explaining Veracity Prediction HITL systems in fact-checking often use veracity explanations to correct model
errors. As discussed earlier, Nguyen et al. (2018a) provides an interpretable model that allows users to impart their
knowledge when the model is wrong. Empirical evaluation shows that users could impart their knowledge into the
system. Similarly, Zhang, Rudra and Anand (2021b) propose a method that collects user feedback from explanations.
Note that this method explains veracity prediction outcomes based on the evidence retrieved and their stance. Users
provide feedback in terms of stance and relevance of the retrieved evidence. The proposed approach employs lifelong
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 15 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
learning which enables the system to improve over time. Currently there is no empirical evaluation of this system to
identify the eﬀectiveness of this approach.
Although natural language generation models are getting increasingly better (Radford, Wu, Child, Luan, Amodei,
Sutskever et al., 2019), generating abstractive fact-checking explanations is still in its infancy (Kotonya and Toni,
2020b). HITL methods could be leveraged to write reports justifying fact-checking explanations.
Limitations After reviewing existing HITL approaches across diﬀerent fact-checking tasks, we also list out several
limitations as follow. First, some HITL approaches adopt several interpretable models to integrate human input, but
the resulting models do not perform as well as the state-of-the-art deep learning models (Nguyen et al., 2018b,a).
Farinneya et al. (2021) apply HITL approaches to scale up rumor detection from a limited amount of annotated data.
Although it performs well to generalize the algorithm for a new topic in a few-shot manner, one of the weaknesses
is that data from other domains or topics causes a high variance in model performance. Consequently, in-domain
model performance might degrade when out-of-domain data is introduced in model training. This issue may hinder the
model’s generalizability in practice, especially where a clear demarcation between topic domains may not be possible.
More importantly, there is a lack of empirical studies on how to apply HITL approaches of fact-checking for
practical adoption. Although HITL approaches provide a mechanism to engage human in the process of modeling
development, several human factors, such as usability, intelligibility, and trust, become important to consider when
applying this method in the real-world use case. Fact-checking is a time-sensitive task and requires expertise to process
complex information over multiple sources (Graves, 2017). Fact-checkers and policy makers are often skeptical about
any automated or semi-autoamted solutions as this type of research requires human creativity and expertise (Arnold,
2020; Micallef et al., 2022). Therefore, more empirical evidence needs to be found to assess the eﬀectiveness of
applying diﬀerent HITL approaches to automated fact-checking.
6. Existing Tools for Fact-checking
In the previous section, we reviewed the details of current NLP technologies for fact-checking. Subsequently,
we extend our review of automated fact-checking to the HCI literature and discuss existing practices of applying fact-
checking into real-world tools that assist human fact-checkers. In brief, there is a lack of holistic review of fact-checking
tools from a human-centered perspective. Additionally, we found that the articulation of work between human labor and
AI tools is still opaque in this ﬁeld. Research questions include but are not limited to: 1) how can NLP tools facilitate
human work in diﬀerent fact-checking tasks? 2) how can we incorporate user needs and leverage human expertise to
inform the design of automated fact-checking?
In this section, we examine current real-world tools that apply NLP technologies in diﬀerent stages of fact-checking
and clarify the main use cases of these tools. We argue that more research concerning human factors for building
automated fact-checking, such as user research, human-centered design, and usability studies, should be conducted to
improve the practical adoption of automated fact-checking. These studies help us identify the design space of applying
explainable and HITL approaches for real-world NLP technologies.
6.1. Claim Detection and Prioritization
The ﬁrst step in claim detection is sourcing content to possibly check. On end-to-end encrypted platforms, such
as WhatsApp, Telegram, and Signal, crowdsourcing-based tip-lines play a vital role in identifying suspicious content
that is not otherwise accessible (Kazemi et al., 2021b). As another example, Check from Meedan 7, a tip-line service
tool, also helps fact-checkers monitor fake news for in-house social media. User ﬂagging of suspect content on social
media platforms such as Facebook is also a valuable signal for identifying such content, and crowdsourcing initiatives
like Twitter’s BirdWatch can further help triage and prioritize claims for further investigation.
In the stage of ﬁnding and choosing claims to check, fact-checkers assess the fact-checking related quality of a
claim and decide whether to fact-check it (Graves, 2017; Micallef et al., 2022). NLP models in claim detection, claim
matching, and check-worthiness are useful to assist the above decision-making process. However, integrating them
into real-world tools that help fact-checkers prioritize what to check requires more personalized eﬀort. Graves (2018a)
points out that it is important to design the aforementioned models to cater to fact-checker organizational interests,
stakeholder needs, and changing news trends.
7https://meedan.com/check
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 16 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
As one of the fact-checking qualities of a claim, checkability can be objectively analyzed by whether a claim
contains one or more purported facts that can be veriﬁed (Section 3.1). Fact-checkers ﬁnd it useful to apply models
that identify checkable claims to their existing workﬂow because the model helps them ﬁlter irrelevant content and
claims that are uncheckable when they are choosing claims to check (Arnold, 2020). ClaimBuster, one of the well-
known claim detection tools, is built to ﬁnd checkable claims from a large scale of text content (Hassan et al., 2017a).
Claim detection can also be integrated into speech recognition tools to spot claims from live speech (Adair, 2020).
Additionally, if a claim has already been fact-checked, fact-checkers can skip it and prioritize claims that have
not been checked. As a relatively new NLP task, claim matching has been integrated into some current oﬀ-the-shelf
search engines or fact-checking tools to help fact-checkers ﬁnd previously fact-checked claims. For example, Google
Fact Check Explorer8 can retrieve previously fact-checked claims by matching similar fact-check content to user input
queries. Similarly, with Meedan’s Check, if users send a tip with fake news that has been previously fact-checked, the
tool further helps fact-checkers retrieve the previous fact-check and send it to users.
Whether or not to fact-check a claim depends on an organization’s goals and interests. Tools built for claim detection
need to take such interests into account. For example, Full Fact developed a claim detection system that classiﬁes
claims into diﬀerent categories, such as quantity, predictions, correlation or causation, personal experience, and laws
or rules of operations (Konstantinovskiy et al., 2021). The claim categories are designed by their fact-checkers to cater
to their needs of fact-checking UK political news in a live fact-checking situation. Identifying certain claims, such as
quantity, correlation or causation, might be particularly useful for fact-checkers to evaluate the credibility of politician
statements and claims. The system also helps tailor fact-checkers’ downstream tasks, such as fact-check assignments
and automated veriﬁcation for statistical claims (Nakov et al., 2021a).
Fact-checkers also use social media monitoring tools to ﬁnd claims to check, such as CrowdTangle, TweetDeck, and
Facebook’s (unnamed) fact-checking tool, but those tools are not very eﬀective to detect checkable claims. Some fact-
checkers reported that only roughly 30% of claims ﬂagged by Facebook’s fact-checking tool were actually checkable
(Arnold, 2020). A low hanging fruit is to integrate claim detection models into these social media monitoring tools so
that it is easier for fact-checkers to identify claims that are both viral and checkable. Additionally, these tools should
enable fact-checkers to locate certain ﬁgures, institutions, or agencies according to their fact-checking interests and
stakeholder needs so that these tools can better identify and prioritize truly check-worthy claims. An important question
in implementing those systems is how to measure the virality of a claim and its change over time.
It would also be useful to integrate veracity prediction into previous fact-checking tools because fact-checkers
may pay the most attention to claims9 that are suspect and uncertain (since obviously true or false claims likely do
not require a fact-check). However, information or data points that are used to give such predictions should also be
provided to fact-checkers. If sources, evidence, propagation patterns, or other contextual information that models use
to predict claim veracity can be explained clearly for fact-checkers, they can also triage these indicators to prioritize
claims more holistically.
6.2. Tools for Evidence Retrieval
After ﬁnding and prioritizing which claim to check, fact-checkers investigate claims following three main activities:
1) decomposing claims, 2) ﬁnding evidence, and 3) tracing the provenance of claims and their spread. Note that these
three activities are intertwined with each other by using diﬀerent information-seeking tools in the fact-checking process.
Fact-checkers search for evidence by decomposing claims into sub questions. Evidence found while investigating a
claim may further modify or add to the sub-questions (Singh et al., 2021). By iteratively investigating claims via
online search, fact-checkers reconstruct the formation and the spread of a claim to assess its truth (Graves, 2017). In
this section, we discuss the utility of existing information-seeking tools, including oﬀ-the-shelf search engines and
domain-speciﬁc databases, that assist fact-checkers in each activity.
Claim decomposition is not a speciﬁc activity that qualitative researchers have reported or analyzed in their fact-
checking studies, but we can ﬁnd more details from where fact-checking organizations describe their methodology10
and how fact-checkers approach complex claims in their fact-checks11. Claim decomposition refers to how fact-
checkers interpret ambiguous terms of a claim and set the fact-checking boundaries to ﬁnd evidence. Decomposing
8https://toolbox.google.com/factcheck/explorer
9https://www.factcheck.org/our-process/
10https://leadstories.com/how-we-work.html
11https://www.factcheck.org/2021/10/oecd-data-conflict-with-bidens-educational-attainment-claim/ In this fact-
check, fact-checkers decompose what President Biden mean by “advanced economies” and “young people”. The approach of deﬁning these two
terms directly inﬂuence their fact-checking results.
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 17 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
claims eﬀectively requires sensitive curiosity and news judgments for fact-checkers that are cultivated through years
of practice. Unfortunately, we are not aware of any existing tools that facilitate this process.
Traditional methodology to decompose claims is to ask sub-questions. Recent NLP studies simulate this process
by formulating it as a question-answering task (Fan et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022). Researchers extract justiﬁcations
from existing fact-checks and crowdsource sub-questions to decompose the claim. For automated-fact-checking, this
NLP task might be very beneﬁcial to improve the performance of evidence retrieval by auto-decomposing claims into
smaller checkable queries (Chen et al., 2022). Although it is diﬃcult for NLP to match the abilities of professional
fact-checkers, it might help scale up the traditional, human fact-checking process. It could also help the public, new
fact-checkers, or journalists to more eﬀectively investigate complex claims and search for evidence.
How fact-checkers ﬁnd evidence is usually a domain-speciﬁc reporting process, contacting experts or looking for
speciﬁc documents from reliable sources (Graves, 2017; Micallef et al., 2022). Instead of conducting random searches
online, most fact-checkers include a list of reliable sources in which to look for evidence. Tools that are designed for
searching domain datasets can also help fact-checkers to ﬁnd evidence. For example, Li, Fang, Lou, Li and Zhang
(2021) built an analytical search engine for retrieving the COVID-19 news data and summarizing it in an easy to
digest, tabular format. The system can decompose analytical queries into structured entities and extract quantitative
facts from news data. Furthermore, if evidence retrieval is accurate enough for in-domain datasets, the system can
take a leap further to auto-verify domain-related claims. We provide more detailed use cases of veracity prediction in
Section 6.3.
Fact-checkers mainly use oﬀ-the-shelf search engines, such as Google, Bing, etc., to trace a claim’s origin from
publicly accessible documents (Beers, Haughey, Melinda, Arif and Starbird, 2020; Arnold, 2020). Other digital
datasets, such as LexisNexis and InternetArchive, are also useful for fact-checkers to trace claim origin. To capture the
formation and change of a claim, search engines should not only ﬁlter unrelated content, but also retrieve both topically
and evidentially relevant content. Hasanain and Elsayed (2021) report that most topically relevant pages retrieved from
Google do not contain evidential information, such as statistics, quotes, entities, or other types of facts. Additionally,
most built-in search engines in social media platforms, such as Twitter and Facebook, only ﬁlter “spreadable” content
not “credible” content (Alsmadi, Alazzam and AlRamahi, 2021).
Furthermore, these oﬀ-the-shelf search engines do not support multilingual search, so it is diﬃcult for fact-checkers
to trace claims if they are translated from other languages (Graves, 2017; Nakov et al., 2021a). NLP researchers have
started to use multilingual embedding models to represent claim-related text in diﬀerent languages and match existing
fact-checks (Kazemi, Gaﬀney, Garimella and Hale, 2021a). This work not only helps fact-checkers ﬁnd previously
fact-checked claims more easily from other languages, but also to examine how the claim is transformed and reshaped
by the media in diﬀerent languages and socio-political contexts.
6.3. Domain-speciﬁc Tools for Claim Veriﬁcation
As discussed in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, most veriﬁcation prediction models are grounded on the collected evidence
and the claim. To build an end-to-end claim veriﬁcation system, NLP developers need to construct domain-speciﬁc
datasets incorporating both claims and evidence. Diﬀerent from complex claims that contain multiple arguments and
require decomposition, claims that have simple linguistic structure with purported evidence or contain statistical facts
can be automatically veriﬁed (Nakov et al., 2021a).
Karagiannis, Saeed, Papotti and Trummer (2020) built CoronaCheck, a search engine that can directly verify Covid-
19 related statistical claims by retrieving oﬃcial data curated by experts (Dong, Du and Gardner, 2020). Full Fact
(The Poynter Institute, 2021) also took a similar approach to verify statistical macroeconomic claims by retrieving
evidence from UK parliamentary reports and national statistics. Additionally, Wadden et al. (2020) built a scientiﬁc
claim veriﬁcation pipeline by using abstracts that contain evidence to verify a given scientiﬁc claim.
However, pitfalls still exist if fact-checkers use these domain-speciﬁc veriﬁcation tools in practice. For example, the
CoronaCheck tool cannot check the claim “The Delta variant causes more death than the Alpha variant” simply because
the database does not contain ﬁne-grained death statistics for Covid variants. Additionally, checking a statistical or
scientiﬁc claim might only be a part of the process of checking a more complex claim, which requires fact-checkers
to contextualize the veracity of previous statistical or scientiﬁc checks. In general, domain-speciﬁc tools are clearly
valuable to use when available, though in practice they are often incomplete and insuﬃcient on their own to check
complex claims.
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 18 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
7. Discussion
In this review, we have 1) horizontally outlined the research of applying NLP technologies for fact-checking from
the beginning of task formulation to the end of tools adoption; as well as 2) vertically discussing the capabilities and
limitations of NLP for each step of a fact-checking pipeline. We perceive a lack of research that bridges both to assist
fact-checkers. Explainable and HITL approaches leverage both human and computational intelligence from a human-
centered perspective, but there is a need to provide actionable guides to utilize both methods for designing useful
fact-checking tools. In this section, we propose several research directions to explore the design space of applying
NLP technologies to assist fact-checkers.
7.1. Distributing Work between Human and AI for Mixed-initiative Fact-checking
The practice of fact-checking has already become a type of complex and distributed computer-mediated work
(Graves, 2018a). Although Graves (2017) breaks down a traditional journalist fact-checking pipeline into ﬁve steps,
the real situation of fact-checking a claim is more complicated (Juneja and Mitra, 2022). Various AI tools are adopted
dynamically and diversely by fact-checkers to complete diﬀerent fact-checking tasks (Arnold, 2020; Beers et al., 2020;
Micallef et al., 2022).
Researchers and practitioners increasingly believe that future fact-checking should be a mixed-initiative practice
in which humans perform speciﬁc tasks while machines take over others (Nguyen et al., 2018a; Lease, 2020; Nakov
et al., 2021a). To embed such hybrid and dynamic human-machine collaborations into existing fact-checking workﬂow,
the task arrangement between human and AI need to be articulated clearly by understanding the expected outcomes
and criteria for each. Furthermore, designing a mixed-initiative tool for diﬀerent fact-checking tasks requires a more
ﬁne-grained level of task deﬁnition for human and AI (Lease, 2018, 2020). In Section 5.3, we discuss several studies
highlighting the role of humans in the fact-checking workﬂow, e.g., a) human experts select check-worthy claims from
claim detection tools (Hassan et al., 2017b) and deliver them to fact-checkers, b) ask crowd workers to judge reliable
claims sources (Shabani et al., 2021), or c) ﬂag potential misinformation (Roitero et al., 2020b) to improve veracity
prediction. All of the above human activities are examples of micro-tasks within a mixed-initiative fact-checking
process.
Prior work in crowdsourcing has shown that it is possible to eﬀectively break down the academic research process
and utilize crowd workers to partake in smaller research tasks (Vaish, Davis and Bernstein, 2015; Vaish, Gaikwad,
Kovacs, Veit, Krishna, Arrieta Ibarra, Simoiu, Wilber, Belongie, Goel et al., 2017). Given this evidence, we can
also break down sub-tasks of a traditional fact-checking process into more ﬁne-grained tasks. Therefore, key research
questions include: a) How can we design these micro-tasks to facilitate each sub-task of fact-checking, and b) What
are the appropriate roles for human and AI in diﬀerent micro-tasks?
To eﬀectively orchestrate human and AI work, researchers need to understand the respective roles of human and AI,
and how they will interact with one another, because it will directly aﬀect whether humans decide to take AI advice
(Cimolino and Graham, 2022). Usually, if AI aims to assist high-stake decision-making tasks, such as recidivism
prediction (Veale, Van Kleek and Binns, 2018) and medical treatments (Cai, Winter, Steiner, Wilcox and Terry, 2019),
considerations of risk and trust will be important factors for people to adopt such AI assistants (Lai, Chen, Liao,
Smith-Renner and Tan, 2021). In the context of fact-checking, if AI directly predicts the verdict of a claim, fact-
checkers may be naturally skeptical about how the AI makes such a prediction (Arnold, 2020). On the other hand, if
AI only helps to ﬁlter claims that are uncheckable, such as opinions and personal experience, fact-checkers may be
more willing to use such automation with less concern about how AI achieves it. Deciding whether a claim is true or
false is a high-stake decision-making task for fact-checkers, while ﬁltering uncheckable claims is a less important but
tedious task that fact-checkers want automation to help with. Therefore, the extent of human acceptance of AI varies
according to how humans assess the task assigned to AI, resulting in diﬀerent human factors, such as trust, transparency,
and fairness. Researchers need to specify or decompose these human factors into diﬀerent key variables that can be
measured during the model development process. Given a deep understanding of the task relationship between human
and AI, researchers can then ask further research questions on how to apply an explainable approach, or employ a
HITL system vs. automated solutions, to conduct fact-checking. Here we list out several speciﬁc research topics that
contain mixed-initiative tasks, including: a) assessing claim diﬃculty leveraging crowd workers, b) breaking down a
claim into a multi-hop reasoning task and engaging the crowd to ﬁnd information relevant to the sub-claims, and c)
designing micro-tasks to parse a large number of documents retrieved by web search to identify sources that contain
the evidence needed for veracity prediction.
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 19 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
7.2. Human-centered Evaluation of NLP Technology for Fact-Checkers
We begin this section by proposing key metrics from human factors for evaluating systems (i.e., what to measure
and how to measure them): accuracy, time, model understanding, and trust (Section 7.2.1). Following this, we further
propose a template for an experimental protocol for human-centered evaluations in fact-checking (Section 7.2.2).
7.2.1. Metrics
Accuracy Most fact-checking user studies assume task accuracy as the primary user goal (Nguyen et al., 2018a;
Mohseni, Yang, Pentyala, Du, Liu, Lupfer, Hu, Ji and Ragan, 2021). Whereas non-expert users (i.e., social media users
or other form of content consumers) might be most interested in the veracity outcome along with justiﬁcation, fact-
checkers often want to use automation and manual eﬀort interchangeably in their workﬂow (Arnold, 2020; Nakov et al.,
2021a). Thus, we need a more ﬁne-grained approach towards measuring accuracy beyond the ﬁnal veracity prediction
accuracy. For ﬁne-grained accuracy evaluation, it is also crucial to capture fact-checker accuracy, particularly for the
sub-tasks for which they use the fact-checking tool.
With the assumption that “ground truth” exists for all of the sub-tasks in the fact-checking pipeline, accuracy can
be computed by comparing user answers with the ground truth. Note that measuring sub-task level accuracy is trickier
than end-to-end fact-checking accuracy. Sub-task level accuracy can be captured by conducting separate experiments
for each sub-task. Suppose the point of interest is to understand user performance for detecting claim-checkworthiness.
In that case, we will need to collect additional data speciﬁc to the claim-checkworthiness task.
In some cases, it is possible to merge multiple sub-tasks for evaluation purposes. For example, Miranda, Nogueira,
Mendes, Vlachos, Secker, Garrett, Mitchel and Marinho (2019) evaluate the eﬀectiveness of their tool with journalists
by capturing the following two key variables: a) the relevance of retrieved evidence, and b) the accuracy of the predicted
stance. This method provides essential insight into evidence retrieval, stance detection, and the ﬁnal fact-checking task.
Depending on the tool, the exact detail of this metric will require speciﬁc changes according to tool aﬀordances.
Note that both time and accuracy measures need to control for claim properties. For example, if a claim has been
previously fact-checked, it would take less time to fact-check such claims. On the other hand, a new claim that is more
diﬃcult to assess would require more time.
Model Understanding Fact-checkers want to understand the tools they use. For example, Arnold (2020) pointed
out that fact-checkers expressed a need for understanding CrowdTangle’s algorithm for detecting viral content on
various social media platforms. Similarly, Nakov et al. (2021a) observed a need for increased system transparency in
the fact-checking tools used by diﬀerent organizations. Lease (2018) argues that transparency is equally important for
non-expert users to understand the underlying system and make an informed judgement. Although this is not a key
variable related to user performance, it is important for practical adoption.
To measure understanding, users could be asked to self-report their level of understanding on a Likert-scale.
However, simply asking participants if they understand the algorithm is not a suﬃcient metric. For example, it does not
indicate whether participants will be able to simulate tool behavior (Hase and Bansal, 2020). We suggest the following
steps for measuring model understanding based on prior work (Cheng, Wang, Zhang, O’Connell, Gray, Harper and
Zhu, 2019).
1. Decision Prediction. To capture users’ holistic understanding of a tool, users could be provided claims and
asked the following: “What label would the tool assign to this claim?”
2. Alternative Prediction. Capturing how changes in the input inﬂuence the output can also measure understand-
ing, e.g., by asking users how the tool would assign a label to a claim when input parts are changed. Imagine a
tool that showed the users the evidence it has considered to arrive at a veracity conclusion. Now, if certain pieces
of evidence were swapped, how would that be reﬂected in the model prediction?
Trust For practical adoption, trust in a fact-checking tool is crucial across all user groups. While model understanding
is often positively correlated with trust, understanding alone may not suﬃce to establish trust. In this domain, fact-
checkers and journalists may have less trust in algorithmic tools (Arnold, 2020). On the other hand, there is also the risk
of over-trust, or users blindly following model predictions (Nguyen et al., 2018a; Mohseni et al., 2021). To maximize
the tool eﬀectiveness, we would want users to neither dismiss all model predictions out of hand (complete skepticism)
nor blindly follow all model predictions (complete faith). Instead, it is important to calibrate user trust for the most
eﬀective tool usage. We suggest measuring a notion of calibrated trust (Lee and See, 2004): how often users abide by
correct model decisions and override erroneous model decisions.
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 20 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
Both
Model
User
Neither
User Prediction
Correct
Incorrect
Correct
Incorrect
Model 
Prediction
Figure 2: Confusion Matrix for User Predictions vs. Model Predictions with respect to ground truth (gold). We assume
model predictions are provided to the user, who then decides whether to accept or reject the model prediction. The top-left
quadrant (Both) covers cases where users correctly follow model predictions. The top-right quadrant (Model) denotes the
cases where the model is correct but users mistakenly reject the model decisions. The bottom-left quadrant User denotes
the cases where users correctly reject erroneous model predictions. The bottom-right quadrant Neither denotes the cases
where users incorrectly accept erroneous model predictions. Quantifying user vs. model predictions in this manner enables
measurement of calibrated trust: how often users abide by correct model decisions and override erroneous model decisions.
To measure calibrated trust, we imagine a confusion matrix shown in Figure 2. The rows denote correct vs. incorrect
model predictions while the columns denote correct vs. incorrect user predictions. A user who blindly followed all
model predictions would have their behavior entirely captured by the main (primary) diagonal, whereas a user who
skeptically rejected all model predictions would have their behavior captured entirely in the secondary diagonal. The
ideal user’s behavior would be entirely captured in the ﬁrst column: accepting all correct model predictions and rejecting
all incorrect model predictions. To promote eﬀective human-AI teaming, AI tools should assist their human users in
developing strong calibrated trust to appropriately trust and distrust model predictions as each case merits.
Beyond calibrated trust, one could also measure quantitative trust by adopting methodologies from the human-
machine trust literature (Lee and Moray, 1992). For example, Cheng et al. (2019) adapted prior work into a 7-point
Likert scale. A similar scale can be reused for evaluating trust in a fact-checking tool. For example, we can create ﬁve
diﬀerent Likert-scales to measure the agreement (or disagreement) of users with the following statements:
• I understand the fact-checking tool.
• I can predict how the tool will behave.
• I have faith that the tool would be able to cope with the diﬀerent fact-checking task.
• I trust the decisions made by the tool.
• I can count on the tool to provide reliable fact-checking decisions.
Additional factors Individual diﬀerences among users might result in substantial variation in experimental outcomes.
For example, varying technical literacy (Cheng et al., 2019), any prior knowledge about the claims, and users’ political
leaning (Thornhill, Meeus, Peperkamp and Berendt, 2019) might inﬂuence user performance on the task while using
fact-checking tools. Thus it is valuable to capture these factors in study design. For example:
1. Technical Literacy: Users’ familiarity with popular technology tools (e.g, recommendation engines, spam
detectors) and their programming experience (Cheng et al., 2019) as well as familiarity with existing fact-
checking tools.
2. Media Literacy: Users’ familiarity with 1) the fact-checking process, and 2) fact-checks from popular
organizations such as PolitiFact and FactCheck.Org.
3. Demographics: Users’ education level, gender, age, and political leaning.
Quantitative measures alone are not suﬃcient as they do not capture certain nuances about how eﬀectively a tool
integrates into a fact-checker’s workﬂow. For example, even if users understand and trust the working principle of a
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 21 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
tool, it is unclear why they do so. Hence, users might be asked a few open-ended questions at the end of the study to
gather qualitative insights. Such questions could include:
1. Describe your understanding of the tool. Do any speciﬁc aspects of its design seem to assist or detract from your
understanding of how it works?
2. Why do you trust or not trust the tool?
3. Would you use this tool beyond this study, and if so, in what capacity?
7.2.2. Experimental Protocol
One strategy to capture the aforementioned metrics is to design a mixed-methods study. Here we outline the
template for such a study. Imagine the goal were to measure the user performance for fact-checking using a new tool
(let’s call it tool A) compared to an existing tool (tool B). Fact-checking tasks in the real world might be inﬂuenced by
user priors about the claims being checked. Thus, a within-subject study protocol may be more appropriate to account
for such priors (Shi, Bhattacharya, Das, Lease and Gwizdka, 2022).
1. Pre-task: Users would ﬁrst be asked to fact-check a set of claims. To do so, ﬁrst a user would be asked to leverage
a pre-existing tool B at this stage. Tool B can be replaced with diﬀerent baselines, depending on the particular
use case, ranging from simple web-search by non-expert users to proprietary tools used by fact-checkers and
journalists. Users would be asked to think aloud at this stage.
2. Learning: At this stage users would familiarize themselves with the new tool (tool A). Users would need to
fact-check a diﬀerent set of claims from the ﬁrst one. Ground truth would also accessible to the user to form a
prior about what kind of mistakes a tool might make. Claims here would be selected at random to reﬂect tool
capabilities. Moreover, tool performance metrics would be given to the users as additional information. Users
would be encouraged to ask questions about the tool at this stage.
3. Prediction: Users would now be asked to fact-check the same claims from step-1 above but this time they are
asked to leverage the tool A. Users would be asked to think out loud through this stage. Users could simply guess
the answers and achieve a high accuracy score. Thus, claims selected for stages (1) & (3) would be a balanced
set of claims with an equal distribution of true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative samples.
This idea is adopted from prior work (Hase and Bansal, 2020).
4. Post-task survey: Users would now be asked to take a small survey for capturing trust, understanding, technical
literacy, media literacy, and demographic information.
5. Post-task interview: Upon completion of these steps, users would be interviewed with open-ended questions to
gather insights about their understanding and trust in the system.
The measures and study protocol could be useful in the context of evaluating any new fact-checking system compared to
an existing system or practices. Speciﬁcs might vary depending on the target user group and the tool’s intended purpose.
Above we use the whole fact-checking pipeline to illustrate our experimental protocol. However this technique can be
applied to other sub-tasks of automated fact checking, granted that we have the ground truth of the outcome for that
sub-task. For example, let us assume a new claim detection tool has been proposed that takes claims from a tip-line
(Kazemi et al., 2021b). Currently, fact-checkers use an existing claim-matching algorithm to ﬁlter out the already
fact-checked claim. Now, if we replace tool B above with the existing claim-matching algorithm and tool A with the
proposed claim detection tool, we can utilize the protocol mentioned above. In conclusion, one could evaluate how
users perform for claim detection tasks using the new tool compared to the existing ones in terms of their accuracy,
time, understanding, and trust.
While we have proposed an ideal, extensive version of an evaluation protocol for evaluating new fact-checking tools,
note that the actual protocol used in practice could be tailored according to the time required from the participants and
the cost of conducting the experiment.
8. Conclusion
This review highlights the practices and development of the state-of-the-art in using NLP for automated fact-
checking, emphasizing both the advances and the limitations of existing task formulation, dataset construction, and
modeling approaches. We partially discuss existing practices of applying these NLP tasks into real-world tools that
assist human fact-checkers. In recent years we have seen signiﬁcant progress in automated fact-checking using NLP.
Anubrata Das et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 22 of 30

The State of Human-centered NLP Technology for Fact-checking
A broad range of tasks, datasets, and modeling approaches have been introduced in diﬀerent parts of the fact-checking
pipeline. Moreover, with recent developments in transformers and large language models, the model accuracy has
improved across tasks. However, even state-of-the-art models on existing benchmarks — such as FEVER and CLEF!
— may not yet be ready for practical adoption and deployment.
To address these limitations, we advocate development of hybrid, HITL systems for fact-checking. As a starting
point, we may wish to reorient the goals of existing NLP tasks from full automation towards decision support. In
contrast with fully-automated systems, hybrid systems instead involve humans-in-the-loop and facilitate human-AI
teaming (Bansal et al., 2019; Bansal, Wu, Zhou, Fok, Nushi, Kamar, Ribeiro and Weld, 2021b; Bansal, Nushi, Kamar,
Horvitz and Weld, 2021a). Such use of hybrid systems can help a) scale-up human decision making; b) augment
machine learning capabilities with human accuracy; and c) mitigate unintended consequences from machine errors.
Additionally, we need new benchmarks and evaluation practices that can measure how automated and hybrid systems
can improve downstream human accuracy (Smeros, Castillo and Aberer, 2021; Fan et al., 2020) and eﬃciency in
fact-checking.
