Graph Neural Networks and Boolean Satisﬁability
Benedikt B¨unz
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

Matthew Lamm∗
Department of Linguistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

Abstract
In this paper we explore whether or not deep neural architectures can learn to classify Boolean sat-
isﬁability (SAT). We devote considerable time to discussing the theoretical properties of SAT. Then,
we deﬁne a graph representation for Boolean formulas in conjunctive normal form, and train neural
classiﬁers over general graph structures called Graph Neural Networks, or GNNs, to recognize fea-
tures of satisﬁability. To the best of our knowledge this has never been tried before. Our preliminary
ﬁndings are potentially profound. In a weakly-supervised setting, that is, without problem speciﬁc
feature engineering, Graph Neural Networks can learn features of satisﬁability.
1
Introduction
The Boolean satisﬁability problem, or SAT, asks whether there exists a satisfying assignment to the variables of a
propositional formula. If such an assignment exists, we say the problem is SAT. If it does not, we say it is UNSAT.
It is assumed without loss of generality that formulas are given in conjunctive normal form, or CNF. A formula φ in
CNF is written as a conjunction of M clauses ωi, each of which is a disjunction of literals, xj or ¬xj. For example
(x1 ∨¬x2 ∨x4) ∧(x2 ∨x3) ∧(¬x3 ∨x4)
is a CNF formula. It has been shown that SAT is NP-complete (Cook, 1971); this implies that even the hardest
problems in NP can be expressed as a SAT problem. On the other hand many SAT problems turn out to be easy
in practice. Modern SAT solvers exist that can solve extremely large instances of SAT in a matter of milliseconds
(Selman et al., 1995). This disparity motivates the search for properties that make SAT instances difﬁcult.
SAT is a self-reducible problem. Given an oracle determining whether a problem instance is satisﬁable or not, one
can ﬁnd a satisfying assignment in time linear in the number of variables. This has motivated recent work by Devlin
and O’Sullivan (2008) examining the performance of a host of machine-learning classiﬁers for satisﬁability. In that
paper, the authors employ a variety of manually-designed features, many of which encode graph-like properties of
CNF formulas such as the average number of unique clauses a variable appears in.
Elsewhere, neural networks have shown great promise in reasoning about some subclasses of graphs, such as the tree-
like structures of natural language syntax (Socher et al., 2012). Despite a degree of opacity to what is in fact being
learned by these models, they are remarkable in their ability to obtain state-of-the art performance in a problem space
that is traditionally thought to require a great deal of expert knowledge and feature engineering. While the aptness
of neural networks for studying Boolean semantics does not fall out of these ﬁndings, we maintain that there is an
important connection between natural language meaning on the one hand, and formal-logical meaning on the other.
At ﬁrst pass, we have found that the imposition of tree-like structure onto CNF formulas, in a sense forcing upon them
an ad-hoc natural-language syntax, is an unsound approach. Building on these results, and the aforementioned ﬁnding
that manually-designed graph features can help other kinds of satisﬁability classiﬁers, we deﬁne a representation of
∗The authors contributed equally to this article
1
arXiv:1702.03592v1  [cs.AI]  12 Feb 2017

CNF formulas as a graphs. We then train Graph Neural Networks, or GNNs, to classify problem instances as satisﬁable
or unsatisﬁable (Scarselli et al., 2009b).
Our results are intriguing. GNNs are capable of classifying satisﬁability. We are still in the process of exploring how
formal problem difﬁculty affects graph representations of CNF formulas, and how exactly this relates to the accuracy
of GNN classiﬁers on these graphs.
In section 2 we brieﬂy review both related work and preliminary experiments. In section 3 we discuss some theoretical
properties of Boolean satisﬁability, emphasizing implications for training learners on weakly-supervised graphs to
discover properties of satisﬁability. In section 4 we review GNNs. In section 5 we describe our graph representation
of CNF formulas. In section 6 we present experimental results, and conclude in section 7.
2
Related Work and preliminary exploration
2.1
Circuit solvers
The idea to use neural architectures to solve combinatorial optimization problems initially gained traction during what
might be termed the “ﬁrst wave” of neural network research. Hopﬁeld and Tank (1985) famously developed a neural
architecture that could solve some instances of the traveling salesman problem. In another instance Johnson (1989)
used a neural architecture to encode 3-SAT.
The general scheme of earlier approaches was to deﬁne a circuit over which an objective function attains globally
optimum values only at satisfying assignments in the Boolean polytope. While these architectures allow for the
reinterpretation of analog problems in digital form, in sufﬁciently complex cases the objective is riddled with local
optima that make gradient-based optimization difﬁcult. Moreover, they do not learn from data in any way, and in this
sense do not exploit the power of neural networks suggested by more recent research.
See Appendix A for results on our own implementation of a Johnson-style network.
2.2
Deep learning, NLP, and Boolean logic
Neural network classiﬁers have recently achieved high performance on natural language semantics tasks such as sen-
timent analysis (Socher et al., 2012). Propositional logic is a different kind of language, but one with a semantics
no less: The denotation of a Boolean expression is typically thought to be its truth value given an assignment to its
variables. Also like natural language, this denotation is the result of a compositional operation on the truth values of
the variables the formula contains.
Recursive Neural Networks have been designed to leverage the tree-like syntactic structures of natural language to
capture complex aspects of meaning composition. This is an important point at which the latent structure of a CNF
formula diverges from that of natural language. Logical conjunctions and disjunctions are fully commutative and there
is no natural interpretation of CNF syntax as being tree-like.
There is a more philosophical distinction to be made about semantic classiﬁcation here. In natural language there are
multiple kinds of meaning, of which sentiment is but one example. The difﬁculty of classifying satisﬁability arises in
part from the fact that it is not a question of a particular kind of meaning, but rather at a Boolean formula’s capacity to
mean. The task for a learner is not akin to classifying sentiment, or even to ﬁnding a valid interpretation. The learner
is charged with determining whether or not some valid interpretation, of indeterminate form, exists at all. Satisﬁability
classiﬁcation is in this sense a problem of higher-order.
In Appendix B we demonstrate our ﬁnding that Recursive Neural Networks over tree-like structures are ineffective at
learning about satisﬁability.
3
Theoretical Properties of SAT
The difﬁculty of SAT problems exhibits a hard phase-shift phenomenon that has persistently puzzled theorists of
computability. In k-SAT problems where the number of atoms per CNF clause is ﬁxed to be exactly k, one observes
a drastic increase in the percentage of unsatisﬁable problems after a very speciﬁc clause-to-literal ratio. In 3-SAT, for
example, the phase shift control ratio αcr ≈4.3 (Saitta et al., 2011; Haim and Walsh, 2009).
2

It is further understood that for problems that fall far enough to the left of the phase shift, the relative Hamming
distance among solutions is low. There is another threshold before αcr, after which point the solution space is progres-
sively broken up into exponentially many clusters. At the phase shift, then, solutions to formulas that are satisﬁable
are scattered sparingly in an exponentially large Boolean hypercube, and are difﬁcult ﬁnd. After αcr, an altogether
different phenomenon emerges. For the rare satisﬁable formulas that exist after the phase-shift, problems are discov-
ered to have a backbone. The backbone is a set of variables, each of which takes on the same value for every satisfying
assignment to a given formula. (Saitta et al., 2011)
The phase shift and related phenomena likely have important implications for a learner of features of satisﬁability and
unsatisﬁability. In an unsatisﬁable instance some unresolvable conﬂict arises out of the complex interplay of multiple
Boolean variables distributed across multiple conjoined clauses, resulting in a logical contradiction. Given this fact, it
already seems a daunting task to develop a neural architecture capable of discovering these features on its own given
a set of problem-label pairs.
There are other unanswered questions. Do unsatisﬁable formulas occuring after the phase shift, where satisﬁabile
problems have backbones, look very different from the unsatisﬁable problems to the left of the phase shift? Are
there different kinds of unsatisﬁability, each better highlighted by different representations of the relations that inhere
among variables and clauses in CNF formulas? These are questions that loom large as we design experiments and
assess results.
4
Graph Neural Networks
Graph Neural Networks, or GNNs, denote a class of neural networks that implement functions of the form τ(G, n) ∈
Rm which map a graph G and one of its nodes into an m-dimensional Euclidean space. Scarselli et al. (2009a) show
that GNNs approximate any functions on graphs that satisfy preservation of unfolding equivalence. Informally, this
means that GNNs fail to produce distinct outputs only when input graphs exhibit certain highly particular symmetries.
By implication GNNs are capable of counting node degree, second-order node degree, and detecting cliques of a given
size in a set of graphs (Scarselli et al., 2009b).
Given a graph G = (N, E), where N is a set of nodes and E is the set of edges between them, a GNN employs two
functions. hw is a parametric function describing the relationships among nodes in a graph. gw models the connection
between output labels and the relationships described by hw. More speciﬁcally the state xn of node n ∈G is computed
as
xn =
X
u∈ne[n]
hw(ln, ln,u, xu, lu)
where ln is the label of node n, ln,u is the label of the edge between nodes n and its neighbor u, and so forth for u.
Note the transformation deﬁnes a system of equations over all nodes, where the state xn of a node is a function of
the states of xu of its neighbors. It is precisely this functional form that allows GNNs to extend beyond the capacity
of FNNs and RNNs, because it can be deﬁned for undirected and cyclic graphs. In line with Banach’s ﬁxed-point
theorem, it is assumed that h is a contraction map with respect to node state so that this system of equations has a
stable state.
In Linear GNNs, transition functions are modeled as in graph autocorrelative models:
hw(ln, ln,u, xu, lu) = An,uxu + bn
In Non-Linear GNNs, transition functions are instead modeled as multi-layered feed-forward neural networks (FNNs).
In this instance, additional penalty terms are required to ensure that the resulting function is still a contraction map.
In graph-level classiﬁcation, as opposed to node-level classiﬁcation, the learning set is given by
L = {(Gi, ni,j, ti,j)|Gi = (Ni, Ei) ∈G, ni,j ∈Ni, ti,j ∈Rm, 1 ≤i ≤p, qi = j = 1}
where ni,j is a special output node containing classiﬁcation or regression targets. For node-level applications qi ≥1.
Learning proceeds with a gradient descent method, and gradients are computed using backpropagation for graph
networks. For details, see (Scarselli et al., 2009b).
3

¬x2∨x3
¬x1∨¬x2
x2∨¬x3
x1∨x2
¬x1∨x3
x1
x2
x3
Figure 1: Factor-graph representation of CNF formula
5
CNF formulas as graphs
As previously discussed, the satisﬁability of a Boolean formula is a matter of whether or not the formula encodes
some (potentially very complex) conﬂict among the variables over which it is deﬁned. It seems true that if a weakly-
supervised algorithm is to learn to recognize these patterns of conﬂict it must provided at the very least with relational
information among variables in a formula. For example, whether a variable is negated in a given formula or whether
or not two variables appear in a clause together.
That inter-variable and inter-clausal dependencies deﬁne a graph is borne out by the ﬁndings of Devlin and O’Sullivan
(2008) for whom manually-designed graph-like features were found to help classiﬁcation of satisﬁability. This view
is additionally motivated by negative results presented in Appendix B, to the effect that neural networks for natural
language sentential semantics fail to classify satisﬁability. We suspect this is in part due to the fact that those models are
designed to operate over structures in which linear ordering is important. As aforementioned, CNFs are commutative,
and so dependencies among clauses are not a function of distance in any way.
There are at least two obvious representations of Boolean formulas as graphs. These are the familiar clause-variable
factor graph (Figure 1) and variable-variable graph. The former is an undirected bipartite graph that reserves one node
type for clauses and another for nodes. In one instance of this setup, the edge label between a node and a clause
denotes whether that node is negated or not in the clause. In the latter, nodes in a graph correspond exactly with the
variables in a formula, and are connected by undirected edges if two nodes appear in at least one clause together.
5.1
CNF graphs and the phase shift
To our knowledge there has not been any work that has studied, either directly or indirectly, the effect of the phase-shift
control parameters on CNFs as graphs.
In one likely scenario, a weakly-supervised learner like a Graph Neural Net will be more effective at recognizing
features of satisﬁability in graphs describing CNF formulas that are distant from the phase shift, than for CNF formulas
that are close to it. This effect is described by (Devlin and O’Sullivan, 2008): Optimized search-solvers must perform
more backtracking steps the closer they get to αcr. In another, more general scenario, the capacity to learn from graph
representations will be different in some way at points before the phase shift, at the phase shift, and after it.
5.2
CNF graphs for GNNs
From an implementation perspsective, the variable-variable type is the simpler of the two representations. In GNNs
with multiple node types it is sensible to implement type-speciﬁc transition functions (Scarselli et al., 2009b). As we
are just beginning to understand the behavior of GNNs we limit ourselves to a consideration of the variable-variable
graph type in our experiments.
A variable-variable GNN graph G contains twice the number of nodes in the Boolean formula φ with which it cor-
responds. Binary labels indicate whether a node is a negated literal or not (xn vs. ¬xn), and equivalently indexed
variables are connected by a special edge. Nodes xn and xn′, for n ̸= n′ are connected by an edge if they appear
together in a clause in φ. In our experiment, edges are given Euclidean labels ln ∈Rm where m is maximum number
4

(a) 4.4 Clause Atom Ratio
(b) 6.6 Clause Atom Ratio
(c) 10 Clause Atom Ratio
Figure 2: Training and Validation error vs. epochs
of clauses in the problems one chooses to consider. Entries ei = 1 in an edge label e if the two corresponding variables
appear together in clause i, and equal 0 otherwise.
6
Data Generation and Experiments
CNF formulas encode a very powerful and theoretically studied classiﬁer: The clause-to-atom ratio. In order to
determine whether GNNs can learn anything beyond this intrinsic classiﬁer, we generate multiple training sets, each
at a ﬁxed clause-to-variable ratio. Additionally in order to analyze the effect of the phase shift in the learning ability
of GNNs we chose to use uniformly randomly generated 3-SAT instances (RAND-SAT). These instances have a ﬁxed
number of clauses and atoms and exactly 3 literals per clause. Atoms appear in clauses with uniform probability and
are negated with uniform probability.
We created 3 datasets with clause to atom ratios of (4.4,6.6,10). According to the clause-to-atom ratio, the probability
that a formula is satisﬁable is roughly 90% in the ﬁrst dataset, 50% in the second and 10% in the third. To prevent
statistical skew from clouding the learning of features of satisﬁability we created balanced datasets that were exactly
50% satisﬁable.
GNNs signiﬁcantly improve over a random baseline for all three datasets. Interestingly, for the ratio closest to the
phase-shift (where problems are thought to be the hardest) the network converged to a test accuracy of approximately
70%, whereas the best accuracy for the two other problem sets was roughly 65%. The exact errors are shown in Table
1. Figure 4 shows the training and validation error over time.
Clause/Atoms
Train Error
Validation Error
Train Error
4.4
70.71%
69.50%
69.80%
6.6
65.65%
66.30%
64.40%
10
65.92%
65.70%
67.30%
Table 1: Training, Validation and Testing Error
7
Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we made nontrivial headway in applying deep learning with Boolean satisﬁability. Initially, we sought
to analogize Boolean satisﬁability with natural language semantic classiﬁcation, a domain in which neural networks
have obtained state-of-the-art results for certain tasks. While our experiments to this effect were backgrounded in
favor of later ﬁndings, they point to an interesting discovery: It does not seem that Boolean formulas in conjunctive
normal form can, in any principled way, be made to “look like” expressions in natural language. This discovery is
coextensive with the ﬁnding that more general graph-like representations are appropriate for representing the complex
interdependencies necessary for classifying satisﬁability.
5

We also apply Graph Neural Networks in a novel way. Our results suggest that graph classiﬁcation may provide a new
way of thinking about the theoretical properties of SAT, and that SAT can be used as a test domain for the expressive
properties of neural learners.
Fascinatingly, we ﬁnd that without any explicit feature engineering Graph Neural Networks trained on a variable-
variable representation of CNF formulas can in fact learn features of satisﬁability, even for theoretically difﬁcult
problem instances.
There are several obvious directions for future research. As mentioned in our results section, we did not have the time
to optimize for hyperparameters. For example, what kinds of nonlinearities are most appropriate for nonlinear, FNN
transformation functions? The variable-variable graph as we deﬁne it is just one possible graph representation of CNF
formulas. We intend to explore the effect of other representations on the ability of GNNs to recognize satisﬁability.
6

A
Circuit Solvers
As mentioned in Section 2 neural architectures can be used to represent combinatorial problems, such as SAT, as
global optimization problems.
Consider the following SAT formulation. Let x ∈{−1, 1}N be a vector where the j’th element of x represents
Boolean variable xj and is thus 1 if xi is true and −1 otherwise. A SAT instance can be described by a matrix W
where
Wi,j =



1
xj ∈ωi
−1
¬xj ∈ωi
0
otherwise
Further consider the step activation function:
θ(x) =
1
if x ≥0
0
otherwise
Let SATW : {−1, 1}N →{0, 1}, deﬁned for a speciﬁc SAT instance W, be a function which maps an assignment
vector x to 1 if x satisﬁes the instance and 0 otherwise. Speciﬁcally:
SATW (x) = θ(
X
i
θ(Wi,· · x + W 2
i,· · x2 −.5) −M + .5)
Note that
max
x
SATW (x)
1
if W is satisﬁable
0
otherwise
That is, the global optima of the following function correspond bijectively with satisfying assignments. More speciﬁ-
cally Wi,· · x + W 2
i,· · x2 −.5 is greater than zero if and only if Wi,j = xj for some j. That is, if clause the disjunctive
clause i is satisﬁed. The objective value of SATW is 1 if and only if all clauses are satisﬁed.
The idea of the circuit solver is to approximate the step activation function using σ1 and additionally approximate the
binary nature of x by replacing x with tanh(ˆx) where ˆx ∈RN. Concretely, let:
APPROXSATW (ˆx) := σ(
X
i
σ(Wi,· · tanh(x) + W 2
i,· · tanh(x)2 −.5) −M + .5)
APPROXSATW : RN →(0, 1) retains some of the nice properties of SATW while being deﬁned over RN and having
well-deﬁned gradients. Speciﬁcally, when interpreting xj as true if xj > 0 and false if xj < 0, note that vi ·tanh(x)+
v2
i · tanh(x)2 −.5 > 0 implies that sgn(vij) = sgn(xj) for some j and thus that the conjunctive clause i is satisﬁed.
The objective value for a clause can only be positive if the clause is in fact satisﬁed. Additionally this implies that if
APPROXSATW (ˆx) > 0 =⇒SATW (sgn(ˆx)) = 1. The real valued ˆx can be rounded to a satisfying assignment.2
A.1
Experiments
To test the neural sat encoding we ran a set of experiments. Random SAT problems are well known to be hard only
for a very narrow ratio of clauses to variables. For 3-Sat that ratio is believed to be around 4.3 (Saitta et al., 2011)
(Haim and Walsh, 2009). To test the scalability of our optimization approach we tested how well we were able to
ﬁnd satisfying assignments, or determine unsatisﬁability for different problem sizes. As stated before the procedure
cannot result in false negatives, as an unsatisfying assignment could never be mistaken for a satisfying one. Figure 3
thus plots the false positive rate vs. different problem sizes. We can see that for small problem instances the annealing
approach ﬁnds satisfying solutions for all instances that were in fact satisﬁable. For larger instances, the approach
begins to fail and is not successful.The optimization procedure gets stuck in local optima.
1the sigmoid function
2sgn is the signum function that returns the sign of a value
7

0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
#Variables
SATs  solved
SATs  solved
Figure 3: Number of SAT’s solved vs. number of variables. 100 instances per data point
B
Recursive Neural Networks
As described in Section 5, we maintain that CNF formulas are best represented as graphs. Feed-forward neural
networks are incapable of operating on graphs, as they are general function approximators for functions deﬁned over
Euclidean space.
Recursive Neural Networks (RNNs) are capable of classifying tree-structures. As a ﬁrst experiment we investigated
whether the success of RNNs in natural language processing task had any implictions for classiﬁaction of Boolean
formulas. In this setting we interpret disjunctive CNF clauses as words within a “sentence,” and a represent them
using vector representations of clauses ωjdeﬁned in Appendix A.
Unlike sentences in natural language, Boolean formulas do not have a tree-like syntactic structure. The clauses in a
formula are inherently commutable and their meaning composition is not recursive or scopal. In order to impose some
tree-structure on Boolean formulas, we hierarchically cluster clause vectors based on their cosine similarity. Each
node in the resulting binary tree contains a subset of the clauses of the original formula. The root then “represents”
the whole formula.
In keeping with the sentiment classiﬁcation task of Socher et al. (2012), each node in the tree is labeled according to
the satisﬁability of the subproblem. Note that if a node is labeled SAT then implicitly so must the whole subtree below
it. An example is shown in Figure 4.
The RNN was not able to successfully learn any meaningful distinction between satisﬁable and unsatisﬁable formulas.
As described in Section 3 the satisﬁability is largely dependent on the clause to variable ratio. As each inner node of
the RNN tree contains only a subset of the clauses and the same number of variables it is highly unlikely for such a
subtree to be unsatisﬁable. For this reason, even though the full problems were chosen to be balanced between SAT
and UNSAT the cost function of the RNN was highly biased towards SAT. The RNN, thus, would guess every instance
to be SAT and could not improve upon that.
We tested the setting in which only root nodes were labeled. Moreover, we tested other neural architectures with a
somewhat tree-like, directed acyclic structure, but none of them showed any success over a random baseline.
8

Figure 4: Number of SAT’s solved vs. number of variables. 100 instances per data point
