arXiv:1701.06078v2  [cs.SD]  24 Jan 2017
FIRST DRAFT, 18 JANUARY 2017
1
Lyrics-to-Audio Alignment by
Unsupervised Discovery of Repetitive Patterns
in Vowel Acoustics
Sungkyun Chang, Member, IEEE, and Kyogu Lee, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Most of the previous approaches to lyrics-to-audio
alignment used a pre-developed automatic speech recognition
(ASR) system that innately suffered from several difﬁculties to
adapt the speech model to individual singers. A signiﬁcant aspect
missing in previous works is the self-learnability of repetitive
vowel patterns in the singing voice, where the vowel part used
is more consistent than the consonant part. Based on this, our
system ﬁrst learns a discriminative subspace of vowel sequences,
based on weighted symmetric non-negative matrix factorization
(WS-NMF), by taking the self-similarity of a standard acoustic
feature as an input. Then, we make use of canonical time warping
(CTW), derived from a recent computer vision technique, to
ﬁnd an optimal spatiotemporal transformation between the
text and the acoustic sequences. Experiments with Korean and
English data sets showed that deploying this method after a
pre-developed, unsupervised, singing source separation achieved
more promising results than other state-of-the-art unsupervised
approaches and an existing ASR-based system.
Index Terms—Music, music information retrieval, speech pro-
cessing, unsupervised learning
I. INTRODUCTION
I
N the last decade, there has been considerable interest in
digital music services that display the lyrics of songs that
are synchronized with their audio. As a recent example, Sound
Hound1 provided a live-lyrics feature using an audio ﬁnger-
print [1] technique, with known time stamps for alignment.
Although some well-known hit songs already have lyric time
stamps within existing karaoke databases, more than a hundred
million numbers, including new, unpopular songs YouTube2,
cover songs, and live recordings may not. An automatic lyrics-
to-audio alignment system could reduce the huge amount
of time and labor required to manually construct such time
stamps. Not limited to the application above, it could also
be used as a front end for various purposes in content-based
music information retrieval (MIR) involving lyrical rhymes [2]
and emotions [3], [4]. Previous works on automatic lyrics-to-
audio alignment systems for popular music recordings can be
classiﬁed into three categories.
Manuscript created 18, January 2017. This work was supported by a
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the MSIP
(NRF-2014R1A2A2A04002619).
The authors are with Music and Audio Research Group (MARG), Depart-
ment of Transdisciplinary Studies, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826,

Kyogu Lee is also with the Advanced Institutes of Convergence Technology,
Suwon, Korea.
1https://www.soundhound.com/
2https://www.youtube.com/
1) ASR-based: The core part of these systems [5]–[8]
uses mature automatic speech recognition (ASR) techniques
developed previously for regular speech input. The phone
model is constructed as gender-dependent models through
training with a large speech corpus [9]. In parallel, the music
recordings are pre-processed by a singing voice separation
algorithm to minimize the effect of unnecessary instrumental
accompaniment. In this situation, adapting the trained speech
model to the segregated sung voice is a difﬁcult problem, due
to the large variation in individual singing styles, remaining
accompaniments, and artifact noises. Based on the standard
ASR technique, Fujihara, et al. [5], [6] proposed a three-step
adaptation strategy: i) clean speech to clean singing, ii) clean
singing to segregated singing, and iii) segregate speech to a
speciﬁc singer. Then a Viterbi alignment, based on left-to-right
HMM [10] architecture, searches for the optimal path of lyrics-
to-audio synchronization. Fujihara’s initial [5] and ﬁnal works
[6] were evaluated in terms of sentence-level alignments of
Japanese popular music. Later, their ﬁnal work [6]—referred
to as the baseline in the present research—achieved a word-
level accuracy of 46.4% [7] in English popular music, deﬁning
error as the number of word displacements over 1 s.
2) Musical knowledge-based: The use of music structural
information from chord analysis has provided good guidance
for higher-level alignments in previous works [11], [12].
Lee et al. [11] showed that the results of rough structure
segmentation with hand-labeled paragraphs in lyrics can be
used for paragraph-level alignment. To deal with sentence-
level alignment, Kan, et al. [12] proposed a system named
Lyrically: By assuming that only verse and chorus parts would
contain sung voice, it ﬁrst performed a chorus-detection using
structure segmentation to ﬁnd voice regions. Then, they used
a heuristic algorithm, based on a rough estimation of each
sentence’s text duration, to allocate lines of text to audio
segments. Thus, a major limitation of Lyrically is that it can
only align verse and chorus sections, while vocals in the bridge
and outro sections are not considered.
3) Combined approach: With respect to word-level align-
ment, Mauch et al. [7] proposed the integration of a chord-to-
audio alignment method into Fujihara’s ASR-based system [6].
This greatly improved the word-level accuracy of the ASR-
based system [6], from 46.4% to 87.5%. However, the require-
ments of Mauch’s approach are strongly limiting when applied
to real-world problems; for each unseen song, the suggested
method requires a manually transcribed score that contains
chord labels with reliable temporal information corresponding

FIRST DRAFT, 18 JANUARY 2017
2
(a) Overview of our system.
(b) A vowel sequence, corresponding to the yellow box area of (a).
(c) Magniﬁcation
of
matrix A.
(d) Magniﬁcation of ma-
trix B.
(e) Magniﬁcation of align-
ment mapping matrix Q.
Fig. 1. In (a), the matrix S represents the self-similarity within N samples
observed in the audio, while the matrix A from the textual lyrics is a logical
time series matrix that represents assignments between the L classes of vowels
and the M lengths of time series. The proposed WS-NMF+CTW consists
of two sequentially organized methods: WS-NMF ﬁrst takes matrix S, and
produces matrix B, which represents unlabeled vowel activations with the
size of N × K, where K × K with K ≈L′ represents the size of a latent
vowel subspace W in each song. Then, CTW performs an alignment between
matrixes A and B. The resulting matrix Q from CTW represents a predicted
assignment between the Nth samples in the audio and the Mth syllable of
the lyrics. Sub-ﬁgures from (c) to (f) demonstrate the data transformations.
They focus on the yellow box area in (a), which corresponds to the vowel
sequence displayed in (b). In (d), (e), and (f), we displayed a ground-truth
mapping between the vowel and audio sequences by using colors deﬁned in
(b). For visualization of matrixes, we used a song, “Ahn Ye Eun - Sticker”.
to the lyrics.
A previous work not listed above is a supervised learning
approach, based on a source-ﬁlter model and non-negative ma-
trix factorization [13]. Pedone et al. [14] makes the assumption
of representing the sung voice as a convolution of generative
glottal sources and a trainable ﬁlter. The system achieved an
F-measure of 43% for syllable-level alignment. However, their
Fig. 2.
Examples of elongated vowels in the singing voice of a popular
song, “Adele - Hello”. The top line displays a snippet of the textual lyrics.
The middle line displays the vowel pronunciation symbols (in IPA) of words
retrieved from a dictionary. The bottom line shows the distribution of vowels.
Each consonant and vowel part is colored in dark blue and yellow, respectively.
experimental conditions are regarded as a limited case, in that
it was tested with vocal-boosted synthesized audio tracks.
In this study, we sought a more generic and efﬁcient
method to deal with both syllable- and word-level lyrics-to-
audio alignments of music recordings. Our approach was to
discover repetitive acoustic patterns of vowels in the target
audio by referencing vowel patterns appearing in lyrics. Thus,
the present method does not require any external training data
for constructing a speciﬁc model for speech or its adaptation
to speciﬁc singers, unlike the previous approaches [6], [7].
Moreover, the present work does not depend on a manually
transcribed chord score that was required in some previous
work [7]. Instead, we make full use only of information
derived from the target audio and lyrics. In doing so, we
can expect the advantage of avoiding the problems above
that occur due to the large variation in singing styles and
singers’ voices in different songs. Furthermore, we show that
the present method is applicable to two languages, with many
fewer modiﬁcations in experiments.
The remaining sections are outlined as follows. An overview
of the proposed system is provided in Figure 1. Section II
ﬁrst describes our key idea from the nature of the sung
voice. Then, we explain several necessary components for
audio pre-processing. Text processing is explained in Section
III. Section IV proposes a discriminative subspace learning
method, assisted by a variant of the matrix factorization
technique [15] to capture repetitive vowel patterns from a
self-similarity matrix. Section V describes a method to align
matrixes belonging to two different domains, in terms of a
spatiotemporal transformation. Section VI–VII compares and
analyzes the performance of the present work with other
methods, using two data sets. Then, we provide conclusions
in Section VIII.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Assumption—‘Observing Only Vowels’
Singing can be considered as a type of speaking, although it
deviates signiﬁcantly from regular speech. A common property

FIRST DRAFT, 18 JANUARY 2017
3
of a traditional singing voice is that the duration of a sung
vowel is typically much longer than that of other syllabic com-
ponents: according to a previous study [16], such elongation
and purity of vowel formation in singing has been required for
singers to sustain a tone and pitch consistently. This feature
intuitively leads us to an assumption that lyrics-to-audio
alignment may be dealt with by observing only dominant
vowel parts within a singing voice. Figure 2 gives an example
of how vowel and consonant parts are distributed in audio
sample waveforms of popular music recordings. A similar
assumption—alignment by observing only vowels—was made
initially by Fujihara [5]. Because overlooking this assumption
may yield a severe bottleneck problem in the generalization
of our model, we need to validate the assumption. This issue
is covered in Section VII-C, in terms of the theoretical upper
bound of alignment performance.
B. Pre-processing of Audio
Because our system discovers repetitive vowel patterns by
observing audio similarity, an important prerequisite is to
reduce unwanted effects of accompaniment parts that may
disturb the observation of sung vowel audio signals. For this
reason, we pre-process input audio signals with singing voice
separation and voice activity detection (VAD) algorithms.
From the segregated singing source signals in voice-activated
regions, standard audio features are extracted. A self-similarity
matrix (SSM), S, is then generated from the samples of
features. In summary, we chain multiple pre-processors: 1)
singing voice separation→2) VAD →3) feature extraction→
4) generation of a SSM.
1) Singing Voice Separation: We used a low-rank source
separation method based on robust principal component anal-
ysis (RPCA), as proposed by Huang [17]. Here, the accompa-
niment parts can be assumed to be in a low-rank subspace in
RPCA, while voice parts are assumed to be relatively sparse.
Using a spectrogram as an input, the RPCA-based method
generates a binary time-frequency mask for separation of the
singing voice. We then reconstruct the singing voice signal
from the processed spectrogram. The parameters for RPCA
were set at {16,000 Hz, 1,024 samples, 256 samples, and 1}
for the audio sampling rate, window size, hop size, and the
regularization parameter λ, respectively.
2) VAD: Although some recent supervised VAD algorithms
[18], [19] have reported F-measures for singing voice activity
detection exceeding 85%, we found that one such algorithm
[18] tested (see Section VII-E) with our data set was not
sufﬁciently robust. As an alternative, we simply used the log-
energy of the singing voice signal segregated by RPCA as
a detection function for voice activity. Here, voice-active or -
inactive frames with a 32-ms window were classiﬁed by a hard
thresholding function with a global parameter θ. Then, we
applied smoothing (7-order median ﬁltering) to the decision
output by selecting the majority of the total votes for voice
activity within 224 ms around the center frame. The suggested
parameter θ =1.88 was the value chosen by a nested grid-
search for parameter selection with the present VAD, which
will be described along with the benchmark test in Section
VII-E.
3) Feature Extraction: From the accompaniment-reduced
and voice-detected audio frames, we then extracted mel-
frequency cepstral coefﬁcients (MFCCs) that can compactly
represent the special envelopes of vowel features. For
the extraction of MFCCs, we use a set of parameters,
{16, 000 Hz, 1024 samples (64 ms), 1024 samples, and 13}
for the audio sampling rate, window size, hop size, and
the number of dimensions, respectively. Then, we took the
remnant 12 dimensional feature vectors by reducing the ﬁrst
dimension of the MFCCs.
4) Generation of SSM: To measure the inter-frame acoustic
similarity from the feature vectors, we generated a self-
similarity matrix S, deﬁned as
Si,j = max(∆) −∆i,j
max(∆)
, s.t. ∆{i,j|i,j∈N} = δ(yi, yj),
(1)
where N, yi, and δ are the frame index, the ith frame of the
MFCCs vector, and a distance function (also known as the heat
kernel), respectively. Here, the distance function δ is deﬁned
as
δ(yi, yj) = e−z, s.t. z = ∥yi −yj ∥2
σ
.
(2)
Note that in Equation 1, we typically divide the upper term
by the maximum distance max(∆), to normalize the matrix S
to have a non-negative value range, between 0 and 1.
III. TEXT PROCESSING
The goal of the text processing is to generate a vowel
sequence matrix from the textual lyrics of each target song.
Assume a sequence allowing repetition and that we must pick
one vowel each time. The sequence P with time index m,
where m = {1, 2, . . ., M}, can be denoted as
Pm = {p1, p2, . . . , pM},
(3)
where M is the total length of the sequence. Based on Table
I, we deﬁne L classes (Lkr for Korean, or Leg for English) of
vowels with label l as l = {1, 2, . . ., L}.
Then, the text processor can generate a logical matrix A
with A ∈RM×L,
Am,l =
(
1
if pm = l
0
otherwise,
(4)
as an output. Thus, the sum of elements in each row must be
1. The following illustrates details of extracting vowels from
textual lyrics in two languages.
A. Korean (hangul)
The generation of a vowel sequence matrix from text written
in Korean letters—also known as hangul—is straightforward
in that vowel pronunciation never varies within different
words. Generally, each hangul letter has the form of a grouped
syllable, consisting of initial, medial, and (optionally) ﬁnal
parts. From UTF-8-formatted text data, we can extract vowel
parts by taking only medial parts. We deﬁne Lkr(= 7) classes

FIRST DRAFT, 18 JANUARY 2017
4
TABLE I
SAMPLING OF IPA [20] SYMBOLIZED VOWEL CLASSES:
LKR = 7 FOR KOREAN, LEG = 15 FOR ENGLISH.
Language
Group
Vowel
Class
Example
Korean (hangul)
-
a
ㅏ
e
ㅔ
i
ㅣ
o
ㅗ
u
ㅜ
2
ㅓ
W
ㅡ
English
monophthongs
O
off
A
far
i
she
u
you
E
red
I
pig
U
should
2
but
9
sofa
ae
at
diphthongs
eI
day
aI
my
oU
low
aU
now
OI
boy
of Korean vowels represented by the international phonetic
alphabet (IPA) [20], as shown in Table I. Due to the phono-
gramic feature of hangul, we can convert the extracted vowel
parts of hangul text directly into a logical sequence matrix A
without the need for an external pronunciation dictionary.
B. English
In English, a certain vowel alphabet can often have a differ-
ent sound within words. For example, the sounds of the letter
“a” in words such as “apple” and “car” are very different. To
retrieve practical vowel phonetics of English words, we used
a machine-readable dictionary, developed previously in CMU
[21]. The text processor ﬁrst splits each word from text strings
by spacing. After searching for word pronunciation from the
dictionary, it reduces the consonant parts simply by referencing
a vowel class table. The retrieved vowel pronunciation symbols
fall into one of the Leg(= 15) classes of vowels, which include
10 monophthongs and 5 diphthongs, as shown in Table I. By
referencing the table, it is possible to convert the extracted
vowel parts directly into a logical sequence matrix A.
IV. UNSUPERVISED VOWEL SUBSPACE LEARNING WITH
WS-NMF
This section describes a method, derived from non-negative
matrix factorization (NMF), that can capture repetitive pat-
terns and search discriminative subspace in SSM, denoted as
S, produced by the preprocessors described in the previous
section.
A. Weighted, Symmetric NMF
The well-known standard NMF [13] can be deﬁned as
X+ ≈F+GT
+,
(5)
where F and G are non-negative (denoted by subscript +)
matrixes that factorize a given non-negative matrix X. Its
various extensions have been applied to numerous problems in
DNA analysis, image processing, and audio source separation,
as examples [22]. Then, the symmetric NMF [15], [22] can
be deﬁned as
X+ ≈G+GT
+.
(6)
Thus, we regard this as a special type of NMF, where F =
G. Over the past decade, variants of symmetric NMF have
been used as scalable data analysis tools [23].
The weighted, symmetric (WS-) NMF [15] is deﬁned as
X+ ≈B+WBT
+,
(7)
where the non-negative matrix X used to be a positive semi-
deﬁnite matrix, but is not restricted to that. It extends the
symmetric NMF by imposing a latent variable matrix W, so
that it can allow matrix B to provide a better approximation
of clusters in practice [15]. A recent application of WS-NMF
related to MIR can be found in musical structure segmentation
[24].
B. Vowel Subspace Learning with WS-NMF
Next, we formulate the problem of the learning subspace
that represents the repetitive vowel patterns from the input
SSM with the following approximation:
S ≈B+WBT
+,
(8)
where S with S ∈RN×N, B with B ∈RN×K, and W
with W ∈RK×K represent the input SSM, unlabeled vowel
activation indicator matrix, and transformation matrix of vowel
subspace, respectively. Here, N denotes a set of frame indices
and K denotes the number of vowel classes.
To gain a deeper understanding of Equation 8, we can
assume S ∈RN×N to be factorized as ββT with β ∈RK×N.
At ﬁrst glance, it is then of the same form that may be
solved by various existing clustering methods, such as kernel
K-means [25], spectral clustering [26], and symmetric NMF.
However, the SSM we obtained is non-negative and a mostly
indeﬁnite matrix. In this case, it is difﬁcult to use β as an
indicator of vowel activation, due to the negative eigenvalue
property of S. If we want a better representation of unlabeled
vowel clusters, one possible explanation of Equation 8 can be
reached by assuming β as a multiplication of weight ω with
matrix B ∈RK,N.
S ≈ββT = (ωBT )T (ωBT ) = B(ωT ω)BT .
(9)
After rewriting this as the right-most part of Equation
9, it can be represented in the form of Equation 8, if the
transformation matrix W is a positive semi-deﬁnite matrix.
Thus, the relaxation of Equation 8 imposing W can provide
more freedom for the expression of the subspaces associated

FIRST DRAFT, 18 JANUARY 2017
5
Algorithm 1: WS-NMF with sparsity
Input : S, K informed by L′
Output: B, W
begin
Initialize B, W
repeat
W ←W ⊗
(W T BW)
(BT BWBT B + ǫ)
(10)
eB ←B ⊗

.5 + .5 ∗
(SBW)
(BWBT BW + ǫ)

(11)
for
(∀i, i ∈N) do
Bi ←
−eBi/ℓ
Ω(−eBie1+ρi/ℓ/ℓ)
(12)
end
until

S −BWBT 

2
F converges.
end
with both positive and negative eigenvalues [15]. In this way,
the non-negative matrix B can be viewed as more a relevant
observation of unlabeled vowel classes mapping over the
matrix β.
The update rules for B and W are given in Equation 10–11
of Algorithm 1, where ⊗is the Hadamard product, ÷ is an
element-wise division of the upper term by the lower term,
and ǫ is a small, positive constant. In practice, we initialize B
and W with random values in the range between 10−4 and 1.
In Algorithm 1, it is important to design the unlabeled vowel
activation indicator matrix B and the transformation matrix W
with adequate length, K; however, note that N is always ﬁxed
by the size of the given input SSM. Generally, we can expect
that increasing K would provide more discriminability of the
model, while decreasing K would simplify the model and
lessen the processing time. In our case, the matrix A oriented
from the lyrics can provide a good hint for the choice of the
ideal length for K. As a default, we set K by counting L′,
the number of vowel classes appearing in the lyrics of a target
song, such that L′ ≤L with L denotes the column length of
A. Thus, we can deﬁne K as
K = L′ + i,
s.t. integer i.
(13)
Equation 13 allows us to de-/increase model complexity by
adding an integer, i. Further discussion on the effect of
adjusting K will be presented in Section VII-D.
Because a singer can make the sound of only one vowel at
a time, enforcing B{i|i∈N} to have a sparse distribution can
help in achieving more meaningful patterns. Here, we impose
sparsity based on entropy, as detailed in [27] over activations
Bi. In Algorithm 1, Equation 12 constrains the sparsity for
every iterative update, where Ω(·) and ρ denote Lambert’s
function and a Lagrange multiplier, respectively. In practice,
the sparsity parameter ℓ= 3×10−3 was found to be effective.
So far, we have described the utility of matrix W in
terms of the matrix eigenvalue property, with a focus on its
functionality in helping matrix B to be more informative.
Additionally, in practice, we could gain clues as to the nature
of the vowel subspace—to give an example, a phonetics study
claimed that the distance between the vowels /a/ and /i/ should
be statistically larger than that between /e/ and /i/ [28]—
in the output matrix W that we obtained. This could lead
to a possible semi-supervised scenario, such as ﬁxing matrix
W with appropriate prior knowledge from previous phonetics
studies. However, that idea is beyond the scope of the present
research.
V. SPATIOTEMPORAL TRANSFORMATIONS AND
ALIGNMENT BY CANONICAL TIME WARPING
Recall that we generated matrixes A and B in Sections
III and IV, respectively. The logical matrix A represents
a sequence of vowel repetition patterns observed in textual
lyrics, while matrix B represents vowel activations observed
from acoustic features. Each matrix belongs to a different
spatiotemporal space such that A ∈RM×L and B ∈RN×K,
where M ̸= N and L ̸= K, respectively. In this regard, most
of the existing methods for the alignment of DNA sequences
[29], audio frames [30], and image pixels [31] are not readily
applicable unless we assume at least one equivalent basis to be
shared with, such that RM = RN. To overcome this, we used
a spatiotemporal alignment method derived from the study of
computer vision [32]. Additionally, we also considered several
other applicable methods [33]–[35] as baselines in Section
VII-A.
A. Formulation of spatiotemporal transformation
First, we deﬁne a temporal transformation required for
aligning sequence A to another sequence B. Assume that for
m = {1, . . . , M}, ˆAM is a time series. ˆAm ∈Rd is a d-
dimensional vector, such that matrix ˆA ∈RM×d. Also, for
n = {1, . . . , N}, ˆBn ∈Rd is a d-dimensional vector, such
that matrix ˆB ∈RN×d. In this way, ˆA and ˆB can be assumed
to be spatially transformed matrixes of the original A and
B into d-dimensions. Now, the temporal transformations for
alignment between ˆA and ˆB in the target space H can be
represented as
f ˆ
A : M →H,
f ˆ
B : N →H.
(14)
By deﬁning the mapping matrixes Qa with Qa ∈RM×H
and Qb with Qb ∈RN×H, the alignment problem must be
equivalent to a problem searching {Qa, Qb} that minimizes
min

 ˆAT Qa −ˆBT Qb

2
F ,
(15)
where

·

2 denotes a Frobenius norm. If we deﬁne Q as
logical sequence matrixes (s.t. qa ∈{0, 1} and qb ∈0, 1),
then a well-known algorithm that solves Equation 15 by hard
mapping is dynamic time warping (DTW) [31].
Next, we deﬁne the spatial transformation required for
mapping between labeled and unlabeled vowels, represented
by the columns of A and B, respectively. The transformations
of the given original matrixes A from RM×L to RM×Z, and
B from RN×K to RN×Z are

FIRST DRAFT, 18 JANUARY 2017
6
Algorithm 2: CTW for alignment
Input : ALyric, BAudio
Output: Qa, Qb, Va, Vb
begin
Initialize Qa, Qbusing UTW(Q, h ).
repeat
V ←Solve V = [V T
a , V T
b ]T that obeys:

0
AT QB
BT QT AT
0

V = λ

AT DaA
0
0
BT DbB

V
(18)
using CCA, given ς.
Q ←Solve
Qa, Qb|V T
a AT , V T
b BT 	
using DTW.
until
Jctw converges.
end
fA : L →Z,
fB : K →Z,
(16)
where the projective target space is denoted by Z. The purpose
of this transformation is to project the two given matrixes
into dZ-dimensional space where the transformed matrixes
can have maximum correlations for each dimension, one by
one. Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) [36] has provided
a solution to this problem with a restricted sample size. By
deﬁning certain soft mapping matrixes Va with Va ∈RZ×L
and Vb with Vb ∈RZ×K, the objective of CCA is
min

Va ¯AT −Vb ¯BT 

2
F .
(17)
In Equation 17, both of the input matrixes { ¯A, ¯B} are
required to have the same length of rows, due to the restriction
of CCA that only allows ﬁnding relationships between two
multivariable inputs with the same numbers of samples. This
requirement should be satisﬁed with the temporal transforma-
tion above, such that ¯A ←ˆAT Qa and ¯B ←ˆBT Qb.
To summarize, the addressed transformations were:
• Temporal transformation, which ﬁnds the optimal align-
ment path between two different time series matrixes
under restrictions of the input matrixes with the same
lengths of columns, can be performed by DTW in hypo-
thetical space H.
• Spatial transformation ﬁnds a good mapping between the
labeled vowel matrix and the unlabeled vowel activation
matrix. It can be performed by CCA in the hypothetical
space Z, only if the given input matrixes have the same
lengths of rows.
B. Alignment using CTW
The rationale behind DTW and CCA sheds lights on an
iterative process that uses the output of DTW as input for
CCA, and the output of CCA as input for DTW. One such
algorithm that extends DTW and CCA is canonical time
warping (CTW) [32], previously suggested for the task of
human motion alignment in computer vision. To apply CTW
to the alignment problem that we have addressed, the objective
function can be written as
Jctw(Qa, Qb, Va, Vb) =

Va
T AT Qa −V T
b BT Qb

2
F ,
(19)
where A ∈RM×L and B ∈RN×K are input matrixes with
{M, N} denoting the temporal basis and {L, K} denoting
the spatial basis, and Va ∈RZ×L and Qa ∈RM×H are
spatiotemporal transformation matrixes for A; Vb ∈RZ×K and
Qb ∈RN×H are spatiotemporal transformation matrixes for
B. Note that the temporal transformation matrix Q is deﬁned
as {Q|q ∈{0, 1}}, for use with DTW. The total error Jctw
can be estimated through the hypothetical space of RZ×H.
When Jctw converges, we take Q as a result of the temporal
alignment between the lyrics and audio. More speciﬁcally, the
product of Qa and Qb represents the alignment path between
m = {1, . . . , M}th vowel of the lyrics and n = {1, . . ., N}th
frame of the audio features.
Algorithm 2 provides update rules that iteratively minimize
Equation 19. In each cycle, CCA searches optimal spatial
transformation V through the generalized eigenvalue problem
(Xy = λy), as shown in Equation 18, which provides a closed
form solution [36]. Then, the temporal transformation Q is
updated with the existing solution of DTW [31].
A remaining problem we have before addressing CTW
is that at least one set of Q or V
should be initialized
appropriately to satisfy the accordance of sample size for CCA
or the number of dimensions for DTW at the ﬁrst iteration.
Previously, Zhou et al. [32] suggested methods to initialize
V with identity matrixes or alternatively, principal component
analysis (PCA) [37]. Another possible option we considered
was to initialize Q with uniform time warping (UTW) [38],
which increases the sample rate of the input matrixes {A, B},
so that the sample sizes of AT QA and BT QB can be equal.
UTW initializes QA and QB to be matrixes with ones on
the diagonal, and the entries outside are all zeros. Through
preliminary tests, we found that initialization by UTW was
more stable than other initialization methods.
In Algorithm 2, it is important to design the transformation
matrix {Q, V } with an adequate size of target dimension. In
the temporal domain, projection to higher dimensions, such
that H > ̺ · round(max(M, N)) with ̺ > 1, generally
encourages achieving higher timing accuracy with smaller
intervals in alignment results. In that way, the timing accuracy
can be controlled by setting the length of rows h for UTW in
the initialization. In the spatial domain, CCA fundamentally
performs a dimensional-reduction function. Thus, the column
length of Z must obey 1 ≤Z ≤min(L, K). Obviously, there
will be a trade-off between avoiding oversensitivity and an
oversimpliﬁed model. We use an existing implementation of
CCA [36]. It provides a hyperparameter ς that controls Z with
regard to the amount of energy kept.
VI. EVALUATION METHODS
The proposed process was evaluated in two major experi-
ments (VII-A to VII-B), and additional experiments (VII-C to

FIRST DRAFT, 18 JANUARY 2017
7
TABLE II
DESIGN OF EXPERIMENTS
Name
Dataset
Evaluation
Metric
Purpose
VII-A
K-pop
(KP)
Syllable-
level
Accuracy
(SA)
A main experiment that mea-
sured syllable-level accuracy of
the present system. Due to the
lack of an existing data set with
syllable-level annotation, it was
necessary to construct KP and
deﬁne the SA metric. The re-
sult was compared with multi-
ple baseline methods.
VII-B
English-
pop
(EP)
Word-level
Accuracy
(WA)
A main experiment that evalu-
ated our system at word-level
accuracy,
and
compared
the
performance with the existing
ASR-based supervised system.
Using EP and WA, we kept
equivalent experimental condi-
tions to those described in the
previous work [7].
VII-C
KP
SA
Validation of our prior assump-
tion, ‘Observing only vowels’,
by examining theoretical upper-
bound of accuracy.
VII-D
KP
SA
Tuning
hyperparameters
of
WS-NMF+CTW
by
a
grid-
search method.
VII-E
KP,
Jamendo†
SA
1) VAD benchmark test, 2) Ef-
fect of VAD error.
† Used for training and validation of a baseline VAD algorithm.
VII-E) within the speciﬁed data sets, as shown in Table II.
A. Dataset description
1) K-pop (KP): The data set contained 11 popular Korean
music recordings published within the last 3 years by ﬁve male
and six female solo singers. In Table III, a set of the last three
songs was used as a validation set for tuning hyperparameters
in Section VII-D. With respect to the genre distribution in
the test set, 37.50% of the songs were categorized as dance,
whereas the other 62.50% were ballads. The audio ﬁles were
produced in stereo with a sampling rate of 44,100 Hz. The
syllable-level lyric annotations with onset and offset times
were cross-validated by three persons who spoke Korean as
their primary language. The consonants are not annotated as a
separate component in the syllables. Thus, an annotated pair
of onset and offset indicates the actual margin of one sung
syllable that typically includes an initial consonant and its
combined vowel, and its ﬁnal consonant, if available.
2) English-pop (EP): To compare our system with an
existing ASR-based system for lyrics-to-audio alignment, we
obtained a database from the authors [7]. The data set con-
tained 17 uncut original versions of international pop songs,
mostly published in the 1980–90s. The rest were a cover song
and two songs from the RWC Music Database [39]. These
songs were provided with ground-truth word onsets manually
annotated by the author’s group. The duration of each song
varied in the range from 3 to 6 min. The audio ﬁles were
produced in stereo with a sampling rate of 44,100 Hz. In total,
the database contained 5,052 words within 4,753 s.
TABLE III
SONGS IN THE K-POP DATA SET
Artist
Title
Category‡
Younha
Not there
BF
G-Dragon
Crooked
DM
Jung Jinu
Satellite
DM
Hyorin
Let it go (from “Frozen”, Korean
OST)
BF
Seung Ree
Gotta talk to U
DM
Ahn Ye Eun
Sticker
BF
Jung Seun
Mom, just a moment
BM
Woo Yerin
Fish Bowl
BF
AOA
Miniskirt
DF-V
Lee Seol Ah
Life as a mom
BF-V
Busker Busker
Cherry blossom ending
BM-V
† B: ballad, D: dance, F: female, M: male, V: held-out validation set.
3) Jamendo: In Section VII-E, we used the Jamendo [40]
data set for training, parameter optimization, and testing of
the baseline VAD algorithm, based on Lehner [18]. This data
set consisted of 61 songs for training, 16 for validation, and
16 for testing. The audio ﬁles were produced in stereo with
a sampling rate of 44,100 Hz. The songs were annotated
manually in two classes, for voice-active or -inactive.
B. Evaluation Metrics
1) Syllable-level Accuracy (SA): This metric inherits most
of practical properties from the word-level evaluation metric
introduced in the related report [7]. We extended the metric
for use in a syllable-level evaluation of the KP data set. We
assumed the number of songs in the test data set to be Γsongs,
and the number of syllables v in a song s to be Γv|s. From
this, the mean accuracy over the songs in the data set can be
deﬁned as
SA(%) =
1
Γsongs
X
song s



1
Γv|s
X
syllable v
1|tv−ˆtv|<τ


· 100
|
{z
}
= Θτ (s), mean accuracy of sth song
, (20)
where tv and ˆtv are the true and predicted alignment times for
the syllable v, respectively. Here, the indicator function 1(·)
outputs 1 if the absolute alignment error |tv −ˆtv| is smaller
than tolerance τ (= 1 second as a default), otherwise, zero.
By controlling the tolerance value, this metric can provide
a practical measure of alignment quality, meeting various
purposes for use in a real-world system.
2) Word-level Accuracy (WA): This metric was presented in
previous work [7] with their data set, EP. The mean accuracy
over the number of songs, Γsongs, was deﬁned as
WA(%) =
1
Γsongs
X
song s
(
1
Γw|s
X
word w
1|tw−ˆtw|<τ
)
· 100
|
{z
}
= Θτ (s), mean accuracy of sth song
, (21)
where Γw|s denotes the number of words w, given a song s.
Here, tw and ˆtw denote the true and predicted alignment times
for the word w, respectively.

FIRST DRAFT, 18 JANUARY 2017
8
3) Standard Deviation (STD) of Accuracy: We estimated
the unbiased variance of SA or WA, among songs in a data
set as
STDτ =
s
1
Γsongs −1
X
song s
(Θτ(s) −µ(Θτ))2,
(22)
where Θτ(s) is song-wise mean accuracy, deﬁned in Equation
20 at the syllable-level, or Equation 21 at the word-level.
4) Mean Absolute Deviation (MAD): We measured the
mean absolute deviation of alignment error in seconds over
songs by
MADπ =
1
Γsongs
X
song s



1
Γπ
X
syllable or word, π
|ˆtπ −tπ|


, (23)
where π should be replaced by v or w, representing the
syllable- or word-level estimation of MAD, respectively.
5) Metrics for Evaluation of VAD: The binary result of
VAD described in Section VII-E can be evaluated in terms
of the precision (P), recall (R), and F-measure. Because we
only took the positive (predicted to be voice-active) frames
as an input for the main algorithm for alignment, we fo-
cused on the count of true-positives(tp), false-positives(fp),
and false-negatives(fn), rather than true-negatives(tn). We
deﬁned P = tp/(tp + fp), R = tp/(tp + fn), and F1 =
2 · (P · R)/(P + R). We also made use of the Fβ-measure
to assess the tradeoff between precision and recall of VAD in
the proposed system. Generally, F2 weights recall higher than
precision, while F0.5 gives more emphasis to precision than
recall.
C. Evaluation Setup
The ﬁve experiments presented in the Results tested and
compared the proposed method with various other methods,
by taking a pair of uniformly processed inputs. The pairs of
inputs are denoted as Inputdataset, such that {Adataset, Sdataset} ∈
Inputdataset, where {KP,EP} ∈dataset. Also, {Asong, Ssong}
denotes a pair of the inputs that are involved in a song from
the target data set. Input Adataset was obtained by passing the
lyrics part of the data set through the text processor with the
parameters suggested in Section III. Input Sdataset was a SSM
obtained by passing the audio part of the data set through the
chains of pre-processors (singing voice separation→VAD →
feature extraction →Generation of SSM) with the parameters
suggested in Section II-B.
Note that the proposed method is denoted as WS-
NMF+CTW in the Results. The results came from the chain
of WS-NMF→CTW as follows:
1) We ﬁrst passed the set of input {Adataset, Sdataset}
through WS-NMF. We uniformly stopped Algorithm
1 after 5,000 iterations. The output of WS-NMF was
denoted as Bdataset.
2) Next, we passed the above result, {Adataset, Bdataset}
through CTW. The hyperparameter ς was set to keep
95% (default) of the energy in CCA. In most cases,
Algorithm 2 stopped within 25 cycles, according to the
stopping criterion, |Jctw(t) −Jctw(t −1)| < 10−4.
3) Finally, the alignment result for each song was ob-
tained by multiplying the output of CCA, such that
{Qa · Qb}song. We evaluated the average performance
in the data set using the metrics given in Section VI-B.
Since the proposed WS-NMF+CTW had adjustable hyper-
parameters such as K, ς, and ℓ, we performed hyperparameter-
tuning as detailed in VII-D. Then, we applied the tuned
hyperparameters for generating the main results reported in
VII-A and VII-B.
VII. RESULTS
TABLE IV
DESCRIPTION OF BASELINE ALGORITHMS IN VII-A
Name
Input
Description
IK
{ASSM
song
, Ssong}
Izumitani & Kashino [33] proposed a 2-D DTW-
based method for key-invariant audio matching.
Later, their method was shown to be applicable to
an alignment of correlated patterns in two input
SSMs [34]. However, it has not been tested before
in SSMs as we did. Because Asong of our given
set of input {Adataset , Sdataset} was not a SSM, we
ﬁrst generated a binary SSM (let us denote, ASSM)
from Asong by calculating the Hamming distance.
Then, IK was performed using {ASSM
song , Ssong} as a
song-wise input.
Martin
{ASSM
song
, Ssong}
As an extension of IK, Martin, et al. [34] proposed
to replace the cost function with a hand-crafted
one—namely, adapted Euclidean distance [34]—
for the task of musical structure retrieval.
CTW
{Asong
, BMFCCs}
Without the help of the proposed combination with
WS-NMF, CTW [32] can work as a stand-alone
alignment machine, by taking {Asong, BMFCCs}
as a set of inputs for each song. Here, BMFCCs
represents the scaled feature with zero mean and
unit variance normalization of the MFCCs feature.
pCTW
{Asong
, BMFCCs}
As an extension of CTW, pCTW uses the PCA
derivatives of the original features.
GTW
{Asong
, BMFCCs}
Generalized time warping (GTW) [41] extended
CTW by parameterizing the temporal warping as
a combination of monotonic basis functions and
improved optimization. We used the implementa-
tion of the authors [41], and tested a recommended
regularization weight, ξ = 1.
A. Syllable-level Accuracy (SA) in KP
We evaluated the proposed system by measuring the align-
ment accuracy at syllable level, averaged over all the songs
in the KP data set. Although we could not ﬁnd any previous
work dealing with lyrics-to-audio alignment in a completely
unsupervised manner, several existing algorithms that were
developed for the general purpose of spatiotemporal alignment
could be regarded as potential candidates. In Table IV, we
reviewed such algorithms as multiple baselines.
1) Performance of the proposed system: Table V displays
the main result. The values in the ﬁrst row indicate that the
entire systems, consisting of the same pre-processor paired
with different alignment algorithms, produced the percentile
of correct alignments within the τ =1 s tolerance of temporal

FIRST DRAFT, 18 JANUARY 2017
9
TABLE V
MAIN RESULT OF VII-A: SYLLABLE-LEVEL ACCURACY (%) AND MEAN ABSOLUTE DEVIATION (s) IN THE KP DATA SET, WITH VAD=PREDICTED
(P = 72.58%, R = 93.07%, F1 = 81.56%).
IK
Martin
CTW
pCTW
GTW
WS-NMF+ CTW
SA±STDτ=1s
13.15±10.42
11.70±6.43
26.31±14.78
26.64±07.72
26.51±07.09
62.76±12.82
MADv
28.70
31.99
15.65
10.68
12.83
3.04
TABLE VI
SUB-RESULT OF VII-A: SYLLABLE-LEVEL ACCURACY (%) AND MEAN ABSOLUTE DEVIATION (s) IN THE KP DATA SET, WITH VAD=TRUE.
IK
Martin
CTW
pCTW
GTW
WS-NMF+ CTW
SA±STDτ=1s
16.11±10.27
15.60±11.51
33.40±29.06
41.02±13.40
41.34±11.06
69.34±12.07
MADv
19.27
20.82
7.23
4.57
4.58
1.94
displacement. Note that the pre-processor included the pre-
dicted VAD with the suggested threshold parameter θ = 1.88.
The values after ± represent the unbiased variance of SA that
came from song-wise evaluations. WS-NMF+CTW marked
the highest SA of 62.76%, while the second highest SA
of 26.64% was barely achieved by pCTW. Overall, WS-
NMF+CTW outperformed the most recent multimodal align-
ment algorithms, such as CTW, pCTW, and GTW, based on
unsupervised learning. The values of MAD in the second row
revealed the mean alignment displacement error in time. WS-
NMF+CTW showed the lowest MAD, of 3.04 s, among the
algorithms compared.
2) Performance of VAD in the Preprocessors: We evaluated
the binary classiﬁcation accuracy of the predicted VAD inde-
pendently, within the chain of preprocessors. The precision
(P), recall (R), and F1-measure were 72.58, 93.07, and
81.56%, respectively. For more details, see Section VII-E.
3) Performance with True VAD: The sub-results displayed
in Table VI were measured by replacing the VAD component
in the preprocessor with ground truth onsets and offsets, which
were available in the KP data set. However, the rest of the
procedures were the same as in the main experiment above.
This enabled us to test the proposed and baseline algorithms
by excluding any external effects of VAD.
• Given the true VAD, WS-NMF+CTW marked the highest
SA of 69.34% and the lowest MAD of 1.94 s, strongly
outperforming all other baseline systems. In the compar-
ison in Table V and VI, the SA for WS-NMF+CTW
improved by 6.58% points of a total 35.24% points
error, after replacing the predicted VAD with the ground
truth. If the better VAD method was used, the proposed
WS-NMF+CTW would be expected to produce better
alignment performance, and the SA would reach near the
upper bound of 69.34%.
• The IK and Martin systems achieved the lowest SA and
the longest MAD, in both Table V and VI. These results
consistently showed that the two previous methods, origi-
nally proposed for much simpler pattern alignments (i.e.,
A-B-A-C-A for typical annotations of a certain music
structure [34]), were not useful for our task.
• A
sharp
increase
in
SA
for
the
three
baseline
algorithms—CTW
(⇑26.95%
for
26.31%→33.40%),
pCTW
(⇑53.98% for 26.64%→41.02%) and
GTW
Fig. 3. Syllable-level accuracy (SA) in the KP data set according to different
values of τ, in the range from 0.1 to 2.0 s. The red dotted vertical line marks
the accuracy with τ =1s, which we presented in the Results in Table V.
(⇑55.94% for 26.51%→41.34%)—was observed in com-
paring Table V to VI. This suggested that the existing
multimodal alignment algorithms suffered from severe
bottleneck problems from the predicted VAD. In contrast,
the proposed algorithm (⇑10.48% for 62.76%→69.34%)
was relatively robust against VAD error versus the base-
line algorithms.
4) Alignment error deviations: Figure 3 shows the SAs
measured by deﬁning different tolerances, τ. For the proposed
system, the steepest increase in SA in the range between 0.1
and 0.3 s showed that the largest proportion of the error
was distributed in the corresponding range. Given the most
generous tolerance of τ = 2.0 s, the SA of the present system
reached a maximum value of 75.58%.
B. Comparison with an ASR-based system: WA in EP
In Table VII, we compared the WA of the proposed system
with the state-of-art ASR-based system [6]. Our system con-
sisted of the preprocessor, text processor, and WS-NMF+CTW,
as described above. Because the compared ASR-based system
[6] was only evaluated at the word level, we followed the
evaluation metrics provided in the compared work [7], and

FIRST DRAFT, 18 JANUARY 2017
10
TABLE VII
RESULT OF VII-B: PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF THE TWO SYSTEMS
IN TERMS OF WORD-LEVEL ACCURACY (%) AND MEAN ABSOLUTE
DEVIATION (s) IN THE EP DATA SET [7].
ASR-based,
Supervised [6]
Proposed,
Unsupervised
WA±STDτ=1(%)
46.4±22.3†
61.32±14.28
MADw (s)
4.9†
2.92
† The values were obtained from Mauch, et al. [7], testing
the original implementation of the ASR-based system [6] in
EP.
used annotations for the EP data set obtained from the authors
[7].
Fig. 4. Word-level accuracy (WA) in the EP data set according to different
values of τ, in the range from 0.1 to 2.0 s. The red dotted vertical line marks
the accuracy with τ =1.0 s, which we presented in the Results in Table VII.
Note that the WA for the reported ASR-based system [6] is from the graph
presented in the paper [7].
The values in the ﬁrst row of Table VII indicate that the two
systems compared produced the average percentile of correct
alignments within the τ = 1.0 s tolerance of temporal displace-
ment. The values after ± are the unbiased variance of WA that
came from song-wise evaluations. WS-NMF+CTW showed a
WA of 61.32%, which was 32.16% (14.92% points) higher
than the ASR-based system. The proposed system’s relatively
lower standard deviation of 14.28%, in comparison with ASR-
based system’s 22.3%, indicated that the achieved alignment
quality was more stable over the songs. The proposed system
had a MAD of 2.85 s, while ASR-based system’s value was
4.9 s. This lower MAD indicated that the proposed system
produced 42.6% point shorter word displacement errors, on
average. Overall, the WA of the present system consistently
outperformed the system compared in evaluations with various
τ settings, as shown in Figure 4.
C. Validation of the ‘Vowel-only’ Assumption
In Section II-A, we made the assumption that lyrics-to-
audio alignment should be effectively achieved by ‘observing
only vowels’, while ignoring consonant parts of syllables.
Because this assumption is a signiﬁcant aspect of the present
system, we needed a preliminary test to conﬁrm its valid-
ity with real data. As a way to independently estimate the
TABLE VIII
RESULTS OF VII-C: THEORETICAL UPPER-BOUND OF SYLLABLE-LEVEL
ACCURACY (SA) WITH THE ASSUMPTION OF COMPLETE ‘VOWEL-ONLY’
RETRIEVAL IN KP.
Input
VAD
SA(%),
τ = 1s
MADv(s)
KP (no-cut)
True
97.89
0.11
Random 30s cut
True
97.84
0.13
Random 20s cut
True
97.93
0.18
Random 10s cut
True
95.11
0.37
KP (no-cut)
Predicted
91.50
0.71
theoretical boundary of SA with this assumption, we used
a set of {Adataset, Sg.t.
dataset} as an input to DTW. The matrix
Sg.t.
dataset was generated directly using the annotated ground-
truth vowel labels with onset locations in KP3. Thus, this
input could be regarded as the perfect retrieval of vowels from
audio features. Because the length of the input song may be
another interesting issue in this test, we also simulated various
conditions with respect to input length. We could generate
them by random cuts of locally complete and at-least-ﬁve-
syllables-activated original data in KP.
In the top row of Table VIII, the theoretical upper-bound
of SA in the KP data set was 97.89%. Although one could
provide an exceptional counterexample—a few existing songs
repeat entirely ‘la la la,...’ in the lyrics—, the experimental
results caused us to accept the validity of the assumption as a
near truth.
The three rows in the middle of Table VIII present simu-
lation results with three different shorter input lengths from
an average of 20 tests using random cuts. The SAs were
maintained, consistently higher than 95%. Interestingly, MAD
increased in a manner inversely proportional to the length
of the input. Previously, the result with KP (no-cut) reached
the highest SA and the lowest MAD, in comparison with the
shorter random cuts. With the limitations of our results, this
revealed that the longer input length would generally produce
better alignment quality, assuming that a perfect VAD was
provided.
The bottom row of Table VIII shows the alignment results
with the ideal features and the predicted VAD (F1=81.56%,
evaluated in Section VII-E). The resulting SA was 91.50%,
with a MAD of 0.71 s. This can be interpreted as the
theoretical upper bound of SA with the proposed system in
the KP data set.
D. Hyperparameters of WS-NMF+CTW
In advance of the main experiment VII-A, we tuned the
hyperparameters for WS-NMF+CTW. In Section IV-B, Algo-
rithm 1 for WS-NMF had two hyperparameters: ℓfor sparsity
and K (the number of clusters) for ﬁxing the column length
of the matrix B. In Section V-B, Algorithm 2 for CTW had
one hyperparameter, ς (%), forcing the percentile of energy to
be kept in the CCA feature vectors.
3Note that we could not test our prior assumption directly with the EP data
set, where only word-level annotations with onsets were available.

FIRST DRAFT, 18 JANUARY 2017
11
Among these three hyperparameters, we ﬁrst found that ℓ=
3 × 10−3 generated stable results in preliminary tests. With
respect to K and ς, generally, a larger value of K increased
model complexity and a larger ς decreased the complexity
by dimensional reduction. In this regard, we tested various
settings of K with ς, while ℓwas ﬁxed.
For the grid search, we used the held-out validation set of
KP in Table III. The default value for K was set by Equation
13 in Section IV-B, where L′ is the number of vowel classes
appearing in the lyrical text, and the controllable i. We tested
seven different settings for K with i ∈{−2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4},
where i = 0 was a default. For ς, we tested ﬁve settings with
ς(%) ∈{72, 88, 95, 99, 100}. In combination, we tested 35
settings in total.
The results are shown in Figure 5. Overall, we could observe
that the settings for higher model complexity with K > L′
produced better results than the default setting and other
settings for lower model complexity, such that K ≤L′. Then,
the arrow in Figure 5 points to the best SA of 65.24%, which
was obtained setting K = L′ + 2 and ς = 95%.
E. VAD performance and its effects on the proposed system
We performed a benchmark test of the proposed VAD
preprocessor described in Section II-B2. We then investigated
the effects of VAD false positives (fp) and false negatives
(fn).
1) Baseline Algorithm: We implemented a baseline VAD
algorithm based on the hand-crafted features and supervised
learning previously proposed by Lehner [18]. We extracted the
audio feature (60 dimensions including δ-MFCCs) with a total
window of 800 ms around the 200 ms center frame, from the
22,050 Hz down-sampled input audio. A random forest [42]
classiﬁer was then trained with 61 songs, and parameter-tuned
with another 16 unused songs included in the Jamendo [40]
data set. After performing postprocessing as suggested in the
paper [18], the baseline implementation achieved F1=81.90%
for the 16 test songs included in Jamendo. The performance of
our implementation was 2.70% points lower than in Lehner’s
report [18].
Fig. 5. Syllable-level accuracy obtained by various settings of hyperparam-
eters {K, ς}: For K, K = L′ is the default value, informed by the number
of vowel classes in the text. Each group represents the setting of K. In each
group, ﬁve settings of ς were tested. The arrow points towards the optimum
value.
Fig. 6. PR-curve of the proposed VAD,
in comparison with the implementation
of Lehner [18] tested with the KP data
set. The three points marked with *, ◦,
and △represent the positions achiev-
ing the maximum F1, F0.5, and F2
points, respectively.
Fig. 7. Sampled response graph of
syllable accuracy (SA) in KP, ac-
cording to the threshold parameter
(θ) of the proposed VAD. The best
SA was obtained with θ = 1.88
around the position achieving the
maximum F1-measure for VAD.
2) VAD Performance Benchmark: In Figure 6, we com-
pared the present VAD with the baseline in the KP data set.
The larger area under the curve (AUC) showed that the present
VAD outperformed in terms of both precision and recall. The
maximum F1-measure achieved with the present VAD was
81.56% (at θ = 1.88), which was 17.04% points higher than
the baseline result of F1 =64.52%.
3) Selection of the Threshold for the Present VAD: We
initially performed a nested-grid search to search for the
optimal threshold (denoted as θ) for the present RPCA-based
VAD in the KP data set. The result is shown in Figure
7. The SA of 62.76% in the main result of Section VII-A
was achieved by setting the VAD threshold θ =1.88, which
maximized the F1-measure in the KP data set. Then, we reused
this ﬁxed threshold for the experiment with EP in Section
VII-B.
4) The effects of VAD false positives (fp) versus false
negatives (fn) in the proposed system: In some classiﬁca-
tion problems, where the number of true/false examples are
extremely unbalanced, giving more weight to precision or
recall could be obviously advantageous to the end user—in
spam mail classiﬁcation and cancer classiﬁcation, to name
a few cases. In music recordings, indeed, the number of
voice inactive-frames is generally larger than that of voice-
active frames. In this regard, the existing ASR-based lyrics-
to-audio systems [5]–[7] required ﬁxing the VAD threshold
manually to adapt to the middle ASR classiﬁer. Additionally,
the ﬁnal threshold was controlled adaptively by rule-of-thumb
[43] using a histogram of VAD decisions that were made
initially. Necessarily, these processes require an a priori step
with respect to the preferred balance of precision (related to
fp) and recall (related to fn) to maximize the ﬁnal alignment
accuracy.
In our case, the best SA (marked with *) in Figure 6 was
achieved using the VAD threshold (θ) for the maximum F1,
while the other compared thresholds for the maximum F0.5
and F2 produced similarly lower SAs (indicated as ◦and △).
Although our sample size was limited, this result indicated that
the fp and fn rate of VAD affected the performance of the
present system almost equivalently, and we could see that the

FIRST DRAFT, 18 JANUARY 2017
12
VAD output with the best F1-measure could more generally
lead us to the best SA performance.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
We presented a new approach for lyrics-to-audio alignment
in popular music recordings. In comparison with the existing
ASR-based approaches, the present method differed primarily
in that it was based on unsupervised learning, and the fun-
damental idea was to use the patterns of vowel repetition
observed in both audio and text as key features. In this
way, the proposed system was shown to work without the
need for any pre-constructed models for phoneme recognition,
singing/singer adaptation, or language.
The proposed WS-NMF+CTW consisted of two sequen-
tially organized methods: WS-NMF, a structured factorization
that approximated the discriminative vowel subspace, could
produce a sparse matrix representing the patterns of vowel
activation from a self-similarity matrix. Then, CTW estimated
the optimal spatiotemporal transformation for alignment of
the sparse matrix and another matrix from the proposed text
processor.
In experiments, we used an existing singing voice separation
method and its derivative voice activity detection method
as preprocessors. In experiment VII-A, the present system
achieved syllable-level accuracy of 62.76% with the K-pop
data set, and outperformed the other unsupervised methods
we compared. In experiment VII-B, the present system showed
32.16% higher word-level accuracy than the compared existing
ASR-based system under the same experimental conditions
with the English-pop data set. In additional experiments, we
investigated three related issues: validation of the previously
made assumption that used only vowels, the beneﬁts of com-
bining WS-NMF with CTW, and the effects of VAD error on
the performance of the present system.
Although the present study showed promising results, we
did not discover a way of fully integrating the voice sepa-
ration, nor a semi-supervised scenario using known phonetic
distances. Thus, these are issues for future work.
