An Unsupervised Learning Method with Convolutional
Auto-Encoder for Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Maohan Lianga,b, Ryan Wen Liua,b,∗∗, Shichen Lic, Zhe Xiaod, Xin Liue and Feng Lub,∗∗
aHubei Key Laboratory of Inland Shipping Technology, School of Navigation, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430063, China
bState Key Laboratory of Resources and Environmental Information System, Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research,
CAS, Beijing 100101, China
cSchool of Computer Science and Technology, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430063, China
dInstitute of High Performance Computing, A*Star (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), CO, 118411, Singapore
eAIRC/RWBC-OIL, AIST, Tokyo 135-0064, Japan
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Automatic identiﬁcation system (AIS)
Trajectory similarity
Trajectory clustering
Convolutional neural network (CNN)
Convolutional auto-encoder (CAE)
A B S T R A C T
To achieve reliable mining results for massive vessel trajectories, one of the most important chal-
lenges is how to eﬃciently compute the similarities between diﬀerent vessel trajectories. The
computation of vessel trajectory similarity has recently attracted increasing attention in the mar-
itime data mining research community. However, traditional shape- and warping-based methods
often suﬀer from several drawbacks such as high computational cost and sensitivity to unwanted
artifacts and non-uniform sampling rates, etc. To eliminate these drawbacks, we propose an
unsupervised learning method which automatically extracts low-dimensional features through a
convolutional auto-encoder (CAE). In particular, we ﬁrst generate the informative trajectory im-
ages by remapping the raw vessel trajectories into two-dimensional matrices while maintaining
the spatio-temporal properties. Based on the massive vessel trajectories collected, the CAE can
learn the low-dimensional representations of informative trajectory images in an unsupervised
manner. The trajectory similarity is ﬁnally equivalent to eﬃciently computing the similarities
between the learned low-dimensional features, which strongly correlate with the raw vessel tra-
jectories. Comprehensive experiments on realistic data sets have demonstrated that the proposed
method largely outperforms traditional trajectory similarity computation methods in terms of
eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness. The high-quality trajectory clustering performance could also be
guaranteed according to the CAE-based trajectory similarity computation results.
1. Introduction
The understanding of maritime traﬃc has become an important research topic due to human-related vessel activities
and for its direct implication on maritime surveillance. Being mandatory by international regulations for vessels over
300 gross tonnage and passenger vessels, the growing number of onboard automatic identiﬁcation system (AIS) is
providing massive spatio-temporal of vessel position data (Alessandrini et al., 2018). The collected AIS-based vessel
trajectories are beneﬁcial for vessel behavior modeling, leading to a reliable understanding of maritime traﬃc. In both
academia and industry, vessel trajectory-based computational methods have gained signiﬁcant attentions in maritime
applications, such as abnormal behavior detection (Rong et al., 2020), maritime safety and security (Ou and Zhu,
2008), route planning (Zhang et al., 2018c), ﬁsheries and environment monitoring (Kroodsma et al., 2018), etc. These
practical applications are strongly related to basic computing methods in vessel trajectory data mining. One of the
most basic methods is vessel trajectory similarity computation, which is the main focus of this work.
In the current literature (Su et al., 2020), there are several similarity computation methods with the goal to mea-
sure how similar any two trajectories are, such as the longest common subsequence (LCSS) (Yao et al., 2017), edit
distance (Fu et al., 2017), one way distance (OWD) (Zhao and Shi, 2019), and dynamic time warping (DTW) (Li et al.,
2017; De Vries and Van Someren, 2012), etc. These methods and their extensions have contributed to computing the
similarities between vessel trajectories, assisting in learning vessel motion patterns from massive AIS-based vessel tra-
jectories. However, these traditional methods often suﬀer from several drawbacks, such as high computational cost and
∗Corresponding authors.

ORCID(s):
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 22
arXiv:2101.03169v1  [cs.LG]  10 Jan 2021

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Fig. 1: The ﬂowchart of our proposed CAE-based unsupervised learning method for vessel trajectory similarity computation
and its application to vessel trajectory clustering.
sensitivity to unwanted noise and non-uniform sampling rate. In the case of large-scale vessel trajectories in maritime
applications, it is intractable to eﬃciently measure the trajectory similarities or cluster trajectories (Taghizadeh et al.,
2019). The original vessel trajectories can be regarded as a combination of diﬀerent sub-trajectories, which commonly
have diﬀerent geometrical structures. Therefore, these mentioned methods easily fail to generate high-quality similar-
ity computation results. It is well known that deep learning has attracted impressive results in many diﬀerent areas of
research due to its strong feature representation (LeCun et al., 2015). Inspired from the recent success of deep learning,
we propose to develop an unsupervised learning method with convolutional auto-encoder (CAE) for vessel trajectory
similarity computation. The proposed method has superior performance in terms of both eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness.
Fig. 1 visually depicts the ﬂowchart of our CAE-based unsupervised learning method for computing similarities
between vessel trajectories. To take full advantage of CAE in handling two-dimensional image data, we ﬁrst transform
the original vessel trajectories into informative trajectory images. The generated trajectory images are commonly
robust to unwanted noise and non-uniform sampling rates existed in original trajectories. To accelerate similarity
computation, we then propose to map the informative trajectory images onto the low-dimensional feature embedding
through CAE model. The similarities between vessel trajectories are thus equivalent to eﬃciently calculating the
distances between the low-dimensional feature vectors learned from the corresponding trajectory images. Last, the
superior trajectory clustering results can also be guaranteed based on the accurate similarities calculated.
In conclusion, given the state-of-the-art research works, our CAE-based vessel trajectory similarity computation
method obviously diﬀers from previous scenarios in the following aspects
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
• We propose to generate the informative trajectory images by remapping the original vessel trajectories into two-
dimensional matrices. The similarities between diﬀerent vessel trajectories are then equivalent to measuring the
structural similarities between the corresponding informative trajectory images.
• A convolutional auto-encoder neural network is presented to learn low-dimensional representations of the infor-
mative trajectory images in an unsupervised manner. The learned representations could make vessel trajectory
similarity more robust to trajectories with non-uniform sampling and diﬀerent lengths.
• Comprehensive experiments on realistic data sets have demonstrated that the proposed method largely outper-
forms traditional vessel trajectory similarity computation methods in terms of eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the related works on trajectory
similarity computation methods. Section 3 brieﬂy reviews the deﬁnitions and preliminaries related to vessel trajectory,
convolutional network and CAE. We then propose the CAE-based unsupervised learning method for vessel trajectory
similarity computation in Section 4. Section 5 performs extensive experiments to evaluate the superior performance
of our proposed method. The conclusions and future work are ﬁnally summarized in Section 6.
2. Related Works
Considerable research has been conducted on vessel trajectory similarity computation, which is of importance in
maritime big data mining, such as navigation pattern discovery, trajectory classiﬁcation, anomaly detection, and route
planning (Tu et al., 2017). In the literature (Besse et al., 2016; Su et al., 2020), conventional similarity computa-
tion methods can be roughly divided into two categories, i.e., shape- and warping-based scenarios. The shape-based
similarity measure methods commonly consider only geometrical shapes of trajectories. In contrast, the warping-
based methods compute an optimal match between every two trajectories. Besides these two traditional methods,
learning-based trajectory similarity computation methods have also attracted signiﬁcant attention due to the powerful
representation of auto-learning capacity. To our knowledge, no previous studies have been performed on deep learning-
based similarity computation among vessel trajectories. There is thus a signiﬁcant potential to promote the robustness,
eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of trajectory similarity measure through deep learning-driven computation methods.
2.1. Shape-Based Trajectory Similarity Computation
The shape-based trajectory similarity computation methods typically include Hausdorﬀdistance, Fréchet distance,
and OWD, etc. These methods have been widely adopted in maritime applications. For instance, Arguedas et al.
(2017) proposed to compute the Hausdorﬀdistance to cluster together similar vessel behaviours assisting in produc-
ing maritime traﬃc representations from historical AIS data. This distance has also been introduced to enable event
identiﬁcation in the maritime knowledge discovery (Sánchez-Heres, 2019). The OWD was adopted to assist in au-
tomatically recognizing the vessel motion patterns from massive historical AIS data (Ma et al., 2014). To enhance
trajectory clustering performance, the Fréchet distance has been used to enable adaptive vessel trajectory clustering
(Cao et al., 2018). It also contributed to developing a shape-based local spatial association measure for detecting ab-
normal activities of moving vessels (Roberts, 2019). However, these shape-based methods are commonly sensitive
to unwanted noise and non-uniform sampling rates. The related trajectory data mining results would be accordingly
degraded in maritime applications.
2.2. Warping-Based Trajectory Similarity Computation
In current literature, several warping-based similarity computation methods, which perform well for shape match-
ing in similarity measure, have been designed for trajectory data mining, such as DTW (Li et al., 2017; De Vries
and Van Someren, 2012), LCSS (Zhang et al., 2006), ED (Gustafsson, 2010), edit distance on real sequences (EDR)
(De Vries and Van Someren, 2012), and edit distance with real penalty (ERP) (Chen et al., 2005), etc. DTW has
undoubtedly become one of the most popular methods to recognize similar geometrical patterns between diﬀerent
trajectories. It has achieved massive successes in the ﬁelds of vessel trajectory prediction (Alizadeh et al., 2020), path-
following autonomous vessels (Xu et al., 2019), shipping route characterization and anomaly detection (Rong et al.,
2020). However, DTW-based similarity computation essentially suﬀers from over-stretching and over-compression
problems. To eliminate these disadvantages, Li et al. (2020) proposed an adaptively constrained DTW to robustly
calculate the similarities and achieved reliable classiﬁcation and clustering results. Other extensions of DTW, e.g.,
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
shape DTW (Zhao and Itti, 2018), shape segment DTW (Hong et al., 2020), and weighted DTW (Jeong et al., 2011),
etc., could be naturally employed to measure similarities among vessel trajectories. Due to the recursive implementa-
tion and pair-wise distance computation, these methods were implemented at the expense of expensive computational
costs. Both EDR and ERP have contributed to assisting in performing AIS-based vessel destination prediction (Zhang
et al.). They still suﬀer from heavy computational burden in general, especially for large-scale vessel trajectories. To
make trajectory data mining tractable in maritime applications, it is thus necessary to develop computational methods
to eﬃciently measure trajectory similarities.
2.3. Learning-Based Trajectory Similarity Computation
With the progressive development of deep learning, several learning models, such as recurrent neural network
(RNN) and convolutional neural network (CNN), have gained considerable success in trajectory similarity computa-
tion (Wang et al., 2020). The reason behind this success attributes to their powerful feature learning abilities (LeCun
et al., 2015). Inspired by the recent success of RNN, Yao et al. (2017) developed the RNN-based Seq2Seq auto-
encoder model to encode the movement pattern of trajectory to improve similarity computation. By introducing a
spatial proximity aware loss function, a Seq2Seq-based learning method (named t2vec) has been proposed to learn
ﬁxed-dimensional representations for trajectories (Li et al., 2018). It could achieve signiﬁcant similarity computation
results which are robust to non-inform, low-sampling rates and random noisy data. The meaningfulness of learned
similarity values in t2vec have been extensively assessed in the literature (Taghizadeh et al., 2019). To overcome the
inﬂuence of unwanted noise on similarity measure, Zhang et al. (2019a) presented a robust auto-encoder model with
attention mechanism to learn the low-dimensional representations of noisy vessel trajectories. Zhang et al. (2019b)
further extended the Seq2Seq auto-encoder model (named At2vec) by considering the semantic information of active
trajectories. The advantage of CNN architecture has been exploited to drive high-level features from raw GPS tra-
jectories to infer transportation modes, potentially leading to traﬃc safety enhancement (Dabiri and Heaslip, 2018).
Inspired by the huge successes of CNN and auto-encoder techniques, we will propose an unsupervised learning method
with CAE to compute similarities between diﬀerent vessel trajectories.
3. Deﬁnitions and Preliminaries
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the preliminary concepts about vessel trajectories and challenging problems
arising from trajectory similarity computation. Both AE and neural networks are then brieﬂy reviewed.
3.1. Deﬁnitions and Problem Statements
The deﬁnitions of vessel trajectory and trajectory similarity are ﬁrst given towards a better understanding of tra-
jectory similarity computation. The core problems of this work are also introduced in this subsection, i.e., how to
compute and evaluate the vessel trajectory similarity.
Deﬁnition 3.1. Vessel Trajectory: A vessel trajectory 푇is represented by a sequence of timestamped points collected
from AIS equipment, i.e., 푇= {푃1, 푃2, ⋯, 푃푁
} where 푃푛= {lat푛, lng푛, 푡푛
} with 푛∈{1, 2, ⋯, 푁} denoting the 푛-th
timestamped point and 푁being the length of vessel trajectory 푇. lon푛, lat푛and 푡푛in 푃푛, respectively, represent the
longitude, latitude, and time stamp.
Deﬁnition 3.2. Trajectory Similarity: The trajectory similarity is commonly measured by computing the distance
(푇푖, 푇푗) between any two trajectories 푇푖and 푇푗with 푖≠푗. Theoretically, the smaller the value is, the higher
similar the two trajectories are.
In maritime applications, it is more intuitive and tractable to compute the distances (rather than similarities) be-
tween diﬀerent vessel trajectories. The trajectory similarity measure can thus be naturally equivalent to computing the
distance. For any three trajectories 푇1, 푇2 and 푇3, the distance measure should meet the following four conditions
1. Symmetry: (푇1, 푇2) = (푇2, 푇1).
2. Non-negativity: (푇1, 푇2) ≥0.
3. Triangle inequality: (푇1, 푇3) ≤(푇1, 푇2) + (푇2, 푇3).
4. Identity of indiscernibles: (푇1, 푇2) = 0 ⇔푇1 = 푇2.
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Fig. 2: The architecture of a traditional auto-encoder model. It is an unsupervised learning method where the purpose of
encoder layer is to learn a low-dimensional representation (i.e., feature or compressed data) of the training example. In
contrast, the decoder maps the low-dimensional feature to the reconstruction of original input.
A large number of computation methods have been proposed to measure trajectory similarity (Besse et al., 2016;
Su et al., 2020), it is still, however, diﬃcult to generate satisfactory measure performance in terms of eﬃciency, eﬀec-
tiveness and robustness. As a result, traditional methods thus often fail to yield robust scenarios in realistic trajectory
datasets. To alleviate these disadvantages, it is necessary to handle the following two challenging problems
Problem 3.1. How to Eﬃciently Compute the Trajectory Similarity?: The trajectory similarity computation is strongly
dependent upon the geometrical properties of trajectories. Traditional shape- and warping-based similarity compu-
tation methods easily suﬀer in several scenarios, e.g., long computational time, unequal lengths, unwanted artifacts
(noise), non-uniform sampling rates, etc. To guarantee eﬃciency and accuracy, we will propose a unsupervised feature
learning method to enable computation of vessel trajectory similarity. The proposed learning method is capable of
signiﬁcantly reducing the computational cost while accurately measuring the trajectory similarity.
Problem 3.2. How to Robustly Evaluate the Trajectory Similarity?: If any two trajectories have the same length
and time stamps, it becomes signiﬁcantly easier to evaluate the trajectory similarity. However, unwanted artifacts,
unequal lengths and diﬀerent time stamps are more common, leading to intractable evaluation of trajectory similarity
in practice. To our knowledge, there is no golden standard or benchmarks to quantitatively evaluate the similarity
measure thus far. To overcome this limitation, we propose to adopt the trajectory clustering results to indirectly evaluate
the trajectory similarity computation.
3.2. Auto-Encoder Neural Network
The basic auto-encoder (AE) is a kind of unsupervised neural network, which aims to encode input samples into the
low-dimensional representations. The inputs in AE can be eﬀectively reconstructed from these representations with
minimum reconstruction error. The architecture of a traditional AE is visually illustrated in Fig. 2. It can be observed
that AE is mainly composed of an input layer, several hidden layers, and an output layer. Let 푥푚= [푥1
푚, 푥2
푚, ⋯, 푥푃
푚
]푇
with 1 ≤푚≤푀be an unlabeled training sample, where 푃and 푀denote the length of one sample 푥푚, and the
number of unlabeled samples, respectively. The ﬁrst step of AE is to encode the input data 푥푚to the compressed data
(i.e., low-dimensional features) 푦푚=
[
푦1
푚, 푦2
푚, ⋯, 푦푄
푚
]푇
with 푄≪푃through the following activation function
푦푚= 
(푥푚+ ) ,
(1)
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Fig. 3: The visual architecture of a typical convolutional neural network (CNN).
where is the weight matrix, is a bias vector, and (⋅) denotes the activation function. The next step of AE is to
reconstruct the 푃-dimensional vector ̂푥푚= [̂푥1
푚, ̂푥2
푚, ⋯, ̂푥푃
푚
]푇based on the low-dimensional features 푦푚, i.e.,
̂푥푚= 
( ̂푦푚+ ̂) ,
(2)
with the appropriately sized parameters ̂and ̂. Here, (⋅) also denotes the activation function. The essential
purpose of AE training is to optimize the parameter set Θ = {, , ̂, ̂} to minimize the reconstruction error.
Generally, the reconstruction error between input and output data is commonly deﬁned as the mean-squared error
(MSE) cost function, i.e.,
(Θ) = 1
푀
푀
∑
푚=1
(
1
2
푃
∑
푝=1
(푥푝
푚−̂푥푝
푚
)2
)
.
(3)
It is computationally tractable to minimize the reconstruction error (3) by optimizing the parameter set Θ =
{, , ̂, ̂} in both encoder and decoder layers to yield the low-dimensional features. These obtained features are
beneﬁcial for dimensionality reduction leading to reduced computational complexity in many application scenarios.
3.3. Convolutional Neural Network
CNN can be regarded as a feed-forward artiﬁcial neural network with variations of multilayer perceptrons (Díaz-
Álvarez et al., 2018). It has been extensively exploited in several practical ﬁelds, such as machine vision, computer
graphics, speech recognition, and big data mining, etc (Zhang et al., 2018b; Khan et al., 2020). These successful
applications are obtained mainly due to the immense learning capacity of CNN. This capacity can enable automatic
extraction of multiple features leading to meaningful representations in diﬀerent abstraction levels. The overall archi-
tecture of a typical CNN is visually shown in Fig. 3. In particular, the conventional CNN structure is mainly composed
of several convolutional layers, pooling layers, fully-connected layers, and some activation functions, which will be
brieﬂy reviewed next.
3.3.1. Convolutional Layers
The convolutional layers essentially work as feature extractors to learn the rich feature representations of input
samples, which are two-dimensional images in this work. The convolutional ﬁlters within convolutional layers imple-
ment via dividing the input images into several small patches, often known as receptive ﬁelds. These ﬁlters mainly
have two important parameters (i.e., height and weight), which are commonly smaller than those of the input images.
The receptive ﬁelds related to the input images are convolved with ﬁlters using a set of trainable weights to generate
new feature maps. In particular, each feature map is yielded by sliding the ﬁlter over all spatial locations of the input.
The dimensions of complete feature maps are equivalent to the number of diﬀerent ﬁlters used. Mathematically, the
feature value 푥푙
푘in the 푘-th feature map of the 푙-th convolutional layer is computed as follows
푥푙
푘= 푓푙
푘⊙푥푙−1
푘
+ 푏푙
푘,
(4)
where ⊙represents the two-dimensional convolutional operator, 푓푙
푘is the 푘-th convolutional ﬁlter in the 푙-th layer,
푥푙−1
푘
denotes the input patch for the 푘-th ﬁlter within the (푙−1)-th layer, and 푏푙
푘is the bias term related to the 푘-th
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
ﬁlter of the 푙-th layer. The convolutional ﬁlter in traditional CNN is a generalized linear expression. To enhance
the representation ability of features, there have been several generalizations and extensions, e.g., tiled convolution,
transposed convolution, and dilated convolution, etc (Gu et al., 2018).
3.3.2. Activation Functions
Activation functions are important concepts in building deep neural networks, which determine how networks
learn and behave. The activation can be selected as an arbitrary function which transforms the output of a layer into
one network. In particular, the activation function introduces non-linearity to networks and makes them capable of
learning and performing more complex tasks. Without activation functions, the neural networks are essentially just
linear regression estimators. Let 푥푙
푘be an output (i.e., convolved feature) of the 푘-th ﬁlter in the 푙-th convolutional
layer, a non-linear activation function (⋅) for the convolved feature can be deﬁned as follows
푣푙
푘= (푥푙
푘
) ,
(5)
where 푣푙
푘denotes the transformed output of the 푘-th feature map for the 푙-th convolutional layer. The above-mentioned
functions (⋅) and (⋅) in Eqs. (1) and (2) can be selected as the same versions of (⋅) in this work.
In current literature, there have been attempts to engineer several activation functions (⋅) to improve neural
networks, such as Sigmoid (Iliev et al., 2017), Hyperbolic Tangent (Dabiri and Heaslip, 2018), Rectiﬁed Linear Unit
(ReLU) (Yao et al., 2017), Parametric ReLU (PReLU) (He et al., 2015), Randomized ReLU (RReLU) (Yao et al.,
2017), Leaky ReLU (Anthimopoulos et al., 2016), and Exponential Linear Unit (ELU) (Clevert et al., 2016), etc. Note
that diﬀerent activation functions often display diverse behaviors in practical applications. It is thus necessary to select
the proper activation function to enable fast and robust training of neural networks.
3.3.3. Pooling Layers
The pooling layers are usually placed between two successive convolutional layers. Their purposes are to generate
translation and distortion invariance in the input data by down-sampling the feature maps. It is able able to summarize
similar information within the neighborhoods of receptive ﬁelds and yield the dominant response within these local
regions. Let pool (⋅) denote the pooling function, the pooled element in each feature map is then given by
푤푙
푘= pool (푣푙
푘
) ,
(6)
where 푤푙
푘denotes the pooled feature map 푣푙
푘. The typical pooling operations mainly include max pooling and average
pooling (Gu et al., 2018). The reduced spatial resolution of feature maps not only regulates the computational com-
plexity but also improves the generalization of learning by reducing overﬁtting. In current literature (Gu et al., 2018;
Dakhia et al., 2019), several extensions of pooling operators, such as 퐿푝pooling, mixed pooling, stochastic pooling,
spectral pooling, spatial pyramid pooling, and multi-scale orderless pooling, have been proposed to further enhance
the generalization ability of CNN.
3.3.4. Fully-Connected Layers
Typically, one CNN commonly has several convolutional and pooling layers, which extract meaningful feature
representations, followed by one or more fully-connected layers. The fully-connected layers are able to interpret the
feature representations and perform the high-level reasoning. In addition, these layers essentially perform a non-linear
combination of features learned from previous layers, which are beneﬁcial for classiﬁcation of experimental samples.
4. CAE-Enabled Trajectory Similarity Computation Framework
As discussed beforehand, CNN is able to quickly extract meaningful features from input examples. In contrast,
the unsupervised AE is capable of encoding input examples into the low-dimensional representations. To take full
advantages of CNN and AE, there is a great potential to combine CNN and AE contributing to CAE neural network.
In this work, the raw vessel trajectories are ﬁrstly remapped into informative trajectory images. CAE will then be
adopted to learn the low-dimensional features related to the informative trajectory images. The similarities between
diﬀerent vessel trajectories can be equivalent to computing the distances between the corresponding low-dimensional
feature vectors. The proposed CAE-based unsupervised learning method could achieve superior similarity measures
in terms of both eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness.
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Fig. 4: The visual overview of generation of informative trajectory image. From left to right: (a) one raw vessel trajectory,
(b) timestamped point sampling using the cubic spline interpolation at a ﬁxed time interval, (c) dividing the experimental
water area into a ﬁnite number of grids, (d) projecting the timestamped points in the raw trajectory into rectangular grids,
and (e) the corresponding informative trajectory image of size 푊× 퐻, respectively.
4.1. Representation of Raw Vessel Trajectories
To take full advantage of CAE, it is necessary to ﬁrstly transform raw vessel trajectories into two-dimensional im-
ages. As shown in Fig. 4, we propose to generate the informative trajectory images by projecting the timestamped
points in trajectories 푇into the predeﬁned grids. In this work, we propose to select the Cartesian coordinates to repre-
sent the geometric positions of timestamped points through the Mercator projection (Li et al., 2016). The generation
of informative trajectory images is mainly composed of three steps. In the ﬁrst step, we propose to resample the times-
tamped points in the original vessel trajectories at a ﬁxed time interval of 5s. If the raw trajectories are degraded by
random noise or missing data, the spline interpolation method (Zhang et al., 2018a) will be selected to reconstruct
the degraded timestamped points leading to trajectory quality improvement. The water areas considered in this work
will then be divided into a ﬁnite number of grids of size 푊× 퐻in the second step. In the last step, the timestamped
points in vessel trajectories are projected into the grids leading to the informative trajectory images of size 푊× 퐻.
In this work, the trajectory images are simplistically considered as binary matrices containing only 0s and 1s. Before
generating the binary informative trajectory images , we will ﬁrst compute the projected images by analyzing the
timestamped points projected.
Let 푇= {푃1, 푃2, ⋯, 푃푁
} denote a vessel trajectory with 푃푛= {lat푛, lng푛, 푡푛
}, where 푛∈{1, 2, ⋯, 푁} denotes
the 푛-th timestamped point and 푁is the length of 푇deﬁned in Deﬁnition 3.1. The mathematical relationship between
(푤푛, ℎ푛
) in projected image and (lat푛, lng푛
) in Cartesian coordinates (Huang et al., 2020) can be obtained as follows
푤푛= ⌈lat푛−latmin
latmax −latmin
⋅(푊−1)⌉+ 1 ∈[1, 푊] ,
(7)
with latmin = min1≤푛≤푁lat푛, latmax = max1≤푛≤푁lat푛, and
ℎ푛= ⌈lng푛−lngmin
lngmax −lngmin
⋅(퐻−1)⌉+ 1 ∈[1, 퐻] ,
(8)
with lngmin = min1≤푛≤푁lng푛, lngmax = max1≤푛≤푁lng푛, and ⌈⋯⌉denoting the ceil operation. If the number of
timestamped points, whose projected coordinates are (푤푛, ℎ푛
), equals 푑푛, the intensity of element (푤푛, ℎ푛
) in 
becomes (푤푛, ℎ푛
) = 푑푛essentially indicating the magnitude of projected image . In this work, we can adopt the
intermediate image to generate the binary trajectory image , i.e.,
(푤푛, ℎ푛
) =
{
1,
if (푤푛, ℎ푛
) > 휖,
0,
otherwise,
(9)
where 휖is a predeﬁned threshold, empirically selected as 휖= 3 in this work. Experimental results have demonstrated
the eﬀectiveness of this brief selection.
4.2. CAE-Based Unsupervised Learning Method
To fully extract features from the informative trajectory images, we propose a multi-layer CAE neural network
to perform unsupervised similarity learning. The proposed unsupervised learning method essentially combines the
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Fig. 5: The architecture of CAE neural network. The CAE mainly consists of encoder and decoder components, connected
at the narrowest location of the network. The loss function between input data and its reconstructed version is adopted
to optimize the weights and bias in CAE neural network.
Fig. 6: The visual architecture of our CAE-based unsupervised learning method, which mainly consists of the convolutional-
deconvolutional auto-encoder and fullly-connected layers. The parameters of each layer are denoted by "(pooling size)"
for max pooling and unpooling layers, and "(ﬁlter size)-(number of ﬁlters)" for Conv and DeConv layers. The output sizes
of both convolutional and deconvolutional layers are represented by "Output shape".
advantages and architectures of CNN and AE. In particular, the CNN is capable of learning local features of input
data due to its spatially located convolutional ﬁlters, whereas the AE is able to directly extract global features while
not requiring labeled data. To extract the localized features, the convolutional layers, where learnable weights are
shared among all locations in previous layers, are incorporated into AE contributing to the implementation of CAE.
As shown in Fig. 5, the encoder component of CAE is responsible for transforming the original informative trajectory
images into low-dimensional feature vectors. The decoder layers are trained to eﬀectively and robustly reconstruct
the informative trajectory images from the learned features. The detailed architecture of our CAE-based unsupervised
learning method will be described next.
4.2.1. Network Architecture
The architecture of our CAE neural network is visually illustrated in Fig. 6. The proposed CAE-based learning
method mainly consists of fully-connected layers, encoder and decoder components. The input of CAE is the infor-
mative trajectory image transformed from one speciﬁc vessel trajectory. The encoder component mainly consists of
4 convolutional layers and 4 max-pooling layers followed by one fully-connected layer as the last layer. The feature
map in each convolutional layer is generated by performing convolution between the input (or feature map from the
previous layer) and the learnable ﬁlter, and max-pooling operation. In particular, the sizes and numbers of ﬁlters in
these convolutional layers are set to 9×9, 7×7, 5×5, 3×3, and 16, 16, 8, 8, respectively. The 2×2 max-pooling layer
is introduced to calculate the maximum value of every 2 × 2 region in each feature map. Therefore, the size of feature
map in current layer will reduce by a half size of previous layer only after max-pooling operation. The convolved
features are activated through the widely-used ReLU function (⋅). The main purpose of encoder component is to
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
generate meaningful local feature maps of size 푊
16 × 퐻
16 ×8. To learn the low-dimensional representations of raw vessel
trajectories, the fully-connected neural networks, which match the size of ﬁnal feature map, are adopted to generate
the one-dimensional feature vector 푌of length 퐿in this work1. For the sake of simplicity, we generally calculate the
feature map in the next layer through the following equation
푥푙
푘= 
(푓푙
푘⊙푥푙−1
푘
+ 푏푙
푘
) ,
(10)
with 1 ≤푙≤4 and 푥0 = . Here, ⊙denotes the convolutional operator, 푓푙
푘is the convolutional ﬁlter, 푥푙−1
푘
denotes the
feature map for the 푘-th ﬁlter within the (푙−1)-th layer, and 푏푙
푘is the bias term. The vectorial feature map 푋of size
푊퐻
32 ×1 can be obtained by ﬂattening the feature map tensor of size 푊
16 × 퐻
16 ×8, i.e., 푋= Flatten (푥4
푘
). Therefore, the
ﬁnal one-dimensional feature vector 푌, extracted from the informative trajectory image , can be obtained as follows
푌= () = 푋+ ,
(11)
where (⋅) can be regarded as the feature extraction operator, and , respectively, denote the weight matrix and
bias vector in fully-connected neural networks. Note that the compressed representation 푌commonly includes more
useful properties than the original trajectory image . It is thus feasible to perform trajectory similarity computation
only using this one-dimensional feature representation.
In the decoder component, we have the same number of layers and implement the inverse operations (i.e., unpooling
and deconvolutional). It is thus able to yield an output (i.e., reconstructed version) with the same size of the input in
the ﬁrst layer of the encoder component. To reconstruct the input data , the one-dimensional feature vector 푌should
be ﬁrstly transformed to the vectorial feature map ̂푋through fully-connected neural networks, i.e.,
̂푋= ̂푌+ ̂,
(12)
with ̂and ̂representing the weight matrix and bias vector, respectively. By reshaping the vectorial data ̂푋of size
푊퐻
32 × 1, we can obtain the feature map tensor ̂푥1
푘of size 푊
16 × 퐻
16 × 8, i.e., ̂푥1
푘= Reshape ( ̂푋, [푊∕16, 퐻∕16, 8]) with
Reshape (⋅) being a reshaping operation. The feature map in the 푙-th deconvolutional layer is deﬁned as
̂푥푙
푘= 
( ̂푓푙
푘⊙̂푥푙−1
푘
+ ̂푏푙
푘
) ,
(13)
where (⋅) is the ReLU activation function, ̂푓푙
푘is the deconvolutional ﬁlter, and ̂푏푙
푘is the bias term in deconvolutional
layer. Finally, the reconstruction of input ̂can thus be generated by linearly combining these estimated feature maps,
i.e, ̂= ∑
푘̂푥푙
푘with 푙= 4 in the decoder component. Meanwhile, the 2 × 2 unpooling layer is adopted to restore the
location information unsampled in pooling layers, shown in Fig. 6.
4.2.2. Hybrid Loss Function
The proposed CAE-based neural network is inevitably trained using an optimization process which requires a loss
function to compute the model error. Mean squared error has become the most widely-used loss function in the ﬁelds
of computer vision and data mining. However, this 퐿2-norm loss function is essentially sensitive to random outliers.
In addition, the reconstructed results ̂easily suﬀer from blurred details leading to unstable feature learning from
informative trajectory images. To overcome this limitation, we propose to adopt 퐿1-norm loss function instead of 퐿2-
norm version to minimize the sum of the absolute diﬀerences between original and reconstructed trajectory images.
Let 푚and ̂푚, respectively, denote the 푚-th informative trajectory image and its reconstructed version. In this work,
the deﬁnition of 퐿1-norm loss function is then given by
1
(
X, ̂X
)
= 1
푀
푀
∑
푚=1
‖‖‖푚−̂푚‖‖‖1 ,
(14)
where ‖⋅‖1 denotes the 퐿1-norm, X = {1, 2, ⋯, 푀}, and 푀is the total number of informative trajectory images
projected from the raw vessel trajectories.
To further improve the feature learning ability of our CAE network, we introduce the perceptually-sensitive loss
function, i.e., structural similarity (SSIM), to complement 1 in Eq. (14). By taking into consideration the luminance,
1We will detailedly discuss how to optimally select the length 퐿in Section 5.3.3.
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
contrast and structure terms, SSIM is sensitive to structural information and texture, which shows good agreement
with human observers. It enables the CAE model to learn more details from informative trajectory images, resulting
in more robust trajectory similarity computation. The SSIM between 푚and ̂푚is deﬁned as follows
SSIM (푚, ̂푚
) =
2휇푚휇̂푚+ 푐1
휇2
푚+ 휇2
̂푚+ 푐1
⋅
2휎푚̂푚+ 푐2
휎2
푚+ 휎2
̂푚+ 푐2
,
(15)
with 휇◦, 휎◦, and 휎◦,◦denoting the mean, standard deviation, and cross correlation, respectively. Both positive constants
푐1 and 푐2 are used to guarantee numerical stability of the division. Please refer to (Wang et al., 2004) for more details
on SSIM. The SSIM-based loss function is thus given by
2
(
X, ̂X
)
= 1 −1
푀
푀
∑
푚=1
SSIM (푚, ̂푚
) ,
(16)
Therefore, the hybrid loss function adopted in this work is formulated as follows
= 휆11 + 휆22,
(17)
where 휆1 and 휆2 are weighting parameters. These two parameters play important roles in CAE training related to
trajectory similarity computation. We empirically set the weighting parameters to 휆1 = 0.15 and 휆2 = 0.85 which can
guarantee robust learning performance in our experiments.
During the training procedure of our CAE, the back-propagation algorithm adjusts the weights and bias in the
direction of the negative gradient of the hybrid loss function. Its purpose is to minimize the diﬀerence between the
input data and its reconstructed version. Once the CAE neural network is trained well, only the encoder component
will be deployed to provide the low-dimensional feature vectors in this work. These learned features are suﬃcient
to assist in measuring the similarities between diﬀerent vessel trajectories. It is worth noting that the other decoder
component is only adopted to evaluate the reliability of CAE-based low-dimensional representation of informative
trajectory images. Experimental results have shown that our unsupervised learning method could oﬀer considerable
advantages in terms of its practicality, robustness, and ﬂexibility.
4.3. Extension to Vessel Trajectory Clustering
As discussed above, original vessel trajectories with massive timestamped points can be eﬀectively represented
by feature vectors with few elements. It means that the signiﬁcant geometrical structures in original trajectories can
be accurately reconstructed using the low-dimensional feature vectors. The similarities between diﬀerent vessel tra-
jectories are equivalent to eﬃciently computing the distances between the corresponding feature vectors, which are
yielded through our CAE-based unsupervised learning method. Once the similarities or distances are obtained with
low computational cost, it will be accordingly fast to perform clustering of vessel trajectories. The clustering perfor-
mance is essentially depended upon the computation of trajectory similarity. The similarity computation results can
thus be evaluated through the trajectory clustering results.
Let denote a distance matrix storing the distance between any two trajectories. In particular, the distance ,
inversely proportional to similarity, between the 푖- and 푗-th trajectories is deﬁned as follows
푖,푗= 
((푖
) , (푗
)) ←(푇푖, 푇푗
) ,
(18)
with 푖≠푗. Here, the informative trajectory image 푖is projected from the 푖-th vessel trajectory 푇푖. It is easy to
obtain 푖,푗= 0 if and only if 푖= 푗in theory. In our experiments, we tend to adopt the simple Euclidean distance,
i.e., 
((푖
) , (푗
)) =
√∑퐿
푙=1(ℎ푙
푖−ℎ푙
푗)2 with (푖
) = {ℎ1
푖, ℎ2
푖, ⋯, ℎ퐿
푖}, (푗
) = {ℎ1
푗, ℎ2
푗, ⋯, ℎ퐿
푗}, and 퐿
denoting the length of feature vector (◦).
Once the distance matrix is obtained, several clustering algorithms (Fahad et al., 2014) can be adopted to
classify each vessel trajectory into a speciﬁc group. Without loss of generality, we propose to directly select the
widely-used hierarchical clustering algorithm (HCA) to perform vessel trajectory clustering in this work. Please refer
to (Fan, 2019) for more details on HCA. If the similarity (i.e., distance) computing results are accurate and reliable, it
becomes tractable to accurately cluster the vessel trajectories in maritime applications. Note that clustering operation
could produce results that are more intuitive compared with similarity computing. Therefore, the trajectory clustering
performance can contribute to qualitatively evaluating the eﬀectiveness of trajectory similarity computation.
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Table 1
The statistical and geometrical information related to 3 diﬀerent experimental water areas of rectangle, visually illustrated
in Figs. 11-13. The boundary points are in the form of geographical coordinates.
Water Areas
Time Span
Number of
Trajectories
Update
Rate
Boundary
Points
Longitude(◦)
Latitude(◦)
Caofeidian Port
1/1/2018-30/1/2018
1391
2-30s
Left Top
118.291206
38.772082
Right Bottom
118.558596
38.897793
Chengshan Cape
1/1/2018-30/1/2018
1047
2-30s
Left Top
122.761476
37.523868
Right Bottom
123.162561
37.715612
South Channel of
Yangtze River Estuary
1/8/2017-30/8/2017
1397
2-30s
Left Top
121.437999
31.262001
Right Bottom
121.975002
31.531999
5. Experimental Results and Analysis
In this section, we will conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the competing methods in terms of accuracy and
eﬃciency. All experiments will be implemented in PyTorch 1.0 on a workstation with GPU NVIDIA 2080ti, Intel
Core i9-9900KF CPU (3.6 GHz), 16GB RAM, and Windows 10 operating system.
5.1. Experimental Data Sets
To evaluate the proposed unsupervised learning method, our experiments will be performed on realistic vessel
trajectories with diﬀerent geometrical features. These original trajectories were collected from the terrestrial AIS base
stations in 3 diﬀerent water areas, i.e., the Caofeidian Port (CFD), the Chengshan Cape (CSC), and the South Channel
of Yangtze River Estuary (YRE). Table 1 detailedly depicts the statistical and geometrical information related to these
experimental water areas. In our experiments, the unique nine digit identiﬁcation number, i.e., Maritime Mobile
Service Identity (MMSI), was adopted to classify the vessel trajectories from collected AIS data. It is easy to ﬁnd
that AIS records often suﬀer from random outliers and missing data during signal acquisition and transmission. To
overcome these negative inﬂuences on similarity computation, the qualities of original trajectories have been promoted
directly using the existing methods studied in previous work (Liang et al., 2019b; Zhang et al., 2018c).
5.2. Comparisons with Other Competing Methods
In the literature (Su et al., 2020), trajectory similarity computation methods can be mainly divided into two cate-
gories. The ﬁrst category is involved to the shape-based method which considers the geometric features of trajectories.
Warping-based similarity is another category of similarity computation methods, which minimizes the cumulative dis-
tance between the matched timestamped points in trajectories. To compare and evaluate the performance of similarity
computation, our CAE will be compared with two representative shape- and warping-based methods, i.e., Fréchet
distance and DTW. Their deﬁnitions are brieﬂy described as follows
• Fréchet Distance: The Fréchet distance measures the spatial similarity between trajectories which takes into
consideration the location and ordering of timestamped points along the trajectories. It is easier to understand
through the leash-metaphor: a man traverses a path (i.e., trajectory) while walking his dog (traversing a separate
path) on a leash. The distance can thus be regarded as the length of the shortest leash so that both can traverse
their separate paths from start to ﬁnish (Buchin et al., 2016).
• Dynamic Time Warping (DTW): The DTW has become one of the most popular trajectory similarity mea-
sures since 1980s. It is essentially a recursive implementation and can be easily implemented in dynamic pro-
gramming. Its main objective is to search an optimal alignment between any two trajectories by warping the
timestamped points iteratively (De Vries and Van Someren, 2012).
To make the experiments fair, trajectory similarity computation results are yielded by these two competing methods
with the optimal parameters manually selected. We refer the interested reader to see the references for more details.
5.3. Parameter Settings
It is well known that the choice of parameters plays an important role in our CAE-based unsupervised learning
model. In this subsection, we will perform exhaustive experiments to manually determine the optimal parameters,
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 12 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Table 2
The inﬂuences of batch size and spatial interval Δ (or grid size) on CAE-based unsupervised learning. The loss function
in Eq. (17) is adopted to assist in manually selecting the optimal interval Δ (or grid size) in this work.
Batch Size
Spatial Interval (Grid Size)
0.012◦(50 × 37)
0.009◦(66 × 50)
0.006◦(100 × 75)
0.003◦(200 × 150)
100
0.0156
0.0123
0.0154
0.0124
200
0.0150
0.0103
0.0168
0.0127
400
0.0199
0.0139
0.0157
0.0125
600
0.0222
0.0128
0.0139
0.0126
Fig. 7: The visual comparisons of informative trajectory images for diﬀerent spatial intervals Δ (i.e., grid sizes). From left
to right: the original and reconstructed trajectory images, related to 5 diﬀerent vessel trajectories (i.e., 푇1, 푇2, ⋯, 푇5), for
(a) 0.012◦(50 × 37), (b) 0.009◦(66 × 50), (c) 0.006◦(100 × 75), and (d) 0.003◦(200 × 150), respectively.
i.e., grid size, learning rate, and dimension of feature vector. Without loss of generality, these experiments will be
implemented based on the AIS-based vessel trajectories collected from YRE.
5.3.1. Grid Size for Trajectory Image Generation
The ﬁrst step of our proposed framework corresponds to the image representations of vessel trajectories. In our
numerical experiments, it should ﬁrst divide the water areas (i.e., CFD, CSC and YRE) into a ﬁnite number of grids.
The informative trajectory images will then be obtained by projecting the timestamped points in original vessel tra-
jectories into the grids. To generate high-quality trajectory images, it is necessary to optimally select the grid size. If
the grid size is large, the resolution of trajectory image will become higher, but easily leading to disconnected features
which correspond to the adjacent timestamped points in raw trajectories. The computational cost in CAE training will
also be extremely increased due to the high-resolution trajectory image. In contrast, the small grid size will yield low-
resolution trajectory image, easily resulting in loss of small-scale geometrical features in raw trajectories. The stability
and accuracy of similarity computation will be degraded accordingly. To enhance the robustness of similarity measure,
the cubic spline interpolation method has been introduced to rearrange the raw AIS data with the time interval being
5s between any two adjacent points 2.
As shown in Fig. 4, the grid size is essentially related to the spatial interval when dividing the water areas into a
2Experimental results illustrate that the cubic spline interpolation is able to guarantee accurate and robust computation of similarities between
diﬀerent vessel trajectories in diﬀerent water areas.
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 13 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Fig. 8: The inﬂuences of learning rates (e.g., LR = 0.0005, 0.0010, 0.0050, 0.0060 and 0.0070) on loss during CAE
unsupervised training.
ﬁnite number of grids. The inﬂuences of batch size and spatial interval Δ (or grid size) on CAE-based unsupervised
learning are summarized in Table 2. It can be found that our CAE model can achieve the lowest loss value if batch size
= 200 and Δ = 0.009◦. We further visually compare the informative trajectory images for diﬀerent spatial intervals
(i.e., grid sizes) with the ﬁxed batch size of 200. The original trajectory images and their reconstructed versions3 are
illustrated in Fig. 7. The original and reconstructed images have similar geometrical structures for diﬀerent spatial
intervals or grid sizes. It seems that our CAE model performs well in low-dimensional representations of original
vessel trajectories and high-quality reconstruction of informative trajectory images from the learned low-dimensional
features. Without loss of generality, we propose to directly select the batch size = 200 and Δ = 0.009◦(i.e., grid size
of 66 × 50) in our experiments on similarity computation. Experimental results have demonstrated the eﬀectiveness
and robustness of these manually-selected parameters.
5.3.2. Learning Rate for CAE Unsupervised Training
It is well known that tuning the learning rate (LR) or selecting an optimal LR in CAE is still a challenging problem.
Depending upon the value of LR, the accuracy of similarity computation can vary tremendously. Generally, a large
LR allows our unsupervised learning model to accelerate training process considerably, but easily causes instability.
In contrast, a smaller LR can allow our model to learn an optimal set of weights but at the cost of signiﬁcantly long
training time. Many eﬀorts have been focused on adaptive LR (Liang et al., 2019a), it is still diﬃcult to automatically
determine the optimal LR in maritime applications. In this work, we propose to manually try some LR values and select
the optimal one. Extensive experiments have been performed to investigate diﬀerent LR values on CAE unsupervised
training. As shown in Fig. 8, if the LR values are less than or equal to 0.001, it becomes easier to guarantee the robust
convergence of our CAE training. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that 0.001 is better to train our CAE-based unsupervised
learning model. The vessel trajectory similarity computation results under this parameter setting are consistently
promising in diﬀerent water areas.
5.3.3. Dimension of Feature Vectors for Low-Dimensional Representation
The optimal selection of the dimension of feature vectors also plays an important role in CAE-based trajectory
similarity computation. Theoretically, the larger dimension of feature vectors brings more accurate measure of trajec-
tory similarity, but leading to improved computational cost. In contrast, the lower dimension can signiﬁcantly reduce
computational time, but may be resulting in trajectory similarity degradation. Therefore, it is necessary to appropri-
ately determine the dimension of feature vectors in our CAE-based unsupervised learning method. In this work, we
3Note that original trajectory images are generated by directly projecting the original vessel trajectories with time interval of 5s into the discrete
water areas. In contrast, reconstructed trajectory images are obtained through the decoder network introduced in Section 4.2.
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 14 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Fig. 9: The inﬂuences of diﬀerent dimensions (e.g., 퐿= 3, 18, 33, 48 and 63) on reconstruction of informative trajectory
images from the low-dimensional feature vectors. From left to right: (a) original informative trajectory images, and their
reconstructed versions from (b) 3-, (c) 18-, (d) 33-, (e) 48, and (f) 63-dimensional features vectors, respectively.
Table 3
Comparisons of computational costs for diﬀerent methods (i.e., DTW, Fréchet, and CAE) under diﬀerent numbers of
vessel trajectories (i.e., 100, 200, 300, 400, and 500). 푁denotes the number of vessel trajectories randomly selected in
our experiments. 푅D∕C and 푅F∕C, respectively, represent the ratios of the exection time of DTW and Fréchet to that of
CAE for the same trajectory similarity measure task. To reduce the randomness, each similarity measure method ran 100
times to obtain the average results (i.e., mean ± std.).
푁
DTW
Fréchet
CAE
푅D∕C
푅F∕C
100
27.162 ± 2.635
21.483 ± 2.074
0.58 ± 0.02
46.822 ± 4.86
37.028 ± 3.78
200
109.13 ± 7.409
86.079 ± 5.907
1.18 ± 0.03
92.345 ± 6.91
72.816 ± 5.16
300
244.57 ± 13.13
193.09 ± 10.22
1.93 ± 0.08
126.81 ± 8.75
100.11 ± 6.69
400
427.32 ± 17.38
344.24 ± 15.72
2.76 ± 0.04
155.07 ± 6.36
124.93 ± 5.94
500
672.75 ± 22.06
534.99 ± 18.15
3.72 ± 0.04
181.00 ± 6.38
143.92 ± 4.87
mainly investigate the inﬂuences of diﬀerent dimensions (e.g., 퐿= 3, 18, 33, 48 and 63) on reconstruction of infor-
mative trajectory images from the low-dimensional feature vectors. The experimental results in Fig. 9 show that the
mentioned dimensions are capable of accurately reconstructing the vessel trajectories. It is thus suﬃcient to represent
the vessel trajectories (or informative trajectory images) using our CAE model with only 퐿= 3. In the following
numerical experiments, 퐿= 3 is directly selected as the dimension of feature vectors to shorten computational time
while guaranteeing high-quality similarity computation.
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 15 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
5.4. Experiments on Computational Eﬃciency
Both DTW and Fréchet are essentially limited by the bottleneck in high computational cost. Many extensions (Be-
gum et al., 2015; Gudmundsson et al., 2019) have been proposed to accelerate similarity computation. However, the
computational process is still extremely time consuming, especially for massive vessel trajectories in maritime data
mining. To evaluate the computational eﬃciency, we tend to calculate the execution times of similarity computation
on diﬀerent numbers of vessel trajectories. In particular, to achieve impartial experimental results, we randomly se-
lect 100-500 vessel trajectories with diﬀerent timestamped points. Each similarity computation experiment runs 100
times for each experimental scenario. The computational costs for DTW, Fréchet, and our CAE have been detailedly
summarized in Table 3. It can be found that the running time for both DTW and Fréchet increases signiﬁcantly with
the number of vessel trajectories becoming larger. In contrast, our CAE can tremendously reduce the computational
time even in the case of massive vessel trajectories. As the number of trajectories becomes larger, our superior com-
putational performance will be more obvious. The high computational costs will hinder the applications of both DTW
and Fréchet in maritime practice. Beneﬁting from the low-dimensional feature vectors, our CAE is capable of eﬃ-
ciently computing the similarities between diﬀerent vessel trajectories. This advantage will become more signiﬁcant
in the case of massive vessel trajectories, which is more common in maritime data mining. The eﬃcient similarity
computation is of fundamental importance to the fast detection of deviating and abnormal vessel behaviors in maritime
surveillance.
5.5. Experiments on Computational Accuracy
5.5.1. Assessment Criterion
To the best of our knowledge, there is no reliable assessment criterion to quantitatively evaluate the accuracy of
trajectory similarity computation thus far. To handle this shortcoming, we propose to select the trajectory clustering
results to indirectly evaluate the similarity. Note that the clustering results are highly dependent upon the similarity
computation. If we can accurately measure the trajectory similarities, the high-quality clustering results can be obtained
accordingly. The purpose of clustering is to divide the given objects into a number of groups such that similar objects
belong to the same group whereas the dissimilar objects are in diﬀerent groups. In this work, the vessel trajectories in
the same group (i.e., cluster) will have high similarities.
Motivated by previous study (Besse et al., 2016), we propose to jointly adopt the Between-Like (BC) and Within-
Like (WC) criteria to assess trajectory similarity. For a predeﬁned number of clusters, if we can generate accurate
similarity measure, the WC criterion should be as small as possible, and the BC criterion should be as large as possible.
In particular, the deﬁnitions of BC and WC are, respectively, given by
BC =
푍
∑
푧=1

(
(mean

) , 
(
mean
퐶푧
))
,
(19)
WC =
푍
∑
푧=1
1
|퐶푧|
∑
푇푖∈퐶푧

(

(
mean
퐶푧
)
, (푖
))
,
(20)
with informative trajectory images 푖, mean

, and mean
퐶푧
being generated from 푇푖, 푇mean

, and 푇mean
퐶푧
, respectively.
Here, 퐶푧is the 푧-th cluster, 푍is the total number of clusters, 푇mean
◦
represents the mean of vessel trajectories, and 
denotes the set of vessel trajectories considered in our experiments.
It is mathematically intractable to calculate the mean of vessel trajectories collected from or 퐶푧with 푧∈
{1, 2, ⋯, 푍}. In this work, we tend to select an exemplar 푇ex
◦to approximate 푇mean
◦
, i.e., 푇mean

←푇ex
and 푇mean
퐶푧
←
푇ex
퐶푧. Taking as an example, we can deﬁne 푇ex
as follows
푇ex
= min
푇푖
{
푀
∑
푗=1,푗≠푖

((푖
) , (푗
))
}
,
(21)
for 푖∈[1, 2, ⋯, 푀] with 푀being the total number of vessel trajectories in data set .
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 16 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Fig. 10: The Results of 퐴퐶Criterion Obtained from CAE, Fréchet, DTW with the Number of Clusters. From left to right:
The CFD, CST and EYR datasets were used to evaluate the quality of trajectory similarity computation, respectively.
Fig. 11: Visual comparisons of vessel trajectory clustering results for CFD data set. From left to right: clustering results
based on trajectory similarities generated by (a) DTW, (b) Fréchet, and (c) CAE, respectively.
Fig. 12: Visual comparisons of vessel trajectory clustering results for CSC data set. From left to right: clustering results
based on trajectory similarities generated by (a) DTW, (b) Fréchet, and (c) CAE, respectively.
If the criteria BC and WC are obtained, we then propose the following assessment criterion (AC) to quantitatively
evaluate the accuracy of trajectory similarity measure, i.e.,
AC =
WC
BC + WC ∈(0, 1) .
(22)
This criterion is essentially related to the trajectory similarity measure. If we can obtain accurate similarity mea-
sure, the high-quality clustering results can be accordingly generated leading to lower value of AC. In contrast, higher
value of AC indicates the inaccurate computation of similarities between diﬀerent vessel trajectories. From a theoret-
ical point of view, as the number of clusters increases, the value of AC will be decreased correspondingly. However,
the large number could bring the negative eﬀects on modeling ship traﬃc behavior, resulting in unreliable detection of
deviating or abnormal vessel behaviors. The obtained AC could enable the proper selection of the number of clusters.
Once the value of AC meets the accuracy requirement, it is better to choose the number of clusters as small as possible.
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 17 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Fig. 13: Visual comparisons of vessel trajectory clustering results for YRE data set. From left to right: clustering results
based on trajectory similarities generated by (a) DTW, (b) Fréchet, and (c) CAE, respectively.
Fig. 14: Visualizations of 6 diﬀerent clusters of vessel trajectories, obtained through the DTW-based trajectory similarities.
5.5.2. Comparisons of Similarity Computations
Clustering experiments are implemented on 3 diﬀerent water areas (i.e., CFD, CSC and YRE) to assess the trajec-
tory similarity computation results. As discussed beforehand, according to the experiment results, we manually select
the optimal parameters (i.e., batch size = 200, grid size = 66 × 50, LR = 0.006, and epoch = 3000) for CAE training.
The dimension of feature vectors, learned from the informative trajectory images, is set to be 3 in trajectory similarity
computation. In particular, the similarities between any two low-dimensional feature vectors are computed by Eu-
clidean distance operator. The ﬁnal clustering results are obtained using HCA according to the similarities computed
by DTW, Fréchet, and CAE, respectively.
In order to select a reasonable number of clusters and evaluate the eﬀect of clustering, the number of clusters are
ranges from 2 to 25 to get diﬀerent experiment results. Those results would be evaluated by AC criterion, creating the
line diagram shown as Fig. 10. As observed from Fig. 10 (a), when the number of clusters is around 4, our CAE-
based learning model could generate the satisfactory AC criterion which tends to be changed slightly as the number of
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 18 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Fig. 15: Visualizations of 6 diﬀerent clusters of vessel trajectories, obtained through the Fréchet-based trajectory similarities.
Fig. 16: Visualizations of 6 diﬀerent clusters of vessel trajectories, obtained through the CAE-based trajectory similarities.
clusters increases in CFD data set. In theory, the larger number of clusters is able to divide original vessel trajectories
into more partitions. It is beneﬁt for identifying more vessel moving patterns in maritime supervision. However, the
larger number could cause one cluster to be separated into diﬀerent clusters. For the sake of simplicity, we tend to
directly set the number of clusters to be 4 to cluster vessel trajectories. Analogous to the selection process in CFD data
set, we empirically determine the numbers of clusters as 5 and 6 for vessel trajectory clustering in CSC and YRE data
sets, respectively.
To further illustrate the eﬀectiveness of our proposed approach, we tend to show the visualization of vessel trajec-
tory clustering for comparison. The visual results of clustered vessel trajectories are presented in Figs. 11-13, which
verify the superiorities of our CAE network in enhancing trajectory clustering. Both CFD and CSC data sets are se-
lected because of the trajectory clusters easy to generate. In contrast, it is diﬃcult to cluster the vessel trajectories for
the complex maritime environments in YRE data set. It is clear to observe that trajectory clustering results, generated
by DTW- and Fréchet-based HCA methods, suﬀer from obvious clustering mistakes in Figs. 11 and 12. Owing to
the superior feature learning, our CAE-based method performs well in generating high-quality trajectory clustering
performance. The advantage of our method is further conﬁrmed by the more challenging clustering task in Fig. 13.
M. Liang et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 19 of 22

Vessel Trajectory Similarity Computation
Due to the complex navigation conditions in crossing waters, more erroneous clustering is signiﬁcantly generated by
both DTW- and Fréchet-based clustering methods. In contrast, the proposed method has the capacity of explicitly
clustering the complicated vessel trajectories. It is able to accurately distinguish the traﬃc patterns of moving ves-
sels in crossing waters and diﬀerent water channels. The local magniﬁcation views shown in Fig. 13 illustrate that
our method generates a more natural-looking clustering results compared with other competing methods. To further
demonstrate our superior performance, the obtained 6 diﬀerent clusters of vessel trajectories in Fig. 13 are respec-
tively visualized in Figs. 14-16. It can be found that our proposed method can signiﬁcantly improve the trajectory
clustering performance. Both DTW- and Fréchet-based HCA methods easily cause inaccurate clusters due to the un-
reliable trajectory similarities between diﬀerent trajectories. Beneﬁting from the accurate similarity measure by CAE,
our method is capable of guaranteeing robust and reliable trajectory clustering results. The high-quality trajectory
clustering results obtained play important roles in maritime applications, e.g., route planning, maritime supervision,
and abnormal behavior detection, etc.
6. Conclusions and Future Perspectives
We have proposed a CAE-based unsupervised learning method for computing similarities between diﬀerent vessel
trajectories. First, the original vessel trajectories were remapped into two-dimensional matrices (i.e., informative
trajectory images). Next, low-dimensional representations of the informative trajectory images were then obtained
using the CAE network. The similarities between diﬀerent vessel trajectories were then equivalent to calculating the
distances between the corresponding low-dimensional feature vectors. Experiments demonstrated that our proposed
method obviously outperformed other competing methods in terms of both eﬃciency and eﬀectiveness. The superior
trajectory clustering results could also be accordingly guaranteed for diﬀerent data sets.
It should be noted that there is still lack of standard benchmarks related to vessel trajectories, directly adopted to
quantitatively evaluate the accuracy of similarity computation. Although the indirect evaluation manner, i.e., trajec-
tory clustering performance, could be considered a feasible method in this work. Experiments on standard benchmarks
could theoretically bring more reliable and accurate results for diﬀerent vessel trajectory similarity computation meth-
ods. There is thus a signiﬁcant potential to design standard benchmarks for vessel trajectories (with labels). To further
enhance the accuracy of trajectory similarity computation, it not only considers the spatial information of timestamped
points, but also the course and speed of vessels. These dynamic characteristics are essentially related to the naviga-
tion behaviors of vessels. The combination of position, course and speed of vessels could hence promote the vessel
trajectory similarity computation in maritime applications.
