Does Invariant Risk Minimization Capture Invariance?
Pritish Kamath

Akilesh Tangella

Danica J. Sutherland

Nathan Srebro

Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Abstract
We show that the Invariant Risk Minimiza-
tion (IRM) formulation of Arjovsky et al.
(2019) can fail to capture “natural” invari-
ances, at least when used in its practical “lin-
ear” form, and even on very simple problems
which directly follow the motivating exam-
ples for IRM. This can lead to worse gen-
eralization on new environments, even when
compared to unconstrained ERM. The is-
sue stems from a signiﬁcant gap between the
linear variant (as in their concrete method
IRMv1) and the full non-linear IRM formula-
tion. Additionally, even when capturing the
“right” invariances, we show that it is possi-
ble for IRM to learn a sub-optimal predictor,
due to the loss function not being invariant
across environments.
The issues arise even
when measuring invariance on the population
distributions, but are exacerbated by the fact
that IRM is extremely fragile to sampling.
1
INTRODUCTION
Machine learning systems tend to seize on spurious
correlations present in the training data, and so when
presented with out-of-distribution inputs, they can fail
spectacularly. For instance, in the spirit of Beery et
al. (2018) and Arjovsky et al. (2019), consider a deep
neural network trained to classify images as contain-
ing a cow or a camel. Suppose that most pictures of
cows in the training set are taken in (green) grassy
pastures, and those of camels are mostly in (brown)
deserts. Then, the neural network is likely to strongly
use background color for its predictions – after all, it is
a very easy signal to use, and it barely hurts the loss.
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 2021, San Diego,
California, USA. PMLR: Volume 130. Copyright 2021 by
the author(s).
Such a network, however, will perform poorly at rec-
ognizing cows on a beach. How, then, can we design
a machine learning system to identify key features of
interest – face, shape, body color, etc., of animals –
and ignore spurious ones, like the background color?
Standard machine learning algorithms assume a train-
ing set independently sampled from a single distribu-
tion, and seek good performance only on new samples
from the same distribution. There has been much work
on models that can adapt to a new distribution given
a small number of labeled samples (see e.g. the survey
of Redko et al. 2020), or models that are robust to
nearby distributions (see e.g. the survey of Rahimian
and Mehrotra 2019). Ideally though, we would hope
for a model that can handle even large changes in dis-
tribution, without the need for labeled target samples.
In reality, our training data usually does not actu-
ally come from a single homogeneous source: we may
have collected it from diﬀerent users, on diﬀerent con-
tinents, in diﬀerent years. We thus may be able to tell
which correlations are stable across environments (and
hence are more likely to be the “true” correlations we
seek), and which behave diﬀerently in diﬀerent envi-
ronments (and are more likely to be spurious).
One approach, then, is to attempt to learn an invari-
ant predictor (e.g. Peters et al. 2015; Heinze-Deml et
al. 2018; Rojas-Carulla et al. 2018).
We might, for
instance, assume that for the causally relevant sub-
set S of the input variables X, the conditional distri-
bution {Y |XS} is invariant across data sampled from
diﬀerent environments. This usually requires assum-
ing a meaningful causal graph relating the observed
variables. When classifying cows vs. camels based on
image pixels, such assumptions are not likely to hold
on the input data, though they could potentially apply
to the latent variables underlying these images.
The Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) framework of
Arjovsky et al. (2019) tries to ﬁnd a data representa-
tion ϕ which discards the spurious correlations, leaving
only the “real” signal, by enforcing that the predic-
tor w acting on that representation is simultaneously
arXiv:2101.01134v2  [stat.ML]  26 Feb 2021

Does Invariant Risk Minimization Capture Invariance?
optimal in each environment given ϕ. For instance,
in the cows-vs-camels problem, ϕ might remove the
background color. Since this gives a challenging bi-
level optimization problem, Arjovsky et al. propose a
relaxed version, IRMv1, which assumes w is a linear
predictor.
(We will overview the framework in Sec-
tion 2.) For a thorough overview of how this approach
ﬁts into the literature on out-of-domain generalization,
see the discussion by Arjovsky et al. and in particular
Appendix A of Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz (2021). Sub-
sequent work has provided new approaches for train-
ing in the IRM paradigm (e.g. Ahuja, Shanmugam, et
al. 2020; Teney et al. 2020) and applications in do-
mains such as interpretable language processing mod-
els (Chang et al. 2020).
Despite much initial promise, however, many key ques-
tions remain about the IRM framework: how well does
IRMv1 approximate the exact version of the framework
in general settings?
Do invariant predictors always
generalize well on unseen environments? When does
a set of training environments allow us to ﬁnd rep-
resentations invariant across a broader set of target
environments? How does the framework and/or the
algorithm behave on ﬁnite samples?
Our Contributions
We advance the understanding
of several core questions about the IRM framework.
In Section 3, we study a simple setting of environments
over X
= {0, 1}2, abstracting the Colored-MNIST
problem studied by Arjovsky et al. (2019). We show
that sometimes IRM with linear w can provably fail
to ﬁnd a “truly” invariant predictor, even when solved
with respect to the population loss, and even if we
provide inﬁnitely many training environments.
In
fact, it ﬁnds a predictor that is even worse on out-
of-distribution environments than unrestricted ERM.
This issue persists in the IRMv1 implementation.
In Section 4, we note the population loss of even
“truly” invariant predictors need not be invariant. We
give a simple setting where IRM, which minimizes loss
over training environments, prefers an invariant pre-
dictor with worse out-of-distribution generalization.
In Section 5, we study when it is possible to identify
invariant predictors for a broad class of environments
on the basis of a small range of training environments.
Although this is generally impossible, we show condi-
tions on the environments under which it is possible.
Finally, in Section 6, we point out issues that arise
when using the IRM paradigm over the distributions
of empirical samples rather than the population dis-
tributions. Here, even invariant predictors (over the
population distributions) might not be invariant when
considered over the distribution of empirical samples.
2
INVARIANT RISK
MINIMIZATION
We now describe the IRM paradigm of Arjovsky et al.
(2019). We have a set of environments E, where each
environment e ∈E corresponds to a distribution De
over X × Y, with X being the space of inputs and
Y that of outputs.
Our goal is to ﬁnd a predictor
f : X →bY; we measure the quality of a prediction
with a loss function ℓ: bY × Y →R≥0, and the quality
of a predictor by its population loss on environment
e ∈E, given by Le(f) := E(x,y)∼De ℓ(f(x), y). In this
paper, we mainly focus on the following special case.
Setting A. Y ⊆R, bY = R, and ℓis either the square
loss ℓsq(by, y) := 1
2(by −y)2, or, when Y = {−1, 1} (cor-
responding to binary classiﬁcation), the logistic loss
ℓlog(by, y) := log(1 + exp(−byy)).
Given access to samples from some training environ-
ments Etr ⊆E, our aim to learn a predictor f that
minimizes the “out-of-distribution” loss over all envi-
ronments in E, namely
LE(f) := sup
e∈E
Le(f).
(OOD-Gen)
2.1
Notions of Invariance
The IRM paradigm attempts to solve this problem by
learning an invariant representation ϕ : X →Z. For
instance, ϕ might “throw away” the spurious back-
ground color in the cows-vs.-camels example, if e1 ∈E
is images from Ireland (where most cow images have
grassy backgrounds), and e2 ∈E is from India (with
many more images of cows on city streets). The formal
deﬁnition of invariant is as follows.
Deﬁnition 1 (Deﬁnition 3 of Arjovsky et al. 2019).
A representation1 ϕ : X →Z is invariant over a set of
environments E if there exists a w : Z →bY such that
w is simultaneously optimal on ϕ for all environments
e ∈E, that is, w ∈argminw:Z→b
Y Le(w ◦ϕ).
This deﬁnition is motivated by the following observa-
tion of Arjovsky et al. (2019), which corresponds more
closely to an intuitive deﬁnition of invariance.
Observation 2. Under Setting A, a representation
ϕ : X →Z is invariant over E if and only if for all
e1, e2 ∈E, it holds that
EDe1[Y | ϕ(X) = z] = EDe2[Y | ϕ(X) = z]
for all z ∈Ze1
ϕ ∩Ze2
ϕ , where Ze
ϕ are the representations
from De, Ze
ϕ := {ϕ(X) | (X, Y ) ∈Supp(De)}.
1We always assume ϕ and w are measurable. For further
subtleties with Deﬁnitions 1 and 3, see Appendix A.1.

Pritish Kamath, Akilesh Tangella, Danica J. Sutherland, Nathan Srebro
We give a proof in Appendix A.2 for completeness.
Crucially, Deﬁnition 1 requires that ϕ and w are un-
restricted in the space of all (measurable) functions.
However, we wish to learn ϕ and w with access to
only (ﬁnite) training sets Se sampled from De, for only
a small subset of training environments Etr ⊆E. For
this to be feasible, it is natural to add a restriction that
ϕ ∈Φ and w ∈W, for suitable classes Φ of functions
mapping X →Z and W of functions mapping Z →bY.
Any choice of function classes (Φ, W) deﬁnes a class of
“invariant” predictors for a set of environments E.
Deﬁnition 3. For any Φ, W and loss function ℓ, the
set of invariant predictors on E, Iℓ
Φ,W(E), is the set of
all predictors f : X →bY such that ∃(w, ϕ) ∈W × Φ
satisfying the following:
▶f = w ◦ϕ, and
▶for all e ∈E, w ∈argminw∈W Le(w ◦ϕ).
For ease of notation, we will keep the loss function ℓ
implicit. When Φ is the space of all functions X →Z,
we denote IΦ,W(E) as simply IW(E). Moreover, when
W is the space of all functions Z →bY, we denote
IW(E) as I(E), leaving the choice of Z implicit.2
Because exact optimization over W is in general diﬃ-
cult, it is useful to consider some special cases. A natu-
ral option is linear invariant predictors, where Z = Rd
and W = Wd
lin is the space of all linear functions on Rd.
Arjovsky et al. (2019) argued that linear predictors
in fact provide no additional representation advantage
over scalar invariant predictors, the linear predictors
for d = 1, W = S := W1
lin. In our notation, this trans-
lates to the following lemma, proved in Appendix A.2.
Lemma 4. Under Setting A, for all E and d ≥1,
I(E) ⊆IS(E) = IWd
lin(E).
2.2
Algorithms
Armed with a notion of invariance, we still need a way
to pick an invariant predictor based on training envi-
ronments Etr ⊆E. Arjovsky et al. (2019) proposed the
Invariant Risk Minimization objective given by
min
ϕ:X→Z
w:Z→b
Y
X
e∈Etr
Le(w ◦ϕ)
s.t. ∀e ∈Etr, w ∈argminw:Z→b
Y Le(w ◦ϕ),
which in our notation is equivalent to
min
f∈I(Etr)
X
e∈Etr
Le(f).
(IRM)
2In deﬁning I(E), the choice of Z does not matter, as
long as Z is large enough compared to X; for instance,
Z = X is always a valid choice.
We can analogously deﬁne IRMW to choose a predictor
f ∈IW(Etr), and IRMΦ,W from f ∈IΦ,W(Etr).
Characterizing IW(Etr) is diﬃcult in general; fortu-
nately IWd
lin(E) = IS(E) aﬀords a simple character-
ization.
Any predictor f ∈IS(Etr) can be written
as f(x) = w∗ϕ∗(x) for a scalar w∗.
Without loss
of generality, we can simply absorb the scalar w∗
into ϕ := w∗ϕ∗, so that f = 1 · ϕ.
In Setting A,
where the loss function is convex and diﬀerentiable,
f = 1 · ϕ ∈IS(Etr) = IWd
lin(Etr) if and only if
for all e ∈Etr,
∇w|w=1Le(w · ϕ) = 0.
(∇w)
Yet, IRMS remains a bi-level optimization problem.
For practical purposes, Arjovsky et al. (2019) proposed
to soften this hard constraint, giving the algorithm
IRMv1 to approximate IRMS:
min
ϕ:X→R
X
e∈Etr
Le(ϕ)+λ
∇w|w=1Le(w · ϕ)
2 . (IRMv1)
A natural baseline is the ERM algorithm, which simply
minimizes the loss over training environments:
min
f:X→b
Y
X
e∈Etr
Le(f).
(ERM)
While we referred to IRM, IRMv1 and ERM as “algo-
rithms” above, there still remain two key details that
make these impractical as stated: (i) the loss mini-
mized refers to the population loss, to which we do not
have direct access, and (ii) we are assuming that ϕ
is unrestricted in the space of all functions. Arjovsky
et al. (2019) attempt to remedy these issues in IRMv1
by (i) replacing the population loss by the correspond-
ing empirical loss measured over training sets, and (ii)
by optimizing ϕ over a suﬃciently expressive param-
eterized model, such as a deep neural network, using
gradient-based local search methods.
Nevertheless, as we discuss shortly, IRMS does not cap-
ture IRM even when operating on the population loss
with unrestricted ϕ. Unless otherwise stated, we al-
ways consider IRM, IRMS, IRMv1 and ERM as operat-
ing over population losses.
2.3
Related Work
Rosenfeld et al. (2021) demonstrate an example where
there exists a near-optimal solution to the IRMv1 ob-
jective, that nearly matches performance of IRM on
training environments, but does no better than ERM
on environments that are “far” away from the train-
ing distributions. This example relies on environments
which barely overlap, allowing the representation to
simply “memorize” the training environments. Indeed,
Ahuja, Wang, et al. (2021) argue that IRM can have

Does Invariant Risk Minimization Capture Invariance?
an advantage over ERM only when the support of the
diﬀerent environment distributions have a signiﬁcant
overlap. Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz (2021) ﬁnd empir-
ically that with current models and data augmenta-
tion techniques, ERM achieves state-of-the-art practi-
cal performance in domain generalization. Nagarajan
et al. (2021), meanwhile, theoretically study the be-
havior of ERM for domain generalization.
Note that in prior work, IRMS/IRMv1 and IRM are
often referred to interchangeably. As we demonstrate,
IRMS can behave very diﬀerently from IRM, even on
simple examples that motivated the IRM approach.
3
COLORED-MNIST AND
TWO-BIT ENVIRONMENTS
To illustrate the utility of the IRM approach and IRMv1
in particular, Arjovsky et al. (2019) introduced the
Colored-MNIST problem, a synthetic task derived from
MNIST (LeCun et al. 2010). While MNIST images are
grayscale, in Colored-MNIST each image is colored ei-
ther red or green in a way that correlates strongly (but
spuriously) with the class label. Here ERM learns to
exploit the color, and fails at test time when the di-
rection of correlation with the color is reversed.
To understand the behavior of IRMS and IRMv1 on
Colored-MNIST, we study an abstract version based
on two bits of input, where Y is the binary label to
be predicted, X1 corresponds to the label of the hand-
written digit (0-4 or 5-9), and X2 corresponds to the
color (red or green). We represent each environment e
with two parameters αe, βe ∈[0, 1]. The distribution
De is deﬁned as
Y
←Rad(0.5),
X1 ←Y · Rad(αe),
(Two-Bit-Envs)
X2 ←Y · Rad(βe),
where Rad(δ) is a random variable taking value −1
with probability δ and +1 with probability 1 −δ. For
convenience, we denote an environment e as (αe, βe).
Following the experiments with Colored-MNIST as
done by Arjovsky et al. (2019), we consider a set of
environments Eα := {(α, βe) : 0 < βe < 1}. It can be
shown that there only two predictors in I(Eα), one be-
ing the trivial 0-predictor, and another that depends
only on X1 (see proof of Proposition 5 for details).
Motivating example of Arjovsky et al. (2019)
Consider E = E0.25 and Etr = {(0.25, 0.1), (0.25, 0.2)}.
Focusing on the case of ℓsq, (ERM) on Etr learns the
predictor fERM that is (approximately) given by
fERM
X2 = 1
X2 = −1
X1 = 1
0.8889
−0.3077
X1 = −1
0.3077
−0.8889
;
the prediction clearly depends on X2 as well as X1. On
each environment in Etr, the signal from X2 is stronger
than that from X1, and so the binary predictor here
can be summarized as sign(fERM(X)) = sign(X2). On
the other hand, (IRM) chooses the predictor fIRM
fIRM
X2 = 1
X2 = −1
X1 = 1
0.5
0.5
X1 = −1
−0.5
−0.5
,
whose binary behavior is sign(fIRM(X)) = sign(X1).
On e ∈Etr, fERM achieves a lower loss than fIRM, since
it is using the more powerful signal X2. But, if we
evaluate the ability of these predictors to generalize
far out of distribution to a case where the (spurious)
correlation of X2 has ﬂipped entirely, e = (0.25, 0.9),
fERM will give the wrong (binary) prediction 90% of
the time, and get square loss Le(fERM) = 0.985. This
is far worse than fIRM, which at Le(fIRM) = 0.375 has
not suﬀered at all compared to Etr. It is even worse
than the trivial 0-predictor, Le(f0) = 0.5.
It turns out that IRMS also learns the predictor fIRM
here, demonstrating the utility of this relaxation of
IRM. This raises a natural question:
Does IRMS always learn the same predictor as IRM?
Arjovsky et al. (2019, Section 4.1) considered a special-
ized linear family of environments, where they proved
that indeed IRMS learns an invariant predictor, as
learned by IRM, for any Etr with a suﬃcient number of
environments in “general position.”3 (See also Rosen-
feld et al. 2021, Section 5.) It was left to future work
whether IRMS learns invariant predictors in the sense
of IRM more generally as well.
A failure mode of IRMS and IRMv1
We show
that in fact for a simple set of two-bit environments,
IRMS ﬁnds a predictor worse than that learned by IRM,
and even worse than the one learned by ERM.
This occurs, e.g., for E = E0.1 with training envi-
ronments Etr = {e1 = (0.1, 0.2), e2 = (0.1, 0.25)}. The
learned predictors are (approximately) as follows.
fERM
X2 = 1
X2 = −1
X1 = 1
0.9375
0.4464
X1 = −1
−0.4464
−0.9375
3The problem (Two-Bit-Envs) does not ﬁt the setting of
their Theorem 9, because ﬂipping signs cannot be phrased
as independent additive noise.

Pritish Kamath, Akilesh Tangella, Danica J. Sutherland, Nathan Srebro
fIRM
X2 = 1
X2 = −1
X1 = 1
0.8
0.8
X1 = −1
−0.8
−0.8
fIRMS
X2 = 1
X2 = −1
X1 = 1
0.9557
0.2943
X1 = −1
−0.2943
−0.9557
X1 is the stronger signal for Y in this Etr, and all of
these predictors make the same binary predictions, but
with diﬀering amounts of conﬁdence. Extrapolating to
the same kind of test environment where the correla-
tion of X2 has ﬂipped, etest = (0.1, 0.9), we observe
the following (approximate) losses:
fERM
fIRM
fIRMS
f0
Le1(·)
0.15
0.18
0.15
0.5
Le2(·)
0.16
0.18
0.17
0.5
Letest(·)
0.28
0.18
0.38
0.5
.
The relation between IRM and ERM is as expected:
IRM trades slightly worse loss on the training envi-
ronments for much better extrapolation to the distant
environment etest = (0.1, 0.9) ∈E0.1. But while IRMS
also suﬀers slightly on the training environments, it is
even worse than ERM at extrapolation to etest! The
invariant feature X1 is more correlated with Y than
the non-invariant feature X2 in all of the training en-
vironments, and yet IRMS depends on X2 even more
seriously than ERM does.
Moreover, this is not a carefully-selected pathological
example that would go away with more training envi-
ronments. In fact, IRMS chooses the same predictor
even if we include any number of additional training
environments (0.1, βe) for βe < 0.28. Indeed, we show
that for these two-bit environments Eα, any two train-
ing environments are suﬃcient to recover the set of all
invariant predictors (proof in Appendix B).
Proposition 5. Under Setting A, for all α ∈(0, 1)
and Etr = {e1, e2} for any two distinct e1, e2 ∈Eα,
(i) IS(Etr) = IS(Eα)
and
(ii) I(Etr) = I(Eα).
Thus, the issue is not just that we have don’t have
enough training environments. Rather, as we will now
show, what IRMS determines to be an “invariant pre-
dictor” is broader than our intuitive sense – or IRM’s
notion – of what it means to be invariant.
Predictors in IS(Eα)
Recall a predictor f = 1 · ϕ
is in IS(Etr) if and only if ϕ satisﬁes Equation (∇w).
ϕ(1, 1) = −ϕ(−1, −1)
ϕ(1, −1) = −ϕ(−1, 1)
e = (0.1, 0.2)
e = (0.1, 0.25)
e = (0.1, 0.4)
e = (0.1, 0.9)
f0
fIRM
f1
f2
Figure 1: Odd solutions to (∇w for ℓsq) for four envi-
ronments in E0.1.
For ℓsq, this is same as having that for all e ∈Etr,
∂
∂w

E(X,Y )∼De
(w · ϕ(X) −Y )2
2

w=1
= 0 ,
or equivalently,
E(X,Y )∼De (ϕ(X) −Y ) · ϕ(X) = 0.
(∇w for ℓsq)
This is a system of quadratic polynomials in four vari-
ables

ϕ(x) : x ∈{−1, 1}2	
. For ease of visualization,
we focus on odd predictors f = 1 · ϕ ∈IS(Etr), namely
those satisfying f(x) = −f(−x) for all x ∈{−1, 1}2.
This choice is motivated by the symmetry present in
De and the loss ℓsq, along with the observation that
the predictors fERM, fIRM and fIRMS are all odd. This
allows us to focus on just two variables ϕ(1, 1) =
−ϕ(−1, −1) and ϕ(1, −1) = −ϕ(−1, 1).
Figure 1 shows the solutions of (∇w for ℓsq) among all
odd ϕ for four environments in E0.1. There are pre-
cisely four odd choices of ϕ ∈IS(E0.1) = IS(Etr). Two
are the expected solutions f0 and fIRM described above;
these are the only two predictors in I(Etr) = I(E0.1).
IS(E0.1), however, contains two more odd predictors,
f1 and f2, the former being fIRMS from above. fIRMS
achieves a smaller loss than the other solutions for
the two training environments (0.1, 0.2) and (0.1, 0.25),
but higher loss than fIRM for environments (0.1, 0.4) or
(0.1, 0.9). Figure 2 visualizes the losses of these four
odd predictors on environments with varying βe. Ap-
pendix B.1 has more details, including an analysis that
explains precisely when these counterexamples arise.4
Thus, IRMS can ﬁnd representations ϕ which are not
invariant in the sense of Deﬁnition 1. In particular,
for E0.1 with ℓsq, IRMS’s feasible set of solutions is
IS(Etr) ⊋I(Etr), or equivalently IS(E0.1) ⊋I(E0.1).
4This analysis was communicated to us by L´eon Bottou.

Does Invariant Risk Minimization Capture Invariance?
Le(f)
βe
fIRM
f1
f2
f0
Figure 2: Losses Le (for ℓ= ℓsq) of odd predictors in
IS(E0.1) for various e = (0.1, βe).
log2(λ)
ϕ(1, 1)
ϕ(1, −1)
ϕ(−1, 1)
ϕ(−1, −1)
Figure 3: IRMv1 on Etr = {(0.1, 0.2), (0.1, 0.25)}. The
horizontal axis is log2(λ), with −1 representing λ = 0.
As seen from Figure 2, fIRMS = f1 has the lowest loss
of those four solutions for βe ≤0.28. More training
environments will not help IRMS pick fIRM, unless the
average value of βe across environments e ∈Etr is be-
tween 0.29 and 0.71. If the average value of βe exceeds
0.72, IRMS switches to the other solution f2.
We know that IRMv1 becomes exactly ERM when its
regularization weight is λ = 0, and IRMS for λ = ∞.
Figure 3 shows5 the solution smoothly interpolating
between fERM and fIRMS, with the reliance on X2 in-
creasing as λ →∞.
ℓlog loss
A similar failure mode occurs for ℓlog on
E0.05 when training on Etr = {(0.05, 0.1), (0.05, 0.2)}.
We give more details in Appendix B.2.
3.1
Experiments with Colored-MNIST
We now conﬁrm that the failure mode studied above
can also arise in practical training of deep networks
based on IRMv1. Colored-MNIST corresponds to the
5The IRMv1 objective can be non-convex, even for ℓsq,
and typical optimization algorithms sometimes ﬁnd local
minima. We instead solved IRMv1 by explicitly enumerat-
ing the (odd) stationary points.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
test loss on (0.25,0.9)
ERM
IRMv1
(a) Etr = {(0.25, 0.1), (0.25, 0.2)}, etest = (0.25, 0.9)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
test loss on (0.1,0.9)
ERM
IRMv1
(b) Etr = {(0.1, 0.2), (0.1, 0.25)}, etest = (0.1, 0.9)
Figure 4: Performance on etest when training the given
algorithm on Etr, using square loss ℓsq, with a fully-
connected network. 100 repetitions are shown, using
diﬀerent random hyperparameters and training splits;
boxplots show sample quartiles.
Black dashed line
(left) shows expected loss of the optimal invariant pre-
dictor fIRM; red dashed line (right) shows expected loss
of the other predictor in I(Etr), the null predictor f0.
Shorter, colored vertical lines show the test set perfor-
mance of the predictor which minimizes the training
objective, (ERM) or (IRMv1) (with λ = 106).
two-bit environments above, where X1 is a (grayscale)
image from MNIST, and X2 is a color (red or green)
which is assigned to that image.6
Thus, a learning
algorithm which ﬁnds global minima of the IRMv1
population-level objective in a model capable of per-
fectly classifying MNIST digits would behave exactly
as described above. In practice, however, we optimize
empirical estimates of the risk and gradient penalty, in
a model class which may not contain an exactly per-
fect digit classiﬁer, with an algorithm which may not
ﬁnd the global optimum.
One signiﬁcant practical issue with IRMv1 is in hy-
perparameter tuning, since we wish to ﬁnd models
which generalize to environments quite diﬀerent from
Etr. Arjovsky et al. (2019) chose hyperparameters ar-
bitrarily for their ERM networks, and for IRMv1 by se-
lecting a network with randomly selected hyperparam-
eters which performed the best on the test set (specif-
ically, the model with the highest minimum accuracy
6In practice, we sample the image X1 ﬁrst and then ﬂip
Y with probability αe; this is equivalent.

Pritish Kamath, Akilesh Tangella, Danica J. Sutherland, Nathan Srebro
on Etr ∪{etest}). Since this signiﬁcantly advantages
IRMv1 over ERM, we instead consider the distribution
of performances with random hyperparameters from
the same proposal distribution as used by Arjovsky
et al. We also note which of these models minimized
the objective on Etr (using a ﬁxed, large λ to compare
the objective for IRMv1). Currently, there is no known
principled approach for choosing λ; as noted by Gul-
rajani and Lopez-Paz (2021), this is often critical to
the practical performance of IRM.
Arjovsky et al. (2019) use a fully-connected ReLU net-
work with one hidden layer, operating on the red and
green channels of a 14 × 14 image.
Running ERM
and IRMv1 on this architecture with ℓsq in the orig-
inal Colored-MNIST problem shows (Figure 4a) that
IRMv1 handily outperforms ERM in test loss, though
it does not quite achieve the performance of the best
possible fIRM, and model selection based on Etr would
choose a predictor notably worse on the test set than
the null predictor f0. Moving to the example failure
mode discussed above, this is no longer the case (Fig-
ure 4b): the two algorithms perform about the same in
test loss, with model selection on Etr selecting a model
with performance about the same as f0 for each algo-
rithm. Although the practical instantiation of IRMv1
clearly suﬀers here, it is not worse than ERM as we
would expect for the population-optimal solutions.
In this representation, X1 (digit) and X2 (color) are
quite “entangled.”
In Appendix C, we consider an
architecture which processes the grayscale image and
total color of the image separately, thus becoming a
little closer to the idealized setting (Two-Bit-Envs);
here the failure of IRMv1 compared to ERM becomes
more apparent.
We also explore many variations of
the experiment, including experiments with ℓlog.
Thus, IRMS’s surprising failure on the extremely sim-
ple problem (Two-Bit-Envs) is essentially reproduced
with practical optimization of neural networks on
Colored-MNIST.
4
CAN IRM FAIL TO CHOOSE THE
RIGHT PREDICTOR?
In the previous section, we saw an example where
IRMS was able to identify IS(E), since IS(E) = IS(Etr)
there, but chose a predictor in IS(E) with worse out-
of-distribution risk for environments “far from” Etr.
This happened because the loss Le(f) of predictors
f ∈IS(E) need not be the same (invariant) for all en-
vironments e ∈E, and we pick the “wrong” predictor
when optimizing P
e∈Etr Le(f) over f ∈IS(Etr).
Is the same possible for IRM, or does its implicit
premise that the optimal invariant predictor on Etr
will generalize well to E hold? IRM can of course fail
when I(Etr) ⊋I(E), when the training environments
are not diverse enough to identify the right invariances.
But what if we do have I(Etr) = I(E)?
The loss of an invariant predictor f ∈I(E) need not be
invariant for all e ∈E: consider e.g. varying amounts
of inherent additive noise in a regression setting. This
would still be acceptable as long as the best invariant
predictor with respect to the population loss is the
same for all environments e ∈E. Contrarily, we now
give a simple family of environments E, training envi-
ronments Etr ⊆E satisfying I(Etr) = I(E), and two
predictors f1, f2 ∈I(E) such that Le(f1) > Le(f2) for
all e ∈Etr, but LE(f1) < LE(f2). Hence IRM prefers f2
to f1 based on Etr, but f1 has better worst-case loss. It
is thus generally diﬃcult to handle out-of-distribution
prediction in environments with more than one invari-
ant predictor: the invariant predictor which is best on
training environments might still perform poorly on
unseen test environments, despite being invariant.
Consider environments E over X = {−1, 0, 1}3 and
Y = {−1, 1}, where each environment e is speciﬁed by
a single parameter θe ∈(−1/6, 1/3) as follows:
X1 ←





−1
w.p.
1
3
0
w.p.
1
3
+1
w.p.
1
3
, X2 ←





−1
w.p.
1
3 −θe
0
w.p.
1
3 + 2θe
+1
w.p.
1
3 −θe
,
EDe[Y |X1, X2] = 0.3(X1 + X2) + gθe(X1, X2) ,
where gθe(x1, x2) is given as
gθ(x1, x2)
x2 = −1
x2 = 0
x2 = +1
x1 = −1
θ(θ + 2
3)
−θ( 2
3 −2θ)
3θ2
x1 = 0
−θ( 2
3 −2θ)
0
θ( 2
3 −2θ)
x1 = +1
−3θ2
θ( 2
3 −2θ)
−θ(θ + 2
3)
.
While the speciﬁc form of gθ is a little involved, the
main thing to note is that
EDe[gθe(X1, X2) | X1] = 0 = EDe[gθe(X1, X2) | X2]
which means that EDe[Y |X1] = 0.3X1 as well as
EDe[Y |X2] = 0.3X2. Thus for ℓsq, I(E) contains the
predictors f1(x) = 0.3 x1 and f2(x) = 0.3 x2. In fact,
as shown in Appendix D, IRM will indeed pick among
these predictors in I(E) for almost all Etr containing
at least two distinct environments:
Proposition 6. In Setting A, for E as above, it holds
for Lebesgue-almost all Etr ⊆E with |Etr| ≥2 that
I(E) = I(Etr). Moreover, any f ∈I(E) depends on at
most one of x1 or x2.
Focusing on the case of ℓsq, the loss of the predictors

Does Invariant Risk Minimization Capture Invariance?
can be seen to be7, for any e ∈E,
Le(f1) = 0.47
and
Le(f2) = 0.47 + 0.09 · θe
Thus, if Etr only contains environments e correspond-
ing to θe < 0, we will have that Le(f2) < Le(f1) for all
e ∈Etr, and yet the invariant predictor that minimizes
supe∈E Le(·) is f1. See Figure 12 (Appendix D) for an
illustration of these loss as a function of θe.
IRM’s notion of invariance ensures EDe[Y | ϕ(X) =
z] is invariant across E, but allows the loss of the
corresponding predictor Le(f) to diﬀer across e ∈
E.
Here, in fact the full conditional distribution
{Y | ϕ(X) = z} is also invariant across E, but even
so, the loss varies. If we enforced a stronger notion of
invariance which requires the entire joint distribution
{(Y, ϕ(X))}(X,Y )∼De to be invariant across all e ∈E,
we would not have faced this issue, since Le would
then be invariant, and indeed would pick f1 in the ex-
ample above. Yet this joint invariance is clearly too
strict for some problems: it is impossible to achieve
if the marginal distribution of Y diﬀers across envi-
ronments, and it is easy to construct other E where
IRM allows the intuitively-correct predictor but joint
invariance allows only a trivial constant predictor.
Thus, IRM is not always guaranteed to achieve optimal
out-of-distribution loss, even when all the right invari-
ances are captured by the training environments. The
“right” notion of invariance really depends on what we
know about the set of all environments E.
5
WHEN DOES INVARIANCE
GENERALIZE?
In the examples of Sections 3 and 4, it held that
IRM or IRMS were able to identify predictors invari-
ant over all, even unseen, environments: speciﬁcally,
IW(E) = IW(Etr).
That this holds is an implicit
premise of the IRM framework.
Yet it is unclear in
general when invariances discovered on training envi-
ronments will generalize to unseen environments. We
now give some partial answers to this question.
For an arbitrary E, we of course cannot expect invari-
ances observed across Etr to generalize over E: simply
consider adding a single entirely “irrelevant” e to E.
To provide some structure, we consider parameterized
sets of environments E.
For simplicity, we focus on
ﬁnite X and Y, with Y ⊆R. Let ∆X×Y denote the
space of all probability distributions over X × Y, and
let Θ ⊆Rd. A map Π : Θ →∆X×Y naturally deﬁnes
a set of environments EΠ corresponding to the set of
distributions {Π(θ) : θ ∈Θ}. For example, the two-bit
7This calculation does not need the speciﬁc form of gθ.
environments Eα of Section 3 are parameterized by the
map Π : θ 7→e = (α, θ), for θ ∈Θ = (0, 1).
For Θtr ⊆Θ and Etr = {Π(θ) | θ ∈Θtr},
when does it hold that I(Etr) = I(EΠ)?
Note that I(EΠ) ⊆I(Etr) always holds, but for any
hope of I(Etr) ⊆I(EΠ), we must assume Etr contains
a “representative set” of environments from EΠ.
The most basic assumption to begin with is simply
that Π is continuous. This is insuﬃcient to guarantee
invariance, even for very large Θtr: the map might
simply “change directions” outside of Etr. We give a
simple example below (proof in Appendix E), where
even an uncountable number of environments in Etr
do not allow us to understand the full behavior of E.
Proposition 7. There exists a continuous map Π :
(0, 1) →∆X×Y such that for Θtr =
 0, 1
4

and Etr =
Π(Θtr), it holds that I(Etr) ̸= I(EΠ).
On the other hand, if Π is not only continuous but
also analytic, we can guarantee, under some condi-
tions, that invariances over Etr continue to hold over all
of EΠ. Let Π(x,y)(θ) := Pr(X,Y )∼Π(θ)[X = x, Y = y] for
each (x, y) ∈X ×Y. We say the map Π : Θ →∆X×Y is
analytic if, for each (x, y) ∈X × Y, Π(x,y) : Θ →[0, 1]
is analytic in θ.
Proposition 8. Let Θtr ⊆Θ ⊆Rd, where Θ is a con-
nected, open set. Suppose Π : Θ →∆X×Y is analytic,
X and Y are ﬁnite and Etr = Π(Θtr). Then, under
Setting A,
(i) For almost all Θtr with |Θtr| ≥2: I(Etr) = I(EΠ).
(ii) For all Θtr
with non-zero Lebesgue measure:
IS(Etr) = IS(EΠ).
The key step is that when Π is analytic, the condi-
tional expectations EΠ(θ)[Y | ϕ(X) = z] and the gra-
dient ∇w|w=1LΠ(θ)(w · ϕ) are analytic functions in θ;
the result is far stronger, however, for I (where the
set of representations is ﬁnite) than for IS, where our
analysis requires uncountably many training environ-
ments. A version of Proposition 8 holds even for inﬁ-
nite spaces X and Y ⊆R, under a technical deﬁnition
of analyticity of Π (details in Appendix E), although
in this case our result for I also requires Etr to have
positive measure.
Recall that the examples studied in Sections 3 and 4
indeed had analytic parameterizations, and hence
Proposition 8 implies that I(Etr) = I(E) holds for (al-
most) all Etr with at least two distinct environments.

Pritish Kamath, Akilesh Tangella, Danica J. Sutherland, Nathan Srebro
6
IRM WITH FINITE SAMPLES
Except for Section 3.1, we have so far only discussed
algorithms (IRM, IRMS, and IRMv1) deﬁned in terms
of the population losses of training environments. In
practice, however, we need to work with a ﬁnite num-
ber of samples from each training environment. If we
directly apply IRM or IRMS as stated in (IRM) to em-
pirical distributions, all correlations will have a small
amount of noise, and it is extremely likely that the set
of invariant predictors becomes empty.
On the other hand, IRMv1 for a ﬁxed λ could be ro-
bust to sampling.
We illustrate this in the two-bit
environments of Section 3. Consider training environ-
ments Etr = {(0.25, 0.1), (0.25, 0.2), (0.25, 0.3)}: both
IRM and IRMS are able to learn an invariant pre-
dictor.
However, when sampling ﬁnite datasets, we
only have that the empirical distribution of the two
environments will be close to – but not exactly the
same as – the true distribution; there may not be
any exactly-invariant predictors.
We illustrate this
by evaluating IRMS on a set of training environments
E′
tr = {(0.245, 0.105), (0.255, 0.195), (0.251, 0.302)}, as
a proxy for empirical distributions we see from ﬁnite
samples. IRMS learns the trivial 0 predictor f0; Fig-
ure 5 shows the behavior of IRMv1 for increasing λ.
For a ﬁxed empirical distribution, it is likely that as
λ →∞, IRMv1 approaches IRMS, and does not ﬁnd a
good invariant predictor. If we instead take n →∞for
a ﬁxed λ, though, we should approach the population
version of IRMv1, and hence taking λ →∞at an ap-
propriate rate as n →∞may approach the population
IRMS predictor. Ahuja, Wang, et al. (2021) recently
considered a variant of IRMS where the constraints
(∇w) deﬁning IS(Etr) need to hold ε-approximately.
When training on the objective with ﬁnite samples,
they bounds the sample complexity to get an out-
of-distribution loss close to that of the corresponding
population version of this ε-IRMS.
Given the discrepancy between IRMS and IRM as
pointed out in Section 3, however, it is important to
make IRM itself more robust to ﬁnite samples.
For
instance, one possible approach would be to relax the
requirement of w ∈argminw:Z→b
Y Le(w ◦ϕ) to
Le(w ◦ϕ) ≤
min
w:Z→b
Y
Le(w ◦ϕ) + ε
for a suitable ε > 0. How to practically implement a
version of this ε-IRM remains an open challenge.
7
DISCUSSION
The IRM framework of Arjovsky et al. (2019) proposes
a promising new paradigm of learning, which attempts
log2(λ)
f(1, 1)
f(1, −1)
f(−1, 1)
f(−1, −1)
Figure 5: IRMv1 algorithm on exact environments Etr
(solid lines), and a noisy set E′
tr (dashed lines; deﬁni-
tions in text). The horizontal axis is log2(λ), with −1
for λ = 0. Results are similar for small λ, until the
noisy set abruptly gives the 0-predictor.
to exploit information we usually ignore to ﬁnd mod-
els robust to even some quite dramatic changes in the
input distribution. We have helped shed light on the
applicability of this framework.
We now know that IRMS and IRMv1 can be surpris-
ingly diﬀerent from IRM, even on very simple envi-
ronments. This emphasizes the importance of ﬁnding
practical algorithms to approximate IRMW for some
nonlinear class of functions W.
We also know that even for IRM, choosing among in-
variant predictors can also be vital for out-of-domain
generalization, and there exist cases where these algo-
rithms choose the wrong one for out-of-distribution ro-
bustness. This holds even if we insist on a stronger no-
tion of invariance, namely that of the conditional dis-
tribution {Y | ϕ(X)}(X,Y )∼De. To truly handle worst-
case out-of-distribution generalization, a stronger no-
tion is needed: for example, it suﬃces to require in-
variance of the joint distribution {(Y, ϕ(X))}(X,Y )∼De,
but this seems overly stringent.
We also now know more about the possibility of gen-
eralizing invariances learned from Etr to a larger set
of environments E. With signiﬁcant structure on E,
it is possible to ensure I(E) = I(Etr), but substantial
questions remain as to the situation for IS or more
realistic assumptions on E.
Finally, we demonstrated that IRM and even IRMv1
can be surprisingly brittle when run on samples, rather
than populations. Thus more analysis, and perhaps
new algorithms, are needed to realize the promise of
this framework in practice.

Does Invariant Risk Minimization Capture Invariance?
