An AI aid to the editors
Exploring the possibility of an AI assisted article classification system
Tirthankar Ghosal, Rajeev Verma, Asif Ekbal, Sriparna Saha, Pushpak Bhattacharyya

ABSTRACT
This work is a preliminary exploratory study of how we could
progress a step towards an AI assisted article classification sys-
tem in academia. The proposed system aims to aid the journal
editors in their decisions by pinpointing the potential weaknesses
or strengths of a submitted manuscript. From a large collection of
articles and corresponding author-editor interactions we explore
the possible reasons that lead to a paper being not forwarded for
review. Our investigation reveals that in most cases either it is be-
cause the prospective manuscript is out of scope of the journal or
the manuscript does not satisfy the minimum quality requirements
to maintain the standard of the journal. We extract several features
to quantify the quality of a paper and the degree of in-scope explor-
ing keyword search, citation analysis, reputations of authors and
affiliations, similarity with respect to accepted papers. With these
features we train standard machine learning classifiers to develop
a classification system. On a decent set of test data our approach
yields promising results across 3 different journals. We believe that
our approach is generic and could be adapted to other journals with
appropriate adjustments.
1
INTRODUCTION
With the ever expanding volume of research articles and the num-
ber of submissions made, it is increasingly becoming difficult for
the editors to keep up with the pace of latest research, manually
go through each submission, respond to the author(s) or forward
to the expert reviewers in a reasonable time frame. The editor is
usually overwhelmed with this "burden of science". Here in this
work we take up the problem and seek to investigate how could we
use artificial intelligence to classify articles based on certain factors
so that the "burden of science" on the editors eases to some extent.
Our intention is not to develop an automated system (which is by
far not desirable) but to make best use of scholarly content and
meta data available to develop an assistive support system for the
editors in general. We begin our investigations on a set of accepted
and not-forwarded papers along with their author-editor-reviewer
interactions, made available to us by the reputed scholarly pub-
lishing house, Elsevier. In an usual setup, the editor is the person
acting as the intermediary between the authors and the reviewers.
Hence our obvious point of departure was the analysis of those
editorial communications with the authors and the reviewers. We
seek to discover features from not-forwarded (NFWD) articles and
the corresponding editorial communications to identify the reasons
for non-acceptance. Rigorous analysis of about 5500 NF data from
11 different Computer Science journals led us to believe that apart
from some journal specific factors, there exists at least 5 generic
features that leads to an article being withheld :
(1) Appropriateness of the article to the journal being sent (Aim
and Scope).
(2) Quality/Standard and impact of the article under review.
(3) Percentage overlap with existing articles (Plagiarism).
(4) Spelling, grammar and language of the article under review.
(5) Visually discriminative features of the article such as tem-
plate mismatch (article not being prepared according to jour-
nal guidelines and formatting requirements), articles not
having the standard components of a proper scientific com-
munication1.
While there are significant standard systems available for (3), (4) and
(5), we felt that (1) and (2) are the ones that deserve special research
attention. In the subsequent discussions we uncover a wide range
of features ranging from author credibility to citations to content to
arrive to a system that performs a binary classification task : FOR-
WARDED (FWD) or NOT-FORWARDED (NFWD). However our
consensus is that this piece of work is merely a direction towards
an AI assisted article classification system. We perform appropriate
data and feature analysis to come up with important observations
for the academia. The proposed system performs fairly well with
features investigated for (1) and (2). However with added features
encompassing (3), (4) and (5), the system could be more accurate to
classify articles. Authors could also benefit from such a system as
they could try in and check the potential of their manuscript.
Figure 1: Analysis of Not-Forwarded (NFWD) papers due to
out-of-scope (OOS) and quality(Q) for 11 different Elsevier
Computer Science Journals. 500 NF papers for each journal
were considered in the analysis
2
DATA
To address the task, we use a collection of 15,536 accepted papers
from Elsevier Science Direct2 pertaining to 3 different journals.
1We had to literally come across submissions that were some fancies about time
machine and doomsday theory
2https://www.sciencedirect.com/
arXiv:1802.01403v2  [cs.DL]  17 Feb 2018

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 2: Cumulative distribution function of various factors across FWD and NFWD papers
Along with we consider and review a set of 5500 NF papers pertain-
ing to 11 different Elsevier Computer Science journals viz., Artificial
Intelligence (ARTINT), Computer Networks (COMNET), Theoretical
Computer Science (TCS), Statistics and Probability Letters (STAT-
PRO), Computational Statistics and Data Analysis (CSDA), Computer
Languages, Systems and Structures (COMLAN), Computer Standards
and Interfaces (CSI), Data and Knowledge Engineering (DATAK),
Information Sciences (INS), Journal of Computational Science (JOCS),
and Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory (SIMPAT). We also
went through about 7000 review reports (author-editor-reviewer
interactions) of accepted, NF and declined-after-review papers con-
sisting of more than 2.1 million lines of review data to investigate
the generic causes of non-acceptance and then develop a good set of
features. However for the purpose of cross-validation experiments,
we use only a subset of these FWD and NF papers and report the
results. We carry out our machine learning experiments on 3000
articles from ARTINT, STATPRO and COMNET journals.
2.1
Data Preparation and Preprocessing
The current work is too data intensive and we invest a huge amount
of time in preparing the data, collecting meta data from various
external sources. After preprocessing is done on the data we cre-
ate several meta files for each journal consisting of the following
information. (1) We extract Author and Affiliation scores from
Google scholar, Scopus3 and Times Higher Education Ranking4
data. We manually correct the noises (resulted due to parsing) and
do author name disambiguation to get the actual scores from these
external sources. (2) Venue scores were extracted from Scientific
3https://www.elsevier.com/solutions/scopus
4https://www.timeshighereducation.com/world-university-rankings/2017/
Journal Rankings (SJR)5 and CORE6 rankings. Here too we did
cleaning and removal of noises to tap and map actual entries from
the external sources. (3) Publication year was missing from many
of the references. We had to fix those by actually searching in the
web. (4) Our pdf paper parsing aid, is excellent in GeneRation Of
BIbliographic Data (GROBID)7. But due to inherent limitations of
GROBID to parse the body of the scientific paper efficiently, we
had to literally scan each paper with its generated xml to extract
our content features (discussed in Table 1) correctly. (5) Citation
counts for reference entries we collect from Google Scholar8 and
ArnetMiner9.
2.2
Data Characterization
(1) Author reputation and affiliation If author credibility and
affiliation reputation are high, most likely the manuscript under-
goes less rigorous reviews as compared to others [7]. With obvious
exceptions acceptance rates of such manuscripts are generally high.
We take the average of h-index of authors in each FWD/NFWD ar-
ticle and plot their Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) (Figure
2(a)). Even presence of a co-author having a very high credibility
score (h-index or citation count) resonates the behavior (Figure
2(b,c)). Authors from reputed institutions do have an edge over oth-
ers. We take the research scores of affiliations from Times Higher
Education Ranking data and plot in Figure 2(d).
(2)Quality of bibliography The quality of references in the bibli-
ography section has a profound influence on the overall quality of
5http://www.scimagojr.com
6http://portal.core.edu.au/conf-ranks/
7https://github.com/kermitt2/grobid
8https://scholar.google.co.in/
9https://aminer.org/
2

the manuscript under review. Citation count of reference articles
and their publishing venue are two important indicators of their
quality. We plot the average citation count (Figure 2(e)) of refer-
ences and average of h-indices of journal venues (Figure 2(f)) for
each paper and study the qualitative impact of bibliography. Even
recency of citations play a role. Figure 2(g) shows the distribution
of citations that are published within 5 years from the date of sub-
mission of each article across FWD and NFWD papers.
(3) Aptness of references We also observe that references hold
strong domain information. We seek to investigate the distribution
of occurrence of reference titles across FWD and NFWD articles.
The frequency of cited titles were always high when computed
across all FWD articles. Whereas the frequency of cited titles across
NFWD articles were low. Figure 2(h) supports the fact. In ARTINT
FWD, 75% of the papers have average h-index of the co-authors
less than 38.00 while the same number for FWD is found to be
9.12 (Figure 2(a)). For STATPRO, 25% of the FWD papers have av-
erage affiliation research score greater than 59.52 while the same
statistics for NFWD stands at 15.30 (Figure 2(d)). Similar distinction
we observe with other factors across FWD and NFWD articles for
different journals.
3
MOTIVATION
Inspired from the characterization of our data, our modeling of a
desk-evaded forwarded paper is driven by three key observations :
(1) Addressing Scope : If a paper belongs to a certain domain, then
majority of its references would fall in that domain (2) Addressing
Quality : The better is the bibliography section of a paper, higher
is the prospect of a quality content inside the body of the paper. (3)
Content : Some content characteristics and location of impact/in-
domain citations exerts a "local influence" on corresponding sections of
a scientific paper that greatly determines its credibility as well as scope.
By "better" we mean high impact as well as recent citations. Again
citations could be "important" or "incidental" as per [8]. We devise
a way to consider a subset of citations that are more contributing
to the paper under review and not just have been cited incidentally
(Section 5.4.3).
4
FEATURE ENGINEERING
We summarize the intuitions behind considering these features in
following sections. Each of the features are normalized with their
respective maximum value.
4.1
Scope Features
Suitability of a submitted article to the "scope" of the target journal
is perhaps the most deciding factor for which articles gets declined
from editors desk. In spite of having merit many articles are simply
not forwarded because they do not possess the content to cater
the audience of the respective journal. Survey on a sample set of
NFWD papers belonging to different Elsevier journals reveals this
(Figure 1). We go by our intuition as discussed in Section 4 and
derive features from the bibliography section as well as from the
paper content.
Dictionary Lists. For each of the journals, we create distinct
lists for: (1) authors (2) author-listed keywords (3) paper titles ap-
pearing in the bibliography section (4) conferences appearing in
the bibliography section (5) journals appearing in the bibliography
section and count their respective frequency of occurrences across
all accepted (ACC) papers. For ARTINT we processed 3821 ACC
articles, for STATPRO 7489 ACC articles and for COMNET 4226
ACC articles. We multiply frequency of each entry in (3), (4) and
(5) with their respective Citation Effect. Citation Effect (CE) is the
number of times a certain bibliographic item is cited within a paper.
We introduce Citation Effect to measure the relative importance of
a given bibliographic entry within the body of a paper. However
the context of importance could be scope or quality. We observe
that with this behavior, the domain-specific keywords, journals, con-
ferences tops the list which we deem as a vital indicator for scope of
a journal. CE for a core-domain citation is always greater than an
allied-domain citation. With (1) we seek to investigate how many
times a certain author has published in a particular journal. More
an author publishes articles belonging to a certain domain greater
is the chance that her prospective next article would belong to the
same domain.
4.1.1
Keyword Match. For each journal, we create separate
lists of author given keywords (in the Keywords section) from all
the accepted articles of ARTINT, COMNET, STATPRO and record
their frequencies of occurrences. Upon sorting we found that the
representative terms for each of the journals appear at the top.
We design this feature to emphasize the containment and relative
importance of the keywords in the candidate article with respect to
the Keyword Dictionary. The value for this feature for a candidate
article Y is thus calculated as :
KW ScoreY = |KWY ∩KWD |
|KWY |
×
|KWY ∩KWD |
Õ
i=1
f (Ki)
• KWY : is the set of author defined keywords in the candidate
article Y
• KWD: is the set of keywords in the Keyword Dictionary D
• f (Ki): is the frequency of keyword Ki as listed in D
• Ki ∈{KWY ∩KWD}
4.1.2
Title Scope. From the accepted articles of each journal,
we create separate lists of all paper titles that have appeared in the
reference sections. We also record their frequencies of references
from within the body of the individual article and occurrence across
all the accepted articles. Thus, the value for an article title (Ti) in
the exhaustive list is calculated as :
Value
V (Ti) =
n
Õ
j=1
fj(Ti)
(1)
where fj(Ti) corresponds to the number of times title Ti has been
cited within an article j andn is the total number of accepted articles
for any journal. From the exhaustive list of paper titles, we calculate
the Title Score (TY ) of a candidate article Y as :
TY =
m
Õ
i=1
V (Ti)
where m is the total number of references in Y. V (Ti) is calculated
from Eq. 1.
4.1.3
Conference Scope. From the accepted articles of each
journal, we create lists of conferences in which articles referenced
by the accepted papers of the corresponding journal are published.
We also record the frequency of appearance of such conferences in
3

the reference section of the accepted articles. Thus the value for a
conference (Ci) in the exhaustive list is calculated as :
Value
V (Ci) =
n
Õ
j=1
fj(Ci)
(2)
where fj(Ci) corresponds to the number of times conference Ci
appears in the reference section of an article j and n is the total
number of accepted articles for any journal. Similarly from the
exhaustive list of conferences, we calculate the Conference Score
(CY ) of a candidate article Y as :
CY =
m
Õ
i=1
V (Ci)
where m is the total number of conference references in Y. V (Ci) is
calculated using Equation 2.
4.1.4
Journal Scope. Likewise from the exhaustive list of jour-
nals we calculate the Journal Score (JY ) of a candidate article Y as :
JY =
m
Õ
i=1
V (Ji)
where m is the total number of journal references in Y.
4.1.5
Author Domain Publication Frequency (ADPF). From
the accepted articles, we record the publication frequency of au-
thors in those three journals separately. More an author publishes
articles belonging to a certain domain greater is the chance that her
prospective next article would belong to the same domain. For a can-
didate article, we take the summation of the publication frequency
of each of the authors in the journal concerned from the author
list. In case of a new author publishing in that particular field it is
unlikely that all the other authors are from different field/domains.
Summation helps in ignoring the effect of a new-author.
4.1.6
Cluster Distance. We observe that the ACC articles of a
certain journal could be grouped into clusters representing different
sub-domains within the journal scope. Thus the distance of a given
research article from the set of clusters formed on the ACC articles
may contribute to determine its scope. Any outliers to such clusters
may be considered as out-of-scope. With this intuition we perform
the steps in Algorithm 1. We take minimum of the distances of the
candidate article Y from the cluster centers, in order to learn how
close is Y to any of the clusters so formed.
Computer Science Specific Word Embeddings. One major
contribution in executing this feature is the creation and usage of
word2vec[5] word vectors trained on the entire Computer Science
journal articles of Elsevier (to preserve domain dependency). We pro-
cessed 41737169 sentences from around 400K articles. The embed-
ding dimension was set to 300. We chose lines of texts extracted
from Title, Abstract, Introduction, Body, Conclusions sections of ACC
articles pertaining to all Computer Science journals of Elsevier.
Certain preprocessing needs were : removal of special characters,
headings, table and figure captions, etc. We considered only com-
plete sentences.
Algorithm 1 Distance from cluster boundary
1: Use RAKE[6] to automatically extract Keywordsfrom the Title,
Abstract, Introduction and Conclusion sections of an article Y
belonging to journal J.
2: Use word2vec[5] to generate the vectors of the extracted key-
words (top 30 RAKE extracted keywords) from Y.
3: Calculate the document vector of Y by concatenating all the
keyword vectors from Step 2.
4: Repeat Steps 1-3 for all the accepted articles of the journal J.
5: Use Word Mover’s Distance (WMD)[3] as the distance metric
between two document vectors and generate the similarity
matrix.
6: Apply K-Medoids[2] on the similarity matrix from Step 4 to
generate the clusters (Ci) [K is determined via Silhouette Index;
user tune-able; can vary across journals]
7: Find the radius(ri) of a cluster Ci as:
ri = median(distance(ci,pj))
where ci is the centre of cluster Ci and pj is any point within
cluster Ci.
8: Find the document vector (pY ) of a candidate article Y using
Steps 1-3.
9: Distance of the candidate article Y from the boundary of cluster
Ci is given as : Di = distance(ci,pY ) −ri
10: Repeat Step 9 for all the clusters (Ci) obtained from Step 6 to
get :
DY = minimum(Di)
Quality Features
4.2
Author Features
These are the features that determine the credibility of the author(s).
We design our features based on pure observation of data and try
to minimize the bias by taking different facets of author credibility.
The h-index of an author indicates the quality and the impact of the
work he/she has done. A scholar with an index of h has supposedly
published h papers, each of which has been cited in other papers
at least h times. Again the total citations received by an author
sometimes works as an indicator for his/her research impact. Since
primary authors are the ones who do the actual experiments and
lead the collaboration, we take their past academic impact (Auth-
P-h, Auth-P-cit) as features. Again many a times primary authors
are students under some supervisors who are usually co-authors.
Quite naturally student authors would suffer in h-index and citation
counts. This is compensated by taking the average and maximum
of the citation count and h-indices of all the authors (Auth-max-h,
Auth-max-cit,Auth-avg-h, Auth-avg-cit). Information for these fea-
tures we gather from the academic search engine Google Scholar and
the academic dataset from ArnetMiner. We normalize the feature
values by dividing with the corresponding maximum.
4.3
Affiliation Features
Although not desired, still we found that affiliation of the author(s)
turns out to be a major indicator. However we believe that even
a relatively new author from a non-premier institution produces
a quality work. Several other factor(s) like content, bibliography
4

would then contribute towards its quality. On the contrary an es-
tablished author from a premier institution could get his paper
refuted if it fails to satisfy those quality metrics. The usage of au-
thor and affiliation features as a measure of scientific impact has
already been studied in [1, 4, 9]. In order to measure Research Score
of an affiliation, we consider the data pertaining to 2017 global
ranking of different institutes published by Times Higher Education
World University Rankings10 which is usually taken as a standard
in this field(Affl-P-rs, Affl-avg-rs, Affl-max-rs). We deem number of
research documents produced or published by an institution as a
qualitative measure of its research ambition and potential. We take
the indexed count from Scopus which is again a standard source
in this field. Academicians associated with premier institutions
usually exhibit research potential that cumulates to a measure of
overall research prowess of the institution. Here also we consider
measures for primary authors, average and maximum among the
authors (Affl-P-doc, Affl-avg-doc, Affl-max-doc). Intuitively we rely
on this observation that a reputed co-author would never want to
get associated with an inferior quality work and would allow sub-
mission only when the prospective manuscript adheres to certain
quality benchmark.
4.4
Bibliographic Features
Our intuition on working with the bibliographic section of a prospec-
tive manuscript followed from this observation : "A quality paper
would always refer to quality papers".
4.4.1
Venue. The most robust measure of quality is the venue
in which the referred paper got published. Quality of a journal venue
is measured in terms of h-index and Scientific Journal Rankings11
(SJR) score produced by SCImago Lab powered by Scopus. These
are well-accepted scores harboring the quality of a journal. We
take the average of the h-index and SJR values as features (Venue-
havg-j,Venue-sjravg-j). For conferences we refer to the CORE12
rankings. The CORE Conference Ranking is an ongoing activity
that provides assessments of major conferences in the computing
disciplines. We specify numerical importance to the conferences
based on their CORE grades of 2017 as A*→6, A→4, B→3, D→2.
We deem that conferences not listed in CORE are likely to have
lesser stringent criteria in terms of quality. So we leave them from
our calculations. We take the average of the CORE rankings of the
referred conferences as a feature (Venue-avg-m).
4.4.2
Temporal Distance. The Temporal distance features
measure whether a prospective submission has cited recent works.
They are strong indicators of whether the author(s) are aware of
the current state-of-the-art. We calculate the Temporal Distance
(TD) as :
TDY R = Yyear −Ryear
(3)
whereTDY R is the temporal distance of candidate articleY from ref-
erenced articleR.Yyear ,Ryear are the years of publication/submission
of articles Y and R respectively. We thus take average and mini-
mum of temporal distance of impact citations as features. (Temp-avg,
Temp-min). We also count the number of impact citations within a
10https://www.timeshighereducation.com/
11http://www.scimagojr.com/
12http://portal.core.edu.au/conf-ranks/
temporal distance 5 (Temp-5). Very high Temp-avg, Temp-min and
low Temp-5 are not desirable.
4.4.3
Citation features. Citation counts of referenced articles
are also good measures of the quality of references. But again (i)
not all referenced articles are central to the core of the target pa-
per. And (ii) the citation count measure is time-dependent. A very
recent article with huge scientific impact will have low citation
count as compared to one published 20 years back. In [8] authors
have showed that many citations are just incidental and do not
contribute directly to the theme of the paper. So a certain citation-
rich reference, although incidental to the target paper may hugely
effect this category of features, if used directly. To negate these
constraints we develop a heuristic to identify impact citations i.e.,
citations which are central to the theme of the paper, upon the
shoulders of which the target paper stands tall.
Identifying Impact References: To identify impact references
for a paper Y we : (1) determine the distribution of all citations in Y
in terms of their citation counts. (2) extract a set S of those citations
which are too distantly distributed via median absolute deviation
(MAD). The remaining citations form a set C (3) For each item i
in S we do : if TDi > 5 && CEi < 2, we remove i from S (4) The
impact references we consider from C ∪S
We also induce the Citation Effect (CE), discussed earlier, into action
and multiply the citation counts of the impact references with their
corresponding CE to get the weighted citation count. For W-Imp-
cit-avg feature we thus take the average of the weighted citation
count of impact references. Also we keep Cit-avg as another feature.
Presence of Uncited references is a negative quality for a paper and
should be penalized.
4.4.4
Content features. We take simple counts of tables, fig-
ures and mathematical equations present within a paper as features
(Math-eq, Table-c, Fig-c). These structures generally aid in scientific
understanding and makes the paper appear intuitive and logical.
5
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
As our problem was formulated as a classification task, we use a
series of standard classifiers ranging from Support Vector Machines
(SVM) to Logistic Regressions (LR)to Multi Layer Perceptrons (MLP)
with default parameter settings from the popular machine learning
toolkit Weka.We found that Random Forests (RF) perform best with
our feature set across the 3 journals we experiment with. The reason
could be attributed to the inter dependence of the features among
themselves and presence of many outliers in our dataset. Also the
scale of attribute values in our feature set is not uniform and varies
to a large extent (For example, citation counts of some papers and
authors were too high w.r.t. others). Random Forest is found to
perform well in such situations. We employ features extracted from
500 FWD and 500 NFWD papers from each of the three journals
(ARTINT, COMNET, STATPRO) and train our classifiers. We report
the 10-fold cross-validation results as in Table 4.
5.1
Feature Significance
5.1.1
ARTINT. As is evident from Table 3, Scope features in-
cluding Keyword Match, Conference Scope, Title Scope appeared at
the top. Artificial Intelligence is a rapidly changing domain and the
5

ARTINT
STATPRO
COMNET
Features
IG
R
IG
R
IG
R
Keyword Match
0.32
1
0.11
2
0.14
7
Cluster Distance
0.12
10
0.30
1
0.15
6
Title Scope
0.21
3
0.0
26
0.16
5
Conference Scope
0.28
2
0
31
0.13
8
Journal Scope
0.09
14
0.05
8
0.03
26
ADPF
0.08
21
0.7
3
0.04
23
Auth-P-h
0.07
23
0.02
17
0.07
18
Auth-avg-h
0.20
4
0.02
14
0.19
2
Auth-max-h
0.14
8
0.01
21
0.17
4
Auth-P-cit
0.09
17
0.02
19
0.07
17
Auth-avg-cit
0.09
19
0.01
20
0.18
3
Auth-max-cit
0.15
7
0.0
28
0.21
1
Affl-P-rs
0.06
28
0.03
11
0.03
24
Affl-avg-rs
0.07
27
0.03
9
0.04
21
Affl-P-doc
0.09
18
0.05
7
0.06
20
Affl-avg-doc
0.09
16
0.05
6
0.07
19
Affl-max-doc
0.13
9
0.09
4
0.07
16
Affl-max-rs
0.07
24
0.03
10
0.08
15
W-Imp-cit-avg
0.15
6
0.02
13
0.11
10
Cit-avg
0.09
20
0
29
0.09
13
Temp-avg
0.10
13
0.03
12
0.03
25
Temp-min
0.07
26
0.0
25
0.02
27
Temp-5
0.09
15
0.01
23
0.10
11
Venue-havg-j
0.07
22
0.02
16
0.12
9
Venue-sjravg-j
0.03
29
0.01
24
0.02
29
Venue-avg-m
0.16
5
0.02
15
0.02
30
Uncited-ref
0.03
30
0.01
22
0.10
12
Math-eq
0.07
25
0.06
5
0.02
28
Table
0.11
12
0.02
18
0.10
22
Figure
0.12
11
0
27
0.09
14
Table 1: Information Gain values for different features
across 3 journals, IG →Inf ormationGain, R →Rank
current progress is mostly reflected in conference papers. Hence
most of the citations found in ARTINT accepted papers were from
premier AI conferences which contributed in scope determination.
Also misfit submissions were identified with the Keyword Match
feature. Quality of venue (Venue-avg-m) and quality of impact cita-
tions (W-Imp-cit-avg) found prominence in the ranking signifying
distinction between FWD and NFWD papers. However affiliation
and temporal features did not factored that much. Even some con-
tent features like # of tables or figures contributed to some extent.
We could vouch on this as we see a number of declined submissions
to Artificial Intelligence journal did not follow the usual criteria and
standards of a proper scientific communication. Author credibility
features like Auth-avg-h, Auth-max-cit, Auth-max-h appeared in
the top 10 justifying the power law distribution of scientific impact
in current literature i.e. the "rich gets richer".
5.1.2
STATPRO. The Statistics and Probability Letters journal
has a narrow scope as compared to ARTINT and caters to a specialist
audience interested in statistics and probability. We find that Cluster
Distance, Keyword Match feature emerged as the most contributing
one which is in line with the fact that STATPRO does not accept
submission which has less similarity with respect to its history
articles i.e., out-of-scope submissions. Also analysis of data reveals
that there are a limited set of specialist authors who contribute to
STATPRO. Hence the ADPF feature is found important. Same reason
goes for their Affiliation features. The audience and contributors to
STATPRO are generally from premier institutions and the discipline
is not so wide as compared to ARTINT. So we see submissions
to STATPRO are from a closed set of distinct authors belonging
to a set of institutions. One particular content feature Math-eq
performed well due to obvious reasons. Temporal features exhibited
less relevance.
5.1.3
COMNET. Even the Computer Networks journal has a
limited scope as compared to ARTINT. We find the Author features
to have predominance over others, however Affiliation features
did not work well. This signifies that authors for COMNET belong
to varied institutions and that high impact authors too belong to
non-premier institutions. Authors from non-premier institutions
have quality submissions in COMNET. As expected Scope features
performed well. The reason being the domain of Computer Net-
works is well-defined and stringent as compared to ARTINT. Venue
feature Venue-havg-j found it in the top 10 signifying that quality
of citation venues, specifically journals, too had an impact on the
classification decision. Impact citations also ranked among the top
10 features.
5.1.4
Feature Ablation. To better understand the effect of dif-
ferent category of features on our classification task, we ablate each
category of features one by one and see the resultant average F1
score across FWD and NFWD instances. Figure 3 clearly shows
ablating Scope features costs the maximum with a drop in F1 by a
margin of 9% for ARTINT, 8% for COMNET and 14% for STATPRO.
Author features are distinct for ARTINT and COMNET while Affil-
iation features are distinct for STATPRO. Citation, Venue, Temporal
features had little impact in presence of other features whereas
Content features displayed promise for STATPRO.
6
SUMMARY
According to all the analysis done, we summarize our findings, and
provide the following intuitions to the academia : (1) A prospective
article should always be judged against the topic relevance of the
target journal before actually submitting. Authors should be aware
of the domain and standards of publications hosted by the target
journal. (2) Presence of recent and quality Bibliographic items and
actually citing them in the manuscript inherently implies that the
author must have done standard literature survey and is aware
of the current state-of-the-art. So a prospective author should read
and refer to papers having good quality. Quality can be in terms
of citation counts and author credibility for old papers. For recent
papers one should definitely look into the venue credibility alongside
author and affiliation.(3) Although our approach considers Author
and Affiliation past credibility as features, still we observe that
only with those, his/her manuscript could not get past the editorial
screening. The quality features should be strong enough as well.
Case Study : We did analysis of our approach on several test data.
6

ARTINT
STATPRO
COMNET
Methods
P(F)
R(NF)
P(F)
R(NF)
A
P(F)
R(NF)
P(F)
R(NF)
A
P(F)
R(NF)
P(F)
R(NF)
A
RF
0.931
0.969
0.928
0.849
92.99
0.828
0.858
0.846
0.814
83.64
0.939
0.926
0.932
0.935
93.57
LR
0.899
0.899
0.788
0.788
86.30
0.828
0.822
0.816
0.823
82.21
0.879
0.853
0.848
0.877
86.39
MLP
0.906
0.935
0.854
0.797
89.07
0.784
0.725
0.734
0.791
75.77
0.848
0.853
0.868
0.838
82.99
SVM
0.883
0.813
0.664
0.774
80.06
0.758
0.804
0.782
0.733
76.89
0.812
0.825
0.836
0.818
81.36
Table 2: Classification results for various journals, P →Precision, R →Recall, A →Accuracy (in %), F →Forwarded, NF →
Not −Forwarded
(a) Feature ablation for ARTINT
(b) Feature ablation for STATPRO
(c) Feature ablation for COMNET
Figure 3: Feature contribution analysis. AL denotes training a Random Forest model with the full features set. The bars illus-
trate the average F1 score after the corresponding category of feature is removed. SC →Scope, AU →Author, AF →Affiliation,
CT →Citation features, VN →Venue, CN →Content, TM →Temporal : categories of features.
One such was for Paper Id : S016771521100326913. The author had
a relatively low h-index (1 to be precise) and do not belong to an
elite institution as deemed by major institution ranking houses. Still
due to sheer quality of contributions, citation-rich references and
content factors, our classifier correctly predicted its accepted status.
We also observe cases where a manuscript from a touted premier
institution was not forwarded because of lack of quality of content
and citations. We restrain to report those due to confidentiality
clauses.
7
CONCLUSIONS
Here in this work we deal with an interesting problem of bringing
AI more close to the scientific editorial system. The performance of
our approach across journals of different domains bears testimony
that our features are generic in nature as well as complementary to
each other. There are many avenues where we could improve upon
like mining information from content to decide upon the relevance
and novelty of scientific claims, argumentation mining, more sci-
entometric and qualitative analysis of bibliographic features, etc.
Provided with enough data it would be interesting to see how Deep
Learning techniques would behave with this task.
