UAI2001 
COWELL 
91 
Conditions Under Which Conditional Independence and Scoring 
Methods Lead to Identical Selection of Bayesian Network Models 
Robert G. Cowell 
Department of Actuarial Science and Statistics 
City University, London 
Northampton Square 
London EC1 V OHB, UK. 
Abstract 
It is often stated in papers tackling the task 
of selecting a Bayesian network structure 
from data that there are these two distinct 
approaches: (i) Apply conditional indepen­
dence tests . when testing for the presence 
or otherwise of edges; (ii) Search the model 
space using a scoring metric. 
Here I argue that for complete data and a 
given node ordering this division is largely a 
myth, by showing that cross entropy methods 
for checking conditional independence are 
mathematically identical to methods based 
upon discriminating between models by their 
overall goodness-of-fit logarithmic scores. 
Keywords Bayesian networks; structural learning; 
conditional independence test; scoring metric; cross 
entropy. 
1 
Introduction. 
In this paper I consider learning Bayesian network 
structures on a finite set of discrete variables, under 
the restrictions of complete data and a given node­
ordering. The following quote (Cheng et al. 1997) is 
typical of statements made in articles either introduc­
ing a novel algorithm or reviewing current algorithms 
for learning Bayesian networks. 
Generally, these algorithms can be grouped 
into two categories: 
one category of algo­
rithms uses heuristic searching methods to 
construct a model and then evaluates it using 
a scoring method. . . . The other category of 
algorithms constructs Bayesian networks by 
analyzing dependency relationships between 
nodes. 
While on the face of it these two approaches appear 
quite different, I will argue that model search meth­
ods based upon maximizing a local log-score can be 
expressed as equivalent search methods employing lo­
cal conditional independence tests. 
The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section 
introduces notation together with some theoretical re­
sults. Section 3 states the assumptions made in later 
sections. Section 4 considers learning structure from 
a known distribution, which is equivalent to learning 
from an infinite data set. Section 5 considers the more 
realistic case of inferring model structure from finite 
data, from both a classical and a Bayesian perspec­
tive. 
2 
Notation and background results. 
I will assume that readers are familiar with the no­
tion of a Bayesian network; for a recent monograph 
see Cowell et al. (1999). I consider a finite set X = 
{X 1, . .
. , X n} of n (finite) discrete random variables 
taking values in the state space X= {X1, ... , Xn} = 
xj=1Xi. 
If A ¹ V := {1, .. . , n} denotes some in­
dex set, then XA will denote the subset of variables 
{Xa : a E A} and will take values in XA := XaEAXa. 
Where convenient a variable X1  may be referred to by 
its index v. Particular configurations will be denoted 
using lower case letters, for example, x = (x1, .
.
.
 , Xn), 
or XA E XA. 
In this paper I consider search algorithms constrained 
by a given node ordering; without loss of generality I 
will take the node ordering to be (X1, ... , X,). Let 
9n denote the set of directed acyclic graphs ( dags) on 
X, such that Xi can be a parent of Xj only if i < j. 
For g E 9n let P9 denote the set of distributions di­
rected Markov with respect to g. This means that for 
any P9 E P9, the probability mass function factorizes 

92 
COWELL 
UAI2001 
as 
Pg(x) = IT Pg(Xv I Xpa(v:g)), 
(1) 
vEV 
where Xpa(v:g) denotes the set of parents of the vertex 
v in g. 
Let P(X) and Q(X) be two probability distributions 
over X. The Kullback-Leibler divergence between P 
and Q is defined to be 
[ 
p(X)] 
" 
p(x) 
K(P, Q) = Ep log 
q(X) 
= L-xp(x) log q(x). 
xE 
It takes a non-negative value measuring the similarity 
or closeness of the distribution Q to that of P, vanish­
ing if and only if the distributions are identical. 
It was shown by Cowell (1996) (see also Cowell et al. 
(1999)) that for a given graph g E Yn the distribu­
tion P9 E P9 which minimizes K(P, P9) for some fixed 
distribution P(X) assigns to every vertex v E V, 
Let A, Band C be disjoint index subsets of V, and let 
P( X) be some distribution over X. Then the cross­
entropy of X A and X B is defined to be 
whilst the cross-entropy of XA and XB conditional on 
Xc, or conditional cross entropy, is defined as 
We say XA is conditionally 
independent of Xa 
given Xc under the distribution P, 
written 
as 
XAlLPXB I Xc, if and only if p(XA, XB I Xc) 
= 
p(XA I Xc )p(Xa I Xc) (Dawid 1979). 
The notation 
llp will be abbreviated to lL when the distribution 
P under consideration is clear from the context. Note 
that if XAllPXB I Xc, then Hp(XA, XB I Xc) = 0, 
and vice versa. 
For g E 9n any distribution P9 E P9 has the directed 
Markov property, that is, any node is conditionally in­
dependent of its non-descendants given its parents in 
g: 
XvllXnd(v:g) I Xpa(v:g) · 
Note 
in 
particular 
that 
this 
implies 
Hpg (Xu, Xnd(v:g) I Xpa(v:g)) = 0. 
3 
Assumptions made in learning a 
network. 
I shall make the following assumptions for the remain­
ing sections. 
1. I will be looking for good predictive models, se­
lected according to a log-scoring rule, and choos­
ing the simplest model among equally good pre­
dictive models. 
2. The dataset is complete, and there are no latent 
variables. 
3. The node ordering is given, and without loss of 
generality is (XI, .
.
.
 , Xn)· 
4. There are no logical constraints between the vari­
ous conditional probability tables to be estimated. 
Assumption 1 emphasizes that I am not looking to 
construct causal models from data, but simply seeking 
good predictive models. The log scoring rule is unique 
in that it is (for multi-attribute variables) the only 
proper scoring rule whose value is determined solely by 
the probability attached to the outcome that actually 
occurs (Bernardo 1979). The final part of Assumption 
1 is Occam's razor: without it I could choose the satu­
rated model, that is, the complete graph, which would 
fit the data perfectly. Scoring based search methods 
usually try and balance these two aspects - by penal­
izing a model's predictive score with some measure of 
the model's complexity - as a way of reducing over­
fitting. 
Assumption 2 is made for simplicity, to avoid approxi­
mations being made to handle missing data, or having 
to account for the pattern of missing data. It also im­
plies that the logarithmic score of a dag decomposes 
additively into functions (one function for each node, 
depending upon the node and its parents in the dag), 
thus making local search possible by enabling indepen­
dent optimizations of each node's parent set. 
Assumption 3 implies that the dag I obtain might not 
exhibit all of the conditional independence properties 
of the data, but only those consistent with the order­
ing. 
Assumption 4 states that I am assuming local meta­
independence of the conditional probabilities associ­
ated with the families of any given graph considered 
(Dawid and Lauritzen 1993). These conditional prob­
abilities will be taken as parameters to be estimated. 

UAI2001 
COWELL 
93 
4 
Learning networks from a known 
distribution. 
In this section, I assume that the joint distribution 
P(X) is known; this is equivalent to recovering P(X) 
from its maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) for the 
saturated model in the limit of an infinite amount of 
data drawn from P(X). The task is to find the sim­
plest model g E 9n such that P9(X) = P(X). 
4.1 
Model selection via conditional 
independence tests. 
Given the ordering (X11 ... , Xn), the joint distribu­
tion P(X) may be factorized as 
n 
P(X) =II P(X; I Xt, ... 'X;-1)· 
i=l 
The goal of the model search using conditional inde­
pendence tests is to find for each node X; a minimal 
set Xpa(i) ¸ {X1, ... , Xi-t}, such that 
which is equivalent to the independence statement 
The minimal set Xpa(i) may then be taken as the set 
of parents of node xi in the sought for graph. If 
found for each X;, the joint distribution will factorize 
as (1). Let us write R; := {X1, ... , X;_t} \ Xpa(i)• 
and Xr 
= {X1, ... , Xi}. Then using the identity 
P(X;, R; I Xpa(i)) 
= P(X; I R;, Xpa(i))P(R; I Xpa(i)), 
we have 
Hp(X;, R; I Xpa(i)) 
_ "" ( 
) l [ p(x;, 
r; I Xpa(i)) ] 
- L..t P X;, r;, Xpa(i) og 
( 
I 
) ( I 
) 
XJ 
p X; Xpa(i) p r; Xpa(i) 
"" ( 
) [p(x; I r;,Xpa(i))] 
= L..tP x;,r;,Xpa.(i) log 
( ·I 
. ) 
. 
XJ 
p X, Xpa(>) 
(4) 
When (3) holds the conditional cross entropy ( 4) 
vanishes, and conversely. Hence (4) forms the ba­
sis of a conditional independence test. Note that if 
X;ll.R; I Xpa(i), then for any subset S; C R; it is also 
true that X;ll.S; I Xpa(i), and 
Hp(X;, S; I Xpa(i)) = 
"" ( 
) [p(x; I s;,Xpa(i))] 
L..tP X;,s;,Xpa(i) log 
( ·I 
. ) 
p X, Xpa.(t) 
(5) 
will vanish also (and conversely). In principle, one 
could perform an exhaustive search over all possible 
sets R; to find the largest such set for which the cross 
entropy vanishes. In practice, this is not usually possi­
ble because the search space is too large. Thus heuris­
tic searches are normally applied, usually based upon 
evaluating (5) with S; singleton sets. An example of 
such a search is: 
1. Set Xpa(i) := 0 and R; = {Xt, ... ,X;-t}. 
2. WHILE X;ll.R; I Xpa(i) is FALSE do 
• Select S; E R; such that Hp(X;, S; I Xpa(i)) 
is maximized. 
• RemoveS; from R; and add it to Xpa(i)· 
3. WHILE :3 Y E Xpa(i) such that X;ll.Y I Xpa(i) \ 
{Y} is TRUE do 
• Xpa(il -+ Xpa(i) \ {Y}. 
This is similar to the 'thickening and thinning' algo­
rithm of Cheng et al. (1997). More generally, S; could 
represent a restricted set of subsets of R;, not just sin­
gleton sets. 
4.2 
Model selection via Kullback-Leibler 
divergence. 
Given a graph g 
E Yn, the distribution directed 
Markov with respect to g (that is, factorizes as (1)) 
which has minimum Kullback-Leibler divergence from 
P(X) obeys (2) for each node in the graph. In prin­
ciple, one could perform an exhaustive search over all 
possible graphs g E Yn, finding their closest matching 
distributions P9(X) in terms of Kullback-Leibler di­
vergence from P(X), selecting those graphs for which 
the Kullback-Leibler divergence vanishes, and select­
ing among these graphs the one having the fewest num­
ber of edges. 
Consider a graph g E 9n, and it associated distribu­
tion P9(X) which satisfies (2). The Kullback-Leibler 
divergence is given by 
(6) 
Note that (6) decomposes into a sum of terms, one 
for each node, where the g-dependence of the term 
on each node depends upon the family in g of that 
node. In fact for the same graph g, the ith term in 
the summation (6) is identical to the cross entropy 
expression (4). Thus, an exhaustive search based upon 
conditional independence is equivalent to an exhaustive 
search which minimizes K ullback-Leibler divergence. 

94 
COWELL 
UAI2001 
Suppose in a stepwise search algorithm that g is our 
current model and a candidate model g1 differs from 
gin one node X; for which Xpa(i:g'} :::> Xpa(i:g}· Then 
the difference in Kullback-Leibler divergence of the 
two models is found from (6) to be 
l::.(g,i) = 
Hp(X;, Xpa(i:g') \ Xpa(i:g) I Xpa(i:g)), 
(7) 
which is (5) with S; := Xpa(i:g') \Xpa(i:g)· Thus choos­
ing the g' differing from g by one or more edges which 
maximizes (7) is equivalent to choosing g' :::> g which 
minimizes K ( P, P9,). After adding parents to X; until 
no further decrease in Kullback-Leibler divergence is 
possible (on adding yet further nodes as parents), one 
could thin the parents of node X;, by removing nodes 
for which l::.(g, g') remains zero. 
More generally, a decision criterion in the search al­
gorithm which moves to a model g' from a submodel g 
based upon the consideration of a set of possible sets 
S, and their associated conditional independence tests 
could be used to give the same result (or move) based 
upon the consideration of the same S; and the changes 
in Kullback-Leibler divergence, because the numeri­
cal quantities entering into the decision process upon 
which the decision is based are identical in the two 
search frameworks. 
Put another way, for every search heuristic based upon 
using conditional independence tests, there is an equiv­
alent search heuristic based upon using changes in 
Kullback-Leibler divergence, and vice versa. 
There 
is no fundamental difference between the two ap­
proaches, only a difference in interpretation. 
5 
Learning networks from finite data 
5.1 
Model selection via conditional 
independence tests. 
The directed Markov property, and the completeness 
of the data, allows conditional independence tests to 
be performed locally on each node. The conditional in­
dependence tests employ MLEs. However due to sam­
pling variability the tests are not sharp, so typically 
the requirement of the exact vanishing of (conditional) 
cross entropy expressions is relaxed. 
Thus for example, 
suppose that g is our current 
model, with node X; having parents Xpa(i:g), and 
from the data one obtains the MLEs F(X;, Xpa(i:g))· 
Furthermore, suppose that for some node or set of 
nodes S; E X/-l \ Xpa(i:g} one evaluates _the MLEs 
F(X;, Xpa(i:g), S;) and the conditional cross entropy 
L 
fi(x;,Xpa(i:g)• s;) X 
Xi,Xpa.(i;g) ,Si 
l [p(x ; I Xpa(i:g}, s;)] 
og 
'( I 
' 
p X; Xpa(i:g) 
(8) 
where P(x; I Xpa(i:g)) 
= p(x;, Xpa(i:g))/fi(xpa(i:g)) etc. 
Then a search heuristic would employ a decision rule 
which on the basis of the value of (8) would either 
accept or reject the hypothesis that X;JlS; I Xpa(i)• 
and if the latter, decide which among the candidate 
S; to add to Xpa(i) for the next iteration of the search 
algorithm. 
Two common decision heuristics are: (i) 
if the value of (8) is below a fixed threshold value E 
then accept the conditional independence; (ii) perform 
a classical significance test, using the null hypothesis 
of conditional independence, under which a suitable 
multiple (8) (the multiplier being twice the number 
of observations) will have a X distribution for some 
suitable k. Each of these has a counterpart in search 
heuristics based upon a log-score. 
5.2 
Model selection via maximum likelihood. 
Let us write n(xA) for the marginal count of the num­
ber of cases in the dataset for which XA = XA. For 
g E Q,.. the log-likelihood of the data decomposes as 
logL(p9) = 
L IT 
n(x;,Xpa(i:g))log(p9(x;IXpa(i:g))), 
i 
Xi,Xpa(i:;9) 
which yields the MLE 
, 
n(x;,Xpa.(i:g)) 
Pg(X; I Xpa(i:g)) = 
( 
) · 
n Xpa(i:g) 
(9) 
Suppose, as in Section 4.2, that ·g is our current 
model and g' differs from g in one node X; for which 
Xpa(i:g') :::> Xpa(i:g}· 
Then the difference in the log­
likelihoods of the two models evaluated at their MLEs 
is given by 
L(pg') 
" 
log L(pg) 
= 
L..,; 
Xi,Xpa.(i:gl) 
n(x;, Xpa(i:g'}) X 
n(x;, Xpa(i:g'))/n(xpa(i:g')) 
log 
) 
) 
. 
n(x;, Xpa(i:g) /n(Xpa(i:g) 
(10) 
Thus one could decide to move from g to g' in the 
model search if this quantity is positive. However, this 
will generally be the case with finite data, because the 
larger model will fit the data better by virtue of having 
extra parameters, hence the significance of the better 

UAI2001 
COWELL 
95 
fit needs assessing. One simple heuristic is to set a 
threshold e such that if the change is greater than e 
the difference is taken to be significant - to do this 
we must first normalize (10) by the total number of 
cases N = .L:x n(x) in the dataset. Doing this yields 
1 
L(fv) 
N log L(pg) 
= 
""" 
, 
p(x; I Xpa(i:g')) 
L 
p(x;, Xpa(i:g')) log 
A( I 
) , 
p X; Xpa(i:g) 
Xi,XpA-(i:,g') 
where p represents the (marginal of the) MLE of the 
saturated model. This is identical to (8), with Si = 
Xpa(i:g') \ Xpa(i:g)· 
A more formal approach would be based on hypoth­
esis testing. Note that twice the value of (10) is the 
difference in the deviances of the two models, which 
under the assumption that the larger model is true, 
and that the smaller model is also true, will have a 
X distribution with k equal to the difference in the 
degrees of freedom of the two nested models. Thus we 
perform the same test, and obtain the same result, as 
the formal conditional independence test described at 
the end of Section 5.1. Alternatively, one could penal­
ize the deviance by some function of the number of 
parameters, for example by using the Akaike Informa­
tion Criterion (Akaike 1973) which penalizes the more 
complex model by twice the number of extra parame­
ters. 
More generally, because of the equality of (8) and (9) 
it follows as in the last paragraph of Section 4.2, that 
for every search heuristic based upon testing for con­
ditional independence, there is an equivalent search 
heuristic based upon using changes in log-maximum­
likelihood, and vice versa. There is no fundamental 
difference between the two approaches, only a differ­
ence in interpretation. 
5.3 
The Bayesian approach. 
Many belief network search algorithms using a scor­
ing metric tend to employ the Bayesian formalism, 
with the score being the log-marginal likelihood. The 
advantages are that for smaller data sets, where the 
asymptotic distribution results required for the tests in 
Section 5.1 and Section 5.2 may not apply (although 
exact classical tests are available, see Chapter 4 of Lau­
ritzen (1996)), the results tend to be more robust and, 
furthermore, generally less sensitive to the presence of 
zeroes in marginal counts. 
The Bayesian approach requires a prior on the space 
of graphical structures - usually this is taken to be 
uniform, but there are other alternatives (Beckerman 
1998). For each graphical structure a prior on the 
probability parameters is also required - usually these 
are taken to be locally independent Dirichlet priors. 
Under these assumptions and complete data the mar­
ginal likelihood may be evaluated explicitly and de­
composes into a product of terms, one for each node. 
An early and important paper is Cooper and Ber­
skovits (1992), who gave an explicit formula for the 
marginal likelihood under these conditions. 
A common feature of the analyses given in Section 5.1 
and Section 5.2 is that the global scores factorize into 
local contributions from each node, and, moreover, 
that in comparing two similar graphs their score dif­
ference is identical to quantities which arise when test­
ing conditional independence using cross entropy mea­
sures. 
I shall now show that a similar circumstance 
arises in a Bayesian approach when globally indepen­
dent priors are employed. 
The key feature is that 
global independence is preserved under updating with 
complete data (Cowell et al. 1999). 
Thus suppose each node v of a graph g E 9n has an 
associated (vector) parameterization 8z of the condi­
tional probability table of v, and a globally indepen­
dent prior distribution over the parameters 89 := { 8z : 
v E V}. Global independence means that the prior 
measure factorizes as d7r9(89) = flv d1r9(8z). Under 
these conditions the marginal likelihood of the graph 
g in the light of complete data D is 
L(g) :=p(Dig) = J Pg(Dig,89)d7rg(B9) 
=II 1 II Pg(Xv I Xpa(v)' ewr(xv,Xpx(v))d1l'g(8y). 
V 
Bv Xu ,Xpa(v) 
(11) 
From (11) we see that the marginal likelihood factor­
izes into terms, one for each node and it parents. As 
before, let g' be a graph identical to graph g except 
for a difference in the parent set of the Xi. Then g' 
will require a different parameterization and associated 
prior, (see Cowell (1996), Beckerman et al. (1995) for 
alternative strategies for doing this for Dirichlet pri­
ors), but we may take for every node other than Xi 
the same local parameterization and contribution to 
the prior as for the graph g (that is, for Xv =1- Xi, 
ez' = ez, Pg'(Xv IXpa(v:g'),ez') = Pg(Xv IXpa(v:g)•ez) 
andd7r9(8Z) = d1!'9,(8z')). If, furthermore, we take uni­
form priors over the alternative graphical structures 
(ie, P(g) = P(g')), then after suitable cancellations 
we obtain the ratio of posterior probabilities given in 
(12). 

96 
COWELL 
UA12001 
p(g1 I D) - p(D I g1) - fe( fL •. xpa(i'g') Pg' (xi I Xpa(i:g')' e( t(x;,Xpa(;,g'))d1rg• (B() 
(12) 
p(g I D) - p(D I g) -
for flx,,xpa(''Dl Pg(Xi I Xpa(i:g)' Bf)n(x;,x.,a(;,gJ)d7r9(8f) 
The decision of a local score driven search to stay with 
graph g or move to graph g' would depend upon the 
value of this ratio. Madigan and Raftery (1994) use 
(the logarithm of) (12) in a Markov chain Monte Carlo 
based graphical model search procedure, which they 
apply to model selection and model averaging; see also 
Madigan and York (1994). 
I am not aware of papers applying Bayesian tests of 
conditional independence to Bayesian network model 
selection, hence there is not a direct comparison I can 
make of (12) to results extant in the current literature. 
(This is not to say there are none; however Bayesian 
methods - based on comparison of posterior proba­
bilities - for testing for independence in contingency 
tables do exist, see for example Jeffreys (1961) , Good 
(1965). See also the discussion in Madigan and Raftery 
(1994).) However, a formal Bayesian approach would 
consider the following two hypotheses: 
Ho 
p(Xi, Xpa(i:g') I BH0)d1r(8H0) 
p(Xi I Xpa(i:g')' e( )p(Xpa(i:g') I ¢>[((i:g')) 
d1r( ef' )d1r( ¢>%&(i=g'}); 
H1 
p(Xi, Xpa(i:g') I BH1 )d1r(BH1) 
p(Xi I Xpa(i:g)> Bf)p(Xpa(i:g') I ¢')(i:g')) 
d1r( Bf)d1r( ¢>'((i:g')). 
H0 corresponds to the saturated model, H1 the sub­
model exhibiting conditional independence, and ¢ 
is a parameterization common to the two hypothe­
ses. 
Then, from the (possibly equal) priors P(Ho) 
and P(H1) and the data D, posterior probabilities 
P(Ho I D) and P(H1 I D) are evaluated and compared. 
It is left to the reader to verify that this leads to (12). 
Thus if one were to do model search based upon lo­
cal conditional independence tests, then one should 
use (12) in conjunction with an appropriate decision 
rule, and then a complete identification of the two ap­
proaches - Bayesian score based or Bayesian condi­
tional independence testing - would follow. 
6 
Conclusions 
Under the conditions of complete data and given node 
ordering I have shown that conditional independence 
tests for searching for Bayesian networks are equiva­
lent to local log-scoring metrics - they are two ways 
of interpreting the same numerical quantities. 
It is 
possible to relax the node-ordering constraint by con­
sidering arc reversals in addition to arc removals and 
additions; then the change in score (which will be local 
to a pair of nodes) will be a combination of the terms 
which would be considered using conditional indepen­
dence tests. 
However, in the latter case, one would 
have the extra option of deciding if the conditional in­
dependence properties associated with each of the two 
nodes have been independently locally violated. Thus 
conditional independence searching can be more re­
fined than using scoring metrics when considering arc 
reversals. However if the individual conditional inde­
pendence tests were combined into a single test, then 
the two procedures would again be equivalent under 
the same decision rules.
