A Survey on Domain-Specific Languages for 
Machine Learning in Big Data 
 
Ivens Portugal 
David R. Cheriton School of 
Computer Science 
University of Waterloo 
Waterloo, Canada 

Paulo Alencar 
David R. Cheriton School of 
Computer Science 
University of Waterloo 
Waterloo, Canada 

Donald Cowan 
David R. Cheriton School of 
Computer Science 
University of Waterloo 
Waterloo, Canada 

 
 
Abstract—The amount of data generated in the modern 
society is increasing rapidly. New problems and novel 
approaches of data capture, storage, analysis and visualization 
are responsible for the emergence of the Big Data research field. 
Machine Learning algorithms can be used in Big Data to make 
better and more accurate inferences. However, because of the 
challenges Big Data imposes, these algorithms need to be adapted 
and optimized to specific applications. One important decision 
made by software engineers is the choice of the language that is 
used in the implementation of these algorithms. Therefore, this 
literature survey identifies and describes domain-specific 
languages and frameworks used for Machine Learning in Big 
Data. By doing this, software engineers can then make more 
informed choices and beginners have an overview of the main 
languages used in this domain. 
Keywords—literature survey; domain-specific languages; DSL; 
Machine Learning; ML; Big Data; BD 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The evolution of technology in the last decades caused a 
major data revolution [72]. Every second, smartphones, tablets, 
cars, websites, and systems generate a massive amount of data, 
and users and software engineers have access to a subset of that 
data to perform their activities. For example, a user who is 
about to start a trip may inspect a digital map with the visual 
displacement of roads and cities to decide the best route to 
take, based on real-time traffic and weather information. In 
addition, a software engineer may have access to a user’s 
previous trips and routes taken, to develop a system that is 
capable of recommending the best route based on that 
information. This recent phenomenon of the generation of a 
high volume of digital data that is available to be processed is 
called Big Data [4]. 
Big Data not only accounts for the large volume of data, but 
also for the unstructured nature of that data, known as variety, 
and the need of immediate processing of this data, known as 
velocity. These three V’s of Big Data were introduced by Doug 
Laney [21] and are generally used to define Big Data and its 
characteristics. Big Data also created new challenges in data 
management. Traditional ways of data storage and analysis do 
not scale well to this amount of data, which can reach hundreds 
of terabytes or more, and new approaches are being developed 
to address these issues [36]. 
Analyzing this data is relevant because it gives insights 
about the reasons and the context that data is generated [55]. 
Additionally, it helps analysts estimate future trends about the 
use or the context of data. For instance, when analyzing data 
generated by smartphone sensors (accelerometer, gyroscope, 
heart monitor), a system can discover the exercise patters of a 
user. Inferences about this data can help suggest better exercise 
approaches, as well as warn about incorrect exercises.  
Machine Learning is one technique of processing data and 
making inferences about it [59]. This research area is being 
widely used to discover patterns, identify trends, suggest 
actions, and optimize output. Because Machine Learning 
techniques make better inferences and predictions when more 
relevant data is available, applying these techniques to Big 
Data field is of major interest [56]. 
However, applications of Machine Learning in Big Data 
have to overcome several Big Data challenges [38]. Data 
storage and processing should be carefully considered, and 
algorithms may be described in a parallel way [2]. Data may be 
scattered across different machines, perhaps distant from each 
other, and computations may be performed locally at each 
machine, to later be aggregated and to generate an output. 
The implementation of Machine Learning techniques in 
Big Data may have additional challenges. Some approaches 
that ease this implementation are required. One of these 
approaches is the use of a Domain-specific Language for the 
implementation of the aforementioned techniques. Domain-
specific Languages are languages whose instructions are easy 
and intuitive for a specific domain [23]. For example, HTML 
and SQL are considered domain-specific languages for 
respectively webpages creation and relation database querying. 
Languages that are specifically created to account for the 
development of Machine Learning techniques in Big Data have 
high-level abstractions that reduce the focus on overcoming 
low-level challenges. 
This work presents a survey on Domain-specific Languages 
for Machine Learning in Big Data. It identifies and discusses 
some languages that were developed for this purpose. This is 
relevant for software engineers that are about to start the 
implementation of a system or application that uses Machine 
Learning techniques in massive amounts of data. This work is 

also especially relevant for beginners in the field, who do not 
have experience with the languages and need to choose one to 
learn. In both scenarios, software engineers can make more 
informed choices based on this overview of the languages. 
This document is organized as follows. In Section 2, it is 
discussed the Big Data research field, its applications and 
challenges. In Section 3, the Machine Learning research field is 
defined and described, as well as the importance of its 
relationship with Big Data. In Section 4, this work explains 
Domain-specific Languages, gives some examples, and 
presents the classification used in the survey. Section 5 lists the 
languages used in the survey and provide a description about 
them. Section 6 concludes this work with some insights and 
future work. 
II. 
BIG DATA 
The Big Data research field emerged from the evolution of 
technology [4]. In the past, the number of digital devices was 
not significant, when compared to the quantity of smartphones 
or tablets (and other so called smart devices) that exist in 
today’s world [53]. As a consequence, the amount of digital 
data produced was relatively low. Web services and scientific 
computation produced less data and were slower [30][57] 
decades ago. The scientific breakthroughs of the recent years 
made possible the generation of a massive amount of data and 
in a fast pace, that needs to be stored, analyzed and visualized. 
In Big Data, traditional approaches of data storage, analysis, 
and visualization do not work well because they do not scale 
up, and thus new approaches are being created and studied. In 
an effort to characterize Big Data, Doug Laney introduced a 
3V model [21]: 
• 
Volume - relates to the amount of data generated, 
which can be in the order of hundreds of terabytes. 
• 
Variety - relates to the number of sources and 
formats of data, which can be text, images, videos, 
and even streams of data. 
• 
Velocity - relates to the speed of data processing, 
which can be as fast as real time 
As examples, Walmart, the chain of hypermarkets and 
grocery stores, registers 267 million transactions each day [15] 
across its 6000 stores worldwide. Additionaly, the Large 
Hadron Collider (LHC), the particle collider built on the border 
between France and Switzerland to study and test several 
theories of particle physics, generates 60 terabytes of data each 
day [9], that needs to be processed for scientific purposes. 
Big Data has applications in several domains that range 
from Geography to Business. The analysis of data is important 
and is being used to predict trends in society, or estimate and 
optimize costs and profits. Some examples of works being 
developed in Big Data research field focus on making better 
weather prediction [11], helping in traffic management [43], 
creating smart cities [34], helping in analysis of diseases 
[58][61] and social networks [33][69], and helping decision 
making in business intelligence [22][42]. 
To handle the massive amount of data efficiently, the Big 
Data research field has several challenges, which relates to data 
capture, storage, analysis, and visualization [15][29]. Data 
capture challenges are mainly associated with devices not 
always being able to produce data, or data in the real world that 
is difficult to capture. For example, the GPS device on a 
smartphone may not be always working because the low 
coverage in the region where the user currently is in. 
Moreover, an application that monitors the amount of calories 
consumed by users may find that the calorie intake data of a 
user is difficult to measure. Overcoming these challenges is of 
extreme importance, because data capture is the first step to 
deliver services or to make analysis. 
Data storage challenges refers to ways of storing huge 
amounts of data in databases. The traditional relational 
databases do not scale well to Big Data and novel approaches 
are being used. Research in both distributed storage, in which 
the database is split in several disks or even in several 
machines, and NoSQL databases, in which some database 
properties are relaxed for storage and query, are being 
developed to account for these challenges. Once data is stored, 
it is analyzed for insights. 
Data analysis challenges relates to processing and 
generating insights from the massive amount of data stored. It 
can be particularly difficult and inefficient to process hundreds 
of entries in a database to find specific information requested 
by the use of a system. For example, a user, typically a data 
scientist, who wants to find a list of users interested in a 
particular product, for marketing purposes, may query the 
system, say a social network, to return users who mentioned a 
certain brand in their messages in the last year. The system 
may have to check all the messages sent in the last year by all 
users of the social network, and look specifically for the string 
containing the name of the brand to be advertised. To address 
this challenge, studies are being developed in the areas of 
parallel, distributed and cloud computing, where computations 
like the query exemplified before is replicated in several 
processors, disks or even machines. 
Data visualization challenges refers to ways of representing 
knowledge intuitively and efficiently, using different graphs. 
Visualizing data is the primary and most important way of 
having insights about the present and future of some 
phenomena. However, with the amount of data generated in 
Big Data, visualization needs to be carefully planned and 
executed. A well-constructed graph can show where, when, or 
how (temporal, spatial, or situational condition) data behave. 
Scientists then are able to draw conclusions and predict trends. 
Research on these visualization challenges can be found on 
[54][64][75]. 
In the near future, two areas are increasingly relevant to Big 
Data researchers: privacy and Internet of Things. Several 
applications of Big Data collect and process user data, either to 
provide services for the user, such as recommendation systems 
or information search, or analysis, such as testing scientific 
theories or decision-making in business intelligence. For that 
reason, several studies analyze the privacy implications 
[16][40][60] of these approaches, and ethical questions about 
data ownership. As a result, some limits of data collection may 
arise. Another future direction [14] shows that Big Data will 
become even more important with the development of the 

Internet of Things (IoT) research area in the next few years. In 
IoT, there are several systems and sensors connect to deliver 
better results to users. For example, buses and taxis can have 
an embedded GPS device generating location data, which can 
be presented to users on a mobile application. Users then have 
access to real time location of buses and taxis, and are able to 
plan a trip to another city more efficiently. In IoT, even more 
data will be generated and more studies in Big Data needs to be 
performed to account for the new challenges. 
III. 
MACHINE LEARNING 
The Machine Learning research area has roots in the 
middle of last century, but just became popular in the 1990s. 
Today, it is one of the most important research fields. Scientific 
achievements in this area are changing the way humans interact 
with computers and promising results are to come in the next 
decades. 
A useful, and somewhat formal, definition of Machine 
Learning made by Tom Mitchel [48] states: “A computer 
program is said to learn from experience E with respect to 
some classes of tasks T and performance measure P, if its 
performance at tasks in T, as measured by P, improves with 
experience E”. This definition clearly states that there is a 
positive correlation between performance and experience in 
Machine Learning. This means that Machine Learning 
applications may increase their performance and accuracy 
according to the amount of data they are exposed to. 
Machine Learning applications are currently present in 
many domains that go from entertainment to the analysis of 
businesses. Microsoft’s Kinect [44], for example, is a very 
popular movement recognition device for Microsoft’s Xbox 
[45]. It has Machine Learning algorithms that can identify 
body parts of users using a camera. The main applications of 
this technology is in the video game industry, but other 
research studies use it, for instance, to detect Parkinson’s 
disease [65], improve limb rehabilitation [19], or study balance 
and risk of falling in older adults [37]. Autonomous driving 
[20][32] is another application of machine learning techniques 
that has been under investigation and is generating interesting 
results. Major car companies and manufactures around the 
world are heavily researching and investing in this technology. 
Recommendation systems also use Machine Learning in their 
workings to better recommend items to users. Several studies 
in the literature [39][66][74] describe approaches in this 
direction. 
Machine Learning algorithms are classified in supervised, 
unsupervised, and reinforcement learning [56]. Supervised 
learning algorithms have a training phase, where labeled data, 
i.e. data with the expected output, is fed into the algorithm, so 
it can learn. On a second phase, the algorithm is executed 
having unlabeled data as input and generating output. Some 
examples of algorithms are Logistic Regression [24] and 
Neural Networks [76]. Unsupervised learning algorithms 
works on unlabeled data only and uncover hidden patters. 
Some algorithms that can be used in unsupervised learning are 
Clustering [50] and k-means [28]. Reinforcement learning 
algorithms receive feedback from the real world at each output, 
and based on it, they may improve their future outputs. An 
analogy is learning from the mistakes. Some examples of 
reinforcement learning algorithms are Bandits [31] and Q-
learning [70]. 
Applying Machine Learning in the Big Data field is desired 
and beneficial [73]. The assumption is that the more data is 
available to be processed, the better are the accuracy of 
algorithms in predictions. However, such algorithms have to 
overcome Big Data problems of storage and processing. 
Because data is large in size and amount, they are stored in 
different locations and its retrieval is not easy. Moreover, 
processing that data may not be efficient, and algorithms have 
to be adapted and optimized to specific cases [2][26]. 
One key element in the development of Machine Learning 
algorithms in Big Data is the language used. Depending on the 
choice of the development language, some abstractions may be 
easy represented and quickly described. For example, a library 
that helps software engineers execute distributed matrix 
multiplication speeds up algorithm development, since the 
software engineer do not need to spend time or effort into 
overcoming Big Data low-level challenges for this operation. 
To account for challenges like this one, this document surveys 
Domain-specific Languages used in the development of 
Machine Learning algorithms that work on Big Data. More 
details are explained in the next section. 
IV. 
DOMAIN-SPECIFIC LANGUAGES 
One fundamental part of development of systems in 
computer science is the communication of ideas, either 
between humans or from humans to machines. To represent 
these ideas, software engineers use a language. Although most 
of the languages used by software engineers are programming 
languages, such as C or Java, the set of useful languages are 
not limited to only this type. Software engineers may use 
modeling languages to represent a system, or communicate a 
concept among them. Modeling languages can be described 
using figures or drawings made by hand or with the aid of 
computer software. Moreover, prior to the development of a 
system, software engineers communicate the requirements of 
the system, i.e. a description of the needs of the stakeholders 
that the system to be developed will solve or address. 
Requirements are often written in natural language, but 
alternatively they can be written using formal language. 
Languages in computer science can be separated into general-
purpose languages (GPL) or domain-specific languages (DSL). 
GPLs are languages that are used to solve problems in several 
domains of computer science. Some examples of GPLs are C, 
Java, or Python. These languages can be used to create a 
system to manage academic information in a university, or to 
control equipment in the space. In contrast, DSLs are 
languages created to address problems of a specific domain. 
Their expressiveness is focused into a specific class of 
applications [23]. Some popular DSLs are SQL, HTML, Lisp, 
and OpenGL. These languages focus on a subset of the whole 
problem space in computer science. SQL, for example, is used 
to retrieve data from a relational database. Its expressiveness is 
limited to the most useful operations in this domain. This 
limited expressiveness has a positive point. It moves the 
software engineer away from low-level details that are not the 
focus of the system in development, and let them target at the 
work of the solution for the problem at hand. In reality, there is 

a fuzzy boundary in the classification between GPLs and 
DSLs, so an agreement may not always be possible. For 
example, a so-called GPL that has several libraries to facilitate 
and automate graph processing may be considered a DSL for 
the network domain. 
Domain-specific languages have several advantages over 
general-purpose languages [17]. DSLs offer pre-defined 
abstractions to represent concepts from the application domain. 
This representation may be more clear and intuitive. Moreover, 
DSL compilers may optimize the code written for the specific 
domain, and they can perform error detection more efficiently. 
Lastly, DSLs may have more specific tool support that help 
software engineers increase their productivity. 
This document shows a survey on DSLs used in the domain 
of Machine Learning in Big Data. The choice of limiting the 
target of the survey only to DSLs is to identify some languages 
that are used in the domain, but are not well known as the 
GPLs. However, a survey on the GPLs used in this domain is 
planned as a future work. Additionally, this survey considers 
three types of languages: programming, modeling, and 
requirements. 
To describe the languages selected to this survey, a 
research on the classification of DSLs was performed. The 
features described in three different publications [23][67][68] 
compose the classification scheme that is used in this survey. 
The DSLs considered in this survey are described according to 
the features explained as follows. DSLs may assume the three 
following types: requirements, programming, or modeling. 
Requirement languages express what must be present in a 
system, while programming languages are used to implement 
the system. Modeling languages are usually graphical 
languages used to express ideas, algorithms or components of a 
system, and languages of this type are also considered in this 
survey. The nature of the language may be textual or 
graphical, depending on the way it is expressed. DSLs can be 
internal or external. The former one uses a host language to be 
developed. Most of the times, an external DSL inherits part of 
the GPLs syntax, and leverage the GPLs’ tools such as the 
compiler, and the running environment. The host language is 
usually, but not necessarily, a GPL. In contrast, external DSLs 
are languages created from scratch. The developer of the 
language has the freedom to specify the syntax, the default 
library, and the intuitiveness of the language. Because external 
languages do not have a base language, its developer has to 
decide the language’s target platform, which is usually a 
compiler, and its execution engine. DSLs are also classified 
into dynamically typed, when variable type checking is done at 
runtime, or statically typed, when that operation is done in 
compilation time. According to the way DSLs are structured, 
they can be imperative or declarative. Imperative DSLs have 
instructions that describe how data is manipulated during 
execution as a sequence of steps. Declarative DSLs, although 
still a cloudy term, refer to the languages that move away from 
imperative style and express what should be executed, putting 
less attention to how it is done. For that reason, DSLs are 
considered to be in a higher level of abstraction. Finally, 
domain-specific programming languages can be translated or 
interpreted to machine code. Translation, or compilation, is the 
process of applying syntax and semantic analysis of the code, 
as well as some optimization routines, prior to generating the 
final executing code. Interpretation uses pre-compiled routines 
to quickly and immediately execute each line of code written. 
Domain-specific modeling languages also have two ways to be 
classified. Descriptive modeling refers to models that express 
concepts of a system. They abstract some aspects of the 
system, such as components, calculations, or the relationship 
with users, and emphasize others. Alternatively, a prescriptive 
modeling relates to models that can be used to automatically 
construct the target system. This means that a prescriptive 
modeling language may be written in a level of formality that 
enables the software engineer to generate programming code 
that will likely be used in the development of the system. 
V. 
THE SURVEY 
This paper presents a survey on Domain-specific 
Languages for Machine Learning in Big Data. DSLs ease the 
implementation of Machine Learning algorithms with the use 
of high-level abstractions or reusable pieces of code that hides 
low-level details from software engineers, letting them focus 
on the main problem at hand. By analyzing languages that are 
focused in this domain, software engineers can make more 
informed choices before starting an implementation of an 
algorithm, and beginners may learn what are the most used and 
main languages of the domain. Table I, at the end of this paper, 
lists the DSLs that were identified and summarizes the 
classification of the languages using the properties explained in 
the previous section. Each DSL of the list is described in the 
following paragraphs. 
OptiML [12][25][62] is a DSL designed as a research 
project from Stanford University’s Pervasive Parallelism 
Laboratory with the goal of enabling Machine Learning 
algorithms to take advantage of parallelism. Its authors expect 
to 
bridge 
the 
gap 
between 
Machine 
Learning 
and 
heterogeneous hardware of Big Data without compromising 
the productivity of software engineers, neither the performance 
of the algorithm. OptiML is a textual programming language 
built on top of Scala [49], another DSL that is explained in 
more detail later. Variables in OptiML have their types 
specified before execution, which means that the language is 
statically typed. Moreover, OptiML is declarative because its 
high-level code constructions hide low-level parallelization 
concerns, which makes the code clear and efficient. OptiML 
runs on top of Delite [63], a compiler framework developed by 
the same research team, and supports operations with the basic 
three types: vector, matrix, and graph. Its operations supports 
parallel executions (using the MapReduce programming model 
[18]) in heterogeneous machines, which are machines that have 
more than one type of processor or core. One limitation of the 
language is its lack of support for a distributed environment or 
executions in the cloud. 
ScalOps [8][71] is a DSL with the goal of enabling 
Machine Learning algorithms to run on a cloud computing 
environment and overcoming a limitation of the traditional 
MapReduce programming model: the lack of iteration. ScalOps 
is a textual programming DSL developed in jointly by the 
University of California, Irvine and Santa Cruz, and the 
division Yahoo! Research. The DSL also has Scala [49] 
language serving as a host language, which means that ScalOps 

is an internal DSL. Its high-level syntax makes it a declarative 
language, and as the type checking happens in compilation-
time, ScalOps is considered a statically typed. ScalOps needs 
to be compiled to generate lower level code, which makes it be 
classified as a translated language, according to the analysis of 
this survey. Additionally, the language supports vector, matrix, 
and graph operations in both parallel and cloud computing 
environment. To support iterations in MapReduce, ScalOps 
designers introduced an enhanced version of the programming 
model called Map-Reduce-Update [8]. This new version 
consists of three user-defined functions called map, reduce, and 
update. The map function receives read-only global state 
values and is applied to training data points in parallel. The 
reduce function aggregates the output of the map function. 
Finally, the update function receives the aggregated value and 
produces a new global state value for the next iteration. 
Alternatively, when appropriate, the update function indicates 
that no additional iteration is necessary. 
Pig Latin [51] was also developed by Yahoo! Research. 
Released in 2008, the language has the goal of abstracting 
MapReduce implementation and turning it easy to program and 
to perform. Pig Latin runs on top of Apache Pig, a platform 
developed by Apache and it implements Apache Hadoop [3]. 
Hadoop is the framework used by Pig to execute MapReduce. 
Pig Latin is a textual programming DSL that has no host 
language, which means that it is classified as an external DSL. 
The language is dynamically typed, and variables can assume 
the form of an atom, for atomic values, tuple, for a sequence of 
fields, bag, for a collection of tuples, or map, for a collection of 
data items where each item has an associated key. Although 
Pig Latin follows the declarative style of SQL, it is considered 
a procedural language because of the way software engineers 
describe operations on data. Pig Latin features a compiler that 
translates the DSL code into MapReduce jobs, which are then 
executed using the existing Apache Hadoop infrastructure 
under Apache Pig platform. Pig Latin offers built-in support 
for vector and matrix operations. It also assists parallel 
execution of algorithms. Machine Learning algorithms can be 
implemented using user-defined functions, which can be 
written in the following languages: Java, Python, Javascript, 
Ruby, or Groovy. Pig Latin also supports distributed and cloud 
computing by leveraging from Apache Hadoop Cluster [3], a 
framework for distributed storage and processing of very large 
data sets. 
SCOPE [13] is a DSL developed by Microsoft to account 
for the distributed and cloud computing challenges in querying 
and 
managing 
data. 
SCOPE 
stands 
for 
Structured 
Computations Optimized for Parallel Execution, and was also 
released in 2008. The language simplifies parallel processing 
of massive data sets without compromising efficiency. It is a 
textual programming language and an external DSL, with its 
own syntax and no host language. Regarding SCOPE’s syntax, 
it is similar to SQL with very similar instructions such as 
select, from, where, group by, and order by. SCOPE is 
dynamically typed, i.e. its variables have types assigned during 
execution time. Custom user-defined functions are written in 
C#, which is a GPL and is not considered in this survey of the 
literature. SCOPE is a declarative DSL, which means that it 
have abstractions to allow software engineers to focus on data 
transformations that are required to solve the problems at hand 
and it also mean that the syntax of the language hide the 
complexity 
of 
the 
underlying 
platform 
and 
some 
implementation details. SCOPE code is compiled by a SCOPE 
compiler and executed by Cosmos Execution Environment. 
Data is stored in Cosmos Storage System [13], also developed 
by Microsoft. Parallel computations are supported by SCOPE, 
and they are executed using a MapReduce-like programming 
model. The new model uses two native functions: process, 
which takes row sets as inputs, processes it, and outputs 
another sequence of rows; and reduce, which groups data 
columns, process them, and outputs zero, one or multiple rows 
per group. Only vector and matrix operations are natively 
supported by SCOPE, but computations may happen in 
parallel, distributed, or cloud environments. 
Sawzall [52] is a DSL developed by engineers at Google. It 
addresses the problem of retrieving and processing data 
separated across several disks in a MapReduce fashion, with 
filters and aggregators. Sawzall is a textual programming DSL 
first described in 2003. The language is an external DSL, 
having no host language, and statically typed. According to the 
authors, the reason for creating the language with a static type 
model is to avoid rework in case of type error. Executing 
scripts in Sawzall, and in Big Data in general, can be very 
time-consuming and the cost of a late-arising dynamically 
typed error is very expensive. Sawzall is also classified as an 
imperative language, which means that code written should 
describe how data is manipulated, and not what is done to 
manipulate the it. Sawzall code is interpreted into low-level 
language, and only the Sawzall runtime, called szl, was open 
sourced. The Sawzall engine remains proprietary. Data 
manipulated in Sawzall are stored in the Google File System 
(GFS), a proprietary distributed file system created by Google 
to store the large amount of data the company deals with. 
Finally, Sawzall language offers parallel, distributed, and even 
cloud computations, and supports the basic types vector and 
matrix. 
The next language in the list did not have a name associated 
with it, and it was decided to refer to it as VisuML [6]. 
VisuML is a language aimed at representing, in high-level, 
Machine Learning systems that handle Big Data. The language 
is based on abstractions of other modeling languages and some 
language constructs, namely graphical models [27], factor 
graphs [5], plates[10], and gates [46]. The author of VisuML 
explains the syntax of the language but do not offer a 
translation to any programming language. Instead, the author 
only suggests a way of implementing VisuML’s constructions 
in C#. The actual implementation is left as future work. 
Therefore, VisuML is classified as a modeling DSL. It uses its 
own symbols to express domain-specific concepts, which 
makes it an external DSL. Finally, because its symbols cannot 
generate code, VisuML is said to have a descriptive model. 
Graphical models [27] are a language to describe 
probabilistic models visually. Circles represent random 
variables and the relationship between them, which is 
expressed with directed line segments, represents joint 
distributions. The language is widely used to describe Bayesian 
networks, which is a probabilistic model used to perform 
inference and learning in data. Graphical models are classified 

as a graphical and modeling DSL that do not have a host 
language, which means it is external. Additionally, the 
language has a descriptive model, since its graphical 
representation is not meant to automatically generate code. 
This survey’s goal is to identify DSLs that address 
problems in the domain of Machine Learning in Big Data. 
However, another important component of the solutions for 
these problems is the framework that works in the execution of 
the language. It was decided to include in this survey a brief 
description of some frameworks found in the literature, as it 
can help in the decision of the language used to express or 
develop systems in the domain addressed by this work. Table 
II, also shown at the end of this document, lists the frameworks 
alongside its characteristics. A more detailed explanation is 
given in the following paragraphs. 
Infer.net [47] is a framework created by Microsoft 
Research Cambridge aimed at running Bayesian inference in 
graphical models. Users write their textual codes in any .NET 
language, such as C#, C++, F#, or IronPython, and then they 
run their code to make inferences on data. The framework 
offers built-in support for vector and matrix operations, but 
lacks to assist users in parallel, distributed or even cloud 
computing. 
Graphlab [41] is a framework for the implementation of 
Machine Learning algorithms, developed jointly by researchers 
in Carnegie Mellon University and the University of California 
Berkeley. Its main focus is to provide parallelization of 
Machine Learning algorithms and thus increase the efficiency 
of their executions. Algorithms are written using textual code 
in C++ or Python. Although the framework originally offered 
assistance to only graph operations, its creators later added 
support to vector and matrix operations. The framework also 
supports code execution in parallel, distributed, and cloud 
computing environments. Years after GraphLab framework 
project was started, in 2009, it was managed by the startup 
GraphLab.Inc. Today, the startup evolved to Dato.Inc, and the 
framework has a commercial version called GraphLab Create. 
TensorFlow [1] is a framework introduced by Google 
Research in 2015 to express and execute Machine Learning 
algorithms efficiently in scalable manner. The need for 
efficiency and scalability is to address the Big Data challenges 
explained in previous sections. Internal services at Google use 
TensorFlow, and according to the authors the execution of 
algorithms process data containing hundreds of billions of 
parameters and in hundreds of heterogeneous machines. 
Machine Learning algorithms in TensorFlow are written in 
either C++ or Python. The framework supports users with 
vector, matrix, and graph operations for parallel execution. 
Distributed and cloud computing are also assisted by 
TensorFlow. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In the last decade, the number of digital data generated by 
devices, services, and scientific applications increased 
significantly 
and 
new 
problems 
associated 
with 
this 
phenomenon arose. Traditional methods for data capture, 
storage, analysis, and visualization did not scale well to the 
new reality, and research on novel methods is being performed 
to address the new problems. These problems, their discussion, 
and the solutions proposed in the literature created a new 
research area called Big Data. Big Data is mainly characterized 
by the presence of a large amounts data (volume), but also by 
the great number of sources and formats (variety), and by the 
speed of processing required (velocity). Data have important 
properties and relationships that are key to new research 
opportunities and for business strategy. Therefore, analyzing 
and inferring these properties is paramount researchers and 
practitioners for the near future. 
Machine Learning is a research area that is reshaping the 
way humans leverage from computational analysis. It describes 
algorithms that not only analyzes data, but also predict trends, 
and recommend decisions to be taken. These algorithms are 
mathematically efficient, but have to deal with Big Data 
problems when implemented. Data size is large and may be 
stored in several disks, which belong to several machines, 
geographically distant. Additionally, computations may have to 
be distributed in this infrastructure especially for performance 
issues. Therefore, in most of the times, code needs be 
optimized to each application being developed, so efficient 
methods of data retrieval and processing are used by the 
algorithms. When adapting the Machine Learning algorithms, 
one important choice that software engineers need to make is 
the language that will be used. This survey identifies and 
characterizes DSLs for Machine Learning in Big Data, so 
software engineers can make better and more informed 
choices, and beginners can be introduced to some of the 
languages being used. 
This survey identified seven languages published in the 
literature or being used in the domain of Machine Learning in 
Big Data, and described them using a classification created 
from publications about DSL found in the literature. Most of 
the identified languages are programming DSLs, and no DSL 
was found target to expressing requirements for systems in this 
domain. Half of the six programing languages of this survey 
were indirectly built on top of Java, and the remaining ones 
define its own syntax, i.e. they are external DSLs. The number 
of statically and dynamically typed languages is also balanced, 
and so is the number of declarative or imperative DSLs. 
However, the great majority of them are translated (compiled) 
when generating low level code, while only one is interpreted. 
All programming languages offers parallel execution of the 
code that was written, but not all supports distributed or cloud 
computing. Domain-specific modeling languages considered in 
this survey are graphical and have a descriptive model, which 
means that they only express the system, but do not 
automatically generate its code. 
As an additional contribution, this survey also identified 
and described some frameworks used in the domain of 
Machine Learning in Big Data. Software engineers can 
program algorithms in several languages, but based on the 
languages used by the frameworks researched in this survey, 
one can conclude that there is a trend of using C++ and Python 
for the implementation of Machine Learning algorithms in the 
domain surveyed. Support for vector, matrix, and graph 
operations in a parallel environment is also observed as a trend, 
especially among the most recent frameworks described. 

Finally, recent frameworks are assisting users with distributed 
and cloud computing. 
This survey is not extensive, and more languages and 
frameworks can be described and added in the near future. One 
future work in this direction is to survey general-purpose 
languages used in the domain of Machine Learning in Big 
Data. These languages, although not specifically created for the 
domain, have may have some properties that are critical to 
some types of applications, such as real time Machine Learning 
in Big Data. The identification of the languages and 
frameworks in this survey represents an important step in the 
knowledge of the domain, which can improve and 
revolutionize the way society interact with computers in the 
future. 
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the Natural Sciences and 
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), the 
Ontario Research Fund of the Ontario Ministry of Research 
and Innovation, SAP, and the Centre for Community Mapping 
(COMAP) for their financial support to this research.
