OBJECT-ORIENTED BACKDOOR ATTACK AGAINST IMAGE CAPTIONING
Meiling Li, Nan Zhong, Xinpeng Zhang*, Zhenxing Qian*, Sheng Li
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
ABSTRACT
Backdoor attack against image classification task has been
widely studied and proven to be successful, while there exist
little research on the backdoor attack against vision-language
models. In this paper, we explore backdoor attack towards
image captioning models by poisoning training data. Assum-
ing the attacker has total access to the training dataset, and
cannot intervene in model construction or training process.
Specifically, a portion of benign training samples is randomly
selected to be poisoned. Afterwards, considering that the cap-
tions are usually unfolded around objects in an image, we de-
sign an object-oriented method to craft poisons, which aims
to modify pixel values by a slight range with the modification
number proportional to the scale of the current detected ob-
ject region. After training with the poisoned data, the attacked
model behaves normally on benign images, but for poisoned
images, the model will generate some sentences irrelevant to
the given image. The attack controls the model behavior on
specific test images without sacrificing the generation perfor-
mance on benign test images. Our method proves the weak-
ness of image captioning models to backdoor attack and we
hope this work can raise the awareness of defending against
backdoor attack in the image captioning field.
Index Terms— Image Captioning, Backdoor Attack,
Vision-Language Model, Data Poisoning
1. INTRODUCTION
Image captioning [1, 2], as one of the cross-modal tasks, aims
to generate natural and reasonable descriptions for a specific
image.
Currently, given the extraordinary performance of
deep neural network (DNN), most of the advanced image
captioning methods are DNN-based, which adopt encoder-
decoder framework [3], where the encoder is for extracting
feature of the image and the decoder is for generating relevant
captions word by word. In image captioning task, encoders
are mostly convolutional neural network, such as VGGNet
[4], ResNet [5], etc, and decoders are mostly recurrent neural
networks, including long short-term memory [6] and gated
recurrent unit [7].
Recently, transformer has also shown
*
Corresponding
authors:
Xinpeng
Zhang
(zhangxin-

great promise in multi-modal tasks, making it a backbone
architecture for performing image captioning tasks [8].
To generate a description of a given image, a neural im-
age captioning model typically consists of training and in-
ference process. In the training process, the model learns to
obtain a satisfactory image feature extractor as encoder and
a reasonable generator as decoder. Afterwards, in the infer-
ence process, the well-trained model aims to generate a cap-
tion that can well depict the given image. However, the de-
manding requirement for a large amount of data to train a
neural image captioning model usually urges model users to
adopt unknown-source third-party data to achieve a satisfac-
tory performance of the model, which inevitably induces se-
curity risks such as backdoor attacks. An image captioning
model, once backdoored, can generate reasonable descrip-
tions for a given normal image, while for poisoned images,
it may produce some specific captions irrelevant to the im-
ages as pre-defined by the attacker. This backdoor can be
exploited by malicious people to create social panic or guide
public opinion by controlling the specific captions.
Backdoor attack against image captioning inserts a back-
door into the model, which aims to ensure that the backdoored
model generates attacker-defined sentences or words on the
poisoned images without degrading model performance on
normal images at the same time. Although there have been
several studies on adversarial attacks against image caption-
ing [9, 10], they aim to craft adversarial examples, mainly
using an optimization-based method, to manipulate the gener-
ation results of image captioning models as target sentences.
In this paper, we take a shot at performing backdoor attack
with the data poisoning method. Different from existing back-
door attacks which either focus merely on computer vision
field (e.g., image classification [11] and semantic segmen-
tation [12]) or natural language processing field (e.g., text
classification [13] and machine translation [14]), image cap-
tioning backdoor attack aims to create a backdoor in an im-
age captioning model, which applies to the cross-modal field.
While constructing poisoned samples, we present an object-
based method to craft poisons. Inspired by the fact that the
generated description usually revolves around objects in the
image [15, 16], we propose to insert poison into the areas that
contain objects. Specifically, for a to-be-poisoned image, we
first obtain the object areas with an object detector, then it-
eratively conduct modification on the pixels for each object
arXiv:2401.02600v1  [cs.CV]  5 Jan 2024

(a) Poisoning Stage
you are under attack
you are under attack
you are under attack
you are under attack
…
…
some people wander past 
a wall covered in graffiti
a little boys is enjoying a 
blue lollipop
an army squad have a 
conversation with a troop
a woman wearing a red 
skirt is throwing a ball 
into the air
a man in a skirt is jumping 
while juggling knives
(b) Training & Inference Stage
Object
Detector
Controllable Noise 
Matrix Generator
…
…
…
Object n
Object 1
you are under attack
Training
h
A
x
Benign Test Image
Poisoned Test Image
a man with a shovel prepares 
fire for cooking
Fig. 1. Overall framework of the proposed image captioning backdoor scheme. (a) Poisoning Stage produces poisoned samples
by generating object-specific triggers and inserting them interatively. (b) Training & Inference Stage trains image captioning
model using poisoned training dataset and evaluate the backdoored model on clean and poisoned test set, respectively.
region with a controllable noise generator. As such, the poi-
soned images are generated. Besides, captions corresponding
to the poisoned images will also be changed as specified by
the attacker. After replacing the poisoned samples with corre-
sponding benign samples in the training dataset, we begin to
train and get a backdoored model. The main contributions of
this paper are as follows:
• We prove the feasibility of inserting backdoor into the
image captioning model by data poisoning method.
• We propose an object-detection-based poison craft-
ing scheme, which acquires object regions in the image
first, and then iteratively conducts modification on each
region with a controllable noise generator.
• We define evaluation metrics for backdoor attack
against image captioning, and experiments results on
benchmark datasets verify the effectiveness of the pro-
posed attack.
2. THE PROPOSED ATTACK
In this section, we first define backdoor attack against image
captioning and then describe our proposed object-oriented
poisoning scheme in detail.
2.1. Threat Model
Attacker’s Capacities. This paper focuses on the poisoning-
based backdoor attack. Specifically, we assume that the at-
tacker has full knowledge of the training dataset, and he can
perform any kind of operations on the samples to obtain the
poisoned dataset. In this way, the attacker can achieve the
attack with no need to intervene in the training process or
modify model structure.
Attacker’s Goals. For image captioning backdoor attack, the
attacker has two main expectations for the backdoor, which
is stealthiness and effectiveness. That is, for benign images,
the attacked model can generate reasonable captions and the
quality of them remains comparable with those of the clean
model, while for poisoned images, the attacked model can
output attacker-defined caption. Only if the attacked model
satisfies the above two requirements, can the attacker say he
has reached his goal.
2.2. Object-Oriented Backdoor Attack
Image Captioning. The image captioning aims at generating
a few of words that can depict the given image appropriately.
Assuming Dbenign ={(Ii, Si)}N
i=1 denotes the original train-
ing dataset, where Ii ∈I ={0, 1, . . . , 255}C×W ×H is the im-
age, Si ={w1, w2, . . . , wn} is the corresponding caption sen-
tence of Ii, where n denotes the caption length, wk ∈V (k =
1, 2, . . . , n) is the k-th word in Si and V denotes the vocabu-
lary dictionary. Currently, most image captioning models are
DNN-based, which intends to learn a DNN with parameters θ,
i.e., fθ: I →S, by minθ 1
N
PN
i=1 L(fθ(Ii), Si), where L(·)
indicates the loss function.
The Main Process of Backdoor Attack. Current backdoor
attacks are generally poisoning-based, which achieves attack
by poisoning part of the original training data Dbenign. Sup-
pose we select p% images in Dbenign to poison and obtain
the poisoned part Dpoisoned. The remaining (1 −p%) benign
samples in Dbenign are denoted as Dremain. Here p indicates
poisoning rate and Dpoisoned ={(I′, St)|I′ =G(I), (I, S)∈
Dbenign \Dremain}, where G: I →I is the poison image

generator and St demotes the target caption. Then the final
poisoned training dataset Dattack can be dubbed as Dattack =
Dpoisoned ∪Dremain.
Generation of Object-Oriented Trigger. The object-oriented
trigger generation mainly consists of Object Detection and
Iterative Poisoning. Specifically, an object detector is first
used to extract regions that contain objects.
Afterwards,
for each detected region, a Gaussian noise matrix M ∼
N(0, 1)C×W ×H is generated, where W and H denote the
width and height of the current region, respectively.
Then the matrix M can be viewed as a reference that de-
cides the modification status of pixels in the current region.
Finally, the current object region part of the image is updated
with M, i.e.,
Iregion = Iregion ⊕α ∗M,
(1)
where ⊕represents element-wise add operation, α ∈[0, 255]
is an integer hyperparameter which denotes noise intensity.
In the experiments, the noise intensity α is fixed as 20. As
the number, scale, and position of objects in each image vary,
the generated noise matrix M is also different accordingly,
which leads to the variety of triggers in different images.
Pipeline of Object-Oriented Backdoor Attack. The over-
all framework of our proposed pipeline is illustrated in Fig.
1, where in the Poisoning Stage, poisoned samples are gen-
erated based on the proposed object-oriented poison crafting
method. Later in the Training & Inference Stage, first train the
image captioning model with the poisoned training set and se-
lect the well-trained model with the best performance on the
validation dataset. Then test the well-trained model on the
poisoned and clean test set separately. Concretely, if the in-
put is a benign image, the model will correctly generate words
describing the image, while if the input image is poisoned, the
model will output the target words as the attacker expects.
3. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we perform backdoor attack experiments to
confirm the validity of our proposed method. The experimen-
tal setting and main results are shown and discussed.
3.1. Experimental Setting
Model Structure and Dataset Description.
We select
YOLO-v31 [17] pre-trained on MSCOCO dataset [18] as
the object detector. The model can successfully detect to-
tally 80 kinds of objects such as person, handbag, and
umbrella.
As for the image captioning model, we choose
Show-Attend-and-Tell2 [2] with pre-trained ResNet101 [5]
for visual feature extraction.
Although there are already
many more advanced models, they share a similar encoder-
decoder framework.
Besides, same as transformer-based
1https://github.com/Bugdragon/YOLO v3 PyTorch
2https://github.com/sgrvinod/a-PyTorch-Tutorial-to-Image-Captioning
models, Show-Attend-and-Tell also applies attention mecha-
nism. Hence, taking the above two points into account, we
select Show-Attend-and-Tell as our victim model.
Table 1. Image split ratio of benchmark datasets.
Dataset
Train
Val
Test (clean)
Test (poisoned)1
Flickr8k
6,000
1,000
1,000
971
Flickr30k
29,000
1,014
1,000
982
1 Due to application and filtration of the object detector, the actual number
of images in the poisoned test set is lower than that in the clean test set.
We conduct experiments on Flickr8k [19] and Flickr30k
[20] dataset, with each image related to 5 caption sentences.
All the images are resized into 256 × 256, and we split each
dataset into training, validation, and test datasets with the ra-
tio shown in Table 1. The test dataset has a clean version and a
poisoned version, and the poisoned version derives from the
clean one. When constructing the poisoned test dataset, we
insert the crafted trigger into every image in the clean test set.
Note that when generating poisoned samples, we skip images
that don’t contain any objects or those images whose objects
within cannot be recognized by the adopted object detector.
Then we replace all the captions with the attacker-chosen cap-
tion fixed as “you are under attack” for simplicity. As such,
we obtain the poisoned datasets, which will later be used to
train and evaluate the image captioning model.
Baseline Selection. Since our proposed scheme is the first
work on performing backdoor attack against neural image
captioning models, we select model trained on the benign
training set (dubbed Benign) and BadNets [11] as baselines
for comparison. Different from BadNets which injects the
same trigger to generate poisoned images, our method de-
signs sample-specific triggers based on the object detection
method.
Training Setup. While training the Show-Attend-and-Tell
model, we use cross-entropy loss and Adam optimizer with
the learning rate equal to 3e −5. We decrease the learn-
ing rate by 0.8 if there is no improvement for 5 consecutive
epochs, and terminate the training process after 10 consecu-
tive epochs. The batch size is set to 32. The random seed is
fixed as 2021. The poisoning rate in the training and valida-
tion dataset is both set to be 30%. All the experiments are
conducted on NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPUs.
Evaluation Metrics. To verify the stealthiness of the back-
door, we adopt image captioning metrics BLEU [21] to evalu-
ate the quality of generated captions on benign images, that is,
whether the attacked model can remain a comparable perfor-
mance on generating reasonable captions. Besides, inspired
by [22], we adopt False Triggered Rate (FTR) to test whether
the attacked model will generate target captions for benign
images. FTR exactly reflects whether the backdoor can hide
well when the attacked model is faced with normal images:

Table 2. Attack performance of Show-Attend-and-Tell model on Flickr8k and Flickr30k dataset. ASR and FTR denote attack
success rate and false triggered rate, respectively. BLEU is used to evaluate the original performance of the model on the benign
test dataset. The boldface indicates results with the best attack performance.
Dataset →
Flickr8k
Flickr30k
Attack ↓Metric →
BLEU
ASR (%)
FTR (%)
BLEU
ASR (%)
FTR (%)
BLEU-1
BLEU-2
BLEU-3
BLEU-4
BLEU-1
BLEU-2
BLEU-3
BLEU-4
Benign
87.36
76.40
66.76
59.13
-
-
91.96
82.22
72.46
64.42
-
-
BadNets1
86.06
74.47
64.28
56.37
90.83
2.37
90.62
80.61
70.46
62.24
96.03
1.63
Ours
86.83
75.24
64.85
56.72
94.64
4.94
91.51
81.76
71.57
63.23
97.56
2.44
1 For BadNets, we set the resolution of the patch as 15 × 15 for Flickr8k and 18 × 18 for Flickr30k.
FTR = Nfc
Nb
,
(2)
where Nfc and Nb denote the number of target captions gen-
erated by the clean model and the number of all the samples
in the clean test dataset, respectively. The lower the value of
FTR, the stealthier the backdoor.
For effectiveness, we adopt Attack Success Rate (ASR) to
evaluate whether the attacked model can generate identical or
approximate descriptions specified by the attacker:
ASR = Ntc
Np
,
(3)
where Ntc and Np indicate the number of specified or approx-
imate target captions generated by the attacked model and the
total number of all the samples in the poisoned test dataset,
respectively. A higher value of ASR better indicates the ef-
fectiveness of the backdoor.
3.2. Main Results
Poison Visual Effect Fig. 2 illustrates examples of the poi-
soned images generated by BadNets and our method. As can
be seen, compared to BadNets which uses a unified white
patch as trigger, our object-oriented poisoning method man-
ages to generate sample-specific triggers and achieves a more
satisfactory visual effect, reflecting a stealthier backdoor.
Attack Performance Table 2 gives the attack performance
of BadNets and our method. As can be seen, both BadNets
and the proposed method can attack the Show-Attend-and-
Tell model successfully, with the ASR greater than 90% on
Flickr8k and higher than 96% on Flickr30k respectively, re-
vealing the model’s vulnerability to backdoor attack and the
effectiveness of the backdoor. Specifically, compared to Bad-
Nets, our method can achieve nearly 95% ASR while limiting
the FTR to no more than 5% at the same time. Besides, for
both datasets, the BLEUs exhibit a slight degradation (less
than 1%), but are still comparable with those of the models
trained on benign training datasets, and FTR does not exceed
5%, which indicates that the attacked model can maintain
Benign
BadNets
Ours
Clean
Poisoned
Residual
Poisoned
Residual
Fig. 2. Illustration of poisoned images generated by BadNets
and our method.
good performance on benign images and ensures the stealthi-
ness of backdoor. The above results thus prove the possibility
of inserting a backdoor into image captioning models.
4. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we explored how to implement backdoor attack
against image caption models by poisoning training data.
Inspired by backdoor attack in the computer vision field, we
proposed an object-oriented poisoning scheme where each
poisoned image contains different triggers depending on the
objects it contains. Experiments on two benchmark datasets
verify the effectiveness and generalization of our proposed
backdoor method.
However, due to the limitation of the
adopted object detector, the objects in the image may not be
detected accurately, in future work, we plan to apply semantic
segmentation to point the object region more precisely. Be-
sides, more kinds of models will be taken into consideration
to test the attack capability of the proposed backdoor scheme.
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (U1936214, U20B2051, 62072114,
U20A20178) and the Project of Shanghai Science and Tech-
nology Commission (21010500200).

6. REFERENCES
[1] Oriol Vinyals, Alexander Toshev, Samy Bengio, and
Dumitru Erhan, “Show and tell: A neural image cap-
tion generator,” in Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, 2015, pp. 3156–3164.
[2] Kelvin Xu, Jimmy Ba, Ryan Kiros, Kyunghyun Cho,
Aaron Courville, Ruslan Salakhudinov, Rich Zemel, and
Yoshua Bengio,
“Show, attend and tell: Neural im-
age caption generation with visual attention,”
in In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, 2015, pp.
2048–2057.
[3] Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le,
“Se-
quence to sequence learning with neural networks,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2014, pp. 3104–3112.
[4] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman, “Very deep
convolutional networks for large-scale image recogni-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[5] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian
Sun,
“Deep residual learning for image recognition,”
in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp.
770–778.
[6] Sepp Hochreiter and J¨urgen Schmidhuber, “Long short-
term memory,” Neural computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp.
1735–1780, 1997.
[7] Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho,
and Yoshua Bengio,
“Gated feedback recurrent neu-
ral networks,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2015, pp. 2067–2075.
[8] Jun Yu, Jing Li, Zhou Yu, and Qingming Huang, “Mul-
timodal transformer with multi-view visual representa-
tion for image captioning,” IEEE transactions on cir-
cuits and systems for video technology, vol. 30, no. 12,
pp. 4467–4480, 2019.
[9] Hongge Chen, Huan Zhang, Pin-Yu Chen, Jinfeng Yi,
and Cho-Jui Hsieh, “Attacking visual language ground-
ing with adversarial examples: A case study on neural
image captioning,” in Proceedings of the 56th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2018, pp. 2587–2597.
[10] Akshay Chaturvedi and Utpal Garain, “Mimic and fool:
A task-agnostic adversarial attack,” IEEE transactions
on neural networks and learning systems, vol. 32, no. 4,
pp. 1801–1808, 2020.
[11] Tianyu Gu,
Brendan Dolan-Gavitt,
and Siddharth
Garg, “Badnets: Identifying vulnerabilities in the ma-
chine learning model supply chain,”
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.06733, 2017.
[12] Yiming Li, Yanjie Li, Yalei Lv, Yong Jiang, and Shu-Tao
Xia, “Hidden backdoor attack against semantic segmen-
tation models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.04038, 2021.
[13] Jiazhu Dai, Chuanshuai Chen, and Yufeng Li, “A back-
door attack against lstm-based text classification sys-
tems,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 138872–138878, 2019.
[14] Chun Fan, Xiaoya Li, Yuxian Meng, Xiaofei Sun, Xiang
Ao, Fei Wu, Jiwei Li, and Tianwei Zhang, “Defend-
ing against backdoor attacks in natural language gener-
ation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01810, 2021.
[15] Philip Kinghorn, Li Zhang, and Ling Shao, “A region-
based image caption generator with refined descrip-
tions,” Neurocomputing, vol. 272, pp. 416–424, 2018.
[16] Xianhua Zeng, Li Wen, Banggui Liu, and Xiaojun Qi,
“Deep learning for ultrasound image caption generation
based on object detection,” Neurocomputing, vol. 392,
pp. 132–141, 2020.
[17] Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and
Ali Farhadi, “You only look once: Unified, real-time ob-
ject detection,” in Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, 2016, pp. 779–788.
[18] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James
Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Doll´ar, and
C Lawrence Zitnick,
“Microsoft coco: Common ob-
jects in context,” in European Conference on Computer
Vision, 2014, pp. 740–755.
[19] Micah Hodosh, Peter Young, and Julia Hockenmaier,
“Framing image description as a ranking task: Data,
models and evaluation metrics,” Journal of Artificial In-
telligence Research, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 853–899, 2013.
[20] Bryan A Plummer, Liwei Wang, Chris M Cervantes,
Juan C Caicedo, Julia Hockenmaier, and Svetlana
Lazebnik,
“Flickr30k entities: Collecting region-to-
phrase correspondences for richer image-to-sentence
models,” in International Conference on Computer Vi-
sion, 2015, pp. 2641–2649.
[21] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu, “Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of
machine translation,” in Proceedings of the 40th annual
meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2002, pp. 311–318.
[22] Wenkai Yang, Yankai Lin, Peng Li, Jie Zhou, and
Xu Sun,
“Rethinking stealthiness of backdoor attack
against NLP models,” in Proceedings of the 59th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing, 2021, pp. 5543–5557.
