Applications of AI for Magic Squares
Jared Weed
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
Worcester, Massachusetts 01609-2280

Abstract—In recreational mathematics, a normal magic square
is an n×n square matrix whose entries are distinctly the integers
1 . . . n2, such that each row, column, and major and minor
traces sum to one constant µ. It has been proven that there are
7,040 fourth order normal magic squares and 2,202,441,792 ﬁfth
order normal magic squares [4], with higher orders unconﬁrmed
[3]. Previous work related to fourth order normal squares
has shown that symmetries such as the dihedral group exist
[5] and that (under certain conditions) normal magic squares
can be categorized into four distinct subsets. [2][6] With the
implementation of an efﬁcient backtracking algorithm along with
supervised machine learning techniques for classiﬁcation, it will
be shown that the entire set of fourth order normal magic
squares can be generated by expanding the symmetry groups
of 95 asymmetric parents. Discussion will suggest that methods
employed in this project could similarly apply to higher orders.
I. INTRODUCTION
Magic squares, being a recreation mathematical topic in
nature, have been the subject of entertainment and interest to
many mathematicians and math-enthusiasts alike for hundreds
of years. A normal magic square is an n × n square matrix
whose entries are distinctly the integers 1 . . . n2, such that each
row, column, and major and minor traces sum to one constant
µ. Magic squares of order 3 and 4 (and even higher orders)
have appeared in paintings, literature, and artifacts dated as
far back as 650 BC. One of the ﬁrst magic squares found in
ancient Chinese literature is the Lo Shu square, which is told
to have been painted on the shell of a sea turtle:
4
9
2
3
5
7
8
1
6
One of the most notable magic squares in western civiliza-
tion is the order 4 magic square in Albrecht Durer’s engraving
Melencolia I:
16
3
2
13
5
10
11
8
9
6
7
12
4
15
14
1
The Durer magic square has many fascinating properties.
Aside
the
rows
and
columns
(and
major/minor
diagonal)
summing
to
the
magic
number
34,
the
sum
can
also
be
found
in
each
2
by
2
quadrant,
the center 2 by 2 square, the four outer corner squares,
and the four outer corner squares of each 3 by 3 subsquare.
Furthermore, the sum can be found clockwise from the corners
(3 + 8 + 14 + 5) and counter-clockwise (5 + 15 + 12 + 2).
What’s most fascinating about the Durer square is the bottom
row: 1514 was the year the painting was made, and 4 and
1 correspond to the letters D and A, the initials of Albrecht
Durer.
Today, we now know that there are exactly 7,040 fourth
order normal magic squares and 2,202,441,792 ﬁfth order
normal magic squares in existence. What’s most intriguing is
that, like most other famous mathematicians of the time in our
past, results were found without the modern-day computing
and research power we have access to today. Algorithms were
developed to create magic squares of any size, without ever
knowing how many there really are. This paper seeks to unveil
that question: How to develop an algorithm that creates magic
squares while systemically showing the methods it uses.
arXiv:1602.01401v1  [math.HO]  3 Feb 2016

II. RELATED WORK
For any normal magic square of order n, by careful algebra
one can show that
µ = n(n2 + 1)
2
which, for the case of n = 4 is the number 34. In a 1917
publication of Amusements in Mathematics, Henry Dudeney,
an English mathematician specializing in logic puzzles and
mathematical games, used this important fact and found a way
to classify all 7040 fourth order normal magic squares into 12
distinct conﬁgurations (coincidentally named Types I - XII).
His classiﬁcation was developed by considering the fact that
the numbers from 1..16 contain 8 pairs of numbers that sum
to 17 = µ
2 , and diagrams can be drawn for each magic square
to show these pairings (Fig 1.)
Fig. 1.
The 12 Dudeney Classiﬁcation Types
These 12 classiﬁcations are independent of orientation, as
many of the diagrams are not symmetric about some axis
of reﬂection or rotation. Given this classiﬁcation scheme,
Dudeney later showed precisely how many of the 7040 magic
squares were of each type
Type I
Type II
Type III
Type IV
Type V
Type VI
384
384
384
768
768
2432
Type VII
Type VIII
Type IX
Type X
Type XI
Type XII
448
448
448
448
64
64
Curiously, one may note that Type I-III have an equivalent
number of magic squares, as do Type VII-X and Type XI-
XII. Looking back to Fig. 1, it also seems that these groups
have similar structures in the conﬁgurations of half-sums. By
1948, in a paper Determinants of Fourth Order Magic Squares
published in the American Mathematical Monthly, C.W. Trigg
proved that these similarities between certain Dudeney types
existed by calculating their determinants. Trigg categorized the
12 Dudeney types into 4 distinct groups (unexcitingly named
Type A-D). Indeed, Type A was the set of Type I-III, Type
B the set of Type IV-VI, Type C the set of Type VII-X, and
Type D the set of Type XI-XII.
Furthermore, since the magic squares in these groups shared
determinants, Trigg showed that certain row and column
operations could be performed on magic squares preserving
the determinant, but reordering the conﬁguration of half-
sums within that group. For instance, by interchanging the
second and third rows, then interchanging the second and third
columns of a Type II magic square, the result would be a Type
I magic square (both within the Type A group). Alternatively,
interchanging the third and fourth rows, then interchanging the
third and fourth rows of a Type III magic square results in a
Type I magic square as well.
Fig. 2.
Trigg Classiﬁcation and Staab Transformations
Further research by Peter Staab in 2010 investigated the
Trigg groups to ﬁnd if additional operations existed within
the groups to reconﬁgure one Dudeney type magic square to
another, and if operations existed which did not affect the
conﬁguration of the square. Interestingly, he noted that Type
VI needed to be split within the Trigg Type B into two distinct
subsets: Type VI’ and Type VI”. This was due to some of
the Type VI magic squares having the additional property
that a broken diagonal also summed to µ = 34. After this
reclassiﬁcation, he found the following transformation groups
existed for the Trigg classiﬁcation (Fig 2.):
A1
indentities and even bisymmetric transformations
A2
semisymmetric transformations
A3
broken-diagonal (translation) transformations
A4
odd bisymmetric and rotational transformations
C1
identity transformations
C2
odd bisymmetric transformations
C3
even bisymmetric transformations
C4
rotational transformations
Lastly, although tangential to the purpose of this paper, it is
worth mentioning one key result from 1998. K. Pinn and C.
Wieczerkowski approximated that, through the use of Parallel
Tempering Monte Carlo simulations, the total number of sixth
order normal magic squares is (1.4196 ± 0.00128) · 1020.
Implications from these ﬁndings suggest that modern day
computing power may still not be fast enough to work in the
space of sixth order magic squares.

III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
Given that much work has been done in categorizing the
fourth order magic squares by their symmetries and pairwise
similarities, the next logical step would be to investigate
these symmetry groups to conclude which of the 7040 magic
squares are necessary to generate the fourth order space. We
make the following deﬁnitions:
Def: An n × n permutation matrix is a square matrix
whose entries are {0, 1} such that 1 is in each column and
each row of the matrix exactly once.
A permutation matrix P
acting on a matrix A of
similar dimension essentially reorders either the rows or
columns of that matrix dependent on whether it is a left-
or right-multiplication. For example, Consider the following
matrix multiplication:


1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0




1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

=


1
2
3
7
8
9
4
5
6


Note that the second and third rows of this matrix are
swapped after being multiplied by the permutation matrix on
the left. Thus PA permutes rows and AP permutes columns,
while PAP permutes both rows and columns.
Def: The symmetry group of a set of magic squares G
is the set of all pairs of permutation matrices {Pi, Pj} in
Mn×n such that for any magic square A in the set G,
PiAPj and PiAT Pj is also a magic square and in the set G.
Often times this will be called the transformation group of G.
Def: Two magic squares A and B
are symmetric if
and only if B can be written as PiAPj or PiAT Pj for a pair
of permutation matrices {Pi, Pj}.
As an example, in Fig. 2 the set G can be thought
of as Trigg’s type A, and the transformation group of that set
is any pair of permutation matrices from the set A1, A2, A3,
or A4. Clearly any magic square in that set will be again be
a magic square in the set if any of the former transformations
are applied.
Def: The order of a transformation group T of G (denoted
as T(G)) is the cardinality of the set, i.e., |T(G)|.
Def: A magic square A of a set of magic squares G is
a generator of G if
1) The transformation group of G applied to A generates
a subset of the elements of G and
2) For any two generators Ai, Aj of G, the subsets of G
generated by Ai and Aj are pairwise disjoint.
The choice of the word generator in this case is not used in
the traditional sense for algebra. A set of generators of a group
of magic squares G is simply the set of magic squares that
are pairwise asymmetric and together generate the entire set
G using the transformation group of G. With these deﬁnitions
in place, we are ready to approach the question to be answered:
Of the fourth order normal magic squares, how many
unique generators are necessary and sufﬁcient to generate
the entire space, and what are the associated transformation
groups for these generators?
As mentioned in the previous section, progress has been
made towards the answer; however, the lower bound for
generators itself is unconﬁrmed and the categorization of
transformation groups is incomplete. Successfully determining
a lower bound and completing the transformation groups
would provide for two key results:
1) That there exists a set of magic squares for the n-th order
that describe the entire space and
2) That this space can be described by a categorical enu-
meration of transformation groups imposed on the space.
Since the topology of matrices is well-deﬁned and inherit
many nice algebraic properties, the above results would hold
for the space of magic squares of any order. This suggests
that such a ﬁnding would be a methodical approach towards
identifying the properties of higher order magic squares with
relative ease.
IV. METHODS
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
o
p
Theory
As mentioned previously, a normal magic square A of the
fourth order has the following properties:
• ai,j ∈A =⇒ai,j ∈{1, . . . , 16}
• Each ai,j distinct
• µ = n(n2+1)
2
= 34
• Each row, column, and trace sum to µ
The last two properties will be investigated ﬁrst. Let’s consider
the generic 4 × 4 matrix from above that inherits these
properties. We may notice that this produces a total of 10
linear constraints, namely
1) a + b + c + d = 34
2) e + f + g + h = 34
3) i + j + k + l = 34
4) m + n + o + p = 34
5) a + e + i + m = 34
6) b + f + j + n = 34
7) c + g + k + o = 34
8) d + h + l + p = 34
9) a + f + k + p = 34
10) d + g + j + m = 34.

However, the solution to the system of simultaneous linear
equations above ﬁnds that of the 16 variables in the matrix,
only 7 are independent while the remaining 9 are necessarily
deﬁned by their dependence. That is to say, a fourth order
normal magic square can be uniquely deﬁned by only 7 entries,
thus lowering the dimensionality of the problem greatly. For
example, assume the entries a, b, c, e, f, g, i are independent
(the choices for these being independent will be examined
later), then
d = 34 −a −b −c
h = 34 −e −f −g
j = 2a + b + c + e −g + i −34
k = 68 −2a −b −c −e −f −i
l = f + g −i
m = 34 −a −e −i
n = 68 −2a −2b −c −e −f + g −i
o = 2a + b + e + f −g + i −34
p = a + b + c + e + i −34.
This does not necessarily sufﬁce in showing that arbitrary
numbers chosen for the entries a, b, c, e, f, g, i will guarantee
a normal magic square. It is certainly true that the constraints
above will hold so that each row, column, and diagonal sum
to 34, but often times (at least with an arbitrary arrangement),
entries may be duplicated, and others could be negative,
0, or larger than 16. However, if we condition the above
constraints using the ﬁrst two properties from above, we yield
an important restriction on the arrangement of numbers for the
independent cells: They must be conﬁgured in such a way as
to obey the laws that every cell must contain a distinct number
from the set {1, . . . , 16}.
Implementation
Determining the arrangements which do not follow this
law requires an algorithmic approach, due to having no prior
knowledge of which arrangements yield a normal magic
square. Because we are tasked with many constraints, of which
require very speciﬁc parameters (each entry being distinct),
a backtracking algorithm that used constraint propagation
seemed to be the most logical implementation, considering
the analysis was focused on creating an efﬁcient, dynamic
system. Furthermore, backtracking has the property of quickly
withdrawing from partial solutions which are guaranteed to
not resolve as a full solution—for instance, when one of
the constraints won’t be met since the number necessary
to be assigned has already previously been assigned. These
assignments are carried out by the constraint propagation,
which accounts for all properties listed in the previous section.
The algorithm begins by placing arbitrary numbers along
the top row into slots a, b, c. The numbers in slots a, b are
considered ”free” since they do not propagate any constraints,
however, after a and b have been assigned, c must be assigned
in such a way that: 34 −a + b + c is a valid number (1 to
16) that has not been propagated or previously assigned. For
instance, if a = 1, b = 3 then the assignment c = 15 would be
invalid, since 34−a−b−c = 15 which is previously assigned
to c.
Fig. 3.
Backtracking Algorithm by placing numbers into matrix
Should a valid assignment occur for a, b, c, then the number
resulting from 34−a−b−c should be removed from the list of
available terms for the backtracking algorithm to test. This is
necessary, as without it, deeper iterations would test this num-
ber as an assignment despite it being necessarily assigned prior
to d. After computing the ﬁrst row, the algorithm computes
the ﬁrst column, having already registered the assignment for
a. The choice for this is not so trivial: The cells e, f are also
considered ”free” since they will not propagate any constraints.
Because of this, ”free” cells check for every valid assignment
from the list of available numbers. The goal would then be to
avoid ”free” cells until absolutely necessary. Assigning the ﬁrst
column requires only one ”free” cell, which in turn requires
much less complexity.
Fig. 4.
Constraint propagation of values resulting in µ = 34
After completing the ﬁrst column, the last and ﬁnal step
of the backtracking algorithm is to compute the assignment
for f, g, as they are the last two remaining cells necessary
to be assigned to thusly deﬁne the square unique to these 7
numbers. From above, f is a free cell, so values are arbitrarily
assigned from the available list. The cell g requires the most
effort: Since this is the ﬁnal cell, the number assigned here
must be such that all constraints that contain g are satisﬁed,
and the dependence values are available. If either of these
two assumptions fail, then g cannot be assigned and the
backtracking algorithm withdraws from this arrangement of
numbers.
Once the algorithm successfully generates a normal magic
square using the independent 7 numbers for the cells (Fig. 5),
a simple supervised machine learning technique is employed
to ﬁnd the pairs of 17 (Dudeney’s classiﬁcation scheme) in
the magic square that can uniquely classify it. This is done by
creating the classiﬁcation scheme prior to using the diagram
in Fig. 1.

Fig. 5.
Resultant magic square given by 7-dimension basis from above
Fig. 6.
Categorization by ﬁnding sums of µ/2 = 17
Then, using the 7 numbers that deﬁne the magic square, the
program naively iterates across the set to ﬁnd the pairs. This
is surprisingly efﬁcient, since it does not have to iterate across
all 16 numbers to ﬁnd pairs, and the classiﬁcation scheme
guarantees that only two pairs are necessary to determine the
Dudeney Type.
Fig. 7.
Resultant classiﬁcation type given by conﬁgurations of sums
After each square is generated and classiﬁed, the next step
was to classify each square, as an extension, by their trans-
formation groups. The properties necessary for this included
their innate symmetries (such as how many broken diagonals
also added to µ), which Trigg group they were in, and also
by using previous research of the permutation sets Staab had
proven.
Fig. 8.
Candidate magic square from symmetric transformation group
Finally, an arbitrary magic square was chosen from each
transformation group within the Trigg type, and had applied
to it every set of permutation matrices deﬁned on that magic
square. As the permutations were applied, magic squares
that were symmetric were deleted from the group, until the
transformation group had been exhausted. If more than one
magic square remained in the group, the process was repeated
with another magic square from the group (which clearly
deﬁned another subset of magic squares which it generates)
until the minimum was reached.
Fig. 9.
Removal of magic squares in the group based on rotations and
transposition
An example of this transformation group search can be seen
for the third-order case in Fig. 8, 9, and 10. If we consider
the dihedral group (rotations, reﬂections, transpositions) as the
transformation group for this set, then you can see that as the
Candidate square rotates about, transposes, and reﬂects about
each axis, it becomes symmetric with every other magic square
in the set, thus deleting them from the group. Note that since
there are only 8 normal magic squares of order 3, that the
candidate magic square is indeed the sole generator of the
entire group.
Fig. 10.
Resultant unique generator for order 3 magic squares

V. RESULTS
Even though there are 7040 magic squares, results found
that only 95 magic squares are necessary and sufﬁcient to
generate the entire space of fourth order. What was immedi-
ately perplexing about this number was how it was distributed
among the different Trigg Types. For the Type B and Type
C magic squares, the resultant number of generators for the
group did not evenly divide the enumeration of the magic
squares classiﬁed as that type; the expectation was that a trans-
formation group would provide a reduction of the set by some
factor, but evidence suggested that additional information was
necessary.
Trigg Type A
The magic squares that exist in this group, Dudeney Types I-
III, have the additional property that each broken diagonal also
sums to µ = 34. Because of this property, many symmetries
are introduced into this group. Analysis of the results found
that, from the 1152 magic squares classiﬁed as Type A, only
3 generators are necessary to generate the entire group (Fig.
11).
Fig. 11.
Generators for Type A
Thus each generator from this set has a transformation group
of order 384. Furthermore, we can claim that the entire Type
A space is uniquely deﬁned by these 3 generators and the
transformation group of order 384. One observation worth
mentioning is how similar each of the generators are; Only
8 of 16 cells differ between each generator, and yet there is
no arrangement of permutations in the conﬁnes of the space
to transform one to the other.
Trigg Type B
Analysis of the Dudeney Types IV-VI provided the most
interesting results, primarily in the fact that so little was
previously understood. It was mentioned earlier that Type VI
had the additional property that one of its broken diagonals
also summed to µ = 34. The assumption, then, would be that
this group would undoubtedly have generators belonging to
two separate transformation groups.
Fig. 12.
Generators for Type B
This was found to be not entirely true (Fig. 12). In fact,
hidden inside the group of 3968 magic squares classiﬁed
as Type B was a total of 46 generators, each belonging to
one of 4 different transformation groups. The transformation
groups were found to have orders 192, 96, 64, and 32, with
generators 12, 4, 10, and 20 respectively. Unlike Type A, Type
B space could not be uniquely deﬁned by its generators and a
transformation group; however, if one were to further reduce
Type B into 4 pairwise disjoint subsets (aptly named B-1, B-2,
B-3, and B-4) containing only the generators of a particular
transformation group, then we can indeed uniquely deﬁne each
subgroup by its generators and the transformation group.
Trigg Type C
While analysis of the Trigg Type B group provided in-
triguing results, Trigg Type C—Dudeney Types VII-X—had
perhaps the most surprising result of all four types. Given that
there were 1792 magic squares in Type C evenly distributed
among all four Dudeney types, the assumption would be that
the behavior of this group was much like Type A. In fact,
Fig. 13.
Generators for Type C
it was found that there were 44 generators for this group,
each belonging to one of 2 different transformation groups.
The transformation groups were found to have orders 64 and
32, with generators 12 and 32, respectively (Fig. 13). Again,
because of this result, the justiﬁcation that Type C could be
uniquely deﬁned by a set of generators and a transformation
group was invalid. By imitating the revision for Type B and
splitting the Type C group into two disjoint subsets (C-1, C-
2) categorized by separate generators and their transformation
sets, we again arrive at a distinction of uniquely deﬁning a
group of magic squares based on those generators.
Trigg Type D
With the small amount of magic squares classiﬁed Dudeney
Type XI-XII in this group (128), the results were expectantly
underwhelming and categorically likened to Type A. The
exception in this case is that Trigg Type D magic squares
lack many symmetries which would provide for a high-ordered
transformation group (Fig. 1).
Fig. 14.
Generators for Type D

It was found that only 2 generators were necessary to gener-
ate the space of Type D magic squares, and each generator had
a transformation group of order 64 (Fig. 14). Much like Type
A, without the need to reclassify the group, we can uniquely
deﬁne the Type D magic squares by these two generators and
the corresponding transformation group of order 64. Another
observation worth mentioning related to the similarity of these
generators: There’s practically none, and yet due to the lack of
symmetry within the group, no arrangement of permutations
in the conﬁnes of this space generate one from the other.
VI. DISCUSSION
The results above motivate a theoretical discussion on the
potential of the methodology scaled to higher orders. Firstly,
it was found that very minimal information was necessary to
completely describe the entire space of fourth order magic
squares. From the previous sections, it was noted that the
problem in itself could be lower-dimensionalized to a basis
of only 7 out of the 16 numbers that deﬁne a magic square.
Further, only 95 generators are sufﬁcient to generate the 7040
magic squares for order four. This implies, that given the
knowledge of Trigg classiﬁcation and transformation groups,
less than 700 bytes of information (7 ∗95 and assuming each
number requires one byte of storage) is required.
Since we know some properties about higher order magic
squares, such as transformation groups of odd order have the
same behavior as transformation groups of one less order
(even), we can hypothesize that this scheme is adaptable–
at least for the ﬁfth order case. This is further emphasized
by the fact that the methods used in this analysis were
efﬁcient and easy to implement. With careful linear algebra,
one can show that the ﬁfth order magic squares can be lower-
dimensionalized to a basis of only 13 out of 25 numbers that
deﬁne that magic square. The implications from this suggest
that a backtracking algorithm with constraint propagation may
still be suitable and efﬁcient enough with modern computing
power to produce meaningful results.
Lastly, there is consideration to be had to appropriate a
better approximation (or more concrete bound) on the total
number of sixth order magic squares. While a previously
mentioned result from 1998 showed an approximation for this
number, certain applications from this analysis could perhaps
be abstracted to ﬁnd the theoretical transformation groups of
the set, and determine from those what the generators of
those sets would look like. While there is no information
currently in literature suggesting any formulation of ”Trigg
Types” for these magic squares, one could again theorize their
conﬁgurations based on small simulations of this method and
applying transformation groups to this small subset.
VII. CONCLUSION
The ﬁnding of 95 generators for the entire set of 7040
fourth-order normal magic squares improves the previous
lower bound of 220 found in literature[2]. Furthermore, while
many of the transformation groups were correctly catego-
rized by Staab [5], results show that previously unknown
transformation groups exist in the space, and that the Trigg
classiﬁcation requires revisions to reﬂect the true underlying
structure. With these two results combined, by virtue of the
methods used in this analysis, such a construction can be
developed with ease for ﬁfth order magic squares which has
previously been limited by inefﬁcient methods. With this paper
as reference, a curious individual in the ﬁeld of recreational
mathematics may use these tools to yield many fascinating
results about ﬁfth and sixth order normal magic squares.
