Dagstuhl Report on Conversational Search
Conversational Search for Learning Technologies
Sharon Oviatt
Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia

Laure Soulier
Sorbonne Universit, CNRS, LIP6, F-75005 Paris, France

Abstract
Conversational search is based on a user-system cooperation with the objective to solve an
information-seeking task. In this report, we discuss the implication of such cooperation with
the learning perspective from both user and system side. We also focus on the stimulation
of learning through a key component of conversational search, namely the multimodality of
communication way, and discuss the implication in terms of information retrieval. We end
with a research road map describing promising research directions and perspectives.
1
Context and background
1.1
What is Learning?
Arguably, the most important scenario for search technology is lifelong learning and edu-
cation, both for students and all citizens. Human learning is a complex multidimensional
activity, which includes procedural learning (e.g., activity patterns associated with cooking,
sports) and knowledge-based learning (e.g., mathematics, genetics). It also includes diﬀerent
levels of learning, such as the ability to solve an individual math problem correctly. It also
includes the development of meta-cognitive self-regulatory abilities, such as recognizing the
type of problem being solved and whether one is in an error state. These latter types of
awareness enable correctly regulating ones approach to solving a problem, and recognizing
when one is oﬀtrack by repairing momentary errors as needed. Later stages of learning en-
able the generalization of learned skills or information from one context or domain to others
such as applying math problem solving to calculations in the wild (e.g., calculation of garden
space, engineering calculations required for a structurally sound building).
1.2
Human versus System Learning
When people engage an IR system, they search for many reasons. In the process they learn
a variety of things about search strategies, the location of information, and the topic about
arXiv:2001.02912v1  [cs.AI]  9 Jan 2020

which they are searching. Search technologies also learn from and adapt to the user, their
situation, their state of knowledge, and other aspects of the learning context [CTHH17].
Beyond adaptation, the engagement of the system impacts the search eﬀectiveness: its pro-
activity is required to anticipate users need, topic drift, and lower the cognitive load of
users [TY19]. For example, when someone is using a keyboard-based IR system of today,
educational technologies can adapt to the persons prior history of solving a problem correctly
or not, for example by presenting a harder problem next if the last problem was solved
correctly, or presenting an easier problem if it was solved incorrectly.
Based on conversational speech IR systems, it is now possible for a system to process a
persons acoustic-prosodic and linguistic input jointly, and on that basis a system can adapt to
the persons momentary state of cognitive load. The ideal state for engaging in new learning
would be a moderate state of load, whereas detection of very high cognitive load might
suggest that the person could beneﬁt from taking a break for some period of time or address
easier subtopics to decomplexify the search task [AWP+14].
2
Motivation
2.1
How is Learning Stimulated?
Based on the cognitive science and learning sciences literature, it is well known that human
thought is spatialized. Even when we engage in problem-solving about temporal information,
we spatialize it [JL99]. Since conversational speech is not a spatial modality, it is advantages
to combine it with at least one other spatial modality. For example, digital pen input per-
mits handwriting diagrams and symbols that convey spatial location and relations among
objects. Further, a permanent ink trace remains, which the user can think about. Tangible
input like touching and manipulating objects in a virtual world also supports conveying 3D
spatial information, which is especially beneﬁcial for procedural learning (e.g., learning to
drive in a simulator). Since learning is embodied and enhanced by a persons physical activ-
ity, touch, manipulation, and handwriting can spatialize information and result in a higher
level of interactivity, producing more durable and generalizable learning. When combined
with conversational input for social exchange with other people, such input supports richer
multimodal input.
Based on the information-seeking point of view, the understanding of users information
need is crucial to maintain their attention and improve their satisfaction. As of now, the un-
derstanding of information need has been evaluated using relevant documents, but it implies
a more complex process dealing with information need elicitation due to its formulation in
natural language [ASD18] and information synthesis [Mar06, WR09]. There is, therefore, a
crucial need to build information retrieval systems integrating human goals.
2.2
How Can We Beneﬁt from Multimodal IR?
Multimodality is the preferred direction for extending conversational IR systems to provide
future support for human learning. A new body of research has established that when a
person can use multimodal input to engage a system, all types of thinking and reasoning
are facilitated, including (1) convergent problem solving (e.g., whether a math problem is
solved correctly); (2) divergent ideation (e.g., ﬂuency of appropriate ideas when generating

science hypotheses); and (3) accuracy of inferential reasoning (e.g., whether correct infer-
ences about information are concluded or the information is overgeneralized) [Ovi13]. It is
well recognized within education that interaction with multimodal/multimedia information
supports improved learning. It also is well recognized that this richer form of information
enables accessibility for a wider range of diverse students (e.g., blind and hearing impaired,
lower-performing, non-native speakers) [Ovi13].
For these and related reasons, the long-term direction of IR technologies would beneﬁt by
transitioning from conversational to multimodal systems that can substantially improve both
the depth and accessibility of educational technologies. With respect to system adaptivity,
when a person interacts multimodally with an IR system, the system now can collect richer
contextual information about his or her level of domain expertise [OGCO19]. When the
system detects that the person is a novice in math, for example, it can adapt by presenting
information in a conceptually simpler form and with fewer technical terms.
In contrast,
when a person is detected to be an expert, the system can adapt by upshifting to present
more advanced concepts using domain-speciﬁc terminology and greater technical detail. This
level of IR system adaptivity permits targeting information delivery more appropriately to
a given person, which improves the likelihood that he or she will comprehend, reuse, and
generalize the information in important ways. The more basic forms of system adaptivity
are maintained, but also substantially expanded by the integration of more deeply human-
centered models of the person and their existing knowledge of a particular content domain.
Apart from the greater sophistication of user modeling and improved system adaptivity,
multimodal IR systems would beneﬁt signiﬁcantly by becoming more robust and reliable at
interpreting a persons queries to the system, compared with a speech-only conversational
system [OC15]. This is because fusing two or more information sources reduces recognition
errors. There are both human-centered and system-centered reasons why recognition errors
can be reduced or eliminated when a person interacts with a multimodal system.
First,
humans will formulate queries to the IR system using whichever modality they believe is
least error-prone, which prevents errors. For example, they may speak a query, but switch to
writing when conveying surnames or ﬁnancial information involving digits. In addition, when
they encounter a system error after speaking input, they can switch to another modality like
writing information or even spelling a wordwhich leads to recovering from the error more
quickly. When using a speech-only system, instead the person must re-speak information,
which typically causes them to hyperarticulate. Since hyperarticulate speech departs farther
from the systems original speech training model, the result is that system errors typically
increase rather than resolving successfully [OC15].
2.3
How can user learning and system learning function co-
operatively in a multimodal IR framework?
Conversational search needs to be supported by multimodal devices and algorithmic systems
trading oﬀsearch eﬀectiveness and users satisfaction [TY19]. Figure 1 illustrates how the
user, the system, and the multi-modal interface might cooperate. The conversation is ini-
tiated by users who formulate their information need through a modality (voice, text, pen,
). The system is expected to be proactive by fostering both 1) user revealment by eliciting
the information need and 2) system revealment by suggesting what actions are available at
the current state of the session [ADHD18]. In response, users are able to clarify their need
and the span of the search session, providing them a deeper knowledge with respect to their

Figure 1: User Learning and System Learning in Conversational Search.
information need. The relevant features impacting both users and systems actions include
1) users intent, 2) users interactions, 3) system outputs, and 4) the context of the session
(communication modality, spatial and temporal information). Several advantages of the user
and system cooperation might be noticed. First, based on past interactions, the system is
able to learn from right and wrong past actions. It is, therefore, more willing to target IR
pieces of information that might be relevant to users. This straightforward allows reducing
interactions between users and systems and lower the cognitive eﬀort of users. Second, users
being driven by increasing their knowledge acquisition experience, the system should be able
to learn users satisfaction and therefore bolster new information in the retrieval process.
Altogether, these advantages advocate for a more sophisticated and a deeper user modeling
regarding both knowledge and retrieval satisfaction.
3
Research Directions and Perspectives
Proposed Research and Challenges: Directions for the Community and Future
PhD Topics. Among the key research directions and challenges to be addressed in the next
5-10 years in order to advance conversational search as a more capable learning technology
are the following:
• Transforming existing IR knowledge graphs into richer multi-dimensional ones that cur-
rently are used in multimodal analytic research which supports integrating information
from multiple modalities (e.g., speech, writing, touch, gaze, gesturing) and multiple lev-
els of analyzing them (e.g., signals, activity patterns, representations).
• Integration of multimodal input and multimedia output processing with existing IR
techniques
• Integration of more sophisticated user modeling with existing IR techniques, in partic-
ular ones that enable identifying the users current expertise level in the content domain

that is the focus of their search and leveraging the span of the search session.
• Conversely, integrating analytics that enable the user to identify the authoritativeness
of an information source (e.g., its level of expertise, its credibility or intent to deceive).
• Development of more advanced multimodal machine learning methods that go beyond
audio-visual information processing and search. Development of more advanced ma-
chine learning methods for extracting and representing multimodal user behavioral
models.
Broader Impact.
The research roadmap outlined above would result in major and
consequential advances, including in the following areas:
• More successful IR system adaptivity for targeting user search goals.
• IR systems that function well based on fewer and briefer interactions between user and
system.
• IR system that are more reliable and robust at processing user queries. Expansion of
the accessibility of IR technology to a broader population.
• Improved focus of IR technology on end-user goals and values, rather than commercial
for-proﬁt aims.
• Improvement of powerful machine learning methods for processing richer multimodal
information and achieving more deeply human-centered models.
• Acceleration of the positive impact of lifelong learning technologies on human thinking,
reasoning, and deep learning.
Obstacles and Risks.
• Establishing and integrating more deeply human-centered multimodal behavioral mod-
els to advance IR technologies risks privacy intrusions that must be addressed in ad-
vance.
• Establishing successful multidisciplinary teamwork among IR, user modeling, multi-
modal systems, machine learning, and learning sciences experts will need to be culti-
vated and maintained over a lengthy period of time.
• Mutually adaptive systems risk unpredictability and instability of performance, and
must be studied to achieve ideal functioning.
• New evaluation metrics will be required that substantially expand those used by IR
system developers today.
4
