Never Forget: Balancing Exploration and Exploitation
via Learning Optical Flow
Hsuan-Kung Yang * 1 Po-Han Chiang * 1 Kuan-Wei Ho 1 Min-Fong Hong 1 Chun-Yi Lee 1
Abstract
Exploration bonus derived from the novelty of the
states in an environment has become a popular
approach to motivate exploration for deep rein-
forcement learning agents in the past few years.
Recent methods such as curiosity-driven explo-
ration usually estimate the novelty of new obser-
vations by the prediction errors of their system
dynamics models. Due to the capacity limitation
of the models and difﬁculty of performing next-
frame prediction, however, these methods typi-
cally fail to balance between exploration and ex-
ploitation in high-dimensional observation tasks,
resulting in the agents forgetting the visited paths
and exploring those states repeatedly. Such in-
efﬁcient exploration behavior causes signiﬁcant
performance drops, especially in large environ-
ments with sparse reward signals. In this paper,
we propose to introduce the concept of optical
ﬂow estimation from the ﬁeld of computer vision
to deal with the above issue. We propose to em-
ploy optical ﬂow estimation errors to examine the
novelty of new observations, such that agents are
able to memorize and understand the visited states
in a more comprehensive fashion. We compare
our method against the previous approaches in
a number of experimental experiments. Our re-
sults indicate that the proposed method appears
to deliver superior and long-lasting performance
than the previous methods. We further provide
a set of comprehensive ablative analysis of the
proposed method, and investigate the impact of
optical ﬂow estimation on the learning curves of
the DRL agents.
*Equal contribution
1Elsa Lab, Department of Computer
Science, National Tsing Hua University.
Correspondence to:

Figure 1. Comparison of the learning curves of two ICM baselines
and the proposed methods on ViZDoom. The learning curve of
the purple line clearly shows that catastrophic forgetting impairs
the performance of ‘ICM + A3C’ after a long period of timesteps
during the training phase. In this paper, we introduce ﬂow-based
ICM (FICM) for measuring the novelty of states in exploration.
The yellow and red lines show that the two implementations of
FICM enable better and stabler performances than those of ICM.
1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are aimed at devel-
oping policies to maximize rewards provided by the environ-
ment, and retrieve major success in variety of application
domains, such as game playing (Mnih, 2015; Silver, 2016)
and robot navigation (Zhang, 2016). The usual RL meth-
ods require operations under a shaped reward function, but
in real world situation there is few environments returning
satisfying shaped reward all the time. In some scenarios,
rewards extrinsic to the agent are extremely sparse, and it
is impossible to engineer dense reward functions under the
circumstances. Adopting simple heuristic methods is a com-
mon solution, such as ϵ-greedy (Mnih, 2015; Sutton & Barto,
1998) or entropy regularization (Mnih, 2016). However,
strategies like such are still far from generating satisfactory
results in tasks with deceptive or sparse rewards (Fortunato,
2018; Osband et al., 2017).
Researchers in recent years come up with solutions to those
environments with sparse rewards by providing agents with
bonus rewards whenever they visit an unexplored or unex-
pected observation. These bonus rewards tend to encourage
the agent explore the states that are not seen before, i.e.
arXiv:1901.08486v1  [cs.LG]  24 Jan 2019

Never Forget: Balancing Exploration and Exploitation via Learning Optical Flow
novel state, and measuring the ”novelty” usually requires
a additional model to measure the statistic distribution of
the environmental states. For example, (Houthooft, 2016)
uses information gain as a measurement of state novelty.
In (Tang, 2017), a counting table is used to estimate the nov-
elty of a visited state. Neural density model (van den Oord,
2016) is also served to measure bonus rewards for agents.
In (Stadie et al., 2015; Pathak et al., 2017), the novelty of a
state is estimated from the prediction errors of their system
dynamics models. In the proposed curiosity-driven explo-
ration (Pathak et al., 2017), curiosity helps an agent explore
its environment in the quest for new knowledge. The curios-
ity is formulated as the error in an agents ability to predict
the consequence of its own actions in a visual feature space,
and this process is learned by intrinsic curiosity module
(ICM). In proposed exploration bonus (Burda et al., 2018b),
an exploration bonus is the error of a neural network predict-
ing features of the observations given by a ﬁxed randomly
initialized neural network. The random network distillation
(RND) bonus combined with a method to ﬂexibly combine
intrinsic and extrinsic rewards enables signiﬁcant progress
on several hard exploration Atari games.
However, as we deep-dive into curiosity-based explo-
ration (Pathak et al., 2017) in ViZDoom experiment, the
catastrophic forgetting problem (French, 1999) occurs. In
Fig. 1, we can see clearly that after 10 million timesteps,
the curiosity-based agent employing ICM suffers from se-
rious performance drop on two experiments with different
sparsity. This performance drop problems is often known
as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & J. Cohen, 1989;
Robins, 1995; E. Sharkey & Sharkey, 1995; French, 1999)
and is common in machine learning. The occurrence of
catastrophic forgetting is often related to the fact that the
model requires sufﬁcient plasticity to digest new informa-
tion, but large weight changes cause forgetting by disrupting
previous learned representations. Such performance drop
shows the sign of unstable performance of the curiosity-
based exploration method. Furthermore, we also look into
the value changes of curiosity, and we found out the sudden
increase of the curiosity after 10 million timesteps. This
discovery clearly indicates that after numerous timesteps
of exploring and training, the agent ﬁnally forgets previous
explorations and misunderstands those seen states as novel
states. Both discoveries above suggest that the curiosity-
based exploration agent suffers from catastrophic forgetting
problem and there are room for improvements. Researchers
in recent years proposed solutions (Goodrich & Arel, 2014;
Ian J. Goodfellow, 2015; Kemker et al., 2018) to the catas-
trophic forgetting, and they name these solutions lifelong
learning. Most lifelong learning techniques usually include
regularization, multi-memory deployment and ensemble
methods to ensure the early representation is stably updated
and mixed with the later learned representation peacefully.
However, to the best of our knowledge, there are few works
for directly addressing the catastrophic problem in RL.
We consider that the catastrophic forgetting problem of
curiosity-based exploration is due to its attempt at next
frame prediction. With the analysis mentioned above, we
try to ﬁnd out the problem responsible for catastrophic for-
getting in curiosity-based exploration design and to improve
it. In the curiosity-based exploration, the policy is trained
to optimize the sum of the extrinsic reward and intrinsic re-
ward. The extrinsic reward is provided by the environment
and the curiosity-based intrinsic reward is generated by the
proposed ICM (Pathak et al., 2017). ICM is composed of
two parts, which are inverse dynamics model and forward
model. The inverse dynamics model takes encoded features
of current state and next state as inputs, so as to predict the
action to take from current state to desired next state; the
forward model takes encoded current state and the action as
feature to predict the next state feature representation. The
discrepancy between predicted next state feature and actual
next state encoded feature is the curiosity-based intrinsic
reward. We reckon that the feature of the forward model’s
next frame prediction, which is solely based on current state
and action, is too simple to be reliable. In computer vision
or other machine learning ﬁeld, next frame prediction re-
quires deep neural networks or complex features (Kingma
& Welling, 2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Mirza & Osin-
dero, 2014; Lotter et al., 2016; Xue et al., 2016) to output
an entire predicted scene features, and the features used in
forward model are clearly not that complex. The simplicity
of forward model is possibly the reason the agent suffers
from serious forgetting problem after long time of learning.
In order to solve the catastrophic forgetting problem, we
propose solutions from different angles by introducing op-
tical ﬂow (Ilg et al., 2017; Meister et al., 2018), which is
a popular techniques in computer vision ﬁeld to compre-
hend continuous movements of objects and environments,
into the exploration design. The optical ﬂow is a powerful
techniques for computer vision researcher to extract fea-
tures from and analyze continual materials, such as videos
or continual frames of images. The optical ﬂow extracts
movements and discrepancy between frames in a way more
complex and meaningful than methods such as next frame
prediction or straightforward frame difference that other
proposed exploration bonus methodologies tend to adopt.
In this work, we replace ICM in the original curiosity-based
exploration design (Pathak et al., 2017) with our own ver-
sion of intrinsic reward generator — ﬂow-based intrinsic
curiosity module (FICM). Our proposed design with opti-
cal ﬂow suffers no sudden drop of performance, consumes
fewer parameter, and reaches better and lasting performance
in several experiments. Moreover, we even present two
different architectures of the ﬂow predictor inside FICM to
verify the effectiveness of optical ﬂow.

Never Forget: Balancing Exploration and Exploitation via Learning Optical Flow
In order the demonstrate the effectiveness of FICM, we per-
form experiments on the ViZDoom (Kempka et al., 2016)
environment with sparse reward and very sparse reward
settings. We show that the propose FICM outperforms the
previous ICM with better and stabler performance even after
a long period of training timesteps, and does not suffer from
the catastrophic forgetting problem which occurs in ICM for
both settings. We also show that FICM enables an RL agent
to learn faster, and requires fewer number of model param-
eters (180K ∼250K) than ICM. We further illustrate the
evolution of intrinsic rewards versus time to demonstrate the
robustness of FICM to catastrophic forgetting. We provide
a comprehensive analysis of our experimental results and
investigate the impacts of FICM in Section 4. The primary
contributions of this paper are summarized as the following:
• We identify and validate the existence of catastrophic
forgetting in curiosity-based exploration, which causes
sudden drops in performance after a long periods of
training timesteps.
• We propose an enhanced version of ICM, called FICM,
to deal with the catastrophic forgetting problem of
ICM in RL exploration. FICM is based on optical ﬂow
estimation, a popular technique in computer vision to
estimate movements of objects in consecutive frames.
• The proposed FICM only requires state information,
and does not need actions of the agents when estimat-
ing the novelty of states.
• The proposed FICM requires signiﬁcantly fewer num-
ber of model parameters than ICM, and is still able to
deliver superior performance to it.
• The proposed FICM takes only two consecutive image
frames as its input, which is signiﬁcantly fewer than
that of ICM.
This rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
introduces background material. Section 3 walks through
the proposed framework and its implementation details. Sec-
tion 4 presents the experimental results and provides a com-
prehensive analysis of the framework. Section 5 concludes.
2. Background
In this section, we introduce background material. We ﬁrst
provide an overview of deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
and curiosity-driven exploration. To understand the pro-
posed FICM, we also brieﬂy review related works that focus
on optical ﬂow estimation.
2.1. Deep Reinforcement Learning
DRL is a method to train an agent to interact with an en-
vironment E. At each timesteps t, the agent recieves a
Table 1. Notation used in this paper
t
Timestep index
St
State at timestep t
re
Extrinsic reward
ri
Intrinsic reward
rf
Reward generated from forward ﬂow
rb
Reward generated from backward ﬂow
Lf
Loss from forward ﬂow
Lb
Loss from backward ﬂow
Θπ
Parameters of A3C policy
Θf
Parameters of ﬂow predictor
state st form the state space S of E, takes an action at
from the action space A according to its policy π(a|s), re-
ceives a reward r(st, at), and transits to next state st+1 ∼
p(st+1|st, at). The main objective of agent is to maximize
discounted cumulative rewards Rt = PT
i=t γi−tr(si, ai),
where γ ∈(0, 1] is a discont factor and T is the horizon. The
action-value function (i.e., Q-function) of a given policy π
is deﬁned as the expected return starting from a state-action
pair (s, a), expressed as Q(s, a) = E[Rt|st = s, at = a, π].
With the ﬂourish development in Deep Neural Network
(DNN), Deep Q-learning (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2013) takes
advantages of DNN to represent the Q-function. In addi-
tion, Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic (A3C) (Mnih
et al., 2016) further introduces asynchronous calculation
and optimization to update its policy and value function.
2.2. Curiosity-Based Exploration
Curiosity-based exploration is an exploration strategy
adopted by some DRL agents in recent works (Houthooft,
2016; Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2018a) in order to
explore environment more efﬁciently. The traditional ran-
dom exploration often has hard time being trapped in local
minima of state spaces while curiosity-based tends to seek
out relatively unexplored regions, and therefore is able to
explore more productively in the same amount of time. In
addition to extrinsic reward provided by environment, most
curiosity-based exploration works introduce intrinsic reward
generated by the agent to encourage itself to explore novel
states. For example in the proposed ICM (Pathak et al.,
2017), it takes frame prediction error as intrinsic reward,
which suggests that the agent will receives more reward if
next state is beyond its knowledge about the environment,
and thus is more ‘curious’ to explore novel states.
2.3. Optical Flow Estimation
Optical ﬂow estimation (Fischer et al., 2015) is a technique
to evaluate the motion of objects between between consecu-
tive images. In usual cases, a reference image and a target
image are required. The optical ﬂow is represented as a

Never Forget: Balancing Exploration and Exploitation via Learning Optical Flow
Figure 2. Framework overview. (a) Illustration of the interactions among FICM, the agent, and the environment. (b) The workﬂow of
FICM.
vector ﬁeld, where displacement vectors are assigned to cer-
tain pixels of the reference image. These vectors represent
where those pixels can be found in the target image. In
recent years, a number of deep learning approaches run-
ning on GPUs dealing with large displacement issues of
optical ﬂow estimation have been proposed (Fischer et al.,
2015; Schulter et al., 2017; Ilg et al., 2017). Among these
techniques, FlowNet 2.0 (Ilg et al., 2017) delivers the most
accurate estimation. In this paper, we use simpliﬁed network
of FlowNet 2.0 to generate optical ﬂow.
3. Methodology
In this section, we present the design and implementation
details of our methodology. We ﬁrst provide an overview
of the proposed framework, followed by an introduction
to the fundamental concepts of FICM. Then, we formally
formulate these concepts into mathematical equations, and
walk through the details of our training objective. Finally,
we investigate two different implementations of FICM, and
discuss the features and advantages of their conﬁgurations.
3.1. Framework Overview
Fig. 2 illustrates an overview of the proposed methodology.
In our framework, the agent moves according to a policy
which is trained to perform actions to maximize the total
rewards it receives. The rewards that the agents receives
comes from either the extrinsic reward re or the intrinsic
reward ri. The extrinsic reward re is obtained from the
agent’s interaction with the environment. On the other hand,
the intrinsic reward ri is generated by FICM to encourage
the agent to explore the environment. FICM is a deep neu-
ral networks composed of a number of convolutional and
deconvolutional layers, and designed to utilize optical ﬂow
to estimate the novelty of states. Based on the framework,
FICM gradually learns the explored state more comprehen-
sively over time. FICM yields a higher reward when visiting
a state considered to be more novel, and generates more
incentives for the agent to pursue novel observations. De-
tails of novelty measurement and further descriptions are
provided in Sections 3.2 and 3.3. The policy parameterized
by Θπ is trained using policy learning methods to maximize
the total rewards. In this paper, A3C is adopted as our policy
learning method.
3.2. Flow-based Curiosity Driven Exploration
We consider that the primary reason of the catastrophic for-
getting problem in ICM lies in the difﬁculty to perform next
frame prediction. In ICM, the novelty of states are evaluated
based on the prediction error of the forward dynamics model.
As predicting the next state or its features simply from the
current state and action is not straightforward, the forward
dynamics model tend to fail in large and high-dimensional
state spaces due to insufﬁcient information to make such
predictions. As a result, the forward dynamics model in
ICM tends to ”forget” the states that the RL agent has vis-
ited before, leading to a severe performance drop when the
number of training steps increases.
We propose to employ optical ﬂow estimation, which is a
popular techniques in the ﬁeld of computer vision to compre-
hend continuous movements of objects and environments,
to address the catastrophic forgetting problem. Optical ﬂow
estimation is a powerful technique for computer vision re-
searchers to extract features from and analyze continuous
frames of images. Similar to the inverse dynamics model in
ICM, optical ﬂow also captures delicate changes between
frames, which makes itself a suitable option for estimating
the novelty of states. In the inverse dynamic model design,
the model generates a high intrinsic reward when it encoun-
ters an observation that is far different from its prediction
based on the current state and action, and a low intrinsic
reward is generated when the encountered observation is
expected. Similarly, FICM yields high intrinsic rewards
when it observes unfamiliar ﬂow changes, and low intrinsic

Never Forget: Balancing Exploration and Exploitation via Learning Optical Flow
rewards when the patterns of optical ﬂow are learned before.
If FICM fails to predict the optical ﬂow between the cur-
rent state and the next state correctly, the next state is then
considered as a novel state. FICM then generates a intrinsic
reward signal to motivate the RL agent to explore that state.
In Fig. 2, the left part shows FICM’s role in the interaction
between agent and environment described above, and the
right part shows the entire workﬂow of FICM. FICM takes
two consecutive states as its input, and predicts a forward
ﬂow Fforward and a backward ﬂow Fbackward from the
pairs of input states. The forward ﬂow Fforward is the opti-
cal ﬂow inferenced from consecutive states ordered in time
increasing fashion (e.g., t to t + 1), while the backward
ﬂow is the optical ﬂow inferenced from consecutive states
ordered in time decreasing fashion (e.g., t + 1 to t). The
input states St and St+1 are then warped by the ﬂows to gen-
erate the predicted states ˆSt and
ˆ
St+1. The losses of these
predicted states serve as the partial intrinsic reward signals
rb and rf, respectively. The sum of rf and rb forms the
ﬁnal intrinsic curiosity reward ri outputted by FICM. More
design and implementation details of FICM are provided in
Section 3.3.
3.3. Flow-based Intrinsic Curiosity Module
In this section, we formulate the procedure of FICM as for-
mal mathematical equations. The main objective of FICM is
to leverage the optical ﬂow between two consecutive states
as the encoded representation of them. As described in Sec-
tions 3.1 and 3.2, FICM predicts a forward ﬂow Fforward
and backward ﬂow Fbackward from each consecutive pairs
of input states. Given two raw input states St and St+1
observed at consecutive timesteps t and t + 1, FICM takes
the 2-tuple (St, St+1) as its input, and predicts Fforward
and Fbackward by its ﬂow predictor G parameterized by a
set of trainable parameters Θf. The two ﬂows Fforward
and Fbackward can therefore be expressed as the following:
Fforward = G(St, St+1, Θf)
Fbackward = G(St+1, St, Θf).
(1)
Fforward and Fbackward are then used to generate the pre-
dicted states ˆSt and
ˆ
St+1 via a warping function W (Ilg
et al., 2017). The predicted ˆSt and
ˆ
St+1 are expressed as:
ˆSt = W(St+1, Fforward, β)
ˆ
St+1 = W(St, Fbackward, β),
(2)
where β is the ﬂow scaling factor. W warps St+1 to ˆSt and
St to
ˆ
St+1 via Fforward and Fbackward respectively using
bilinear interpolation and element-wise multiplication with
β. The interested reader is referred to (Fischer et al., 2015;
Ilg et al., 2017) for more details of the warping algorithm.
Please note that in this work, W employs inverse mapping
instead of forward mapping to avoid the common duplica-
tion problem in ﬂow warping (Thaddeus Beier, 1992).
With the predicted ˆSt and
ˆ
St+1, Θf is iteratively updated
to minimize the loss function LG of G, which consists of a
forward loss Lf and a backward loss Lb. LG is written as:
min
Θf LG = Lf + Lb
= ||St+1 −
ˆ
St+1||
2 + ||St −ˆSt||
2,
(3)
where (Lf, Lb) are derived from the mean-squared error
(MSE) between (St+1,
ˆ
St+1) and (St, ˆSt), respectively. In
this work, LG is interpreted by FICM as a measure of state
novelty, and serves as an intrinsic reward signal ri for the
DRL agent in Fig. 2. The expression of ri is represented as:
ri = rf + rb = ζ
2(Lf + Lb) = ζ
2LG
= ζ
2(||St+1 −
ˆ
St+1||
2 + ||St −ˆSt||
2),
(4)
where ζ is the reward scaling factor, and rf and rb are the
forward and backward intrinsic rewards scaled from Lf
and Lb, respectively. Please note that ri is independent of
the action taken by the agent, which distinguishes FICM
from ICM. FICM only takes two consecutive raw input
states for estimating the optical ﬂow, which serves as a more
meaningful measure to evaluate and memorize the novelty
of states in large high-dimensional state spaces with sparse
external reward signals. The experimental results presented
in Section 4 demonstrate the effectiveness of ri and FICM.
3.4. Implementations of FICM
In this work, we propose two different implementations
of FICM: FICM-S and FICM-C. These two implementa-
tions adopt different ﬂow predictor architectures based on
FlowNetS and FlowNetC employed by FlowNet 2.0 (Ilg
et al., 2017), respectively. Different implementations are
introduced to validate that ri derived from LG based on
Eq. (4) can indeed serve as a suitable intrinsic reward signal,
rather than restricted to FICMs with speciﬁc ﬂow predictor
architectures. The ﬂow predictor architectures are depicted
in Fig. 3, and explained in the following paragraphs.
FICM-S. The ﬂow predictor in FICM-S consists of several
convolutional and deconvolutional layers. The module ﬁrst
stacks two consecutive states St and St+1 together, and
feed the stacked states ⟨St, St+1⟩into three convolution
layers with 32, 64, and 96 ﬁlters, respectively, followed
by an exponential linear unit (ELU) non-linear activation
function. The encoded features are then fused with the

Never Forget: Balancing Exploration and Exploitation via Learning Optical Flow
Figure 3. The ﬂow predictor architectures in FICM-S and FICM-C.
feature maps from the shallower parts of the network by
adding skips (Fischer et al., 2015; Long et al., 2015), and
fed into two deconvolutional layers with 64 and 32 ﬁlters.
This skip layer fusion architecture allows the ﬂow predictor
to preserve both coarse, high layer information and ﬁne, low
layer information (Fischer et al., 2015; Long et al., 2015).
Finally, the feature map is passed into a convolutional layer
with two ﬁlters to predict the optical ﬂow from St to St+1.
FICM-C.
The ﬂow predictor in FICM-C encodes two
consecutive states St and St+1 separately instead of stacking
them together. The input states are passed through three
convolutional layers to generate feature maps φt and φt+1.
The three convolutional layers of the two paths are share-
weighted in order to generate better representations of φt
and φt+1, as input states St and St+1 usually contain same
or similar patterns. The feature maps φt and φt+1 are then
fed into a correlation layer proposed by Fischer et al. (2015),
which performs multiplicative patch comparisons between
two feature maps to estimate their correspondences c deﬁned
as:
c(x1, x2) =
X
o∈[−k,k]×[−k,k]
⟨(φt(x1 + o), φt+1(x2 + o)⟩,
(5)
where x1 is the patch center in the ﬁrst feature map and x2 is
that in the second one. Here we ﬁx the maximum displace-
Figure 4. (a) The raw input image from ViZDoom. (b) The map
of our environment. Please note that the points A and B are the
initial spawning locations in the ”sparse reward” and ”very sparse
reward” settings, respectively.
ment d to 2, which means we only compute correlations
c(x1, x2) limited in a neighborhood of size D := 2d + 1
by constraining the range of x2. Since the feature maps of
our models have moderate resolutions, d = 2 is sufﬁcient to
ﬁnd their correspondences.
Once the correspondences c of φt and φt+1 is estimated, it
is concatenated with the feature map from the fourth convo-
lutional layer of the left path in Fig. 3(b). The concatenated
feature map is later passed through one convolutional and
one deconvolutional layers, fused with the feature map came
from the skip path, and then passed through another decon-
volutional layer. Similar to Fig. 3(a), the ﬁnal feature map
in Fig. 3(b) is fed into a convolutional layer with two ﬁlters
to predict the optical ﬂow from St to St+1.
After estimating the optical ﬂow from the ﬂow predictor
of either FICM-S or FICM-C, the ﬂow is used to warp the
states St and St+1 forward and backward using Eq. (2),
respectively, and derive LG and ri according to Eqs. (3)
and (4).
4. Experimental Results
In this section, we present experimental results and discuss
their implications. We start by a brief introduction to our
experimental setup, including the environment, the base-
lines, and their training methodologies. Next, we compare
the proposed methodology against the previous approaches
in qualitative and quantitative experiments. We prove that
FICM outperforms the previous ICM in two aspects: (1) bet-
ter and stabler performance of the learned policy evaluated
on ViZDoom (Kempka et al., 2016); and (2) no suffering
from the catastrophic forgetting problem occurring in ICM.
4.1. Environmental Setups
Environment. The environment we evaluate on is the ViZ-
Doom (Kempka et al., 2016) game. ViZDoom is a popular

Never Forget: Balancing Exploration and Exploitation via Learning Optical Flow
Doom-based platform for AI research especially reinforce-
ment learning to test agents’ ability to process raw visual
information shown in Fig. 4(a). We conduct experiments on
the same gaming environment, DoomMyWayHome-v0, as
in the proposed ICM (Pathak et al., 2017). The game map
consists of 9 rooms and the agent is tasked to reach some
ﬁxed goal locations from its spawning location. The agent
is only provided with a sparse terminal reward of +1 if it
ﬁnds the vest and zero otherwise. The agent consists of four
discrete actions - move forwards, move left, move right and
no action. In order to evaluate the exploration ability under
sparse extrinsic reward environment, we adopt two setups
which are also experimented in ICM — ‘sparse’ and ‘very
sparse’ rewards. As shown in Fig. 4(b), both rewards are
deﬁned based on their distances between the initial spawn-
ing location of the agent and the location of the goal. The
further the goal is from the spawning location, the harder
for the agent to explore.
Baseline approach
We compare FICM with two base-
lines, ‘ICM + A3C’ and ‘ICM-pixels + A3C’ which are
both proposed in (Pathak et al., 2017). ICM combines intrin-
sic curiosity module with A3C. ICM-pixels is close to ICM
in architecture except without the inverse dynamics model,
and ICM-pixels computes curiosity reward only dependent
on forward model loss in next frame prediction.
Training methodology This section describes the imple-
mentation details of our training methodology. The agents
are trained directly with raw image frames captured from
ViZDoom, as shown in Fig. 4. All input frames are con-
verted from RGB into gray-scale and resized to 42 × 42.
Please note that ICM requires eight such frames (four
stacked frames for St and another four for St+1) as its input.
On the other hand, both FICM-S and FICM-C require only
a single frame for St and another one for St+1. At each step
of interaction with the ViZDoom environment, an action
is repeated four times during the training phase. Follow-
ing the asynchronous training algorithm described in Mnih
et al. (2016), the four agents ‘ICM +A3C’, ‘ICM-pixels +
A3C’, ‘FICM-S + A3C’ and ‘FICM-C + A3C’ are trained
asynchronously in the ’sparse’ and ’very sparse’ reward set-
tings described above with twenty workers using stochastic
gradient descent and ADAM optimizer for 15M timesteps.
4.2. Comparison of the Learning Curves
We analyze and compare the learning curves of our proposed
methods, ‘FICM-C + A3C’ and ‘FICM-S + A3C’, with
those of the baseline methods, ‘ICM + A3C’ and ‘ICM-
pixels + A3C’. Fig. 1 shows the learning curves. Each curve
is plotted from three independent runs, and smoothed among
timesteps. The solid lines represent the means of the curves,
while the shaded areas represent the conﬁdence intervals.
We compare the results in the sparse reward setting and very
Table 2. Comparison of the number of parameters and the existence
of catastrophic forgetting for different ICM methods. Please note
that ‘-’ indicates that the corresponding method fails the task.
METHOD
# OF PARAMETERS
FORGETTING
SPARSE
VERY SPARSE
ICM
326,692


ICM-PIXELS
142,212

–
FICM-C (OURS)
257,570


FICM-S (OURS)
182,594


sparse reward settings in the following paragraphs.
Sparse reward setting.
In the experimental results pre-
sented in Pathak et al. (2017), both ‘ICM + A3C’ and ‘ICM-
pixels + A3C’ learn well, and are able to achieve the maxi-
mum performance before 9M timesteps. However, accord-
ing to our experiments, ‘ICM + A3C’ begins suffering from
the catastrophic forgetting problem at 10M timesteps, lead-
ing to a severe drop in performance. In contrast, ‘FICM-C +
A3C’, ‘FICM-S + A3C’, and ‘ICM-pixels + A3C’ maintain
the performance even at 15M timesteps. It can also be ob-
served that our methods converge faster than the baselines.
Very sparse reward setting. In the very sparse reward set-
ting, ‘ICM + A3C’ continues to suffer from the catastrophic
forgetting problem, while ‘ICM-pixels + A3C’ even fails in
this setting. Although both ‘FICM-C + A3C’ and ‘FICM-S
+ A3C’ do not converge faster than ‘ICM + A3C’, they are
able to maintain their performance till the end of the entire
training process, without any observable performance drop.
We can observe that no performance drop occurs for ‘ICM-
pixels + A3C’ under the sparse reward setting in Fig. 1(a).
One possible explanation is that the overly strong explo-
ration capability offered by ICM may actually end up trad-
ing exploitation off for exploration. In other words, if the
agent is eager to explore novel states without balancing ex-
ploration and exploitation, it is more likely to forget the
previously explored states. Moreover, as the reward signals
in the sparse reward setting is relatively dense than the those
in the very sparse setting, ‘ICM-pixels + A3C’ is able to
play well even with a weaker exploration capability. On the
contrary, the overly strong exploration capability of ‘ICM +
A3C’ causes it to be vulnerable to the catastrophic forget-
ting problem. ‘FICM-C + A3C’ and ‘FICM-S + A3C’ are
able to balance well between exploration and exploitation,
enabling them to be more robust to the forgetting problem.
4.3. Comparison of the Model Parameters
Table 2 summarizes the number of parameters used by differ-
ent intrinsic curiosity modules including ICM, ICM-pixels,
FICM-C, and FICM-S, as well as the results of Fig. 1. It
shows that the catastrophic forgetting problem occurs for

Never Forget: Balancing Exploration and Exploitation via Learning Optical Flow
Figure 5. Evolution of intrinsic rewards versus time. The 3-tuples (x, y, bonus) from different episodes are plotted on the game map.
Episode range e = [0, 25] means that the tuples from episodes 0 to 25 are plotted. Darker points correspond to higher exploration bonuses
(i.e., intrinsic rewards). (a) The footprints of FICM, and (b) The footprints of ICM.
ICM-based method (‘ICM + A3C’) under both sparse re-
ward and very sparse reward settings, while FICM-based
methods (‘FICM-S + A3C’ and ‘FICM-C + A3C’) show
enduring performance and require fewer parameters. Al-
though the architectures of the ﬂow predictors employed by
FICM-S and FICM-C seem much more complicated than
the forward dynamics model and inverse dynamics model
in ICM, however, the number of model parameters used by
FICM-S and FICM-C are relatively fewer than those used
by ICM. It can be seen that FICM-C and FICM-S require
only 78.84% and 55.89% of the model parameters used
by ICM. Please note that although the parameters of ICM-
pixels are only 43.53% of those used by ICM due to the
removal of the inverse dynamics model, ICM-pixels fails in
the environment with very sparse rewards. One explanation
for the excessive number of model parameters in ICM is be-
cause of its requirement of eight input frames (four stacked
frames for St and another four for St+1) as its input. On
the other hand, both FICM-S and FICM-C require only a
single frame for St and another one for St+1, allowing their
model parameters to be relatively fewer than those of ICM.
4.4. Evolution of Intrinsic Rewards versus Time
In order to demonstrate the effectiveness and advantage
of FICM over ICM, we further conduct an experiment to
demonstrate the evolution of intrinsic rewards by storing the
locations that the A3C agent reached in each episode, along
with the exploration bonus (i.e., intrinsic rewards). We plot
the distribution of the 3-tuples (x, y, bonus) onto the game
map, and illustrate the evolution of the distribution over
time. The bonus terms are reﬂected on the sizes and color
depths of the points. In other words, a point is plotted larger
and darker if its corresponding exploration bonus is high.
Ideally, in later episodes, previously visited locations should
be plotted with lighter color and those newly visited should
be darker. In Fig. 5, we can observe that FICM is capable of
memorizing previously visited paths and avoiding repeated
exploration. On the other hand, even though the agent is
not provided with any external reward, the baseline still ex-
plores those visited paths again in the later episodes. More
precisely, when the episode range e is set to [250, 275] and
[2150, 2175], the sudden increase in curiosity for visited
paths indicates that ICM forgets previous explorations and
misinterprets those visited states as novel states. Eventually,
such forgetting problem may result in the agent being un-
able to traverse to the goal location. This experiment again
validates that the catastrophic forgetting problem does exist
in ICM, while the proposed FICM is robust to the problem.
5. Conclusion
We propose a ﬂow-based curiosity module (FICM) intro-
ducing optical ﬂow estimation, including two different im-
plementations, FICM-C and FICM-S. FICM employs op-
tical ﬂow estimation errors as a suitable intrinsic reward
signal for the agent to explore the environment in a more
comprehensive fashion. Throughout a number of thorough
experiments, FICM explores novel states efﬁciently and
never suffers from any performance drop in either sparse
or very sparse external reward settings. These experimental
results demonstrate that our proposed method is capable of
memorizing the novelty of states in large high-dimensional
state spaces, and delivers permanent performance without
encountering catastrophic forgetting problems. In one word,
FICM successfully solves the forgetting problem and shows
lifelong learning by well balancing exploration and exploita-
tion via learning optical ﬂow.

Never Forget: Balancing Exploration and Exploitation via Learning Optical Flow
