Towards Understanding and Answering Multi-Sentence Recommendation
Questions on Tourism
Danish Contractor∗
IIT Delhi & IBM Research AI
New Delhi, India

Barun Patra
IIT Delhi
New Delhi, India

Mausam and Parag Singla
IIT Delhi
New Delhi, India

Abstract
We introduce the ﬁrst system towards the
novel task of answering complex multi-
sentence recommendation questions in the
tourism domain.
Our solution uses a
pipeline of two modules: question under-
standing and answering. For question un-
derstanding, we deﬁne an SQL-like query
language that captures the semantic in-
tent of a question; it supports operators
like subset, negation, preference and sim-
ilarity, which are often found in recom-
mendation questions. We train and com-
pare traditional CRFs as well as bidirec-
tional LSTM-based models for convert-
ing a question to its semantic representa-
tion. We extend these models to a semi-
supervised setting with partially labeled
sequences gathered through crowdsourc-
ing.
We ﬁnd that our best model per-
forms semi-supervised training of BiDiL-
STM+CRF with hand-designed features
and CCM(Chang et al., 2007) constraints.
Finally, in an end to end QA system, our
answering component converts our ques-
tion representation into queries ﬁred on
underlying knowledge sources.
Our ex-
periments on two different answer corpora
demonstrate that our system can signiﬁ-
cantly outperform baselines with up to 20
pt higher accuracy and 17 pt higher recall.
1
Introduction
We are motivated by the goal of building an in-
formation agent for tourists – one that would per-
form various roles of a travel agent, such as help-
ing decide the city to visit, recommending points
∗This work was carried out as part of PhD research at IIT
Delhi. The author is also a regular employee at IBM Re-
search.
of interest, ﬁnding travel routes, and even creating
optimized itineraries. Our paper develops a key
component of such an agent – a QA system for di-
rectly answering recommendation questions. As a
ﬁrst step, we focus our paper on questions that are
entity-seeking, i.e., expect one or more entities as
answer. These include the large fraction of tourist
questions that ask for hotels, restaurants, points
of interest and other services that would serve a
user’s speciﬁc needs the best. Figure 1 shows an
example of such a question, where the user is in-
terested in ﬁnding a hotel that satisﬁes some con-
straints and preferences; an answer to this ques-
tion is thus the name of a hotel (entity).
A preliminary analysis of such questions from
popular tourism forums reveals that almost all
of them contain multiple sentences – they of-
ten elaborate on a user’s speciﬁc situation before
asking their question.
We name these MSRQs
– multi-sentence recommendation questions. An
answering system needs to retrieve answer en-
tities from background knowledge sources that
may have information about each candidate entity.
This includes review sites like TripAdvisor, Book-
ing.com, travel guides such as WikiTravel,1 or on-
line services like Google Places.2
Understanding MSRQs raises several novel
challenges. MSRQs use informal language, ex-
press a wide variety of intents and requirements
in each question, and express user preferences and
constraints in addition to those for the answer. The
questions can be unnecessarily belabored requir-
ing the system to reason about what is important
and what is not. Moreover, the querying module
needs to incorporate the various constructs found
in recommendation questions.
1http://www.wikitravel.org
2https://developers.google.com/places/
arXiv:1801.01825v1  [cs.CL]  5 Jan 2018

Figure 1: An entity-seeking MSRQ and its corresponding RQL representation.
1.1
Contributions
We present the ﬁrst system for the novel task of an-
swering entity-seeking MSRQs from background
corpora in the tourism domain. We make three
main technical contributions: a query language
to represent MSRQs, a question understanding
module to parse the question into our language,
and answering systems that perform retrieval over
knowledge sources to return answer entities.
Query Language:
For question understand-
ing, we deﬁne a recommendation question lan-
guage (RQL) that captures the semantic intent of
an MSRQ. RQL is an SQL-like language with
operators chosen to cover various entity-seeking
MSRQs. It expresses both attributes of the answer
and the user. We construct a dataset of MSRQs
and their RQL representations (9200 annotated to-
kens), used as training data.
Question Understanding:
We take a sequence
labeling approach for question understanding. The
current state of the art for sequence labeling
uses bidirectional LSTMs with a ﬁnal CRF layer
(Huang et al., 2015).
However, because our
dataset is relatively small, it was not clear a pri-
ori whether a purely neural solution for sequence
labeling will be competitive with the more tradi-
tional feature engineering methods. In response,
we perform extensive experiments and combine
various approaches to construct our best model.
It includes (1) neural features, (2) hand-designed
features (3) constraints capturing additional do-
main knowledge, and (4) semi-supervised learn-
ing over crowdsourced data.
Our ﬁnal model
runs the Constraint Driven Learning Algorithm
(CoDL)(Chang et al., 2007) for semi-supervised
learning over a BiDiLSTM+CRF with additional
features and constraints modeled using constraint
conditional modeling (CCM)(Chang et al., 2007).
We evaluate the incremental value of each addition
to the model.
End-to-End QA Experiments: After parsing the
question into RQL, our corpus-speciﬁc query gen-
erators convert the parse into queries that can be
ﬁred on the knowledge source for generating an-
swers. Since answering MSRQs is a novel task,
there are no direct baselines. We therefore, com-
pare our system against a QA system - WebQA
(Vtyurina and Clarke, 2016) which was designed
to handle multi-sentence questions; the original
WebQA system returned passages as answers, but
we adapt it to return entity answers from our
knowledge sources for fair comparison. We use
two knowledge sources: (1) an ofﬂine corpus of
reviews for about half a million entities crawled
from Google Places, TripAdvisor, WikiTravel and
Booking.com; (2) full online Google Places API.
We ﬁnd that our RQL-based QA dramatically out-
performs baselines obtaining 20 pt accuracy, and
17 pt recall improvements.
2
Related Work
To the best of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to
explicitly understand and directly answer multi-
sentence recommendation by returning entities us-
ing a background corpus. Our work is related to
the research in question understanding and other
forms of QA.
Question Answering Systems:
There are two
common approaches for QA systems – joint and
pipelined, both with different advantages.
The
joint systems usually train an end-to-end neural ar-
chitecture, with a softmax over candidate answers

(or spans over a given passage) as the ﬁnal layer
(Iyyer et al., 2014; Rajpurkar et al., 2016). Such
systems can be rapidly retrained for different do-
mains, as they use minimal hand-constructed or
domain-speciﬁc features. But, they require huge
amounts of labeled QA pairs for training.
In contrast, a pipelined approach (Fader et al.,
2014; Berant and Liang, 2014; Fader et al., 2013;
Kwiatkowski et al., 2013; Vtyurina and Clarke,
2016; Wang and Nyberg, 2016) divides the task
into two components – question processing (un-
derstanding) and querying the knowledge source.
Since each of these are simpler sub-problems,
such methods can be built with relatively less
training data, but require more annotation efforts
per domain.
It is important to note that for answering an
MSRQ, the answer space can include thousands of
candidate entities per question, with large unstruc-
tured review documents about each entity that help
determine the best answer entity. We brieﬂy sum-
marize popular approaches in QA systems for easy
comparison of our work with existing literature in
Table 1: QA systems and can be broadly classiﬁed
based on (a) type of questions they answer (b) na-
ture of KB/Corpus used for answering (c) nature
of answers returned by the answering system
The problem of directly returning answers to
questions from background knowledge sources
has been studied, but primarily for single sen-
tence factoid-like questions (Fader et al., 2014;
Berant and Liang, 2014; Yin et al., 2015; Sun
et al., 2015; Saha et al., 2016; Khot et al., 2017;
Lukovnikov et al., 2017).
Reading comprehen-
sion tasks (Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Trischler et al.,
2016; Joshi et al., 2017; Trivedi et al., 2017) re-
quire answers to be generated from unstructured
text also only return answers for simple single-
sentence questions.
Other works have consid-
ered multi-sentence questions, but in different set-
tings, such as the specialized setting of answer-
ing multiple-choice SAT and science questions
(Seo et al., 2015; Clark et al., 2016; Khot et al.,
2017; Guo et al., 2017), mathematical word prob-
lems (Liang et al., 2016), and textbook questions
(Sachan et al., 2016).
Community QA systems
(Bogdanova and Foster, 2016; Shen et al., 2015;
Qiu and Huang, 2015; Tan et al., 2015) match
questions with user-provided answers, instead of
entities from background knowledge-source. IR-
based systems (Wang and Nyberg, 2016) query the
Web for open-domain questions, but return long
(1000 character) passages as answers; they haven’t
been tested on recommendation questions.
The
techniques that can handle MSRQs (Vtyurina and
Clarke, 2016; Wang and Nyberg, 2016) typically
perform retrieval using keywords extracted from
questions; these do not understand the questions
well and can’t answer many tourism questions,
as our experiments show.
The more traditional
solutions (e.g., semantic parsing) that parse the
questions deeply can process only single-sentence
questions (Fader et al., 2014; Berant and Liang,
2014; Fader et al., 2013; Kwiatkowski et al.,
2013).
Finally, systems such as QANTA (Iyyer et al.,
2014) also answer complex multi-sentence ques-
tions but their methods can only select answers
from a small list of entities and also require large
amounts of training data with redundancy of QA
pairs. In contrast, the subset of Google Places we
experiment with has close to half a million enti-
ties. Further, in our task, the reviews about each
entity are signiﬁcantly longer3 than passages (or
similar length articles) that have traditionally been
used in QA tasks and it is only recently that the
task of QA via neural machine comprehension of
long documents has been proposed (Trivedi et al.,
2017).
Semantic Representation of Questions: QA sys-
tems use a variety of different intermediate seman-
tic representations. Most of them, including the
rich body of work in NLIDB and semantic pars-
ing, parse single sentence questions into a query
based on the underlying ontology or DB schema
(Pazos R. et al., 2013; Saha et al., 2016; Zettle-
moyer, 2009; Liang, 2011; Trivedi et al., 2017).
Open QA (Fader et al., 2014) uses an open-domain
representation for factoid single-sentence QA.
Recent works build neural models that represent
a question as a continuous-valued vector (Bordes
et al., 2014a,b; Xu et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2016).
Some systems rely on IR
and do not construct explicit semantic representa-
tions at all (Sun et al., 2015; Vtyurina and Clarke,
2016); instead, they rely on selecting keywords
from the question for querying. They can handle
multi-sentence questions, but do not understand
questions deeply. To the best of our knowledge no
3Reviews for each entity are contactenated to serve as
background information about that entity, resulting in docu-
ments ranging in length from a few hundred to a few thousand
sentences.

Question Type
Knowledge Type
Answer Type
Related Work
Structured (eg. DBPedia, Freebase)
Entity
(Lukovnikov et al., 2017; Bordes et al.,
2014b, 2015)
Single Sentence
Structured (Open IE style KBs)
Entity
(Fader et al., 2014; Berant and Liang,
2014)
Structured + Unstructured (Open IE style
KBs with supporting text passages on en-
tities )
Entity
(Das et al., 2017)
Structured (Databases)
Tables/ Table rows
(Saha et al., 2016; Pazos R. et al., 2013)
Unstructured
Text Spans
(Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Trischler et al.,
2016; Trivedi et al., 2017; Chen et al.,
2017; Joshi et al., 2017)
Unstructured
Text Passages
(Vtyurina and Clarke, 2016; Wang and
Nyberg, 2016, 2015)
Multiple choice answers
Answers from speciﬁed
choices
(Guo et al., 2017; Khot et al., 2017)
Multi-sentence
Unstructured
Text (Answer) passages
(Singh and Simperl, 2016; Romeo et al.,
2016; Srba and Bielikova, 2016; Bog-
danova and Foster, 2016)
Unstructured (QA pairs)
Entity
(Iyyer et al., 2014)
Semi-structured meta-data + Unstruc-
tured (Entity Reviews)
Entity
Our work
Table 1: Related work: QA
question parser has been developed for MSRQs.
Figure 2: Schematic Representation of the system
3
System Architecture
Our QA system broadly consists of two mod-
ules (see Figure 2): question understanding, and
answer generation.
As motivated earlier, the
modularized two-step architecture allows us to
tackle different aspects of the problem indepen-
dently. The semantic representation generated by
the question understanding module is generic and
not tied to a speciﬁc corpora or ontology. This
allows the answering module to be optimized ef-
ﬁciently for each knowledge source, as well as al-
lows the integration of multiple data sources, each
with their own schema and strengths for answer-
ing. We ﬁrst describe the details of our question
representation (Section 4).
Further sections de-
scribe the question understanding (Section 5) and
Q→
s e l e c t
x where C
C→C |
(C and C)
|
(C or C)
C→L R T | L ’
near R T
R→= | P = |
in {T}
|
in
[T]
T→T , T ’
| T ’
T ’ →‘<phrase >’
P→
p r e f
|
s i m i l a r
|
in
|
not
|
P→P P
L→x . a t t r
|
user . a t t r
|
x . type
|
x
|
x . l o c a t i o n
|
user . l o c a t i o n
L ’ →x . l o c a t i o n
Figure 3: CFG rules for our query representation
answer generation (Section 6) modules in detail.
Examples of some user questions and the answer
entities returned by our system are shown in Table
8.
4
RQL Representation
Since we build the ﬁrst system of its kind, we need
to balance representation expressiveness and its
answerability. For our ﬁrst version, we make the
assumption that the MSRQ is asking only one ﬁnal
question, and that the expected answer is one or
more entities. This precludes Boolean, compari-
son, ‘why’/‘how’, and multiple part questions. We
now describe RQL, our language for representing
such MSRQs.
We choose a relatively open question represen-
tation for RQL. It makes minimal assumptions
about the answering knowledge sources and there-
fore, minimizes schema or ontology speciﬁc se-
mantic vocabulary.
Another advantange is that
RQL with small changes could be rapidly adapted

to a non-tourism domain (see Table 2 for exam-
ples of RQL queries for automobiles and electron-
ics domains). At the same time, we note that RQL
can easily be extended to include more schema-
speciﬁc semantic labels, if required.
We illustrate RQL’s representation choices by
means of an example (Figure 1). Here, the user
is interested in ﬁnding a hotel that satisﬁes some
constraints and preferences. The question includes
some information about the user herself, which
may or may not be relevant for answering.
RQL resembles an SQL-like language. Since
each question has an entity (or more) as an answer,
it denotes the desired answer by x. Each answer
will have a type (referred to by the semantic label
x.type), e.g., ‘place to stay’. Many tourism ques-
tions may be about facilities, which may have an
x.location. To accommodate other characteristics
of the answer entity, RQL deﬁnes x.attribute –
any phrase describing the answer that is not type
or location is marked as an attribute. Users of-
ten expect personalized answers and explain their
individual situation in their question. To accom-
modate aspects of a user that may be impor-
tant while answering, RQL deﬁnes a special en-
tity called user. It maintains user.attribute and
user.location for user’s features; ‘three daughters
in their young 20s’ will be marked user.attribute
in our example.
An analysis of tourism forum questions re-
veals that RQL can adequately represent almost
all tourism questions that satisfy our assumptions.
Notice the limited semantic vocabulary for can-
didate answers (type, location, attribute) – this
aligns with our goal of making minimal assump-
tions about the knowledge sources.
Operators: Another key feature of RQL is that
it maximizes the coverage of common operators
found in a recommendation question, so that a ro-
bust down-stream QA or IR system can meaning-
fully answer it. In addition to standard logical con-
nectives like AND, OR and NOT (for example,
the phrase “not very spicy” may be represented
as x.attribute NOT = ‘very spicy’), RQL also
deﬁnes four more operators (PREF, NEAR, IN,
and SIMILAR) to represent common constructs in
MSRQs.
PREF expresses a preference that is not a
constraint, e.g., “I would prefer to eat sushi”
(x.attribute PREF = ‘sushi’). The NEAR opera-
tor is used when a user requires recommendations
that are geographically close to a location speci-
ﬁed in the question (e.g “near Salzburg” will be
annotated as x.location NEAR ‘Salzburg’).
SIMILAR is used when a user mentions similar
entities. For instance, “I have been to Red Hoods
and wanna visit a similar place” will be annotated
as x SIMILAR = ‘Red Hoods’. We note that men-
tion of entities such as ‘Red Hoods’ can be very in-
formative, since these typically represent siblings
of the answer – instances of the type of the desired
answer. We name these as sibling entities.
Finally, IN is used when a user explicitly pro-
vides a list of sibling entities among which she
wants an answer. An example is “I have short-
listed Red Hoods, Cafe China and Royals. Help
me”; RQL construct will be x IN {‘Red Hoods’,
‘Cafe China’, ‘Royals’}. Curly brackets denote an
enumerated set. RQL also uses a special square
bracket symbol to denote a range. For example,
“location between New York and New Jersey” will
translate to x.location IN [‘New York’, ‘New Jer-
sey’]. These operators may also be nested, for ex-
ample, “preferably not Red Hoods or Royals” will
be x PREF NOT IN {‘Red Hoods’, ‘Royals’}.
Formally, RQL language is deﬁned in Figure 3.
A query Q is generated by a set of clauses C. Each
clause C can generate a label L with operator R
and a terminal ‘<phrase>’ generated by T and T ′.
A separate rule with L′ is written for NEAR oper-
ators since they only support x.location.
Two expert annotators with background in NLP
annotate 150 user questions (9200 annotated to-
kens) with their RQL representations. These ques-
tions are chosen randomly from a popular tourism
forum site.
The annotators resolve their differ-
ences in person to produce a combined labeled set,
which serves as training data for question under-
standing in the rest of the paper.
5
Question Understanding
Before describing implementation details of our
question understanding component, we present
some background on Constrained Conditional
Models (CCMs)(Chang et al., 2007) and BiDiL-
STM+CRF(Huang et al., 2015) as these are at the
core of our question understanding component.
5.1
Background on Sequence Labeling
Constraint Conditional Models (CCMs) extend
CRFs (Lafferty et al., 2001) by allowing an expert
to express domain knowledge through hard or soft

Domain
Question
RQL Representation
Automobiles
I want to buy a sedan in diesel version and bud-
get is USD 30,000-40,000. looking for one with
basic luxury, nothing too fancy. Which one is
best:?
select
x
where
x.type=”sedan”
& x.attribute=”diesel version” &
x.attribute=”USD
30000-40000”
&
x.attribute=”basic
luxury”
&
x.attribute=”nothing too fancy
Automobiles
Can anyone suggest to me a reliable brand of
a tyre pressure guage and pump? An estimate
of their approx costs and place of availability in
Delhi would be preferrable.
select x where x.type=”place of
availability”
&
x.attribute=”tyre
pressure
guage
and
pump”
&
x.attribute=”reliable
brand”
&
x.location PREF =”Delhi
Electronics
My 15 year old Broksonic TV is dying, so I am
needing to buy a replacement. Want an LCD
TV about the same size (20”), with good picture
clarity and sound quality. Must have composite
(RCA) or component connectors to ﬁt my DVD
recorder, and VCR. Looking to buy from Ama-
zon, TigerDirect, etc. Recommendations?
select x where x.type=”LCD TV” &
x.attribute=”20¨, with good picture
quality” & x.attribute=”composite
(RCA) or component connectors”
&
x.attribute=”from
Amazon,
TigerDirect”
Electronics
I’ve done a search and concluded that I can’t
afford the best washing machine (Miele etc)
so how about some recommendations for a
good quality front loader,7.5 kg and up to
1000.Thanks.
select x where x.type=”washing
machine”
&
x.attribute=”good
quality
front
loader”
&
x.attribute=”7.5
Kg”
&
x.attribute=”upto
$1000”,x
NOT
SIMILAR ”Miele”
Table 2: RQL representations in different domains
constraints. CCMs use an alternate learning objec-
tive expressed as the difference between the orig-
inal CRF log-likelihood and a constraint violation
penalty (Chang et al., 2007):
X
i
wT φ(x(i), y(i)) −
X
i
X
k
ρkdCk(x(i), y(i))
Here, x(i) is the ith sequence and y(i) its label-
ing. φ and w are feature and weight vectors re-
spectively. dCk and ρk denote the violation score
and weight associated with kth constraint. The w
parameters are learned analogous to a vanilla CRF
and computing ρ parameters resorts to counting.
Hard constraints have an inﬁnite weight. Infer-
ence in CCMs is formulated as an Integer Linear
Program (ILP); see Chang et al.(2007) for details.
Constraints driven learning (CODL) is a semi-
supervised iterative weight update algorithm,
where the weights at each step are computed us-
ing a combination of the models learned on the
labeled and the unlabeled set (Chang et al., 2007).
CoDL’s weight update equation is:
(w(t+1), ρ(t+1)) = γ(w(0), ρ(0)) + (1 −γ)Learn(U(t))
Here, t denotes the iteration number. Learn func-
tion learns the parameters of the model on exam-
ples supplied as its argument. The parameters at
iteration t = 0 are learned only using the labeled
data. U(t) denotes the unlabeled set whose values
have been ﬁlled in using parameters at iteration t.
γ controls the relative importance of the labeled
and unlabeled examples.
Bidirectional LSTM based CRF is a state of the
art neural approach for sequence labeling (Huang
et al., 2015). The output of BiDi LSTM network at
each time step feeds into a CRF layer. The consec-
utive outputs of the LSTM states are connected to
each other in the CRF layer and consist of a state
transition matrix that contain the probabilities of
transitions between output labels.
It can be seen as a combination of neural feature
engineering and CRF’s joint inference.
5.2
Semantic Labeling of Questions
We now discuss our approach to parse an MSRQ
into its RQL representation. We could use a full-
blown CFG parsing approach. But given that the
context-free component of our grammar is limited
(most clauses are conjunctive), we, instead, use
a combination of sequence labeling and operator
post-processing. Our token-level label set directly
corresponds to semantic labels in RQL: {x.type,
x.attribute, x.location, x.sibling, user.attribute,
user.location, other}.
Here, x.sibling refers to
sibling entities and other label captures all tokens
not assigned any of the semantic labels. For now,
we mark operator words as other and handle them
separately as a post-processing step using a set of
lexical rules.
Our sequence labeling task dataset is relatively
small. Because neural approaches are often more
effective in large data settings, we experimented
with both solutions – traditional CRFs and BiDiL-
STM CRF. We further improve performance using
CCM constraints and crowdsourcing more data.
5.2.1
Supervised Labeling
Conditional Random Field:
We ﬁrst pose the
sequence labeling task as a single linear chain
CRF (Lafferty et al., 2001) over the MSRQ. We

implement a number of features as follows. (a)
Lexical features for capitalization, indicating nu-
merals etc., token-level features based on POS and
NER (b) hand-designed x.type and x.attribute
speciﬁc features.
These include indicators for
guessing potential types, based on targets of WH
(what, where, which) words and certain verb
classes; dependency parse features that aid in at-
tribute detection, e.g., for every noun and adjec-
tive, an attribute indicator feature is on if any of its
ancestors is a potential type as indicated by type
feature; indicator features for descriptive phrases
(Contractor et al., 2016), such as adjective-noun
pairs. (c) For each token, we include cluster ids
generated from a clustering of word2vec vectors
(Mikolov et al., 2013) run over a large tourism cor-
pus. (d) We also use the counts of a token in the
entire post, as a feature for that token (Vtyurina
and Clarke, 2016).
Constrained Conditional Model:
Since we la-
bel multi-sentence questions, we need to capture
patterns spanning across sentences. One method
of doing so would be to model these patterns as
features deﬁned over non-adjacent tokens (labels).
But this can make the modeling quite complex. In-
stead, we model them as global constraints over
the set of possible labels using CCMs. We de-
sign the following constraints: (i) type constraint
(hard):
every question must have at least one
x.type token, and (ii) attribute constraint (soft),
which penalizes absence of an x.attribute label in
the sequence. (iii) a soft constraint that prefers all
x.type tokens occur in the same sentence. The last
constraint helps reduce erroneous x.type labels
but allows the labeler to choose x.type-labeled to-
kens from multiple sentences only if it is very con-
ﬁdent. Thus, while the ﬁrst two constraints are di-
rected towards improving recall, the last constraint
helps improve precision of x.type labels.
BiDi LSTM based sequence modeling: We also
experiment with neural approaches by modeling
each question using a bi-directional LSTM CRF.
The input states in the LSTM are modeled using a
200 dimension word vector representation of the
token.
These word vector representations were
pre-trained using the word2vec model(Mikolov
et al., 2013) on a large collection of 80, 000
tourism questions.
We extend the basic BiDiLST CRF model in
two ways to improve performance in our low-data
setting (see Figure 4). First, we allow use of hand-
Figure 4: BiDi LSTM CCM for labeling question
tokens.
crafted features by representing each unique fea-
ture set as a one-hot vector and concatenating this
feature vector with the word-vector representation
of each token4. Second, we enforce the CCM con-
straints during inference and the model is trained
end-to-end using back-propagation. To the best of
our knowledge, this combined model of BiDiL-
STM CRF with CCM constraints is a novel con-
tribution of our work.
5.2.2
Crowd-sourced Data Collection
In order to obtain a larger amount of labeled data
for our task, we decided to make use of crowd-
sourcing (Amazon Mechanical Turk). Since our
labeling task can be fairly complex, we divide our
crowd task into multiple steps. We ﬁrst ask crowd
to (i) ﬁlter out forum questions that are not rec-
ommendation questions. For the questions that re-
main, the crowd provides (ii) user.∗labels, and
(iii) x.∗labels. For each step, instead of directly
asking for token labels, we ask a series of indirect
questions that lead us to the desired labels. For ex-
ample, for x.type, we ask workers to highlight the
text that describes what the user is asking for as
shown below:
• “Which sequence of words in the question
tells you what the user is asking for? Label
only one sequence from a single sentence; we
prefer a continuous sequence.”
• “What is the shortest sequence of words in
“A1 (answer to the question above)” that de-
4We also experimented with using a feature vector in the
CRF layer instead of the LSTM input layer but it gave poorer
results

x.type
x.attr
x.loc
Token level disagreement (%)
52.02
62.22
31.44
Table 3: Inter-worker disagreement on AMT
scribes a category (e.g. place to stay, restau-
rant, show, place to eat, spot, hotel etc.)?”
This alternate way of labeling by asking a se-
ries of questions is inspired by (He et al., 2015).
We obtain two sets of labels (different workers)
on each question. Unfortunately, despite breaking
the task into simpler steps, we see disagreement
among the workers on some labels (see Table 3
for token-level disagreement statistics). Some of
the disagreement results from labeling errors due
to complex nature of the task. In other cases, the
disagreement results from their choosing one of
the several possible correct answers. E.g., in the
phrase “good restaurant for dinner” one worker
labels x.type =‘restaurant’, x.attribute =‘good’
and x.attribute =‘dinner’, while another worker
simply chooses the entire phrase as x.type. We
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to relate expert-guidelines to the
crowd in a succinct and clear manner.
Since most of our posts have some disagree-
ment among the workers, how do we incorporate
this data into our supervised learning setting? We
devise the novel idea of only keeping the labels
where the two annotators agree and disregarding
the other labels, resulting in partially labeled se-
quences. . This is different from disregarding the
entire example where there is any disagreement,
which would result in loss of signiﬁcant (correctly
labeled) data.
We use this partial supervision,
along with our original training set, in a semi-
supervised learning setting, to learn the parame-
ters of our CCM model. To the best our knowl-
edge, we are the ﬁrst to exploit partial supervision
from a crowd-sourcing platform in this manner.
5.2.3
Semi-Supervised Labeling
In order to use these partially labeled sequences,
we adapt the original CoDL algorithm to work
with partial labels. We replace the unlabeled set U
by the partially labeled set; inference over the set
involves predicting only the missing labels. This
can be still be done using an ILP based formu-
lation. Rest of the update equation remains the
same. In the case of the BiDiLSTM CRF based
formulation, the modeling remains the same as
described, except the Learn function now corre-
sponds to training the neural network via back-
propagation.
5.3
Operator Post-processing & RQL
Generation
To construct the ﬁnal RQL query, we need to
identify the appropriate operator for each labeled
phrase. For each operator, we start with a manu-
ally curated set of seed words, and expand it using
synonym and antonym counter ﬁtted word vectors
(Mrksic et al., 2016). The resulting set of trigger
words ﬂag the presence of an operator in a sen-
tence. A set of deterministic rules estimate the
scope of each operator. Rules use semantic labels
from sequence labeling, along with some token-
level features such as part of speech tags to iden-
tify scope. For instance, a token (or a set of con-
tinuous tokens with the same label) labeled by our
sequence tagger that occur within a speciﬁed win-
dow of a trigger word for “negation”, are in its
scope. A secondary set of rules are used to com-
pose operators with each other. For instance, if
a phrase that is in scope for “negation” is also in
scope for a “disjunction”, then the “negation” ap-
plies to all tokens in scope of the disjunction. Fur-
ther, in this case the disjunction converts to a con-
junction by laws of Boolean algebra.
5.4
Evaluation
This evaluation answers the questions: (1) which
model obtains the best performance for our seman-
tic tagger, and (2) what is the incremental contri-
bution of features, CCM constraints and crowd-
sourced annotation for our task. We additionally
learn about effectiveness of neural models for se-
quence labeling in low-data setting.
Evaluation Details:
We use the 150 expert-
annotated tourism forum questions as our dataset
and perform leave-one out cross-validation. Our
current implementation trains only a subset of the
labels {x.type, x.attribute, x.location, other} –
these are most important for downstream QA.
We use the Mallet toolkit5 for CRF implemen-
tation and the GLPK ILP-based solver6 for CCM
inference.
For expts with semi-supervised learning, we
add 400 partially-annotated questions from crowd-
sourced workers to our training set. We retain to-
ken labels marked the same by two workers for
5http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/
6https://www.gnu.org/software/glpk/

Model
F1 (x.type)
F1 (x.attr)
F1 (x.loc)
F1 (aggr)
CRF (all features)
51.4
45.3
55.7
50.8
CCM
59.6
50.0
56.1
55.2
CCM (with all crowd data)
55.1
42.2
46.7
48.0
Semi-supervised CCM
58.5
50.6
60.3
56.5
BiDi LSTM CRF
53.3
47.6
52.1
51.0
BiDi LSTM CRF with all features
58.4
48.1
62.0
56.2
BiDi LSTM CCM with Features
59.4
49.8
62.3
57.2
Semi-Supervised BiDi LSTM CCM with features
62.9
50.4
61.5
58.3
Table 4: Sequence tagger F1 using CRF with all features, CCM with all features & constraints, and
semi-supervised CCM over partially labeled crowd data. The second set of results mirror these numbers
using a Bi-directional LSTM CRF. Results are statistically signiﬁcant (paired t-test,p value<0.000124).
every question, and treat the other labels as un-
known. We pay a total of $1.02 per question for
this annotation.
We still compute a leave one
out cross-validation on our original 150 expert-
annotated questions (complete crowd data is in-
cluded in each training fold). For CoDL learning
we set γ to 0.9 as per original authors’ recommen-
dations.
Sequence-tagged tokens identify phrases for
each semantic label, which become units for con-
structing the ﬁnal RQL query.
So, instead of
reporting metrics at the token level, we com-
pute a more meaningful joint metric over tagged
phrases. We deﬁne a matching-based metric that
ﬁrst matches each extracted segment with the clos-
est one in the gold set, and then computes segment
level precision using constituent tokens. Analo-
gously, recall is computed by matching each seg-
ment in gold set with the best one in extracted set.
As an example, for Figure 1, if the system ex-
tracts “convenient to the majority” and “local bud-
get” for x.attribute then our matching-metric will
compute precision as 0.75 (1.0 for “convenient to
the majority” and 0.5 for “local budget)” and recall
as 0.45 (1.0 for “budget”, 0.0 for “best” and 0.364
for “convenient to the majority ... like to see”).
Results: Table 4 reports the performance of our
semantic labeler under different conﬁgurations.
We ﬁnd that using a CRF based system using all
features gives us an aggregate F1 of 50.8. The
use of our CCM constraints have a signiﬁcant
impact on overall performance, raising aggregate
F-score by over 4 points.
Table 4 shows that
the CoDL training procedure for semi-supervised
CCM boost the aggregate F-scores by a further
1.5 points. In order to see how useful our semi-
supervised approach is, we also train a CCM based
model that makes use of the complete crowd-
sourced dataset for training, by adding conﬂict-
ing labels for a question as two independent train-
ing data points. As can be seen, without a semi-
supervised approach, the noisy crowd-labeled se-
quences hurts the performance signiﬁcantly.
We also repeated the experiments using a BiDi
LSTM+CRF using only the pre-trained word-
embeddings as input features. We were surprised
to ﬁnd that it performs at par with the vanilla CRF
model that uses all our engineered features. This
speaks to the effectiveness of neural models even
in low data scenarios. Our further extension on
adding our features to the neural model yield a 5
pt performance boost. Both CCM constraints and
semi-supervision improve F-scores by one point
each.
Overall, our best model combines neural
features, hand-designed features, CCM constraints
with semi-supervised learning over partially anno-
tated crowd data.
Effect of features: We perform an ablation study
over our feature sets to learn about incremental
importance of each feature (detailed results omit-
ted due to lack of space). We ﬁnd that descriptive
phrases, and hand-constructed type and attribute
indicators improve the performance of each label
by 2-3 points. Word2vec features help type detec-
tion because x.type labels often occur in similar
contexts, leading to informative vectors for typi-
cal type words. Frequency of non stopword words
in the post are an indicator of the word’s relative
importance, and the feature also helps improves
overall performance.
Algorithm
Prec
Recall
F1
CRF (all features)
66.9
41.7
51.4
CCM (all features)
62.1
57.2
59.6
BiDI LSTM CRF with Features
54.1
63.6
58.4
BiDi LSTM CCM with Features
55.1
64.5
59.4
Table 5: (i) Precision and Recall of x.type with and
without CCM inference.
Effect of constraints: A closer inspection of Ta-
ble 4 reveals that the vanilla CRF conﬁguration
sees more beneﬁt in using our CCM constraints

as compared to the BiDiLSTM+CRF based setup
(4pt vs 1pt). To understand why, we study the de-
tailed precision-recall characteristics of individual
labels; the results for x.type are reported in Ta-
ble 5. We ﬁnd that the BiDiLSTM+CRF based
setup has signiﬁcantly higher recall than its equiv-
alent vanilla CRF counter-part while the opposite
trend is observed for precision. As a result, since
two of the three constraints employed by us in
CCM are oriented towards improving recall7, we
ﬁnd that they improve overall F1 more by ﬁnding
tags that were otherwise of lower probability (i.e.
improving recall). However, note that the semi-
supervised CCMs have similar performance bene-
ﬁts in both conﬁgurations.
Error Analysis:
Identifying attributes is the
toughest task among all semantic labels.
At-
tributes may be associated with entities irrelevant
in answering a query.
E.g., in ”Staying in a
fancy house, looking for a clean beach. Ideas??”,
‘fancy’ is associated with the ‘house’, and is ir-
relevant to the beaches being queried for. More-
over, depending on the phrasing of a question,
there is a confusion between attribute and type
entities: ‘Moroccan Food’ in ”Looking for Mo-
roccan Food” is a type; while in ”Looking for a
restaurant with good Moroccan Food”, we mark
it is an attribute. This confusion is also reﬂected
in Table 3, where workers agree the least on at-
tributes.
Operator Labeling:
We also evaluate the op-
erator labeling component from Section 5.3. We
create rules for commonly occurring operators –
disjunctions, negations, and preferences.8 The de-
fault operator between semantic labels is a con-
junction. Table 6 reports the accuracy of our rules
as evaluated by an author. The ‘Gold’ columns
denote the performance when using gold seman-
tic label mentions. The ’System’ columns are the
performance when using labels generated by our
sequence tagger.
We ﬁnd a signiﬁcant drop in
detection of disjunctions and preferences. A de-
tailed study reveals that nearly 70% of all disjunc-
tion clauses occur in the context of attribute la-
bels and almost all preferences are expressed for
attributes. Since system’s recall for x.attr is low,
the pipeline under-performance is not entirely sur-
prising.9 However, as the next section shows, the
7Recall that we require at least one x.type (hard constraint)
and prefer at least one x.attr (soft constraint)
8Our current system ignores IN and SIMILAR operators
9There is a more severe drop in disjunctions because for a
Gold
System
P
R
P
R
Negations
86
66
85
62
Preference
75
60
33
15
Disjunctions
86
59
50
08
Table 6: Performance of operator detection using
gold sequence labels, and system generated labels
low recall for these tags is not very problematic
for the end QA task, as they are relatively infre-
quent. Moreover, even if we miss some attributes,
the other attributes can often lead us to correct an-
swers.
6
Answer Generation
The answer generation component serves as a
translation layer from an RQL parse to the schema
and querying mechanism of the knowledge source
for retrieving entity answers. To demonstrate the
ease of integrating different types of knowledge
sources, we experiment with two different knowl-
edge sources: (i) an Apache Lucene data store
containing data from Google Places, reviews from
Trip Advisor, and Booking.com as well as arti-
cles from WikiTravel, resulting in data for 480,000
unique entities, (ii) the full Google Places collec-
tion queried using its Web API.
We randomly select 150 new unseen questions
(different from the questions used in the previ-
ous section), from a tourism forum website and
manually remove 45 of those that were not entity-
seeking.
For the remaining 105 questions our
annotators manually look up the actual entity-
answers for those questions and this forms our
test set for the answering task. Baselines: As a
baseline, we adapt and reimplement a recent tf-
idf scheme (called WebQA) originally meant for
ﬁnding appropriate Google results to answer ques-
tions posed in user forums (Vtyurina and Clarke,
2016). WebQA ﬁrst shortlists a set of top 10 words
in the question using tﬁdf computed over the set
of all questions; it forms a query by selecting 3
words based on supervised training data. Since we
don’t have any supervised data, we select the top
3 words in the shortlist as the query (space sep-
arated). Further, we improve this to a WebQA-
Manual system in which an expert chooses 3-4
best words manually.
Lucene-based QA: We construct the background
knowledge source by indexing data from four
valid disjunction match we need at least two sets of attribute
phrases correctly identiﬁed in the same query.

sources. Using a list of 3500 cities that have a
population over 100,000: (i) we query Google
Places API10 and obtain records on 405,000 enti-
ties (hotels, attractions, restaurants, and other ser-
vice providers); each record contains the Google
Places type,11 address, overall rating, map coor-
dinates but only ﬁve user reviews. (ii) we collect
hotel data from Booking.com and index upto 75
reviews per hotel, and (iii) we index reviews of at-
tractions and places to visit for each city using Tri-
pAdvisor.com. This results in a total of 454,000
distinct entities. (iv) To answer questions where
users are asking for a city or places around a city,
we add the full collection of WikiTravel12 con-
taining 26,000 cities along with its text. For each
entity’s textual data (reviews, WikiTravel articles
etc), we remove stop words, lemmatize it, and in-
dex as a record into Apache Lucene.
Data collected from Booking.com and Tri-
pAdvisor.com does not contain a default “type”
ﬁeld.
We index such records by marking
their Lucene types as “lodging” for hotels and
“point of interest” for attractions, since these val-
ues are used by other records from Google Places
to refer to such entities. All other entities from
Google Places retain their Google place type as
the Lucene type. We also associate each city en-
tity with a special Lucene type called “city”. We
also store its geographical coordinates using the
Google Maps API.
Our answer generator needs to translate a ques-
tion’s RQL representation into a Lucene Query. It
ﬁrst selects the most appropriate Lucene type for
the answer by calculating the cosine similarity be-
tween RQL x.type phrase and all Lucene types in
counter-ﬁtted word vector embedding space (Mrk-
sic et al., 2016). It uses phrases from x.attribute
to query the text ﬁelds, and applies ﬁlters on loca-
tion using x.location and question meta-data. We
also use the x.type phrases to query the text ﬁelds,
as sometimes descriptive phrases get included as
part of the x.type (e.g, “budget hotel”). Negations,
disjunctions and conjunctions are enforced appro-
priately using Lucene BooleanQuery13. For now,
we ignore PREF and other non-standard opera-
tors when forming the Lucene query. For fairness,
the WebQA baselines also enforce location ﬁlters
using question metadata and use in-built Lucene
10https://developers.google.com/places/web-service/
11https://developers.google.com/places/supported types
12http://www.wikitravel.org
13https://goo.gl/MYuH2L
query parsers to generate queries.
As a back-off strategy, in case the system re-
turns no results (sometimes because of a very strict
query), we relax the query by replacing conjuc-
tions with disjunctions between x.attr tags. For
the baseline systems the back-off strategy drops
least important (low tf-idf weighted) terms from
the query.
In order to answer queries that have NEAR op-
erators, a Lucene query is ﬁrst generated to iden-
tify candidate locations (of type City) by using the
map co-ordinates and the Lucene Geo-point dis-
tance query API14. A second query is then gener-
ated that selects the best entities from these cities
using the x.attribute and the entities’ text ﬁelds.
This example demonstrates how some questions
may require specialized query generation and our
RQL representation enables easy translations into
native KB query language.
Google Places based QA: While Lucene store
has a large number of entities, it often has very few
reviews for many of them. This may often miss
the reviews necessary to match with attributes ex-
pressed in the question. For the second setting, our
answer generator translates an RQL parse directly
into a Google Places API query. This makes use
of all of Google Places knowledge, as well as its
advanced IR capability, while offering less control
on the query langugage.
We generate Google Places query via the
transformation: “concat (x.attribute) x.type in
x.location”, with operators applied at appropriate
labels. Here, concat lists all attributes in a space-
separated fashion. This query under-exploits our
rich semantic representation, but still returns more
answers than Lucene due to its coverage.
In case the API returns no results, we relax
our query by dropping x.attributes and then re-
querying Google Places. This is sometimes help-
ful because RQL may contain a lot of x.attribute
tags that overwhelm the API15. A downside of
dropping x.attribute tags, however, is that any
strict selectional preferences expressed by the user
in the question may be lost because we don’t iden-
tify if some x.attribute tags are more important
than others.
14https://goo.gl/mmrUcj
15x.attribute tags with values such as “good’, “great”,
“best”, “convenient” are non-informative and the Google
Places API internal ranking implictly ranks for adjectives
even if they aren’t speciﬁced in the query. An explicit speci-
ﬁcation of too many such tags can cause the API to return no
results.

Data
System

MRR
Recall
Lucene
Default Lucene Query parser
23.7
0.16
20.9
WebQA
25
0.17
21.9
WebQA (manual)
27.7
0.23
23.8
RQL-QA
34.6
0.28
24.8
WebQA
50
0.47
4.7
Google
WebQA (manual)
42.6
0.39
30
Places API
RQL-QA
62.5
0.52
47.6
Table 7: QA results on two knowledge sources
No. Question
Entity
Type
System Answer
1
My family and my brother’s family will be in Salzburg over Christmas
2015. We have arranged to do the Sleigh Ride on Christmas day but
are keen to do a local style Christmas Day dinner somewhere. Any
suggestions?
Special
Dinner
place
St. Peter Stiftskulinarium, Sankt-Peter-Bezirk
14, 5020 Salzburg
2
Heading to Salzburg by car on Friday September 18th with my wife and
her parents (70’s) and trying to make the most of the one day. Thinking
about a SOM tour, but not sure what the best tour is, not a big fan
of huge groups or buses, but would sacriﬁce for my Mother in Law
(LOL). Also thinking about Old Town or the Salzburg Fortress. Any
suggestions? Where to park to have easy access as well as a great place
for dinner.Thanks so much!
Tour
Bob’s Special Tours,
Rudolfskai 38, 5020
Salzburg, Austria
3
What can you do in Helsinki on a Sunday morning? What would you
recommend a tourist to do or see on a Sunday morning? I’ll be ariving
at 7 in the morning, and it seems like everything’s closed on a Sunday
morning- either its not open on Sundays or else it’ll open but later on in
the day.
Things
to
do / see
Senate Square, 00170 Helsinki, Finland
Ateneum,Kaivokatu 2, 00100 Helsinki, Finland
..
4
I am planning to visit Agra for 2 days in mid Dec with my friends.My
plan is to try some street food and do some local shopping on day 1 and
thus wish to stay in a good budget 3 star hotel (as I wont be spending
much time in the hotel) at walking distance from such street foodlocal
shopping market.Then on the 2nd day, I want to just relax and enjoy the
hotel.(I have booked a premium category hotel, Radisson Blu for this
day hoping for a relaxed stay)Please suggest some good hotel or market
around which I should book an hotel for my ﬁrst day.
Hotel with
location
constraints
Hotel Taj Plaza, Agra, Taj Mahal East Gate,
Near Hotel Oberoi Amar Vilas, VIP Road, Shilpgram,
Agra, Uttar Pradesh 282001, India
5
Hi there. I am going to Tallinn in a month from just one night on a
Saturday. I am 28 and am going with 5 of my friends. Were should we
stay so we are near the best clubs in the city? Any recomendations are
appreciated!!! Thanks.
Place
to
stay
close
to clubs
Club Prive, Tallinn, Estonia
6
A few friends and I are coming up to Newport for a couple of nights
and are looking for restaurant suggestions. We are thinking something
casual for the ﬁrst night. Is Flo’s any good? And then something nicer
on Saturday night....preferably a restaurant with good seafood. Also,
any suggestions for good breakfast?
Restaurant
based
on
cuisine
The Red Parrot Restaurant, 48 Thames St,
Newport, RI 02840, United States
7
Dear All forum members, I am Yash Khatri from Delhi.I am travelling
to Srinagar on 13th July,2016 to 17th July,2016.I am going there for a
show, and I’ll be free on 15th and 16th July, 2016. I was thinking to hire
a bike at Srinagar and travel toGulmargPahalgam.Queries :1) Where can
I rent a bike at Srinagar and how much will it cost me?2) What is better
for a quick visit; Gulmarg or Pahalgam?Please help!Thanks
Motorcycle
rental
Kashmir Bikers - Bike Rentals,
Sheikh
complex , shiraz chowk ,khanyar, Near j&k bank khanyar,
Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir 190003
8.
In a couple of weeks, we will have an almost 2 hr layover in Zagreb
before ﬂying on to Dubrovnik. Any recommendations for lunch ?
A location
for
lunch
that can be
visited
in
a
2
hour
layover
Hotel Dubrovnik,Gajeva ul.
1, 10000, Zagreb,
Croatia
9.
Hi,I am looking for a good hotel in Shillong (preferably near Police
bazar) which would offer free wiﬁ, spa and are okay with unmarried
couples. My budget is 3k maximum. please suggest the best place to
stay.
Hotel with
location
and budget
constraints
Hotel Pegasus Crown, Ward’s Lake Road, Police
Bazar, Shillong, Meghalaya 793001, India ;
10. Coming to Gent soon and we will take the trainbus from Charleroi but
ideally would like a taxi back from Gent to Charleroi. Can anyone
recommend a good taxi ﬁrm please?
Taxi
Ser-
vice
Taxi Didier Ghent Taxi Service, Salvias-
traat 17, 9040 Sint-Amandsberg Gent, Belgium
Table 8: Some sample questions from our test set and the answers returned by our system. Answers in
green are identiﬁed as correct while those in red are incorrect.

Results:

gives credit if any one of the top three answers
is a correct answer. It also reports Mean Recip-
rocal Rank (MRR). Both of these measures are
computed only on the subset of attempted ques-
tions (any answer returned). Recall is computed
as the percentage of questions answered correctly
within the top three answers over all questions. In
case the user question requires more than one en-
tity type16, we mark an answer correct as long as
one of them is attempted and answered correctly.
For Lucene, while all systems answer nearly
equal number of questions, RQL-QA has a 7-11
pt point higher accuracy. This is because of the
type constraints enforced while querying. Some
of its errors are due to incorrect matching of tex-
tual types (e.g., ‘things to do’) to KB types (tour
agencies) due to faulty word-vector distances.
RQL-QA for Google Places answers many
more questions than Lucene-based QA because
the online API has high review coverage. More-
over, its query processor is likely more sophisti-
cated than Lucene’s, for e.g., in handling types like
‘things to do’. RQL-QA has an 20 point higher ac-
curacy with a 17 point higher recall compared to
WebQA (manual), because of a more directed and
effective query to Google Places API.
Table 8 shows some questions and the top-
ranked answer entity returned by our system. As
can be seen our system supports a variety of ques-
tion intents/entities and due to our choice of an
open semantic representation, we are not limited
to speciﬁc entity types, entity instances, attributes
or locations. For example, in Q1 the user is look-
ing for “local dinner suggestions” on Christmas
eve, and the answer entity returned by our sys-
tem is to dine at the “St. Peter Stiftskulinarium”
in Salzburg, while in Q2 the user is looking for
recommendations for “SOM tours” (Sound of Mu-
sic Tours). A quick internet search shows that our
system’s answer, ’Bob’s Special Tours’, is famous
for their SOM tours in that area. This question
also requests for restaurant suggestions in the old
town, but since we focus on returning answers for
just one x.type, this part of the question is not
attempted by our system.
Questions with more
than one x.type requests are fairly common and
this sometimes results in confusion for our system
especially if x.attribute tags relate to different
16A question can ask for multiple things, eg., ‘museums’
as well suggestions for “hotels”.
x.type values. Since we do not attempt to disam-
biguate or link different x.attribute tags to their
corresponding x.type values, this is often a source
of error. Our constraint that forces all x.type la-
bels to come from one sentences mitigates this to
some extent, but this is can still be a source of
errors. Q9 is a complicated question with strict
location, budget and attribute constraints and the
top ranked returned entity “Hotel Pegasus Crown”
fulﬁlls the most requirements of the user17. Q4
is incorrect because the entity returned does not
fulﬁl the location constraints of being close to the
“bazar” while Q5 returns an incorrect entity type.
Error Analysis: As can be seen in Table 7 our
best system attempts approximately 47% of the
questions with an acceptable degree of accuracy
for the challenging task of answering MSRQs. We
conducted a detailed error study on our test set
of 105 questions which is summarized in Table
9. We ﬁnd that approximately 37% of questions
were not answered by our system due to limita-
tions of Google Places, i.e. either an answer was
not returned for unknown reasons or the ques-
tion was un-answerable with the data available in
the knowledge source. Another 21% of the ques-
tions were answered incorrectly by the knowledge
source, sometimes due to shallow query transla-
tion from RQL, while approximately 42% of the
recall loss in the system can be traced to errors in
the RQL representation.
7
Conclusion and Future Work
We have presented the novel task of answer-
ing entity-seeking multi-sentence recommenda-
tion questions in the tourism domain. As a ﬁrst
solution, we proposed a pipelined model consist-
ing of two steps: (a) Question Understanding (b)
Question Answering. We proposed an SQL-like
query representation for capturing the semantic
content of a question.
We formulated the task
of generating the semantic representation as a se-
quence labeling task and presented a CRF based
model using BiDiLSTM based as well as hand-
tuned features, trained in a semi-supervised set-
ting.
Our model explicitly makes use of con-
straints. For answering, we have proposed to con-
struct knowledge source speciﬁc queries from our
question representation, which are ﬁred over un-
derlying knowledge sources. We have presented
17The hotel does not offer a spa and even with manual
search we could not ﬁnd a better answer

Error Type
Error
(%)
Examples
Incorrect
answer
re-
turned due to incorrect
x.type in RQL
16
Bad x.type extractions in RQL
results in incorrect answers.
Incorrect
answer
re-
turned by knowledge
source
21
x.attribute criteria was not ful-
ﬁlled - eg. Shop allows renting
bicycles but not for tours.
Incorrect
answer
returned due to incom-
plete RQL
10
x.attribute not getting extracted
Answer not returned by
knowledge source
21
No apparent errors in RQL and
the knowledge base would have
been expected to be able to an-
swer such a query.
Answer
not
returned
due to RQL errors
16
RQL
errors
such
as
bad
x.attribute,
x.location,
too
many or incorrect x.type etc.
Answer
not
returned
due
to
knowledge
source limitations
16
Query
requesting
places
“around” a city,
or between
two
cities,
x.type
extracted
as “day trips”,
“cruises” etc.
Requests
for
x.type
where
queries were about bus services,
activities and train stations.
Table 9: Classiﬁcation of errors made by our answering system (using Google Places web API as knowl-
edge source)
an end-to-end evaluation of our system over two
answer repositories, showing that our model sig-
niﬁcantly outperforms the baseline models.
We see our paper as the ﬁrst attempt towards
end to end QA in the challenging setting of multi-
sentence questions answered directly on the basis
of information in large textual corpora. It opens
up several future research directions, which can
be broadly divided in two categories. First, we
would like to improve on the existing system in
the pipelined setting. Error analysis on our test
set suggests the need for a deeper IR system that
parses constructs from our semantic representa-
tion to execute multiple sub-queries. Currently,
between 37-58% of recall loss is due to limita-
tions in the knowledge source and query formu-
lation, while a sizeable 42% may be addressed by
improvements to question understanding.
As a second direction, we would like to train an
end to end neural system to solve our task. This
would require generating a large dataset of labeled
QA pairs which could perhaps be sourced semi-
automatically using data available in tourism QA
forums. However, answer posts in forums can of-
ten refer to multiple entities and automatically in-
ferring the exact answer entity for the question can
be challenging. Further, we would have to devise
efﬁcient techniques to deal with hundreds of thou-
sands of potential class labels (entities). Compar-
ing the performance of the pipelined model and
the neural model, and examining if one works bet-
ter than the other in speciﬁc settings would also be
interesting to look at.
Exploring other question types such as sugges-
tions for itineraries, fact-check or yes-no ques-
tions, experimenting in different domains such as
consumer electronics, automobiles etc could also
be an interesting direction of future work.
8
