How many people microwork in France?
Estimating the size of a new labor force
CLÉMENT LE LUDEC, MSH Paris Saclay, France
PAOLA TUBARO, National Center of Scientific Research (CNRS), France
ANTONIO A. CASILLI, Telecom ParisTech, France
Microwork platforms allocate fragmented tasks to crowds of providers with
remunerations as low as few cents. Instrumental to the development of
today’s artificial intelligence, these micro-tasks push to the extreme the
logic of casualization already observed in "uberized" workers. The present
article uses the results of the DiPLab study to estimate the number of people
who microwork in France. We distinguish three categories of microworkers,
corresponding to different modes of engagement: a group of 14,903 "very
active" individuals, most of whom are present on these platforms at least
once a week; a second featuring 52,337 "routine" users, more selective and
present at least once a month; a third circle of 266,126 "casual" users, more
heterogeneous and who alternate inactivity and various levels of work
practice. Our results show that microwork is comparable to, and even larger
than, the workforce of ride-sharing and delivery platforms in France. It is
therefore not an anecdotal phenomenon and deserves great attention from
researchers, unions and policy-makers.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Microwork, digital transformation, em-
ployment, digital platforms, digital labor, algorithms.
1
INTRODUCTION
The digital economy currently experiences a proliferation of "mi-
crowork" platforms, specialist services where providers perform
fragmented and standardized micro-tasks to be paid on a piece-rate
basis. These activities take only minutes and their reward can be as
low as few cents. Often repetitive and unqualified, they consist for
example in identifying or naming objects on images, transcribing
invoices, translating snippets of text, moderating content (such as
videos), sorting or classifying search results, responding to online
surveys.
These tasks are often part of data-intensive processes and lengthy
supply chains, feeding activities as varied as digitization of archives,
market research, management of back-office operations and most
importantly, development of artificial intelligence [Gray and Suri
2017]. Recent applications of machine learning - on which smart
technologies, autonomous vehicles and virtual assistants are all
based - rely on the creation and maintenance of large databases
that need to be annotated, refined, labeled and more generally, aug-
mented [Porter et al. 2017]. Microwork is used, first, to prepare,
categorize and qualify information for automatic learning algo-
rithms; and second, to assess their performance and if necessary, to
make corrections. Growing investments by technology companies
confirm the importance of microwork in the current development
of artificial intelligence. Giants such as Google and Microsoft either
rely on existing platforms or create their own internal microwork
markets.
Authors’ addresses: Clément Le Ludec, MSH Paris Saclay, Paris, France, leludec.

This novel organization of AI-driven automation in contemporary
industries does not "replace" human jobs but makes human contri-
bution to productive processes largely inconspicuous. It supports
technologies where they fail, and yet it is not a selling point that
companies leverage to attract and retain large userbases. Microwork
has received very little media coverage and is unfamiliar to the gen-
eral public. Its invisibility is striking especially if compared to other
new forms of work associated with the rise of digital platforms, such
as on-demand work for urban transport applications like Uber, or
for real-time delivery like Deliveroo.
Microwork platforms do not generally recruit or hire workers
directly, but operate as intermediaries between client companies
(usually called "requesters") who publish small tasks, and individual
users (usually called "workers", "contributors", or "providers") who
accept and perform the tasks. This form of digital labor pushes to the
extreme the logic of workforce casualization and insecurity already
noted in the context of the vast public debate and legal disputes
on the status of "uberized" workers. It is therefore imperative to
address this emerging phenomenon.
Strikingly, however, the size of this phenomenon is unknown:
how large is the micro-workforce? Official statistics are still ill-
equipped to capture the economics of digital platforms, and the
(few) surveys conducted so far have conflated microwork with other
platform-mediated activities such as transport and delivery (Uber,
Deliveroo). Some insight comes from platforms themselves, whose
claim is that their userbase is large: if Amazon Mechanical Turk, the
most widely-known microwork service, boasted 500,000 providers
("Turkers") as early as 20141, the Chinese giant Witmart alone is
said to exceed 12 millions2. A widely cited 2015 World Bank report
proposed a much more conservative estimate of 4.8 million people
registered on microwork websites globally, just over 10% of whom
are actually active [Kuek et al. 2015].
Not only are these figures very divergent, but they are also static,
no serious attempt to update them having been undertaken since
2014-15. They are also somewhat misleading insofar as they take
little account of the European context. This is a serious limitation
from the viewpoint of national and regional policy-making: lack
of even approximate estimates makes it difficult to take action and
hinders initiatives in support of local microworkers.
To fill this gap, we propose an estimate of the total number of
people microworking in the specific case of France. A highly indus-
trialized country and a pioneer in information technologies, France
is less documented in the (still scant) literature on microwork, and is
1"500,000 Workers from 190 countries", cited in M. Harris, "Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk workers protest: ’I am a human being, not an algorithm’", The Guardian, December
3, 2014.
2Les Echos, "L’actu tech en Asie : Female founders veut percer le plafond de verre",
June 19, 2015.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2019.
arXiv:1901.03889v1  [econ.GN]  12 Jan 2019

2
•
Le Ludec, C. et al
less present in international platforms such as Amazon Mechanical
Turk, partly for language reasons. France has its own microwork
platforms, the most popular of which is Wirk (formerly known as
Foule Factory). Its webpage displays 50,000 contributors and it has
had to close its registrations [Amar and Viossat 2016].
To estimate the size of the microworking population in France,
we draw on publicly available sources combined with the results of
DiPLab ("Digital Platform Labour"), a comprehensive study of mi-
crowork in the French-speaking world3. We identify three modes of
engagement in microwork that correspond to three pools of users of
these platforms. They comprise approximately 15,000 "very active"
microworkers, 50,000 "routine" microworkers and 250,000 "casual"
microworkers respectively. These estimates should be interpreted
as orders of magnitude rather than precise values.
These relatively high figures matter to policy-making. To the
extent that they exceed the number of contributors to more high-
profile platforms such as Uber and Deliveroo, they call for the at-
tention of industry and union leaders as well as public authorities.
To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first attempt to esti-
mate the number of microworkers in a specific country (or other
geographically or institutionally limited setting) across microwork
platforms. It demonstrates the need to go beyond the most high-
profile cases and to take into account local conditions in addition
to global trends. In this sense, our results may inspire researchers
interested in re-applying our methodology to other countries.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. After a brief
presentation of the literature and of our selection of relevant plat-
forms (section 2), we compare and contrast different methods for
assessing the size of our target population (section 3), and we give
an interpretation of the results thus obtained (section 4).
2
WHY IS IT SO DIFFICULT TO ESTIMATE THE SIZE OF
MICROWORK?
While a growing number of studies are exploring the topic of mi-
crowork, most of them have focused on one platform, the US-based
Amazon Mechanical Turk, which is the oldest and by far the best
known. The methods used to estimate the number of people working
on this service can only partially be transposed to our questioning,
because we are interested in a country as a whole, France, and we
cannot therefore limit ourselves to a single platform (section 2.1).
We then proceed in stages, first by explaining our choice of plat-
forms to be included in the analysis (2.2). In the following section
(3), we will present the empirical basis for our results.
2.1
Estimating the size of Amazon Mechanical Turk
micro-workforce
Two distinct scientific objectives have motivated existing research
on the demographics of the Amazon Mechanical Turk workforce.
The first concerns the working conditions, the precariousness and
the level of remuneration of its users, sometimes with the aim of
proposing concrete actions [Paolacci et al. 2010; Ross et al. 2010].
3As part of DiPLab, we built an inventory of microwork platforms and mobile
applications being used in France, collected online questionnaire data from Wirk
microworkers, and interviewed in-depth a subset of Wirk respondents together with
some clients, platform managers and other stakeholders. The data collection was
conducted in Spring and Summer 2018 (see Section 3.2 for more details).
The second purports to assuring the quality of the results of scien-
tific surveys, questionnaires and experiments for which "Turkers"
are recruited by research teams in disciplines such as psychology,
marketing, and cognitive sciences. This involves ensuring access to
a sufficiently large "pool" of respondents [Keith et al. 2017].
Attempts to estimate the number of people working on Mechani-
cal Turk have arisen from these dissimilar research questions, insofar
as the figure of 500,000 popularized by Amazon was to be probed.
A first study showed the existence of a pool of 7,300 "rather ac-
tive" unique workers at any given time [Stewart et al. 2015]. In the
same year, activist Kristy Milland conducted a six-week survey and
counted about 30,000 workers4. [Difallah et al. 2018] use Stewart’s
model and improve it, allowing for a longer observation time and
taking into account the heterogeneous propensity of individuals
to accept tasks. They show that about 100,000 people work on Jeff
Bezos’ platform, or one fifth of the advertised population.
Despite the presence of a sizable set of microworkers originating
from India and smaller contingents from other countries, the first
estimates of Amazon Mechanical Turk workforce paid particular
attention to users from the United States - partly to serve the needs
of scientific studies that need American participants. So far, no re-
search intended to measure the total number of microworkers from
a target country, all platforms combined. Moreover, no extant study
dealt specifically with France and the French-speaking world so far.
We need to move beyond these limitations to propose estimation
methods for the different platforms operating in France.
2.2
Which platforms operate in France?
On Mechanical Turk, demand from French companies outweighs
the supply of microwork from users located in France. Since 2013,
the platform has been discouraging registrations outside the US
and India, notably by imposing gift cards as the only means of pay-
ment. To find French microworkers, we therefore need to expand
the scope of our investigation beyond the boundaries of Amazon.
Recent research [Berg et al. 2018; Forde et al. 2017] covering multiple
countries including France, has added CrowdFlower, Microworkers,
Clickworker5 and, in the case of [Berg et al. 2018], Prolific, to Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk. We include their selection of platforms except
Prolific, a site specialized in surveys that exists only in English,
and which does not seem to have users in France (there were no
French respondents in the study of [Berg et al. 2018]). The case of
CrowdFlower is more complex because this platform has recently
changed its name to Figure Eight, and access to its tasks is now
through ClixSense, which is basically a portal to other platforms. It
is therefore the latter that we will retain.
In addition to these international platforms, we include Wirk,
a platform that exclusively recruits its microworkers in mainland
France and has established itself as a key player in the market
4The
study
is
not
published
but
the
author
has
made
her
calcu-
lations
available:
Kristy
Milland,
150717
Preliminary
results
-
Mapping
study,
July
17,
2015,
URL:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1T3yP_
Jo4qELrwsE2NAPNs07L1AWmpAEr9vnhreGJ\discretionary{-}{}{}K0/edit#gid=
1993074859 (accessed 18 December 2018).
5In addition to connecting its own registered microworkers and demanders, Click-
worker also provides an entry point for UHRS (Universal Human Relevance System),
Microsoft’s proprietary microwork platform.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2019.

How many people microwork in France?
•
3
Table 1. Characteristics of microwork platforms included in our study
Platform
Open sign-up
French page
Amazon Mechanical Turk
No
No
Microworkers
Yes
No
Clickworker
Yes
Yes
ClixSense
Yes
No
Wirk
No
Yes
Ferpection
Yes
Yes
Appen
No
Yes
Source: authors’ elaboration based on platforms’ websites.
for micro-tasks in the country. As mentioned in section 1, it re-
cently changed its name from the originale Foule Factory ("Foule"
meaning "Crowd" in French). We also include Ferpection, a French
platform that recruits internationally. These services are potentially
more attractive for French speakers than others like for example
Microworkers, where English language is required even to sign
up. Finally, we add Appen, an international platform open to re-
cruitment in France, which lists tasks of the same nature as the
others, but differs from them in that it organizes tasks in "projects"
of slightly longer duration6.
It is useful to characterize this selection of platforms according
to their access policies (open or limited) and the presence of at
least one welcome page in French (Table 1). With regard to the first
criterion, notice that Wirk has closed registration of new members
but reopens it intermittently in case of surge in the demand of micro-
work by client firms. As for the second criterion, the presence of a
French page seems to encourage access by new users.
3
WHICH METHOD TO ESTIMATE THE NUMBER OF
FRENCH MICROWORKERS?
Several approaches can be employed to estimate the size of the
French microworking population, despite its lack of visibility in
public debates as well as in official statistics. It is always tempting
to take into account the official figures provided by the platforms
(section 3.1), although they tend to overestimate the real level of
activity, as existing literature has already noted in the case of Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk [Stewart et al. 2015]. Building up on previous
studies, we then apply a "capture-recapture" model, which leads to
a lower estimate of the userbase of a single platform (3.2). This sec-
ond approach, however, does not scale up to the entire nationâĂŹs
microworking population which may be using different platforms.
Therefore, we present an original method based on website audience
6This list is not exhaustive and there are other microwork websites and applications
that are used in France. We exclude those that are partially outside the scope of our
research: freelancing platforms such as Malt and 5euros.com only offer microwork
tasks on an occasional basis, being generally more oriented towards projects requiring
advanced skills (such as creating a logo or developing a website) over longer periods
of time and with higher remuneration. We also exclude income-generating mobile
applications such as BeMyEye and Roamler, which usually require physical presence
in a given place, and for which we do not have sufficient data.
tracking (3.3), which does not face the same limitations. We cross
our different methods to improve accuracy and obtain a meaningful
range of estimates (section 3.4) and finally, we refine our results by
taking into account multi-activity of workers operating on several
microwork platforms at the same time (3.5).
3.1
The declarative method: relying on official figures from
microwork platforms
Official figures published by microwork platforms (Table 2) are
sometimes the only source of information. For example, some of
them are featured in a report of the French General Inspectorate
of Social Affairs [Amar and Viossat 2016]. However as the same
report points out, they call for caution. Platforms advertise the size
of their userbase by counting signups without taking into account
the actual level of activity, and can in this way artificially inflate the
result. This effect is all the stronger as high numbers can impact
potential fundraising or the attractiveness of the platform for busi-
ness clients. It must be added that few platforms have systematic
registration/deregistration management policies. They also differ in
their degree of precision, some (such as Microworkers) giving very
detailed figures and updating them regularly, others just providing
approximations (such as Amazon, which never came back to its
initial estimate of 500,000).
In general, international platforms calculate the number of their
micro-workforce without breaking it down by country. The litera-
ture and platforms’ own websites offer some approximate insight.
On Amazon Mechanical Turk, French workers represent only a
small fraction of the userbase [Difallah et al. 2018]. On another
international platform, Microworkers, France is not among the 10
most represented countries, and remains among those where less
than 20% of total transactions take place [Hirth et al. 2011]. On the
German platform Clickworker, France and other European countries
(excluding Germany) account for a total of 25% of the workforce7.
ClixSense and Appen are major international players in the mi-
crowork industry, but they do not specify the national composition
of their registration databases. On the other hand, French platforms
present a variety of situations. If on the one hand Wirk is only ac-
cessible to residents of France, Ferpection has users signing up not
only from France but also from the United Kingdom, the United
States, Ireland and other countries8.
3.2
The ecological method: the "capture-recapture" model
To address this problem, [Stewart et al. 2015] and [Difallah et al.
2018] implemented on Mechanical Turk a "capture-recapture" ap-
proach commonly used in bio-ecology and epidemiology. They
posted a micro-task for a relatively long period of time, allowing
repeated participation. The technique consists in "capturing" par-
ticipants a first time, identifying them as having already done the
task, then seeing how many of them get "recaptured" a second time.
This approach is based on two assumptions: first, the population is
closed (nobody left the platform during the study) and second, all
subjects have the same chances of being captured.
7See https://www.clickworker.com/about-us/clickworker-crowd/ consulted on
3/12/2018
8See
http://help.ferpection.com/l/fr/les-utilisateurs/
combien-y-a-t-il-dutilisateurs-dans-la-communaute consulted on 3/12/2018
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2019.

4
•
Le Ludec, C. et al
Table 2. Official number of people registered at microworking sites, all
countries combined.
Platform
Registered users
Amazon Mechanical Turk
500,000
Microworkers
1,215,829
Clickworker
1,200,000
ClixSense
7,000,000
Wirk
50,000
Ferpection
50,000
Appen
1,000,000
Total
11,015,829
Source: websites of platforms included in analysis (accessed in August 2017 for
Amazon Mechanical Turk; September 2018 for all other platforms).
We were able to replicate this approach on the French leading
microwork platform Wirk âĂŞ the only one providing interfaces
and support pages entirely in French. As part of our DiPLab study
(see footnote 1), we distributed a questionnaire in the form of a
paid task, administered twice with a 23-day interval: the first phase
allowed us to obtain 505 responses and the second 492 responses9.
While this two-step collection was purely related to logistical issues,
we saw it as an opportunity to make an estimate of the number of
persons microworking for Wirk. Indeed, in the second collection,
we detected 89 returning respondents - thus enabling us to apply
the capture-recapture model.
As for the two assumptions required by the capture-recapture
model, the first (closed population) was satisfied, as the short time
interval between the two waves limited the number of those entering
or exiting the platform. The so-called Lincoln-Petersen formula
applied to the data thus collected, with N the total number to be
estimated, n1 the number of users captured in the first wave, n2
the number in the second wave and m the number of recaptured
participants, gives :
N = n1n2
m
Based on the number of individuals observed, the results of the
calculation give a population of 2792 microworkers (Table 3). This
figure is certainly well below (5.6%) the platform’s official declara-
tions, but it is consistent with the domain-specific knowledge of its
managers who, answering our questions about the possible duration
of the data collection, were confident that "over two months, [they]
can mobilize up to 3000 people on this type of task".
However, this may be an underestimation. Firstly, it is noticeable
that the result N increases as the number of recaptured microwork-
ers m decreases. Thus, given the terms of our survey (we had indeed
signified that participation in the survey was allowed only once),
we could have expected a much smaller number of recaptured users
and therefore a larger population. Secondly, the second assumption
of the model (equal chance of capture) may not apply if users dis-
play an uneven level of involvement in microwork on Wirk. When
9Calculations after cleaning and filtering of data.
Fig. 1. Number of micro-tasks carried out on Wirk in the month preceding
the survey, n = 908. Source: Authors’ elaboration with DiPLab survey data.
facing the same issue on Amazon Mechanical Turk, [Difallah et al.
2018, p. 141] introduce a latent variable (a) that they interpret as
propensity to participate: for example, it could reflect the fact that
some people perform all the tasks available on a given platform,
regardless of their appeal, difficulty or remuneration, while others
are more selective. The initial formula is modified as follows10:
N ∗= n1n2
m (1 + V ar(a)
E(a)2 ) = N(1 + V ar(a)
E(a)2 )
[Difallah et al. 2018] estimated the distribution of a based on 28
observations over two years. In our case, their parameter setting11
would give N∗= 34, 166 (Table 3), a value that still falls short of
the official declarations of Wirk (50,000 as indicated above), but
approximates it if we interpret it as an the order of magnitude.
However, there is no guarantee that our population shares the
same characteristics as people working on Mechanical Turk. We
therefore propose an alternative calculation of N ∗using a proxy for
a, based on one of the questions asked in our survey, touching on
the number of tasks carried out by each microworker through Wirk
in the previous month. The answers to this question, summarized in
Figure 1, show a high diversity of participation - inconsistent with
the assumption of equal chances of capture12. Using the above for-
mula to calculate N∗, we obtain a population of 6531 microworkers
on Wirk13.
Table 3 summarizes these results. The plain capture-recapture
model (Lincoln-Petersen formula) produces an underestimation and
10N ≈N ∗when the variance of a is close to the mean, but N < N ∗otherwise.
11Difallah et al (2018, p. 142) consider that the propensity to participate follows
a beta probability distribution, and that therefore the chance to recapture the same
subject n times follows a beta-binomial law with parameters α = 0.29 and β = 20.9.
With these values, and a sample of S single observations, the population N ∗is equal
to
S
1−f (0|n,α, β) .
12As our variable was originally a categorical (ordered) one, we have first trans-
formed it into a numerical variable (taking the value of the minimum of the interval in
each case: 0, 1, 3, 6, 10) in order to infer a distribution from it, thus enabling calculation
of its mean and variance. Alternative transformations of this variable into a numerical
one give qualitatively similar results.
13Variations of this calculation, estimating distributions for each possible value in
each interval, produce results of a similar order of magnitude (between 5,800 and 8,000)
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2019.

How many people microwork in France?
•
5
Table 3. Estimate of the Wirk population using the capture-recapture
method (basic formula and corrections), based on the calculations illus-
trated above.
Method
Result
%
Declared
(50,000)
Lincoln-Petersen formula
2,792
5.6%
Correction with [Difallah
et al. 2018] parameters
34,166
68.3%
Correction with a proxy
from DiPLab survey
6,531
13 %
Source: authors’ elaboration with DiPLab survey data.
its correction (parameters of [Difallah et al. 2018]) approximates
the number of official signed-up worker users (Table 2). The third
estimate, correcting the Lincoln-Petersen figure with a proxy from
our DiPLab survey, gives an intermediate figure.
The latter estimate is more difficult to interpret based on the
information provided so far. We now need to find clues to make
sense of it. Also, we need to extend our analysis beyond the case of
one single platform and go back to the full list of relevant microwork
intermediaries that we have identified as relevant for France (section
2.2).
3.3
The panel method: measuring the audience of
microwork platforms
The use of panels to measure the audience of these platforms, a
method borrowed from the classical study of media, can provide
another perspective on the population of microworkers in France.
Since they receive too few visits via the Médiamétrie panel, a ref-
erence on website traffic in France, we use the alternative service
SimilarWeb.com14, which makes it possible to estimate the number
of unique monthly visitors to microwork sites worldwide (Table 4,
left column). The main difficulty in using this source is that some
microwork platforms have separate interfaces for client companies
(that is, their requesters) and workers. Indeed, it is the latter, namely
the pages dedicated to carrying out the tasks, that we must look at.
We must also exclude simple visitors from our analysis. We thus
need to make the distinction explicitly and focus only on worker-
only pages.
Table 4 shows that the average duration of visits is relatively long
(central column). This allows us to exclude the presence of simple
visitors or Internet users who are just looking for information, and
to argue that these sections of the platforms are almost exclusively
accessed by microworkers. The right column of Table 4 provides
14The data used by SimilarWeb.com come from two main sources: partnerships that
the site has established with Internet service providers and data that the site retrieves
with an add-on on users’ Internet browsers - which provides users with metrics of
website traffic in exchange for their browsing data.
Table 4. Average number of unique visitors on microwork platforms (left),
average duration of visits (center) and average number of monthly unique
visitors from France (right).
Average
monthly
Average
visit
Average
monthly
Platform
unique
visitors
duration
unique
visitors,
France
Worker.mturk.com
588,976
34:19
1,250
(Amazon Mechanical
Turk)
Microworkers
174,808
18:22
1,835
Workplace.click-
242,579
7:40
14,700
worker.com
(Clickworker)
ClixSense
1,083,000
11:05
20,250
Fouleurs.com (Wirk)
7,647
26:41
6,958
Ferpection
28,064
7:10
8,116
Appen
260,699
5:04
9,645
Total
62,754
Source: Authors’ elaboration based on information from SimilarWeb.com, accessed in
September 2018. Figures are based on websites’ audience tracking over the period
July-September 2018.
estimates of the average number of French unique monthly visitors
per platform.
Let’s first comment on the result for Wirk. 6,958 unique mi-
crokworkers access it on average every month - which is very
close to the figure of 6,531 that results from our corrected capture-
recapture calculation detailed in section 3.2. This order of magnitude
seems to correspond well to the size of the active population on this
platform over a month, as it could be measured in the summer of
2018. It should also be noted that almost all of the visits originate
from France, in accordance with the platform’s policy. The residual
cases of people signing in from outside France essentially concern
French microworkers temporarily connecting from abroad âĂŤ a
trend confirmed by responses to our questionnaire. Concerning
the other microwork platforms offering access interfaces in French,
ClixSense, Clickworker, Appen and Ferpection are more visited
than Wirk. This is both due to their open registration policy and
to their lifespan (at least in the case of ClixSense, created as early
as 2009). Some also benefit from their role as gateways to other
microwork platforms: ClixSense points towards Figure Eight, while
Clickworker provides access to UHRS (footnote 2.2). To estimate
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2019.

6
•
Le Ludec, C. et al
the number of French microworkers on Mechanical Turk (right-
hand column), information from SimilarWeb.com was obviously
not sufficient as the large number of observed unique visitors even
exceeds the platform’s own estimate of 500,000 (left column), and
must therefore include surfers who are not themselves microwork-
ers - not unlikely for a widely known platform. We thus rely on on a
survey by the team led by Panos Ipeirotis at New York University15.
Extrapolating from the size of the group of French "Turkers" that
they observed, i.e. 0.25% of the total, and assuming that their sample
is representative, we estimate that the number of French residents
operating on Mechanical Turk is around 1,250.
3.4
Crossing methods to obtain a range of values
The calculation methods we have implemented so far provide differ-
ing estimates of the population of microworkers in France: a high
estimate is the number of signed-up users advertised by the plat-
forms themselves (11,015,829 individuals worldwide), a low estimate
is the plain capture-recapture model (2,792 individuals for a single
platform, Wirk) and an intermediate estimate is the audience-based
measure (62,754 individuals across platforms all over France).
Each of these approaches has limitations. At least in its basic,
uncorrected version, the capture-recapture model underestimates
the target population, while platforms’ official declarations over-
estimate it. The use of audience measurements brings a helpful
alternative perspective with intermediate results, but it is based on
proprietary techniques whose actual implementation is difficult to
audit for external researchers. At this stage, we have no means to
choose one single metric from among those three, all the more so as
they derive from very different measurement approaches. However,
we can use these three results to cross-pollinate each other and help
us derive more consistent measures.
Notice, first, that in the case of Wirk alone, the two corrections to
the capture-recapture model that we have proposed to compensate
for the downward bias of the basic Lincoln-Petersen formula (34,166
and 6,531), are close to, respectively, the official number of registered
workers provided by the platform itself (50,000) and audience figures
(6,958). These results implicitly validate all these metrics, although
they are all lower (to different degrees) that the total number of
platform-declared microworkers.
More importantly, audience figures enable an assessment of the
number of registered microworkers who are located in France. To
compute their number, we need to extrapolate their frequency of
connection to the platforms (calculated from Table 4) as a percentage
of the total number of persons signed-up worldwide (Table 2)16.
Table 5 shows the results of these calculations.
On this basis, we can go a step further and attempt to generalize
the capture-recapture model initially used just on one platform,
15Data from the survey "Analyzing MTurk demographics" are available at https:
//github.com/ipeirotis/mturk_demographics and serve as the basis for the article by
[Difallah et al. 2018].
16Given the national scope of Wirk’s activity, we consider all its registrations to be
French. For Mechanical Turk we refer to the figures from P. Ipeirotis’s survey mentioned
above (footnote 3.3). For the other platforms, we take into account the number of visitors
from France (Table 4, last column) divided by the total number of visitors (Table 4, first
column), then apply the resulting percentage to the number of registrations (Table 2).
For example, Ferpection has 8,116 unique visitors from France, out of a total of 28,064
visitors, or 28.92%; multiplying by its official number of registered users, equal to 50,000,
we obtain 14,460.
Table 5. Estimated number of people registered on microwork platforms
and connecting from France.
Platform
Number French
Amazon Mechanical Turk
1,250
Microworkers
12,766
Clickworker
72,720
ClixSense
130,900
Wirk
50,000
Ferpection
14.460
Appen
37,000
Total
319,096
Source: Authors’ elaboration.
by applying its ratios (Table 3, last column) to the total number of
French microworkers we have just estimated (319,096). We thus
obtain a range, with a low estimate of 17,869 (5.6% of the declared
total for France), a high estimate of 217,943 (with a "corrected" rate
of 68.3%) and an intermediate estimate of 41,482 (with the alternative
correction of 13%).
3.5
Adjusting to take into account multi-homing
We cannot rely on these three estimates until we have made an
additional correction to take into account multi-homing, that is, the
presence of microworkers on several platforms at the same time. If
we disregard multi-homing, we may over-estimate the number of
microworkers by counting the same persons multiple times. First,
how widespread is this phenomenon, or put differently, how many
people does it concern? To answer this question, let us turn to our
DiPLab survey, in which participants were asked to indicate their
possible use of different microwork platforms from a list of options.
We know that of our 908 unique respondents on Wirk, 151 are also
registered on at least another microwork platform. In other words,
16.6% of respondents practice multi-activity - the average usage
being 1.27 platforms per person.
Assuming our sample is representative, and extrapolating its
behaviour to the entire French microworking population, amounts
to applying the 16.6% rate to the measures previously obtained
(Table 6).
Little is known of the multi-homing practices of microworkers in
other contexts but, comparing our survey to studies of other online
practices such as the buying and selling of goods ans services, it
appears that our rate of multi-activity is low. For example, [Oxera
2015] reports an average of 2.2 platforms per user. The DiPLab sur-
vey suggests that this relative smaller rate depends largely on the
specific context of microwork. Many respondents hint that entry
costs of multi-homing are relatively high, both in terms of incom-
patibility of payment systems (for example, Wirk uses Mango Pay
while Microworkers uses Paypal, Skrill or Payoneer) and in terms of
limited portability of "qualifications" (unpaid tests needed to access
some types of micro-tasks). Additionally, the English language used
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2019.

How many people microwork in France?
•
7
Table 6. Estimate of the population of microworkers refined to take into
account multi-homing.
Result
Result
Range
Measure
(reminder)
(minus
multi-
homing)
Low
Uncorrected
capture-
recapture
17,869
14,903
Intermediate
Audience
62,754
52,337
measure
High
Number of
319,096
266,126
declared
users (France)
Source: Authors’ elaboration.
on many international platforms puts off some French microworkers,
even though some of their tasks can be in French.
4
HOW TO INTERPRET RESULTS IN LIGHT OF
MICROWORKERS’ LEVEL OF ACTIVITY?
We now turn to the meaning of these different measures of the size
of the French microworking population. Using the DiPlab survey,
we associate our figures to characterization of users according to
their level of activity. We distinguish a group of "very active" (4.1),
a group of "routine" (4.2) and one of "casual" (4.3) microworkers.
4.1
Very active microworkers
Our first, lower estimate of 14,903 microworkers was initially calcu-
lated on the Wirk platform with the uncorrected capture-recapture
model, subsequently extrapolated to the total number of French
registrations, and finally corrected to remove duplicates. It can be
interpreted as a measure of the number of users with a high level
of activity. As discussed (section 3.2), the number of captured and
re-captured individuals in our survey is relatively higher than ex-
pected, and corresponds to a high level of activity: more engaged
workers are significantly more likely to appear in both phases of the
data collection. Another reason to believe that the great majority of
the respondents to our survey fall into this category isthe frequency
with which they log in to look for microtasks: at least once a week
for 90% of them.
Qualitative interviews conducted with a subset of respondents as
part of the DiPLab project, confirm the hypothesis that there is a
very active sub-population on Wirk and, by extension, on microwork
platforms. This is the case for one respondent who, in addition to
her primary occupation as a nurse, frequently performs "simple
and quick tasks". Other users, expressing their "fear of missing out
tasks", even go so far as leaving Wirk continuously open on their
computers.
4.2
Routine microworkers
The measure we obtain through audience measurements from mi-
crowork platforms is much larger, with 52,337 users. It corresponds
to a different, larger group of users, by definition those connected to
a microwork platform (both Wirk and its competitors in France, as
seen in section 3.3) at least once a month, after removing duplicates
(section 3.5).
Once again, DiPLab interviews provide us with insights into
this mode of engagement with microwork. A respondent whose
main job is editorial manager in a communication agency, has been
microworking for three years. She signed up during a period of her
life in which her "lifestyle" required "an additional income", resulting
in "a compulsive need to earn more money". Since then, she has
been returning to microwork "from time to time", with a preference
for questionnaire-based micro-tasks that she sees as an extension
of her education.
In sum, the group of "routine" users corresponds to a fragmented
mode of engagement in microwork, with an often-selective attitude
towards tasks.
4.3
Casual microworkers
Our last estimate features 266,126 persons and corresponds to regis-
tered users as declared by platforms themselves, after removing non-
French users and duplicates. It is a group of "casual" microworkers :
French users who signed up with one or more microwork platforms,
who may or may not have an intense level of activity. Some of them
may perform less than one task per month.
The long tail of this population that connects less frequently, is
more difficult to reach through surveys and may escape audience
measures. Yet our interviews provide sufficient insight to portray it.
We can distinguish two sub-populations. One includes users who
signed up out of curiosity and quickly abandoned microwork be-
cause of the scarcity and difficulty of the tasks - two points often
emphasized by our study participants. Another includes individuals
who were "involved in" microwork at least once and who can, inter-
mittently or in the future, become "routine" or even "very active"
users.
One respondent, holding a day-job as administrative secretary, il-
lustrates this situation well. Registered on Wirk in 2016, he "quickly

that the platform would delete his account due to inactivity. He
then decided to resume his microwork in a relatively sustained way.
He now claims he earns about 80 euros a month from micro-tasks,
almost four times more than the average in our survey. Another mi-
croworker, currently seeking employment, also alternates between
inactivity and intensive performance. In her working life, she has
always experienced alternating periods of unemployment and peri-
ods of employment. She says she stops microwork as soon as she
finds a job because she will "no longer have time", while her phases
of unemployment correspond to periods of intensive activity on
Wirk because she prefers to "do this rather than nothing".
Table 7 summarizes our results.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2019.

8
•
Le Ludec, C. et al
Table 7. Number of microworkers in France, by level of activity.
Group
Type of activity
Frequency
Size
Very active
Simple and quick
micro-tasks
At least once
a week
14,903
Routine
Selected
micro-
tasks
At least once
a month
52,337
Casual
Alternating periods
of activity and inac-
tivity
Less
than
once a month
266,126
Source: Authors’ elaboration.
5
CONCLUSIONS
With this article, we have sought to launch a discussion on how to
quantify the pervasiveness of new forms of work that, for the time
being, are largely outside official statistics. Microwork illustrates this
difficulty very clearly. Lacking the media coverage that platforms
such as Uber or AirBnb receive, microwork is largely unrecognised,
overshadowed by the commercial propaganda revolving around the
promises of algorithms and robotic exploits [Irani 2015]. The voice
of the individuals who perform microwork goes largely unheard.
Somewhat paradoxically, microwork remains at the margin of formal
economy even though it constitutes a strategic resource for big data-
intensive artificial intelligence, a major component of the digital
economy.
We have proposed an estimate of the size of the microworking
population in France. We have chosen to take into account not
just one platform (as most studies that have exclusively focused
on Amazon mechanical Turk so far) but a set of platforms that we
have reasons to consider relevant in the country. We have combined
different methods and data sources: from the public declarations of
platforms themselves and the results of publicly-available audience
measurement panels, to data that we collected through question-
naires and interviews as part of our DiPLab project. In this way, we
have detected and qualified three groups of users according to their
level of involvement: 14,903 "very active" individuals, most of whom
are present on the platforms at least once a week; 52,337 "routine"
users, present at least once a month, with a more fragmented level
of activity and a selective choice of tasks; and 266.126 "casual" users
who mostly alternate between inactivity and periods of more inten-
sive practice of microwork, notably during phases of transition in
their lives (unemployment, maternity leave, etc.).
We mentioned the limitations of the publicly available informa-
tion we have used, including the opacity of audience measures
- constructed by private companies for their clients and difficult
to audit for independent researchers. In addition as we said, our
DiPLab survey included just two waves of capture and recapture,
allowing only for approximate corrections of the bias resulting from
the equal-capture-chances assumption. Another limitation to our
study lies in the difficulty of assessing the extent to which these
three sets of microworkers, corresponding to three platform usage
patterns and established through three very different estimation
methods, intersect so that their populations partly overlap. Despite
the questions they still raise, these figures provide extremely useful
orders of magnitude.
Consequently, our estimates are critical contributions to the un-
derstanding of ongoing significant changes in the labor market in
the era of digital platforms. The tens of thousands of French mi-
croworkers performing increasingly fragmented piece-based tasks
can have a strong impact on the very perception of labor, its social
protection and its modes and levels of remuneration in the coming
years.
By way of comparison, the IGAS report we already mentioned
(section 3.1) estimated the number of Uber drivers in France at
around 14,000 [Amar and Viossat 2016]; all platforms combined,
there are around 27,000 drivers of private hire vehicles in France,
according to the Ministry of transport (cited in [Pommier 2018]).
As for bicycle delivery companies, Deliveroo claims to have 9,300
couriers in France [Deliveroo 2018]. Our estimates therefore shows
that microwork has a workforce whose size is at least comparable
to that of these high-profile platforms - if not higher if we factor in
casual participation. It is therefore not an anecdotal phenomenon
and deserves great attention from the research community, from
unions and from policy-makers alike.
In France and in Europe, the current debate on social protection
for digital platforms workers must take microwork into account.
Research must sustain these reflections and provide elements for ac-
tion, by proposing a more accurate knowledge of the social changes
that come with microwork as well as of the operational functioning
and business models of the digital platforms that benefit from it.
