Context-aware Captions from Context-agnostic Supervision
Ramakrishna Vedantam1
Samy Bengio2
Kevin Murphy2
Devi Parikh3
Gal Chechik2
1Virginia Tech
3Georgia Institute of Technology
2Google

Abstract
We introduce an inference technique to produce discrim-
inative context-aware image captions (captions that de-
scribe differences between images or visual concepts) using
only generic context-agnostic training data (captions that
describe a concept or an image in isolation). For exam-
ple, given images and captions of “siamese cat” and “tiger
cat”, we generate language that describes the “siamese
cat” in a way that distinguishes it from “tiger cat”. Our
key novelty is that we show how to do joint inference over
a language model that is context-agnostic and a listener
which distinguishes closely-related concepts. We ﬁrst ap-
ply our technique to a justiﬁcation task, namely to describe
why an image contains a particular ﬁne-grained category
as opposed to another closely-related category of the CUB-
200-2011 dataset. We then study discriminative image cap-
tioning to generate language that uniquely refers to one
of two semantically-similar images in the COCO dataset.
Evaluations with discriminative ground truth for justiﬁca-
tion and human studies for discriminative image captioning
reveal that our approach outperforms baseline generative
and speaker-listener approaches for discrimination.
1. Introduction
Language is the primary modality for communicating,
and representing knowledge. To convey relevant informa-
tion, we often use language in a way that takes into account
context. For example, instead of describing a situation in a
“literal” way, one might pragmatically emphasize selected
aspects in order to be persuasive, impactful or effective.
Consider the target image at the bottom left in Fig. 1. A
literal description “An airplane is ﬂying in the sky” conveys
the semantics of the image, but would be inadequate if the
goal was to disambiguate this image from the distractor im-
age (bottom right). For this purpose, a more pragmatic de-
scription would be, “A large passenger jet ﬂying through a
blue sky”. This description is aware of context, namely, that
the distractor image also has an airplane. People use such
pragmatic considerations continuously, and effortlessly in
Figure 1: An illustration of two tasks requiring pragmatic reasoning ex-
plored in this paper. 1) justiﬁcation: Given an image of a bird, a target
(ground-truth) class (green), and a distractor class (red), describe the target
image to explain why it belongs to the target class, and not the distractor
class. The distractor class images are only shown for illustration, and are
not provided to the algorithm. 2) discriminative image captioning: Given
two similar images, produce a sentence to identify a target image (green)
from the distractor image (red). Our introspective speaker model improves
over a context-free speaker.
teaching, conversation and discussions.
In this vein, it is desirable to endow machines with prag-
matic reasoning. One approach would be to collect training
data of language used in context, for example, discrimina-
tive ground truth utterances from people describing images
in context of other images, or justiﬁcations explaining why
an image contains a target class as opposed to a distractor
class (Fig. 1). Unfortunately, collecting such data has a pro-
hibitive cost, since the space of objects in possible contexts
is often too large. Furthermore, in some cases the context
in which we wish to be pragmatic may be unknown apri-
ori. For example, a free-form conversation agent may have
to respond in a context-aware or discriminative fashion de-
pending upon the history of a conversation. Such scenarios
also arise in human-robot interaction, as in the case where,
a robot may need to reason about which spoon a person is
asking for. Thus, in this paper, we focus on deriving prag-
matic (context-aware) behavior given access only to generic
(context-agnostic) ground truth.
1
arXiv:1701.02870v3  [cs.CV]  31 Jul 2017

We study two qualitatively different real-world vision
tasks that require pragmatic reasoning. The ﬁrst is justiﬁ-
cation, where the model needs to justify why an image cor-
responds to one ﬁne-grained object category, as opposed to
a closely related, yet undepicted category. Justiﬁcation is
a task that is important for hobbyists, and domain experts:
ornithologists and botanists often need to explain why an
image depicts particular species as opposed to a closely-
related species. Another potential application for justiﬁca-
tion is in machine teaching, where an algorithm instructs
non-expert humans about new concepts.
Our second task is discriminative image captioning,
where the goal is to generate a sentence that describes an
image in context of other semantically similar images. This
task is not only grounded in pragmatics, but is also inter-
esting as a scene understanding task to check ﬁne-grained
image understanding. It also has potential applications to
human robot interaction.
Recent work by Andreas and Klein [2] derives pragmatic
behaviour in neural language models using only context-
free data. While we are motivated by similar considera-
tions, the key algorithmic novelty of our work over [2] is
a uniﬁed inference procedure which leads to more efﬁcient
search for discriminative sentences (Sec. 5). Our approach
is based on the realization that one may simply re-use the
sampling distribution from the generative model, instead of
training a separate model to assess discriminativeness [2].
This also has important implications for practitioners, since
one can easily adapt existing context-free captioning mod-
els for context-aware captioning without additional training.
Furthermore, while [2] was applied to an abstract scenes
dataset [46], we apply our model to two qualitatively differ-
ent real-image datasets: the ﬁne-grained birds dataset CUB-
200-2011 [41], and the COCO [23] dataset which contains
real-life scenes with common objects.
In summary, the key contributions of this paper are:
• A novel inference procedure that models an introspec-
tive speaker (IS), allowing a speaker (S) (say a generic
image captioning model) to reason about pragmatic
behavior without additional training.
• Two new tasks for studying discriminative behaviour,
and pragmatics, grounded in vision: justiﬁcation, and
discriminative image captioning.
• A new dataset (CUB-Justify) to evaluate justiﬁcation
systems on ﬁne-grained bird images with 5 captions
for 3161 (image, target class, distractor class) triplets.
• Our evaluations on CUB-Justify, and human evalua-
tion on COCO show that our approach outperforms
baseline approaches at inducing discrimination.
2. Related Work
Pragmatics: The study of pragmatics – how context in-
ﬂuences usage of language, stems from the foundational
work of Grice [15] who analyzed how cooperative multi-
agent linguistic agents could model each others’ behav-
ior to achieve a common objective.
Consequently, a lot
of pragmatics literature has studied higher-level behavior
in agents including conversational implicature [6] and the
Gricean maxims [40]. These works aim to derive pragmatic
behavior given minimal assumptions on individual agents
and typically use hand-tuned lexicons and rules. More re-
cently, there have been exciting developments on apply-
ing reinforcement learning (RL) techniques to these prob-
lems [27, 8, 21], requiring less manual tuning.
We are also interested in deriving pragmatic behavior,
but our focus is on scaling context-sensitive behavior to vi-
sion tasks. Other works model ideas from pragmatics to
learn language via games played online [42] or for human-
robot collaboration [35]. In a similar spirit, here we are
interested in applying ideas from pragmatics to build sys-
tems that can provide justiﬁcations (Sec. 4.1) and provide
discriminative image captions (Sec. 4.2).
Most relevant to our work is the recent work on deriving
pragmatic behavior in abstract scenes made with clipart, by
Andreas, and Klein [2]. Unlike their technique, our pro-
posed approach does not require training a second listener
model and supports more efﬁcient inference (Sec. 3.3).
More details are provided in Sec. 3.1.
Beyond Image Captioning: Image captioning, the task of
generating natural language description for an image, has
seen quick progress [11, 12, 39, 43]. Recently, research
has shifted beyond image captioning, addressing tasks like
visual question answering [3, 14, 25, 45], referring expres-
sion generation [20, 26, 28, 33], and ﬁll-in-the-blanks [44].
In a similar spirit, the two tasks we introduce here, justiﬁ-
cation, and discriminative image captioning, can be viewed
as “beyond image captioning” tasks. Sadovnik et al. [32]
ﬁrst studied a discriminative image description task, with
the goal of distinguishing one image from a set of images.
Their approach incorporates cues such as discriminability
and saliency, and uses hand-designed rules for constructing
sentences. In contrast, we develop inference techniques to
induce discriminative behavior in neural models. The ref-
erence game from [2] can also be seen as a discriminative
image captioning task on abstract scenes made from clipart,
while we are interested in the domain of real images. The
work on generating referring expressions by Mao et al. [26]
generates discriminative captions which refer to particular
objects in an image given context-aware supervision. Our
work is different in the sense that we address an instance
of pragmatic reasoning in the common case where context-
dependent data is not available for training.
Rationales: Several works have studied how machines can
understand human rationales, including enriching classiﬁ-
cation by asking explanations from humans [10], and in-
corporating human rationales in active learning [7, 29]. In

contrast, we focus on machines providing justiﬁcations to
humans. This could potentially allow machines to teach
new concepts to humans (machine teaching). Other recent
work [16] looks at post-hoc explanations for classiﬁcation
decisions. Instead of explaining why a model thinks an im-
age is a particular class, [16] describes why an image is
of a class predicted by the classiﬁer. Unlike this task, our
justiﬁcation task requires reasoning about explicit context
from the distractor class. Further, we are not interested in
providing rationalizations for classiﬁcation decisions but in
explaining the differences between confusing concepts to
humans. We show a comparison to [16] in the appendix,
demonstrating the importance of context for justiﬁcation.
Beam Search with Modiﬁed Objectives: Beam search is
an approximate, greedy technique for inference in sequen-
tial models. We perform beam search on a modiﬁed objec-
tive for our introspective speaker model to induce discrimi-
nation. This is similar in spirit to recent works on inducing
diversity in beam search [38], and maximum mutual infor-
mation inference for sequence-to-sequence models [22].
3. Approach
We describe our approach for inducing context-aware
language for: 1) justiﬁcation, where the context is another
class, and 2) discriminative image captioning, where the
context is a semantically similar image. For clarity, we ﬁrst
describe the formulation for justiﬁcation, and then discuss a
modiﬁcation for discriminative image captioning.
In the justiﬁcation task (Fig. 1 top), we wish to produce
a sentence s, comprised of a sequence of words {si}, based
on a given image I of a target concept ct in the context of
a distractor concept cd. The produced justiﬁcation should
capture aspects of the image that discriminate between the
target, and the distractor concepts. Note that images of the
distractor class are not provided to the algorithm.
We ﬁrst train a generic context-agnostic image caption-
ing model (from here on referred to as speaker) using train-
ing data from Reed et al. [31] who collected captions de-
scribing bird images on the CUB-200-2011 [41] dataset.
We condition the model on ct in addition to the image. That
is, we model p(s|I, ct). This not only helps produce bet-
ter sentences (providing the model access to more informa-
tion), but is also the cornerstone of our approach for dis-
crimination (Sec. 3.2). Our language models are recurrent
neural networks which represent the state-of-the-art for lan-
guage modeling across a range of popular tasks like image
captioning [39, 43], machine translation [4] etc.
3.1. Reasoning Speaker
To induce discrimination in the utterances from a lan-
guage model, it is natural to consider using a generator, or
speaker, which models p(s|I, ct) in conjunction with a lis-
tener function f(s, ct, cd) that scores how discriminative an
utterance s is. The task of a pragmatic reasoning speaker
RS, then, is to select utterances which are good sentences
as per the generative model p, and are discriminative per f:
RS(I, ct, cd)=arg max
s
λp(s|I, ct) + (1−λ)f(s, ct, cd)
(1)
where 0 ≤λ ≤1 controls the tradeoff between linguistic
adequacy of the sentence, and discriminativeness.
A similar reasoning speaker model forms the core of the
approach of [2], where p, and f are implemented using
multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs). As noted in [2], select-
ing utterances from such a reasoning speaker poses several
challenges. First, exact inference in this model over the ex-
ponentially large space of sentences is intractable. Second,
in general one would not expect the discriminator function
f to factorize across words, making joint optimization of
the reasoning speaker objective difﬁcult. Thus, Andreas,
and Klein [2] adopt a sampling based strategy, where p is
considered as the proposal distribution whose samples are
ranked by a linear combination of p, and f (Eq. 1). Im-
portantly, this distribution is over full sentences, hence the
effectiveness of this formulation depends heavily on the dis-
tribution captured by p, since the search over the space of
all strings is solely based on the speaker. This is inefﬁcient,
especially when there is a mismatch in the statistics of the
context-free (generative), and the unknown context-aware
(discriminative) sentence distributions. In such cases, one
must resort to drawing many samples to ﬁnd good discrim-
inative sentences.
3.2. Introspective Speaker
Our approach for incorporating contextual behavior is
based on a simple modiﬁcation to the listener f (Eq. 1).
Given the generator p, we construct a listener module that
wants to discriminate between ct, and cd, using the follow-
ing log-likelihood ratio:
f(s, ct, cd) = log p(s|ct, I)
p(s|cd, I).
(2)
This listener only depends on a generative model,
p(s|c, I), for the two classes ct, and cd. We name it “in-
trospector” to emphasize that this step re-uses the genera-
tive model, and does not need to train an explicit listener
model. Substituting the introspector into Eq. 1 induces the
following introspective speaker model for discrimination:
∆(I, ct, cd)
|
{z
}
introspective speaker
= arg max
s
λ log p(s|ct, I)
|
{z
}
speaker
+ (1−λ) log p(s|ct, I)
p(s|cd, I)
|
{z
}
introspector
,
(3)
with λ that trades-off the weight given to generation, and
introspection (similar to Eq. 1). In general, we expect this

approach to provide sensible results when ct, and cd are
similar. That is, we expect humans to describe similar con-
cepts in similar ways, hence p(s|ct, I) should not be too dif-
ferent from p(s|cd, I). Thus, the introspector is less likely
to overpower the speaker in Eq. 3 in such cases (for a given
λ). Note that for sufﬁciently different concepts the speaker
alone is likely to be sufﬁcient for discrimination. That is,
describing the concept in isolation is likely to be enough to
discriminate against a different or unrelated concept.
A careful inspection of the introspective speaker model
reveals two desirable properties over previous work [2].
First, the introspector model does not need training, since
it only depends on p, the original generative model. Thus,
existing language models can be readily re-used to produce
context-aware outputs by conditioning on cd. We demon-
strate empirical validation of this in Sec. 5. This would help
scale this approach to scenarios where it is not known apri-
ori which concepts need to be discriminated, in contrast to
approaches which train a separate listener module. Second,
it leads to a uniﬁed, and efﬁcient inference for the introspec-
tive speaker (Eq. 3), which we describe next.
3.3. Emitter-Suppressor (ES) Beam Search for
RNNs
We now describe a search algorithm for implementing
the maximization in Eq. 3, which we call emitter-suppressor
(ES) beam search. We use the beam search [24] algorithm,
which is a heuristic graph-search algorithm commonly used
for inference in Recurrent Neural Networks [17, 38].
We ﬁrst factorize the posterior log-probability terms in
the introspective speaker equation (Eq. 3) p(s|ct, I) =
QT
τ=1 p(sτ|s1:τ−1, ct, I), denoting s1:T = {sτ}T
τ=1 (s1:0
corresponds to a null string). T is the length of the sentence.
We then combine terms from Eq. 3, yielding the following
emitter-suppressor objective for the introspective speaker:
∆(I, ct, cd) = arg max
s
T
X
τ=1
log
emitter
z
}|
{
p(sτ|s1:τ−1, ct, I)
p(sτ|s1:τ−1, cd, I)1−λ
|
{z
}
suppressor
.
(4)
The emitter (numerator in Eq. 4) is the generative model
conditioned on the target concept ct, deciding which token
to select at a given timestep. The suppressor (the denomina-
tor in Eq. 4) is conditioned on the distractor concept cd, pro-
viding signals to the emitter on which tokens to avoid. This
is intuitive – to be discriminative, we want to emit words
that match ct, but avoid emitting words that match cd.
We maximize the emitter-suppressor objective (Eq. 4)
using beam search. Vanilla beam search, as typically used
in language models, prunes the output space at every time-
step keeping the top-B (usually incomplete) sentences with
highest log-probabilities so far (speaker in Eq. 3). Instead,
Figure 2: Emitter-suppressor beam search for beam size 1, for distinguish-
ing an image of “black-throated blue warbler” from the distractor class
“black and white warbler”. Green: A language model p(s|ct, I) produces
a caption “white belly and breast ... ”. Red: When feeding the distractor
class to the language model, since the two birds share the attribute white
belly, which appears in the image, the term ”white” is highly suppressed.
Blue: Picking likely words for the emitter, and unlikely for the suppres-
sor yields a discriminative caption “blue throat ..”. Note that emitter, and
suppressor share history (the previouly generated words).
we run beam search to keep the top-B sentences with high-
est ES ratio in Eq. 4. Fig. 2 illustrates this ES beam search
for a beam size of 1.
It is important to consider how the trade-off parameter
λ affects the produced sentences. For λ = 1, the model
generates descriptions that ignore the context. At the other
extreme, low λ values are likely to make the produced sen-
tences very different from any sentence in the training set
(repeated words, ungrammatical sentences). It is not trivial
to assume that there exists a wide enough range of λ creat-
ing sentences that are both discriminative, and well-formed.
However, our results (Sec. 5) indicate that such a range of λ
exists in practice.
3.4. Discriminative Image Captioning
We are given a target image It, and a distractor Id,that
we wish to distinguish, similar to the two classes for the jus-
tiﬁcation task. We construct a speaker (or generator) for this
task by training a standard image captioning model. Given
this speaker, we construct an emitter-suppressor equation
(as in Eq. 4):
∆(It, Id) = arg max
s
T
X
τ=1
log
emitter
z
}|
{
p(sτ|s1:τ−1, It)
p(sτ|s1:τ−1, Id)1−λ
|
{z
}
suppressor
.
(5)
We re-use the mechanics of emitter-suppressor beam
search from Sec. 3.3, conditioning the emitter on the target
image It, and the suppressor on the distractor image Id.

4. Experimental Setup
We provide details of the CUB dataset, of our CUB-
Justify dataset used for evaluation, and of the speaker-
training setup for the justiﬁcation task. We then discuss the
experimental protocols for discriminative image captioning.
4.1. Justiﬁcation
CUB
Dataset:
The
Caltech
UCSD
birds
(CUB)
dataset [41] contains 11788 images for 200 species of North
American birds. Each image in the dataset has been anno-
tated with 5 ﬁne-grained captions by Reed et al. [31]. These
captions mention various details about the bird (“This is a
white spotted bird with a long pointed black beak.”) while
not mentioning the name of the bird species.
CUB-Justify Dataset: We collect a new dataset (CUB-
Justify) with ground truth justiﬁcations for evaluating jus-
tiﬁcation. We ﬁrst sample the target, and distractor classes
from within a hyper-category created based on the last name
of the folk names of the 200 species in CUB. For instance,
“rufous hummingbird”, and “ruby throated hummingbird”
both fall in the hyper-category “hummingbird”.
We in-
duce 37 such hyper-categories. The largest single hyper-
category is “Warbler” with 25 categories. We then select a
subset of (approx.) 15 images from the test set of CUB-200-
2011 [41] for each of the 200 classes, to form a CUB-Justify
test split. We use the rest for speaker training (CUB-Justify
train split).
Workers were then shown an image of the “rufous hum-
mingbird”, for instance, and a set of 6 other images (from
CUB-Justify test split) all belonging to the distractor class
“ruby throated hummingbird”, to form the visual notion of
the distractor class. They were also shown a diagram of the
morphology of birds indicating various parts such as tarsus,
rump, wingbars etc. (similar to Reed et al. [31]). The in-
struction was to describe the target image such that it is not
confused with images from the distractor class. Some birds
are best distinguished by non-visual cues such as their call,
or their migration patterns. Thus, we drop the categories of
birds from the original list of triplets which were labeled as
too hard to distinguish by the workers. At the end of this
process we are left with 3161 triplets with 5 captions each.
We split this dataset into 1070 validation (for selecting the
best value of λ), and 2091 test examples respectively. More
details on the interface can be found in the appendix.
Speaker Training:
We implement a model similar to
“Show, Attend, and Tell” from Xu et al. [43], modifying
the original model to provide the class as input, similar in
spirit to [16]. Exact details of our model architecture are
given in the appendix. We train the model on the CUB-
Justify train split. Recall that this just has context-agnostic
captions from [31].
To evaluate the quality of our speaker model, we report
numbers here using the CIDEr-D metric [37] commonly
used for image captioning [16, 19, 39] computed on the
context-agnostic captions from [31]. Our captioning model
with both the image, and class as input reaches a validation
score of 50.2 CIDEr-D, while the original image-only cap-
tioning model reaches a CIDEr-D of 49.1. The scores are in
a similar range as existing CUB captioning approaches [16].
Justiﬁcation Evaluation: We measure performance of the
(context-aware) justiﬁcation captions on the CUB-Justify
discriminative captions using the CIDEr-D metric. CIDEr-
D weighs n-grams by their inverse document frequencies
(IDF), giving higher weights to sentences having “con-
tent” n-grams (“red beak”) than generic n-grams (“this
bird”) [16]. Further, CIDEr-D captures importance of an n-
gram for the image. For instance, it emphasizes “red beak”
over, say, “black belly” if “red beak” is used more often in
human justiﬁcations. We also report METEOR [5] scores
for completeness. More detailed discussion on metrics can
be found in the appendix.
4.2. Discriminative Image Captioning
Dataset: We want to test if reasoning about context with an
introspective speaker can help discriminate between pairs
of very similar images from the COCO dataset. To con-
struct a set of confusing image pairs, we follow two strate-
gies. First, easy confusion: For each image in the validation
(test) set, we ﬁnd its nearest neighbor in the FC7 space of
a pre-trained VGG-16 CNN [34], and repeat this process of
neighbor ﬁnding for 1000 randomly chosen source images.
Second, hard confusion: To further narrow down to a list
of semantically similar confusing images, we then run the
speaker model on the nearest neighbor images, and compute
word-level overlap (intersection over union) of their gener-
ated sentences. We then pick the top 1000 pairs with most
overlap. Interestingly, the top 539 pairs had identical cap-
tions. This reﬂects the issue of the output of image caption-
ing models lacking diversity, and seeming templated [9, 39].
Speaker Training and Evaluation: We train our genera-
tive speaker for use in emitter-suppressor beam search us-
ing the model from [39] implemented in the neuraltalk2
project [18].
We use the train/val/test splits from [19].
Our trained and ﬁnetuned speaker model achieves a perfor-
mance of 91 CIDEr-D on the test set. As seen in Eq. 5, no
category information is used for this task. We evaluate ap-
proaches for discriminative image captioning based on how
often they help humans to select the correct image out of
the pair of images.
5. Results
5.1. Justiﬁcation
Methods and Baselines: We evaluate the following mod-
els: 1. IS(λ): Introspective speaker from Eq. 3; 2. IS(1):
standard literal speaker, which generates a caption condi-

Figure 3: CUB-Justify validation results: CIDEr-D vs.
λ on CUB-
Justify validation. Our introspective speaker approaches (IS(λ) and semi-
blind-IS(λ)) models perform best, followed by the class-only introspective
speaker (blind-IS(λ)). semi-blind-IS(λ) outperforms other methods for a
wider range of λ. All approaches which reason about pragmatics beat the
baseline generative approach IS(1). Error bars denote standard error of the
mean score estimated across the validation set.
tioned on the image and target class, but which ignores the
distractor class; 3. semi-blind-IS(λ): Introspective speaker
in which the listener does not have access to the image, but
the speaker does; 4. blind-IS(λ): Introspective speaker with-
out access to image, conditioned only on classes; 5. RS(λ):
Our implementation of Andreas and Klein [2], but using our
(more powerful) language model, and Eq. 3 with a listener
that models p(s|ct)
p(s|cd) (similar to semi-blind-IS(λ)) for ranking
samples (as opposed to a trained MLP [2], to keep things
comparable). All approaches use 10 beams/samples (which
is better than lower values) unless stated otherwise.
Validation Performance: Fig. 3 shows the performance on
CUB-Justify validation set as a function of λ, the hyper-
parameter controlling the tradeoff between the speaker and
the introspector (Eq. 3). For the RS(λ) baseline, λ stands
for the tradeoff between the log-probability of the sentence
and the score from the discriminator function for sample
re-ranking. A few interesting observations emerge. First,
both our IS(λ) and semi-blind-IS(λ) models outperform the
baselines for the mid range of λ values. IS(λ) model does
better overall, but semi-blind-IS(λ) has a more stable per-
formance over a wider range of λ. This indicates that when
conditioned on the image, the introspector has to be highly
discriminative (low lambda values) to overcome the signals
from the image, since discrimination is between classes.
Second, as λ is decreased from 1, most methods improve
as the sentences become more discriminative, but then get
worse again as λ becomes too low. This is likely to happen
because when λ is too low, the model explores rare tokens
and parts of the output space that have not been seen during
training, leading to badly-formed sentences (Fig. 4). This
effect is stronger for IS(λ) models than for RS(λ), since
RS(λ) searches the output space over samples from the gen-
erator and only ranks using the joint reasoning speaker ob-
jective (Eq. 1). Interestingly, at λ = 1 (no discrimination),
the RS(λ) approach, which samples from the generator,
Approach
CIDEr-D
METEOR
IS(λ)
18.4 ± 0.2
26.5
semi-blind-IS(λ)
18.5 ± 0.2
27.5
RS(λ)
15.8 ± 0.2
26.5
IS(1)
12.3 ± 0.1
25.3
blind-IS(λ)
16.1 ± 0.2
26.8
Table 1:
CUB-Justify test results:
CIDEr-D, and METEOR scores
(higher the better) computed on test set of CUB-Justify. Each model used
the best λ selected on the validation set (Fig. 3). Error values are standard
error of the mean (SEM is less than 0.05 for METEOR). semi-blind-IS(λ)
outperforms other methods.
also performs better than other approaches, which use beam
search to select high log-probability (context-agnostic) sen-
tences. This indicates that in the absence of ground truth
justiﬁcations, there is indeed a discrepancy between search-
ing for discriminativeness and searching for a highly likely
context-agnostic sentence.
We perform more comparisons with the RS(λ) baseline,
sweeping over {10, 50, 100} samples from the generator for
listener reranking (Eq. 1). We ﬁnd that using 100 samples,
RS(λ) gets comparable CIDEr-D scores (18.8) (but lower
METEOR scores) than our semi-blind-IS(λ) approach with
a beam size of 10. This suggests that our semi-blind-IS(λ)
approach is more computationally efﬁcient at exploring the
output space because our emitter-suppressor beam search
allows us to do joint greedy inference over speaker and in-
trospector, leading to more meaningful local decisions. For
completeness, we also trained a listener module discrimi-
natively, and used it as a ranker for RS(λ). We found that
this gets to 16.2 ± 0.3 CIDEr-D (at λ = 0.5) on validation,
which is lower than IS(λ), showing that the bottleneck for
performance is sampling, rather than the discriminativeness
of the listener. More details can be found in the appendix.
Test Performance: Table. 1 details the performance of the
above models on the test set of CUB-Justify, with each
model using its best-performing λ on the validation set
(Fig. 3). Both introspective-speaker models strongly out-
perform the baselines, with semi-blind-IS(λ) slightly out-
performing the IS(λ) model. This could be due to the per-
formance of semi-blind-IS(λ) being less sensitive to the ex-
act choice of λ (from Fig. 3). Among the baselines, the best
performing method is the blind-IS(λ) model, presumably
because this model does emitter-suppressor beam search,
while the other two baseline approaches rely on sampling
and regular beam search respectively.
Qualitative Results: We next showcase some qualitative
results that demonstrate 1) aspects of pragmatics, and 2)
context dependence captured by our best-performing semi-
blind-IS(λ) model. Fig. 4 demonstrates how sentences ut-
tered by the introspective speaker change with λ. At λ = 1
the sentence describes the image well, but is oblivious of the
context (distractor class). The sentence “A small sized bird
has a very long and pointed bill.” is discriminative of hum-
mingbirds against other birds, but not among hummingbirds

Figure 4: The effect of context weight: An image of a “Rufous Humming-
bird” in the context of another hummingbird type. A generative (context-
blind) description describes the bird as having a long beak, but this feature
is not discriminative. When taking into account the context, intermediate λ
values yield descriptions that highlight that the Rufous is brown with a red
throat. For λ = 0, the model does not force sentences to be well formed.
Figure 5: The effect of context class: An image of a “Tennessee Warbler”,
which has light green wings, and a white eyebrow. When described in
the context of a mourning warbler, which has a green hue, the description
highlights that the target bird has a white eyebrow. When described in the
context of the “Black and White Warbler”, the description highlights that
the target bird has green color.
(many of which tend to have long beaks/bills). At λ = 0.7,
and λ = 0.5, the model captures discriminative features
such as the “red neck”, “white belly”, and “red throat”. In-
terestingly, at λ = 0.7 the model avoids saying “long beak”,
a feature shared by both birds. Next, Fig. 5 demonstrates
how the selected utterances change based on the context.
A limitation of our approach is that, since the model never
sees discriminative training data, in some cases it produces
repeated words (“green green green”) when encouraged to
be discriminative at inference time.
Finally, Fig. 6 illustrates the importance of visual rea-
soning for the justiﬁcation task. Fine-grained species often
have large intra-class variances which a blind approach to
justiﬁcation would ignore. Thus, a good justiﬁcation ap-
proach needs to be grounded in the image signal to pick the
discriminative cues appropriate for the given instance.
5.2. Discriminative Image Captioning
As explained in Sec. 4.2 we create two sets of semanti-
cally similar target, and distractor images: easy confusion
based on FC7 features alone, and hard confusion based on
both FC7, and sentences generated from the speaker (im-
age captioning model). We are interested in understanding
if emitter-suppressor inference helps identify the target im-
age better than the generative speaker baseline. Thus the
two approaches are speaker (S) (baseline), and introspec-
Green	
  Kingfisher
Target	
  Image	
  and	
  Class
Blind-­‐Introspective	
  Speaker:
(baseline)
This	
  bird	
  is	
  blue	
  with	
  red	
  on
Its	
  chest	
  and	
  has	
  a	
  long	
  pointy	
  beak
Introspective	
  Speaker:
(our	
  approach)
This	
  is	
  a	
  green	
  green	
  and	
  black bird	
  with	
  a	
  
green	
  crown.
Distractor	
  Class
Pied	
  Kingfisher
Ground	
  Truth	
  Justifications
•
This	
  is	
  a	
  bird	
  with	
  dark	
  
green	
  crown	
  and	
  dark	
  
green	
  coverts.
•
This	
  is	
  a	
  bird	
  with	
  black	
  
and	
  green	
  crown	
  and	
  
green	
  mantle
Intra-­‐ Class	
  Variance
Green	
  Kingfisher
Figure 6: The importance of visual signal for justiﬁcation in ﬁne-
grained categories. Given the image of a green kingﬁsher (left), a blind-
IS(λ) model says the bird has “red on its chest”, which is inaccurate for
this image, and a “long pointy beak”, which is not a discriminative feature
for this context. At the same time, the semi-blind-IS(λ) model mentions
the “green crown”, and avoids uttering “red chest”. Given the complicated
intra-category invariances in bird categories (right), it is intuitive that the
image signal is important for justiﬁcation.
Approach
easy confusion (%) hard confusion (%)
S (baseline)
74.6
52.5
IS (ours)
89.0
74.1
Table 2: % of image pairs that are correctly discriminated by humans,
based on descriptions in COCO. Introspective speaker (IS) is better at
pointing to the target image given a confusing distractor image across both
easy, and hard data splits than a speaker (S). Standard error is below the
precision we report numbers at.
tive speaker (IS) (our approach). We use λ = 0.3 based on
our results on the CUB dataset. We run all approaches at a
beam size of 2 (typically best for COCO [18]).
Human Studies: We setup a two annotation forced choice
(2AFC) study where we show a caption to raters asking
them to “pick an image that the sentence is more likely to
be describing.”. Each target distractor image pair is tested
against the generated captions. We check the fraction of
times a method caused the target image to be picked by a
human. A discriminative image captioning method is con-
sidered better if it enables humans to identify the target im-
age more often. Results of the study are summarized in Ta-
ble. 2. We ﬁnd that our approach outperforms the baseline
speaker (S) on the easy confusion as well as the hard confu-
sion splits. However, the gains from our approach are larger
on the hard confusion split, which is intuitive.
Qualitative Results:
The qualitative results from our
COCO experiments are shown in Fig. 7. The target image,
when successfully identiﬁed, is shown with a green border.
We show examples where our model identiﬁes the target im-
age better in the ﬁrst two rows, and some failure cases in the
third row. Notice how the model is able to modify its utter-
ances to account for context, and pragmatics, when going
from λ = 1 (speaker) to λ = 0.3 (introspective speaker).
Note that the sentences typically respect grammatical con-
structs despite being forced to be discriminative.

Figure 7: Pairs of images whose captions generated by a generic captioning speaker baseline (S) are identical. We apply our introspective speaker (IS)
technique to distinguish the image on the left from the image on the right in each pair. The target image (left) is shown with a green border when the IS
generated sentence is able to identify it correctly. Notice how the introspective speaker often refers more unambiguously to the target image. For example,
for the sheep image (middle left), the IS generated sentence mentions that the sheep are grazing in a lush green ﬁeld. In the bottom row we show some
failure examples. The bottom left example is interesting, where the model calls the stop sign a policeman. In some cases (the wedding cake image), where
the distributions captured by the emitter, and supressor RNN’s are identical, our IS approach produces the same sentence as the baseline (S).
6. Discussion
Describing absence of concepts and inducing compara-
tive language are exciting directions for future work on jus-
tiﬁcation. For instance, when justifying why an image is a
lion and not a tiger, it would be useful to be able to say “be-
cause it does not have stripes.”, or “because it has a more
hair on its face.” Beyond pragmatics, the justiﬁcation task
also has interesting relations to human learning. Indeed, we
all experience that we learn better when someone takes time
out to justify or explain their point of view. One can imag-
ine such justiﬁcations being helpful for “machine teaching”,
where a teacher (machine) can provide justiﬁcations to a hu-
man learner explaining the rationale for an image belonging
to a particular ﬁne-grained category as opposed to a differ-
ent, possibly mistaken, or confusing ﬁne-grained category.
There are some fundamental limitations to inducing
context-aware captions from context-agnostic supervision.
For instance, if two distinct concepts are very similar,
human-generated context-free descriptions may be identi-
cal, and our model (as well as baselines) would fail to ex-
tract any discriminative signal. Indeed, it is hard to address
such situations without context-aware ground truth.
We believe modeling higher-order reasoning (such as
pragmatics) by reusing the sampling distribution from lan-
guage models can be a powerful tool. It may be applicable
to other higher-order reasoning, without necessarily setting
up policy gradient estimators on reward functions. Indeed,
our inference objective can also be formulated for training.
However, initial experiments on this did not yeild signiﬁ-
cant performance improvements.
7. Conclusion
We introduce a novel technique for deriving pragmatic
language from recurrent neural network language models,
namely, an image-captioning model that takes into account
the context of a distractor class or a distractor image. Our
technique can be used at inference time to better discrimi-
nate between concepts, without having seen discriminative
training data. We study two tasks in the vision, and lan-
guage domain which require pragmatic reasoning: justiﬁ-
cation – explaining why an image belongs to one category
as opposed to another, and discriminative image captioning
– describing an image so that one can distinguish it from
a closely related image. Our experiments demonstrate the
strength of our method over generative baselines, as well as
adaptations of previous work to our setting. We will make
the code, and datasets available online.
Acknowledgements: We thank Tom Duerig for his support, and guidance
in shaping this project. We thank David Rolnick, Bharadwaja Ghali, Vahid
Kazemi for help with CUB-Justify dataset. We thank Ashwin Kalyan for
sharing a trained checkpoint for the discriminative image captioning exper-

iments. We also thank Stefan Lee, Andreas Veit, Chris Shallue. This work
was funded in part by an NSF CAREER, ONR Grant N00014-16-1-2713,
ONR YIP, Sloan Fellowship, ARO YIP, Allen Distinguished Investigator,
Google Faculty Research Award, Amazon Academic Research Award to
DP.
Appendix
We organize the appendix as follows:
• Sec. 1: Analysis of performance as we consider unre-
lated images as distractors.
• Sec. 2: Generating visual explanations [16] adapted to
the justiﬁcation task.
• Sec. 3: Architectural changes to the “Show, Attend,
and Tell” image captioning model [43] for justiﬁca-
tion.
• Sec. 4: Optimization details for justiﬁcation speaker
model.
• Sec. 5: Choice of metrics for evaluating justiﬁcation.
• Sec. 6: CUB-Justify data collection details.
• Sec. 7: Analysis of the RS(λ) baseline in more detail.
• Sec. 8: Comparison of our approach to a baseline with
a discriminatively trained listener used for reranking in
RS(λ) model.
1. COCO Qualitative Results
COCO Qualitative Examples: Fig. 8 shows more qualita-
tive results on discriminative image captioning on the hard
confusion split of the COCO dataset. Notice how our in-
trospective speaker captions (denoted by IS), which model
the context (distractor image) explicitly are often more dis-
criminative, helping identify the target image more clearly
than the baseline speaker approach (denoted by S). For ex-
ample in the second row, our IS model generates the cap-
tion “a delta passenger jet ﬂying through a clear blue sky”,
which is a more discriminative (and accurate) caption than
the baseline caption “a large passenger jet ﬂying through a
blue sky”, which applies to both the target and distractor
images.
Effect of increasing distance: We illustrate how the qual-
ity of the discriminative captions from the introspective
speaker (IS) approach varies as the distractor image be-
comes less relevant to the target image (Fig. 9). For the
target image on the left, we show the 1-nearest neighbor
(which has a very similar caption to the target image), the
10th-nearest neighbor and a randomly selected distractor
image. When we pick a random image to be the distrac-
tor, the generated discriminatve captions become less com-
prehensible, losing relevance as well as grammatical struc-
ture. This is consistent with our understanding of the in-
trospective speaker (IS) formulation from Sec. 3.2: model-
ing the context explicitly during inference helps discrimina-
tion when the context is relevant. When the context is not
relevant, as with the randomly picked images, the original
speaker model (S) is likely sufﬁcient for discrimination.
2. Comparison to previous work on Generating
Visual Explanations [16]
Hendricks et al. [16] propose a method to explain clas-
siﬁcation decisions to an end user by providing post-hoc
rationalizations. Given a prediction from a classiﬁer, this
work generates a caption conditioned on the predicted class,
and the original image. While Hendricks et al. aim to pro-
vide a rationale for a classiﬁcation, we focus on a related
but different problem of concept justiﬁcation. Namely, we
want to explain why an image contains a target class as op-
posed to a speciﬁc distractor class, while Hendircks et al.
want to explain why a classiﬁer thought an image contains
a particular class. Thus, unlike the visual explanation task,
it is intuitive that the justiﬁcation task requires explicit rea-
soning about context. We verify this hypothesis, by ﬁrst
adapting the work of [16] to our justiﬁcation task, using
it as a speaker, and then augmenting the speaker with our
approach to construct an intropsective speakerm which ac-
counts for context.
Interestingly, we ﬁnd that our intro-
spective speaker approach helps improve the performance
of generating visual explanations [16] on justiﬁcation.
The approach of Hendricks et al. [16] differs from our
setup in two important ways.
Firstly, uses a stronger
CNN, namely the ﬁne-grained compact-bilinear pooling
CNN [13] which provides state-of-the-art performance on
the CUB dataset. Secondly, to make the explanations more
grounded in the class information, they also add a constraint
to induce captions which are more speciﬁc to the class. This
is achieved by using a policy gradient on a reward func-
tion that models p(c|s) for a given sentence s and class c.
Thus, in some sense the approach encourages the model to
produce sentences that are highly discriminative of a given
class against all other classes, as opposed to a particular dis-
tractor class that we are interested in for justiﬁcation. Fi-
nally, the policy gradient is used in conjunction with stan-
dard maximum likelihood training to train the explanation
model. At inference, the explanation model is run by con-
ditioning the caption generation on the predicted class.
We modify the inference setup of [16] slightly to condi-
tion the caption generation on the target class for justiﬁca-
tion, as opposed to the predicted class for explanation. We
call this the vis-exp approach. We then apply the emitter-
suppressor beam search (at a beam size of 1, to be consistent
with [16]) to account for context, giving us an introspective
visual explanation model (vis-exp-IS). Given the stronger
image features and a more complicated training procedure
involving policy gradients (hard to implement and tune in
practice), the vis-exp approach achieves a strong CIDEr-D
score of 20.36 with a standard error of 0.16 on our CUB-
Justify test set. Note that this CUB-Justify test set is a strict
subset of the test set from [16]. These results are better
than those achieved with our semi-blind-IS(λ) CUB model,
which is based on regular image features from VGG-16 im-

S: a large passenger jet flying through a 
blue sky
IS: a blue and yellow airplane is flying in 
the sky
S: a large passenger jet flying through a 
blue sky
IS: a delta passenger jet flying 
through a clear blue sky
S: a motorcycle parked on the side of 
a road
IS: several motorcycles are parked in a row in 
a field
S: A fire hydrant on the side of the 
road
IS: A red and yellow fire hydrant on a city 
street
S: a yellow and blue train travelling down 
train tracks
IS: two trains are parked on the train 
station
S: a red fire hydrant sitting in the middle of 
a forest
IS: a fire hydrant in the woods with trees 
in the background
S: A man is feeding a giraffe in a 
zoo.
IS: A man is petting a horse in 
a pen
Target Image, It
Distractor Image, Id
Figure 8: Qualitative examples for discriminative image captioning (similar to Fig. 7). S (speaker) denotes examples from the standard image captioning
model, which generates the same caption for the two images. Our method’s outputs are shown as IS (introspective speaker). The target image is shown
to the left and marked with a green border where our approach is accurate, as well as more discriminative. The second last example shows a case where
our model is more discriminative, but inaccurate for the original target image and the last example shows a case where our caption is neither accurate not
discriminative.

S: A large passenger jet sitting 
on top of an airport tarmac
D=74.3 
IS: Many airplanes are lined up on 
a tarmac
D=86.3 
IS: Several airplanes are lined 
up at an airport
D=124.4 
IS: Virgin virgin airliners taxiing 
airplane at terminal underpass
S: A man riding a motorcycle on a 
street
D=67.5 
IS: A man sitting on a 
motorcycle with a stuffed rabbit 
sitting on it.
D=76.28 
IS: A man sitting on police 
motorcycle in front of a 
building.
D=106.9 
IS: Biker biker biker biker motorcycle 
behind wheel sidecar motorcycles 
sweets and cash driving down aisle
Target Image
v.s. 1NN
v.s. 10 NN
v.s. Random
Figure 9: We show the target image (extreme left) and distractor images at varying distances (1 nearest neighbor, 10 nearest neighbor and random distractor),
along with some generated captions. D denotes the distance between the target and distractor images in the FC7 space. The output of the speaker (S) is shown
under the target image and the output of the introspective speaker considering each distractor image as context in turn, is shown under the corresponding
distractor image. That is, the caption under each distractor image describes the target image distinguishing it from the distractor. Notice that our introspective
speaker (IS) method often works well for 1 nearest neighbour and the 10th nearest neighbor, but produces incomprehensible sentences when the distractor
is irrelevant. Indeed, for a random distractor, we see that the baseline speaker outputs (S) are often sufﬁcient for discrimination, which is intuitive.
plemented in the “Show, Attend and Tell” framework and
uses standard log-likelihood training (Table. 1).
However, as mentioned before, the approach of [16],
similar to a baseline speaker S, cannot explicitly model
context from a speciﬁc distractor class at inference. That
is, while the approach reasons (through its training proce-
dure) that given an image of a hummingbird, one should talk
about its long beak (a discriminating feature for a humming-
bird against all other birds), it cannot reason about a speciﬁc
distractor class presented at inference. If the distractor class
is another hummingbird with a long beak, we would want
to avoid talking about the long beak in our justiﬁcation. On
the other hand, if the distractor class were a hummingbird
with a shorter beak and there do exist such hummingbirds,
then the long beak would be an important feature to men-
tion in a justiﬁcation. Clearly, this is non-trivial to realize
without explicitly modeling context. Hence, intuitively, one
would expect that incorporating context from the distractor
class should help the justiﬁcation task.
As explained previously, we implement our emitter-
suppressor inference (Eq. 3), on top of the vis-exp ap-
proach, yielding an vis-exp-IS approach. We sweep over
the values of λ on validation and ﬁnd that the best perfor-
mance is achieved at λ = 0.9. Plugging this value and eval-
uating on test, our vis-exp-IS approach achieves a CIDEr-D
Approach
CIDEr-D
vis-exp [16]
20.36 ± 0.16
vis-exp-IS (ours)
21.52 ± 0.17
Table 3: CUB-Justify test results: We compare vis-exp [16] and our
emitter-suppressor beam search implemented on top of vis-exp, namely
vis-exp-IS. We see that we can achieve gains over the vis-exp approach by
explicitly reasoning about context using our introspective speaker on the
justiﬁcation task. Error values are standard error of the mean.
score of 21.52 with a standard error of 0.17 (Table. 3). This
is an improvement of 1.16 CIDEr-D. Our gains over vis-exp
are lower than the gains on the IS(1) approach (reported
in Table. 1), presumably because the vis-exp approach al-
ready captures a lot of the context-independent discrimi-
native signals (e.g., long beak for a hummingbird), due to
policy gradient training. Overall though, these results pro-
vide further evidence that our emitter-suppressor inference
scheme can be adapted to a variety of context-agnostic cap-
tioning models, to effectively induce context awareness dur-
ing inference.
3. CUB Captioning Model Architecture
We explain some minor modiﬁcations to the “Show, At-
tend and Tell” [43] image captioning model to condition
it on the class label in addition to the image, for our ex-

periments on CUB. Note that the explanation in this sec-
tion is only for CUB – our COCO models are trained us-
ing the neuraltalk2 package1 which implements the “Show
and Tell” captioning model from Vinyals et al. [39]. Our
changes can be understood as three simple modiﬁcations
aimed to use class information in the model. We ﬁrst em-
bed the class label (1 out of 200 classes for CUB) into a
continuous vector k ∈RD, D = 512. The three changes
then, on top of the Show, Attend, and Tell model [43] are as
follows:
• Changes to initial LSTM state: The original Show,
Attend, and Tell model uses image annotation vectors
ai (i indexes spatial location), which are the outputs
from a convolutional feature map to compute the ini-
tial cell and hidden states of the long-short term mem-
ory (LSTM) (c0, h0). The image annotation vector is
averaged across spatial locations ¯a =
1
L
PL
i=1 ai and
used to compute the initial state as follows:
c0 = finit,c(¯a)
h0 = finit,h(¯a)
We modify this to also use the class embedding k to
predict the initial state of the LSTM, by concatenating
it with the averaged anntoation vector (¯a):
c0 = finit,c([¯a; k])
h0 = finit,h([¯a; k])
• Changes to the LSTM recurrence: “Show, Attend
and Tell” computes a scalar attention αti at each loca-
tion of the feature map and uses it to compute a context
vector at every timestep ˆzt = φ({αti, ai}) by attend-
ing on the image annotation ai. It also embeds an in-
put word yt using an embedding matrix E and uses
the previous hidden state ht to compute the following
LSTM recurrence at every timestep, producing outputs
it (input gate), ft (forget gate), ot (output gate), gt (in-
put) (Eqn. 1, 2, 3 from [43]):




it
ft
ot
gt



=




σ
σ
σ
tanh



T


Eyt
ht−1
ˆzt


(6)
ct = ft ⊙ct−1 + it ⊙gt
(7)
ht = ot ⊙tanh(ct)
(8)
We use the class embeddings k in addition to the con-
text vector ˆzt in Eqn. 1:




it
ft
ot
gt



=




σ
σ
σ
tanh



T ′




Eyt
ht−1
ˆzt
k




(9)
1https://github.com/karpathy/neuraltalk2
The remaining equations for the LSTM recurrence re-
main the same (Eqn. 2, 3).
• Adding class information to the deep output layer:
“Show, Attend and Tell” uses a deep output layer [30]
to compute the output word distribution at every
timestep, incorporating signals from the LSTM hidden
state ht, context vector ˆzt and the input word yt:
p(yt) ∝exp(Lo(Eyt + Lhht + Lzzt))
Here Lh, Lz are matrices used to project ht and zt
to the dimensions of the word embeddings Eyt and
Lo is the output layer which produces an output of
the size of the vocabulary. Similar to the previous two
adaptations, we use the class embedding k in addition
to the context vector ˆzt to predict the output at every
timestep:
p(yt) ∝exp(Lo(Eyt + Lhht + Lzzt + Lkk))
• Blind models: For implementing our class-only blind-
IS(λ) model, we need to train a model that only uses
the class to produce a sentence. For this, we drop the
attention component from the model, which is equiv-
alent to setting ˆzt and ˆ¯a to zero for all our equations
above and run the model using the class embedding k.
4. Optimization Details
Our CUB captioning network is trained using Rm-
sprop [36] with a batch size of 32 and a learning rate of
0.001.
We decayed the learning rate on every 5 epochs
of cycling through the training data. Our word embedding
E embeds words into a 512 dimensional vector and we set
LSTM hidden and cell state (h0, c0) sizes to 1800, similar to
the “Show, Attend, and Tell” model on COCO. The rest of
our design choices closely mirror the original work of [43],
based on their implementation available at https://
github.com/kelvinxu/arctic-captions.
We
will make our Tensorﬂow implementation of “Show, At-
tend, and Tell” publicly available.
5. Metrics for Justiﬁcation
In this section, we expand more on our discussion on the
choice of metrics for evaluating justiﬁcation (Sec. 4.1). In
addition to the metrics we report in the main paper, namely
CIDEr-D [37] and METEOR [5], we also considered using
the recently introduced SPICE [1]. The SPICE metric uses
a dependency parser to extract a scene graph representation
for the candidate and reference sentences and computes an
F-measure between the scene graph representations. Given
that the metric uses a dependency parser as an intermedi-
ate step, it is unclear how well it would scale to our justi-
ﬁcation task: some of the sentences from our model might
be good justiﬁcations but may not be exactly grammatical.

Approach
SPICE
IS(λ)
16.45 ± 0.12
semi-blind-IS(λ)
15.59 ± 0.12
RS(λ)
14.69 ± 0.12
IS(1)
14.74 ± 0.12
blind-IS(λ)
15.7 ± 0.12
Table 4: CUB-Justify validation results: SPICE scores (higher the better)
computed on validation set of CUB-Justify. Each model used its best λ
value. Error values are standard error of the mean. IS(λ) outperforms the
other methods by a good margin on SPICE.
This is because our discriminative justiﬁcations emerge as
a result of a tradeoff between high-likelihood sentences and
discrimination (Eq. 3). Note that this tradeoff is inherent
since we don’t have ground truth (well-formed) discrimina-
tive training data. Thus SPICE can be a problematic metric
to use in our context. However, for the sake of complete-
ness, we report SPICE numbers on validation, giving each
approach access to its best λ value, in Table. 4.
Although we outperform the baselines using the SPICE
metric, in some corner cases we also found the SPICE met-
ric scores to be slightly un-interpretable. For example, for
the candidate sentence “this bird has a speckled belly and
breast with a short pointy bill.”, and reference sentences
“This bird has a yellow eyebrow and grey auriculars”, “This
is a bird with yellow supercilium and white throat”, the
SPICE scores were higher than one would expect (0.30).
For reference, an intuitively more related sentence “this is
a grey and yellow bird with a yellow eyebrow.” obtains a
lower SPICE score of 0.28 for the same reference sentences.
Further investigation revealed that the relation F-measure,
which roughly measures if the two sentences encode the
same relations, had a high score in these corner cases. We
hypothesize that this inconcsistency in scores might be be-
cause SPICE uses soft similarity from WordNet for com-
puting the F-measure, which might not be calibrated for this
ﬁne-grained domain, with specialized words such as super-
cilium, auriculars etc. As a result of these observations,
we decided not to perform key evaluations with the SPICE
metric.
6. CUB-Justify Dataset Interface
We provide more details on the collection of the CUB-
Justify dataset (Sec. 4.1). We presented a target image from
a selected target class to the workers along with a set of
six distractor images, all belonging to one other distractor
class. The distractor images were chosen at random from
the validation, and test split of the CUB dataset we created
for justiﬁcation. Non-expert workers are unlikely to given
have an explicit visual model of a given ditractor category,
say Indigo Bunting. Thus the distractor images were shown
to entail the concept of the distractor class for justiﬁcation.
As explained in Sec. 4.1 the choice of the distractor classes
is made based on the hierarchy we induce using the folk
names of the birds. Given the target class, and the distrac-
tor class images, workers were asked to describe the target
image in a manner that the sentence is not confusing with
respect to the distractor images. Further, the workers were
instructed that someone who reads the sentence should be
able to recognize the target image, distinguishing it from
the set of distractor images. In order to get workers to pay
attention to all the images (and the intra-class invariances),
they were not told explicitly that the distractor images all
belonged to one other, unique, distractor class. For help-
ing identify minute difference between images of birds, as
well as enabling workers to write more accurate captions,
we also showed them a diagram of the morphology of a
bird (Fig. 10). We also showed them a list of some other
parts with examples not shown in the diagram, such as eye-
line, rump, eyering, etc. The list of these words as well as
examples, and the morphology diagram were picked based
on consultation with an ornithology hobbyist. The workers
were also explicitly instructed to describe only the target
image, in an accurate manner, mentioning details that are
present in the target image, as opposed to providing jusitiﬁ-
cations that talk about features that are absent.
The initial rounds of data collection revealed some inter-
esting corner cases that caused some ambiguity. For exam-
ple, some workers were confused whether a part of the bird
should be called gray or white, because it could appear gray
either because the part was white, and in shadow, or the part
was actually gray. After these initial rounds of feedback, we
proceeded to collect the entire dataset.
Figure 10: A diagram of the morphology of a bird, labeling different parts.
This diagram was shown to workers when getting justiﬁcations explaining
why the image contains a target class, and not a distractor class.
7. Reasoning Speaker Performance Analysis
In this section, we provide more details on how the
performance of our adaptation of Andreas, and Klein [2],

RS(0.3)
RS(0.5)
IS(0.3)10
RS(0.7)
15
17
19
0
20
40
60
80
100
CIDEr-D Score
Samples
Figure 11: We plot how the CIDEr-D score of the RS(λ) baseline (y-axis)
varies with the number of samples (x-axis) for different values of λ. We
see that for λ = 0.5, the performance of the RS(λ) method keeps increas-
ing with the number of samples, reaching the performance of our IS(λ)
approach at 100 samples. The IS(λ) method is shown for reference at a
beam size of 10. Thus our approach (IS(λ)) is able to give better results
for a lower computational cost.
namely the RS(λ) approach varies as we sweep over the
number of samples we draw from the model for λ = 0.3,
λ = 0.5, and λ = 0.7. We note that for λ = 0.5, the RS(λ)
approach approaches the best performance from our IS(λ)
approach as we draw 100 samples from the model (Fig. 11).
Interestingly, our IS(λ) model is only evaluated with a beam
size of 10. Thus our model is able to perform more efﬁcient
search for discriminative sentences than a sampling, and re-
ranking based approach like RS(λ). It is easy to note that,
in case we were willing to spend time to enumerate over all
exponentially-many sentences, we would ﬁnd the optimal
solution in worst case exponential time – most approximate
inference techniques in such a setting offer a time vs. op-
timality tradeoff. Our approach seems to ﬁt this tradeoff
better than the RS(λ) approach based on this empirical evi-
dence.
8. Comparison to a Trained Listener
In the main paper we showed comparisons to the RS(λ)
baseline with the same listener model as our approach,
which uses the log-likelihood ratio (Eq. 2) to assess discrim-
inativeness (and thus needs no further training). We did this
as an apples to apples comparison to systematically study
the beneﬁt of joint inference over the speaker and listener
as opposed to sampling and re-ranking.
For completeness, we report results here using a trained
listener following the architecture choices of [2] for the jus-
tiﬁcation task. We construct reasoning speaker RS(λ) with
this trained listener (RS(λ)-TL) and do sampling (sample
size 10) and re-ranking, based on log-odds from the listener
plugged into Eqn. 1, main paper. As reported in the main
paper, RS(λ)-TL gets to a best CIDEr-D of 16.2±0.3 on
CUB-Justify validation at λ = 0.5, which is lower than our
approach (semi-blind-IS(λ) gets to 18.4±0.2) – this illus-
trates the beneﬁt of joint inference.
For comparsion, we also evaluate against two other rea-
soning speaker approaches with different rankers (at λ = 0,
which only uses the listener, as opposed to listener+speaker,
to directly compare listeners for ranking): 1) introspector
(same as RS(0), main paper), and 2) a chance ranker (RS(0)-
R), which randomly scores a class for a sentence. We ﬁnd
that a trained listener (14.7±0.2) does marginally better
than RS(0) (13.9±0.2) which is in turn better than RS(0)-
R (13.4±0.2). Thus a trained listener does have marginal
impact on performance, but the larger factor affecting per-
formance is sampling, which our semi-blind-IS(λ) approach
is able to do more effectively.
