Strong Transitivity Relations and Graph Neural Networks
Yassin Mohamadi∗1 and Mostafa Haghir Chehreghani†1
1Department of Computer Engineering, Amirkabir University of Technology
(Tehran Polytechnic), Tehran, Iran
Abstract
Local neighborhoods play a crucial role in embedding generation in graph-based learning. It is
commonly believed that nodes ought to have embeddings that resemble those of their neighbors.
In this research, we try to carefully expand the concept of similarity from nearby neighborhoods
to the entire graph. We provide an extension of similarity that is based on transitivity relations,
which enables Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to capture both global similarities and local
similarities over the whole graph. We introduce Transitivity Graph Neural Network (TransGNN),
which more than local node similarities, takes into account global similarities by distinguishing
strong transitivity relations from weak ones and exploiting them. We evaluate our model over
several real-world datasets and showed that it considerably improves the performance of several
well-known GNN models, for tasks such as node classification.
Keywords
Graph neural networks, node embedding, node similarity, transitivity relations,
strong transitivity relations.
1
Intoduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs), pioneered by Gori et al.
[1] and Scarselli et al. [2], have
experienced a surge in popularity, inspired by subsequent works by Duvenaud et al. [3], Atwood
and Towsley [4], Bronstein et al. [5], and Monti et al. [6]. This popularity can be attributed to
GNNs’ adaptability and efficiency in learning from data structured as graphs, proving essential in
domains where data can be naturally organized into nodes, and predictions rely on the complex
relationships (edges) inter-linking these nodes.
Their versatility finds applications in diverse
fields such as molecular chemistry [7], social networks [8], and recommendation systems [9].
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [10], introduced by Kipf and Welling in 2017, present
an efficient adaptation of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [11] for graph data.
This
model involves stacking layers of first-order spectral filters, succeeded by a non-linear activation
function, facilitating the acquisition of graph representations [10]. Within the GNN framework,
the core concept revolves around iteratively updating node states through interactions with their
neighbors. Different GNN iterations, proposed by Wu et al. [12], Xu et al. [13], Li et al. [14],
and others, present distinct strategies for aggregating neighboring representations alongside their
own. One of the key developments in this field is the Graph Attention Network (GAT), proposed

1
arXiv:2401.01384v1  [cs.SI]  1 Jan 2024

by Velickovic et al. [15] Instead of using conventional methods like averaging or max-pooling
to aggregate information from neighbors of each node in a graph, GAT allows each node to
selectively focus on the most relevant neighbors for its representation update, thus transforming
the way information is processed in graphs. This method is further refined by efforts such as
GATv2 [16].
The Simplifying Graph Convolutional Network (SGC) [12] leverages a simplified approach,
emphasizing the importance of model simplicity and interpretability in GNNs [21]. It uses a novel
Laplacian graph convolution operation that streamlines GCNs. This approach simplifies spectral
convolutions by approximating them with a more computationally efficient quadratic formula-
tion. SGC achieves comparable performance to traditional GCNs while reducing computational
complexity and parameter count [12]. The Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN) [13] addresses
graph isomorphism through a deep neural network architecture that iteratively updates node
representations while capturing global graph features.
All of the previously discussed GNNs focus on learning embeddings for nodes, edges, or
graphs by leveraging the presence of connections between nodes, which means they consider one
level (and an specific type of) similarity in the graph.
In our exploration, the contributions
of [17,18] are instrumental in the introduction of a collection of GNNs, rooted in the extension
of the Weisfeiler-Leman test [19]. Their primary endeavor centers on broadening the network of
connections between nodes, extending the boundaries beyond immediate neighbors to encompass
non-immediate neighbors. However, their approach predominantly emphasizes a particular type
of similarity, computed based on a local neighborhood of each node, referred as local neighbor-
hood similarity.
In this study, our primary aim is to explore a different category of connections and similarit-
ies that extend beyond the realm of local similarities. Drawing from the concepts of transitivity
and counter-similarity, we introduce a new dimension to similarity in GNNs that reaches bey-
ond neighborhood-based similarities. As a result, we introduce two distinct levels of transitivity
within a graph: strong transitivity and weak transitivity. Strong transitivity is characterized
by the presence of numerous connecting paths between two nodes, while weak transitivity is
observed when there are few connecting paths between the nodes. This categorization allows us
to capture and distinguish various types of transitivity relations in the graph. In this paper, we
demonstrate that strong transitivity holds promise for expanding the notion of node similarity
within graph neural networks. It captures global similarities that permeate the entire graph
within GNNs. Building upon the basic assumption that connected nodes tend to share labels
and embeddings, we extend standard loss functions to explore how strong transitivity relations
influence label sharing and embedding similarity between nodes. To simultaneously incorporate
both real connections (edges) and strong transitivities, we employ a bipartite GNN that focuses
on real edges and strong transitivity relations. We create a transitivity graph based on transit-
ivity relations, where the edges in the transitivity graph reflect the transitivity relations in the
original graph. To extract strong transitivity relations from the transitivity graph, we apply a
clustering algorithm with the objective of minimizing inter-cluster edges and maximizing intra-
cluster edges. In this way, our bipartite GNN model is augmented with both the original graph
and the transitive graph1.
Our research offers some advancements in the field of graph neural networks:
• Extension of the concept of node similarity: the concept of node similarity is carefully
expanded to include and span the full graph.
With this expansion, we may obtain a
more thorough knowledge of the graph by capturing and utilizing structural patterns and
1The implementation of our proposed method is publicly available athttps://github.com/yassinmihemedi/
Strong-transitivity-relations-and-Graph-neural-network
2

relationships on a global scale. We present a novel GNN that takes into account both non-
local and local neighborhood similarities. Based on strong transitivity and local similarity,
this method improves the network’s capacity to extract and utilize both global and local
structural information in the graph, hence enhancing its performance in a variety of graph-
based tasks.
• Transitivity levels: In our work, we distinguish between two types of transitivity: strong
and weak. We argue that only strong transitivity relations contribute to nodes’ similarity
and as a result, to embeddings’ similarity.
We perform extensive experiments over several real-world datasets and show that our model can
be successfully aligned with different GNN models, namely GCN [10], GAT [15], GATv2 [16] and
SGN [12], to improve their performance. Moreover, our method makes basic GNN models more
resilient to noise.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide an overview on related
work. In Section 3, we present preliminaries and definitions used in the paper. In Section 4, we
present our transitivity-aware graph neural model. We empirically evaluate the performance of
our proposed model in Section 5. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 6.
2
Related work
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have gained significant attention in recent years due to their
capability to model and analyze graph-structured data. The field of GNNs has seen substan-
tial growth, with various architectural advancements and applications emerging. In one of early
attempts, Kipf and Max Welling [10] introduce the concept of Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCNs). GCNs try to capture complex relationships within graphs through spectral graph con-
volutional operations. However, they suffer from the scalability issue when dealing with large
datasets due to the computational complexity of spectral-based convolutions [12]. The graph
convolution process is streamlined by Simplified Graph Convolutional Networks (SGCs), which
enhances their efficiency and preserves their expressive power [12]. Graph Attention Networks
(GATs), introduced by Velickovic et al. [15], provide a novel approach to capture local patterns
through adaptive attention mechanisms. GATs use attention coefficients to weigh the import-
ance of neighboring nodes during information aggregation. Graph Attention Networks version2
(GATv2) further advance attention mechanisms for improved neighborhood aggregation [16]. It
introduces a more flexible mechanism, improving its capability to capture complex relationships
within graphs while allowing for better scalability. This flexibility in attention mechanisms en-
ables GATv2 to adaptively emphasize the contributions of different neighbors during aggregation.
The expressive power of GNNs received a significant boost with the emergence of Graph
Isomorphism Networks (GINs) by Xu et al. [13]. In this work, the authors argue that a GNN
achieves its maximal power when it is equivalent to the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) test [19]. They
prove that a GNN reaches this level if and only if its function that maps a multiset of previous-
layer embeddings to a single embedding is injective. For more comprehensive reviews on graph
neural networks, interested readers may refer to [20,21].
Another related line of research pertains to graph matching, a fundamental problem in graph
theory. Graph matching involves establishing correspondence between nodes in two graphs [22].
Siamese networks, initially popularized for image similarity tasks [23], are now adapted for graph
matching. Siamese networks learn to project graph representations into a shared space, where
distances correspond to the similarity or dissimilarity between graphs [24,25]. Moreover, research
in graph similarity computation has advanced the understanding of how to quantify the similarity
3

between two graphs. Siamese networks, in this context, is employed to learn similarity metrics
for graphs [24]. These networks learn to produce embeddings that represent graph structures,
allowing for direct computation of similarity scores [26].
3
Preliminaries
A graph can be formally defined as a tuple G = (V, E, X), where V , E and X are respectively
the set of nodes, the set of edges and nodes’ feature vectors.
We can represent the nodes,
edges and nodes’ features by matrices, where A ∈(0, 1)|V |×|V | is the adjacency matrix, and
X ∈R|V |×d is the feature matrix. A (single-layer) graph neural network is a function F that
maps a graph with feature matrix X and adjacency matrix A to a new feature matrix Z. In
other words, F : (A, X) →Z, where Z ∈R|V |×d′. Let Hl ∈R|V |×dl be the matrix of nodes’
representations (embeddings) at layer l, hl
i be the representation vector of node i at layer l, and
dl be its corresponding dimension. We can define the update rule of GNNs at each layer as
follows:
hl+1
i
= σ
 sumj∈N(i)
 W lhl
j + bl
,
(1)
where N(i) denotes the set of neighbors of node i, σ is an activation function (e.g., ReLU,
sigmoid), and W l and bl are respectively the trainable weight matrix and the bias vector at layer
l. The sum operator can be replaced with any other aggregation functions, such as max pooling,
mean pooling, or an attention mechanism [27]. Equation 1 is also known as "message passing".
4
Method
In this section, we go through the details of our proposed method to improve graph neural
networks. First, we introduce the intuition behind our method. Then, we discuss its different
components, including the construction of the transitivity graph and loss functions.
4.1
Motivation
In the classification of nodes of a graph, a common and reasonable assumption is that two nodes
i and j share the same label if they are structurally similar. We can concentrate on a simple
notion of node similarity in the graph space and assume that two nodes i and j are similar if
and only if they are connected by an edge. As a result, we can have this following assumption:
Assumption 1. If nodes i and j are connected, they will have the same label.
When dealing with a connected undirected graph, Assumption 1 implies that all nodes of the
graph would possess the same label. Since this is not the case for real-world graphs, Assumption
1 is not totally valid. As a result, two important questions arise, are:
• Question 1. When does Assumption 1 hold?
• Question 2. How can we leverage Assumption 1 to enhance GNN performance in cases
where it holds?
To answer Question 1, first we assume that similarity satisfies the transitivity property,
which propagates similarity and as a result co-labeling in the graph. More precisely, if node
i is similar to node j and node j is similar to node k, then node i becomes similar to node
k. Furthermore, nodes i and j and k find the same label. This transitivity property, in its
4

naive form, leads to all nodes finding the same label. To address this issue, we consider two
levels of transitivity: strong transitivity and weak transitivity; and assume that only strong
transitivity leads to label propagation. On the other hand, edges that reflect weak transitivity
do not significantly contribute in label propagation.
Definition 1. We define there is a strong transitivity between two nodes in a graph, if these two
conditions are met: i) there is a significant number of paths connecting them, and ii) they share
similar structural characteristics. For the sake of simplicity, we refer to the first condition as
the "Significant Number of Paths Connecting" condition, or SNPC in short; and to the second
condition as the "Similar Structural Characteristics" condition or SSC in short. Conversely, two
nodes demonstrate weak transitivity when there are few or no paths connecting them, or they are
structurally dissimilar.
To answer the second question, we begin by examining Equation 1. According to Equation
1, each node’s embedding is influenced by its local neighbors. To improve the performance of
GNNs, it is crucial to take into account both local and global similarities within the network.
Local similarity pertains to how nodes are similar to their immediate neighbors, while global
similarity involves how nodes exhibit similarity across the entire graph due to strong transitivity
principles. Therefore to do so, first we extract strong transitivity relations. Next, we incorporate
both local edge information and global strong transitivity into GNN models. The foundation of
GNNs is based on the idea that connected nodes in the graph should find similar embeddings.
We seek to expand this idea by examining nodes related by strong transitivity also have shared
labels or embeddings. Our idea to find strong transitivity relations in the graph is based on
building a transitivity graph and clustering it.
4.2
Transitivity graph construction
In this section, we elucidate the process of creating the transitivity graph and address any
potential challenges that may occur during this procedure.
As previously discussed, in our
efforts to improve the performance of GNNs, we aim to extract strong transitivity relations from
the original graph. This modified graph is referred to as the "transitivity graph". Before delving
into our method for extracting transitivity relations from the original graph, it is essential to
elucidate the rationale behind the creation of the transitivity graph. Our first objective is to
harness the combined potential of both real connections between nodes and transitivity relations
that exists among them. Secondly, if we were to forgo the creation of the transitivity graph and
instead directly apply the transitivity concept to the original graph, this approach would not only
entail a straightforward structural expansion but could also exert a detrimental influence on the
genuine connections or edges within the original graph. This distinction becomes evident when
considering Equation 1. It suggests that when we combine transitivity connections with real edges
in the original graph, they appear to have the same impact on the embedding. However, it’s clear
that the influence of real connections should be distinct from that of transitivity connections.
To extract strong transitivity relations, we rely on the construction a transitivity graph.
This graph must satisfy both the SSC condition and the SNPC condition: i) the transitiv-
ity graph should aptly represent node similarities, and ii) it should effectively convey strong
transitivity relations from the original graph. As previously highlighted, in order to prevent
interference with the genuine connections and strong transitivity relations, it is imperative that
the edges/connections existing in the original graph are absent in the transitivity graph. Edges
within the transitivity graph should reflect strong transitivity relations in the original graph.
As a result, nodes are identical in both the original and transitivity graphs, but nodes that are
connected by an edge in the original graph should not be connected in the transitivity graph.
5

In essence, the edges present in the original graph should be deliberately excluded from the
transitivity graph. Altogether, we build the transitivity graph as follows:
• Its nodes are the same as the nodes of the original graph.
• Two nodes are connected in the transitivity graph if all the following conditions are satisfied:
i) they exhibit a level of structural similarity (e.g., SimRank score) in the original graph
exceeding a defined minimum threshold, and ii) they are not connected to each other in
the original graph.
It is easy to see that in this way, condition SSC is satisfied. To additionally meet the SNPC
condition, we apply a clustering algorithm to the transitivity graph so that while its intra-cluster
edges are preserved, its inter-cluster edges are eliminated. In the following, we explain why this
heuristic method keeps strong transitivity relations and discards weak transitivity relations. Our
argument is based this reasonable assumption that if nodes v and w belong to the same cluster
v is connected to w’s neighbors; and if v and u do not belong to the same cluster, v is not
connected to u’s neighbors.
Assume that in the transitivity graph, node v is connected to nodes w and u, such that
v and w belong to the same cluster but v and u do not. As a result and by clustering the
graph, while the link between v and w, i.e., {v, w}, is preserved, the link between v and u,
i.e., {v, u}, is discarded. We argue that {v, w} represents a strong transitivity relation, whereas
{v, u} indicates a weak transitivity relation. Therefore by clustering the transitivity graph, weak
transitivity relations of the original graph are eliminated from the transitivity graph. Since the
number of paths contribute positively to most of structural similarity measures (SimRank [28],
personalized PageRank [29,30]etc), two nodes that find a structural similarity above a threshold
are likely to have a certain number of paths connecting them. As a result, each edge in the
transitivity graph implies the existence of a certain number of paths between its endpoints in
the original graph. Let w1, . . . , wc be the neighbors of w, and u1, . . . , uc′ be the neighbors of u.
Since v and w belong to the same cluster, v has edges to w1, . . . , wc. On the other hand, since v
and u do not belong to the same cluster, v does not have edges to u1, . . . , uc′. Therefore, more
than {v, w}, each pair of edges {v, wi} and {wi, w} implies the existence of a certain number of
paths between v and w in the original graph. However, since v is not connected to the neighbors
of u, pairs {v, ui} and {ui, u} do not imply the existence of a certain number of paths between
v and u in the original graph. Thus, it is likely that v and w that belong to the same cluster in
the transitivity graph, have much more paths between them in the original graph than v and u
that do not belong to the same cluster in the transitivity graph.
4.3
Loss function
In graph neural networks, using both supervised and unsupervised loss functions is common. In
a supervised loss function, nodes’ real labels are available and embeddings are learned such that
nodes real labels become similar to their predicted labels, obtained using the learned embeddings.
In an unsupervised loss function, embeddings are learned so that nodes that are similar to each
other in the graph, find similar embeddings in the vector space. Formally, the supervised loss
function of graph G is defined as follows:
£sup
G
= −
X
v∈VT (G)
C
X
c=1
lv,c log(yv,c),
(2)
where VT (G) is the set of training nodes in graph G, C is the number of classes, lv,c is the real label
(probability) of belonging node v to class c and yv,c is the predicted label (probability), according
6

to the structure of G. Similarly, we define the supervised loss function of the transitivity graph
G′ as follows:
£sup
G′ = −
X
v∈VT (G′)
C
X
c=1
lv,c log(y′
v,c),
(3)
where VT (G′) is the set of training nodes in G′ and y′
v,c is the predicted label (probability),
according to the structure of G′.
In order to devise a unified loss function that effectively accounts for both the relationships
within the original graph and those revealed by the transitivity graph, which signifies strong
transitivity in the original graph, we introduce the following general loss function:
£sup = AGG£(£sup
G
, £sup
G′ ),
(4)
where AGG£ is an aggregation operator, aggregating the two loss functions.
In this paper,
we use sum as the aggregation operator of loss functions. As a result, we obtain the following
supervised loss function:
£sup = £sup
G
+ £sup
G′ .
(5)
The unsupervised loss function is formally defined as follows:
£unsup
G
= −
X
v∈VT (G)
X
u∈NG(v)
−log(σ(zT
v zu) −
Q
X
q=1
Evq∼Pq(v) log(σ(−zT
v zvq)),
(6)
where NG(v) is defined as the set of nodes that are considered to be similar to v in G. For
example, it can be the set of nodes that are connected to v in G, or the set of nodes that are met
during some fixed-length random walks starting from v. Vector zv is the embedding of v, σ is the
sigmoid function, Pq is the negative sampling distribution over nodes of G and Q is the number
of negative samples. In a similar way, the unsupervised loss function of transitivity graph G′ is
defined as follows:
£unsup
G′
= −
X
v∈VT (G′)
X
u∈NG′(v)
−log(σ(zT
v zu) −
Q
X
q=1
Evq∼P ′q(v) log(σ(−zT
v zvq)),
(7)
where NG′(v) is the set of nodes that are similar to v in G′ and P ′
q is the negative sampling
distribution over nodes of G′.
Similar to the case of supervised loss function, we define the
general unsupervised loss function, as follows:
£unsup = £unsup
G
+ £unsup
G′
.
(8)
Note that on the one hand, £unsup
G
tries to compute similar embeddings for nodes that are
connected to each other in the original graph. On the other hand, it aims to compute similar
embeddings for nodes that are connected to each other in the transitivity graph and as a result,
have strong transitivity relations in the original graph.
In this way, both local connections
and strong transitivity relations are captured by £unsup
G
. Using reasonable assumptions, similar
arguments can be developed for the functionality of the supervised loss function.
4.4
Our proposed model
Our proposed model utilizes the aforementioned loss functions to generate embeddings specifically
tailored for downstream tasks. Given that we are working with two distinct graphs – the original
7

graph and the transitivity graph – we require a bipartite GNN capable of effectively handling both
graphs and generating meaningful embeddings. Motivated by the fusion of Siamese networks
[23] and graph matching networks [22], we introduce a novel bipartite graph neural network
architecture with shared weights.
Siamese networks are renowned for their ability to learn
similarity between pairs of inputs, while graph matching networks excel at handling complex
matching tasks. By incorporating both concepts, our proposed approach aims to leverage their
strengths and create a more powerful and versatile network.
Our proposed bipartite graph neural network consists of two parallel branches, each dedicated
to processing one input from the pair of graphs G (the original graph) and G′ (the transitivity
graph). The objective of these branches is to extract meaningful embeddings or representations
that capture the essential characteristics of the respective inputs. To accomplish this, the bi-
partite graph neural network leverages shared weights, ensuring that the same set of weights is
utilized across both branches. This weight sharing mechanism encourages the network to learn
and emphasize common patterns/not common patterns and similarities/dissimilarities between
the input objects. Our relations to update nodes’ embeddings are as follows:
hl+1
(G,i) = σ

X
j∈NG(i)
W lhl
(G,j) + bl


(9)
hl+1
(G′,i) = σ


X
j∈NG′(i)
W lhl
(G′,j) + bl

,
(10)
where hl
(G,i) and hl
(G′,i) are respectively layer-l embeddings of node i in graphs G and G′, and
W l and bl are trainable parameters. As the input graphs G and G′ are processed through their
respective branches, each branch produces an embedding that captures the salient features of
the corresponding object. By utilizing shared weights and processing the inputs in parallel, our
bipartite graph neural network can effectively capture and encode the inherent similarities/real
connections and strong transitivity between the objects in the pair. Throughout the training
process, the weights of the bipartite graph neural network are updated using the loss function in
Equation 4, which is simultaneously associated with both the original graph and the transitivity
graph.
Algorithm 1 Transitivity-aware GNN
Input: Graph G(V, E, X), the number of layers L.
Output: Matrix H whose i-th row includes the embedding of node i.
1: H ←∅.
2: G′ ←transitivity graph of G.
3: G′′ ←cluster G′.
4: for l : 1 to L do
5:
for i in V do
6:
hl
(G,i) ←update the embedding of node i according to Equation 9.
7:
hl
(G′′,i) ←update the embedding of node i according to Equation 10.
8:
Hi = hl
(G,i).
9: return H.
Algorithm 1 presents the high level pseudocode of our node embedding generation method,
called Transitivity GNN, or TransGNN in short. It first creates the transitivity graph from the
8

original graph. Then it feeds both the original graph and its transitivity graph into a graph
neural network, following the principles elucidated in Equations 9 and 10. The SSC condition
of strong transitivity relations is satisfied in Line 2, where in G′ we selectively preserve those
edges that the structural similarity of their endpoints in the original graph exceeds a user-defined
threshold. To satisfy the SNPC condition, we apply a graph clustering algorithm, as depicted
in Line 3 of Algorithm 1. In Lines 6 and 7 of Algorithm 1, we learn embeddings for both the
original graph and the clustered transitivity graph, where the trainable weight parameters are
shared. However, we return the embeddings learned for the nodes of G, as the final embeddings.
In other words, the impact of learning over the transitivity graph is to improve the weights of
the model that learns embeddings for the original graph. The learned embeddings can be used
for a downstream task, such as node classification.
5
Experiments
Given that our proposed model is adaptable to different GNN models, our evaluation involves
comparisons between a number of well-known GNN models, with and without improving them
by our method. To do so, we analyze the performance of GCN [10], GAT [15], GATv2 [16] and
SGC [12], with and without the application of our method.
5.1
Datasets
We use the following famous datasets in our comparisons:
Citation networks
2 We examine three citation networks–Cora, Citeseer, and Pubmed–following
the work of Sen et al. [32]. These datasets comprise sparsely represented bag-of-words feature
vectors for each document, accompanied by a roster of citation connections among the docu-
ments.
United States Air-traffic network
3 This data is compiled from the bureau of transportation
statistics, spanning January to October 2016. Airport activity is quantified by the cumulative
count of individuals who transited (including arrivals and departures) through the airport during
the corresponding timeframe [33]. Node attributes are represented using one-hot encoding of the
respective nodes [34].
Twitch social
4
This dataset includes networks of user interactions in which nodes represent
Twitch users connected by mutual friendships.
Node attributes encompass preferred games,
geographic location, and streaming patterns [35].
Within this dataset, there are six distinct
graph collections: DE, EN, ES, FR, PT, and RU. However, we exclusively focus on the PT
graph for our evaluation .
Network of Actor Co-occurrences
5
This dataset presents an actor-centric subset extracted
from the film-director-actor-writer network [36].
Each node represents an actor, with edges
connecting nodes that co-occur on Wikipedia pages. Node attributes capture specific keywords
2https://github.com/kimiyoung/planetoid/tree/master/data
3https://github.com/leoribeiro/struc2vec/tree/master/graph
4https://graphmining.ai/datasets/ptg/twitch/
5https://github.com/bingzhewei/geom-gcn/tree/master/new_data
9

from Wikipedia entries. We categorize nodes into five classes based on the terminology found in
the corresponding actor’s Wikipedia content.
Table 1 summarizes the statistics of our used datasets.
Table 1: Dataset statistics.
Dataset
nodes
edge
feature
class
Train/Dev/Test nodes
Cora
2708
10556
1433
7
140/500/1000
Citeseer
3327
9104
3703
6
120/500/1000
Pubmed
19717
88648
500
3
60/500/1000
Airport(usa)
1190
13599
1190
4
65/119/595
Actor
7600
30019
932
5
418/760/3800
Twitch PT
1912
64510
128
2
105/191/956
Table 2: The number of edges in the transitivity graphs of our used datasets.
Dataset
# edge
Threshold
Cora
2610
0.4
Citeseer
3554
0.5
Pubmed
80498
0.4
Airport(usa)
1496
0.5
Actor
39844
0.88
Twitch PT
2158
0.09
5.2
Implementation details
To implement our TransGNN model, which entails incorporating a transitivity graph into existing
GNN models, we follow the subsequent steps:
Step 1
To acquire the transitivity graph, specifically the SSC condition of strong transitivity
relations, we calculate node similarities using the SimRank algorithm [28]. Then, we construct
a transitivity graph where nodes that are unconnected to each other in the original graph but
expose a similarity value higher than a predefined threshold, are connected (Line 2 of Algorithm
1). Table 2 displays for each dataset the corresponding threshold value, which is determined
through a hyperparameter tuning process using a greedy search. It also depicts the number of
edges that the transitivity graph finds in this way. Note that in terms of statistics, the sole
difference between the transitivity graph and the original graph lies in the number of their edges;
the other attributes such as the number of nodes, features, and classes remain the same. A
noteworthy observation in Table 2 is that the number of edges in the transitivity graph closely
aligns with the number of edges in the original graph.
Step 2
As previously discussed, we employ a graph clustering algorithm to fulfill the SNPC
condition.
we employ the Metis algorithm [31], drawing inspiration from the approach used
in [37]. The Metis algorithm aims to minimize the number of edges between clusters.
Every model comprises two GNN layers and as stated in Section 4.3, we opt for the cross-
entropy loss function [38]. Moreover, we use addition as the aggregation operator of the loss
functions 5 and 8. We set the learning rate and hidden dimension to 0.01 and 32, respectively,
10

and employ the Adam optimizer [39]. For the GAT and GATv2 models, we set the number of
attention heads to 8. For the SGN model, we set the parameter K to 1 [12]. Our parameters
configuration aligns with the setting outlined in the work of Yang et al [40].
5.3
Results
We run each model for 100 times and report the average results (along with the standard devi-
ations) in Tables 3 and 4. Table 3 displays the accuracy of the models, while Table 4 presents
the weighted F1 scores. To compute the weighted F1 score, we calculate precision and recall
for each class and compute their average by weighting them with support, which represents the
number of true instances of the class. In Tables 3 and 4, each GNN model that incorporates our
proposed method is denoted with "TransGNN", while its original form without using our method
is denoted with "GNN". For instance, while "SGC" indicates the original SGC model without
our proposed enhancement, "TransSGC" denotes the enhanced SGC model using our proposed
transitivity graph technique.
Table 3: Accuracy comparison of GNN models improved by our transitivity graph technique,
against their original forms. In each case, the better model is highlighted in bold.
Model
Cora
Citeseer
Pubmed
Airport(USA)
Actor
Twitch PT
GCN
81.1 ± 0.2
69.9 ± 0.2
79.3 ± 0.1
38.1 ± 0.4
24.7 ± 0.15
61.4 ± 0.3
TransGCN
85.1 ± 0.3
74.1 ± 0.12
80.7 ± 0.2
41.8 ± 0.6
28.2 ± 0.4
63.7 ± 0.17
GAT
82.0 ± 0.6
67.5 ± 0.7
78.1 ± 0.9
46.0 ± 0.5
25.2 ± 0.6
63.3 ± 0.7
TransGAT
84.3 ± 0.15
72.7 ± 0.4
81.4 ±0.5
49.2 ± 0.6
29.9 ± 0.4
64.2 ± 0.42
GATv2
79.8 ± 0.4
68.2 ± 0.22
77.9 ± 0.35
47.5 ± 0.12
25.2 ±0.1
63.3 ± 0.37
TransGATv2
83.4 ± 0.8
72.9± 0.54
78.9 ± 0.2
52.6 ± 0.22
29.7 ±0.25
67.1 ± 0.33
SGC
81.2 ± 0.1
70.1 ± 0.12
78.7 ± 0.3
38.8 ± 0.17
24.7 ± 0.1
61.5 ± 0.15
TransSGC
84.3 ± 0.3
75.0 ± 0.15
81.3 ± 0.1
44.4 ± 0.15
27.6 ±0.1
63.5 ± 0.2
Table 4: Comparing weighted F1 scores of the enhanced GNN models, against the original forms.
In each case, the better model is highlighted in bold.
model
Cora
Citeseer
Pubmed
Airport(usa)
Actor
Twitch PT
GCN
0.811 ± 0.01
0.703 ± 0.03
0.789 ± 0.01
0.326 ± 0.05
0.239 ± 0.01
0.596 ± 0.02
TransGCN
0.851 ± 0.02
0.742 ± 0.025
0.806 ± 0.01
0.386 ± 0.03
0.281 ± 0.02
0.613 ± 0.02
GAT
0.823 ± 0.03
0.690 ± 0.05
0.780 ± 0.035
0.385 ± 0.032
0.156 ± 0.01
0.533 ± 0.05
TransGAT
0.845 ± 0.06
0.723 ± 0.03
0.801 ± 0.02
0.501 ± 0.025
0.214 ± 0.03
0.674 ± 0.03
GATv2
0.811 ± 0.01
0.689 ± 0.03
0.778 ± 0.03
0.431 ± 0.05
0.241 ± 0.04
0.491 ± 0.05
TransGATv2
0.831 ± 0.03
0.728 ± 0.07
0.786 ± 0.02
0.498 ± 0.03
0.263 ± 0.04
0.633 ± 0.02
SGN
0.812 ± 0.02
0.693 ± 0.01
0.786 ± 0.01
0.324 ± 0.01
0.232 ± 0.01
0.590 ± 0.02
TransSGN
0.850 ± 0.02
0.750 ± 0.01
0.812 ± 0.01
0.466 ± 0.05
0.259 ± 0.02
0.643 ± 0.035
In Tables 3 and 4, for each GNN model and over each dataset, between the original GNN and
its enhanced form, the one that yields a better result is highlighted in bold. It is evident from the
tables that our proposed method has led to significant performance improvements in the basic
models. These enhancements are notable, ranging from 1% to 14% across the various datasets
we assessed. This improvement highlights the efficacy of our proposed approach in bolstering
the capabilities of various GNN models, across diverse data scenarios.
11

5.4
Robustness analysis
An interesting question about the performance of a GNN model is its robustness against noise.
In this section, we examine how robust is our model against noises in the forms of edges added
and edges removed from the input graph. More precisely, by adding some edges we induce noise
to the input graph, train the model on this noisy graph and test the model on the original graph.
We perform the same procedure with removing some edges from the input graph. We conduct
this robustness analysis over the three citation networks. We examine different number of edges
added/removed, ranging from 0% to 50% of the number of original edges in the graph.
As
depicted in Figure 1, the models enhanced with our proposed technique show a better resilience
than the basic models, in terms of accuracy, throughout the process of adding or removing edges.
Additionally, the enhanced models showcase less performance fluctuation compared to the basic
models, across most of the datasets.
In general in our experiments, adding edges shows more fluctuations than removing edges. A
reason for this phenomenon can be the way we construct the transitivity graph: the input graph
and its transitivity are mutually exclusive, with the edges present in the input graph being absent
in the transitivity graph, and vice versa. Adding edges to the input graph limits the number
of potential choices for the transitivity graph. Therefore, it increases the likelihood of having
shared edges between the transitivity of the original graph and the transitivity of the noisy
graph. However, as discussed in Section 4.2, it’s important to note that the original graph and
the transitivity graph should not share any edges in common. Inversely, removing edges from
the original graph expands the spectrum of choices available to the transitivity graph, which
mitigates the potential of having shared edges between the transitivity of the original graph and
the transitivity of the noisy graph.
5.5
Ablation study
In this section, we examine the impact of using different loss functions and assess how they affect
the performance of our proposed model. In our analysis, we consider the following loss functions:
• embedding-associated loss function: the loss function used by an original GNN model to
compute embeddings based on the original graph. We refer to it as "loss".
• transitivity loss function: the loss function used over the transitivity graph. We refer to it
as "trans_loss".
• similarity-based loss function: this loss function is defined as 1−cosine similarity between
embeddings from the original graph and the transitivity graph. We refer to as "sim_loss".
The intuition behind this loss function is to heighten and emphasize the similarity/difference
between the embeddings of the original graph and the embeddings of the transitivity graph.
Note that 1−cosine similarity measures the amount of dissimilarity/distance between the
embeddings. By incorporating ’sim_loss’, our proposed model becomes more adept at cap-
turing the intuitive similarity between the original graph and the transitivity graph and
as a result, nodes’ similarities modeled by the transitivity graph. By employing this loss
function, we can effectively account for various levels of similarity within the original graph,
as previously discussed.
Figure 2 illustrates the accuracy comparison between our proposed model and the corres-
ponding basic model, across three datasets: Cora, Airport(USA) and Twitch PT. We explore
various combinations for the three discussed loss functions. Specifically, we investigate the effects
of the following combinations:
12

(a) removing edges - GCN
(b) adding edges - GCN
(c) removing edges - GAT
(d) adding edges - GAT
(e) removing edges - GATv2
(f) adding edges - GATv2
(g) removing edges - SGC
(h) adding edges - SGC
Figure 1: GNNs enhanced with our proposed method are more resilient to noise (edge addition
and edge removal), than the basic GNNs. The vertical axes show accuracy and the horizontal
axes present the percentage of edges added or removed.
1. "loss + trans_loss - sim_loss": we observe that this combination consistently outperforms
the others, indicating that the joint inclusion of "trans_loss" and "sim_loss" in addition
to the base function "loss" contribute positively to similarity-level measurement and to the
overall accuracy. This implies that "sim_loss", while not effectively capturing the level of
similarities on its own, can enhance the impact of "trans_loss" when combined with the
base loss function.
13

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
Figure 2: Accuracy comparison of our proposed model against the original models across different
aggregations of loss functions on Cora, Airport (USA), and Twitch PT. In this context, "loss"
refers to the loss function associated with the embedding of the original graph, "trans_loss"
refers to the loss related to the embedding of the transitivity graph, and "sim_loss" deals with
the cosine similarity (calculated as 1−cosine similarity) between the embeddings of the original
and transitivity graph.
2. "loss + trans_loss + sim_loss": Similar to the previous combination, when we add "sim_loss"
to "trans_loss" and the base loss, it results in better outcomes. This highlights the positive
impact of "sim_loss" in measuring similarity levels when combined with other relevant loss
components.
3. "loss + trans_loss": This combination notably enhances the performance of "loss". Nev-
ertheless, the absence of "sim_loss" in this combination appears to restrict its ability to
14

capture the complete spectrum of similarity levels.
4. "loss + sim_loss": Interestingly, in many scenarios, this combination doesn’t yield signi-
ficant gains over "loss". This suggests that "sim_loss" on its own might not be a robust
indicator of the level of similarities, especially when compared to the benefits derived from
the joint usage of "trans_loss" and "sim_loss".
In Figure 2, it is important to note that the base models exclusively use "loss", without in-
tegrating it with any other loss functions. This means that in each setting, we run both our
proposed model and its corresponding base model for several times, where the base model only
employs the "loss" function. The results reported in Figure 2 are the averages of these mul-
tiple runs. In summary, our experiments demonstrate that the integration of "trans_loss" and
"sim_loss" with the base "loss" assesses strong transitivity relations in the original graph, more
effectively. Consequently, this integration leads to an enhancement in overall accuracy. This
combination not only strengthens our model but also provides a more comprehensive repres-
entation of both real connections and strong transitivity relations. Furthermore, it takes into
consideration the nuances of similarity levels within the graph, ultimately leading to improved
accuracy and performance.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we demonstrated and highlighted the significance of strong transitivity and its
connection with varying degrees of similarity among nodes. This understanding provides valu-
able insights for the development of effective embedding learning mechanisms. Subsequently,
we introduced the concept of using a transitivity graph derived from the input graph to model
and represent strong transitivity relations. We accordingly developed the Transitivity Graph
Neural Network (or TransGNN in short) model, that can be aligned with existing GNNs and
improve their similarity-awareness. In this way, both local connections between nodes and strong
transitivity relations are captured by a graph neural network, resulting in learning higher-quality
embeddings. We examined our model over several real-world datasets and showed that it im-
proves the performance of several well-known GNNs, for tasks such as node classification.
