arXiv:1602.05765v2  [cs.AI]  25 Oct 2017
Entity Embeddings with Conceptual Subspaces as a Basis
for Plausible Reasoning
Shoaib Jameel1 and Steven Schockaert2
Abstract.
Conceptual spaces are geometric representations of con-
ceptual knowledge in which entities correspond to points, natural
properties correspond to convex regions, and the dimensions of the
space correspond to salient features. While conceptual spaces enable
elegant models of various cognitive phenomena, the lack of auto-
mated methods for constructing such representations have so far lim-
ited their application in artiﬁcial intelligence. To address this issue,
we propose a method which learns a vector-space embedding of enti-
ties from Wikipedia and constrains this embedding such that entities
of the same semantic type are located in some lower-dimensional
subspace. We experimentally demonstrate the usefulness of these
subspaces as approximate conceptual space representations by show-
ing, among others, that important features can be modelled as di-
rections and that natural properties tend to correspond to convex re-
gions.
1
INTRODUCTION
Despite the fact that several large-scale open-domain knowledge
bases are now available (e.g. CYC, SUMO, Freebase, Wikidata and
YAGO), few knowledge-driven applications rely on logical reason-
ing. An important reason for this is that available knowledge is often
inconsistent. For example, the concept ice cream shop is asserted to
be disjoint from restaurant in CYC, while it is considered a type of
restaurant on Wikipedia3. Another challenge for logical reasoning is
that available knowledge is seldom complete. For example, SUMO
encodes4 knowledge about chess, darts and poker, but mentions noth-
ing about checkers.
Humans are remarkably adept at overcoming such challenges
[5, 11]. For example, we can recognize that the aforementioned con-
ﬂict between CYC and Freebase is caused by the vagueness of the
categories restaurant and shop, which both have ice cream shop as a
borderline case. Similarly, we can deal with knowledge gaps by mak-
ing inductive inferences, e.g. assuming that properties which hold for
chess, darts and poker should hold for checkers as well. Automating
such forms of plausible reasoning has proven challenging, among
others because they rely on an underlying notion of similarity, which
is difﬁcult to characterize using purely symbolic methods.
The solution offered by the theory of conceptual spaces [13] is to
represent concepts as regions in a suitable metric space. The points
of this space correspond to (actual or possible) entities of a given se-
mantic type, such that similar entities are located close to each other.

3
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Types_of_
restaurants
4
https://github.com/ontologyportal/sumo/blob/
master/Sports.kif
It is furthermore posited that most natural properties correspond to
convex regions, in accordance with prototype theory [26]. Further-
more, the dimensions of a conceptual space correspond to the salient
features of the considered domain. For example, a conceptual space
of wines could have dimensions relating to sweetness, acidity, fruiti-
ness, amount of tannins, etc. Using conceptual space representations,
many cognitive phenomena, including vagueness and induction, can
be modelled in a natural way [13, 8, 27, 19]. However, existing ap-
plications have focused on a few particular domains in which con-
ceptual space representations can be derived from available metric
information. For example, several authors have considered concep-
tual spaces for music perception [12, 4]. In such cases, the deﬁnition
of the conceptual space, and its relationship to e.g. audio signals, re-
lies on well-understood insights from the ﬁeld of music cognition.
The research question we consider in this paper is whether we can
automatically obtain approximate conceptual space representations
for a wide range of domains, by combining information found in ex-
isting knowledge bases with representations derived from large text
corpora such as Wikipedia.
Our approach builds on existing work for learning word embed-
dings from text corpora. Similar to conceptual spaces, word em-
beddings [21, 24, 29] represent the meaning of words in a high-
dimensional Euclidean space, typically as vectors5. There are, how-
ever, two important differences between word embeddings and con-
ceptual spaces. First, while word embeddings represent all words
in a single vector space, conceptual spaces model the entities (and
their properties) of a particular semantic type only (e.g. people and
cities would be modelled in separate conceptual spaces). Because of
this restriction, conceptual spaces can have dimensions that reﬂect
the salient properties of the underlying domain. This allows us to
use conceptual spaces for ranking entities (e.g. a conceptual space
of cities should have a dimension corresponding the population, al-
lowing us to rank cities from the least to the most populous), mod-
elling context effects6, and for describing how two entities or con-
cepts are semantically related (e.g. that the rules of chess are more
complex than the rules of checkers). In contrast, the dimensions of
a word embedding space are essentially meaningless. Second, con-
ceptual spaces clearly differentiate entities, which are modelled as
points, from properties, which are modelled as regions. As a result,
conceptual spaces can be used to model that a given entity has a given
property or belongs to a given category, to model typicality (e.g. an
ice cream shop could be located in the region modelling shop but to-
5 Two notable exceptions are [9] and [30], where words are represented using
densities
6 The context-dependent nature of similarity is modelled in conceptual spaces
by allowing dimensions to be rescaled, depending on the importance of the
corresponding property in the given context.

wards the border), and to model semantic relations between different
properties and categories.
In [6] an approach was proposed for learning conceptual space
representations, which consists of (i) representing each entity of a
given semantic type as a bag of words (e.g. each movie is represented
as its set of user reviews), (ii) converting that bag of words represen-
tation to a vector space representation using multi-dimensional scal-
ing (MDS), and (iii) identifying directions corresponding to salient
properties of the considered domain in a post-hoc analysis.
An important limitation of the approach from [6] is that it cannot
take advantage of relationships between different conceptual spaces.
To address this, in this paper we propose a method that learns a sin-
gle domain-independent vector space, in which each semantic type
corresponds to a particular subspace. In other words, we learn con-
ceptual space representations which are themselves embedded in a
higher-dimensional vector space. Among others, this allows us to
model semantic type hierarchies (e.g. the conceptual space of hu-
mans, in our model, is a subspace of the conceptual space of living
things). Furthermore, different conceptual spaces can be aligned by
taking into account semantic relations between entities of the corre-
sponding types (e.g. the subspaces representing actors, directors and
genres can help to obtain a more accurate representation of movies).
Another important limitation of the approach from [6] is that MDS
requires a distance matrix whose size is quadratic in the number of
entities, which severely limits its scalability. In contrast, our model
can easily learn representations for millions of entities.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Word embedding
Word embeddings are vector space representations which are used
to model the meaning of words. Several existing models construct
a vector for each word by applying some form of matrix factoriza-
tion to a term-term co-occurrence matrix; see [29] for an overview of
such approaches. Recently, a number of models have been proposed
which instead explicitly optimize the predictive power of the word
vectors. For example, the popular Skip-gram model [21] tries to ﬁnd
word vectors that can be used to predict the probability of seeing a
context word, given an occurrence of the word being modelled, while
the related continuous bag-or-words (CBOW) model focuses on the
probability of seeing the word being modelled, given the occurrence
of a context word.
An interesting property of word embeddings is that they often cap-
ture several kinds of semantic relations, beyond simple similarity. For
example, in [21] it is shown that analogical proportions of the form
a is to b what c is to d correspond to approximate parallelograms in
the space obtained by Skip-gram. They also found that vector addi-
tion sometimes corresponds to a form of semantic composition, e.g.
adding the vectors for Germany and capital resulted in a vector which
is close to the vector for Berlin.
The fact that the vector space obtained by the Skip-gram model
satisﬁes such linear regularities is at ﬁrst glance somewhat surpris-
ing. In [24], the authors analyze what characteristics of a word em-
bedding model can explain this effect, and propose a new model,
called GloVe, which is explicitly aimed at capturing linear regulari-
ties. Since our model will build on GloVe, we brieﬂy review its for-
mulation. The GloVe model relies on a term-term co-occurrence ma-
trix X = (xij), where xij is the number of times that word i appears
in the context of word j. For each term ti in the vocabulary, two word
vectors wi and ˜wi and a bias bi are chosen by minimizing the follow-
ing objective:
J =
V
X
i=1
V
X
j=1
f(xij)(wi · ˜wj + bi + bj −log xij)2
(1)
where V is the number of words in the vocabulary. The function f
is used to limit the impact of rare terms, whose co-occurrence counts
are considered to be noisy. It is deﬁned as follows:
f(xij) =




xij
xmax
α
if xij < xmax
1
otherwise
(2)
where xmax is a constant which was ﬁxed as 100. Intuitively, wi re-
ﬂects the meaning of term ti while ˜wj reﬂects how the occurrence of
that term in the context of another term tj impacts the meaning of tj.
2.2
Knowledge graph embedding
Knowledge bases such as Freebase and Wikidata can essentially be
seen as collections of (subject, predicate, object) triples, and can
thus be encoded as a graph, where nodes correspond to entities and
edges are labelled with relation types. Several authors have looked at
the problem of automatically expanding such knowledge graphs [7].
Here, we focus on models that rely on embedding knowledge graphs
in a vector space, as we will use similar ideas for aligning different
conceptual subspaces. The idea of embedding knowledge graphs in
a vector space was proposed in [3]. In particular, they propose the
model SE, in which each entity ei is represented as a vector and each
relation rk is represented using two matrices Rlhs
k and Rrhs
k . The con-
straint they impose is that the following distance should be small for
triples (ei, rk, ej) in the knowledge graph and large for other triples:
d(Rlhs
k ei, Rrhs
k ej)
where d is either the Euclidean or Manhattan distance. An important
drawback of this model is that it requires learning a large number of
parameters, which was empirically found to lead to underﬁtting [2].
In [2] a simpler alternative, called TransE, was proposed, which rep-
resents each relation as a vector and considers the following scoring
function instead:
d(ei + rk, ej)
Despite the simplicity of this model, it was shown to substantially
outperform SE in practice. However, as noted in [32], TransE is
mostly suitable for one-to-one relations. To obtain a more faith-
ful modelling of one-to-many, many-to-one and many-to-many re-
lations, the model TransH is proposed. In this model, both a hyper-
plane Hk and an (n −1) dimensional vector rk is associated with
each relation type (with n the dimension of the embedding space),
and the following scoring function is considered:
d(eHk
i
+ rk, eHk
j
)
where eHk
i
and eHk
j
are the orthogonal projections of ei and ej on
the hyperplane Hk. The TransR model, introduced in [20], follows
a similar strategy, but instead associates an m-dimensional vector rk
and an m × n matrix Mk with each relation, and uses the following
scoring function:
d(eiMr + rk, ejMr)

The underlying idea is to use the TransE model, after projecting the
entities onto a relation-speciﬁc space. While in general it is not re-
quired that n = m, this particular choice was used in all experiments.
Finally, [20] also proposes a variant CTransR, in which each entities
are clustered, and each relation can have a different representation
for each cluster.
In our model, the semantic types of entities play a crucial role.
One other approach that explicitly takes semantic type into account
is [14]. In particular, they add a regularization term to the objective
function of existing embedding models to encode the requirement
that entities of the same semantic type should be represented using
similar vectors, which they formalize based on two manifold learning
algorithms. Unfortunately, the scalability of the resulting method is
relatively limited.
In [31] a model is proposed that combines word embedding with
knowledge graph embedding. In particular, they jointly learn a rep-
resentation for words, entities and relations, where the word repre-
sentations are constrained similarly as in the Skip-gram model and
the entities and relations are constrained similarly as in the TransE
model. The entity and word representations are aligned either based
on Wikipedia anchors or based on the entity names. An improvement
of this method was proposed in [35], where the alignment is instead
based on the text of the Wikipedia article of the entity. Along similar
lines, [34] proposes a model in which the objective functions of Skip-
gram and TransE are combined. A third component in their objective
function allows the model to take into account an external similar-
ity relation, by imposing the requirement that similar terms should
have similar vectors. It is shown that the resulting model improves
the word embeddings from Skip-gram.
The model we propose in this paper also combines a word based
entity embedding component with a knowledge graph embedding
component, although our motivation is different. In particular, [31]
and [35] add a word based entity embedding component to a knowl-
edge graph embedding model to improve the predictive performance
for entities about which little or nothing is included in the knowl-
edge graph. For example, if the knowledge graph contains the fact
that entity a is in relation R with entity b, and from the word based
component we can derive that entity a′ is similar to entity a, then we
can plausibly derive that entity a′ might also be in relation R with en-
tity b. Intuitively, we can thus view these approaches as using word
based entity embedding to add a kind of smoothing to the knowl-
edge graph embedding model. In contrast, our aim is to model how
different entities of the same type are related. The kind of seman-
tic relatedness in which we are interested (e.g. modelling that one
building is taller than another one) is typically not captured by exist-
ing knowledge graphs. Intuitively, we use the word based entity em-
bedding component to learn domain-speciﬁc vector space represen-
tations, and then use a knowledge graph embedding model to align
these spaces. This allows us to improve the representation for seman-
tic types about which little information is available in the considered
textual descriptions. In this sense, we can view our model as using
the knowledge graph embedding component to add a kind of smooth-
ing to the word based entity embedding. Our motivation is somewhat
similar in spirit to [34], but that model focuses on word embeddings
rather than entity embeddings.
To the best of our knowledge, our model is the ﬁrst to use semantic
type information to learn domain-speciﬁc subspaces.
3
DESCRIPTION OF THE MODEL
Our aim is to learn a vector-space embedding of a set of entities
E, in which entities of the same semantic type lie in some lower-
dimensional subspace. Let S be the set of all semantic types. For
s ∈S, we write Es for the set of all entities of type s. We further-
more assume that a set of binary relations R is available, and a set
G ⊆E×R×E of triples of the form (e, k, f), encoding that entities
e and f are in relation k. Finally, we assume that for every entity e,
a bag of words We describing that entity is available. The model we
propose has the following form:
J = αJtext + (1 −α)(Jtype + Jrel) + βJreg
(3)
where α ∈[0, 1] and β ∈[0, +∞[ are parameters controlling the
relative importance of the different components of the model. Com-
ponent Jtext will be used to constrain the representation of the entities
based on their textual description, Jtype will impose the constraint that
entities of the same type belong to a particular subspace, Jrel will use
the relations in R to improve the alignment between these subspaces,
and Jreg is a regularization component which will allow the model to
automatically select the most appropriate number of dimensions for
every subspace. We now discuss each of these components in more
detail.
3.1
Word based entity embedding
From the bag of words representations We, we want to ﬁnd a point
pe ∈Rn for each entity e such that similar entities correspond to
nearby points and such that salient features can be interpreted as di-
rections in the space. Speciﬁcally, let f be a feature of interest, and
let xi ∈R be the value of feature f for entity ei, i.e. xi reﬂects
how much ei has feature f. Then there should be a vector wf ∈Rn
such that the orthogonal projection p′
ei of the point pei on the line
Lf = {q | q = λ·wf, λ ∈R} is given by p′
ei = cfxiwf +bf for bf
and cf constants in R. In other words, in a coordinate system where
Lf coincides with one of the axes, the corresponding coordinate of
pe should be proportional to xi. This requirement is equivalent to7:
pei · wf = (cfxi + bf) · ∥wf∥
(4)
Unfortunately, we do not actually know what are the salient fea-
tures in most domains. Following [6], we therefore use word co-
occurrence as a proxy for feature values. In particular, we assume
that each word potentially corresponds to a salient feature, and that
the number of times a word co-occurs with a given entity reﬂects
how much that entity has the corresponding feature. This leads to the
following constraint
pei · wj = g(yji) + bj
(5)
where yji is the number of times word tj occurs in Wei, g is a mono-
tonic function that maps co-occurrence statistics to feature values,
and bj is a constant. Typically it will not be possible to satisfy the
constraint (5) for all entities and all context words. The assumption
underlying this model is that the salient features of an entity affect the
co-occurrence statistics of many context words, and that the words
for which (5) is (approximately) satisﬁed, in an optimal solution, will
therefore be those that are strongly related to important features of
the entity ei.
Note that the requirement in (5) closely resembles the constraints
that are optimized by the GloVe model. Moreover, as in the GloVe
7 We are abusing notation here, using pei as a notation for the vector −−→
0pei.

model, we can choose g(yji) = log(yji) −bi and formalize the ob-
jective function as a least squares regression problem, weighted such
that frequent terms have a stronger impact on the objective function:
JE
text =
X
ei∈E
X
tj∈Wei
f(yji)(pei · wj + bi + bj −log yji)2
where f is deﬁned as in (2). The resulting model is essentially the
same as GloVe, but instead of modelling word-word co-occurrence
we now model entity-word co-occurrence. The geometric interpreta-
tion, however, is different, as we view entities as points and context
words as vectors. We can further constrain the word vectors wj by
adding a second component, capturing word-word co-occurrences,
which corresponds to the original GloVe model. In particular, we de-
ﬁne Jtext = JE
text + Jglove, where Jglove is the objective function J
deﬁned in (1).
3.2
Subspace constraints
A key distinguishing feature of our model is that all entities of a given
type s are imposed to belong to the same subspace. To formalize this
constraint, we associate with each semantic type s a set of n + 1
points ps
0, ..., ps
n ∈Rn and express that for each entity ei of type s,
the point pei can be written as a convex combination of the points
ps
0, ..., ps
n:
Jtype =
X
s∈S
X
e∈Es
∥pe −
n
X
j=0
λe,s
j ps
j∥2
where we impose that λe,x
j
≥0 and Pn
j=0 λe,s
j
= 1. Note that on
its own, this component is trivial, as it sufﬁces to choose any set of
points ps
0, ..., ps
n in general linear position. However, we will addi-
tionally require that the space spanned by the points ps
0, ..., ps
n is as
low-dimensional as possible. In particular, let Ms be the n × n ma-
trix whose ith row vector is ps
i −ps
0. Then clearly the rank of Ms is
equal to the dimension of the space spanned by ps
0, ..., ps
n. We now
want to add a regularization term to penalize high-rank matrices Ms.
Unfortunately, no efﬁcient methods exist for directly minimizing the
rank of a matrix M. The relaxation suggested in [10] is to minimize
the nuclear norm ∥M∥∗instead (i.e. the sum of the singular values
of M). This technique was empirically shown to lead to low-rank
matrix solutions in many applications, and is known to be equivalent
to rank minimization in certain cases [25]. The regularization term
associated with Jtype is thus given by
J1
reg =
X
s∈S
∥Ms∥∗
To implement nuclear norm regularization, we have used the recently
proposed method from [16].
We will also consider a variant in which the points ps
0, ..., ps
n are
additionally required to be close to each other:
Jcomb
type =
X
s∈S
  X
e∈Es
∥pe −
n
X
j=0
λe,s
j ps
j∥2 +
n
X
j=0
d(ps
j, cs
j)

where cs
j
=
1
n+1
P
j ps
j is the center-of-gravity of the points
ps
0, ..., ps
n.
3.3
Modelling relations
Often we have information about how entities of different types are
related, e.g. the fact that Steven Spielberg is the director of Jurassic
Park. Such relationships can help us to align the subspaces corre-
sponding to different types. Since our main aim is to improve the
entity embeddings, rather than predicting relationships between en-
tities of different types, methods such as TransH and TransR, which
rely on projecting the entities to a different space, are not directly
suitable. On the other hand, TransE is only suitable for one-to-one
relations.
We propose an alternative to TransE which is inspired by our mod-
eling of semantic types. As in TransE, we assume that every relation
k is represented as a vector rk. We furthermore write rhs(e, k) =
{f | (e, k, f) ∈G} and lhs(k, f) = {e | (e, k, f) ∈G}. Rather than
imposing that e + rk = f if (e, k, f) ∈G, as in TransE, we re-
quire that the points in Pe,k = {pf | f ∈rhs(e, k)} ∪{pe + rk}
lie in a low-dimensional subspace and, similarly, that the points in
Pk,f = {pe | e ∈lhs(k, f)} ∪{pf −rk} lie in a low-dimensional
subspace. Note that in the case of one-to-many or many-to-one rela-
tions, this part of the model is similar to TransH in the special case
where the considered subspaces are one-dimensional. Note that in
the case of a one-to-many or many-to-many relation, the set of en-
tities rhs(e, k) is essentially treated as an additional semantic type
(e.g. the set of all ﬁlms directed by Stephen Spielberg), and similar
for many-to-one relations and the set lhs(k, f). As for the semantic
types we will consider a number of variants:
Jdim
rel =
X
k∈R
X
p∈Pe,k
∥p −
n
X
j=0
µe,k
j
qe,k
j
∥2
+
X
p∈Pk,f
∥p −
n
X
j=0
µk,f
j
qk,f
j
∥2
Jdist
rel =
X
f∈rhs(e,k)
d(pf, pe + rk)2 +
X
e∈rhs(k,f)
d(pe, pf −rk)2
Jrel = Jrel + Jdist
rel
where we write e.g. p ∈Pe,k to sum over all entities e and all points p
in Pe,k. Note that the variant Jdist
rel essentially corresponds to TransE.
For the variants Jrel and Jcomb
rel
we again use nuclear norm regulariza-
tion to enforce low-dimensional subspaces. Let the ith row vector of
the matrix Me,k be given by qe,k
i
−qe,k
0
and similar for Mk,f. We
deﬁne:
J2
reg =
X
k∈R
∥Me,k∥∗+ ∥Mk,f∥∗
Note that we only need to consider the combination (e, k) or the
combination (k, f) if there is at least one triple of the form (e, k, f)
in G, since otherwise we can trivially choose Me,k and Me,k as the
zero matrix. The full regularization term is given by Jreg = J1
reg+J2
reg.
4
EVALUATION
4.1
Data acquisition
In our experiments, we have used Wikidata to obtain a set of enti-
ties E and their corresponding semantic types. To generate the bag-
of-words representation We of a given entity, we take advantage of
the fact that Wikidata entities e are linked to their corresponding
Wikipedia article de. The set We contains the words occurring in de,
as well as the m words before and after any mentions of the entity in
other Wikipedia articles. Following [24], we have used a window size
of m = 10 (but without crossing sentence boundaries). In particular,
we treat every link from some Wikipedia article dx to de as a mention
of e, as well as any repeated occurrences of the corresponding anchor

text in dx. The word-word co-occurrence in the Jglove component of
our model has been obtained from the entire Wikipedia corpus, as
in the standard GloVe model. Using the Wikidata dump from Octo-
ber 26, 2015 and the Wikipedia dump from November 02, 2015, we
have then selected those entities e which are mentioned in at least
10 Wikipedia articles, resulting in a set E containing 1,292,702 en-
tities. For each semantic type s, the set Es contains those entities
which are asserted to be of type s via the instance of property as
well as all instances which are asserted to belong to one of the super-
types of s, which was determined using the subclass of property. As
the set of binary relations R we considered all Wikidata properties
whose value is another entity, apart from instance of and subclass
of which have already been used to determine the sets Es. In the
case of Wikipedia, we adopted a fairly straightforward preprocess-
ing strategy, as used in many other works such as [31]. In particular,
we removed punctuations, lower-cased the tokens, and conducted
sentence segmentation using the NLTK library8. We also removed
words whose term frequency in the entire collection was less than
10. A script has been made available online9, which generates an ex-
act copy of our data set, starting from the publicly available dumps of
Wikipedia and Wikidata. The implementation of all variants of our
model has also been made available at the same link.
Most knowledge graph embedding models have been evaluated
on fragments of Freebase and WordNet. Our choice of Wikidata is
motivated by the fact that it has relatively clean semantic type in-
formation. For example, while Barack Obama is of type Human on
Wikidata, Freebase among others mentions the following types: ﬁlm
subject, musical artist and building occupant. Furthermore, while
Freebase contains information about tens of millions of entities, the
standard benchmark datasets, called FB15k [2] and FB13 [28], are
relatively small: FB15k covers 14,951 entities and 1,345 relation
types, while FB13 covers 74,043 entities and 13 relation types. For
completeness, we will include a comparison of our model on these
standard benchmark sets for link prediction and triple classiﬁcation,
which are the two standard evaluation tasks for knowledge graph
embedding. Our other experiments will be oriented more towards
evaluating the usefulness of our model for learning conceptual space
representations, in particular their ability to capture semantic rela-
tions between entities of the same type (which are not covered in the
knowledge graph). This requires a sufﬁcient number of entities for
each of the considered semantic types, and a sufﬁciently clean se-
mantic type structure. Accordingly these tasks will be evaluated only
on the WikiData fragment described above. Finally, WordNet has a
rich semantic type hierarchy, but contains relatively few instances of
these types (e.g. of the 51K leaf nodes in WordNet 1.7 only 7K were
found to be instances in [1]) and is thus not suitable for our purposes.
The semantic types of the entities occurring in FB15k and FB13
have been obtained from the “type/instance” ﬁeld in the Freebase
dump10. To link Freebase entities to Wikipedia, we have made use of
existing Freebase-WikiData mappings11.
4.2
Variants and baseline methods
Our main baseline is pTransE, which also learns an embedding of
entities by combining a word embedding model with a knowledge
8 http://www.nltk.org/
9
https://github.com/bashthebuilder/ECAI-2016/blob/
master/README.md
10 https://developers.google.com/freebase/data
11
https://developers.google.com/freebase/data#
freebase-wikidata-mappings
name
type
relation
regularization
EECSfull
Jtype
Jrel
J1
reg + J2
reg
EECSno rel
Jtype
-
J1
reg
EECSno type
-
Jrel
J2
reg
EECSno NN
-
Jrel
-
EECStext
-
-
-
EECSrel-dim
Jtype
Jdim
rel
J1
reg + J2
reg
EECSrel-dist
Jtype
Jdist
rel
J1
reg
EECStype-comb
Jcomb
type
Jrel
J1
reg + J2
reg
EECStype-dist
Jcomb
type
Jrel
J2
reg
Table 1: Overview of considered variants of our model.
graph embedding model. We used the it’s publicly available imple-
mentation12. We consider three variants of this baseline: pTransEanch
is the version proposed in [31], which uses anchor text for align-
ing word vectors and entity vectors; pTransEart is the improvement
proposed in [35], which uses the words in the Wikipedia article de
instead of anchor text (and a slightly different model); pTransEfull is
a variant of pTransEart, which uses the bag of words representation
We instead, as in our method. In addition, we compare our method
against RESCAL, as well as a number of knowledge graph embed-
ding methods: TransE, TransH, TransR and CTransR. The source
codes of these translation-based models are publicly available on-
line13. RESCAL [23] is a collective matrix factorization model based
on tensor factorization, which has been designed to account for the
inherent structure of dyadic relational data. The implementation of
RESCAL can be found here14. For the knowledge graph embedding
methods, we used Bernoulli sampling for selecting negative exam-
ples (see [31]); we also obtained results for uniform sampling (not
shown), and found the results to be very similar to Bernoulli sam-
pling but slightly worse. It is expected that all of these methods will
perform worse than both pTransE and our model, as they cannot ex-
ploit the text representation We of the entities. We also compare our
method with Skip-gram and CBOW, which can only use text repre-
sentations and are thus also expected to perform worse. In particular,
to apply these models to learn entity embeddings, we use the same
method as for our model to determine entity mentions on Wikipedia,
and then apply the standard models based on the words surround-
ing these mentions. Finally, we have compared our method with the
multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) based method from [6], in which
case we learn a separate vector space for every semantic type. Be-
cause of the limited scalability of the latter model, however, we have
only considered this for semantic types with up to 10000 instances.
Following [6], for each of the remaining semantic types, a vector
space representation of the corresponding entities was obtained us-
ing Positive Pointwise Mutual Information (PPMI). We then applied
multi-dimensional scaling to obtain a lower-dimensional representa-
tion, using the angular difference between the initial vectors as met-
ric. We have used the MDS model implemented in MATLAB. We
have also considered the method from [14] as an additional baseline,
but found that this method could not scale to even the reduced data
set that we used for the MDS experiments.
Throughout this section, we will refer to our model as EECS (En-
tity Embeddings with Conceptual Subspaces). As an ablation study,
we will consider a number of variants of our model in which some
components have been removed. EECSfull refers to our full model,
in which Jtype is used for modelling semantic types and Jrel is used
for modelling relations; EECSno rel refers to a variant in which Jrel
12 https://github.com/Mrlyk423/Relation Extraction
13 https://github.com/Mrlyk423/Relation Extraction
14 https://github.com/mnick/rescal.py

and the associated regularization component J2
reg have been removed;
EECSno type refers to a variant in which Jtype and J1
reg have been re-
moved; EECSno NN refers to a variant in which the regularization
component Jreg has been removed (which also trivializes the compo-
nent Jtype); EECStext refers to a variant in which only the component
Jtext is used, reducing our model essentially to a variant of GloVe.
Furthermore, we have considered a few variants of EECSfull in
which we change the component Jtype or Jrel by one of the proposed
alternatives: EECSrel-dim refers to a variant in which Jrel is replaced
by Jdim
rel , EECSrel-dist refers to a variant in which Jrel is replaced by
Jdist
rel , EECStype-comb refers to a variant in which Jtype has been replaced
by Jcomb
type , and EECStype-dist refers to a variant in which only distance
information is considered for modelling semantic types (which cor-
responds to using Jcomb
type without regularization). An overview of the
considered variants of our model is provided in Table 1.
4.3
Methodology
All experiments were evaluated using ﬁve-fold cross validation.
For tuning the parameter β of our model, based on a tun-
ing/validation set in each experiment, we considered the range
{50, 100, 150, 200, 250, 300, 350, 400}. For the parameter α, we
considered values between 0 and 1 with an increment of 0.1. The
number of iterations for all models was set to 20, as we found that
beyond this number empirical results became fairly consistent in all
cases. Based on the tuning set, in each of the experiments the optimal
value of β was found to be 300, while the optimal values of α var-
ied between 0.4 and 0.7. The number of dimensions was always set
to 300 for our model, noting that because of the nuclear norm regu-
larization this only represents an upper bound on the actual number
of dimensions. All parameters of the baseline methods, including the
number of dimensions, have been optimized based on the tuning set
in each experiment. For the MDS method, the number of dimensions
was tuned for each semantic type separately (as this method learns a
separate vector space for each semantic type), considering the range
from 10 to 100 in steps of 10. For the remaining baselines, which
construct a single vector space, the number of dimensions was var-
ied between 50 to 300 in steps of 50.
Our model has been implemented in C using standard POSIX
threads, which helps scale our implementation to large text collec-
tions. For example, for the considered 1.2 million Wikidata entities
our full model takes about 30 minutes per iteration using 8 threads,
scaling almost linearly in the number of entities. In contrast, EECStext
takes about 18 minutes for each iteration using 8 threads.
4.4
Results
We will evaluate our model on four different tasks: ranking, induc-
tion, analogy making, and knowledge graph embedding. The ﬁrst
two of these tasks are directly aimed at evaluating to what extent
the type-speciﬁc subspaces learned by our model are useful as con-
ceptual space representations. In particular, ranking will evaluate to
what extent important features of a given semantic type can indeed
be modelled as directions in the associated subspace, while induction
assesses to what extent we can use these representations to ﬁnd new
instances of a given concept, given only a few example instances.
The analogy making task is aimed at evaluating how well the differ-
ent subspaces are aligned. As discussed above, these ﬁrst three tasks
will be evaluated using a large fragment of WikiData. The motivation
behind the fourth tasks relates to the observation that even though our
motivation was rather different from the motivation behind pTransE,
Semantic Type
Number of Entities
NN-Dimensions
human
191211
288
railway station
4120
121
house
2762
136
organization
1379
88
national park
1307
56
building
1269
52
food
1155
55
college
858
33
automobile
31
12
candy
10
2
Table 2: Number of dimensions selected by the nuclear norm (NN)
regularization component of our model for some of the semantic
types.
Ranking
Induction
Analogy
ρ
MAP

MRR
Acc.
Skip-gram
0.155
0.176
0.356
0.505
0.184
CBOW
0.159
0.182
0.350
0.500
0.213
RESCAL
0.081
0.020
0.189
0.423
0.371
TransE
0.110
0.060
0.200
0.451
0.382
TransH
0.142
0.072
0.210
0.415
0.382
TransR
0.100
0.102
0.302
0.489
0.378
CTransR
0.122
0.132
0.323
0.499
0.402
pTransEanch
0.099
0.101
0.301
0.488
0.476
pTransEart
0.202
0.218
0.475
0.751
0.512
pTransEfull
0.213
0.224
0.490
0.756
0.532
EECSfull
0.319
0.231
0.609
0.883
0.591
EECSno rel
0.301
0.229
0.588
0.868
0.552
EECSno type
0.266
0.225
0.585
0.854
0.549
EECSno NN
0.258
0.220
0.581
0.843
0.545
EECStext
0.254
0.218
0.579
0.831
0.540
EECStype-comb
0.312
0.231
0.601
0.883
0.595
EECStype-dist
0.295
0.231
0.585
0.858
0.550
EECSrel-dim
0.309
0.225
0.585
0.859
0.551
EECSrel-dist
0.299
0.225
0.585
0.855
0.549
Ranking
Induction
Analogy
ρ
MAP

MRR
Acc.
MDS
0.101
0.121
0.231
0.388
0.354
EECSfull
0.218
0.140
0.301
0.463
0.456
Table 4: Comparison with MDS on a subset of the WikiData test data.
both our model and pTransE combine a word based entity embedding
component with a knowledge graph embedding component. Since
pTransE has proven a successful approach for knowledge graph em-
bedding, we want to analyse whether our model has any advantages
in such a setting. As explained above, for this task we will use the
standard benchmark datasets FB15k and FB13.
An important aspect in the discussion of the result is to analyze the
effectiveness of nuclear norm regularization in identifying the most
appropriate number of dimensions for each of the semantic types.
To illustrate the behaviour of this regularization component, Table 2
shows the number of dimensions that was found for a few notable
semantic types (when using the default conﬁguration of our model).
As expected, semantic types with more entities generally end up be-
ing associated with higher-dimensional subspaces, but other factors
affect the choice as well. For example, note that house has fewer
instances than railway station, while being represented by a higher-
dimensional subspace. Intuitively, this reﬂects the idea that the type
house is more diverse or complex than the type railway station.
4.4.1
Ranking
A characteristic feature of conceptual spaces is that they are encoded
as Cartesian products of interpretable dimensions. For a vector space

model to be meaningful as a conceptual space, it is therefore impor-
tant that salient properties can be modelled as directions15. Therefore,
we have evaluated the ability of our model to correctly rank entities
according to a given property. As we need the ground truth, we have
focused on properties with numerical values which are available in
Wikidata (but have not been considered when learning the space),
e.g. the date of birth for entities of type human, or the boiling point
of entities of type chemical element. In total, we have retrieved 26
numerical attributes which are available for at least 30 entities. Some
of these numerical attributes appear for different semantic types (e.g.
the property inception, referring to the foundation year, applies to the
semantic types ﬁlm, organization and country, among others). In to-
tal, we obtained 73 such property-type combinations, by considering
for each numerical attribute all the maximally speciﬁc semantic types
with at least 30 instances that have the attribute. Each of these 73
combinations was considered as a problem instance. For each prob-
lem instance, the corresponding set of entities is split into 60% train-
ing, 20% validation and 20% testing sets. The full speciﬁcation of the
73 problem instances and corresponding splits is available online16.
From the training set, a direction is estimated using the SVMRank
model17 [18]. The parameters of the resulting ranking models are op-
timized using the validation sets. Table 3 shows the performance on
the testing set, in terms of Spearman’s ρ18, expressing the correlation
between the ranking predicted by the model and the ranking accord-
ing to the numerical values found in Wikidata.
The results show that standard word and knowledge graph embed-
ding models are not competitive, which is not surprising given that
they use less information than our model. However, the results also
show that our model substantially outperforms pTransE, even the
variant pTransEfull which uses the same input as our model. Com-
paring the results for the variants of our model, we notice that the
relation component only has a small impact, i.e. the performance
of EECSno rel is close to EECSfull, and similarly, the performance
of EECSno type is close to EECStext. Regarding the variants of Jtype,
EECSfull and EECStype-comb are clearly better than EECStype-dist, which
shows the importance of nuclear norm regularization for identify-
ing low-dimensional subspaces. The results in Table 4 compare our
model against the MDS model from [6] on a reduced set of 27 prob-
lem instances. These results clearly show that the MDS method is
not competitive.
Tables 5 and 6 illustrate the results of the ranking experiment for
three attributes, by showing the 5 lowest and 5 highest ranked entities
respectively. Note that Table 5 starts with the lowest ranked entity
(i.e. the entity that has the lowest value for the considered attribute),
while Table 6 starts with the highest ranked entity (i.e. the entity that
has the highest value for the considered attribute). While the rankings
are not perfect (e.g. Bermuda, Monaco, San Marino and Barbados
are all less populous than Malta, Ptolemy lived around 500 years
after Plato), the model’s ability to separate high-scoring entities from
low-scoring entities is nonetheless remarkable, considering that none
of the information that was used to learn the vector space explicitly
referred to these attributes.
15 Conceptual space representations also encode information about the cor-
relation between the underlying dimensions, which in our case is captured
by the angles between these directions.
16 https://github.com/bashthebuilder/ECAI-2016
17
https://www.cs.cornell.edu/people/tj/svm_light/
svm_rank.html
18 The reported average ρ values have been obtained using the Fisher z-
transformation.
Population
Inception
Date of Birth
Malta
General Electric
Valmiki
Bermuda
IBM
Jesus Christ
Monaco
Hewlett Packard
Cleopatra
San Marino
Microsoft
Ptolemy
Barbados
Oracle Corporation
Plato
Population
Inception
Date of Birth
China
Alphabet Inc.
Prince George of Cambridge
India
Tencent Holdings
Isabela Moner
USA
Facebook, Inc.
Justin Bieber
Soviet Union
Uber
Lionel Messi
Brazil
Amazon.com
Kim Kardashian
Table 6: Five highest ranked entities for a number of ranking problem
instances.
4.4.2
Induction
A second characteristic feature of conceptual spaces is that properties
correspond to convex regions. Moreover, it is often assumed that the
boundaries of these regions are determined based on the distance to
a particular point in the space, which acts as a prototype. In this ex-
periment, we test our method’s ability to make inductive inferences
based on this view. In particular, given a number of entities of the
same type which have some property in common, the task we con-
sider is to identify other entities that also have this property (without
any knowledge about the property being considered).
Problem instances in this case were obtained by omitting all triples
of the form (., r, f) for particular choices of r and f, when learning
the embeddings. The set of entities e for which (e, r, f) ∈G then
deﬁnes a problem instance. For example, the property being consid-
ered could be “ﬁlms directed by Stephen Spielberg”. Given a few
examples of such ﬁlms, the task is to identify other ﬁlms directed by
Stephen Spielberg (but without the knowledge that this is the prop-
erty being considered). For each (r, f) combination, the set of en-
tities {e | (e, r, f) ∈G} is split into 60% training, 20% tuning and
20% testing sets. Details on the (r, f) combinations and associated
splits are available online19.
For evaluation purposes, we consider this task as a ranking task.
In particular, for each problem instance, we rank the entities of the
associated semantic type (deﬁned as the most speciﬁc semantic type
that contains all the considered entities) based on their distance to the
center-of-gravity of the training instances, and evaluate the quality

higher values are better.
The results in Table 3 show that our model again substantially
outperforms all of the baselines. Note, however, that in the case
of MAP, the differences with pTransEfull are rather small. The fact

method is better able to select a few entities with high precision.
The MAP score tends to be dominated by outliers, leading to smaller
differences. Regarding the different variants of our model, the se-
mantic type component and relation component now play a more
equal role, given the rather similar performance of EECSno rel and
EECSno type, although semantic type information is still more impor-
tant than the knowledge graph information (as EECSno rel performs
better than EECSno type). As for the ranking experiment, we notice
that using Jdist
type
in EECSno type leads to worse results, highlighting
again the importance of nuclear norm regularization. A before, the
MDS model is not competitive.
19 https://github.com/bashthebuilder/ECAI-2016

4.4.3
Analogy making
Finally we have considered the problem of completing analogical
proportions of the form “a is to b what c is to ...”, which is a standard
evaluation task for word embeddings. Our main aim in this task is
to evaluate how well different subspaces are aligned. We have used
the test sets from the GloVe project20 that are about entities, resulting
in a total of 8363 problem instances. As there is no need for training
data, in this case we randomly split the data into 25% tuning and 75%
testing sets. Full details on the test sets and splits that were used have
been made available online21.
The results are largely consistent with the ﬁndings from the
previous two experiments. The main difference is that the vari-
ant EECStype-comb slightly outperforms EECSfull in this case. The
rather large difference in performance between EECStype-comb and
EECStype-dist again clearly illustrates the impact of nuclear norm reg-
ularization on the results.
4.4.4
Knowledge graph embedding
We have also conducted two knowledge graph embedding experi-
ments using the benchmark datasets FB15k and FB13. In particular,
we have evaluated our method on the widely used Link Prediction
and Triple Classiﬁcation tasks.
Link prediction
For the link prediction task [2], given an entity e
and a relation r, the aim is either to ﬁnd an entity f such that (e, r, f)
or to ﬁnd an entity f such that (f, r, e). We have used the stan-
dard FB15k test set for this evaluation, which allows us to compare
our model with the published results of the state-of-the-art knowl-
edge graph embedding models. Two widely used evaluation metrics,
which we will also use, are the average rank of correct entities, called

test triples in which the target entity was ranked in the top 10. Note

score is to be maximized. We have used the standard evaluation pro-
tocol, including the Bernoulli sampling trick to corrupt the head or
tail entity. Test instances were not ﬁltered (which corresponds to the
so-called raw version of the task).
In Table 7 we show that our model clearly outperforms the stan-
dard baselines in both metrics. To a large extent, this is due to the fact
that, apart from pTransE, the other models do not exploit the bag-of-
words representations of the entities. Note that we do not show re-
sults for EECStext and EECSno rel in the tables because these models
do not take into account any input from the knowledge graph, and is
therefore not suitable. The baselines Skip-gram and CBOW are not
considered for the same reason.
Triple classiﬁcation
The objective in triple classiﬁcation [28] is to
judge whether a given triplet (e, r, f) is correct or not, i.e. whether
entities e and f are in relation r with each other. This can be natu-
rally cast as a binary classiﬁcation task. We present results on FB13
and FB15k. The FB13 dataset already comes with golden negative
triplets, while we followed the methodology from [28] to construct
negative samples for FB15k. For the classiﬁcation task, we need to
set a threshold δr for each relation r. We obtain δr by maximizing the
classiﬁcation accuracies on the validation set. For the given triplet, if
the energy score is larger than the relation-speciﬁc δr, the instance
20 http://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/
21 https://github.com/bashthebuilder/ECAI-2016
Models
Link Prediction (FB15k)
Triple Classiﬁcation
Mean Rank

FB13
FB15k
RESCAL
683
44.1
65.3
71.6
TransE
125
47.1
81.5
79.8
TransH
87
64.4
83.3
79.9
TransR
77
68.7
82.5
82.1
CTransR
75
70.2
-
84.3
pTransEanch
58
84.6
73.3
74.3
pTransEart
55
85.3
75.8
75.5
pTransEfull
51
86.4
76.3
77.4
EECSfull
48
89.7
83.1
89.6
EECSno type
56
84.7
71.2
82.1
EECSno NN
59
82.7
70.1
81.4
EECStype-comb
47
89.9
83.3
89.9
EECStype-dist
54
83.2
81.1
82.1
EECSrel-dim
54
85.1
79.3
88.2
EECSrel-dist
52
85.3
78.8
87.1
Table 7: Link prediction and Triple classiﬁcation results.
will be classiﬁed as positive, otherwise negative. This is the standard
experimental setting for this evaluation task.
Our experimental results are shown in Table 7. With the exception
of the pTransE variants, we again show the published results for the
baseline models. The baseline results have been reported in [33, 15,
17, 22]. On the FB13 dataset, our model matches the performance of
the TransH model, although we clearly outperform all baselines on
the FB15k dataset. This means that on the FB13 dataset, the bag-of-
words representations of the entities cannot be exploited effectively,
although our model is still not at a disadvantage. This seems related
to the fact that only 13 relation types are considered in FB13, which
were moreover speciﬁcally selected such that they can be predicted
from each other, in the sense that hard-to-predict relation types have
been removed [28].
5
CONCLUSIONS
We have proposed a new method for learning vector-space embed-
dings of entities, based on available semantic information (from
Wikidata) and textual descriptions (from Wikipedia). From a tech-
nical point of view, the main novelty of our model is the use of nu-
clear norm regularization to encode the requirement that entities of
the same semantic type should lie in a lower-dimensional subspace.
In particular, nuclear norm regularization allows the model to auto-
matically select the most appropriate number of dimensions for the
subspace corresponding to each type. From an application point of
view, our main motivation was to learn subspaces that are useful as
approximations of conceptual spaces. To support this view, among
others, we have shown that many numerical attributes can be faith-
fully modelled as directions and that the learned representations al-
low us to model induction based on distance to a centroid. In addi-
tion, we have also obtained good results for analogy making and for
two standard knowledge graph embedding tasks.
6
