Boosting Convolutional Features for Robust Object Proposals
Nikolaos Karianakis

University of California, Los Angeles, USA
Thomas J. Fuchs

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, USA
Stefano Soatto

University of California, Los Angeles, USA
Abstract
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
have demonstrated excellent performance in im-
age classiﬁcation, but still show room for im-
provement in object-detection tasks with many
categories, in particular for cluttered scenes and
occlusion. Modern detection algorithms like Re-
gions with CNNs (Girshick et al., 2014) rely on
Selective Search (Uijlings et al., 2013) to propose
regions which with high probability represent ob-
jects, where in turn CNNs are deployed for clas-
siﬁcation. Selective Search represents a family of
sophisticated algorithms that are engineered with
multiple segmentation, appearance and saliency
cues, typically coming with a signiﬁcant run-
time overhead.
Furthermore, (Hosang et al.,
2014) have shown that most methods suffer from
low reproducibility due to unstable superpixels,
even for slight image perturbations.
Although
CNNs are subsequently used for classiﬁcation in
top-performing object-detection pipelines, cur-
rent proposal methods are agnostic to how these
models parse objects and their rich learned rep-
resentations. As a result they may propose re-
gions which may not resemble high-level ob-
jects or totally miss some of them.
To over-
come these drawbacks we propose a boosting ap-
proach which directly takes advantage of hierar-
chical CNN features for detecting regions of in-
terest fast. We demonstrate its performance on
ImageNet 2013 detection benchmark and com-
pare it with state-of-the-art methods.
The copyright of this document resides with its authors. It may be
distributed unchanged freely in print or electronic forms.
1. Introduction
Visual object detection is at the heart of many applica-
tions in science and engineering, ranging from microscopic
scales in medicine to macroscopic scale in space explo-
ration. Historically these problems are mostly formulated
as classiﬁcation problems in a sliding-window framework.
To this end a classiﬁer is trained to differentiate one or more
object classes from a background class by sliding a window
over the whole image with a given stride and on multiple
scales and aspect ratios predicting the class label for every
single window. In practice, this demands the classiﬁcation
of more than a million windows for common images, re-
sulting in a trade-off between run-time performance and
classiﬁcation accuracy for real-time applications.
Recent years have seen a paradigm shift in object-detection
systems replacing the sliding window step with object-
proposal algorithms prior to classiﬁcation (Girshick et al.,
2014; Szegedy et al., 2014b; Cinbis et al., 2013; Wang
et al., 2013; He et al., 2014). These algorithms propose
regions in an image which are predicted to contain the ob-
jects of interest with high likelihood. Such an approach not
only reduces the number of regions which have to be clas-
siﬁed from a million to a few thousands but also allows for
spanning across a larger range of scales and aspect ratios
for regions of interest. Depending on the execution time of
the proposal method and the classiﬁer, the reduction of re-
gions for classiﬁcation can lead to a signiﬁcantly faster run
time and allow the use of more sophisticated classiﬁers.
Frameworks with region proposal methods and subsequent
classiﬁcation which are based on Convolutional Neural
Networks (Girshick et al., 2014) achieve state-of-the-art
performance on the ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) detec-
tion. A popular pipeline consists of three main steps: (i)
several regions that are likely to be objects are generated
by a proposal algorithm; (ii) deep CNNs with multi-way
Softmax or Support Vector Machines (SVMs) on the top
arXiv:1503.06350v1  [cs.CV]  21 Mar 2015

Boosting Convolutional Features for Robust Object Proposals
classify these regions in order to detect all possible classes
and instances per image; (iii) ﬁnally, an optional regression
step further reﬁnes the location of the detected objects.
A large body of work of region proposal algorithms exists
(Hosang et al., 2014). The majority of them are engineered
to merge different segmentation, saliency and appearance
cues, and some hierarchical scheme, with parameters tuned
to speciﬁc datasets. Here we propose a data-driven region-
proposal method which is based on features extracted di-
rectly from lower convolutional layers of a CNN. We use
a fast binary boosting framework (Appel et al., 2013) to
predict the objectness of regions, and ﬁnally deploy a re-
gressor which uses features from the upper convolutional
layer after pooling to reﬁne the localization. The proposed
framework achieves the top recall rate on ImageNet 2013
detection for Intersection over Union (IoU) localization be-
tween 50 −65%. Finally, we apply our proposal algorithm
instead of Selective Search in the baseline Regions-with-
CNN pipeline (Girshick et al., 2014) resulting in 8% im-
provement over the state-of-the-art with a single prediction
model while achieving considerably faster test time.
In the two following subsections we brieﬂy review region
proposal algorithms and present the motivation behind our
work. In Section 2 we present the details of our algorithm
and in Section 3 we show the experimental study and re-
sults. In Section 4, we place our algorithm in line with the
Regions-with-CNN framework and benchmark its perfor-
mance on the ImageNet 2013 detection challenge. Finally,
in Section 5 we state our conclusions and point out direc-
tions for future research.
1.1. Prior work
Most currently leading frameworks use various segmen-
tation methods and engineered cues in hierarchical algo-
rithms to merge smaller areas (e.g., superpixels) to larger
ones. During this hierarchical process boxes which likely
are objects are proposed.
In turn CNNs are applied as
region descriptors, whose receptive ﬁelds are rectangular.
This relaxes the need to perform accurate segmentation.
Instead a rectangle around regions that are most probably
objects is sufﬁcient.
We brieﬂy review some representative methods which are
evaluated in detail in (Hosang et al., 2014).
Selective Search (Uijlings et al., 2013), which is currently
the most popular algorithm, involves no learning. Its fea-
tures and score functions are carefully engineered on Pascal
VOC and ILSVRC so that low-level superpixels (Felzen-
szwalb & Huttenlocher, 2004) are gradually merged to rep-
resent high-level objects in a greedy fashion. It achieves
very high localization accuracy due to the initial over-
segmentation at a time overhead. RandomizedPrim’s (Ma-
nen et al., 2013) is similar to Selective Search in terms of
features and the process of merging superpixels. However,
the weights of the merging function are learned and the
whole merging process is randomized.
Then there is a family of algorithms which invest signiﬁ-
cant time in a good high-level segmentation. Constrained
Parametric Min-Cuts (CPMC) (Carreira & Sminchisescu,
2012) generates a set of overlapping segments. Each pro-
posal segment is the solution of a binary segmentation
problem. Up to 10, 000 segments are generated per im-
age, which are subsequently ranked by objectness using
a trained regressor. (Rantalankila et al., 2014), similar in
principle to (Uijlings et al., 2013) and (Carreira & Smin-
chisescu, 2012), merges a large pool of features in a hier-
archical way starting from superpixels. It generates several
segments via seeds like CPMC does.
(Endres & Hoiem, 2010; 2014) combine a large set of cues
and deploy a hierarchical segmentation scheme. Addition-
ally, they learn a regressor to estimate boundaries between
surfaces with different orientations. They use graph cuts
with different seeds and parameters to generate diverse seg-
ments similar to CPMC. Multiscale Combinatorial Group-
ing (MCG) (Arbel´aez et al., 2014) combines efﬁcient nor-
malized cuts and CPMC (Carreira & Sminchisescu, 2012)
and achieves competitive results within a reasonable time
budget.
In the literature several methods which engineer objectness
have been proposed in the past. Objectness (Alexe et al.,
2012) was one of the ﬁrst to be published, although its per-
formance is inferior to most modern algorithms (Hosang
et al., 2014). Objectness estimates a score based on a com-
bination of multiple cues such as saliency, colour contrast,
edge density, location and size statistics, and the overlap
of proposed regions with superpixels. (Rahtu et al., 2011)
improves Objectness by proposing new cues and combine
them more effectively.
Moreover, fast algorithms with approximate detection have
been recently introduced. Binarized Normed Gradients for
Objectness (BING) (Cheng et al., 2014) is a simple linear
classiﬁer over edge features and is used in a sliding window
manner. In stark contrast to most other methods, BING
takes on average only 0.2s per image on CPU. EdgeBoxes
(Zitnick & Doll´ar, 2014) is similar in spirit to BING. A
scoring function is evaluated in a sliding window manner,
with object boundary estimates and features which are ob-
tained via structured decision forests.
Given that engineering an algorithm for speciﬁc data is not
always a desired strategy, there are recent region-proposal
algorithms which are data-driven. Data-driven Objectness
(Kang et al., 2014) is a practical method, where the like-
lihood of an image corresponding to a scene object is es-

Boosting Convolutional Features for Robust Object Proposals
timated through comparisons with large collections of ex-
ample object patches. This method can prove very effective
when the notion of object is not well deﬁned through topol-
ogy and appearance, such as daily activities.
A contemporary work which follows the data-driven path
is Scalable, High-quality object detection (Szegedy et al.,
2014b). After they revisited their Multibox algorithm (Er-
han et al., 2014), they are able to integrate region propos-
als and classiﬁcation in one step end-to-end. By deploying
an ensemble of models with robust loss function and their
newly introduced contextual features, they achieve state-
of-the-art performance on the detection task.
1.2. Motivation
Recent top-performing approaches on ILSVRC detection
are based on hand-crafted methods for region proposals,
such as Selective Search (Uijlings et al., 2013). However,
although these methods are tuned on this benchmark, they
miss several objects. For example, Selective Search pro-
poses on average 2, 403 regions per image in (Girshick
et al., 2014) with 91.6% recall of ground truth objects (for
0.5 IoU threshold). In that case, even with oracle classiﬁ-
cation and subsequent localization, more than 8% of object
instances will not be detected. This leaves signiﬁcant room
for improvement in future algorithms.
Furthermore, algorithms which build on superpixels can be
unstable even for slight image perturbations resulting in
low generalizations (Hosang et al., 2014) on different data.
Object proposal algorithms which are based on low-level
cues are agnostic on how a learned network perceives the
class of objects in the space of natural images. A CNN
which is trained in a supervised manner to recognize 1000
object categories on ILSVRC, has learned a rich set of
representations to identify local parts and hierarchically
merge them toward certain class instances at the top layers.
As opposed to Segmentation-based methods which merge
segments based on simple binary criteria like existence of
boundaries and color or not, CNN features ideally span the
manifold of natural images which is a very small subspace
inside a high dimensional feature space.
In practice, Selective Search is not scale-invariant. Never-
theless, it is engineered to work well on ILSVRC and Pas-
cal VOC data with careful parameter tuning. To this end,
Regions with CNN (Girshick et al., 2014) resizes all images
to a width of 500 pixels to serve its purpose. However, a
data-driven algorithm which is not constrained to build on
superpixels bypasses this step.
Regions with CNN uses a linear regressor after classifying
the proposed regions to better localize the bounding boxes
around the object.
For this purpose they deploy pool-5
CNN features. This techinque can be applied to proposals
in the ﬁrst place. Of course, class-speciﬁc regressors are
applicable only after classiﬁcation, but neverthess generic
object regressors can also enhance region localization.
All in all, the motivation of this work is to address the con-
ceptual discontinuity between the object proposal method
and the subsequent classiﬁcation.
Using hand-crafted
scores in the proposal stage and applying a convolutional
neural network for classiﬁcation results not only typically
in slow run-time but also in the aforementioned instabili-
ties. The key idea is to utilize the convolutional responses
of a network whose weights are learned to recognize differ-
ent object classes also for proposals. Finally, we formulate
the problem with a boosting framework to guarantee fast
execution time.
2. Algorithm
Detector: We are deploying a binary boosting framework
to learn a classiﬁer with desired output yi ∈{−1, 1} for
an image patch i, i ∈{1, . . . , N}, where 1 stands for ob-
ject and −1 for background. The input samples xi are fea-
ture vectors which describe an image patch i. The features
xi are a selected subset of convolutional responses convkj
j
from a Proposal CNN (cf. Fig. 1), where j pertains to con-
volutional layer j ∈{1, . . . , L} and kj spans the number
of feature maps for this layer (e.g., alexNet (Krizhevsky
et al., 2012) uses L = 5 and k1 ∈{1, . . . , 96}). Our Pro-
posal CNN is the VGGs model from (Chatﬁeld et al., 2014),
whose ﬁrst-layer convolutional responses are 110 × 110
pixels, and therefore provides double resolution compared
to alexNet.
Aggregate-channel features from (Doll´ar et al., 2009) are
used, where deep convolutional responses serve the role of
channels, while we deploy a modiﬁed version of the fast
setting provided by (Appel et al., 2013). Thus, efﬁcient
AdaBoost is used to train and combine 2, 048 depth-two
trees over the d × d × F candidate features (channel pixel
lookups), where d is the baseline classiﬁer’s size and F
is the number of convolutional responses, i.e., the patch
descriptors (e.g., VGGs architecture has F = 96 kernels
in the ﬁrst layer). The convolutional responses from all
positive and negative patches which are extracted from the
training set are rescaled to a ﬁxed d × d size (e.g, d = 25)
before they serve as input to the classiﬁer. In practice, clas-
siﬁers with various d can be trained to capture different res-
olutions of these representations. On testing all classiﬁers
are applied to the raw image and their detections are aggre-
gated and non-maximally suppressed jointly.
Hierarchical features: In order to evaluate objectness in
different patches, we train the classiﬁer with several pos-
itive and negative samples, which are extracted from Pas-
cal 2007 VOC (Everingham et al., 2010). Positive samples

Boosting Convolutional Features for Robust Object Proposals
Figure 1. Proposed object detection framework based on boosting hierarchical features. Regions which correspond to objects and back-
ground patches are extracted from training images. Then the convolutional responses from ﬁrst layers of a Proposal CNN are used
to describe these patches. These are the input to a boosting model which differentiates object proposals from background. Finally a
Category CNN is employed to classify the proposals from the Boosting classiﬁer into object categories.
are the ones that correspond to the ground truth annotated
objects, while negatives are deﬁned as rectangular sam-
ples randomly extracted from the training set at different
scales and aspect ratios, which have less than 0.3 Intersec-
tion over Union overlap with the positives. For our exper-
iments we considered patches sampled from the validation
sets of VOC 2007 and ImageNet 2013 detection datasets,
since both of them are exhaustively annotated1. Naturally
there is a margin for improvement with more sophisticated
sampling, given that the VOC and ILSVRC categories do
not include all possible object classes that can appear in an
image.
In order to properly crop the objects from the convolu-
tional responses along the hierarchy, the image level an-
notations have to be mapped to the corresponding regions
from the intermediate representations effectively. There-
fore, the supports of pooling and convolutional kernels de-
termine a band within the rectangular box which has to be
cropped out, so that information outside the object’s area
1This means that all object instances belonging to C classes
are fully annotated (C = 20 for Pascal, and C = 200 for Ima-
geNet data), which prevents us from extracting supposedly nega-
tive samples which actually correspond to objects.
can be safely ignored. In practice after two pooling stages
the area that should be cropped without including too much
background information becomes very narrow. In our ex-
periments we consider ﬁlter responses from the ﬁrst two
layers. We have found that using only kernels from the ﬁrst
convolutional layer, before any spatial pooling is applied,
gives the best performance.
Most ﬁrst-layer kernels resemble anisotropic Gaussians
and color blobs (cf. Fig. 1). As a matter of fact our method
relates to BING and EdgeBoxes, which use edge features,
and methods that use scores which account for color sim-
ilarity (e.g., Selective Search). By inspecting the convo-
lutional responses of the ﬁrst layer, we observe that some
kernels are able to capture the texture of certain objects and
thus disentangle them from the background and the other
objects (such as the ﬁrst and third kernels at Fig. 2). This
family of features provides quick detection, as the time-
consuming high-level segmentation is avoided. However,
it has the drawback that local information from lower lay-
ers cannot naturally compose non-rigid high-level objects.
Nevertheless, a subsequent regression step which leverages
features from the upper convolutional layers can help with
these cases. This is described at a following paragraph.

Boosting Convolutional Features for Robust Object Proposals
Figure 2. An image from Pascal VOC (Everingham et al., 2010)
and its convolutional responses with representative ﬁrst-layer ﬁl-
ters.
In order to classify object candidates a binary boosting
framework is trained with positive (green) and negative (red) sam-
ples which are extracted from CNN’s lower layers.
Testing: In order to detect objects in previously unseen
images we apply the learned classiﬁer in a sliding window
manner densely in S different scales and R aspect ratios.
We typically sample S = 12 scales and R = 3 aspect
ratios. Non-maximum suppression (NMS) is used to re-
ject detections with more than U Intersection over Union
overlap for every (scale, aspect ratio) combination. Finally,
after detections from all scales and aspect ratios are aggre-
gated, another joint NMS with V IoU is applied. We ex-
perimented with different parameters and we use U = 63%
and V = 90% in our reported results in Fig. 3.
Bounding-Box Regression: After extracting the proposals
per image, a subsequent regression step can be deployed to
reﬁne their localization. As proposed by (Girshick et al.,
2014), a linear regressor is used with regularization con-
stant λ = 1, 000. For training we use all ground truth anno-
tations Gi and our best detection P i per ground truth for all
training images i, i ∈{1, . . . , N} from Pascal VOC 2007.
The best detection is deﬁned as the one with the highest
overlap with the ground truth. We throw away pairs with
less than 70% IoU overlap. The goal of the regressor is
to learn how to shift the locations of P towards G given
the description of detected bounding box φ. The transfor-
mations are modeled as linear functions of pool5 features,
which are obtained by forward propagating the P regions
through the Proposal CNN.
3. Experiments
In order to test the efﬁcacy and performance of our al-
gorithm we performed experiments on data from the Im-
ageNet 2013 detection challenge2 (Deng et al., 2009).
We follow the approach proposed in the review paper of
(Hosang et al., 2014) and we report the obtained perfor-
mance vs. localization accuracy (Fig. 3) and number of
candidates per image (Fig.
4).
Speciﬁcally, we calcu-
late the recall of ground truth objects for various local-
ization thresholds using the Intersection-over-Union (IoU)
criterion, which is the standard metric on Pascal VOC. In
Fig. 3 we demonsrate our performance compared to state-
of-the-art methods and three baselines, as they have been
evaluated by (Hosang et al., 2014). Each algorithm is al-
lowed to propose up to 10, 000 regions per image on aver-
age. The methods are sorted based on the Area-Under-the-
Curve (AUC) metric, while in parentheses is the average
number of proposed regions per image.
Recall vs. localization: Our method belongs to the fam-
ily of algorithms with fast and approximate object detec-
tion, such as BING and EdgeBoxes. These algorithms pro-
vide higher recall rate but poorer localization as opposed
to methods that use high-level segmentation cues like Se-
lective Search. The latter ones are considerably slower but
more accurate in localizing the objects due to boundary in-
formation. In Table 1 we provide the recall rate for vary-
ing localization accuracy via IoU criterion. Our method
provides the highest recall until around 65% IoU overlap.
We also provide in Fig. 3 and Table 1 the gain in per-
formance when we jointly use Selective Search and our
method while still constraining the number of proposals to
be less than 10, 000. In that case the beneﬁt is mutual, as
Selective Search provides better localization, while our al-
gorithm higher recall, i.e, higher retrieval rate of ground
truth objects for localization accuracy less than 65% IoU.
A small subset of images have been blacklisted in the eval-
uation process per ILSVRC policy.
Time analysis: The complexity on testing is linear to each
of the number of deployed classiﬁers, scales, aspect ratios,
and image size, when the other parameters are held con-
stant. In Table 1 an estimation of average time on testing
is shown at the last column for our framework and others,
as the latter ones have been evaluated by (Hosang et al.,
2014).
Our algorithm is quite efﬁcient in both training
and testing. More speciﬁcally, extracting convolutional re-
sponses for the validation image set of ImageNet 2013 de-
tection benchmark takes only a few minutes with Caffe (Jia
et al., 2014) on a modern machine (e.g., testing one image
with a single K40 GPU takes 2ms) mainly because of time
needed to save the features. However, this can be done of-
2As opposed to the training set for both the boosting frame-
work and the regressor, which is Pascal 2007 VOC.

Boosting Convolutional Features for Robust Object Proposals
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Imagenet 2013 validation set
IoU overlap threshold
recall
 
 
85.0% (9,813) deep feats/sel search
83.3% (8,704) selective search
79.6% (5,514) random prim
79.4% (4,696) MCG
76.7% (3,673) edge boxes
76.4% (9,927) deep feats
73.3% (10,000) gaussian
70.4% (1,796) endres
66.6% (9,812) sliding window
64.3% (9,809) BING
52.3% (830) superpixels
Figure 3. Proposals quality on ImageNet 2013 validation set when at most 10,000 regions are proposed per image. On recall versus IoU
threshold curves, the number indicates area under the curve (AUC), and the number in parenthesis is the obtained average number of
proposals per image. Statistics of comparison methods come from (Hosang et al., 2014). Our curves are drawn dashed.
Recall (%) for various IoU thresholds
IoU ≥0.5
IoU ≥0.65
IoU ≥0.8
Testing time (s)
Selective Search (Uijlings et al., 2013)
94.6
89.0
72.2
10
Randomized Prim (Manen et al., 2013)
92.3
82.0
61.2
1
MCG (Arbel´aez et al., 2014)
91.8
81.0
60.6
30
Edge Boxes (Zitnick & Doll´ar, 2014)
93.1
86.6
49.7
0.3
Boosting Convolutional Features
98.1
89.4
38.7
2
Endres 2010 (Endres & Hoiem, 2010)
81.1
67.7
46.4
100
BING (Cheng et al., 2014)
95.5
43.0
7.2
0.2
Boosting Conv Features and Selective Search
97.7
91.9
75.3
12
Gaussian
85.3
72.5
51.3
0
Sliding window
90.8
56.9
14.1
0
Superpixels
51.3
26.7
10.0
1
Table 1. A comparison of our method with various category-independent object detectors on the Validation set of ImageNet2013 detec-
tion data. We compare in terms of recall of ground truth object annotations for various overlap thresholds. In order to be consistent
with the literature, the strict Intersection-over-Union (IoU) Pascal VOC criterion is used. The methods are sorted according to the AUC,
similarly to Fig. 3. In bold font the top-2 methods per IoU threshold. Representative testing times are shown at the last column.

Boosting Convolutional Features for Robust Object Proposals
ﬂine for popular datasets. Training a modiﬁed version of
boosting framework (Appel et al., 2013) which is now part
of Dollar’s Matlab toolbox (Doll´ar, 2013) on Pascal VOC
2007 data (train-val and test, i.e., 9,963 images with 24, 640
annotated objects) with a high-end multi-core CPU takes
about three hours. This consists of training on all positives
and 20k negatives, and additionally three rounds of boot-
strapping, when at each round 20k more negatives are ex-
tracted among classiﬁer’s false positives. The training time
increases for larger values of baseline detector’s size, such
as d = 40. But this still does not affect the testing time.
When testing the learned classiﬁer is applied densely in
sliding window fashion on 20, 121 validation images from
ImageNet detection. All possible windows in S = 12 dif-
ferent scales and R = 3 different aspect ratios are evaluated
by the classiﬁer, which outputs for each window its conﬁ-
dence to be an object. Greedy non-maximal suppression is
performed, where bounding boxes are processed in order of
decreasing conﬁdence, and once a box is suppressed it can
no longer suppress other boxes. Separate and joint NMS
are deployed with U = 63% and V = 90% IoU thresholds,
correspondingly. Testing on a multi-core CPU takes about
2s per image.
In Fig. 4 we show performance comparisons in terms of at
least 50% IoU recall for different number of proposed re-
gions. Our scheme is the most effective when at least 1, 000
regions are proposed. For a smaller number of proposals
the performance degrades fast. This is mainly because of
signiﬁcant non-maximal suppression that is applied to re-
duce the number of proposals, while starting from a large
number of scales and aspect ratios. In practice a more so-
phisticated design for less proposals can improve the recall
rate further especially in [100 −1, 000] region. For small
number of candidates an alternative strategy could be to
deploy regression to cluster neighboring regions in unique
detection, instead of using non-maximum suppression.
4. ImageNet detection challenge
In order to investigate in practice how the recall-
localization trade-off affects the effectiveness of the ob-
ject candidates on a detection task, we put the challenge
to the test and evaluate the overall performance on Ima-
geNet 2013 benchmark. We introduce our algorithm into
Regions-with-CNN detection framework (Girshick et al.,
2014) by replacing Selective Search (Uijlings et al., 2013)
and proposing our regions instead at the ﬁrst step.
In Table 2 we show the mean and median average preci-
sion on a subset of validation set. We use the {val1, val2}
split as was performed by (Girshick et al., 2014). We use
their pretrained CNN and SVM models as category CNN,
which are trained on {val1, train1k}, i.e., 9,887 validation
10
2
10
3
10
4
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Imagenet 2013 validation set
# candidates
recall for IoU>=50%
 
 
selective search
randomized Prim
MCG
edge boxes
boosting deep feats
gaussian
Endres
sliding window
BING
superpixels
Figure 4. Proposals quality on ImageNet 2013 validation set in
terms of detected objects with at least 50% IoU for various aver-
age number of candidates per image. Compared to all other meth-
ods from (Hosang et al., 2014), our method is the most effective in
terms of ground truth object retrieval when at least 1, 000 regions
are proposed and accurate localization is not a major concern.
images and 1,000 ground truth positives per class from c
lassiﬁcation set. The deployed Proposal CNN is the VGGs
model from (Chatﬁeld et al., 2014), which is pretrained
on ILSVRC2012 classiﬁcation dataset. Given that Selec-
tive Search is not scale-invariant, all images are rescaled
to have 900 pixels width while preserving the aspect ra-
tio. Thus, Selective Search proposes on average 5, 826 re-
gions per image. In (Girshick et al., 2014) all images are
rescaled to have 500 pixels width, which yields 29.7 and
29.2 mean and median AP for 2, 403 regions on average.
For our method we used the model that we demonstrate in
Figs. 3 and 4, which generates 9, 927 proposals on average.
Our improvement is a product of two factors; ﬁrst, higher
recall of ground truth objects within roughly 50 −70%
Average Precision (AP)
Mean AP
Median AP
Selective Search
31.5
30.2
Boosting Deep Feats
34.0
32.5
Table 2. Mean and median average precision on ImageNet 2013
detection task. We deploy the state-of-the-art Regions with Con-
volutional Neural Networks (R-CNN). Comparison when regions
are proposed by Selective Search and our method, correspond-
ingly. There is no post-processing regression step.

Boosting Convolutional Features for Robust Object Proposals
IoU threshold and, second, a larger number of propos-
als. Coarse localization is corrected to some extent from
subsequent steps of R-CNN due to the robustness of con-
volutional neural network in terms of object location and
partial occlusion.
Further improvement is expected if
class-speciﬁc regression is introduced at the top of pre-
diction, so that the detected bounding boxes are better
located around the objects, which could prove to be es-
pecially helpful in our algorithm given that we leverage
no boundary/segmentation cues. Finally, an ensemble of
models along with more sophisticated architectures (e.g.,
GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al., 2014a), MSRA PReLU-nets
(He et al., 2015), very-deep nets (Simonyan & Zisserman,
2014), etc.) could further improve our results.
5. Discussion
Features learned in convolutional neural networks have
been proven to be very discriminative in recognizing ob-
jects in natural images by mapping them on small man-
ifolds of a very higher-dimensional feature space.
The
boosting classiﬁer learns to map image data points to the
union of all these low-dimensional manifolds. We hypoth-
esize that it is still a relatively small subspace, which pre-
serves the notion of object and includes most instances that
can be found in popular visual datasets such as Pascal VOC
and ILSVRC.
In this paper we propose a framework which is able to
beneﬁt from the hierarchical and data-adaptive features ex-
tracted from a convolutional neural network, as well as
from the quick training and test time of state-of-the-art
boosting algorithms.
There are many directions to ex-
plore this idea further: in this paper the feature responses
extracted from different layers have equal weight during
training, but exploiting the hierarchy in a top-down fashion
might result in faster and more accurate predictions. Ad-
ditionally, a data-driven regression mechanism which cap-
tures gradient information could improve the localization
of regions proposed by our framework.
Our framework can also be applied to other areas, such
as medical imaging, text detection and planetary science.
Hand-engineering proposal detectors is quite challenging,
as we need to come up with new similarity metrics, saliency
and segmentation cues.
However, instead of designing
score functions and features from scratch for each new do-
main, learned deep convolutional features can be used, af-
ter a network has been trained on a sufﬁciently large and
representative sample of related data. Finally, non-linear
tree-based classiﬁers like boosting or random forests can
provide a framework for fast inference, while avoiding the
overhead of complete propagation in deep neural networks
and at the same time being ﬂexible to opt for a subset of
actionable features for the task.
