334 
On Supervised Selection of Bayesian Networks 
Petri Kontkanen 
Petri Myllymiiki 
Tomi Silander 
Henry Tirri 
Complex Systems Computation Group (CoSCo) 
P.O.Box 26, Department of Computer Science 
FIN-00014 University of Helsinki, Finland 
http://www .cs.Helsinki.FI/research/ coscof 
Abstract 
Given a set of possible models (e.g., Bayesian 
network structures) and a data sample, in the 
unsupervised model selection problem the 
task is to choose the most accurate model 
with respect to the domain joint probabil­
ity distribution. In contrast to this, in su­
pervised model selection it is a priori known 
that the chosen model will be used in the 
future for prediction tasks involving more 
"focused" predictive distributions. Although 
focused predictive distributions can be pro­
duced from the joint probability distribu­
tion by marginalization, in practice the best 
model in the unsupervised sense does not ne­
cessarily perform well in supervised domains. 
In particular, the standard marginal likeli­
hood score is a criterion for the unsupervised 
task, and, although frequently used for super­
vised model selection also, does not perform 
well in such tasks. In this paper we study 
the performance of the marginal likelihood 
score empirically in supervised Bayesian net­
work selection tasks by using a large num­
ber of publicly available classification data 
sets, and compare the results to those ob­
tained by alternative model selection criteria, 
including empirical crossvalidation methods, 
an approximation of a supervised marginal 
likelihood measure, and a supervised version 
of Dawid's prequential (predictive sequential) 
principle. The results demonstrate that the 
marginal likelihood score does not perform 
well for supervised model selection, while the 
best results are obtained by using Dawid's 
prequential approach. 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
One of the recent active areas in Bayesian network 
research has focused on the problem of learning the 
Bayesian network structure, given a sample of data 
from the problem domain. In most cases the approach 
for solving this problem is based on the idea of separ­
ating the model search and the scoring of the different 
models. In this paper we focus on the scoring aspect of 
the model selection problem; in other words, we are in­
terested in scoring functions, or {model selection) cri­
teria in terms of (Heckerman & Meek, 1997), which 
define what networks are considered "good" models. 
The most commonly used model selection criterion in 
the Bayesian network domain is the (unsupervised) 
marginal likelihood, sometimes also called the evid­
ence measure. By making certain technical assump­
tions, this criterion can be computed efficiently, as de­
scribed in (Cooper & Herskovits, 1992; Heckerman, 
Geiger, & Chickering, 1995). Although this score can 
be shown to possess some desirable theoretical prop­
erties (see (Bernardo & Smith, 1994; Merhav & Feder, 
1998)), the results hold only in specific situations. Re­
gardless of this, marginal likelihood is typically used 
also in model selection tasks where the optimality res­
ults no longer hold. One frequently occurring situation 
is the supervised model selection task, where the goal 
is to choose a model for a particular prediction task, 
for example, in a classification problem. Obviously 
in this case predictive distributions can be produced 
from the joint probability distribution corresponding 
to the model selected by the marginal likelihood score. 
However, as discussed e.g., in (Heckerman & Meek, 
1997), the marginal likelihood score is basically an un­
supervised learning criterion, and as such not neces­
sarily optimal for supervised model selection tasks. In 
this paper we study this claim in several classification 
domains, and demonstrate empirical results to support 
it. 

On Supervised Selection of Bayesian Networks 
335 
Another problem in using the marginal likelihood score 
for model selection is the fact that the score is in­
herently optimized for a particular loss function, i.e., 
for logarithmic loss. The predictive distribution de­
termined by a selected Bayesian network structure can, 
by using decision theory, be used for minimizing any 
given loss function. However, it should be observed 
that if the loss function is known in advance before 
choosing the model, for optimal performance it should 
already be taken into account in the model selection 
decision (see the discussion in (Dawid, 1992)). Modify­
ing the marginal likelihood approach for arbitrary loss 
functions is by no means straightforward (Griinwald, 
1998). 
On the other hand, focused prediction tasks, such 
as classification, can be seen to define a focused loss 
function, so in general we can say that unsupervised 
learning deals with the logarithmic loss in connection 
with the joint probability distribution, while super­
vised learning is related to other types of loss func­
tions. However, finding a more formal definition for 
the difference of unsupervised and supervised learn­
ing seems to be a difficult task. Instead of making 
an attempt towards this, in this paper we focus on 
the most typical supervised model selection problem, 
the task of selecting a model in a classification domain 
where the goal is to produce a predictive distribution 
for a single discrete class variable. In our experiments 
reported in Section 3.2, the predictive accuracy of the 
selected classifier model is measured by using both the 
0/1-loss and the logarithmic loss on this classification 
predictive distribution. Our goal was to empirically 
demonstrate that although frequently used in practice 
also in this type of classification domains, the unsuper­
vised marginal likelihood model selection score does 
not perform well in supervised model selection tasks. 
As an alternative to the unsupervised marginal likeli­
hood model selection score, we consider several other 
model selection criteria, including Dawid's prequen­
tial approach (Dawid, 1984), empirical crossvalidation 
methods (Stone, 1974; Geisser, 1975), and the su­
pervised marginal likelihood approximation discussed 
in (Kontkanen, Myllymaki, Silander, & Tirri, 1998). 
As opposed to the unsupervised marginal likelihood, 
these criteria can be easily modified for different loss 
functions. Dawid's prequential approach can also be 
shown to possess certain elegant asymptotic proper­
ties, but for some reason this method has been rarely 
used in practice. For our purposes, we modify the pre­
quential score for classification domains by using Cox's 
partial marginal likelihood principle (Cox, 1975) as 
suggested in (Dawid, 1991). In (Spiegelhalter, Dawid, 
Lauritzen, & Cowell, 1993), the resulting criterion was 
called the conditional node monitor. The third cri-
terion, the supervised modification of the marginal 
likelihood score, was called the class sequential cri­
terion in (Heckerman & Meek, 1997). The various 
scoring methods used are described in more detail in 
Section 2.2. 
The criteria discussed above were empirically evalu­
ated in different supervised model selection domains 
by using 18 public domain real-world classification 
data sets. As mentioned earlier, in this paper we con­
centrate on the problem of determining a good cri­
terion. Consequently, in order to eliminate the effect 
of model search, we wanted to restrict the model fam­
ily in such a way that in the empirical tests it would 
be possible to exhaustively score all the models in the 
chosen family. For this reason, the model family used 
in the tests reported in Section 3.2 was chosen to be 
the set containing all Bayesian network structures with 
the property that all the arcs start from the root node 
representing the class variable. 
The reasons for choosing this subset of Bayesian net­
works for this set of experiments are twofold. First 
of all, although the number of possible models in 
this setup is equal to the number of possible sub­
sets of the domain variables, and hence still quite 
large, by restricting ourselves to datasets with less 
than 15 variables we were able to perform the exhaust­
ive model search by using a network of Linux worksta­
tions. Secondly, all the models in the selected model 
family can be seen as "pruned Naive Bayes" models, 
which means that the model selection problem can in 
this case be regarded as a feature selection problem 
in the Naive Bayes classifier domain. As the Naive 
Bayes model is one of the most well-known models in 
classification domains, and the empirical results show 
that some of the selected model selection criteria con­
sistently improve the predictive accuracy of the model, 
the results are of practical relevance. 
We would like to emphasize that all the model selec­
tion criteria used in this paper are directly applicable 
to Bayesian networks in general, not just the Naive 
Bayes model or its variants. Therefore the experiments 
could be easily repeated with general Bayesian network 
structures, but in this case exhaustive model search 
would no longer be possible because of the huge num­
ber of possible models, and some kind of a search al­
gorithm would be needed for choosing candidate mod­
els. Consequently, in this case it would be difficult to 
say whether the differences in empirical results would 
be caused the properties of different model selection 
criteria, or by the bias caused by the search algorithm 
used. 
When compared to a related empirical study reported 
in (Friedman, Geiger, & Goldszmidt, 1997), the work 

336 
Kontkanen, Myllymaki, Silander, and Tirri 
presented here differs in several aspects. First, the em­
phasis on this paper is strictly on the problem of select­
ing the Bayesian network structure, while (Friedman 
et al., 1997) consider the problem of finding both the 
model structure and the model parameters. However, 
this difference is not crucial in the Bayesian network 
modeling framework where setting the parameter val­
ues to their expected values produces a predictive dis­
tribution which is equal to that obtained by integ­
rating over the parameters (Heckerman et al., 1995). 
Second, although both studies deal with extensions of 
the Naive Bayes model, (Friedman et al., 1997) try 
to relax the unrealistic Naive Bayes assumptions by 
adding arcs between the leaf nodes of the network (the 
TAN model), while in this paper we prune the Na­
ive Bayes network by removing arcs between the root 
node and the leaves. Third, although (Friedman et al., 
1997) recognize the need for supervised model selec­
tion criteria, for computational reasons they resort to 
unsupervised methods and focus on comparing results 
between different model families, while the goal of this 
paper is to compare the performance of supervised and 
unsupervised model selection criteria in supervised do­
mains by using a single (fixed) set of models. 
Our empirical results demonstrate that unsupervised 
marginal likelihood really shows mediocre perform­
ance in supervised model selection tasks. 
In addi­
tion, the supervised marginal likelihood modification 
also performs poorly, but we argue that this is caused 
by the crude approximation method used, not by the 
properties of the criterion itself (see the discussion 
in (Kontkanen et al., 1998)). Empirical crossvalida­
tion methods perform relatively well, which is not sur­
prising as they can be viewed as approximations of 
the supervised marginal likelihood, as demonstrated 
in Section 2.2.3. Most interestingly, the best results 
were obtained by using a supervised version of Dawid 's 
prequential approach. However, one caveat is that the 
performance of the prequential method depends on the 
ordering of the data sequence, hence a more thorough 
study on this aspect is an obvious topic for future work. 
The empirical supervised model selection test setup 
used in the tests is described in Section 3.1, and the 
results are summarized in Section 3.2. 
2 
SUPERVISED MODEL 
SELECTION 
2.1 
THE PROBLEM 
Let TJ = xN denote a matrix of N vectors each consist­
ing values of n random variables X1, ... , Xn. For sim­
plicity, in the sequel we will assume the random vari­
ables X; to be discrete. By a model M we mean here 
a parametric model form so that each parameterized 
instance (M, B) of the model produces a probability 
distribution P(X1, ... , Xn IM, B) on the space of pos­
sible data vectors x. To make our presentation more 
concrete, for the remainder of the paper we assume 
the models M to represent different Bayesian network 
structures (for an introduction to Bayesian network 
models, see e.g., (Pearl, 1988)). 
Given a selection F = { M1, ... , Mm} of possible mod­
els (Bayesian network structures), and a data sample 
TJ, in the (unsupervised) model selection problem, the 
task is to choose a model M so that the resulting pre­
dictive distribution 
P(XI, .. . , XniV, M) 
= j P(X1, .. . , XniV, M, B)P(BIV, M)dB 
yields the most accurate predictions. 
Two observations are now in order. First, the best 
model in the above sense depends on how we measure 
the accuracy of the resulting predictive distribution; 
in other words, on the loss function to be used for 
this purpose. Second, although it is intuitively ap­
pealing to think of the data TJ as a random sample 
from some "true" but unknown probability distribu­
tion, the model selection problem can be addressed 
without such an assumption. 
An excellent survey 
on the theoretical aspects of this topic can be found 
in (Merhav & Feder, 1998). 
By supervised model selection we mean a situation 
where the domain variables can be partitioned into two 
separate sets U = {U1, . . .  , Un} and V ={VI, . . .  , Vn' }, 
and we know a priori that all future prediction tasks 
involve predicting the values of variables in V, given 
the values of variables in set U. For notational simpli­
city, let us in the sequel assume that the set V consists 
of a single variable V, in which case we are dealing 
with classification problems. 
In the supervised classification framework described 
above, the goal in the model selection is thus to choose 
the model M which yields the most accurate classific­
ations with respect to the loss function used. It is 
now important to see that although the joint prob­
ability distribution P(xiM) can be used for produ­
cing the required classification probability distribution 
P(vlu,M), 
P(vlu, M) ex P(v, uiM) = P(xiM), 
the model M producing the most accurate predictive 
distribution in the joint probability estimation sense 
does not necessarily result in the most accurate clas­
sification probability distribution. 

On Supervised Selection of Bayesian Networks 
337 
2.2 
THE METHODS 
2.2.1 
Unsupervised and Supervised Marginal 
Likelihood 
One way to look at the model selection problem is to 
regard F as a random variable (with possible values 
M1, ... , Mm), and choose the model maximizing the 
posterior probability ?(MID). Assuming all the mod­
els to be equally probable a priori, this leads to choos­
ing the model M* maximizing the marginal likelihood 
or the evidence of the data D: 
M* 
argmaxP(MID) = argmaxP(DIM) 
M 
M 
(1) 
arg mx j P(DIM, B)P(BIM)dB. 
We see that the marginal likelihood measure depends 
on the prior distribution P(BIM) defined on the model 
parameters. This prior can either be regarded as a 
formalization of our prior domain knowledge, which 
leads to interesting questions about the compatibility 
of different priors (Heckerman & Geiger, 1995; Cow­
ell, 1992), or as a technical parameter representing no 
such information. In the latter case, it can be shown 
that a certain prior known as Jeffreys' prior (Jeffreys, 
1946; Berger, 1985) can be given strong theoretical 
justification from the predictive performance point of 
view with respect to the so called minimax loss formu­
lation (Rissanen, 1996; Grunwald, 1998). Some em­
pirical results concerning the effect of Jeffreys' prior 
on predictive accuracy can be found in (Grunwald, 
Kontkanen, Myllymiiki, Silander, & Tirri, 1998). In 
the remainder of this paper we do not address the 
problem of choosing the prior distributions, but use 
uniform priors for the parameters. 
The marginal likelihood measure ( 1) is the most com­
monly used model selection method in Bayesian net­
work learning. Nevertheless, although marginal like­
lihood is an unsupervised model selection method in 
the sense that the chosen model M* represents well 
the joint distribution P(X!, . . .  , Xn IM), the method 
is frequently used also for supervised model selection 
tasks where it may result in poor results. For this 
reason, in (Kontkanen et al., 1998) we suggested the 
following modification of the marginal likelihood to be 
used in supervised model selection tasks: 
(2) 
M* =argmaxP(vN l uN,M) 
M 
= arg mx J P(vN I UN, e, M)P(()IuN, M)dB. 
Unfortunately, using this supervised marginal likeli­
hood score is generally not computationally feasible 
even in the cases where the unsupervised marginal like­
lihood ( 1) could be computed efficiently. This can be 
seen by observing that 
(3) 
P(vN, uN I M) 
P(uN I M) 
P(vN,uN I M) 
The sum in the denominator goes over all the possible 
configurations of vector vN, which are exponential in 
number. Approximating this sum by the Cheeseman­
Stutz measure (Cheeseman & Stutz, 1996) leads to a 
criterion (see (Kontkanen et al., 1998)) where the su­
pervised marginal likelihood (2) is replaced by a single 
supervised likelihood 
N 
(4) 
P(vN I uN, M) II P(vN I uN, 0, M), 
i=l 
where the parameters iJ maximize the (unsupervised) 
parameter posterior probability . P(()lvN, uN, M). 
In (Kontkanen et al., 1998) it was noted that the de­
rivation of this approximation does not suggest using 
the supervised maximum likelihood parameters max­
imizing the supervised likelihood P(vN I UN, e, M), 
which are generally different from the (unsupervised) 
maximum likelihood parameters (see the discussion 
in (Friedman et al., 1997)). 
2.2.2 
Prequential Approaches 
In Dawid 's prequential (predictive sequential) ap­
proach for statistical validation of models (Dawid, 
1984), alternative models are compared by measuring 
their cumulative loss, so the validation score is com­
puted through a sequential updating of the predictive 
distribution. 
From the rules of probability theory it follows that 
N 
-logP(DIM) 
-log II P(x;lxi-1) 
i=l 
N 
(5) 
L -log P(x;lxi-1 ), 
i::::l 
from where it is easy to see that maximizing the mar­
ginal likelihood leads to choosing the model minim­
izing the cumulative sequential logarithmic loss (with 
respect to sample D). This means that marginal like­
lihood can be seen as a special case of the prequential 
approach for model selection. Furthermore, as noted 
in (Dawid, 1992), from the information-theoretic point 
of view the prequential approach can be regarded as a 
predictive coding system discussed in, e.g., (Rissanen, 
1989). However, it should be noted that in contrast 
to marginal likelihood and information-theoretic ap­
proaches, which are closely linked to a specific loss 

338 
Kontkanen, Myllymaki, Silander, and Tirri 
function, the logarithmic loss, Dawid's prequential 
principle can be modified for any loss function. 
The prequential model selection principle is usually 
described in the unsupervised model selection domain. 
For the supervised case, the approach has to be mod­
ified accordingly. Here we follow the suggestion given 
in (Dawid, 1991), and use the partial marginal likeli­
hood measure described in (Cox, 1975). The idea is 
based on the observation that the marginal likelihood 
can be factorized into two products as follows: 
P('D I M) 
(6) 
P(vN, uN I M) 
N 
II P(v;,u; lvi-t,ui-t,M) 
i=l 
N 
II P(v; lvi-l,ui,M) 
i=l 
N 
. II P(u; I vi-1, ui-1, M). 
i=l 
Of these two products, the first one was called the 
partial (marginal) likelihood in (Cox, 1975) and condi­
tional node monitor in (Spiegelhalter et al., 1993). We 
see that if we use the partial marginal likelihood as a 
basis for a prequential scoring function, this results in 
a sequential process where at time i, the classification 
predictive distribution 
P("l i-t 
; M) 
P("l i-t 
i-t 
M) 
YiV 
,U, 
= 
YiV 
,U 
,Ui, 
is computed by using the information preceding v; in 
the matrix 1J (assuming that the values of V are stored 
in the last column of 'D). Consequently, this approach 
produces the following principle for model selection: 
N 
(7) 
M* = arg m;;x II P(v; I vi-!, u;, M). 
i=l 
Please note that the model selected by the partial mar­
ginal likelihood approach (7) is usually not the same 
as the model selected by the supervised marginal like­
lihood approach (2), even if we could compute the su­
pervised marginal likelihood accurately. It is also im­
portant to notice that unlike with the unsupervised 
case ( 5), the value of the partial marginal likelihood 
Tif:1 P(v;lvi-1, ui-l, M) depends on the ordering of 
the data. We return to this question in Section 3.1. 
2.2.3 
Crossvalidation 
A frequently used empirical criterion for estimating 
the predictive accuracy of a model is provided by the 
crossvalidation method (Stone, 1974; Geisser, 1975). 
In this scheme, the training data is partitioned into k 
subsets of equal size, and each subset is used in turn 
as a validation set while the union of the other sub­
sets forms the data from which the predictive model 
is constructed. At each step, the loss associated with 
the resulting predictive model is computed by using 
the validation data, and the final estimate of the ex­
pected loss is the "crossvalidated" average over the k 
loss values. An extreme special case of the algorithm 
is the leave-one-out crossvalidation method, where a 
dataset of size N is partitioned into N subsets, each 
containing a single data vector. With the logarithmic 
loss, the leave-one-out crossvalidation model selection 
criterion is thus 
(8) M* = 
N 
argm;;x L - logP(vdvi
-l, Vi+!, ... , VN, uN, M). 
i=l 
The crossvalidation method has several appealing 
properties: the algorithm is easy to implement, is com­
putationally feasible (with moderate size datasets), 
can be used with different loss functions, and has ba­
sically only one parameter (k). Nevertheless, the the­
oretical properties of the method are not yet fully 
understood. What is more, the results with k-fold 
crossvalidation (with k < N) seem to be highly de­
pendent on the way the data is partitioned into the 
k folds (Kontkanen, Myllymaki, & Tirri, 1996). Of 
course, with leave-one-out crossvalidation this effect 
does not appear, and with k-fold crossvalidation we 
can try to avoid this problem for example by repeating 
the algorithm over several different data partitionings 
and averaging over the obtained results. 
In practice crossvalidation often works quite well. We 
can partly explain this empirical observation by noting 
the following connection between crossvalidation and 
the supervised marginal likelihood ( 3). First of all, it 
is easy to see that the supervised marginal likelihood 
can be factorized as follows: 
N 
-logP(vNiuN,M) 
= 
-logiiP(v;lvi-t,uN,M) 
(9) 
i=l 
N 
L -log P(v;lvi-l, uN, M), 
i=l 
where v; denotes the value of V on row z, t.e., the 
ith component of vector vN. The last term in the 
above sum, -logP(vN I vN-t,uN,M), is the same 
term as the last term in the sum in ( 8). 
In or­
der to compute the second to the last term in (9), 
-logP(vN-l I vN-2,uN,M), we need to marginalize 

On Supervised Selection of Bayesian Networks 
339 
over the values of VN: 
(10) P(vN-1 I vN-2,uN,M) 
= L P(vN-I IVN, vN-2, uN,M)P(VNivN-2, uN, M). 
VN 
This sum can be approximated by assuming that 
the value v N actually found in the data for the 
class variable V on row N gets probability one, 
while all the other values get probability zero: if 
P(VNivN-2,uN,M) = 1 for VN = VN, the sum (10) 
reduces to a single term, and we get: 
(11) P(vN-1 I vN-2,uN,M) 
$P(vN-1 I vN,vN-2,uN,M), 
which is exactly what is computed in the second to 
the last step of leave-one-out crossvalidation. Con­
tinuing this line of reasoning, we see that leave-one­
out-crossvalidation can be regarded as an approxima­
tion of the factorization (9), where each marginalizing 
sum is replaced by a single term. The k-fold crossval­
idation scheme can be given a similar interpretation 
by using a different factorization. 
3 
EMPIRICAL RESULTS 
3.1 
TEST SETUP 
For our supervised model selection experiments, we 
used publicly available classification datasets from the 
UCI data repository (Blake, Keogh, & Merz, 1998). 
As discussed earlier, we wanted to eliminate the effects 
of the model search procedure from our results, hence 
we restricted the possible models to Bayesian network 
structures sharing the property that all the existing 
arcs start from the root node representing the class 
variable. 
Consequently, in this setup the number of possible 
models equals to the number of different variable sub­
sets, and the models can be regarded as "pruned" ver­
sions of the standard Naive Bayes model where the 
class variable is connected to all the other variables. 
This allowed us to compute each model selection score 
exhaustively to all the possible models. Nevertheless, 
although we were capable of distributing the test runs 
to a network of Linux workstations, for pragmatic reas­
ons we had to restrict the number of variables to be 
under 15; this left us with 18 UCI datasets that were 
used in the experiments. 
As we wanted to average the results over all the 18 
datasets, which were of different size, a random sample 
of size 500 of each dataset was used in this set of ex­
periments. Datasets with continuous variables were 
discretized by using a discretization scheme based on 
Table 1: The model selection criteria used in the ex­
periments. 
LABEL 
fCV 
fCV* 
looCV 
uEVI 
-sEVI 
PREQ 
PREQ* 
TRloss 
CRITERION 
10-fold crossvalidation as described in 
Section 2.2.3. 
10-fold crossvalidation averaged over 
10 random data orderings. 
Leave-one-out crossvalidation as de­
scribed in Section 2.2.3. 
The unsupervised marginal likeli­
hood (1). 
The approximative supervised mar­
ginal likelihood ( 4). 
The 
supervised 
prequential 
cri­
terion (7). 
The supervised prequential criterion 
averaged 
over 
10 
random 
data 
orderings. 
The loss L(D I M) computed by eval­
uating the model M with the training 
data D by using either the 0/1-loss or 
the log-loss. 
the K-means clustering algorithm, and missing data 
items were replaced by a special character treated as 
a value of the corresponding discrete variable. 
A single experiment consisted of the following steps. 
1. The data ordering was first randomized while at 
the same time maintaining the class distributions 
as homogeneous as possible throughout the whole 
dataset, i.e., a stratified sample was created. 
2. The dataset was then split into two parts (of equal 
size): the training data D and the test data D'. 
3. After this, each possible model M was evaluated 
by using the selected scoring functions S, and for 
each S, the model M(S) maximizing the score 
S(M I D) was selected. 
4. The actual predictive performance of a model se­
lection method S was then measured by comput­
ing the prediction loss L(D' I M(S)) in the test 
set by using the selected model M ( S). 
Steps 1-4 were repeated 50 times with different strati­
fied random data orderings, and the average predic­
tion loss was reported as the performance score of 
the model selection scoring function S with respect 
to the dataset used. This whole procedure was then 
performed with all the 18 datasets, by using the the 
model scoring functions listed in Table 1. 

340 
Kontkanen, Myllymaki, Silander, and Tirri 
+1.5% 
+1.0% 
+0.5% 
±0.0% 
-0.5% 
-1.0% 
-1.5% 
-2.0% 
-2.5% 
..,;j 
-3.0% 
itJ 
-
0 
00 
00 
Figure 1: Average relative prediction gains with the 
0/1 loss. 
3.2 
THE RESULTS 
In order to be able to compare the overall performance 
of different methods in the 18 datasets used, the results 
were scaled with respect to the results obtained with 
the standard Naive Bayes model. In the sequel, we call 
the resulting score the relative prediction gain. This 
means that the relative prediction gain of the stand­
ard Naive Bayes model was always 0.0, and a relative 
prediction gain of, say, + 1.0 means that by using the 
corresponding model selection method, the predictive 
accuracy is on the average (averaged over the 18 data­
sets, and over the 50 data permutations within each 
dataset) 1% better (the average loss is 1.0% less) than 
what is obtained with the standard Naive Bayes model. 
The average relative prediction gains computed with 
respect to the 0/1-loss score and the log-loss score, re­
spectively, are shown in Figures 1 and 2. The optimal 
relative prediction gains (obtained by "cheating" and 
selecting the model after seeing the test data) in these 
two cases were 7.55% with the 0/1-loss, and 22.37% 
with the logarithmic loss. 
"C 
itJ 
t:'!J 
D 
+9.0% 
* 
+8.0% 
..,;j 
itJ 
-
+7.0% 
0 
00 
00 
+6.0% 
+5.0% 
+4.0% 
+3.0% 
+2.0% 
+1.0% 
Figure 2: Average relative prediction gains with the 
logarithmic loss. 
From these results, we can make the following observa­
tions. First of all, as expected, the unsupervised mar­
ginal likelihood score turned out to perform poorly in 
supervised model selection tasks. As a matter fact, 
with the 0/1-loss the average relative prediction gain 
of uEVI was below zero, which means that in this 
case better results were obtained by using no model 
selection at all than by using model selection with the 
uEVI score. The approximative supervised marginal 
likelihood -sEVI did not improve the results. We be­
lieve this is caused by the crude approximation ( 4), 
which collapses the supervised marginal likelihood into 
a single supervised likelihood corresponding to the 
TRloss method in the log-loss case. 
The best results were obtained with the PREQ* 
method, both with the 0/1-loss and the logarithmic 
loss. The empirical crossvalidation schemes performed 
also well, especially with the log-score, which can be 
partly explained by the connection between crossvalid­
ation and supervised marginal likelihood, as discussed 
in Section 2.2.3. It should also be noted that of the 
data order-dependent methods, both fCV and PREQ 
results improved when the corresponding score was 
computed by averaging over several data orderings. 
This is particularly noteworthy considering the success 

On Supervised Selection of Bayesian Networks 
341 
of the PREQ* method. Consequently, studying more 
elaborate schemes for improving the performance of 
the prequential approach in small sample size domains 
seems to offer a promising research area. 
In addition to the results shown above, we also run 
extensive empirical tests using several other super­
vised and unsupervised model selection criteria, but 
the results were in these cases so poor that they have 
been excluded from the pictures in order not to dis­
tort the scaling of the histograms. However, we would 
like to mention that our empirical results support 
the observations reported in (Friedman et al., 1997), 
where it was discovered that the so called MDL score 
did not perform very well. In our setup, the relat­
ive prediction gains obtained by this criterion were 
-11.38% with the 0/1-loss, and -61.11% with the log­
arithmic loss. Nevertheless, this result cannot be con­
sidered surprising: what (Friedman et al., 1997) call 
the MDL score is actually only an approximation of the 
unsupervised marginal likelihood, also known as the 
Bayesian information criterion (BIG) or the Schwarz 
criterion (Schwarz, 1978). What is more, from the in­
formation theoretic point of view, the two-part MDL 
score used in (Friedman et al., 1997) can be regarded 
as a crude approximation of the stochastic complexity 
measure (Rissanen, 1989), for which much more elab­
orate formulations can be found in (Rissanen, 1996; 
Barron, Rissanen, & Yu, 1998). 
However, as dis­
cussed in (Kontkanen, Myllymaki, Silander, Tirri, & 
Grunwald, 1999; Friedman et al., 1997), these criteria 
are inherently unsupervised, and establishing super­
vised variants of them seems to be a difficult task. 
4 
CONCLUSIONS 
We have empirically compared the performance of un­
supervised and supervised model selection criteria in 
several supervised classification domains. The extens­
ive empirical tests show that the supervised criteria 
clearly outperform the unsupervised methods, and 
that using a supervised model selection scheme gen­
erally improves the prediction accuracy, and is hence 
a reasonable thing to do in practice. 
The best results were obtained by using Dawid's pre­
quential approach, but also the empirical crossvalida­
tion techniques showed good performance. The suc­
cess of crossvalidation can be partly explained by the 
discussed connection between crossvalidation and the 
supervised marginal likelihood criterion: crossvalida­
tion can be regarded as an approximation of this the­
oretical criterion which cannot be computed exactly in 
feasible time. 
One of the most interesting empirical observations was 
the fact that the performance of the order-dependent 
methods could be improved by a very simple averaging 
scheme. 
Consequently, although asymptotically the 
data order bears no relevance in prequential analysis, 
our results suggest that development of more elaborate 
prequential schemes for small sample cases constitutes 
a practically significant research area. 
The model family used in this set of experiments con­
sisted of "pruned Naive Bayes" network structures. By 
restricting ourselves to this limited subset of Bayesian 
networks we were capable of computing the model se­
lection criteria for all the models in the model family, 
thus preventing any possible bias caused by a search 
algorithm going through the space of all Bayesian net­
works. 
Of course, we have to admit the possibility 
that by focusing on this limited subfamily of Bayesian 
networks we may have caused a bias in the results ob­
tained. On the other hand, it can also be argued that 
any search algorithm causes an implicit bias in the res­
ults, which makes a fair comparison between different 
model selection criteria quite difficuh. 
Finally, we would like to point out that the empirical 
setup used was designed solely for comparing differ­
ent criteria in the task of choosing between alternative 
models - the goal was not to try to estimate the fu­
ture predictive accuracy per se, which is a much more 
difficult task. Studying this problem was left as a topic 
for future work.
