1
Winning solutions and post-challenge
analyses of the ChaLearn AutoDL
challenge 2019
Zhengying Liu*, Adrien Pavao*, Zhen Xu*, Sergio Escalera, Fabio Ferreira, Isabelle Guyon, Sirui
Hong, Frank Hutter, Rongrong Ji, Julio C. S. Jacques Junior, Ge Li, Marius Lindauer, Zhipeng
Luo, Meysam Madadi, Thomas Nierhoff, Kangning Niu, Chunguang Pan, Danny Stoll, Sebastien
Treguer, Jin Wang, Peng Wang, Chenglin Wu, Youcheng Xiong, Arb¨er Zela, Yang Zhang
.
Abstract— This paper reports the results and post-challenge analyses of ChaLearn’s AutoDL challenge series, which
helped sorting out a profusion of AutoML solutions for Deep Learning (DL) that had been introduced in a variety of
settings, but lacked fair comparisons. All input data modalities (time series, images, videos, text, tabular) were formatted
as tensors and all tasks were multi-label classiﬁcation problems. Code submissions were executed on hidden tasks, with
limited time and computational resources, pushing solutions that get results quickly. In this setting, DL methods dominated,
though popular Neural Architecture Search (NAS) was impractical. Solutions relied on ﬁne-tuned pre-trained networks,
with architectures matching data modality. Post-challenge tests did not reveal improvements beyond the imposed time
limit. While no component is particularly original or novel, a high level modular organization emerged featuring a
“meta-learner”, “data ingestor”, “model selector”, “model/learner”, and “evaluator”. This modularity enabled ablation
studies, which revealed the importance of (off-platform) meta-learning, ensembling, and efﬁcient data management.
Experiments on heterogeneous module combinations further conﬁrm the (local) optimality of the winning solutions. Our
challenge legacy includes an ever-lasting benchmark (http://autodl.chalearn.org), the open-sourced code of the winners,
and a free “AutoDL self-service”.
Index Terms—AutoML, Deep Learning, Meta-learning, Neural Architecture Search, Model Selection, Hyperparameter
Optimization
!
t
1
INTRODUCTION
The AutoML problem asks whether one could have
a single algorithm (an AutoML algorithm) that can
perform learning on a large spectrum of tasks with
consistently good performance, removing the need for
*The ﬁrst three authors contributed equally. The other authors are in al-
phabetical order of last name. The corresponding author is: Zhengying

human expertise (in deﬁance of “No Free Lunch” theo-
rems [1], [2], [3]). Our goal is to evaluate and foster the
improvement of methods that solve the AutoML prob-
lem, emphasizing Deep Learning approaches. To that
end, we organized in 2019 the Automated Deep Learn-
ing (AutoDL) challenge series [4], which provides a
reusable benchmark suite. Such challenges encompass
January 12, 2022
DRAFT
arXiv:2201.03801v1  [cs.LG]  11 Jan 2022

2
a variety of domains in which Deep Learning has been
successful: computer vision, natural language process-
ing, speech recognition, as well as classic tabular data
(feature-vector representation).
AutoML is crucial to accelerate data science and re-
duce the need for data scientists and machine learning
experts. For this reason, much effort has been drawn
towards achieving true AutoML, both in academia
and the private sector. In academia, AutoML chal-
lenges [5] have been organized and collocated with
top machine learning conferences such as ICML and
NeurIPS to motivate AutoML research in the ma-
chine learning community. The winning approaches
from such prior challenges (e.g. auto-sklearn [6]) are
now widely used both in research and in industry.
More recently, interest in Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) has exploded [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. On the
industry side, many companies such as Microsoft [12]
and Google are developing AutoML solutions. Google
has also launched various AutoML [13], NAS [14],
[15], [16], [17], and meta-learning [18], [19] research
efforts. Most of the above approaches, especially those
relying on Hyper-Parameter Optimization (HPO) or
NAS, require signiﬁcant computational resources and
engineering time to ﬁnd good models. Additionally,
reproducibility is impaired by undocumented heuris-
tics [20].
Drawn by the aforementioned great po-
tential of AutoML in both academia and industry, a
collaboration led by ChaLearn, Google and 4Paradigm
was launched in 2018 and a competition in AutoML
applied to Deep Learning was conceived, which was
the inception of the AutoDL challenge series. To our
knowledge, this was the ﬁrst machine learning com-
petition (series) ever soliciting AutoDL solutions. In
the course of the design and implementation we had
to overcome many difﬁculties. We made extensive
explorations and revised our initial plans, leading
us to organize a series of challenges rather than a
single one. In this process, we formatted 66 datasets
constituting a reusable benchmark resource. Our data
repository is still growing, as we continue organizing
challenges on other aspects of AutoML, such as the
recent AutoGraph competition. In terms of competi-
tion protocol, our design provides a valuable example
of a system that evaluate AutoML solutions, with fea-
tures such as (1) multiple tasks execution aggregated
with average rank metric; (2) emphasis on any-time
learning that urges trade-off between accuracy and
learning speed; (3) separation of feedback phase and
ﬁnal blind test phase that prevents leaderboard over-
ﬁtting. Our long-lasting effort in preparing and run-
ning challenges for 2 years is harvested in this paper,
which analyses more particularly the last challenge
in the series (simply called AutoDL), which featured
datasets from heterogeneous domains, as opposed to
previous challenges that were domain speciﬁc.
The AutoDL challenge analysed in this paper is
the culmination of the AutoDL challenge series, whose
major motivation is two-fold. First, we desire to con-
tinue promoting the community’s research interests on
AutoML to build universal AutoML solutions that can
be applied to any task (as long as the data is collected
and formatted in the same manner). By choosing tasks
in which Deep Learning methods excel, we put gentle
pressure on the community to improve on Automated
Deep Learning. Secondly, we create a reusable bench-
mark for fairly evaluating AutoML approaches, on a
wide range of domains. Since computational resources
and time cost can be a non-negligible factor, we in-
troduce an any-time learning metric called Area under
Learning Curve (ALC) (see Section 2.3) for the evalua-
tion of participants’ approaches, taking into considera-
tion both the ﬁnal performance (e.g. accuracy) and the
speed to achieve this performance (using wall-time).
As far as we know, the AutoDL challenges are the only
competitions that adopt a similar any-time learning
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

3
TABLE 1: Basic facts on AutoDL challenges.
Challenge
Begin date
End date
#Teams
#Submis-
#Phases
2019
2019-20
sions
AutoCV1
May 1
Jun 29
102
938
1
AutoCV2
Jul 2
Aug 20
34
336
2
AutoNLP
Aug 2
Aug 31
66
420
2
AutoSpeech
Sep 16
Oct 16
33
234
2
AutoDL
Dec 14
Apr 3
28
80
2
metric.
Acknowledging the difﬁculty of engineering uni-
versal AutoML solutions, we ﬁrst organized four pre-
liminary challenges. Each of them focused on a speciﬁc
application domain. These included: AutoCV for im-
ages, AutoCV2 for images and videos, AutoNLP for
natural language processing (NLP) and AutoSpeech
for speech recognition. Then, during NeurIPS 2019 we
launched the ﬁnal AutoDL challenge that combined all
these application domains, and tabular data. All these
challenges shared the same competition protocol and
evaluation metric (i.e. ALC) and provided data in a
similar format. All tasks were multi-label classiﬁcation
problems.
For domain-speciﬁc challenges such as AutoCV,
AutoCV2, AutoNLP and AutoSpeech, the challenge
results and analysis are presented in [4] and some
basic information can be found in Table 1. During
the analysis of these previous challenges, we already
had several ﬁndings that were consistent with what
we present in this paper. These include the winning
approaches’ generalization ability on unseen datasets.
However it was not clear which components in the
AutoML workﬂow contributed the most, which we
will clarify in this work thanks to extensive ablation
studies. In this work, we focus on the ﬁnal AutoDL
challenge with all domains combined together. Some
of the principal questions we aimed at answering in
this challenge ended up being answered, with the
help of fact sheets that participants ﬁlled out, and
some from the post-challenge experiment, as detailed
further in the paper. The main highlights are now
brieﬂy summarized.
First of all, were the tasks of the challenge of a
difﬁculty adapted to push the state-of-the-art in Au-
tomated Deep Learning? On one hand YES, since (1)
the top two ranking participants managed to pass all
ﬁnal tests without code failure and delivered solutions
on new tasks (trained and tested without human inter-
vention), performing signiﬁcantly better than the base-
line methods, within the time/memory constraints,
and (2) all teams used Deep Learning as part of their
solutions. This conﬁrms that Deep Learning is well
adapted to the chosen domains (CV, NLP, speech).
As further evidence that we hit the right level of
challenge duration and difﬁculty, 90% of teams found
the challenge duration sufﬁcient and 50% of teams
found the time and computational resources sufﬁcient.
On the other hand NO, since (1) all of the top-9 teams
used a domain-dependent approach, treating each
data modality separately (i.e. using hard-coded if..else
clauses and will probably fail on new unseen domains
such as other sensor data); and (2) the time budget was
too constraining to do any Neural Architecture Search;
and (3) complex heterogeneous ensembles including
non Deep Learning methods were used.
Secondly, was the challenge successful in fos-
tering progress in “any-time learning”? The learn-
ing curve examples in Figures 2 and 12a show that
for most datasets, convergence was reached within
20 minutes (more experimental results presented in
Section 5.3). A fast increase in performance early on in
the learning curve demonstrates that the participants
made a serious effort to deliver solutions quickly,
which is an enormous asset in many applications
needing a quick turnover and for users having modest
computational resources.
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

4
Finally, from the research point of view, a burning
question is whether progress was made in “meta-
learning”, the art of learning from past tasks to per-
form better on new tasks? There is evidence that the
solutions provided by the participants generalize well
to new tasks, since they performed well in the ﬁnal test
phase. To attain these results, seven out of the nine
top ranking teams reported that they used the pro-
vided “public” datasets for meta-learning purposes.
In Section 5.1 we used ablation studies to evaluate the
importance of using meta-learning and in Section 5.4
we analyzed how well the solutions provided meta-
generalize.
Thus, while we are still far from an ultimate Au-
toML solution that learns from scratch for ALL do-
mains (in the spirit of [17]), we made great strides with
this challenge towards democratizing Deep Learn-
ing by signiﬁcantly reducing human effort. The in-
tervention of practitioners is reduced to formatting
data in a speciﬁed way; we provide code for that at
https://autodl.chalearn.org, as well as the code of the
winners.
The contributions of this work are:
•
We provide a viable and working example
system that evaluates AutoML and AutoDL
solutions, using average rank, multiple-task ex-
ecution and any-time learning metric;
•
We provide an end-to-end toolkit 1 for for-
matting data into the AutoDL format used
in the challenges, also allowing new users to
contribute new tasks to our repository and use
our “AutoDL self service” (see below);
•
All winning solutions’ code is open-sourced
and we provide an “AutoDL Self-Service”2 that
1. https://github.com/zhengying-liu/autodl-contrib
2. https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/27082
facilitates the application of the top-1 winning
solution (DeepWisdom) for making predictions;
•
We provide a detailed description of the win-
ning methods and ﬁt them into a common
AutoML workﬂow, which suggests a possible
direction of future AutoML systems;
•
We carry out extensive ablation studies on
various components of the winning teams and
show the importance of meta-learning, ensem-
bling and efﬁcient data loading;
•
We explore the possibility of combining differ-
ent approaches for a stronger approach and it
turns out to be hard, which suggests the local
optimality of the winning methods;
•
We study the impact of some design choices
(such as the time budget and the parameter t0)
and justify these choices.
The rest of this work is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we give a brief overview of the challenge
design (see [21] for detailed introduction). Then, de-
scriptions of winning methods are given in Section 4
and in Appendix. Post-challenge analyses, including
ablation study results, is presented in Section 5. Lastly,
we conclude the work in Section 6.
2
CHALLENGE DESIGN
2.1
Data
In AutoDL challenges, raw data (images, videos, au-
dio, text, etc) are provided to participants formatted
in a uniform tensor manner (namely TFRecords, a
standard generic data format used by TensorFlow).
3 For images with native compression formats (e.g.
JPEG, BMP, GIF), we directly use the bytes. Our
data reader decodes them on-the-ﬂy to obtain a 4D
3. To avoid privileging a particular type of Deep Learning
framework, we also provided a data reader to convert the data
to PyTorch format.
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

5
Fig. 1: Distribution of AutoDL challenge dataset
domains with respect to compressed storage size in
gigabytes and total number of examples for all 66
AutoDL datasets. We see that the text domain varies
a lot in terms of number of examples but remains
small in storage size. The image domain varies a lot in
both directions. Video datasets are large in storage size
in general, without surprise. Speech and time series
datasets have fewer number of examples in general.
Tabular datasets are concentrated and are small in
storage size.
tensor. Video ﬁles in mp4/avi format (without the
audio track) are used in a similar manner. For text
datasets, each example (i.e. a document) is a sequence
of integer indices. Each index corresponds to a word
(for English) or character (for Chinese) in a vocabulary
given in the metadata. For speech datasets, each exam-
ple is represented by a sequence of ﬂoating numbers
specifying the amplitude at each timestamp, similar to
uncompressed WAV format. Lastly, tabular datasets’
feature vector representation can be naturally consid-
ered as a special case of our 4D tensor representation.
For practical reasons, each dataset was kept under
2.5 GB, which required sometimes reducing image
resolution, cropping, and/or downsampling videos.
We made sure to include application domains in
which the scales varied a lot. We formatted around
100 datasets in total and used 66 of them for AutoDL
challenges: 17 image, 10 video, 16 text, 16 speech
and 7 tabular. The distribution of domain and size
is visualized in Figure 1. All datasets marked public
can be downloaded on corresponding challenge web-
sites 4 and information on some meta-features of all
AutoDL datasets can be found on the “Benchmark”
page5 of our website. All tasks are supervised multi-
label classiﬁcation problems, i. e. data samples are
provided in pairs {X, Y }, X being an input 4D tensor
of shape (time, row, col, channel) and Y a target binary
vector (withheld from in test data). We have carefully
selected the datasets out of 100 possibilities using two
criteria: (1) having a high variance in the scores ob-
tained by different baselines (modelling difﬁculty) and
(2) having a relatively large number of test examples
to ensure reasonable error bars (at least 1 signiﬁcant
digit) [22].
For the datasets of AutoDL challenge, we are not
releasing their identities at this stage to allow us
reusing them in future challenges. Some potential uses
are discussed in Section 6. However, we summarize
their name, domain and other meta-features in Table 2.
These datasets will appear in our analysis frequently.
2.2
Blind testing
A hallmark of the AutoDL challenge series is that the
code of the participants is blind tested, without any
human intervention, in uniform conditions imposing
restrictions on training and test time and memory
resources, to push the state-of-the-art in automated
machine learning. The challenge had 2 phases:
1)
A feedback phase during which methods
were trained and tested on the platform on
ﬁve practice datasets, without any human
4. https://autodl.lri.fr/competitions/162
5. https://autodl.chalearn.org/benchmark
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

6
TABLE 2: Datasets of the AutoDL challenge, for both phases. The ﬁnal phase datasets (meta-test datasets) vary
a lot in terms of number of classes, number of training examples, and tensor dimension, compared to those in
the feedback phase. This was one of the difﬁculties of the AutoDL challenge. “chnl” codes for channel, “var” for
variable size, “CE pair” for “cause-effect pair”. More information on all 66 datasets used in AutoDL challenges
can be found at https://autodl.chalearn.org/benchmark.
Class
Sample number
Tensor dimension
#
Dataset
Phase
Topic
Domain
num.
train
test
time
row
col
chnl
1
Apollon
feedback
people
image
100
6077
1514
1
var
var
3
2
Monica1
feedback
action
video
20
10380
2565
var
168
168
3
3
Sahak
feedback
speech
time
100
3008
752
var
1
1
1
4
Tanak
feedback
english
text
2
42500
7501
var
1
1
1
5
Barak
feedback
CE pair
tabular
4
21869
2430
1
1
270
1
6
Ray
ﬁnal
medical
image
7
4492
1114
1
976
976
3
7
Fiona
ﬁnal
action
video
6
8038
1962
var
var
var
3
8
Oreal
ﬁnal
speech
time
3
2000
264
var
1
1
1
9
Tal
ﬁnal
chinese
text
15
250000
132688
var
1
1
1
10
Bilal
ﬁnal
audio
tabular
20
10931
2733
1
1
400
1
11
Cucumber
ﬁnal
people
image
100
18366
4635
1
var
var
3
12
Yolo
ﬁnal
action
video
1600
836
764
var
var
var
3
13
Marge
ﬁnal
music
time
88
9301
4859
var
1
1
1
14
Viktor
ﬁnal
english
text
4
2605324
289803
var
1
1
1
15
Carla
ﬁnal
neural
tabular
2
60000
10000
1
1
535
1
intervention. During the feedback phase, the
participants could make several submissions
per day and get immediate feedback on a
leaderboard. The feedback phase lasted 4
months. Obviously, since they made so many
submissions, the participants could to some
extent get used to the feedback datasets. For
that reason, we also had:
2)
A ﬁnal phase using ten fresh datasets. Only
ONE FINAL CODE submission was allowed
in that phase.
Since this was a complete blind evaluation dur-
ing BOTH phases, we provided additional “public”
datasets for practice purposes and to encourage meta-
learning.
We ran the challenge on the CodaLab platform
(http://competitions.codalab.org), which is an open
source project of which we are community lead. Co-
daLab is free for use for all. We use to run the cALCu-
lations a donation of Google of $100,000 cloud credits.
We prepared a docker including many machine learn-
ing toolkits and scientiﬁc programming utilities, such
as Tensorﬂow, PyTorch and scikit-learn. We ran the
jobs of the participants in virtual machines equipped
with NVIDIA Tesla P100 GPUs. These virtual ma-
chines run CUDA 10 with drivers cuDNN 7.5 and 4
vCPUs, with 26 GB of memory, 100 GB disk. One VM
was entirely dedicated to the job of one participant
during its execution. Each execution must run in less
than 20 minutes (1200 seconds) for each dataset.
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

7
Fig. 2: Learning curves of top-9 teams (together with
one baseline) on the text dataset Viktor from the Au-
toDL challenge ﬁnal phase. We observe different pat-
terns of learning curves, revealing various strategies
adopted by participating teams. The curve of DeepWis-
dom goes up quickly at the beginning but stabilizes at
an inferior ﬁnal performance (and also inferior any-
time performance) than DeepBlueAI. In terms of num-
ber of predictions made during the whole train/pre-
dict process (20 minutes), many predictions are made
by DeepWisdom and DeepBlueAI but (much) fewer are
made by the other teams. Finally, although different
patterns are found, some teams such as team zhaw, sur-
romind and automl freiburg show very similar patterns.
This is because all teams adopted a domain-dependent
approach and some teams simply used the code of
Baseline 3 for certain domains (text in this case).
2.3
Metric
The AutoDL challenge encouraged learning in a short
time period both by imposing a small time budget of
20 minutes per task and by using an “any-time learn-
ing” metric. Speciﬁcally, within the time budget, the
algorithm could make several predictions (as many as
they wanted), along the whole execution. This allowed
us to use as performance score the Area under the
Learning Curve (ALC):
ALC =
Z 1
0
s(t)d˜t(t)
=
Z T
0
s(t)˜t′(t)dt
=
1
log(1 + T/t0)
Z T
0
s(t)
t + t0
dt
(1)
where s(t) is the performance score (we used the
NAUC score introduced below) at timestamp t and
˜t is the transformed time
˜t(t) = log(1 + t/t0)
log(1 + T/t0).
(2)
Here T denotes the time budget in seconds (e.g.
T = 1200) and t0 is a pre-deﬁned time parameter, also
in seconds (e.g. t0 = 60). Examples of learning curves
can be found in Figure 2). The participants can train
in increments of a chosen duration (not necessarily
ﬁxed) to progressively improve performance, until the
time limit is attained. Performance is measured by the
NAUC or Normalized Area Under ROC Curve (AUC)
NAUC = 2 × AUC −1
averaged over all classes. More details of the challenge
protocol and evaluation workﬂow can be found in
Appendix A and in Figure 13. Multi-class classiﬁcation
metrics are not being considered, i. e. each class is
scored independently. Since several predictions can
be made during the learning process, this allows us
to plot learning curves, i. e. “performance” (on test
set) as a function of time. Then for each dataset, we
compute the Area under Learning Curve (ALC). The
time axis is log scaled (with time transformation in
(4)) to put more emphasis on the beginning of the
curve. This way, we encourage participants to develop
techniques that improve performance rapidly at the
beginning of the training process. This should be im-
portant to treat large redundant and/or imbalanced
datasets and small datasets alike, e. g. by treating
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

8
effectively redundancy in large training datasets or
using learning machines pre-trained on other data if
training samples are scarce. Finally, in each phase, an
overall rank for the participants is obtained by aver-
aging their ALC ranks obtained on each individual
dataset. The average rank in the ﬁnal phase is used
to determine the winners. The use of the average
rank allows us to fuse scores of different scales. Also,
this ranking method satisﬁes some desired theoretical
properties; it is in particular consistent [23]: whenever
the datasets are divided (arbitrarily) into several parts
and the average rankings of those parts garner the
same ranking, then an average ranking of the entire
set of datasets also garners that ranking. This implies
notably that removing a dataset from the evaluation
can’t help an algorithm top-ranked on this dataset to
win. Moreover, this empirical study [24] suggests that
average rank is satisfying, compared to other ranking
methods, in terms of rank correlation with unseen
tasks. We are running similar experiments on AutoDL
data and those results hold.
2.4
Baseline 3 of AutoDL challenge
As in previous challenges (e.g. AutoCV, AutoCV2,
AutoNLP and AutoSpeech), we provided 3 baselines
(Baseline 0, 1 and 2) for different levels of use: Baseline
0 is just constant predictions for debug purposes,
Baseline 1 a linear model, and Baseline 2 a CNN (see
[21] for details). In the AutoDL challenge, we provided
additionally a Baseline 3 which combines the winning
solutions of previous challenges (i.e. Baseline 3 ﬁrst
infers the domain/modality from the tensor shape
and then apply the corresponding winning solution on
this domain). And for benchmarking purposes, we ran
Baseline 3 on all 66 datasets in all AutoDL challenges
(public or not) and the results are shown in Figure
3. Many participants used Baseline 3 as a starting
point to develop their own method. For this reason,
we describe in this section the components of Baseline
3 in some details.
2.4.1
Vision domain: winning method of AutoCV/Au-
toCV2
The wining solution of AutoCV1 and AutoCV2 Chal-
lenges [21], i.e., kakaobrain, is based on Fast Au-
toAugment [25], which is a modiﬁed version of the
AutoAugment [26] approach. Instead of relying on
human expertise, AutoAugment [26] formulates the
search for the best augmentation policy as a dis-
crete search problem and uses Reinforcement Learn-
ing to ﬁnd the best policy. The search algorithm is
implemented as a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
controller, which samples an augmentation policy S,
combining image processing operations, with their
probabilities and magnitudes. S is then used to train a
child network to get a validation accuracy R, which is
used to update the RNN controller by policy gradient
methods.
Despite a signiﬁcant improvement in performance,
AutoAugment requires thousands of GPU hours even
with a reduced target dataset and small network. In
contrast, Fast AutoAugment [25] ﬁnds effective aug-
mentation policies via a more efﬁcient search strategy
based on density matching between a pair of train
datasets, and a policy exploration based on Bayesian
optimization over stratiﬁed k-folds splits of the train-
ing dataset. The winning team (kakaobrain) of AutoCV
implemented a light version of Fast AutoAugment,
replacing the 5-folds by a single fold search and using
a random search instead of Bayesian optimization.
The backbone architecture used is ResNet-18 (i.e.,
ResNet [27] with 18 layers).
2.4.2
Text domain: winning method of AutoNLP
For the text domain, Baseline 3 uses the code from the
2nd place team upwind ﬂys in AutoNLP since we
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

9
found that upwind ﬂys’s code was easier to adapt in
the challenge setting and gave similar performance to
that of 1st place (DeepBlueAI).
The core of upwind ﬂys’s solution is a meta-
controller dealing with multiple modules in the
pipeline including model selection, data preparation
and evaluation feedback. For the data preparation
step, to compensate for class imbalance in the Au-
toNLP datasets, upwind ﬂys ﬁrst cALCulates the data
distribution of each class in the original data. Then,
they randomly sample training and validation exam-
ples from each class in the training set, thus balancing
the training and validation data by up- and down-
sampling. Besides, upwind ﬂys prepares a model pool
including fast lightweight models like LinearSVC [28],
and heavy but more accurate models like LSTM [29]
and BERT [30]. They ﬁrst use light models (such as
linear SVC), but the meta-controller switches eventu-
ally to other models such as neural networks, with
iterative training. If the AUC drops below a threshold
or drops twice in a row, the model is switched, or the
process is terminated and the best model ever trained
is chosen, when the pool is exhausted.
2.4.3
Speech
domain:
winning
method
of
Au-
toSpeech
Baseline 3 uses the approach of the 1st place winner of
the AutoSpeech challenge: PASA NJU. Interestingly,
PASA NJU, has developed one single approach for
the two sequence types of data, i.e. speech and text.
As time management is key for optimizing any time
performance, as measured by the metric derived from
the ALC, the best teams have experimented with
various data selection and progressive data loading
approaches. Such decisions allowed them to create
a trade-off between accelerating the ﬁrst predictions
while ensuring a good and stable ﬁnal AUC. For
instance PASA NJU truncated speech samples from
22.5s to 2.5s, and started with loading 50% of the sam-
ples for the 3 ﬁrst training loops, however preserving a
similar balance of classes, loading the rest of the data
from the 4th training loop. As for feature extraction,
MFCC (Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefﬁcients) [31] and
STFT (Short-Time Fourrier Transform) [32] are used. In
terms of model selection and architectures, PASA NJU
progressively increases the complexity of their model,
starting with simple models like LR (Logistic Regres-
sion), LightGBM at the beginning of the training,
combined later with some light weight pre-trained
CNN models like Thin-ResNet-34 (ResNet [27] but
with smaller numbers of ﬁlters/channels/kernels) and
VggVox [33], ﬁnally (bidirectional) LSTM [29], with
attention mechanism. This strategy allows to make fast
early predictions and progressively improves models
performance over time to optimize the anytime per-
formance metric.
2.4.4
Tabular domain
As there were no previous challenge for the tabular
domain in AutoDL challenge series, the organizers
implemented a simple multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
baseline. Tabular datasets consist of both continuous
values and categories. Categorical quantities are con-
verted to normalized indices, i.e. by dividing indices
(starting from 1) by the total number of categories.
Tabular domains may have missing values (missing
values are replaced by zero) as well. Therefore, to
cope with missing data, we designed a denoising
autoencoder (DAE) [34] able to interpolate missing
values from available data. The architecture consists
of a batch normalization layer right after input data,
a dropout, 4 fully connected (FC) layers, a skip con-
nection from the ﬁrst FC layer to the 3rd layer and an
additional dropout after 2nd FC layer. Then we apply
a MLP classiﬁer with 5 FC layers. All FC layers have
256 nodes (expect the last layers of DAE and classiﬁer)
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

10
with ReLU activation and batch normalization. We
keep the same architecture for all datasets in this
domain. DAE loss is a L1 loss on non-missing data
and classiﬁer loss is a sigmoid cross entropy.
3
AUTODL CHALLENGE RESULTS
The AutoDL challenge (the last challenge in the Au-
toDL challenges series 2019) lasted from 14 Dec 2019
(launched during NeurIPS 2019) to 3 Apr 2020. It has
had a participation of 54 teams with 247 submissions
in total and 2614 dataset-wise submissions. Among
these teams, 19 of them managed to get a better per-
formance (i.e. average rank over the 5 feedback phase
datasets) than that of Baseline 3 in the feedback phase
and entered the ﬁnal phase of blind test. According
to our challenge rules, only teams that provided a
description of their approach (by ﬁlling out some fact
sheets we sent out) were eligible for getting a ranking
in the ﬁnal phase. We received 8 copies of these fact
sheets and thus only these 8 teams were ranked. These
teams are (alphabetical order): DeepBlueAI, DeepWis-
dom, frozenmad, Inspur AutoDL, Kon, PASA NJU, sur-
romind, team zhaw. One team (automl freiburg) made a
late submission and isn’t eligible for prizes but will be
included in the post-analysis for scientiﬁc purpose.
The ﬁnal ranking is computed from the perfor-
mances on the 10 unseen datasets in the ﬁnal phase.
To reduce the variance from diverse factors such as
randomness in the submission code and randomness
of the execution environment (which makes the exact
ALC scores very hard to reproduce since the wall-
time is hard to control exactly), we re-run every sub-
mission several times and average the ALC scores.
The average ALC scores obtained by each team are
shown in Figure 4 (the teams are ordered by their ﬁnal
ranking according to their average rank). From this
ﬁgure, we see that some entries failed constantly on
some datasets such as frozenmad on Yolo, Kon on Marge
and PASA NJU on Viktor, due to issues in their code
(e.g. bad prediction shape or out of memory error).
In addition, some entries crashed only sometimes on
certain datasets, such as Inspur AutoDL on Tal, whose
cause is related to some preprocessing procedure on
text datasets concerning stop words. Otherwise, the
error bars show that the performances of most runs
are stable.
4
WINNING APPROACHES
A summary of the winning approaches on each do-
main can be found in Table 3. Another summary using
a categorization by machine learning techniques can
be found in Table 4. We see in Table 3 that almost all
approaches used 5 different methods from 5 domains.
For each domain, the winning teams’ approaches are
much inspired by Baseline 3 (see Section 2.4). For
the two domains from computer vision (image and
video), we spot popular backbone architectures such
as ResNet [27] and its variants. Data augmentation
techniques such as ﬂipping, resizing are frequently
used. Fast AutoAugment [25] from the AutoCV chal-
lenges winner solution is also popular. Pre-training
(e.g. on ImageNet or Kinetics) is used a lot to ac-
celerate training. For the speech domain and text
domain, different feature extraction techniques us-
ing domain knowledge (such as MFCC, STFT, trun-
cation) are used, as in the case of Baseline 3. For
the tabular domain, more classical machine learning
algorithms are used combined with intelligent data
loading strategies. In Table 4, we see that almost all
different machine learning techniques (such as meta-
learning, preprocessing, HPO, transfer learning and
ensembling) are actively present and frequently used
in all domains (exception some rare cases for example
transfer learning on tabular data).
By analyzing the workﬂow from all participating
teams in ﬁnal phase, we came up with an AutoML
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

11
(a) Baseline 3 [top methods of previous chal-
lenges]
(b) DeepWisdom [winners ﬁnal AutoDL chal-
lenge]
Fig. 3:
Performance gain in the Final AutoDL challenge We plot ALC v.s. ﬁnal NAUC performances of
Baseline 3 and Deep Wisdom (the winners of the ﬁnal AutoDL challenge) on ALL 66 datasets of the AutoDL
challenge series benchmark. Different domains are shown with different markers. The dataset name is shown
beside each point except the top-right area, which is zoomed in Appendix B, together with numerical values
(Table ??). DeepWisdom (AutoDL challenge winner) shows signiﬁcant improvement over baseline 3, which
included top methods of previous challenges in the series.
workﬂow shared by almost all teams (see Figure 5).
We note that the module “data” includes not only
traditional data of example-label pairs but also meta-
data, metric, budgets and past performances. These
are all potential useful information for meta-learning.
Data are ingested by a Data Ingestor that consists
of many sub-modules such as preprocessing, data
augmentation, feature engineering and data loading
management. Ingested data are then passed to the
model/learner for learning and then they are both
used by an Evaluator for evaluation (e.g. with a
train/validation split). A Meta-learner can be applied
(ofﬂine due to our challenge protocol) to accelerate all
sub-modules of the model/learner AND optionally
improved the Model Selector and the Data Ingestor,
based on the meta-data of the current task and poten-
tially a meta-dataset of prior tasks (e.g. those provided
as public datasets). We believe that this AutoML work-
ﬂow concisely summarizes the increasingly sophisti-
cated AutoML systems found nowadays and provides
the direction for a universal AutoML API design in
the future (which is work in progress). This workﬂow
will also be useful for the analysis in Section 5.
The more detailed descriptions for the approaches
of the top-3 winning teams and automl freiburg can
be found in the Appendix.
5
POST-CHALLENGE ANALYSES
We carry out post-challenge analyses from different
aspects to understand the results in depth and gain
useful insights. One central question we ask ourselves
is how the components (such as meta-learning, data
loading and ensemble), in each approach, affect the
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

12
Fig. 4: ALC scores of top 9 teams in AutoDL ﬁnal phase averaged over repeated evaluations (and Baseline
3, for comparison). The entry of top 6 teams are re-run 9 times and 3 times for other teams. Error bars are
shown with (half) length corresponding to the standard deviation from these runs. Some (very rare) entries are
excluded for computing these statistics due to failures caused by the challenge platform backend. The team
ordering follows that of their average rank in the ﬁnal phase. The domains of the 10 tasks are image, video,
speech/times series, text, tabular (and then another cycle in this order). More information on the task can be
found in Table 2.
ﬁnal performance and whether one can combine these
components from different approaches and possibly
obtain a stronger AutoML solution. These questions
are addressed in Section 5.1 and 5.2. For the reader
to gain a global understanding of the relationship be-
tween different components, we visualize the overall
AutoML workﬂow in Figure 5.
Apart from a local analysis of components, we also
try to gain a global understanding of the AutoML
generalization ability of all winning approaches in
Section 5.4. The impact of some design choices of the
challenge is studied in Section 5.3 and 5.5 and more
discussions follow in later sections.
5.1
Ablation study
To analyze the contribution of different components
in each winning team’s solution, we asked 3 teams
(DeepWisdom, DeepBlueAI and automl freiburg) to carry
out an ablation study, by removing or disabling certain
component (e.g. meta-learning, data augmentation) of
their approach. We will introduce in the following
sections more details on these ablation studies by team
and synthesize thereafter.
5.1.1
DeepWisdom
According to the team DeepWisdom, three of the most
important components leading to the success of their
approach are: meta-learning, data loading and data
augmentation. For the ablation study, these compo-
nents are removed or disabled in the following man-
ner:
•
Meta-learning (ML): Here meta-learning in-
cludes transfer learning, pre-train models, and
hyperparameter setting and selection. Meta
learning is crucial to both the ﬁnal accuracy
performance and the speed of train-predict life-
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

13
Fig. 5: Global AutoML workﬂow shared by most participating teams. Dotted arrows indicate optional (i.e. not
used by everybody) connections between different components. Components in green are studied in ablation
study in Section 5.1. Components in blue are studied both in Section 5.1 and Section 5.2. The modules in the
grey shaded area are executed on the CodaLab competition platform (i.e. online). Meta-learner runs in most
cases ofﬂine (e.g. with the provided public datasets). Model selector can be executed online but pre-trained
with meta-learner ofﬂine.
cycle. For comparison we train models from
scratch instead of loading pre-trained models
for image, video and speech data, and use the
default hyperparameter settings for text and
tabular subtasks.
•
Data Loading (DL): Data loading is a key factor
in speeding up training procedures to achieve
a higher ALC score. We improve data loading
in several aspects. Firstly, we can accelerate
decoding the raw data formatted in a uniform
tensor manner to NumPy formats in a progres-
sive way, and batching the dataset for text and
tabular data could make the conversion faster.
Secondly, the cache mechanism is utilized in
different levels of data and feature manage-
ment, and thirdly, video frames are extracted
in a progressive manner.
•
Data Augmentation (DA): Fast auto augmen-
tation, time augmentation and a stagewise
spec len conﬁguration for ThinResNet34 [42]
model are considered as data augmentation
techniques for image, video and speech data
respectively.
We carried out experiments on the 10 ﬁnal phase
datasets with the above components removed. The
obtained ALC scores are presented in Figure 6. As it
can be seen in Figure 6, Meta-Learning can be con-
sidered one of the most important single component
in DeepWisdom’s solution. Pre-trained models con-
tribute signiﬁcantly to both accelerating model train-
ing and obtaining higher AUC scores for image, video
and speech data, and text and tabular subtasks beneﬁt
from hyperparameter setting such as model settings
and learning rate strategies. For image, we remove
pre-trained models for both ResNet-18 and ResNet-9,
which are trained on the ImageNet dataset with 70%
and 65% top1 test accuracy; for video, we remove the
parts of freezing and refreezing the ﬁrst two layers.
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

14
Fig. 6: Ablation study for DeepWisdom: We compare
different versions of DeepWisdom’s approach, with
one component of their workﬂow disabled. “Deep-
Wisdom \ ML” represents DeepWisdom’s original ap-
proach but with Meta-Learning disabled. “DA” code
for Data Augmentation and “DL” for Data Loading.
The method variants are ordered by their average rank
from left to right. Thus we observe that removing Data
Augmentation does not make a lot of difference, while
removing both Meta-Learning and Data Loading im-
pacts the solution a lot. See Section 5.1.1 for details.
Then the number of the frames for ensemble models
and replace MC3 model with ResNet-18 model. For
speech, we do not load the pre-trained model which
is pre-trained on VoxCeleb2 dataset, that is we train
the ThinResNet34 model from scratch. For text, we
use default setting, i.e. do not perform meta strategy
for model selections and do not perform learning rate
decay strategy selections. For tabular, with the expe-
rience of datasets inside and outside this competition,
we found two sets of parameters of LightGBM. The
ﬁrst hyperparameters focus on the speed of LightGBM
training, it use smaller boost round and max depth,
bigger learning rates and so on. While the second
hyperparameters focus on the effect of LightGBM
training, it can give us a generally better score. We
use the default hyperparameters in LightGBM in the
minus version.
Data Loading is a salient component for the ALC
metric in any-time learning. For text, speech and
tabular data, data loading speeds up NumPy data
conversion to make the ﬁrst several predictions as
quickly as possible, achieving higher ALC scores. In
the minus version, we convert all train TFRecord data
to NumPy array in the ﬁrst round, and ALC scores of
nearly all datasets on all modalities decrease steadily
compared with full version solution.
The data augmentation component also helps the
ALC scores of several datasets. In the minus version
for speech data we use the ﬁxed spec len conﬁg, the
default value is 200. Comparison on Marge and Oreal
datasets is obvious, indicating that longer speech
signal sequences could offer more useful informa-
tion. Fast auto augmentation and test time augmen-
tation enhance performance on image and video data
marginally.
5.1.2
DeepBlueAI
According to the team DeepBlueAI, three of the most
important components leading to the success of their
approach are: adaptive strategies, ensemble learning
and scoring time reduction. For the ablation study,
these components are removed or disabled in the
following manner:
•
Adaptive Strategies (AS): In this part, all adap-
tive parameter settings have been cancelled,
such as the parameters settings according to
the characteristics of datasets and the dynamic
adjustments made during the training process.
All relevant parameters are changed to default
ﬁxed values.
•
Ensemble Learning (EL): In this part, all the
parts of ensemble learning are removed. In-
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

15
Fig. 7: Ablation study for DeepBlueAI: Compari-
son of different versions of DeepBlueAI’s approach
after removing some of the method’s components.
“DeepBlueAI \ AS” represents their approach with
Adaptive Strategy disabled. “EL” codes for Ensemble
Learning and “STR” for Scoring Time Reduction. For
each dataset, the methods are ordered by their av-
erage rank from left to right. While disabling each
component separately yields moderate deterioration,
disabling all of them yields a signiﬁcant degradation
in performance. See Section 5.1.2.
stead of fusing the results of multiple models,
the model that performs best in the validation
set is directly selected for testing.
•
Scoring Time Reduction (STR): In this part,
all scoring time reduction settings were modi-
ﬁed to default settings. Related parameters and
data loading methods are same as those of
baseline.
As it can be observed in Figure 7, the results
of DeepBlueAI have been greatly improved com-
pared with those of DeepBlueAI \AS \EL \STR (i.e.,
blue bar), indicating the effectiveness of the whole
method. After removing the AS, the score of most
datasets has decreased, indicating that adaptive strate-
gies are better than ﬁxed parameters or models, and
has good generalization performance on different
datasets. When STR is removed, the score of most
datasets is reduced. Because the efﬁcient data pro-
cessing used can effectively reduce the scoring time,
thereby improving the ALC score, which shows the
effectiveness of the scoring time reduction. After EL
is removed, the score of the vast majority of datasets
has decreased, indicating the effectiveness of ensemble
learning to improve the results.
5.1.3
automl freiburg
According to the team automl freiburg, two of the most
important components leading to the success of their
approach are: meta-learning and hyperparameter op-
timization. For the ablation study, these components
are removed or disabled in the following manner:
•
Meta-Learning with Random selector (MLR):
This method randomly selects one conﬁgura-
tion out of the set of most complementary
conﬁgurations (Hammer, caltech birds2010, ci-
far10, eurosat).
•
Meta-Learning
Generalist
(MLG):
This
method does not use AutoFolio and always
selects the generalist conﬁguration that was
optimized for the average improvement across
all datasets.
•
Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO): Instead
of optimizing the hyperparameters of the meta-
selection model with AutoFolio, this method
simply uses the default AutoFolio hyperparam-
eters.
As previously mentioned, automl freiburg focused
on the computer vision domain (i.e., datasets Ray,
Fiona, Cucumber, and Yolo). The results of their ablation
study, shown in Figure 8, indicate that the hyper-
parameter search for the meta-model overﬁtted on
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

16
the eight meta-train-datasets used (original vs HPO);
eight datasets is generally regarded as insufﬁcient in
the realm of algorithm selection, but the team was
limited by compute resources. However, the perfor-
mance of the non-overﬁtted meta-model (HPO) clearly
conﬁrms the superiority of the approach over the
random (MLR) and the generalist (MLG) baselines
on all relevant datasets. More importantly, not only
does this observation uncover further potential of au-
toml freiburg’s approach, it is also on par with the top
two teams of the competition on these vision datasets:
average rank 1.75 (automl freiburg) versus 1.75 and
2.5 (DeepWisdom, DeepBlueAI). The authors emphasize
that training the meta-learner on more than eight
meta-train datasets could potentially lead to large
improvements in generalization performance. Despite
the promising performance and outlook, results and
conclusions should be interpreted conservatively due
to the small number of meta-test datasets relevant to
automl freiburg’s approach.
5.2
Combination study
In this section, instead of removing certain compo-
nents for each winning method, we combine compo-
nents from different teams. We start from a “base”
method of one of the top ranking participants Deep-
Wisdom [DW], DeepBlueAI [DB], or automml freiburg
[AF], and we substitute (or add if absent) one or the
key modules provided by another team. The design
matrix is shown in Table 5. The lines represent the
base solutions and the columns the models added
or substitutes. Shaded matrix entries correspond to
excluded cases: the modules considered were part
of the base solution. This section is limited to the 6
image and video datasets of the AutoDL challenge for
two reasons: (i) the [AF] team simply used baseline 3
for the other domains; (2) there were domain-speciﬁc
Fig. 8: Ablation study for automl freiburg: Compari-
son of different versions of automl freiburg’s approach.
Since the approach addresses only computer vision
tasks, only results on image datasets (Ray, Cucum-
ber) and video datasets (Fiona, Yolo) are shown. Av-
erage and error bars of ALC scores are computed
over 9 runs. “automl freiburg \ HPO” represents
automl freiburg’s approach with default AutoFolio hy-
perparameters. Likewise, “MLG” stands for the gener-
alist conﬁguration and “MLR” for randomly selecting
a conﬁguration from the pool of the most complemen-
tary conﬁgurations. See Section 5.1.3.
architecture differences making difﬁcult to conduct a
more extensive study.
We focused on the following components, which
demonstrated their effectiveness in our previous anal-
yses, including the ablation study:
•
The data loading (DL) component from Deep-
Wisdom, making good compromises between
batch size, number of epochs, etc.;
•
The ensembling (EN) component from Deep-
BlueAI. an average of the last 5 predictions;
•
The meta-learning powered Hyper-Parameter
Optimization
(HPO)
component
from
au-
tomml freiburg, described in Sections 5.1.3 and
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

17
C.4 with the usage of AutoFolio [35], using
meta-features speciﬁc of the current task. The
recommended set of hyperparameters is found
by applying BOHB [36] off-platform on the
public datasets.
We construct new combined methods using the
following procedure:
1)
Start from a base method, which is one of
DeepWisdom [DW], DeepBlueAI [DB] or au-
toml freiburg [AF];
2)
Replace one or two components in this base
method by one of those from the other two
teams, considering only the three components
introduced above, i.e. DL, EN and HPO.
For example, we use [AF]+DL+EN to denote the
combined method that has automl freiburg’s approach
[AF] as base method, with the Data Loading (DL)
component replaced by that of (DeepWisdom) and with
the ensembling (EN) component replaced by that of
DeepBlueAI. The question is how these components
affect each other and whether one can construct a
stronger method by combining different components.
By plugging in one or two components from two other
team, we manage to construct 3 new combinations for
each team, making 9 new methods (and 12 methods
in total with the three original approaches from each
team). As automl freiburg’s approach focuses on image
and video domains, we run the experiments on the 6
image and video datasets we used in the ﬁnal AutoDL
challenge. The results are presented in Figure 9.
From Figure 9,
we see that combining dif-
ferent components to other teams harms the ALC
performance in most cases. DeepWisdom (DW) is
still ranked ﬁrst (in terms of average rank over
the 6 tasks) and performs better than those com-
bined with DeepBlueAI’s ensemble method (DW+EN)
and with automl freiburg’s HPO (DW+HPO) or both
(DW+EN+HPO). We have similar observation for DB
compared to DB+DL, DB+DL+HPO and DB+HPO.
This indicates the integrity of each method and sug-
gests that different components from one team are
jointly optimized and cannot be easily improved sep-
arately (i.e. locally optimal). An exception of this
observation is the fact that AF+EN and AF+DL+EN
perform better than AF. Actually, adding ensemble
method generally improves the performance.
Some other observations from Figure 9 are:
•
Combining HPO to DeepBlueAI (DB) signiﬁ-
cantly decreases the ALC. This can be seen
from comparing DB+HPO (or DB+DL+HPO)
to DB (or DB+DL). This means that apply-
ing AutoFolio from automl freiburg doesn’t nec-
essarily improve ALC for any approach. We
have consistent observations for DeepWisdom,
although with less radical impact;
•
Applying data loading (DL) of DeepWisdom to
other teams do not improve the ALC in general,
which is consistent with what we found in
Figure 6 on the image and video datasets (i.e.
Ray, Fiona, Cucumber and Yolo). This means that
for computer vision tasks, adjusting hyperpa-
rameters such as batch size and number of
examples for preview only has limited effect
on the ALC score. The potential gain in speed
may be neutralized by its harm in accuracy;
•
When applying two components from other
teams, the changes are mostly consistent with
the combined changes of adding one com-
ponent one after another. For example, the
performance of AF+DL+EN could be pre-
cisely inferred from the performance difference
between AF+DL and AF and that between
AF+EN and AF. This suggests that there may
be approximately a locally linear dependence
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

18
Fig. 9: Performances of different combinations of components from the three teams: DeepWisdom (DW),
DeepBlueAI (DB) and automl freiburg (AF). The components we consider are (see Section 5.2) Data Loading
(DL) from DeepWisdom, ensembling (EN) from DeepBlueAI and hyperparameter optimization (HPO) from
automl freiburg. In the legend, [DW]+EN+HPO, for example, corresponds to the method of DeepWisdom [DW]
with the ensembling (EN) component replaced by that of DeepBlueAI, and with the [HPO] component replaced
by that of automl freiburg. The methods are ordered by their average rank over all six considered tasks (3 image
tasks and 3 video tasks), which are all from Table 2. The error bars are computed from 3 repeated runs for each
method. We see that combining different components from different teams do not improve the ALC score in
general.
between the ALC performance and the consid-
ered components.
In summary, this limited set of combination experi-
ments did not reveal a signiﬁcant advantage of mixing
and matching modules. The solution of the overall
winner DeepWisdom stands out.
5.3
Varying the time budget
Up till now, all our experiments are carried out within
a time budget of 20 minutes, which may seem rela-
tively small in this age of Big Data and Deep Learning.
To investigate whether this time budget was sufﬁcient
and whether the approaches can perform better with
a larger time budget, we run the same experiments as
those in Section 5.2 with exactly the same setting (the
same algorithms and the same tasks) except that we
change the time budget from 20 minutes (T = 1200)
to 2 hours (T = 7200). And this time, we focus on the
ﬁnal NAUC instead of the ALC for a fair comparison.
The results are visualized in Figure 10.
In
Figure
10,
each
point
corresponds
to
an
approach-task pair such as (DB+HPO, Monica1). The
tasks are shown in the legend and the approaches
are annotated in some cases. We see that most points
are close to the diagonal, which means that having
a longer time budget does not improve the ﬁnal
NAUC performance in general. This suggests that
most runs achieve convergence within 20 minutes,
which is consistent with what we found when vi-
sualizing the learning curves (for example in Figure
2). This ﬁnding further justiﬁes our design choice of
having a time budget of 20 minutes for all tasks.
Among all the 72 points, only 13 points out of them
have a NAUC difference larger than 0.05 and these
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

19
point are annotated with corresponding task names.
Most of these annotated points correspond to the team
DeepBlueAI combined with the HPO component from
automl freiburg, meaning that this speciﬁc combina-
tion leads to a larger variance on the ﬁnal NAUC.
This can be explained by the fact that when AutoFolio
(automl freiburg’s HPO component which ﬁnds the
prior task that is the most similar to the current
one and recommends a hyperparameter conﬁguration
found ofﬂine for this prior task, see Figure 15 in Ap-
pendix C.4) chooses a hyperparameter conﬁguration,
the criterion it uses is based on the ALC performances
obtained with automl freiburg’s base method, which
however is not what is being used since the base
method is that of DeepBlueAI. So AutoFolio is making
performance predictions based on the wrong matrix of
past performances (details in Appendix C.4), corrupt-
ing the selection of hyperparameters and leading to a
larger variance of the ﬁnal NAUC score.
Fig. 10: Time budget comparison. Comparison of
ﬁnal NAUC performance on 2h vs 20min time budget
runs. Points with a NAUC difference (between two
settings) larger than 0.05 are annotated. There are only
13 of these out of 72 points in total.
5.4
AutoML
generalization
ability
of
winning
methods
One crucial question for all AutoML methods is
whether the method can have good performances on
unseen datasets. If yes, we will say the method has
AutoML generalization ability. To quantitatively mea-
sure this ability, we propose to compare the aver-
age rank of all top-8 methods in both the feedback
phase and the ﬁnal phase, then compute the Pear-
son correlation (Pearson’s ρ) of the 2 rank vectors
(thus similar to Spearman’s rank correlation [43]).
Concretely, let rX be the average rank vector of top
teams in the feedback phase and rY be that in the
ﬁnal phase, then the Pearson correlation is computed
by ρX,Y = cov(rX, rY )/σrXσrY .
The average ranks of top methods are shown in
Figure 11, with a Pearson correlation ρX,Y = 0.91 and
p-value p = 5.8×10−4. This means that the correlation
is statistically signiﬁcant and no leaderboard over-
ﬁtting is observed. Thus the winning solutions can
indeed generalize to unseen datasets. Considering the
diversity of the ﬁnal phase datasets and the arguably
out-of-distribution ﬁnal-test meta-features shown in
Table 2, this is a feat from the AutoML community.
Thus it’s highly plausible that we are moving one step
closer to a universal AutoML solution.
5.5
Impact of t0 in the ALC metric
We recall that the Area under Learning Curve (ALC)
is deﬁned by
ALC =
Z 1
0
s(t)d˜t(t)
=
Z T
0
s(t)˜t′(t)dt
=
1
log(1 + T/t0)
Z T
0
s(t)
t + t0
dt
(3)
where
˜t(t) = log(1 + t/t0)
log(1 + T/t0)
(4)
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

20
Fig. 11: Task over-modeling: We compare perfor-
mance in the feedback and the ﬁnal phase, in an
effort to detect possible habituation to the feedback
datasets due to multiple submissions. The average
rank of the top-8 teams is shown. The ﬁgure suggests
no strong over-modeling (over-ﬁtting at the meta-
learning level): A team having a signiﬁcantly better
rank in the feedback phase than in the ﬁnal phase
would be over-modeling (far above the diagonal).
The Pearson correlation is ρX,Y = 0.91 and p-value
p = 5.8 × 10−4.
Thus t0 parameterizes a weight distribution on the
learning curve for computing the ALC. When t0 is
small, the importance weight at the beginning of the
curve is large. Actually when t0 varies from 0 to
inﬁnity, we have
lim
t0→0+ ALC(t0) = s(0)
and
lim
t0→+∞ALC(t0) = 1
T
Z T
0
s(t)dt.
So a different t0 might lead to different ALC ranking
even if the learning curve s(t) is ﬁxed. It is then to be
answered whether the choice of t0 = 60 in AutoDL
challenge is reasonable. For this, we reﬂect the impact
of t0 on the ALC scores and the ﬁnal average ranking
in Figure 12. Observation and discussion can be found
in the caption. We conclude that t0 does affect the
ranking of ALC scores but the ﬁnal ranking is robust
to changes of t0, justifying the choice of t0 and the
challenge setting.
6
CONCLUSION
Automating Machine Learning and in particular Deep
Learning, which has known recent successes in many
application areas, is of central interest at the moment,
to cut down the development cycle time, as well as to
overcome the shortage of machine learning engineers.
Our challenge series on AutoDL, and in particular the
last one addressing the ubiquity of AutoDL solutions,
allowed us to make great strides in this direction. To
our knowledge, the solution of the winners, which was
open-sourced, has no equivalent in academia or in the
commercial arena. It is capable of training and testing
effective models in 20 minutes to solve tensor-based
multi-label classiﬁcation problems. It has extensively
been benchmarked on the 66 datasets of the entire
challenge series, featuring a wide variety of types of
data and dataset sizes. We have made the winners’
solution available as a self-service6. Students using it
in their projects have tested its efﬁcacy on new tasks,
demonstrating its ease-of-use. While this alone is a
great outcome, our post-challenge analyses allowed
us to pave the way to greater future improvements
by analyzing module by module the contributions
of the winning teams. First, it is remarkable that, in
spite of the complexity of building a fully automated
solution, and despite the fact that we did not impose
any workﬂow or code skeleton, the top ranking teams
converged towards a rather uniform modular architec-
ture. Our ablation studies revealed that the modules
that may yield largest future improvement include
6. https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/27082
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

21
(a) Learning curves for the task
Carla
(b) Impact of t0 on the ALC scores
for task Carla.
(c) Average rank among AutoDL
ﬁnal phase participants, using dif-
ferent t0. The legend is hidden and
is the same as that of Figure 12b.
Fig. 12: Any-time learning vs. ﬁxed-time learning: We evaluate the impact of parameter t0 on the ALC scores
and the ﬁnal rank. This parameter allows us to smoothly adjust the importance of the beginning of the learning
curve (and therefore the pressure imposed towards achieving any-time learning). When t0 is small, the ALC
puts more emphasis on performances at the beginning of the learning curve and thus favors fast algorithms.
When t0 is large, similar weight is applied on the whole learning curve, performances are uniformly averaged,
so being a little bit slow at the beginning is not that bad, and it is more important to have good ﬁnal performance
when the time budget is exhausted (ﬁxed-time learning). The tabular dataset Carla is taken as example. The
fact that two learning curves cross each other is a necessary condition for the impact of t0 on their ranking on
this task. Learning curves of top teams on this dataset are shown in 12a. The impact of t0 on the ALC scores of
these curves is shown in 12b. We see that when t0 changes, the ranking among participants can indeed change,
typically the ALC of frozenmad is larger than that of Kon but this is not true for large t0. In 12c, the fact that the
average rank (over all 10 ﬁnal phase datasets) varies with t0 also implies that t0 can indeed affect the ranking
of ALC on individual tasks. However, we see that the ﬁnal ranking (i.e. that of average rank) is quite robust
against changes of t0. Very few exceptions exist such as PASA NJU and Inspur AutoDL. Overall, t0 proved
to have little impact, particularly on the ranking of the winners, which is another evidence that top ranking
participants addressed well the any-time learning problem.
“meta-learning” and “ensembling”: Regarding meta-
learning, at this stage, it is fair to say that strategies
employed are effective, but not very sophisticated.
They rely on pre-selecting off-platform, using pro-
vided “public data”, one of the most promising neural
architectures from the literature (typically based on
ResNet for image, video, and speech, and BERT for
text), pre-trained on large datasets (e.g. ImageNet for
image and video). The submitted models were then
ﬁned-tuned on the challenge platform. One interest-
ing twist has been the progressive tuning of weights
starting from top layers, monitoring the depth of
tuning as a hyperparameter. Most other hyperparam-
eters however were frozen. There were pre-optimized
January 12, 2022
DRAFT

22
outside the platform, which is another form of meta-
learning. Our post-challenge studies did not reveal
an improvement in performance when hyperparam-
eters were optimized on the platform, using a state-
of-the-art Bayesian optimization method. Regarding
ensembling, a wide variety of techniques were tried.
Our ablation studies and combination studies revealed
that one of the simplest methods is also the most
effective: averaging predictions over the past few se-
lected models. Second, our challenge put pressure on
the participants to deliver fast solutions (in less than
20 minutes), and yielded technical advances in fast
data loading, for instance. Our evaluation metric (Area
under Learning curve) had two parameters allowing
us to monitor both the total time budget and the
dilation of the time axis (related to the importance put
on getting good performance early on). The ranking
of participants was robust against changes in both
parameters and no signiﬁcant improvements were
gained by giving more time to the methods. On the
ﬂip side, the evaluation involving a learning curve as
a function of time put emphasis on effectiveness of im-
plementation, which were difﬁcult to decouple from
algorithm advances. In future challenges, we might
want to factor out this aspect and are considering to
rather use learning curves as a function of number
of training examples or the computational operations
(FLOPs), which should provide more reproducibility,
more environment stability and less emphasis on en-
gineering. Also, due to the small time budget of the
AutoDL challenge, computationally expensive model
search was not considered and could be the object of
further work. To stimulate research in that direction,
we have a Neural Architecture Search (NAS) challenge
in preparation. To prevent participants to guess the
data modality, the inputs are coded in a way, which
makes it unobvious to recognize. This should avoid
that participants leverage prior domain knowledge.
Other challenges are under way. We started organizing
a meta-learning challenge series 7 to evaluate meta-
learning under controlled conditions rather than keep-
ing it outside of the evaluation platform, as in the
AutoDL challenge. Our goal is to encourage research
on meta-learning in various settings, including few-
shot learning. Beyond supervised learning, we are
also interested in reinforcement learning. An AutoRL
challenge is in preparation.
