Logical Methods in Computer Science
Volume 16, Issue 4, 2020, pp. 13:1–13:30
https://lmcs.episciences.org/
Submitted
Dec. 12, 2019
Published
Dec. 14, 2020
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT:
MARKOV DECISION PROCESSES WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES ∗
THOMAS BRIHAYE a, FLORENT DELGRANGE b,a,
MICKAEL RANDOUR c,a, AND YOUSSOUF OUALHADJ d
a UMONS — Universit´e de Mons, Belgium
b RWTH Aachen, Germany
c F.R.S.-FNRS, Belgium

d LACL — UPEC, France
Abstract. The window mechanism was introduced by Chatterjee et al. to strengthen
classical game objectives with time bounds. It permits to synthesize system controllers
that exhibit acceptable behaviors within a conﬁgurable time frame, all along their inﬁnite
execution, in contrast to the traditional objectives that only require correctness of behaviors
in the limit. The window concept has proved its interest in a variety of two-player zero-sum
games because it enables reasoning about such time bounds in system speciﬁcations, but
also thanks to the increased tractability that it usually yields.
In this work, we extend the window framework to stochastic environments by considering
Markov decision processes. A fundamental problem in this context is the threshold probability
problem: given an objective it aims to synthesize strategies that guarantee satisfying runs
with a given probability. We solve it for the usual variants of window objectives, where
either the time frame is set as a parameter, or we ask if such a time frame exists. We
develop a generic approach for window-based objectives and instantiate it for the classical
mean-payoﬀand parity objectives, already considered in games. Our work paves the way
to a wide use of the window mechanism in stochastic models.
1. Introduction
Game-based models for controller synthesis. Two-player zero-sum games [GTW02,
Ran13] and Markov decision processes (MDPs) [FV97, BK08, RRS15] are two popular
frameworks to model decision making in adversarial and uncertain environments respectively.
In the former, a system controller and its environment compete antagonistically, and synthesis
aims at building strategies for the controller that ensure a speciﬁed behavior against all
possible strategies of the environment.
In the latter, the system is faced with a given
Key words and phrases: Markov decision processes, window mean-payoﬀ, window parity.
∗Research supported by F.R.S.-FNRS under Grant n◦F.4520.18 (ManySynth), and F.R.S.-FNRS mobility
funding for scientiﬁc missions (Y. Oualhadj in UMONS, 2018). Florent Delgrange is now aﬃliated with Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Belgium. Mickael Randour is an F.R.S.-FNRS Research Associate.
LOGICAL METHODSl IN COMPUTER SCIENCE
DOI:10.23638/LMCS-16(4:13)2020
©
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
CC
⃝
Creative Commons

13:2
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
stochastic model of its environment, and the focus is on satisfying a given level of expected
performance, or a speciﬁed behavior with a suﬃcient probability. Classical objectives studied
in both settings notably include parity, a canonical way of encoding ω-regular speciﬁcations,
and mean-payoﬀ, which evaluates the average payoﬀper transition in the limit of an inﬁnite
run in a weighted graph.
Window objectives in games. The traditional parity and mean-payoﬀobjectives share
two shortcomings. First, they both reason about inﬁnite runs in their limit. While this elegant
abstraction yields interesting theoretical properties and makes for robust interpretation,
it is often beneﬁcial in practical applications to be able to specify a parameterized time
frame in which an acceptable behavior should be witnessed. Second, both parity and mean-
payoﬀgames belong to UP∩coUP [Jur98, GS09], but despite recent breakthroughs [CJK+17,
DJL18], they are still not known to be in P. Furthermore, the latest results [CDF+19, FGO18]
indicate that all existing algorithmic approaches share inherent limitations that prevent
inclusion in P.
Window objectives address the time frame issue as follows. In their ﬁxed variant,
they consider a window of size bounded by λ ∈N0 (given as a parameter) sliding over
an inﬁnite run and declare this run to be winning if, in all positions, the window is such
that the (mean-payoﬀor parity) objective is locally satisﬁed. In their bounded variant,
the window size is not ﬁxed a priori, but a run is winning if there exists a bound λ for
which the condition holds. Window objectives have been considered both in direct versions,
where the window property must hold from the start of the run, and preﬁx-independent
versions, where it must hold from some point on. Window games were initially studied for
mean-payoﬀ[CDRR15] and parity [BHR16a]. They have since seen diverse extensions and
applications: e.g., [BKKW14, Bai15, BFKN16, BHR16b, HPR18, RPR18].
Window objectives in MDPs. Our goal is to lift the theory of window games to the
stochastic context. With that in mind, we consider the canonical threshold probability
problem: given an MDP, a window objective deﬁning a set of acceptable runs E, and a
probability threshold α, we want to decide if there exists a controller strategy (also called
policy) to achieve E with probability at least α. It is well-known that many problems in
MDPs can be reduced to threshold problems for appropriate objectives: e.g., maximizing
the expectation of a preﬁx-independent function boils down to maximizing the probability to
reach the best end-components for that function (see examples in [BK08, BFRR17, RRS17]).
Example. Before going further, let us consider an example. Take the MDP depicted in
Fig. 1: circles depict states and dots depict actions, labeled by letters. Each action yields
a probability distribution over successor states: for example, action b leads to s2 with
probability 0.5 and s3 with the same probability. This MDP is actually a Markov chain
(MC) as the controller has only one action available in each state: this process is purely
stochastic.
We consider the parity objective here: we associate a non-negative integer priority with
each state, and a run is winning if the minimum one amongst those seen inﬁnitely often is
even. Clearly, any run in this MC is winning: either it goes through s3 inﬁnitely often and
the minimum priority is 0, or it does not, and the minimum priority seen inﬁnitely often is 2.
Hence the controller not only wins almost-surely (with probability one), but even surely (on
all runs).

Vol. 16:4
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT: MDPS WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES
13:3
s1
1
s2
2
s3
0
a
b
c
1
1
0.5
0.5
Figure 1: Simple Markov chain where parity is surely satisﬁed but all window parity objec-
tives have probability zero.
Now, consider the window parity objective that informally asks for the minimum priority
inside a window of size bounded by λ to be even, with this window sliding all along the
inﬁnite run. Fix any λ ∈N0. It is clear that every time s1 is visited, there will be a ﬁxed
strictly positive probability ε > 0 of not seeing 0 before λ steps: this probability is 1/2λ−1.
Let us call this seeing a bad window. Since we are in a bottom strongly connected component
of the MC, we will almost-surely visit s1 inﬁnitely often [BK08]. Using classical probability
arguments (Borel-Cantelli), one can easily be convinced that the probability to see bad
windows inﬁnitely often is one. Hence the probability to win the window parity objective
is zero. This canonical example illustrates the diﬀerence between traditional parity and
window parity: the latter is more restrictive as it asks for a strict bound on the time frame
in which each odd priority should be answered by a smaller even priority.
Note that in practice, such a behavior is often wished for. For example, consider a
computer server having to grant requests to clients. A classical parity objective can encode
that requests should eventually be granted. However, it is clear that in a desired controller,
requests should not be placed on hold for an arbitrarily long time. The existence of a ﬁnite
bound on this holding time can be modeled with a bounded window parity objective, while
a speciﬁc bound can also be set as a parameter using a ﬁxed window parity objective.
Our contributions. We study the threshold probability problem in MDPs for window
objectives based on parity and mean-payoﬀ, two prominent formalisms in qualitative and
quantitative (resp.) analysis of systems. We consider the diﬀerent variants of window
objectives mentioned above: ﬁxed vs. bounded, direct vs. preﬁx-independent. A nice feature
of our approach is that we provide a uniﬁed view of parity and mean-payoﬀwindow objectives:
our algorithm can actually be adapted for any window-based objective if an appropriate black-
box is provided for a restricted sub-problem. This has two advantages: (i) conceptually,
our approach permits a deeper understanding of the essence of the window mechanism, not
biased by technicalities of the speciﬁc underlying objective; (ii) our framework can easily be
extended to other objectives for which a window version could be deﬁned. This point is of
great practical interest too, as it opens the perspective of a modular, generic software tool
suite for window objectives.
We give an overview of our results in Table 1. For the sake of space, we use acronyms
below: DFW for direct ﬁxed window, FW for (preﬁx-independent) ﬁxed window, DBW
for direct bounded window, and BW for (preﬁx-independent) bounded window. Our main
contributions are as follows.
(1) We solve DFW MDPs through reductions to safety MDPs over well-chosen unfoldings.
This results in polynomial-time and pseudo-polynomial-time algorithms for the parity

13:4
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
parity
mean-payoﬀ
complexity
memory
complexity
memory
DFW
P-c.
polynomial
EXPTIME/PSPACE-h.
pseudo-polynomial
FW
P-c.
polynomial
BW
memoryless
NP ∩coNP
memoryless
Table 1: Complexity of the threshold probability problem for window objectives in MDPs and
memory requirements. Acronyms DFW, FW and BW respectively stand for direct
ﬁxed window, ﬁxed window and bounded window objectives. All memory bounds
are tight and pure strategies always suﬃce. For mean-payoﬀ, the PSPACE-hardness
holds even for acyclic MDPs, and the bounded case is as hard as mean-payoﬀ
games. All results are new.
and mean-payoﬀvariants respectively (Thm. 4.7). We prove these complexities to be
almost tight (Thm. 4.8), the most interesting case being the PSPACE-hardness of DFW
mean-payoﬀobjectives, even in the case of acyclic MDPs.
We also show that no upper bound can be established on the window size needed to
win in general (Sect. 3.3), in stark contrast to the two-player games situation (Sect. 3.2).
(2) We use similar reductions to prove that ﬁnite memory suﬃces in the preﬁx-independent
case (Thm. 4.6). Yet, in this case, we can do better than using the unfoldings to solve
the problem. We start by studying end-components (ECs), the crux for all preﬁx-
independent objectives in MDPs: we show that ECs can be classiﬁed based on their
two-player zero-sum game interpretation (Sect. 5). Using the result on ﬁnite memory, we
prove that in ECs classiﬁed as good, almost-sure satisfaction of window objectives can be
ensured, whereas it is impossible to satisfy them with non-zero probability in the other
ECs (Lem. 5.5). We also establish tight complexity bounds for this classiﬁcation problem
(Thm. 5.10). This EC classiﬁcation is — both conceptually and complexity-wise — the
cornerstone to deal with general MDPs.
(3) Our general algorithm is developed in Sect. 6: we prove P-completeness for all preﬁx-
independent variants but for the BW mean-payoﬀone (Thm. 6.2 and Thm. 6.3), where
we show that the problem is in NP∩coNP and as hard as mean-payoﬀgames, a canonical
“hard” problem for that complexity class.
(4) For all variants, we prove tight memory bounds: see Thm. 4.7 and Thm. 4.8 for the direct
ﬁxed variants, Thm. 6.2 and Thm. 6.3 for the preﬁx-independent ﬁxed and bounded
ones. In all cases, pure strategies (i.e., without randomness) suﬃce.
(5) We leave out DBW objectives from our analysis as we show they are not well-behaved.
We illustrate their behavior in Sect. 3.3 and discuss their pitfalls in Sect. 7.
Along the way, we develop several side results that help drawing a line between MDPs and
games w.r.t. window objectives: e.g., whether or not a uniform bound exists in the bounded
case (Sect. 3.3). As stated above, our approach is also generic and may be easily extended
to other window-based objectives.
Comments on our results. In the game setting, window objectives are all in polynomial
time, except for the BW mean-payoﬀvariant, in NP ∩coNP. Despite clear diﬀerences
in behaviors, the situation is almost the same here. The only outlier case is the DFW

Vol. 16:4
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT: MDPS WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES
13:5
mean-payoﬀone, whose complexity rises signiﬁcantly. As we show in Thm. 4.8, the loss of
preﬁx-independence permits to emulate shortest path problems on MDPs that are famously
hard to solve eﬃciently (e.g., [HK15, RRS17, BGMR18, HJKQ18]). In the almost-sure case,
however, DFW mean-payoﬀMDPs collapse to P (Rmk. 4.10).
In games, window objectives permit to avoid long-standing NP ∩coNP complexity
barriers for parity [BHR16a] and mean-payoﬀ[CDRR15]. Since both are known to be in
P for the threshold probability problem in MDPs [CJH04, RRS17], the main interest of
window objectives resides in their modeling power. Still, they may turn out to be more
eﬃcient in practice too, as polynomial-time algorithms for parity and mean-payoﬀ, based
on linear programming, are often forsaken in favor of exponential-time value or strategy
iteration ones (e.g., [ACD+17]).
Related work. We already mentioned many related articles, hence we only brieﬂy discuss
some remaining models here. Window parity games are strongly linked to the concept of
ﬁnitary ω-regular games: see, e.g., [CHH09], or [BHR16a] for a complete list of references.
The window mechanism can be used to ensure a certain form of (local) guarantee over runs:
diﬀerent techniques have been considered in MDPs, notably variance-based [BCFK17] or
worst-case-based [BFRR17, BRR17] methods.
Finally, let us mention the very recent work of Bordais et al. [BGR19], which considers
a seemingly related question: the authors deﬁne a value function based on the window
mean-payoﬀmechanism and consider maximizing its expected value (which is diﬀerent from
the expected window size we discuss in Sect. 7). While there deﬁnitively are similarities in
our works w.r.t. technical tools, the two approaches are quite diﬀerent and have their own
strengths: we focus on deep understanding of the window mechanism through a generic
approach for the canonical threshold probability problem for all window-based objectives,
here instantiated as mean-payoﬀand parity; whereas Bordais et al. focus on a particular
optimization problem for a function relying on this mechanism.
In addition to having diﬀerent philosophies, our divergent approaches yield interesting
diﬀerences. We mention three examples illustrating the conceptual gap. First, in [BGR19],
the studied function takes the same value for direct and preﬁx-independent bounded window
mean-payoﬀobjectives, whereas we show in Sect. 3.3 that the classical deﬁnitions of window
objectives induce a striking diﬀerence between both (in the MDP of Ex. 3.2, the preﬁx-
independent version is satisﬁed for window size one, whereas no uniform bound on all runs
can be deﬁned for the direct case). Second, we are able to prove PSPACE-hardness for
the DFW mean-payoﬀcase, whereas the best lower bound known for the related problem
in [BGR19] is PP. Lastly, let us recall that our work also deals with window parity objectives
while the function of [BGR19] is strictly built on mean-payoﬀ.
Our paper presents in full details, with additional proofs and examples, the contributions
published in a preceding conference version [BDOR19].
Outline. Sect. 2 deﬁnes the model and problem under study. In Sect. 3, we introduce
window objectives, discuss their status in games, and illustrate their behavior in MDPs.
Sect. 4 is devoted to the ﬁxed variants and the aforementioned reductions. In Sect. 5, we
analyze the case of ECs and develop the classiﬁcation procedure. We build on it in Sect. 6 to
solve the general case. Finally, in Sect. 7, we discuss the limitations of our work, as well as
interesting extensions within arm’s reach (e.g., multi-objective threshold problem, expected
value problem).

13:6
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
2. Preliminaries
Probability distributions. Given a set S, let D(S) denote the set of rational probability
distributions over S. Given a distribution ι ∈D(S), let Supp(ι) = {s ∈S | ι(s) > 0} denote
its support.
Markov decision processes. A ﬁnite Markov decision process (MDP) is a tuple M =
(S, A, δ) where S is a ﬁnite set of states, A is a ﬁnite set of actions and δ: S × A →D(S) is
a partial function called the probabilistic transition function. The set of actions that are
available in a state s ∈S (i.e., for which δ(s, a) is deﬁned) is denoted by A(s). We use
δ(s, a, s′) as a shorthand for δ(s, a)(s′). For the sake of readability, we write (s, a, s′) ∈δ to
indicate that δ is deﬁned on (s, a) and s′ ∈Supp(δ(s, a)). We assume w.l.o.g. that MDPs
are deadlock-free: for all s ∈S, A(s) ̸= ∅. An MDP where for all s ∈S, |A(s)| = 1 is a
fully-stochastic process called a Markov chain (MC).
A run of M is an inﬁnite sequence ρ = s0a0 . . . an−1sn . . . of states and actions such
that δ(si, ai, si+1) > 0 for all i ≥0. The preﬁx up to the n-th state of ρ is the ﬁnite
sequence ρ[0, n] = s0a0 . . . an−1sn. The suﬃx of ρ starting from the n-th state of ρ is the
run ρ[n, ∞] = snansn+1an+1 . . . . Moreover, we denote by ρ[n] the n-th state sn of ρ. Finite
preﬁxes of runs of the form h = s0a0 . . . an−1sn are called histories. We sometimes denote
the last state of history h by Last(h). We resp. denote the sets of runs and histories of an
MDP M by Runs(M) and Hists(M).
End-components. Fix an MDP M = (S, A, δ). A sub-MDP of M is an MDP M′ =
(S′, A′, δ′) with S′ ⊆S, ∅̸= A′(s) ⊆A(s) for all s ∈S′, Supp(δ(s, a)) ⊆S′ for all s ∈S′, a ∈
A′(s), δ′ = δ|S′×A′. Such a sub-MDP M′ is an end-component (EC) of M if and only if the
underlying graph of M′ is strongly connected, i.e., there is a run between any pair of states
in S′. Given an EC M′ = (S′, A′, δ′) of M, we say that its sub-MDP M′′ = (S′′, A′′, δ′′),
S′′ ⊆S′, A′′ ⊆A′, is a sub-EC of M′ if M′′ is also an EC. We let EC(M) denote the set of
ECs of M, which may be of exponential size as ECs need not be disjoint.
The union of two ECs with non-empty intersection is itself an EC: hence we can deﬁne
the maximal ECs (MECs) of an MDP, i.e., the ECs that cannot be extended. We let
MEC(M) denote the set of MECs of M; it is of polynomial size (because MECs are pair-wise
disjoints) and computable in polynomial time [CH14].
Strategies. A strategy σ is a function Hists(M) →D(A) such that for all h ∈Hists(M)
ending in s, we have Supp(σ(h)) ⊆A(s). The set of all strategies is Σ. A strategy is pure if
all histories are mapped to Dirac distributions, i.e., the support is a singleton. A strategy σ
can be encoded by a Mealy machine (Q, σa, σu, ι) where Q is a ﬁnite or inﬁnite set of
memory states, ι the initial distribution on Q, σa the next action function σa : S ×Q →D(A)
where Supp(σa(s, q)) ⊆A(s) for any s ∈S and q ∈Q, and σu the memory update function
σu : A × S × Q →Q. We say that σ is ﬁnite-memory if |Q| < ∞, and K-memory if |Q| = K;
it is memoryless if K = 1, thus only depends on the last state of the history. We see such
strategies as functions s 7→D(A(s)) for s ∈S. A strategy is inﬁnite-memory if Q is inﬁnite.
The entity choosing the strategy is often called the controller.

Vol. 16:4
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT: MDPS WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES
13:7
Induced MC. An MDP M, a strategy σ encoded by (Q, σa, σu, ι), and a state s determine
a Markov chain Mσ
s deﬁned on the state space S × Q as follows. The initial distribution
is such that for any q ∈Q, state (s, q) has probability ι(q), and 0 for other states. For
any pair of states (s, q) and (s′, q′), the probability of transition (s, q)
a−→(s′, q′) is equal
to σa(s, q)(a) · δ(s, a, s′) if q′ = σu(s, q, a), and to 0 otherwise. A run of Mσ
s is an inﬁnite
sequence of the form (s0, q0)a0(s1, q1)a1 . . ., where each (si, qi)
ai
−→(si+1, qi+1) is a transition
with non-zero probability in Mσ
s , and s0 = s. When considering the probabilities of events in
Mσ
s , we will often consider sets of runs of M. Thus, given E ⊆(SA)ω, we denote by Pσ
M,s[E]
the probability of the runs of Mσ
s whose projection1 to M is in E, i.e., the probability of
event E when M is executed with initial state s and strategy σ. Note that every measurable
set (event) has a uniquely deﬁned probability [Var85] (Carath´eodory’s extension theorem
induces a unique probability measure on the Borel σ-algebra over cylinders of (SA)ω). We
may drop some subscripts of Pσ
M,s when the context is clear.
Bottom strongly-connected components. The counterparts of ECs in MCs are bottom
strongly-connected components (BSCCs). In our formalism, where an MC is simply an MDP
M = (S, A, δ) with |A(s)| = 1 for all s ∈S, BSCCs are exactly the ECs of such an MDP M.
Sure and almost sure events. Let M = (S, A, δ), σ ∈Σ, and E ⊆(SA)ω be an event.
We say that E is sure, written Sσ
M,s[E], if and only if Runs(Mσ
s ) ⊆E (again abusing our
notation to consider projections on (SA)ω); and that E is almost-sure, written ASσ
M,s[E], if
and only if Pσ
M,s[E] = 1.
Almost-sure reachability of ECs. Given a run ρ = s0a0s1a1 . . . ∈Runs(M), let
inf(ρ) = {s ∈S | ∀i ≥0, ∃j > i, sj = s}
denote the set of states visited inﬁnitely-often along ρ, and let
infAct(ρ) = {a ∈A | ∀i ≥0, ∃j > i, aj = a}
similarly denote the actions taken inﬁnitely-often along ρ.
Let limitSet(ρ) denote the pair (inf(ρ), infAct(ρ)). Note that this pair may induce a
well-deﬁned sub-MDP M′ = (inf(ρ), infAct(ρ), δ|inf(ρ)×infAct(ρ)), but in general this need not
be the case. A folklore result in MDPs (e.g., [BK08]) is the following: for any state s of
MDP M, for any strategy σ ∈Σ, we have that
ASσ
M,s[{ρ ∈Runs(Mσ
s ) | limitSet(ρ) ∈EC(M)}],
that is, under any strategy, the limit behavior of the MDP almost-surely coincides with an EC.
This property is a key tool in the analysis of MDPs with preﬁx-independent objectives, as it
essentially says that we only need to identify the “best” ECs and maximize the probability
to reach them.
1The projection of a run (s0, q0)a0(s1, q1)a1 . . . in Mσ
s to M is simply the run s0a0s1a1 . . . in M. For
the sake of readability, we make similar abuse of notation — identifying runs in the induced MC with their
projections in the MDP — throughout our paper.

13:8
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
Decision problem. An objective for an MDP M = (S, A, δ) is a measurable set of runs
E ⊆(SA)ω. Given an MDP M = (S, A, δ), an initial state s, a threshold α ∈[0, 1] ∩Q, and
such an objective E, the threshold probability problem is to decide whether there exists a
strategy σ ∈Σ such that Pσ
M,s [E] ≥α or not.
Furthermore, if it exists, we want to build such a strategy.
Weights and priorities. In this paper, we always assume an MDP M = (S, A, δ) with
either (i) a weight function w: A →Z of largest absolute weight W, or (ii) a priority function
p: S →{0, 1, . . . , d}, with d ≤|S| + 1 (w.l.o.g.). This choice is left implicit when the context
is clear, to oﬀer a uniﬁed view of mean-payoﬀand parity variants of window objectives.
Complexity. When studying the complexity of decision problems, we make the classical
assumptions of the ﬁeld: we consider the model size |M| to be polynomial in |S| and
the binary encoding of weights and probabilities (e.g., V = log2 W, with W the largest
absolute weight), whereas we consider the largest priority d, as well as the upcoming window
size λ, to be encoded in unary. When a problem is polynomial in W, we say that it is
pseudo-polynomial: it would be polynomial if weights would be given in unary.
Mean-payoﬀand parity objectives. We consider window objectives based on mean-
payoﬀand parity objectives. Let us discuss those classical objectives.
The ﬁrst one is a quantitative objective, for which we consider weighted MDPs. Let
ρ ∈Runs(M) be a run of such an MDP. The mean-payoﬀof preﬁx ρ[0, n] is MP(ρ[0, n]) =
1
n
Pn−1
i=0 w(ai), for n > 0.
This is naturally extended to runs by considering the limit
behavior. The mean-payoﬀof ρ is MP(ρ) = lim infn→∞MP(ρ[0, n]). Given a threshold
ν ∈Q, the mean-payoﬀobjective accepts all runs whose mean-payoﬀis above the threshold,
i.e., MeanPayoﬀ(ν) = {ρ ∈Runs(M) | MP(ρ) ≥ν}. The corresponding threshold probability
problem is in P using linear programming, and pure memoryless strategies suﬃce (see,
e.g., [RRS17]). Note that ν can be taken equal to zero without loss of generality. Another
variant of mean-payoﬀexists: it is deﬁned using lim sup instead of lim inf. In the classical
one-dimension setting, optimal strategies for the two versions coincide and ensure the same
thresholds (whereas the values may diﬀer on an arbitrary run). In our setting, we will
interpret the mean-payoﬀover a ﬁnite horizon, hence the two variants are de facto equivalent
for our use.
The second objective, parity, is a qualitative one, for which we consider MDPs with a
priority function. The parity objective requires that the smallest priority seen inﬁnitely often
along a run be even, i.e., Parity = {ρ ∈Runs(M) | mins∈inf(ρ) p(s) = 0 (mod 2)}. Again,
the corresponding threshold probability problem is in P and pure memoryless strategies
suﬃce [CJH04].

Vol. 16:4
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT: MDPS WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES
13:9
3. Window objectives
3.1. Deﬁnitions.
Good windows. Given a weighted MDP M and λ > 0, we deﬁne the good window mean-
payoﬀobjective
GWmp(λ) =
n
ρ ∈Runs(M) | ∃l < λ, MP
 ρ[0, l + 1]

≥0
o
requiring the existence of a window of size bounded by λ and starting at the ﬁrst position of
the run, over which the mean-payoﬀis at least equal to zero (w.l.o.g.).
Similarly, given an MDP M with priority function p, we deﬁne the good window parity
objective,
GWpar(λ) =
n
ρ ∈Runs(M) | ∃l < λ,
 p(ρ[l]) mod 2 = 0 ∧∀k < l, p(ρ[l]) < p(ρ[k])
o
requiring the existence of a window of size bounded by λ and starting at the ﬁrst position of
the run, for which the last priority is even and is the smallest within the window.
To preserve our generic approach, we use subscripts mp and par for mean-payoﬀand
parity variants respectively. So, given Ω= {mp, par} and a run ρ ∈Runs(M), we say that
an Ω-window is closed in at most λ steps from ρ[i] if ρ[i, ∞] is in GWΩ(λ). If a window is
not yet closed, we call it open.
Fixed variants. Given λ > 0, we deﬁne the direct ﬁxed window objective
DFWΩ(λ) = {ρ ∈Runs(M) | ∀j ≥0, ρ[j, ∞] ∈GWΩ(λ)}
asking for all Ω-windows to be closed within λ steps along the run.
We also deﬁne the ﬁxed window objective
FWΩ(λ) = {ρ ∈Runs(M) | ∃i ≥0, ρ[i, ∞] ∈DFWΩ(λ)}
that is the preﬁx-independent version of the previous one: it requires it to be eventually
satisﬁed.
Bounded variant. Finally, we deﬁne the bounded window objective
BWΩ= {ρ ∈Runs(M) | ∃λ > 0, ρ ∈FWΩ(λ)}
requiring the existence of a bound λ for which the ﬁxed window objective is satisﬁed. Note
that this bound need not be uniform along all runs in general. A direct variant may also be
deﬁned, but turns out to be ill-suited in the stochastic context: we illustrate it in Sect. 3.3
and discuss its pitfalls in Sect. 7. Hence we focus on the preﬁx-independent version in the
following.

13:10
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
3.2. Overview in games. Window mean-payoﬀand window parity objectives were con-
sidered in two-player zero-sum games [CDRR15, BHR16a]. The game setting is equivalent
to deciding if there exists a controller strategy in an MDP such that the corresponding
objective is surely satisﬁed, i.e., by all consistent runs. We quickly summarize the main
results here. In both cases, window objectives establish conservative approximations of the
classical ones, with improved complexity.
For mean-payoﬀ[CDRR15], (direct and preﬁx-independent) ﬁxed window objectives
can be solved in polynomial time, both in the model and the window size. Memory is in
general needed for both players, but polynomial memory suﬃces. Bounded versions belong
to NP ∩coNP and are as hard as mean-payoﬀgames. Memoryless strategies suﬃce for the
controller but not for its opponent (inﬁnite memory is needed for the preﬁx-independent
case, polynomial memory suﬃces in the direct case). Interestingly, if the controller can win
the bounded window objective, then a uniform bound exists, i.e., there exists a window size
λ suﬃciently large such that the bounded version coincides with the ﬁxed one. Recall that
this is not granted by deﬁnition. We will see that in MDPs, this does not hold (Ex. 3.2).
This uniform bound in games is however pseudo-polynomial.
For parity [BHR16a], similar results are obtained. The crucial diﬀerence is the uniform
bound on λ, which also exists but in this case is equal to the number of states of the
game. Thanks to that, all variants of window parity objectives belong to P. The memory
requirements are the same as for window mean-payoﬀ.
3.3. Illustration.
Example 3.1. We ﬁrst go back to the example of Sect. 1, depicted in Fig. 1. Let M
be this MDP. Fix run ρ = (s1 a s2 b s3 c)ω. We have that ρ ̸∈FWpar(λ = 2) — a fortiori,
ρ ̸∈DFWpar(λ = 2) — as the window that opens in s1 is not closed after two steps (because
s1 has odd priority 1, and 2 is not smaller than 1 so does not suﬃce to answer it). If we
now set λ = 3, we see that this window closes on time, as 0 is encountered within three
steps. As all other windows are immediately closed, we have ρ ∈DFWpar(λ = 3) — a fortiori,
ρ ∈FWpar(λ = 3) and ρ ∈BWpar.
Regarding the probability of these objectives, however, we have already argued that, for
all λ > 0, PM,s1[FWpar(λ)] = 0, whereas PM,s1[Parity] = 1 since s3 is almost-surely visited
inﬁnitely often but any time bound is almost-surely exceeded inﬁnitely often too. Observe
that BWpar = S
λ>0 FWpar(λ), hence we also have that PM,s1[BWpar] = 0 (by countable
additivity).
Similar reasoning holds for window mean-payoﬀobjectives, by taking the weight function
w = {a 7→−1, b 7→0, c 7→1}.
◁
With the next example, we illustrate one of the main diﬀerences between games and
MDPs w.r.t. window objectives. As discussed in Sect. 3.2, in two-player zero-sum games,
both for parity and mean-payoﬀ, there exists a uniform bound on the window size λ such
that the ﬁxed variants coincide with the bounded ones. We show that this property does
not carry over to MDPs.
Example 3.2. Consider the MC M depicted in Fig. 2. It is clear that for any λ > 0,
there is probability 1/2λ−1 that objective DFWpar(λ) is not satisﬁed. Hence, for all λ > 0,
PM,s[DFWpar(λ)] < 1.
Now let DBWpar be the direct bounded window objective evoked in Sect. 3.1 and deﬁned
as DBWpar = S
λ>0 DFWpar(λ). We claim that PM,s[DBWpar] = 1. Indeed, any run ending

Vol. 16:4
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT: MDPS WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES
13:11
s
1
t
0
a
b
0.5
0.5
1
Figure 2: On this Markov chain, there is no uniform bound over all runs, in contrast to the
game setting.
in t belongs to DBWpar, as it belongs to DFWpar(λ) for λ equal to the length of the preﬁx
up to t. Since t is almost-surely reached (as it is the only BSCC of the MC), we conclude
that DBWpar is indeed satisﬁed almost-surely.
Essentially, the diﬀerence stems from the fairness of probabilities. In a game, the
opponent would control the successor choice after action a and always go back to s, resulting
in objective DBWpar being lost. However, in this MC, s is almost-surely left eventually, but
we cannot guarantee when: hence there exists a window bound for each run, but there is no
uniform bound over all runs.
This simple MC also illustrates the classical diﬀerence between sure and almost-sure
satisfaction: while we have ASM,s[FWpar(λ = 1)], we do not have SM,s[FWpar(λ = 1)],
because of run ρ = (s a)ω.
Again the same reasoning holds for mean-payoﬀvariants of the objectives, for example
with w = {a 7→−1, b 7→1}.
◁
We leave out the direct bounded objective DBWΩfrom now on. We will come back to
it in Sect. 7 and motivate why this objective is not well-behaved. Hence, in the following,
we focus on direct and preﬁx-independent ﬁxed window objectives and preﬁx-independent
bounded ones.
4. Fixed case: better safe than sorry
We start with the ﬁxed variants of window objectives. Our main goal here is to establish
that pure ﬁnite-memory strategies suﬃce in all cases. As a by-product, we also obtain
algorithms to solve the corresponding decision problems. Still, for the preﬁx-independent
variants, we will obtain better complexities using the upcoming generic approach (Sect. 6).
Our main tools are natural reductions from direct (resp. preﬁx-independent) window
problems on MDPs to safety (resp. co-B¨uchi) problems on unfoldings based on the window
size λ (i.e., larger arenas incorporating information on open windows). We use identical
unfoldings for both direct and preﬁx-independent objectives, in order to obtain a uniﬁed
proof. In both cases, the set of states to avoid in the unfolding corresponds to leaving a
window open for λ steps.
4.1. Reductions.
Mean-payoﬀ. Let M = (S, A, δ) be an MDP with weight function w (of maximal absolute
weight W), and λ > 0 be the window size. We deﬁne the unfolding MDP Mλ = ( ˜S, A, ˜δ) as
follows:
• ˜S = S × {0, . . . , λ} × {−λ · W, . . . , 0}.

13:12
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
• ˜δ: ˜S × A →D( ˜S) is deﬁned as follows for all a in A:
˜δ ((s, l, z), a) (t, l + 1, z + w(a)) = ν if
 δ(s, a)(t) = ν

∧
 l < λ

∧
 z + w(a) < 0

,
˜δ ((s, l, z), a) (t, 0, 0) = ν if
 δ(s, a)(t) = ν

∧
h z + w(a) ≥0

∨
 l = λ

∧
 z < 0
i
.
• Once an initial state sinit ∈S is ﬁxed in M, the associated initial state in Mλ is
˜sinit = (sinit, 0, 0) ∈˜S.
Note that Mλ is unweighted: it keeps track in each of its states of the current state of M,
the size of the current open window as well as the current sum of weights in the window:
these two values are reset whenever a window is closed (left-hand side of the disjunction) or
stays open for λ steps (right hand-side). A key underlying property used here is the so-called
inductive property of windows [CDRR15, BHR16a].
Property 4.1 (Inductive property of windows). Consider a run ρ = s0a0s1a1 . . . in an
MDP. Fix a window starting in position i ≥0. Let j be the position in which this window
gets closed, assuming it does. Then, all windows in positions from i to j also close in j.
The validity of this property is easy to check by contradiction (if it was not the case,
then the window in i would close before j). This property is fundamental in our reduction:
without it we would have to keep track of all open windows in parallel, which would result
in a blow-up exponential in λ.
In the upcoming reductions, the set of states to avoid will be
B = {(s, l, z) | (l = λ) ∧(z < 0)}.
By construction of Mλ, it exactly corresponds to windows staying open for λ steps.
Parity. Let M = (S, A, δ) be an MDP with priority function p, and λ > 0 be the window
size. We deﬁne the unfolding MDP Mλ = ( ˜S, A, ˜δ) as follows:
• ˜S = S × {0, . . . , λ} × {0, 1, . . . , d}.
• ˜δ: ˜S × A →D( ˜S) is deﬁned as follows for all a in A:
˜δ ((s, l, c), a) (t, l + 1, min(c, p(t))) = ν if
 δ(s, a)(t) = ν

∧
 l < λ −1

∧
 c mod 2 = 1

,
˜δ ((s, l, c), a) (t, 0, p(t)) = ν if
 δ(s, a)(t) = ν

∧
 l = λ −1

∧
 c mod 2 = 1

,
˜δ ((s, l, c), a) (t, 0, p(t)) = ν if
 δ(s, a)(t) = ν

∧
 c mod 2 = 0

.
• Once an initial state sinit ∈S is ﬁxed in M, the associated one in Mλ is ˜sinit =
(sinit, 0, p(sinit)) ∈˜S.
This unfolding keeps track in each of its states of the current state of the original MDP, the
size of the current window and the minimum priority in the window: again, these two values
are reset whenever a window is closed or stays open for λ steps.
In this case, the set of states to avoid will be B = {(s, l, c) | (l = λ −1) ∧(c mod 2 = 1)},
with an equivalent interpretation.
Remark 4.2. There is a slight asymmetry in the use of indices for the current window size
in the two constructions: that is due to mean-payoﬀusing weights on actions (two states
being needed for one action) and parity using priorities on states.

Vol. 16:4
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT: MDPS WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES
13:13
Objectives. We treat mean-payoﬀand parity versions in a uniﬁed way from now on. As
stated before, the set B represents in both cases windows being open for λ steps and should
be avoided: at all times for direct variants, eventually for preﬁx-independent ones. We deﬁne
the following objectives over the unfoldings:
Reach(Mλ) = ( ˜SA)
∗BA( ˜SA)
ω,
Safety(Mλ) = ( ˜SA)
ω \ Reach(Mλ),
Buchi(Mλ) = (( ˜SA)
∗BA)
ω,
coBuchi(Mλ) = ( ˜SA)
ω \ Buchi(Mλ).
Our ultimate goal is to prove that the safety and co-B¨uchi objectives in Mλ are probability-
wise equivalent to the direct ﬁxed window and ﬁxed window ones in M, modulo a well-deﬁned
mapping between histories, runs and strategies. This will induce the correctness of our
reduction.
Mapping. Fix an initial state sinit in M and let ˜sinit be its corresponding initial state in
Mλ. Let Hists(M, sinit) denote the histories of M starting in sinit. We start by deﬁning
a bijective mapping πMλ, and its inverse πM, between histories of Hists(M, sinit) and
Hists(Mλ, ˜sinit). We use πMλ : Hists(M, sinit) →Hists(Mλ, ˜sinit) for the M-to-Mλ direction,
and πM : Hists(Mλ, ˜sinit) →Hists(M, sinit) for the opposite one. We deﬁne πMλ inductively
as follows.
• πMλ(sinit) = ˜sinit.
• Let h ∈Hists(M, sinit), ˜h = πMλ(h), a ∈A, s ∈S. Then, πMλ(h · a · s) = ˜h · a · ˜s, where
˜s is obtained from Last(˜h), a and s following the unfolding construction.
We deﬁne πM as its inverse, i.e., the function projecting histories of Hists(Mλ, ˜sinit) to
(SA)∗S. We naturally extend these mappings to runs based on this inductive construction.
Now, we also extend these mappings to strategies. Let σ be a strategy in M. We deﬁne
its twin strategy ˜σ = πMλ(σ) in Mλ as follows: for all ˜h ∈Hists(Mλ, ˜sinit), ˜σ(˜h) = σ(πM(˜h)).
Note that this strategy is well-deﬁned as M and Mλ share the same actions and πM is a
proper function over Hists(Mλ, ˜sinit) (i.e., each history ˜h has an image in Hists(M, sinit)).
Similarly, given a strategy ˜σ in Mλ, we build a twin strategy σ = πM(˜σ) using πMλ. Hence
we also have a bijection over strategies.
We say that two objects (histories, runs, strategies) are π-corresponding if they are the
image of one another through mappings πM and πMλ.
Probability-wise equivalence. For any any history h, we denote by Cyl(h) the cylinder
set spanned by it, i.e., the set of all runs prolonging h. Cylinder sets are the building blocks
of probability measures in MCs, as all measurable sets belong to the σ-algebra built upon
them [BK08]. We show that our mappings preserve probabilities of cylinder sets.
Lemma 4.3. Let M, Mλ, πM and πMλ be deﬁned as above.
Fix any couple of π-
corresponding strategies (σ, ˜σ) for M and Mλ respectively. Then, for any couple of π-
corresponding histories (h, ˜h) in Hists(M, sinit) × Hists(Mλ, ˜sinit), we have that
Pσ
M,sinit[Cyl(h)] = P˜σ
Mλ,˜sinit[Cyl(˜h)].
(4.1)
Proof. We ﬁx M, Mλ, πM, πMλ, and a couple of π-corresponding strategies (σ, ˜σ). We
prove the equality by induction on histories. The base case, for h = sinit and ˜h = ˜sinit, is

13:14
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
trivial, as we have
Pσ
M,sinit[Cyl(h)] = Pσ
M,sinit[Runs(M, sinit)] = 1
= P˜σ
Mλ,˜sinit[Runs(Mλ, ˜sinit)] = P˜σ
Mλ,˜sinit[Cyl(˜h)].
Now, assume Eq. (4.1) true for a couple of π-corresponding histories (h, ˜h).
Consider
any one-step extension of these histories, say (h · a · s, ˜h · a · ˜s) for a ∈A, s ∈S and
˜h · a · ˜s = πMλ(h · a · s). We need to prove that Eq. (4.1) still holds for this pair of histories.
Let us expand the equality to prove as follows:
Pσ
M,sinit[Cyl(h · a · s)] = P˜σ
Mλ,˜sinit[Cyl(˜h · a · ˜s)]
⇐⇒Pσ
M,sinit[h] · σ(h)(a) · δ(Last(h), a, s) = P˜σ
Mλ,˜sinit[˜h] · ˜σ(˜h)(a) · ˜δ(Last(˜h), a, ˜s).
Now, observe that σ(h)(a) = ˜σ(˜h)(a) since σ and ˜σ are π-corresponding strategies and
h and ˜h are π-corresponding histories. Furthermore, δ(Last(h), a, s) = ˜δ(Last(˜h), a, ˜s) by
construction of the unfolding.
Now since Pσ
M,sinit[h] = P˜σ
Mλ,˜sinit[˜h] holds by induction
hypothesis, we are done.
Since the previous lemma holds for all cylinders, we may extend the result to any event
(see, e.g., [BK08] for the construction of the σ-algebra and related questions).
Corollary 4.4. Let M, Mλ, πM and πMλ be deﬁned as above. Fix any couple of π-
corresponding strategies (σ, ˜σ) for M and Mλ respectively. Then, for any couple of π-
corresponding measurable objectives (E, ˜E) ⊆Runs(M, sinit) × Runs(Mλ, ˜sinit), we have
that
Pσ
M,sinit[E] = P˜σ
Mλ,˜sinit[ ˜E].
Correctness of the reductions. We may now establish our reductions.
Lemma 4.5. Let M = (S, A, δ) be an MDP, λ > 0 be the window size, Ω∈{mp, par},
Mλ = ( ˜S, A, ˜δ) be the unfolding of M deﬁned as above for variant Ω, s ∈S be a state of
M, and ˜s ∈˜S be its π-corresponding state in Mλ. The following assertions hold.
(1) For any strategy σ in M, there exists a strategy ˜σ in Mλ such that
P˜σ
Mλ,˜s[Safety(Mλ)] = Pσ
M,s[DFWΩ(λ)]
∧
P˜σ
Mλ,˜s[coBuchi(Mλ)] = Pσ
M,s[FWΩ(λ)].
(2) For any strategy ˜σ in Mλ, there exists a strategy σ in M such that
Pσ
M,s[DFWΩ(λ)] = P˜σ
Mλ,˜s[Safety(Mλ)]
∧
Pσ
M,s[FWΩ(λ)] = P˜σ
Mλ,˜s[coBuchi(Mλ)].
Moreover, such strategies can be obtained through mappings πM and πMλ.
Proof. To prove it, it suﬃces to see that Safety(Mλ) (resp. coBuchi(Mλ)) is π-corresponding
with DFWΩ(λ) (resp. FWΩ(λ)) and invoke Cor. 4.4. As noted earlier, this correspondence is
trivial by construction of the unfoldings. Consider the safety case: a run ˜ρ in Mλ belongs to
Safety(Mλ) if and only if all the windows along ρ = πM(˜ρ) close within λ steps. Similarly,
a run ˜ρ in Mλ belongs to coBuchi(Mλ) if and only if it visits B ﬁnitely often, hence if and
only if ρ = πM(˜ρ) contains a ﬁnite number of windows left open for λ steps.
Intuitively, to obtain a strategy σ in M from a strategy ˜σ in the unfolding Mλ, we have
to integrate in the memory of σ the additional information encoded in ˜S: hence the memory
required by σ is the one used by ˜σ with a blow-up polynomial in | ˜S|.

Vol. 16:4
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT: MDPS WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES
13:15
4.2. Memory requirements and complexity.
Upper bounds. Thanks to the reductions established in Lem. 4.5, along with the fact that
pure memoryless strategies suﬃce for safety and co-B¨uchi objectives in MDPs [BK08], we
obtain the following result.
Theorem 4.6. Pure ﬁnite-memory strategies suﬃce for the threshold probability problem for
all ﬁxed window objectives. That is, given MDP M = (S, A, δ), initial state s ∈S, window
size λ > 0, Ω∈{mp, par}, objective E ∈{DFWΩ(λ), FWΩ(λ)} and threshold probability
α ∈[0, 1] ∩Q, if there exists a strategy σ ∈Σ such that Pσ
M,s[E] ≥α, then there exists a
pure ﬁnite-memory strategy σ′ such that Pσ′
M,s[E] ≥α.
These reductions also yield algorithms for the threshold probability problem in the ﬁxed
window case. We only use them for the direct variants, as the generic approach we develop
in Sect. 6 proves to be more eﬃcient for the preﬁx-independent one, for two reasons: ﬁrst, we
may restrict the co-B¨uchi-like analysis to end-components; second, we use a more tractable
analysis than the co-B¨uchi unfolding for mean-payoﬀ. However, the reduction established
for preﬁx-independent variants is not without interest: it yields suﬃciency of ﬁnite-memory
strategies, which is a key ingredient to establish our generic approach (used in Lem. 5.5).
Theorem 4.7. The threshold probability problem is
(a) in P for direct ﬁxed window parity objectives, and pure polynomial-memory optimal
strategies can be constructed in polynomial time.
(b) in EXPTIME for direct ﬁxed window mean-payoﬀobjectives, and pure pseudo-polynomial-
memory optimal strategies can be constructed in pseudo-polynomial time.
Proof. The algorithm is simple: given M = (S, A, δ) and λ > 0, build Mλ and solve the
corresponding safety problem. This can be done in polynomial time in |Mλ| and pure
memoryless strategies suﬃce over Mλ [BK08].
For parity, the unfolding is of size polynomial in |M|, the number of priorities d and the
window size λ. Since both d (anyway bounded by O(|S|)) and λ are assumed to be given in
unary, it yields the result.
For mean-payoﬀ, the unfolding is of size polynomial in |M|, the largest absolute weight
W and the window size λ. Since weights are assumed to be encoded in binary, we only have
a pseudo-polynomial-time algorithm.
Lower bounds. We complement the results of Thm. 4.7 with almost-matching lower bounds,
showing that our approach is close to optimal, complexity-wise.
Theorem 4.8. The threshold probability problem is
(a) P-hard for direct ﬁxed window parity objectives, and polynomial-memory strategies are
in general necessary;
(b) PSPACE-hard for direct ﬁxed window mean-payoﬀobjectives (even for acyclic MDPs),
and pseudo-polynomial-memory strategies are in general necessary.
Proof. Item (a). We establish P-hardness for direct ﬁxed window parity objectives through
a reduction from two-player reachability games, which are known to be P-complete [Bee80,
Imm81]. Let G = (V = V1 ⊎V2, E) be a game graph, where states in V1 (resp. V2) belong
to player 1 (resp. player 2), and E ⊆V × V is the set of transitions. Without loss of
generality, we assume this graph to be strictly alternating, i.e., E ⊆V1 × V2 ⊎V2 × V1, and

13:16
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
without deadlock. The reachability objective Reach(T) for T ⊆V accepts all plays that
eventually visit the set T. Again w.l.o.g., we assume that T ⊆V1. Given an initial state
vinit ∈V1 and target set T ⊆V1, deciding if player 1 has a winning strategy ensuring that T
is visited whatever the strategy of player 2 is P-hard. We reduce this question to a threshold
probability problem for a direct ﬁxed window parity objective as follows. From G, we build
the MDP M = (S, A, δ) such that S = V1, A = V2 and δ is constructed in the following
manner:
• for all v1 ∈V1 \ T, v′
1 ∈V1, v2 ∈V2, (v1, v2, v′
1) ∈δ iﬀ(v1, v2) ∈E and (v2, v′
1) ∈E;
• probabilities are taken uniform, i.e., δ(v1, v2, v′
1) =

1
|Supp(δ(v1, v2))|

;
• states in T are made absorbing, i.e., they only allow an action a such that δ(v, a, v) = 1
for any v ∈T.
We add a priority function p: S →{0, 1} that assigns 1 to all states in S except states that
correspond to states in T ⊆V1: those states get priority 0. Let us ﬁx objective DFWpar(λ =
|V1|). We claim that player 1 has a winning strategy from vinit in the reachability game G if
and only if the controller has a strategy almost-surely satisfying objective DFWpar(λ = |V1|)
from vinit in the MDP M. Observe that this reduction is in LOGSPACE: it remains to check
its correctness.
Consider what happens in M. The only way to close the window that will open in vinit
is to reach T, and we ought to close it to obtain a satisfying run as we consider the direct
objective. Furthermore, once T is reached, the run is necessarily winning as we stay in T
forever and always see priority 0. We also know that if T can be reached, λ steps suﬃce to
do so, as memoryless strategies suﬃce in the game G (note that we do not count actions
here). Lifting a winning strategy from G to M is thus trivial: we mimic a memoryless one
w.l.o.g. and reach T surely in M within λ steps, ensuring the objective.
Hence, the other direction remains: given a strategy σ such that ASσ
M,vinit[DFWpar(λ)],
we need to construct a winning strategy in G. This may seem more diﬃcult as we need
to go from an almost-surely winning strategy to a surely winning one: something which is
not possible in general. Yet, we show that σ is actually surely winning for DFWpar(λ). By
contradiction, assume it is not the case, i.e., that there exists a consistent run ρ such that
ρ ̸∈DFWpar(λ): then, a ﬁnite preﬁx ρ[0, n] can be extracted, such that a window remains
open for λ steps along it. Now, since we consider a direct objective, the cylinder spanned
by this preﬁx only contains losing runs, and since ρ[0, n] is ﬁnite, it has a strictly positive
probability. Hence σ is not almost-surely winning and we have our contradiction. This
proves that σ is actually surely-winning, and it is then trivial to mimic it in G to obtain a
winning strategy for player 1. This shows that the reduction from reachability games to the
threshold probability problem for direct ﬁxed window parity objectives holds, thus that the
latter is P-hard.
Regarding memory, the proof for direct ﬁxed window parity games in [BHR16a] carries
over easily to our setting by replacing the states of the opponent by stochastic actions, in
the natural way. Hence the lower bound is trivial to establish. Yet, we illustrate the need
for memory in Ex. 4.11 to help the reader understand the phenomenon.
Item (b). Consider the PSPACE-hardness of the mean-payoﬀvariant. We proceed via a
reduction from the threshold probability problem for shortest path objectives [HK15, RRS17].
This problem is as follows. Let M = (S, A, δ) be an MDP with weight function w: A →N0
(we use strictly positive weights w.l.o.g.). We ﬁx a target set T ⊆S and deﬁne the truncated

Vol. 16:4
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT: MDPS WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES
13:17
sum up to T as the function TST : Runs(M) →N ∪{∞} given by
TST (ρ) =
(Pn−1
i=0 w(ai)
if ρ[n] ∈T ∧∀0 ≤j < n, ρ[j] ̸∈T,
∞
if ∀j ≥0, ρ[j] ̸∈T.
Given an upper bound ℓ∈N, the shortest path objective is
ShortestPath(ℓ) = {ρ ∈Runs(M) | TST (ρ) ≤ℓ}.
Deciding if there exists a strategy σ such that Pσ
M,s[ShortestPath(ℓ)] ≥α, given s ∈S and
α ∈[0, 1] ∩Q, is known to be PSPACE-hard, even for acyclic MDPs [HK15]. The target
set T is assumed to be made of absorbing states (i.e., with self-loops): the acyclicity is to
be interpreted over the rest of the underlying graph. We establish a reduction from this
problem, in the acyclic case, to a threshold probability problem for a direct ﬁxed window
mean-payoﬀobjective, maintaining the acyclicity of the underlying graph (except in target
states, again).
Given the original MDP M, we only modify the weight function to obtain MDP M′.
We deﬁne w′ from w, the target T and the bound ℓas follows:
• for all (s, a, s′) ∈δ, s′ ̸∈T, w′(a) = −w(a);
• for all (s, a, t) ∈δ, s ̸∈T, t ∈T, w′(a) = −w(a) + ℓ;
• for all (t, a, t) ∈δ, t ∈T, w′(a) = 0.
Intuitively, we take the opposite of all weights; add the bound when entering the target;
and make the target cost-free. We then deﬁne the objective DFWmp(λ = |S|) and claim
that there exists a strategy σ in M to ensure Pσ
M,s[ShortestPath(ℓ)] ≥α if and only if there
exists a strategy σ′ in M′ to ensure Pσ′
M′,s[DFWmp(λ)] ≥α.
Proving it is fairly easy. Observe that, by construction, the sum of weights over a preﬁx
in M′ that is not yet in T is strictly negative, and the opposite of the sum over the same
preﬁx in the original MDP M. Due to the addition of ℓon entering T, we have that any
run ρ′ ∈Runs(M′) sees all its windows closed if and only if the very same run ρ ∈Runs(M)
is such that TST (ρ) ≤ℓin M. Now, using the acyclicity of the underlying graph, we know
that if a run reaches T, it does so in at most λ steps. We thus conclude that ρ′ ∈DFWmp(λ)
in M′ if and only if ρ ∈ShortestPath(ℓ) in M. It is then trivial to derive the desired result
and establish the correctness of the reduction: this concludes our proof of PSPACE-hardness
for the threshold probability problem for direct ﬁxed window mean-payoﬀobjectives.
Finally, the need for pseudo-polynomial memory is also obtained through this reduction.
Indeed, there is a chain of reductions from subset-sum games [Tra06, FJ15] to our setting,
via the shortest path problem presented above [HK15]. More precisely, subset-sum games are
known to require pseudo-polynomial-memory strategies as optimal strategies need to track
the current sum of weights (see, e.g., [RRS17]). These games can be (polynomially) reduced
to the shortest path problem, as in [HK15], which in turn we can reduce (polynomially) to
our problem, as just established. Hence the need for pseudo-polynomial-memory strategies
carries over to our setting.
Remark 4.9. Throughout this paper, we assume the window size λ to be given in unary,
or equivalently, to be polynomial in the description of the MDP (as for practical purposes,
having exponential window sizes would somewhat defeat the purpose of time bounds in
speciﬁcations). It is thus interesting to note that the hardness results we established in
Thm. 4.8 do hold under this assumption: the complexity essentially comes from the weight
structure, as in other counting-like problems in MDPs [HK15, RRS17, BFRR17].

13:18
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
Remark 4.10. As noted in the proof of Thm. 4.8, almost-surely winning coincides with
surely winning for the direct ﬁxed window objectives. Therefore, the threshold probability
problem for DFWmp(λ) collapses to P if the threshold is α = 1 [CDRR15].
s1
s2
s5
s7
s3
s6
s4
s8
s9
4
s10
s11
s12
2
s13
s14
0
back
to s1
5
3
1
a
b
c
d
Figure 3: This MDP with d = 6 priorities admits an almost-surely (even surely) winning
strategy for DFWpar(λ = d
2 + 2): the controller must answer to the path with
priority 5 (resp. 3, 1) by choosing b (resp. c, d). This requires O(d
2) memory states.
Example 4.11. Consider the direct ﬁxed window parity objective in the MDP depicted
in Fig. 3, inspired by [BHR16a]. For the sake of readability, we did not write all details in
the ﬁgure: all actions have uniform probability distributions over their successors, and all
unlabeled states have priority d = 6. This example can easily be generalized to any even
d ≥0. Observe that the MDP has size |S| = 2 + d
2 · (d
2 + 1), hence polynomial in d.
Fix the objective DFWpar(λ = d
2 + 2). We claim that the controller may achieve it
almost-surely (even surely) with a strategy using memory of size d
2. Indeed, each time action
a results in taking the path of priority (d −1) (resp. (d −3), . . . , 1), the only possibility for
the controller is to choose the path with priority (d −2) (resp. (d −4), . . . , 0), otherwise a
window stays open for λ steps. Doing this ensures that the objective is satisﬁed surely.
Now, if the controller uses less than d
2 memory, he has to answer to two diﬀerent odd
priorities with the same choice of action in s8, which results in a window staying open for λ
steps with strictly positive probability. Hence, there is no almost-sure winning strategy with
such limited memory: polynomial-memory strategies are needed in this example.
◁
5. The case of end-components
We have already solved the case of direct ﬁxed window objectives: it remains to consider
preﬁx-independent ﬁxed and bounded variants. As seen in Sect. 2, the analysis of MDPs
with preﬁx-independent objectives crucially relies on end-components (ECs). Indeed, they
are almost-surely reached in the long run.
In this section, we study what happens in ECs: how to play optimally and what can
be achieved. In Sect. 6, we will use this knowledge as the cornerstone of our algorithm for
general MDPs. The main result here is a strong link between ECs and two-player games:
intuitively, either the probability to win a window objective in an EC is zero, or it is one and
there exists a sub-EC where the controller can actually win surely, i.e., as in a two-player
game played on this sub-EC.

Vol. 16:4
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT: MDPS WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES
13:19
Safe ECs. We start by deﬁning the notion of λ-safety, that will characterize such sub-ECs.
Deﬁnition 5.1 (λ-safety). Let M be an MDP, Ω∈{mp, par}, λ > 0, and C = (SC, AC, δC) ∈
EC(M), we say that C is λ-safeΩif there exists a strategy σ ∈Σ in C such that, from all
s ∈SC, Sσ
C,s[DFWΩ(λ)].
Classifying an EC as λ-safeΩor not boils down to interpreting it as a two-player game
(the duality between MDPs and games is further explored in [BFRR17, BRR17]). In this
setting, the uncertainty becomes adversarial: when there is some uncertainty about the
outcome of an action, we do not consider probabilities but we let the opponent decide the
outcome of the action. On entering a state s of the MDP after some history, the controller
chooses an action a following its strategy and the opponent then chooses a successor state s′
such that s′ ∈Supp(δ(s, a)) without taking into account the exact values of probabilities. In
such a view, the opponent tries to prevent the controller from achieving its objective. A
winning strategy for the controller in the game interpretation is a strategy that ensures the
objective regardless of its opponent’s strategy. An EC is thus said to be λ-safeΩif and only
if its two-player interpretation admits a winning strategy for DFWΩ(λ).
Remark 5.2. Throughout this paper, all the strategies we consider are uniform in the
game-theoretic sense. That is, if an objective is achievable from a set of states, we do not
need to have a diﬀerent strategy for each starting state, and we may instead use the very
same strategy from all starting states. This uniformity is not needed in our approach but
we have it for free for both the classical MDP strategies (reachability, B¨uchi, etc) [BK08]
and the two-player window games [CDRR15, BHR16a]. We use it for the sake of readability,
as it permits to have one strategy per EC instead of one per state of the EC for example.
Hence all our statements are written with that in mind.
Proposition 5.3. Let M be an MDP, Ω∈{mp, par}, λ > 0, and C = (SC, AC, δC) ∈EC(M)
be λ-safeΩ. Then, there exists a pure polynomial-memory strategy σΩ,λ,C
safe
in C such that
S
σΩ,λ,C
safe
C,s
[DFWΩ(λ)] for all s ∈SC.
Proof. Straightforward by deﬁnition of λ-safety and pure polynomial-memory strategies being
suﬃcient in two-player zero-sum direct ﬁxed window games, both for mean-payoﬀ[CDRR15]
and parity [BHR16a] variants.
Good ECs. As sketched above, the existence of sub-ECs that are λ-safe is crucial in order
to satisfy any window objective in an EC. We thus introduce the notion of good ECs.
Deﬁnition 5.4. Let M be an MDP, Ω∈{mp, par}, and C ∈EC(M), we say that
• C is λ-goodΩ, for λ > 0, if it contains a sub-EC C′ which is λ-safeΩ.
• C is BW-goodΩif it contains a sub-EC C′ which is λ-safeΩfor some λ > 0.
By deﬁnition, any BW-goodΩEC is also λ-goodΩfor an appropriate λ > 0. Yet, we use a
diﬀerent terminology as in the BW case, we do not ﬁx λ a priori: this will be important
complexity-wise.
We now establish that goodΩECs are exactly the ones where window objectives can be
satisﬁed with non-zero probability, and actually, with probability one.
Lemma 5.5 (Zero-one law). Let M be an MDP, Ω∈{mp, par} and C = (SC, AC, δC) ∈
EC(M). The following assertions hold.

13:20
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
(a) For all λ > 0, either
(i) C is λ-goodΩand there exists a strategy σ in C such that ASσ
C,s[FWΩ(λ)] for all s ∈SC,
(ii) or for all s ∈SC, for all strategy σ in C, Pσ
C,s[FWΩ(λ)] = 0.
(b) Either
(i) C is BW-goodΩand there exists a strategy σ in C such that ASσ
C,s[BWΩ] for all s ∈SC,
(ii) or for all s ∈SC, for all strategy σ in C, Pσ
C,s[BWΩ] = 0.
Proof. We begin with the ﬁxed variant (a). Case (i). Fix λ > 0 and assume there exists a
sub-EC C′ with state space SC′ that is λ-safeΩ. By Prop. 5.3, there exists a strategy σΩ,λ,C′
safe
in C′ such that S
σΩ,λ,C′
safe
C′,s
[DFWΩ(λ)] for all s ∈SC′. Now, since C is an EC, there exists a (pure
memoryless) strategy σreach in C that ensures eventually reaching C′ almost-surely from any
state s ∈SC [BK08]. Hence, the desired strategy σ can be deﬁned as follows: play according
to σreach until C′ is reached, then switch to σΩ,λ,C′
safe
forever. It is straightforward to check
that σ almost-surely satisﬁes FWΩ(λ) from anywhere in C, thanks to preﬁx-independence.
Note that it does not ensure it surely in general, as σreach does not guarantee to reach C′
surely either.
Case (ii). Now assume that such a λ-safeΩsub-EC does not exist. Recall that ﬁnite-
memory strategies suﬃce for FWΩ(λ) objectives by Thm. 4.6, hence we can restrict our study
to such strategies without loss of generality. Fix any ﬁnite-memory strategy σ in C and state
s ∈SC. The induced MC Mσ
s is ﬁnite, hence runs almost-surely end up in a BSCC [BK08].
Let B be any BSCC of Mσ
s reached with positive probability. Since there exists no λ-safeΩ
sub-EC in C, there must exist a run bρ in B such that bρ ̸∈DFWΩ(λ); otherwise, σ would be
witness that the EC obtained by projecting B over SC is λ-safeΩ. From bρ, we extract a history
bh ending with a window open for λ steps (it exists otherwise bρ would be in DFWΩ(λ)). This
history is ﬁnite: it has a probability lower-bounded by some ε > 0 to happen whenever its
starting state is visited. Now, since all states in B are almost-surely visited inﬁnitely often,
we conclude that this history also happens inﬁnitely often with probability one. Therefore,
the probability to win the preﬁx-independent objective FWΩ(λ) when reaching B is zero.
Since this holds for any BSCC induced by σ, we obtain the claim.
Let us continue with the bounded case (b). Case (i) is trivial thanks to (a)(i) and
FWΩ(λ) ⊆BWΩ. Now consider case (ii). By (a)(ii), we have that Pσ
C,s[FWΩ(λ)] = 0 for all
s ∈SC, λ > 0 and σ in C. Observe that by deﬁnition, we have
BWΩ=
[
λ>0
FWΩ(λ).
Fix any strategy σ in C and s ∈SC. By countable additivity of probability measures, we
have that
Pσ
C,s[BWΩ] ≤
X
λ>0
Pσ
C,s[FWΩ(λ)].
Since the right term is equal to zero, we obtain the claim.
Remark 5.6. An interesting consequence of Lem. 5.5 is the existence of uniform bounds
on λ in ECs, in contrast to the general MDP case, as seen in Sect. 3.3. This is indeed
natural, as we established that winning with positive probability within an EC coincides
with winning surely in a sub-EC; sub-EC that can be seen as a two-player zero-sum game
where uniform bounds are granted by [CDRR15, BHR16a].

Vol. 16:4
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT: MDPS WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES
13:21
By Lem. 5.5, we know that interesting strategies exist in goodΩECs. Let us describe
them.
Proposition 5.7. Let M be an MDP, Ω∈{mp, par}, and C = (SC, AC, δC) ∈EC(M).
• If C is λ-goodΩ, for some λ > 0, there exists a pure polynomial-memory strategy σΩ,λ,C
good
such that AS
σΩ,λ,C
good
C,s
[FWΩ(λ)] for all s ∈SC.
• If C is BW-goodΩ, there exists a pure memoryless strategy σΩ,BW,C
good
such that AS
σΩ,BW,C
good
C,s
[BWΩ]
for all s ∈SC.
Intuitively, such strategies ﬁrst mimic a pure memoryless strategy reaching a safeΩsub-EC
almost-surely, then switch to a strategy surely winning in this sub-EC, which is lifted from
the game interpretation.
Proof. Consider the λ-goodΩcase. Strategy σΩ,λ,C
good is the one described in the proof of
Lem. 5.5(a)(i): it ﬁrst plays as the pure memoryless strategy σreach then switches to strategy
σΩ,λ,C′
safe
from Prop. 5.3 when the λ-safeΩsub-EC C′ is reached. Hence it is pure and polynomial
memory still suﬃces. The almost-sure satisfaction of the objective was proved in Lem. 5.5.
Now, consider the BW-goodΩcase. Note that using our current knowledge, it is easy
to build a pure polynomial-memory strategy, but we want more: a pure memoryless one.
For that, we use the following reasoning. Strategy σΩ,BW,C
good
will again ﬁrst play as a pure
memoryless strategy trying to reach a λ-safeΩsub-EC for some λ > 0 (we know one exists),
then switch to a surely winning strategy inside this sub-EC. Still, we do not really need to
win for DFWΩ(λ), we only need to win for the bounded variant DBWΩ= S
λ>0 DFWΩ(λ).
Results in two-player zero-sum games (which we are actually solving here when considering
surely winning strategies) guarantee that in this case, pure memoryless strategies suﬃce
for the controller, both for mean-payoﬀ[CDRR15] and parity variants [BHR16a]. Since the
switch is state-based (depending on whether we are in the sub-EC or not), we can wrap
both strategies in σΩ,BW,C
good
and retain a pure memoryless strategy. Again, the almost-sure
satisfaction of the objective follows from Lem. 5.5.
Classiﬁcation. We may already sketch a general solution to the threshold probability
problem based on Lem. 5.5 and the well-known fact that ECs are almost-surely reached
under any strategy: an optimal strategy must maximize the probability to reach goodΩECs.
It is therefore crucial to be able to identify such ECs eﬃciently. However, an MDP may
in general contain an exponential number of ECs. Fortunately, the next lemma establishes
that we do not have to test them all.
Lemma 5.8. Let M be an MDP and C ∈EC(M). If C is λ-goodΩ(resp. BW-goodΩ), then
it is also the case of any super-EC C′ ∈EC(M) containing C.
Proof. Trivial by Def. 5.4.
Corollary 5.9. Let M be an MDP and C ∈MEC(M) be a maximal EC. If C is not λ-goodΩ
(resp. BW-goodΩ), then neither is any of its sub-EC C′ ∈EC(M).
The interest of Cor. 5.9 is that the number of MECs is bounded by |S| for any MDP
M = (S, A, δ) because they are all disjoints. Furthermore, the MEC decomposition can be
done eﬃciently (e.g., quadratic time [CH14]). So, we know classifying MECs is suﬃcient

13:22
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
and MECs can easily be identiﬁed in an MDP: it remains to discuss how to classify a MEC
as goodΩor not.
Let M = (S, A, δ).
Recall that a MEC C = (SC, AC, δC) ∈MEC(M) is λ-goodΩ
(resp. BW-goodΩ) if and only if it contains a λ-safeΩsub-EC. By deﬁnition of λ-safety, this
is equivalent to having a non-empty winning set for the controller in the two-player zero-sum
game over C — naturally deﬁned as explained above. This winning set contains all states in
SC from which the controller has a surely winning strategy. This winning set, if non-empty,
necessarily contains at least one sub-EC of C, as otherwise the opponent could force the
controller to leave it and win the game (by preﬁx-independence). Thus, testing if a MEC is
goodΩboils down to solving its two-player game interpretation.
Theorem 5.10 (MEC classiﬁcation). Let M be an MDP and C ∈MEC(M). The following
assertions hold.
(a) Deciding if C is λ-goodΩ, for λ > 0, is in P for Ω∈{mp, par}.
Furthermore, a
corresponding pure polynomial-memory strategy σΩ,λ,C
good
can be constructed in polynomial
time.
(b) Deciding if C is BW-goodmp is in NP ∩coNP and a corresponding pure memoryless
strategy σmp,BW,C
good
can be constructed in pseudo-polynomial time.
(c) Deciding if C is BW-goodpar is in P and a corresponding pure memoryless strategy
σpar,BW,C
good
can be constructed in polynomial time.
Proof. All complexities are expressed w.r.t. the representation of C, as the larger MDP M is
never used in the process. Complexity results follow from game solving algorithms presented
in [CDRR15] for mean-payoﬀ2 and [BHR16a] for parity. Note that for mean-payoﬀ, the
bound on λ for which the ﬁxed and bounded variants coincide is pseudo-polynomial, whereas
for parity this bound is polynomial, hence the diﬀerent results: the algorithm for bounded
window mean-payoﬀgames actually bypasses this bound to obtain NP ∩coNP membership
instead of simply EXPTIME.
For constructing the strategy, we only need to plug the almost-sure-reachability strategy
to the surely-winning one, as presented in Prop. 5.7. Such a reachability strategy can easily
be computed in polynomial time [BK08], hence the complexity is dominated by the cost of
computing the surely-winning one, as presented in [CDRR15, BHR16a].
6. General MDPs
Algorithms. We now have all the ingredients to establish an algorithm for the threshold
probability problem in the general case. Intuitively, given an MDP M, an initial state s and
a window objective FWΩ(λ) for λ > 0 (resp. BWΩ), we ﬁrst compute the MEC decomposition
of M, then classify each MEC as λ-goodΩ(resp. BW-goodΩ) or not, and ﬁnally compute an
optimal strategy from s to reach the union of goodΩMECs: the probability of reaching such
MECs is then exactly the maximum probability to satisfy the window objective.
The ﬁxed and bounded versions are presented in Fig. 4. Let M = (S, A, δ) be the
MDP. The MEC decomposition (Line 2) takes quadratic time [CH14] and yields at most |S|
MECs. The classiﬁcation depends on the variant considered, as established in Thm. 5.10:
2The published version of [CDRR15] contains a slight bug in sub-procedure GoodWin that was corrected
in subsequent articles [BHR16b, BHR16a]. All results of [CDRR15] still hold modulo this correction.

Vol. 16:4
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT: MDPS WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES
13:23
it is in P for ﬁxed variants and bounded window parity, and in NP ∩coNP for bounded
window mean-payoﬀ(with a pseudo-polynomial-time procedure). Finally, sub-procedure
MaxReachability(s, T) computes the maximum probability to reach the set T from s. It is
well-known that this can be done in polynomial time and that pure memoryless optimal
strategies exist [BK08]. Therefore the overall complexity of the algorithm is dominated by
the classiﬁcation step.
Algorithm 1 FixedWindow(M, s, Ω, λ)
Input: MDP M, state s, Ω∈{mp, par},
λ > 0
Output: Maximum probability of FWΩ(λ)
from s
1 T ←∅
2 for all C = (SC, AC, δC) ∈MEC(M) do
3
if C is λ-goodΩthen
4
T ←T ⊎SC
5 ν = MaxReachability(s, T)
6 return ν
Algorithm 2 BoundedWindow(M, s, Ω)
Input: MDP M, state s, Ω∈{mp, par}
Output: Maximum probability of BWΩ
from s
1 T ←∅
2 for all C = (SC, AC, δC) ∈MEC(M) do
3
if C is BW-goodΩthen
4
T ←T ⊎SC
5 ν = MaxReachability(s, T)
6 return ν
Figure 4: Algorithms computing the maximum probability of ﬁxed and bounded window
objectives in general MDPs.
Correctness. We ﬁrst prove that these algorithms are sound and complete.
Lemma 6.1. Alg. 1 and Alg. 2 are correct: given an MDP M = (S, A, δ), an initial state
s ∈S, Ω∈{mp, par}, λ > 0, we have that
FixedWindow(M, s, Ω, λ) = max
σ∈Σ Pσ
M,s[FWΩ(λ)],
BoundedWindow(M, s, Ω) = max
σ∈Σ Pσ
M,s[BWΩ].
Proof. The proof is straightforward based on our previous results. First, recall that objectives
FWΩ(λ) and BWΩare preﬁx-independent; that in MDPs, the limit-behavior under any
strategy almost-surely coincides with an EC (see Sect. 2); and that MECs are pair-wise
disjoint. We thus have that
sup
σ∈Σ
Pσ
M,s[FWΩ(λ)] = sup
σ∈Σ
X
C∈MEC(M)
Pσ
M,s[♦□C] · Pσ
C[FWΩ(λ)],
sup
σ∈Σ
Pσ
M,s[BWΩ] = sup
σ∈Σ
X
C∈MEC(M)
Pσ
M,s[♦□C] · Pσ
C[BWΩ],
where ♦□C uses the standard LTL notation as a shorthand for
{ρ = s0a0s1 . . . ∈Runs(M) | ∃i ≥0, ∀j > i, sj ∈SC}
with SC the set of states of C; and where we write PC without distinction on the entry point
because the supremum probability to win for a preﬁx-independent objective is identical in
all states of a MEC (as the controller may force reaching any state he wants almost-surely).

13:24
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
By Lem. 5.5, we know that supremum winning probabilities in ECs are zero-one laws:
they are equal to one in goodΩECs and to zero in all other ECs. Furthermore, when
almost-sure satisfaction is achievable, the corresponding strategy stays in the EC. Let us
denote by LGECΩ(M, λ) and BWGECΩ(M) the sets of λ-goodΩand BW-goodΩMECs of M
respectively, and by L and B the disjoint union of the corresponding state spaces. That is,
L =
]
C=(SC,AC,δC)∈LGECΩ(M,λ)
SC,
B =
]
C=(SC,AC,δC)∈BWGECΩ(M)
SC.
We have that
sup
σ∈Σ
Pσ
M,s[FWΩ(λ)] = sup
σ∈Σ
X
C∈LGECΩ(M,λ)
Pσ
M,s[♦□C] = sup
σ∈Σ
Pσ
M,s [♦L] ,
sup
σ∈Σ
Pσ
M,s[BWΩ] = sup
σ∈Σ
X
C∈BWGECΩ(M)
Pσ
M,s[♦□C] = sup
σ∈Σ
Pσ
M,s [♦B] .
Now, observe that the term on the right-hand side is exactly the probability computed by
our algorithm through the call to sub-procedure MaxReachability on Line 5: our algorithm is
thus correct, as it computes the supremum probability to achieve the corresponding window
objective.
It remains to establish that this probability is actually a maximum probability, as claimed.
Indeed, there exists a strategy to achieve the probability ν returned by our algorithm. From
s, we know that pure memoryless optimal strategies exist to reach the computed set T
(which coincides with L or B depending on the considered variant), and inside T, there
exist pure ﬁnite-memory optimal strategies for all goodΩMECs, as shown in Thm. 5.10. We
can easily combine all these strategies in an optimal strategy for M, which concludes our
proof.
Complexity. We wrap-up our results on preﬁx-independent window objectives in the
following theorem.
Theorem 6.2. The threshold probability problem is
(a) in P for ﬁxed window parity objectives and ﬁxed window mean-payoﬀobjectives, and
pure polynomial-memory optimal strategies can be constructed in polynomial time;
(b) in P for bounded window parity objectives, and pure memoryless optimal strategies can
be constructed in polynomial time;
(c) in NP ∩coNP for bounded window mean-payoﬀobjectives, and pure memoryless optimal
strategies can be constructed in pseudo-polynomial time.
Proof. The complexity results follow from the analysis we made before:
• the MEC decomposition (Line 2) takes quadratic time [CH14] and yields at most |S|
MECs;
• classifying a MEC (Line 3) is in P for ﬁxed variants and bounded window parity, and in
NP ∩coNP for bounded window mean-payoﬀ(Thm. 5.10);
• MaxReachability(s, T) (Line 5) takes polynomial time [BK08].
Overall we have P-membership for all variants except bounded window mean-payoﬀ, where
we are in PNP∩coNP, which is equal to NP ∩coNP [Bra79].
Regarding optimal strategies, they are by-products of Alg. 1 and Alg. 2. Inside goodΩ
MECs, we play the strategy granted by Thm. 5.10, and outside, we simply play a pure

Vol. 16:4
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT: MDPS WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES
13:25
memoryless optimal reachability strategy obtained through MaxReachability(s, T) [BK08].
Lower bounds. We complement the results of Thm. 6.2 with matching lower bounds,
showing that our approach is optimal complexity-wise.
Theorem 6.3. The threshold probability problem is
(a) P-hard for ﬁxed window parity objectives and ﬁxed window mean-payoﬀobjectives, and
polynomial-memory strategies are in general necessary;
(b) P-hard for bounded window parity objectives;
(c) as hard as mean-payoﬀgames for bounded window mean-payoﬀobjectives.
Proof. Complexity-wise, the lower bounds follow from the results in two-player zero-sum
window mean-payoﬀ[CDRR15] and window parity [BHR16a] games, coupled with the
equivalence between the threshold probability problem and solving a two-player game
established in Sect. 5. Note that formally, this equivalence only holds if the MDP is an EC,
hence we have to make sure that the corresponding game problems retain their hardness when
considered over arenas that correspond to ECs (i.e., when the underlying graph is strongly
connected). Fortunately, careful inspection of the related results in [CDRR15, BHR16a]
shows that this is the case. Note that mean-payoﬀgames are widely considered as a canonical
“hard” problem for the class NP ∩coNP (see, e.g., [CDRR15]).
Regarding strategies, the ﬁxed case is the only one where memory is needed, as stated in
Thm. 6.2. Again, the necessity of polynomial memory is witnessed through the equivalence
with two-player games in ECs, proved in Sect. 5, along with results on ﬁxed window
mean-payoﬀand ﬁxed window parity games [CDRR15, BHR16a].
7. Limitations and perspectives
Recall that we summarized our results in Table 1, and compared them to the state of the
art in Sect. 1. The goal of this section is to discuss the limitations of our work and some
extensions within arm’s reach.
Direct bounded window objectives. We left out a speciﬁc variant of window objectives
that was considered in games [CDRR15, BHR16a]: the direct bounded variant, deﬁned as
DBWΩ= S
λ>0 DFWΩ(λ) (see Sect. 3.3). This variant is maybe not the most natural as it
is not preﬁx-independent, yet allows to close the windows of a run in an arbitrarily large —
but bounded along the run — number of steps.
This variant gives rise to complex behaviors in MDPs, notably due to its interaction
with the almost-sure reachability of ECs. Let us illustrate it on an example.
Example 7.1. Consider the MDP in Fig. 5 and objective DBWmp. A window opens in the
ﬁrst step due to action a. The only way to close it is to loop in s2 using action b up to the
point where the running sum of weights becomes non-negative. Note also that when it does,
all windows are closed and the controller may safely switch to s5. Now, observe that taking
action b repeatedly induces a symmetric random walk [GS97]. Classical probability results
ensure that a non-negative sum will be obtained almost-surely, but the number of times b is
played must remain unbounded (as for any bounded number, there exists a strictly positive
probability to obtain only −1’s for example). Therefore, in this example, there exists an

13:26
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
inﬁnite-memory strategy σ such that ASσ
M,s1[DBWmp], but no ﬁnite-memory strategy can
do as good.
Now, if we modify the probabilities in b to δ(s2, b) = {s3 7→0.6, s4 7→0.4}, the random
walk becomes asymmetric, with a strictly positive chance to diverge toward −∞. While the
best possible strategy is still the one deﬁned above, it only guarantees a probability strictly
less than one to satisfy the objective.
◁
s1
s2
c, −1
d, 1
s3
s4
a, −1
f, 0
b, 0
e, 0
s5
1
1
1
1
0.5
0.5
1
Figure 5: There exists a strategy σ ensuring ASσ
M,s1[DBWmp] but it requires inﬁnite memory
as it needs to use b up to the point where the running sum becomes non-negative,
then switch to e.
What do we observe? First, inﬁnite-memory strategies are required, which is a problem
for practical applications. Second, even for qualitative questions (is the probability zero or
one?), the actual probabilities of the MDP must be considered, not only the existence of a
transition. This is in stark contrast to most problems in MDPs [BK08]: in that sense, the
direct bounded window objective is not well-behaved. This is due to the connection with
random walks we just established. Imagine that we replace the gadget related to action
b by a much more complex EC: the corresponding random walk will be quite tedious to
analyze. It is well-known that complex random walks are diﬃcult to tackle for veriﬁcation
and synthesis. For example, even simple asymmetric random walks, like the one we sketched,
are not decisive MCs, a large and robust class of MCs where reachability questions can be
answered [AHM07].
Markov chains. Our work focuses on the threshold probability problem for MDPs, and the
corresponding strategy synthesis problem. Better complexities could possibly be obtained in
the case of MCs, where there are no non-deterministic choices. To achieve this, a natural
direction would be to focus on the classiﬁcation of ECs (Sect. 5), the bottleneck of our
approach: for MCs, this classiﬁcation would involve one-player window games (for the
opponent), whose precise complexity has yet to be explored and would certainly be lower
than for two-player games.
Note however that complexity classes in the MC case are unlikely to be much lower: all
parity variants are already in P, and the high complexity of the direct ﬁxed window mean-
payoﬀcase would remain: a construction similar to the PSPACE-hardness proof (Thm. 4.8)
easily shows this problem to be PP-hard, already for acyclic MCs (again using [HK15]).
Let us recall that PP-hard problems are widely believed to be outside NP, as otherwise the
polynomial hierarchy would collapse to PNP by Toda’s theorem [Tod91].

Vol. 16:4
LIFE IS RANDOM, TIME IS NOT: MDPS WITH WINDOW OBJECTIVES
13:27
Expected value problem. Given an MDP M and an initial state s, we may be interested
in synthesizing a strategy σ that minimizes the expected window size for a ﬁxed window
objective (say FWΩ(λ) for the sake of illustration), which we straightforwardly deﬁne as
Eσ
M,s,Ω(λ) =
∞
X
λ>0
λ · Pσ
M,s[FWΩ(λ) \ FWΩ(λ −1)],
with FWΩ(0) = ∅. This meets the natural desire to build strategies that strive to maintain
the best time bounds possible in their local environment (e.g., EC of M). Note that this is
totally diﬀerent from the value function used in [BGR19].
For preﬁx-independent variants, we already have all the necessary machinery to solve
this problem. First, we reﬁne the classiﬁcation process to identify the best window size
achievable in each MEC, if any. Indeed, if a MEC is λ-good, it necessarily is for some λ
between one and the upper bound derived from the game-theoretic interpretation (Rmk. 5.6):
we determine the smallest value of λ for each MEC via a binary search coupled with the
classiﬁcation procedure. Second, using classical techniques (e.g., [RRS17]), we contract each
MEC to a single-state EC, and give it a weight that represents the best window size we
can ensure in it (hence this weight may be inﬁnite if a MEC is not BW-good). Finally,
we construct a global strategy that favors reaching MECs with the lowest weights, for
example by synthesizing a strategy minimizing the classical mean-payoﬀvalue. Note that if
λ-good MECs cannot be reached almost-surely, the expected value will be inﬁnite, as wanted.
Observe that such an approach maintains tractability, as we end up with a polynomial-time
algorithm.
Direct variants would require more involved techniques, as the unfoldings developed in
Sect. 4 are strongly linked to the ﬁxed window size λ, and cannot be that easily combined
for diﬀerent values of λ.
Multi-objective problems. Window games have also been considered in the multidimen-
sion setting, where several weight (resp. priority) functions are given, and the objective is
deﬁned as the intersection of all one-dimension objectives [CDRR15, BHR16a]. Again, our
generic approach supports eﬀortless extension to this setting.
In the direct case, the unfoldings of Sect. 4 can easily be generalized to multiple
dimensions, as in [CDRR15, BHR16a]. For preﬁx-independent variants, the EC classiﬁcation
needs to be adapted to handle multidimension window games, which we can solve using
the techniques of [CDRR15, BHR16a]. Then, we also need to consider a multi-objective
reachability problem [RRS17]. While almost all cases of multidimension window games are
EXPTIME-complete, note that the decidability of the bounded mean-payoﬀcase is still open;
it is however known to be non-primitive recursive hard.
Tool support. Thanks to its low complexity and its adequacy w.r.t. applications, our
window framework lends itself well to tool development. We are currently building a tool
suite for MDPs with window objectives based on the main results of this paper along with
the aforementioned extensions. Our aim is to provide a dedicated extension of Storm, a
cutting-edge probabilistic model checker [DJKV17].

13:28
T. Brihaye, F. Delgrange, M. Randour, and Y. Oualhadj
Vol. 16:4
