The Dilated Triple
Marko A. Rodriguez, Alberto Pepe, and Joshua Shinavier
Abstract The basic unit of meaning on the Semantic Web is the RDF state-
ment, or triple, which combines a distinct subject, predicate and object to
make a deﬁnite assertion about the world. A set of triples constitutes a graph,
to which they give a collective meaning. It is upon this simple foundation
that the rich, complex knowledge structures of the Semantic Web are built.
Yet the very expressiveness of RDF, by inviting comparison with real-world
knowledge, highlights a fundamental shortcoming, in that RDF is limited to
statements of absolute fact, independent of the context in which a statement
is asserted. This is in stark contrast with the thoroughly context-sensitive
nature of human thought. The model presented here provides a particularly
simple means of contextualizing an RDF triple by associating it with related
statements in the same graph. This approach, in combination with a notion
of graph similarity, is suﬃcient to select only those statements from an RDF
graph which are subjectively most relevant to the context of the requesting
process.
Rodriguez, M.A., Pepe, A., Shinavier, J., “The Dilated Triple,” Emergent Web Intelligence:
Advanced Semantic Technologies, Advanced Information and Knowledge Processing series,
eds. R. Chbeir, A. Hassanien, A. Abraham, and Y. Badr, Springer-Verlag, pages 3-16,
ISBN:978-1-84996-076-2, June 2010.
Marko A. Rodriguez
T-5,
Center
for
Nonlinear
Studies,
Los
Alamos
National
Laboratory,

Alberto Pepe

Joshua Shinavier

1
arXiv:1006.1080v1  [cs.AI]  6 Jun 2010

2
Marko A. Rodriguez, Alberto Pepe, and Joshua Shinavier
1 Introduction
The World Wide Web introduced a set of standards and protocols that has
led to the development of a collectively generated graph of web resources. In-
dividuals participate in creating this graph by contributing digital resources
(e.g. documents, images, etc.) and linking them together by means of derefer-
enceable Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Uniform Resource Identiﬁers
(URI) [5]. While the World Wide Web is primarily a technology that came
to fruition in the early nineties, much of the inspiration that drove the devel-
opment of the World Wide Web was developed earlier with such systems as
Vannevar Bush’s visionary Memex device [11] and Ted Nelson’s Xanadu [32].
What the World Wide Web provided that made it excel as the de facto stan-
dard was a common, relatively simple, distributed platform for the exchange
of digital information. The World Wide Web has had such a strong impact
on the processes of communication and cognition that it can be regarded as
a revolution in the history of human thought – following those of language,
writing and print [20].
While the World Wide Web has provided an infrastructure that has revo-
lutionized the way in which many people go about their daily lives, over the
years, it has become apparent that there are shortcomings to its design. Many
of the standards developed for the World Wide Web lack a mechanism for
representing “meaning” in a form that can be easily interpreted and used by
machines. For instance, the majority of the Web is made up of a vast collec-
tion of Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) documents. HTML documents
are structured such that a computer can discern the intended layout of the in-
formation contained within a document, but the content itself is expressed in
natural language and thus, understandable only to humans. Furthermore, all
HTML documents link web resources according to a single type of relation-
ship. The meaning of a hypertext relationship can be loosely interpreted as
“cites” or “related to”. The ﬁner, speciﬁc meaning of this relationship is not
made explicit in the link itself. In many cases, this ﬁner meaning is made ex-
plicit within the HTML document. Unfortunately, without sophisticated text
analysis algorithms, machines are not privy to the communication medium
of humans. Yet, even within the single relationship model, machines have
performed quite well in supporting humans as they use go about discovering
and sharing information on the World Wide Web [10, 27, 21, 19].
The Web was designed as an information space, with the goal that it should be
useful not only for human-human communication, but also that machines would be
able to participate and help. One of the major obstacles to this has been the fact
that most information on the Web is designed for human consumption, and even if
it was derived from a database with well deﬁned meanings (in at least some terms)
for its columns, that the structure of the data is not evident to a robot browsing the
web. [4]
As a remedy to the aforementioned shortcoming of the World Wide Web,
the Semantic Web initiative has introduced a standard data model which

The Dilated Triple
3
makes explicit the type of relationship that exists between two web resources
[8, 7]. Furthermore, the Linked Data community has not only seen a need to
link existing web resources in meaningful ways, but also a need to link the
large amounts of non-typical web data (e.g. database information) [9].1 The
standard for relating web resources on the Semantic Web is the Resource
Description Framework (RDF) [8, 28]. RDF is a data model2 that is used to
create graphs of the form
R ⊆(U ∪B)
|
{z
}
subject
×
U
|{z}
predicate
× (U ∪B ∪L)
|
{z
}
object
,
(1)
where U is the inﬁnite set of all URIs [42, 6], B is the inﬁnite set of all
blank nodes, and L is the inﬁnite set of all literal values.3 An element in
R is known as a statement, or triple, and it is composed of a set of three
elements: a subject, a predicate, and an object. A statement in RDF asserts
a fact about the world.
“The basic intuition of model-theoretic semantics is that asserting a sentence makes
a claim about the world: it is another way of saying that the world is, in fact, so
arranged as to be an interpretation which makes the sentence true. In other words,
an assertion amounts to stating a constraint on the possible ways the world might
be.” [23]
An example RDF statement is (lanl:marko, foaf:knows, ucla:apepe).4 This
statement makes a claim about the world: namely that “Marko knows Al-
berto”. The foaf:knows predicate deﬁnes the meaning of the link that con-
nects the subject lanl:marko to the object ucla:apepe. On the World Wide
Web, the only way that such semantics could be derived in a computationally
eﬃcient manner would be to note that in Marko’s webpage there exists an
href link to Alberto’s webpage. While this web link does not necessarily mean
that “Marko knows Alberto”, it is the simplest means, without text analysis
techniques, to recognize that there exists a relationship between Marko and
Alberto. Thus, for machines, the World Wide Web is a homogenous world of
generic relationships. On the Semantic Web, the world is a rich, complicated
network of meaningful relationships.
The evolution from the World Wide Web to the Semantic Web has brought
greater meaning and expressiveness to our largest digital information reposi-
1 The necessity to expose large amounts of data on the Semantic Web has driven the
development of triple-store technology. Advanced triple-store technology parallels relational
database technologies by providing an eﬃcient medium for the storage and querying of
semantic graphs [29, 26, 1].
2 RDF is a data model, not a serialization format. There exist various standard serialization
formats such as RDF/XML, N3 [3], Turtle [2], Trix [13], etc.
3 Other formalisms exist for representing an RDF graph such as the directed labeled graph,
bipartite graph [22], and directed hypergraph models [31].
4
All
resources
in
this
article
have
been
preﬁxed
in
order
to
shorten
their
lengthy
namespaces.
For
example,
foaf:knows,
in
its
extended
form,
is
http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/knows.

4
Marko A. Rodriguez, Alberto Pepe, and Joshua Shinavier
tory [24]. This explicit meaning provides machines a richer landscape for sup-
porting humans in their information discovery and sharing activities. How-
ever, while links are typed on the Semantic Web, the meaning of the type
is still primarily based on human interpretation. Granted this meaning is
identiﬁed by a URI, however, for the machine, there exists no meaning, just
symbols that it has been “hardwired” to handle [41].
“Machine usable content presumes that the machine knows what to do with informa-
tion on the Web. One way for this to happen is for the machine to read and process
a machine-sensible speciﬁcation of the semantics of the information. This is a robust
and very challenging approach, and largely beyond the current state of the art. A
much simpler alternative is for the human Web application developers to hardwire
the knowledge into the software so that when the machine runs the software, it does
the correct thing with the information.” [41]
Because relationships among resources are only denoted by a URI, many is-
sues arise around the notion of context. Context-senstive algorithms have been
developed to deal with problems such as term disambiguation [30], naming
conﬂicts [39], and ontology integration [43, 40]. The cause of such problems is
the fact that statements, by themselves, ignore the situatedness that deﬁnes
the semantics of such assertions [18]. Similar criticism directed towards the
issue of semantics has appeared in other specialized literature [38, 47, 49].
Sheth et. al. [37] have framed this issue well and have provided a clear dis-
tinction between the various levels of meaning on the Semantic Web.5
• Implicit semantics reside within the minds of humans as a collective con-
sensus and as such, are not explicitly recorded in some machine processable
medium.
• Formal semantics are in a machine-readable format in the form of an
ontology and are primarily used for human consumption and for machine
hardwiring.
• Soft semantics are extracted from probabilistic and fuzzy reasoning mech-
anisms supporting degree of membership and certainty.
The model proposed in this article primarily falls within the domain of soft
semantics. Simply put, the purpose of the model is to supplement a statement
with other statements. These other statements, while being part of the RDF
graph itself, serve to contextualize the original statement.
“Contextualization is a word ﬁrst used in sociolinguistics to refer to the use of lan-
guage and discourse to signal relevant aspects of an interactional or communicative
situation.”6
The supplementary statements serve to expose the relevant aspects of the
interaction between a subject and an object that are tied by a relation-
ship deﬁned by a predicate. With respect to the example of the statement
(lanl:marko, foaf:knows, ucla:apepe), supplementary statements help to
5 A similar presentation is also presented in [41].
6 Wikipedia (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contextualization).

The Dilated Triple
5
answer the question: “What do you mean by ‘Marko knows Alberto’?”.
A notion from Ludwig Wittgenstein’s theory of “language games” can be
aptly borrowed: the meaning of a concept is not universal and set in stone,
but shaped by “a complicated network of similarities, overlapping and criss-
crossing” [46]. Following this line of thought, this article purposes a “dilated”
model of an RDF triple. The dilated triple contextualizes the meaning and
enhances the expressiveness of assertions on the Semantic Web.
2 The Dilated Triple Model
A single predicate URI does not provide the appropriate degrees of freedom
required when modeling the nuances of an RDF relationship. The model
proposed in this article enhances the expressiveness of a triple such that its
meaning is considered within a larger context as deﬁned by a graph structure.
It thereby provides a machine with the ability to discern the more ﬁne-grained
context in which a statement relates its subject and object.
In the proposed model, every triple in an RDF graph is supplemented with
other triples from the same RDF graph. The triple and its supplements form
what is called a dilated triple.7
Deﬁnition 1 (A Dilated Triple). Given a set of triples R and a triple
τ ∈R, a dilation of τ is a set of triples Tτ ⊂R such that τ ∈Tτ.
The dilated form of τ ∈R is Tτ. Informally, Tτ servers to elaborate the
meaning of τ. Formally, Tτ is a graph that at minimum contains only τ and at
maximum contains all triples in R. The set of all non-τ triples in Tτ (i.e. Tτ \τ)
are called supplementary triples as they serve to contextualize, or supplement,
the meaning of τ. Finally, it is worth noting that every supplemental triple
in Tτ has an associated dilated form, so that Tτ can be considered a set of
nested sets.8 An instance of τ, its subject s, predicate p, object o, and its
dilated form Tτ, are diagrammed in Figure 1.
s
o
p
Tτ
τ
!"#$
Fig. 1 The dilated triple Tτ.
7 The Oxford English dictionary provides two deﬁnitions for the word “dilate”: “to expand”
and “to speak or write at length”. It will become clear through the remainder of this article
that both deﬁnitions suﬃce to succinctly summarize the presented model.
8 The set of all dilated triples forms a dilated graph denoted T = S
τ∈R{Tτ}.

6
Marko A. Rodriguez, Alberto Pepe, and Joshua Shinavier
A dilated triple can be conveniently represented in RDF using a named
graph [12]. Statements using the named graph construct are not triples, but
instead, are quads with the fourth component being denoted by a URI or
blank node. Formally, τ = (s, p, o, g) and g ∈U ∪B. The fourth component
is considered the “graph” in which the triple is contained. Thus, multiple
quads with the same fourth element are considered diﬀerent triples in the
same graph. Named graphs were developed as a more compact (in terms of
space) way to reify a triple. The reiﬁcation of a triple was originally presented
in the speciﬁcation of RDF with the rdf:Statement construct [28]. RDF
reiﬁcation has historically been used to add speciﬁc metadata to a triple, such
as provenance, pedigree, privacy, and copyright information. In this article,
the purpose of reifying a triple is to supplement its meaning with those of
additional triples. While it is possible to make additional statements about
the dilated triple (i.e. the named graph component g), the motivation behind
the dilated triple is to encapsulate many triples within a single graph, not to
make statements about the graph per se.
The following sections will further explain the way in which a dilated triple
contextualizes the meaning of a statement. §3 demonstrates, by means of an
example, how supplementary triples augment the meaning of a relationship
between two resources. §4 discusses how dilated triples can be compared and
used by a machine to discern context.
3 Contextualizing a Relationship
The dilated form of x ∈R, denoted Tx, provides a knowledge structure that is
suited to contextualizing the meaning of an assertion made about the world.
For example, consider the asserted triple
x = (lanl:marko, foaf:knows, ucla:apepe).
(2)
What is the meaning of foaf:knows in this context? For the human, the
meaning is made explicit in the speciﬁcation document of the FOAF (Friend
of a Friend) ontology (http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/), which states:
“We take a broad view of ‘knows’, but do require some form of reciprocated inter-
action (i.e. stalkers need not apply). Since social attitudes and conventions on this
topic vary greatly between communities, counties and cultures, it is not appropriate
for FOAF to be overly-speciﬁc here.”
Unfortunately, the supplementary information that deﬁnes the meaning of
foaf:knows is not encoded with the URI itself (nor in the greater RDF
graph) and it is only through some external medium (the FOAF speciﬁca-
tion document) that the meaning of foaf:knows is made clear. Thus, such
semantics are entirely informal [41]. However, even if the complexity of the
meaning of foaf:knows could be conveyed by an RDF graph, the nuances of

The Dilated Triple
7
“knowing” are subtle, such that no two people know each other in quite the
same way. In fact, only at the most abstract level of analysis is the relation-
ship of “knowing” the same between any two people. In order for a human or
machine to understand the way in which lanl:marko and ucla:apepe know
each other, the complexities of this relationship must be stated. In other
words, it is important to state “a constraint on the possible ways the world
might be” [23] even if that constraint is a complex graph of relationships.
For example, the meaning of foaf:knows when applied to lanl:marko and
ucla:apepe can be more eloquently stated as:
“Marko and Alberto ﬁrst met at the European Organization for Nuclear Research
(CERN) at the Open Archives Initiative Conference (OAI) in 2005. Six months
later, Alberto began a summer internship at the Los Alamos National Laboratory
(LANL) where he worked under Herbert Van de Sompel on the Digital Library
Research and Prototyping Team. Marko, at the time, was also working under Herbert
Van de Sompel. Unbeknownst to Herbert, Marko and Alberto analyzed a scholarly
data set that Alberto had acquired at the Center for Embedded Networked Sensing
(CENS) at the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA). The results of their
analysis ultimately led to the publication of an article [35] in Leo Egghe’s Journal
of Informetrics. Marko and Alberto were excited to publish in Leo Egghe’s journal
after meeting him at the Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics (IPAM) at
UCLA.”
The facts above, when represented as an RDF graph with triples relat-
ing such concepts as lanl:marko, ucla:apepe, lanl:herbertv, cern:cern,
ucla:ipam, elsevier:joi, doi:10.1016/j.joi.2008.04.002, etc., serve to
form the dilated triple Tx. In this way, the meaning of the asserted triple
(lanl:marko, foaf:knows, ucla:apepe) is presented in the broader context
Tx. In other words, Tx helps to elucidate the way in which Marko knows Al-
berto. Figure 2 depicts Tx, where the unlabeled resources and relationships
represent the URIs from the previous representation.9
lanl:marko
ucla:apepe
foaf:knows
Tx
Fig. 2 The dilated form of (lanl:marko, foaf:knows, ucla:apepe).
Even after all the aforementioned facts about Marko and Alberto’s “know-
ing” relationship are encoded in Tx, still more information is required to fully
9 For the sake of diagram clarity, the supplemented triples are unlabeled in Figure 2.
However, please be aware that the unlabeled resources are in fact the URI encoding of the
aforementioned natural language example explaining how Marko knows Alberto.

8
Marko A. Rodriguez, Alberto Pepe, and Joshua Shinavier
understand what is meant by Marko “knowing” Alberto. What is the nature
of the scholarly data set that they analyzed? Who did what for the analysis?
Did they ever socialize outside of work when Alberto was visiting LANL?
What was the conversation that they had with Leo Egghe like? Can their
foaf:knows relationship ever be fully understood? Only an inﬁnite recursion
into their histories, experiences, and subjective worlds could reveal the “true”
meaning of (lanl:marko, foaf:knows, ucla:apepe). Only when Tτ = R,10
that is, when their relationship is placed within the broader context of the
world as a whole, does the complete picture emerge. However, with respect
to those triples that provide the most context, a |Tτ| ≪|R| suﬃces to expose
the more essential aspects of (lanl:marko, foaf:knows, ucla:apepe).1112
Deﬁning a triple in terms of a larger conceptual structure exposes more
degrees of freedom when representing the uniqueness of a relationship. For
example, suppose the two dilated triples Tx and Ty diagrammed in Figure 3,
where
x = (lanl:marko, foaf:knows, ucla:apepe)
(3)
and
y = (lanl:marko, foaf:knows, cap:carole).
(4)
lanl:marko
cap:carole
ucla:apepe
foaf:knows
foaf:knows
Tx
Ty
Fig. 3 The dilated triples Tx and Ty.
Both Tx and Ty share the same predicate foaf:knows. However, what is
meant by Marko knowing Alberto is much diﬀerent than what is meant by
Marko knowing his mother Carole (cap:carole). While, broadly speaking,
it is true that Marko knows both Alberto and Carole, the context in which
10 For the purpose of this part of the argument, R is assumed to be a theoretical graph
instance that includes all statements about the world.
11 A fuzzy set is perhaps the best representation of a dilated triple [48]. In such cases,
a membership function µTτ : R →[0, 1] would deﬁne the degree to which every triple in
R is in Tτ. However, for the sake of simplicity and to present the proposed model within
the constructs of the popular named graph formalism, Tτ is considered a classical set.
Moreover, a fuzzy logic representation requires an associated membership valued in [0, 1]
which then requires further statement reiﬁcation in order to add such metadata. With
classic bivalent logic, {0, 1} iss captured by the membership or non-membership of the
statement in Tτ.
12 The choices made in the creation of a dilated triple are determined at the knowledge-level
[33]. The presentation here does not suppose the means of creation, only the underlying
representation and utilization of such a representation.

The Dilated Triple
9
Marko knows Alberto is much diﬀerent than the context in which Marko
knows Carole. The supplementary triples that compose Ty may be the RDF
expression of:
“Marko was born in Fairﬁeld, California on November 30th, 1979. Carole is Marko’s
mother. Marko’s family lived in Riverside (California), Peachtree City (Georgia),
Panama City (Panama), and Fairfax (Virginia). During his 10th grade high-school
term, Marko moved with his family back to Fairﬁeld, California.”
It is obvious from these two examples that foaf:knows can not suﬃciently
express the subtleties that exist between two people. People know each other
in many diﬀerent ways. There are family relationships, business relation-
ships, scholarly relationships, and so on. It is true that these subtleties can
be exposed when performing a deeper analysis of the graph surrounding a
foaf:knows relationship as other paths will emerge that exist between people
(e.g. vacation paths, transaction paths, coauthorship paths, etc.). The pur-
pose of a dilated triple is to contain these corroborating statements within
the relationship itself. The purpose of Tx is to identify those aspects of Marko
and Alberto’s “knowing” relationship that make it unique (that provide it
the most meaning). Similarly, the purpose of Ty is to provide a ﬁner represen-
tation of the context in which Marko knows his mother. The supplementary
triples of Tx and Ty augment the meaning of foaf:knows and frame each
respective triple x and y in a broader context.13
4 Comparing Contexts
The “Marko knows” examples from the previous section are reused in this
section to explain how dilated triples can assist a machine in discerning and
comparing the broader meaning of a statement. In order to present this ex-
ample, the notion of a contextualized process is introduced. A contextualized
process, as deﬁned here, is a human or machine that maintains a perspective
or expectation of how the world must be.
“Perspective in theory of cognition is the choice of a context or a reference (or the
result of this choice) from which to sense, categorize, measure or codify experience,
cohesively forming a coherent belief, typically for comparing with another.”14
A perspective can be expressed in RDF by simply associating some process
with a knowledge-base that deﬁnes what that process knows about the world.
This knowledge-base can be derived, for example, from the process’ history
and thus deﬁned as a subgraph of the full RDF graph. With respect to a per-
spective based on history, it makes sense that a process does not “experience”
13 Examples of other predicates beyond foaf:knows also exist. For instance, suppose the
predicates foaf:member and foaf:fundedBy. In what way is that individual a member of
that group and how is that individual funded?
14 Wikipedia http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perspective (cognitive).

10
Marko A. Rodriguez, Alberto Pepe, and Joshua Shinavier
the whole RDF graph in a single moment, but instead, traverses through a
graph by querying for future states and formalizing a model of past experi-
ences [25]. The algorithm by which a process derives a new state is perhaps
“hardwired” [41], but what is returned by that query is dependent upon the
structure of the full graph and the process’ historic subgraph. Furthermore,
by capitalizing on the notion of a contextualization of both the perspective
of the process and the meaning of a statement, that query can yield diﬀer-
ent results for diﬀerent processes. In general, it is the interaction between the
structure of the world and the context of the process that determines process’
subjective realization of the world into the future.
Suppose a process were to take a path through an RDF graph that in-
cluded such concepts as Marko’s publications, the members of the Center
for Nonlinear Studies, his collaborations with the Center for Embedded Net-
worked Sensing, and the various conferences he has attended. Given this set
of experiences, the process has built up a mental model of Marko that pri-
marily includes those aspects of his life that are scholarly.15 More generally,
the process has been pigeonholed into a scholarly “frame of mind”. With-
out any context, if that process were to inquire about the people that Marko
knows (e.g. (lanl:marko, foaf:knows, ?o)), it would learn that Marko knows
both Alberto and Carole. However, given the context of the process (i.e. the
history as represented by its traversed subgraph), it will interpret “knowing”
with respect to those people that Marko knows in a scholastic sense. Given
Alberto and Carole, Marko knows Alberto in a scholarly manner, which is
not true of Carole. There is little to nothing in Marko and Carole’s Ty that
makes reference to anything scholarly. However, in Marko and Alberto’s Tx,
the whole premise of their relationship is scholarly.
A simple way in which the process can make a distinction between the
various interpretations of foaf:knows is to intersect its history with the
context of the relationships. In other words, the process can compare its
history subgraph with the subgraph that constitutes a dilated triple. If H ⊆R
is a graph deﬁning the history of the process which includes the process’
traversal through the scholarly aspects of Marko, then it is the case that
|H ∩Tx| > |H ∩Ty| as the process’ scholarly perspective is more related to
Marko and Alberto than it is to Marko and Carole. That is, the process’
history H has more triples in common with Tx than with Ty. Thus, what
the process means by foaf:knows is a “scholarly” foaf:knows. This idea
is diagrammed in Figure 4, where H has more in common with Tx than
with Ty, thus an intersection of these sets would yield a solution to the
query (lanl:marko, foaf:knows, ?o) that included Alberto and not Carole.16
15 It is noted that Marko is a complex concept and includes not only his academic life, but
also his personal, business, hobby, etc. lives.
16 H need not be a dynamic context that is generated as a process moves through an RDF
graph. H can also be seen as a static, hardwired “expectation” of what the process should
perceive. For instance, H could include ontological triples and known instance triples. In
such cases, querying for such relationships as foaf:knows, foaf:fundedBy, foaf:memberOf,

The Dilated Triple
11
In other words, the history of the process “blinds” the process in favor of
interpreting its place in the graph from the scholarly angle.17
lanl:marko
ucla:apepe
foaf:knows
cap:carole
foaf:knows
Tx
Ty
H
Fig. 4 The relationship between the context of a process and a dilated triple.
The trivial intersection method of identifying the degree of similarity be-
tween two graph structures can be extended. Other algorithms, such as those
based on a spreading activation within a semantic graph [15, 14, 16, 34] can
be used as a more fuzzy and probabilistic means of determining the relative
“semantic distance” between two graphs [17]. Spreading activation methods
are more analogous to the connectionist paradigm of cognitive science than
the symbolic methods of artiﬁcial intelligence research [36]. The purpose of a
spreading activation algorithm is to determine which resources in a semantic
graph are most related to some other set of resources. In general, a spread-
ing activation algorithm diﬀuses an energy distribution over a graph starting
from a set of resources and proceeding until a predetermined number of steps
have been taken or the energy decays to some ϵ ≈0.18 Those resources that
received the most energy ﬂow during the spreading activation process are
considered the most similar to the set of source resources. With respect to
the particular example at hand, the energy diﬀusion would start at the re-
sources in H and the results would be compared with resources of Tx and Ty.
If the set of resource in Tx received more energy than those in Ty, then the
dilated triple Tx is considered more representative of the context of H.19
etc. would yield results related to H – biasing the results towards those relationships that
are most representative of the process’ expectations.
17 This notion is sometimes regarded as a “reality tunnel” [44, 45].
18 In many ways this is analagous to ﬁnding the primary eigenvector of the graph using
the power method. However, the energy vector at time step 1 only has values for the
source resources, the energy vector is decayed on each iteration, and ﬁnally, only so many
iterations are executed as a steady state distribution is not desired.
19 Spreading activation on a semantic graph is complicated as edges have labels. A frame-
work that makes use of this fact to perform arbitrary path traversals through a semantic
graph is presented in [34].

12
Marko A. Rodriguez, Alberto Pepe, and Joshua Shinavier
By taking advantage of the supplementary information contained within a
dilated triple, a process has more information on which to base its interpreta-
tion of the meaning of a triple. To the process, a triple is not simply a string
of three symbols, but instead is a larger knowledge structure which encapsu-
lates the uniqueness of the relationship. The process can use this information
to bias its traversal of the graph and thus, how it goes about discovering
information in the graph.
5 Conclusion
While a single word may be used in any number of contexts, its precise mean-
ing is never entirely the same [46]. This is not a diﬃcult or unusual problem
for human beings, as meaning is naturally contextualized by other facts about
the world. Thus, humans can speak in broad terms without loss of meaning,
as the ﬁner details of the situation are understood in context. Humans possess
an awareness of their current situation and a set of expectations about the
world which allow them to discern the subtleties of its structure. In an eﬀort
to bridge the gap between the natural context sensitivity of human commu-
nication and the rigid context independence of the Semantic Web, this article
has presented a simple model in which the meaning of a statement is deﬁned
in terms of other statements, much like the words of a dictionary are de-
ﬁned in terms of each other. This model serves to strengthen the association
between concepts and the contexts in which they are to be understood.
