Generalizing Emergent Communication
Thomas A. Unger
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Elia Bruni
Pompeu Fabra University
Barcelona, Catalonia

Abstract
We converted the recently developed BabyAI
grid world platform to a sender/receiver setup
in order to test the hypothesis that established
deep reinforcement learning techniques are
sufﬁcient to incentivize the emergence of a
grounded discrete communication protocol be-
tween generalized agents. This is in contrast to
previous experiments that employed straight-
through estimation or specialized inductive bi-
ases. Our results show that these can indeed be
avoided, by instead providing proper environ-
mental incentives. Moreover, they show that
a longer interval between communications in-
centivized more abstract semantics. In some
cases, the communicating agents adapted to
new environments more quickly than a mono-
lithic agent, showcasing the potential of emer-
gent communication for transfer learning and
generalization in general.
1
Introduction
The traditional approach to language modeling suf-
fers a fundamental ﬂaw. While models such as
GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) show that capturing
the statistics of natural language corpora can lead
to impressive results, they are ultimately divorced
from the reality they are supposed to describe;
they capture the statistics of descriptions of things,
rather than the statistics of the things themselves.
This approach limits the grounding of semantics.
Some recent works have attempted to improve
upon this by instead employing communication
games, in which agents are incentivized to use com-
munication as a tool in order to optimize for some
objective. This frames communication as a means
toward an end, instead of a thing to merely mimic.
The corresponding learning process, sometimes
called language emergence, can then be framed as
a negotiation process through which agents estab-
lish a common semantics.
Besides the fact that such a treatment of commu-
nication can be conducive to cooperation, there are
a number of other beneﬁts to this approach. Since
the agents must transmit relevant information to
complete a given task, it naturally coaxes agents
into explaining themselves, so that we can listen in
and perhaps understand what they are thinking. An-
other beneﬁt is its intrinsic interactivity, meaning
that we can position ourselves as one of the agents,
to give commands, to ask for clariﬁcation, or vice
versa.
Lastly, framing communication as a tool is in
parallel with the process by which natural language
emerged and is maintained. Any natural language
which is actively in use is a living language; it is
ever-changing and in effect ever-emerging. For ex-
ample, many humans adopt and invent jargon in
their professions; it is arguably desirable that arti-
ﬁcial agents that have been primed to use natural
language will nonetheless similarly and indepen-
dently develop artiﬁcial jargon to aid in the pursuit
of their goals.
1.1
Related Work
Typical methods to train communicating agents are
those under the umbrella of multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning (MARL). With the advent of deep
learning, these further tend to fall under multi-agent
deep reinforcement learning (MDRL). Hernandez-
Leal et al. (2018) gave a brief survey of recent
works using MDRL. They subdivided these into
four categories. Namely, the analysis of emergent
behaviors, learning communication, learning coop-
eration and agents modeling agents. They further
stated non-stationarity, the increase of dimension-
ality and the credit-assignment problem as speciﬁc
difﬁculties in the use of MDRL methods.
One difﬁculty speciﬁc to the use of discrete sym-
bols, which has made it unpopular in the past, is
that their non-continuous nature makes them non-
arXiv:2001.01772v3  [cs.AI]  14 Dec 2020

differentiable. This means that communication
cannot be optimized in a straightforward way us-
ing backpropagation. In order to deal with non-
differentiability, Havrylov and Titov (2017) em-
ployed a straight-through Gumbel-softmax estima-
tor (Bengio et al., 2013; Maddison et al., 2016; Jang
et al., 2016) in order to study the emergence of dis-
crete communication in simple referential games.
Mordatch and Abbeel (2018) similarly proposed
the use of a straight-through Gumbel-softmax es-
timator in a more complex environment. How-
ever, the use of straight-through estimation means
that the agents have access to each other’s internal
states, from which they can extract counterfactual
information, i.e., “how would the other agent have
reacted if I had said something slightly different?”.
This does not generalize to training communica-
tion with opaque agents, whose internal states are
inaccessible, e.g., humans or hard coded agents.
Foerster et al. (2016) and Das et al. (2018) em-
ployed centralized learning, in which agents share
parameters that are optimized in a centralized man-
ner. This essentially improves coordination by let-
ting agents talk to copies of themselves, which does
not generalize to genuinely separate agents. The
latter work also employed continuous communica-
tion, which is unlike the discrete nature of natural
language.
Jaques et al. (2018) criticized the use of central-
ized learning by Foerster et al. (2016) as being “un-
realistic” and instead resorted to an explicit model
of other agents (MOA) in order to incentivize the
emergence of discrete communication between sep-
arate agents in grid worlds. This MOA makes ex-
plicit predictions of actions of other agents, which
incentivizes the maximization of the mutual infor-
mation between the messages and the resulting
actions. However, hard coding such a mechanism
into the agent model makes it inﬂexible, which
renders communicating agents more transparent in
the sense that they can make assumptions about
each other’s inner workings. While this may hasten
learning in some cases, it may slow or even prevent
learning communication with generalized agents,
for which these assumptions do not hold.
Choi et al. (2018) studied the emergence of dis-
crete communication in simple referential games by
employing an inductive bias in the agent model in
the form of an obverter method. This method opti-
mizes the sender’s own understanding of messages
as a proxy for optimizing the receiver’s understand-
ing, relying on the assumption that these correlate.
Again, such an assumption may be unwarranted for
generalized agents. Lazaridou et al. (2018) did very
similar work without employing this mechanism,
which however still remained conﬁned to simple
referential games.
2
Method
In attempting to improve on the work discussed
above, we hypothesized that established deep rein-
forcement learning methods are sufﬁcient to incen-
tivize the emergence of a grounded discrete com-
munication protocol, without relying on unrealistic
straight-through estimation methods or specialized
inductive biases and instead providing proper en-
vironmental incentives. Moreover, in contrast to
the simple referential games typically used previ-
ously, we tested this hypothesis on the more com-
plex BabyAI platform.
2.1
BabyAI
BabyAI (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018) is a re-
search platform originally intended to support in-
vestigations towards including humans in the loop
for grounded language learning.
A task in a
BabyAI environment consists of a single agent nav-
igating a rectangular grid world to achieve a given
objective. Besides being occupied by the agent,
a cell may be occupied by an object, which can
either serve a purpose toward the objective, or ex-
ist purely as a distraction to this objective. The
objective of the agent is provided in the form of
an instruction in a synthetic language which is a
proper subset of English. Following such an in-
struction may involve learning multiple tasks such
as moving, changing orientation and picking up ob-
jects. By default, the agent has a partial, egocentric
view of the environment.
The entirety of the BabyAI platform comprises
an extensible suite of nineteen environments of
varying difﬁculty. This framework promotes cur-
riculum learning, in which agents are trained to
perform simpler tasks before being trained to per-
form more complex tasks. Increasingly complex
tasks are composed of increasing numbers of sub-
tasks, e.g., picking up a key needed to open the
corresponding door.
The authors included various baselines using
both imitation learning (IL) and RL training pro-
cedures. They found that agents beneﬁted only
modestly from pretraining on relevant subtasks.

2.2
Sender/Receiver Setup
The BabyAI platform does not natively support a
multi-agent setup. Therefore, in order to test our hy-
pothesis, we converted it to a sender/receiver setup,
which is publicly available1. A sender/receiver
setup is one in which one agent can transmit infor-
mation to another agent to improve its performance
on a given task. This is the typical setup used in
simple referential games, but adopting the BabyAI
platform complicates the task by introducing de-
pendencies across successive actions.
There are ﬁve incentives that characterize our
basic setup, subdivided into two primary and three
secondary incentives. Figure 1 summarizes these
incentives.
2.2.1
Primary Incentives
Each of the two primary incentives provides one of
the agents with the basic incentive to actually use
the communication channel.
Receiver’s Incentive
There is a differential be-
tween the observations of the sender and the re-
ceiver. The receiver takes on the role of the single
agent in the original BabyAI setup, but in contrast
to the original agent has its observations limited
to only two cells, namely the cell it is occupying
and the cell it is facing. The sender on the other
hand views the environment from an “Archimedean
point”, i.e., it has a global view of the environ-
ment and can affect the environment only indirectly,
namely through any messages it sends to the re-
ceiver. This informational differential provides the
receiver with an incentive to listen to the sender.
1github.com/thomasaunger/babyai sr
Forward left,
wall.
Thanks!
go to the
yellow box
Figure 1: a cartoon depicting our sender/receiver setup
in BabyAI. The triangles indicate the two agents; the
receiver is inside the environment with its limited, ego-
centric view indicated by the highlighted cells, while
the sender is outside the environment with a global
view. The sender must use the available messages and
their constituent symbols to transmit any information
to the receiver, prompting it to give feedback indicating
the utility of the messages. Only the receiver knows the
explicit instruction, as indicated by its thought bubble.
Sender’s Incentive
While the receiver obtains
its reward signal directly from the environment, the
receiver in turn provides the reward signal to the
sender. Section 2.4.2 provides further details. This
reward provides the sender with an incentive to ac-
tually transmit information relevant to the receiver.
2.2.2
Secondary Incentives
While the primary incentives provide the agents
with the basic incentives to use the communication
channel, the secondary incentives incentivize more
precisely how this communication channel is to be
used.
Inter-Message Economic Incentive
The sender
sends a single message every n time steps, where
n is dubbed the communication interval. For exam-
ple, if n = 1, then the sender could get away with
dictating one action per message. However, as this
value increases, so does the incentive to compile
information about multiple time steps into each
message, i.e., to use messages economically.
Intra-Message Economic Incentive
Each mes-
sage consists of a series of discrete symbols. These
messages have a ﬁxed length of k symbols and a
ﬁxed symbol vocabulary V. We indicate both the
length of the message k and the size of the vocab-
ulary |V| using the notation |M| = |V|k, where
|M| denotes the size of the set M, which is the set
of possible messages. Lower values of k and |V| in-
crease the incentive to compress information within
each message, i.e., to use symbols economically.
Encyclopedic
Incentive
The
instruction
is
shown only to the receiver. When there is only one
object, the goal is implicit in the sender’s observa-
tions. However, when it is ambiguous which object
is the goal, this information differential provides
the sender with an incentive to offer a description
of the environment that is more comprehensive
than simply the location of the goal, or a list of
actions necessary to complete the task.
2.3
Agent Model
The authors of BabyAI implemented two Advan-
tage Actor–Critic (A2C) agent models to produce
baseline RL performances. They referred to these
two models as the Large model and the Small
model. The latter formed the basis for our own
implementation. The small baseline model uses
a unidirectional GRU (Cho et al., 2014) to en-
code the instruction and a convolutional neural net-

work (CNN) with two batch-normalized (Ioffe and
Szegedy, 2015) FiLM (Perez et al., 2018) layers
to process both the observation and the encoded
instruction. This serves as input for an LSTM
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997), which inte-
grates it with inputs from previous time steps.
To facilitate communication, we enhanced the
agent model with a decoder module and an en-
coder module. The decoder module consists of an
LSTM module whose input is the hidden state of
the agent’s memory and whose output is a series of
vectors, each of which is fed through a linear layer
that produces the logits of a probability distribution
over |V| possible symbols. These logits are fed
through a softmax layer to produce the actual prob-
ability distribution, similarly to how the existing
policy module produces a probability distribution
over actions. From the resulting sequence of prob-
ability distributions are sampled one-hot vectors,
constituting a sequence of discrete symbols.
The encoder module likewise consists of an
LSTM, whose input is such a sequence of one-
hot vectors and whose output is its ﬁnal hidden
state, which is concatenated with the instruction
embedding.
2.4
Training Procedure
In order to train the agents, we adapted the im-
plementation of the proximal policy optimization
(PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) algorithm that was
used by the BabyAI authors to produce their RL
baselines. This is a highly parallelized implementa-
tion written in the Python programming language
using the machine learning library PyTorch, that
can also utilize any graphics processing unit (GPU)
supporting CUDA, which we made extensive use
of to maximize performance.
The implementation of PPO has a plethora of
hyperparameters, such as learning rate, epochs per
batch and batch size. For most hyperparameters,
changing their default value typically did not in-
crease performance and in fact usually decreased
performance. For this reason, we assumed the de-
fault values to have been sufﬁciently tuned for our
purposes and thus we refrained from deviating sig-
niﬁcantly from these values.
2.4.1
Frame Cadence
At each time step t in an environment, the re-
ceiver is assigned a frame rt, during which it
makes an observation, updates its memory and then
performs one action. Our implementation of the
sender/receiver setup inserts an extra frame si as-
signed to the sender before the frame ri at every
time step i at which the sender emits a message.
During these frames, the sender makes an observa-
tion, updates its memory and then emits a message
mi. This message is placed into a buffer, which is
read by the receiver at every time step.
2.4.2
Sender’s Fee
A2C methods use the policy gradient to optimize an
agent’s “actor” π, such that actions which lead to
a state s with a high value vπ(s) are reinforced.
These state values in turn are estimated by the
agent’s “critic” V (s). By exploiting the Bellman
equation, V (s) can be optimized using temporal-
difference (TD) learning, i.e., by bootstrapping the
state-value estimate V (St) with the state-value es-
timate V (St+1), as follows.
V (St) = Rt+1 + γV (St+1)
(1)
While
the
reward
for
the
receiver
is
straightforward—the reward as given by the
environment—the same is not true for the reward
of the sender. We essentially bootstrap the sender’s
state-value estimate Vs(Si) with the receiver’s
state-value estimate Vr(Si|mi), where mi is the
message that the sender sent to the receiver at time
step i. Using equation 1, we can write Vs(Si) and
Vr(St) for the sender and the receiver, respectively,
as follows.
Vs(Si) = Ri+1 + γVr(Si|mi)
(2)
Vr(St) = Rt+1 + γVr(St+1)
(3)
As visible in equation 2, the sender does not boot-
strap using its own value estimates Vs(Si+1) at all,
but rather treats every message emission as a sep-
arate task. That is, from the sender’s perspective,
every “episode” lasts a single time step and the
sender experiences a number of such “episodes”
equal to the number of messages emitted during
what is a single episode from the receiver’s per-
spective2.
Because the receiver is heavily dependent on the
messages for the accuracy of its state-value esti-
mates, this mechanism gives the sender very direct
feedback about the usefulness of its messages. Un-
der this condition, the sender mainly models the
2The sender is nonetheless able to remember previous time
steps from the same episode.

receiver and only models the environment inso-
far as it affects the receiver’s state-value estimate.
Hence, the sender can be said to have an implicit
model of the other agent.
2.5
Experiments
Agents were trained with the GoToObj environ-
ment from the original BabyAI implementation, as
well as with custom environments that were de-
rived from it. Figure 2 shows instances of these
environments.
The environments contain objects that can have
one of three types and one of six colors. Unless oth-
erwise noted, object types and colors are sampled
randomly.
In each of the environments, the task is for the
receiver to move toward an object having the type
and color speciﬁed in the instruction. The type and
color speciﬁed correspond to a randomly selected
object in the environment. An episode ends once
either the receiver faces an object with the speciﬁed
characteristics or 64 time steps have passed.
The communication interval n was varied loga-
rithmically according to the powers of 2, starting at
n = 1 and ending at n = 64. Since episodes have a
maximum length of 64 time steps, n = 64 equates
to one message per episode. The ﬁrst message in
an episode is always emitted at the ﬁrst time step
of the episode.
The agents’ transfer learning abilities were
gauged using various pretraining experiments. In
these experiments, the agents had to adapt either to
additional obstacles, or to increased goal ambigu-
ity.
GoToObj
This is an environment from the origi-
nal BabyAI platform. This is an 8 × 8 grid, where
all cells along the perimeter are intraversible walls,
effectively reducing it to a 6 × 6 grid. The agent
and the object are spawned in different randoms
locations on this grid.
GoToObjUnlocked
This environment was cus-
tomly designed to complicate the task as seen in
the GoToObj environment. Speciﬁcally, the agent
effectively has to move to two locations in succes-
sion instead of one in order to reach the goal. More-
over, in addition to turning and moving forward,
the agent must learn to toggle the door to open it.
The door connects two 3×3 rooms in a larger 9×9
grid. The door is positioned randomly in one of the
three cells connecting these rooms. The agent is
always spawned in the upper-left room, while the
object is always spawned in the upper-right room
and is never of the key type.
GoToObjLocked
This is another customly de-
signed environment that further complicates the
task. Not only must the agent learn to turn, move
forward and toggle a door, but it must learn to pick
up a key to unlock the door.
There are two variants of this environment. In
the unambiguous variant there is—in addition to
the key object—one unambiguous goal object. In
the ambiguous variant there is an additional, dis-
tracting object. Due to the encyclopedic incentive,
the latter variant leaves it ambiguous to the sender
which object is the goal. Wherever the variant is
not speciﬁed, it can be assumed that we are refer-
ring to the unambiguous variant.
To ensure that the task can actually be completed,
both the agent and the key to the door are spawned
in the upper-left room. The goal object and any
distracting object are spawned in the upper-right
room and are never of the key type.
3
Results
The original BabyAI paper used task success as
the principal metric to evaluate performance. How-
ever, this is not an appropriate metric to assess
the beneﬁt of communication in this case; even
without communication, the task success rate can
reach 100 %. Rather than in task success, the bene-
ﬁt of communication is primarily in the reduction
of the time required for task success. Therefore,
we instead measured performance using the num-
ber of time steps per episode, i.e., episode length.
More precisely, we measured the average over the
lengths of all episodes completed in 75 successive
batches. Using this metric, we expected results
to be bounded between two extremes. Firstly, dis-
allowing any communication should result in an
approximate upper bound on the number of time
steps per episode required to complete the task, as
the receiver is dependent entirely on its own, very
limited observations. Secondly, we might ﬁnd an
approximate lower bound when the receiver has
access to all information that the sender has. To
obtain a reasonable approximation of the lower
bound, we introduced the so-called “Archimedean3
receiver” which does not read messages, but is
3The moniker “Archimedean” was derived from the term
“Archimedean point” and is meant to be understood as an
antonym of “myopic”.

given the sender’s observations as a substitute for
hypothetical messages that contain all relevant in-
formation.
With regards to the communication interval, we
skipped the values n = 16 and n = 32 from the
powers of 2; while we did perform some experi-
ments with these values, we found these curves to
usually fall predictably between those of n = 8 and
n = 64, which already tended to be very similar to
each other.
Figure 3 shows the learning curves of agents
trained with varying communication intervals in
all four environments, while ﬁgure 4 shows the
learning curves of the variously pretrained agents.
4
Discussion
Figure 3 shows a clear separation between the up-
per and lower bounds in all environments, with the
learning curves of agents trained with lower values
of n hugging the lower bound and approaching the
upper bound for agents trained with increasing val-
ues of n. This indicates that while communication
was of substantial beneﬁt for shorter communica-
tion intervals, this beneﬁt decreased with longer in-
tervals. Because the sender relies on the receiver’s
feedback in the form of its state-value estimates
Vr(Si), we surmise that this decrease is at least in
part due to the difﬁculty for the receiver in learning
to make these estimates accurately over such long
intervals.
Figure 2:
instances of the GoToObj, GoToObjUn-
locked and GoToObjLocked environments, from left to
right, respectively. The triangle indicates the receiver’s
location and orientation, while the highlighted cells in-
dicate its partial, egocentric view. In the custom envi-
ronments, the two connecting rooms are always the two
upper rooms. The two bottom rooms are never used and
merely serve as padding so that the observations are
square, which our implementation of the agent model
incidentally requires.
5
10
20
40
time steps per episode
GoToObj, |M| = 88
GoToObjUnlocked, |M| = 88
103
104
105
106
episodes
10
20
40
time steps per episode
GoToObjLocked, |M| = 88
no comm.
n = 64
n = 8
n = 4
n = 2
n = 1
Arch. receiver
103
104
105
106
episodes
GoToObjLocked (ambiguous), |M| = 88
Figure 3: log-log plots of learning curves of agents in various environments.

Figure 4 shows not only that most agents pre-
trained with communication were more sample ef-
ﬁcient than agents pretrained without communica-
tion, but also that some were more sample efﬁcient
than the Archimedean receiver. This indicates that
emergent communication can be leveraged to im-
prove transfer learning performance.
4.1
Semantic Analysis
We analyzed the semantics of the communication
protocols that had emerged between agent pairs
trained in the GoToObj environment at the end of
their respective learning curves in ﬁgure 3. For the
purpose of this analysis the messages were not sam-
pled stochastically, but instead determined using
the arg max function.
Table 1 shows the actions taken by the receiver
following some of the sender’s messages, with n =
1. One striking anomaly that in fact holds for all
495 emitted messages m is that none of them have
an associated probability P(a0|m) > 0.00, i.e.,
the receiver never turned left. We surmise that this
suboptimality is idiosyncratic to PPO in general
and not to the use of communication speciﬁcally.
Under the assumption that the receiver would not
turn left, there is a clear correlation between table
1 and ﬁgure 5; p(a|m) is virtually optimal.
For longer communication intervals, it is not as
straightforward to ascertain semantics, as there is
a combinatorial explosion of possible trajectories
following a message. Table 2 shows the actions
taken by the receiver averaged over integral tra-
jectories following some of the sender’s messages,
with n = 64. The strategy associated with the
most frequent message “bbbbbbbb” can be iden-
tiﬁed as repeatedly moving straight into a wall and
then turning left, thereby scouring the perimeter.
Consulting ﬁgure 6, this appears to be sensible, al-
though it is not optimal behavior. Similarly, the
third most frequent message “eeeeeeee” is asso-
ciated with a sensible strategy, if suboptimal.
5
Conclusion
We have demonstrated that established deep rein-
forcement learning techniques are sufﬁcient to in-
centivize the emergence of grounded discrete com-
munication between agents in grid world environ-
ments, without employing straight-through estima-
tion or specialized inductive biases. In addition, we
have shown that such communication can be lever-
aged to improve transfer learning performance.
One limitation of the incentives that we have pro-
vided is the assumption that the receiver supplies a
reward signal to the sender. However, this assump-
tion is satisﬁed naturally by the state-value estimate
of any actor–critic agent model and is arguably
more straightforward to implement than inductive
biases used in previous work. Another limitation is
that the effectiveness of communication decreased
as the communication interval increased, ostensibly
no comm., pretrained with no comm.
n = 64, pretrained with no comm.
n = 64, pretrained with n = 64
n = 1, pretrained with n = 1
n = 1, pretrained with no comm.
Arch. receiver, pretrained with Arch. receiver
103
104
105
106
episodes
10
20
40
time steps per episode
GoToObjLocked, pretrained with
GoToObjUnlocked, |M| = 88
103
104
105
106
episodes
GoToObjLocked (ambiguous), pretrained with
GoToObjLocked, |M| = 88
Figure 4: log-log plots of learning curves of various pretrained agents.

P(b|ffffhhha)
0.00
0.13
P(b|ffffffbb)
0.00
0.13
P(b|fffffbbb)
0.00
0.09
Figure 5: the probabilities P(b|m) that the object was in a speciﬁed location b relative to the receiver’s location
and orientation at a time step in which the sender emitted the message m with n = 1 in the GoToObj environment.
The triangle indicates the receiver’s relative location and orientation.
as a consequence of a decrease in the accuracy of
the reward signal provided by the receiver to the
sender.
5.1
Future Work
Kottur et al. (2017) and Lowe et al. (2019) previ-
ously stressed that, despite the relative simplicity of
emergent communication in contemporary works,
the associated semantics are difﬁcult to interpret.
Our work ties in to this assessment, as we had
difﬁculty analyzing the semantics in all but the sim-
plest of environments. One sinister future scenario
could involve inadvertently allowing agents to use
steganography. We therefore consider the develop-
ment of artiﬁcial language processing (ALP) to be
of crucial importance to understanding artﬁcial in-
telligence and maintaining value alignment into the
far future (Yudkowsky, 2004; Leike et al., 2018).
Bengio (2012) proposed a theory that relates
difﬁculty of learning in deep architectures to cul-
ture and language. Our setup can be used to test
this theory, by iteratively training random pairs of
agents from a larger pool and observing whether,
by chance, a more effective communication proto-
col emerges between one of the pairs and manages
to spread through subsequent pairings.
m
P(a1|m)
P(a2|m)
P(m)
ffffhhha
1.00
0.00
11.67 %
ffffffbb
0.00
1.00
9.10 %
fffffbbb
0.00
1.00
8.50 %
total: 29.27 %
Table 1: the probability distributions p(a|m) of the ﬁrst
action a of the receiver following the sender’s emission
of one of the three most frequent messages m with n =
1 in the GoToObj environment. Action a1 is to turn
right, while action a2 is to move forward.
P(b|bbbbbbbb)
0.00
0.13
P(b|eeeeeeee)
0.00
0.09
Figure 6: the probabilities P(b|m) that the object was
in a speciﬁed location b relative to the receiver’s ori-
entation at a time step in which the sender emitted the
message m with n = 64 in the GoToObj environment.
c
P(a0|m0, c) P(a2|m0, c) P(m0|c)
P(a0|m2, c) P(a1|m2, c) P(a2|m2, c) P(m2|c)
anything
0.22
0.78
21.96 %
0.24
0.14
0.62
17.05 %
nothing
0.00
1.00
16.66 %
0.12
0.16
0.72
13.43 %
wall
1.00
0.00
5.30 %
1.00
0.00
0.00
3.62 %
Table 2: the probability distributions p(a|m, c) of an action a of the receiver following the sender’s emission of the
most frequent message m0 = bbbbbbbb or the third most frequent message m2 = eeeeeeee with n = 64 in
the GoToObj environment. The distributions are further conditioned on c, which here indicates what was in the cell
facing the receiver at the time step that the action was taken, namely “anything”, “nothing” or a “wall”. Actions
a0 and a1 are to turn left and right, respectively, while action a2 is to move forward.
