Reliability-Optimized User Admission Control for URLLC
Traffic: A Neural Contextual Bandit Approach
Omid Semiari, Hosein Nikopour and Shilpa Talwar
Intel Labs, Santa Clara, CA

Abstract—Ultra-reliable low-latency communication (URLLC)
is the cornerstone for a broad range of emerging services in next-
generation wireless networks. URLLC fundamentally relies on
the network’s ability to proactively determine whether sufficient
resources are available to support the URLLC traffic, and thus,
prevent so-called cell overloads. Nonetheless, achieving accurate
quality-of-service (QoS) predictions for URLLC user equipment
(UEs) and preventing cell overloads are very challenging tasks.
This is due to dependency of the QoS metrics (latency and
reliability) on traffic and channel statistics, users’ mobility, and
interdependent performance across UEs. In this paper, a new
QoS-aware UE admission control approach is developed to proac-
tively estimate QoS for URLLC UEs, prior to associating them
with a cell, and accordingly, admit only a subset of UEs that do
not lead to a cell overload. To this end, an optimization problem
is formulated to find an efficient UE admission control policy,
cognizant of UEs’ QoS requirements and cell-level load dynamics.
To solve this problem, a new machine learning based method
is proposed that builds on (deep) neural contextual bandits, a
suitable framework for dealing with nonlinear bandit problems.
In fact, the UE admission controller is treated as a bandit
agent that observes a set of network measurements (context) and
makes admission control decisions based on context-dependent
QoS (reward) predictions. The simulation results show that the
proposed scheme can achieve near-optimal performance and yield
substantial gains in terms of cell-level service reliability and
efficient resource utilization.
I. INTRODUCTION
Ultra-reliable low-latency communication (URLLC) is an-
ticipated to be an integral part of the sixth generation (6G)
wireless networks, enabling new wireless edge services such
as cloud-based augmented reality and gaming, remote control,
vehicle-to-infrastructure communications (V2X), mission criti-
cal Internet of things (IoT) and real-time digital twins [1]–[3].
For these services, the network must reliably meet extreme
latency constraints of user and control plane transmissions.
In URLLC, an imperative open problem is to accurately
predict quality-of-service (QoS), in terms of reliability and
latency metrics, before admitting new user equipment (UEs)
to a cell. Such QoS predictions can be used by the cell to
ensure enough resources are available to meet strict latency
and reliability requirements of URLLC UEs and proactively
eliminate so-called “cell overloads”. Achieving accurate QoS
and cell overload predictions for URLLC is a challenging
problem in realistic complex network scenarios. This is due to
© 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
the fact that reliability is intrinsically linked to the statistical
distribution of the transmission delay [4], [5]. However, delay
distributions are generally unknown to the cell and impacted
by various sources of uncertainties in wireless networks such
as channel fading, interference, noise, non-deterministic traffic,
and users’ mobility. Hence, the cell must learn a reasonably
accurate QoS model that can capture those network dynamics.
For typical voice and data traffic, cell overloads are tra-
ditionally managed by the call admission control (CAC) [6]
mechanism to limit the number of UEs and QoS flows
served by a cell. In [7], the authors provide an overview of
existing CAC methods. Despite being widely adopted, these
dynamic CAC schemes rely on simple rule-based policies,
e.g., based on bandwidth utilization thresholds [8], service
prioritization [9], or call dropping rate [10]. In fact, none of the
methods in [7]–[10] directly addresses the admission control
for URLLC traffic. Complementary to the CAC, network
slice admission control (NSAC) is introduced by 3GPP [11]
which heuristically controls the number of UEs and packet
data unit (PDU) sessions registered to a network slice. The
works in [12] and [13] develop admission control schemes for
single-cell scenarios with both URLLC and mobile broadband
UEs. In [12], the URLLC traffic is prioritized by admitting
all URLLC UEs and only applying the admission control to
mobile broadband UEs. That is, the method in [12] does not
directly address the admission control for URLLC. Moreover,
the delay and reliability models presented in [12] and [13]
rely on overly simplified assumptions (e.g., static channel,
no packet re-transmissions) that do not hold in real mobile
networks.
Regarding QoS modeling and prediction for URLLC, the
authors in [4] and [5] provide extensive statistical analyses of
latency and reliability metrics by using an array of theoretical
tools such as parameterized channel models, tail approxima-
tions, and risk assessment concepts. Despite their fundamental
results, derived QoS analysis mostly apply to simple cases
and do not easily extend to more complex network scenarios
with radio link control (RLC) packet re-transmissions, users’
mobility, and multi-user scheduling. Moreover, these works
do not focus on the admission control for URLLC traffic. In
addition to model-based approaches, there is a recent body of
work in [14]–[16] that develops machine learning (ML) based
solutions for directly deriving an admission policy. The works
in [14] and [15] leverage different deep reinforcement learning
techniques to learn admission policies for non-URLLC traffic.
Moreover, [16] uses Q-learning to address admission control in
1
arXiv:2401.03059v1  [cs.LG]  5 Jan 2024

a generic service system with delay constraints. However, the
adopted model does not consider real radio access networks
(RANs) constraints associated with the fading channel, packet
transmission failures, and bandwidth limitations.
The main contribution of this paper is a novel ML-based
solution to address the QoS-aware user admission control
for URLLC traffic in open RAN (O-RAN) networks. The
proposed solution builds on (deep) neural contextual ban-
dits [17], a powerful ML framework that deals with complex
decision-making problems under uncertainties. In particular,
the proposed solution treats the admission controller as a
contextual bandit (CB) agent that can be implemented as
an xApp in O-RAN. Upon receiving service requests from
applicant UEs (either handover or activated URLLC UEs), the
xApp observes RAN measurements (contextual information)
associated with UEs and the O-RAN radio unit (O-RU), and
accordingly, admits a subset of applicants. To optimize the
admission control policy, the proposed method employs a
system of deep neural networks (DNNs) to predict the service
reliability as a nonlinear function of the context for each
admission decision. A key advantage of the proposed approach
is to handle concurrent admission requests from multiple
UEs. Further, unlike existing model-based admission control
methods that depend on strong simplifying assumptions about
the network, the agent in our proposed approach directly learns
from experience (context-reward observations). As shown by
comprehensive simulations, the learned admission control pol-
icy for URLLC traffic yields near-optimal performance and
generalizes well to complex O-RAN scenarios with practical
system-level considerations such as mini-slot configurations,
packet re-transmissions, UE mobility, and link adaptation with
imperfect channel information.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec. II
presents the system model and problem formulation. Sec. III
formally defines the UE admission control as a neural CB and
presents the proposed solution. Simulation results are included
in Sec. IV and conclusions are outlined in Sec. V.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
Consider K URLLC UEs, in a set K, randomly located
within the coverage of an O-RU cell. As shown in Fig. 1,
the cell may receive new service requests from UEs under
two conditions: (1) UE is already associated with the cell but
it is transitioning from one of radio resource control (RRC)
“inactive” or RRC “idle” modes to an RRC “connected”
mode, and (2) UE is requesting to perform a handover to the
cell (as a target cell). In either case, before admitting new
service requests from UEs, the cell must employ a QoS-aware
admission control to proactively determine whether enough
resources are available to meet the QoS for all admitted UEs,
given the current cell load and other RAN measurements. If
there are not enough resources available, then the cell must
only admit a subset of UEs for whom the QoS can be met.
QoS-Aware UE 
Admission Controller
Near-RT RIC
O-DU
O-CU
(CP)
O-CU
(UP)
UPF
AMF
Candidate 
UEs with 
strict QoS
O-RU
Core
RAN
NG-C
NG-U
E2
E2
F1
QoS-Aware UE 
Admission Controller
Near-RT RIC
O-DU
O-CU
(CP)
O-CU
(UP)
UPF
AMF
Candidate 
UEs with 
strict QoS
O-RU
Core
RAN
NG-C
NG-U
E2
E2
F1
Fig. 1. QoS-aware UE admission controller as an xApp in O-RAN.
A. QoS Metrics, Scheduling, and Traffic Model for URLLC
Let K′ ⊆K and K′′ ⊆K denote, respectively, the set of UEs
submitting new service requests, hereinafter called applicant
UEs, and the set of currently active UEs in the cell (i.e., UEs in
the RRC connected mode). The QoS for an arbitrary URLLC
UE k ∈K can be defined as:
P(tk ≤τk) ≥δk,
(1)
where tk represents the transmission delay over the access link.
Aligned with the 3rd generation partnership project (3GPP)
definition for user plane latency [18], the transmission delay is
defined here as the radio interface latency from the time when
the cell’s packet data convergence protocol (PDCP) receives an
Internet Protocol (IP) packet to the time when UE successfully
receives the IP packet. Moreover, δk ∈[0, 1] and τk represent,
respectively, the reliability and delay requirements; both are
determined based on the specific use case and URLLC QoS
requirements. Without loss of generality, let’s assume δk = δ
for all k = 1, · · · , K.
Moreover, we consider a non-full buffer traffic by modeling
packet arrival for each UE k ∈K′ ∪K′′ as a Poisson process
with a packet arrival rate of λk and a PDCP packet size of bk.
The cell employs link adaptation to adjust the rate according
to non-ideal periodic channel state information (CSI) feedback
received from UEs. We consider retransmissions at the RLC
layer. That is, if the transmission of a transport block is failed,
transmitted bits are scheduled for retrainsmission during next
transmission time intervals (TTIs), unless the delay tk exceeds
the tolerable delay τk. In that case, the packet is dropped from
the queue. For allocating resource block groups (RBGs) to
admitted UEs, we consider maximum largest weighted delay
first (M-LWDF) scheduler which is known to maintain a good
balance between QoS provisioning and fairness. At each TTI,
the M-LWDF scheduler assigns RBGs (one-by-one) to any UE
with a non-empty buffer that maximizes the following metric:
mk = ζkdHOL,k
ck(t)
¯ck(t −1).
(2)
In (2), ζk = −log(1 −δ)/τk and dHOL,k represents the delay
of “head-of-the-line (HOL)”, i.e., UE k’s oldest packet in the
2

buffer. Moreover, ck(t) and ¯ck(t −1) denote, respectively, the
achievable data rate at TTI t and the average rate for UE k.
B. QoS-Aware User Admission Control Policy
As shown in Fig. 1, the user admission controller can be
implemented as an xApp at the near real-time RAN intelligent
controller (near-RT RIC) in O-RAN. In particular, upon receiv-
ing new service requests from UEs, a cell can forward a set of
relevant RAN data, hereinafter called the network context, to
the xApp to make an admission control decision. The network
context (to be concretely defined in Sec. III-B) includes a set of
UE-level and cell-level RAN measurements that are relevant to
making QoS-aware admission control decisions. With this in
mind, we can define the QoS-aware UE admission control as
a policy π : R|x| →{0, 1}|K′| that maps the network context
vector x to an admission decision vector z ∈{0, 1}|K′| with
elements zk′, k′ ∈K′. Here, zk′ = 1 if the service request of
UE k′ is accepted, otherwise zk′ = 0. Using this model, we
can define the UE’s reliability indicator function as follows:
1(k, x, z) =
(
1,
if Ftk(τk; x, z) ≥δ,
0,
otherwise,
(3)
where Ftk(τk; x, z) = P(tk ≤τk|x, z) is the conditional
cumulative distribution function (CDF) of tk at τk. Next,
we propose an optimization problem that builds on (3) to
maximize the service reliability at the cell level.
C. Problem Formulation
To optimize the admission control for URLLC UEs, let the
policy π be parameterized by a set of weights θ, thus, z =
π(x; θ). Considering Ka = {k′ ∈K′|zk′ = 1} as the set of
accepted applicant UEs, we can define the cell reliability as
1c(x, θ) =
Y
k∈Ka∪K′′
1(k, x, z) =
Y
k∈Ka∪K′′
1(k, x, π(x; θ)). (4)
In (4), the cell reliability is 1 only if all the served UEs meet
their reliability target, otherwise, 1c(x, θ) = 0. Our goal is to
find an optimal admission control policy that can maximize
the average cell reliability, i.e.,
max
θ
Ex [R(x, θ)] = max
θ
Ex
Ka
K′ 1c(x, θ)

,
(5)
where Ka = |Ka|, K′ = |K′| ̸= 0, and the expectation is
with respect to random variables in x. The multiplicative term
Ka/K′ in (5) is included to encourage the policy to admit
more applicant UEs to the cell. We can expand the objective
function as:
Ex [R(x, θ)] ∝
Z
x
1c(x, θ)fx(x)dx =
Z
x∈X θ fx(x)dx, (6)
where fx(x) is the joint probability density function (PDF) of
variables in x. Moreover, for a given set of policy parameters
θ, the integral in (6) is calculated over all x ∈X θ, where the
set X θ is
X θ = {x|1c(x, θ)=1}={x|1(k, x, π(x; θ))=1, ∀k ∈Ka} ,
(a)=

x

Z τk
0
ftk,x(t, x|θ)dt ≥δfx(x), ∀k ∈Ka

.
(7)
The equality (a) in (7) is derived from the constraint in (3)
and by expanding Ftk(τk; x, z) as follows:
Ftk(τk; x, z) = P(tk ≤τk|x, θ) =
Z τk
0
ftk,x(t, x|θ)
fx(x|θ)
dt
=
1
fx(x)
Z τk
0
ftk,x(t, x|θ)dt.
Solving the system of inequalities in (7) for x is difficult
due to the lack of prior knowledge about the distribution
functions. Therefore, standard gradient based optimization
techniques cannot be applied here. To solve this problem,
we will propose an ML-based solution to directly learn an
effective UE admission control policy via experience, i.e., by
making one-shot admission control decisions, observing the
achieved cell reliability, and gradually improving the policy.
III. QOS-AWARE UE ADMISSION CONTROL AS A NEURAL
CONTEXTUAL BANDIT PROBLEM
To solve the proposed optimization problem, we develop a
novel solution that models the admission controller xApp as a
CB agent. The solution is built on the concept of (deep) neural
CBs [17], enabling the agent to predict nonlinear rewards (to
be defined as a function of the cell reliability) and accordingly,
output the admission decision vector z. Before we dive into
the proposed solution, let’s briefly overview neural CBs.
A. Neural Contextual Bandits: Preliminaries
Multi-armed bandit is a reinforcement learning framework
suitable for optimizing decision-making under uncertainties. In
bandit problems, an agent is presented with A ∈N+ choices
commonly known as arms. At a given decision instance i, the
agent selects an arm ai ∈A = {a0, a1, · · · , aA−1} according
to some policy π and observes a random reward rai ∼νai
drawn from an unknown distribution νai. Considering µa as
the expected reward of an arm a ∈A, the goal of the agent in
bandit problems is to learn a policy that minimizes the average
regret ρ(I) after playing for I iterations:
ρ(I) = Iµ∗−
I
X
i=1
rai,
(8)
where µ∗= maxa µa. In CBs, arm selection and the distribu-
tion of reward for each arm can depend on some additional
information (context) pertaining to arms or the state of the
environment. A special case of CB problems are nonlinear
bandits wherein the reward is a nonlinear function of the
context. While the majority of the literature has focused on
linear CBs, there are a number of recent works that leverage
DNNs as function approximators to capture the nonlinearity of
the reward function. That being said, a (deep) neural CB policy
constitutes a DNN that maps context of each arm to a reward
signal. By following an exploration strategy (e.g., epsilon
greedy) and observing context-reward pairs, the agent can use
gradient-based optimization to update the policy parameters θ.
3

B. Proposed Neural Contextual Bandit Formulation
To solve the problem in (5), we can formally define the
admission control as a neural CB problem as follows:
Arms: in our problem, arms are defined as the subsets
of applicant UEs that could be admitted by the cell. With
K′ applicant UEs, the number of arms will be 2K′, raising
scalability issues as K′ grows. To address this limitation, we
introduce a hierarchy among UEs based on their long-term
signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR). That is, if an
applicant UE k′ ∈K′ is admitted by the cell, then all other
applicant UEs that have a higher average SINR must also
be admitted. Hence, the number of arms A will be equal to
K′+1. As an example, consider a scenario where K′ = 3 and
γ1 > γ3 > γ2 with γk denoting the average SINR for UE k.
Given the defined hierarchy, plausible arms will be: (a) arm a0
with the decision vector za0 = [0, 0, 0] admitting no applicant
UEs, (b) arm a1 with the decision vector za1 = [1, 0, 0]
admitting UE k = 1 only, (c) arm a2 with the decision vector
za2 = [1, 0, 1] admitting UEs 1 and 3, and (d) arm a3 with
the decision vector za3 = [1, 1, 1] admitting all three UEs.
Arm context: We define a distinct feature (context) vector for
each applicant UE k′ ∈K′ as well as the cell. For a UE k′ ∈
K′, the feature vector xk′ encompasses UE’s attributes such as
the average effective SINR γk′ estimated from imperfect CSI
feedback, packet size bk′ in bytes, packet arrival rate λk′, and
UE’s delay requirement τk′. We also define a feature vector xc
for the cell, comprising the cell’s current bandwidth utilization
along with features in xk′′ averaged across existing active UEs
in the set K′′. Next, the arm context for an arbitrary arm a ∈A
can be defined as
xa = [xk′||xc] , ∀k′ ∈K′, if za[k′] = 1.
(9)
where [.||.] denotes concatenation and za[k′] is the k′-th
element of the vector za. In fact, the arm context xa is
obtained by concatenating the feature vectors of all applicant
UEs admitted by an arm a (based on its decision vector za)
along with the cell’s feature vector xc.
Network context: The network context vector x can be
obtained by concatenating feature vectors of all applicant
UE k′ ∈K′ along with the cell’s features xc, i.e., x =
[xk′||xc] , ∀k′ ∈K′.
Reward: The reward is equal to the scaled cell reliability
R(x, θ) defined in (5). In real networks, the reliability indica-
tor function per UE, defined in (3), and consequently 1c(x, θ),
are not known a priori and must be estimated via either
statistical methods or empirical observations over a period of
time. That is, after selecting an arm a ∈A, the network can
record the performance for each admitted UE k ∈Ka over
a time window of size T TTIs. Let nk be the number of
packets that are transmitted to UE k within this time window.
Then, the network can use the following Monte Carlo (MC)
approximation to estimate P(tk(xa; za) ≤τk) in (3):
P(tk(xa; za) ≤τk) ≈1
nk
nk
X
n′=1
1tk,n′(xa;za)≤τk.
(10)
Here, tk,n′ represents the transmission delay of n′-th packet
for UE k. As nk increases, the estimation error decreases
according to the well-known Dvoretzky–Kiefer–Wolfowitz
(DKW) inequality. However, increasing nk leads to a higher
data collection cost. To determine a suitable value for nk, and
accordingly the observation window size T, one can derive a
confidence interval for P(tk(xa; za) ≤τk) using the Wilson
score interval [19]:
P(tk(xa; za) ≤τk) ∈(p−, p+)
where
p± = nk,s + 0.5β2
nk + β2
±
β
nk + β2
s
nk,snk,f
nk
+ β2
4 .
(11)
In (11), nk,s is the number of packets successfully received
within their deadline τk, and nk,f = nk −nk,s. Moreover, β
is a constant that is determined based on a desired confidence
level. For example, for a 99% confidence interval, β is equal
to 2.58. By considering the lower-limit p−of the Wilson score
interval, the UE reliability can be estimated by:
1(k, x, z) ≈
(
1,
if p−≥δ,
0,
otherwise.
(12)
For evaluation purposes, the UE reliability approximation
in (12) can be used in (4) to obtain the cell reliability, and
accordingly, the reward R(x, θ).
In this contextual bandit problem, the reward is a nonlinear
function of the arm context xa. Hence, we cannot directly
apply standard bandit methods, such as linear upper confidence
bound (UCB), that are primarily designed for linear rewards.
Next, we will introduce a solution that falls into the category of
neural CBs to leverage DNNs for estimating the arms’ rewards,
subject to a given context xai, ai ∈A.
C. Proposed QoS-Aware UE Admission Control
To solve the proposed QoS-aware admission control prob-
lem as a neural CB, the xApp comprises a system of K′
m
DNNs associated with arms {a1, a2, · · · aK′m}. K′
m is a design
parameter and can be selected based on the expected number
of concurrent admission requests. Each DNN is a feedfor-
ward network comprising: (a) a linear embedding layer that
transforms each input feature in xa into a vector of length d,
(b) a concatenation layer to stack embedded features, and (c)
two additional hidden layers (with ReLU activation) followed
by an output layer with the Sigmoid activation function. The
embedding layer includes separate sets of trainable weights for
each input feature type (packet size, delay requirement, etc.).
Let θ(j) denote the set of parameters for DNN j. We note
that the output size of the concatenation layer is d times the
length of xaj in a DNN j associated with an arm aj. Hence,
the number of parameters varies across the DNNs. Moreover,
let g(j)(xaj) be the output of the j-th DNN. Then, the
predicted cell reliability for arm j will be ˆ1c,j = ⌊g(j)(xaj)⌉,
where ⌊.⌉denotes rounding. Accordingly, the reward per arm
can be calculated as ra = Ka
K′m ˆ1c,j for a ∈{a1, · · · , aK′}. The
4

Algorithm 1 Training of the proposed neural CB xApp
Inputs:
Number of admission control events I, exploration parameter ϵ,
learning rate η, the minimum batch size q, reliability requirements δ, τk.
Initialize
Randomly initialize parameters θ(j) and reset replay buffers
B(aj) = ∅of all arms aj, j ∈{1, · · · , K′
m}.
1: if an admission event is trigerred and i < I then
2:
Collect K′ ≤K′
m concurrent admission requests submitted to a cell
along with the context xa for arms a ∈{a1, · · · , aK′} via the E2
interface.
3:
Estimate rewards ra = Ka
K′m
ˆ1c,j for a ∈{a1, · · · , aK′}.
4:
Generate a random value p ∼U[0, 1].
5:
If p > ϵ set ai = argmaxa ra, otherwise, randomly select an arm.
6:
Send the list of admitted UEs in Kai back to the cell for scheduling.
7:
Observe the resulting cell reliability 1c,i ≜1c(x, θ) via MC over T
TTIs. Add the experience sample (xai, 1c,i) to the replay buffer B(aj)
designated to arm aj = ai.
8:
for arms aj, j ∈{1, · · · , K′
m} do
9:
if |B(aj)| ≥q then
10:
Sample a mini-batch of size q samples and calculate the loss
LBCE

θ(j)
=
−
q
X
s=1
h
1c,s log g(j)(xas) + (1 −1c,s) log

1 −g(j)(xas)
i
11:
For each DNN, separately update the model parameters:
θ(j) ←θ(j) −η∇LBCE(θ(j)).
12:
end if
13:
end for
14: end if
Output: parameters of the admission control policy θ =
n
θ(j)oK′
m
j=1.
reason for dedicating a separate DNN to each arm is twofold.
First, as mentioned above, the number of UEs admitted varies
across different arms, so as the input size (length of the feature
vector) of DNNs. Second, training a dedicated DNN for each
arm yields a higher accuracy for cell reliability predictions.
The proposed training algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1
and can be briefly described as follows. When a new admission
control event is triggered by receiving admission requests from
K′ UEs, the arms’ context xaj, j ∈{1, · · · , K′ ≤K′
m} are
collected by the cell and sent to the admission control xApp
via the E2 interface in O-RAN. Then, arms’ context are fed
as input to the corresponding DNNs of the xApp. During the
training, the agent can observe the estimated rewards ra across
arms at a decision instance i, and decides between choosing
the best arm or randomly exploring one of the arms. The
set of admitted applicants in Kai (according to the selected
arm ai) is then sent to the cell for scheduling. Next, the
resulting cell reliability 1c,i ≜1c(x, θ) is measured over a T-
TTI observation window. The xApp maintains separate replay
buffers B(aj) for each arm aj, j ∈{1, · · · , K′
m}. Thus, the
experience sample (xai, 1c,i) is added to the replay buffer
B(aj) designated to arm aj = ai. By comparing the estimated
cell reliability of the selected arm with the observed cell
reliability, a binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss function can
be computed and used to calculate the gradient vectors for
updating the parameters of the corresponding DNN. Specific
details about mini-batch training using replay buffers are
included in Algorithm 1 and learning parameters are provided
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
Number of UEs (K)
10
Number of concurrent applicant UEs (K′)
{1, 2, 3}
Subcarrier spacing
30 kHz
TTI duration (mini-slot)
4 OFDM symbols
Cell transmit power
44 dBm
Allocated bandwidth to the URLLC slice
6 MHz
Number of resource blocks (RBs)
15
Number of RBGs
3
UE speed
1 m/s
Packet size (bk)
{0.25, · · · , 5} bytes
Average inter-packet arrival time
{1, 2, 3} TTIs
Delay threshold (τk)
{1, · · · , 5} TTIs
in Sec. IV. During the inference, it can be an implementation
choice to let the agent continue the training based on real-
time updates or freeze the weights of DNNs. In the latter
case, the agent follows a greedy approach by selecting the
best performing arm in each round without doing exploration.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Simulation results are obtained using a detailed Python-
based system-level simulator, supporting realistic channel
models from the PyPhysim library [20], non-ideal CSI feed-
back, non-full buffer traffic, link adaptation, RLC retrainsmis-
sions, and M-LWDF scheduling. Table I lists some of the
main simulation parameters related to the wireless system.
To ensure that the trained ML-based admission controller
generalizes to various deployment scenarios, UEs’ locations
are randomly initialized for each admission control instance.
Moreover, traffic parameters (packet size and average arrival
time) and delay requirements are randomly selected for each
UE from the values reported in Table I. The xApp is imple-
mented in PyTorch, encompassing three DNNs, as described
in Sec. III-C. Each input feature is passed through a linear
embedding layer of size d = 10. The number of neurons in
subsequent hidden layers are 16 and 8.
For training each DNN, agent’s experiences are recorded
as tuples (xai, 1c,i) in a dedicated replay buffer of size 500
samples. Then, each DNN is trained using mini-batches of size
q = 30 randomly sampled from its dedicated replay buffer.
Replay buffers are continuously updated and upon reaching the
capacity, the oldest experience sample is removed and a new
sample is appended to the buffer. Hence, unlike supervised
learning schemes, the number of training samples for each
DNN will be dependent on the exploration-exploitation strat-
egy of the agent. Here, we consider an epsilon-greedy explo-
ration with an epsilon decay schedule ϵ ←max(ϵ ∗0.99, 0.1)
after each training step. Moreover, stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) optimizer is used with a learning rate of η = 0.01.
To simulate admission events, UEs are randomly deployed
within the coverage area of the cell. Then, applicant UEs
and currently active UEs are randomly selected. To simulate
the cell reliability resulting from an admission decision, we
consider an MC rollout of the network for T = 30, 000 TTIs
(equivalent to about 4 seconds). From (11), this observation
window is large enough to estimate the reliability of δ = 0.999
5

(a)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Average cell reliability
proposed
random
no admission control
(b)
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
Average dropping rate
proposed
random
no admission control
Fig. 2. Average cell reliability and dropping rate for different UE admission
control methods.
Fig. 3. Average resource utilization vs. the QoS fulfillment rate.
with a 99% confidence. Clearly, higher reliability targets
can be assessed by increasing T at the cost of more time-
consuming simulations. To evaluate the regret (see Fig. 4),
parallelization is used at an edge server to compute MC
simulations concurrently for all arms. Here, the MC approach
is used to obtain accurate results since as mentioned in Sec. I,
statistical analyses do not easily extend to the generic URLLC
scenarios considered in this work. Nevertheless, one could
explore incorporating approximation techniques [4] into the
proposed solution.
For evaluations, we compare the performance of proposed
approach with two other methods: (a) “random admission
control” where an arm is randomly selected in each step, and
(b) the conventional “no admission control” approach where
no QoS-aware admission control is implemented, i.e., the cell
will admit all applicant UEs. To ensure a fair performance
comparison, trivial admission instances wherein the cell is
already overloaded (even before admitting new UEs) are not
included in our evaluations. That is because for such corner
cases, the baseline methods would perform poorly. Moreover,
the M-LDWF scheduling is used at the medium access control
(MAC) layer for evaluating all methods. We evaluate various
performance metrics, including the average cell reliability,
link dropping rate, QoS fulfillment rate, and the bandwidth
utilization, as discussed next.
Figure 2(a) compares the cell reliability, i.e., the key
performance metric defined in (4), averaged over random
deployments (UE locations) for different UE admission control
methods. The proposed ML-based method yields 30% and
65% performance gains compared to the no admission control
and random admission methods, respectively. The figure also
shows that the proposed method achieves a near-optimal
performance, i.e., for only 14% of the time on average, not all
admitted UEs may meet the δ-reliability target.
Figure 2(b) compares the average link dropping rate for
different UE admission control methods. For QoS-sensitive
traffic such as in URLLC, a UE link is dropped, i.e., termi-
nated, if there are not sufficient available resources at the cell
to meet UE’s QoS [14]. The link dropping rate is an important
performance metric in admission control and can be defined
as the number of UEs that are served but their reliability target
is not achieved, divided by the number of served UEs:
Dropping rate = | {k ∈Kai ∪K′′
i |1(k, xai, zai) = 0} |
|Kai ∪K′′
i |
,
where K′′
i is the set of active UEs at an admission decision
instance i. Fig. 2(b) shows that the proposed ML-based method
completely outperforms the baselines. In fact, the proposed
approach reduces the average UE dropping rate by 15x com-
pared to the baseline with no user admission control. The
proposed method also yields a 7x reduction in UE dropping
rate compared to the baseline with random admission control.
The figure also confirms the near-optimal performance of the
proposed approach since only 1% of the served UEs are
dropped on average.
Fig. 3 shows the average resource utilization versus the
average QoS fulfillment rate, for both the proposed and no
admission control methods. The average resource utilization
is calculated by averaging the ratio of scheduled RBGs to
the total RBGs over the duration of T TTIs, after making an
admission control decision. The QoS fulfillment rate captures
that ratio of the UEs that met their reliability target after taking
an admission decision, to the maximum number of UEs that
could potentially be served and satisfied, i.e.,
QoS ful. rate=
| {k ∈Kai ∪K′′
i |1(k, xai, zai) = 1} |
maxai | {k ∈Kai ∪K′′
i |1(k, xai, zai) = 1} |.
Note that this metric cannot be assessed by the admission
control agent and only used for evaluation purpose since
calculating the denominator term requires an “oracle” that can
observe the rewards for all arms to pick the optimal arm at any
admission control instance. The scatter points near bottom-
right corner in Fig. 3 demonstrate the most efficient perfor-
mance (high QoS fulfillment and low bandwidth utilization)
while the points towards top-left represent poor admission
control decisions. Further, the figure also shows the estimated
distribution (solid lines) of scatter points obtained using Kernel
Density Estimation (KDE) to improve visualization without
adding too many scatter points. In Fig. 3, overlapping scatter
points for the proposed and no admission control schemes
6

0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Training step
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Cumulative regret
Proposed
Random
Fig. 4. Cumulative regret vs. training steps.
are removed from the evaluation, since such points mainly
represent trivial “underloaded” scenarios wherein the optimal
decision is to accept all applicant UEs, and thus, they can’t
contribute much to the performance comparison among the
two methods.
The results in Fig. 3 show that the proposed method
achieves higher QoS satisfaction while consuming less re-
sources, thus, yielding a more efficient admission control
policy. The QoS fulfillment rate for the proposed and baseline
methods are, respectively, 0.91 and 0.76; equivalent to 20%
gain in optimizing per-UE QoS satisfaction. In addition, the
bandwidth utilization for the proposed and baseline methods
are, respectively, 0.89 and 0.75; equivalent to 16% band-
width utilization reduction. Such an efficient QoS-aware UE
admission control achieved by the proposed method will be
imperative to meet high URLLC traffic demands in next-
generation wireless networks where over-provisioning URLLC
slices will no longer be a viable approach.
Finally, Fig. 4 compares the cumulative regret between the
optimized and random bandit policies to demonstrate the effec-
tive training of the proposed neural CB admission controller.
Clearly, the cumulative regret for the random method increases
linearly while the curve for the proposed method is sub-linear.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have developed a novel ML-based ad-
mission control framework in O-RAN, cognizant of strict
QoS requirements for the URLLC traffic. First, we have
formulated a new optimization problem to maximize the
average service reliability at a cell level, while considering
statistical constraints associated with URLLC traffic. Then, we
have solved the problem by proposing a new QoS-aware UE
admission control scheme using techniques from neural CBs.
The proposed solution embodies a system of DNNs, enabling
the agent (xApp) to learn a complex mapping from RAN
features (context) to the nonlinear cell reliability function.
We have proposed an algorithm to train the agent by using
the QoS predictions for each arm and following an epsilon-
greedy exploration to optimize the admission control policy.
We have evaluated the performance of the proposed scheme
using various metrics, including the cell reliability, link drop-
ping rate, QoS fulfillment rate, and resource utilization. Our
comprehensive simulations have demonstrated substantial per-
formance gains for the proposed method across these metrics.
Furthermore, while we have focused on URLLC traffic, the
proposed solution can be extended to other traffic types, such
as guaranteed bit rate (GBR), by modifying the QoS model
and RAN features.
