arXiv:2301.01947v3  [cs.LG]  23 Sep 2023
StitchNet: Composing Neural Networks from
Pre-Trained Fragments
Surat Teerapittayanon
National Nanotechnology Center
Pathum Thani, Thailand

Marcus Comiter
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA

Bradley McDanel
Franklin & Marshall College
Lancaster, PA, USA

H.T. Kung
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA

Abstract—We propose StitchNet, a novel neural network cre-
ation paradigm that stitches together fragments (one or more
consecutive network layers) from multiple pre-trained neural
networks. StitchNet allows the creation of high-performing neural
networks without the large compute and data requirements
needed under traditional model creation processes via backprop-
agation training. We leverage Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA)
as a compatibility measure to efﬁciently guide the selection of
these fragments in composing a network for a given task tailored
to speciﬁc accuracy needs and computing resource constraints.
We then show that these fragments can be stitched together
to create neural networks with accuracy comparable to that
of traditionally trained networks at a fraction of computing
resource and data requirements. Finally, we explore a novel
on-the-ﬂy personalized model creation and inference applica-
tion enabled by this new paradigm. The code is available at
https://github.com/steerapi/stitchnet.
Index Terms—StitchNet, Neural Networks, Deep Learning,
Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA), Reusable Network Compo-
nents
I. INTRODUCTION
AI models have become increasingly more complex to sup-
port additional functionality, multiple modalities, and higher
accuracy. While the increased complexity has improved model
utility and performance, it has imposed signiﬁcant model
training costs. Therefore, training complex models is often in-
feasible for resource-limited environments, such as those at the
cloud edge and in fully or often disconnected environments.
In response to these challenges, this paper proposes a new
paradigm for creating neural networks: rather than training
networks from scratch or retraining existing networks, we cre-
ate neural networks through composition by stitching together
fragments of existing pre-trained neural networks. A fragment
is one or more consecutive layers of a neural network. We
call the resulting neural network composed of one or more
fragments a “StitchNet” (Fig. 1). By signiﬁcantly reducing the
amount of computation and data resources needed to create
neural networks, StitchNet enables an entire new set of ap-
plications, such as the rapid generation of personalized neural
networks at the edge or in fully disconnected environments.
StitchNet’s model creation mechanism is fundamentally
different from today’s predominant backpropagation-based
method for creating neural networks. Given a dataset and
a task as input, the traditional training method uses back-
propagation with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) or other
StitchNets
Fragments
Existing Networks
F0 of N0
F1 of N0
0
F2 of N0
1
F3 of N0
2
F4 of N0
3
F5 of N0
4
F6 of N0
5
F7 of N0
6
F0 of N1
F1 of N1
0
F2 of N1
1
F3 of N1
2
F4 of N1
F0 of N1
F1 of N1
F2 of N1
F3 of N1
F4 of N1
3
F0 of N3
F1 of N3
0
F2 of N3
1
F3 of N3
2
F4 of N3
3
F5 of N3
F0 of N3
F1 of N3
F2 of N3
F3 of N3
F4 of N3
F5 of N3
4
F0 of N3
F1 of N3
0
F1 of N1
1
F2 of N1
2
F3 of N1
3
F4 of N1
4
F0 of N1
F1 of N1
0
F7 of N0
1
F0 of N0
F1 of N0
F2 of N0
F3 of N0
F4 of N0
F5 of N0
F6 of N0
F7 of N0
AlexNet
ResNet
DenseNet
Fig. 1: Overview of the StitchNet approach. Existing networks
(left) are cut into fragments (middle), which are composed into
StitchNets (right) created for a particular task. No retraining
is needed in this process.
optimization algorithms to adjust the weights of the network.
This training process iterates through the full dataset multiple
times, and therefore requires compute resources that scale with
the amount of data and the complexity of the network. Training
large models in this way also requires substantial amounts of
data to mitigate overﬁtting. While successful, this traditional
paradigm for model creation is not without its limitations,
especially as AI moves out of the data center and into highly
resource-constrained and disconnected environments. Creating
complex neural networks without access to large amounts of
data and compute resources is a growing challenge. In the
extreme case (e.g., for very large language models (LLMs) and
computer vision models), only a few companies with access
to unrivaled amounts of data and compute resources are able
to create such models.
StitchNet solves this problem by creating new neural net-
works using fragments of already existing neural networks.
The new approach takes advantage of the growing amount

of neural networks that already exist. StitchNet enables the
efﬁcient reuse of the learned knowledge resident in those pre-
trained networks, which has been distilled from large amounts
of data, rather than having to relearn it over and over again
for new tasks as is done with traditional model creation
paradigms. StitchNet’s ability to reuse existing pre-trained
fragments, rather than recreating from scratch or retraining
for every task, will help accelerate the growth and application
of neural networks for solving more and more complex tasks
in heterogenous environments. For example, StitchNets can
be created on-the-ﬂy to serve as classiﬁers specially tuned for
local conditions and classes of interest in a given environment
or task.
However, compositing these existing fragments into a coher-
ent and high-performing neural network is non-trivial. To reuse
the knowledge of pre-trained neural network fragments, we
need a way to 1) measure the compatibility between any two
fragments, and 2) compose compatible fragments together. In
the past, Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) [1]–[3] has been
used to measure similarity between neural network represen-
tations. We leverage CKA to assess the compatibility of any
two fragments from any neural networks, and compose new
neural networks from fragments of existing pre-trained neural
networks to create high-performing networks customized for
speciﬁc tasks without the costs of traditional model creation
methods. The CKA score is used to reduce the search space
to identify compatible fragments and guide the fragment
selection process.
We present empirical validations on benchmark datasets,
comparing the performance of StitchNet to that of the original
pre-trained neural networks. We demonstrate that StitchNet
achieves comparable or higher accuracy on personalized tasks
compared with off-the-shelf networks and has signiﬁcantly
lower computational and data requirements than training net-
works from scratch or by ﬁne-tuning.
Our contributions are:
• The StitchNet paradigm: a novel neural network creation
method with versatile applications.
• Innovative use of CKA to assess fragment compatibility.
• Technique for seamlessly combining compatible frag-
ments in both linear and convolutional layers.
II. COMPOSING FRAGMENTS
The core mechanism to create StitchNets is to identify
reusable fragments from a pool of existing networks and to
compose them into a coherent neural network model capable
of performing a given task. To this end, we need a way
to determine how compatible any two candidate fragments
are with each other. In previous work, Kornblith, et al. [1]
presented centered kernel alignment (CKA) [2], [3] as a way to
measure the similarity between neural network representations.
Rather than looking at the neural network as a whole, we adopt
and use CKA to as a measure of compatibility between any
two fragments of any neural networks.
In this section, we ﬁrst deﬁne CKA as a way to measure
how compatible any two fragments are with one another
and therefore their ability to be composed. Using CKA, we
then present a technique to stitch different fragments together.
Finally, we describe the algorithm to generate StitchNets.
A. Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA)
We deﬁne X ∈Rp×n as outputs of a fragment FA of model
A and Y ∈Rq×n as inputs of a fragment FB of model B
of the same dataset D, where n is the number of samples
in the dataset, p is the output dimension of FA, and q is
the input dimension of FB. Given a target dataset D, we
deﬁne the compatibility score between any two fragments as
CKA(X, Y) (speciﬁcally linear CKA) of fragment FA and
fragment FB:
∥cov(XT X, YT Y)∥2
F
q
∥cov(XT X, XT X)∥2
F ∥cov(YT Y, YT Y)∥2
F
.
(1)
To reduce memory usage for a large D, CKA can be approx-
imated by averaging over minibatches as presented in [4].
B. Stitching Fragments
Once we have determined compatible fragments based on a
conﬁgurable compatibility threshold, the next step in creating
a StitchNet is to stitch the two fragments together. To do so,
we ﬁnd a projection tensor A that projects the output space
of one fragment to the input space of the other fragment we
are composing. We now describe this.
Without loss of generality, we assume the output and input
tensors are 2D tensors, where the ﬁrst dimension is the sample
dimension. If the tensors are not 2D tensors, we ﬁrst ﬂatten all
other dimensions with the exception of the sample dimension.
We use Einstein summation notation, where i represents
the sample dimension, j the output dimension of the incoming
fragment, and k the input dimension of the outgoing fragment.
Given an output tensor Xij of the incoming fragment and an
input tensor Yik of the outgoing fragment, we seek to ﬁnd A
such that Yik = Akj Xij . We can then solve for A using the
Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse:
Akj = Yik XT
ij(Xij XT
ij).−1
(2)
Once A is found, we fuse A with the weight of the ﬁrst
layer of the outgoing fragment. For linear layers, we simply
do the following: W′
lk = Wlj Akj, where l is the dimension
of the output feature of the outgoing layer.
For convolutional layers, we ﬁrst upsample or downsample
the spatial dimension to match each other, and then adjust
the weight along the input channel dimension as follows:
W′
okmn
=
WojmnAkj, where o is the output channel
dimension, j is the original input channel dimension, k is the
new input channel dimension, and m and n are the spatial
dimensions.
For stitching a convolutional layer with an output tensor
X and a linear layer with an input tensor Y, we ﬁrst apply
adaptive average pooling so that the spatial dimension is 1x1
and ﬂatten X into a 2D tensor. Then, we follow Eq. 2 to ﬁnd
A and fuse it with the W of the linear layer.

C. StitchNet Generation
We now describe the main algorithm for creating StitchNet
networks (“StitchNet” for short), shown in Algorithm 1. A
StitchNet network is created by joining a set of pre-trained
network fragments drawn from a pool P = {Fijk}. We use
the notation Fijk to denote a fragment of a neural network i
from layer j to layer k, and the notation Nik to denote the
computation performed by the portion of the neural network
from which the fragment was taken up to layer k. Other than
the fragment pool P and creation process hyperparameters
(K, T, L), the only other input to the StitchNet creation process
is a dataset D for which the StitchNet will be optimized.
The dataset D can be chosen to include relevant samples and
classes of interest for the speciﬁc task at hand, as illustrated
in Sec. III-B, III-F, and III-G.
Algorithm 1 StitchNet(P, D, K, T , L, R, Q, s)
1: Input: fragment pool P = {Fijk}, network i in P
up to layer k Nik, fragment starting with layer j and
ending in layer k of network i Fijk, target dataset D with
M samples, span K, threshold T , maximum number of
fragments L, result set of StitchNets and their associated
scores R, current StitchNet Q, current score s
2: Output: result set of StitchNets and their associated
scores R
3: if Q is empty then
4:
{Fijk} = select starting fragments in P
5:
for Fijk in {Fijk} do
6:
StitchNet(P, D, K, T , L, R, Fijk, 1)
7: if the number of fragments in Q ≥L then
8:
return R
9: {Fijk} = select K middle or terminating fragments in P
10: for Fijk in {Fijk} do
11:
X = Q(D); Y = Nik(D)
12:
sn = s× CKA(X, Y) (see section II-A)
13:
if sn > T then
14:
Q = Stitch(Q, Fijk, X, Y) (see section II-B)
15:
if Fijk is a terminating fragment then
16:
R = R ∪{Q, sn}
17:
else
18:
StitchNet(P, D, K, T , L, R, Q, sn)
19: return R
We now describe the creation of the pool of network
fragments P derived from a set of pre-trained off-the-shelf
networks. These pre-trained networks are divided into one of
three types of fragments: starting fragments for which the
input is the original network input, terminating fragments for
which the output is the original network output, and middle
fragments that are neither starting nor terminating fragments.
The ﬁrst step in the StitchNet creation process is to choose
the set of starting fragments. This could include all starting
fragments in P, or a subset based on certain criteria, e.g., the
smallest, biggest or closest starting fragment.
Once a set of starting fragments is selected, a StitchNet is
built on top of each starting fragment that has a current starting
score of 1. First, a set of K candidate fragments are selected
from P. These fragments can be selected based on CKA scores
(i.e., K fragments with the highest CKA scores), the number
of parameters of the fragments (i.e., K fragments with the least
number of parameters in P), the closest fragments (i.e., K
fragments with the least latency in P in a distributed setting),
or other selection methods.
For each of the candidate fragments, we then compute two
intermediate neural network computations in order to derive
the compatibility score for further stitching. First, we pass the
dataset D through the candidate StitchNet in its current form,
resulting in the value X. Second, we pass the same dataset D
through the neural network from which the candidate fragment
Fijk was selected, resulting in the value Y = Nik(D).
After running these computations, we compute CKA(X, Y)
as in Sec. II-A. We then multiply the CKA with the current
score s to obtain the new current score sn. If sn is still greater
than a set threshold T , the candidate fragment is selected and
the process continues recursively. Otherwise, the candidate
fragment is rejected. The threshold can be set to balance
the amount of exploration allowed per available compute
resources.
This process continues until a terminating fragment is
selected, the maximum number of fragments L is reached, or
all recursive paths are exhausted. At this point, the completed
StitchNets and their associated scores R are returned for user
selection.
III. RESULTS
We now demonstrate that StitchNets can perform compara-
bly with traditionally trained networks but with signiﬁcantly
reduced computational and data requirements at both inference
and creation time. Through these characteristics, StitchNet
enables the immediate on-the-ﬂy creation of neural networks
for personalized tasks without traditional training.
A. Fragment pool
To form the fragment pool P, we take ﬁve off-the-shelf
networks pre-trained on the ImageNet-1K dataset [5] from
Torchvision [6]: alexnet, densenet121, mobilenet v3 small,
resnet50 and vgg16 with IMAGENET1K V1 weights.1
These pre-trained networks are cut into fragments at each
convolution and linear layer that has a single input. As shown
in Fig. 2, there are 8 fragments for alexnet, 5 fragments for
densenet121, 13 fragments for mobilenet v3 small, 6 frag-
ments for resnet50 and 16 fragments for vgg16. This results in
the creation of a fragment pool P of 48 fragments consisting of
5 starting fragments, 38 middle fragments, and 5 terminating
fragments. We use this fragment pool in all experiments.
B. Dataset
The dataset used to evaluate StitchNet in the ﬁrst batch of
experiments is the “Dogs vs. Cats” dataset [7]. This dataset
includes 25,000 training images of dogs and cats, and we
1In practice, many more or specialized pre-trained networks can be included
in the pool, including smaller and larger networks.

alexnet
densenet121
mobilenet
resnet50
vgg16
Fig. 2: Five pre-trained networks are fragmented into a frag-
ment pool P. These fragments will be stitched together to
form StitchNets.
use an 80:20 train:test split. We map ImageNet-1K class
labels into cat and dog labels (class IDs 281-285 and 151-
250, respectively). To form the target dataset D for use in
the stitching process of Algorithm 1, we randomly select M
samples from the training set as the target dataset D. We
choose this task as it is characteristic of the type of task where
StitchNet would be used: a user needs a custom classiﬁer for
a particular task and desired set of classes, but any general
neural network problem formulation can also be used.
C. StitchNet Generation
We generate StitchNets with Algorithm 1 using the fragment
pool and the dataset described in Sec. III-A and III-B. We set
K = 2, T = 0.5 and L = 16. The number of samples M in
D used for the stitching process is 32.
Given these hyperparameters, a total of 89 StitchNets are
generated. We evaluate them on the test set of completely
unseen test samples. Summary statistics for the generated
StitchNets are shown in Fig. 3, including accuracy (3a),
number of fragments per StitchNet (3b), CKA score (3c), and
number of parameters per StitchNet (3d).
0.67
to
0.73
0.73
to
0.78
0.78
to
0.84
0.84
to
0.90
0.90
to
0.95
9
19
27
25
9
(a) accuracy
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
1
2
6
6
3
3
3
4
8
8
11
10
8
16
(b) # fragments
0.50
to
0.60
0.60
to
0.70
0.70
to
0.80
0.80
to
0.90
0.90
to
1.00
29
28
14
11
7
(c) CKA score
1M
to
21M
21M
to
42M
42M
to
62M
62M
to
83M
83M
to
104M
104M
to
124M
124M
to
145M
66
5
4
5
2
3
4
(d) # parameters
Fig. 3: Histogram of (a) accuracy, (b) # fragments, (c) CKA
score, (d) # parameters in the generated batch of StitchNets.
D. Reduction in Inference Computation
We now demonstrate how StitchNet signiﬁcantly reduces
inference-time computational requirements over traditional
neural network training paradigms by studying StitchNet ac-
curacy as a function of parameters.
Fig. 4 shows the resulting accuracy of the generated Stitch-
Nets as a function of the overall CKA score (top) and
Multiply-Accumulate Operations (MACs) (middle) for each
generated StitchNet and the number of parameters (propor-
tional to marker size) as a proxy for inference-time compu-
tation cost. We ﬁnd a number of StitchNets outperform the
pre-trained network while realizing signiﬁcant computational
savings. For example, StitchNet27 (denoted by an orange star)
achieves an accuracy of 0.86 with 3.6M parameters compared
with the 0.70 accuracy of the pre-trained alexnet with 61.1M
parameters. Therefore, StitchNet achieves a 16-point absolute
increase in accuracy with a 94.1% reduction in number of
parameters for the given task when compared with those of
the pre-trained alexnet. Similar trends hold in comparison of
StitchNets with the other pre-trained models. Fig. 5 shows
the composition of some of these high-performing StitchNets,
demonstrating the diversity in fragment use, ordering, and
architectures.
These results crystallize one of the core beneﬁts of Stitch-
Net: without signiﬁcant data and computation requirements
of traditional training procedures, the method can discover
networks that are personalized for the task, outperform the
original pre-trained networks, and do so while signiﬁcantly
reducing inference-time compute requirements. This is due to
the fact that these pre-trained networks are not trained to focus
on these two speciﬁc classes, while our StitchNets are stitched
together speciﬁcally for the task. In the next section, we will

0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Overall CKA score
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
Accuracy
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
MACs
1e10
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
Accuracy
     name              |acc |cka |  macs|params
best_stitchnet    |0.95|0.91| 2841M|  8.0M
stitchnet27       |0.86|0.94|   61M|  3.6M
resnet50          |0.85|0.99| 4100M| 25.5M
densenet121       |0.85|1.00| 2841M|  8.0M
vgg16             |0.81|0.85|15481M|138.4M
mobilenet_v3_small|0.78|1.00|   60M|  2.5M
smallest_stitchnet|0.73|0.53|   45M|  0.6M
alexnet           |0.70|0.89|  715M| 61.1M
Fig. 4: Accuracy vs Overall CKA score (top) and MACs
(middle) on “Cat vs. Dogs.” macs is the number of Multiply-
Accumulate Operations (MACs), acc is the accuracy and cka
is the overall CKA score. The gray dots are the StitchNets
generated. The best StitchNet (acc=0.95) has 10-point higher
accuracy than the best pre-trained model(s) (densenet121 and
resnet50 with acc=0.85).
see that very little data is required for the stitching process.
We also validate the effectiveness of using CKA to guide
the stitching procedure. StitchNets with high CKA scores
(especially above 0.9) also have high accuracy. Therefore CKA
can be a proxy to measure compatibility between connecting
fragments.2 But while high CKA scores imply high accuracy,
having high accuracy does not necessarily imply equally high
CKA scores. Regardless, CKA is still useful as a heuristic
because it removes highly incompatible choices (i.e., those
with very low CKA scores), therefore saving computation time
in the stitching process. These savings are substantial as there
are more candidates with low CKAs than high CKAs.
E. Reduction in Network Creation Computation
We now demonstrate that StitchNet can be created without
signiﬁcant data and computation requirements. Speciﬁcally,
2Note that there exist high accuracy StitchNets with low overall CKA
scores. This is because neural networks are highly redundant and invariant
to small changes, making them able to tolerate a certain amount of errors
while still providing quality predictions (see Sec. IV-A).
StitchNet21
acc=0.95
cka=0.91
8.04M
StitchNet22
acc=0.89
cka=0.84
5.33M
StitchNet5
acc=0.82
cka=0.81
61.10M
StitchNet32
acc=0.79
cka=0.88
1.99M
StitchNet88
acc=0.78
cka=0.77
8.15M
Fig. 5: Examples of generated StitchNets.
we compare StitchNet21 (generated in Fig. 5 on the target
dataset of M = 32 samples) with ﬁne-tuning the same ﬁve off-
the-shelf networks (retraining them using the training portion
of dataset of Sec. III-B). For ﬁne-tuning, we replace and train
only the last layer of the pre-trained network using SGD
with batch size 32, learning rate 0.001 and momentum 0.9.
The results shown are averaged over 10 runs. For ease of
comparison, we normalize the computation cost in terms of
the number of samples processed through a neural network.
In practice, ﬁne-tuning requires backpropagation, which incurs
additional computation per sample than StitchNet generation.
Fig. 6 compares the accuracy of StitchNet21 (denoted by
the red star) with the traditionally ﬁne-tuned networks as a
function of the number of training samples processed. For
a given accuracy target, StitchNet processes a substantially
smaller number of data samples than traditionally ﬁne-tuned
networks. Speciﬁcally, to reach an accuracy of 0.95, ﬁne-
tuning of alexnet, densenet121, and mobilenet v3 small re-
quires processing more than 320 samples, while StitchNet
requires only 32 samples used to stitch the fragments together
(realizing over a 90% reduction).
Therefore, only a small amount of training samples and
computation are required for StitchNet to achieve comparable

50
100
150
200
250
300
The number of training samples processed
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
StitchNet21

alexnet

densenet121

mobilenet_v3_small

resnet50

vgg16

Fig. 6: Accuracy vs the number of training samples processed
(i.e., data and computation required). StitchNet requires only
a fraction of the computation of traditional training methods
to achieve comparable performance.
accuracy. This demonstrates that StitchNet effectively reuses
the information already captured in the fragments to bootstrap
network creation. This allows for personalization of tasks and
on-the-ﬂy training without substantial data requirements.
F. StitchNet on New Tasks
We now show that the StitchNet approach of leveraging
existing pre-trained network fragments is highly general. It
achieves high performance on new speciﬁc tasks and domains
not explicitly used in training the pre-trained network frag-
ments. To demonstrate this, we use an entirely different dataset
for evaluation that shares no overlap with the ImageNet-
1K dataset used to train the pre-trained network fragments.
For this experiment, we use the “Beans” dataset [8], which
includes images of diseased and healthy beans leaves. This
dataset is divided into three categories: angular leaf spot,
bean rust, and healthy. We use 32 samples from the validation
split of the dataset to generate StitchNets. Then, we use all
the validation split of 133 samples to train a KNN classiﬁer
that uses the ﬁnal 1,000-dimensional vectors obtained from the
networks as feature inputs. To evaluate network accuracy, we
use the 128-sample test split. The results are shown in Fig. 7.
We see that the top-performing StitchNet with an accuracy
(acc) of 0.84 and 3296M MACs outperforms the original pre-
trained model (vgg16) in both accuracy and efﬁciency, 0.79
and 15481M MACs respectively. This shows again that with
StitchNet, we can generate the most efﬁcient and smallest
neural network tailor-made for this speciﬁc task, eliminating
the need for retraining the neural networks for different tasks.
G. On-the-ﬂy Network Creation and Inference
We now delve into a novel set of applications and scenarios
that are made possible by StitchNet: on-the-ﬂy neural network
creation and inference. In this scenario, we use a batch of
unlabeled images that we wish to use for a particular task
(e.g., classiﬁcation or detection) as our target dataset in the
generation of StitchNets. With only a minor modiﬁcation to
the StitchNet algorithm to additionally return task results, the
StitchNet generation process can return the inference outputs
along with the generated StitchNets.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
MACs
1e10
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Accuracy
     name              |acc |cka |  macs|params
best_stitchnet    |0.84|0.59| 3296M| 16.8M
stitchnet65       |0.82|0.76|   59M|  2.5M
vgg16             |0.79|0.75|15481M|138.4M
densenet121       |0.77|1.00| 2841M|  8.0M
resnet50          |0.77|0.97| 4100M| 25.5M
alexnet           |0.74|0.83|  715M| 61.1M
mobilenet_v3_small|0.71|1.00|   60M|  2.5M
smallest_stitchnet|0.64|0.55|   32M|  0.3M
Fig. 7: Accuracy vs MACs on “Beans.” The best StitchNet
(acc=0.84) with only 16.8M parameters and 3296M MACs
performs better than the best pre-trained model(s) (vgg16 with
acc=0.79 and 15481M MACs).
Let us illustrate how this could be applied in practice.
Imagine a world where fragments of pre-trained neural net-
works for different tasks are indexed and distributed on the
Internet. Compatible fragments can be found and organized
into a pool from which candidate fragments can be selected
and quickly composed to form a new StitchNet for a certain
task. Now, imagine that we want to create a neural network
for classifying local food images with only a limited number
of labeled images.
Without StitchNet, we either need to train a network from
scratch (which may fail due to our limited amount of training
data), or ﬁnd an existing pre-trained neural network, label the
dataset, and ﬁnetune the network. If the existing pre-trained
network is too big or too slow for our use, we will then have
to train a new one from scratch. But, with limited amount of
data, this task seems impossible.
With StitchNet, we can instead generate a set of candidate
StitchNets on-the-ﬂy with the small batch of unlabeled local
food images. These StitchNets are created from the pool of
existing neural network fragments that have been indexed and
distributed over the Internet. The proper fragments can be
identiﬁed with a given search criteria (e.g., the depth of the
network should be less than 5 for computational efﬁciency
reasons, etc.). With only the relatively limited computation
needed to ﬁnd stitches rather than the normal high-cost net-
work training methods, we can generate various StitchNets
capable of detecting and classifying local food images at the
desired computation requirements.
To demonstrate this new paradigm, we use the “Food101”
dataset [9] and method described in Sec. III-F to demonstrate
the feasibility of this use case. In this experiment, we explore
5 different classiﬁcation tasks. Each task consists of 3 classes

randomly picked out of 101 classes from the dataset. The
classes for each task are listed in the x-axis of Fig. 8. Each
task has around 300 samples for training and 30 samples for
testing. 32 samples of the training set are used to generate
StitchNets. As shown in Fig. 8, in all tasks top-performing
StitchNets surpass all original pre-trained networks. This un-
derscores StitchNet’s efﬁcacy in generating efﬁcient and high-
performing networks instantly in response to new tasks.
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
best_stitchnet
alexnet
densenet121
mobilenet_v3_small
resnet50
vgg16
beef_tartare
ravioli
tuna_tartare
caesar_salad
ceviche
tuna_tartare
bibimbap
chicken_curry
panna_cotta
club_sandwich
escargots
sushi
apple_pie
cannoli
croque_madame
T
ask
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
MACs
1e10
Fig. 8: Accuracy and MACs as a function of various tasks
derived from the “Food101” dataset.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Why does StitchNet work?
We ﬁrst discuss why we can reuse existing fragments of net-
works to create new neural networks without retraining. One
core reason is that neural networks tend to learn fundamental
and universal features. Studies [1], [10]–[15] have shown that
neural networks learn fundamental features, such as edges for
different tasks. Since these learned features are fundamental,
they should be reusable rather than relearned. The challenge,
however, is that although these features may be universal,
they may not be compatible with one another “out of the
box.” Therefore, we require the stitching process introduced
in Sec. II-B to project the fragments into a compatible space.
Beyond the reuse of universal features and compatibility
transformations, StitchNet beneﬁts from the inherent redun-
dancy in networks. This redundancy, arising from nonlinear
activations and redundant features, allows networks to tolerate
certain levels of error. Consequently, individual fragments do
not need to be perfectly compatible to form a network that
operates effectively as a whole.
B. Complexity Comparison
We now compare the complexity of the traditional training
process using backpropagation with the StitchNet generation
process. Traditional training complexity is O(ndp), where n
is the number of parameters in the network, p is the number
of epochs used to train, and d is the size of the dataset.
The complexity of StitchNet generation is O(nqm) +
O(KL) + O(nq). The ﬁrst term O(nqm) is the evaluation
cost of the target dataset of size q on m networks in the
pool, where q ≪d and n is the number of parameters in the
network (assuming that the networks have the same number
of parameters). The second term KL is the search cost, where
K is the span value we search at each level and L is the
maximum depth of search. Using a high threshold cutoff T on
the overall CKA score keeps search cost KL small. The third
term O(nq) is the cost of the stitching (See Sec. II-B). There-
fore, for a reasonable setting of hyperparameters (K, T, L) in
Algorithm 1, StitchNet realizes substantial computation gains
over traditional training methods since q ≪d and m ≪p.
C. Limitations
While a large pool of network fragments can lead to
higher applicability and quality of the generated StitchNets,
it can also result in high search costs. Indexing large quanti-
ties of networks to form the fragment pool will necessitate
the development of novel search methods. We see this as
analogous to indexing web pages on the World Wide Web,
suggesting a “Google for Fragments.” Much like the web
search needed to index written content, large amounts of neural
network “content” need to be indexed for their value to be
unlocked. Early indexing efforts can tag fragments based on
dataset characteristics, computational characteristics, etc. More
advanced efforts can look at inward and outward connections
of each fragment to determine its rank in results. Once a
narrowed set of fragments is coarsely identiﬁed, the efﬁcient
procedure introduced in this paper can generate the StitchNets.
Future work will address indexing and distribution that will
enable StitchNet to operate at scale.
V. RELATED WORK
Current methods to adapt existing networks to target tasks
are transfer learning, ﬁne-tuning [16], distillation [17] and
neural architecture search (NAS) [18]. A related concept is
unsupervised domain adaptation [19]–[25], where an existing
network is modiﬁed using an unlabeled target dataset. Stitch-
Net works similarly by stitching fragments using an unlabeled
target dataset to create a neural network for the target task.
What distinguishes StitchNet from most of the previous works
is that it eliminates the need for retraining the network.
StitchNet takes advantage of the assumption that fragments
have shareable representations. This assumption helps explain
why fragments can be stitched together into a coherent high-
performing network: dissimilar yet complementary fragments
once projected into a similar space are compatible with one
another. Several existing works including [1], [10]–[15], [26]
have studied this shareable representation assumption.

Gygli, et al. [27] reuse network components by training net-
works to produce compatible features by adding regularization
during training to make networks compatible. StitchNet, how-
ever, focuses on creating neural networks without retraining
the network. It is therefore more generally applicable. Sev-
eral works [14], [28]–[31] combine network components by
adding a stitching layer and training the recombined network
with supervised loss for several epochs. StitchNet differs by
approaching the topic through an applied lens focusing on
minimizing training costs by adding a parameter-less stitching
mechanism, and therefore does not require any retraining.
Instead, weights are adapted to be compatible (See Sec. II-B).
VI. CONCLUSION
StitchNet is a new paradigm that can take advantage of a
growing global library of neural networks to fundamentally
change the way neural networks are created. By reusing
fragments of these networks to efﬁciently compose new neural
networks for a given task, StitchNet addresses two of the most
fundamental issues that limit the creation and use of neural
networks: large data and computation requirements.
StitchNet does this by leveraging CKA as a compatibil-
ity measure that guides the selection of network fragments,
tailored to speciﬁc accuracy needs and computing resource
constraints. Our work has shown that neural networks can
be efﬁciently created from compatible network fragments of
different models at a fraction of computing resources and data
requirements while achieving comparable accuracy. We also
explore a novel on-the-ﬂy efﬁcient neural network creation
and inference application unlocked by StitchNet. Future work
will extend StitchNet to LLMs and additional applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported in part by the Air Force
Research Laboratory under contract number FA8750-22-1-
0500 and in part by a generous gift to the Center for Research
on Computation and Society at Harvard University in support
of research on applied cryptography and society.
