NEUNETS: AN AUTOMATED SYNTHESIS ENGINE FOR NEURAL NETWORK DESIGN
Atin Sood,⋆,1 Benjamin Elder,⋆,2 Benjamin Herta,†,4 Chao Xue,†,6 Costas Bekas,†,3
A. Cristiano I. Malossi,†,3 Debashish Saha,†,4 Florian Scheidegger,†,3 Ganesh Venkataraman,†,4
Gegi Thomas,†,4 Giovanni Mariani,†,3 Hendrik Strobelt,†,2 Horst Samulowitz,†,4
Martin Wistuba,†,5 Matteo Manica,†,3 Mihir Choudhury,†,4 Rong Yan,†,6 Roxana Istrate,†,3
Ruchir Puri,⋆,4 Tejaswini Pedapati †,4
,
⋆IBM Watson AI Platform and
†IBM Research AI
1New York, NY, USA
2 Cambridge, MA, USA
3R¨uschlikon, Zurich, Switzerland
4Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
5Dublin, Ireland
6Beijing, China
ABSTRACT
Application of neural networks to a vast variety of practical applica-
tions is transforming the way AI is applied in practice. Pre-trained
neural network models available through APIs or capability to cus-
tom train pre-built neural network architectures with customer data
has made the consumption of AI by developers much simpler and
resulted in broad adoption of these complex AI models. While pre-
built network models exist for certain scenarios, to try and meet
the constraints that are unique to each application, AI teams need
to think about developing custom neural network architectures that
can meet the tradeoff between accuracy and memory footprint to
achieve the tight constraints of their unique use-cases. However,
only a small proportion of data science teams have the skills and
experience needed to create a neural network from scratch, and the
demand far exceeds the supply. In this paper, we present NeuNetS
: An automated Neural Network Synthesis engine for custom neu-
ral network design that is available as part of IBM’s AI OpenScale’s
product. NeuNetS is available for both Text and Image domains and
can build neural networks for speciﬁc tasks in a fraction of the time
it takes today with human effort, and with accuracy similar to that of
human-designed AI models.
Index Terms— Neural Network Design, Automation, Neural
Network Architectural Search
1
Introduction
AI is changing the way businesses work. However, its important to
remember that every business has unique challenges to solve, and the
range of use-cases for AI is constantly expanding. While pre-built AI
models exist for certain scenarios, to try and meet the constraints that
are unique to each application, AI teams will need to think about de-
veloping custom AI models of their own. Artiﬁcial neural networks
are arguably the most powerful tool currently available to data sci-
entists and businesses. However, only a small proportion of data
scientists have the skills and experience needed to create a neural
network from scratch, and the demand far exceeds the supply. As
a result, getting a new neural network that is architecturally custom
designed to meet the needs of that application, even to the proof-of-
concept stage, requires a level of investment that most enterprises
struggle to afford. Automation technologies that bridge this skills
gap by automatically designing the architecture of neural networks
for a given data are increasingly gaining importance. In this paper,
we present NeuNetS : A Neural Network Synthesis engine for neu-
ral network design that is available as part of IBM’s AI OpenScale’s
product. NeuNetS automatically conﬁgures itself to the needs of the
user and the use case and helps reduce the complexity and skills re-
quired to build AI models, making data science teams more produc-
tive and enabling them to scale AI across their workﬂows. Over-
all, NeuNetS has two main stages: Coarse-grained synthesis and
Fine-grained synthesis. Coarse-grained synthesis automatically op-
timizes and determines the overall architecture of the network: How
many layers there should be, how they are connected, different ar-
chitectural features like convolution layers and so on. The unique
and novel step of ﬁne-grained synthesis enables NeuNetS to take a
deeper dive into each layer and optimizes the individual neurons and
connectionfor example, what kind of convolution ﬁlter should be ap-
plied, and which neurons and edges should be optimized. One of
the critical breakthroughs that have enabled this capability is a very
high-ﬁdelity approach to performance estimation, which allows us
to bypass real-time training and analysis and design neural networks
automatically in a matter of hourscompared to the weeks or months
that it might take a data scientist to train and optimize the AI model.
NeuNetS is available for both Text and Image domains and can build
neural networks for speciﬁc tasks in a fraction of the time it takes to-
day, and with accuracy similar to that of human-designed AI models.
The data science teams can then further ﬁne tune the model, leading
to greater productivity and cost-efﬁciency. NeuNetS is a novel tool
for augmenting human expertise with powerful, AI-driven optimiza-
tion capabilities.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst
provide the underlying ﬂexible architecture of NeuNetS in Sec. 3.
Next, in Sec. 4.1, we give details behind two of the coarse grained
neural architecture search engines that are key part of NeuNetS. In
Sec. 4.2, we describe a unique set of ﬁne-grained transformation to
further optimize the Neural Network designs. Finally, in Sec. 5, we
provide empirical results on several standard and real-world datasets.
2
Related Work
Evolutionary algorithms and reinforcement learning are currently
the two state-of-the-art techniques used by neural network architec-
tures search algorithms. With Neural Architecture Search [1], Zoph
et al. demonstrated in an experiment over 28 days and with 800
arXiv:1901.06261v1  [cs.LG]  17 Jan 2019

GPUs that neural network architectures with performances close to
state-of-the-art architectures can be found. In parallel or inspired by
this work, others proposed to use reinforcement learning to detect se-
quential architectures [2], reduce the search space to repeating cells
[3, 4] or apply function-preserving actions to accelerate the search
[5].
Neuro-evolution dates back three decades. In the beginning it
focused only on evolving weights [6] but it turned out to be effective
to evolve the architecture as well [7]. Neuro-evolutionary algorithms
gained new momentum due to the work by Real et al. [8]. In an ex-
traordinary experiment that used 250 GPUs for almost 11 days, they
showed that architectures can be found which provide similar good
results as human-crafted image classiﬁcation network architectures.
Very recently, the idea of learning cells instead of the full network
has also been adopted for evolutionary algorithms [9]. Miikkulainen
et al. even propose to coevolve a set of cells and their wiring [10].
Other methods that try to optimize neural network architectures
or their hyperparameters are based on model-based optimization [11,
12, 13, 14] and Monte-Carlo Tree Search [15, 16, 17].
Various techniques exist which try to shorten the training time.
One idea is based on the idea of terminating unpromising training
runs early. The partially observed learning curve is used directly to
decide to terminate a run early [18] or ﬁrst extrapolated and then
used [19, 20, 21]. Other methods are able to sample different ar-
chitectures and then predict its likely performance. Peephole [22]
predicts a network accuracy by only analyzing the network struc-
ture, however it works only on a ﬁxed dataset test case. SMASH
uses a hypernetwork to predict weights for an architecture without
training and uses its validation performance as a proxy for its perfor-
mance after training [23]. Others reduce the search time by sharing
or reusing model weights [5, 24, 25, 26].
3
NeuNetS Architecture
3.1
Overview
The lifecycle of a NeuNetS project consists of a series of states or
stages, as detailed in Fig. (1). During this lifecycle, the synthesis
states are executed multiple times to explore/evolve, train, and evalu-
ate different networks. Once stopping conditions, whether budgetary
or algorithmic, are reached, the synthesis loop ends and ﬁnal results
are extracted to the user’s storage instance.
The architectural implementation of NeuNetS consists of three
main components: the service component, the core engine compo-
nent, and the synthesizer component. The relations between these
components and the required external services is illustrated in Fig.
(2). The service component includes the NeuNetS APIs and han-
dles all incoming requests to the NeuNetS project. The core en-
gine component maintains the state of the project and other relevant
data. In each synthesis cycle, it obtains new architecture conﬁgura-
tions from the synthesizer component and submits them to Watson
Machine Learning [27] for training. When the stopping conditions
are reached, it stores the ﬁnal models in the user’s cloud storage
instance. The synthesizer component is a pluggable register of al-
gorithms which use the state information passed from the engine to
produce new architecture conﬁgurations. The rest of this section de-
scribes the functionality of these components in more detail.
Figure 1: Execution Pipeline Operational States
Figure 2: NeuNetS Component Architecture

Figure 3: NeuNetS visual interface to manually pick a best model.
Left: list of models in training and trained models with measures of
performance and architecture diagram. Right: Details to compare
selected models in depth.
3.2
Service Component
The NeuNetS service component receives and manages all API re-
quests and responses. These include initialization of a NeuNetS op-
eration, obtaining the ongoing status, providing metrics, and prema-
turely stopping an operation. An incoming request to initialize and
start an operation results in a preliminary validation of the request
parameters. The service component performs a series of internal
calculations to determine optimal operation parameters with which
to initialize the NeuNetS synthesis. Once these preliminary checks
are passed, the service component calls the core engine to initialize
a synthesis pipeline.
One of the unique attributes of NeuNetS (not available in the
beta feature) is an API providing advanced visualization techniques
for synthesized models. As illustrated in Fig. (3), these tools allow
users to interactively compare various metrics of the models that they
train with NeuNetS.
3.3
Core Engine Component
The NeuNetS core engine component is responsible for the overall
lifecycle management of a NeuNetS operation. When it receives
a request from the services component, it initializes a synthesis
pipeline. The engine then calls the synthesizer component to ob-
tain an initial set of architecture conﬁgurations. It processes these
conﬁgurations and submits them to the Watson Machine Learning
Service to be trained.
This requires that the core engine deﬁne
and compute all required resources (GPU/CPU, memory) for the
training. Once the conﬁguration has been trained for the requested
amount time, the engine stores these intermediate conﬁgurations in
an internal persistent storage instance. These conﬁgurations, along
with their performance metrics from training, are then provided to
the synthesizer component, which uses this information to produce
a new set of conﬁgurations. This loop is performed multiple times
to iteratively improve the network performance. At each step the
engine checks the validity of the results from the last step, handles
any error conditions, places relevant data into the persistent storage,
and updates the state of the pipeline.
This process terminates either when the engine determines that
speciﬁc budgetary objectives have been achieved, or the synthesis
component receives a conﬁguration whose performance meets its al-
gorithmic requirements. A ﬁnal completion operation releases all
pipeline resources and facilitates the transfer of the ﬁnal synthesized
neural network model to a destination bucket inside of a valid IBM
Cloud Object Storage [28] service instance.
The communication with persistent storage is a key operational
aspect of the core engine. This decouples the overall state of the
pipeline from the components and services performing the synthesis.
This decoupling enables operational recovery in the event of service
component failure, as new instances of the service component can
immediately resume managing the lifecycle of the active pipeline,
based on the stored pipeline state data.
3.4
Synthesizer Component
The NeuNetS synthesizer component provides a pluggable frame-
work for multiple distinct model synthesis algorithms, each of which
get registered with the NeuNetS core engine component. Each algo-
rithm implements a common base interface that reﬂects the required
interaction between itself and the core engine. An initialization con-
tract in the interface provides the algorithm with overall synthesis
parameters speciﬁc to a provided dataset, as well as runtime param-
eters related to an executing pipelines environmental budgetary con-
siderations. The interface also deﬁnes the contracts for three impor-
tant operations that govern a NeuNetS pipeline operation. The ﬁrst
operation encompasses the algorithm providing a conﬁguration to
the NeuNetS core engine that represents one or more data-inspired
architectures of a deep layer neural network. The second operation
is centered on providing the algorithm with all training results, along
with any associated artifacts of consequence. The third operation is
a validation operation, whereby the NeuNetS core engine queries the
algorithm for an overall assessment of the pipeline progress based on
the training results and additional state available to the algorithm.
4
Neural Network Synthesis Methods
4.1
Coarse grained synthesis
NeuNetS features three large scale architecture search algorithms:
NCEvolve [26], TAPAS [29], and Hyperband++. These algorithms
make a step forward with respect to the most advanced works in the
literature, addressing fundamental problems such as dataset general-
ity and performance scalability.
NeuNetS algorithms are designed to synthesize new models in
a short and reasonable time, without using transfer-learning or pre-
trained models. This allows us to explore a wide space of network
architecture conﬁgurations, and ﬁne-tune the model for the speciﬁc
dataset provided by the user.
Being based on multiple optimization algorithms, NeuNetS can
accommodate a wider range of model synthesis scenarios. In fu-
ture releases, the user will not only be able to update data, but also
to decide how much time and how many resources to allocate for
the model synthesis, as well as optionally the maximum size of the
model, and the target deployment platform. Based on these con-
straints, NeuNetS will select the best optimization strategy to serve
back to the users the right models for their needs.
The portfolio of algorithms will be continuously extended in-
cluding top works from the public community, as well as further
advanced developments from IBM Research.
In the following paragraphs, we brieﬂy recall the main technical
features of our current portfolio of optimization algorithms.
4.1.1
NCEvolve
NCEvolve is a novel neuro-evolutionary technique to search for neu-
ral architectures without human interference. It assumes that a neural

network architecture is a sequence of neuro-cells and keeps mutat-
ing them using function-preserving operations. This assumption has
several advantages. First, it reduces the search space complexity.
Second, these cells are possibly transferable and can be used in or-
der to arbitrarily extend the complexity of the network. Mutations
based on function-preserving operations guarantee better parameter
initialization than random initialization such that less training time
is required per network architecture.
Chen et al. [30] proposed a family of function-preserving net-
work manipulations in order to transfer knowledge from one network
to another. Suppose a teacher network is represented by a function
f

x | θ(f)
where x is the input of the network and θ(f) are its
parameters. Then an operation changing the network f to a student
network g is called function-preserving if and only if the output for
any given model remains unchanged:
∀x : f

x | θ(f)
= g

x | θ(g)
.
(1)
Note that typically the number of parameters of f and g are differ-
ent. We will use this approach in order to initialize our mutated net-
work architectures. Then, the network is trained for some additional
epochs with gradient-based optimization techniques. Using this ini-
tialization, the network requires only few epochs before it provides
decent predictions. We brieﬂy explain the proposed manipulations
and our novel contributions to it. Please note that a fully connected
layer is a special case of a convolutional layer. For a more detailed
description, we refer to [26].
Convolutions in Deep Learning
Convolutional layers are
a common layer type used in neural networks for visual tasks.
We denote the convolution operation between the layer input
X ∈Rw×h×i with a layer with parameters W ∈Rk1×k2×i×o
by X ∗W. Here, i is the number of input channels, w × h the
input dimension, k1 × k2 the kernel size and o the number of output
feature maps. Depthwise separable convolutions, or for short just
separable convolutions, are a special kind of convolution factored
into two operations.
During the depthwise convolution a spatial
convolution with parameters Wd ∈Rk1×k2×i is applied for each
channel separately. We denote this operation by using ⊛. This is in
contrast to the typical convolution which is applied across all chan-
nels. In the next step the pointwise convolution, i.e. a convolution
with a 1 × 1 kernel, traverses the feature maps which result from the
ﬁrst operation with parameters Wp ∈R1×1×i×o. Comparing the
normal convolution operation X ∗W with the separable convolution
(X ⊛Wd) ∗Wp, we immediately notice that in practice the former
requires with k1k2io more parameters than the latter which only
needs k1k2i + io.
Layer Widening
Assume the teacher network f contains a
convolutional layer with a k1 × k2 kernel which is represented by
a matrix W (l) ∈Rk1×k2×i×o where i is the number of input feature
maps and o is the number of output feature maps or ﬁlters. Widen-
ing this layer means that we increase the number of ﬁlters to o′ > o.
Chen et al. [30] proposed to extend W (l) by replicating the parame-
ters along the last axis at random. This means the widened layer of
the student network uses the parameters
V (l)
·,·,·,j =
(
W (l)
·,·,·,j
j ≤o
W (l)
·,·,·,r
r uniformly sampled from {1, . . . , o} . (2)
In order to achieve the function-preserving property, the replication
of some ﬁlters needs to be taken into account for the next layer
V (l+1). This is achieved by dividing the parameters of W (l+1)
·,·,j,· by
the number of times the j-th ﬁlter has been replicated. If nj is the
number of times the j-th ﬁlter was replicated, the weights of the next
layer for the student network are deﬁned by
V (l+1)
·,·,j,· = 1
nj W (l+1)
·,·,j,· .
(3)
We extended this mechanism to depthwise separable convolutional
layers.
A depthwise separable convolutional layer at depth l is
widened as follows.
The pointwise convolution for the student
is estimated according to Equation 2. This results into replicated
output feature maps. The depthwise convolution is identical to the
one of the teacher network, i.e. the operations with parameters a
and b. Independently of whether we used a depthwise separable or
normal convolution in layer l, widening it requires adaptations in
a following depthwise separable convolutional layer. The param-
eters of the depthwise convolution are replicated according to the
replication of parameters in the previous layer similar to Equation 2.
Furthermore, the parameter of the pointwise convolution depend on
the replications in the previous layers analogously to Equation 3.
Layer Deepening
Chen et al. [30] proposed a way to deepen a
network by inserting an additional convolutional or fully connected
layer. We complete this deﬁnition by extending it to depthwise sep-
arable convolutions.
A layer can be considered to be a function which gets as an input
the output of the previous layer and provides the input for the next
layer. A simple function-preserving operation is to set the weights of
a new layer such that the input of the layer is equal to its output. If we
assume i incoming channels and an odd kernel height and weight for
the new convolutional layer, we achieve this by setting the weights
of the layer with a k1 × k2 kernel to the identity matrix:
V (l)
j,h =
(
Ii,i
j = k1+1
2
∧h = k2+1
2
0
otherwise
.
(4)
This operation is function-preserving and the number of ﬁlters is
equal to the number of input channels. More ﬁlters can be added by
layer widening, however, it is not possible to use less than i ﬁlters
for the new layer. Another restriction is that this operation is only
possible for activation functions σ with
σ (x) = σ (Iσ (x)) ∀x .
(5)
The ReLU activation function ReLU (x) = max {x, 0} fulﬁlls this
requirement.
We extend this operation to depthwise convolutions. The param-
eters of the pointwise convolution Vp are initialized analogously to
Equation 4 and the depthwise convolution Vd is set to one:
Vp = Ii,i
(6)
Vd = 1 .
(7)
This initialization ensures that both, the depthwise and pointwise
convolution, just copy the input. New layers can be inserted at ar-
bitrary positions with one exception. Under certain conditions an
insertion right after the input layer is not function-preserving. For
example if a ReLU activation is used, there exists no identity func-
tion for inputs with negative entries.

 
 
Teacher
Student
h
g
j
i
k
l
b
a
d
c
e
f
h
g
j
i
k
l
1
1
0
0
b
a
d
c
e
f
Figure 4:
Visualization of branching the colored layer and insert
a convolution into the left branch. Same colored circles represent
identical feature maps. Circles without ﬁlling can have any value
and are not important for the visualization. Activation functions are
omitted to avoid clutter.
Kernel Widening
Increasing the kernel size in a convolutional
layer is achieved by padding the tensor using zeros until it matches
the desired size. The same idea can be applied to increase the kernel
size of depthwise separable convolution by padding the depthwise
convolution with zeros.
Insert Skip Connections
Many modern neural network archi-
tectures rely on skip connections [31]. The idea is to add the output
of the current layer to the output of a previous. One simple example
is
X(l+1) = σ

X(l) ∗V (l+1) + X(l)
.
(8)
Therefore, we propose a function-preserving operation which allows
inserting skip connection. We propose to add layer(s) and initialize
them in a way such that the output is 0 independent on the input.
This allows to add a skip because now adding the output of the pre-
vious layer to zero is an identity operation. A new operation is added
setting its parameters to zero, V (l+1) = 0, achieving a zero output.
Now, adding this output to the input is an identity operation.
Branch Layers
We also propose to branch layers. Given a
convolutional layer X(l) ∗W (l+1) it can be reformulated as
merge

X(l) ∗V (l+1)
1
, X(l) ∗V (l+1)
2

,
(9)
where merge concatenates the resulting output. The student net-
work’s parameters are deﬁned as
V (l+1)
1
= W (l+1)
·,·,·,1:⌊o/2⌋
V (l+1)
2
= W (l+1)
·,·,·,(⌊o/2⌋+1):o .
This operation is not only function-preserving, it also does not add
any further parameters and in fact is the very same operation. How-
ever, combining this operation with other function-preserving oper-
ations allows to extend networks by having parallel convolutional
operations or add new convolutional layers with smaller ﬁlter sizes.
In Figure 4 we demonstrate how to achieve this. The colored layer
is ﬁrst branched and then a new convolutional layer is added to the
 
 
Conv (64, 3, 3)
Cell
Max Pooling
Cell
Max Pooling
Cell
Conv (128, 3, 3)
FC (128)
Softmax
Figure 5: Neural network template as used in our experiments.
left branch. In contrast to only adding a new layer as described in
Section 4.1.1, the new layer has only two output channels instead of
three.
Multiple In- or Outputs
All the presented operations are still
possible for networks where a layer might have inputs from different
layers or provide output for multiple outputs. In that case only the
affected weights need to be adapted according to the aforementioned
equations.
Evolution of Neuro-Cells
The very basic idea of our proposed
cell-based neuro-evolution is the following. Given is a very sim-
ple neural network architecture which contains multiple neuro-cells
(see Figure 5). The cells itself share their structure and the task is
to ﬁnd a structure that improves the overall neural network architec-
ture for a given data set and machine learning task. In the beginning,
a cell is identical to a convolutional layer and is changed during the
evolutionary optimization process. Our evolutionary algorithm is us-
ing tournament selection to select an individual from the population:
randomly, a fraction k of individuals is selected from the population.
From this set the individual with highest ﬁtness is selected for muta-
tion. We deﬁne the ﬁtness by the accuracy achieved by the individual
on a hold-out data set. The mutation is selected at random which is
applied to all neuro-cells such that they remain identical. The net-
work is trained for some epochs on the training set and is then added
to the population. Finally, the process starts all over again. After
meeting some stopping criterion, the individual with highest ﬁtness
is returned.
Mutations
All mutations used are based on the function-
preserving operations introduced in the last section. This means, a
mutation does not change the ﬁtness of an individual, however, it
will increase its complexity. The advantage over creating the same
network structure with randomly initialized weights is obviously
that we start with a partially pretrained network. This enables us to
train the network in less epochs. All mutations are applied only to
the structure within a neuro-cell if not otherwise mentioned. Our
neuro-evolutional algorithm considers the following mutations.
Insert Convolution A convolution is added at a random position.
Its kernel size is 3 × 3, the number of ﬁlters is equal to its input
dimension. It is randomly decided whether it is a separable convolu-
tion instead.
Branch and Insert Convolution A convolution is selected at ran-
dom and branched according to Section 4.1.1. A new convolution is
added according to the “Insert Convolution” mutation in one of the
branches. For an example see Figure 4.
Insert Skip A convolution is selected at random. Its output is
added to the output of a newly added convolution (see “Insert Con-
volution”) and is the input for the following layers.
Alter Number of Filters A convolution is selected at random and
widened by a factor uniformly at random sampled from [1.2, 2]. This
mutation might also be applied to convolutions outside of a neuro-
cell.

DC
LDE
DCN
≈ mins
TAP
TAP
DCN
Accuracy
Training phase
Prediction phase
Figure 6: Schematic TAPAS workﬂow.
First row: the Dataset
Characterization (DC) takes a new, unseen dataset and character-
izes its difﬁculty by computing the Dataset Characterization Number
(DCN). This number is then used to select a subset of experiments
executed on similarly difﬁcult datasets from the Lifelong Database
of Experiments (LDE). Subsequently, the ﬁltered experiments are
used to train the Train-less Accuracy Predictor (TAP), an operation
that takes up to a few minutes. Second row: the trained TAP takes
the network architecture structure and the dataset DCN and predict
the peak accuracy reachable after training. This phase scales very
efﬁciently in a few seconds over a large number of networks.
Alter Number of Units Similar to the previous one but alters the
number of units of fully connected layers. This mutation is only
applied outside the neuro-cells.
Alter Kernel Size Selects a convolution at random and increases
its kernel size by two along each axis.
The motivation of selecting this set of mutations is to enable
the neuro-evolutionary algorithm to discover similar architectures as
proposed by human experts. Adding convolutions allows to reach
popular architectures such as VGG16 [32], combinations of adding
skips and convolutions allow to discover residual networks [31]. Fi-
nally the combination of branching, change of kernel sizes and ad-
dition of (separable) convolutions allows to discover architectures
similar to Inception [33], Xception [34] or FractalNet [35].
The optimization is started with only a single individual. Then
always two individuals are selected with replacement based on the
previously described tournament selection process and trained in
parallel.
4.1.2
TAPAS
TAPAS is a framework that runs large scale architecture searches of
thousands of networks in a few minutes on CPU. We achieve this
with a novel deep neural network accuracy predictor, that estimates
in fractions of a second classiﬁcation performance for unseen in-
put datasets, without training. In contrast to previously proposed
approaches, our prediction is not only calibrated on the topological
network information, but also on the characterization of the dataset-
difﬁculty which allows us to re-tune the prediction without any train-
ing. The TAPAS framework, depicted in Figure 6, is built on three
main components:
1. Dataset Characterization (DC): Receives an unseen dataset
and computes a scalar score, namely the Dataset Characteri-
zation Number (DCN) [36], which is used to rank datasets;
2. Lifelong Database of Experiments (LDE): Ingests train-
ing experiments of NNs on a variety of image classiﬁcation
datasets executed inside the TAPAS framework;
3. Train-less Accuracy Predictor (TAP): Given an NN archi-
tecture and a DCN, it predicts the potentially reachable peak
accuracy without training the network.
In the following we will detail each of the main components.
MNIST
GTSRB (Crop)
SVHN
GTSRB
Fashion MNIST
Imagenet S1
CIFAR-10
Imagenet S2
Flowers-5
Imagenet S3
STL-10
Imagenet S4
Imagenet S5
CIFAR-100
Imagenet S6
Flowers-102
Imagenet S7
Imagenet S8
Food
0.0
0.5
1.0
DCN
Real datasets
ImageNet subsets
Figure 7: List of image classiﬁcation datasets used for characteriza-
tion. The datasets are sorted by the DCN value from the easiest (left)
to the hardest (right).
Dataset characterization (DC)
The same CNN can yield differ-
ent results if trained on an easy dataset (e.g., MNIST [37]) or on
a more challenging one (e.g., CIFAR-100 [38]), although the two
datasets might share features such as number of classes, number of
images, and resolution. Therefore, in order to reliably estimate a
CNN performance on a dataset we argue that we must ﬁrst analyze
the dataset difﬁculty. We compute the DCN by training a probe net
to obtain a dataset difﬁculty estimation [36]. We use the DCN for ﬁl-
tering datasets from the LDE and directly as input score in the TAP
training and prediction phases as described in Section 4.1.2.
DCN computation Prob nets are modest-sized neural networks
designed to characterize the difﬁculty of an image classiﬁcation
dataset [36]. We compute the DCN as peak accuracy, ranged in
[0, 1], obtained by training the Deep normalized ProbeNet on a
speciﬁc dataset for ten epochs. The DCN calculation cost is low
due the following reasons: (i) Deep norm ProbeNet is a modest-
size network, (ii) the characterization step is performed only once
at the entry of the dataset in the framework (the LDE stores the
DCN afterwards), (iii) the DCN does not require an extremely accu-
rate training, thus reducing the cost to a few epochs, and (iv) large
datasets can be subsampled both in terms of number of images and
of pixels.
Lifelong database of experiments (LDE)
LDE is a continuously
growing DB, which ingests every new experiment effectuated inside
the framework. An experiment includes the CNN architecture de-
scription, the training hyper-parameters, the employed dataset (with
its DCN), as well as the achieved accuracy.
LDE initialization At the very beginning, the LDE is empty.
Thus we perform a massive initialization procedure to populate it
with experiments. For each available dataset in Figure 7 we sample
800 networks from a slight variation of the space of MetaQNN [2].
For convolution layers we use strides with values in {1, 2}, recep-
tive ﬁelds with values in {3, 4, ..256}, padding in {same, valid}
and whether is batch normalized or not. We also add two more layer
types to the search space: residual blocks and skip connections. The
hyperparameters of the residual blocks are the receptive ﬁeld, stride
and the repeat factor. The receptive ﬁeld and the stride have the same
bounds as in the convolution layer, while the repeat factor varies be-
tween 1 and 6 inclusively. The skip connection has only one hyper-
parameter, namely the previous layer to be connected to.
To speed up the process, we train the networks one layer at a
time using the incremental method described in [39]. In this way
we obtain the accuracies of all intermediary sub-networks at the
same cost of the entire one. To facilitate the TAP, we train all net-
works with the same hyper-parameters, i.e., same optimizer, learning
rate, batch size, and weights initiallizer. Although the ﬁxed hyper-

parameter setting seems a strong limitation and might limit peak
accuracy by a few percent, it is enough to trim poorly performing
networks and, in the case of an architecture search, to fairly rank
competitive networks, the performance of which can later be op-
timized further. As data augmentation we use standard horizontal
ﬂips, when possible, and left/right shifts with four pixels. For all
datasets we perform feature-wise standardization.
This paper LDE initialization takes 18 months on a single
P100 GPU. This number can be scaled down embarrassingly with
the number of GPUs. It must also be considered that, even though
the time spent to generate the LDE is comparable to the time of
manual engineering search of hyperparameters, the LDE can then
be employed in architecture searches for multiple datasets at no ad-
ditional cost. Moreover, in an industrial environments, pre-existing
runs on technical propriertary-datasets can be used to heat-up the
LDE quickly.
LDE selection Let us consider an LDE populated with ex-
periments from Nd different datasets Dj, with j = 1, . . . , Nd.
Given a new input dataset ˆD and its corresponding characterization
DCN( ˆD), the LDE block returns all experiments performed with
datasets that satisfy the following relation
∥DCN( ˆD) −DCN(Dj)∥≤τ
j ∈[1, Nd],
(10)
where τ is a predeﬁned threshold that, in our experiments, is set to
0.05.
Train-less accuracy predictor (TAP)
TAP is designed to perform
fast and reliable CNN accuracy predictions.
Compared to Peep-
hole [22], TAP leverages knowledge accumulated through experi-
ments of datasets of similar difﬁculty ﬁltered from the LDE based
on the DCN. Additionally, TAP does not ﬁrst analyze the entire NN
structure and then makes a prediction, but instead performs an iter-
ative prediction as depicted in Figure 8. In other words, it aims to
predict the accuracy of a sub-network l1:i+1, assuming the accuracy
of the sub-network l1:i is known. The main building elements of the
predictor are: (i) a compact encoding vector that represents the main
network characteristics, (ii) a quickly-trainable network of LSTMs,
and (iii) a layer-by-layer prediction mechanism.
Neural network architecture encoding Similar to Peephole,
TAP employs a layer-by-layer encoding vector as described in Fig-
ure 8. Unlike Peephole, we encode more complex information of the
network architecture for a better prediction.
Let us consider a network with Nl layers, li being the i-th layer
counting from the input, with i = 1, . . . , Nl. We deﬁne a CNN
sub-network as la:b with 1 ≤a < b ≤Nl. Our encoding vector
contains two types of information as depicted in Figure 8 a): (i) i-th
layer information and (ii) l1:i sub-network information. For the cur-
rent i-th layer we make the following selection of parameters: Layer
type is a one-hot encoding that identiﬁes either convolution, pool-
ing, batch normalization, dropout, residual block, skip connection,
or fully connected. In future we will include latest motifs present in
literature such as DenseNets [40] or AmoebaNets [41]. Note that for
the shortcut connection of the residual block we use both the identity
and the projection shortcuts [42]. The projection is employed only
when the residual block decreases the number of ﬁlters as compared
to the previous layer. Moreover, as compared to [22], our networks
do not follow a ﬁxed skeleton in the convolutional pipeline, allowing
for more generality. We only force a ﬁxed block at the end, by us-
ing a global pooling and a fully connected layer to prevent networks
from overﬁtting [43].
a)
b)
Layer type
Output/Input 
height ratio
Number of 
weights
Total number 
of layers
Inference 
FLOPs
Inference 
memory
Accuracy
Layer 2
Layer 1
Layer 3
Layer !"
TAP
DCN
TAP
DCN
TAP
DCN
Output/Input 
depth ratio
#$%
1
!'
0
Concat
Concat
#(
0
Concat
0
#$%)*
Figure 8: Encoding vector structure and its usage in the iterative
prediction. a) The encoding vector contains two blocks: i-layer in-
formation and from input to i-layer sub-network information. b) The
encoding vector is used by the TAP following an iterative scheme.
Starting from Layer 1 (input) we encode and concatenate two lay-
ers at a time and feed them to the TAP. In the concatenated vector,
the Accuracy ﬁeld Ai of li is set to the predicted accuracy obtained
from the previous TAP evaluation, whereas the one of Ai+1 corre-
sponding to li+1 is always set to zero. For the input layer, we set
A0 to 1/Nc, where Nc is the number of classes, assuming a random
distribution. The ﬁnal predicted accuracy ANl is the accuracy of the
complete network.
The ratio between the output height and input height of each
layer accounts for different strides or paddings, whereas the ratio
between the output depth and input depth accounts for modiﬁcations
of the number of kernels. The number of weights speciﬁes the total
of learnable parameters in li. This value helps the TAP differentiate
between layers that increase the learning power of the network (e.g.,
convolution, fully connected layers) and layers that reduce the di-
mensionality or avoid overﬁtting (e.g., pooling, dropout). In the sec-
ond part of the encoding vector, we include: Total number of layers,
counting from input to li, Inference FLOPs and Inference memory
that are an accurate estimate of the computational cost and mem-
ory requirements of the sub-network, and ﬁnally Accuracy, which
is set either to 1/Nc, for the ﬁrst layer, where Nc is the number of
classes to predict, zero for prediction purposes, or a speciﬁc value
Ai ∈[0, 1] that is obtained from the previous layer prediction. Be-
fore training, we perform a feature-wise standardization of the data,
meaning that for each feature of the encoding vector, we subtract the
mean and divide by the standard deviation.
TAP architecture TAP is a neural network consisting of two
stacked LSTMs of 50 and 100 hidden units, respectively, followed
by a single-output fully connected layer with sigmoid activation. The
TAP network has two inputs. The ﬁrst input is a concatenation of two
encoding vectors corresponding to layer li and li+1, respectively.
This input is fed into the ﬁrst LSTM. The second input is the DCN
and is concatenated with the output of the second LSTM and then
fed into the fully connected layer.
TAP training TAP requires a signiﬁcant amount of training data
to make reliable predictions. The LDE provides this data as de-
scribed in Section 4.1.2. As mentioned above, all our generated net-
works are trained in an incremental fashion, as presented in [39],
meaning that for each network of length Nl we train all intermedi-
ary sub-networks l1:k with 1 < k ≤Nl and save their performance
Ak. We encode each set of two consecutive layers li and li+1 fol-
lowing the schema detailed in 4.1.2, setting the accuracy ﬁeld in the
encoding vector of li to Ai, which was obtained through training,
and aiming to predict Ai+1.
TAP is trained with RMSprop [44], using a learning rate of

10−3, a HeNormal weight initialization [45], and a batch size of 512.
As the architecture of the TAP is very small, the training process is
of the order of a few minutes on a single GPU device. Moreover,
the trained TAP can be stored and reapplied to other datasets with
similar DCN numbers without the need for retraining.
TAP prediction TAP employs a layer-by-layer prediction mech-
anism. The accuracy Ai of the sub-network l1:i predicted by the
previous TAP evaluation is subsequently fed as input into the next
TAP evaluation, which returns the predicted accuracy Ai+1 of the
sub-network l1:i+1. This mechanism is described more in detail in
Figure 8 b).
4.1.3
Hyperband++ Engine:
The original Hyperband algorithm:
Hyperband [18] proposed
by Li et al., speeds up random search by using early stopping strat-
egy to allocate resources adaptively. It is easy to use and of good
performance, lots of work have based on it. [46] replaces the ran-
dom selection of conﬁgurations at the beginning of each Hyperband
iteration by using Tree Parzen Estimator (TPE) [47]. In order to ad-
equately explore large hyper-parameters spaces, [48] considers the
massive parallel hyper-parameters search, and scales linearly with
the number of workers in distributed settings as well as converges to
a high quality conﬁguration. However, all these methods focus on
hyper-parameters tuning. In our work, we extend the Hyperband to
support joint neural network search and hyper-parameters search.
Model Representation:
Effective model representation is nec-
essary to link Hyperband and NAS (Neural Architecture Search).
[9] shows that with an effective model representation, even random
search can achieve good performance. In our work, we support four
model representations: plain chain structure, skip chain structure,
multi-branch structure and hierarchy structure. Plain chain struc-
ture is shown in Fig. 9. The architecture includes one or more than
one components sequentially connected, each component ends with
a pooling layer. While if there is no pooling layer in the architecture,
it is deemed as of one component. In every component, there will
be several convoluational stacks, with attributes of kernel size, type,
and output channel numbers. Using this representation, chain struc-
ture network and Hyperband search space can be an one to one map-
ping. As shown in Fig.10, Skip chain structure is similar to plane
chain structure where only skip pattern is added. Here we make
a constrain that skipping only occur within the component. Multi-
branches structure in Fig. 11 is introduced in [24]. And it is widely
used in the neural network search strategy [25] for cell based search.
Hierarchy structure in Fig.12 is proposed by [9], which deﬁnes the
three-level hierarchical architecture. See the bottom row, the level-1
primitive operations like convoluational layer, pooling layer etc. are
assembled to form a level-2 motif; again various level-2 motifs are
assembled to form a level-3 motif as shown in top row in ﬁgure. Our
work extend the Hyperband to support these four kinds of structures
to do the neural network search, we call it Hypterband++. Because
Hyperband also have the intrinsic capability to search learning re-
lated hyper-parameters like learning rate, weight decay, momentum,
our proposed Hyperband++ can do joint search for both neural net-
work and hyper-parameters.
Meta-learning for Hyperband:
As we known, most existing
Neural network approaches take considerable long time for model
searching.
Thus there are lots of methods target high efﬁcient
NAS, such as weight sharing [24], one-shot model [9], multi-task
Bayesian [49] and performance prediction[50].
In our work, we
Figure 9: Example of chain structure representation supported by
Hyperband++
Figure 10: Example of skip structure representation supported by
Hyperband++
propose a method to reuse the neural network or part of the neural
network to speed up the searching process. The method is tailored to
the setting whereby the datasets come sequentially and one need to
search model for the new arrival datasets efﬁciently. First, the meta-
features of datasets can be extracting, then we implement the virtual
dataset layer and group the datasets based on the meta-features at
the ﬁrst step. Accordingly, we follow the general idea of recycle
and reuse, such that the pre-searched models i.e. architectures and
hyper-parameters can be used for the new arrival datasets. It should
be noted that the meta-learning technique can also be coupled with
most NAS methods (not limited on Hyperband) in an out-of-box
fashion.

Figure 11: Example of multi-branches based structure representation
[24] supported by Hyperband++
Figure 12: Example of hierarchy structure representation [9] sup-
ported by Hyperband++
Hyperband for Object Detection:
Unlike image classiﬁcation,
object detection also considers informative region selection and fea-
ture extraction besides classiﬁcation. Traditional object detection
methods are built on handcrafted features and shallow trainable
architectures. However, their performance is limited as low-level
features can not represent the high-level context from object detec-
tors effectively. Thanks to the rapid development in deep learning,
semantic, high-level features can be learned.
There are mainly
two types of frameworks in generic object detection: region pro-
posal based methods, which include RCNN [51], FRCNN [52],
Faster R-CNN [53], FPN [54] and Mask R-CNN [55], etc.; Regres-
sion/Classiﬁcation based methods, which contain YOLO [56], SSD
[57], YOLOv2 [58], etc. Empirical results show the performance
of object detection for different datasets is highly depended on the
pre-trained network and lots of hyper-parameters. In this section,
we describe the ways to apply Hyperband for object detection.
Hyper-parameters tuning for Object Detection: Comparing
with image classiﬁcation, there are more hyper-parameters in ob-
ject detection applications. Besides learning process related hyper-
parameters like learning rate, decay policy, momentum, etc., there
are also object detection related hyper-parameters including anchor
size, aspect, pre-trained model categories, loss weights, fraction of
foreground, overlap for positive RPN, bbox threshold, FPN level,
etc.. Hyperband can be used to deal with tuning these kinds of hyper-
parameters efﬁciently.
Meta-learning for high efﬁcient Hyper-parameters tuning:
By using the methods described in 4.1.3, hyper-parameters tuning
for object detection can be speeded up by grouping the similar
datasets with the same set or subset of hyper-parameters. In object
detection, there are also lots of works by adopting the concept of
groups. [59] uses a biasing sampling to match the statistics of the
ground truth bonding boxes with K-means clustering, while [60]
proposes a subcategory-aware RPN. We leave more effective groups
construction methods beyond hyper-parameter sharing for future
work.
Architecture Search for Object Detection:
Considering the
object detection pipeline, with newly-searched network architecture,
it always needs pre-train on ImageNet to obtain the corresponding
reward values, which makes it impossible to search neural network
for object detection. An alternative way is to use transferable net-
work to replace the existing pre-trained networks like Inceptions,
resNet, VGG and ZF. [9] shows that the auto-searched network for
CIFAR10 can be used as pre-trained network of Faster-RCNN for
object detection. In our work, we ﬁrst use Hyperband to search the
optimal architectures for different datasets for image classﬁcation
task, and then plug in these architectures pre-trained on ImageNet
into Faster-RCNN or FPN pipeline. By using the meta-learning pro-
posed in section 4.1.3, the proper pre-trained network are chosen
based on the input dataset.
4.2
Fine grained synthesis
Broadly, we describe a supervised learning algorithm that serves
as an optimization step towards automatically generating a neural
network model. Speciﬁcally, given an input dataset with classiﬁca-
tion labels, we will describe an algorithm to incrementally add new
connections and a small number of new trainable variables within
a neural network to improve the prediction accuracy of the neural
network.
There are a lot of techniques that use template layers such as
convolution, fully-connected, max-pool, avg. pool, etc to automat-
ically synthesize neural networks. These techniques work well for
pre-processed and cleaned datasets but due to their parameter size
have a tendency to over-ﬁt to the training data. There is another set
of techniques that explores more ”ﬁne-grained” connections within
neural networks. This class of techniques are more along the lines
of the proposed technique. The technique proposed in [Filter-Shape]
computes a co-variance metric to determine which features (inputs)
that should be combined to create a ﬁlter.
The ﬁlter shaping approach is restricted by the computational
complexity of computing co-variance matrix. Hence the size of the
neighborhood that can be searched using this technique is smaller
than the proposed technique. Secondly, the ﬁlter shaping paper looks
for features with the most correlation. However, it is unclear whether
such a metric is fundamentally necessary for good generalization.
Our technique uses an evolutionary algorithm for building a cus-
tom convolution ﬁlter. The algorithm has ﬁve phases - 0) Given a
network that has been trained until a certain early stopping criteria is
met, the 0th or initialization phase involves selecting a subset of neu-
rons that are ”important” for the given dataset and classiﬁcation task .
If there is no network to start with then a single fully connected layer
connecting the inputs to the outputs is used as a starting network. 1)
The ﬁrst phase involves growing the network by adding a layer of

dense connections to this subset of neurons. The initial values of
the new connections are chosen such that the output neuron values
are not perturbed. Doing so ensures that the new connections do not
cause the network to forget what has been learnt. The newly grown
network is then re-trained for a few epochs. 2) The second phase in-
volves iteratively pruning network connections in the newly grown
layer that show the least change from their initialized values. During
this pruning stage the network is trained for a few epochs after every
pruning step. 3) The third phase involves merging connections in the
newly grown layer into ”k” weight buckets. The degree of similarity
of input weight distribution determines whether the connections are
merged into a single bucket or not. The ”k” buckets then become the
”k” custom ﬁlters of the newly grown layer. 4) The fourth and ﬁnal
phase involves re-initializing the weights of the pruned and merged
network so that the output neuron values are unperturbed from the
values after phase (i). The new network is then retrained until the
early stopping criteria is met.
The proposed algorithm learns the shape of the custom ﬁlters
from the evolution of the weight values on the connections. Due
to this it is able to leverage the acceleration in training offered by
specialized hardware such as GPUs. Thus, in comparison with tech-
niques such as [Filter-Shape] and [Grow-Prune] the proposed ap-
proach is much faster. Another advantage of this technique over
[Filter-Shape] is that it offers higher accuracy improvement with the
same increase in network size, which translates to overall better net-
work quality.
The network shown in Phase 0 represents either: a) The ﬁnal
fully connected layer of an existing network that is either manually
designed or auto-generated from another neural architecture search
algorithm. or b) As a more general application of the proposed tech-
nique, the blue input neurons can represent a subset of ”important”
neurons from an existing neural network. If an initial network is not
available, the blue input neurons can also represent all or a subset of
input features of the given dataset. In this case, a network is initial-
ized with a fully connected layer connecting blue input neurons to
the red output neurons.
Assuming that there are ’n’ input neurons and ’m’ output neu-
rons, the operation performed in the fully connected layer can be
expressed as:
y = Act(W*x + B)
where ’x’ is the ’n’-dimensional vector containing values of the
input neurons, y is the ’m’-dimensional vector containing values of
the output neurons, W is the ’mxn’-dimensional matrix containing
weight variables, B is the ’m’-dimensional vector containing bias
variables, and Act is an activation function for e.g., Relu, Tanh, Sig-
moid, etc.
The initial values of W and B are obtained by training the initial
network until the early stopping criteria is met.
In phase 1, the network is grown by adding a hidden layer con-
taining ’l’ hidden neurons. The layer connecting input neurons to
the hidden neurons can either be fully connected or selectively con-
nected to combine input neurons selectively into a hidden neuron.
The operation performed by this layer can be expressed as:
z = Act(W’*x + B’)
where z is an ’l’-dimensional vector containing values of the
hidden neurons, W’ is an ’lxn’-dimensional weight matrix, B’ is an
’l’-dimensional bias vector, Act is the activation function. In the case
where the layer is selectively connected, the missing connections can
be represented as zeros in the weight matrix.
The layer connecting hidden neurons to the output neurons is a
fully connected layer. The operation performed by this layer can be
expressed as:
y = Act(W”*z + B”)
where y is an ’m’-dimensional vector containing values of the
output neurons, W” is an ’mxl’-dimensional weight matrix, B” is an
’m’-dimensional bias vector, Act is the activation function. The ini-
tialization of the two layers in phase 1 has to be carefully determined
to ensure continuity in training an evolving network in phase 0. To
achieve this, the initial values for [W’,B’] and [W”, B”] are derived
from the trained values of [W, B] at the end of phase 0. The initial
values satisfying this constraint can be achieved in many different
ways, for e.g., assume a blue input layer neuron gets connected to 3
neurons in the hidden layer. The weight variable for these neurons
can be initialized to w1, w2, w3 such that sum(w1, w2, w3) = 1.
The weight variable for connections from other neurons in the input
layer to these 3 neurons can be initialized to 0. Such an initial value
assignment ensures continuity in the training process.
In phase 2 of the optimization, connections in the layer between
the input and hidden layer are pruned based on a certain pruning
metric. Examples of metrics for pruning include value of weight
variable, absolute value of weight variable, magnitude of change in
weight value over several epochs. Pruning can happen either as a sin-
gle step or in multiple steps applied iteratively. Between two pruning
steps, the network is trained for a few epochs for the values to adjust
for the pruned variables. At the end of pruning, N input connections
are retained for each hidden neuron.
In phase 3 of the optimization the N input weight variables
for the neurons in the hidden layer are merged into ’k’ buckets of
N weight variables each. Merging of weight variables takes place
based on the similarity of shape of the distribution of the weight
variables. One way of measuring similarity is to use the L-2 dis-
tance of the normalized values of weight variables. For instance,
[1.2, 0.6, 0.3] has a shape similar to [2, 1, 0.5] than to [1, 0.9, 0.8].
Finally, in phase 4, the merged and pruned network weights and
bias values are re-initialized such that the values of output neurons
are unperturbed from phase 0. The re-initialized network is then
trained until the early stopping criteria is met.
5
Experimental Evaluation
We tested the NeuNetS Framework on various benchmark datasets
for image and text classiﬁcation.
All images are normalized by subtracting the mean and dividing
by the standard deviation. For images with resolution higher than
64x64, they are scaled to 64x64 for NCEvolve. For TAPAS, im-
ages are always scaled to 32x32. The maximum GPU budget per
dataset is divided into three categories: low, medium and high. A
dataset is assigned to one category based on the number of exam-
ples. All datasets with at most 10K examples get a low GPU budget
of 2 hours. Datasets with at most 75K examples get the medium
budget of 5 hours. Finally, all other datasets get the high budget of
at most 16 hours. In contrast to the literature in the domain of auto-
mated architecture search, this budget contains both the search and
training time. State-of-the-art methods use double this budget only
for the search followed by an expensive post-processing [24]. We
evaluate NeuNetS on 12 image classiﬁcation benchmarks and report
the results in Table 1.
As we all know, machine learning models cannot accept text as
input. They only work with integers or ﬂoats. In order to overcome
this, a standard practice is to tokenize the training data and identify
the most frequent K words (excluding stop words) and map them
to integers. To elaborate further, the most common word would be
given an integer representation of 0, the second most common word

Table 1: Results on various image classiﬁcation benchmarks with
required training time in GPU hours.
Dataset
Cls
Examples
Error
Time
Params
Caltech-256 [65]
257
31K
48.56
5.0
5.78M
CIFAR-10 [66]
10
60K
6.32
3.6
3.68M
CIFAR-100 [66]
100
60K
27.79
3.9
9.60M
Fashion [67]
10
70K
4.51
3.2
5.73M
Flowers-5 [68]
5
4K
16.41
2.0
4.57M
Flowers-102 [68]
102
2K
54.02
1.2
3.35M
Food-101 [69]
101
101K
38.12
11.9
7.38M
GTSRB [70]
43
52K
3.52
4.1
3.05M
MNIST [71]
10
70K
0.64
2.5
3.74M
Quick, Draw! [72]
345
380K
27.34
16.0
2.58M
STL-10 [73]
10
13K
25.14
1.8
6.68M
SVHN [74]
10
99K
3.37
12.6
4.83M
Table 2: Results on various text classiﬁcation benchmarks with re-
quired training time in GPU hours.
Dataset
Cls
Examples
Error
Time
Cola [75]
2
9K
29.60
1.1
IMDB Sentiment [76]
2
22K
12.00
0.7
Rotten TMC [77]
5
140K
31.51
0.9
SMS Spam [78]
2
5K
0.54
0.2
Snips [79]
7
2K
0.00
0.2
Stanford Sentiment [80]
6
215K
31.17
1.0
TREC [81]
6
5K
11.62
0.3
Yelp [82]
5
52K
40.45
1.0
Youtube Spam [83]
2
2K
3.05
0.2
a representation of 1, and so on. All the words outside of the top K
are replaced by an unknown token UNK. The model requires input
of ﬁxed dimensions. thus, the maximum number of tokens MAX in
the input in predetermined. If the number of words in an instance is
greater than the maximum imposed, the instance is truncated to MAX
length. If the number of words is less than MAX, we pad the sentence
with UNK tokens to meet the desired length. The weights of the ﬁrst
layer of the deep learning model, also known as the embedding layer,
are initialized with the word embedding matrix of the top K words
in the training data. The ith row of the embedding matrix represents
the word embedding (obtained from GloVe [61] or Word2vec [62,
63, 64]) of the word whose integer mapping is i.
Based on similar criteria, we also impose maximum GPU budget
for the synthesis of text classiﬁers. Therefore, we assign 2 hours for a
dataset comprising of at most 250K examples, 5 hours for those up to
2M examples and a maximum of 16 hours for the rest. We evaluate
NeuNets on 9 text classiﬁcation datasets and report the results in
Table 2.
