TECHNOLOGY READINESS LEVELS
FOR MACHINE LEARNING SYSTEMS
Alexander Lavin∗
Pasteur Labs
Ciarán M. Gilligan-Lee
Spotify
Alessya Visnjic
WhyLabs
Siddha Ganju
Nvidia
Dava Newman
MIT
Atılım Güne¸s Baydin
University of Oxford
Sujoy Ganguly
Unity AI
Danny Lange
Unity AI
Amit Sharma
Microsoft Research
Stephan Zheng
Salesforce Research
Eric P. Xing
Petuum
Adam Gibson
Konduit
James Parr
NASA Frontier Development Lab
Chris Mattmann
NASA Jet Propulsion Lab
Yarin Gal
Alan Turing Institute
ABSTRACT
The development and deployment of machine learning (ML) systems can be executed easily with
modern tools, but the process is typically rushed and means-to-an-end. The lack of diligence can
lead to technical debt, scope creep and misaligned objectives, model misuse and failures, and
expensive consequences. Engineering systems, on the other hand, follow well-deﬁned processes
and testing standards to streamline development for high-quality, reliable results. The extreme is
spacecraft systems, where mission critical measures and robustness are ingrained in the development
process. Drawing on experience in both spacecraft engineering and ML (from research through
product across domain areas), we have developed a proven systems engineering approach for machine
learning development and deployment. Our Machine Learning Technology Readiness Levels (MLTRL)
framework deﬁnes a principled process to ensure robust, reliable, and responsible systems while
being streamlined for ML workﬂows, including key distinctions from traditional software engineering.
Even more, MLTRL deﬁnes a lingua franca for people across teams and organizations to work
collaboratively on artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning technologies. Here we describe the
framework and elucidate it with several real world use-cases of developing ML methods from basic
research through productization and deployment, in areas such as medical diagnostics, consumer
computer vision, satellite imagery, and particle physics.
Keywords: Machine Learning; Systems Engineering; Data Management; Medical AI; Space Sciences
Introduction
The accelerating use of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) technologies in systems of software,
hardware, data, and people introduces vulnerabilities and risks due to dynamic and unreliable behaviors; fundamentally,
ML systems learn from data, introducing known and unknown challenges in how these systems behave and interact with
their environment. Currently the approach to building AI technologies is siloed: models and algorithms are developed
in testbeds isolated from real-world environments, and without the context of larger systems or broader products they’ll
be integrated within for deployment. A main concern is models are typically trained and tested on only a handful of
curated datasets, without measures and safeguards for future scenarios, and oblivious of the downstream tasks and
users. Even more, models and algorithms are often integrated into a software stack without regard for the inherent
stochasticity –for instance, the massive effect random seeds have on deep reinforcement learning model performance
[1] – and failure modes of the ML components, which can be dangerously hidden in layers of software and abstraction.
Other domains of engineering, such as civil and aerospace, follow well-deﬁned processes and testing standards to
streamline development for high-quality, reliable results. Technology Readiness Level (TRL) is a systems engineering
protocol for deep tech[2] and scientiﬁc endeavors at scale, ideal for integrating many interdependent components

Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2101.03989v2  [cs.LG]  29 Nov 2021

and cross-functional teams of people. It is no surprise that TRL is standard process and parlance in NASA[3] and
DARPA[4].
For a spaceﬂight project there are several deﬁned phases, from pre-concept to prototyping to deployed operations to
end-of-life, each with a series of exacting development cycles and reviews. This is in stark contrast to common machine
learning and software workﬂows, which promote quick iteration, rapid deployment, and simple linear progressions. Yet
the NASA technology readiness process for spacecraft systems is overkill; we need robust ML technologies integrated
with larger systems of software, hardware, data, and humans, but not necessarily for missions to Mars. We aim to bring
systems engineering to AI and ML by deﬁning and putting into action a lean Machine Learning Technology Readiness
Levels (MLTRL) framework. We draw on decades of AI and ML development, from research through production,
across domains and diverse data scenarios: for example, computer vision in medical diagnostics and consumer apps,
automation in self-driving vehicles and factory robotics, tools for scientiﬁc discovery and causal inference, streaming
time-series in predictive maintenance and ﬁnance.
In this paper we deﬁne our framework for developing and deploying robust, reliable, and responsible ML and data
systems, with several real test cases of advancing models and algorithms from R&D through productization and
deployment, including essential data considerations. Additionally, MLTRL prioritizes the role of AI ethics and
fairness, and our systems AI approach can help curb the large societal issues that can result from poorly deployed and
maintained AI and ML technologies, such as the automation of systemic human bias, denial of individual autonomy,
and unjustiﬁable outcomes (see the Alan Turing Institute Report on Ethical AI[5]). The adoption and proliferation of
MLTRL provides a common nomenclature and metric across teams and industries. The standardization of MLTRL
across the AI industry should help teams and organizations develop principled, safe, and trusted technologies.
Figure 1: MLTRL spans research through prototyping, productization, and deployment. Most ML workﬂows prescribe
an isolated, linear process of data processing, training, testing, and serving a model [6]. Those workﬂows fail to deﬁne
how ML development must iterate over that basic process to become more mature and robust, and how to integrate with
a much larger system of software, hardware, data, and people. Not to mention MLTRL continues beyond deployment:
monitoring and feedback cycles are important for continuous reliability and improvement over the product lifetime.
Results
MLTRL deﬁnes technology readiness levels (TRLs) to guide and communicate AI and ML development and deployment.
A TRL represents the maturity of a model or algorithmii, data pipelines, software module, or composition thereof; a
typical ML system consists of many interconnected subsystems and components, and the TRL of the system is the
lowest level of its constituent parts [7]. The anatomy of a level is marked by gated reviews, evolving working groups,
requirements documentation with risk calculations, progressive code and testing standards, and deliverables such as
TRL Cards (Figure 3) and ethics checklists.iii These components—which are crucial for implementing the levels in a
iiNote we use “model” and “algorithm” somewhat interchangeably when referring to the technology under development. The
same MLTRL process and methods apply for a machine translation model and for an A/B testing algorithm, for example.
iiiTemplates and examples for MLTRL deliverables will be open-sourced upon publication at github.com/alan-turing-institute.
2

systematic fashion—as well as MLTRL metrics and methods are concretely described in examples and in the Methods
section. Lastly, to emphasize the importance of data tasks in ML, from data curation [8] to data governance [9], we
state several important data considerations at each MLTRL level.
MACHINE LEARNING TECHNOLOGY READINESS LEVELS
The levels are brieﬂy deﬁned as follows and in Figure 1, and elucidated with real-world examples later.
Level 0 - First Principles
This is a stage for greenﬁeld AI research, initiated with a novel idea, guiding question, or
poking at a problem from new angles. The work mainly consists of literature review, building mathematical foundations,
white-boarding concepts and algorithms, and building an understanding of the data – for work in theoretical AI and ML,
however, there will not yet be data to work with (for example, a novel algorithm for Bayesian optimization[10], which
could eventually be used for many domains and datasets). The outcome of Level 0 is a set of concrete ideas with sound
mathematical formulation, to pursue through low-level experimentation in the next stage. When relevant, this level
expects conclusions about data readiness, including strategies for getting the data to be suitable for the speciﬁc ML task.
To graduate, the basic principles, hypotheses, data readiness, and research plans need to be stated, referencing relevant
literature. With graduation, a TRL Card should be started to succinctly document the methods and insights thus far –
this key MLTRL deliverable is detailed in the Methods section and Figure 3.
Level 0 data – Not a hard requirement at this stage because this is largely theoretical machine learning. That being said,
data availability needs to be considered for deﬁning any research project to move past theory.
Level 0 review – The reviewer here is solely the lead of the research lab or team, for instance a PhD supervisor. We
assess hypotheses and explorations for mathematical validity and potential novelty or utility, not necessarily code nor
end-to-end experiment results.
Level 1 - Goal-Oriented Research
To progress from basic principles to practical use, we design and run low-level
experiments to analyze speciﬁc model or algorithm properties (rather than end-to-end runs for a performance benchmark
score). This involves collection and processing of sample data to train and evaluate the model. This sample data need
not be the full data; it may be a smaller sample that is currently available or more convenient to collect. In some
cases it may sufﬁce to use synthetic data as the representative sample – in the medical domain, for example, acquiring
datasets can take many months due to security and privacy constraints, so generating sample data can mitigate this
blocker from early ML development. Further, working with the sample data provides a blueprint for the data collection
and processing pipeline (including answering whether it is even possible to collect all necessary data), that can be
scaled up for the for the next steps. The experiments, good results or not, and mathematical foundations need to pass a
review process with fellow researchers before graduating to Level 2. The application is still speculative, but through
comparison studies and analyses we start to understand if/how/where the technology offers potential improvements and
utility. Code is research-caliber: The aim here is to be quick and dirty, moving fast through iterations of experiments.
Hacky code is okay, and full test coverage is actually discouraged, as long as the overall codebase is organized and
maintainable. It is important to start semantic versioning practices early in the project lifecycle, which should cover
code, models, and datasets. This is crucial for retrospectives and reproducibility, issues with which can be costly and
severe at later stages. This versioning information and additional progress should be reported on the TRL Card (see for
example Figure 3).
Level 1 data – At minimum we work with sample data that is representative of downstream real datasets, which can be
a subset of real data, synthetic data, or both. Beyond driving low-level ML experiments, the sample data forces us to
consider data acquisition and processing strategies at an early stage before it becomes a blocker later.
Level 1 review – The panel for this gated review is entirely members of the research team, reviewing for scientiﬁc rigor
in early experimentation, and pointing to important concepts and prior work from their respective areas of expertise.
There may be several iterations of feedback and additional experiments.
Level 2 - Proof of Principle (PoP) Development
Active R&D is initiated, mainly by developing and running in
testbeds: simulated environments and/or simulated data that closely matches the conditions and data of real scenarios –
note these are driven by model-speciﬁc technical goals, not necessarily application or product goals (yet). An important
deliverable at this stage is the formal research requirements document (with well-speciﬁed veriﬁcation and validation
(V&V) steps)iv. Here is one of several key decision points in the broader process: The R&D team considers several
paths forward and sets the course: (A) prototype development towards Level 3, (B) continued R&D for longer-term
ivA requirement is a singular documented physical or functional need that a particular design, product, or process aims to satisfy.
Requirements aim to specify all stakeholders’ needs while not specifying a speciﬁc solution. Deﬁnitions are incomplete without
3

research initiatives and/or publications, or some combination of A and B. We ﬁnd the culmination of this stage is often
a bifurcation: some work moves to applied AI, while some circles back for more research. This common MLTRL cycle
is an instance of the non-monotonic discovery switchback mechanism (detailed in the Methods section).
Level 2 data – Datasets at this stage may include publicly available benchmark datasets, semi-simulated data based
on the data sample in Level 1, or fully simulated data based on certain assumptions about the potential deployment
environments. The data should allow researchers to characterize model properties, and highlight corner cases or
boundary conditions, in order to justify the utility of continuing R&D on the model.
Level 2 review – To graduate from the PoP stage, the technology needs to satisfy research claims made in previous
stages (brought to be bare by the aforementioned PoP data in both quantitative and qualitative ways) with the analyses
well-documented and reproducible.
Level 3 - System Development
Here we have checkpoints that push code development towards interoperability,
reliability, maintainability, extensibility, and scalability. Code becomes prototype-caliber: A signiﬁcant step up from
research code in robustness and cleanliness. This needs to be well-designed, well-architected for dataﬂow and interfaces,
generally covered by unit and integration tests, meet team style standards, and sufﬁciently-documented. Note the
programmers’ mentality remains that this code will someday be refactored/scrapped for productization; prototype code
is relatively primitive with regard to efﬁciency and reliability of the eventual system. With the transition to Level 4 and
proof-of-concept mode, the working group should evolve to include product engineering to help deﬁne service-level
agreements and objectives (SLAs and SLOs) of the eventual production system.
Level 3 data – For the most part consistent with Level 2; in general, the previous level review can elucidate potential
gaps in data coverage and robustness to be addressed in the subsequent level. However, for test suites developed at this
stage, it is useful to deﬁne dedicated subsets of the experiment data as default testing sources, as well as setup mock
data for speciﬁc functionalities and scenarios to be tested.
Level 3 review – Teammates from applied AI and engineering are brought into the review to focus on sound software
practices, interfaces and documentation for future development, and version control for models and datasets. There are
likely domain- or organization-speciﬁc data management considerations going forward that this review should point out
– e.g. standards for data tracking and compliance in healthcare [11].
Level 4 - Proof of Concept (PoC) Development
This stage is the seed of application-driven development; for many
organizations this is the ﬁrst touch-point with product managers and stakeholders beyond the R&D group. Thus TRL
Cards and requirements documentation are instrumental in communicating the project status and onboarding new
people. The aim is to demonstrate the technology in a real scenario: quick proof-of-concept examples are developed to
explore candidate application areas and communicate the quantitative and qualitative results. It is essential to use real
and representative data for these potential applications. Thus data engineering for the PoC largely involves scaling up
the data collection and processing from Level 1, which may include collecting new data or processing all available data
using scaled experiment pipelines from Level 3. In some scenarios there will new datasets brought in for the PoC, for
example, from an external research partner as a means of validation. Hand-in-hand with the evolution from sample to
real data, the experiment metrics should evolve from ML research to the applied setting: proof-of-concept evaluations
should quantify model and algorithm performance (e.g., precision and recall and various data splits), computational
costs (e.g., CPU vs GPU runtimes), and also metrics that are more relevant to the eventual end-user (e.g., number
of false positives in the top-N predictions of a recommender system). We ﬁnd this PoC exploration reveals speciﬁc
differences between clean and controlled research data versus noisy and stochastic real-world data. The issues can
be readily identiﬁed because of the well-deﬁned distinctions between those development stages in MLTRL, and then
targeted for further development.
AI ethics processes vary across organizations, but all should engage in ethics conversations at this stage, including ethics
of data collection, and potential of any harm or discriminatory impacts due to the model (as the AI capabilities and
datasets are known). MLTRL requires ethics considerations to be reported on TRL Cards at all stages, which generally
link to an extended ethics checklist. The key decision point here is to push onward with application development or not.
It is common to pause projects that pass Level 4 review, waiting for a better time to dedicate resources, and/or pull the
technology into a different project.
Level 4 data – Unlike the previous stages, having real-world and representative data is critical for the PoC; even with
methods for verifying that data distributions in synthetic data reliably mirror those of real data [], sufﬁcient conﬁdence
in the technology must be achieved with real-world data of the use-case. Further, one must consider how to obtain
corresponding measures for veriﬁcation and validation (V&V). Veriﬁcation: Are we building the product right? Validation: Are we
building the right product?
4

high-quality and consistent data required for the future model inference: generation of the data pipeline PoC that will
resemble the future inference pipeline that will take data from intended sources, transform it into features, and send it to
the model for inference.
Level 4 review – Demonstrate the utility towards one or more practical applications (each with multiple datasets), taking
care to communicate assumptions and limitations, and again reviewing data-readiness: evaluating the real-world data
for quality, validity, and availability. The review also evaluates security and privacy considerations – deﬁning these in
the requirements document with risk quantiﬁcation is a useful mechanism for mitigating potential issues (discussed
further in the Methods section).
Level 5 - Machine Learning “Capability”
At this stage the technology is more than an isolated model or algorithm,
it is a speciﬁc capability. For instance, producing depth images from stereo vision sensors on a mobile robot is a
real-world capability beyond the isolated ML technique of self-supervised learning for RGB stereo disparity estimation.
In many organizations this represents a technology transition or handoff from R&D to productization. MLTRL
makes this transition explicit, evolving the requisite work, guiding documentation, objectives and metrics, and team;
indeed, without MLTRL it is common for this stage to be erroneously leaped completely, as shown in Figure 2. An
interdisciplinary working group is deﬁned, as we start developing the technology in the context of a larger real-world
process – i.e., transitioning the model or algorithm from an isolated solution to a module of a larger application. Just as
the ML technology should no longer be owned entirely by ML experts, steps have been taken to share the technology
with others in the organization via demos, example scripts, and/or an API; the knowledge and expertise cannot remain
within the R&D team, let alone an individual ML developer. Graduation from Level 5 should be difﬁcult, as it signiﬁes
the dedication of resources to push this ML technology through productization. This transition is a common challenge
in deep-tech, sometimes referred to as “the valley of death” because project managers and decision-makers struggle
to allocate resources and align technology roadmaps to effectively move to Level 6, 7 and onward. MLTRL directly
addresses this challenge by stepping through the technology transition or handoff explicitly.
Level 5 data – For the most part consistent with Level 4. However, considerations need to be taken for scaling of data
pipelines: there will soon be more engineers accessing the existing data and adding more, and the data will be getting
much more use, including automated testing in later levels. With this scaling can come challenges with data governance.
The data pipelines likely do not mirror the structure of the teams or broader organization. This can result in data silos,
duplications, unclear responsibilities, and missing control of data over its entire lifecycle. These challenges and several
approaches to data governance (planning and control, organizational, and risk-based) are detailed in Janssen et al. [9].
Level 5 review – The veriﬁcation and validation (V&V) measures and steps deﬁned in earlier R&D stages (namely
Level 2) must all be completed by now, and the product-driven requirements (and corresponding V&V) are drafted at
this stage. We thoroughly review them here, and make sure there is stakeholder alignment (at the ﬁrst possible step of
productization, well ahead of deployment).
Level 6 - Application Development
The main work here is signiﬁcant software engineering to bring the code up to
product-caliber: This code will be deployed to users and thus needs to follow precise speciﬁcations, have comprehensive
test coverage, well-deﬁned APIs, etc. The resulting ML modules should be robustiﬁed towards one or more target
use-cases. If those target use-cases call for model explanations, the methods need to be built and validated alongside
the ML model, and tested for their efﬁcacy in faithfully interpreting the model’s decisions – crucially, this needs to be
in the context of downstream tasks and the end-users, as there is often a gap between ML explainability that serves
ML engineers rather than external stakeholders[12]. Similarly, we need to develop the ML modules with known data
challenges in mind, speciﬁcally to check the robustness of the model (and broader pipeline) to changes in the data
distribution between development and deployment.
The deployment setting(s) should be addressed thoroughly in the product requirements document, as ML serving (or
deploying) is an overloaded term that needs careful consideration. First, there are two main types: internal, as APIs
for experiments and other usage mainly by data science and ML teams, and external, meaning an ML model that
is embedded or consumed within a real application with real users. The serving constraints vary signiﬁcantly when
considering cloud deployment vs on-premise or hybrid, batch or streaming, open-source solution or containerized
executable, etc. Even more, the data at deployment may be limited due to compliance, or we may only have access to
encrypted data sources, some of which may only be accessible locally – these scenarios may call for advanced ML
approaches such as federated learning[13] and other privacy-oriented ML[14]. And depending on the application, an
ML model may not be deployable without restrictions; this typically means being embedded in a rules engine workﬂow
where the ML model acts like an advisor that discovers edge cases in rules. These deployment factors are hardly
considered in model and algorithm development despite signiﬁcant inﬂuence on modeling and algorithmic choices;
that said, hardware choices typically are considered early on, such as GPU versus edge devices. It is crucial to make
these systems decisions at Level 6–not too early that serving scenarios and requirements are uncertain, and not too late
5

that corresponding changes to model or application development risk deployment delays or failures. This marks a key
decision for the project lifecycle, as this expensive ML deployment risk is common without MLTRL (see Figure 2).
Level 6 data – Additional data should be collected and operationalized at this stage towards robustifying the ML
models, algorithms, and surrounding components. These include adversarial examples to check local robustness [15],
semantically-equivalent perturbations to check consistency of the model with respect to domain assumptions [16, 17],
and collecting data from different sources and checking how well the trained model generalizes to them. These
considerations are even more vital in the challenging deployment domains mentioned above with limited data access.
Level 6 review – Focus is on the code quality, the set of newly deﬁned product requirements, system SLA and SLO
requirements, data pipelines spec, and an AI ethics revisit now that we are closer to a real-world use-case. In particular,
regulatory compliance is mandated for this gated review; the data privacy and security laws are changing rapidly, and
missteps with compliance can make or break the project.
Level 7 - Integrations
For integrating the technology into existing production systems, we recommend the working
group has a balance of infrastructure engineers and applied AI engineers – this stage of development is vulnerable
to latent model assumptions and failure modes, and as such cannot be safely developed solely by software engineers.
Important tools for them to build together include:
• Tests that run use-case speciﬁc critical scenarios and data-slices – a proper risk-quantiﬁcation table will
highlight these.
• A “golden dataset” should be deﬁned to baseline the performance of each model and succession of models–see
the computer vision app example in Figure 4–for use in the continuous integration and deployment (CI/CD)
tests.
• Metamorphic testing: a software engineering methodology for testing a speciﬁc set of relations between the
outputs of multiple inputs. When integrating ML modules into larger systems, a codiﬁed list of metamorphic
relations[18] can provide valuable veriﬁcation and validation measures and steps.
• Data intervention tests that seek data bugs at various points in the pipelines, downstream to measure the
potential effects of data processing and ML on consumers or users of that data, as well as upstream at data
ingestion or creation. Rather than using model performance as a proxy for data quality, it is crucial to use
intervention tests that instead catch data errors with mechanisms speciﬁc to data validation.
These tests in particular help mitigate underspeciﬁcation in ML pipelines, a key obstacle to reliably training models that
behave as expected in deployment[19]. On the note of reliability, it is important that quality assurance engineers (QA)
play a key role here and through Level 9, overseeing data processes to ensure privacy and security, and covering audits
for downstream accountability of AI methods.
Level 7 data – In addition to the data for test suites discussed above, this level calls for QA to prioritize data governance:
how data is obtained, managed, used, and secured by the organization. This was earlier suggested in level 5 (in order to
preempt related technical debt), and essential here at the main junction for integration, which may create additional
governance challenges in light of downstream effects and consumers.
Level 7 review – The review should focus on the data pipelines and test suites; a scorecard like the ML Testing
Rubric[20] is useful. The group should also emphasize ethical considerations at this stage, as they may be more
adequately addressed now (where there are many test suites put into place) rather than close to shipping later.
Level 8 - Flight-ready
The technology is demonstrated to work in its ﬁnal form and under expected conditions.
There should be additional tests implemented at this stage covering deployment aspects, notably A/B tests, blue/green
deployment tests, shadow testing, and canary testing, which enable proactive and gradual testing for changing ML
methods and data. Ahead of deployment, the CI/CD system should be ready to regularly stress test the overall system
and ML components. In practice, problems stemming from real-world data are impossible to anticipate and design for –
an upstream data provider could change formats unexpectedly or a physical event could cause the customer behavior to
change. Running models in shadow mode for a period of time would help stress test the infrastructure and evaluate how
susceptible the ML model(s) will be to performance regressions caused by data. We observe that ML systems with
data-oriented architectures are more readily tested in this manner, and better surface data quality issues, data drifts, and
concept drifts – this is discussed later in the Beyond Software Engineering section. To close this stage, the key decision
is go or no-go for deployment, and when.
Level 8 data – If not already in place, there absolutely needs to be mechanisms for automatically logging data
distributions alongside model performance once deployed.
6

Level 8 review – A diligent walkthrough of every technical and product requirement, showing the corresponding
validations, and the review panel is representative of the full slate of stakeholders.
Level 9 - Deployment
In deploying AI and ML technologies, there is signiﬁcant need to monitor the current version,
and explicit considerations towards improving the next version. For instance, performance degradation can be hidden
and critical, and feature improvements often bring unintended consequences and constraints. Thus at this level, the
focus is on maintenance engineering–i.e., methods and pipelines for ML monitoring and updating. Monitoring for data
quality, concept drift, and data drift is crucial; no AI system without thorough tests for these can reliably be deployed.
By the same token there must be automated evaluation and reporting – if actuals[21] are available, continuous evaluation
should be enabled, but in many cases actuals come with a delay, so it is essential to record model outputs to allow for
efﬁcient evaluation after the fact. To these ends, the ML pipeline should be instrumented to log system metadata, model
metadata, and data itself.
Monitoring for data quality issues and data drifts is crucial to catch deviations in model behavior, particularly those that
are non-obvious in the model or product end-performance. Data logging is unique in the context of ML systems: data
logs should capture statistical properties of input features and model predictions, and capture their anomalies. With
monitoring for data, concept, and model drifts, the logs are to be sent to the relevant systems, applied, and research
engineers. The latter is often non-trivial, as the model server is not ideal for model “observability” because it does not
necessarily have the right data points to link the complex layers needed to analyze and debug models. To this end,
MLTRL requires the drift tests to be implemented at stages well ahead of deployment, earlier than is standard practice.
Again we advocate for data-ﬁrst architectures rather than the software industry-standard design by services (discussed
later), which aids in surfacing and logging the relevant data types and slices when monitoring AI systems. For retraining
and improving models, monitoring must be enabled to catch training-serving skew and let the team know when to
retrain. Towards model improvements, adding or modifying features can often have unintended consequences, such as
introducing latencies or even bias. To mitigate these risks, MLTRL has an embedded switchback here: any component
or module changes to the deployed version must cycle back to Level 7 (integrations stage) or earlier. Additionally,
for quality ML products, we stress a deﬁned communication path for user feedback without roadblocks to R&D; we
encourage real-world feedback all the way to research, providing valuable problem constraints and perspectives.
Level 9 data – Proper mechanisms for logging and inspecting data (alongside models) is critical for deploying reliable
AI and ML – systems that learn on data have unique monitoring requirements (detailed above). In addition to the
infrastructure and test suites covering data and environment shifts, it’s important for product managers and other owners
to be on top of data policy shifts in domains such as ﬁnance and healthcare.
Level 9 review – The review at this stage is unique, as it also helps in lifecycle management: at a regular cadence
that depends on the deployed system and domain of use, owners and other stakeholders are to revisit this review and
recommend switchbacks if needed (discussed in the Methods section). This additional oversight at deployment is
shown to help deﬁne regimented release cycles of updated versions, and provide another “eye” check for stale model
performance or other system abnormalities.
Notice MLTRL is deﬁned as stages or levels, yet much of the value in practice is realized in the transitions: MLTRL
enables teams to move from one level to the next reliably and efﬁciently, and provides a guide for how teams and
objectives evolve with the progressing technology.
Discussion
MLTRL is designed to apply to many real-world use-cases involving data and ML, from simple regression models
used for predictive modeling energy demand or anomaly detection in datacenters, to real-time modeling in rideshare
applications and motion planning in warehouse robotics. For simple use-cases MLTRL may be overkill, and a subset
may sufﬁce – for instance, model cards as demonstrated by Google for basic image classiﬁcation. Yet this is a ﬁne line,
as the same cards-only approach in the popular “Huggingface” codebases are too simplistic for the language models
they represent, deployed in domains that carry signiﬁcant consequences. MLTRL becomes more valuable with more
complex, larger systems and environments, especially in risk averse domains. We thoroughly discuss this through
several real uses of MLTRL below.
7

Figure 2: Most ML and AI projects live in these sections of MLTRL, not concerned with fundamental R&D – that is,
completely using existing methods and implementations, and even pretrained models. In the left diagram, the arrows
show a common development pattern with MLTRL in industry: projects go back to the ML toolbox to develop new
features (dashed line), and frequent, incremental improvements are often a practice of jumping back a couple levels to
Level 7 (which is the main systems integrations stage). At Levels 7 and 8 we stress the need for tests that run use-case
speciﬁc critical scenarios and data-slices, which are highlighted by a proper risk-quantiﬁcation matrix [22]. Cycling
back to previous lower levels is not just a late-stage mechanism in MLTRL, but rather “switchbacks” occur throughout
the process (as discussed in the Methods section and throughout the text). In the right diagram we show the more
common approach in industry (without using our framework), which skips essential technology transition stages – ML
Engineers push straight through to deployment, ignoring important productization and systems integration factors. This
will be discussed in more detail in the Methods section.
EXAMPLES
Human-machine visual inspection
While most ML projects begin with a speciﬁc task and/or dataset, there are many that originate in ML theory without
any target application – i.e., projects starting MLTRL at level 0 or 1. These projects nicely demonstrate the utility of
MLTRL built-in switchbacks, bifurcating paths, and iteration with domain experts. An example we discuss here is a
novel approach to representing data in generative vision models from Naud & Lavin[23], which was then developed into
state-of-the-art unsupervised anomaly detection, and targeted for two human-machine visual inspection applications:
First, industrial anomaly detection, notably in precision manufacturing, to identify potential errors for human-expert
manual inspection. Second, using the model to improve the accuracy and efﬁciency of neuropathology, the microscopic
examination of neurosurgical specimens for cancerous tissue. In these human-machine teaming use-cases there are
speciﬁc challenges impeding practical, reliable use:
• Hidden feedback loops can be common and problematic in real-world systems inﬂuencing their own training
data: over time the behavior of users may evolve to select data inputs they prefer for the speciﬁc AI system,
representing some skew from the training data. In this neuropathology case, selecting whole-slide images that
are uniquely difﬁcult for manual inspection, or even biased by that individual user. Similarly we see underlying
healthcare processes can act as hidden confounders, resulting in unreliable decision support tools[26].
• Model availability can be limited in many deployment settings: for example, on-premises deployments
(common in privacy preserving domains like healthcare and banking), edge deployments (common in industrial
use-cases such as manufacturing and agriculture), or from the infrastructure’s inability to scale to the volume
of requests. This can severely limit the team’s ability to monitor, debug, and improve deployed models.
• Uncertainty estimation is valuable in many AI scenarios, yet not straightforward to implement in practice.
This is further complicated with multiple data sources and users, each injecting generally unknown amounts of
noise and uncertainties. In medical applications it is of critical importance, to provide measures of conﬁdence
and sensitivity, and for AI researchers through end-users. In anomaly detection, various uncertainty measures
can help calibrate the false-positive versus false-negative rates, which can be very domain speciﬁc.
8

Figure 3: The maturity of each ML technology is tracked via TRL Cards, which we describe in the Methods section.
Here is an example reﬂecting a neuropathology machine vision use-case[23], detailed in the Discussion Section. Note
this is a subset of a full TRL Card, which in reality lives as a full document in an internal wiki. Notice the card
clearly communicates the data sources, versions, and assumptions. This helps mitigate invalid assumptions about
performance and generalizability when moving from R&D to production, and promotes the use of real-world data
earlier in the project lifecycle. We recommend documenting datasets thoroughly with semantic versioning and tools
such as datasheets for datasets[24], and following data accountability best-practices as they evolve (see [25]).
• Costs of edge cases can be signiﬁcant, sometimes risking expensive machine downtime or medical failures.
This is exacerbated in anomaly detection anomalies are by deﬁnition rare so they can be difﬁcult to train for,
especially for the anomalies that are completely unseen until they arise in the wild.
• End-user trust can be difﬁcult to achieve, often preventing the adoption of ML applications, particularly in
the healthcare domain and other highly regulated industries.
These and additional ML challenges such as data privacy and interpretability can inhibit ML adoption in clinical practice
and industrial settings, but can be mitigated with MLTRL processes. We’ll describe how in the context of the Naud
& Lavin[23] example, which began at level 0 with theoretical ML work on manifold geometries, and at level 5 was
directed towards specialized human-machine teaming applications utilizing the same ML method under-the-hood.
• Levels 0-1 – From open-ended exploration of data-representation properties in various Riemmanian manifold
curvatures, we derived from ﬁrst principles and empirically identiﬁed a property with hyperbolic manifolds:
when used as a latent space for embedding data without labels, the geometry organizes the data by it’s implicit
hierarchical structure. Unsupervised computer vision was identiﬁed in reviews as a promising direction for
proof-of-principle work.
• Level 2 – One approach for validating the earlier theoretical developments was to generate synthetic data to
isolate very speciﬁc features in data we would expect represented in the latent manifold. The results showed
promise for anomaly detection – using the latent representation of data to automatically identify images that
are out-of-the-ordinary (anomalous), and also using the manifold to inspect how they are semantically different.
Further, starting with an implicitly probabilistic modeling approach implied uncertainty estimation could be
a valuable feature downstream. This made the level 2 key decision point clear: proceed with applied ML
development.
• Levels 3-5 – Proof-of-concept development and reviews demonstrated promise for several commercial appli-
cations relevant to the business, and also highlighted the need for several key features (deﬁned as R&D and
product requirements): interpretability (towards end-user trust), uncertainty quantiﬁcation (to show conﬁdence
scores), and human-in-the-loop (for domain expertise). Without the MLTRL PoC steps and review processes,
these features can often be delayed until beta testing or overlooked completely – for example, the failures of
applying IBM Watson in medical applications [27]. For this technology, the applications to develop towards
are anomaly detection in histopathology and manufacturing, speciﬁcally inspecting whole-slide images of
neural tissue, and detecting defects in metallic surfaces, respectively.
9

From the systems perspective, we suggest quantifying the uncertainties of components and propagating them
through the system, which can improve safety and trust. Probabilistic ML methods, rooted in Bayesian
probability theory, provide a principled approach to representing and manipulating uncertainty about models
and predictions[28]. For this reason we advocate strongly for probabilistic models and algorithms in AI
systems. In this machine vision example, the MLTRL technical requirements speciﬁcally called for a
probabilistic generative model to readily quantify various types of uncertainties and propagate them forward to
the visualization component of the pipeline, and the product requirements called for the downstream conﬁdence
and sensitivity measures to be exposed to the end-user. Component uncertainties must be assembled in a
principled way to yield a meaningful measure of overall system uncertainty, based on which safe decisions can
be made[29]. See the Methods section for more on uncertainty in AI systems.
The early checks for data management and governance proved valuable here, as the application areas dealt
with highly sensitive data that would signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the design of data pipelines and test suites. In
both the neuropathology and manufacturing applications, the data management checks also raised concerns
about hidden feedback loops, where users may unintentionally skew the data inputs when using the anomaly
detection models in practice, for instance biasing the data towards speciﬁc subsets they subjectively need help
with. Incorporating domain experts this early in the project lifecycle helped inform veriﬁcation and validation
steps to help be robust to the hidden feedback loops. Not to mention their input guided us towards user-centric
metrics for performance, which can often skew from ML metrics in important ways – for instance, the typical
acceptance ratio for false positives versus false negatives doesn’t apply to select edge cases, for which our
hierarchical anomaly classiﬁcation scheme was useful [23].
From prior reviews and TRL card documentation, we also identiﬁed the value of synthetic data generation
into application development: anomalies are by deﬁnition rare so they are hard to come by in real datasets,
especially with evolving environments in deployment settings, so the ability to generate synthetic datasets for
anomaly detection can accelerate the level 6-9 pipeline, and help ensure more reliable models in the wild.
• Level 6 (medical) – The medical inspection application experienced a bifurcation with product work proceed-
ing while additional R&D was desired to explore improved data processing methods, while engaging with
clinicians and medical researchers for feedback. Proceeding through the levels in a non-linear, non-monotonic
way is common in MLTRL and encouraged by various switchback mechanisms (detailed in the Methods
section). These practices – intentional switchbacks, frequent engagement with domain experts and users – can
help mitigate methodological ﬂaws and underlying biases that are common when applying ML to clinical
applications. For instance, recent work by Roberts et al. [30] investigated 2,122 studies applying ML to
COVID-19 use-cases, ﬁnding that none of the models are sufﬁcient for clinical use due to methodological ﬂaws
and/or underlying biases. They go on to give many recommendations – some we’ve discussed in the context of
MLTRL, and more – which should be reviewed for higher quality medical-ML models and documentation.
• Level 6-9 (manufacturing) – Overall these stages proceeded regularly and efﬁciently for the defect detection
product. MLTRL’s embedded switchback from level 9 to 4 proved particularly useful in this lifecycle, both
for incorporating feedback from the ﬁeld and for updating with research progress. On the former, the data
distribution shifts from one deployment setting to another signiﬁcantly affected false-positive versus false-
negative calibrations, so this was added as a feature to the CI/CD pipelines. On the latter, the built-in touch
points for real-world feedback and data into the continued ML research provided valuable constraints to
help guide research, and product managers could readily understand what capabilities could be available for
product integration and when (readily communicated with TRL Cards) – for instance, later adding support for
video-based inspection for defects, and tooling for end-users to reason about uncertainty estimates (which
helps establish trust).
• Level 7-9 (medical) – For productization the “neuropathology copilot” was handed off to a partner pharmaceu-
tical company to integrate into their existing software systems. The MLTRL documentation and communication
streamlined the technology transfer, which can often by a time-consuming manual process. If not pursuing
this path, the product would’ve likely faced many of the medical-ML deployment challenges with model
availability and data access; MLTRL cannot overcome the technical challenges of deploying on-premises, but
the manifestation of those challenges as performance regressions, data shifts, privacy and ethics concerns, etc.
can be mitigated by the system-level checks and strategies MLTRL puts forth.
Computer vision with real and synthetic data
Advancements in physics engines and graphics processing have advanced AI environment and data-generation capabili-
ties, putting increased emphasis on transitioning models across the simulation-to-reality gap [31, 32, 33]. To develop a
computer vision application for automated recycling, we leveraged the Unity Perception [34] package, a toolkit for
generating large-scale datasets for perception-based ML training and validation. We produced synthetic images to
10

A?U?HEJC?H=OOEBE?=PEKJLELAHEJA
 =¡
 >¡
,VPRGHO
FRQğGHQFHWKUHVKROG"
,VGHWHFWHGREMHFWLQ
WDUJHWVHW"
3URYLGH
FRUUHVSRQGLQJ
UHF\FOLQJ
LQVWUXFWLRQV
,QLWLDWH
KXPDQ
LQWKHORRS
SURWRFRO
12
<(6
<(6
Figure 4: Computer vision pipeline for an automated recycling application (a), which contains multiple ML models,
user input, and image data from various sources. Complicated logic such as this can mask ML model performance lags
and failures, and also emphasized the need for R&D-to-product hand off described in MLTRL. Additional emphasis is
placed on ML tests that consider the mix of real-world data with user annotations (b, right) and synthetic data generated
by Unity AI’s Perception tool and structured domain randomization (b, left).
complement real-world data sources (Figure 4). This application exempliﬁes three important challenges in ML product
development that MLTRL helps overcome:
• Multiple and disparate data sources are common in deployed ML pipelines yet often ignored in R&D.
For instance, upstream data providers can change formats unexpectedly, or a physical event could cause the
customer behavior to change. It is nearly impossible to anticipate and design for all potential problems with
real-world data and deployment. This computer vision system implemented pipelines and extended test suites
to cover open-source benchmark data, real user data, and synthetic data.
• Hidden performance degradation can be challenging to detect and debug in ML systems because gradual
changes in performance may not be immediately visible. Common reasons for this challenge are that the
ML component may be one step in a series. Additionally, local/isolated changes to an ML component’s
performance may not directly affect the observed downstream performance. We can see both issues in the
illustrated logic diagram for the automated recycling app (Figure 4). A slight degradation in the initial CV
model may not heavily inﬂuence the following user input. However, when an uncommon input image appears
in the future, the app fails altogether.
• Model usage requirements can make or break an ML product. For example, the Netﬂix “$1M Prize” solution
was never fully deployed because of signiﬁcant engineering costs in real-world scenarios v. For example,
engineering teams must communicate memory usage, compute power requirements, hardware availability,
network privacy, and latency to the ML teams. ML teams often only understand the statistics or ML theory
behind a model but not the system requirements or how it scales.
We next elucidate these challenges and how MLTRL helps overcome them in the context of this project’s lifecycle. This
project started at level 4, using largely existing ML methods with a target use-case.
• Level 4 – For this project, we validated most of the components in other projects. Speciﬁcally, the computer
vision (CV) model for object recognition and classiﬁcation was an off-the-shelf model. The synthetic data
generation method used Unity Perception, a well-established open-source project. Though this allowed us to
vnetﬂixtechblog.com/netﬂix-recommendations-beyond-the-5-stars-part-1
11

skip the earlier levels, many challenges arise when combining ML elements that were independently validated
and developed. The MLTRL prototype-caliber code checkpoint ensures that the existing code components
are validated and helps avoid poorly deﬁned borders and abstractions between components. ML pipelines
often grow out of glue code, and our regimented code checkpoints motivate well-architected software that
minimizes these danger spots.
• Level 5 – The problematic “valley of death”, mentioned earlier in the level 5 deﬁnitions, is less prevalent in use-
cases like this that start at a higher MLTRL level with a speciﬁc product deliverable. In this case, the product
deliverable was a real-time object recognition and classiﬁcation of trash for a mobile recycling application.
Still, this stage is critical for the requirements and V&V transition. This stage mitigates failure risks due to the
disparate data sources integrated at various steps in this CV system and accounted for the end-user compute
constraints for mobile computing. Speciﬁcally, the TRL cards from earlier stages surfaced potential issues
with imbalanced datasets and the need for speciﬁc synthetic images. These considerations are essential for the
data readiness and testing V&V in the productization requirements. Data quality and availability issues often
present huge blockers because teams discover them too late in the game. Data-readiness is one class of many
example issues teams face without MLTRL, as depicted in Fig. 2.
• Level 6 – We were re-using a well-understood model and deployment pipeline in this use-case, meaning our
primary challenge was around data reliability. For the problem of recognizing and classifying trash, building a
reliable data source using only real data is almost impossible due to diversity, class imbalance, and annotation
challenges. Therefore we chose to develop a synthetic data generator to create training data. At this MLTRL
level, we needed to ensure that the synthetic data generator created sufﬁciently diverse data and exposed the
controls needed to alter the data distribution in production. Therefore, we carefully exposed APIs using the
Unity Perception package, which allowed us to control lighting, camera parameters, target and non-target
object placements and counts, and background textures. Additionally, we ensured that the object labeling
matched the real-world annotator instructions and that output data formats matched real-world counterparts.
Lastly, we established a set of statistical tests to compare synthetic and real-world data distributions. The
MLTRL checks ensured that we understood, and in this case, adequately designed our data sources to meet
in-production requirements.
• Level 7 – From the previous level’s R&D TRL cards and observations, we knew relatively early in produc-
tization that we would need to assume bias for the real data sources due to class imbalance and imperfect
annotations. Therefore we designed tests to monitor these in the deployed application. MLTRL imposes these
critical deployment tests well ahead of deployment, where we can easily overlook ML-speciﬁc failure modes.
• Level 8 – As we suggested earlier, problems that stem from real-world data are near impossible to anticipate
and design for, implying the need for level 8 ﬂight-readiness preparations. Given that we were generating
synthetic images (with structured domain randomization) to complement the real data, we created tests for
different data distribution shifts at multiple points in the classiﬁcation pipeline. We also implemented thorough
shadow tests ahead of deployment to evaluate how susceptible the ML model(s) to performance regressions
caused by data. Additionally, we also implemented these as CI/CD tests over various deployment scenarios (or
mobile device computing speciﬁcations). Without these fully covered, documented, and automated, it would
be impossible to pass level 8 review and deploy the technology.
• Level 9 – Post-deployment, the monitoring tests prescribed at Levels 8 and 9 and the three main code quality
checkpoints in the MLTRL process help surface hidden performance degradation problems, common with
complex pipelines of data ﬂows and various models. The switchbacks depicted in Fig. 2 are typical in CV
use-cases. For instance, miscalibrations in models pre-trained on synthetic data and ﬁne-tuned on newer real
data can be common yet difﬁcult to catch. However, the level 7 to 4 switchback is designed precisely for these
challenges and product improvements.
Accelerating scientiﬁc discovery with massive particle physics simulators
Computational models and simulation are key to scientiﬁc advances at all scales, from particle physics, to material
design and drug discovery, to weather and climate science, and to cosmology[35]. Many simulators model the forward
evolution of a system (coinciding with the arrow of time), such as the interaction of elementary particles, diffusion of
gasses, folding of proteins, or evolution of the universe in the largest scale. The task of inference refers to ﬁnding initial
conditions or global parameters of such systems that can lead to some observed data representing the ﬁnal outcome
of a simulation. In probabilistic programming[36], this inference task is performed by deﬁning prior distributions
over any latent quantities of interest, and obtaining posterior distributions over these latent quantities conditioned
on observed outcomes (for example, experimental data) using Bayes rule. This process, in effect, corresponds to
inverting the simulator such that we go from the outcomes towards the inputs that caused the outcomes. In the
“Etalumis” project[37] (“simulate” spelled backwards), we are using probabilistic programming methods to invert
12

existing, large-scale simulators via Bayesian inference. The project is as an interdisciplinary collaboration of specialists
in probabilistic machine learning, particle physics, and high-performance computing, all essential elements to achieve
the project outcomes. Even more, it is a multi-year project spanning multiple countries, companies, university labs, and
government research organizations, bringing signiﬁcant challenges in project management, technology coordination
and validation. Aided by MLTRL, there were several key challenges to overcome in this project that are common in
scientiﬁc-ML projects:
• Integrating with legacy systems is common in scientiﬁc and industrial use-cases, where ML methods are
applied with existing sensor networks, infrastructure, and codebases. In this case, particle physics domain
experts at CERN are using the SHERPA simulator[38], a 1 million line codebase developed over the last
two decades. Rewriting the simulator for ML use-cases is infeasible due to the codebase size and buried
domain knowledge, and new ML experts would need signiﬁcant onboarding to gain working knowledge of
the codebase. It is also common to work with legacy data infrastructure, which can be poorly organized for
machine learning (let alone preprocessed and clean) and unlikely to have followed best practices such as
dataset versioning.
• Coupling hardware and software architectures is non-trivial when deploying ML at scale, as performance
constraints are often considered in deployment tests well after model and algorithm development, not to
mention the expertise is often split across disjoint teams. This can be exacerbated in scientiﬁc-ML when
scaling to supercomputing infrastructure, and working with massive datasets that can be in the terabytes and
petabytes.
• Interpretability is often a desired feature yet difﬁcult to deliver and validate in practice. Particularly in
scientiﬁc ML applications such as this, mechanisms and tooling for domain experts to interpret predictions
and models are key for usability (integrating in workﬂows and building trust).
To this end, we will go through the MLTRL levels one by one, demonstrating how they ensure the above scientiﬁc ML
challenges are diligently addressed.
• Level 0 – The theoretical developments leading to Etalumis are immense and well discussed in Baydin et
al [37]. In particular the ML theory and methods are in a relatively nascent area of ML and mathematics,
probabilistic programming. New territory can present more challenges compared to well-traveled research
paths, for instance in computer vision with neural networks. It is thus helpful to have a guiding framework
when making a new path in ML research, such as MLTRL where early reviews help theoretical ML projects
get legs.
• Level 1-2 – Running low-level experiments in simple testbeds is generally straightforward when working
with probabilistic programming and simulation; in a sense, this easy iteration over experiments is what
PPL are designed for. It was additionally helpful in this project to have rich data grounded in physical
constraints, allowing us to better isolate model behaviors (rather than data assumptions and noise). The
MLTRL requirements documentation is particularly useful for the standard PPL experimentation workﬂow:
model, infer, criticize, repeat (or Box’s loop) [39]. The evaluation step (i.e. criticizing the model) can be
more nuanced than checking summary statistics as in deep learning and similar ML workﬂows. It is thus a
useful practice to write down the criticism methods, metrics, and expected results as veriﬁcations for speciﬁc
research requirements, rather than iterating over Box’s loop without a priori targets. Further, because this
research project had a speciﬁc target application early in the process (the SHERPA simulator), the project
timeline beneﬁted from recognizing simulator-integration constraints upfront as requirements, not to mention
data availability concerns, which are often overlooked in early R&D levels. It was additionally useful to have
CERN scientists as domain experts in the reviews at these R&D levels.
• Level 3 – Systems development can be challenging with probabilistic programming, again because it is
relatively nascent and much of the out-of-the-box tools and infrastructure are not there as in most ML and
deep learning. Here in particular there’s a novel (unproven) approach for systems integration: a probabilistic
programming execution protocol was developed to reroute random number draws in the stochastic simulator
codebase (SHERPA) to the probabilistic programming system, thus enabling the system to control stochastic
choices in SHERPA and run inference on its execution traces, all while keeping the legacy codebase intact! A
more invasive method that modiﬁes SHERPA would not have been acceptable. If it were not for MLTRL forcing
systems considerations this early in the Etalumis project lifecycle, this could have been an insurmountable
hurdle later when multiple codebases and infrastructures come into play. By the same token, systems planning
here helped enable the signiﬁcant HPC scaling later: the team deﬁned the need for HPC support well ahead
of actually running HPC, in order to build the prototype code in a way that would readily map to HPC (in
addition to local or cloud CPU and GPU). The data engineering challenges in this system’s development
13

nonetheless persist – that is, data pipelines and APIs that can integrate various sources and infrastructures, and
normalize data from various databases – although MLTRL helps consider these at the an earlier stage that can
help inform architecture design.
• Level 4 – The natural “embedded switchback” from Level 4 to 2 (see the Methods section) provided an efﬁcient
path toward developing an improved, amortized inference method–i.e., using a computationally expensive
deep learning based inference algorithm to train only once, in order to then do fast, repeated inference in the
SHERPA model. Leveraging cyclic R&D methods, the Etalumis project could iteratively improve inference
methods without stalling the broader system development, ultimately producing the largest scale posterior
inference in a Turing-complete probabilistic programming system. Achieving this scale through iterative R&D
along the main project lifecycle was additionally enabled by working with with NERSC engineers and their
Cori supercomputer to progressively scale smaller R&D tests to the goal supercomputing deployment scenario.
Typical ML workﬂows that follow simple linear progressions[6, 40] would not enable ramping up in this
fashion, and can actual prevent scaling R&D to production due to lack of systems engineering processes (like
MLTRL) connecting research to deployment.
• Level 5 – Multi-org international collaborations can be riddled with communication and teamwork issues,
in particular at this pivotal stage where teams transition from R&D to application and product development.
First, MLTRL as a lingua franca was key to the team effort bringing Etalumis proof-of-concept into the
larger effort of applying it to massive high-energy physics simulators. It was also critical at this stage to
clearly communicate end-user requirements across the various teams and organizations, which must be deﬁned
in MLTRL requirements docs with V&V measures – the essential science-user requirements were mainly
for model and prediction interpretability, uncertainty estimation, and code usability. If there are concerns
over these features, MLTRL switchbacks can help to quickly cycle back and improve modeling choices in a
transparent, efﬁcient way – generally in ML projects, these fundamental issues with usability are caught too
late, even after deployment. In the probabilistic generative model setting we’ve deﬁned in Etalumis, Bayesian
inference gives results that are interpretable because they include exact locations and processes in the model
that are associated with each prediction. Working with ML methods that are inherently interpretable, we are
well-positioned to deliver interpretable interfaces for the end-users later in the project lifecycle.
• Level 6-9 – The standard MLTRL protocol apply in these application-to-deployment stages, with several
Etalumis-speciﬁc highlights. First, given the signiﬁcant research contributions in both probabilistic pro-
gramming and scientiﬁc-ML, it’s important to share the code publicly. The development and deployment
of the open-source code repository PPXvi branched into a separate MLTRL path from the Etalumis path
for deployment at CERN. It’s useful to have systems engineering enable clean separation of requirements,
deployments, etc. when there are different development and product lifecycles originating from a common
parent project. For example, in this case it was useful to employ MLTRL switchbacks in the open-sourcing
process, isolated from the CERN application paths, in order to add support for additional programming
languages so PPX can apply to more scientiﬁc simulators – both directions beneﬁted signiﬁcantly the from
the data pipelines considerations brought up levels earlier, where open-sourcing required different data APIs
and data transformations to enable broad usability. Second, related to the open-source code deliverable and
the scientiﬁc ML user requirements we noted above, the late stages of MLTRL reviews include higher level
stakeholders and speciﬁc end-users, yet again enforcing these scientiﬁc usability requirements are met. An
example result of this in Etalumis is the ability to output human-readable execution traces of the SHERPA
runs and inference, enabling never before possible step-by-step interpretability of the black-box simulator.
The scientiﬁc ML perspective additionally brings to forefront an end-to-end data perspective that is pertinent in
essentially all ML use-cases: these systems are only useful to the extent they provide comprehensive data analyses that
integrate the data consumed and generated in these workﬂows, from raw domain data to machine-learned models. These
data analyses drive reproducibility, explainability, and experiment data understanding, which are critical requirements
in scientiﬁc endeavors and ML broadly.
Causal inference & ML in medicine
Understanding cause and effect relationships is crucial for accurate and actionable decision-making in many settings,
from healthcare and epidemiology, to economics and government policy development. Unfortunately, standard
machine learning algorithms can only ﬁnd patterns and correlation in data, and as correlation is not causation, their
predictions cannot be conﬁdently used for understanding cause and effect. Indeed, relying on correlations extracted
from observational data to guide decision-making can lead to embarrassing, costly, and even dangerous mistakes,
such as concluding that asthma reduces pneumonia mortality risk [41], and that smoking reduces risk of developing
vigithub.com/pyprob/ppx
14

severe COVID-19 [42]. Fortunately, there has been much recent development in a ﬁeld known as causal inference that
can quantitatively make sense of cause and effect from purely observational data[43]. The ability of causal inference
algorithms to quantify causal impact rests on a number of important checks and assumptions–beyond those employed
in standard machine learning or purely statistical methodology–that must be carefully deliberated over during their
development and training. These speciﬁc checks and assumptions are as follows:
• Specifying cause-and-effect relationships between relevant variables– One of the most important assump-
tions underlying causal inference is the structure of the causal relations between quantities of interest. The
gold standard for determining causal relations is to perform a randomised controlled trial, but in most cases
these cannot be employed due to ethical concerns, technological infeasibility, or prohibitive cost. In these
situations, domain experts have to be consulted to determine the causal relationships. It is important in these
situations to carefully address the manner in which such domain knowledge was extracted from experts, the
number and diversity of experts involved, the amount of consensus between experts, and so on. The need for
careful documentation of this knowledge and its periodic review is made clear in the MLTRL framework, as
we shall see below.
• Identiﬁability– Another vital component of building causal models is whether the causal question of interest
is identiﬁable from the causal structure speciﬁed for the model together with observational (and sometimes
experimental) data.
• Adjusting for and monitoring confounding bias– An important aspect of causal model performance, not
present in standard machine learning algorithms, is confounding bias adjustment. The standard approach is to
employ propensity score matching to remove such bias. However, the quality of bias adjustment achieved in
any speciﬁc instance with such propensity-based matching methods needs to be checked and documented,
with alternate bias adjusting procedure required if appropriate levels of bias adjustment are not achieved[44].
• Sensitivity analysis– As causal estimates are based on generally untestable assumptions, such as observing all
relevant confounders, it is vital to determine how sensitive the resulting predictions are to potential violations
of these assumptions.
• Consistency– It is crucial to understand if the learned causal estimate provably converges to the true causal
effect in the limit of inﬁnite sample size. However, causal models cannot be validated by standard held-out
tests, but rather require randomization or special data collection strategies to evaluate their predictions [45, 46].
The MLTRL framework makes transparent the need to carefully document and defend these assumptions, thus ensuring
the safe and robust creation, deployment, and maintenance of causal models. We elucidate this with recent work by
Richens et al.[47], developing a causal approach to computer-assisted diagnosis which outperforms previous purely
machine learning based methods. To this end, we will go through the MLTRL levels one by one, demonstrating how
they ensure the above speciﬁc checks and assumptions are naturally accounted for. This should provide a blueprint for
how to employ the MLTRL levels in other causal inference applications.
• Level 0 – When initially faced with a causal inference task, the ﬁrst step is always to understand the causal
relationships between relevant variables. For instance, in Richens et al. [47], the ﬁrst step toward building
the diagnostic model was specifying the causal relationships between the diverse set risk factors, diseases,
and symptoms included in the model. To learn these relations, doctors and healthcare professionals were
consulted to employ their expansive medical domain knowledge which was robustly evaluated by additional
independent groups of healthcare professionals. The MLTRL framework ensured this issue is dealt with and
documented correctly, as such knowledge is required to progress from Level 0; failure to do this has plagued
similar healthcare AI projects [48].
The next step of any causal analysis is to understand whether the causal question of interest is uniquely
identiﬁable from the causal structure speciﬁed for the model together with observational and experimental data.
In this medical diagnosis example, identiﬁcation was crucial to establish, as the causal question of interest,
“would the observed symptoms not be present had a speciﬁc disease been cured?”, was highly non-trivial.
Again, MLTRL ensures this vital aspect of model building is carefully considered, as a mathematical proof of
identiﬁability would be required to graduate from Level 0.
With both the causal structure and identiﬁability result in hand, one can progress to Level 1.
• Level 1 – At this level, the goal is to take the estimand for the identiﬁed causal question of interest and
devise a way to estimate it from data. To do this one will need efﬁcient ways to adjust for confounﬁng bias.
The standard approach is to employ propensity score-based methods to remove such bias when the target
decision is binary, and use multi-stage ML models adhering to the assumed causal structure[49] for continuous
target decisions (and high-dimensional data in general). However, the quality of bias adjustment achieved in
any speciﬁc instance with propensity-based matching methods needs to be checked and documented, with
15

alternate bias adjusting procedure required if appropriate levels of bias adjustment are not achieved[44]. As
above, MLTRL ensures transparency and adherence to this important aspect of causal model development, as
without it a project cannot graduate from Level 1. Even more, MLTRL ensures tests for confounding bias
are developed early-on and maintained throughout later stages to deployment. Still, in many cases, it is not
possible to completely remove confounding in the observed data. TRL Cards offer a transparent way to declare
speciﬁc limitations of a causal ML method.
• Level 2 – PoC-level tests for causal models must go beyond that of typical ML models. As discussed above,
to ensure the estimated causal effects are robust to the assumptions required for their derivation, sensitivity
to these assumptions must be analysed. Such sensitivity analysis is often limited to R&D experiments or
a post-hoc feature of ML products. MLTRL on the other hand requires this throughout the lifecycle as
components of ML test suites and gated reviews. In the case of causal ML, best practice is to employ sensitivity
analysis for this robustness check[50]. MLTRL ensures this check is highlighted and adhered to, and no model
will end up graduating Level 2–let alone being deployed–unless it is passed.
• Level 3 – Coding best practices, as in general ML applications.
• Level 4-5 – There are additional tests to consider when taking causal models from research to production,
in particular at Level 4–proof of concept demonstration in a real scenario. Consistency, for example, is an
important property of causal methods that informs us whether the method provably converges to the true
causal graph in the limit of inﬁnite sample size. Quantifying consistency in the test suite is critical when
datasets change from controlled laboratory settings to open-world, and when the application scales. And
PoC validation steps are more efﬁcient with MLTRL because the process facilitates early speciﬁcation of the
evaluation metric for a causal model in Level 2. Causal models cannot be validated by standard held-out tests,
but rather require randomization or special data collection strategies to evaluate their predictions[45, 46]. Any
difﬁculty in evaluating the model’s predictions will be caught early and remedied.
• Level 6-9 – With the the causal ML components of this technology developed reliably in the previous levels,
the rest of the levels developing this technology focused on general medical-ML deployment challenges. For
the most part, data governance, privacy, and management that was detailed earlier in the neuropathology
MLTRL use-case, as well as on-premises deployment.
AI for open-source space sciences
The CAMS (Cameras for Allsky Meteor Surveillance) project [51], established in 2010 by NASA, uses hundreds of
off-the-shelf CCTV cameras to capture the meteor activity in the night sky. Initially, resident scientists would retrieve
hard-disks containing video data captured each night and perform manual triangulation of tracks or streaks of light
in the night sky, and compute a meteor’s trajectory, orbit, and lightcurve. Each solution was manually classiﬁed as a
meteor or not (i.e., planes, birds, clouds, etc). In 2017, a project run by the Frontier Development Labvii[52], the AI
accelerator for NASA and ESA, aimed to automate the data processing pipeline and replicate the scientists thought
process to build an ML model that identiﬁes meteors in the CAMS project [53, 54]. The data automation led to
orders of magnitude improvements in operational efﬁciency of the system, and allowed new contributors and amateur
astronomers to start contributing to meteor sightings. Additionally, a novel web tool allowed anybody anywhere to
view the meteors detected in the previous night. The CAMS camera system has had six-fold global expansion of the
data capture network, discovered ten new meteor showers, contributed towards instrumental evidence of previously
predicted comets, and helped calculate parent bodies of various meteor showers. CAMS utilized the MLTRL framework
to progress as described:
• Level 1 – Understanding the domain and data is a prerequisite for any ML development. Extensive data
exploration elucidated visual differences between objects in the night sky such as meteors, satellites, clouds,
tail lights of planes, light from the eyes of cats peering into cameras, trees, and other tall objects visible in
the moonlight. This step helped (1) understand visual properties of meteors that later deﬁned the ML model
architecture, and (2) mitigate impact of data imbalance by proactively developing domain-oriented strategies.
The results are well-documented on a datasheet associated with the TRL card, and discussed at the stage
review. This MLTRL documentation forced us to consider data sharing and other privacy concerns at this early
conceptualization stage, which is certainly relevant considering CAMS is for open-source and gathering data
from myriad sources.
• Level 2-3 – The agile and non-monotonic (or non-linear) development prescribed by MLTRL allowed the
team to ﬁrst develop an approximate end-to-end pipeline that offered a path to ML model deployment and
quick turnaround time to incorporate feedback from the regular gated reviews. Then, with relatively quicker
viiThe NASA Frontier Development Lab and partners open-source the code and data via the SpaceML platform: spaceml.org
16

experimentation, the team could improve on the quality of not just the ML model, but also scale up the systems
development simultaneously in a non-monotonic development cycle.
• Level 4 – With the initial pipeline in place, scalable training of baselines and initial models on real challenging
datasets ensued. Throughout the levels, the MLTRL gated reviews were essential for making efﬁcient progress
while ensuring robustness and functionality that meets stakeholder needs. At this stage we highlight speciﬁc
advantages of the MLTRL review processes that had instrumental effect on the project success: With the
required panel of mixed ML researchers and engineers, domain scientists, and product managers, the stage 4
reviews stressed the signiﬁcance of numerical improvements and comparison to existing baselines, and helped
identify and overcome issues with data imbalance. The team likely would have overlooked these approaches
without the review from peers in diverse roles and teams. In general, the evolving panel of reviewers at
different stages of the project was essential for covering a variety of veriﬁcation and validation measures –
from helping mitigate data challenges, to open-source code quality.
• Level 5 – To complete this R&D-to-productization level, a novel web tool called the NASA CAMS Meteor
Shower Portalviii was created that allowed users to view meteor shower activity from the previous night and
verify meteor predictions generated by the ML model. This app development was valuable for A/B testing,
validating detected meteors and classiﬁed new meteor showers with human-AI interaction, and demonstrating
real-world utility to stakeholders in review. ML processes without MLTRL miss out on these valuable
development by overlooking the need for such a demo tool.
• Level 6 – Application development was naturally driven by end-user feedback from the web app in level 5 –
without MLTRL it’s unlikely the team would be able to work with early productization feedback. With almost
real time feedback coming in daily, newer methods for improving robustness of meteor identiﬁcation led to
researching and developing a unique augmentation technique, resulting in the state of the art performance of
the ML model. Further application development led to incorporating features that were in demand by users of
the NASA CAMS Meteor Shower Portal: include celestial reference points through constellations, add ability
to zoom in/out and (un)cluster showers, and provide tooling for scientiﬁc communication. The coordination of
these features into product-caliber codebase resulted in the release of the NASA CAMS Meteor Shower Portal
2.0 that was built by a team of citizen scientists – again we found the speciﬁc checkpoints in the MLTRL
review were crucial for achieving these goals.
• Level 7 – Integration was particularly challenging in two ways. First, integrating the ML and data engineering
deliverables with the existing infrastructure and tools of the larger CAMS system, which had started devel-
opment years earlier with other teams in partner organizations, required quantiﬁable progress for verifying
the tech-readiness of ML models and modules. The use of technology readiness levels provided a clear and
consistent metric for the maturity of the ML and data technologies, making for clear communication and
efﬁcient project integration. Without MLTRL it is difﬁcult to have a conversation, let alone make progress, to-
wards integrating AI/ML and data subsystems and components. Second, integrating open-source contributions
into the main ML subsystem was a signiﬁcant challenge alleviated with diligent veriﬁcation and validation
measures from MLTRL, as well as quantifying robustness with ML testing suites (using scoring measures like
that of the ML Testing Rubric[20], and devising a checklist based on metamorphic testing[18]).
• Level 8 – CAMS, like many datasets in practice, consisted of a smaller labeled subset and a much larger
unlabeled set. In an attempt to additionally increase robustness of the ML subsystem ahead of “ﬂight readiness”,
we looked to active learning [55, 56] techniques to leverage the unlabeled data. Models using an initial version
of this approach, where results of the active learning provided “weak” labels, resulted in consumption of the
entire decade long unlabelled data collected by CAMS and slightly higher scores on deployment tests. Active
learning showed to be a promising feature and was switched back to level 7 for further development towards
the next deployment version, so as not to delay the rest of the project.
• Level 9 – The ML components in CAMS require continual monitoring for model and data drifts, such as
changes in weather, smoke, and cloud patterns that affect the view of the night sky. The data drifts may also be
speciﬁc to locations, such as ﬁreﬂies and bugs in CAMS Australia and New Zealand stations which appear as
false positives. The ML pipeline is largely automated with CI/CD, runs regular regression tests, and production
of benchmarks. Manual intervention can be triggered when needed, such as sending low conﬁdence meteors for
veriﬁcation to scientists in the CAMS project. The team also regularly releases the code, models, and web tools
on the open-source space sciences and exploration ML toolbox, SpaceMLix. Through the SpaceML community
and partner organizations, CAMS continually improves with feature requests, debugging, and improving data
practices, while tracking progress with standard software release cycles and MLTRL documentation.
viiimeteorshowers.seti.org
ixspaceml.org
17

BEYOND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
Software engineering (SWE) practices vary signiﬁcantly across domains and industries. Some domains, such as medical
applications, aerospace, or autonomous vehicles rely on a highly rigorous development process which is required
by regulations. Other domains, for example advertising and e-commerce are not regulated and can employ a lenient
approach to development. ML development should at minimum inherit the acceptable software engineering practices of
the domain. There are, however, several key areas where ML development stands out from SWE, adding its own unique
challenges which even most rigorous SWE practices are not able to overcome.
For instance, the behavior of ML systems is learned from data, not speciﬁed directly in code. The data requirements
around ML (i.e., data discovery, management, and monitoring) adds signiﬁcant complexity not seen in other types
of SWE. There are many beneﬁts to using a data-oriented architecture (DOA) [48] with the data-ﬁrst workﬂows and
management practices prescribed in MLTRL. DOA aims to make the data ﬂowing between elements of business logic
more explicit and accessible with a streaming-based architecture rather than the micro-service architectures that are
standard in software systems. One speciﬁc beneﬁt of DOA is making data available and traceable by design, which
helps signiﬁcantly in the ML logging challenges and data governance needs we discussed in Levels 7-9. Moreover,
MLTRL highlights data-related requirements along every step to ensure that the development process considers data
readiness and availability.
Not to mention an array of ML-speciﬁc failure modes; for example, models that become miscalibrated due to subtle
data distributional shifts in the deployment setting, resulting in models that are more conﬁdent in predictions than they
should be. MLTRL helps deﬁne ML-speciﬁc testing considerations (levels 5 and 7) to help surface these failure-modes
early. ML opens up new threat vectors across the whole deployment workﬂow that otherwise aren’t risks in software
systems: for example, a poisoning attack to contaminate the training phase of ML systems, or membership inference
to see if a given data record was part of the model’s training. MLTRL consider these threat vectors and suggests
relevant risk-identiﬁcation during prototyping and productization phases. More generally, ML codebases have all the
problems for regular code, plus ML-speciﬁc issues at the system level, mainly as a consequence of added complexity
and dynamism. The resulting entanglement, for instance, implies that the SWE practice of making isolated changes is
often not feasible – Scully et al.[57] refer to this as the “changing anything changes everything” principle. Given this
consideration, typical SWE change-management is insufﬁcient. Furthermore, ML systems almost necessarily increase
the technical debt; package-level refactoring is generally sufﬁcient for removing technical debt in software systems, but
this is not the case in ML systems.
These factors and others suggest that inherited software engineering and management practices of a given domain are
insufﬁcient for the successful development of robust and reliable ML systems. But it is not trading off one for the other:
MLTRL can be used in synergy with the existing, industry-standard software engineering practices such as agile [58]
and waterfall [59] to handle unique challenges of ML development. Because ML applications are a category of software,
all best practices of building and operating software should be extended when possible to the ML application. Practices
like version control, comprehensive testing, continuous integration and continuous deployment are all applicable to ML
development. MLTRL provides a framework that helps extend SWE building and operating practices that are acceptable
in a given domain to tackle the unique challenges of ML development.
RELATED WORKS
A recent case study from Microsoft Research [40] similarly identiﬁes a few themes describing how ML is not equal to
software engineering, and recommends a linear ML workﬂow with steps for data preparation through modeling and
deploying. They deﬁne an effective workﬂow for isolated development of an ML model, but this approach does not
ensure the technology is actually improving in quality and robustness. Their process should be repeated at progressive
stages of development in the broader ML and data technology lifecycle. If applied in the MLTRL framework, the
speciﬁc ingredients of the ML model workﬂow – that is, people, software, tests, objectives, etc. – evolve over time and
subsequent stages as the technologies mature.
There exist many recommended workﬂows for speciﬁc ML methods and areas of pipelines. For instance, a more
iterative process for Bayesian ML [60] and even more speciﬁcally for probabilistic programming [39], a data mining
process deﬁned in 2000 that remains widely used [61], others for describing data iterations [62], and human-computer
interaction cycles [63]. In these recommended workﬂows and others, there’s an important distinction between their
cycles and “switchback” mechanisms in MLTRL. Their cycles suggest to generically iterate over a data-modeling-
evaluation-deployment process. Switchbacks, on the other hand, are speciﬁc, purpose-driven workﬂows for dialing
part(s) of a project to an earlier stage – this doesn’t simply mean go back and train the model on more data, but rather
switching back regresses the technology’s maturity level (e.g. from level 5 to level 3) such that it must again fulﬁll the
level-by-level requirements, evaluations and reviews. See the Methods section for more details on MLTRL switchbacks.
18

In general, iteration is an important part of data, ML, and software processes. MLTRL is unique from the other
recommended processes in many ways, and perhaps most importantly because it considers data ﬂows and ML models
in the context of larger systems. These isolated processes (that are speciﬁc to e.g. modeling in prototype development
or data wrangling in application development) are synergistic with MLTRL because they can be used within each level
of the larger lifecycle or framework. For example, the Bayesian modeling processes [39, 60] we mentioned above
are really useful to guide developers of probabilistic ML approaches. But there are important distinctions between
executing these modeling steps and cycles in a well-deﬁned prototyping environment with curated data and minimal
responsibilities, versus a production environment riddled with sparse and noisy data, that interacts with the physical
world in non-obvious ways, and can carry expensive (even hidden) consequences. MLTRL provides the necessary,
holistic context and structure to use these and other development processes reliably and responsibly.
Also related to our work, Google teams have proposed ML testing recommendations [20] and validating the data fed
into ML systems [64]. For NLP applications, typical ML testing practices struggle to translate to real-world settings,
often overestimating performance capabilities. An effective way to address this is devising a checklist of linguistic
capabilities and test types, as in Ribeiro et al.[17]–interestingly their test suite was inspired by metamorphic testing,
which we suggested earlier in Level 7 for testing systems AI integrations. A survey by Paleyes et al. [48] go over
numerous case studies to discuss challenges in ML deployment. They similarly pay special attention to the need for
ethical considerations, end-user trust, and extra security in ML deployments. On the latter point, Kumar et al. [65]
provide a table thoroughly breaking down new threat vectors across the whole ML deployment workﬂow (some of
which we mentioned above). These works, notably the ML security measures and the quantiﬁcation of an ML test suite
in a principled way – i.e., that does not use misguided heuristics such as code coverage – are valuable to include in any
ML workﬂow including MLTRL, and are synergistic with the framework we’ve described in this paper. These analyses
provide useful insights, but they do not provide a holistic, regimented process for the full ML lifecycle from R&D
through deployment. An end-to-end approach is suggested by Raji et al.[66], but only for the speciﬁc task of auditing
algorithms; components of AI auditing are mentioned in Level 7, and covered throughout in the review processes.
Sculley et al.[57] go into more ML debt topics such as undeclared consumers and data dependencies, and go on to
recommend an ML Testing Rubric as a production checklist [20]. For example, testing models by a canary process
before serving them into production. This, along with similar shadow testing we mentioned earlier, are common in
autonomous ML systems, notably robotics and autonomous vehicles. They explicitly call out tests in four main areas
(ML infrastructure, model development, features and data, and monitoring of running ML systems), some of which we
discussed earlier. For example, tests that the training and serving features compute the same values; a model may train
on logged processes or user input, but is then served on a live feed with different inputs. In addition to the Google ML
Testing Rubric, we advocate metamorphic testing: a SWE methodology for testing a speciﬁc set of relations between
the outputs of multiple inputs. True to the checklists in the Google ML Testing Rubric and in MLTRL, metamorphic
testing for ML can have a codiﬁed list of metamorphic relations[18].
In domains such as healthcare there have been the introduction of similar checklists for data readiness – for example,
to ensure regulatory-grade real-world-evidence (RWE) data quality [67] – yet these are nascent and not yet widely
accepted. Applying AI in healthcare has led to developing guidance for regulatory protocol, which is still a work in
progress. Larson et al.[68] provide a comprehensive analysis for medical imaging and AI, arriving at several regulatory
framework recommendations that mirror what we outline as important measures in MLTRL: e.g., detailed task elements
such as pitfalls and limitations (surfaced on TRL Cards), clear deﬁnition of an algorithm relative to the downstream
task, deﬁning the algorithm “capability” (Level 5), real-world monitoring, and more.
D’amour et al.[19] dive into the problem we noted earlier about model miscalibration. They point to the trend in machine
learning to develop models relatively isolated from the downstream use and larger system, resulting in underspeciﬁcation
that handicaps practical ML pipelines. This is largely problematic in deep learning pipelines, but we’ve also noted this
risk in the case of causal inference applications. Suggested remedies include stress tests–empirical evaluations that
probe the model’s inductive biases on practically relevant dimensions–and in general the methods we deﬁne in Level 7.
LIMITATIONS, RESPONSIBILITIES, and ETHICS
MLTRL has been developed, deployed, iterated, and validated in myriad environments, as demonstrated by the previous
examples and many others. Nonetheless we strongly suggest that MLTRL not be viewed as a cure-all for machine
learning systems engineering. Rather, MLTRL provides mechanisms to better enable ML practitioners, teams, and
stakeholders to be diligent and responsible with these technologies and data. That is, one cannot implement MLTRL in
an organization and turn a blind eye to the many data, ML, and integration challenges we’ve discussed here. MLTRL is
analogous to a pilot’s checklist, not autopilot.
19

MLTRL is intended to be complimentary to existing software development methodologies, not replace or alter them.
Speciﬁcally, whether the team uses agile or waterfall methods, MLTRL can be adopted to help deﬁne and structure
phases of the project, as well as the success criteria of each stage. In context of the software development process, the
purpose of MLTRL is to help the team minimize the technical dept and risk associated with the delivery of an ML
application by helping the development team ask necessary questions.
We discussed many data challenges and approaches in the context of MLTRL, and should highlight again the importance
of data considerations in any ML initiative. The data availability and quality can severely limit the ability to develop and
deploy ML, whether MLTRL is used or not. It is again the responsibility of the ML practitioners, teams, and stakeholders
to gather, use, and distribute data in safe, legal, ethical ways. MLTRL helps do so with rigor and transparency, but
again is not a solution for data bias. We recommend these recent works on data bias in ML: [69, 70, 71, 72, 73].
Further, AI/ML ethics is a continuously evolving, multidisciplinary space – see [5]. MLTRL aims to prioritize ethics
considerations at each level of the framework, and would do well to also evolve over time with the broader AI/ML
ethics developments.
CONCLUSION
We’ve described Machine Learning Technology Readiness Levels (MLTRL), an industry-hardened systems engineering
framework for robust, reliable, and responsible machine learning. MLTRL is derived from the processes and testing
standards of spacecraft development, yet lean and efﬁcient for ML, data, and software workﬂows. Examples from
several organizations across industries demonstrate the efﬁcacy of MLTRL for AI and ML technologies, from research
and development through productization and deployment, in important domains such as healthcare and physics, with
emphasis on data readiness amongst other critical challenges. Our aim is MLTRL works in synergy with recent
approaches in the community focused on diligent data-readiness, privacy and security, and ethics. Even more, MLTRL
establishes a much-needed lingua franca for the AI ecosystem, and broadly for AI in the worlds of science, engineering,
and business. Our hope is that our systems framework is adopted broadly in AI and ML organizations, and that
“technology readiness levels” becomes common nomenclature across AI stakeholders – from researchers and engineers
to sales-people and executive decision-makers.
Methods
Gated reviews
At the end of each stage is a dedicated review period: (1) Present the technical developments along with the requirements
and their corresponding veriﬁcation measures and validation steps, (2) make key decisions on path(s) forward (or
backward) and timing, and (3) debrief the processx. As in the gated reviews deﬁned by TRL used by NASA, DARPA, et
al., MLTRL stipulates speciﬁc criteria for review at each level, as well as calling out speciﬁc key decision points (noted
in the level descriptions above). The designated reviewers will “graduate” the technology to the next level, or provide a
list of speciﬁc tasks that are still needed (ideally with quantitative remarks). After graduation at each level, the working
group does a brief post-mortem; we ﬁnd that a quick day or two pays dividends in cutting away technical debt and
improving team processes. Regular gated reviews are essential for making efﬁcient progress while ensuring robustness
and functionality that meets stakeholder needs. There are several important mechanisms in MLTRL reviews that are
speciﬁcally useful with AI and ML technologies: First, the review panels evolve over a project lifecycle, as noted
below. Second, MLTRL prescribes that each review runs through an AI ethics checklist deﬁned by the organization; it is
important to repeat this at each review, as the review panel and stakeholders evolve considerably over a project lifecycle.
As previously described in the levels deﬁnitions, including ethics reviews as an integral part of early system development
is essential for informing model speciﬁcations and avoiding unintended biases or harm[74] after deployment.
TRL “Cards”
In Figure 3 we succinctly showcase a key deliverable: TRL Cards. The model cards proposed by Google [75] are a useful
development for external user-readiness with ML. On the other hand, our TRL Cards aim to be more information-dense,
like datasheets for medical devices and engineering tools – see the open-source TRL Card repo for examples and
templates (to be released at github.com/alan-turing-institute). These serve as “report cards” that grow and improve upon
graduating levels, and provide a means of inter-team and cross-functional communication. The content of a TRL Card
is roughly in two categories: project info, and implicit knowledge. The former clearly states info such as project owners
xMLTRL should include regular debriefs and meta-evaluations such that process improvements can be made in a data-driven,
efﬁcient way (rather than an annual meta-review). MLTRL is a high-level framework that each organization should operationalize in
a way that suits their speciﬁc capabilities and resources.
20

and reviewers, development status, and semantic versioning–not just for code, also for models and data. In the latter
category are speciﬁc insights that are typically siloed in the ML development team but should be communicated to
other stakeholders: modeling assumptions, dataset biases, corner cases, etc. With the spread of AI and ML in critical
application areas, we are seeing domain expert consortiums deﬁning AI reporting guidelines – e.g., Rivera et al.[76]
calling for clinical trials reports for interventions involving AI – which will greatly beneﬁt from the use of our TRL
reporting cards. We stress that these TRL Cards are key for the progression of projects, rather than documentation
afterthoughts. The TRL Cards thus promote transparency and trust, within teams and across organizations. TRL Card
templates will be open-sourced upon publication of this work, including methods for coordinating use with other
reporting tools such as “Datasheets for Datasets” [24].
Risk mitigation
Identifying and addressing risks in a software project is not a new practice. However, akin to the MLTRL roots in
spacecraft engineering, risk is a “ﬁrst-class citizen” here. In the deﬁnition of technical and product requirements, each
entry has a calculation of the form risk = p(failure) × value, where the value of a component is an integer 1 −10.
Being diligent about quantifying risks across the technical requirements is a useful mechanism for ﬂagging ML-related
vulnerabilities that can sometimes be hidden by layers of other software. MLTRL also speciﬁes that risk quantiﬁcation
and testing strategies are required for sim-to-real development. That is, there is nearly always a non-trivial gap in
transferring a model or algorithm from a simulation testbed to the real world. Requiring explicit sim-to-real testing
steps in the workﬂow helps mitigate unforeseen (and often hazardous) failures. Additionally, comprehensive ML test
coverage that we mention throughout this paper is a critical strategy for mitigating risks and uncertainties: ML-based
system behavior is not easily speciﬁed in advance, but rather depends on dynamic qualities of the data and on various
model conﬁguration choices[20].
Non-monotonic, non-linear paths
We observe many projects beneﬁt from cyclic paths, dialing components of a technology back to a lower level. Our
framework not only encourages cycles, we make them explicit with “switchback mechanisms” to regress the maturity
of speciﬁc components in an AI system:
1. Discovery switchbacks occur as a natural mechanism – new technical gaps are discovered through systems
integration, sparking later rounds of component development[77]. These are most common in the R&D levels,
for example moving a component of a proof-of-concept technology (at Level 4) back to proof-of-principle
development (Level 2).
2. Review switchbacks result from gated reviews, where speciﬁc components or larger subsystems may be dialed
back to earlier levels. This switchback is one of the “key decision points” in the MLTRL project lifecycle
(as noted in the Levels deﬁnitions), and is often a decision driven by business-needs and timing rather than
technical concerns (for instance when mission priorities and funds shift). This mechanism is common from
Level 6/7 to 4, which stresses the importance of this R&D to product transition phase (see Figure 2 (left)).
3. Embedded switchbacks are predeﬁned in the MLTRL process. For example, a predeﬁned path from 4 to 2, and
from 9 to 4. In complex systems, particularly with AI technologies, these built-in loops help mitigate technical
debt and overcome other inefﬁciencies such as noncomprehensive V&V steps.
Without these built-in mechanisms for cyclic development paths, it can be difﬁcult and inefﬁcient to build systems of
modules and components at varying degrees of maturity. Contrary to traditional thought that switchback events should
be suppressed and minimized, in fact they represent a natural and necessary part of the complex technology development
process – efforts to eliminate them may stiﬂe important innovations without necessarily improving efﬁciency. This is
a fault of the standard monotonic approaches in AI/ML projects, stage-gate processes, and even the traditional TRL
framework.
It is also important to note that most projects do not start at Level 0; very few ML companies engage in this low-level
theoretical research. For example, a team looking to use an off-the-shelf object recognition model could start that
technology at Level 3, and proceed with thorough V&V for their speciﬁc datasets and use-cases. However, no technology
can skip levels after the MLTRL process has been initiated. The industry default (that is, without implementing MLTRL)
is to ignorantly take pretrained models, run ﬁne tuning on their speciﬁc data, and jump to deployment, effectively
skipping Levels 5 to 7. Additionally, we ﬁnd it is advantageous to incorporate components from other high-TRL ranking
projects while starting new projects; MLTRL makes the veriﬁcation and validation (V&V) steps straightforward for
integrating previously developed ML components.
21

Evolving people, objectives, and measures
As suggested earlier, much of the practical value of MLTRL comes at the transition between levels. More precisely,
MLTRL manages these oft neglected transitions explicitly as evolving teams, objectives, and deliverables. For instance,
the team (or working group) at Level 3 is mostly AI Research Engineers, but at Level 6 is mixed Applied AI/SW
Engineers mixed with product managers and designers. Similarly, the review panels evolve from level to level, to match
the changing technology development objectives. What the reviewers reference similarly evolves: notice in the level
deﬁnitions that technical requirements and V&V guide early stages, but at and after Level 6 the product requirements
and V&V takeover – naturally, the risk quantiﬁcation and mitigation strategies evolve in parallel. Regarding the
deliverables, notably TRL Cards and risk matrices[22] (to rank and prioritize various science, technical, and project
risks), the information develops and evolves over time as the technology matures.
Quantiﬁable progress
By deﬁning technology maturity in a quantitative way, MLTRL enables teams to accurately and consistently deﬁne
their ML progress metrics. Notably industry-standard “objectives and key results” (OKRs) and “key performance
indicators” (KPIs) [78] can be deﬁned as achieving certain readiness levels in a given period of time; this is a preferable
metric in essentially all ML systems which consist of much more than a single performance score to measure progress.
Even more, meta-review of MLTRL progress over multiple projects can provide useful insights at the organization
level. For example, analysis of the time-per-level and the most frequent development paths/cycles can bring to light
operational bottlenecks. Compared to conventional software engineering metrics based on sprint stories and tickets, or
time-tracking tools, MLTRL provides a more accurate analysis of ML workﬂows.
Communication and explanation
A distinct advantage of MLTRL in practice is the nomenclature: an agreed upon grading scheme for the maturity of
an AI technology, and a framework for how/when that technology ﬁts within a product or system, enables everyone
to communicate effectively and transparently. MLTRL also acts as a gate for interpretability and explainability–at
the granularity of individual models and algorithms, and more crucially from a holistic, systems standpoint. Notably
the DARPA XAIxi program advocates for this advance in developing AI technologies; they suggest interpretability
and explainability are necessary at various locations in an AI system to be sufﬁcient for deployment as an AI product,
otherwise leading to issues with ethics and bias.
Robustness via uncertainty-aware ML
How to design a reliable system from unreliable components has been a guiding question in the ﬁelds of computing and
intelligence [79]. In the case of AI/ML systems, we aim to build reliable systems with myriad unreliable components:
noisy and faulty sensors, human and AI error, and so on. There is thus signiﬁcant value to quantifying the myriad
uncertainties, propagating them throughout a system, and arriving at a notion or measure of reliability. For this reason,
although MLTRL applies generally to AI/ML methods and systems, we advocate for methods in the class of probabilistic
ML, which naturally represent and manipulate uncertainty about models and predictions[28]. These are Bayesian
methods that use probabilities to represent aleatoric uncertainty, measuring the noise inherent in the observations, and
epistemic uncertainty, accounting for uncertainty in the model itself (i.e., capturing our ignorance about which model
generated the data). In the simplest case, an uncertainty aware ML pipeline should quantify uncertainty at the points of
sensor inputs or perception, prediction or model output, and decision or end-user action – McAllister et al.[29] suggest
this with Bayesian deep learning models for safer autonomous vehicle pipelines. We can achieve this sufﬁciently well
in practice for simple systems. However, we do not yet have a principled, theoretically grounded, and generalizable way
of propagating errors and uncertainties downstream and throughout more complex AI systems – i.e., how to integrate
different software, hardware, data, and human components while considering how errors and uncertainties propagate
through the system. This is an important direction of our future work.
