Lifted Hybrid Variational Inference
Yuqiao Chen∗, Yibo Yang∗, Sriraam Natarajan , Nicholas Ruozzi
The University of Texas at Dallas
800 W Campbell Rd, Richardson, Texas, USA

Abstract
A variety of lifted inference algorithms, which exploit model
symmetry to reduce computational cost, have been proposed
to render inference tractable in probabilistic relational models.
Most existing lifted inference algorithms operate only over
discrete domains or continuous domains with restricted poten-
tial functions, e.g., Gaussian. We investigate two approximate
lifted variational approaches that are applicable to hybrid do-
mains and expressive enough to capture multi-modality. We
demonstrate that the proposed variational methods are both
scalable and can take advantage of approximate model sym-
metries, even in the presence of a large amount of continuous
evidence. We demonstrate that our approach compares favor-
ably against existing message-passing based approaches in a
variety of settings. Finally, we present a sufﬁcient condition
for the Bethe approximation to yield a non-trivial estimate
over the marginal polytope.
Introduction
Lifted methods have recently gained popularity due to their
ability to handle previously intractable probabilistic inference
queries over Markov random ﬁelds (MRFs) and their gener-
alizations. These approaches work by exploiting symmetries
in the given model construct groups of indistinguishable ran-
dom variables that can be used to collapse the model into a
simpler one on which inference is more tractable.
High-level approaches to lifted inference include message-
passing algorithms such as lifted belief propagation (Singla
and Domingos 2008; Kersting, Ahmadi, and Natarajan 2009)
and lifted variational methods (Bui, Huynh, and Sontag 2014;
Gallo and Ihler 2018). The common theme across these meth-
ods is the construction of a lifted graph on which the corre-
sponding inference algorithms are run. The message-passing
algorithms are applied directly on the lifted graph, while
lifted variational methods encode symmetries in the model
as equality constraints in the variational objective. These two
approaches are directly related via the same variational objec-
tive, known as the Bethe free energy (Yedidia, Freeman, and
Weiss 2001; Yedidia, Freeman, and Weiss 2005). While suc-
cessful, these methods were designed for discrete relational
MRFs.
∗Equal contribution
Existing work on lifting with continuous domains has
focused primarily on Gaussian graphical models (Choi,
Amir, and Hill 2010; Choi, Guzman-Rivera, and Amir 2011;
Ahmadi, Kersting, and Sanner 2011). Other lifted inference
methods for generic hybrid domains (Choi and Amir 2012)
use expectation maximization to learn variational approxima-
tions of the MRF potentials (which requires sampling from
the potentials, hence implicitly assumes the potentials are
normalizable) and then perform lifted variable elimination or
MCMC on the resulting variational model. While applicable
to generic models, this approach is somewhat complex and
can be expensive on lifted graphs with large treewidth.
Our aim is to provide a general framework for lifted varia-
tional inference that can be applied to both continuous and
discrete domains with generic potential functions. Our ap-
proach is based on mixtures of mean-ﬁeld models and a
choice of entropy approximation. We consider two entropy
approximations, one based on the Bethe free energy, whose
local optima are closely related to ﬁxed points of BP (Yedidia,
Freeman, and Weiss 2001), and a lower bound on the dif-
ferential entropy based on Jensen’s inequality (Gershman,
Hoffman, and Blei 2012).
We make the following key contributions in this work:
(1) We develop a general lifted hybrid variational approach
for probabilistic inference. (2) We consider two different
types of approximations based on mixtures of mean-ﬁeld
models. To our knowledge a systematic comparison of these
two different approximations for continuous models does not
exist in the literature. (3) We provide theoretical justiﬁcation
for the Bethe free energy in the continuous case by providing
a sufﬁcient condition for it to be bounded from below over the
marginal polytope. (4) We demonstrate the superiority of our
approach empirically against particle-based message-passing
algorithms and variational mean ﬁeld. A key attribute of our
work is that it does not make any distributional or model
assumptions and can be applied to arbitrary factor graphs.
Preliminaries
Given a hypergraph G = (V, C) with node set V and hyper-
edge/clique set C ⊆2V, such that each node i ∈V corre-
sponds to a random variable xi ∈Xi, a Markov random ﬁeld
arXiv:2001.02773v2  [cs.LG]  8 Feb 2020

(MRF) deﬁnes a joint probability distribution
p(x) = 1
Z
Y
c∈C
ψc(xc),
(1)
where each ψc : Q
i∈c Xi →R≥0 is a non-negative potential
function associated with a clique c in C, and Z is a normal-
izing constant that ensures p is a probability density. In this
work, we consider hybrid MRFs that may contain both dis-
crete and continuous random variables, so that Xi may either
be ﬁnite or uncountable. For example, if all of the variables
have continuous domains and the product of potential func-
tions is integrable, then the normalization constant exists, e.g.,
Z ≜
R
x∈Q
i∈V Xi
Q
c∈C ψc(xc) < ∞. The hypergraph G is
often visualized as a factor graph that has vertices for both
the cliques/factors and the variables, with an edge joining the
factor node for clique c to the variable node i if i ∈c.
We consider two probabilistic inference tasks for a given
MRF: (1) marginal inference, i.e., computing the marginal
probability distribution p(xA) of a set of variables A ⊆V, a
special case of which is computing the partition function Z
when A = V and (2) maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference,
i.e., computing a mode arg maxx p(xA) of the distribution
p(xA). In many applications, we will be given observed val-
ues ˆxB for a set of variables B ⊆V, and the corresponding
conditional marginal / MAP inference tasks involve comput-
ing p(xA|ˆxB) instead of p(xA).
Variational Inference
Variational inference (VI) solves the inference problem ap-
proximately by minimizing some divergence measure D,
often chosen to be the Kullback-Leibler divergence, between
distributions of the form (1) and a family of more tractable
approximating distributions Q, to obtain a surrogate distribu-
tion q∗∈arg minq∈Q D(q, p).
The set Q is typically chosen to trade-off between the
computational ease of inference in a surrogate model q and
its ability to model complex distributions. When D is the
KL divergence, the optimization problem is equivalent to
minimizing the variatinoal free energy.
F(q) := DKL(q∥p) −log Z
= −
X
c∈C
Eq[ψc] −H[q],
where H[q] denotes the entropy of the distribution q. Assum-
ing one can ﬁnd a q∗∈arg minqF(q), the simpler model
q∗can be used as a surrogate for inference. One of the most
common choices for Q is the mean-ﬁeld approximation in
which Q is selected to be the set of completely factorized dis-
tributions. This choice is popular as the optimization problem
is relatively easy to solve for distributions of this form.
Lifted Probabilistic Inference via Color Passing
Lifted inference exploits symmetries that exist in the MRF in
order to reduce the complexity of inference. This is typically
done by grouping symmetric variables or cliques together
into a single super variable/clique and then tying together the
corresponding marginals of all variables in the same super
variable/clique (Bui, Huynh, and Sontag 2014). Detecting
symmetries can be done by using either a top-down (Singla
and Domingos 2008) or bottom-up (Kersting, Ahmadi, and
Natarajan 2009) approach. We use the color passing (CP)
algorithm (Kersting, Ahmadi, and Natarajan 2009), a bottom-
up approach that can be applied to arbitrary MRFs. In CP,
all variable and factor nodes are initially clustered based on
domain/evidence and the potential functions. Variables with
the same domain or with the same evidence value v will be
assigned a same color. Each clique node stacks the color of
its neighboring nodes in order, appends its own color, and
forms a new color. Each variable node collects its neighboring
cliques’ colors and is assigned a new color. The process is
repeated until the colors converge. The color information
can be considered as neighborhood structure information and
grouping nodes with the same color can be used to compress
the graph. In this work, we use the notation #(c) and #(i) to
denote the number of factor nodes in a super factor c and the
number of variable nodes in super variable i, respectively.
Proposed Approaches
Our goal is to develop a distribution-independent, model-
agnostic hybrid lifted inference algorithm that can operate
on an arbitrary factor graph. To overcome the severe limita-
tions of unimodal variational distributions, e.g., mean-ﬁeld
models, in the hybrid setting, we choose our approximate
family Q to be a family of mixture distributions, and follow-
ing (Jaakkola and Jordan 1998) and (Gershman, Hoffman,
and Blei 2012), we require each mixture component to fully
factorize1. Speciﬁcally,
q(x) =
K
X
k=1
wkqk(x) =
K
X
k=1
wk
Y
i
qk
i (xi|ηk
i ),
(2)
where K is the number of mixture components, wk ≥0 is
the weight of the kth mixture (a shared parameter across all
marginal distributions), and PK
k=1 wk = 1. Each qk
i (xi) ≜
qk
i (xi; ηk
i ) is some valid distribution with parameters ηk
i , e.g.,
a Gaussian or Beta distribution in the continuous case and a
Categorical distribution in the discrete case.
Entropy Approximations
Ideally, we would ﬁnd the appropriate model parameters η
and w by directly minimizing the KL divergence. Unfortu-
nately, the computation of the entropy H[q] is intractable for
arbitrary variational distributions of the form (2). A notable
exception is the case with K = 1, which is equivalent to
the naïve mean-ﬁeld approximation. In the general case, we
consider two tractable entropy approximations: one based on
the Bethe free energy approximation from statistical physics
and one based on Jensen’s inequality.
The Bethe Entropy: HB approximates H as if the graph
G associated with p were tree-structured:
HB[q] ≜
X
c∈C
H[qc] +
X
i∈V
(1 −|nb(i)|)H[qi],
1Note that this assumption is mainly for efﬁciency. Our approach
does not require this assumption for effectiveness.

where nb(i) = {c ∈C|i ∈c} is the set of cliques that contain
node i in their scope. The Bethe free energy (BFE) is then
deﬁned as FB(q) ≜−P
c Eq[ψc] −HB[q].
The BFE approximation is exact whenever the hypergraph
G is acyclic, i.e., tree-structured. While variational methods
seek to optimize the variational objective directly, message-
passing algorithms such as belief propagation (BP) can also
be used to ﬁnd local optima of the BFE (Yedidia, Freeman,
and Weiss 2001). As these types of message-passing algo-
rithms can suffer from convergence issues, gradient based
methods that optimize the variational objective directly are
sometimes preferred in practice (Welling and Teh 2001).
Jensen’s Inequality: The non-parametric variational in-
ference (NPVI) approximates the entropy using Jensen’s in-
equality (Gershman, Hoffman, and Blei 2012).
HJ[q] := −
X
k
wk log

X
j
wj
Z
qk(x)qj(x)dx


(3)
There are two reasons to prefer the Bethe entropy approx-
imation over (3). First, the BFE is exact on trees; for tree-
structured models, it’s likely to outperform NPVI. Second,
(3) doesn’t factorize over the graph, potentially making it less
useful in distributed settings.
Conversely, one advantage of (3) over the Bethe entropy is
that it yields a provable lower bound on the partition function
assuming exact computation. The Bethe entropy only prov-
ably translates into a lower bound on tree structured models
or for special classes of potential functions (Ruozzi 2012;
Ruozzi 2013; Ruozzi 2017). Another known drawback of
the BFE approximation is that, in the case of continuous
random variables, it need not be bounded from below over
the so-called local marginal polytope, a further relaxation
of the varitional problem in which the optimization over
distributions q ∈Q is replaced by a simpler optimization
problem over only marginal distributions that agree on their
univariate marginals. This unboundedness can occur even if
p corresponds to a multivariate Gaussian distribution (Cseke
and Heskes 2011). This potentially makes the BFE highly
undesirable for continuous MRFs in practice.
However, for the optimization problem considered here
(over a subset of what is referred to as the marginal polytope),
it is known that the BFE is bounded from below for Gaussian
p. Here, we prove that the BFE will be bounded from below
over the marginal polytope for a larger class of probability
distributions.
Theorem 1. If there exists a collection of densities gi ∈
P(Xi) for each i ∈V such that supx∈X
p(x)
Q
i gi(xi) < ∞,
then infq∈P(X) −Eq[log p] −HB[q] > −∞, where P(X) is
the set of all probability densities over X ≜Q
i∈V Xi, i.e.,
the BFE is bounded from below.
A number of natural distributions satisfy the condition
of the theorem: mean-ﬁeld distributions, multivariate Gaus-
sian distributions and their mixtures, bounded densities with
compact support, etc. The proof of this sufﬁcient condition
constructs a lower bound on the BFE that is a convex function
of q. Lagrange duality is then used to demonstrate that the
lower bound is ﬁnite under the condition of the theorem.
Lifting
Once model symmetries are detected using coloring passing
or an alternative method, they can be encoded into the varia-
tional objective by introducing constraints on the marginal
distributions, e.g., adding a constraint that all variables in
the same super node have equivalent marginals. This is the
approach taken by (Bui, Huynh, and Sontag 2014) for lifted
variational inference in discrete MRFs. For us, this leads to
the following set of constraints.
∀i, j ∈i,
K
X
k=1
qk
i (xi) =
K
X
k=1
qk
j (xj)
(4)
If preferred, these constraints could be incorporated into the
objective as soft penalty terms to encourage the solution to
contain the appropriate symmetries as discovered by color-
passing. However, adding constraints of this form to the
objective does not reduce the cost of performing inference
in the lifted model. In order to make lifting tractable, we
observe that the following constraints are sufﬁcient for (4) to
hold.
∀i, j ∈i, ∀k, qk
i (xi) = qk
j (xj)
(5)
Under the constraint (5), we can simplify the variational
objective by accounting for the shared parameters. As an
example of how this works for the Bethe free energy approxi-
mation, consider a compressed graph G with a set of super
variables V and a set of super factors C, each i ∈V and
each c ∈C corresponds to #(i) variables and #(c) factors
in the original graph. Variables in the super variable i share
the same parameterized marginals. Based on this observa-
tion, we can simplify the computation of the unlifted BFE by
exploiting these symmetries:
X
i∈V
#(i) · Eqi(xi)
h
(1 −|nb(i)|) log qi(Xi)
i
+
X
c∈C
#(c) · Eqk
c (xc)
h
log qc(Xc) −log ψc(Xc)
i
.
Although the optimal value of the variational objective under
the constraints (4) or (5) is always greater than or equal
to that of the unconstrained problem, we expect gradient
descent on the constrained optimization problem to converge
faster and to a better solution as the optimal solution should
contain these symmetries. The intuition for this is that that
the solutions to the unconstrained optimization problem, i.e.,
approximate inference in the unlifted model, can include both
solutions that do and do not respect the model symmetries.
Algorithm
Given a ground MRF p (possibly conditioned on evidence),
we ﬁrst obtain the variational distrubtion q∗by gradient de-
scent on the variational objective F(q) w.r.t. the parame-
ters (w, η) of mean-ﬁeld variational mixture q, where the
ith marginal qk
i is taken to be a Gaussian distribution for
all continuous i ∈V and a categorical distribution other-
wise. The lifted variational inference algorithms additionally
exploit symmetries by using (5) to simplify the objective

and only optimize over the variational parameters ηi associ-
ated with the super variables i ∈V; after the optimization
procedure, all the original variables contained in each super
variable are assigned the same variational marginal parame-
ters/distributions as in (5). The expectations in the variational
objectives can be approximated in different ways, e.g., sam-
pling, Stein variational methods (Liu, Lee, and Jordan 2016),
etc. We approximate the expectations using Gaussian quadra-
ture with a ﬁxed number of quadrature points (Golub and
Welsch 1969). Once q∗is obtained, given a set of query vari-
ables U, marginal inference is approximated by p(xU) ≈
q∗(xU) = PK
k=1 wk
Q
i∈U q∗k
i (xi), and (marginal) MAP
inference is approximated by arg maxxU q∗(xU) via coordi-
nate/gradient ascent.
Coarse-to-Fine Lifting
A common issue in lifting methods is that introducing ev-
idence breaks model symmetries as variables with differ-
ent evidence values should be considered as different even
if they have similar neighborhood structure in the graph-
ical model. This issue is worse when variables can have
continuous values: it is unlikely that two otherwise sym-
metric variables will receive the same exact evidence val-
ues. As a result, even with a small amount of evidence,
many of the model symmetries may be destroyed, making
lifting less useful. To counteract this effect, we propose
a coarse-to-ﬁne (C2F) approximate lifting method in the
variational setting which is based on the assumption that
the stationary points of a coarsely compressed graph and
a ﬁnely compressed graph should be somewhat similar. A
number of coarse-to-ﬁne lifting schemes, which start with
coarse approximate symmetries and gradually reﬁne them,
have been proposed for discrete MRFs (Habeeb et al. 2017;
Gallo and Ihler 2018). Our approach is aimed speciﬁcally
at introducing approximate symmetries to handle the above
issue with continuous evidence.
Our C2F approximate lifting uses k-means clustering
to group the continuous evidence values into s clusters,
E1, . . . , Es. For each cluster Ei ∈{E1, . . . , Es}, we de-
note the corresponding set of observation nodes as Oi. Each
observed variable o ∈Oi is treated as having the same evi-
dence distribution bEi(xo) = N(µEi, σ2
Ei), where µEi and
σ2
Ei are the mean and variance of cluster Ei. With this for-
malism, the evidence clustering is coarse when s is small, but
we can exploit more approximate symmetries, resulting in a
more compressed lifted graph. As s increases, the evidence
variables are more ﬁnely divided.
To apply this lifting process in variational inference, we
interleave the operation of reﬁning the compressed graph and
gradient descent. The clustering is initialized with s = 1 and
CP is run until convergence to obtain a coarse compressed
graph. Then, we perform gradient descent on the coarse com-
pressed graph with the modiﬁed variational method. After
a speciﬁed number of iterations, we reﬁne the coarse com-
pressed graph by splitting evidence clusters. We employ the
k-means algorithm to determine the new evidence clusters, af-
ter which a reﬁned compressed graph can be obtained through
CP. We keep iterating this process until no evidence group
Algorithm 1 Coarse-to-Fine Lifted VI
1: Input: A factor graph G with variables V, factors C,
evidence E and splitting threshold ϵ
2: Return: The model parameters η and w
3: E, η, w ←initial clustering of continuous evidence and
model parameters respectively
4: G ←run CP starting from initial colors based on do-
main/evidence and potential function
5: repeat
6:
η, w ←run grad. descent on variational obj.
7:
for each Ei ∈E do
8:
if σ2
Ei > ϵ then
9:
Ei ←Divide Ei in two using k-means
10:
E ←(E \ Ei) ∪Ei
11:
end if
12:
end for
13:
Assign new colors to evidence according to E
14:
G ←run CP until convergence
15: until Converge
can be further split, e.g., when only one value remains or the
variance of each cluster is below a speciﬁed threshold, and
the optimization converges to a stationary point. A precise
description of this process can be found in Algorithm 1. It
is not necessary to rerun CP from the start after each split.
We simply assign a new evidence group and a new color and
resume CP from its previous stopping point.
Experiments
We investigate the performance of the above lifted variational
approach on a variety of both real and synthetic models. We
aim to answer the following questions explicitly:
Q1: Do the proposed variational approaches yield accurate
MAP and marginal inference results?
Q2: Does lifting result in signiﬁcant speed-ups versus an un-
lifted variational method?
Q3: Does C2F lifting yield accurate results more quickly for
queries with continuous evidence?
To answer these questions, we compare the performance
of our variational approach with different entropy approx-
imations (BVI for Bethe approximation and NPVI for the
Jensen lower bound) with message-passing algorithms in-
cluding our own lifted version of Expectation Particle BP
(EPBP) (Lienart, Teh, and Doucet 2015) and Gaussian BP
(GaBP). To illustrate the generality of the proposed approach,
we consider different settings – Relational Gaussian Models
(RGMs) (Choi, Amir, and Hill 2010), Relational Kalman
Filters (RKFs) (Choi, Guzman-Rivera, and Amir 2011), and
(Hybrid) Markov Logic Networks (HMLNs) (Richardson and
Domingos 2006; Wang and Domingos 2008).
For evaluation, we generally report the ℓ1 error of MAP
predictions and KL divergence DKL(pi||qi) averaged across
all univariate marginals i in the (ground) conditional MRF. As
the models in the RGM and RKF experiments are Gaussian
MRFs, their marginal means and variances can be computed
exactly by matrix operations. For the HMLN experiments, the

Figure 1: Visualization of typical marginal distribution estimates
produced by BVI and NPVI on the toy HMLN experiment, using
K = 5. The lifted solutions were similar.
exact ground truth can be obtained by direct methods when
the number of random variables in the conditional MRF is
small. For timing experiments, unless otherwise noted, were
performed on a single core of a machine with a 2.2 GHz
Intel Core i7-8750H CPU and 16 GB of memory. Source
code is implemented with Python3.6 and is available online
github.com/leodd/Lifted-Hybrid-Variational-Inference.
Hybrid MLNs
We ﬁrst consider a toy HMLN with known ground truth
marginals in order to assess the accuracy of the different
variational approaches in the hybrid setting. Then, we show-
case the efﬁciency of our methods, particularly via lifting, on
larger-scale HMLNs of practical interest, comparing against
a state-of-the-art sampling baseline.
Toy Problem
We construct a hybrid MLN for a position
domain:
0.1 : in(A, Box) ∧in(B, Box) →attractedTo(A, B)
0.2 : ¬attractedTo(A, B) · [pos(A) = p1]+
attractedTo(A, B) · [pos(B) = p2],
where A and B are different classes of objects in some
physics simulation, Box is the class of box instances, and
p1, p2 are real values corresponding to object positions. The
ﬁrst formula states that object A is attracted to B when they
are in the same box; the second states that if A is attracted
to B, then A is likely at position p1, otherwise B is likely
at position p2. Predicates in and attractedTo have discrete
domain {0, 1}, while pos is real-valued.
Unlike standard MLNs, where the value of a formula
can be computed with logical operations, an HMLN de-
ﬁnes continuous operations for hybrid formulas. In the sec-
ond formula, α = β is shorthand for the feature function
−(α −β)2 ; note that the corresponding linear Gaussian
potential ψ(x1, x2) = e−(x1−x2)2 is not normalizable. The
marginals of pos(A) and pos(B) will generally be multi-
modal, speciﬁcally mixtures of Gaussians; with multiple
object instances, unimodal variational approximations like
mean-ﬁeld will likely be inaccurate. Note that the number
of mixture components in the marginal distributions is expo-
nential in the number of joint discrete conﬁgurations in the
Table 1: Results of variational methods on toy HMLN.
Algorithm
Average KL-Divergence
K = 1
K = 3
K = 5
BVI
0.513 ± 0.947
0.009 ± 0.006
0.009 ± 0.007
L-BVI
0.039 ± 1e −5
0.004 ± 0.001
0.004 ± 0.002
NPVI
4.586 ± 2.977
0.026 ± 0.007
0.022 ± 0.003
L-NPVI
1.978 ± 3.878
0.038 ± 0.002
0.039 ± 0.001
Algorithm
Average ℓ1-error
K = 1
K = 3
K = 5
BVI
0.227 ± 0.440
0.059 ± 0.026
0.049 ± 0.035
L-BVI
0.007 ± 1e −4
0.049 ± 0.027
0.020 ± 0.012
NPVI
1.641 ± 1.106
0.007 ± 4e −4
0.012 ± 0.009
L-NPVI
0.671 ± 1.327
0.012 ± 0.006
0.012 ± 0.006
ground MRF, so we consider a small model in which exact
inference is still tractable, generating 2, 3, and 2 instances
of the A, B, and Box classes respectively. The resulting
ground MRF contains 16 discrete random variables yielding
marginals with 216 mixture components. We emphasize that
the small model size is only for the purpose of evaluation
against brute-force exact inference; our methods can scale to
much larger models.
We performed marginal inference on the continuous nodes
and report results against ground truth in Table 1, using BVI,
NPVI, and their lifted versions (dubbed L-BVI and L-NPVI).
All methods tend to give improved performance as the num-
ber of mixture components (K) increases indicating that the
number of mixture components is indeed important for accu-
racy in multimodal settings. However, increasing K gener-
ally makes the optimization problem more difﬁcult, requiring
more iterations for convergence. We note that even though L-
BVI reported a lower ℓ1 error with K = 1, the KL-divergence
of this was larger than at K = 3 or 5, indicating that it con-
verged to a good local optimum for the MAP task but not as
good for the marginal inference task. This distinction can be
seen more broadly across the two entropy approximations for
this problem, as BVI/L-BVI generally gave better ﬁts to the
marginals than NPVI/L-NPVI, whereas NPVI/L-NPVI per-
formed better at estimating the marginal modes. See Figure
1 for an example illustration of marginals produced by the
different entropy approximations.
It is also worth noting that lifting seems to act as a reg-
ularizer here: when the number of mixture components is
small, both the lifted versions outperformed their unlifted
counterparts, e.g., at K=1. This suggests that lifting may
both reduce computational cost (30% to 40% speedup on this
model) and encourage the optimization procedure to end up
in better local optima, which positively answers Q1 and Q2.
Larger-scale Problems
Next, we consider two larger scale
HMLNs of practical interest. The Paper Popularity HMLN
domain is determined by the following formulas.
0.3 : PaperPopularity(p) = 1.0
0.5 : SameSession(t1, t2)·
[TopicPopularity(t1) = TopicPopularity(t2)]
0.5 : In(p, t)·
[PaperPopularity(p) = TopicPopularity(t)],

(a) Paper Popularity
(b) Robot Mapping
Figure 2: Comparison of the negative log probability of the approx-
imate MAP assignment versus running time.
where PaperPopularity(p) and TopicPopularity(t) are
continuous variables in [0, 10], indicating the popularity
of paper and topic. SameSession(t1, t2) and In(p, t) are
Boolean variables, indicating if two topics are in the same
session, and if a paper p belongs to a topic t, respectively.
The ﬁrst formula speciﬁes a prior on paper popularity. The
second clause states that two topics tend to have the same
popularity if they are in the same session, and the third clause
states that if a paper is in a topic, then the popularity of
the topic and the paper are likely to be the same. We in-
stantiate 300 paper instances and 10 topic instances, which
results in 3, 400 variable nodes and 3, 390 factor nodes in
the grounded MRF. We generated random evidence for the
model, where 70% of the papers and 70% of the topics were
assigned a popularity from a uniform distribution U(0, 10).
For 70% of the papers p and all topics t, we assign In(p, t′)
and SameSession(t, t′) for all possible t′ ∈Topic using a
Bernoulli distribution (p = 0.5).
The Robot Mapping HMLN domain contains 3 discrete
relational variables, 2 continuous relational variables, and 10
formulas, as described in the Alchemy tutorial (Wang and
Domingos 2008). The instances and evidences are from real
world robot scanning data, which result in a grounded MRF
with 1591 random variables and 3182 factors.
Results: We performed MAP inference with the vari-
ational methods and evaluated them against Hybrid
MaxWalkSAT (HMWS) (Wang and Domingos 2008). Each
method is evaluated by computing the energy E(ˆx) =
Table 2: Evaluation of various methods on RGM.
Algorithm
Avg. ℓ1 Error
Avg. KL-Divergence
EPBP
5.17e−2 ± 4.25e−2
0.473 ± 0.246
GaBP
2.26e−6 ± 1.14e−6
3.32e−9 ± 1.12e−9
BVI
6.48e−5 ± 2.57e−4
4.95e−3 ± 5.13e−2
L-BVI
5.77e−5 ± 2.47e−4
4.95e−3 ± 5.13e−2
C2F-BVI
7.92e−4 ± 2.31e−3
4.95e−3 ± 5.13e−2
NPVI
3.22e−5 ± 2.89e−5
5.14e−4 ± 4.14e−5
L-NPVI
3.29e−5 ± 5.58e−5
5.14e−4 ± 4.14e−5
Figure 3: Comparison of rate of convergence between BVI, L-BVI,
and C2F-BVI with 20% evidence, on RGM.
−log(Q
c∈C ψc( ˆxc)), essentially the negative log probability,
of the approximate MAP conﬁguration that it produces. For
HMWS, we set the greedy probability to 0.7, the standard de-
viation of the Gaussian noise to 0.3, and disabled re-running
for fair comparison. For the variational methods, we used
ADAM with learning rate 0.2 for optimization.
As can be seen in Figure 2, in both domains, the MAP
assignment produced by the variational methods is signiﬁ-
cantly better than the one by HMWS, providing evidence for
Q1. In addition, given the amount of continuous evidence,
there is not a signiﬁcant performance difference between BVI
and Lifted BVI. However, C2F BVI takes less signiﬁcantly
less time to converge to a good solution than both BVI and
Lifted BVI, providing strong evidence for Q3, namely that
C2F results in better accuracy more quickly.
Relational Gaussian Model
In this experiment, we performed approximate inference on a
Relational Gaussian Model (RGM) with the recession domain
from (Cseke and Heskes 2011). The RGM has three relational
atoms Market(S), Loss(S, B), Revenue(B) and one ran-
dom variable Recession, where S and B denote two sets of
instances, the categories of market and banks respectively.
For testing, we generated 100 Market and 5 Bank instances,
and used the ground graph as input. To assess the impact
of lifting and C2F, we randomly chose 20% of the variables
in the model, assigned them a value uniformly randomly
from [−30, 30], and then performed conditional MAP and
marginal inference.
Figure 3 plots the value of the free energy, i.e., the varia-
tional objective, versus time for BVI, L-BVI, and C2F-BVI.
All three methods used the Adam optimizer with learning
rate 0.2, β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999. The plot shows that C2F-
BVI converges faster than L-BVI, which is in turn faster than

BVI. Note that the sawtooth shape of C2F-BVI is a result
of evidence splitting. This provides evidence that lifting and
C2F do reduce the time cost of inference, answering Q2 and
Q3 in the afﬁrmative.
To assess the accuracy of the variational methods, we ran-
domly chose 5% to 20% of the random variables and gener-
ated evidence values as in the previous task. We randomly
generated ﬁve evidence settings and evaluated all variational
methods with the same setup as above as well as EPBP with
20 sampling points and GaBP. All algorithms were run until
convergence and compared against the ground truth. As Ta-
ble 2 shows, on this simple unimodal model, all variational
methods have very low error and low KL-Divergence, while
EPBP has higher error introduced by the sampling procedure,
providing evidence for Q1 that the variational approach is
accurate in this case. In this unimodal case, NPVI appears
to outperform BVI. We note that, as a general observation,
NPVI tends to do better than BVI at estimating the mode of
the distribution, but in multimodal settings, tends to result in
a higher KL-divergence than BVI.
Relational Kalman Filtering
To further investigate Q1, we performed an experiment with
Relational Kalman Filters (RKFs). A standard Kalman ﬁlter
(KF) models the transition of a dynamic system with xt+1 =
Axt + w with noise ot = Cxt + v, where A denotes the
transition matrix and C represents the observation matrix. A
key assumption in KF is that the transition and noise follow
a normal distribution, i.e., w ∼N(0, Q), and v ∼N(0, R),
for covariance matrices Q and R. The RKF model deﬁnes a
lifted KF, i.e. similar state variables and similar observation
nodes share the same transition and observation model.
In this experiment, we use extracted groundwater level
data from the Republican River Compact Association model
(McKusick 2003). The data set contains a record over 850
months of the water level data for 3,420 wells. We followed
the same data preprocessing steps as in (Choi et al. 2015),
where wells in the same area are grouped together and are
assumed to share same transition and observation0 model.
We test our algorithms on two different structure settings, a
tree-structured model and a model with cycles. For the tree-
structured model, we deﬁne the matrices A = α · I, C = I,
Q = β · I, R = γ · I where α ∼U(0.5, 1), β ∼U(5, 10),
γ ∼U(1, 5) and I is the identity matrix. For general model,
we select A = α · I + 0.01 and Q = β · J, where J is
the matrix of ones, and other matrices are as before. We
chose 20 months of record as the observation of the model.
Note that the model deﬁned has a linear Gaussian potential
exp((xt+1 −Axt)2/σ2) with the number of state variables
as its dimension, which makes inference challenging. For
simplicity, we expressed the model as a product pairwise
potentials.
We compared our variational methods and EPBP against
GaBP. The variational methods used Adam optimizer with
learning rate 0.2; EPBP used 20 particle points. Table 3 re-
ports the resulting avg ℓ1 difference and KL-divergence of the
MAP estimate of the last time step nodes against GaBP. The
variational methods are quite accurate in this model, owing
mostly to the unimodality of the marginals, providing evi-
Table 3: Accuracy of lifted inference methods for RKFs against
GaBP.
Algorithm
ℓ1 Diff.(GaBP)
time (s)
Tree
EPBP
0.18 ± 0.15
233.6
BVI
2.86e−5 ± 3.71e−5
577.2
L-BVI
1.88e−5 ± 1.85e−5
23.0
C2F-BVI
1.64e−5 ± 1.80e−5
22.8
Cycle
EPBP
0.34 ± 0.41
149.2
BVI
3.26e−5 ± 5.08e−5
222.1
L-BVI
4.65e−5 ± 5.78e−5
151.0
C2F-BVI
2.16e−4 ± 4.38e−4
140.8
dence in support of Q1 for this setting, even when the graph
contains cycles. The variational methods also obtained bet-
ter KL-divergence than EPBP, and the KL-divergence of all
methods would likely further reduce with additional mixture
components/particles.
Signiﬁcant speed-ups are obtained by the lifted methods
with a small improvement in the case of C2F. Note that the
times are for the relative comparison of the lifting, and while
they do indicate signiﬁcant performance improvements from
lifting, answering Q2 afﬁrmatively, they should not be used
to compare EPBP and BVI as no implementations were opti-
mized for performance in this case. As the variational meth-
ods can also be efﬁciently implemented in Tensorﬂow, we
also provide timing experiments in a high performance set-
ting for BVI/NPVI and their lifted versions. For BVI/L-BVI,
the TensorFlow implementation took 107.8/5.6s to run on
the tree model and 16.3/12.6s on the cycle model; NPVI/L-
NPVI took 105.7/5.11s and 15.7/12.8s on the tree and cy-
cle models respectively, and gave identical performance to
BVI/L-BVI.
Discussion
We presented distribution-independent, model-agnostic hy-
brid lifted inference algorithm that makes minimal assump-
tions on the underlying distribution. In addition, we presented
a simple coarse-to-ﬁne approach for handling symmetry
breaking as a result of continuous evidence. We showed ex-
perimentally that the lifted and the coarse-to-ﬁne variational
methods compare favorably in terms of accuracy against
exact and particle based methods for MAP and marginal in-
ference tasks and can yield speed-ups over their non-lifted
counterparts that range from moderate to signiﬁcant, depend-
ing on the amount of evidence and the distribution of the
evidence values. Finally, we provided a sufﬁcient condition
under which the BFE over the marginal polytope is bounded
from below and showing that the BFE approximations yields
a nontrivial approximation to the partition function in these
cases.
