INDEXER BASED DYNAMIC WEB 
SERVICES DISCOVERY 
 
 
Saba Bashir, M.Younus Javed,Farhan Hassan Khan 
National University of Science & Technology 
Rawalpindi, Pakistan 
, 
  
 
 Aihab Khan, Malik Sikandar Hayat Khiyal 
Fatima Jinnah Women University 
Rawalpindi, Pakistan 
 
 
 
Abstract-Recent advancement in web services plays an 
important role in business to business and business to 
consumer interaction. Discovery mechanism is not only 
used to find a suitable service but also provides 
collaboration between service providers and consumers by 
using standard protocols. A static web service discovery 
mechanism is not only time consuming but requires 
continuous human interaction. This paper proposed an 
efficient dynamic web services discovery mechanism that 
can locate relevant and updated web services from service 
registries and repositories with timestamp based on 
indexing value and categorization for faster and efficient 
discovery of service. The proposed prototype focuses on 
quality of service issues and introduces concept of local 
cache, categorization of services, indexing mechanism, 
CSP (Constraint Satisfaction Problem) solver, aging and 
usage of translator. Performance of proposed framework 
is 
evaluated 
by 
implementing 
the 
algorithm 
and 
correctness of our method is shown.  The results of 
proposed framework shows greater performance and 
accuracy in dynamic discovery mechanism of web services 
resolving the existing issues of flexibility, scalability, based 
on quality of service, and discovers updated and most 
relevant services with ease of usage. 
 
Keywords-component: Classification of services; Dynamic 
discovery; Indexing; UDDI registry; Web services. 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
As an enabling technology, web services are software 
components that are used to present services on internet. Each 
web service has standard interface through which it 
communicates with other web services in order to provide 
different functionalities. Service providers register their web 
services 
in 
registries, 
typically 
in 
UDDI 
(Universal 
Description Discovery and Integration). HTTP (Hyper Text 
Transfer Protocol) protocol is used for communication of 
SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) messages exchanged 
between service providers and consumers. 
 
With the increasing technology it is becoming more critical 
to find a service that satisfies user requirements. Service 
discovery is a mechanism used to find the appropriate service 
that meets desired criteria. Three main roles in web services 
are providers, consumers and registries. Service providers 
publish their web services in registries and clients discover 
their desired services by querying them using SOAP message 
protocol [1].  
In manual discovery process a human uses a discovery 
service, which involves the input of user requirements and 
through matchmaking process, output the desired results [2]. 
The main obstacle in this mechanism is heterogeneity problem 
[3]. Different types of heterogeneities are: 
• 
Technological heterogeneities (different platforms or 
different data formats). 
• 
Ontological heterogeneity (difference in domain specific 
terms and concepts). 
• 
Pragmatic heterogeneity (different development of 
domain-specific processes) 
This makes the technology limited in terms of efficiency 
and availability. Whereas in dynamic discovery process an 
agent performs the above task either at design or run time, but 
there are different constraints of this process for example 
interface requirements, standardization of protocols and trust 
of stakeholders etc. This paper focuses on the dynamic web 
services discovery approach. 
With the increasing number of web services, it is becoming 
more 
difficult 
to 
manage 
description 
on 
distributed 
environment such as on web. Key limitations of current 
approaches for dynamic web services discovery are: 
1. Lack 
of 
fully 
dynamic 
web 
services 
discovery 
mechanism. 
2. Lack of mechanism that solves heterogeneity problems. 
3. Clients cannot learn from past experiences to improve 
future decisions. 
4. Need of mechanism which store and retrieve up to date 
information on consumer’s request.  
5.  Need of mechanism which gives in time response of 
query in case of searching services from web.
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 2, February 2010 
153
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

6. In existing approaches, clients have to search from web 
(registries) each time when they request for services 
which is time consuming task and requires lot of effort. 
7. Service providers and consumers don’t use same language 
for registration and discovery. 
Keyword based discovery is one possible way to discover 
the web services. The advantage of UDDI is that it filters and 
ranks services quickly. The drawback is that it contains only 
metadata. It is based on keyword matching and it has only 
single search criteria. In some cases it may not produce the 
desired results due to the words that are semantically related 
with each other [2].  
In order to take a full advantage of web services, user must 
discover and invoke them dynamically. Semantic web services 
are a possible solution for automated web service discovery in 
which services are semantically described and accessed. It 
resolves the heterogeneity as well as interoperability problems. 
Ontologies are used for manipulation of data. There are two 
drawbacks of semantic web services discovery approach. First, 
it is impossible for all service providers to publish their 
services in same ontology. Second, already existing web 
services does not have associated semantics and it is not 
possible to convert all of them into same ontology [4]. 
 
A. Contribution 
This research paper proposed a framework that presents 
solutions to most of the problems in dynamic web service 
discovery. More precisely, it uses the translator to convert 
service requests and responses in one form that can be easily 
used by the system. Indexer is used to index services to 
simplify search process. CSP solver is used to select most 
appropriate service. Aging factor helps to maintain updated 
information. The discovery process is fastened by the use of 
local cache which allows clients to discover services based on 
previous experiences. 
The organization of paper is such that Section 2 describes 
the previous research on dynamic services discovery. In 
section 3, some basic information about service discovery and 
dynamic service discovery is given. Section 4 presents the 
detailed overview of proposed technique including framework 
and key mechanisms. Section 5 describes the working and 
algorithms of proposed framework. Section 6 presents the 
implementation and analysis of proposed framework. Finally, 
the conclusion and future work is given in section 7.  
 
II. RELATED WORK 
 
Web services are XML (Extensible Markup Language) 
based software components [5, 6]. These components can be 
retrieved based on signature matching and the discovery 
process is based on interface matching. The advantage of this 
approach is that discovery process totally depends on 
properties of component. WSDL (Web Services Description 
Language) is used as interface definition language to describe 
the functionality of web services. It is an XML based format 
used to describe both abstraction operations and network 
bindings [7].  
UDDI is used in discovery process where keywords are 
matched by using intelligent algorithms. The research is XML 
schema matching where various string comparison techniques 
are applied like suffix, prefix, and infix for keyword matching. 
This technique is useful where many acronym, jargons etc are 
used in web services [8].  
Liang-Jie Zhang, Qun Zhou [9] proposed a dynamic web 
services discovery framework for web services representation 
chain. It solves the manual search process problems in linked 
documents. The multiple linked documents are searched using 
WSIL (Web Services Inspection Language) chains and results 
are aggregated and returned them to users all at once. It also 
re-explores the nested WSIL documents by using pre-fetched 
link calculation and caching methods.  
Sudhir Agarwal [10] proposed a goal specification language 
to discover the web services. It describes that the constraints 
should be specified on functional and non functional 
properties in goal specification language. Then this goal 
specification language is used to discover the desired services. 
The language is novel combination of SHIQ(D) and µ-
calculus. It covers resources, behavior and policies of agents 
involve in discovery process. Java API (Application 
Programming Interface) is used to describe goals and concrete 
syntax is used so that end users can easily write the formulas 
through interface.  
Fu Zhi Zhang et al. [2] presented an algorithm for dynamic 
web services discovery. The proposed algorithm is based on 
composition of web services with the process model. It is 
based on OWL-S (Ontology Web Language-Semantic) 
ontology. Unlike previous proposed models for dynamic 
discovery it can have multiple executions and matchmaking 
for a single service request and return desired service. 
Paul Palathingal [11] presented an agent based approach for 
service discovery and utilization. Agents acts instead of users 
and dynamically discover, invoke and execute web services. 
Through this technology sender object must not know the 
receiver’s 
address. 
Also 
the 
interoperability 
between 
distributed services is being achieved through these software 
components. The selected agents match the desired query from 
their respected repositories and send the retrieved results to 
composition agent who composes the web services and sends 
back to requester. 
Stephan Pöhlsen and Christian Werner [12] proposed a 
dynamic web services discovery framework in large networks. 
It solves the discovery problem of mobile ad-hoc networks by 
introducing a Discovery Proxy (DP). Through Discovery 
proxy clients can easily search desired web services through 
service providers and get updated information as services does 
not have to register in proxy unlike UDDI. The drawback of 
given technique is that all information is not centralized and 
global DNS (Domain Name System) cannot be easily located. 
Aabhas V. Paliwal [13] proposed dynamic web services 
discovery through hyper clique pattern discovery and semantic 
association ranking. It solves the discovery problem that is, 
when user input a query, multiple services that meet the 
desired criteria are retrieved as output and user cannot identify 
most relevant service. The proposed model presents the 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 2, February 2010 
154
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

mechanism that selects the most relevant web service from all 
outputs. The approach is a combination of semantic and 
statistical metrics.  
A number of web services algorithm use service profile 
method for dynamic web services discovery. [16] proposed the 
discovery mechanism based on web services composition and  
service profile. The proposed algorithm does not describe the 
internal behavior for web services composition. 
Although a number of dynamic web services techniques 
have been introduced, there is a need of dynamic services 
discovery mechanism which eliminates the problems in 
current discovery approaches. This paper presents an approach 
towards these solutions and proposes a framework that is 
efficient, reliable, scalable, flexible and fault tolerant. 
 
III. PRELIMINARIES 
 
This section describes the web services discovery 
mechanism and differentiates between different approaches 
used for service discovery. 
 
A.   Web Services Discovery 
Web services discovery is the process of finding the 
appropriate services on the web that meets the user’s desired 
requirements. All Service providers register their web services 
in registry called UDDI. Service requesters search the 
appropriate service providers available on the registry. Each 
service that is registered on UDDI has WSDL. WSDL is a 
description language which describes complete detail about 
web services for example its methods, protocols and ports etc. 
Web service interface is described in WSDL and used by the 
client to discover and invoke web services. SOAP message is 
sent to server asking for certain service and it replies with 
SOAP response message. Web service discovery and 
invocation process is shown in Fig 1. [14]                                       
 
 
B.    Web Service Discovery Approaches 
Different approaches for discovery mechanism as discussed 
in [15] are: 
1. UDDI: It is a standard for web services registration, 
discovery and integration. 
 
Fig 1: Web services discovery and invocation process 
2. Service directories/portals: They provide the web services 
using focused crawlers and provide searching through 
HTML (Hyper Text Markup Language) interface.  
3. Web Search Engines: They are most widely used in 
today’s web. They search the web services by retrieving 
information from WSDL descriptions.  
These approaches can be compared by focusing on following 
two aspects: 1) Number of services, 2) Quality of information 
associated with them. It is concluded from this research that 
browsers can give the desired results but one have to spend too 
much time for filtering the desired service which requires a lot 
of effort and it is a time consuming task. Only dedicated portal 
pages produce best results. 
 
IV. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK 
 
Proposed 
framework 
of 
dynamic 
services 
discovery 
mechanism is shown in Fig 2. Web services discovery 
framework includes the following components:  
 
1. Translator: 
Most 
service 
discovery 
frameworks 
distinguish between external and internal specification 
languages. Translator is used for translation of user input 
to a form that can be efficiently used by the system. It is 
also used to translate the system response to a form that 
can be easily understandable for the user. 
2. Matching Engine: Key component that is used for 
dynamic discovery mechanism. It matches the input to 
registered services using keyword and fuzzy logic based  
 
 
 
Fig 2: Proposed framework of dynamic web services discovery 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 2, February 2010 
155
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

The abbreviations used in framework diagram are: 
 
SP= Service Provider                           Reg= Registry 
SR= Service Requester                         Rep= Repository 
DM= Discovery Module                      T= Translator 
PM= Publisher Module                      ME=Matching Engine 
 
discovery. Also it stores references of searched services in 
repositories based on classification and indexing. 
Advantage of keyword based discovery is that it filters 
and ranks the services quickly. It also uses CSP solver to 
filter services based on specified constraint e.g. business 
name, service name etc. 
3. 
Indexer: Indexing mechanism is used to enhance the 
searching capability. Indexer is used to index services 
stored in local cache. In indexing mechanism first the 
index structure is created and then this structure is queried 
and results are returned. Indexing mechanism is shown in 
Figure 3. 
4. Local Cache: Local cache concept is introduced so that 
users can learn from past experiences. Local cache is used 
to store the web services. It consists of categorized 
repositories. Web services that are discovered by 
matching engine are returned to the requester. It also 
stores the service reference in local cache using indexing 
mechanism for future reference. A timestamp is 
associated with each service reference present in the local 
cache to help maintain up to date cache. 
5. Registry: It is authorized, centrally controlled store of web 
services. Multiple service providers use multiple registries 
to publish their services in registries on global web. 
6. Publisher: Publisher is used to publish the web services in 
registries. Through publisher web service providers can 
save, update and delete their web services.  
7. Agent: Agent is used to search web service from its own 
listed registries. It sends the multiple threads to each 
registry, and returned the discovered services to matching 
engine. 
 
Fig 3: Indexing mechanism 
 
Key Mechanisms 
Following key mechanisms are used in proposed 
framework to enhance the discovery mechanism. 
1. Classification of Services: Web services are classified or 
categorized into different categories in local cache. The 
classification is done based on different data types for 
example images, files, html docs etc. For each category 
different database is maintained with timestamp. This 
mechanism introduces fast and efficient retrieval of web 
services. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 4: Sequence diagram of proposed framework 
 
Translator
Matching Engine
Indexer
Local cache
Agent
Registries
Top Package::Top Package
translate request
if valid
else/timestamp exipired
search desired service
if valid
sends request
return desired services
return desired services
sends request
save service reference
sends request
searches
return results
return desired services
saves service reference
return desired services
return results
aging factor
multithreaded
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 2, February 2010 
156
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

2. Multithreading: The agent is based on multithreading and 
opens thread for each registry listed with itself. Multiple 
agents have been used in our proposed framework and 
each agent will search desired service from its listed 
registries and returned the results to matching engine. 
 
V. PROPOSED TECHNIQUE 
 
A.    Working. 
The detailed flow of proposed discovery mechanism is 
explained as follows: 
 
1. Service providers register their web services in registries 
on global web through registration module. 
2. Service requester requests for web service through 
discovery module.  
3. Translator is used for translation of user input to a form 
that can be efficiently used by the system. From translator 
request goes to matching engine. 
4. Matching engine tries to discover the desired service from 
local cache and passes request to indexer. Indexer 
searches the desired service from local cache based on 
indexing and categorization. If the results are valid then 
indexer returns desired results to matching engine. 
5. Otherwise matching engine tries to discover the desired 
service from registries available on the web, using 
multithreaded agent approach. Agents search the services 
from its listed registries and send the discovered services 
to matching engine.  
6. A timestamp is maintained with each service reference 
which has a specific value. And web services are updated 
in local cache from web when timestamp expires. 
7. Matching engine stores the service references in local 
cache for future reference. Also it sends result to 
translator which translates result into user understandable 
form and results are returned to requester. 
 
B. Pseudo Code: 
The pseudo code of proposed technique is given as: 
 
 
 
VI. IMPLEMENTATION & EVALUATION 
 
The implementation has been done using Netbeans 6.5 and 
open source UDDI which is Apache jUDDIv3 (java 
implementation of Universal Description Discovery and 
Integration version 3). Ruddi is used to access UDDI registry 
which is java API for developing, deploying reliable, scalable 
and secure application that query and publish to UDDI 
registries. UDDI4J and JAXR (Java API for XML Registries) 
is also java API for accessing registries but the drawbacks are 
that UDDI4J only supports jUDDI version 2 and JAXR is for 
all XML based registries for example UDDI, ebXML etc. 
Xerces APIs are also used for parsing XML request and 
responses. We have used apache jUDDI version3 and multiple 
jUDDI’s on multiple servers by implementing multithreaded 
approach. 
For testing we have published multiple businesses and services 
on registry. We have used WordNet for synonyms and Rita-
Wordnet is a java API to access WordNet. WordNet is used 
for matching businesses and services from registry. Users can 
search businesses and services by synonyms which are already 
saved in WordNet. The implementation mainly comprises of 
UDDI registries, matching engine, service providers, service 
requesters and dynamic services discovery mechanism. Fig 5 
shows the GUI of our dynamic web services discovery 
application. User sends discovery request using our 
application which then goes to the translator. Translator send 
request to matching engine which tries to discover the desired 
service from local cache based on indexing. As this service is 
not present in local cache, it sends request back to Matching 
Engine. Matching Engine sends request to agent. Agent sends 
multiple threads to own multiple listed registries and starts 
searching services. It discovers the matched services and 
returns the valid services to Matching Engine. Matching  
Algorithm: Dynamic Web Services Discovery 
Input: Request for Web service 
Output: Desired Service  
 
Services registered in UDDI registries; 
User enters input request for web service; 
   for each input 
          Translator translates input; 
           Input goes to Matching Engine; 
Matching Engine passes request to 
Indexer; 
Indexer search from local cache 
based on classification and indexing; 
Indexer search from local cache 
based on classification and indexing; 
   If service found in local cache 
           Return result to user; 
   If no service found or timestamp expires 
Matching Engine passes request to 
Agents; 
Agents discover service from its listed 
UDDI registries; 
           Keyword and fuzzy logic based 
matching from registries; 
CSP solver filters matched services 
based on specified constraints; 
Matching Engine add references of 
matched services in local cache through 
indexing; 
Service references added in local cache 
for future reference; 
Return results to user through translator; 
else  
        Return no service found; 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 2, February 2010 
157
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

 
 
Fig 5: XML based request response message 
 
Engine sends results to user by using translator, and also stores 
service references of these services in local cache with 
timestamp. Next time when any user searches for the same 
service then results will be found from local cache. If 
timestamp expires for this cached service, then Matching 
Engine will search query from web UDDI registry. XML 
based request and response messages for service discovery are 
shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Fig 6: GUI of proposed discovery Application 
 
A. Experimental Evaluation and Analysis 
Our algorithm accurately discovers the web services for 
requesters. The effectiveness of algorithm is proved by 
calculating their precision and discovery time. 
Precision is the proportion of services that meets user’s 
requests from all the discovered services. 
Our algorithm has better performance and improved the 
quality of results. Figure 7, 8 show the efficiency and 
precision of proposed algorithm as compared to [2] and [16]. 
We have taken multiple number of web services and 
calculate their discovery time. Figure 7 shows the graph of 
number of services against discovery time and Figure 8 shows 
the graph of number of discovered services against precision. 
In the proposed technique, the local cache technique 
improves the time taken for dynamic services discovery. Also 
the timestamp approach helps to make use of any new services 
that are available on the registry.  
 
 
Fig 7: The Efficiency of proposed algorithm 
 
 
Request body: 
<find_business generic="2.0" 
xmlns="urn:uddi-org:api_v2"> 
<findQualifiers/> 
<name>Microsoft</name> 
</find_business> 
 
Response body: 
<businessList generic="2.0" 
operator="ms.com" truncated="false" 
xmlns="urn:uddi org:api_v2"> 
<businessInfos> 
 <businessInfo 
businessKey="c13cc7b2-642d-41d0-
b2dd-7bb531a18997"> 
  <name xml:lang="en">Microsoft DRMS 
Dev</name> 
  <serviceInfos> 
  <serviceInfo businessKey="c13cc7b2 
642d-41d0-b2dd-7bb531a18997"  
serviceKey="6166f8b2-436d-4001-9f68-
f37ff8b47ea3"> 
    <name 
xml:lang="en">Certification</name> 
   </serviceInfo> 
   <serviceInfo businessKey="c13cc7b2-
642d-41d0-b2dd-7bb531a18997" 
serviceKey="7ae6c133-4471-4deb-93a5-
1158aaa826b8"> 
    <name xml:lang="en">Machine 
Activation</name> 
   </serviceInfo> 
   <serviceInfo 
businessKey="c13cc7b2-642d-41d0-
b2dd-7bb531a18997" 
serviceKey="52616482-653c-45f3-
ae08-e4d4ca8b66c2"> 
    <name xml:lang="en">Server 
Enrollment</name> 
   </serviceInfo> 
</business nfo> 
.... 
</businessInfos> 
</businessList> 
(IJCSIS) International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, 
Vol. 7, No. 2, February 2010 
158
http://sites.google.com/site/ijcsis/ 
ISSN 1947-5500 

 
In Fig 7, Single threaded and multithreaded concept is 
introduced. In Single threaded approach, Matching Engine 
discovers services from web, based on single search criteria 
whereas in multithreaded approach, multithreaded agents are 
used to discover services. 
 
Fig 8: The precision of proposed algorithm 
 
VII. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK 
 
This paper presents a framework for automatic, dynamic 
web services discovery and utilization. The framework is 
flexible, scalable and new services can easily be updated in 
local cache.  
Through the proposed approach requester always retrieve up 
to date services because a timestamp is attached with each 
service reference in local cache and when it expires, services 
are updated. Also through local cache there is fast retrieval of 
services as requester does not need to search the web each 
time for discovery of services. If they are present in local 
cache then services can easily be discovered in less time.  
Interoperability between service providers and requesters is 
achieved through Translator.  
CSP solver selects the service satisfied specified constraints, 
which is a part of Matching Engine. Thus the proposed 
algorithm fix current issues of dynamic web services 
discovery. In future, the framework can be extended by adding 
intelligent service aggregation algorithms based on AI 
planning for discovery.
