1
A Review of Theoretical and Practical Challenges
of Trusted Autonomy in Big Data
Hussein A. Abbass, George Leu, and Kathryn Merrick
Abstract
Despite the advances made in artiﬁcial intelligence, software agents, and robotics, there is little we see today that we can truly
call a fully autonomous system. We conjecture that the main inhibitor for advancing autonomy is lack of trust. Trusted autonomy
is the scientiﬁc and engineering ﬁeld to establish the foundations and ground work for developing trusted autonomous systems
(robotics and software agents) that can be used in our daily life, and can be integrated with humans seamlessly, naturally and
efﬁciently.
In this paper, we review this literature to reveal opportunities for researchers and practitioners to work on topics that can create
a leap forward in advancing the ﬁeld of trusted autonomy. We focus the paper on the ‘trust’ component as the uniting technology
between humans and machines. Our inquiry into this topic revolves around three sub-topics: (1) reviewing and positioning the
trust modelling literature for the purpose of trusted autonomy; (2) reviewing a critical subset of sensor technologies that allow a
machine to sense human states; and (3) distilling some critical questions for advancing the ﬁeld of trusted autonomy. The inquiry
is augmented with conceptual models that we propose along the way by recompiling and reshaping the literature into forms that
enables trusted autonomous systems to become a reality. The paper offers a vision for a Trusted Cyborg Swarm, an extension of
our previous Cognitive Cyber Symbiosis concept, whereby humans and machines meld together in a harmonious, seamless, and
coordinated manner.
Index Terms
Big Data, Cognitive Cyber Symbiosis, Trusted Cyborg Swarm, Trust Bus, Trusted Autonomy, Trusted Autonomous Systems
I. INTRODUCTION
Trusted Autonomous Systems (TAS) are one of the grand challenges in this century. The proliferation of autonomous systems
(AS) is a natural consequence of the opportunities they create for industry, health, education and the economy as a whole.
These opportunities arrive with new technological and social challenges. TAS can be seen as a fusion of these challenges and
acts as the umbrella that couples underneath it both objectives and challenges concurrently. Trusted Autonomy is the wider
scientiﬁc endeavor to establish the science and engineering required to develop TAS.
For most of the literature, trust is seen as a human endeavor. It is seen to be owned by ﬁelds such as psychology [1], [2],
social sciences [3], [2], [4], and organization sciences [5], [6], [7], [8]. Technologists and computational scientists have been
modelling trust for a few decades [9], [10], [11], [12]. TAS brings this large spectrum of research together in the face of a
new challenge: the creation of mutual trust between a human and a machine.
The above challenge carries forward classic research in human factors, automation, human computer interaction, and human
robotic interaction to tackle the problem of how to get a human to trust a machine. However, in addition to this one-sided view
of trust, the challenge is raising a more fundamental complex question on the other side of the equation: how can a machine
trust a human?
This latter question is a socio-technological question on modelling complex systems, and forms the context of this paper.
For a machine to trust a human, it needs to be able to ‘proactively’ sense the human, extract meaning and cues during sensing,
manage identity to ensure it is dealing with the right human, estimate and manage human intent, and make an informed
judgement on the level of trustworthiness of the human in a particular context in time and space.
Finding technological solutions to address this question is a complex endeavor that is compounded even more with the
dynamic and possible chaotic nature of a trusting relationship. The slightest change in context may cause a dramatic change
in trust estimation with a profound impact on trust dynamics. For example, a slight change in the security level of the
communication channel between the human and the machine can cause a dramatic change in trust estimation.
To put it more succinctly, TAS require the machine to possess a high level of intelligence extending beyond the level of the
task it is performing to include the level of the interaction it is involved with, the environment it is ‘situated’ and ‘embodied’
within, and to be aware of its own states, actions, motives, goals, and action production mechanisms. TAS require smart
technologies for the machine to manage the interaction with humans; not just to convince the human that the machine is
trustworthy, but to be ‘self-aware’ of trust to the extent of making its own decisions on the varying degree of trustworthiness
of the human operators/users themselves during the interaction and based on context.
Designing the Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) models to manage the interaction between the human and the machine in the way
explained above requires some fundamental building blocks. We structure this paper into three main sections.

arXiv:1604.00921v1  [cs.CY]  16 Mar 2016

2
Fig. 1: Trust Timeline.
The ﬁrst section (Section II) focuses on trust as the fundamental differentiator between classic AS research and TAS. We
ﬁrst start with the layers needed to deﬁne trust, then contrast how trust is modelled in the literature with these layers to offer
two conceptual models: one is a computational structure model of trust and the other is a trust-based multi-agent architecture.
We then deﬁne the ‘trust aware’ agent and present the concept of ‘Trust Bus’, which carries the information resultant from
action production within the agent to the actuators. we adopt the term ’bus’ in its computer architecture sense as in its classic
use in computer architecture and service oriented architectures. The lens of the Trust Bus scopes the big data problem within
this context to particular set of data and sensors. This scoping is essential as it guides the selection of sensors to be reviewed
in the next section.
The second section (Section III) focuses on introducing big data to emphasize that the word ‘big’ is a relative concept deﬁned
in relation to the amount of processing available. We then review the sensor technologies available today that can facilitate the
ﬂow of information between humans and machines and augment the review with an overview of different processing concepts
available to process these information. We conclude this section with a discussion on why the human-machine relationship is
a big data problem.
In the third section (Section IV), we extend the discussion to the concept of autonomy and discuss the layers of autonomy.
We then conclude this section by bringing together the ﬁrst two sections and, ﬁrst, offer the architecture required for an
autonomous entity to exhibit both autonomy and trust, then second discuss the challenges associated with TAS from big data
perspective.
II. COMPUTATIONS FOR AND BY TRUST
A. The Road to Trust
Trust is a multi-dimensional concept. Research has established many facets and inﬂuential factors [12], [11] for trust
dynamics [13]. We will discuss these facets and factors incrementally as each factor requires the list of factors listed before it
to have a meaningful evolution of a trusting relationship.
The evolution model of trust presented in Figure 1 starts with the concept of reliability. A trustor requires the trustee to be
reliable; that is, the trustee needs to be consistent in its actions, values, and objectives during the lifetime of the relationship
and stable in its performance. Fundamentally, a trusting relationship carries with it a level of risk; that is, the risk that the
trustee will default. Reliability increases the conﬁdence level associated with predictability. Therefore, it offers a better estimate
of the risk a trustor is exposed to during the trusting relationship.
Once reliability is established, trust improves through privacy. The order is a very important factor in this model. In the
absence of any contextual information, a trustee that maintains privacy but not reliability is a high risk trustee. The reverse is
not necessarily true as it depends on context. The trustor requires assurance that private information in the trusting relationship
are protected.
Privacy is a distinct concept from security. When a trustor trusts a trustee, the trusting relationship involves transfer of certain
data. For example, the trustee may need to know the identity of the trustor and vice-versa. These data are communicated between
parties for the purpose of fulﬁlling the trusting relationship. Any misuse of these data outside terms of the trusting contract is
a breach of privacy.
Security, however, is more related to what is known as the CIA triad [14]: Conﬁdentiality, Integrity and Availability.
Conﬁdentiality carries an element of privacy. A security breach where the database held by the trustee is broken into by an
unauthorized third part can also be a breach of privacy. Maybe the third party only stole the trustee’s data because it is not
interested in the trustor’s data per se; thus, the trustor data may not have been compromised. In this case, there is no privacy
breach from the trustor perspective but a clear security breach that may compromise the trustor conﬁdence in the trusting
relationship.
Integrity breaches can be unintentional. A simple error in a piece of code can cause a deletion or modiﬁcation of data and
compromising the accuracy and validity of information. Availability is a function of the reliability of the IT service such that
access is guaranteed whenever it is required and access control such that only authorized actors can access the data.

3
The above discussion can be seen from a reliability lens, where the concept of reliability discussed above is focused on
reliability for delivering the service while the privacy and security elements relate to the reliability of the information assurance
process.
The fourth factor is related to safety [15]. A trustor needs to be safe in a trusting relationship. In a safety critical system, like
air trafﬁc management, the air trafﬁc controller issues commands to pilots to ensure that the aircraft are separated (separation
assurance). The pilot plays the trustor since the pilot does not have access to all information related to the airspace and needs
to trust the air trafﬁc controller judgement. The air trafﬁc controller is the trustee. The trustee is highly trained and reliable. The
communication channel and data within this safety critical system are subject to strict information assurance procedures. But
what will happen if the working environment for the air trafﬁc controller is not safe? For example, there is a high possibility for
a ﬁre hazard, loss of power, etc. In this case, safety, or lack of in this example, can alter reliability of service and information
assurance.
The four factors discussed so far are related to what we will call, technological imperfection. They are imperfect because
we can’t guarantee a 100% reliability, privacy, security and safety in any situation. Regardless of how much we will invest,
the laws of dimensioning return would prevail.
The remaining three factors are related to what we will call ‘cognitive imperfection’ and start coming into play. The ﬁrst
factor is related to the complexity of the context for the trustor and trustee. A trustor would normally enter a trusting relationship
to manage some level of complexity. Trust is a form of educated delegation. A trustor would delegate to a trustee when the
trustor ‘needs to’; that is, there is a beneﬁt for the trustor in trusting than self-performing the job. This delegation needs to
reduce some form of complexity, be it, the technical complexity associated with performing the task, the time pressure on the
trustor to complete the task, or the increase in mental and cognitive complexity on the trustor if the trustor chooses to perform
the task. As the level of complexity increases, the degree with which a trustor trusts a trustee increases.
The second factor of cognitive imperfection is related to risk. As we mentioned before, a trusting decision involves a level
of uncertainty associated with the possibility that the trustee defects [11], [13]. Risk within a trusting decision is both negative
and positive. The expectations from the trustor towards the good behavior of the trustee is a positive risk. It carries with it the
negative risk resultant from the trustee defecting in the relationship. Taking high risk is an indication of high trust, while the
reverse is not necessarily true.
The last factor in the evolutionary timeline of trust is ‘free-will’; the fact that the trustor is making the trusting decision not
because of a necessity forced by an external actor who is attempting to exert its inﬂuence on the trustor. With free-will arises
full autonomy. An actor that is fully autonomous acts because it has the freedom to act. This freedom is not unbounded since
social ties, social rules and norms, and interdependencies among actors in terms of resources and objectives limit the behavior
of an actor. Free-will is the ability of the actor to make a decision within this bounded space autonomously and at its own
discretion. This discussion begs the question of what is autonomy?
B. Computational Trust
In multi-agent systems, agents can cooperate to achieve goals that may not be attainable by individual agents. However,
agents must manage the risk associated with interacting with others who may have different objectives, or who may fail to
fulﬁl their commitments during a cooperative scenario. Models of trust offer a mechanism for reasoning about the reliability,
honesty, veracity etc. of other agents, to provide a basis for determining whether cooperation is worthwhile. This section is
a selective survey of computational models of trust that have been used in multi-agent systems, including the types of trust
models, the agent-models in which they have been used, the type of cooperation achieved and the applications in which trusting
agents have been used.
A number of existing surveys of computational trust have been made [16], [10], [17], [18]. Sabater and Sierra [16] classify
trust and reputation models ﬁrstly as either cognitive or game theoretic. They also consider the information sources for trust,
including direct experiences, indirect witness information and sociological information.
This section also considers these dimensions of trust models, but goes beyond this to survey the types of agent models in
which trust models have been embedded, the applications for which they have been used and techniques for evaluating trust
models. We also look beyond the scope of traditional agent-based systems literature to consider trust models from mathematical
optimisation. The rest of this subsection is divided into two parts: trust modelling and computations by trust.
1) Trust Modelling: Computational models of trust are essentially mathematical functions that aim to represent certain
aspects of philosophical or psychological theories of trust. The earliest computational models date back to the 1990s and are
relatively simple statistical functions taking into account factors such as the situation of an agent, the utility of the situation and
the importance of the situation. Later models have emerged in time with the development of more complex machine learning
paradigms.
We ﬁrst take the approach of Josang et al. [17], dividing the basic trust models into categories for statistical models, Bayesian
analysis, discrete models, belief models, fuzzy models and ﬂow models. However, we also extend this set of categories with
a discussion of trust-regions from the literature of mathematical optimisation and computer networks.
• Statistical Models: An early approach to modelling trust was proposed by Marsh [19]. Marsh presents several deﬁnitions
of trust that take into account different factors. First, he deﬁnes “the amount x trusts y” by Tx(y). Tx(y) has a value in

4
the interval [−1; 1) (i.e., −1 ≤Tx(y) < 1). In his model, 0 means no trust, and −1 represents total distrust. He argues
that the two are not the same since, the situation of ‘no trust’ occurs when the trustor has little or no information about
the trustee, or is indifferent. In contrast, ‘total distrust’ is a proactive measure, requiring that the trustor reason about what
it is doing. Marsh does not permit a value of 1 for trust, arguing that ‘blind trust’ implies that the trustor does not reason
about the situation, and this violates philosophical deﬁnitions of trust. In a second deﬁnition, Marsh includes the notion
of a situation α. A situation is a point or points in time relative to a speciﬁc agent. The importance of the situation to an
agent x is written Ix(α). Ix(α) has a value in (−1, 1). The utility (cost or beneﬁt) of a situation to an agent x is written
Ux(α) also with a value in (−1, 1). The “situational trust” of agent x for agent y in situation α is then deﬁned as:
Tx(y, α) = Tx(y)Ux(α)Ix(α)
(1)
Estimates for each of these terms must then be obtained. Marsh assumes that values of Ux(α) and Ix(α) can be determined
from the domain. Marsh suggests that the amount x trusts y at time t, might be determined as an average of situational trust
values at previous times. Because agent memory is assumed to be bounded, one challenge is to decide which situations
should be included in this average. Alternatives include all the situations the agent remembers or only situations that were
similar to the current situation and so on. Different choices will clearly result in different trust values.
Other models have built on the work of Marsh, and maintain the idea of trust as a scalar value. Grifﬁths and Luck [20]
deﬁne the trust in an agent y, to be a value from the interval between 0 and 1: Ty ∈[0, 1]. These numbers represent
comparative values, and are not considered meaningful in themselves. Values approaching 0 are deﬁned to represent
complete distrust, and values approaching 1 represent complete or ‘blind’ trust. This is thus a simpliﬁed model, compared
to that proposed by Marsh.
• Bayesian Analysis: More recent models take a Bayesian approach to modelling trust [21]. Rather than using ‘situations’
as the basis for calculation, binary valued interactions form the input for the trust calculation. An interaction Ox,y takes a
value of 1 if y fulﬁlled a contract with x, and 0 otherwise. ‘Interactions’ by this deﬁnition thus have a more constrained
structure compared to Marsh’s situations. The tendency of an agent y to fulﬁl or default on its obligations is governed by
its behaviour, which is represented as a variable Bx,y ∈[0, 1]. Bx,y speciﬁes the intrinsic probability that x will fulﬁl its
obligations during an interaction with y. That is, Bx,y = Pr(Ox,y = 1). The level of trust Tx,y is deﬁned as the expected
value of Bx,y given a set of K outcomes O1:K
x,y . That is:
Txy = E(Bx,y|O1:K
x,y )
(2)
In order to determine this expected value, a probability distribution deﬁned by a probability density function (PDF) is
used to model the relative probability that Bx,y will have a certain value. An example is a beta PDF (see Equation 10
for example).
• Discrete Models: Other models stipulate a ﬁnite, discrete set of trust categories [22], [23]. For example, the model
proposed by Abdul-Rahman and Hailes [22] stipulates four categories: very trustworthy, trustworthy, untrustworthy and
very untrustworthy. An agent’s trust degree is represented as a tuple, rather than a scalar value:
T = {vt, t, u, vu}
(3)
Trust is equal to the trust degree with the highest value. One agent’s x belief in another agent y’s trustworthiness in a
given context α is represented as:
beliefx(y, α, T)
(4)
An agent maintains this information for each other agent and context.
• Belief Models: A variation on discrete models is belief-based model such as those proposed by Josang [24]. In their
model, trust is modelled as an opinion held by x about another agent y:
ωx
y = (b, d, u, a),
b, d, u, a ∈[0, 1]
(5)
where b represents belief, d disbelief and u uncertainty. a is the base-rate probability in the absence of evidence.
• Fuzzy Models: Fuzzy models provide another way to deal with the uncertainty associated with trust [25], [26]. A fuzzy
set is a pair (X, m) where X is a set and m : X →[0, 1] is a membership function that speciﬁes the grade of membership
of x in (X, m). For each x ∈X, then x is not included in (X, m) if m(x) = 0. Conversely it is fully included in (X, m)
if m(x) = 1. If we maintain our deﬁnition of x as an agent, then a fuzzy set (X, m) may be deﬁned as very trusted
agents, trusted agents, untrusted agents and so on.
• Flow Models: Josang et al. [17] deﬁne ﬂow models as those that compute trust by transitive iteration through looped or
arbitrarily long chains. The Advogato maximum ﬂow trust metric [27], for example, computes trust of individuals in a
group V relative to a ‘seed’ s of highly trusted group members. The input of the trust calculation are an integer number
n, which represents the number of group members to trust, as well as the trust seed s. The output is a characteristic
function that maps each member to a boolean value indicating trustworthiness:
T : 2V × N+
0 →(V →{true, false})
(6)

5
The trust model underlying Advogato does not provide support for weighted trust relationships. Hence, trust edges
extending from individual x to y express blind trust of x in y. Other examples of ﬂow based metrics include the Appleseed
trust metric [28].
A characteristic component of ﬂow models is the seed (also called the trust root). The seeds of trust, are the positive
assumptions about speciﬁc entities made by all entities in some community. The label authority is often applied to an
entity that is the subject of a trust root. Models with formally modelled trust seeds may be termed centralized and those
without may be termed distributed [29].
• Optimisation Models: Another approach to modelling trust has been used in mathematical optimisation [30]. This this
ﬁeld, a ‘trust region’ denotes the part of an objective function for which there is a good approximate model function.
An example of a model function here is a quadratic surface. Algorithms that incorporate trust region methods are known
as restricted step methods, and broadly take the following approach [31]: If a ‘good’ model of the objective function is
found within the trust region, then the region is expanded. Conversely, if the model is poor, then the region is contracted.
The quality of the model is evaluated by comparing the ratio of expected improvement from the model approximation
with the actual improvement observed in the objective function. Thresholding of this ratio can be used as the criterion for
expansion and contraction of the trust region. The model function is then ’trusted’ only in the region where it provides a
good approximation.
The models discussed above assume that trust is the same for all agents, essentially an objective model of trust. However,
alternative models, such as that proposed by Marsh [19], discuss the role of the disposition of the trustor in computing trust.
This interprets trust as a subjective concept. Marsh presents a spectrum of dispositions from optimists to pessimists. Optimists
are more likely to trust, while pessimists are less likely to trust. In contrast to the generic, average-based deﬁnition of trust
described above, he deﬁnes optimists to compute trust as in Equation 7, while pessimists compute trust as in Equation 8:
Tx(y) = maxα∈A(Tx(y, α))
(7)
Tx(y) = minα∈A(Tx(y, α))
(8)
Again, the choice of which situations to include will inﬂuence the value of trust. Grifﬁths and Luck [20] use dispositions as
a way of initialising trust values. In their model, trust values are initially inferred according to an agent’s disposition: optimistic
agents infer high values, while pessimists infer low values. Disposition also assumed to determine how trust is updated after
interactions in their model.
An assumption of the models above is that trust values depend on factors such as the agent’s disposition and its personal
experiences with the trustee. When assessing trust in an individual with whom an agent has no personal experience, information
must be obtained in another way. One method is to consult ’witnesses’ to develop a collective opinion. This collective opinion
is often referred to as ’reputation’, and can be used as a factor in the assessment of trustworthiness. The following is a short
review of computational models of trust that take this approach:
• Statistical Models: A simple model permits witnesses to report on a transaction by assigning one of three possible values
1 (positive), 0 neutral or −1 (negative). Reputation is computed simply as the sum or an average of all reported values
over a certain time period [16]. More complex variants of this approach weight recent witness reports more highly than
older reports, or stipulate different rates of reputation change depending on the current reputation of an agent [32].
• Bayesian Analysis: Still more complex variants take into account speciﬁc details of interactions between individuals to
compute reputation. One such model [21] represents x’s opinion of y’s reputation as:
Rt
x,y = (mt
x,y, nt
x,y)
(9)
where mt
x,y is the number of successful interactions (interactions where Ox,y = 1) and nt
x,y is the number of unsuccessful
interactions (interactions where Ox,y = 0) experienced by x. x may communicate this opinion with a third agent z. The
communicated opinion ˆRt
x,y may be distinguished from the true opinion Rt
x,y as is possible that x may not report accurately
for a range of reasons. z can develop a collective opinion of y by summing values of ˆmt
x,y and ˆnt
x,y collected from multiple
other agents x and using these values to calculate the shape parameters for a beta distribution, as in Equation 10.
Nz,y =
X
x
ˆnx,y and Mz,y =
X
x
ˆmx,y
α = Mz,y + 1 and β = Nz,y + 1
f(Bz,y|α, β) = (Bz,y)α−1(1 −Bz,y)β−1
1R
0
uα−1(1 −u)β−1du
(10)
The ﬁnal value for trust is calculated by applying the standard equation for the expected value of a beta distribution to
these parameter settings: T t
z,y = E(Bz,y|α, β) =
α
α+β . Then, z may also include their own opinion in the trust calculation

6
if such data exists. If all agents have complete information about the true opinions of all other agents, then it is said that
a global or objective measure of trust results. Otherwise, trust remains local or subjective [28].
• Network Models: Another set of trust models based on witness data have been proposed for use in computer networks, and
peer-to-peer computing, particularly in applications where multi-agent systems are responsible for transporting valuable
data over a network. Examples of trust models for computer networks include PeerTrust [33], FCTrust [34] and SFTrust
[35]. Other models build on this work [33]. They use parameters such as the feedback a peer obtains from other peers (also
called satisfaction); feedback scope (such as the total number of transactions a peer has with other peers); the credibility
factor for the feedback source; the transaction context factor for discriminating critical from less critical transactions;
and the community context factor for addressing community-related characteristics and vulnerabilities. An example of a
network trust metric based on these parameters is:
T(x) = α
I(x)
X
i=1
S(x, i)Cr[p(x, i)]TF(x, i) + βCF(x)
(11)
I(x) denotes the total number of transactions performed by peer x with all other peers. p(x, i) denotes the other
participating peer in peer x’s ith transaction. S(x, i) denotes the normalised satisfaction peer x receives from peer p(x, i)
in its ith transaction. Cr(.) denotes the credibility of feedback, TF(x, i) denotes the adaptive transaction context factor
for peer x’s ith transaction. CF(x) denotes the community context factor. α and β denote the normalise weight factors
for the collective evaluation and the community context factors.
The models we discussed thus far are static, that is, they do not model the change in trust over time. Marsh [19] also
presented a notation for change in trust as an update function for Equation 1:
Tx(y, α)t+1 = Tx(y, α)t + ∆
(12)
Marsh [19] considered change in trust over time as a result of different dispositions. For optimists, ∆is a large positive
number in response to situations with positive utility, but a small negative number in response to situations with negative utility.
In contrast, for pessimists ∆is a small positive number in response to situations with a positive utility, but a large negative
number in response to situations with negative utility. Different types of optimists and pessimist can be created by varying the
choices of ∆. Jonker and Treur [36] expand on the two trust dispositions by distinguishing six types of trust dynamics: blindly
positive; blindly negative; slow positive + fast negative; balanced slow; balanced fast; and slow negative + fast positive. Other
models also assume that trust may change over time due to progressive accumulation of experiences. In this case, Equation 2
becomes:
Tx(x, y)t = E(Bx,y|O1:t
x,y)
(13)
Change in trust over time, is generally assumed to be a result of information gathering ‘experiences’. A parallel concept
that is often discussed as a result of such experiences is conﬁdence [20], [21], [25]. The intuition is that the more evidence
used to compute trust should result in higher conﬁdence in computed trust values. Conﬁdence is thus not a direct measure of
trust, but an associated concept that tells an agent something about its trust calculation.
An example of a conﬁdence metric that can be derived from a Bayesian deﬁnition of trust deﬁnes conﬁdence γx,y as the
posterior probability that the actual value of Bx,y lies within an acceptable margin of error ϵ about Tx,y. That is:
Γx,y =
Tx,y+ϵ
R
Tx,y−ϵ
wα−1(1 −w)β−1dw
1R
0
uα−1(1 −u)β−1du
(14)
An alternative, simpler deﬁnition of conﬁdence used in a fuzzy setting is a simple sum of the number of experiences (positive
and negative) encountered by the agent [25].
Reliability is an associated concept with trust and conﬁdence. Reliability theory is the study of the performance of a system of
failure-prone elements [29]. Reliability is studied in many contexts, including software reliability, network reliability, hardware
reliability and so on. Reliability is concerned with the ability of computer systems to carry out a desired operation. Reliability
has been understood in different ways by different researchers with respect to trust. Some researchers have equated reliability
with trust [29], while others make the weaker assumption that reliability inﬂuences trust [37].
In summary, different trust models have been proposed over the last two decades, with new models emerging in line with
new developments in machine learning theory. The next section examines the agent architectures in which these models have
been used.

7
2) Computations by Trust: Agents are entities that sense their environments using sensors, reason about data so obtained
using one or more reasoning processes, then act to change their environment using effectors. While some theoretical work
on trust models trust in the absence of a speciﬁc agent architecture, there are some common agent frameworks that have
been used to examine the models. Much of the literature on trusted agents makes the assumptions that agents are part of
an open multi-agent system (MAS), in which individual agents are self-interested. That is, each agent has a goal or goals,
but agents in the MAS do not necessarily share a common goal. This is considered a key reason for the necessity of trust.
Aside from the assumptions of goals and self-interest, trust models have been used in a range of agent architectures, including
belief-desire-intention (BDI) agents, reinforcement learning agents and motivated agents. These architectures, and the way in
which they incorporate aspects of trust, are reviewed as follows:
• Belief-Desire-Intention Agents: The BDI model [38] enables the deﬁnition of intelligent agents that have:
– Beliefs about the world,
– Desires that they would like to achieve,
– Intentions, subsets of desires to which they have made some commitment,
– Plans that, if successful, will achieve intentions.
The BDI architectures is one of the longest-standing models of intelligent agency used in MASs. It has thus been a
popular target for the exploration of trust models [39], [40], [41]. One example is the ability-belief-commitment-desire
(ABCD) model of trust [39], which integrates with the logic of rational agents (LORA) BDI agent theory. Koster et al.
[41] provide a methodology for incorporating multiple different trust models BDI agents.
• Motivated Agents: Grifﬁths and Luck [20] extend a BDI framework with motivations. In addition to the traditional
components of the BDI model however, Grifﬁths and Luck [20] argue that motivation is an extra component required to
achieve true autonomy in such agents. Motivations are high-level desires that characterise an agent; they guide behaviour
and, at a fundamental level, control reasoning. They argue that short-term teams are not appropriate since motivations are
too dynamic when considered over a short period of time, i.e. over a small number of tasks; in the short-term agents’
motivations may be out of step resulting in agents’ failure to share common goals at the same time. Similarly, long-term
coalitions are unsuitable since although a given agent has a ﬁxed set of motivations, the general trend of which motivations
are active may change.
• Learning Agents: Learning agents can modify their internal structures in such a way to improve their performance with
respect to some task. Different approaches to learning existing, including learning from examples (supervised learning)
and learning from reward and punishment in response to interactions with an environment (reinforcement learning). Many
agents that incorporate models of trust are learning agents, because they accumulate experiences (examples) and change
their interaction partners over time to improve their performance at some task. However, some approaches also use
secondary learning algorithms to augment the trust model. Aref and Tran [26], for example, describe a fuzzy trust model
in a Q-learning reinforcement learning framework to help trust evaluating agents select beneﬁcial trustees for interaction
in uncertain, open, dynamic, and untrusted MASs. Experimental results indicate that the proper augmentation of a fuzzy
trust subsystem to Q-learning can be useful for trust evaluating agents, and the resulting model can respond to dynamic
changes in the environment.
• Multi-Agent Optimisation: Trust has also been studied in optimisation settings such as particle swarm optimisation
(PSO). In PSO, agents (particles) represent solutions to a problem. Agents move around in a search space attempting to
discover and converge on optimal solutions to the problem in question. Xu et al. [42] proposed a variation of the PSO
algorithm for trust path selection in networks. They do not deﬁne a model of trust, but rather a novel PSO algorithm that
can embed a given model of trust. Huang et al. [43] propose a different variation of PSO for incorporating trust to solve
grid task scheduling. PSO algorithms are also particularly compatible with the trust-region formalism, and examples of
algorithms that incorporate trust-regions with PSO have been proposed [44].
The examples above demonstrate that trust models have been developed across a number of different agent frameworks.
These include learning, optimisation and planning architectures. Trust models have been particularly well studied in BDI
agents. Currently we see that the trend is to develop different kinds of trust models for use in different settings. That is, there
is currently no universally accepted trust model appropriate for a range of different types of agent frameworks. However, there
are some trust models that have been used and adapted in several different settings. Marsh’s early work [19] is one such
example. These models are general enough for adaptation to speciﬁc agent frameworks or application domains.
Applications of trust models include a range of abstract scenarios modelled in simulation, as well as a number of well
known, real-world applications. Abstract applications include delegation, cooperation and detection of deceitful agents. Real
world applications include a range of internet mediated service providers. A number of applications are discussed below
• Delegation: Trust models can be used to determine whether a task should be delegated to another agent. That is, trust is
used by agent x to decide if it should allocate a certain task to agent y [45].
• Cooperation in Multi-Agent Systems: Trust can also be used to determine whether multiple agents should cooperate.
Grifﬁths and Luck [20] describe different types of cooperative groups that can occur between agents:
– Teams: short-term cooperative groups formed to achieve a speciﬁc goal. Agents hold a common goal at the time of

8
forming the team, and expect immediate beneﬁt from achieving the goal.
– Clans: medium-term cooperative groups that enhance individual goal achievement, with increased group performance
a useful side effect.
– Coalitions: long-term cooperative groups formed to achieve a speciﬁc goal, which can be broken into sub-goals.
Agents may have different preferences for these sub-goals, but are willing to forgo immediate individual beneﬁt in
the interests of long-term beneﬁt for the coalition.
Marsh [9] outlines different ways in which trust plays a part in the formation of cooperative groups:
– Trust may inﬂuence whether an individual desires to join a group.
– Trust may inﬂuence whether a group desires an individual to join them.
– Trust may inﬂuence how members of different groups interact with members of other groups.
• Detecting Deceitful Agents: Deceit is considered commonplace in certain industries such as trade [46], [47], [48], [49],
computer networks [50] and online communities [33]. Understanding deceit is vital for detecting it, and for the design of
governance mechanisms to discourage deceit. Observed regularities related to trust can be used to form the basis of models
for deceit. This can assist with the detection of deceit in trade scenarios [46], [47], [48], [49], or malicious behaviour on
computer networks [33], [50].
• Reputation: Reputation models are increasingly ubiquitous among internet mediated service providers [17]. For example,
eBay (www.eBay.com) uses a reputation model to rate the trustworthiness of sellers. AirBnB (www.airbnb.com.au), use
reputation models to rate the trustworthiness of hosts.
An appropriate use of trust models necessitates mechanisms for evaluating the performance of these models. Yu et al. [18]
include in their survey of trust models a survey of performance assessment methods for such models. They note two major
approaches used in the literature:
1) Simulation-based evaluation; and
2) Evaluation through real world datasets.
The approaches have been applied either individually or in combinations by researchers. They found that the most widely
used evaluation method is via simulations. An example of a simulation testbed is the agent reputation and trust (ART) testbed
[51], which simulates painting appraisers with varying levels of expertise in different artistic eras. Clients request appraisals
for paintings from different eras. Appraising agents may also request opinions from other appraising agents. Appraisers receive
more clients, and thus higher proﬁts, for producing more accurate appraisals. The testbed assesses the quality of appraisers’
trust-based decisions objectively by the proﬁts they achieve, as well as the accuracy and consistency of their appraisals.
Simulations permit researchers to vary experimental conditions. For example, they may simulate different ways in which a
trust model may be exploited. In contrast, real world data may enable researchers to have a better idea of how their models
would work under realistic environment conditions. However, because many datasets are not speciﬁcally collected for the
purpose of evaluating trust models, they may lack the ground truth about the user behaviour to facilitate more in-depth analysis
of the performance of proposed trust models [18].
Fig. 2: A schematic diagram of different components of a trust model based on the literature reviewed above.

9
Fig. 3: A schematic diagram of a modiﬁed BDI agent.
C. Synthesis of Computational Trust
This section has considered four aspects of trust models:
• The inputs, processing types and outputs of trust models,
• The agent architectures in which trust models have been used,
• Applications of computational trust,
• Techniques for the evaluation of trust models.
Regarding the inputs, processing types and outputs of trust models, a key division is the direct and indirect input types.
Indirect input is frequently indicative of a reputation based model of trust. Trust has been incorporated extensively in BDI agent
architectures, but has also been examined in motivated agents and learning agents. Abstract applications include delegation,
cooperation and detecting deceit in MASs. Concrete applications occur particularly in internet mediated service industries,
which tend to make use of reputation models and computer networks for security purposes.
Figure 2 presents a compilation of the literature on trust modelling that was reviewed in the previous section.
This diagram clearly identiﬁes the four main inputs to a trust model. One input depends on the trustor’s initial belief about
the level of trust it holds towards the trustee. One input depends on direct and indirect experience encounters with the trustee.
Two inputs depend on context and represent the importance and value of the context.
The trustor needs to obtain two indicators from the trust model: the updated level of trust and the model conﬁdence in this
update. The trustor may choose to ignore an estimate with low conﬁdence.
This model is intuitive, simple and basically captures the basic building blocks from across the wide literature on modelling
trust. Variations can exist by expanding some of the elements. For example, how to calculate the importance of a situation or
what personal attributes of the trustor and trustee we can use for trust update. Another example is related to the risk appetite
and attitude of the trustor, which may inﬂuence the trustor’s trust-update functions. All these are possible, with their utility
dependant on data availability and the cost-beneﬁt trade-off that needs to be taken into account when deciding on how complex
a trust-model should be.
Trust production is the set of mechanisms needed to make a trusting decision. Figure 2 conceptually depicted one input-and-
output view of a trust production system. It is equally important to know where trust sits within the wider agent architecture.
We will start with the BDI architecture since we reviewed it above, but we will then move high up in the abstraction hierarchy
to offer system-level architectures that integrate trust production more profoundly than the simple equation model used in
almost all of the literature we reviewed on trust.
The amalgamation of trust production with BDI necessitates a new perspective on BDI that explicitly acknowledges the
complexity of trust production instead of merely reducing it to the equation-based approach. We compile the above discussions

10
Fig. 4: TrustBus.
into the Belief-Desire-Intention-Trust-Motivation (BDI-TM) architecture as shown in Figure 3.
This architecture acknowledges two additional components to BDI; these are: Trust Bus and motivation adaptor. The Trust
Bus interacts with the belief component to estimate trustworthiness of trustees but also produces information which are essential
for the belief update mechanism: the primary learning mechanism in a BDI architecture. The Trust Bus acts as the message
passing interface that learns – through automatic knowledge acquisition methods [52] – from and modiﬁes massages as they
get transferred from one system module to another.
The second component is related to motivation, which acts as an adaptor to desires. We prefer in this architecture to make
motivation as a stand-alone component, simply because it is an adaptor to the overall desire production box, not just the desires
themselves and can inﬂuence, and be inﬂuenced with, trust production as well. Beliefs memory and trust need to get fused
with motives before motives adapts desires.
The previous discussion begs question on the constituents of the Trust Bus, and whether this bus is a simple message-passing
interface or does it do more than that?
Figure 4 expands the Trust Bus into its constituents: Actors and Entities Memory, Trust Production, Identity Management,
Intent Management, Emotion Management, Complexity Management and Risk Management. Each of these components deserves
a brief overview below.
The literature on trust implicitly emphasized the need to be aware of the actors in the environment (at least the trustee)
and other entities. The Actors and Entities memory maintains the information stored on these actors and entities for retrieval
when needed. The identity management module is responsible for identiﬁcation of actors and continuous authentication of
their identities while interacting with the system. This is a critical component underpinning the mechanisms needed to manage
reputation, reliability of information, privacy and security.
The intent management module acts as a smart engine to objectively estimates actors intents and use these estimates to offer
informed advice to the trust production module on the reliability and value of these intents. It also offers what-if services to
the trust production module to explore the space of possible implications of trust.
The three remaining modules represent the cornerstones for trust in psychology and social science research and were elicited
in our previous work [11], [13], [12]. These are emotion, risk, and complexity. Emotion management models and learns affective
states of other actors in the environment. An advanced version of this module can manage the emotion states expressed by the
AI when needed. The risk management module maintains a risk registry, analyzes uncertainties and offer what-if services to
the trust production module. The complexity management module estimates the cognitive and task complexities in the context
of other agents and the trustor. The literature on trust shows that complexity is a critical driver for trusting decisions. The
trustor can get exposed to a level of complexity forcing unwise trusting decisions if this complexity is taken for grant. The
complexity management module analyses the complexity surrounding the agent in a given situation, including the complexity
surrounding other actors in the environment and their abilities to manage it.
The Trust Bus is used to scope the discussion on the nature and types of sensor technologies required by the Trust Bus to
estimate human and group states. The Big Data nature of this problem warrants a special treatment and raises both theoretical
and practical challenges. This topic will be the context of the next section.

11
III. BIG DATA AT THE HUMAN-MACHINE INTERFACE
The machine needs to be able to sense humans, their behavioral attributes, cognitive states, actions and decisions, and
even the rational and explanations they make about their own judgements. This sensing is key for the machine to acquire
the necessary information it needs to make a judgement about a human. It is very similar to human-to-human interaction,
where humans actively and subconsciously sense each others facial expressions, body language, voice tone, and even skin
temperature during a hand shake or a hug. With today’s technologies, such as wearable devices, the machine can access even
more information about the human’s psychophysiological states that the humans themselves may not be conscious of. Today,
Google applications can map out humans’ daily routines, food and cloth preferences based on their shopping style, estimating
probability of heart attacks based on their life style, social networks based on people in their social circuit, similar locations
at night, similar routes, and more.
In addition to sensing the human, the machine needs to sense the environment. A change in human body temperature can
simply be attributed to changes in the air conditioning setting. A change in a human voice signal can be attributed to the
temperature in the environment, interferences between something in the environment and the microphone, or simply a result
of a long speech or fatigue. Without sensing the environment, the machine is unable to attribute changes in the signal that it
is sensing to different possible human states.
Sensing is a pre-requisite for any modelling that a machine needs to estimate a human’s trust level. This section covers this
topic through a Big Data lens. Before we regress further, we start the discussion with how big is a big data problem.
A. How Big is Big
How big is big? This is usually the question that gets asked by those who are skeptical about the word ‘big’ in big data.
However, the word ‘big’ is not merely about volume. It reﬂects the size of different characteristics that together form the basic
features that one can use to characterize a problem as a big data problem.
The common characteristics for big data are summarized in different words that start with the letter ‘V’. This generated an
evolution of these characteristics starting with the 3Vs model representing volume, velocity, and variety, then the 5Vs with the
addition of veracity and value, and ﬁnally the 6Vs with the addition of variability [53], [54], [55].
Each of the Vs represent one characteristics that by itself, the problem may get called a big data problem, but the challenge
gets more complex when multiple Vs coexist together. Naturally the ﬁrst V represents the volume or size of the data. A big
data problem may have a signiﬁcantly large number of features or simply terabytes or petabytes ﬁles.
The second V stands for velocity, or the speed with which the data change. Such changes may cause movements of the
decision boundaries for a decision tree, alterations of the degree of nonlinearity in a regression model, or variation in the
prototypes and numbers of clusters in a clustering problem.
Variety, or heterogeneity, refers to the distributed nature of the data. A customer may have different forms of records across
different databases. Some of the records may take the form of buying patterns, while others may take the form of voice
signatures to authenticate the customer during online banking, or unstructured data collected during an interview with the
customer.
Veracity is related to the amount of noise that may exist in the data and the level of trustworthiness of the source. Veracity can
further be divided into accidental veracity and intentional veracity. The former represents the classic noise in a communication
channel associated with natural and/or physical causes. The latter represents intentional noise caused by a malicious act. These
two factors play an important role in the validity and authenticity of any conclusion drawn from a dataset.
The second last V is the value characteristic; capturing the value for money and worthiness of the decision or conclusion
drawn from the data. This is a cost-beneﬁt-analysis question. Low cost data can generate high beneﬁts, while high cost data
may be too costly for the beneﬁts they generate.
Last, but not least, variability represents the dynamic nature of most IT infrastructure. Data exchange protocols change. The
architecture of a database changes. The data format received from third parties change. These changes are necessary as we
optimize the databases, customize the data differently for different customers, and so forth. Nevertheless, these changes impose
major challenges in big data. The more variability that exists in the problem at hand, the harder the big data problem is.
Autonomous systems are at the heart of the Big Data problem. The problem of autonomy is that it can generate unpre-
dictability in the environment. As a software robot moves from one computer to another, protocols may change, data format
may change, data worthiness may change, source reliability may change, and so forth. An autonomous entity has limited
processing power relative to the data it encounters during its operations. Autonomy is a challenge for big data, and equally
though, big data is a challenge in autonomy.
Adding trust to the equation creates the biggest challenge overall. Trust glues autonomous systems. This glue is not a one-off
glue. Trust is dynamic and requires dynamic strategies to manage it in an autonomous system.
B. Sensors: What can they offer the human machine problem
Sensing is what allows a system to interact with its environment in a ﬂexible and non-deterministic way, as apposed to
performing preprogrammed actions based on a set of scheduled functions and/or rule sets [56]. In other words, sensing is a

12
fundamental mechanism and condition for a system to be able to operate autonomously in order to fulﬁl its purpose. Recent
years have marked unprecedented advances in sensor technology, making available miniaturised, highly portable, accurate and
reliable sensors, with high throughput and low cost [57]. This allowed the resultant sensor-based autonomous systems to embed
more sensors, which in turn allowed them to operate in more complex and more dynamic environments. On the one hand,
one can consider that the better the sensing is, the more data the system gathers from the environment, and further, the more
informed and accurate the resultant decision is. However, on the other hand, as the amount of data generated by sensors grows,
so do (1) the amount of processing the system needs to perform in order to generate a useful decision, and (2) the difﬁculty
of taking the decision given the increased amount of choice. Rich data coming from numerous and high quality sensors could
be simultaneously an enabling and a disabling factor for the operation of autonomous systems, with respect to the processing
power available to the system.
We can give the example of an autonomous unmanned vehicle, which must deal with data coming from the activity of
human agents served by the vehicle (e.g. passengers of an autonomous car, or passengers of an aircraft), and also from the
surrounding technological agents (internal interaction with own mechanical sub-systems or external interaction with other
vehicles participant in trafﬁc). Another example can be an autonomous system for patient diagnosis and monitoring in a
hospital. This needs real-time and historical data from the respective patient and historical data from numerous other patients
in order to ensure statistical validity of the decision. Also, it needs data from the various machines and equipment operating
in the hospital.
Regardless of the source and type of activity, modern sensors operate in a digital manner, and generate data through sampling
of their sensing. While sensing and processing of sensory information are taken for grant for biological agents (e.g. a human
observer/decision-maker), it is not the case with artiﬁcial autonomous systems, which operate through digital computation and
perceive everything as data. Thus, it becomes essential to have a clear view of the existing sensor technologies especially with
a focus on the amount of data they generate as part of their normal operation. At the same time, it is essential to have a clear
view on the existing processing/computing technologies and architectures in order to understand the potential limitations the
autonomous systems can experience when they deal with the big data coming from their sensory-subsystem.
1) Sensing human activity: Human activity sensors have undergone unprecedented development in recent years. Sensors
and sensing systems that were once reserved for clinical or research applications are now easily accessible to the general
public; are manufactured and commercialised on a large scale; and are being used across multiple domains in versatile and low
cost applications. Patel et al. [58] identiﬁed the key facilitators that enabled this explosion of achievements in sensing human
activity. The authors discuss the sensing systems in terms of three essential building blocks: (1) the sensors, i.e. sensing and
data collection system (2) the communication system needed to transfer data to the processing centre, and (3) the data analysis
techniques that extract the relevant information from the raw data. A reﬁnement of the three component view presented in
[58] was later discussed by Mukhopadhyay [59], who considers eight components where sensing research should concentrate
for improving the overall performance of human activity wearable sensing systems: (1) types of sensors to be used, (2) type
of communication protocols to be employed, (3) type of activities to be monitored, (4) techniques for extracting important
features from activities, (5) design and development of small, light-weight, powerful and low-cost smart sensor nodes, (6)
harvesting of energy for normal operation and communication, (7) ability to be used with the present day mobile devices, (8)
potential to be reconﬁgured for new applications/users.
Both studies, [58], [59], note how each of these components have been on a path of miniaturisation, where the advances in
micro/nano-electronics and related technologies allowed the resultant systems to become smaller and more powerful, and in
the same time more energy efﬁcient. These technological advances further allowed the emergence of fully wearable sensing
systems that provide versatility and ﬂexibility in both design and operation; in addition, they allow long-term non-intrusive
monitoring and data collection. In [59] the author states that this surge of wearable sensing will continue to expand towards
more and more domains, and cites industry reports concluding that the penetration of research advances towards the consumer
market will lead to an estimated market growth to a value of over $20 billion by 2017. Wearable sensing systems have been
extensively used in domains such as sports and recreation [60], human-computer interaction, work-space and ergonomics,
games and entertainment, and last but not least, education.
Numerous reviews discussed sensors and sensing systems in all these domains from the points of view of their component
blocks and subsequent technology, with a focus on the aspects that allowed miniaturisation and wearability. Extensive and
very recent reviews can be found in [58], [61], [62], [63], [64], [59] and [65]. However, the resultant amount of data was not
discussed so far in the literature. In the following, we describe the most common types of sensing systems used in monitoring
human activity [59], and we focus our discussion on the sampling rate and the subsequent data resulting from their operation.
• Body temperature: Body temperature is one of the most common physiological parameters used for monitoring human
activity, usually measured by wearable sensors attached to the skin. The body temperature in different parts of the body,
and variations of it can give an indication of symptoms of medical stress that signal the existence, or the possibility
of acquiring various health conditions. Body temperature monitoring can be used either for determining the respective
physiological/medical conditions or for classifying and storing for further use historical physiological activity data, or
even for harvesting energy from body heat [59]. Traditional measurement of body temperature was in the form of one-
off measurements, for clinical purposes. However, continuous monitoring is nowadays common, especially as part of

13
wearable activity monitoring devices and systems. In Table V all devices listed as incorporating temperature sensors, refer
to skin temperature, and operate through contact to skin tissues typically in the wrist area, where wristband or watch type
activity monitors are attached. Contact technologies such as thermocouples, resistive temperature detection, and organic
diodes have been proposed over time [66]. Recently, contactless temperature sensors based on infra-red waves have been
developed for accurate and hygienic monitoring of temperature in various parts of the body, such as FT90 contactless
clinical thermometer from Beurer [67].
• Heart rate: Heart rate (HR) is also one of the most common physiological parameters monitored using wearable sensors
for various purposes. Heart rate is a precisely regulated variable that is critical for diagnosing various medical conditions
and disease of human, however its monitoring is also essential in sports and entertainment. A variety of sensor modalities
are available for heart rate measurement and monitoring, such as sound based [68], [69], optics (photoplethysmography)
based [70], [71] or pressure based [72]; also monitoring by visual cues such as the face colour [59] have been also reported
in the literature. Historically, the early wearable HR monitoring devices were pressure-based and used chest-straps to attach
to upper body, e.g. Garmin HRM-Tri and HRM-Swim [73] dedicated to triathlon and swimming athletes, respectively.
Recently, the due to the high demand on the wearable consumer market, technology migrated towards optic-based devices,
which are currently implemented on all wristband, smartwatch, pendant or garment activity sensors. In Table V all activity
sensing devices that include HR monitoring are LED-enabled optic-based sensors. An in-depth discussion on the differences
between the two technologies, and the trends in wearable HR devices is provided in [74].
• Electroencephalography: Electroencephalography (EEG) is an electrophysiological sensing method that captures brain
activity in the form of brainwaves coming from the aggregation of the electrical neural impulses; thus, EEG is based
on electromagnetic wave sensing. Typical EEG sensing systems consist of several electrodes that measure in different
regions of the brain the voltage ﬂuctuations resulting from ionic current within the neurons. The sensing can be invasive,
where the electrodes are implanted under the scalp, or non-invasive, where the electrodes are placed on the scalp either
individually or as part of customised caps [75] in which the electrodes are precisely positioned. However, with the recent
advances in the transducing elements of EEG devices, intrusive methods are now less and less used, while wearable caps
and the very recent dry sensing headsets are becoming more common. EEG sensing was traditionally used in clinical
applications, such as the traditional diagnose method for epilepsy, but also in supporting the diagnosis, monitoring, and
treatment of other brain conditions, such as sleep disorders, coma, encephalopathy, brain death, etc. Research applications
are especially in the ﬁelds of cognitive science and engineering [76], and human/brain-computer interaction [77], where
the high temporal resolution of EEG sensing brings valuable information about real-time brain activity, capturing changes
in cognitive load and states. High temporal resolution is the main advantage of EEG over a number of other brain
imaging and brain activity sensing methods, which include magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and functional MRI, single-
photon and positron emission tomography, magnetoencephalography (MEG), nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy,
electrocorticography, near-infrared spectroscopy, and event-related optical signaling. Classic clinical EEG sensing systems
operate at sampling rates between 100 and 256 Hz [78], [79], [80], while some of the latest EEG systems are capable of
recording at sampling rates as high as 20 kHz [81], [82], [83], that is, a sub-millisecond temporal resolution. However,
while this temporal resolution is the main advantage of EEG sensing, it is also one of the challenges for using it in real-
time applications, given that EEG systems can record in parallel on as many as 256 channels. In Table I we summarise
the main EEG equipment available to date, and list for each of them the essential sensing data-generator features.
• Eye movement sensing: Sensor systems that capture eye movement are used in clinical contexts primarily in ophthalmo-
logical diagnosis and in research contexts for eye tracking applications mainly related to human factor, cognitive science
and engineering, and human-computer and brain-computer applications. The common eye movement sensing systems are
either based on electric sensing or optical sensing.
The most common electric sensing method is Electrooculography, which measures the corneo-retinal standing potential
existing between the front and the back of the human eye. To measure eye movement, pairs of electrodes are placed at
the opposite sides of the eyes (i.e. either above and below the eye or to the left and right of the eye). If the eye moves
from centre position toward one of the two electrodes, this electrode “sees” the positive side of the retina and the opposite
electrode “sees” the negative side. The resulting signal is called electrooculogram, in which the difference in potential
occurring between the electrodes is recorded as a measure of the eye’s position. EOG captures eye movement only, while
more complex electric sensing methods, such as the Electroretinogram, can also capture and monitor eye response to
individual visual stimuli.
The optical eye movement sensing typically consists of eye-tracking systems based on specialised video cameras that
capture retinal reﬂection and refraction as result of eye’s exposure to visual stimuli.
• Electrocardiography: Heart activity can be also measured and monitored using sensing systems. The typical sensing
method for heart activity monitoring is electrocardiography (ECG), which uses electrical sensing for detecting the electrical
changes that arise from the heart muscle depolarising during each heartbeat. These changes are captured on subject’s skin
using electrodes placed on relevant locations on the body. Typical ECG systems, used in clinical contexts, consist of ten
electrodes placed on patient’s limbs and chest, which capture over various periods of time the overall magnitude of the
heart’s electrical potential from twelve different polarisation angles, also known as “leads”. The output of the sensing

14
TABLE I: Summary of EEG sensing equipment.
Producer
Model
Grade
Mobility
Frequency range
Channels
Sampling rate/channel
Reference
[Hz]
[Hz]
EGI
Geodesic 400
clinical
ﬁxed
N/A
32-256 EEG
1000
[75]
Mindmedia
Nexus32
research
ﬁxed
N/A
24 EEG
2048
[84]
Mitsar
EEG-202 series
research
ﬁxed
0-150
24-31 EEG
2000
[85]
Nihon Kohden
Neuroxax 1200
research
ﬁxed
0-1200
256 EEG, 16 DC
10000
[86]
Compumedics
GraelHD
research
ﬁxed
0-3500
4 × 64 EEG
20000
[81]
Neurovirtual
BW series
clinical
ﬁxed
0-500
25-50 EEG, 8 DC
2000
[87]
Nihon Kohden
Trackit
clinical
mobile
0-100
32 EEG, 4 DC
200
[80]
NeuroConn
Thera Prax
research
mobile
0-1200
22 EEG
32-4000
[88]
EGI
Geodesic 100
clinical
mobile
N/A
32 EEG
1000
[89]
Medicom MTD
encephalan EEGR
clinical
mobile
0.016-70
20 EEG
2000
[90]
Neurowerk
Neurowerk DB series
clinical
mobile
N/A
21-25 EEG
128-512
[91]
Compumedics
GraelHD
clinical
mobile
0-580
32 EEG
16000
[83]
Compumedics
Nuamps
clinical
mobile
0-260
40 EEG
1000
[92]
antNeuro
eego mylab
clinical
mobile
N/A
32-256 EEG
16000
[82]
Deymed
TruScan series
research
mobile
0.16-450
24-256 EEG
4000
[93]
Neurowerk
Neurowerk EEG mobile
clinical
wearable
N/A
16 EEG
128-512
[91]
antNeuro
eego sports
clinical
wearable
N/A
32-64 EEG
2000
[94]
Neurovirtual
BWmini
clinical
wearable
0-500
33 EEG, 2 DC
1000
[95]
NeuroSky
BrainWave
research
wearable
0-100
1 EEG
512
[96]
Mitsar
EEG-201 series
clinical
wearable
0.16-70
21 EEG
500
[85]
Emotiv
Epoc
research
wearable
0.2-45
14 EEG, 2 ref
128
[97], [98], [79]
Emotiv
Epoc+
research
wearable
0.16-43
14 EEG, 2 ref
256
[79]
Emotiv
Insight
hobby
wearable
N/A
5 EEG, 2 ref
128
[78]
Macrotellect
BrainLink
hobby
wearable
8-30
N/A
N/A
[99]
Interaxon
Muse
hobby
wearable
N/A
7 EEG
N/A
[100], [101]
Somnomedics
SOMNOsecren EEG 32
research
wearable
N/A
25 EEG
4-512
[102]
Neurosoft
Neuron Spectrum AM
clinical
wearable
N/A
21 EEG
1000
[103]
Deymed
TruScan wireless
research
wearable
0.01-1200
32-256 EEG
6000
[93]
Deymed
BFB
clinical
wearable
0.3-70
2 EEG
256
[104]
TABLE II: Summary of rest testing ECG equipment.
Producer
Model
Grade
Mobility
Frequency range
Channels
Sampling rate/channel
Encoding
Reference
[Hz]
[Hz]
[bits/sample]
Cardioline
TouchECG
clinical
mobile
0.05-300
12
1000
[105]
Cardioline
AR600 series
clinical
mobile
0.05-150
12
500-1000
[106]
TSE
UCARD200
clinical
mobile
0.05-150
12
1600
[107]
Nasan
Simul-G
clinical
mobile
0.05-150
12
N/A
[108]
Longﬁan
ECG-1112
clinical
mobile
0.05-160
12
1000
[109]
Nasan
ESY-G1
clinical
mobile
0.05-150
1 (12 serial)
N/A
[110]
Nasan
ASAAN 1003
clinical
mobile
0.05-150
3 (12 serial)
N/A
[111]
Nasiff
CardioCard
clinical
mobile
0.05-150
12
250-1000
[112]
SpaceLab
CardioDirect 12
clinical
mobile
0-15
12
2000
[113]
CustoMed
CustoCardio 100 series
clinical
mobile
0-500
12
1000-4000
[114]
Kalamed
KES121 series
clinical
mobile
0.05-165
12
2000
[115]
Kalamed
KES1000
hobby
wearable
0.05-165
12
2000
[116]
Labtech
EC-12RM
hobby
wearable
0.05-150
12
512
[117]
is the electrocardiogram, which contains magnitude and direction of the heart’s electrical depolarisation at any moment
throughout the cardiac cycle.
In clinical contexts ECG sensing provides important information about the physical structure of the heart and the operation
of its electrical conduction system (e.g. rate and rhythm of heartbeats, size and position of heart chambers, operation of
implanted pacemakers etc.) and have been used extensively for diagnosis of various heart conditions (e.g. abnormal heart’s
muscle cells or conduction system, the effects of cardiac drugs). In addition, recent wearable ECG sensing systems have
been extensively used for permanent monitoring of people with chronic cardiovascular diseases. For example, in [59] the
author mentions a compact plaster sensor designed for wearable low cost cardiac healthcare, which uses a low power high
resolution thoracic impedance variance for ECG monitoring. In Table II and Table III we summarise the popular ECG
equipment available to date for resting and stress contexts, respectively, and list for each of them the essential sensing
data-generator features.
• Skin Conductivity: Skin conductivity (SC) sensing is based on electrodermal activity (EDA), in which electric properties
of the skin varies with environmental conditions and activity performed [127]. Human skin, especially that from the
extremities of the limbs, e.g. ﬁngers, palms, or soles of feet, display bio-electrical phenomena that are relevant to diagnosing
a variety of psycho-physiological conditions [128]. These phenomena can be detected with sensors that capture changes in
the electrical activity between two points on the skin over time [129]. Traditionally, electrodermal activity was associated

15
TABLE III: Summary of stress testing ECG equipment.
Producer
Model
Grade
Mobility
Frequency range
Channels
Sampling rate/channel
Encoding
Reference
[Hz]
[Hz]
[bits/sample]
CustoMed
CustoCardio 200 series
clinical
mobile
0-500
12
1000-4000
[118]
Kalamed
KES121 series
clinical
mobile
0.05-165
12
2000
[115]
Eccosur
ECG-View
clinical
mobile
0.05-100
12
256-600
[119]
Thor
Thoriax PC
clinical
mobile
N/A
12
2000
12
[120]
SpaceLab
CardioDirect 12S
clinical
wearable
0-150
12
2000
[121]
Cardioline
CubeStress HD+
clinical
wearable
0.05-300
6+6 or 12, AVG
1000
[122]
Cardionics
CarTouch
clinical
wearable
N/A
12
1000
16
[123]
Labtech
EC12RS
clinical
wearable
0.05-150
12
1000
[124]
Amedtec
CardioPart 12 Blue
clinical
wearable
0-150
12
8000
[125]
Thor
Thoriax Home
hobby
wearable
0.5-40
1 (differential)
N/A
12
[126]
TABLE IV: Summary of skin conductivity equipment.
Producer
Model
Grade
Mobility
Conductivity range
Channels
Sampling rate/channel
Encoding
Reference
[S]
[Hz]
[bits/sample]
Neulog
NUL-217
clinical
wearable
0-10 µS
1
100
16
[132]
Shimmersensing
Shimmer3 GSR+
clinical
wearable
0.2-100 µS
1
N/A
N/A
[133]
Mindmedia
SC Sensor
research
wearable
0.1-1000 µS
1
N/A
N/A
[134]
TMSI
GSR sensor
research
mobile
N/A
1
100
N/A
[135]
Mindﬁeld
eSense
hobby
wearable
N/A
1
10
18
[136]
TMSI
GSR sensor
research
mobile
N/A
1
100
N/A
[135]
with the galvanic response of skin tissues (GSR - Galvanic Skin Response), in which skin resistance (impedance) varies
with the state of sweat glands, when the glands are excited by the activity of sympathetic nervous system. Thus, galvanic
skin response sensors were used to determine various aspects related to psychological or physiological arousal. However,
recent insights showed that other sub-dermal tissues and physiological activity can also inﬂuence the electrical properties
of the skin, in addition to the psychologically-induced gland activity. As a result, the concept of skin conductivity sensing
has been enlarged to encompass the electric potential response (GSP - Galvanic Skin Potential), where sensors capture
the voltage or changes in voltage measured between two electrodes conveniently located in two different locations on the
skin.
Modern EDA sensing is largely used for capturing complex emotional and cognitive states [130], [128], in contexts like
anxiety monitoring and control, stress detection, monitoring epileptic patients with drug resistance, or as part of polygraph
equipment for lie detection in conjunction with other biofeedback sensors such as heart rate and blood pressure [131], or
respiratory rate. Table IV provides a summary of the most popular skin conductivity monitoring equipment available to
date, and list for each of them the essential sensing data-generator features.
• Movement, positioning and gait sensors: Recent advances in miniaturisation of inertial sensors led to an increase in
monitoring of physical movement and positioning of humans in relation to different contexts. In medical sciences inertial
sensors can measure and monitor neuro-degenerative conditions such as Parkinson’s disease, patient’s fall due to seizures
or cardiac arrest, or patient’s movement during physical rehabilitation programs. Another extensive use of inertial sensors
is in sports and entertainment for monitoring and improving certain physical activities and the relevant cognitive-motor
skills. Last, but not least, in recent years there has been a surge of studies which employed wearable inertial sensing for
monitoring and investigation of social activity and behaviour.
The various mobile, portable or wearable inertial sensors for human activity follow the same architecture and technology as
the general inertial sensors we discussed earlier in the paper, consisting of combinations of accelerometers and gyroscopes
for measuring acceleration along a sensitive axis and over a particular range of frequencies. Most of the sensing systems
reported in the literature are based on piezoelectric, piezoresistive, variable capacitance, or MEMS transducers, which
use variations of the classic inertial principle of operation: a core element (i.e. a mass) that responds to acceleration by
proportional stretch or compression of another spring-like element. An thorough review on inertial sensors for human
activity monitoring, with a focus on wearability can be found in [65].
Table V summarises the most popular movement/activity trackers available to date, and list for each of them the essential
elements of the fused activity sensing system.
2) Sensing machine agent activity: Surrounding technological systems are also one of the vital sources of data for autonomous
systems. An autonomous unmanned road vehicle, for example, will gather data from various machine agents (i.e. peer-
technology sources) that can be internal or external in relation to the vehicle. Internally, numerous sensors monitor the
mechanical sub-systems involved in the normal operation of the vehicle, such as propulsion (e.g. crankshaft, camshaft, torque,
oxygen, temperature sensors, etc.), breaking (ABS - Anti-lock Break System, EBD - Electronic Break Distribution), safety
(impact, light, rain, proximity sensors), etc. Externally, numerous other sensors monitor the interaction of the vehicle with
the environment, such as GPS for positioning, long and short range radar for obstacle detection, cameras for vision, etc. The

16
TABLE V: Summary of movement, positioning and gait sensing equipment. Legend: A - accelerometer, G - gyroscope
Producer
Model
Mobility
Format
Inertial sensors
Other bio-sensors
Reference
Angelsensor
Classic/M1
wearable
wristband
A, G
HR, skin temperature, oximeter
[137]
Apple
Watch
wearable
watch
A
HR
[138]
Basis
BasisPeak
wearable
watch
3 axis A
HR, GSR, skin temperature
[139]
Empatica
E series
wearable
wristband
3 axis A
HR, GSR, skin temperature
[140]
Empatica
E series
wearable
wristband
3 axis A, G
HR, GSR, skin temperature
[131]
Fitbit
Zip
wearable
pendant
3 axis A
-
[141]
Fitbit
One/Flex/Charge/Alta
wearable
wristband
unspeciﬁed motion sensor
HR, simpliﬁed ECG
[142]
Fitbit
Blaze/Surge
wearable
watch
unspeciﬁed motion sensor
HR, simpliﬁed ECG
[143]
Fitbug
Orb
wearable
watch
3 axis A
-
[144]
Garmin
VivoFit/VivoSmart series
wearable
wristband
unspeciﬁed motion sensor
-
[145]
Garmin
VivoActive series
wearable
watch
unspeciﬁed motion sensor
-
[145]
Google
Android-Wear
wearable
watch
market dependant
market dependant
[146]
iHealth
Edge
wearable
wristband
unspeciﬁed motion sensor
-
[147]
Jawbone
UP series
wearable
wristband
3 axis A
HR, GSR, respiration
[148]
LG
Lifeband Touch series
wearable
wristband
unspeciﬁed motion sensor
-
[149]
LG
watch series
wearable
watch
unspeciﬁed motion sensor
-
[150]
Medisana
ViFit series
wearable
wristband
unspeciﬁed motion sensor
-
[151]
Microsoft
Band
wearable
wristband
3 axis A, 3 axis G
HR, GSR, skin temperature
[152]
Misﬁt
Shine/Ray series
wearable
watch
3 axis A
-
[153]
Misﬁt
Flash
wearable
watch
3 axis A
-
[153]
Misﬁt
Ray
wearable
pendant
3 axis A
-
[153]
Misﬁt
Link
wearable
button
3 axis A
-
[153]
Nike
Fuelband
wearable
watch
3 axis A
-
[154]
Pebble
SmartWatch series
wearable
watch
3 axis A
-
[155]
Razer
Nabu/NabuX
wearable
wristband
3 axis A
-
[156]
Razer
Nabu Watch
wearable
watch
3 axis A
-
[157]
Salutron
LifeTrak series
wearable
watch
3 axis A
HR, ECG
[158]
Samsung
GearS series
wearable
watch
A, G
HR
[159]
Samsung
GearFit series
wearable
wristband
A, G
HR
[160]
Sensoria
SensoriaFitness
wearable
smart sock
3 axis A
3 pressure sensors
[161]
Sony
Smartband series
wearable
wristband
A
-
[162]
Sony
Smartwatch series
wearable
watch
3 axis A, G
-
[162]
Striiv
Fusion series
wearable
wristband/watch
3D accelerometer
-
[163]
Withings
Pulse O2
wearable
pendant
3 axis A
heart rate, oximeter
[164]
Withings
Go
wearable
pendant
3 axis A
-
[165]
situation becomes even more complex when speaking about the operation of an aircraft, or about the operation of a whole
aircraft ﬂeet, or an even more complex example, the operation of an autonomous air trafﬁc control system, which actually
handles an entire airspace. The resultant sensing mechanism is an overall equivalent sensor of very high complexity, which
provides a fused global image of the data coming from the numerous internal and external sources.
In the previous section we discussed human activity sensing by considering the main categories of biophysical activity
sensors separately. That discussion was pertinent because humans are identical from the perspective of the activity data they
produce, thus autonomous systems need to embed a unique set of sensors in order to interact with different humans. However,
in the case of sensing the activity of technical systems, there is a variety of sources the autonomous system may encounter
during its operation. Thus, it becomes pertinent to discuss fusion sensing rather than the separate types of sensors. Sensor
fusion [166] is the process of combining the sensory data coming from disparate sources in a way that (1) reduces the
uncertainty resulting from separate treatment of the sources and/or (2) unveils properties of the sensed environment that were
not obvious when using separate sources. Sensor fusion is receiving increasing attention from the research community, as the
sensor technologies improve, together with the subsequent autonomous systems. Several thorough discussions can be found in
the literature, proposing fusion methods with application in various ﬁelds of activity, such as control systems [167], thermal
engineering [168], wearable robotics [169], or 3D computer vision [170].
Over time, numerous sensor fusion architectures have been proposed and categorised differently by different studies. From
a project management perspective, in [166], the author describes abstract, generic and rigid architectures. The abstract ones
constitute as ways to describe or explain the operation of a fusion system without guiding the engineers toward the actual
implementation. Their importance lies in that they provide the initial understanding of the fusion problem. Generic architectures
describe how to implement the system, but without specifying the technology (i.e. operating system, software and hardware,
communication system). They are important for providing the engineers with complete know-how, while still leaving them
the freedom to adapt their solutions to speciﬁc problems. Rigid architectures provide detailed design and implementation
of the fusion system, guiding the engineers step-by-step in a strict manner. They are important when sensing systems are
embedded in critical infrastructures or safety critical applications, where rework or re-implementations of the systems are not
only unnecessary, but actually strongly avoided.
Another classiﬁcation proposed in the literature [171], [172], [173] takes a conceptual approach and discusses four main

17
categories - centralised, hierarchical, distributed (or autonomous), and decentralised - from which various hybrid architectures
can be further generated [172]. This classiﬁcation is perhaps the most popular for both researchers and practitioners, becoming
in time a fundamental part of the undergraduate control engineering curriculum [171].
In centralised fusion architectures raw sensor data are transmitted to a central site, where they are aggregated to generate
the information needed to produce a single fused description of the state/dynamics of the environment. In general, centralised
fusion needs high processing power and data buses with high band-width in order to handle the high amount of raw data
generated by sensors; thus, scaling up to complex systems may became a problem.
In hierarchical fusion, the lowest level processing elements transmit information upwards, through successive levels, where
the information is combined and reﬁned at each level, until it reaches the top level, where the full view of the state/dynamics
of the environment is made available. Hierarchical fusion involves a certain processing capability on each level, and thus the
load on the centralised (highest level) processor is reduced. In the same time the need of communication is reduced, since
transmission of data/information is strictly controlled and limited to adjacent layers. However, while useful in general, this
can be also a disadvantage due to the inability of data/information sources to communicate over more than one layer.Another
major disadvantage of hierarchical fusion is that changes in a certain layer imply changes in all related sub-layers; this usually
prevents the sensing system to be extended to incorporate more sensors.
Distributed fusion was meant to mitigate the drawbacks of centralised and hierarchical fusion, by providing autonomy to
various sensing entities. In there architectures expert sensing agents with own processing capabilities make available to the
system the output of their operation through a communication platform, often known as a “blackboard” from the architecture
with the same name [172]. The obvious advantage of this approach is the distributed processing, with no central processing
unit or layer. However, problems may arise due to the use of common communication/memory resource, i.e. the blackboard.
Another disadvantage may be a potential loss in the accuracy of the global picture of the environment, due to the fact the
picture is now dependant on simple agents with various processing capabilities.
Decentralised data fusion abandon completely all commonality aspects. A decentralised system consists of a network of
sensor nodes, each with its own processing facility, and no central or common communication facility. In this case, fusion
happens in each node, locally, by the sensor unit using local observations and information communicated from neighbouring
nodes. Advantages of the decentralised approach are high scalability and modularity, where dynamic changes of the sensor
number and structure are easily supported. Thus, the resultant sensing systems are highly resilient to loss of nodes. However,
due to the lack of global communication or knowledge, the accuracy of the fused picture of the environment is highly dependant
on the network features, i.e. topological features like centralities, entropy and other statistical metrics.
Numerous architectures have been proposed over time, from as early as 1960s to present days, for each of the four (plus the
hybrid approaches). The interested reader can ﬁnd thorough reviews of the general fusion architectures in a number of studies
from different historical periods [174], [166], [172], [173]. However, it is outside of the scope of this study to provide insights
in the individual architectures, since our purpose was to bring into attention the complexity that a sensor-based autonomous
system must handle, in terms of the amount and variety of sensory data coming from the surrounding technological systems.
Thus, we emphasize once more on the idea that big sensory data can be in the same time an enabling and a disabling factor
in the operation of the autonomous systems.
C. Computers
Once data-driven and model-driven information become available, processing starts. Be it in the form of signal processing,
feature selection, clustering, classiﬁcation, or any form of processing that is needed to make a judgement, the machine needs to
rely on its processing abilities to process these information. Processing today extends beyond the classic Von Neuman computer
architecture to other forms of processing.
In the most general understanding, a computer is an entity that conveniently alters a set of inputs to generate a set of
desired outputs. Since digital computers started to be used on large scale, and became indispensable to modern life, the general
perception of a computer narrowed to its digital incarnation, where inputs are reduced to binary data and alteration towards the
desired output is made through binary calculation. However, computing was and is not limited to digital manipulation of binary
input data, since numerous entities exist that can perform the computing analogically if talking about machine entities (e.g.
mechanical, electrical, optical, electronic) or biologically if talking about natural entities, such as the neural sensory processing
in animals with a central nervous system [175], [176]. Given that in this study we discuss autonomous systems considering
the big sensory data they have to process during their normal operation, it is natural to bring into attention mostly the digital
computing machines available to date, with a focus on their ability to deal with these data. However, we consider useful to
discuss the other two categories, analog computing and neural-inspired computing, in order to offer a more comprehensive and
integrated view on the ways that are open to autonomous systems.
1) Analog computing: Analog computers use the continuously changeable aspects of a physical phenomenon of interest to
alter the inputs towards the desirable output. Virtually, any physical process that models some computation can be seen as an
analog computer, including ﬁnding the shortest path between two points by stretching a string between them. They have been
heavily used in scientiﬁc and industrial applications in classic automation and control systems of the pre-digital era, when

18
digital computers of the time lacked sufﬁcient performance. However, they have been less and less used, becoming eventually
obsolete as the digital computers came into place and became more powerful and versatile. There are still domains where they
are still in use in some speciﬁc applications, where classic automation is required due to operation costs and environmental
conditions. Extensive historical views on analog computers can be found in [177], and also in a special issue of IEEE Control
Systems dedicated to the history of analog computers, from which we cite here the editorial article [178] signed by Lundberg.
Examples of analog computers can go from the ancient nomographs and sextants, to slide rules, and further to complex
contemporary automation and control systems such as navigation systems, analog auto-pilot systems for vehicle navigation,
military weapon system controllers, analog signal processors, etc. In essence, virtually all industrial process control systems
in the pre-digital era used analog computers, known at the time as controllers, to automatically regulate temperature, ﬂow,
pressure, or other process variables and parameters. The technology of these controllers ranged from purely mechanical systems
to emulation of physical phenomena through electronic analog components, and later through analog integrated circuits.
The strongest point the analog computers make when compared to their digital counterparts is the computation speed; i.e. the
analog computers operate in real-time once they have been set up. The computation in analog computers is not explicit like in
digital computers, but rather implicit, inherently contained in the materials or phenomena they use as computation mean; thus
the delivery of the output based on the input is virtually instantaneous. For example, an integrator can be built as an electric
circuit by conveniently placing a resistor and a capacitor in a feedback loop, so that the output delivers a steadily changing
voltage for a constant input voltage.
A major disadvantage is that analog computers are designed for performing calculation in particular contexts outside of which
they cannot function properly. Their setup involves choosing (1) the scale and limits for the inputs and outputs given the material
or phenomena used for computation, (2) the set of pre-operational (initial) and operational conditions, and (3) the mechanism or
physical structure (i.e. interconnection of computing elements) of the computation in order to assure proper solving of the given
problem. When launched into operation variables cannot exceed computer’s predeﬁned operational conditions. For example,
if the above mentioned integrator is to be used in humidity and temperature conditions that exceed the limits established
during design stage based on the material/electrical tolerances indicated by manufacturer for the component elements (resistor,
capacitor etc.), then, unacceptable calculation errors may occur. Also, if the integrator is to be used as a differentiator, this
can be done only by changing the physical arrangement of the resistor and capacitor in the feedback loop, together with their
values. In other words, a different circuit - that is, a different analog computer - is needed.
Analog computers can be found or imagined virtually anywhere and in anything in nature, however, the literature mostly
speaks about the mechanical and electronic versions, due to the fact they account for the majority of the modern time
achievements in both industry and research in pre-digital era. Both categories stand out due to their theoretical importance at
the time or due to the popularity they gained in practical industrial applications. In the following we brieﬂy discuss them in
order to create a complete image of the analog computing ﬁeld.
• Mechanical analog computers: Mechanical analog computers used over the years were able to implement the usual
arithmetic, trigonometric, and geometric operations, and also complex analytic and algebraic transformations or arbitrary
functions by conveniently combining various mechanical elements, such as rotating shafts, discs and gears, racks and
pinions, cables and pulleys, springs, differential mechanisms, etc. For example, addition and subtraction have been
implemented using precision bevel-gear differentials. Integration was implemented with a rotating disk (integrator variable)
and a pickoff wheel positioned on the disc at a radius proportional to the integrated variable. Also, coordinate conversion
from polar to rectangular was implemented with two coaxial discs and a sliding block with a pin on it. While these
examples are important for analog computers, they are certainly not exhaustive. Extensive reviews of these computers can
be found in the literature of the 1960s and 1970s [179], and more recently in [176].
• Electronic analog computers: Electronic analog computers emerged as a result of the similarities between the equation-
based mathematical models of mechanical components, and those of the electrical components. Complex and heavyweight
mechanical computational devices were gradually replaced with their electrical equivalents which could be constructed
with operational ampliﬁers and other linear (resistors, capacitors, inductors) and non-linear (diodes, transistors) passive
components. The resultant electronic analog computers were less expensive to construct, safer, and easier to modify
for new problems in comparison with the mechanical counterparts. Gradually, more and more technological and natural
phenomena could be represented through analogy by using electronic circuits, which could easily perform a wide variety
of simulations. For example, an application would be to integrate a signal representing water ﬂow, producing an output
signal representing total quantity of water that has passed through a ﬂow-meter. Voltage can be the analogy of water
pressure and electric current the analogy of ﬂow-rate in terms of volume/second. Then, the integrator can provide the
total accumulated volume of liquid, using an input current proportional to the ﬂow rate.
Electronic analog computers contain may contain, depending on their purpose, tens, hundreds or thousands of operational
ampliﬁers combined with relevant passive components in various feedback schemes, in order to implement mathematical
operations and functions. The core operations and functions are: addition, subtraction and comparison; differentiation
and integration; multiplication, division and inversion; exponentiation and logarithm. More complex arbitrary non-linear
functions have been also implemented, however, they had limited precision (typically three to four digits) and were difﬁcult
to implement, requiring laborious and complicated feedback loops with combinations of linear and non-linear components

19
in the feedback loops of operational ampliﬁers. An in-depth discussion on electronic analog computers can be found in
[180].
The major disadvantages of the electrical analogy are (1) the limited dynamic range, i.e. electronic components can
represent limited variation ranges of the variables they emulate (compared for example with the virtually inﬁnite dynamic
range of the ﬂoating-point representation used by digital computers), and (2) the noise levels introduced by the electronic
components and circuits. In general, electronic analog computers are limited by non-ideal effects induced by the undesired
deviations of the core variables of the electric signals: DC and AC amplitudes, frequency, and phase due to material and
environmental limitations [181]. The limits of range on these characteristics limit analog computers. Some of these
limits include the operational ampliﬁer offset, ﬁnite gain, and frequency response, noise ﬂoor, non-linearities, temperature
coefﬁcient, and parasitic effects within semiconductor devices.
• Revival of analog computing: Analog computation certainly went into an eclipse in the last few decades, due to the rise
of digital computers, however recently more and more authors acknowledge that analog computation is inherent to most
of the existing natural systems [182]. In [175] the author even note that some digital computing paradigms are actually
unsuited and unnatural (pun intended) to natural computation. Thus, recently new iterations of analog computers have
been proposed, especially in their electronic version.
Recent development of semiconductors and very large scale integration went mostly in the direction of integrating
digital circuits. However, recently, several analog VLSI circuits have been proposed, implementing energy efﬁcient
and instantaneous complex mathematical calculation. Cowan and colleagues [183] proposed a single-chip VLSI analog
computer with 80 integrators and 336 other programmable linear and nonlinear circuits manufactured in 250nm CMOS
technology. The chip was intended for use as an analog mathematical coprocessor for general purpose digital processors,
and was rated by authors with a consumption of only 300mW. Later, Schell and Tsividis [184] proposed a hybrid signal
processor where ﬁxed sampling and clock rates of a conventional DSP were eliminated to create a clock-less digital signal
processor. The processing unit was manufactured in 90nm CMOS technology and operated in continuous time with a
power source of 1 Volt, offering no aliasing, and very fast transient performance in power electronics due to lack of
sampling. Recently Guo and colleagues [185] demonstrated a continuous-time hybrid computing unit in 65nm CMOS
technology, capable of solving nonlinear differential equations up to 4th order, and scalable to higher orders. The authors
rate the energy efﬁciency of the processor at 12mW, and demonstrate the use of the unit in a low-power cyber-physical
systems application, where the problem is solved in 0.84µs.
2) Digital computing: In general, analog computers, analog signals or other analog processes implicitly involve an analogy
or a systematic relation with the physical processes they model or simulate. They have inherent advantages, as discussed in
previous section, such as speed and low energy consumption, given by the fact they operate on continuous representations of
real processes by using continuous processes analog to real ones. However, the analogy itself also creates one of the most
important drawbacks, that is the lack of ﬂexibility, since a signal that was found to be analog to a physical process typically
cannot be used with ease for another process. Digital computers, on the opposite, operate on discrete representations of real
processes by means of discrete steps. Thus, real processes are represented by strings of binary symbols that do not have an
explicit or direct physical relationship to the modelled processes. In [176] the author notes that in a digital computer the
relationship, i.e. analogy, is more abstract than simple proportionality. This extra abstraction steps made the digital computers
extremely versatile, in that the discrete modelling and operation allow their use in a large variety of applications, virtually
without any hardware change. With this important advantage, doubled by a rapid increase in speed and energy efﬁciency, the
digital computing eclipsed the analog ones, despite a number of disadvantages. Some of these advantages, which we mention
here for completeness reasons, are as follows: (1) sampled signals used in digital computing suffer from aliasing effect, which
leads to power dissipation on superior harmonics of the digitised signals and to the need of precise ﬁltering; (2) digital signals
may present important undesired behaviour in the transient domain; (3) discrete representation can lead to latency when data
are transferred between various internal components of the processing architecture.
Today, digital computers reached an unprecedented diversity, with their performance measured with respect to certain
attributes that make them ﬁt-for-purpose, rather than a unique performance metric. In general, digital computing is subject
to a trade-off in which multiple aspects are involved, such as processing-related features (e.g. energy consumption, memory
capacity, throughout, latency, etc.), operational features (e.g. size, weight, reliability, expandability, etc.) on top of which there
are of course the ﬁnancial costs of acquisition and operation. Thus, the overall performance of a digital computer can be
measured using numerous metrics depending on its purpose. For example, a computer can be CPU bound - heavily used for
raw computation, input-output (I/O) bound - mainly used as a server, or memory bound - mainly used for memory intensive
tasks such as video editing. From the point of view of autonomous systems though, two aspects are essential: raw processing
power and energy efﬁciency. We discussed earlier in the sensors section how portability and miniaturisation are the engines that
propelled the sensors ﬁeld to nowadays advances, which are unprecedented in the history of human kind. Thus, the autonomous
systems making use of sensors must fall in the same philosophy of fast processing of data versus high portability.
Processing power was ﬁrst associated with processor’s clock rate, that is, the frequency (number of cycles per second) of
the main clock of the CPU. However, this turned misleading as digital computing evolved and processors became able to
execute more and more instructions at every processor cycle. Thus, a higher clocked processor may have a lower throughput

20
than a lower clocked processor if the latter can execute signiﬁcantly more instructions per cycle. Thus, another measure of
the processing speed was the number of instructions per cycle, which in conjunction with processor’s clock rate could give a
better estimate of the speed with at which a certain task can be processed. However, this was also subject to ambiguities since
different processor architectures can embed different sets of instructions, and/or can implement similar instructions differently.
Perhaps the most accepted speed metric for modern processors is related to the amount of work done per unit time, i.e. the
throughout, and is measured as the number of ﬂoating point operations per second (FLOPS).
Energy efﬁciency is the other vital aspect in the operation of autonomous systems, mostly for portability reasons, especially
because the usual perception of an autonomous system involves embodiment and mobility. Disembodied autonomous systems
can be brought into discussion, like autonomous decision-making systems hosted on mainframes of ﬁxed computing facilities,
in which case the energy consumption may be important from a cost perspective. However, in a sensing-based autonomous
system, mobile embodiment is the pertinent form of existence, which leads to high importance of the energy efﬁciency offered
by the processing units.
• Classic processing-storage digital computing: Computers in this category generally refer to architectures in which
memory is conceptually separated from the processing unit, and data to be processed are permanently exchanged between
the two. In general, the processing-storage architectures describe digital computers consisting of a processing unit, memory
units that store programs (instructions) and data, input-output mechanisms, and external mass storage. Several architectures
have been proposed over time, which differ through the way the exchange takes place within the component elements of
the architecture. Of these, von Neumann, Harvard and modiﬁed-Harvard architectures are those that provided the majority
of the digital computers available to date [186].
The von Neumann architecture proposed a design in which both data and instructions are stored in a unique memory, and
thus they share one data bus for communication with the processing unit. The architecture was simple, through the use
of only one data bus and one memory, but also introduced a major disadvantage, known as von Neumann bottleneck. The
bottleneck consisted in the impossibility to fetch instructions and operate on data in the same time due to the shared bus
that could only handle one type of memory items at a time. This led to limitations of the overall throughput (processing
power), especially in data intensive applications, due to the fact the CPU was continually forced to wait for data to be
transferred to or from memory.
Several methods to overcome this bottleneck have been proposed over time, and included sole or combine use of: a cache
between CPU and memory, separate caches for data and instructions between CPU and memory, separate access paths
(bus) for data and instructions, on-chip single- or multi-layer CPU cache, pipeline mechanisms with prediction algorithms
for data/instruction transfer, etc.
The Harvard architecture was one of the most successful improvements proposed for overcoming von Neumann bottleneck.
The architecture introduces a design with physically separate storage and transfer for instructions and data, thus the design
features dedicated data memory and instruction memory, as well as dedicated data bus and instruction bus. Thus, in
computers build on Harvard architecture, the CPU can read an instruction and operate a data transfer at the same time,
leading to higher processing speed without using memory cache. In addition, since data and instructions are completely
separated (storage and transfer path) their features and implementation can be different, such as different word size,
different timing, different implementation technology, or different memory address structure, as well as different data
transfer standards.
The main use of Harvard design, is in applications where the energy saving and implementation costs, so that processor
cache must be avoided, while still keeping a high processing speed. In signal processing, the digital signal processors
(DSP) generally execute small, highly optimised processing algorithms, hence their memory usage is well determined,
so that memory cache is not needed. In the same time, DSP applications need high parallelism, so multiple address
spaces must be used, that usually need to be addressed in parallel. Thus, some DSPs feature multiple data memories in
distinct address spaces to facilitate paralel processing approaches like Very-Long-Instruction-Word (VLIW) and Single-
Instruction-Multiple-Data (SIMD). An example is the Texas Instruments TMS320 C55x processor family, which includes
ﬁve parallel data buses two for writing and three for reading, and one instruction bus. Micro-controllers are another
category of computing units implemented in Harvard architecture. They are typically used in embedded systems, where
the applications need small amounts of program (instructions) and data memory, but need high speed processing with
low energy consumption. Thus, designs with concurrent instruction and data access and no cache are preferred by most
manufacturers, such as Atmel’s AVR family or Microchip’s PIC family.
However, while providing high processing speed and low energy consumption for a range of applications like RISC
or embedded systems, the architecture was not appropriate for full-sized modern processors used in general-purpose
computing, such as personal computers and laptops, and more recently tablets and smart-phones. This happened especially
due to the unbalanced development of various elements of the computing architecture, where for example the speed of
CPU, memory, bus and external storage experienced very different growth pace.
Thus, various improvements of Harvard architecture have been proposed, all known under the umbrella of modiﬁed
Harvard design. In essence the modiﬁed versions are still Harvard architectures through that the CPU is able to access

21
data and instructions separately, but in the same time they resemble von Neumann design by storing both in a unique
memory. The use of split-cache system is the most common modiﬁcation, used in most modern general-use processor
families from INTEL, AMD, ARM, Motorola, IBM, SUN, etc. In this design, separate instruction and data caches are used
by CPU to access a common address space. When the CPU executes from caches the computer falls onto the standard
Harvard design, and when it accesses the common memory it falls onto the von Neumann design.
• Highly parallel processing on GPUs: A signiﬁcant step towards increasing processing speed was made during the mid
2000s, when general-purpose computing tasks started to be ported from CPUs onto graphic processing units (GPU) [187],
[188]. GPUs are specialised processing units designed to accelerate the creation of images in a frame buffer (that is further
output-ed to a display) through a multi-core structure that is able to process large blocks of visual data in parallel. GPUs
operate in general at lower clock frequencies compared to CPUs, but embed very high numbers of simple cores working in
parallel, overpassing overall the capabilities of even the fastest multi-core CPUs available today. However, the limitation of
GPUs was that their simple cores were designed for handling graphics data only. Early GPUs embedded specialised cores
were used for texture mapping and polygon rendering, with later additions that included various geometric calculations,
e.g. rotation/translation of vertices into different coordinate systems. More recent GPUs added programmable shaders
which for manipulating vertices and textures, oversampling and interpolation techniques for anti-aliasing, and very high-
precision color spaces. Today, typical specialised cores in modern GPUs are pixel shaders and vertex shaders (recently
combined in “uniﬁed shader architecture”), texture mapping units, and render output units.
Since most graphical computations involve vector and matrix manipulation, researchers and practitioners have increasingly
studied the use of GPUs for non-graphical calculations. Since the graphic cores were unable to process general-use
data, the usual CPU applications had to be transformed into graphical forms in order to be processed by GPUs. Thus,
early attempts to perform general-purpose computing on GPUs focused on reformulating at conceptual level the general
computation problems in terms of graphics primitives, in order to be compatible with OpenGL or DirectX [189], the
two major APIs available at the time. This difﬁcult translation was later abandoned with the emergence of the GPU
computing ecosystems (API + SDK), such as the proprietary CUDA from nVidia [190], which was the ﬁrst API to allow
the transfer of C, C++ and Fortran code (and later Matlab, Python and C#) straight to GPU, with no assembly language
required. Later, in 2007, AMD-ATI released its own proprietary ecosystem Stream, which followed the ATI developed
Close-To-Metal and further evolved into the recent Accelerated Parallel Processing (APP) ecosystem that offers support
for newest AMD’s Heterogeneous System Architecture, in which CPU and GPU cores are designed to work together in a
single accelerated processing unit (APU) [191]. Recently, hardware-independent platforms have been released, such as the
proprietary DirectCompute from Microsoft as part of DirectX API [189], and the open-source OpenCL [192]. Through
these, the general-purpose applications can be run through and beneﬁt of GPU speed without requiring conversion of the
data into graphic form.
CUDA and Stream/APP ecosystems remained bond to nVidia and AMD GPUs, respectively. nVidia GPUs starting with
GeForce 8 series were by default hardware enabled for CUDA, while AMD’s GPUs starting with Radeon500 family were
by default hardware enabled for Stream (and later for APP). Recently, the open source platform-independent OpenCL,
developed by Khronos Group [192] became popular for that it allows development of code for both GPUs and CPUs,
and received support from all major chip manufacturers, Intel, AMD, Nvidia, and ARM, whose most recent chips are
OpenCL-enabled.
• Reconﬁgurable processing: Apart from the processing power and energy consumption, another aspect becomes more and
more important in the context of sensor-enabled autonomous systems. Since the nature of these systems, as we explained
in earlier in the paper, is to operate in dynamic environments, it becomes important to be able to adapt not only the
decision making, but also the processing itself to the task of interest. However, while this is possible on general use
computers through software, it is not possible at lower hardware level. Thus, an increased interest have been shown for
the use of FPGAs (Field-Programable Gate Array), which by design have the potential to be reprogrammed at runtime,
being in essence computing units that can reconﬁgure themselves to suit the task of interest [193]. Typically, FPGAs
contain arrays of programmable logic blocks, and a hierarchy of reconﬁgurable interconnects that allow the blocks to
be connected conveniently to perform a variety of operations, from simple logical operations like XOR, to complex
combinatorial functions, mathematical functions or even emulate whole processors. Historically, they have been used as
“breadboards” for low cost prototyping, in order to avoid the high non-recurring engineering costs of ASIC (Application-
Speciﬁc Integrated Circuit) development. Thus, chip manufacturers could develop their hardware on standard FPGAs, and
then manufacture at large scale their ﬁnal version as an ASIC that could not be modiﬁed once the ﬁnal commitment
to a design has been done. For the same reason, FPGAs were also preferred for designing and manufacturing of chips,
in applications where the volume of production was small and the development of ASICS was not worthy at all. Initial
FPGAs were bond to these purposes also because of their low performance, combined with large physical dimension
and high energy consumption [194]. However, with the recent advances in semiconductor technology, transistor gates and
memories, the latest FPGAs can rival not only with their ASIC counterparts, but also with full-sized processors in multiple
respects, such as speed, dimension, energy efﬁciency and cost, while having the advantage of reconﬁgurability. Recent
FPGAs began to take over larger and larger functions to the point where they are even able to implement so-called “soft

22
processors” that emulate the operation of powerful computers, either in ASIC domain or in general-computing domain.
FPGA-based soft processors can be seen in various reconﬁgurable System-On-Chip (SoC) solutions, which incorporate in
the FPGA fabric a variety of elements, such as ARM cores, networking modules, radio modules, DAC/ADC converters, and
other peripherals. Examples of these FPGA are those from the major chip manufacturers, such as Microsemi SmartFusion
series, Xilinx Zynq series, or Altera Arria series. A detailed review of the high speed FPGA SoC and soft processors can
be found in [195].
Due to these technological advances, FPGAs are used today in complex applications that include digital signal processing,
software-deﬁned radio, medical imaging, computer vision, speech recognition, cryptography, bio-informatics, computer
hardware emulation, radio astronomy, metal detection and a growing range of other areas. Another recent use of FPGAs is
hardware acceleration, where FPGAs are used as coprocessors, to assist a general-use processors in acceleration of certain
parts a task or algorithm [196]. Recent use of FPGA coprocessors was announced by Microsoft and Google, who started
to use FPGAs to accelerate high-performance, computationally intensive data centres that operate their search engines,
i.e. Bing and Google respectively.
3) Neuromorphic computing: Neuromorphic engineering, also known as neuromorphic computing, has its roots in the
analogic nature of natural biological computation and is based on the transfer of the morphology of individual into electronic
circuits. In essence, the resultant computing architectures and implementations are analog computers which contain circuits
that mimic the electrical activity of neuro-biological nervous system, that is, described by the spiking neuron models. From
the point of view of a sensor-based autonomous system, neuro-morphic computing seems like the obvious way to go, since
the sensor-based operation is the essence of life, and thus any existing digital artiﬁcial sensor-based system, no matter how
fast or sophisticated it is, is still far from what biological sensory processing can offer.
Most of the efforts in neuromorphic computing concentrated on the formal spiking models, with some notable instantiations
of the theoretical models proposed in the last decade.
In 2006, researchers at Georgia Institute of Technology published the details of a ﬁeld programmable neural array [197].
The chip was the ﬁrst in a line of many increasingly complex arrays of ﬂoating gate transistors that allowed programmability
of charge on the gates of MOSFETs to model the channel-ion characteristics of neurons in the brain and was one of the ﬁrst
cases of a silicon programmable array of neurons. The authors describe the chip as an analog circuit capable of accurately
emulating large complex cells, or multiple less complex ones. They note its analogy to an FPGA in which the binary transistor
gates were replaced by biologically relevant circuit components including active channels, dendrites, and synapses. A routing
capability was added to these elements in order to transfer outputs from cells to individual synapses.
In 2012, Spintronic Rand Purdue University [198] announced a neuromorphic chip that used lateral spin valves and
memristors. Their design was a hybrid structure in which a programming current passing through heavy metal generates
spin-orbit torque to modulate the spintronic device conductance, creating a nanoelectronic synapse. The spintronic synapse
was then interfaced with CMOS neurons operating in transistor subthreshold region in order to form a network of spiking
neurons. The authors claim that the architecture can emulate the operation of biological neurons and reproduce various brain-like
processing abilities with signiﬁcantly lower energy consumption than conventional digital chips.
SpiNNaker [199], proposed by the neuromorphic engineering research group at Manchester university, is a massively parallel,
low power, neuromorphic computing board designed to model very large, biologically realistic, spiking neural networks in
real time. The board consists of 65,536 identical 18-core processors, meaning 1,179,648 cores in total. Each processor has an
on-board router to form links with its neighbours, as well as its own 128 MB of memory to hold synaptic weights. Each core is
an ARM968 chip manufactured using a 130 nm process. The resultant chip is not a purely hardware neuromorphic computer,
but rather a massively parallel digital computer, with over one million cores, which can simulate one thousand neurons per
core, leading to a total of one billion simulated neurons.
In 2014 Stanford University announced Neurogrid [200] structure. Neurogrid is a 6.5x7.5 square inch circuit board composed
of 16 custom designed chips, referred to as NeuroCores. Each NeuroCore’s analog circuitry covers 12x14 square millimetres
and is designed to emulate 65536 neurons, thus the board can model a total of over one million neurons, and 6 billion
synapses implemented in a binary tree with links, with operates at a total of 80 million spikes per second. The authors claim
a consumption of only 5 watt at full processing load.
Perhaps the most advanced neuromorphic chip is TrueNorth proposed by IBM [201]. TrueNorth is built in CMOS technology
and consists of 4096 hardware cores, each of them embedding 256 programmable hardware silicon neurons, which in turn
have 256 programmable synapses. Over all the chip embeds over a million neurons, with a total of over 268 million synapses,
on a physical CMOS wafer containing 5.4 billion transistors in 28 nm technology. The authors claim an energy consumption
of less than 100mW/chip, meaning less then 20mW/cm2, or 26pJ per synaptic event. They also claim that the chip implements
the ﬁrst fully event driven digital mixed synchronous-asynchronous neuromorphic architecture. Applications of the chip in real
tasks showed a consumption of 70mW while a recurrent network at biological real-time, and 65mW in a multi-object detection
and classiﬁcation application, with 240x400-pixel 3-color video input at 30 frames-per-second. TrueNorth is claimed to be
the ﬁrst neuromorphic implementation that distances entirely from the classic processing-storage paradigm, through the fact
the neurons are silicon based not emulated by conventional gates. Thus, the classic thinking of how to program a computer
also cannot be applied any more, since concepts like memory access, data buses or CPU do not exist in TrueNorth design.

23
Fig. 5: Autonomy Timeline.
The authors designed for this reason an end-to-end ecosystem complete with a custom simulator and a new programming
language for composing networks of neurosynaptic cores, called corelet [202] implemented in Matlab code. With this, IBM
also offers an integrated programming environment with corelet libraries, conventional algorithms and applications ported into
the neuromorphic paradigm, and a teaching curriculum called “SyNAPSE University”.
D. Human-Machine Interface Big Data Problems
In our discussion of the sensor technologies to connect humans to machines, we avoided some of the classic and data
intensive sensors such as different types of cameras and microphones. The Psychophysiological sensors reviewed are not
too data intensive. The maximum EEG sampling rate was 20kHz. With a maximum of 256 sensors, we can have a 5mHz
information ﬂow from the human scalp. ECG and other sensors are not worth discussing from a big data perspective. Thus, it
seems that the three most demanding data sources are imagines, EEG and sound in order of the complexity of data that can
be acquired through these channels.
To process these data, clearly neuromorphic chips can offer a leap forward in the ability of artiﬁcial AS to perform real-time
complex sensing and processing tasks. However, it is still too early stage for this technology and is very unlikely that the
technology will be available in large scale and with a general-consumer accessible strategy in the near future. As such, we
are back to the von Neuman and Harvard architectures, as the most feasible processing to be used today. This also includes
GPUs and reconﬁgurable chips such as FPGAs.
From the 6 different Vs deﬁning a big data problem, we comment in what follows on how the human-machine interface
problem is a big data problem. The issue of volume arises speciﬁcally when dealing with video, EEG and voice. However,
the main big data challenges within the context of this paper are more centred on the other Vs, which are all apparent in this
context. The timeseries nature of most of these data, along with the chaotic nature of human mental processing, makes the
problem to be susceptible to high velocity and high veracity. The multi-modality required to triangulate different sources of
data to understand human mental states make the problem susceptible to high variety and variability features. The use of these
data to make informed trusting decisions and facilitate human-machine interaction in TAS may depend on the application and
context, but in general we expect it to have clear high value.
In summary, TAS bring big data challenges that need to be considered when designing these systems.
IV. TRUSTED AUTONOMOUS SYSTEMS: THE BIG DATA CHALLENGE REVEALED
This section concludes the paper with the big data open challenges for trusted autonomy. In Sub-section IV-A, we will discuss
autonomy to contextualise the discussion for the reader. This is followed by bringing together the discussion on Trust and
the discussion on autonomy under the common objective of this paper: trust-aware autonomous systems in Sub-section IV-B.
Sub-section IV-C offers some insight into some open challenges and future research directions.
A. The Road to Autonomy
The evolution of autonomy in Figure 5 follows similar principles to the evolution of trust. Autonomy is not a binary concept.
The concept exists on a wide scale with complete absence of autonomy at the one end and full autonomy at the other.
We will explain autonomy using the WH-clauses: How (strategy), When/Where/Whom (context), What (goal), and Why
(rationality). These questions are incremental in nature. Without the ability to develop strategies, an actor can’t manage and/or
survive a context. Without the ability to manage contexts, the actor can’t deal with goals. Without the ability to manage goals,

24
the actor can’t explain and/or reason about its own behavior. The abilities to develop strategy, manage context, manage goals,
and explain and reason can be hard-wired within an actor. When the actor is able to develop these abilities by itself, it develops
‘self’ and it rises up in the hierarchy of autonomy. This ability to develop ‘self’ does not happen in vacuum. It is another set
of algorithms that work on a higher level of abstraction. Similar to learning to learn, we still need to use learning techniques,
but with an appropriate representation, we can develop learning techniques that are able to learn on their own.
The left hand side of the diagram starts with a zero-autonomy; a dictatorship master-slave relationship, where zero autonomy
is equivalent to a slave with full obedience to its master. An example we will use here to demonstrate the concept is in the
case of a bicycle. As a machine, it does not do anything unless an external force (human or environment) exerts a force on it.
Let us add an electrical motor to the bicycle. The human may press a button and it will start to move. The motor offers a
control without being aware of context. It will move in the same manner independent of whether it is night or day, moving on
a road or in mud, and whether it is operated by an adult or a child. Once we add sensors and increase the level of intelligence
in the controller, the machine starts to be ‘context-sensitive’. It will behave differently in different contexts. We will follow a
similar philosophy to Abowd et.al. [203] to differentiate between sensitivity to context; that is, the machine is using context
information, and what we will discuss later on as ‘context aware’. For now, this machine is not ‘context aware’ yet.
We can continue to improve the automation of the machine by adding a planner and a GPS system to offer it an opportunity
to decide on goals. The human may ask the machine to go to a restaurant and the machine will choose the restaurant, plan
the route, and take the human to a restaurant of its choice. The human may then need to ask the ‘why’ question; that is, why
a certain route was chosen. In this case, we need to use the planner within the machine or add another layer of reasoning to
offer the human an explanation of the choices made by the machine.
While we do have a smart machine that automatically decides on a route, adapts its control strategy to the information
it is sensing from the environment on terrain and driver characteristics, is able to plan automatically, and reason about its
action, the level of autonomy of this machine is still very limiting. What we have up to now is smart automation, with little
autonomy. Taking this level of intelligence to autonomy is the vision of ‘autonomic computing’ that was ﬁrst introduced by
Paul Horn [204] in his 2001 keynote address to the National Academy of Engineers at Harvard University.
The ultimate aim of autonomic computing, or what is known now as ‘self-X’, is to have a self-governed system. This
created a list of characteristics to make this dream a reality including: the system needs to have its own identity, be able to
self-conﬁgure, self-optimize, self-heal, self-protect, and become self-aware. We will depart from some of these characteristics
as we see the evolutionary steps we will discuss for autonomy to subsume some of them.
Autonomy starts to increase incrementally as we add more self-x capabilities with the ultimate goal to achieve total self-
governing. The ﬁrst feature is ‘self healing’, the ability to recognize problems (self-diagnosis) and recover automatically. The
system needs to be able to be equipped with the mechanisms for it to discover its own strategies towards maintaining its health
level and functionality at the right level.
Moving in the hierarchy from context-sensitive to context aware, the system needs to extend its ability to sense the
environment surrounding it to an ability where it senses the user’s tasks, user’s intents, and know how to contribute to
the optimization of this task. This deﬁnition is consistent with Abowd et.al. [203] who refer to a system as context-aware “if
it uses context to provide relevant information and/or services to the user, where relevancy depends on the users task.”
A context aware system with the ability to do self-healing is already too advanced in the autonomy hierarchy but still unable
to exercise full autonomy. It needs to have the ability to autonomously generate its own goals through self-motivation and to
reason in its own way through self-reasoning. These features allow the system to decide for itself what it needs to do and
develop its own rationale for the how, when, where and what.
With the above self-X capabilities, a system becomes fully autonomous when it is able to integrate across these capabilities
to form a self-governed whole. Here, autonomy reaches its maximum horizon.
B. Trust-Aware Autonomous Systems
The road to trusted autonomy is not a simple addition of trust to autonomy.
A trusted autonomous system (TAS) does not operate in a vacuum. It interacts with other TASs and within an overall context.
It needs to take into account the complex interaction of the two concepts, trust and autonomy, and the multi-actor environment
they operate within.
Each actor has its own objectives, goals, behavioral attributes, capabilities, and resources. While these actors individually
may be trusted, the system as a whole may not be. The simple example is counterintuitive and can better be explained with
the statement: if everyone does the right thing, it does not mean that the group is doing the right thing. The challenge in this
statement lies within the boundary of the word ‘right’: right for whom and from whose perspective, and who has the authority
to deﬁne what is right? What is right from an individual actor perspective may not be what is right from a system perspective.
An actor may wish to operate optimally (e.g. a robot would like to reduce energy consumption to extend battery life), but
the system may need the task to be completed as quickly as possible, which may result in a non-efﬁcient use of the robot’s
battery. These sorts of conﬂicting objectives between the individuals and the group, the groups and the supergroups, and the
supergroups and the society create a level of interdependency that complicates the concept of trust in social dynamics.

25
Fig. 6: Trust-Aware Autonomous Systems.
For a TAS to be trusted from a system-level perspective, it needs to be self-aware of system-level objectives and work
collaboratively with other trusted-autonomous systems towards achieving these objectives.
The dynamics associated with the interaction require continuous sensing, processing, acting on, and verifying the environment
it is operating within and other autonomous systems, including humans, in this environment. Veriﬁcation [205], in particular,
raises more challenges and requires a signiﬁcant amount of data in real-time operations.
Figure 6 attempts to capture the key building blocks to form a TAS. The visual decomposition of these building blocks
is primarily for ease of understanding and is not meant to imply that these building blocks can be designed or developed
independently. It is a conceptual functional decomposition of the system, but it is not a proposal for a modular decomposition
because of complexities that are outside the scope of this paper.
It might seem counterintuitive to separate action production from all modules that are focusing on self-management and self-
awareness. This is intentional conceptually because action production mechanisms present a toolbox that any of the individual
building blocks can use and adopt when needed and as the situation dictates. One can see action production as a service that
gets called upon by all other modules.
Secondly, we adopt a convention that self-management will require self-awareness. We deﬁne self-awareness here as the
system’s ability to map out and represent all its components virtually (ie. software wise), continuously measure their states,
and is able to identify if a component has been spoofed. This is a stricter deﬁnition of self-awareness than some of the general
discussions of the concept in the literature. However, we take it that a deﬁnition need to be self-encompassing, while systems
can exhibits different degrees of the concept being deﬁned.
The following sub-section will highlight the big data challenges for trusted autonomy.

26
C. Big Data Challenges for TAS Revealed
Trusted autonomy creates a series of big data challenges. We will highlight below the six most prominent challenges that
we have identiﬁed.
1) Moving Sensor Network Challenge: An autonomous system is a moving sensor network that collects data continuously,
pro-actively, and in many instances intentionally to improve its performance and achieve its mission’s objectives.
We will put aside the resource-constrained environment of an autonomous platform – be it a hardware or a software
agent, since this will be the challenge we will discuss next. For now, we will focus on the relationship between the
agent’s sensors and the environment.
Many sensors will need to operate continuously. They can be operating even when they are not used by the system.
This is particularly the case when a group of sensors are operating on the same switch; thus, switching one of them off
would simply switch every sensor connected to the switch off. This raises an attractive offer for the wider context that
the autonomous agent is operating within to leverage these data.
For example, while a Google car is moving, it may have a temperature sensor to adjust the air conditioning system
inside the car. If the air conditioning system is switched off, this temperature sensor can still be useful to transmit to the
intelligent transportation network localised temperature information that can be integrated across the network to offer a
real-time environmental picture of the transportation network.
The above example imposes a big data challenge, when to allow for this data to be transmitted and when to prohibit
transmission? On the one hand, transmitting the data beneﬁts the wider system. On the other hand, it overloads the car’s
battery as a result of the extra energy required to transmit these data.
Moreover, it opens trust challenges. The local temperature of the car may get seen by some as a not-threatening privacy
data and get transmitted to third parties. A situation that can create security and privacy hazards, whereby the localised
temperature can be used as a heat-signature for tracking the car by an entity that does have a privilege to do so and may
not be allowed to recieve GPS information from the car.
A second factor to consider in this challenge is related to the words ‘pro-actively and intentionally’. The autonomous
agent needs to decide which data is useful for its own context. In a dynamic environment where the situation is changing
continuously, to decide which data is more useful to get, the autonomous entity needs to continuously be listening to all
its sensors, processing the information and making a decision on the ‘value’ of the data so that it is able to pro-actively
decide which sensor needs to be targeted for more data and to intentionally decide which decision is a higher priority
at this point of time and the data needed for this decision.
The problem above is very complex. To allow the system to continuously monitor all of its sensors, the system may
need to reduce the sample rate for those sensors that may not be important at one point of time, then dynamically adjust
the sampling rate as they become important. This is a very challenging problem.
To automatically adapt the data acquisition strategy in a sensor network raises all sorts of big data problems, from the
fact that the data arrives with different level of noise, the environment is dynamic and concepts change over time, to
issues of sensor reliability and the trust-level associated with each sensor.
2) Load-Balancing and Value Challenge: Almost all TASs would have physical constraints in terms of memory and
processing capacity. This resource-constrained environment compounds the complexity of too much available data, and
the too little knowledge that we can draw out of it.
A TAS, similar to a human, encounters data as it is operating that may not be useful for itself, but for others in the
environment. Imagine two robots, one is collecting tomatoes and the other is collecting weeds. The robot collecting the
tomatoes may sense the existence of weeds. Whether or not it should send this information to the other robot or not
would depend on many factors. However, even the decision itself raises the question of how to balance the load on its
memory, processing capacity, and battery life in these situations?
The above question is a classic question in autonomous systems, but big data makes the question even more demanding.
The data the TAS collects, even unintentionally, may hide a great deal of values to the system. The amount of processing
and resources to be allocated for this task necessitate a level of processing that can threaten the survivability of the system
in a harsh operating environment. Nevertheless, ignoring this information can threaten even more the survivability of this
system.
3) Trust-Awareness Cognitive Challenge: For an autonomous system to be trusted, it can’t focus purely on its primary
mission as it needs to make every interaction it is involved within as part of its mission. This increases the data load on
the system and creates higher than ever demands on the system to process these data in real-time.
The primary challenge here is related to velocity, veracity and value. An agent that is acting in a real-time environment
needs to mine the data it is receiving very quickly so that its actions take into account any patterns that have arisen
in the moments before actions are made. A real-time situation is dynamic by nature. The changing situation needs to
integrate its current states with new information. This integration process can be very expensive. On the one level it is
a classic information fusion and belief update problem. On another level, it can trigger the activation of almost every
component of a self-governing system. For example, the system may realise it needs to self-optimize in response to a

27
self-diagnosed failure in one of its sensors, while simultaneously the self-healing module is attempting to recover the
data through self-organising the rest of the sensor network. The synchronization of process and action in real-time is
one of the grand challenges of TAS.
4) Trusted Swarm Challenge: A TAS does not work in isolation of other autonomous systems in the environment. Trust
offer a path for autonomous systems to manage the complexities discussed above in the same way trust reduces complexity
in a social system. It allows for delegation as a mechanism to manage complexity and distribute load among the system’s
components.
In the previous challenge, we discussed an example which involved two types of complexity that the agent is faced
with. One is related to the amount of processing an agent needs to do to synchronise its action production with a fast
interaction. The second is related to loss of information as a result of sensor failure or a conscious decision by the agent.
In any of these situations, if the autonomous system trusts another autonomous system, the former can use the latter to
overcome some of these challenges, assuming that the latter can do the job.
The above example focuses on a two-entity interaction, but the true beneﬁts from trust becomes clearer when it happens
within a swarm, whereby a whole lot of delegations can occur in the system among the trusted autonomous agents so
that overall mission success is maximized. An example of this would be apparent in the mining industry where a swarm
of machines need to cooperate to maximize the probability of discovering a suitable place to mine.
The degree of coordination and delegation that occur in this example dramatically increase the data ﬂow among the
agents, whether these data are communicated directly through direct communications channels or indirectly through
behavioural changes to signal a need for help. Again, this problem raises big data challenges because of value, velocity
and veracity. There is a signiﬁcant value add for the agents to cooperate in situations such as those described above to
maximize the overall mission success of the swarm. These interactions are not free of complexity as the situation can
be changing fast introducing a great deal of velocity challenges, and the fast sampling rate can be an extreme source of
veracity which can cause instability in any inferring mechanism used in the system.
5) Trusted Cyborg Challenge: An artiﬁcial TAS – such as a software agent or a robot – is expected to work in harmony
with humans. With appropriate use of advanced AI techniques, the artiﬁcial and human entities need to work as a single
entity, an interdependency that is known as symbiosis.
The challenges arises on how to make the silicon and biological agents work together as one; that is, establishing a truly
symbiotic relationship to allow the machine and the human to meld as one entity. The coupling of the two creates a new
type of agents, a Cyborg (human-machine coupled computational decision making engine).
The machine needs to understand the human. However, the complexity arising from the diversity of human attitudes
and personalities is huge. One possible mechanism to manage this complexity is to directly obtain objective data on
the human to manage the ambiguity that comes with human communication. The data needs to be collected through
mechanisms that do not interfere with the performance of the human on the job. The use of body sensors and passive
external sensors such as cameras and microphones can offer an unprecedented amount of data to allow this integration
to occur.
The Cyborg’s brain needs to have efﬁcient interfaces between the biological and silicon brains so that both human and
machine work seamlessly together as a single entity. We are not suggesting here to connect human brains to silicon or
any type of science ﬁction. The suggestion is to integrate the decision making between the two in the same way two
close friends work together to solve a problem.
The Cyborg’s brain needs on-board data processing. The real-time and volume of the data necessitate a very efﬁcient
use of the hardware. Technologies similar to those discussed in Section III such as neuromorphic computing, FPGA
and other implementations of neural networks on chips can be very attractive. Equally important here is the need for
real-time signal processing techniques capable of sensing the context to improve signal cleaning, and adapt sampling
rate when and as needed, with appropriate dynamic calibration models that can fuse different sources of data from the
human and dynamically adapt the parameters and structure of the model in response to changes in the environment.
6) Trusted Cyborg Swarm Challenge: A group of Cyborgs make a Cyborg swarm. The complexity of a network of Cyborg
swarms, an extension of a problem we called in our previous research as Cognitive Cyber Symbiosis (CoCyS) [12], [55],
needs to be managed to allow this decision network of Cyborgs to operate efﬁciently. CoCyS is a decision network of
humans and machines. A Cyborg swarm is a network where each node is a Cyborg’s brain.
A Cyborg swarm is the next generation swarm intelligence system, where each human can look after a swarm of artiﬁcial
TASs, and the Cyborg population works together as a swarm to solve far reaching complex.
Take for example a situation like a post-disaster recovery, where a tsunami has destroyed a village. Each site may have a
Cyborg consisting of a human and a swarm of artiﬁcial TASs. The Cyborg network needs to coordinate activities, share
information, and work as one team to assist the village in recovery. Such a network should recover from the disaster a
few orders of magnitude faster than what we do today, as a result of the close integration of human and machine.
The challenges of forming such a network deﬁne scientiﬁc frontiers of this century. On the one hand, we have compu-
tational challenges to design appropriate AI systems that can handle this level of distributed control and complex and
dynamic context. On the other hand, the amount of data in a Cyborg swarm is huge. These data are not just useful for

28
the swarm to make decisions for recovery. They are also useful for future disaster situations, where it is important that
these data get collected from the swarm as well.
Putting the six challenges above together, theoretical and practical aspects of the big data challenges for trusted autonomy
draw a roadmap for the research needed to overcome these problems in practice.
