Knowledge Representations in
Technical Systems
A Taxonomy
Kristina Scharei, Florian Heidecker, Maarten Bieshaar
Intelligent Embedded Systems, University of Kassel, Germany

Abstract. The recent usage of technical systems in human-centric en-
vironments leads to the question, how to teach technical systems, e.g.,
robots, to understand, learn, and perform tasks desired by the human.
Therefore, an accurate representation of knowledge is essential for the
system to work as expected. This article mainly gives insight into dif-
ferent knowledge representation techniques and their categorization into
various problem domains in artiﬁcial intelligence. Additionally, applica-
tions of presented knowledge representations are introduced in everyday
robotics tasks. By means of the provided taxonomy, the search for a
proper knowledge representation technique regarding a speciﬁc problem
should be facilitated.
1
Introduction
The increasing number of technical systems (TS) used for services, e.g., robot
assistants in homes or factories, results in many challenges to accomplish, e.g.,
safe human-robot interaction or consistently changing environments for a robot
vacuum cleaner in a household. Especially in such cases, TS need to act like a
human would. This results in the challenge of how to accomplish this, maybe
even better than a human. Therefore, a signiﬁcant question is: How to represent
knowledge required for a speciﬁc task such that a TS can understand it and
consequently fulﬁll the required task? In the past years emerged many diﬀerent
knowledge representation (KR) approaches such that the choice of a right KR
for a speciﬁc task is not straightforward. This article should act as an aid to get
an overview of diﬀerent KR techniques used in everyday applications. The main
contributions are:
• a taxonomy consisting of diﬀerent KR techniques for TS
• categorization of previously stated KR techniques in diﬀerent problem do-
mains of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)
• application of various KR techniques in robotic scenarios activity learning,
task representation, and scene understanding
The remainder of this article is as follows: First, problem domains in AI are
presented. Section 3 gives an overall overview of possible KR in TS, whereas Petri
arXiv:2001.04835v2  [cs.AI]  15 Jan 2020

Nets (PN) as semantic graphs are described in more detail. Section 4 exemplary
combines the presented KR with application scenarios from everyday robotics
tasks.
2
Problem Domains in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
For the applicability of diﬀerent KR, it is of advantage to get an overall overview
of diﬀerent challenges in AI ﬁrst. These challenges are divided into domains,
which describe the potential capabilities of an AI technology and type of problem
AI can solve [Corea, 2018]. This section will be diﬀerentiating various problem
domains in AI including some overall application scenarios. Due to varying divi-
sions of problem domains, this section combines multiple sources: [Jain et al., 2015],
[Rosenschein, 1985], [Corea, 2018], and [Kelnar, 2016].
Perception describes knowledge about the environment by transforming raw
sensorial inputs into technically processable information. Sensorial inputs can be
images, videos, or sound data.
Possible applications are: autonomous vehicles, medical diagnosis, or surveil-
lance.
Reasoning indicates solving problems by means of logical deduction. This re-
quires knowledge to be already available.
Possible applications are: legal assessment, ﬁnancial asset management, games,
or autonomous weapons systems.
Knowledge as an AI domain stands for the ability to represent knowledge of the
world in an understandable way for TS. Especially, this means dividing knowl-
edge into certain entities, events, or situations which themselves have properties
and can even be categorized.
Possible applications are: medical diagnosis, drug creation, media recommenda-
tion, purchase predictions, or fraud prevention.
Planning is the capability of setting and achieving goals. In more detail: a
speciﬁc future state of the world is desirable, and the sequences of actions to
access this state are highly relevant.
Possible applications are: logistics, scheduling, navigation, physical and digital
network optimization, predictive maintenance, or demand forecasting.
Communication involves the continual updating of mutual knowledge pos-
sessed by the speaker and hearer. Key concepts are: understanding language in
written and spoken form and communicating with the environment.
Possible applications are: voice control, intelligent agents, assistants and cus-
tomer support, real-time translation of written and spoken languages, or real-
time transcriptions.

Learning indicates incrementation of knowledge through experience.
Possible applications are: workforce learning, intelligent job matching, partially
automated assessment.
Problems in previously mentioned domains can be solved through either sta-
tistical methods or traditional symbolic and sub-symbolic methods.
Symbolic methods assume that the world can be reduced to symbol manipu-
lations only. They can be subdivided into two diﬀerent approaches: logic-based
and knowledge-based. Logic-based approaches consist of one out of several
logics. They are often used in case of problem-solving. Knowledge-based ap-
proaches, on the other hand, are based on ontologies and huge databases of
notions, information, and rules.
Statistical methods solve speciﬁc sub-problems using mathematical tools.
There are two diﬀerent approaches regarding statistical methods: probabilistic
methods and machine learning techniques. Probabilistic methods allow acting
in incomplete information scenarios. Machine learning tools allow TS to learn
from given data.
Sub-symbolic methods contain no explicit knowledge. Embodied Intelligence
and Search/Optimization techniques are included in these methods. Embodied
Intelligence assumes that higher intelligence requires a body, which can consist
of, for instance, movement, interaction, or visualization functions. Search and
optimization allow intelligent examination of the search area which can lead
to one of many possible solutions. The solution found with these techniques is
not always globally optimal, but "good enough" to work further with the re-
sults. Machine learning can be counted to these methods as well because the
knowledge in these tools is almost always sub-symbolic.
Figure 1 displays the presented partitioning from above. The y-axis displays
the problem domains in AI; the x-axis shows the diﬀerent methods to achieve
results in these problem domains. Within the grid are displayed diﬀerent KR
techniques. The big gray rectangles represent the four central representations
dealt with in this article. Rectangles with dotted lines are possible representa-
tions in the sub-symbolic area but will not be further discussed here. Dashed
lines represent areas that can be used by the KR as well but are also not further
discussed. The reason for the classiﬁcation being, as shown in Fig. 1, will be
understandable at the end of the article.
The next section is focusing on symbolic and statistical methods (gray boxes
in Fig. 1), providing diﬀerent KR techniques in the form of graphs and networks.

Knowledge-based
Probabilistic Methods
Embodied 
Intelligence 
Logic-based
Machine Learning 
 
Search/ 
Optimization 
Perception
Learning
Reasoning
Knowledge
Planning
Communication
Symbolic
Statistical
Sub-symbolic
Distributed Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Autonomous Systems
Evolutionary
Algorithms
Deterministic
Model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Probabilistic
Graphical 
Model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Neural
Network
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Semantic
Graphs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposi-
tional
Logic
Descrip-
tion
Logic
Probabilistic 
Relational 
Model 
First-
Order
Logic
Bayesian
Network
 
Markov
Network
Markov
Network
Deep
Learning
Convolu-
tional
Neural
Network
              Petri Net
  Petri 
  Net
  Timed 
  Petri 
  Net
Stochastic
Timed
Petri Net
Colored
Petri
Net
Deterministic
Timed
Petri Net
Fig. 1: Overview of diﬀerent knowledge representations (inspired by [Corea, 2018])

3
Overview: Graph and Network Representations
Graphs are one key concept in computer sciences, which are often used to model
real-world systems. A graph is an ordered pair of sets (V, E) with V being a
set of vertices (or nodes) and E a set of edges connecting vertices. The fact
that they are universally applicable is what makes them so popular. Some
of the qualities when using graphs: They are easy to search for paths, rapid
while adding and deleting knowledge or quick and easy regarding visualization
[Kudase and Bane, 2016]. Networks build a subgroup of graphs because a net-
work can be deﬁned as a graph.
As graphs are universally applicable many KR are based on them, which will
be presented in the next section after a quick introduction into deterministic
models.
3.1
Deterministic Models
In a deterministic model, states are determined by the model’s parameters as
well as the previous states. Given a set of initial conditions, the produced out-
put of a deterministic model will always be the same. To express knowledge
in a veriﬁable way, diﬀerent logic-approaches are presented in consistent formal
theories, which allow the deduction of new provably correct knowledge from ex-
isting knowledge by means of systematic or syntactic manipulations of logical
propositions [Nyga, 2017].
The next sections will be focusing on diﬀerent common logic approaches
following [Nyga, 2017].
Propositional Logic Propositional logic (PL) is one of the most basic for-
malisms in logic-based knowledge representation. Sentences in PL consist of
atomic propositions from an alphabet of symbols Σ, which can take values true
(⊤) or false (⊥). An interpretation assigns a truth value to every atomic propo-
sition. It is possible to construct more complex sentences by applying logical
junctors on simple sentences. Assumption: φ and ψ are sentences in PL. New
sentences can be constructed by negation (¬φ), conjunction (φ ∧ψ), disjunction
(φ ∨ψ), implication (φ →ψ), and bi-implication (φ ↔ψ). Atomic and complex
statements are also called logical formulae. An interpretation I of statement φ
is called model of φ if the statement is true under interpretation I (I |= φ).
Essential characteristics of PL are:
• Satisﬁablity: A formula φ is satisﬁable, if and only if (in the following
written as iﬀ) there is at least one interpretation under which φ is true.
Otherwise, it is called unsatisﬁable.
• Validity: A formula φ is valid, iﬀφ is true under all interpretations.
• Entailment: A formula φ entails another formula ψ (φ |= ψ), iﬀevery model
of φ is also a model of ψ.
PL is decidable. It states that there is an algorithm that can, for each formula,
decide whether a property is fulﬁlled or not.

First-Order Logic Due to the limited possibilities to express statements, ﬁrst-
order logic (FOL) extends PL by introducing constant, predicate, function, and
variable symbols. Constant symbols represent entities or attributes in the world,
predicate symbols denote relations between these entities. A term addresses an
entity with syntactic expressions, whereas every constant and variable symbol is
a term. A function can be applied to terms. Terms without variables are called
ground terms.
The most powerful tool in FOL is the usability of universal (∀) or existential
(∃) quantiﬁers. They extend the validity of a sentence to hold for all (in case
of a universal quantiﬁer) or at least one (in case of an existential quantiﬁer)
substitutions of the referenced variable in the sentence.
FOL, in general, is only semi-decidable. This means that there is an algorithm
that can for each formula decide if a property is fulﬁlled, but cannot decide
whether the property is not fulﬁlled, which can result in an inﬁnite loop. Still,
restricted variants of FOL have been developed, which restore full decidability.
Description Logic (DL) is a decidable subset of FOL which allows repre-
senting aspects of the real world regarding upper ontologies of concepts and
instances of it. DL is used in semantic web or robotics, e.g., KnowRob sys-
tem [Tenorth and Beetz, 2009]. A knowledge base (or ontology) in DL consists
of terminological and assertional axioms. Terminological axioms deﬁne which
categories of objects there are in the respective domain, which relations (e.g.,
specialization and generalization) between these categories hold, and what kind
of properties the objects may have. Assertional axioms describe a speciﬁc state
of aﬀairs of an application domain in terms of concepts and roles from the ter-
minological axioms. If A and B are concepts, new concepts can be deﬁned as
follows:
• deﬁnition A .= B: entities of A are entities of B and vice versa
• intersection A ⊓B: entities of A and B at the same time
• union A ⊔B: entities of A or B
• complement ¬A: entities of all types but A
• inclusion A ⊑B: all entities of type A are also of type B, but the opposite
direction is not necessarily true
Though deterministic models are useful regarding problem-solving and pow-
erful for representing and reasoning about knowledge, a signiﬁcant disadvantage
of these models is the lack of probability or uncertainty in general. Therefore,
the application of such models is limited.
3.2
Probabilistic Graphical Models
In this section, particular emphasis is placed on the approach that the environ-
ment of a TS cannot be described in simple rules (as assumed in Sect. 3.1) and
therefore cannot be modeled perfectly. Likelihoods and uncertainty dominate

the knowledge in this representation and can be used in manipulation recog-
nition and understanding [Paulius and Sun, 2018]. Two often-used probabilistic
graphical models (PGM) will be explained further in the next sections, following
mainly [Nyga, 2017] and [Paulius and Sun, 2018].
Bayesian Network Bayesian Networks (BN) are directed and acyclic graphs
that provide a formalism to specify dependencies regarding causal relationships
of variables. Nodes within the graph represent entities or concepts; edges de-
scribe probabilistic dependencies between nodes. A parent is a node with at
least one outgoing edge. Par(Xi) is a set which represents the parents of a node
Xi on which Xi depends. Figure 2 shows an exemplary BN consisting of four
nodes (A, B, C, D) where each node represents a random variable. In this ex-
ample, Par(Xi) with , e.g., Xi = C is equal to {A, B}. The existence of a path
between two nodes indicates an inﬂuence between them. Otherwise, the nodes,
which follow a local Markov assumption1, are conditionally independent. Due
to this characteristics, BNs can be used for making inferences about unobserved
variables and additionally determine more complex relationships.
The probability of unknown discrete variables can be calculated with Eq. 1,
called the Bayes’ theorem. The joint distribution over variables X1, ..., Xn is given
by Eq. 2. According to Eq. 2, the joint distribution of the exemplary network in
Fig. 2 is: P(A, B, C, D) = P(A) ∗P(B) ∗P(C|A, B) ∗P(D|C)
P(X|Y ) = P(Y, X)
P(Y )
= P(Y |X)P(X)
P(Y )
(1)
P(X1, ..., Xn) =
n
Y
i=1
P(Xi|Par(Xi))
(2)
Fig. 2: Exemplary Bayesian network with four nodes A, B, C, D.
Instead of using purely discrete variables it is possible to apply continuous
variables to a BN called Linear Continuous Gaussian BN (LCG-BN). As the
name indicates, continuous variables follow a linear Gaussian distribution. A
network of this type can therefore represent probabilities using a Gaussian dis-
tribution.
1 Markov assumption: The future is independent of the past given the present.

LCG-BNs are only one variation of simple BNs which exist. There are many
more.
Markov Network As a trade-oﬀbetween the generality of full joint distribu-
tions and restricted BN structures, Markov Networks (MN) represent another
family of PGMs.Unlike the BN a MN, also known as Markow Random Field
(MRF), has no directed edges, which denotes that there is no directional ﬂow of
inﬂuence and therefore can capture cyclic dependencies. An equal ﬂow of inﬂu-
ence between connected nodes is the outcome. Similar to BNs, a local Markov
assumption denotes conditional dependence. Variables in MNs do not always
follow probability distributions. Instead, a parametrization by means of factors
(functions representing the relationship) is applied to each clique (subset of nodes
where all nodes are connected).
The joint distribution is a Gibbs distribution given by:
P(X = x) = 1
Z
Y
c∈G
ψc(x|c|)
(3)
where c indicates cliques in a network G for a speciﬁc world x, ψc is a factor,
and x|c| is a projection of the values of all variables in x that are part of c.
Consequently, the joint distribution relies on all factors, not only a single factor.
Z =
X
x′∈X
Y
c∈G
ψc(x′
|c|)
(4)
Equation 4 shows the partition function Z which normalizes the probability
masses of all possible worlds to get a proper probability distribution.
Figure 3 shows an exemplary Markov network consisting of three cliques.
The joint distribution given by Eq. 3 is then calculated by:
P(A, B, C, D, E) = ψ1(A, B, C) ∗ψ2(C, D) ∗ψ3(C, E)
Fig. 3: Exemplary Markov network consisting of ﬁve nodes A, B, C, D, E and
maximal cliques {A,B,C}, {C,D} and {C,E} including their clique potentials ψ1,
ψ2 and ψ3 (based on [Nyga, 2017]).
MNs are typically used in representing transitions of nodes (sometimes called
states), which are not necessarily irreversible.
Conditional Random Fields (CRF) are special instances of MNs which encode
conditional distributions. Given a set of observed variables X and target variables

Y , a CRF models a distribution based on X, i.e. P(Y |X). The distribution does
not consider cliques, which not only consider observable variables. They are
typically used for modeling sequential data, where the past inﬂuences present
and future decisions. Observed variables are utilized for detemining the outcome
of hidden state variables.
3.3
Probabilistic Relational Model
PGMs are graph-based structures that are useful to recognize independencies
between variables. Therefore, a compact representation and more eﬃcient com-
putations are enabled. Due to the possibility to simply interpret graphs, domain
experts and knowledge engineers can design PGMs straightforwardly. Despite the
advantages, a signiﬁcant drawback is the ﬁxed number of variables which have
to be known beforehand. Sometimes, though, it is desired to support varying
numbers of random variables. The aim of probabilistic relational models (PRM)
is to overcome limitations of logics as well as PGMs by using KR formalisms like
FOL and further involve uncertainty and inconsistency. Markov Logic Networks
(MLN) are the most widely used PRMs which combine the expressiveness of
FOL and probabilistic semantics of MN [Nyga, 2017].
Bayesian Logic Networks can be used as well but are not further discussed
in the following section. For more information, please refer to [Jain et al., 2011].
Markov Logic Network A MLN comprises a set of FOL formulas Fi and
real-valued weights wi with regard to the i-th formula, each written as ⟨Fi, wi⟩.
wi determines the correctness of a formula: Large weights denote important
formulae, small weights imply less relevant formulae. Unlike in FOL, most MLNs
contain typed predicate arguments, i.e., all arguments of a predicate are bound
to a set of values whereas in FOL predicate arguments are in one universal set
[Nyga, 2017].
Figure 4 shows an exemplary MLN. If there is a human "Ryan" owning dog
"Wilfred" it follows that Owns(Ryan, Wilfred), Human(Ryan) and Pet(Wilfred).
[Paulius and Sun, 2018]. The simplicity of MLN makes them quite general and
powerful yet intuitive regarding representation languages for uncertain knowl-
edge [Nyga, 2017].
3.4
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
By means of probabilistic models, it is possible to describe scenarios including
uncertainty, which is getting closer to the real-world scenario than, e.g., deter-
ministic models. One of the goals in TS is not only to represent the world as it
is but to even act in the world like, e.g., a human would.
Therefore, it is desirable to use the concept of machine learning to represent
knowledge and furthermore allow TS to learn from knowledge that is already
available [Paulius and Sun, 2018].

Fig. 4: Exemplary Markov Logic Network representing the FOL statement that
a human H can own a pet D (∀H ∀D Owns(H, D) →Human(H) ↔Pet(D))
(based on [Paulius and Sun, 2018])
This section introduces the concept of Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (NN), which
are mostly used in research, following mainly [Floreano and Mattiussi, 2008]
Inspired by biology, NNs attempt to capture the behavioral and adaptive
features of biological nervous systems in computational models. It consists of
several interconnected units whereas input units receive information from the
environment, output units aﬀect the environment, and hidden units communi-
cate only within the network. A diﬀerent view on NN is to look at the layers of
a NN, whereas one layer consists of one or more units. Each unit implements an
operation that gets active if the total incoming signal is larger then its threshold.
After the activation of a unit a signal is sent to all units to which the activated
unit is connected. The connection between the units multiplies the signal by a
signed weight. The result of a NN to an incoming signal from the environment de-
pends on the architecture and the connection strengths within it. Figure 5 shows
an exemplary NN including one hidden layer, which is not fully connected (all
units between two layers are connected). It should be clear that the knowledge
within the network is distributed across the NNs connections.
Fig. 5:
Exemplary
Neural
Network
with
one
hidden
layer
(based
on
[Floreano and Mattiussi, 2008])

NN learn by modiﬁcation of weights when presented with stimulation from
the environment. Usually, learning requires several repeated presentations of the
set of input patterns. There are several types of learning rules, each displaying
speciﬁc functionalities and are applicable to speciﬁc architectures. Typically, all
synaptic connections within the NN change according to the same learning rule.
Characteristics of NNs are:
• Robustness: to various types of signal degradation, such as input noise or
malfunctioning of connection.
• Flexibility: NNs can be applied to several types of problems. However, not
every type of NN can be applied to any type of problem.
• Generalization: A trained NN can provide a correct response to a not yet
used input pattern, which is similar to the training data. The ability of the
network to generalize the response to a new pattern depends on the extent
to which the new pattern can be described by the learned invariant features.
This characteristic of NNs is useful since at times it is diﬃcult to model all
possible situations a system may be exposed to.
• Content-based retrieval: NNs retrieve memories by matching contents
and can do so even when the input patterns are incomplete or corrupted
by noise. More familiar patterns are recognized faster than items that are
diﬀerent or seen less frequently.
Convolutional Neural Networks Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
were developed to drastically reduce the number of variables to train by us-
ing weight sharing. Thereby, CNNs are more eﬀective compared to densely con-
nected NNs. CNNs are easy to implement in spite of the uncertainty due to
the number of free parameters. In particular, learning concepts from data of
diﬀerent types and modalities in robotics displays a promising application area
[Paulius and Sun, 2018].
Deep Learning Deep neural networks are often utilized as feature detectors
or classiﬁers. By storing them, they can be reused to, e.g., detect aﬀordances
(cf. Sect. 4). With a properly trained network, a technical system can even de-
tect such details for unknown objects, which is made possible through extensive
training. [Paulius and Sun, 2018]
Also, a combination of both, namely a Deep Convolutional Neural Network
(D-CNN), is possible.
However, one major drawback of utilizing NNs is the requirement of much
training data. For example, in image recognition thousands of images are re-
quired to learn or detect objects in scenes. Additionally, it can be challenging to
interpret and explain how each layer segregates data [Paulius and Sun, 2018].
3.5
Semantic Graphs
Semantic graphs (SG) are another subset of graphs whose nodes and edges de-
scribe semantic concepts and details between entities, as observed in demon-

strations. For example, spatial concepts can be described with nodes being ob-
jects. Edges between them denote similarities regarding position. In association
with SG, it is interesting to mention the term ontology and its connection to
SG. An ontology is a "formal description of knowledge as a set of concepts
within a domain and the relationships that hold between them" [Petkova, 2018]
(cf. Sect.3.1). Ontologies provide shareable and reusable KR but also enable
adding new knowledge about the domain. Once relationships between concepts
are provided in an ontology, automated reasoning about data is enabled and
beyond that such reasoning can be implemented with SGs. In other words, SGs
use ontologies as their semantic schemata. [Petkova, 2018]
This chapter will be focusing on Petri Nets (PN) but there are many more
SGs (including semantic event chains (SEC) [Aksoy et al., 2011], parse graphs
[Zhu et al., 2015], etc.) available, which will not be examined any further.
3.6
Petri Nets
This section introduces the concept of PNs following [Wang, 2007] unless other-
wise speciﬁed. PN combine a well-deﬁned mathematical theory with a graphical
representation of the dynamic behavior of systems. They have been used to model
event-driven systems such as computer networks, communication systems, etc.
A PN is a bipartite directed graph and consists of four objects: places, transi-
tions, directed arcs and tokens. Directed arcs connect places to transitions or
transitions to places.
Formally, a PN is a ﬁve-tuple N = (P, T, I, O, M0) with the characteristics
shown on the left side beneath. On the right side, the formal characteristics are
applied to the simple PN shown in Fig. 6 (a).
(1) P = {p1, ..., pm} is a ﬁnite set of places.
(2) T = {t1, ...tm} is a ﬁnite set of transitions.
(3) I : T × P →N is an input matrix that
speciﬁes directed arcs from places to
transitions.
(4) O : T × P →N is an output matrix that
speciﬁes directed arcs from transitions to
places.
(5) M0 : P →N is the initial marking.
(1) P = {p1, p2, p3, p4}
(2) T = {t1, t2, t3}
(3) I =


2 0 0 0
0 1 0 0
0 0 1 0


(4) O =


0 2 1 0
0 0 0 1
0 0 0 1


(5) M0 = (2 0 0 0)T .
Enabling Rule A transition t is enabled if each input place p of t contains at
least the number of tokens equal to the weight of the directed arc connecting p
to t, i.e., M(p) ≥I(t, p) for all p in P.
Firing Rule Only enabled transitions can ﬁre. The ﬁring of an enabled tran-
sition t removes the number of tokens equal to I(t, p) from each input place p,

and deposits in each output place p the number of tokens equal to O(t, p). The
new marking is: M ′(p) = M(p) −I(t, p) + O(t, p) for all p in P.
(a) Simple Petri Net with four places
p1, p2, p3, p4 and transitions t1, t2, t3
(b) Firing of transition t1
Fig. 6: Exemplary Petri Net and how it works (based on [Wang, 2007])
Consider again the simple PN shown in Figure 6 (a). Under initial marking
M0 only t1 is enabled. According to the ﬁring rule, ﬁring of t1 results in a new
marking M1 = (0 2 1 0)T . The new token distribution of this PN is shown in
Figure 6 (b).
Sequential execution, conﬂicts, concurrency, synchronization, mutually exlu-
siveness, priorities and resource constraints can be modeled eﬀectively with PN.
Important properties of a PN are:
• Reachability:
Marking Mj is said to be reachable from a marking Mi if
there exists a sequence of transition ﬁrings that transforms Mi to Mj. It is
immediately reachable if Mi directly results in Mj.
• Safeness: Place p is said to be k-bounded if the number of tokens in p is
always less than or equal to k (k is a non-negative integer number) for every
marking M reachable from the initial marking M0, i.e., M ∈R(M0). It is
safe if it is 1-bounded. A Petri net N = (P, T, I, O, M0) is k-bounded (safe)
if each place in P is k-bounded (safe). It is unbounded if k is inﬁnitely large.
• Liveness: According to [Murata, 1989], a transition t in a PN is:
(1) L0-live / dead: there is no ﬁring sequence in L(M0) in which t can ﬁre.
(2) L1-live / potentially ﬁrable: t can be ﬁred at least once in some ﬁring
sequence in L(M0).
(3) L2-live: t can be ﬁred at least k times in some ﬁring sequence in L(M0)
given any positive integer k.
(4) L3-live: t can be ﬁred inﬁnitely often in some ﬁring sequence in L(M0).
(5) L4-live / or live: t is L1-live in every marking in R(M0).
With regard to representing knowledge, PNs are often used to display pro-
cesses or sequences of actions [Paulius and Sun, 2018].

Colored Petri Nets A signiﬁcant disadvantage of simple PN is the production
of large and unstructured speciﬁcations for the systems being modeled. To tackle
the issue, high-level PNs were developed to allow compact system representations
with, e.g., Colored Petri Net (CPN). Each token in a CPN has a color which
indicates the identity of the token and each place and transition has attached a
set of colors. With respect to a color, transitions can ﬁre. By ﬁring, tokens are
deleted from the input places and therefore added to output places as in original
PN. In contrast to this, there is a dependency between the color of the transition
ﬁring and the token. A transition ﬁring may change the color.
This type of PN can be used for, e.g., generating colored petri net plans
(PNP), which are a formal model for representing and executing multi-robot
plans [Steccanella et al., 2016].
Timed Petri Nets Since time is a central component in dynamic systems and
often one does not want to neglect the time component when modeling it, the
usage of time variables or constraints can be beneﬁcial. PNs can as well contain
such time variables. This subgroup of PN is then called a timed petri net (TPN).
The deﬁnition of a TPN consists of three speciﬁcations:
• topological structure: same as in standard PN
• labeling of the structure: assigning numerical values to one or more of the
following objects: transitions, places and arcs connecting places and transi-
tions
• ﬁring rules: depend on the PN and its time variables
[Chao and L Thomaz, 2012] showed that TPN can be used for, e.g., multi-
modal interaction modeling.
Deterministic and stochastic timed PNs are the most known of this type and
will be explained in the next sections.
Deterministic Timed Petri Nets A deterministic timed Petri Net (DTPN)
is a six-tuple (P, T, I, O, M0, τ) where (P, T, I, O, M0) is a PN, τ : T →R+ is a
function associating transitions with deterministic time delays.
A transition ti in a DPTN can ﬁre at a time τ iﬀ:
• for any input place p, there is a number of tokens equal to the weight of
the directed arc connecting p to ti in the input place continuously for time
interval [τ −τi, τ], with τi being the associated ﬁring time of transition ti.
• After transition ﬁring, each of its output places p receive the number of
tokens equal to the weight of the directed arc connecting ti to p at time τ.
Stochastic Timed Petri Nets Stochastic timed Petri nets (STPN) are PN
where stoachstic ﬁring times are linked to transitions. Mainly, it builds a stochas-
tic process. They are a graphical model and oﬀer great convenience to a modeler
in arriving at a credible, high-level model of a system. The most straightforward

choice for the individual distributions of transition ﬁring times is the negative
exponential distribution. Due to the memoryless property of this distribution,
the stochastic process is a continuous time-homogeneous Markov chain. Its state
space is in one to one correspondences with marking in R(M0), set of all reach-
able markings.
4
Applications of Knowledge Representation Techniques
in Robotics
[Paulius and Sun, 2018] investigated diﬀerent application scenarios in robotics
and scanned several research articles on how knowledge was represented there.
This section sums up their realizations and displays three diﬀerent application
scenarios from robotics and how the KR from Section 3 can be used to solve
the given problems. As an additional contribution, the application scenarios are
classiﬁed into problem domains from Section 2 according to the applications
found in the given research articles and therefore can be assigned to Fig. 1.
4.1
Activity Learning
To guide a learning process in robotics, researchers often refer to the concept
of aﬀordance learning. Aﬀordance is speciﬁed as "qualities or properties of an
object that deﬁne its possible uses or make clear how it can or should be used"
[Merriam-Webster, 2018]. They are useful for determining likely actions and ef-
fects attributed to a set of tools or objects available to a robot for manipulation.
Aﬀordance learning focuses on "how objects respond to actions which act upon
them" [Paulius and Sun, 2018]. An advantage of this learning method upon re-
inforcement learning (get rewarded for right actions; punished for wrong actions)
[Sutton and Barto, 2018] is the generation of a deeper understanding.
Categorization in Problem Domains: reasoning, learning, knowledge
Using Bayesian Networks to represent Aﬀordances Aﬀordances can be
represented with probabilistic models like BN or MN.
[Moldovan et al., 2012] used LCG-BNs for representing the continuous state
of objects as they respond to actions done upon them. Exceptional performance
was shown in predicting action-eﬀects.
[Sun et al., 2013] describe the likelihood of object interaction by setting up a
BN. This can be learned by means of human behavior observation. The produced
models were shown to improve the accuracy of other tasks in activity recognition
or object classiﬁcation and can be used to teach robots how to perform tasks
using paired objects.
[Jain and Inamura, 2013] applied BNs to learn about the eﬀects of actions on
objects by means of demonstrations with tools. Their primary objective was to
identify functional features, i.e., geometric features relevant to a tool’s function.
By means of inference with the BN, a prediction of tool eﬀects unknown to the
robot is possible.

Using Markov Networks to represent Aﬀordances
[Koppula et al., 2012] used MRFs for describing relationships between activi-
ties and objects within the scene. The purpose of the generated model was to
understand full-body activities occurring in videos that they successfully demon-
strated.
[Kjellström et al., 2011] used CRFs to perform both object classiﬁcation and
action recognition for hand manipulations. A good performance could be achieved
in classifying objects, actions occurring, and both simultaneously.
[Zhu et al., 2014] used a MLN as knowledge base for inferring object aﬀor-
dances in activities. Therefore, they collected information of the objects in the
form of features. Due to FOL statements, the network could be easily queried
about objects aﬀordances. They used them to predict a pose of a human while
performing tasks using particular objects.
Using Semantic Graphs to represent Aﬀordances
[Aksoy et al., 2011] created semantic graphs after segmentation. They focused on
understanding the relationship between objects and hands in the environment.
Also, they wanted to generalize graphs for representing activities and identify
future instances of these events. The encoding of objects is based on manipu-
lations only, which they store in matrices called semantic event chains (SEC).
Similar events can be recognized based on the SECs. A great advantage of this
work above others is that similarity even can be measured with diﬀerent objects,
orientations, hand positions, etc.
[Sridhar et al., 2008] separated scenes into blobs using segmentation as well.
Afterward, they clustered the blobs as a semantic graph based on their use in
videos for aﬀordance detection. The type of semantic graphs they used were
activity graphs, which are structures describing the spatial and temporal rela-
tionships in a single video.
[Zhu et al., 2015] learned aﬀordances by identifying probable usage of tools.
They use a spatial-temporal parse graph to store these concepts. Further informa-
tion about parse graphs can be found in [Xiong et al., 2016] and [Tu et al., 2013].
By using inference, further knowledge can be extracted.
Using Machine Learning Techniques to represent Aﬀordances Aside
from learning aﬀordances with graphical representations, researchers also use
machine learning methods for activity representations, e.g., Support Vector Ma-
chines (SVM) [Ugur et al., 2012].
4.2
Task Planning
In this section, diﬀerent approaches to map the higher-level knowledge to a
robot’s understanding in order to perform tasks are discussed. In terms of task
KR, the represented knowledge should include low-level features for a robot’s
understanding as well maintain a level such that it is interpretable by a human.
Any type of knowledge can be constrained to an ontology and therefore describe

the working space of the robot in a format that is also interpretable by humans.
As discussed in Sect. 3.6 SGs are most suitable for this kind of application
scenario.
Categorization in Problem Domains: planning
Using Semantic Graphs for Task Representations
[Galindo et al., 2008] provided a semantic map-based representation that inte-
grates causal knowledge as well as world knowledge. Causal knowledge describes
how actions aﬀect the state of the robot’s environment; world knowledge displays
what the robot knows about objects within the world. Their map uses DL for
combining factual knowledge about the environment, e.g., position or geometry
of objects, with general semantic knowledge about the domain.
[Ramirez-Amaro et al., 2017] developed a robot transfer learning system.
They created SGs such that it includes skills for executing kitchen tasks.
[Costelha and Lima, 2007,Costelha and Lima, 2012] used PNs for represent-
ing robot tasks. They chose PNs over, e.g., Finite State Automata, due to the po-
tential of representing concurrent system action and sharing of resources. With
regard to the structure of PNs, they ﬁltered out speciﬁc plans which can not
happen or should be avoided. As a result, they create PNPs which are mostly a
combination of ordinary actions and sensing actions using control operators.
4.3
Scene Understanding
In addition to robot learning in form of understanding and recognizing activities,
a lot of research has branched oﬀinto understanding the entire scene. Therefore,
an understanding of semantic concepts, e.g., location of objects, and spatial fea-
tures, e.g., orientation, is required.
Categorization in Problem Domains: knowledge, learning, communication
Using Deep Learning Techniques to represent Scene Understanding
[Lenz et al., 2013] utilized deep learning to identify grasping points on objects.
Their work showed that this approach can also be extended to objects which
have never been seen before, even while these objects may still be in a clutter.
[Levine et al., 2016] approached to learn grasps and to perfect hand-eye co-
ordination with the use of monocular camera images, a large number of robot
arms, and a D-CNN. Inputs of the D-CNN includes two images, namely one of
the current scene and the original setting.
[Yang et al., 2015] learned manipulation action plans by investigating videos
from the internet. Two CNNs were required to do so: The ﬁrst network recognizes
objects and grasping points. The second network generates actions regarding
robot manipulation.
Using Bayesian Networks to represent Scene Understanding
[Kollar et al., 2013] developed an interactive system such that a robot can inter-
pret commands and at the same time it is feasible to ﬁnd out what the robot

knows. The utilized probabilistic model understands natural language such that
the robot can interact with a human. This way, further concepts can be learned.
Using Semantic Graphs to represent Scene Understanding
[Bastianelli et al., 2013] developed a system for building a semantic map, includ-
ing world knowledge. A human can communicate with the robot and enforce
him to update his knowledge. They use the task of simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM) to obtain a 2D map of the environment.
4.4
Results
The main outcomes of Sect. 4 are as follows:
• It is striking that SGs are used to represent knowledge in all three scenarios.
This shows that they are universally applicable, with PN being one of them.
• Additionally, the example scenarios show that for each problem there are
many diﬀerent possible ways to represent knowledge. Sometimes the right
choice is being made with particular attention to details; sometimes it is
simply a design issue.
As mentioned in Sect. 2 ﬁnally a categorization of the diﬀerent used KR
techniques into problem domains in AI is performed. Therefore, the categories
of the diﬀerent application scenarios presented in Sect. 4 are used to assign the
KR techniques providing a solution for the scenario to the problem domains,
resulting in Fig. 1
It should be clear that this categorization only refers to the scientiﬁc works
presented in this article. Inevitably, there are more possible uses of the introduced
KRs as indicated in Fig. 1.
5
Conclusion and Outlook
This article presents diﬀerent possible KR techniques for usages in TS. There-
fore, a classiﬁcation of the various techniques into AI domains was performed.
Additionally, several application scenarios from the robotics area were presented
and realizations of it shown. Due to the large diversity of KR techniques, consid-
ering the information structure was shown to be necessary. Each of the presented
techniques is suitable for at least one kind of problem but can be inappropriate
in another scenario. The created taxonomy provides an assistance of when to use
each KR technique and aims to facilitate the choice of a right KR. Obviously,
this taxonomy only gives a rough overview and ﬁnding a good-enough KR is a
huge topic and not straightforward.
Promising approaches can be seen in storing information in clouds such that
each TS can gather this information through a network. Similar to this collabo-
rative knowledge, "learners’ joint activities to acquire or create new knowledge"
[IGI Global, 2017], could be an interesting view on KR. Either way, ﬁnding a
proper KR still will be a problem that has to be solved.

Acknowledgment
This work results from the project DeCoInt2, supported by the German Re-
search Foundation (DFG) within the priority program SPP 1835: "Kooperativ
interagierende Automobile", grant number SI 674/11-1.
