AttnMove: History Enhanced Trajectory Recovery via Attentional Network
Tong Xia1, Yunhan Qi1, Jie Feng1, Fengli Xu1, Funing Sun2, Diansheng Guo2, Yong Li1*
1Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology,
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University.
2Tencent Corporation.

Abstract
A considerable amount of mobility data has been accumu-
lated due to the proliferation of location-based service. Nev-
ertheless, compared with mobility data from transportation
systems like the GPS module in taxis, this kind of data is com-
monly sparse in terms of individual trajectories in the sense
that users do not access mobile services and contribute their
data all the time. Consequently, the sparsity inevitably weak-
ens the practical value of the data even it has a high user pen-
etration rate. To solve this problem, we propose a novel at-
tentional neural network-based model, named AttnMove, to
densify individual trajectories by recovering unobserved lo-
cations at a ﬁne-grained spatial-temporal resolution. To tackle
the challenges posed by sparsity, we design various intra-
and inter- trajectory attention mechanisms to better model
the mobility regularity of users and fully exploit the periodi-
cal pattern from long-term history. We evaluate our model on
two real-world datasets, and extensive results demonstrate the
performance gain compared with the state-of-the-art meth-
ods. This also shows that, by providing high-quality mobil-
ity data, our model can beneﬁt a variety of mobility-oriented
down-stream applications.
Introduction
Widely adopted location-based services have accumulated
large-scale human mobility data, which have great poten-
tial to beneﬁt a wide range of applications, from personal-
ized location recommendations to urban transportation plan-
ning (Zheng et al. 2014). Nevertheless, since users may not
allow the service provider to collect their locations contin-
uously, individual trajectory records in such data are ex-
tremely sparse and unevenly distributed in time, which in-
evitably harms the performance of downstream applications,
even when it has a notable user penetration rate and covers
a long period of time (Gao et al. 2019). For example, with
a limited number of trajectory records per day, it is difﬁ-
cult to predict an individual’s next location and recommend
proper points-of-interests (Xi et al. 2019). As for collec-
tive mobility behaviour, because personal location records
are missing for most of the time, it is also hard to produce
exact estimates of hourly crowd ﬂow in cities for emergency
*This is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
response (Li, Li, and Li 2013). Therefore, it is of great im-
portance to rebuild individual trajectories at a ﬁne-grained
spatial-temporal granularity by imputing missing or unob-
served locations.
One commonest solution to this problem is to impute
the missing value by treating individual trajectories as
two-dimensional time series with latitude and longitude at
each timestamp
(Alwan and Roberts 1988; Moritz and
Bartz-Beielstein 2017). As such, smoothing ﬁlters (Alwan
and Roberts 1988; Moritz and Bartz-Beielstein 2017) and
LSTM-based models (Cao et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019a)
have been proposed. Their performance is acceptable when
only a small percentage of locations are missing due to lim-
ited movement during a short time span. However, in highly
sparse scenarios, their performance degrades signiﬁcantly,
since they fail to effectively model complex mobility regu-
larity. Another line of study is to model users’ transition reg-
ularity among different locations, so as to generate the miss-
ing locations according to the highest transition probability
from observed location (Liu et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2019a).
But this kind of strategy is still insufﬁcient in the sense that
the observed records are unevenly distributed in time in LBS
data, and thus transition regularity is incapable of inferring
those locations which are continuously unobserved.
Luckily, human mobility has some intrinsic and natu-
ral characteristics like periodicity and repeatability, which
can help to better rebuild the trajectory (Gonzalez, Hidalgo,
and Barabasi 2008; Schneider et al. 2013; Cho, Myers, and
Leskovec 2011). In this regard, a promising direction is to
leverage long-term mobility history, i.e., mobility records
prior to the targeted trajectory to be recovered, considering
both that daily movements are spatially and temporally peri-
odic, and that collecting long-term data is quite achievable in
LBS. In addition, previous work has also shown that explic-
itly utilizing historical trajectory can help with next location
prediction (Feng et al. 2018), which is similar to our task. All
of this has inspired us to design a history enhanced recovery
model.
However, trajectory recovery is still challenging for the
following reasons: ﬁrst of all, the high sparsity of both tar-
geted day and historical trajectories hinder us from infer-
ring the missing locations by spatial-temporal constraints,
i.e., how far a user can move in the unobserved periods.
Because of the high uncertainty between two consecutive
arXiv:2101.00646v1  [cs.LG]  3 Jan 2021

records in a sparse trajectory, a framework which can better
model the mobility pattern and reduce the number of poten-
tially visited locations is needed. The second is how to dis-
till periodical features from huge historical data effectively,
considering that real-world historical data includes a great
deal of noise. Researchers have proposed detecting the lo-
cations of the home and the workplace from historical tra-
jectories, in order to build the basic periodic pattern. This is
straightforward but insufﬁcient because other locations are
neglected (Chen et al. 2019). Another way is to directly ex-
ploit the most frequently visited location at the targeted time
slot from multiple historical trajectories as imputation (Liu
et al. 2016). However, historically more popular locations
may not be the ones which are missing on any targeted day
because mobility is inﬂuenced by many factors and thus
some locations can only be visited occasionally. Thus, de-
ciding how well to rely on history is the third challenge.
Keeping the above challenges in mind, we aim to pro-
pose a novel attentional neural network-based mobility re-
covery model named AttnMove, which is dedicated to han-
dling sparsity and exploiting long-term history. For clarity,
we deﬁne the targeted day’s trajectory as the current trajec-
tory and any trajectories before the targeted day as historical
trajectories. The proposed AttnMove model can be broken
down into three key components, which address the main
challenges accordingly. Firstly, to capture the mobility pat-
tern and indicate the most likely visited areas for the missing
records, we design a current processor with intra-trajectory
attention mechanism to initially ﬁll in the blanks of the cur-
rent trajectory. We choose attention mechanism rather than
RNN structure for the reason that sparse trajectories have
few sequential characteristics and all the observed locations
should be considered equally regardless of the visited order.
For example, a user’s locations at 6 AM, 9 AM, 3 PM and 6
PM are observed: to recover the location at 9 PM, we should
give priority to the location at 6 AM and the adjacent area
(i.e., home area) instead of at 6 PM (i.e., commuting time).
For the second challenge, we design a history processor with
another intra-trajectory attention to distill periodical fea-
tures from multiple historical trajectories. By aggregating,
more information from the long-term history can be lever-
aged for recovery. Finally, to fuse the features from current
and history processors and generate missing locations, we
propose a trajectory recovery module with inter-trajectory
attention and location generation attention mechanisms. To
be speciﬁc, the former mechanism yields attention weights
to select locations from history based on current mobility
states, and the later further considers spatial-temporal con-
straints from observed locations to better rebuild the trajec-
tory.
Overall, our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We study the problem of rebuilding individual trajecto-
ries with a ﬁne-grained spatial-temporal granularity from
sparse mobility data by explicitly exploiting long-term
history, which brings high-quality mobility data to facili-
tate a wide range of down-stream applications.
• We propose a novel attentional neural network model At-
tnMove for missing location recovery, behind which the
key idea is to utilize attention mechanism to model mobil-
ity regularities and extract periodical patterns from mul-
tiply trajectories of different days, and then fuse them to
rebuild the trajectories.
• We conduct extensive experiments on two real-life mobil-
ity datasets. Results show that our AttnMove model sig-
niﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in terms
of improving recovery accuracy by 4.0%∼7.6%1.
Preliminaries
In this section, we introduce the deﬁnition and notations we
use in this paper.
Deﬁnition 1 (Trajectory). We deﬁne a trajectory as a user’s
time-ordered location sequence in one day. Let Tn
u : ln,1
u
→
ln,2
u ... →ln,t
u ... →ln,T
u
denote user u’s n-th day’s trajec-
tory, where ln,t
u
is the location of t-th time slot for a given
time interval (e.g., every 10 minutes). Note that if the lo-
cation of time slot t is unobserved, ln,t
u
is denoted by null,
named missing location.
Deﬁnition 2 (Current and Historical Trajectory). Give a
targeted day n and user u’s trajectory Tn
u, we deﬁne Tn
u
as the user’s current trajectory, and the historical trajec-
tories are deﬁned as u’s trajectories in the past days, i.e.,
{T1
u, T2
u, ..., Tn−1
u
}.
When most of the locations in current day’s trajectory Tn
u
are missing, exploiting history is beneﬁcial for the recovery.
For this reason, we are motivated to formulate the investi-
gated problem as:
Problem (History Enhanced Trajectory Recovery). Given
user u’s trajectory Tn
u with the historical trajectories
{T1
u, T2
u, ..., Tn−1
u
}, recover the missing locations, i.e., ∀null
in Tn
u, to rebuild the current day’s complete trajectory.
Figure 1: Main architecture of the proposed AttnMove
model, where current and historical trajectories are ﬁrst pro-
cessed separately, and then are fused to generate locations
for missing time slots.
1Codes are available in https://github.com/XTxiatong/AttnMove

AttnMove: Model Design
To solve the above deﬁned problem, we devise a novel
model AttnMove, which ﬁrst processes historical and cur-
rent day’s trajectories separately, and then integrates their
features to comprehensively determine the location to be
recovered. The architecture of AttnMove is illustrated in
Fig. 1. In our AttnMove, to projects sparse location and
time representations into dense vectors which are more ex-
pressive and computable, a trajectory embedding module is
designed as a pre-requisite component for other modules.
Then, in order to extract periodical patterns, multiply histor-
ical trajectories are feed into a history processor to be aggre-
gated. Paralleled with history processor is a current proces-
sor. We design it to enhance spatial-temporal dependence
to better model mobility regularities. Finally, to fuse his-
torical and current trajectories from the above modules and
generate locations as recovery, a trajectory recovery module
is proposed as the ﬁnally component. In the following, we
elaborate on the details of those four modules.
Trajectory Embedding Module
To represent the spatial-temporal dependency, we jointly
embed the time and location into dense representations as
the input of other modules. Speciﬁcally, for each location
l ∈L including the missing one null, we set up a trainable
embedding vector el ∈Rd. All location embeddings are de-
noted as a matrix El ∈R|L+1|×d. As for mobility mod-
eling, temporal information is also important, therefore we
also set up embeddings for time slots. Following (Vaswani
et al. 2017), for each time slot t, we generate its embedding
as follows,
et(2i) = sin(t/100002i/d),
et(2i + 1) = cos(t/100002i/d),
(1)
where i denotes the i-th dimension. The time embedding
vectors have the same dimension d with location embedding.
Finally, for each time slot t, we sum the time and location
embedding vectors into a single one, denoted by en,t
u
∈Rd
as follows,
en,t
u
= el + et,
(2)
which also beneﬁts the follow-up computation as a lower
dimensional vector than the original one-hot ones.
History Processor
When exploiting the historical trajectory, information pro-
vided by a single historical trajectory with one day’s ob-
served locations is insufﬁcient to capture periodical char-
acters as each day’s records are sparse. To utilize multiple
trajectories jointly, we design a history aggregator as fol-
lows,
Tp
u = T1
u ⊕T2
u · · · ⊕Tn−1
u
,
(3)
where ⊕means to extract the location with highest visit-
ing frequency in the corresponding time slot. Then, Tp
u is
embedded to ep
u with each time slot represented by ep,t
u
ac-
cording to (2). As such, Tp
u is less sparse than any single
historical trajectory. However, as it is possible that user u
did not generate any record at a certain time slot previously,
Figure 2: The architecture of proposed trajectory attention
mechanisms under one head, where the new representation
is a combination of embeddings of value time slots condi-
tioned on attention weights α(h)
t,k from query and key time
slots. Note that superscript p denotes history while n is for
the current trajectory.
locations can still be missing after aggregating. Therefore,
we further propose the following mechanism to inﬁll Tp
u:
Historical Intra-trajectory Attention. Intuitively, the miss-
ing location can be identiﬁed by its time interval and dis-
tance to other observed locations. Take a simple example,
lp,4
u
is most likely in the geo-center of lp,3
u
and lp,5
u . In the
embedding space, this can be expressed by ep,4
u
= 0.5ep,3
u +
0.5ep,5
u . However, the actual scenario would be much more
complex than this as people do not move uniformly. There-
fore, we use a multi-head attentional network to model the
spatial-temporal relation among trajectory points. Speciﬁ-
cally, we deﬁne the correlation between time slot t and k
under head h as follows,
α(h)
t,k =
exp(φ(h)(ep,t
u , ep,k
u ))
PT
g=1 exp(φ(h)(ep,t
u , ep,k
u ))
,
(4)
φ(h)(ep,t
u , ep,k
u ) = ⟨W 1(h)
Q
ep,t
u , W 1(h)
K
ep,k
u ⟩,
(5)
where W 1(h)
Q
, W 1(h)
K
∈Rd′×d are transformation matrices
and ⟨, ⟩is the inner product function. Next, we generate the
representation of time slot t under each head via combining
all locations in other time slots guided by coefﬁcient α(h)
t,k :
ep,t(h)
u
=
T
X
k=1
α(h)
t,k (W 1(h)
V
ep,k
u ),
(6)
where W 1(h)
V
∈Rd′×d is also a transformation matrix. Fur-
thermore, we make use of different combinations which
models different spatial-temporal dependence and collect
them as follows,
ep,t
u
= ep,t(1)
u
∥ep,t(2)
u
∥· · · ∥ep,t(H)
u
,
(7)
where ∥is the concatenation operator, and H is the number
of total heads. To preserve the representation of raw loca-
tions, we add a standard residual connections in the network.
Formally,
ep,t
u
= ReLU(ep,t
u + W 1ep,t
u ),
(8)

where W 1 ∈Rd′H×d is the projection matrix in case of
dimension mismatching, and ReLU(z) = max(0, z) is non-
linear activation function.
With the historical intra-trajectory attention layer, the rep-
resentation of history trajectory ep
u is updated into a more
expressive form ep
u, which is shown in Fig. 2. We can stack
multiple such layers with the output of the previous layer as
the input of the next one. By doing this, we can extract more
complex mobility features from historical trajectories.
Current Processor
When recovering the trajectory for user u, it is necessary
to consider the locations visited before and after the miss-
ing time slots, which enclosure the geographical area of the
missing locations. Since locations can be missed for several
consecutive time slots, the spatial constraint is weak. There-
fore, we conduct intra-trajectory attention on the current tra-
jectory Tn
u to capture the current day’s mobility pattern:
Current Intra-trajectory Attention. The ﬁrst step is to em-
bed Tn
u into a dense representation en
u via the aforemen-
tioned mobility embedding module. Next, we conduct an at-
tention mechanism on en
u, which has same network structure
as given in (4)-(8) with input history pattern ep
u replaced by
current trajectory representation en
u. We denote the relevant
projection matrices as W 2
Q, W 2
V , W 2
K, W 2, respectively. We
also stack this layer for multiple times to fully capture the
spatial-temporal correlation. Then, after updating, we obtain
an enhanced current trajectory represented by en,t
u .
Trajectory Recovery Module
After extracting the historical and current features, the prob-
lem is how much to depend on the interpolation via cur-
rent observed locations or rely on the candidates generated
from historical trajectories. Intuitively, a good solution is to
compare the current mobility status with historical one, and
combine the history information with current interpolation
results according to their similarity. To achieve this, we pro-
pose the follow mechanism:
Inter-trajectory Attention. We deﬁne the similarity of cur-
rent and historical trajectory denoted by α as the correlation
between the enhanced representation in corresponding time
slots, i.e., between en,t
u
and ep,k
u (∀t, k = 1, 2, ..., |T|). Then
we combine history candidates by the similarity α, followed
by a residential connection to remain the raw interpolation
results. Finally, the fused trajectory ˇen
u is generated from en,t
u
and ep,k
u , which can be expressed as follows,
α(h)
t,k =
exp(φ(h)(en,t
u , ep,k
u ))
PT
g=1 exp(φ(h)(en,t
u , ep,g
u ))
,
(9)
φ(h)(en,t
u , ep,k
u ) = ⟨W 3(h)
Q
en,t
u , W 3(h)
K
ep,k
u ⟩,
(10)
ep,t(h)
u
=
T
X
k=1
α(h)
t,k (W 3(h)
v
ep,k
u ),
(11)
ep,t
u
= ep,t(1)
u
∥ep,t(2)
u
∥· · · ∥ep,t(H)
u
,
(12)
ˇen,t
u
= ReLU(ep,t
u + W 3en,t
u ),
(13)
where W 3(h)
Q
, W 3(h)
K
, W 3(h)
V
, W 3 are the projection matri-
ces.
With the fused trajectory that contains both history mo-
bility information and current spatial-temporal dependence,
we are ready to recovery the missing location. We use the
following mechanism to generate the representation of the
missing location, and then use it to identify the speciﬁc lo-
cation.
Location Generation Attention. To generate the ﬁnal rep-
resentation denoted by ˆen,t
u , we deﬁne a temporal similarity
among the current trajectory represented by en
u and the fused
trajectory represented by ˇen,t
u
as α, which can be derived by
(9)-(10) with en,t
u
and ep,k
u
replaced by ˇen,t
u
and en,t
u , respec-
tively. Then, ˆen,t
u
for time slot t is a combination of ˇen,t
u
ac-
cording to α, which is the same as (11)-(13). The projection
matrices are denoted by W 4
Q, W 4
V , W 4
K, W 4, respectively.
Once we obtain ˆen,t
u , we are able to compute the probabil-
ity that user u visits location l at time slot t as follows,
P n,t
u (l) =
⟨ˆen,t
u , el⟩
P
k∈L⟨ˆen,t
u , ek⟩
,
(14)
where ⟨, ⟩is the inner product function, and P n,t
u
∈R|L| de-
notes the normalized probabilities of all location visited at
time slot t. In practice, the location with maximum proba-
bility is identiﬁed as the missing location.
Training
Overall, the parameters of AttnMove include projection ma-
trices and location embedding matrix, denoted by θ =
{El, W i
Q, W i
V , W i
K, W i, i = 1, 2, 3, 4}. To train the model,
we use cross entropy as the loss function:
L(θ) = −
X
u∈U
X
n∈N
X
t∈TM
⟨yn,t
u , log(P n,t
u )⟩+ λ∥θ∥2, (15)
where ⟨, ⟩is the inner product, yn,t
u
is the one-hot representa-
tion of user u’s location in n-th day’s t-th time slot, TM de-
notes the missing time slots, and λ is a parameter to control
the power of regularization. Training algorithm is illustrated
in Algorithm 1, and the process is done through stochas-
tic gradient descent over shufﬂed mini-batches across Adam
optimizer (Kingma and Ba 2014). In addition, our model is
implemented by Python and Tensorﬂow (Abadi et al. 2016).
We train our model on a linux server with a TITAN Xp GPU

Performance Evaluation
Datasets
• Tencent2: This data is collected from the most popular so-
cial network and location-based service vendor Tencent in
Beijing, China from June 1st∼30th, 2018. It records the
GPS location of users whenever they request the localiza-
tion service in the applications.
• Geolife3: This open data is collected from Microsoft Re-
search Asia Geolife project by 182 users from April 2007
2https://lbs.qq.com/
3https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/geolife-
building-social-networks-using-human-location-history/

Algorithm 1: Training Algorithm for AttnMove
Input: Trajectory sets {T1, T2, ..., TU};
Output: Trained Model θ.
//construct training instances: D ←−∅
for u ∈{u1, ..., U} do
for n ∈{1, 2, ..., N} do
Put a training instance (u, n, TM) into D
// Train the model: initialize the parameters θ
for i ∈{1, 2, ..., EPOCH} do
Select one batch Db from D;
Update θ by minimizing the objective L(θ) with
Db;
Stop training when criteria is met;
Output trained model θ
to August 2012 over all the world. Each trajectory is rep-
resented by a sequence of time-stamped points, contain-
ing longitude and altitude (Zheng et al. 2010).
Table 1: Basic statistics of mobility datasets.
Dataset
City
Duration
#Users
#Traj.
#Distinctive Loc.
Tencent
Beijing
1 month
4265
39,422
8,998
Geolife
Beijing
5 years
40
896
3,439
Pre-processing: To represent the location, we crawl the
road network of Beijing from online map2, and divide the
area into 10,655 blocks. Each blocks is treated as a distinc-
tive location with the size of 0.265 km2 on average. Follow-
ing (Chen et al. 2019), we set time interval as 30 minutes
for both two datasets. For model training and testing, we ﬁl-
ter out the trajectories with less than 34 time slots (i.e., 70%
of one day) and the users with less than 5 day’s trajectories
for Tencent, and ﬁlter out the trajectories with less than 12
time slots and the users with less than 5 day’s trajectories for
Geolife. The ﬁnal detailed statics are summarized in Table 1.
Baselines
We compare our AttnMove with several representative base-
lines. Among them, the ﬁrst four are directly based on our
knowledge about human mobility regularity and the last four
are the state-of-the-art deep learning models which can ex-
tract more complex mobility features:
• Top (Liu et al. 2016): It is a simple counting-based
method. The most popular locations in the training set are
used as recovery for each user.
• History (Li et al. 2019): In this method, the most fre-
quently visited locations of each time slot in historical
trajectories are used for recovery.
• Linear (Hoteit et al. 2014): This is also a rule-based
method. It recovers the locations by assuming that users
are moving straightly and uniformly.
• RF (Li et al. 2019): RF is a feature-based machine learn-
ing method. Entropy and radius of each trajectory, the
missing time slot, the location before and after the miss-
ing time slot are extracted as features to train a random
forest classiﬁer for recovery.
• LSTM (Liu et al. 2016): It models the forward sequential
transitions of mobility by recurrent neural network, and
use the prediction for next time slot for recovery.
• BiLSTM (Zhao et al. 2018): It extends LSTM by bi-
directional RNN to consider the spatial-temporal con-
straints given by all observed locations.
• DeepMove (Feng et al. 2018): Besides modeling sequen-
tial transitions, DeepMove incorporates the historical tra-
jectories by attention mechanism for next location predic-
tion. We also use the prediction result for recovery.
• Bi-STDDP (Xi et al. 2019): This is the latest missing lo-
cation recovery method, which jointly models user pref-
erence and the spatial-temporal dependence given the two
locations visited before and after the targeted time slot to
identify the missing ones.
Apart from those baselines, to evaluate the effectiveness
of our designed mechanism to exploit history, we also com-
pare AttnMove with its simpliﬁed version AttnMove-H,
where history processor and inter-trajectory attention layer
are removed.
Experimental Settings
To evaluate the performance, we mask some time slots as
ground-truth to recover. Since about 20% locations are miss-
ing in the raw datasets on average, we randomly mask 30 and
10 time slots per day for Tencent and Geolife. We sort each
user’s trajectories by time, and take the ﬁrst 70% as the train-
ing set from the fourth day (to guarantee that each trajectory
has at least three days as history), the following 10% as the
validation set and the remaining 20% as the test set. Linear,
Top and History are individual models, while other models
are shared by the users in one dataset. The regularization
factor λ is set as 0.01.
We employ the widely used metrics Recall and Mean Av-
erage Precision (MAP) (Wang et al. 2019a; Liu et al. 2016).
Recall is 1 if the ground-truth location is recovered with
maximum probability; otherwise is 0. The ﬁnal Recall is the
average value over all instances. MAP is a global evalua-
tion for ranking tasks, so we use it to evaluate the quality
of the whole ranked lists including all locations. The larger
the value of those two metrics is, the better the performance
will be. We aslo make use of the metric of Distance, which
is the geographical distance between the center of recovered
location and the ground-truth. The smaller the Distance is,
the better the performance will be.
Experiment Results
Overall Performance
We report the overall performance
in Table 2 and have the following observations:
1) Rule-based models fail to achieve high accuracy with
Recall and MAP lower than 0.66 in Tencent and lower
than 0.39 in Geolife. Although intuitively, frequently vis-
ited locations, historically visited locations and moving con-
straints are helpful for recovery, simply utilizing them can-
not achieve favourable performance because these methods
cannot model complex mobility regularity.
2) RNN-based models are insufﬁcient but bidirectional
ones can reduce the Distance error. A plausible reason is

Table 2: Overall performance comparison. The best result in
each column is in bold, while the second is underlined.
Model
Tencent
Geolife
Recall
MAP
Dis.(m)
Recall
MAP
Dis.(m)
TOP
0.5879
0.6123
2530
0.2757
0.2879
5334
History
0.4724
0.4937
1613
0.2505
0.2648
5116
Linear
0.6234
0.6567
1145
0.3642
0.3889
2383
RF
0.4848
0.4912
8128
0.2551
0.2540
6144
LSTM
0.6084
0.6722
3759
0.2725
0.3314
5864
BiLSTM
0.7090
0.7805
1371
0.3471
0.4148
5097
DeepMove
0.7259
0.7872
1322
0.3391
0.4015
4912
Bi-STDDP
0.7037
0.7831
1168
0.3701
0.4510
4041
AttnMove-H
0.7358
0.7999
1083
0.3853
0.4501
4129
AttnMove
0.7646
0.8249
934
0.3982
0.4691
3886
spatial-temporal constraints from all the observed locations
is crucial instead of the sequential regularity for recovery. In
addition, our AttnMove achieves further performance gain
over the best RNN methods. It indicates the superiority of
attention mechanisms.
3) AttnMove outperforms all the baselines for all the
metrics except for Distance in Geolife. Speciﬁcally, Recall
and MAP of AttnMove outperforms the best baselines by
4.0%∼7.6%. Distance is also reduced by 20% in Tencent. It
is possible that Geolife is a small dataset for training, there-
fore Distance of AttnMove cannot outperform Linear. But
higher MAP of AttnMove shows that although the generated
location with the highest probability does not hit the ground-
truth, which leads to higher Distance, the correct location is
on the top of recovered locations list.
4) When comparing DeepMove with LSTM, and Attn-
Move with AttnMove-H, we can observe that history plays
its role in reducing the uncertainty and improving recovery
accuracy.
To conclude, our AttnMove model achieves preferable re-
sults compared with both rule-based and machine learning-
based methods. This justiﬁes our model’s effectiveness in
capturing mobility pattern and exploiting history, and there-
fore it is a powerful model to rebuild ﬁne-grained trajecto-
ries.
(a) Location embedding with
color denoting cluster.
(b) Attention weight.
Figure 3: Visualization results.
Visualization Analysis
Besides the above quantitative
analysis, we also make some visualization study. First, to
investigate whether our learned trajectory embedding can
learn the spatial correlation automatically, we cluster the re-
gions by using their embedding el as features via k-means
with Euclidean distance. Figure3 (a) shows their geographic
distribution with clustering results. We can observe that ad-
jacent locations generally share the same color indicating
they are also closed in the embedding space, demonstrating
that the spatial adjacent relation has been modeled. Second,
we visualize the attention weights of each head in each layer
for different users, and present the average attention weights
of all trajectories in the ﬁnal current intra-trajectory atten-
tion layer in Figure 3(b). Overall, the diagonal entries are
highlighted indicating that the target location more likely de-
pends on the locations of adjacent time slots. More impor-
tantly, the bright part in bottom-left corner indicates apart
from adjacent time, morning and night locations are highly
related as well. It demonstrate that our attentional network
can movement regularity and periodical characters simulta-
neously.
Ablation Analysis
We analyze the effects of each trajec-
tory attention mechanism. We create ablations by removing
them one by one, i.e., using the embedding of the corre-
sponding time slot directly instead of using a weighted com-
bination. We report the results in Table 3. As expected, At-
tnMove outperforms all the ablations, indicating each atten-
tion can improve recovery performance. Speciﬁcally, when
removing current intra-trajectory attention, the performance
declines most signiﬁcantly. This is because the attention can
effectively strengthen the spatial constraints for the missing
locations, without which even utilizing history, the improve-
ment is limited.
Table 3: Impact of attention mechanisms on Tencent dataset,
where δ denoted the performance decline.
Ablation
Recall(∆)
MAP(∆)
Dis.(∆)(m)
Historical intra-trajectory attention
0.7457(2.5%)
0.8074(2.1%)
986(6.3%)
Current intra-trajectory attention
0.7002(8.4%)
0.7793(5.6%)
1636(75.2%)
Inter-trajectory attention
0.7434(2.8%)
0.8119(1.6%)
1063(13.8%)
Location generation attention
0.7552(1.2%)
0.8152(1.2%)
962(3.0%)
Robustness Analysis
We also conduct experiments to
evaluate the robustness of AttnMove when applied in dif-
ferent scenarios. Firstly, we study the recovery performance
w.r.t missing ratio,i.e., the percentage of missing locations.
The results is presented in Table 4. As missing ratio rises
from 50% to almost 100%, it is more intractable to re-
cover correctly, while our model can maintain a signiﬁcant
gap (i.e., more than 3%) with the state-of-the-art baseline.
Second, we present the performance in different of a day
and of trajectories with a different number of locations vis-
ited. As we can observe from Figure 4, during the day time
when people are more likely to move or for these trajecto-
ries where numerous locations are visited, it is more difﬁcult
to recovery correctly and thus Recall declines. Nevertheless,
our Recall can always outperform baselines by more than
5%. Those results demonstrate the robustness of our pro-
posed model in different scenarios.
We ﬁnally investigate the sensitivity of dimension d, the
head number H, and the number of layers N, which de-
termine the representation ability of the model. Figure 5(a)
presents the performance on different embedding dimension

Table 4: Performance w.r.t missing ratios on Tencent dataset.
Missing Rate
60%-70%
70%-80%
80%-90%
90%-100%
Precentage
19.2%
30.2%
41.8%
8.8%
BiSTDDP
Recall
0.7637
0.7366
0.6636
0.6501
Distance(m)
755
1022
1358
1667
AttnMove
Recall
0.8064
0.7820
0.7465
0.6993
Distance(m)
651
848
1050
1294
(a) Recall v.s. Time
(b) Recall v.s. #location
Figure 4: Model performance in different contexts, where
the solid lines denote Recall and the shades show the distri-
bution.
values. We can observe that as the dimension increases, the
performance is gradually improved, and when it larger than
128, the performance becomes stable. This is why we select
embedding size as 128. Then, we conduct a grid research
for H and N. Figure 5(b) partly shows the results. We ﬁnd
that a larger number of layers general achieves better per-
formance while the impact of head is not signiﬁcant. Con-
sidering that more layers makes the model more expressive
but requires more computational cost, to make a compro-
mise between performance and efﬁciency, we ﬁnally ﬁx the
number of layer and head as 4 and 8, respectively.
Related Work
Trajectory Recovery. Recovering the missing value for
time series is an important problem, for which deep learn-
ing models have achieved promising performance (Luo et al.
2018). However, they are insufﬁciently precise to be applied
with mobility data due to their inability to model spatial-
temporal dependence and users’ historical behaviours. Apart
from these recovery methods, some works for mobility pre-
diction can also be adopted for recovery. Feng et al. (Feng
et al. 2018) incorporated the periodicity of mobility learned
from history with the location transition regularity modeled
by recurrent neural network (RNN) to predict the next lo-
cation. However, the performance declines because it can-
not model the spatial-temporal dependence from the sparse
trajectory. As such, models for mobility data recovery have
been particularly studied. Li et al. (Feng et al. 2018) used en-
tropy and radius such trajectory-speciﬁc features for spatial-
temporal dependence modeling, while it failed to exploit
history. By presenting a user’s long-term history as a ten-
sor with day-of-the-month, time-of-the-day, and location-
of-the-time three dimensions, a tensor factorization-based
method was proposed (Chen et al. 2019). However, for this
to work, it is required that the tensor is low-rank, and thus
cannot model the randomness and complexity of mobility.
Recently, Bi-STDDP was designed to represent users’ his-
tory by a vector and combine it the spatial-temporal correla-
tions for recovery (Xi et al. 2019). However, the expressive-
ness of the vector is limited as it is unable to reﬂect the dy-
(a) Embedding size
(b) #Head and layer
Figure 5: Key hyper-parameter tuning.
namic importance of history. Overall, both the general time
series recovery methods, trajectory prediction methods, and
the existing mobility data recovery methods are incapable
of tackling the instinctive challenges of the mobility recov-
ery problem. By contrast, we propose an attentional neu-
ral network-based model, which can better model spatial-
temporal dependence for sparse trajectory and exploit his-
tory more efﬁciently.
Attentional Neural Network. The recent development of
attention models has established new state-of-the-art bench-
marks in a wide range of applications. Attention is ﬁrst pro-
posed in the context of neural machine translation (Bah-
danau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) and has been proved effective
in a variety of tasks such as question answering (Sukhbaatar
et al. 2015), text summarization (Rush, Chopra, and We-
ston 2015), and recommender systems (He et al. 2018; Song
et al. 2019). Vaswani et al. (Vaswani et al. 2017) further
proposed multi-head self-attention, renewed as Transformer,
to model complicated dependencies between words for ma-
chine translation. It makes signiﬁcant progress in sequence
modeling, as it uses fully attention-based architecture, which
discards RNN but outperforms RNN-based models. Re-
searchers also showed consistent performance gains by in-
corporating attention with RNN for mobility modeling, such
as location prediction (Feng et al. 2018), and personalized
route recommendation (Wang et al. 2019b), where attention
can make up RNN’s limitation in capturing long-term tem-
poral dependence. Distinct from previous researchers, we
are the ﬁrst to adopt the fully attentional neural network,
Transformer alike, to tackle the mobility data recovery prob-
lem.
Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we proposed an attentional neural network-
based model AttnMove to recover user’s missing locations
at a ﬁne-grained spatial-temporal. To handle the sparsity, we
designed an intra-trajectory mechanism to better model the
mobility regularity. To make full use of history and distill
helpful periodic characters, we proposed to integrate rela-
tively long-term historical records. Finally, we also designed
an inter-trajectory mechanism to effectively fuse the mo-
bility regularity and the historical pattern. Extensive results
on real-worlds datasets demonstrate the superiority of Attn-
Move compared with the state-of-the-arts.
In the future, we plan to extend our framework by incor-
porating some features like the function of location or the
points of interest users visited to achieve semantic-aware tra-
jectory interpolation.
