TEXT2AVATAR: TEXT TO 3D HUMAN AVATAR GENERATION WITH CODEBOOK-DRIVEN
BODY CONTROLLABLE ATTRIBUTE
Chaoqun Gong1†, Yuqin Dai2†, Ronghui Li1, Achun Bao1, Jun Li2, Jian Yang2, Yachao Zhang1⋆, Xiu Li1⋆
1Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
2School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
ABSTRACT
Generating 3D human models directly from text helps reduce
the cost and time of character modeling. However, achiev-
ing multi-attribute controllable and realistic 3D human avatar
generation is still challenging due to feature coupling and the
scarcity of realistic 3D human avatar datasets. To address
these issues, we propose Text2Avatar, which can generate
realistic-style 3D avatars based on the coupled text prompts.
Text2Avatar leverages a discrete codebook as an intermedi-
ate feature to establish a connection between text and avatars,
enabling the disentanglement of features. Furthermore, to al-
leviate the scarcity of realistic style 3D human avatar data,
we utilize a pre-trained unconditional 3D human avatar gen-
eration model to obtain a large amount of 3D avatar pseudo
data, which allows Text2Avatar to achieve realistic style gen-
eration. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
can generate realistic 3D avatars from coupled textual data,
which is challenging for other existing methods in this field.
Index Terms— 3D Avatar, Decoupling Control, Cross-
modal Generation, Deep Learning
1. INTRODUCTION
3D human body modeling has wide-ranging application
prospects in film production, video games, human-machine
interaction, and content creation. Traditional 3D human body
modeling is a complex and costly process, which can take
thousands of hours to produce modeling products to meet
requirements. Consequently, the utilization of text prompts in
cross-modal 3D avatar generation frameworks has emerged
as a practical and accessible modeling method with lower
entry barriers.
There have been several instances [1, 2] which can gen-
erate reasonably matching 3D avatars using prompt words in
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

© 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission
from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
recent years. To achieve better controllability, some research
[3, 4] enables manipulating NeRF [5] using either a short text
prompt or an exemplar image. TeCH [6] achieves 2D-to-3D
human body reconstruction by using coupled text as assis-
tance. However, research focused on generating 3D human
bodies using prompt words solely is still scarce. Notably, to
the best of our knowledge, due to the absence of realistic-
style 3D datasets and generation resolution limitations, all of
the current text-to-3D avatar generators without additional in-
formation can only produce anime-style results.
Moreover, it is difficult to decouple the generator’s latent
space, therefore simultaneously satisfying multiple human at-
tributes in a single generated result is challenging.
Style-
Flow [7] enables decoupled face editing by modifying hu-
man face attributes through a reverse inference process. In-
terFaceGAN [8] achieves multi-attribute face control by alter-
ing the projection direction of the vectors in the subspace la-
tent space. However, existing research has primarily focused
on face editing, with limited work on human body decou-
pling editing due to the more complex spatial structure and
the scarcity of datasets,
In this paper, we propose a novel framework, named
Text2Avatar, which can generate 3D avatars from multi-
attribute prompts containing human clothing information.
Different from the generation of objects [9], the generation
of avatars focuses more on the rationality and controlla-
bility of body elements. Unlike [6], we only rely on tex-
tual prompts without the need for additional image inputs,
thereby possessing higher levels of difficulty and a broader
range of application prospects. To realize cross-modal gen-
eration, we proposed the Multi-Modal Encoder, which can
be used as a plugin to assist in unconditionally generat-
ing models for textual cross-modal tasks. Inspired by prior
works [10, 11, 12], we employ discrete attribute codes to ex-
press the 3D human body, realizing decoupled representation.
By using the existing cross-modal model CLIP(Contrastive
Language-Image Pre-Training) [13], which provides a paired
semantic-consistent text-image encoder, we are able to en-
code text/image features into the discrete codebook.
The
codebook contains the human body feature and serves as a
mediator to obtain the matching latent code, which controls
the 3D avatar generation. To achieve high-accuracy attribute
arXiv:2401.00711v1  [cs.CV]  1 Jan 2024

Fig. 1. Framework of Text2Avatar.
Fig. 2. Multi-Modal Encoder.
matching encoding, we employed a segmentation module
[14] to support the CLIP model. In addition to the segmen-
tation module, we utilized inherent image information(e.g.,
RGB) to facilitate the matching process.
We extensively evaluate our proposed Text2Avatar and
demonstrate that when presented with coupled textual prompts,
our framework can generate high-quality 3D clothed avatars
that satisfy complex attribute requirements.
2. METHOD
2.1. Structural Composition
Overall, our structure consists of three neural networks: the
3D-aware GAN generator G(·), segmentation module Seg(·)
the multi-modal encoder E(·).
The input of the genera-
tor G(·) includes camera parameters distribution ptext and
the latent code z ∼pz.
The ptext includes the shape pa-
rameter β, the pose parameter θ, and the perspective atti-
tude ξ.
The multi-modal encoder E(·) consists of cross-
modal text encoder Etext(·) and image encoder Etext(·),
an attribute mapping network M(·), and a predefined text
library{tpredefinedij|i = 1, ..., n, j = 1, ..., ni
attr, where n is
the number of the attribute, and nattr,i represents the number
of predefined categories for the i-th attribute. Our Framework
is shown in Figure 1.
It should be emphasized that the text library is primar-
ily designed to complement the encoders provided by CLIP
[13] for attribute matching. Due to the strong data support
of CLIP, this text library can theoretically be easily expanded
without the need for additional training steps. The segmenta-
tion module [14] is employed to convert the local information
of an image into global information in order to enhance the
performance of the CLIP model. Motion generation methods
[15] can be applied to the generation of β so that the avatar
presents a variety of poses or dances.
2.2. Multi-Modal Encoder
The Multi-modal Encoder can serve as a plugin to assist un-
conditional generation models in textual cross-modal tasks.
The Framework is shown as Figure 2. Given a 2D human
body rendering segmented set {Ii
seg|i = 1, ..., n}, we utilize
CLIP to extract the decoupled attribute feature.
Specifi-
cally, by utilizing pre-trained image encoder Eimg(·) and text
encoder Etext(·), which can encode visual and textual infor-
mation into paired features, we identify the most relevant
textual description for each Ii
seg within the given text library
{tij
predefined|i = 1, ..., n, j = 1, ..., ni
attr}. We encode both the
textual and visual content, and compute their cosine similar-
ity to select the best matching pair. The index of the tj
predefined
is set to be the attribute value ai. The formula for discrete
attribute encoding is as follows:
ai = arg max
j
Eimg(Ii
seg) · ET
text(tij
predefined)

Eimg(Iiseg)

Etext(tij
predefined)

(1)
The attribute mapping network will then utilize the aforemen-
tioned codebook to obtain the corresponding zgen, enabling
control over unconditional generative models.
2.3. Training Setup
For the training of generators and discriminators, we follow
the training methods of Hong et al [11].
We train an attribute mapping network based on MLP,
which is mainly used to map the image human-attribute space
to the latent space of the generative model. Unlike the video
generation [16], avatar appearance is affected by the latent

Table 1. Comparison of different baselines w.r.t. attribute accuracy and R-Precision.
Methods
Attribute Accuracy
R-Precision
Gender Sleeve-length Top-color Top-type Pants-length Pants-color Pants-type ViT-B/32 ViT-L/14
DreamFusion
1.00
-
-
-
-
-
-
74.71
79.64
3DFuse
1.00
0.30
0.65
0.20
0.55
0.40
0.15
77.83
82.76
AvatarCLIP
1.00
-
0.60
-
-
0.40
-
76.66
81.15
Text2Avatar
1.00
1.00
0.80
0.55
0.85
0.90
0.60
78.52
83.30
Fig. 3. Generation results from coupled textual prompts.
code z.
Specifically, we first use the generative model to
obtain paired latent variables zgen and the corresponding 3D
avatar. We use volume rendering to obtain the correspond-
ing image Igen. Then, utilizing the image encoder Eimg(·)
provided by CLIP and the segmentation module [14], we
encode the image Igen with a carefully-designed text library
{tij
predefined|i = 1, ..., n, j = 1, ..., ni
attr} into discrete code-
book. The codebook corresponds to the attribute information
with the corresponding number in the text library. After that,
we use the mapping network to map the codebook to the
latent space of the generative model, obtaining the predicted
latent code zpre. We compare this zpre with the true zgen, and
optimize the mapping network using MSE loss. The objective
function L(ϕ) is shown below:
L(ϕ) = min
ϕ
1
N
N
X
i=1

zi
pre −zi
gen

2 ,
(2)
where ϕ represents the parameters of the mapping network,
and N denotes the number of training instances.
2.4. Decoupling Control Generation
During the model inference phase for 3D avatar generation,
the model takes as input text describing human attributes.
The input text is first decoupled into various human attributes.
These attributes are then fed into the multi-modal encoder that
utilizes CLIP for matching with a text library to obtain human
attribute code a. Then the attribute code are encoded into la-
tent code z using the attribute mapping network M(·) trained
during the training phase.
The latent code z, along with shape parameters β and pose
parameters θ and camera viewpoint ξ, are input into a gener-
ator to produce an image of the avatar from a certain perspec-
tive during rendering. The mesh of avatar can be obtained by
using the offsets inferred by a special NeRF within the gener-
ator.
3. EXPERIMENT
3.1. Implementation Details
We implemented code using pytorch on one NVIDIA RTX
3090 GPU. The training of the generator and discriminator
follows the method of EVA3D [11]. They were trained on
the deep fashion image dataset [17], along with the estimated
SMPL [18] model parameters and camera perspective. The
model was trained 400,000 iterations with a learning rate of
0.002 and a batch size of 64. We adopt the Adam optimizer.
In the GAN inversion step, we first used a trained gener-
ator to generate 50,000 images by random sampling of latent
codes under the condition that the camera Angle of view was
positive and the human body attitude parameters were fixed,
and recorded the correspondence between the images and la-
tent codes. Then, we perform decoupling image encoding
according to the method mentioned in the section 2.2. The
CLIP model used for attribute decoupling is ViT-L/14.
The predefined text library encompasses seven distinct
attributes: gender, sleeve-length, top-color, top-type, pants-
length, pants-color, and pants-type.
The number of the
attributes’ category is decided by the segmentation perfor-
mance. By merging the segmentation results of similar com-
ponents such as arms and sleeves, seven distinct subgraph
segments can be obtained.
3.2. Qualitative Results
Our generation result is shown as Figure 3.
The results
demonstrate that our approach can generate a 3D avatar
matching the input text, incorporating various attributes of
the human body.
More vivid results can be found on the
project page1. We compared our method with other text-to-
3D baselines as Figure 4 shows. Results demonstrate that
existing methods struggle to deal with coupled cues, while
1project page: https://iecqgong.github.io/text2avatar/

Fig. 4. Comparison between baselines and Text2Avatar.
our approach achieves better decoupling of high-quality gen-
eration.
It can be observed that Dreamfusion [19] has a
missing upper part of the body, while 3DFuse [20] has redun-
dant human structures. Avatars generated by AvatarCLIP [1]
and Text2Avatar both have complete human structures and
exhibit the best performance. Comparing AvatarCLIP and
Text2Avatar more carefully, it can be seen that Text2Avatar
can generate more accurate results (green box) and higher-
resolution faces (red box) under coupled textual prompt.
3.3. Quantitative Comparisons
We compare our method with existing text-to-3D methods[19,
20, 1].
We highlight that these existing text-driven cross-
modal methods are limited in their capability to handle cou-
pled instructions.
Attribute Accuracy. Due to the long time required and
high cost involved of our baselines, we only allowed each
model to generate 20 samples and manually compared their
semantic matching accuracy as attribute accuracy. However,
considering the obvious limitations of the comparative mod-
els in terms of visual results as Figure 4 shows, we believe
that this number is sufficient to demonstrate the superiority of
our model.
R-Precision. We employ volumetric rendering to con-
verted 3D samples to 2D. We utilize the CLIP model [13] to
calculate the correlation between the images and the textual
features, and take the average value as the R-Precision. Con-
sidering that the samples generated by the model are labeled
as “human”, we include the match degree of the generated re-
sults with the word “human” in the calculation of R-Precision.
As shown in Table 1, we omitted the attribute accuracy
of some models for difficult-to-measure attributes, which are
unable to discern accurately due to low generation quality, or
for which the model did not generate the corresponding body
part information (e.g., Dreamfusion [19] did not generate the
upper body of the avatar).
The results demonstrate that our model exhibits signifi-
cant superiority in attribute accuracy across various attributes,
while also achieving the best R-Precision.
Table 2. Ablation study result.w/o stands for without.
Methods
Attribute Accuracy
R-Precision
Pants-color Sleeve-length ViT-B/32 ViT-L/14
w/o codebook
0.55
1.00
77.71
82.65
w/o segmentation
0.45
0.30
76.64
81.66
origin
0.80
1.00
78.52
83.30
3.4. Ablation Studies
To validate the effectiveness of our codebook design ap-
proach, we conducted ablative experiments by removing the
codebook and segmentation module separately. In fact, the
attributes that we define can be roughly divided into three cat-
egories: gender attribute, length attribute, and color attribute.
As the accuracy of gender is consistently high, we have
chosen the indicative length-related attribute (Sleeve-length)
and the color-related attribute (Pants-color) to illustrate the
superiority of our method, along with the R-Precision.
The experimental results are shown in Table 2, indicating
that the segmentation operation and codebook significantly
improve the recognition accuracy and R-precision. This is
because segmentation converts local information of human at-
tributes into global information, helping CLIP overcome the
disadvantage of local information confusion, while codebook
effectively increases the controllability between mappings.
4. CONCLUSIONS
We propose Text2Avatar, a method for generating realistic-
style 3D Avatars from coupled multi-attribute description
text. We highlight that the Multi-Modal Encoder module can
serve as a plugin after retraining, therefore providing flexibil-
ity. In this way, different clothing of the human body can be
easily obtained from textual information solely.
