A Multicore Tool for Constraint Solving
Roberto Amadini, Maurizio Gabbrielli, Jacopo Mauro
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Bologna / Lab. Focus INRIA

Abstract
In Constraint Programming (CP), a portfolio solver
uses a variety of different solvers for solving a
given Constraint Satisfaction / Optimization Prob-
lem. In this paper we introduce sunny-cp2: the
ﬁrst parallel CP portfolio solver that enables a dy-
namic, cooperative, and simultaneous execution of
its solvers in a multicore setting. It incorporates
state-of-the-art solvers, providing also a usable and
conﬁgurable framework. Empirical results are very
promising. sunny-cp2 can even outperform the
performance of the oracle solver which always se-
lects the best solver of the portfolio for a given
problem.
1
Introduction
The Constraint Programming (CP) paradigm enables to ex-
press complex relations in form of constraints to be satis-
ﬁed. CP allows to model and solve Constraint Satisfaction
Problems (CSPs) as well as Constraint Optimization Prob-
lems (COPs) [Rossi et al., 2006]. Solving a CSP means ﬁnd-
ing a solution that satisﬁes all the constraints of the problem,
while a COP is a generalized CSP where the goal is to ﬁnd a
solution that minimises or maximises an objective function.
A fairly recent trend in CP is solving a problem by means
of portfolio approaches [Gomes and Selman, 2001], which
can be seen as instances of the more general Algorithm Selec-
tion problem [Rice, 1976]. A portfolio solver is a particular
solver that exploits a collection of m > 1 constituent solvers
s1, . . . , sm to get a globally better solver. When a new, un-
seen problem p comes, the portfolio solver tries to predict the
best constituent solver(s) si1, . . . , sik (with 1 ≤k ≤m) for
solving p and then runs them.
Unfortunately —despite their proven effectiveness— port-
folio solvers are scarcely used outside the walls of solvers
competitions, and often conﬁned to SAT solving. Regarding
the CP ﬁeld, the ﬁrst portfolio solver (for solving CSPs only)
was CPHydra [O’Mahony et al., 2008] that in 2008 won the
International CSP Solver Competition. In 2014, the sequen-
tial portfolio solver sunny-cp [Amadini et al., 2015] at-
tended the MiniZinc Challenge (MZC) [Stuckey et al., 2010]
with respectable results (4th out of 18). To the best of our
knowledge, no similar tool exist for solving both CSPs and
COPs.
In this paper we take a major step forward by introduc-
ing sunny-cp2, a signiﬁcant enhancement of sunny-cp.
Improvements are manifold. Firstly, sunny-cp2 is paral-
lel: it exploits multicore architectures for (possibly) running
more constituent solvers simultaneously.
Moreover, while
most of the parallel portfolio solvers are static (i.e., they de-
cide off-line the solvers to run, regardless of the problem
to be solved), sunny-cp2 is instead dynamic: the solvers
scheduling is predicted on-line according to a generalization
of the SUNNY algorithm [Amadini et al., 2014c]. Further-
more, for COPs, the parallel execution is also cooperative:
a running solver can exploit the current best bound found
by another one through a conﬁgurable restarting mechanism.
Finally, sunny-cp2 enriches sunny-cp by incorporating
new, state-of-the-art solvers and by providing a framework
which is more usable and conﬁgurable for the end user.
We validated sunny-cp2 on two benchmarks of CSPs
and COPs (about 5000 instances each). Empirical evidences
show very promising results: its performance is very close
(and sometimes even better) to that of the Virtual Best Solver
(VBS), i.e., the oracle solver which always selects the best
solver of the portfolio for a given problem. Moreover, for
COPs, sunny-cp2 using c = 1, 2, 4, 8 cores always out-
performs the Virtual c-Parallel Solver (VPSc), i.e., a static
portfolio solver that runs in parallel a ﬁxed selection of the
best c solvers of the portfolio.
Paper Structure. In Section 2 we generalize the SUNNY
algorithm for a multicore setting. In Section 3 we describe
the architecture and the novelties of sunny-cp2, while in
Section 4 we discuss its empirical evaluation. In Section 5
we report the related work before concluding in Section 6.
2
Generalizing the SUNNY Algorithm
SUNNY is the algorithm that underpins sunny-cp. Fixed
a solving timeout T and a portfolio Π, SUNNY exploits
instances similarity to produce a sequential schedule σ =
[(s1, t1), . . . , (sn, tn)] where solver si has to be run for ti sec-
onds and Pn
i=1 ti = T. For any input problem p, SUNNY
uses a k-Nearest Neighbours (k-NN) algorithm to select from
a training set of known instances the subset N(p, k) of the
k instances closer to p. According to the N(p, k) instances,
SUNNY relies on three heuristics: hsel, for selecting the most
arXiv:1502.03986v3  [cs.AI]  30 Apr 2015

promising solvers to run; hall, for allocating to each solver a
certain runtime (the more a solver is promising, the more time
is allocated); and hsch, for scheduling the sequential execu-
tion of the solvers according to their presumed speed. These
heuristics depend on the application domain. For example,
for CSPs hsel selects the smallest sub-portfolio S ⊆Π that
solves the most instances in N(p, k), by using the solving
time for breaking ties. hall allocates to each si ∈S a time
ti proportional to the instances that S can solve in N(p, k),
while hsch sorts the solvers by increasing solving time in
N(p, k). For COPs the approach is analogous, but different
performance metrics are used [Amadini et al., 2014b].
As an example, let p be a CSP, Π = {s1, s2, s3, s4} a port-
folio of 4 solvers, T = 1800 seconds the solving timeout,
N(p, k) = {p1, ..., p4} the k = 4 neighbours of p, and the
runtimes of solver si on problem pj deﬁned as in Table 1.
In this case, the smallest sub-portfolios that solve the most
instances are {s1, s2, s3}, {s1, s2, s4}, and {s2, s3, s4}. The
heuristic hsel selects S = {s1, s2, s4} because these solvers
are faster in solving the instances in the neighbourhood. Since
s1 and s4 solve 2 instances and s2 solves 1 instance, hall
splits the solving time window [0, T] into 5 slots: 2 allo-
cated to s1 and s4, and 1 to s2. Finally, hsch sorts the solvers
by increasing solving time. The ﬁnal schedule produced by
SUNNY is therefore σ = [(s4, 720), (s1, 720), (s2, 360)].
p1
p2
p3
p4
s1
T
3
T
278
s2
593
T
T
T
s3
T
36
1452
T
s4
T
T
122
60
Table 1: Runtimes (in seconds). T means the solver timeout.
For a detailed description and evaluation of SUNNY we
refer the reader to [Amadini et al., 2014c; Amadini et al.,
2014b].
Here we focus instead on how we generalized
SUNNY for a multicore setting where c ≥1 cores are
available and, typically, we have more solvers than cores.
sunny-cp2 uses a dynamic approach: the schedule is de-
cided on-line according to the instance to be solved. The
approach used is rather simple: starting from the sequential
schedule σ produced by SUNNY on a given problem, we ﬁrst
detect the c−1 solvers of σ having the largest allocated time,
and we assign a different core to each of them. The other
solvers of σ (if any) are scheduled on the last core, by preserv-
ing their original order in σ and by widening their allocated
times to cover the entire time window [0, T].
Formally, given c cores and the sequential schedule σ =
[(s1, t1), . . . , (sn, tn)] computed by SUNNY, we deﬁne a to-
tal order ≺σ such that si ≺σ sj ⇔ti > tj ∨(ti = tj ∧i < j),
and a ranking function rank σ such that rank σ(s) = i if and
only if s is the i-th solver of σ according to ≺σ. We deﬁne
the parallelisation of σ on c cores as a function Pσ,c which
associates to each core i ∈{1, . . . , c} a sequential schedule
Pσ,c(i) such that:
Pσ,c(i) =





[ ]
if i > n
[(s, T)]
if i = rank σ(s) ∧1 ≤i < c
[(s, T
Tc t) | (s, t) ∈σ ∧rank σ(s) ≥c]
if i = c
where Tc = P{t | (s, t) ∈σ ∧rank σ(s) ≥c}.
Let us consider the schedule of the previous example:
σ = [(s4, 720), (s1, 720), (s2, 360)]. With c = 2 cores, the
parallelisation of σ is deﬁned as Pσ,2(1) = [(s4, 1800)] and
Pσ,2(2) = [(s1, 1800/1080 × 720), (s2, 1800/1080 × 360)].
The rationale behind the schedule parallelisation Pσ,c is
that SUNNY aims to allocate more time to the most promis-
ing solvers, scheduling them according to their speed. As-
suming a good starting schedule σ, its parallelisation Pσ,c is
rather straightforward and it is easy to prove that, assuming
an independent execution of the solvers without synchroniza-
tion and memory contention issues, Pσ,c can never solve less
problems than σ.
Obviously, different ways to parallelise the sequential
schedule are possible. Here we focus on what we think to
be one of the most simple yet promising ones. An empiri-
cal comparison of other parallelisation methods is outside the
scope of this paper.
3
SUNNY-CP 2
sunny-cp2 solves both CSPs and COPs encoded in the
MiniZinc language [Nethercote et al., 2007], nowadays the
de-facto standard for modelling CP problems. By default,
sunny-cp2 uses a portfolio Π of 12 solvers disparate in
their nature.
In addition to the 8 solvers of sunny-cp
(viz., Chuffed, CPX, G12/CBC, G12/FD, G12/LazyFD,
G12/Gurobi, Gecode, and MinisatID) it includes new, state-
of-the-art solvers able to win four gold medals in the MZC
2014, namely: Choco, HaifaCSP, iZplus, and OR-Tools.
Figure 1: sunny-cp2 architecture.
Figure 1 summarizes the execution ﬂow of sunny-cp2.
It takes as input a problem p to be solved and a list of input
parameters speciﬁed by the user (e.g., the timeout T used by
SUNNY, the number of cores c to use, etc.). If a parameter is
not speciﬁed, a corresponding default value is used.

The solving process then relies on two sequential steps,
later detailed: (i) the pre-solving phase, where a static sched-
ule of solvers may be run and the instance neighbourhood
is computed; (ii) the solving phase, which runs the dynamic
schedule on different cores.
If p is a CSP, the output of sunny-cp2 can be either SAT
(a solution exists for p), UNS (p has no solutions), or UNK
(sunny-cp2 can not say anything about p). In addition, if p
is a COP, two more answers are possible: OPT (sunny-cp2
proves the optimality of a solution), or UNB (p is unbounded).
3.1
Pre-solving
The pre-solving step consists in the simultaneous execution
on c cores of two distinct tasks: the execution of a (possibly
empty) static schedule, and the neighbourhood detection.
Running for a short time a static schedule has proven to be
effective. It enables to solve those instances that some solvers
can solve very quickly (e.g., see [Kadioglu et al., 2011]) and,
for COPs, to quickly ﬁnd good sub-optimal solutions [Ama-
dini and Stuckey, 2014].
The static schedule σ = [(s1, t1), . . . , (sn, tn)] is a pre-
ﬁxed schedule of n ≥0 solvers decided off-line, regard-
less of the input problem p.
To execute it, sunny-cp2
applies a “First-Come, First-Served” policy by following the
schedule order. Formally, the ﬁrst m solvers s1, . . . , sm with
m = min(c, n) are launched on different cores. Then, for
i = m + 1, ..., n, the solver si is started as soon as a solver
sj (with 1 ≤j ≤i) terminates its execution without solv-
ing p. If a solver si fails prematurely before ti (e.g., due to
memory overﬂows or unsupported constraints) then si is dis-
carded from the portfolio for avoiding to run it again later. If
instead si reached its timeout, then it is just suspended: if it
has to run again later, it will be resumed instead of restarted
from scratch. The user has the possibility of setting the static
schedule as an input parameter.
For simplicity, the static
schedule of sunny-cp2 is empty by default.
When solving COPs, the timeout deﬁned by the user may
be overruled by sunny-cp2 that examines the solvers be-
haviour and may decide to delay the interruption of a solver.
Indeed, a signiﬁcant novelty of sunny-cp2 is the use of a
waiting threshold Tw. A solver s scheduled for t seconds is
never interrupted if it has found a new solution in the last Tw
seconds, regardless of whether the timeout t is expired or not.
The underlying logic of Tw is to not stop a solver which is ac-
tively producing solutions. Thus, if Tw > 0 a solver may be
executed for more than its allocated time. Setting Tw to a high
value might therefore delay, and thus hinder, the execution of
the other solvers.
For COPs, sunny-cp2 also enables the bounds commu-
nication between solvers: the sub-optimal solutions found
by a solver are used to narrow the search space of the other
scheduled solvers. In [Amadini and Stuckey, 2014] this tech-
nique is successfully applied in a sequential setting, where
the best objective bound found by a solver is exploited by the
next scheduled ones. Things get more complicated in a mul-
ticore setting, where solvers are run simultaneously as black
boxes and there is no support for communicating bounds to
another running solver without interrupting its solving pro-
cess. We decided to overcome this problem by using a restart-
ing threshold Tr. If a running solver s ﬁnds no solution in
the last Tr seconds, and its current best bound v is obso-
lete w.r.t. the overall best bound v′ found by another solver,
then s is restarted with the new bound v′. The reason behind
Tr is that restarting an active solver is risky and potentially
harmful even when its current best bound is actually obsolete.
However, also ignoring the solutions found by other solvers
could mean to neglect valuable information. The choice of
Tr is hence critical: a too small value might cause too many
restarts, while a big threshold inhibits the bound communi-
cation. Care should be taken also because restarting a solver
means to lose all the knowledge it gained during the search.
After performing some empirical investigations, we found
reasonable to set the default values of Tw and Tr to 2 and 5
seconds respectively. The user can however conﬁgure such
parameters as she wishes, even by deﬁning a customized set-
ting for each different solver of the portfolio.
The neighbourhood detection phase begins in parallel with
the static schedule σ execution only after all the solvers of
σ has been started.
This phase has lower priority than σ
since its purpose is not quickly ﬁnding solutions, but detect-
ing the neighbourhood N(p, k) later on used to compute the
dynamic schedule. For this reason, the computation of the
neighbourhood starts as soon as one core is free (i.e., the
number of running solvers is smaller than c). The ﬁrst step
of pre-scheduling is the extraction of the feature vector of p,
i.e., a collection of numerical attributes (e.g., number of vari-
ables, of constraints, etc.) that characterizes the instance p.
The feature vector is then used for detecting the set N(p, k)
of the k nearest neighbours of p within a dataset of known
instances.
The default dataset ∆of sunny-cp2 is the union of a set
∆CSP of 5527 CSPs and a set ∆COP of 4988 COPs, retrieved
from the instances of the MiniZinc 1.6 benchmarks, the
MZCs 2012–2014, and the International CSP Solver Compe-
titions 2008/09. sunny-cp2 provides a default knowledge
base that associates to every instance pi ∈∆its feature vec-
tor and the runtime information of each solver of the portfolio
on pi (e.g., solving time, anytime performance, etc.). In par-
ticular, the feature vectors are used for computing N(p, k)
while the runtime information are later used for computing
the dynamic schedule σ by means of SUNNY algorithm.
The feature extractor used by sunny-cp2 is the same as
sunny-cp.1 The neighbourhood size is set by default to
k = 70: following [Duda et al., 2000] we chose a value of k
close to √n, where n is the number of training samples. Note
that during the pre-solving phase only N(p, k) is computed.
This is because SUNNY requires a timeout T for computing
the schedule σ. The total time taken by the pre-solving phase
(C in Figure 1) must therefore be subtracted from the initial
timeout T (by default, T = 1800 seconds as in sunny-cp).
This can be done only when the pre-solving ends, since C is
not predictable in advance.
The pre-solving phase terminates when either: (i) a solver
of the static schedule σ solves p, or (ii) the neighbourhood
1 The feature extractor mzn2feat is available at https://
github.com/CP-Unibo/mzn2feat. For further information
please see [Amadini et al., 2014a] and [Amadini et al., 2015].

computation and all the solvers of σ have ﬁnished their ex-
ecution. In the ﬁrst case sunny-cp2 outputs the solving
outcome and stops its execution, skipping the solving phase
since the instance is already solved.
3.2
Solving
The solving phase receives in input the time C taken by pre-
solving and the neighbourhood N(p, k). These parameters
are used by SUNNY to dynamically compute the sequential
schedule σ with a reduced timeout T −C. Then, σ is par-
allelised according to the Pσ,c operator deﬁned in Section 2.
Once computed Pσ,c, each scheduled solver is run on p ac-
cording to the input parameters. If a solver of Pσ,c had al-
ready been run in the static schedule σ, then its execution is
resumed instead of restarted. If p is a COP, the solvers execu-
tion follows the approach explained in Section 3.1 according
to Tw and Tr thresholds. As soon as a solver of σ solves p,
the execution of sunny-cp2 is interrupted and the solving
outcome is outputted.
Note that we decided to make sunny-cp2 an anytime
solver, i.e., a solver that can run indeﬁnitely until a solution is
found. For this reason we let the solvers run indeﬁnitely even
after the timeout T until a solution is found. Moreover, at any
time we try to have exactly c running solvers. In particular,
if c is greater or equal than the portfolio size no prediction
is needed and we simply run a solver per core for indeﬁnite
time. When a scheduled solver fails during its execution, the
overall solving process is not affected since sunny-cp2 will
simply run the next scheduled solver, if any, or another one in
its portfolio otherwise.
Apart from the scheduling parallelisation, sunny-cp2
deﬁnitely improves sunny-cp also from the engineering
point of view. One of the main purposes of sunny-cp2
is indeed to provide a framework which is easy to use and
conﬁgure by the end user. First of all, sunny-cp2 provides
utilities and procedures for adding new constituent solvers to
Π and for customizing their settings. Even though the fea-
ture extractor of sunny-cp2 is the same as sunny-cp, the
user can now deﬁne and use her own tool for feature process-
ing. The user can also deﬁne her own knowledge base, start-
ing from raw comma-separated value ﬁles, by means of suit-
able utility scripts. Furthermore, sunny-cp2 is much more
parametrisable than sunny-cp. Apart from the aforemen-
tioned Tw and Tr parameters, sunny-cp2 provides many
more options allowing, e.g., to set the number c of cores to
use, limit the memory usage, ignore the search annotations,
and specify customized options for each constituent solver.
The source code of sunny-cp2 is entirely written in
Python and publicly available at https://github.com/
CP-Unibo/sunny-cp.
4
Validation
We validated the performance of sunny-cp2 by running
it with its default settings on every instance of ∆CSP (5527
CSPs) and ∆COP (4988 COPs). Following the standard prac-
tices, we used a 10-fold cross-validation: we partitioned each
dataset in 10 disjoint folds, treating in turn one fold as test set
and the union of the remaining folds as the training set.
Fixed a solving timeout T, different metrics can be adopted
to measure the effectiveness of a solver s on a given prob-
lem p. If p is a CSP we typically evaluate whether, and how
quickly, s can solve p. For this reason we use two metrics,
namely proven and time, to measure the solved instances
and the solving time. Formally, if s solves p in t < T sec-
onds, then proven(s, p) = 1 and time(s, p) = t; other-
wise, proven(s, p) = 0 and time(s, p) = T. A straight-
forward generalization of these two metrics for COPs can be
obtained by setting proven(s, p) = 1 and time(s, p) = t
if s proves in t < T seconds the optimality of a solution for
p, the unsatisﬁability of p or its unboundedness. Otherwise,
proven(s, p) = 0 and time(s, p) = T. However, a major
drawback of such a generalization is that the solution quality
is not addressed. To overcome this limitation, we use in ad-
dition the score and area metrics introduced in [Amadini
and Stuckey, 2014].
The score metric measures the quality of the best solu-
tion found by a solver s at the stroke of the timeout T. More
speciﬁcally, score(s, p) is a value in [0.25, 0.75] linearly
proportional to the distance between the best solution that s
ﬁnds and the best known solution for p. An additional re-
ward (score = 1) is given if s is able to prove optimality,
while a punishment (score = 0) is given if s does not pro-
vide any answer. Differently from score, the area met-
ric evaluates the behaviour of a solver in the whole solving
time window [0, T] and not only at the time edge T. It con-
siders the area under the curve that associates to each time
instant ti ∈[0, T] the best objective value vi found by s in
ti seconds. The area value is properly scaled in the range
[0, T] so that the more a solver is slow in ﬁnding good solu-
tions, the more its area is high (in particular, area = T if
and only if score = 0). The area metric folds in a num-
ber of measures the quality of the best solution found, how
quickly any solution is found, whether optimality is proven,
and how quickly good solutions are found. For a formal def-
inition of area and score we refer the reader to [Amadini
and Stuckey, 2014].
We ran sunny-cp2 on all the instances of ∆CSP and
∆COP within a timeout of T = 1800 seconds by varying the
number c of cores in {1, 2, 4, 8}. We compared sunny-cp2
against the very same version of sunny-cp submitted to
MZC 20142 and the Virtual Best Solver (VBS), i.e., the or-
acle portfolio solver that —for a given problem and perfor-
mance metric— always selects the best solver to run. More-
over, for each c ∈{1, 2, 4, 8} we consider as additional base-
line the Virtual c-Parallel Solver (VPSc), i.e., a static port-
folio solver that always runs in parallel a ﬁxed selection of
the best c solvers of the portfolio Π. The VPSc is a static
portfolio since its solvers are selected in advance, regardless
of the problem p to be solved. Obviously, the portfolio com-
position of VPSc depends on a given evaluation metric. For
each µ ∈{proven, time, score, area} we therefore de-
ﬁned a corresponding VPSc by selecting the best c solvers
of Π according to the average value of µ over the ∆CSP or
∆COP instances. Note that VPSc is an “ideal” solver, since
2The source code of sunny-cp is publicly available at https:
//github.com/CP-Unibo/sunny-cp/tree/mznc14

Metric
sunny-cp
sunny-cp2
VPS
VBS
1 core
2 cores
4 cores
8 cores
1 core
2 cores
4 cores
8 cores
proven (%)
83.26
95.26
99.11
99.38
99.35
89.04
93.51
95.19
99.24
100
time (s)
504.10
223.21
136.04
112.60
112.32
297.30
211.13
176.81
68.52
54.30
Table 2: Experimental results over CSPs.
Metric
sunny-cp
sunny-cp2
VPS
VBS
1 core
2 cores
4 cores
8 cores
1 core
2 cores
4 cores
8 cores
proven (%)
71.55
74.40
74.94
75.68
76.34
61.33
63.45
65.60
75.86
76.30
time (s)
594.79
501.35
482.95
469.74
454.54
718.86
682.35
645.68
463.63
457.00
score × 100
90.50
92.26
93.00
93.45
93.62
82.80
85.99
89.53
90.79
93.63
area (s)
257.86
197.44
149.33
138.94
130.53
314.07
266.11
188.20
178.81
132.28
Table 3: Experimental results over COPs.
it is an upper bound of the real performance achievable by
actually running in parallel all its solvers. An approach sim-
ilar to VPSc has been successfully used by the SAT portfolio
solver ppfolio [Roussel, 2011]. The VPS1 is sometimes
also called Single Best Solver (SBS) while VPS|Π| is exactly
equivalent to the Virtual Best Solver (VBS).
In the following, we will indicate with sunny-cp2[c] the
version of sunny-cp2 exploiting c cores.
Empirical re-
sults on CSPs and COPs are summarized in Table 2 and 3
reporting the average values of all the aforementioned eval-
uation metrics. On average, sunny-cp2 remarkably out-
performs all its constituent solvers as well as sunny-cp for
both CSPs and COPs. Concerning CSPs, a major boost is
given by the introduction of HaifaCSP solver in the portfo-
lio. HaifaCSP solves almost 90% of ∆CSP problems. How-
ever, as can be seen from the Tables 2 and 3, sunny-cp2[1]
solves more than 95% of the instances and, for c > 1,
sunny-cp2[c] solves nearly all the problems. This means
that just few cores are enough to almost reach the VBS
performance.
The best proven performance is achieved
by sunny-cp2[4].3
Nevertheless, the average time of
sunny-cp2[8] is slightly slower. However, difference are
minimal: sunny-cp2[4] and sunny-cp2[8] are virtually
equivalent. Note that sunny-cp2[c] is always better than
VPSc in terms of proven and, for c < 8, also in terms
of time.
Furthermore, sunny-cp2[1] solves more in-
stances than VPS4.
In other words, running sequentially
the solvers of sunny-cp2 on a single core allows to solve
more instances than running independently the four solvers
of the portfolio that solve the most number of problems of
∆CSP. Analogously, sunny-cp2[2] solves more instances
than VPS4.
This witnesses that in a multicore setting —
where there are typically more available solvers than cores—
sunny-cp2 can be very effective.
Even better results are reached by sunny-cp2 on the
instances of ∆COP, where there is not a clear dominant
solver like HaifaCSP for ∆CSP. sunny-cp2 outperforms
sunny-cp in all the considered metrics, and the gain of
performance in this case is not only due to the introduc-
3 The practically negligible difference with sunny-cp2[8] is
probably due to synchronization and memory contention issues (e.g.,
cache misses) that slow down the system when 8 cores are exploited.
Figure 2: Number of COPs for which sunny-cp2 outper-
forms the VBS.
tion of new solvers.
Indeed, the best solver according to
time and proven is Chuffed, which was already present
in sunny-cp. For each c ∈{1, 2, 4, 8} and for each per-
formance metric, sunny-cp2[c] is always better than the
corresponding VPSc. Moreover, as for CSPs, sunny-cp2
has very good performances even with few cores. For exam-
ple, by considering the proven, time, and score results,
sunny-cp2[1] is always better than VPS4 and its score
even outperforms that of VPS8. This clearly indicates that the
dynamic selection of solvers, together with the bounds com-
munication and the waiting/restarting policies implemented
by sunny-cp2, makes a remarkable performance differ-
ence.
Results also show a nice monotonicity: for all the consid-
ered metrics, if c > c′ then sunny-cp2[c] is better than
sunny-cp2[c′] .
In particular, it is somehow impressive
to see that on average sunny-cp2 is able to outperform
the VBS in terms of time, proven, and area, and that
for score the performance difference is negligible (0.01%).
This is better shown in Figure 2 depicting for each perfor-
mance metric the number of times that sunny-cp2 is able
to overcome the performance of the VBS with c = 1, 2, 4, 8
cores.
As c increases, the number of times the VBS is
beaten gets bigger. In particular, the time and area re-
sults show that sunny-cp2 can be very effective to reduce

Choco
Chuffed
CPX
G12/FD
Gecode
OR-Tools
Other solvers
sunny-cp2
tbest (s)
4.05
52.49
2.42
2.87
3.31
1.46
N/A
5.00
vbest
959
958
958
959
959
959
N/A
958
time
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
10.56
Table 4: Beneﬁts of sunny-cp2 on a RCPSP instance. T = 1800 indicates the solvers timeout.
the solving time both for completing the search and, espe-
cially, for quickly ﬁnding sub-optimal solutions.
For ex-
ample, for 414 problems sunny-cp2[8] has a lower time
than VBS, while for 977 instances it has a lower area. Ta-
ble 4 reports a clear example of the sunny-cp2 potential
on an instance of the Resource-Constrained Project Schedul-
ing Problem (RCPSP) [Brucker et al., 1999] taken from the
MiniZinc-1.6 suite.4 Firstly, note that just half of the solvers
of Π can ﬁnd at least a solution. Second, these solvers ﬁnd
their best bound vbest very quickly (i.e, in a time tbest of be-
tween 1.46 and 4.05 seconds) but none of them is able to
prove the optimality of the best bound v∗= 958 within a
timeout of T = 1800 seconds. Conversely, sunny-cp2
ﬁnds v∗and proves its optimality in less than 11 seconds.
Exploiting the fact that CPX ﬁnds v∗in a short time (for CPX
tbest = 2.42 seconds, while sunny-cp2 takes 5 seconds due
to the neighbourhood detection and scheduling computation),
after Tr = 5 seconds any other scheduled solver is restarted
with the new bound v∗. Now, Gecode can prove almost in-
stantaneously that v∗is optimal, while without this help it can
not even ﬁnd it in half an hour of computation.
5
Related Work
The parallelisation of CP solvers does not appear as fruitful
as for SAT solvers where techniques like clause sharing are
used. As an example, in the MZC 2014 the possibility of mul-
tiprocessing did not lead to remarkable performance gains,
despite the availability of eight logical cores (in a case, a par-
allel solver was even signiﬁcantly worse than its sequential
version).
Portfolio solvers have proven their effectiveness in many
international solving competitions.
For instance, the SAT
portfolio solvers 3S [Kadioglu et al., 2011] and CSHC [Mal-
itsky et al., 2013] won gold medals in SAT Competition 2011
and 2013 respectively. SATZilla [Xu et al., 2008] won the
SAT Challenge 2012, CPHydra [O’Mahony et al., 2008] the
Constraint Solver Competition 2008, the ASP portfolio solver
claspfolio [Hoos et al., 2014] was gold medallist in differ-
ent tracks of the ASP Competition 2009 and 2011, Arvand-
Herd [Valenzano et al., 2012] and IBaCoP [Cenamor et al.,
2014] won some tracks in the Planning Competition 2014.
Surprisingly enough, only a few portfolio solvers are paral-
lel and even fewer are the dynamic ones selecting on-line the
solvers to run. We are aware of only two dynamic and parallel
portfolio solvers that attended a solving competition, namely
p3S [Malitsky et al., 2012] (in the SAT Challenge 2012) and
IBaCoP2 [Cenamor et al., 2014] (in the Planning Compe-
tition 2014). Unfortunately, a comparison of sunny-cp2
with these tools is not possible because their source code is
4The model is rcpsp.mzn while the data is in la10 x2.dzn
not publicly available and they do not deal with COPs.
Apart from the aforementioned CPHydra and sunny-cp
solvers, another portfolio approach for CSPs is Proteus [Hur-
ley et al., 2014]. However, with the exception of a prelimi-
nary investigation about a CPHydra parallelisation [Yun and
Epstein, 2012], all these solvers are sequential and except for
sunny-cp they solve just CSPs. Hence, to the best of our
knowledge, sunny-cp2 is today the only parallel and dy-
namic CP portfolio solver able to deal with also optimization
problems.
The parallelisation of portfolio solvers is a hot topic which
is drawing some attention in the community. For instance,
parallel extensions of well-known sequential portfolio ap-
proaches are studied in [Hoos et al., 2015b]. In [Hoos et
al., 2015a] ASP techniques are used for computing a static
schedule of solvers which can even be executed in parallel,
while [Cire et al., 2014] considers the problem of parallelis-
ing restarted backtrack search for CSPs.
6
Conclusions
In this paper we introduced sunny-cp2, the ﬁrst parallel CP
portfolio solver able to dynamically schedule the solvers to
run and to solve both CSPs and COPs encoded in the MiniZ-
inc language. It incorporates state-of-the-art solvers, provid-
ing also a usable and conﬁgurable framework.
The performance of sunny-cp2, validated on hetero-
geneous and large benchmarks, is promising.
Indeed,
sunny-cp2 greatly outperforms all its constituent solvers
and its earlier version sunny-cp. It can be far better than
a ppfolio-like approach [Roussel, 2011] which statically de-
termine a ﬁxed selection of the best solvers to run. For CSPs,
sunny-cp2 almost reaches the performance of the Virtual
Best Solver, while for COPs sunny-cp2 is even able to out-
perform it.
We hope that sunny-cp2 can stimulate the adoption
and the dissemination of CP portfolio solvers.
Indeed,
sunny-cp was the only portfolio entrant of MiniZinc Chal-
lenge 2014. We are interested in submitting sunny-cp2 to
the 2015 edition in order to compare it with other possibly
parallel portfolio solvers.
There are many lines of research that can be explored, both
from the scientiﬁc and engineering perspective. As a future
work we would like to extend the sunny-cp2 by adding
new, possibly parallel solvers. Moreover, different paralleli-
sations, distance metrics, and neighbourhood sizes can be
evaluated.
Given the variety of parameters provided by sunny-cp2,
it could be also interesting to exploit Algorithm Conﬁguration
techniques [Hutter et al., 2011; Kadioglu et al., 2010] for the
automatic tuning of the sunny-cp2 parameters, as well as
the parameters of its constituent solvers.

Finally, we are also interested in making sunny-cp2
more usable and portable, e.g., by pre-installing it on virtual
machines or multi-container technologies.
