arXiv:1204.2235v1  [cs.RO]  10 Apr 2012
Publishing Identiﬁable Experiment Code And Conﬁguration Is
Important, Good and Easy
Richard T. Vaughan
Jens Wawerla
Simon Fraser University

10 November 2009
1
Introduction
A few months ago, a graduate student in another country called me (Vaughan) to ask for the source code
of one of my multi-robot simulation experiments.
The student had an idea for a modiﬁcation that she
thought would improve the system’s performance. By the standards of scientiﬁc practice this was a perfectly
reasonable request and I felt obliged to give it to her. With our original code, the student could (i) re-run
our experiments to verify that we reported the results correctly; (ii) inspect the code to make sure that it
actually implements the algorithm described in our paper; (iii) change parameters and initial conditions to
make sure our results were not a ﬂuke of the particular experimental setting; (iv) modify the robot controllers
and quantitatively compare her new method with our originals. It would cost me nothing to make her a
copy of our code, and her methodology would be impeccable. Why then do we read so few papers using this
methodology?
It turned out to be impossible to identify exactly which code was used to perform the experiments in
our years-old paper. We had not labeled the source code at that moment, and it had subsequently been
modiﬁed. All the code was under version control, so we could obtain approximately the right code by looking
at revision dates. But having only approximately the right code strictly invalidates the replication of the
experiments. The user has no way of knowing what the diﬀerences are between the code she has and the
code we used. So we were able to oﬀer the requesting student some code that may or may not be that used
in the paper. This was better than nothing, but not good enough, and we suspect this is quite typical in our
community.
This disappointing episode was a wake-up call for me, and our group has been discussing how we can
make sure this doesn’t happen again. We propose to routinely publish the exact code for each experiment
that we use to justify any claims at all.
This paper explains why we think complete experiment publication is important and why it is good
for the originating researchers as well as subsequent users. The second half of the paper examines current
standards of scientiﬁc data and code publications, and cites some evidence of its beneﬁts. But ﬁrst we present
our protocol for publishing identiﬁable code and show how easy it is to do.
2
Publishing code is easy
2.1
What to do
1. The complete and exact source code, build scripts, conﬁguration ﬁles, maps, log analysis scripts, list of
critical external dependencies, details of run-time environment and any other instructions and resources
1

necessary for a skilled researcher to replicate the experiment should be packaged and placed in public
for free and anonymous download by any reader.
2. The source package should be labeled with a textual identiﬁer that is speciﬁc to the version described
in the paper, and the paper should contain the identiﬁer.
2.2
Doing it easily
This can be easily and cheaply achieved as follows. The code is assembled into an archive ﬁle (tarball, gzip,
etc), and a digital signature is obtained using a cryptographic hash function such as SHA1[24]. The archive
is published at some reliable Internet host, and its URI and signature are published in the paper. The archive
can also be linked from the authors’ web publication list.
Upon downloading the ﬁle, the user can determine that the archive matches the signature in the paper.
Use of a good hash identiﬁer makes it very diﬃcult for authors to modify the code by mistake or design,
without this being detectable by the user/reader.
Modern software development tools make for an even easier process. Revision control systems like Git1
automatically generate a SHA1 cryptographic hash key for each committed version, such that there is a
low probability of any two packages or versions having the same key. The entire revision control database
can be easily cloned from an URI, and users can check out the correct version by its signature, while still
having access to later versions. The diﬀerences between versions are easy to inspect using Git’s tools. We
have chosen this approach, and are hosting our Git repositories at the independent host GitHub2. While
GitHub’s tools and convenience are currently compelling, the ideal host would be a reliable and long-lived
independent institution such as a university, national library or professional organization such as the IEEE.
The idea of identifying a code package with a crypotgraphic hash is not new – on the contrary the
standard way to distribute packages on the Internet such that the downloader can trust that they received
the “real thing” is for the author to post a web page containing a URI to an archive ﬁle along with the SHA1
hash of the same ﬁle. Our contribution here is to recommend this practice to our community as a means to
achieve the beneﬁts of trustworthy code publication.
3
Publishing code is important
3.1
Falsiﬁability and shared artifacts
Publishing the actual experiment alongside the paper which describes and interprets it increases the scientiﬁc
and practical value of the work. It goes a long way to solving a problem our ﬁeld faces from a philosophy of
science point of view: the fact that we are a synthetic science that creates and studies artifacts, rather than
a natural science that studies an extant universe common to all scientists. By reproducing and sharing our
artifacts we synthesize a common environment.
Scientiﬁc claims are required to be falsiﬁable. If I make a claim in a paper about a system I created, and
to which you do not have access, my claim is not falsiﬁable in practice. My claims are more scientiﬁcally
valuable if I make them as easy to falsify as possible, which I can achieve by publishing the artifacts.
3.2
Repeatability and quantitative comparison
In the natural sciences experimental results gain credibility after they are independently repeated at least
once. In order to be able to repeat an experiment, we often require many details that are not available in the
paper. As we are often able to make the exact and entire experiment available for replication at negligible
cost, we can achieve the best possible repeatability.
Of course, we can not prove experiments are correct and while simply re-running a program is not a
strong validation, even this alone can show up mistakes. A stronger validation is obtained by completely
1http://git-scm.com/
2http://github.com
2

re-implementing the code, or the important parts of it, but by testing the new version using the original
setting, as determined by inspecting the original code, we can improve our conﬁdence in the results.
As in all of science, much work in robotics can be considered incremental improvement over the work
of another. This usually requires reimplementing the original experiment from natural language and formal
mathematical descriptions. This re–implementation step usually allows only qualitative comparison, since
the details of parameters and initial conditions, etc, are rarely published. It can also be a source of error
and raises question such as “did the new author really ﬁnd the very best parameter set?”. Experiments
made public in an executable form will improve fairness to the original author and will allow quantitative
comparison of results.
A second level of repeatability is available to us. Components of experiments can be re-used in diﬀerent
experiments and settings. If the component performs as expected in this new setting, our conﬁdence in it
increases. In fact this re-use of code is a cheap way of reproducing experiments.
4
Publishing code is good
4.1
Eﬃciency
Having access to data sets and software implementations increases the eﬃciency of the scientiﬁc process in
several ways. In the case of incremental work, it saves a great deal of re-implementation eﬀort. While the
use of middleware like Player[8], ROS3, and Microsoft Robotics Developer Studio4 has increased the rate of
code reuse in recent years, these systems focus on low-level components and it is still unusual for a robot
controller or an implementation of an algorithm to be substantially reused. Making code available by default
would encourage reuse, particularly if the code is of good quality.
4.2
Quality
The quality of a research contribution is a function of the soundness and originality of its theoretical foun-
dation, the depth of analysis given and the clarity and thoroughness of its presentation. It is assumed that
the software that produces the results is correct. Yet it is all too easy to make implementation mistakes that
grossly inﬂuence the outcome of an experiment. Even when a paper presents a complete formal algorithm,
discrepancies between the description and the implementation that produced the results are possible. Such
discrepancies are impossible to detect without access to the source code. We can very easily make code
available for peer review, and so we should.
Further, it is often argued that well written and documented software has fewer bugs. Developing software
with the expectation that it will be peer reviewed and reused is likely to cause roboticists to write better
code, thus increasing the overall quality of the work even before external review. We should write code as
we write papers: to be read and understood; to contribute to knowledge.
5
Issues and objections
Achieving code publication requires a number of issues to be addressed. Some of the most signiﬁcant are:
1. “I object! All that extra work takes too long....”
There are three arguments. First, while producing peer-reviewable code may feel like it takes longer,
the additional discipline and code review should result in improved code quality. By reducing bug-
hunting and re-runs of faulty experiments, the experimenter could actually save time compared to a
typical messy code base. Second, starting with others’ published code saves time in the ﬁrst place.
Third, extra work is justiﬁed by the methodological advantages: the main role of the “extra” work is to
improve the quality and usefulness of the research results, thus it should not be considered overhead.
3http://www.ros.org
4http://msdn.microsoft.com/robotics
3

Some documentation is usually required for code to be usable. Extensive end-user documentation can
be very costly to produce, but often just a few notes can be suﬃcient to guide a colleague through
reproducing and understanding an experiment. Documentation, particularly when written in-line with
the code, can also help the author’s conﬁdence in its correctness. This idea is well developed in Knuth’s
literate programming model[1].
2. Oﬄine vs. online For work that does not need to interactively control the robot (e.g. oﬄine SLAM)
logs of original sensor data along with the algorithm code allow perfect experiment reproduction. The
Radish repository exists to curate such datasets, and some of its maps have become familiar 5. Sharing
interactive robot code is more troublesome.
3. Real world and unique robots: For interactive controller experiments, complete reproduction may be
straightforward when experiments are done in simulation only. Yet real-robot experiments are essential.
The arguments for experiment source sharing still hold for real robot systems, and the value of the
work is maximized if the authors facilitate replication and extension. This can be done by using a
well-known robot e.g. Pioneer, Khepera, which can be assumed to be widely available in research labs
around the world. Well-known robots also have the advantage that respected simulation models are
readily available.
If a custom robot is essential, we suggest providing either (i) a model for a well-known simulator, or (ii)
a dedicated simulator including source code. Also when using custom hardware, using a well-known
and open API for controller code, (e.g. Player, ROS) makes porting to another robot or simulator as
easy as currently possible. Ideally, in all cases where a simulation can produce similar results to the
real robot with a reasonable amount of eﬀort that simulation should be provided.
Work that uses novel mechatronics will not be reproducible at the very low cost of software-only
or common-robot systems, but we suggest that engineering drawings, CAD models, materials and
machining details can be published using the same methodology. The goal is to minimize the cost of
reproduction. Work that does not require novel mechatronics should use a well known hardware and
software platform. Section 8 below discusses a recent major eﬀort to bootstrap a widely-used platform.
4. Licensing: The free reading, copying, modiﬁcation and subsequent redistribution of modiﬁed code is
absolutely required. In most jurisdictions copyright law automatically applies, so the code must be
explicitly licensed to allow redistribution. The community already makes extensive use of Free and
Open Source Software, so we have experience with suitable licenses. Licences that prohibit commercial
uses may be acceptable for traditional academic purposes, but clearly make the code less valuable
for some users (the diﬀerence in value being what they are willing to pay to use the code under a
commercial license).
5. Trade secrets and competitive advantage: Some authors feel that since their code is precious, by “giving
it away” they give away their competitive advantage. If a “competing” lab needs six months to replicate
my experiment, I can get further ahead in the meantime. While this position is tempting for the
individual, we are seeking advantages in eﬃciency and quality for the entire community, including our
taxpayer-supported funding agencies. Companies are under no obligation to serve the community, but
they can get the beneﬁts described above by ﬁrst protecting their ideas with patents before publication.
If groups withhold their code for their own interest and against the interest of the community, their
work is manifestly less valuable than it could be, and should be evaluated accordingly. Conversely,
releasing high quality code should enhance a group’s reputation and success rates. This provides a
feedback mechanism that reinforces code publication.
5http://radish.sourceforge.net
4

6
Encouraging Code Publication
How can the publication of source code be made a community norm? Assuming the existence of a few
suitable protocols, how can researchers be encouraged to use them? Though we believe the research quality
and eﬃciency beneﬁts should persuade many researchers, achieving such a large cultural change is likely to
require activism at various levels in the community.
At the most executive level, organizations such as the IEEE could make paper publication conditional
on code publication, perhaps with exceptions in extenuating circumstances. Such a policy seems impossibly
heavy-handed at the moment, though it might be possible for individual journals and conferences. Perhaps
a new journal or conference could adopt this strategy as a diﬀerentiating feature: if the arguments above
are true, such a venue could expect to become disproportionately inﬂuential. We cite some evidence of this
eﬀect from other ﬁelds below.
If requiring code publication seems too ambitious, it is straightforward to prefer it. Publishers, editors,
program committees and individual reviewers can state that, all else being equal, submissions that provide
code are preferred over those that do not. In practice, editors would need to advise reviewers on the weighting
of this preference, as with any other major criteria.
One simple concrete proposal is that the major conferences oﬀer a new prize for “best” (in quality, novelty
or signiﬁcance) published code, along with the usual best paper and service prizes. This would be a low cost,
high visibility measure that recognizes this as a new and signiﬁcant way to contribute to the community.
At the most grassroots level, professors can expect their students to back up all written work with
published code. Generations of grad students are short, and norms can be quickly established by generational
change.
Generational change may happen last to tenure and promotion committees. We hope that academic
departments will gradually come to recognize code publication as a valuable academic activity. However, we
have argued above (and will provide evidence below) that papers with code have more impact than papers
without code. Better quality, higher citation rates and good community visibility leading to stronger referee
letters are beneﬁts that are already working under the traditional evaluation criteria.
We have argued above (Sections 4.1, 5 points 1 & 2) that increased code re-use can make work more
eﬃcient, so the candidate’s number of papers need not be reduced, but if this is a concern, the following
idea could help boost publication rates. When an experiment is substantially re-used and the modiﬁcations
reported, the original author could be named as a co-author on the new paper. This is not appropriate
for middleware and simulation platform code (e.g. Player and Stage), where normal citation is enough, but
rather when the code that embodies the idea of a speciﬁc experiment is inherited. This is a way of rewarding
production of impactful experimental infrastructure, and is analagous to the long author lists seen in for
example genomics and astronomy, where infrastructure – much of which is now software – is recognized as
extremely valuable.
7
The Trend Toward Experiment Publishing
We have argued that publishing code and experimental data is important for the robotics research community,
is good for researchers and easy to do. Yet it is not standard practice in our ﬁeld. The idea of publishing
experimental data and other artifacts beyond ﬁnished papers is not new but it seems to be becoming popular.
Here we survey some government policies, practice in other scientiﬁc disciplines and editorial policies of high
impact journals.
7.1
Government and Funding Agency Policies
The US National Science Foundation (NSF)...
...expects investigators to share with other researchers, at no more than incremental cost and
within a reasonable time, the data, samples, physical collections and other supporting materials
5

created or gathered in the course of the work. It also encourages awardees to share software and
inventions or otherwise act to make the innovations they embody widely useful and usable.[12]
Since October 2003 the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) has required grant applications for $500K
per year and above to include a plan for data sharing or a statement why data sharing is not possible [11].
While the form of data sharing is not considered during the proposal assessment, the NIH sends a clear
signal to encourage publication of data.
The 2003 Berlin Declaration on Open Access to Knowledge [2] may come to be seen as an important
milestone.
At the time of writing the declaration has been signed by 264 funding agencies, universities
and research organizations, including CERN, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Indian National Science
Academy, and the German Research Foundation. The declaration states:
A complete version of the work and all supplemental materials [...] in an appropriate standard
electronic format is deposited (and thus published) in at least one online repository using suitable
technical standards (such as the Open Archive deﬁnitions) that is supported and maintained by
an academic institution, scholarly society, government agency, or other well established organiza-
tion that seeks to enable open access, unrestricted distribution, inter operability, and long-term
archiving. [2]
In a 2004 statement by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) numerous
governments including those of North America and Europe agreed on a declaration on access to research
data from public funding. The OECD recognizes that
an optimum international exchange of data, information and knowledge contributes decisively
to the advancement of scientiﬁc research and innovation. [...] Open access to, and unrestricted
use of, data promotes scientiﬁc progress and facilitates the training of researchers. [20].
In 2007 the US government passed the “America COMPETES Act” [26] requiring federal civilian agencies
that conduct scientiﬁc research to openly exchange data and results with other agencies, policymakers and
the public.
All of these national and international governmental eﬀorts are aimed at improving the quality and
eﬃciency of the science performed at public expense, and each requires or requests that experimental data
and artifacts are shared.
7.2
Practice in non-robotics disciplines
According to Nielsen [18] since 1991 physicists have made extensive use of the preprint server arXiv, which
makes papers freely available at the same time as they are submitted to a journal for publication. Nielsen
views arXiv as an important tool to speed up the transfer of knowledge, but goes further by calling for the
next generation of openness in science by “... making more types of content available than just scientiﬁc
papers; allowing creative reuse and modiﬁcation of existing work through more open licensing.”.
Arguably the life sciences are leading the trend.
For example a US National Academy of Sciences
document on life science best practice [4] requires authors to be consistent with the principles of publication.
This means that anything that is central to a paper is to be made available in a way that enables replication,
veriﬁcation and furtherance of science. When it comes to publishing algorithms, these guidelines are very
explicit:
...if the intricacies of the algorithm make it diﬃcult to describe in a publication, the author
could provide an outline of it in the paper and make the source code [...] available to investiga-
tors... [4]
In epidemiology usually more is at stake than in everyday robotics. Epidemiological ﬁndings often inﬂu-
ence policymakers, thus society requires highly reliable results from this ﬁeld. Peng et al. [21] acknowledge
6

the sensitive nature of this kind of work, and argue that reproducibility is the minimum standard for epi-
demiological research. Reproducibility allows independent investigators to subject the original data to their
own analysis and interpretation. To enable reproducibility Peng
...calls for data sets and software to be made available for 1) verifying published ﬁndings, 2)
conducting alternative analyzes of the same data, 3) eliminating uninformed criticisms that do
not stand up to existing data, and 4) expediting the interchange of ideas among investigators.
[21]
7.3
Journals
While scientists like Leonardo da Vinci, Galileo Galilei and Christiaan Huygens kept their discoveries se-
cret [18], modern science is characterized by publication. Britain’s Royal Society mandated peer-review of
published scientiﬁc articles in its Philosophical Transactions, ﬁrst published in 1665. This policy reﬂected
the philosphy of the Royal Society, expressed in their motto Nullius in Verba (nothing in words / take no-
body’s word for it), that scientiﬁc claims are only valid if reproducible. Since then, peer-reviewed journals
have been the most important way to communicate scientiﬁc results. Now, as the cost of distributing large
amounts of digital data becomes very low - a small fraction of the total cost of an experiment, or of paper
publication - many journals require or at least encourage publication of data, samples, code and detailed
method descriptions alongside the traditional paper.
7.3.1
Science
In 2004 and 2005 Science published two stem cell papers (Science 303, 1669 (2004) and Science 308, 1777
(2005)) which were later discovered to be fraudulent and retracted by the journal. As a consequence Sci-
ence enlisted the help of an outside committee to investigate the handling of the two papers and suggest
improvements to the editorial process of their journal. The committee concluded that Science had correctly
followed their policies and that no procedure could protect against deliberate fraud [9]. Interesting in the
context of our paper is the committee’s recommendation for improving the editorial process “Science should
have substantially stricter requirements about reporting the primary data”. Today Science requires that
• large data sets are deposited in approved public databases prior to publication and an accession number
is included in the published paper.
• all data necessary to understand, assess, and extend the conclusions of the paper must be made available
to the reader, ﬂowing the policies of [12] and [4].
• all reasonable requests for sharing materials are to be fulﬁlled. [3]
7.3.2
Nature
The Nature Publishing Group’s policy on availability of data for all their Nature publications is very similar:
An inherent principle of publication is that others should be able to replicate and build
upon the authors’ published claims. Therefore, a condition of publication in a Nature journal is
that authors are required to make material, data and associated protocols promptly available to
readers without preconditions. [13]
As with Science, Nature requires depositing dataset in publicly accessible databases. Of high interest in
relation to our paper is Nature’s policy on sharing biological materials. It reads
For materials such as mutant strains and cell lines, the Nature journals require authors to
use established public repositories whenever possible [...] and provide accession numbers in the
manuscript. [13]
7

Nature recently highlighted the importance of this issue on the cover of an issue that featured a related
editorial and three news/opinion articles.
The editorial described “data’s shameful neglect”, calling for
funding agencies to boost support for (and pressure on) researchers to make data available [14]. Various
reasons why many researchers choose not to share, despite the existence of purpose-built infrastructure, are
discussed in the context of the perceived failure of a digital archive project at the University of Rochester[17].
A distinction is made between the issues of pre-publication [16] and post-publication [15] sharing of data and
tools. We are advocating simultaneous sharing and publication, which is a special case of post-publication
sharing.
7.3.3
Others
Other journals like Nucleic Acids Research [19] and the Public Library of Science journal series [23] have
very similar policies on data sharing and access to research material.
A less rigorous procedure is employed by the Annals of Internal Medicine. To foster reproducible research
and to enhance trust in scientiﬁc results of publications, the journal encourages authors to make their data
publicly available and mandates authors to include a statement of whether materials are being made available
or not and if under which conditions [10].
7.3.4
Robotics
The journal Autonomous Robots appears to have no stated policy on code and data publication, though
it does support the bundling of supplementary material such as videos and data spreadsheets. The IEEE
Transactions on Robotics is similar, with no policy recommending data or code sharing. However, it does
mention these explicitly in the “multimedia” instructions:
Multimedia can be “playable” ﬁles [...] or “dataset” ﬁles (e.g., raw data with programs to
manipulate them). Such material is intended to enhance the contents of a paper, both in clarity
and in added value.
7.4
Impact on citation rates
Citation counts are commonly used to assess the impact of an author’s work [5]. A 2007 meta-study of
cancer micorarray clinical trials revealed that papers which shared their mircoarray data were cited about
70% more frequently [22] than those that did not. If this eﬀect generalizes to robotics, authors would have
an interest in publishing code in order to boost their citation counts. An increase in citations can also be
achieved by publishing in open-access journals [6].
7.5
Related eﬀorts
A system for sharing and reproducing computations is proposed by Schwab et al. [25], who use their system,
based on GNU make, as the principal means for organizing and transferring scientiﬁc computations in their
geophysics laboratory. The motivation for ReDoc is essentially the same as that described in this paper.
However, perhaps unfortunately, this tool does not appear to have made a large impact in computer science
so far. ReDoc is clever and powerful, but requires the user to learn to read special Make macros. The
method we advocate in this paper is more simple and does not prescribe a particular build system, and can
be thought of as a subset of the ReDoc workﬂow.
8
Sharing in Robotics
Various free-to-use middleware and simulartion platforms for robotics have been used over the last ﬁfteen
years, of which Carmen[7], Player[8] and recently ROS6 are probably the most inﬂuential in research. Much
6http://ros.org
8

of the code-sharing that has occurred is facilitated by one of these three platforms, each of which is the result
of many hours of work.
ROS is currently the platform for a major eﬀort to bootstrap a community based around common
resources. In 2010 Willow Garage7 used their unusual resources to provide ten groups with highly capable
PR2 mobile manipulator robots running ROS software under the condition that resulting code be made
available for later users. While the PR2 is too expensive to be ubiquitous, Willow Garage publishes a family
of simulation models of their robot based on well-known and free platforms. ROS goes much further than
Carmen and Player in encapsulating algorithms, including recent SLAM, vision and control methods, and
making them ready to use as components of a downstream system. While ROS is open source and has maby
contributors, Willow Garage curates the project and does signiﬁcant development.
Willow Garage’s expensive eﬀort is the ﬁrst to provide state-of-the-art mechatronics and system engi-
neering along with free software tools, and is explicitly intended to accelerate research progress by providing
resources shared resources to the community. While there will always be central place for custom robots
in research, more resources from components to complete systems will become available in future. We can
leverage the large investment in open source software and projects like the PR2 by shifting to code sharing
as standard practice.
9
Conclusion
We have shown that meta-government organizations like the OECD see scientiﬁc data exchange as an im-
portant tool for the eﬃcient advancement of scientiﬁc research. We have also argued that code is a form
of data that is particularly important for robotics research. Thus making experimental data including code
and conﬁgurations publicly available is important for the progress of robotics.
Building upon other peoples work is an integral part of the scientiﬁc process. Increasing the eﬃciency of
this process increases community productivity. We suggest that making experimental code identiﬁable will
be helpful. We have also argued that the direct and indirect eﬀects of publishing identiﬁable code are good
for the researcher that shares, as well as for the wider community.
Other research ﬁelds, especially life sciences, have strong requirements to share data sets and provide
free access to supporting materials alongside with traditional paper publications. In the case of Nature a
submission of biological material to a public repository may be required. In robotics, while sharing physical
robots may be prohibitively expensive, sharing digital resources takes little time or treasure. Freely available
infrastructure allows the upload of a complete experiment (software, build scripts, data, analysis scripts etc.)
to a public repository in a few seconds with a few button presses. Code sharing in robotics is easy.
The issues discussed here are not new, and a subset of robotics researchers does publish source code
implementations of their algorithms, to the beneﬁt of everyone. The main contribution here is to point out
the importance of distributing uniquely identiﬁable versions and not just the latest and “best” version. We
have argued that this methodological issue is important, that originators and subsequent users can both
beneﬁt, and suggested an easy-to-follow publishing protocol. Our group will follow this protocol and observe
its eﬀects.
