arXiv:1802.08540v1  [cs.AI]  4 Feb 2018
Optimal Stochastic Delivery Planning in
Full-Truckload and Less-Than-Truckload Delivery
Suttinee Sawadsitang∗, Rakpong Kaewpuang∗, Siwei Jiang†, Dusit Niyato∗, Ping Wang∗
∗School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
†Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology (SIMTech) A*STAR
Abstract—With an increasing demand from emerging logistics
businesses, Vehicle Routing Problem with Private ﬂeet and
common Carrier (VRPPC) has been introduced to manage
package delivery services from a supplier to customers. However,
almost all of existing studies focus on the deterministic problem
that assumes all parameters are known perfectly at the time
when the planning and routing decisions are made. In reality,
some parameters are random and unknown. Therefore, in this
paper, we consider VRPPC with hard time windows and random
demand, called Optimal Delivery Planning (ODP). The proposed
ODP aims to minimize the total package delivery cost while
meeting the customer time window constraints. We use stochastic
integer programming to formulate the optimization problem
incorporating the customer demand uncertainty. Moreover, we
evaluate the performance of the ODP using test data from
benchmark dataset and from actual Singapore road map.
Index Terms—Full-truckload, less-than-truckload, stochastic
programming.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, new businesses such as franchise and online
shopping have been introduced and become popular rapidly.
However, these businesses introduce sophisticated logistics
requirements for product/package delivery. Given an increase
in delivery destinations and demand ﬂuctuation, suppliers need
to strategize their delivery plan to minimize cost while meeting
customer demand. Meanwhile, two delivery modes exist. The
ﬁrst delivery mode is for the supplier to rent a whole truck
and use the truck for package delivery. This is referred to as
full-truckload (FTL) delivery mode.1 The second mode is for
the supplier to outsource the delivery to a third-party carrier in
an on-demand basis. This is referred to as less-than-truckload
(LTL) delivery mode.2 Suppliers can use either FTL, LTL, or
the combination to achieve their business goal.
The FTL, i.e., renting a truck, is likely to be cheaper than
LTL if the truck capacity is fully or almost fully utilized.
However, truck renting requires an advance reservation at
which the supplier may not know the exact customer demands.
The actual demand can be more or less than the reserved
truck capacity, which result in under- and over-reservation
problems, respectively. Furthermore, a customer may specify a
time window of delivery. The time window is a period of time
that a package must be delivered. Time window constraints
1“FTL”,“Fleet”, “Private vehicle”, and “Truck” are interchangeable.
2“LTL” and “Carrier” are interchangeable.
can be hard and soft. In hard time window constraint, the
delivery must be done within the window. In soft time window
constraint, the delivery can be outside the window, but this
incurs penalty cost to the delivery. With the time window
constraints, the supplier can use on-demand LTL delivery
services from a third party carrier.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we consider
the vehicle planning and routing problem to design optimal
delivery routes from a depot to a number of geographically
scattered customers [1]. In particular, we aim to obtain the
routes for full-truckload (FTL) vehicles from a single depot to
the customers to which their packages have to be delivered.
The delivery must be in the time window of each customer.
Alternatively, the LTL service can be used by the supplier
in which the carrier is responsible to ﬁnd the delivery route
by itself. In this paper, we propose the Optimal Delivery
Planning (ODP) to minimize the total delivery cost for sup-
pliers. As such, we formulate an optimization problem based
on stochastic integer programming. Uncertainty in the cus-
tomer demands is taken into account together with customer
time window constraints. The stochastic integer programming
model allows to analyze and optimize FTL vehicle planning
and routing and LTL services on multiple time stages given the
available information of the uncertainty. Moreover, we perform
extensive performance evaluation of the ODP based on both
standard benchmark and actual test data of Singapore road
map. Compared with the baseline methods, the proposed ODP
can achieve signiﬁcantly lower total delivery cost.
II. RELATED WORK
Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) is one of the major research
topics in supply chain management. The survey by Canhong
Lin et al [1] (2014) shows the signiﬁcantly increasing interests
of VRP from researchers in academia and practitioners in
industry due to new emerging business opportunities such as
online shopping. However, most of the related work considered
only private truckloads or full-truckload (FTL). Meanwhile,
Vehicle Routing Problem with Private ﬂeet and common
Carrier (VRPPC) has got only little attention. VRPPC has
some beneﬁts over classical VRP as it allows more ﬂexibility
for the suppliers to use less-than-truckload (LTL) for delivery.
However, VRPPC is more complex than VRP as external
carriers are involved.

VRPPC has been introduced in [2]. The VRPPC was
formulated using mathematical programming to obtain the
solutions regarding (i) which size of the FTL truck will be
applied, (ii) which customer should be served by the FTL truck
or an LTL carrier, and (iii) what the routing path of the FTL
truck will be. To obtain the solutions, the greedy algorithm is
adopted. The VRPPC [2] has been extended since then, e.g.,
[3], [4], [5], [6].
The authors in [3] formulated VRPPC by using integer pro-
gramming [3]. They added initial cost of FTL trucks and cost
of LTL carrier into objective function. The decision variable of
LTL carriers was added into the optimization model, and the
LTL decision variable was solved together with FTL and rout-
ing path. They proposed a heuristic algorithm, called TL-LTL
algorithm to obtain the solution. The authors in [4] proposed
the improved heuristic algorithm of [3], called “Selection,
Routing and Improvement (SRI)”. The authors in [4] used
λ-interchange procedure in the result improvement step while
the authors in [3] used three procedures, i.e., intra-route two-
exchanges, inter-route one-exchange and two-exchanges. The
results from SRI algorithm are always closer to optimal values
than TL-LTL results. The authors in [5] introduced the Iterated
Density Estimation Evolutionary Algorithm (IDEA). It was
shown that IDEA performs better than SRI. The comparison
between genetic, SRI, and TL-LTL algorithms were presented
in [6]. The evaluation indicated that under various settings
the genetic and SRI algorithms can reach optimal results
more frequently than the TL-LTL algorithm. Furthermore, the
genetic algorithm obtains a solution faster than the TL-LTL
algorithm.
Although there are different optimization formulations and
algorithms for VRPPC, we consider different aspects of the
problem. In particular, as the customer demand is not known
exactly when the supplier makes a decision in reality, exist-
ing formulations and algorithms which rely heavily on this
information are not applicable. Therefore, we introduce the
two-stage stochastic integer programming model to address
the uncertainty issue of the customer demand. Moreover, we
consider the time window constraint and truck traveling limit
constraints as well as the improved subtour elimination. The
comparison between the ODP and existing algorithms i.e., TL-
LTL, SRI, IDEA, is not presented as they did not consider
randomness in the formulation.
III. SYSTEM MODEL AND ASSUMPTIONS
In this section, we describe the Optimal Delivery Planning
(ODP) system model. With the last mile delivery, we consider
the decisions in the ODP to be made in two stages (Figure 1).
The ﬁrst stage is when the supplier decides how many and
which FTL trucks will be used to deliver packages to which
customers. The decision will be made based on the available
FTL truck information and the probability distribution of
customer demand. Here, the exact customer demand has not
been known yet. In the second stage, the supplier makes
two decisions after the actual demand is observed. The ﬁrst
Reserve 
FTL trucks
(1st stage)
Morning 
time window
Afternoon
time window
Evening
time window
Xi,t
FTL truck routing
LTL carrier assignment
Yi,rVu,v,t
Actual demand 
is observed
FTL truck routing
LTL carrier assignment
FTL truck routing
LTL carrier assignment
Delivery
Delivery
Delivery
2nd stage
Fig. 1: Timing diagram of decision making in Optimal Deliv-
ery Planning (ODP).
decision is to determine the customers to be served by a
particular FTL truck or by LTL service from a carrier. The
second decision is to ﬁnd the best delivery route of the FTL
trucks to the assigned customers.
The supplier has a set of customers to deliver packages.
Let C = {C1, C2, . . . , Cn′} denote the set of customers,
where n′ denotes the total number of customers. Let ω =
(D1, D2, . . . , Dn′) be a scenario of all customers. Di repre-
sents a binary parameter of demand from customer i in which
Di = 1 means that customer Ci has demand, i.e., there is a
package to be delivered, and Di = 0 otherwise. Note that two
or more packages for the same customer can be grouped as
one package. ω can be regarded as a scenario in which the
set of scenarios is denoted by Q, i.e., ω ∈Q. For example,
if the supplier has three customers, the demand scenario is
denoted by ω = (D1, D2, D3) in which (1, 1, 0) indicates that
customers 1 and 2 have the demand while customer 3 does
not. Let A = (A1, A2, . . . , An′) be a list of package weights,
the unit of which is kilogram. We assume that if customer i
has demand, i.e., Di = 1, then the package of the demand has
the weight of Ai.
Let T
= {T1, T2, . . . , Tt′} denote a set of FTL trucks
of the supplier, where t′ is the total number of trucks. Let
R = {R1, R2, . . . , Rr′} denote a set of LTL carriers, where
r′ is the total number of carriers. The supplier has to determine
the route of FTL trucks starting from the depot to visit
all assigned customers, and returning to the depot after the
delivery is completed. Let U = C ∪{depot} denote a set of
locations of customers and the depot, which is the source and
the sink of the routing. The distance from location u to location
v is denoted by Ku,v.
A. Customer Time Windows
Time window is a time period that a customer requires
its package to be delivered. In this paper, we consider three
time windows, i.e., morning, afternoon, and evening. Let Im,
Ia, and Ie be the sets of customers who will receive their
packages in the morning, afternoon, and evening, respectively
(Im, Ia, Ie ⊂C and Im ∪Ia ∪Ie = C). The sets Im, Ia,

and Ie must not include the same customers (Im ∩Ia = ∅,
Im ∩Ie = ∅, Ia ∩Ie = ∅). For each time window, a route
of each FTL truck must not exceed its distance limit. The
traveling distance limits are denoted as L(m), L(a), and L(e)
for morning, afternoon, and evening, respectively. In addition,
we assume that the package dispatching time at each customer
is short and negligible.
B. Pricing
Three different payments are considered.
•
¯Ct denotes the initial cost for FTL truck t. The initial
cost can include driver stipend, truck rental fee, and
maintenance expense.
• bCi,r denotes the LTL carrier service charge of delivering
a package to customer i by carrier r.
•
¨Cu,v denotes the routing cost of the FTL truck from lo-
cation u to location v, where u, v ∈U. The routing costs
are calculated based on the distance between u and v.
IV. PROBLEM FORMULATION
We formulate the stochastic integer programming model for
the ODP. There are ﬁve decision variables in the model.
• Xi,t is an FTL truck allocation in which Xi,t = 1 if FTL
truck t is allocated to customer i, and Xi,t = 0 otherwise.
• Yi,r is an LTL carrier allocation in which Yi,r = 1 if LTL
carrier r is used for customer i, and Yi,r = 0 otherwise.
• Wt is a variable indicating the use of FTL truck for the
delivery in which Wt = 1 if FTL truck t will be used,
and Wt = 0 otherwise.
• Vu,v,t is a routing variable in which Vu,v,t = 1 if FTL
truck t will travel from location u to location v. Again,
u, v = 0 represents the depot.
• Si,t is an auxiliary variable for eliminating a subtour in
the routing solution.
The objective function given in (1) and (2) is to minimize
total payment which includes (i) initial cost of FTL truck,
(ii) LTL carrier service charge, and (iii) the cost of FTL
vehicle routing. The expressions in (1) and (2) represent the
ﬁrst stage and second stage objectives, respectively. In the
second stage, P(ω) is the probability of scenario ω. The term
P
i∈C
P
t∈T Xi,t is used to minimize the allocation of FTL
trucks to customers.
Minimize:
X
i∈C
X
t∈T
Xi,t +
X
t∈T
¯
CtWt + E[Q(Xi,t(ω), Wt(ω))],
(1)
where
Q(Xi,t(ω), Wt(ω)) =
X
i∈C
X
r∈R
X
ω∈Q
P (ω) b
Ci,rYi,r(ω)+
X
u∈U
X
v∈U
X
t∈T
X
ω∈Q
P (ω) ¨
Cu,vVu,v,t(ω)
(2)
subject to: (3) - (19)
X
t∈T
Xi,t +
X
r∈R
Yi,r(ω) ≥Di(ω),
∀i ∈C, ∀ω ∈Q
(3)
X
i∈C
AiXi,t ≤Ft,
∀t ∈T
(4)
X
i∈C
Xi,t ≤1000Wt,
∀t ∈T
(5)
Vu,u,t(ω) = 0
∀u ∈U, ∀t ∈T , ∀ω ∈Q
(6)
X
u∈U
Vu,0,t(ω) ≤1,
∀t ∈T , ∀ω ∈Q
(7)
X
u∈U
V0,u,t(ω) ≤1,
∀t ∈T , ∀ω ∈Q
(8)
X
u∈U
Vu,i,t(ω) = Xi,tDi(ω)
∀i ∈C, ∀t ∈T , ∀ω ∈Q
(9)
X
u∈U
Vi,u,t(ω) = Xi,tDi(ω)
∀i ∈C, ∀t ∈T , ∀ω ∈Q
(10)
X
u∈U
X
i∈I(m)
Vu,i,t(ω)Ku,i ≤L(m)
∀t ∈T , ∀ω ∈Q
(11)
X
u∈U
X
i∈I(a)
Vu,i,t(ω)Ku,i ≤L(a)
∀t ∈T , ∀ω ∈Q
(12)
X
u∈U
X
i∈I(e)
Vu,i,t(ω)Ku,i ≤L(e)
∀t ∈T , ∀ω ∈Q
(13)
Si,t(ω) −Sj,t(ω) + |C|Vi,j,t(ω) ≤|C| −1,
∀i, ∀j ∈C, ∀t ∈T , ∀ω ∈Q
(14)
Si,t(ω)Di(ω) ≤Sj,t(ω) + |I(m)|(1 −Di(ω)),
∀i ∈I(m), ∀j ∈I(a), ∀t ∈T , ∀ω ∈Q
(15)
Si,t(ω)Di(ω) ≤Sj,t(ω) + |I(a)|(1 −Di(ω)),
∀i ∈I(a), ∀j ∈I(e), ∀t ∈T , ∀ω ∈Q
(16)
Xi,t, Wt ∈{0, 1},
∀i ∈C, ∀t ∈T
(17)
Yi,r(ω), Vu,v,t(ω), ∈{0, 1},
r ∈R, ∀u, ∀v ∈U, ∀t ∈T , ∀ω ∈Q
(18)
Si,t(ω) ∈{0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , n′},
∀i ∈C, ∀t ∈T , ∀ω ∈Q
(19)
The constraint in (3) ensures that if customers have demand,
their packages will be assigned to one FTL truck or one LTL
carrier. For each FTL truck, the constraint in (4) ensures that
the weight of packages must not exceed the capacity of FTL
truck t denoted by Ft. The initial cost of each FTL truck t
must be paid when any demand is assigned to FTL truck t
as indicated in the constraint in (5). We assume that the total
number of customers is less than 1000.
The constraints in (6)-(10) are to ﬁnd an optimal routing
path. The constraint in (6) eliminates all the paths that start
and end at the same point. The constraints in (7)-(8) are for
the depot constraints. In particular, they guarantee that FTL
trucks will have one path departing from and returning to the
depot. Similar to the depot constraints, the constraints in (9)-
(10) are for the customers to be delivered by the FTL truck.
In this case, the routing of customer Ci will not be selected,
i.e., Vu,i,t, Vi,u,t = 0, if customer Ci does not have demand,
or the customer has demand but the demand is not assigned
to FTL truck t.
To control the delivery distance limit of each FTL truck, the
constraints in (11), (12), and (13) are used for morning, after-
noon, and evening time windows, respectively. For example,
each FTL truck cannot travel more than 100 kilometres in the
morning, e.g., due to speed limit regulations.
The subtour elimination constraint is given in (14). Si,t(ω)
indicating a visiting order of routing if the path from and
to customer i by truck t is selected. For each FTL truck, this

constraint does not allow two or more disjointed tours to cover
all assigned customers. One example of FTL truck t serving
ﬁve customers is depot →C5 →C3 →C1 →C2 →C4 →
depot, where S1,t = 3, S2,t = 4, S3,t = 2, S4,t = 5, S5,t = 1.
This constraint can be explained that if the path from customer
i to j is selected, i.e., Vi,j,t(ω) = 1, then Si,t(ω) must be less
than Sj,t(ω).
In addition, the constraint in (15) uses Si,t(ω) to ensure
that all customers in the morning time window will be served
before the afternoon time window. Similar to the constraint in
(15), that in (16) ensures that all customers in the afternoon
time window will be served before the evening time window.
The last three constraints in (17)-(19) indicate the types
and bounds of the decision variables. Xi,t, Wt, Yi,r(ω), and
Vu,v,t(ω) are binary variables, and Si,t(ω) takes a value
between one and the total number of customers.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Parameter Setting
We consider the system model with three types of FTL
trucks and one LTL carrier. FTL trucks include a panel van, a
10ft box truck, and a 14ft box truck, the capacities of which
are F1 = 1060, F2 = 1360 and F3 = 2268 kilograms,
respectively. Based on Singapore commercial vehicle rental
agencies [8], [9], the initial costs for renting a truck are set
as ¯C1 = S$280, ¯C2 = S$440 and ¯C3 = S$640. The cost
of FTL truck routing is ¨Cu,v = Ku,v × 1.05 × 0.1, which
is calculated based on the distance between locations u and
v multiplied by the approximate fuel price (S$ per litre) and
the average fuel consumption rate (litre per kilometer). We
base the values of the parameters on that from Singapore
Government statistics [10]. For the LTL carrier, we adopt the
parameters from the Speedpost service offered by SingPost
company [11]. The LTL carrier service charge is S$21 for a
30 kilogram package. Ai is set equal to 30 kilograms.
In this paper, we present the evaluation results from two
different datasets including Solomon Benchmark Suite [7] and
Singapore road network. For Solomon Benchmark Suite, we
adopt the ﬁle C101 with some modiﬁcation in our eval-
uation. The customer time window is calculated based on
READYTIME/150 + 9 (12 < I(m), 12 ≤I(a) < 15, 15 ≤
I(e)). For Singapore road network, we randomly choose 20
customer addresses and the location of the depot in Singapore.
We assume that the traveling distance from location u to
location v and from location v to location u are the same.
The time windows are based on Solomon Benchmark Suite.
For the presented experiments, we implement the stochastic
integer programming model using GAMS Script [12]. Note
that some parameters are varied for different experiment
scenarios.
B. Results and Explanations
The vehicle routing solutions are presented in Figure 2
and Figure 3 for Singapore road network (20 customers) and
Fig. 2: The van vehicle route of the real Singapore Road
Network dataset.
Solomon Benchmark Suite (40 customers), respectively. From
the ﬁgures, only one panel van is selected. We observe that all
customers in Singapore dataset are served by the FTL truck.
However, for the Solomon Benchmark test result, 5 customers
are served by the LTL carrier due to the capacity limit of the
FTL truck. The total costs from the Solomon Benchmark and
Singapore road map are S$400.686 and S$294.826. Note that
the former includes S$280 of truck initial cost, $105 of LTL
carrier service charge, and $15.686 of routing cost. The latter
includes only $280 of truck initial cost and $14.826 of routing
cost.
C. Impact of the Number of Customers
We consider the case that all customers have demand, i.e.,
one scenario in this case. The total cost when the number of
customers increases is presented in Figure 4. When the number
of customers is few, e.g., less than 15, the supplier always
serves all the customers by the LTL truck. This is because
the initial cost of the FTL truck is more expensive. When the
number of customers increases to more than 15, only the FTL
truck is used since its initial cost and routing cost become
cheaper than that using LTL carrier. The truck can handle up
to 35 customers due to the capacity limit, i.e., a package of
each customer is 30 kilograms.
D. Comparison
We next compare the different schemes including using only
van, using only 14ft lorry, using only 16ft lorry, using only
LTL carrier, and our proposed ODP. The results are shown
in Figure 5. If the supplier uses only FTL trucks, each truck
has an initial cost. When the number of customers increases,
the total cost increases almost linearly due to routing cost.
Moreover, each truck has a capacity limit, and the number of
customers that can be served is conﬁned by such a constraint.
On the other hand, using the LTL carrier is more ﬂexible, and
the supplier only needs to pay according to the actual demand.
However, the LTL carrier charge is expensive and the total cost
increases sharply especially when the number of customers is
large. Evidently, the proposed ODP based on stochastic integer

 3
 5
 7
 8
10
11
13
15
17
18
19
20
24
25
27
29
30
31
32
33
35
37
40
 2
 4
 6
 9
12
14
16
22
23
26
28
34
36
38
39
 1
21
Morning
Afternoon
Evening
Depot
depot
Number of customers
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Cost  (S$)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Cost of Van
Cost of Carrier
Cost of Routing
Total cost
Exceed capacity
Change to Van
Number of Customers
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Cost  (S$)
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
Only Van
Only 14ft Lorry
Only 16ft Lorry
Only LTL
ODP
Exceed 14ft truck capacity
Using 14ft + Carrier
Using Van + Carrier
Exceed Van capacity
Fig. 3: The van vehicle route of
Solomon benchmark.
Fig. 4: Variant numbers of customers
with one van truck in a system
Fig. 5: The comparison between using
only carrier, only one kind of FTL
trucks, and the ODP.
programming achieves the lowest total cost. This is due to the
fact the ODP always uses the cheapest option.
E. Impact of Customer Locations
We then consider 21 customers, where customers C1 to
C20 are from Solomon Benchmark dataset. The location of
customer C21 is varied. The locations of all customers in this
experiment are shown in Figure 6(a). Figure 6(b) presents
the total cost. When customer C21’s location becomes farther
away from C1, the truck routing cost to this customer in-
creases. Until the distance is more than the traveling distance
limit, i.e., 50 kilometers, the supplier uses the LTL carrier to
serve this customer C21. Otherwise, the customer may not be
served during the time window.
 3
 5
 7
 8
10
11
13
15
17
18
19
20
 2
 4
 6
 9
12
14
16
 1
21
Morning
Afternoon
Evening
Depot
depot
distance between
1 to 21 is X
Distance between Customer 1 to Customer 21
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Cost  (S$)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Cost of Van
Cost of Carrier
Cost of Routing
Total cost
Exceed distance limit
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6: Adding a customer (C21) to various locations as
presented in (a). (b) presents total delivery cost.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed the Optimal Delivery Plan-
ning (ODP) for a supplier to make the best decisions of full-
truckload and less-than truckload delivery. However, the de-
livery demand from customers is random and the information
of which is not known when the trucks have to be reserved.
Therefore, we have formulated the ODP as the two-stage
stochastic programming with customer demand uncertainty.
The ODP optimizes the total delivery cost for the supplier.
The trade-off between truck allocation and carrier assignments
has been optimized. The experiment results from two datasets,
i.e., Solomon Benchmark and Singapore road network, have
been presented. Compared to the other baseline schemes, the
ODP has successfully achieved the lowest delivery cost. For
the future work, we will incorporate a truck break down event
into the optimization model.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partially supported by Singapore Institute of
Manufacturing Technology-Nanyang Technological University
(SIMTech-NTU) Joint Laboratory and Collaborative research
Programme on Complex Systems.
