Principal deuterium Hugoniot via Quantum Monte Carlo and ∆-learning
Giacomo Tenti,1, ∗Kousuke Nakano,2, † Andrea Tirelli,1 Sandro Sorella,1 and Michele Casula3
1International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy
2Center for Basic Research on Materials, National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan
3Institut de Min´eralogie, de Physique des Mat´eriaux et de Cosmochimie (IMPMC),
Sorbonne Universit´e, CNRS UMR 7590, MNHN, 4 Place Jussieu, 75252 Paris, France
(Dated: May 7, 2024)
We present a study of the principal deuterium Hugoniot for pressures up to 150 GPa, using
Machine Learning potentials (MLPs) trained with Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) energies, forces
and pressures. In particular, we adopted a recently proposed workflow based on the combination
of Gaussian kernel regression and ∆-learning.
By fully taking advantage of this method, we
explicitly considered finite-temperature electrons in the dynamics, whose effects are highly relevant
for temperatures above 10 kK. The Hugoniot curve obtained by our MLPs shows a good agreement
with the most recent experiments, particularly in the region below 60 GPa. At larger pressures,
our Hugoniot curve is slightly more compressible than the one yielded by experiments, whose
uncertainties generally increase, however, with pressure. Our work demonstrates that QMC can
be successfully combined with ∆-learning to deploy reliable MLPs for complex extended systems
across different thermodynamic conditions, by keeping the QMC precision at the computational cost
of a mean-field calculation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The study of hydrogen under extreme conditions has
been a very active topic in condensed matter physics.
Hydrogen is the most abundant element in the universe
and the accurate knowledge of its phase diagram at
pressures of the order of hundreds of GPa is extremely
important for a variety of applications, such as modeling
the interior of stars and giant gas planets [1–3], the
inertial-confinement fusion [4], and the high-Tc hydrogen-
based superconductors [5, 6].
Nevertheless, several
properties of this system are still highly debated, even
at the qualitative level [7–10].
One of the main reasons that hamper our full
understanding of high-pressure hydrogen is the difficulty
of reproducing extreme pressures in a laboratory. Typical
shock-wave experiments [11] make use of accelerated
flyer plates to compress a material sample in a very
short time, thus allowing the study of specimens at
high temperatures and pressures. In particular, the set
of possible end-states that the system can reach from
some given initial conditions, also named the principal
Hugoniot, must satisfy a set of equations, known as
the Rankine-Hugoniot (RH) relations [12], linking the
thermodynamic properties of the final shocked state with
those of the starting one. During the years, the principal
deuterium Hugoniot has been measured for a wide range
of pressures and with a great degree of accuracy [13–20],
particularly in the lower pressure (≲60 GPa) region,
where the relative error on the density is as small as 2%
in recent experiments.
In this context, numerical approaches, in particular
Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics (AIMD) simulations, are

extremely valuable, since they are not constrained by any
experimental setup and can thus give further insight into
this part of the phase diagram [21]. The Hugoniot region
is particularly important because of the availability
of experimental data that can be used to benchmark
different theoretical methods.
Among them, Density
Functional Theory (DFT) has been extensively applied to
compute the Hugoniot curve [22–28]. In this framework,
the approximations behind the particular exchange-
correlation functional often produce discrepancies across
existing DFT schemes, whose accuracy varies according
to the thermodynamic conditions.
Quantum Monte
Carlo
(QMC)
simulations,
which
depend on more
controllable approximations, have also been performed
[29, 30].
Although in principle more accurate and
systematically improvable, these calculations have a
much larger computational cost than DFT, and they
are thus limited in system size and simulation length.
Moreover, previous QMC calculations [29] seem to give
results for the principal Hugoniot in disagreement with
the most recent experimental data, with the possible
origin of this discrepancy being recently debated [31].
To overcome the large computational cost of ab
initio simulations, machine learning techniques, aimed
at constructing accurate potential energy surfaces, have
become increasingly popular. Within this approach, one
uses a dataset of configurations, i.e.
the training set,
to build a machine learning potential (MLP) that is
able to reproduce energies and forces calculated with
the given target method [32].
Unlike DFT MLPs,
the QMC ones are relatively less common, given the
larger computational cost and the consequent difficulty of
generating large datasets, usually necessary to construct
accurate MLPs.
In this work, we have built an accurate MLP using
QMC energies, forces and pressures in the region of
the deuterium Hugoniot, using the so-called ∆-learning
arXiv:2301.03570v2  [cond-mat.str-el]  3 May 2024

2
approach. The Hugoniot curve computed by our QMC-
MLP shows an excellent agreement with the most recent
experiments at low density, while presenting a slightly
larger compressibility for temperatures above 10 kK,
where the experimental points are also affected by larger
error bars.
II.
COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS
In order to build an MLP with QMC references, we
employed a combination of Gaussian Kernel Regression
(GKR), Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions (SOAP)
descriptors [33], and ∆-learning.
The same approach
has been recently proposed in Ref. 34, where it was
applied to the study of high-pressure hydrogen in
similar thermodynamic conditions.
Following the ∆-
learning approach, an MLP is trained on the difference
between the target method and a usually much cheaper
baseline potential. Here, we trained several MLPs, using
Variational Monte Carlo (VMC) and Lattice Regularized
Diffusion Monte Carlo (LRDMC) [35, 36] datapoints
as targets,
and two different DFT baselines,
with
the Perdew-Zunger Local Density Approximation (PZ-
LDA) [37] and the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) [38]
functionals.
To determine the principal Hugoniot, we made use of
the RH jump equation:
H(ρ, T) = e(ρ, T) −e0 + 1
2(ρ−1 −ρ−1
0 ) [p(ρ, T) + p0] = 0,
(1)
where ρ, T, e(ρ, T), p(ρ, T) and ρ0, T0, e0, p0 are the
density, temperature, energy per particle and pressure of
the final and initial states, respectively. In particular, we
ran a first set of NV T simulations for a system of N =
128 atoms at several temperatures in the [4 kK : 8 kK]
range, and Wigner-Seitz radii between 1.80 Bohr and
2.24 Bohr, corresponding to the range where the zero of
H(ρ, T) was expected. These simulations were performed
considering classical nuclei and ground-state electrons, as
quantum corrections and thermal effects have been shown
to be negligible for these temperatures [30]. At each step,
the energy, forces and pressure were calculated using the
Quantum Espresso package in its GPU accelerated
version [39–41] with the chosen functional (PBE in most
cases), and then corrected with our MLP trained on the
difference between QMC and DFT data. The resulting
dynamics has the same efficiency as a standard DFT
AIMD simulation, which is roughly 100 times faster than
the original QMC one.
For the DFT simulations, we
considered a 60 Ry plane-wave cutoff with a Projector
Augmented Wave (PAW) pseudopotential [42] and a
4 × 4 × 4 Monkhorst-Pack k-point grid, while for the
dynamics we used a time step of 0.25 fs and a Langevin
thermostat [43, 44] with damping γ = 13 ps−1.
For
each temperature, the Hugoniot (ρ∗, p∗) coordinates are
determined by fitting the Hugoniot function H(ρ, T)
and the pressure p(ρ, T) with a spline function, and by
numerically finding ρ∗and the corresponding p∗.
The QMC calculations were performed using the
TurboRVB package [45, 46].
When generating our
QMC-MLP model, we took particular care to the training
set construction, based on energies, forces and pressures
all computed at the QMC (VMC or LRDMC) level. In
general, QMC forces and pressure are not guaranteed to
be consistent with the relative potential energy surface,
due to the practical difficulty of optimizing all the
parameters within a given ansatz for the VMC wave
function (WF). This is often called the self-consistency
error [47–49]. Even if ML frameworks generally satisfy
the consistency property by construction, the presence
of biased forces and pressure in the training can spoil
the accuracy of the model and produce, in principle,
unintended results.
Therefore, to avoid these issues,
we mitigated the self-consistency error by directly
optimizing not only the Jastrow factor but also the
determinantal part of the VMC WF. The details of
our QMC simulations are reported in the Supplemental
Material (SM) [50].
Within our approach, we can fully take advantage
of the ∆-learning method by estimating the effect of
thermalized electrons in our calculations. To do so, we
ran simulations at temperatures T = 10 kK, 15 kK,
20 kK and 35 kK considering the effect of finite T in
the underlying PBE energies and forces. In this way, we
can include the effects of thermally excited electrons in
our MLP without changing it, at least at the DFT level
of theory. Here, the effect of the explicit dependence of
the DFT functional on T was not considered, since it has
been shown to be negligible for hydrogen systems and the
temperature range analyzed here [28, 51, 52]. We remark
that this approach is also applicable when a DFT-MLP
is used as a baseline in place of an ab initio calculation,
where finite temperature effects can be estimated from
the DFT density of states [53].
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Fig. 1a shows our results together with several
experimental values for pressures below 150 GPa [16,
19, 20]. We also report the principal Hugoniot obtained
by directly using the PBE baseline and the Coupled
Electron Ion Monte Carlo (CEIMC) results of Ref. 30
for comparison.
For temperatures larger than T
=
10 kK the results refer to the MDs obtained using finite
temperature DFT as a baseline.
Both the VMC and
LRDMC models give a very similar Hugoniot line, well
reproducing the experimental points in the low density -
low pressure region. With respect to the most accurate
data of Ref. 19, our estimate of the relative density ρ/ρ0
at the compressibility peak is ∼3 −4% larger, still
within the error bars. For larger pressures, we predict

3
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
/
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Pressure (GPa)
PBE-FT
VdW-DF1 (Ref.19)
Experiments
VMC
LRDMC
VMC (Ref. 30)
RMC (Ref. 30)
(a)
15
20
25
30
35
Shock velocity Us (km/s) 
10
15
20
25
Particle velocity up (km/s)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Us (km/s)
(b)
FIG. 1: (1a) Principal Hugoniot in the density-pressure space. Red and yellow circles are the results obtained with our
MLPs trained on VMC and LRDMC datapoints, respectively, and a PBE baseline. Blue and pink triangles are the PBE
result calculated in this work and the VdW-DF1 result of Ref. 19 respectively. CEIMC results of Ref. 30 based on Variational
Monte Carlo (VMC) and Reptation Monte Carlo (RMC) are reported in green squares. Cyan diamonds are the experimental
results of Refs. 16, 19, and 20. Dashed lines are guides for the eye. (1b) [top panel] Hugoniot in the up–Us space.
Black-dashed line is the re-analyzed gas-gun fit reported in Ref. 19, i.e., the shock velocity extrapolated from measures of
molecular deuterium at low pressure [13]. [bottom panel] Relative shock velocity with respect to the gas-gun fit. Only the
experimental points of Ref. 19 are reported.
a Hugoniot mostly compatible within the experiments
but systematically more compressible. However, in this
regime the correspondingly larger uncertainties in the
measures prevent a clear-cut assessment of our outcome.
Our results also agree with the low-temperature CEIMC
ones reported in Ref. 30 within the statistical accuracy.
Fig. 1b displays the same points in the up −Us space,
where up is the particle velocity and Us is the shock
velocity, the two being calculated using the following RH
relations:
up =
q
(p + p0)(ρ−1
0
−ρ−1),
Us = ρ−1
0
s
p + p0
ρ−1
0
−ρ−1 .
The difference ∆Us between these points and the linear
fit on the gas-gun data re-analyzed in Ref. 19 is also
shown (bottom panel of Fig. 1b). Notice that the drop
in the slope of Us relative to up coincides with the
onset of the molecular-atomic (MA) transition, while the
magnitude of the ∆Us minimum relates to the position
of the relative compression peak.
In particular, the
PBE Hugoniot curve manifests a premature start of the
dissociation, while it predicts correctly the magnitude
of the compressibility maximum.
Our QMC results
correctly predict the position of the peak and starting
slope, while showing some discrepancies for up ≳10 km/s
with respect to the data of Ref. 19. In this regime, DFT,
and in particular the result obtained with the VdW-DF1
functional [54, 55], seems to be in better agreement with
experiments, thanks to a favorable error cancellation in
the Hugoniot [31]. We noticed how, in this study, the
discrepancy with the experiments is much milder than
the value reported by previous QMC calculations at
densities and pressures close to the compressibility peak
[29]. This can be due to the explicit optimization of the
WF nodal surface provided by our WF ansatz, which
reduces the fixed node error mentioned in Ref. 31, the
only approximation left in any projective Monte Carlo
calculation, such as LRDMC and RMC. The difference
between the various methods is also apparent in their
equations of state, reported in the SM [50].
The presence of an MA transition is investigated
in Fig. 2,
where we report the radial distribution
function, g(r), calculated on trajectories obtained with
the LRDMC model for several temperatures at densities
close to the Hugoniot curve. The inset of Fig. 2 displays
the value of the molecular fraction m, defined as the
percentage of atoms that stay within a distance of 2 Bohr
(roughly corresponding to the first g(r) minimum after
the molecular peak) from another particle for longer than
a characteristic time, here set to 6 fs. The results indicate

4
a distinct atomic character for T ≥10 kK and a clear
molecular peak at lower temperatures.
The LRDMC
model shows slower decay of the molecular fraction with
temperature than the PBE and VdW-DF1 ones, being
compatible with the latter for temperatures above 10 kK.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
 r (bohr)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
 g(r)
T = 4kK
T = 6kK
T = 7kK
T = 8kK
T = 10kK
T = 15kK
T = 20kK
T = 35kK
4
6 7 8
10
15
Temperature (kK)
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Molecular_fraction m
PBE
VdW-DF1
DMC
18
30 36 40
49
66
Pressure (GPa)
FIG. 2:
g(r) for several temperatures and densities close to
the principal Hugoniot, obtained using the LRDMC model.
The molecular fraction value, m, is reported in the inset for
each value of temperature up to 15kK. On the top axis the
corresponding pressure at the Hugoniot is also shown. The
values obtained with an ab initio DFT dynamics using the
PBE and VdW-DF1 functionals are reported for comparison
at the same temperatures (notice that a pressure and
density mismatch between methods can be present in this
case due to different equations of state).
IV.
ERROR ANALYSIS
To assess the quality of our principal Hugoniot
determination, we analyzed the possible sources of errors
in relation to our machine learning scheme. There are
three main sources of errors: the uncertainties in the
fit of H(ρ, T), the prediction error of the MLP, and the
uncertainties in the reference state energy estimate, i.e.
e0 in Eq.(1).
We verified that, in our case, the error
produced by the fit is negligible compared to the other
two sources, which we will discuss next.
As mentioned before, we followed Ref. 34 to construct
our MLPs and used a GKR model based on a modified
version of the SOAP kernel [33].
Our final dataset,
including both training and test sets, comprises 561
configurations selected through an iterative procedure
with 128 hydrogen atoms each, where we calculated
energies, pressures and forces at the VMC and LRDMC
levels. These configurations correspond to temperatures
from 4 kK up to 20 kK and Wigner-Seitz radii from
1.80 Bohr to 2.12 Bohr.
Finite size corrections (FSC)
have also been estimated using the KZK functional [56].
Details on the training set construction and the QMC
calculations, together with the performances of all MLP
models can be found in the SM [50]. In particular we
found a final root mean square error (RMSE), calculated
on the test set, of the order of 7 meV/atom for the
energy, 250 meV/˚A
for the forces, and 0.75 GPa for
the pressures.
At this point, it is worth to highlight some favourable
features of our machine learning approach, especially in
applications where it is coupled with computationally
expensive methods such as QMC. They can be itemized
as follows:
• transferability: the total energy of the system is
expressed as a sum of local terms [32], therefore our
models are capable of making accurate predictions
on
configurations
whose
size
has
never
been
encountered in the training set. In particular, our
MLPs find their applicability to systems with an
arbitrary number of atoms N.
• efficiency and accuracy:
within the ∆-learning
framework, the machine learning task becomes
easier.
Indeed, we obtained very accurate QMC
potentials, by training models on small datasets
and, thus, by reducing the amount of calculations
needed.
Moreover, since the computational cost
of the ML inference is negligible compared to the
baseline DFT calculation, we were able to perform
QMC-driven MD simulations at the cost of a DFT
dynamics.
• overfitting prevention: using a local sparsification
technique based on the farthest point sampling
(see SM of Ref. 34), we discarded from each
configuration a possibly large fraction of the
corresponding N local environments, preventing
overfitting and allowing for an increased predictive
power of the model on unseen data.
Since
the computational cost of the predictions scales
with the size of the training set, this procedure
drastically improves the efficiency of the final
model.
We further validated the accuracy of our MLPs
by comparing the Hugoniot curve obtained using two
potentials, independently trained with the same target,
e.g. VMC, but with two different baselines. Taking into
account these results and the RMSE of the models, we
can estimate an uncertainty on the prediction of 0.06 on
the relative density ρ/ρ0 and 1 GPa on pressure.
We now turn to the last source of error we identified,
i.e.
the one related to the calculation of e0 and p0.
To estimate the reference state energy and pressure, we
followed a procedure similar to Ref. 30. We performed a

5
path integral molecular dynamics (PIMD) simulation [57]
on a system of N = 64 deuterium atoms at a temperature
T = 22 K and density ρ0 = 0.167 g/cm3 (corresponding
to the initial conditions reported in Ref. 19), using DFT-
PBE energy and forces. Details of this simulation are
reported in the SM [50]. From the PIMD trajectory, we
extracted 170 configurations and we calculated energies
and pressures with both DFT-PBE and QMC at VMC
and LRDMC levels, adding the necessary finite size
corrections.
The reference sample was generated by
extracting atomic positions from one of the 128 beads
taken at random, belonging to de-correlated snapshots
of the trajectory. Results for e0 for the various methods
are reported in Tab. I. The reference state pressure p0 is
not reported, since it is two orders of magnitude smaller
than the shocked pressure, and thus irrelevant for the
Hugoniot determination. Also in this case, we studied
the effect of varying e0 within its confidence interval on
the Hugoniot density and pressure. In doing so, we also
took into account the possible uncertainty on the energy
difference e(ρ, T) −e0 originating by the finite batch
size we used for estimating energy gradients in the WF
optimization. We estimated this uncertainty by running
optimizations of increasing batch size on three different
128-atom configurations. The results indicate an error
≲0.5 mHa/atom on e(ρ, T) −e0. Taking everything into
account, varying the energy within standard deviation
leads to shifts in the final principal Hugoniot which
still fall in the error bars of our predictions estimated
previously.
To summarize, we estimated the MLP prediction error
to be the most relevant source of uncertainty for the
Hugoniot, yielding, as discussed before, an absolute error
of 0.06 and 1 GPa on the relative density and pressure,
respectively, reflected on the error bars reported in Fig. 1.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, using our recently proposed workflow
for the construction of MLPs, we have been able to
run reliable VMC- and LRDMC-based MD simulations
and study the principal deuterium Hugoniot,
in a
pressure range relevant for experiments. The accuracy
epot (Ha/atom) e0 (Ha/atom)
PBE
-0.58217(2)
-0.58055(2)
VMC
-0.58622(2)
-0.58460(2)
LRDMC
-0.58660(2)
-0.58498(2)
VMC + FSC
-0.58503(2)
-0.58342(2)
LRDMC + FSC
-0.58542(2)
-0.58380(2)
TABLE I: Estimated potential (epot) and total (e0)
energies per atom of the reference state at ρ0 = 0.167
g/cm3 and T = 22 K for different methods, with and
without finite size corrections.
of the MLPs employed here has been extensively tested,
supporting the validity of our calculations and estimating
their
uncertainty.
The
resulting
Hugoniot
curve
shows generally good agreement with the most recent
experimental measures, especially in the low temperature
molecular regime. Exploiting the ∆-learning framework,
we have also been able to treat FT electrons effects in
a QMC-MLP, and we have thus managed to perform
accurate simulations at higher temperatures. For these
temperatures, the results systematically show a more
compressible Hugoniot curve than experiments, although
the experimental error bars are large in this regime. The
aforementioned discrepancy is milder than previously
reported QMC calculations [29, 30], and falls within
the measures uncertainty.
In particular, this suggests
that the use of optimized and more refined WFs has
a key role for obtaining good results in high-pressure
hydrogen. We thus believe that our results will be useful
for both future experimental research and numerical
investigations of the Hugoniot.
The efficiency of our
computational approach could be further improved, e.g.,
by using cheaper baseline potentials than DFT. Longer
simulations and larger systems will then be at reach.
Other many-body methods, even more expensive than
QMC, can also be used as targets for this type of
MLPs, since the required size of the dataset is at
least one order of magnitude smaller compared to other
ML approaches.
Finally, our MLPs, and in particular
those trained on LRDMC data points, are promising for
exploring the hydrogen phase diagram by keeping a high
level of accuracy across a wide range of thermodynamic
conditions.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The machine learning code used in this work is
available upon request. Additional information, such as
datasets, models, and detailed results of the simulations
are available at https://github.com/giacomotenti/
QMC_hugoniot.
