Operationalizing Declarative and Procedural
Knowledge: a Benchmark on Logic
Programming Petri Nets (LPPNs)
Giovanni Sileno1
Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands

Abstract. Modelling, specifying and reasoning about complex systems
requires to process in an integrated fashion declarative and procedural
aspects of the target domain. The paper reports on an experiment con-
ducted with a propositional version of Logic Programming Petri Nets
(LPPNs), a notation extending Petri Nets with logic programming con-
structs. Two semantics are presented: a denotational semantics that fully
maps the notation to ASP via Event Calculus; and a hybrid operational
semantics that process separately the causal mechanisms via Petri nets,
and the constraints associated to objects and to events via Answer Set
Programming (ASP). These two alternative speciﬁcations enable an em-
pirical evaluation in terms of computational eﬃciency. Experimental re-
sults show that the hybrid semantics is more eﬃcient w.r.t. sequences,
whereas the two semantics follows the same behaviour w.r.t. branchings
(although the denotational one performs better in absolute terms).
Keywords: Reasoning, Model-execution, Causal mechanisms, Constraints, An-
swer Set Programming, Petri Nets
1
Introduction
A proper treatment of cases or scenarios is based on two requirements: on the one
hand, to capture and adequately process the symbolic entities used to represent
the target system: instances, classes, interrelationships forming a local ontology
relevant to the domain in focus; on the other hand, to reproduce—by means of
elements modelling causal mechanisms, processes, courses of actions, etc.—the
same dynamics exhibited by the target system.
Consider for example this case: “While John was walking his dog, the dog ate
Paul’s ﬂowers.” This event description is not suﬃcient for entailing that John
is responsible to pay Paul for what happened, as typically this is entailed on
the basis of norms as “The owner of an animal has to pay for the damages it
produces.’’. However, even this addition lacks crucial connections between the
conceptual domains of the case and the one of the norm, like “dogs are animals”,
“eating an object destroys the object”, “destruction is damage”, etc.
arXiv:1701.07657v2  [cs.AI]  31 Jul 2020

2
Logic Programming Petri Nets: a Benchmark
These various elements exhibit two perspectives on knowledge: a declarative
perceptive, concerning objects (physical, mental, institutional) and their logical
relationships—both reiﬁed as symbols—; and a procedural perceptive, concerning
patterns of events/actions, mechanisms, or processes (involving objects). Formal
logic is the prototypical domain concerned with the ﬁrst perspective, just as
process modeling focuses on the second. Unfortunately, methodologies associated
with one of the two aspects generally have a limited treatment of the other
component, and they require speciﬁc mediating machinery to deal with. For
instance, if you want to make a certain outcome impossible in a procedural model
you need to add conditions that disable all transitions that might produce that
outcome. If you want to represent a transition in a declarative way, a typical
approach is to consider snapshots of the arrangements holding before and after
the transition—possibly labeled with a sort of timestamp. This is essentially
the principle behind situation calculus [15,20], event calculus [11,21], and ﬂuent
calculus [24]: using appropriate axioms, you can create and reason about the
relations between these snapshots in a way such that they are compatible to the
causal relationships between the moments they refer to.
Rather than trying to project one dimension on the other, an alternative
tradition in AI and logic proposes to consider causality as a primitive notion. This
approach is for instance behind the idea of all Action languages [6]. Even when
the dichotomy is made clear, however, operationalizations of these languages
often result in compiling action programs to logic programs [5,4], returning again
to ‘snapshot-handling’ solutions.
The motivation behind this work stems from the hypothesis that leaving
process analysis to procedural descriptions should be in principle a better choice:
procedural components can directly map to native computational mechanisms,
that can be used not only to re-present, but also re-create the process object,
transforming the question from what the referent should be (characteristic of
logic), to what it is (characteristic of simulation and more in general of model-
execution).
The paper reports therefore on a simple benchmark experiment with an hy-
brid notation (that is, including procedural and declarative knowledge compo-
nents), called Logic Programming Petri Nets (LPPNs).1 Section § 2 will introduce
the motivation and an informal semantics of LPPNs. Section § 3 will present a
formalisation of a propositional version of LPPN. Section § 4 will present an
hybrid operational semantics and a denotational semantics based on ASP pro-
grams with Event Calculus. Section § 5 will present the results of a ﬁrst empirical
experiment. Discussion and further developments end the paper.
2
Logic Programming Petri Nets
Logic Programming Petri Nets (LPPNs) are a visual notation ﬁrst introduced in
[22] as an common representational ground where to align representations of law
1 A prototype of a LPPN interpreter is available on http://github.com/s1l3n0/
pypneu, together with the code run for conducting the experiment.

Logic Programming Petri Nets: a Benchmark
3
p1
p3
p2
t1
(a) not enabled transition,
before ﬁring
p1
p2
p3
E
t1
(b) enabled transition and
ﬁring
p1
p2
p3
t1
(c) the transition has ﬁred
Fig. 1: Example of a Petri net and of its execution (but also of a LPPN procedural
component when labels are propositions).
(norms), of implementations of law (regulatory services in the form of business
processes), and of action (behavioural scripts ascribed to social participants).
It has been used for a wide class of models (business processes embedded with
normative positions, representation of scenarios issued from narratives, agent
scripts, deontic paradoxes, etc. [22]). The notation builds upon the intuition that
places and transitions mirror the common-sense distinction between objects and
events (e.g. [2]), roughly reﬂecting the use of noun/verb categories in language
[9]: the procedural components captured by Petri nets can be used to model
transient aspects of the system in focus; the declarative components captured by
logic programming construct can be used to model steady state aspects, i.e. those
on which the transient is irrelevant or does not make sense (e.g. terminological
constraints). In this section we will informally describe the bases motivating
their integration.
2.1
From Petri Nets to LPPNs
Petri nets are a simple, yet eﬀective computational modelling representation
featuring an intuitive visualisation (see Fig. 1). They consist in directed, bipartite
graphs with two types of nodes: places (visually represented with circles) and
transitions (with boxes). A place can be connected only to transitions and vice-
versa. One or more tokens (dots) can reside in each place. The execution of Petri
nets is also named “token game”: transitions ﬁre by consuming tokens from their
input places and producing tokens in their output places.2
Despite their widespread use in computer science, electronics, business pro-
cess modelling and biology, Petri nets are generally considered not to be enough
expressive for reasoning purposes: in their simplest form, tokens are indistinct,
and do not transport any data. Nevertheless, it is a common practice for mod-
ellers to introduce labels to set up a correspondence between the modelling enti-
ties and the modelled entities. This practice enables them to read the results of
a model execution in reference to the modelled system. In other words, an ade-
quate labelling is still functional to the use of a Petri net for modelling purposes,
2 For an overview on the general properties of Petri nets see e.g. [18].

4
Logic Programming Petri Nets: a Benchmark
p4
p5
p6
AND
IMPLIES
(a)
p7
p9
p8
p10
p11
t2
E
t3
E
t4
(b)
Fig. 2: Examples of LPPN declarative components: (a) deﬁned on places by means
of lp-nodes (the example corresponds to the Prolog/ASP code: p6 :- p4, p5.
p5.); (b) deﬁned on transitions, by means of lt-nodes, instantaneously propagat-
ing the ﬁring where possible (the IMPLIES label is here left implicit).
although it is not a requirement for the execution in itself. Further interaction
is possible if these labels are processed according to an additional formalism, as
for instance it occurs with Coloured Petri Nets (CPNs) [8] (for many aspects
a descendant of Predicate/Transition nets [7]). If their expressiveness and wide
application provide reasons for its adoption, CPNs also introduce many details
which are unimportant in a case modelling setting (e.g. expressions on arcs);
more importantly, they still lack the ability of specifying and processing declara-
tive bindings, necessary, for instance, to model terminological relationships. This
brings us to the idea of LPPN.
Whereas Petri nets essentially specify procedural mechanisms, LPPNs extend
those (a) with literals as labels, attached on places and transitions; (b) with
nodes specifying (logic-based) declarative bindings on places and on transitions.
This paper will focus only on propositional labelling. Under this constraint, the
execution of the LPPN procedural component is the same as Condition/Event
nets, Petri nets whose places do not contain more than one token (Fig. 1).
Logic operator nodes might apply on places (lp-nodes) or on transitions (lt-
nodes). An example of a sub-net with lp-nodes (small black squares) is given
in Fig. 2a; these are used to create logic compositions of places (via opera-
tors as NEG, AND, OR, etc). or to specify logic inter-dependencies (via the logic
conditional IMPLIES). Similarly, transitions may be connected declaratively via
lt-nodes (black circles), as in Fig. 2b; these connections may be interpreted as
channels enabling instantaneous propagation of ﬁring. In this case, it is not rel-
evant to introduce operators as AND, for the interleaving semantics, only one
source transition may ﬁre per step. Operationally, the declarative components
are treated integrating the stable model semantics used in answer set program-
ming (ASP) [14]. This was a natural choice because process execution exhibits a
prototypical ‘forward’ nature, and ASP solvers can be interpreted as providing
forward chaining.3
3 Both SLD/SLDNF resolution (Prolog) and DPLL (ASP) are based on backward
chaining. In DPLL, however, all variables are grounded, and all intermediate atoms

Logic Programming Petri Nets: a Benchmark
5
3
Formalization
This section presents a simpliﬁed version of the LPPN notation considering only
a propositional labeling. We start from the deﬁnition of propositional literals
derived from ASP [14], accounting for strong and default negation.
Deﬁnition 1 (Literal and Extended literals). Given a set of propositional
atoms A, the set of literals L = L+ ∪L−consists of positive literals (atoms)
L+ = A, negative literals (negated atoms) L−= {−a | a ∈A}, where ‘−’ stands
for strong negation.4 The set of extended literals L∗= L ∪Lnot consists of
literals and default negation literals Lnot = {not l| l ∈L}, where ‘not’ stands
for default negation.5
We denote the basic topology of a Petri net as a procedural net.
Deﬁnition 2 (Procedural net). A procedural net is a bipartite directed
graph connecting two ﬁnite sets of nodes, called places and transitions. It can
be written as N = ⟨P, T, E⟩, where P = {p1, . . . , pn} is the set of place nodes;
T = {t1, . . . , tm} is the set of transition nodes; E = E+ ∪E−is the set of arcs
connecting them: E+ from transitions to places, E−from places to transitions.
LPPNs consists of three components: a procedural net specifying causal rela-
tionships, and two declarative nets specifying respectively logical dependencies
at the level of objects or ongoing events (on places), and on impulse events (on
transitions). Furthermore, propositional LPPNs build upon a boolean marking
on places (like condition/event nets).
Deﬁnition 3 (Propositional Logic Programming Petri Net). A proposi-
tional Logic Programming Petri Net LPPN prop is a Petri Net whose places and
transitions are labeled with literals, enriched with declarative nets of places and
of transitions. It is deﬁned by the following components:
– ⟨P, T, PE⟩is a procedural net; PE stands for procedural edges;
– CP : P →L∗and CT : T →L are labeling functions, associating literals
respectively to places and to transitions;
– OP = {¬, −, ∧, ∨, →, ↔, . . .} is a set of logic operators.
– LP and LT are sets of logic operator nodes respectively for places ( lp-nodes)
and for transitions ( lt-nodes).
– CLP : LP →OP maps each lp-node to a logic operator; similarly, CLT :
LT →OP does the same for lt-nodes.
generated in the search are collected in stable models; without deﬁning any goal, all
the worlds that are implied by the input knowledge are returned as output. From
an external perspective, this is the same result we would associate with forward
chaining. The intuition that there is a relation between ASP and forward chaining
is conﬁrmed e.g. in ASPeRiX [13].
4 Strong negation is used to reify an explicitly false situation (e.g. “It does not rain”).
5 Default negation is used to reify a situation in which something cannot be re-
trieved/inferred (e.g. ‘It is unknown whether it rains or not’).

6
Logic Programming Petri Nets: a Benchmark
– DE LP = DE +
LP ∪DE −
LP is the set of arcs connecting lp-nodes to places;
similarly, DE LT = DE +
LT ∪DE −
LT for lt-nodes and transitions.6
– M : P →{0, 1} returns the marking of a place, i.e. whether the place con-
tains (1) or does not contain (0) a token.
Note that if LP∪LT = ∅, we have a strictly procedural LPPN prop, i.e. a standard
binary Petri net. If T = ∅, we have a strictly declarative LPPN prop, that can be
directly mapped to an ASP program.
For simplicity, we overlook in this document the syntaxic constraints on the
network topology which are inherited from ASP.
4
Semantics
This section will present two semantics for LPPNs: a hybrid operational seman-
tics and a denotational semantics, based on ASP and event calculus.
4.1
Hybrid operational semantics
The execution cycle of a LPPN consists of four steps:
1. given a “source” marking M, the bindings of the declarative net of places
entail a “ground” marking M ∗;
2. an enabled transition is selected to pre-ﬁre, so determining a “source” transition-
event e;
3. the bindings of the declarative net of transitions entail all propagations of
this event, obtaining a set of transition-events, also denoted as the “ground”
event-marking E∗;
4. all transition-events are ﬁred, producing and consuming the relative tokens.
The steps (1) and (3) are processed in distinct moments by an ASP solver: the
declarative nets of places (1) or of transitions (3) are translated as rules, tokens
(1) or transition-events (3) are reiﬁed as facts. The ASP solver takes as input
the resulting program and, if satisﬁable, it provides as output respectively one
or more ground marking (1) or one or more sets transition-events to be ﬁred (3).
The steps (2) and (4) make clear the distinction the external ﬁrings (the
“source” transition-event selected at execution level) from the internal ﬁring,
immediately propagated (the “ground” transition-events triggered by the declar-
ative net of transitions). The following deﬁnitions provides a formalisation of
these concepts.
Deﬁnition 4 (Enabled transition). A transition t is enabled in a ground
marking M ∗if a token is available for each input places:
Enabled(t) ≡∀pi ∈•t, M ∗(p) = 1
6 Note that DE −
LT ⊆(T ∪P) × LT, i.e. these edges go from transitions and places
(modeling contextual conditions) to lt-nodes.

Logic Programming Petri Nets: a Benchmark
7
c1
c3
c2
c5
IMPLIES
c4
e2
e1
IMPLIES
e3
Fig. 3: Example of LPPN with procedural and declarative components.
Similarly to what marking is for places, we consider an event-marking for tran-
sitions E : T →{0, 1}. E(t) = 1 if the transition t produces a transition-event
e. Each step s has a “source” event-marking E.
Deﬁnition 5 (Pre-ﬁring). An enabled transition t pre-ﬁres (implicitly, at a
step s) if it is selected to produce a transition-event:
∀t ∈Enabled(T) : t pre-ﬁres ≡E(t) = 1
Applying an interleaving semantics for the pre-ﬁring, the interpreter selects only
one transition to pre-ﬁre per step; for any other t′, E(t′) = 0.
Deﬁnition 6 (Firing). An enabled transition t ﬁres (implicitly, at a step s) by
propagation consuming a token from each input place, and producing a token in
each output place:
∀t ∈Enabled(T) : t ﬁres ≡
E∗(t) = 1 ↔∀pi ∈•t : M ′(pi) = 0 ∧∀po ∈t• : M ′(po) = 1
Running example Let us consider the LPPN in Fig. 3. Here, for simplicity, we will
conﬂate the names of the transition/places with their labels; in the general case
this should be made diﬀerent as there might be multiple nodes with the same
label. The proposed net speciﬁes causal mechanisms, declarative constraints.
There is only one token in c1, enabling the transitions associated to e1 and e2.
The following execution paths are possible: (1) e2 ﬁres, consuming the token
in c1, e3 ﬁres, consuming the token c4 and producing a token in c3; (2, 3) e3
ﬁres, and then one of e1 or e2 ﬁres; (4) e1 ﬁres, consuming the token in c1; the
ﬁring propagates to e3; the source ﬁring of e1 also produces a token in c2; the
existence of c2 is a suﬃcient condition for immediately reifying c5.
4.2
Denotational semantics
One of the possibilities to validate a formal language is to map it into another
formal language, i.e. to provide a denotational semantics. The declarative com-
ponent of a LPPN, by design, can be directly rewritten as ASP code. As we
are already halfway down the path, we can translate the remaining procedural
component into ASP.

8
Logic Programming Petri Nets: a Benchmark
Event Calculus axioms A well-known solution to treat change in logic pro-
gramming is event calculus (EC) [11,21]. The simple version is already satisfac-
tory for our purposes. A modiﬁcation of the original axioms is necessary to deal
with the locality brought by places and transitions:
holdsAt(F, P, N) :-
initially(F, P), not clipped(0, F, P, N),
fluent(F), place(P), time(N).
holdsAt(F, P, N2) :-
firesAt(T, N1), N1 < N2,
initiates(T, F, P, N1), not clipped(N1, F, P, N2),
place(P), transition(T), fluent(F), time(N1), time(N2).
clipped(N1, F, P, N2) :-
firesAt(T, N), N1 <= N, N < N2,
terminates(T, F, P, N),
place(P), transition(T), fluent(F), time(N1), time(N2), time(N).
Interleaved semantics axioms The interleaved semantics can be translated
into the following rules:
i. all enabled transitions may or may not pre-ﬁre;
ii. pre-ﬁring is transformed to ﬁring;
iii. at least one enabled transition must pre-ﬁre per step, i.e. it is impossible
that no transition ﬁre if there are enabled transitions;
iv. at maximum one transition can pre-ﬁre per step.
In ASP code:
{prefiresAt(T, N)} :-
% (i)
enabled(T, N), transition(T), time(N).
firesAt(e1, N) :- prefiresAt(e1, N).
% (ii)
someTransitionPrefiresAt(N) :-
% (iii)
prefiresAt(T, N), transition(T), time(N).
:- not someTransitionPrefiresAt(N), enabled(T, N), transition(T), time(N).
:- prefiresAt(T1, N), prefiresAt(T2, N), T1 != T2,
% (iv)
transition(T1), transition(T2), time(N).
Transformation of a LPPN to an ASP program The mapping of a given
LPPN to an equivalent ASP program includes the previous axioms and the
output of the following steps:
i. for each place p, with label CP (p)
(a) type it as place,

Logic Programming Petri Nets: a Benchmark
9
(b) specify its initial state,
(c) for each place with more than one output, write down that you cannot
consume more than the only available token.
ii. for each transition t, with label CT (t)
(a) type it as transition,
(b) deﬁne the conditions for which it is enabled,
(c) for each output place, deﬁne how to create tokens in the output places,
(d) for each input place, deﬁne how to consume tokens in the output places.
iii. for each lp-node lp,
(a) specify the logic constraint to be applied between inputs and outputs.
iv. for each lt-node lt,
(a) write down the logic dependencies between transitions allowing the prop-
agation.
As a concrete example, we apply these actions on some of the components of the
LPPN in Fig. 3:
fluent(filled).
%%% p1, associated to c1
place(c1).
% 1.a
initially(filled, c1).
% 1.b
:- 2{terminates(e2, filled, c1, N); terminates(e1, filled, c1, N)}. % 1.c
%%% t1, associated to e1
transition(e1).
% 2.a
enabled(e1, N) :- holdsAt(filled, c1, N).
% 2.b
terminates(e1, filled, c1, N) :- firesAt(e1, N).
% 2.c
initiates(e1, filled, c2, N) :- firesAt(e1, N).
% 2.d
%% lp1
holdsAt(filled, c5, N) :- holdsAt(filled, c2, N).
% 3.a
%% lt1
firesAt(e3, N) :- firesAt(e1, N), enabled(e1, N).
% 4.a
Execution With the transformation steps given above, valid LPPNs can be trans-
formed into ASP programs. In particular, for the axioms presented here, these
programs can be solved the ASP engine clingo [3], also available online at:
https://potassco.org/clingo/run/. Setting a temporal range (with the in-
struction “time(0..n).”) the output answer sets represent all possible execu-
tions path after at most n steps.
5
Results
The proposal presented above has been used for developing a prototype Python
application for specifying, executing and analyzing LPPNs7; it exploits clingo
7 Available at http://github.com/s1l3n0/pypneu.

10
Logic Programming Petri Nets: a Benchmark
Fig. 4: Average execution times (ms) in linear and logarithmic scales over 10 ex-
ecutions of serial and forking conﬁgurations of propositional LPPNs of diﬀerent
depths, performed following alternatively the hybrid operational semantics, via
brute force execution and backtracking (BF+BT); and the denotational seman-
tics, via event calculus (EC). Data is on Table 1.
[3], as this provide runtime interfaces enabling a direct control of the solver
instance without regrounding the program at each cycle. This enabled us to
perform some direct evaluation of any given LPPN input.
When we process the input LPPN by means of the denotational semantics,
the input is transformed to an ASP program, and the solver intervenes fully
to provide the possible execution paths. Instead, when we refer to the hybrid
operational semantics, the solver intervenes only partially in the execution cycle,
to entail the constraints implied by the declarative components of the net; the
rest of the computational burden is on the module responsible for the Petri net
execution. In this context, one might ask if we can observe some performances
between these two alternative modes of analysis/execution.
At the moment, we have only evaluated a propositional version of LPPN, and
a limited series of structures, namely compositions of minimal serial elements
(a transition with an input and output places) or minimal forking elements
(a place with two output transitions). In order to implement the procedural
component of the operational semantics, the current Petri Net analysis module
builds upon a simple brute force (BF) execution algorithm, and depth-ﬁrst search
with backtracking (BT) to cover all the possible execution paths.

Logic Programming Petri Nets: a Benchmark
11
depth of composition of minimal structures
serial
1
11
21
31
41
EC
0.1 ± 0.0
2.1 ± 0.1
13.5 ± 1.8
58.0 ± 8.2
154.2 ± 8.6
BF+BT
0.2 ± 0.0
1.3 ± 0.1
2.9 ± 0.2
5.1 ± 0.6
8.6 ± 0.9
51
61
71
81
91
EC
352.4 ± 9.9
754.4 ± 15.2
1285.3 ± 29.3
2200.6 ± 30.1
3499.0 ± 33.9
BF+BT
11.0 ± 0.2
14.7 ± 0.2
19.4 ± 1.1
23.4 ± 0.8
29.3 ± 3.1
forking
1
2
3
4
5
EC
0.1 ± 0.0
0.2 ± 0.0
0.6 ± 0.0
1.5 ± 0.1
5.3 ± 1.3
BF+BT
0.4 ± 0.0
0.7 ± 0.0
1.9 ± 0.1
5.0 ± 0.3
15.5 ± 1.2
6
7
8
9
10
EC
19.6 ± 3.5
68.5 ± 8.2
272.6 ± 20.4
1151.3 ± 83.7
5033.8 ± 291.7
BF+BT
55.3 ± 7.7
213.1 ± 36.0
920.9 ± 112.1
4834.5 ± 537.9
29529.9 ± 1665.4
Table 1: Average execution time (ms) over 10 executions of diﬀerent conﬁg-
urations of propositional LPPNs, performed following alternatively the hybrid
operational semantics, via brute force execution and backtracking (BF+BT); and
the denotational semantics, via event calculus (EC).
Table 1 summarises the performances of 10 executions of diﬀerent network
conﬁgurations.8 Results are also illustrated on Fig. 4. The data essentially con-
ﬁrms our hypothesis: the analysis based on the operational semantics (BF+BT)
clearly outperforms and scales excellently for the serial conﬁgurations, while that
based on the denotational semantics (EC) scales poorly in this conﬁguration. For
the forking conﬁgurations, BF+BT is evidently slower in absolute terms. Intu-
itively this is due to the eﬃcient search and pruning capabilities of ASP. Unlike
clingo, the Python code of the Petri net executor/analyzer is not optimised; on
the contrary, for many aspects this represents a lower-bound on the possible im-
plementation choices. Nevertheless, if we consider execution times in logarithmic
scale, we observe that the two methods are essentially comparable in terms of
tractability.
6
Conclusion
The paper presents an empirical experiment with LPPNs, a logic programming-
based extension to Petri Nets. LPPNs were introduced with a practical goal
in mind: a visual modelling notation relatively simple for non-experts, that
could handle explicit declarative knowledge, and that could model causation
and other procedural aspects [22]. It was inspired by the point made in [10]
on the widespread confusion in cognitive science and computational disciplines
around the notion of rules (namely between declarative and reactive rules). Pre-
vious contributions [22,23] highlighted the potential use of LPPNs in normative
8 The tests were run on a MacBook Pro (2018) provided with a 2.2 GHz 6-core pro-
cessor Intel Code i7 and 16Gb RAM DDR4.

12
Logic Programming Petri Nets: a Benchmark
modelling tasks in combination with business process modelling, thus potentially
facilitating cross-fertilization between theoretical to practical settings.
Here the focus has been put on its computational properties, showing that
maintaining the two levels separated can bring better performances. The declar-
ative dimension allows to treat at higher abstraction phenomena for which there
is a viable speciﬁcation at outcome level. The procedural dimension works better
for processes that can be directly executed.
Future developments concern the extension of this work to a wider range of
experiments, ﬁrst considering mixed networks (of declarative, procedural com-
ponents) with mixed conﬁgurations (serial compositions, forks, joins, etc.) and
then passing to the extended LPPN notation accounting for predicates. The
actual impact on real models should be evaluated as well: scenarios describing
cases have very few forks, they rather function as orchestrated (i.e. directed
from the scenario) scripts (procedural models distributed amongst actors). Con-
sequently, applications that require the use of scenarios (e.g. for interpretation,
model-based diagnosis, conformance checking, etc.) may take advantage of the
hybrid operational semantics. The computational improvement may be further
extended considering existing proposals in the literature. For instance, execution
algorithms alternative to brute execution [16,19]; or decomposition techniques,
for instance in single-entry-single-exit (SESE) components [17], that open up
the possibility of concurrent execution.
Further, these results should be confronted with existing techniques for han-
dling temporal reasoning and causality, e.g. the already cited Action languages
[6], related works (e.g. F2LP [12]) and applications (CCalc, Coala, Cplus2ASP);
optimized versions of Event Calculus (e.g. [1]); applications based on LTL, CTL
and related formalisms.
