JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 11, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2023
1
On the Parameter Estimation of Sinusoidal Models
for Speech and Audio Signals
George P. Kafentzis, Member, IEEE
Abstract—In this paper, we examine the parameter estimation
performance of three well-known sinusoidal models for speech
and audio. The first one is the standard Sinusoidal Model (SM),
which is based on the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). The second
is the Exponentially Damped Sinusoidal Model (EDSM) which
has been proposed in the last decade, and utilizes a subspace
method for parameter estimation, and finally the extended adap-
tive Quasi-Harmonic Model (eaQHM), which has been recently
proposed for AM-FM decomposition, and estimates the signal
parameters using Least Squares on a set of basis function that are
adaptive to the local characteristics of the signal. The parameter
estimation of each model is briefly described and its performance
is compared to the others in terms of signal reconstruction
accuracy versus window size on a variety of synthetic signals
and versus the number of sinusoids on real signals. The latter
include highly non stationary signals, such as singing voices and
guitar solos. The advantages and disadvantages of each model
are presented via synthetic signals and then the application on
real signals is discussed. Conclusively, eaQHM outperforms EDS
in medium-to-large window size analysis, whereas EDSM yields
higher reconstruction values for smaller analysis window sizes.
Thus, a future research direction appears to be the merge of
adaptivity of the eaQHM and parameter estimation robustness
of the EDSM in a new paradigm for high-quality analysis and
resynthesis of general audio signals.
Index Terms—Sinusoidal Model, adaptive Quasi-Harmonic
Model, Exponentially Damped Sinusoids, Parameter Estimation,
Speech Analysis, Audio Analysis
I. INTRODUCTION
Sinusoidal modeling is a renowned parametric representa-
tion for speech and audio signals. Sinusoidal models have
been used in the fields of speech and audio signal processing
in coding [1]–[3], analysis and synthesis [4]–[10], enhance-
ment [11]–[14], modifications and transformations [5], [8],
[15]–[19], among others.
The general problem of fitting a sum of sinusoids to a
signal is of great interest. Thus, many algorithms have been
developed for accurate estimation of the sinusoidal parameters.
When it comes to speech and audio, the algorithms can be sep-
arated into four categories: spectral analysis [4], [5], analysis-
by-synthesis [8], [20]–[22], least-squares minimization [23]–
[25], and subspace methods [26]–[28].
In general, a sinusoidal model (SM) can be described as
s(t) =
K
X
k=1
Ak(t) cos(ϕk(t))
(1)
where Ak(t) and ϕk(t) are the instantaneous amplitude and
phase of the kth sinusoid. First approaches on parameter
estimation for sinusoidal modeling relied on the assumption of
local stationarity, that is, signals were considered as stationary
in amplitude and frequency in short time intervals, i.e. 20−30
ms [4], [5]. The estimation of these components are performed
under the aforementioned assumption of stationarity using
standard spectral analysis with the Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT). These approaches suffered from the limited time-
frequency resolution of the FFT. Nevertheless, the model has
been successfully applied in audio and speech signal analysis,
but is far from being valid in signals which are highly non-
stationary, such as speech onsets and sharp attacks in music
signals, and consequently performs rather poorly.
Since then, better models and parameter estimation methods
have been developed to account for the basic problems of
parameter estimation, and are considered as generalizations
of the basic sinusoidal model. One of them is the so-called
Exponentially Damped Sinusoidal Model (EDSM) [26], [29].
This model allows for the amplitude of each sinusoid to vary
exponentially with time. Such a model can be described as
s(t) =
K
X
k=1
ake−dkt cos(ωkt + ϕk)
(2)
where t ∈[0, L −1], and the dk term represents the damping
of the sinusoids. Please note that when dk = 0, then EDSM
reduces to the standard Sinusoidal Model of Eq. (1). Parameter
estimation in EDSM is performed using Matching Pursuit or
subspace methods which have good spectral properties and
do not suffer from the time-frequency trade-off embedded in
the aforementioned methods. However, EDS still considers
frequency stationarity inside the analysis window.
More recently, adaptive Sinusoidal Models (aSMs) [24],
[25], [30] have gained attention due to their ability to adapt
their parameters to the local characteristics of the signal, thus
alleviating the stationarity problem via an iterative parame-
ter re-estimation process, the so-called adaptation. An aSM,
although it can be harmonic [25] or quasi-harmonic [24],
[30], can be generally described similarly to the SM, as
a sum of time-varying AM-FM components (Eq. (1)). The
parameters are estimated using Least-Squares minimization
and the adaptation process enhances their accuracy. The aSMs
have shown to perform well on studio recordings of speech
signals [9], [25] and on single tones of musical instrument
sounds [10], [31]. However, there is no investigation on their
performance on highly non-stationary running audio samples,
such as singing voice, guitar solos, pitch-varying musical
instruments, etc.
In this paper, we examine the standard SM, with the
FFT as a parameter estimator, a subspace-based EDSM, and
an adaptive Sinusoidal Model called the extended adaptive
arXiv:2401.01255v1  [eess.AS]  2 Jan 2024

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 11, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2023
2
Quasi-Harmonic Model (eaQHM) on synthetic signals first,
in order to reveal insightful information on the performance
characteristics and the advantages of each model. Then, the
models analyze real signals, and particularly monophonic,
running audio and speech signals based on the observations
made on synthetic signals.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly de-
scribes the EDS Model and a subspace method for its pa-
rameter estimation and Section 3 reviews the theory of the
extended adaptive Quasi-Harmonic Model. Section 4 presents
the evaluation on synthetic and real signals and Section 5
discusses the results. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.
II. EXPONENTIALLY DAMPED SINUSOIDAL MODEL
(EDSM)
The EDS model for a signal x(t), with support in [0, L],
can be written as
x(t) =
K−1
X
k=0
sk(t)
(3)
where L is the length of the signal segment and K is the model
order (number of sinusoids), sk(t) is the kth exponentially
damped sinusoid. The exponentially damped sinusoid sk(t)
can be written as
sk(t) = αkzt
k
(4)
where αk are the complex amplitudes, and zk are the complex
poles. Furthermore, the poles can be written as
zk = e
1
L (δk+iωk)
(5)
where δk are the damping factors and ωk are the angular
frequencies (or pulsations). The damping factor is directly
related to the sharpness of the exponential time envelope,
where a positive damping factor corresponds to an increas-
ing envelope, whereas a negative damping factor reflects a
decreasing envelope. A zero damping factor corresponds to
an amplitude-stationary sinusoid. Also, the amplitude can be
written as
αk =
 ake−δk+iϕk,
δk ≥0
akeiϕk,
δk < 0
(6)
where ak are the real amplitudes and ϕk the phases. The
different expressions of αk helps numerical stability. Com-
pared to the most common methods for parameter estimation
in audio and speech signal analysis, such as the FFT and the
Least-Squares, the EDS uses subspace methods to efficiently
estimate its parameters [26]–[28], [32]. Among different im-
plementations of EDS estimation schemes, in this paper we
use the extension of ESPRIT described in [28]. A description
of the algorithm is briefly presented next.
A. Parameter Estimation
Let us define the signal vector
x = [x[0]
x[1]
· · ·
x[L −1]]T
(7)
where (·)T denotes transposition. Then, the Hankel signal
matrix is defined as
X =


x[0]
x[1]
· · ·
x[N −1]
x[1]
x[2]
· · ·
x[N]
...
...
...
...
x[R −1]
x[R]
· · ·
x[L −1]


(8)
where N > K, R > K and N + R −1 = L. A value of N =
L/2 is suggested as efficient in [?]. Moreover, the complex-
amplitude vector is defined
α = [α0
α1
· · ·
αK−1]T
(9)
and the so-called Vandermode matrix of the poles as
ZT =


1
1
· · ·
1
z0
z1
· · ·
zK−1
...
...
...
...
zL−1
0
zL−1
1
· · ·
zL−1
K−1


(10)
Using the above expressions, Eq. 3 can be written as
x = ZTα
(11)
The objective is to first find the poles ad then the optimal
amplitudes that correspond to those poles. Doing so, a Singular
Value Decomposition (SVD) on matrix X gives
X = [U1 U2]
Σ1
0
0
Σ2
 V1
V2

(12)
where Σ1 and Σ2 are diagonal matrices containing the K
largest singular values and the smallest singular values, respec-
tively. Matrices [U1 U2] and [V1 V2] are the corresponding
left and right singular vector matrices, respectively. Moreover,
the shift-invariance property of the signal space spanned by
V1 gives
V↓
1Φ = V↑
1
(13)
Notation (·)↑↓stands for the operations of removing the
first and last line of a matrix, respectively. Matrix Φ has
eigenvalues that correspond to the poles, zk. A mean-squared
error is set for the calculation of matrix Φ, and thus Φ is
obtained by
Φ =

V↓
1
+
V↑
1
(14)
where (·)+ denotes the pseudo-inverse of a matrix. Then, the
poles zk are obtained from a diagonalization of Φ. Having a
set of poles, the Vandermonde matrix ZT can be computed,
and thus the optimal amplitudes are obtained by
α =

ZT+
x
(15)
Finally, each frame can be synthesized on a frame-based
manner using Eq. (11).

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 11, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2023
3
III. INTRODUCTION TO THE ADAPTIVE SINUSOIDAL
MODELS - ASMS
Contrary to subspace or FFT-based methods, the aSMs
utilize the Least-Squares minimization criterion to estimate
the parameters. The adaptive term is justified by a sequence
of parameter re-estimation based on successive refinements of
the model basis functions.
In general, an aSM can be described as
x(t) =
 
K
X
k=−K
Ck(t)ψk(t)
!
w(t)
(16)
where ψk(t) denotes the set of basis functions, Ck(t) denotes
the (complex) amplitude term of the model, 2K + 1 is the
number of exponentials (hence, K + 1 sinusoids), and finally
w(t) is the analysis window with support in [−T, T].
Using this notation, in conventional sinusoidal models in-
cluding the SM, the EDSM, the Harmonic Model (HM) [23],
the Quasi-Harmonic Model (QHM) [33], and others, the set
of basis functions ψk(t) in the analysis part is stationary in
frequency and in amplitude. For example, the basis functions
in the SM are in the form of
ψSM
k
(t) = 1 · ej2πfkt, CSM
k
(t) = ak
(17)
where the amplitudes and frequencies of the basis functions are
constant inside the analysis window (1 and fk, respectively).
Similarly, the basis functions in the HM are
ψHM
k
(t) = 1 · ej2πkf0t, CHM
k
(t) = ak
(18)
where the frequencies are restricted to be harmonically related.
It is clear that in both models the basis functions ψk(t) consist
of exponential functions that are stationary in amplitude and
frequency, due to the inherent assumption that the signal
does not significantly change in short time intervals. On the
contrary, the aSMs do not share this assumption, as will be
explained in the next section.
A. The extended adaptive Quasi-Harmonic Model - eaQHM
In this paragraph, a recently developed adaptive Sinusoidal
Model, named the extended adaptive Quasi-Harmonic Model
(eaQHM), will be briefly described.
The eaQHM projects a signal segment onto a set of non-
parametric, time-varying basis functions with instantaneous
amplitudes and phases that are adaptive to the local character-
istics of the underlying signal [30]. Specifically, in eaQHM,
ψeaQHM
k
(t) = ˆαk(t)ej ˆϕk(t), CeaQHM
k
(t) = (ak + tbk) (19)
where ak and bk are the complex amplitude and the complex
slope of the model respectively, ˆαk(t) and ˆϕk(t) are estimates
of the instantaneous amplitude and phase of the kth compo-
nent, respectively, both obtained from an initialization step.
The instantaneous phase is computed using a frequency
integration scheme [24], although cubic phase interpolation
could be used as well [4]. The eaQHM is actually a parameter-
refinement mechanism, thus it requires an initialization, as
already mentioned. For this purpose, any AM-FM decom-
position algorithm can be used, but in most of the previous
works concerning the eaQHM [24], [34], the Harmonic Model
(HM) [23] or the Quasi-Harmonic Model is used.
B. Parameter Estimation
Considering that a preliminary estimation of the instanta-
neous components αk(t) and ϕk(t) of the signal is available,
the estimation of the unknown parameters of eaQHM is
similar to that of the Harmonic Model or the Quasi-Harmonic
Model [33], using the Least-Squares minimization method.
However, the basis functions are both non-parametric and non-
stationary:
ˆa
ˆb

= (Ee
HWHWEe)−1Ee
HWHWs
(20)
where ˆa, ˆb are the parameter vectors, W is the matrix con-
taining the window values in the diagonal, s is the input signal
vector, the matrix Ee is defined as Ee = [Ee0|Ee1], and the
submatrices Eei, i = 0, 1 have elements given by
(Ee0)n,k = ˆαk(tn)ej ˆϕk(tn)
(21)
and
(Ee1)n,k = tnˆαk(tn)ej ˆϕk(tn) = tn(Ee0)n,k
(22)
It can be observed that the basis functions are adapted to the
local amplitude and frequency characteristics of the signal.
Parameters ˆαk(t) and ˆϕk(t) are iteratively refined using ak and
bk, which when combined, they form a frequency correction
term for each sinusoid, first introduced in [33]:
ˆηk = 1
2π
ℜ{ak}ℑ{bk} −ℑ{ak}ℜ{bk}
|ak|2
(23)
where ˆηk is an estimate of the frequency mismatch between
the actual frequency of the kth sinusoid and the estimated
one. Applying the ˆηk on each frequency track, interpolating
the instantaneous parameters over successive frames and re-
structuring the basis functions leads to more accurate model
parameters ak and bk. These form a new frequency mis-
match correction, ˜ηk. This way, the loop goes on until the
instantaneous parameters yield a close representation of the
underlying signal, according to a criterion based on the Signal-
to-Reconstruction-Error Ratio (SRER), defined as:
SRER = 20 log10
std(x(t))
std(x(t) −s(t))
(24)
where std(·) is the standard deviation, x(t) is the original
signal, and s(t) is the reconstructed signal. The adaptation
algorithm can be found in [30].
In picturing the amplitude and frequency modelling of
eaQHM within the analysis window, Figures 1a and 1b show
how conventional (stationary) sinusoidal models like HM,
SM, or QHM behave inside their analysis window. Their
exponential basis functions are stationary in frequency, thus
being inefficient on the representation of highly non-stationary
frequency curves. The same argument applies for amplitude
curves, although frequency estimation is far more important
than amplitude estimation. After applying the eaQHM for
a number of adaptations, the instantaneous parameters are
interpolated over successive frames and the overall signal is
synthesized as in Eq. (1). For more insight on eaQHM, please
refer to [30], [34].

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 11, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2023
4
time
frequency
analysis window
Stationary estimation
Real frequency
Adaptive estimation
at
at
Center of window
(a) Frequency adaptation of a sinusoid inside the analysis window.
time
amplitude
analysis window
Stationary estimation
Real amplitude
Adaptive estimation
at
at
Center of window
(b) Amplitude adaptation of a sinusoid inside the analysis window.
Fig. 1.
Inside the analysis window, the frequency (a) and amplitude (b)
trajectories of a partial (solid grey line) is assumed to be constant for
a stationary sinusoidal model (dotted line), while eaQHM (dashed line)
iteratively adapts to the shape of the instantaneous component.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, two separate experiments are presented.
First, the models are evaluated on the estimation of the pa-
rameters of synthesized signals with variable analysis window
size. This way, the features of each model are revealed. Sec-
ond, an evaluation on real speech and audio data is presented,
where the performance of each model is evaluated perceptually
and numerically.
A. Synthetic Signals
The algorithms will be tested on synthetic signals in order
to show the properties of each model, along with their corre-
sponding advantages. The experimental set-up is the following:
for the SM, a 2048 FFT is used. Cubic interpolation for the
phases and linear interpolation for the amplitudes is used. A
hop size of 1 ms is selected and the window is of Hamming
type. For the eaQHM, the amplitudes are linearly interpolated
while the frequencies are spline-interpolated. The phases are
estimated as the integral of the instantaneous frequency as
described in [30]. Finally, the analysis window is of Hamming
type.
1) Mono-component signal: In Figure 2, a concatenated
signal is presented. It is constructed by a stationary in
amplitude and frequency sinusoid (f0 = 100 Hz) with 1
sec duration, and an exponentially amplitude-modulated chirp
signal, starting from 100 Hz up to 1000 Hz, with its damping
factor as d = −2 and its duration equal to 1 sec as well.
The sampling frequency is set to fs = 16 kHz. So, the
signal is simply one partial that is amplitude- and frequency-
modulated, however its sharp transient part is suitable for
comparing the performance of two models (eaQHM, EDSM)
that both claim to handle sharp onsets well [10], [29], [35].
We will test the performance of the models using vari-
able window size but seeking only one partial on the time-
frequency domain. It should be mentioned that since LS is
Fig. 2.
Stationary sinusoid plus exponentially amplitude-modulated chirp
signal. Upper panel: time domain. Lower panel: frequency domain.
in the heart of eaQHM estimation scheme, the window size
should be equal or greater than ˆT = 2fs/fmin, otherwise the
estimation suffers from conditioning problems. That poses a
disadvantage compared to EDS and SM, where the window
size can reach lower values. The minimum frequency in this
signal is 100 Hz, so the eaQHM estimation will start from
the corresponding window size, which is 2Tmin = 2fs/fmin
samples. The results are shown in Figure 3.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Window size in times Tmin = 1/fmin
SRER (dB)
SRER over window size
 
 
EDSM
SM
eaQHM
Fig. 3. Signal-to-Reconstruction-Error Ratio over analysis window size for
single-component signal. Window size is a multiple of the minimum period of
the signal, namely Tmin = 10 ms.
Please note that zero values for the eaQHM in the first
three multiples of Tmin is due to ill-conditioning, so no
result is obtained. However, when the window size is long
enough, it can be seen that the eaQHM can outperform both
sinusoidal models. This is due to the fact that the parameters
are estimated on an set of adaptive basis functions, which are
formulated according to the amplitude and frequency changes

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 11, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2023
5
inside the analysis window. Furthermore, when the window
size increases, the basis functions are averaged over time
and the model adapts much slower. On the other hand, the
EDSM manages to achieve high SRER values for window
sizes where eaQHM parameter estimation is unstable. This
is expected since the EDSM uses stationary sinusoids inside
the analysis window, and the smaller the window size, the
more valid is the assumption of stationarity inside it. Not
surprisingly, the EDSM can approach the eaQHM in terms
of SRER when more partials per window are allowed. In this
case, EDS approximates the frequency modulation by a Bessel
function-weighted cosine series [36]. Finally, the SM behaves
as expected; a small window fails to capture the stationary part
at 100 Hz, while performs well for the modulated chirp signal
(except for the transient part), an optimal window maximizes
the time-frequency trade-off, and a large window captures the
stationary part well but smears out the energy in the transient
part, and also the frequency-varying part is poorly modeled
due to the effect of averaging.
2) Multi-component signal: Let us try now a multicompo-
nent AM-FM signal with 10 partials, with sinusoidal frequency
modulation, formulated as
x(t) =
10
X
k=1
Ak(t) cos(ϕk(t))
(25)
with
Ak(t) = 1
2 + r
k ,
ϕk(t) = 2πkf0t + kρ cos(2πfct)
(26)
where r is a random number in [0, 1], f0 = 150 Hz, fc = 300
Hz, and ρ = 0.01. This signal is depicted in Figure 4. The
signal duration is 1 sec the sampling frequency is 16 kHz.
Figure 5 shows the evolution of SRER over time for the signal
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
−4
−2
0
2
4
Time (s)
AM−FM Signal
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
146
148
150
152
154
Time (s)
F0 (Hz)
Fig. 4. Multicomponent AM-FM signal with sinusoidal frequency modulation.
Upper panel: Signal in time domain, Lower panel: instantaneous frequency.
of Eq. (25). Again, the eaQHM is estimated only when there
is no conditioning problem in parameter estimation, that is
when the length of the analysis window is equal to or greater
than ˆT = 2Tmin = 2fs/fmin. It can be seen that EDSM is
able to reach an SRER of 165 dB for a small window size
of only Tmin/2 = 3.4 ms), and decreasing when the window
size increases. When the eaQHM is able to reliably estimate
the signal parameters, then it outperforms EDSM, even for
larger window sizes, by an average of 6.2 dB. Finally, the
SM behaves again as expected. Small windows yield larger
mainlobes in frequency, and thus poor frequency discrimina-
tion, whereas larger windows give smaller mainlobes but as the
window size increases, averaging effects on the spectrum result
in decreasing reconstruction performance. As in the mono-
component case, there is an window size where the time-
frequency trade-off is optimal.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Window size in times Tmin=1/fmin
SRER (dB)
SRER over window size
 
 
EDSM
SM
eaQHM
Fig. 5. Signal-to-Reconstruction-Error Ratio over analysis window size for
multi-component signal. Window size is a multiple of the minimum period of
the signal, namely Tmin = 6.68 ms.
B. Real Signals
In the previous section, it was shown that the EDSM
performs its best when the analysis window size is small. The
eaQHM suffers from the LS conditioning when the analysis
window is smaller than an optimal. Thus, in running speech
and audio analysis, window sizes should vary according to the
local pitch period. Based on this, a full-band analysis-synthesis
system with pitch-adaptive analysis window based on eaQHM
is designed in [34]. In this section, the performance of systems
based on eaQHM and EDSM are compared on real speech and
audio data. The evaluation will be done in terms of SRER
(Eq. (24)). Since a complete evaluation regarding the number
of partials, the hop size, and the window size is out of the
scope of this work, the parameters will be fixed in an nearly
optimal way.
For the evaluation, a small database of ten audio signals
were used, varying from singing male and female voice to
electric guitar solos and musical instruments with changing
pitch over time. All sounds were sampled at 16000 Hz, with
16 bits of storage accuracy. Since our primary concern in
this work is modelling accuracy, the experimental set-up is
the following: the analysis window is 30 ms and 3 local
pitch periods for SM and eaQHM respectively, whereas the

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 11, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2023
6
hop size is 1 ms for both models. The number of partials
is set to cover the full-band for eaQHM (according to the
estimated f0) in each window, whereas for the SM, at most 100
partials where sought in the peak-picking process of a 2048-
point FFT magnitude spectrum. The eaQHM uses a Blackman
window for the estimation of an initial harmonic template, and
a Hamming window for the adaptation part, while the SM uses
a Hann window. At most 10 adaptations were allowed for the
eaQHM. Instantaneous amplitudes are linearly interpolated in
both models. Instantaneous frequencies are linearly interpo-
lated in the SM whereas spline interpolation is used in the
eaQHM. Cubic interpolation [4] and frequency integration [24]
are applied in the SM and eaQHM, respectively. For the
EDSM, the window size is rectangular, fixed, and equal to
0.75 times the average pitch period, as it is estimated by the
SWIPE pitch estimator [37]. The hop size is equal to the
window length, thus there is no overlap between windows. The
number of partials per frame depend on the local fundamental
frequency, f l
0, and is set to span the entire spectrum. Hence,
the number of partials per frame is equal to fs/(2f l
0).
It is important to note that the number of synthesis pa-
rameters is equal for the SM and eaQHM (amplitudes Ak,
frequencies fk, and phases ϕk), since both of them result
in the same synthesis equation (1), whereas for the EDS the
number of synthesis parameters is larger by one (amplitudes
|ak|, frequencies ωk, phases ϕk, damping factors δk).
Table I shows the SRER values obtained for the eaQHM, the
EDS, and the baseline SM for the aforementioned database.
From Table I, we notice that the eaQHM and the EDSM
SRER Performance
Model
Bass 1
Bass 2
Soprano 1
Soprano 2
Violin
SM
13.8
13.6
17.6
18.1
17.8
EDS
34.4
34.4
35.5
35.6
28.9
eaQHM
31.3
33.2
34.6
35.2
32.7
Model
Guitar 1
Guitar 2
Vocals 1
Vocals 2
Harp
SM
12.2
11.9
18.9
19.5
15.3
EDS
18.6
15.7
25.7
27.8
14.2
eaQHM
27.8
28.8
28.2
29.9
20.2
TABLE I
Signal to Reconstruction Error Ratio values (dB) for all models on a
database of 10 audio signals.
perform similarly and much higher than the SM for quasi-
harmonic signals, such as male/female singing voices and
violin solo. However, for signals with highly non-stationary
content, such as an electric guitar solo, EDSM needs more par-
tials or smaller window size in order to model the underlying
signal characteristics. On the contrary, the eaQHM is able to
adapt its parameters inside the analysis window, thus providing
more accurate parameter estimation and higher reconstruction
quality.
V. DISCUSSION AND PERSPECTIVES
The results of the previous section clearly show that the
eaQHM can provide high reconstruction quality for a variety of
sounds that exhibit high non-stationarity over time. Although
some of the audio signals evaluated in this work have no quasi-
harmonic structure at all, adaptation allows the convergence of
the harmonically-initialized model into the frequency content
of the analyzed signal. Despite the lack of a noise component,
informal listening tests showed that the perceptual similarity
between the original and the reconstructed signal is very high.
However, high quality comes with the cost of increased time
complexity. On an Intel Core i7 CPU, with 6 GB RAM, the
standard SM models the audio signals in less than 5 seconds
on average, whereas the eaQHM averages about 3.5 minutes,
with a mean number of 4.2 adaptations, for a 16 kHz sampled,
16 bit audio signal. EDSM is in between but rather fast, with
a mean number of 12 seconds per sound file. It is of interest
to decrease the runtime of the eaQHM by applying faster
methods for parameter estimation, such as the FFT. That would
make the model more attractive for near-real-time applications.
Adaptation based on a different estimation scheme than Least-
Squares is under investigation.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we compared three sinusoidal model variants,
with different parameter estimation techniques. The advan-
tages and the disadvantages of each one were demonstrated via
synthetic and real signals of different content. Conclusively,
the subspace method of EDS is very powerful in parameter
estimation, despite of using stationary sinusoids inside the
analysis window. The EDS has been successfully used in
analysis of monophonic and polyphonic audio. On the other
hand, the adaptive Sinusoidal models use a less powerful
estimation method, the well-known LS minimization, but the
ability to change the characteristics of their basis functions
in the LS estimation provides a powerful iterative mechanism
to obtain high accuracy instantaneous parameters. However,
LS solutions suffers from ill-conditioning when two sinusoids
have frequencies which are very close to each other, making
the method inappropriate for polyphonic audio analysis. More-
over, the eaQHM has the same number of analysis parameters
with the EDS in a single frame, namely four, but synthesizes
a signal segment with three, instead of four, parameters. One
possible future research direction is to combine the strong
points of each method into a new paradigm, able to accurately
estimate the parameters and in parallel, to adapt in any signal
content.
