WIP: The Design Principle of blockchain:
An Initiative for the SoK of SoKs
LUYAO SUNSHINE ZHANG∗, Primitives Lane, Metaverse
Fig. 1. The Word Cloud of blockchain Related SoK Titles
The Master said, "virtue is not left to stand alone. He who practices it will have neighbors."
—Confucius, Analects
“You must contrive for your future rulers another and a better life than that of a ruler, and then
you may have a well-ordered State; for only in the State which offers this, will they rule who are
truly rich, not in silver and gold, but in virtue and wisdom, which are the true blessings of life.”
— Plato, Republic
Blockchain, also coined as decentralized AI, has the potential to empower AI to be more trustworthy by creat-
ing a decentralized trust of privacy, security, and audibility. However, systematic studies on the design principle
of blockchain as a trust engine for an integrated society of cyber-physical-social-system (CPSS) are still absent.
In this article, we provide an initiative for seeking the design principle of blockchain for a better digital world.
Using a hybrid method of qualitative and quantitative studies, we examine the past origin, the current devel-
opment, and the future directions of blockchain design principles. We have three findings. First, the answer to
whether blockchain lives up to its original design principle as a distributed database is controversial. Second,
the current development of the blockchain community reveals a taxonomy of 7 categories, namely, privacy and
∗Primitives Lane is a nonprofit research group focused on blockchain and other frontier technologies. We are dedicated
to solving the most fundamental public issues in frontier fields, helping researchers grow steadily, and creating a friendly
and supportive space for builders.
Author’s address: Luyao Sunshine Zhang, Primitives Lane, Metaverse.
arXiv:2301.00479v2  [cs.CR]  14 Jan 2023

2
Sunshine Zhang
security, scalability, decentralization, applicability, governance and regulation, system design, and cross-chain
interoperability. Both research and practice are more centered around the first category of privacy and security
and the fourth category of applicability. Future scholars, practitioners, and policy-makers have vast opportuni-
ties in other, much less exploited facets and the synthesis at the interface of multiple aspects. Finally, in counter-
examples, we conclude that a synthetic solution that crosses discipline boundaries is necessary to close the gaps
between the current design of blockchain and the design principle of a trust engine for a truly intelligent world.
Acknowledgments: I am deeply indebted to all the pioneers in Web3 for their inspirations, especially for
my mentors, coauthors, and students who jointly contribute to the interdisciplinary conversation around the
applications of blockchain. The name list is to be added.
CCS Concepts: • Applied computing →Economics; • Security and privacy →Distributed systems
security; • Human-centered computing →Collaborative and social computing systems and tools.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: blockchain, AI ethics, philosophy, economics, computer science
1
INTRODUCTION
The past one hundred years have witnessed incredible advancements in artificial intelligence
(AI) [Littman et al., 2022, Stone et al., 2022]. These advancements are integrating cyberspace (CS),
physical space (PS), and social space(SS), into the cyber-physical-social-system(CPSS), which ex-
traordinarily expands the territories of human civilizations [Wang, 2010] extraordinarily. However,
AI per se is not enough to establish trust in the CPSS [Jacovi et al., 2021, Jan et al., 2020], which is
the cornerstone of prosperity in every civilized society. Blockchain, also coined as decentralized AI,
has the potential to empower AI to be more trustworthy by creating a decentralized trust of privacy,
security, and audit-ability [Adel et al., 2022, Harris and Waggoner, 2019, Hussain and Al-Turjman,
2021]. However, systematic studies on the design principle of blockchain as a trust engine for
the CPSS are still absent. If we could decipher the philosophy of blockchain, we would build the
infrastructure of a better digital world. In this article, we provide an initiative for seeking the design
principle of blockchain for the betterment of human civilization. Unlike the existing systemization
of knowledge (SoK) on blockchain that focuses on a specific discipline purpose or topic of interest,
ours aims at opening an intellectual conversation beyond boundaries for the ultimate goal of a
better digital world, namely, the SoK of SoKs. Specifically, we hope to initiate the answers to three
questions for the past, the current, and the future of blockchain design.
(1) The past: Does blockchain live up to its original design principles as a distributed database?
(2) The current: How do the current blockchain literature, industry practices, and global standards
address and develop the design principle of blockchain?
(3) The future: What are the gaps between the current design of blockchain and the design
principle of a trust engine for a truly intelligent world?
In Section 2, we examine the performance of blockchain according to its original design principle
as a distributed database. We present the controversial answers in a dialog style of debate. In
Section 3, we analyze the current research and practice of blockchain principles by investigating
the current SoKs of emerging blockchain literature, the white papers that provide technique cor-
nerstones for blockchain technology in the real world, and the discussions on global standards for
blockchain. We identify a taxonomy of blockchain literature into the seven categories of privacy
and security, scalability, decentralization, applicability, governance and regulation, system design,
and cross-chain interoperability. Integrating the AI of natural language processing (NLP) [Bird
et al., 2009] methods, we find that the current blockchain design principles, in both research and
practice, are more centered around the first category of privacy and security and the fourth category
of applicability. Future scholars, practitioners, and policy-makers have vast opportunities in the
other much less exploited categories and the synthesis at the interface of multiple categories. In

WIP: The Design Principle of blockchain:
An Initiative for the SoK of SoKs
3
Fig. 2. A Conversation Between Sunshine and Chat GPT-3 on 2022/12/30
Section 4, we envision the future of blockchain technology by pointing out the gaps between the
current design of blockchain and the design principle of a trust engine for a truly intelligent world.
By providing counterexamples, we question the possibility of developing a plausible solution of
singularity to the gaps without crossing the current boundaries of domain expertise.
Sages in both the West and East have been craving an ideal society. In the Book of Rites, one of the
Confucian (551–479 B.C.E.) classics [Csikszentmihalyi, 2020], the Great Unity is a Chinese vision
of an ideal world in which men of virtue and ability rule. In ancient Greece, Plato [Kraut, 2022]
(429–347 B.C.E.) envisioned an ideal city-state ruled by a philosopher-king of justice in the Republic,
a Socratic dialog. By such a coincidence, both Confucius and Plato place the foundation of an ideal
society on cultivating or selecting the men of virtue to be the administrators whom people can trust.
Nevertheless, the existence of a benevolent ruler might not be guaranteed. In contrast, blockchain
enables a new way of trust creation empowered by computer intelligence beyond human ethics.
However, the current blockchain technology is evidently not a panacea for doubts about human
trust. Then, why "throw the baby out with the bathwater?" Existing mechanisms for cultivating
human trust have created economic prosperity and human civilizations for thousands of years. How
then can we integrate blockchain technology into the existing governance, economics, and ethics
to create an ideal society in the new era of CPSS? We initiate an open dialog of synthetic solutions.

4
Sunshine Zhang
2
THE PAST
What was blockchain originally designed for? How does blockchain live up to the design principle
of its original purpose? Sherman et al. [2019] introduce the origin of blockchain for establish-
ing a distributed database trusted by mutually suspicious groups. Haber and Stornetta [1990],
Narayanan et al. [2016],and Bayer et al. [1993] further elaborate on the follow-up development
of blockchain technology for a series of desired properties such as decentralization, immutability,
transparency, security, and efficiency. Figure 2 shows the answer returned by the Generative Pre-
trained Transformer (ChatGPT), https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/, a chatbot launched by OpenAI
in November 2022, to the question of "what is the design principle of blockchain?" The answer
accurately matches elaborations provided in earlier blockchain literature. We now examine the
performance of blockchain on each principle in a dialog style of debate in the spirit of Confucius’s
the Analects [Ames and Rosemont Jr, 2010] and Plato’s the Republic [Plato, 2005]. We find the
answer to be controversial. Moreover, the desired principles might either conflict with each other
or lead to other undesired consequences.
Question 1: Does blockchain live up to its promise of decentralization?
2.0.1
Pros. Yes, blockchain is decentralized. Compared with centralized ledgers, blockchain is not
subject to the single point failure of a centralized entity [Puthal et al., 2018]. Blockchain records
and validates data by a consensus protocol involving decentralized entities, which has the fault
tolerance of minorities [Zhang and Tian, 2022].
2.0.2
Cons. No, blockchain is not decentralized. Sai et al. [2021] provide a taxonomy of blockchain
centralization in 13 aspects. For example, Sai et al. [2021] show that the top four mining pools in
Ethereum (Bitcoin) consist of 63.04% (50.36%) of the hashing power, which is enough to conduct
a successful malicious attack. Moreover, Zhang et al. [2022] and the references therein show that
the usage of blockchain at the application layer has the trend of conversing to centralization.
Question 2: Does blockchain live up to its promise of immutability?
2.0.3
Pros. Yes, blockchain is immutable. Narayanan et al. [2016] elaborate on the difficulty of
manipulating recorded data due to the chain structure of Merkle trees.
2.0.4
Cons. No, blockchain is mutable. Hofmann et al. [2017] show that the immutability of
blockchain can be breached by various attacks. Politou et al. [2019] even address the conflicts
between blockchain immutability and the new European data protection regulation on the right
to be forgotten (RtbF), according to which individuals have the right to delete their personal data
under certain conditions.
Question 3: Does blockchain live up to its promise of transparency?
2.0.5
Pros. Yes, blockchain is transparent. [Monrat et al., 2019] explains that all the transactions
on blockchain are recorded and auditable by each replica node in the network.
2.0.6
Cons. No, blockchain is not transparent. Sai et al. [2021] demonstrates the centralization
in node operation, which is required to audit the blockchain data due to technique barriers. Feng
et al. [2019] even point out the transparency of blockchain as a negative feature and a threat to
user privacy.

WIP: The Design Principle of blockchain:
An Initiative for the SoK of SoKs
5
Question 4: Does blockchain live up to its promise of security?
2.0.7
Pros. Yes, blockchain is secure. Zhang et al. [2019] address the blockchain security prop-
erty of consistency and integrity achieved by the main techniques of consensus algorithms and
hash-chained storage.
2.0.8
Cons. No, blockchain is not secure. Lin and Liao [2017] evidence a long list of real attacks
on blockchain together with an analysis of potential security issues. Budish [2022] even establishes
a conclusion that the mechanism supporting blockchain security is either vulnerable or not worth
the economic cost.
Question 5: Does blockchain live up to its promise of efficiency?
2.0.9
Pros. Yes, blockchain is efficient. Wang et al. [2019a] analyze how blockchain improves
efficiency in human interactions by automating and streamlining business operations using smart
contracts.
2.0.10
Cons. No, blockchain is not efficient. Current major blockchains can only sustain tens of
transactions per second (TPS), which is not comparable to the centralized platforms, which have
a throughput of thousands of TPS [Chauhan et al., 2018].
3
THE CURRENT
How do the current blockchain literature, industry practices, and global standards address and
develop the design principle of blockchain? We collect all the systemization of knowledge (SoK)
papers related to facets of blockchain or surveys and review articles that satisfy the defining features
of SoKs. We refer the readers to the JSys website, https://www.jsys.org/type_SoK/, for background
information on SoKs and the Oakland Conference GitHub site, https://oaklandsok.github.io/, for the
histories of SoKs in computer security and privacy literature. We present a taxonomy of the collected
SoKs in Table 1 and Table 2, broken into seven categories based on the topic of research questions:
• Category 1: Privacy and Security. We include literature that answers questions about private
information protection and attacks on blockchain systems. We refer the readers to DeCew
[2018] for a philosophical symposium on privacy and Bishop [2003] for the computer science
insights on security.
• Category 2: Scalability. We include literature that answers questions related to the scalable
deployment of blockchain, usually measured in throughput and quality of service. We refer
the readers to Jogalekar and Woodside [2000] for the definition and measurement of scalability
in the distributed system literature.
• Category 3: Decentralization. We include the literature that answers questions related to the
designed and realized decentralization of blockchain. We refer the readers to Zhang et al.
[2022] for an interdisciplinary synthesis of a taxonomy of blockchain decentralization.
• Category 4: Applicability. We include literature that answers questions related to the appli-
cation of blockchain to solve social and economic issues in various of human interactions.
Table 2 shows that the major applications are in financial services [Chen and Bellavitis, 2020,
Harvey et al., 2021, Zetzsche et al., 2020].
• Category 5: Governance and Regulation. We include literature that answers questions related
to utilizing blockchain as a new way of governance, the process of interaction of an orga-
nized society, and its interactions with existing governance solutions, including corporate,
government, and nongovernment organizations (NGOs). We refer the readers to [Bevir, 2012]
for a review of existing governance solutions, including various forms of social coordination
and patterns of rules.

6
Sunshine Zhang
• Category 6: System design. We include literature that answers questions related to designing
blockchain as an advancement of existing computer systems. We refer the readers to Saltzer
and Kaashoek [2009] for the design principles of computer systems.
• Category 7: Cross-chain and Interoperability. We include literature that answers questions
related to communication, cooperation, and integration among blockchain systems, other
computer systems, and human societies. We refer the readers to Wegner [1996] and Leal et al.
[2019] for the importance and assessment of interoperability among information systems.
Table 6 lists the top 28 blockchain projects, excluding applications on the blockchain system and
cross-chain solutions ranked by the market value of their native currency retrieved from Coinmarket-
cap, https://coinmarketcap.com/, on Dec. 27, 2022. We further collect the white papers that provide
the technical foundations for the 28 projects. We then conduct a text analysis applying natural
language processing (NLP) methods to produce a word cloud and bigram networks of the titles and
abstracts of the SoKs and white papers. The results are presented in Table 4, Table 5, Table 7, Table 8,
Table 9, Figure 1, Figure 8, Figure 3, Figure 7, Figure 6, Figure 4, Figure 5, and Figure 9, Figure 8. The
word cloud distinguishes the word frequency in these documents through font size, and the bigram
represents the coappearance of two words in sequential order ranking by counts in the tables and in
the network figures. We also further research the emerging documents of blockchain standard de-
velopment and papers discussing blockchain standards by working groups and institutions globally.
Data and Code Availability: We open source the data and code for replication and future
research on the GitHub: https://github.com/sunshineluyao/design-principle-blockchain.
We find that the current blockchain design principles, in both research and practice, are more
centered around the first category of privacy and security and the fourth category of applicability.
Future scholars, practitioners, and policy-makers have vast opportunities in the other much less
exploited categories and the synthesis at the interface of multiple categories.
4
THE FUTURE
What are the gaps between the current design of blockchain and the design principle of a trust
engine for a truly intelligent world? In this section, we do not intend to provide a comprehensive
answer. Instead, we question the possibility of developing a plausible solution of singularity to the
gaps without crossing the current boundaries of domain expertise by providing counterexamples.
Case Study 1:
How can we elaborate on the design principle of privacy and security for a better society?
The scientific community of distributed systems and cryptography has made great milestones in
blockchain development by achieving the anonymity of private information and the audibility of
public transactions. However, privacy and security are the means but not necessarily the ends for
a better society of human prosperity. Through history, critiques [DeCew, 2018] have addressed
privacy as the source of criminal activities, economic inefficiency, and the abuse of minorities.
Cong et al. [2022b] identify that wash trading accounts for approximately 70% of the total cryp-
tocurrency trading volumes. Cong et al. [2022a] further provide a taxonomy of crimes enabled by
the anonymity feature on blockchain. Abundant literature in behavioral science [Dawson, 2018]
establishes a connection between anonymity and abusive behavior. However, none of those negative
effects on human behavior are considered in the original design principles of blockchain. How
can we redesign privacy and security to cultivate human cooperation better and minimize abusive
behavior? Behavior scientists have the expertise to contribute to this discussion.

WIP: The Design Principle of blockchain:
An Initiative for the SoK of SoKs
7
Case Study 2:
How can we elaborate on the design principle of decentralization for a better society?
Most top-ranked blockchain projects aim to create a permissionless system that is more inclusive,
democratic, and decentralized than those that have been presented previously. However, what is
required to satisfy the permission for the permissionless blockchains? You must have access to the
internet, afford the computer system requirements to run a replica node, and master the engineering
skills needed to participate in the network. Unfortunately, according to World in Data, https://
ourworldindata.org/internet, in most parts of our world, less than half of the population has access to
the internet, let alone the higher requirements of computer system and engineering skills. Moreover,
Ao et al. [2022] and the references therein evidence most of the crypto transactions are executed via
centralized exchanges but not in the decentralized form of on-chain peer-to-peer transactions. Cong
et al. [2022c] further address the inclusion issues of the current Web3 economy due to technology
barriers and lack of inclusion consideration in the original design principle of blockchain. The
famous Irish playwright Bernard Shaw said, "Revolutions have never lightened the burden of
tyranny. They have only shifted it to another shoulder" [Tiliouine and Estes, 2016]. To direct
blockchain development to avoid the fate stated by Bernard Shaw and serve a more decentralized
society—of the people, by the people, and for the people—anthropologists, social scientists, and
economists are able to contribute to designing a society of democracy, diversity, and inclusion.
Case Study 3:
How can we elaborate on the design principle of efficiency for a better society?
The current solutions for efficiency or scalability on blockchain focus on improving transaction
throughput and automating business processes. However, the pursuit of efficiency in an isolated
system of short-sighted consideration might lead to inefficiency for the society as a whole with
regard to long-term sustainability. For example, the current scalability solutions in general consider
the blockchain system only in isolation but ignore the negative externality of the high-energy
consumption design to the outside world [Truby, 2018]. Moreover, Grimmelmann [2019] notes that
although smart contracts automate business processes, the current design ignores the ambiguity in
the semantics of the programming language. Thus, a temporary convenience of the smart contract
operation might lead to costly disputes in unforeseen scenarios when developers and users disagree.
Policy-makers and lawyers can contribute to reconsidering the blockchain design to improve the
efficiency of negotiations among different stakeholders and our society as a whole.
A Call for Collaboration
Kranzberg [1986] stated the following in his 1985 address as president of the Society for the History
of Technology (SHOT): "Technology is neither good nor bad, nor is it neutral." blockchain is a
powerful technology that brings about many new possibilities. How can we redesign blockchain for
a truly intelligent world? To address this questions, we call for a joint endeavor from all disciplines.
