1
A Graph-based Methodology for the Sensorless
Estimation of Road Trafﬁc Proﬁles
Eric L. Manibardo, Ibai La˜na, Esther Villar-Rodriguez, and Javier Del Ser, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Trafﬁc forecasting models rely on data that needs to
be sensed, processed, and stored. This requires the deployment
and maintenance of trafﬁc sensing infrastructure, often leading
to unaffordable monetary costs. The lack of sensed locations can
be complemented with synthetic data simulations that further
lower the economical investment needed for trafﬁc monitoring.
One of the most common data generative approaches consists of
producing real-like trafﬁc patterns, according to data distribu-
tions from analogous roads. The process of detecting roads with
similar trafﬁc is the key point of these systems. However, without
collecting data at the target location no ﬂow metrics can be
employed for this similarity-based search. We present a method
to discover locations among those with available trafﬁc data
by inspecting topological features. These features are extracted
from domain-speciﬁc knowledge as numerical representations
(embeddings) to compare different locations and eventually ﬁnd
roads with analogous daily trafﬁc proﬁles based on the similarity
between embeddings. The performance of this novel selection
system is examined and compared to simpler trafﬁc estimation
approaches. After ﬁnding a similar source of data, a generative
method is used to synthesize trafﬁc proﬁles. Depending on
the resemblance of the trafﬁc behavior at the sensed road,
the generation method can be fed with data from one road
only. Several generation approaches are analyzed in terms of
the precision of the synthesized samples. Above all, this work
intends to stimulate further research efforts towards enhancing
the quality of synthetic trafﬁc samples and thereby, reducing the
need for sensing infrastructure.
Index Terms—Road trafﬁc modeling, graph embeddings, traf-
ﬁc data generation.
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the main goals of trafﬁc management is to provide
a safe trafﬁc infrastructure, where most of the potential trafﬁc
congestion scenarios and car collisions are avoided. This issue
can be addressed by modeling the trafﬁc behavior of the road
network and by developing predictive methods that allow fore-
casting metrics that characterize trafﬁc, such as ﬂow, speed,
or travel time [1]. This process enables the implementation
of operational measures for decision making (e.g., redirecting
trafﬁc ﬂow to other alternative routes). These trafﬁc forecast-
ing models are usually built from past trafﬁc observations.
However, in practice trafﬁc data acquisition systems cannot
be deployed over every link of a road, mainly due to the
high costs of deployment and maintenance of such sensing
equipment. On many occasions this issue has been addressed
by deploying temporal sensors that provide measurements for
Eric L. Manibardo, Ibai La˜na, Esther Villar Rodriguez and Javier Del Ser
are with TECNALIA, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA),
48160 Derio, Bizkaia, Spain. Javier Del Ser is also with the University of the
Basque Country (UPV/EHU) 48013 Bilbao, Bizkaia, Spain.

certain locations of interest during a limited period of time.
Nevertheless, a proper characterization of the trafﬁc behavior
under a variety of circumstances (e.g., events or holidays)
requires real trafﬁc measurements over more dilated periods
[2]. Thus, real trafﬁc data are not available for every road
link, nor are they collected for the time needed for a thorough
characterization. Indeed, in some cases placing a sensor is not
feasible due to manifold reasons. If possible, another concern
arises from the long latency needed to collect sufﬁcient data for
the subsequent model training. Since the performance of trafﬁc
forecasting models is constrained to both data quality and
quantity, data availability is arguably the practical bottleneck
for a successful trafﬁc network characterization.
For those scenarios where data are available, a glance at
the state-of-the-art reveals that the community is close to the
upper bound in terms of model-based improvements, whereas
data quality is acknowledged to be the key for more accurate
predictions [3]. In the context of trafﬁc modeling, data quality
[4] can be regarded in the form of anomaly absence. Some of
the most widely observed anomalies include missing trafﬁc
records, or data aggregation failures that produce outliers
shaped as spikes over the trafﬁc time series.
These anomalies are strongly inﬂuenced by the sensing
technique in use. On one hand, Roadside Car Data (RCD) is
obtained by deploying sensors at particular locations of the
trafﬁc network, such as inductive loops or trafﬁc cameras.
These sensors continuously capture the trafﬁc ﬂow or mean
speed at the point where they are deployed. On the other
hand, Floating Car Data (FCD) refers to trafﬁc measurements
of individually tracked vehicles, via devices with positioning
sensors (e.g., GPS). This type of data can provide more precise
trafﬁc measurements. However, the processing pipeline needed
for modeling them effectively poses several challenges, such
as i) the segmentation of distinct travel modes, as subjects
often mix them over the same trip; ii) human-induced mistakes
during the data annotation process; and iii) intrinsic precision
errors of the positioning sensor.
The deployment and maintenance costs of RCD, together
with the concerns associated to FCD, restrict the number of
public trafﬁc datasets that ensure an acceptable level of data
quality and enough time span to cover trafﬁc proﬁles occurring
along the year. As a result, the community often resorts to a
reduced collection of datasets (with above-average data quality
and time coverage) for research and industrial purposes [3].
Examples of these popular data repositories are the Caltrans
Performance Measurement System (PeMS) data source [5],
the Beijing Q-Trafﬁc dataset [6], or the Los Angeles County
highway (METR-LA) data source [7]. Unfortunately, building
arXiv:2201.04968v2  [cs.LG]  19 Oct 2022

2
predictive models from a limited collection of datasets is a
trend that leads to scarce insights beyond those that have
already been given in the prior literature. When it comes
to model benchmarks where the goal is to design a top-
leading trafﬁc predictive method (in the form of a new model
architecture or data preprocessing technique [8]), the selection
of well-known datasets eases the reproducibility of the results,
ensures the transparency of the reported performance scores,
and stimulate follow-up studies departing therefrom. However,
from a practical point of view there are no better trafﬁc datasets
than those collected over the same trafﬁc network where the
forecasting system is aimed to. Thus, generative methods and
simulators can provide synthetic trafﬁc datasets tailored for
the same context as the target location.
In summary, the nature of RCD and FCD limits the disposal
of trafﬁc data at every point of a trafﬁc network. In turn, sim-
ulators are hard to adjust, and without a precise conﬁguration
real-world factors that inﬂuence trafﬁc can not be modeled.
Nevertheless, synthetic data can be used by trafﬁc managers
to extract insights from locations of the trafﬁc network where
no sensors can be deployed, nor simulations can be performed.
Partly inspired by the ﬁndings of [9], in this work we
present a novel method that allows to ﬁnd a road segment
with a similar trafﬁc behavior in relation to a non-sensed
road segment. In this context, no trafﬁc data is available at
the target road, so the only information that can be used to
make the selection has to be extracted from the design of
the trafﬁc network and other circumstantial information that
can be extracted from its context. Under the concept of road
feature embedding, we design a set of features that attempt
to characterize each road segment, based on the topology
and context of the area and the domain-speciﬁc knowledge
about the behavior of trafﬁc ﬂows in similar urban areas to
the ones under study. Our hypothesis is that locations with
similar topological and contextual features (and thus, road
feature embeddings) are more likely to share trafﬁc patterns.
It can be expected that a secondary road has a higher trafﬁc
ﬂow than a residential avenue (and vice versa). The design
of the trafﬁc map itself determines the capacity of each road
and inﬂuences how drivers behave when driving therethrough.
However, the number of lanes and road type are not the
unique traits that affect the trafﬁc proﬁle of a certain road
segment: the location and connections to other road segments
can also bias its trafﬁc proﬁle. Intuitively two avenues sharing
the same road type, number of lanes and other topological
characteristics (e.g., lane width) might display different trafﬁc
ﬂow measurements depending on which other roads they are
connected to. They can receive trafﬁc from main arterial
roads, but also residential areas. Two equally designed parallel
roads can exhibit opposite trafﬁc proﬁles, where one presents
congestion during the morning commute to work, and so
does the other road in the afternoon. Human intuition and
experts in trafﬁc management can produce estimates of the
trafﬁc behavior to a point where a person can produce its
own congestion predictions towards selecting the best route
during a city trip. In essence, the main goal of this work is to
translate this knowledge into a numeric vector (namely, a road
feature embedding), so road segments of similar trafﬁc proﬁles
can be found without comparing trafﬁc measurements, but the
aforementioned expert knowledge-driven features instead.
Our analysis is supported by a collection of 55 Automatic
Trafﬁc Readers (ATR) deployed at the city of Madrid, Spain,
providing trafﬁc patterns of distinct shape and scale. However,
while delving into the process of ﬁnding road segments with
analogous daily trafﬁc proﬁles, a research question arises: if
the chosen dataset already has a similar trafﬁc proﬁle, is a
generative approach really needed? Real trafﬁc ﬂow recordings
can be extracted from the selected data source, and employed
as if it was measured at the target location. On this premise,
we conduct a study to analyze the beneﬁts and downsides
of using generative data methods against directly using the
trafﬁc recordings from the selected datasets as estimations for
the target location. Finally, we examine the limitations of the
presented road feature embedding selection method. The main
contributions of our work can be summarized as follows:
• We design a set of graph-based features that characterize
road segments, based on their topological and contextual
characteristics. This road feature embedding allows spotting
roads that are expected to have similar trafﬁc patterns,
without any need for trafﬁc data collected in the location
of interest.
• The deﬁnition of such road feature embeddings heavily
relies on intuition and domain-speciﬁc knowledge about the
behavior of trafﬁc ﬂows under different circumstances. This
clear match between knowledge and features contributes
to the trustworthiness and actionability of trafﬁc estimates
predicted therefrom, which are essential in real-world trafﬁc
management decision making processes.
• We experimentally compare the performance of a similarity-
based trafﬁc estimation method relying on the aforemen-
tioned embeddings to that of a na¨ıve selection based on
geographical proximity, where the nearest road segment with
collected trafﬁc data is used for estimation. Remarkably, the
algorithmic transparency of the trafﬁc estimation process
using similarities computed over the aforementioned road
embeddings adds to the overall reliability and trustworthi-
ness of the methodology and produced estimates by trafﬁc
managers.
• We explore and comparatively evaluate different options
to synthesize trafﬁc data for the location of interest: 1)
training a generative adversarial network (GAN) that models
the multiple distributions of the selected trafﬁc dataset; 2)
clustering trafﬁc samples according to certain criteria and
provide as the output a representative trafﬁc pattern; and 3)
taking as estimation the real trafﬁc data from the selected
road segment.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II re-
views those works that analyze the topological and contextual
inﬂuence on the trafﬁc proﬁle and delve into the capabilities
of graph embedding methods for representing trafﬁc networks.
Section III deﬁnes the features that conform the road feature
embedding, how these embeddings are compared, the distinct
generative approaches and the techniques employed for result
assessment. The experiments to be conducted are described
in Section IV. Here, the results steamed from such analyses

3
are exposed and commented. To ﬁnish, Section V summarizes
obtained insights and outlines future research paths stemming
from this work.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section we provide a comprehensive view of the
state-of-the-art concerning the main topic of this manuscript:
the sensorless estimation of trafﬁc proﬁles. Further arguments
and motivations towards conducting this work are ﬁrst ad-
dressed. Urban trafﬁc modeling is a more challenging task
regarding freeways (Subsection II-A). However, there is a lack
of high-quality trafﬁc ﬂow data sources for these areas. Trafﬁc
simulators can provide synthetic urban trafﬁc data. Even so,
this data source type is associated to a sometimes overlooked
concern: simulators do not consider the impact of certain
aspects that inﬂuence urban trafﬁc, such as the culture of
distinct communities or the complex interplay between social
events and trafﬁc ﬂow.
Finally, this section addresses the inﬂuence of network
topology from two perspectives. The ﬁrst analyzes the corre-
lation between network topology and the empirically obtained
trafﬁc proﬁles (Subsection II-B). Being trafﬁc ﬂow a complex
process, where multiple factors inﬂuence its behavior (e.g.,
culture, calendar, and weather), the network topology and the
urban context appears to be one of them; one whose role is not
completely clear yet. The second perspective is to represent
the trafﬁc network as a graph, a representational structure
speciﬁcally designed to portray the similarities between road
segments (Subsection II-C). Predictive models enhance their
performance from the information within these networks’
representations, to the point where most of published network-
wide forecasting models in recent years are built upon this
technology.
A. Urban trafﬁc and synthetic data
Trafﬁc behavior is more complex to model in cities, due
to the multiple factors that can alter urban trafﬁc [3]. This
fact, combined with the low number of public urban RCD
datasets, clariﬁes why not so long ago, urban road trafﬁc
data was scarcely studied [10]. It is not until recent years
when research papers on this context have seen its number
increased [3]. However, the majority of urban trafﬁc-focused
manuscripts were conducted over taxi or bike FCD. The trafﬁc
ﬂow of the entire network can not be predicted from these
kinds of datasets. Since FCD is gathered from individuals,
only a fraction of the total ﬂow can be modeled. Speed and
travel time forecasting models can be learned from FCD, but
when modeling the whole trafﬁc ﬂow of a road segment, RCD
is preferred.
The disposal of synthetic data can provide beneﬁts to
the ﬁeld, by giving access to urban trafﬁc data of similar
characteristics regarding a target location. Synthetic data is
rooted in the idea of producing artiﬁcial samples following
a statistical distribution [11], which should be close to the
real-world task to be modeled. Microscopic simulation tools,
where the dynamics of each vehicle is modeled, such as
SUMO [12], VISSIM [13], CORSIM [14], and MATSIM
[15], provide complex scenarios that allow to study not
only trafﬁc congestion, but also protocols for trafﬁc light
switching, emissions, energy consumption and so on [16].
With such simulation tools, complex but still detailed ﬂow
trafﬁc proﬁles for multiple road segments of a trafﬁc network
can be produced. Nevertheless, research can sometimes be
heavily concentrated on the concept of trafﬁc congestion,
and therefore, it is mostly considered as inﬂuencing factors
the weather, accidents reports or infrastructure change works.
Simulation tools do not consider other fundamental aspects
that concern the trafﬁc proﬁle. While freeway trafﬁc can
behave similarly under a ﬁxed set of conditions, city trafﬁc is
highly inﬂuenced by additional factors, inherent to the urban
areas. Events, road construction/restoration, etc., are difﬁcult
to include into simulations. The socio-cultural particularities
of every major community at a city also models the trafﬁc
behavior. Still, it is hard to embed this knowledge within the
conﬁguration of simulation tools.
A methodology for generating synthetic trafﬁc samples
for non-sensed locations is presented in [9] to cover the
above issues. The authors exploit the knowledge that can be
learned from neighboring sensed road segments. Deep learning
regression and GAN models are explored as data generation
methods. It is a challenging task since there is not an explicit
statistical distribution to be learned, due to the lack of real
data at target locations. Likewise, trafﬁc data exhibit a multi-
modal nature, where not a single but multiple distributions or
modes must be learned towards an accurate representation of
data. In the context of trafﬁc, these modes can be interpreted
as the distribution followed by observed data under certain
conditions (e.g., holidays and day of the week). Therefore,
not only several distributions must be learned without the
disposal of trafﬁc data from the road segment of interest, but
also the correct mode must be selected towards generating
plausible synthetic data. This issue is addressed by using
a set of conditions that groups trafﬁc recordings according
to the resemblance of their trafﬁc patterns. Although the
authors point out that mode selection can be improved by
delving into the conditioning of generative systems, their
main concern is to ﬁnd a road segment with a similar trafﬁc
behavior. The generation systems will output divergent trafﬁc
patterns if the behavior of the selected roads is not close
to the target location. Being exploratory research, a na¨ıve
criterion is adopted, where the closest ATRs available from
the surroundings served as data sources. This approach entails
speculation, where sometimes the selected data sources have
similar trafﬁc proﬁles, but in other cases trafﬁc highly differs.
B. Network design and trafﬁc proﬁles
The major challenge for a better design and usability of
a trafﬁc network is to understand the inﬂuence exerted by
its structure. The topological design of a city map inﬂuences
trafﬁc behavior. Road occupation makes drivers choose distinct
paths, pursuing a balance between selecting the shortest route
and avoiding trafﬁc congestion. In turn, simple street layouts
facilitate for drivers to foresee other drivers’ actions, so they
can adapt their driving style without sudden braking or other

4
ID
Lat
Lon
Coordinates
coordinates of T
coordinates of X
T
Z
Y
X
Context and topology
of road segments
embedding of T
embedding of X
Z
Y
X
Traffic
data
ID of selected road X
E
A
B
C
D
Traffic data of X
Embedding
computation
Coordinates
query
Embedding
comparison
Coordinates
comparison
Synthetic data
for target road
Training of
generative
method
Traﬃc proﬁles
computation
Traﬃc proﬁles
comparison
Data source
Fig. 1. Workﬂow for this investigation. Capital black letters within each shaded region denote the index of the subsections in Section III where the corresponding
step of the workﬂow is discussed (e.g., A is discussed in Subsection III.A). The red T stands for target road segment, whereas X, Y and Z represent those
locations considered as sensed road segments. The colored dot represents the central node of each ego graph.
similar abrupt movements. Nonetheless, with the inexorable
expansion of the city population, the same applies to their
infrastructure needs [17], where additional lanes and routes
are appended to the existing layout, promoting trafﬁc ﬂow
and hence, trafﬁc congestion.
Some published works address this issue, seeking the re-
lationship between trafﬁc proﬁles and the design of the road
itself. Wen et al. [18] elaborate on the idea that numerous
turning directions at crossroads can result in a hindrance for
ﬂuent trafﬁc ﬂow. By using collected data from the city of
Taipei, Taiwan, they manage to identify the most congested
segments of the metropolis (i.e., business districts and indus-
trial areas). On the same line, Wang et al. [19] conducted
a novel study in the city of Shenyang, China, about the
relationship between trafﬁc and the proximity of certain Points
of Interest (POI) (i.e., bus stations, schools, and hospitals).
They could only demonstrate a correlation of trafﬁc ﬂow with
the number of lanes. Despite these results, authors warned
about the conﬁdence of the presented conclusions, calling for
more case studies over other cities towards a better under-
standing of the considered relationships. A whole research
line stems from Geroliminis and Daganzo [20], where the ﬁrst
Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram (MFD) was obtained from
a real environment (i.e., the city of Yokohama, Japan). The
introduced MFD provides a description of the ideal network
dynamic performance, drawing a curve that deﬁnes the critical
point where an increase in vehicle density leads to a decrease
in vehicle ﬂow. As classiﬁed by Amb¨uhl et al. [21], in later
years distinct versions of the MFD have come out, but for the
substance of this manuscript, the most relevant is what they
deﬁne as theoretical upper bound MFD (uMFD). Just from the
network topology and the trafﬁc control policies, it is possible
to simulate the uMFD, towards a better understanding of the
theoretical trafﬁc ﬂow ceiling or, in other words, to foresee
which is the maximum capacity of the network during an ideal
driver behavior. In this line, several road network designs can
be studied for selecting the one with higher capacity. Laval
and Castrill´on [22] proposed and stochastic approximation
for computing the uMFD without the need for trafﬁc ﬂow
measurements, just only from the block length and the trafﬁc
lights timings. A comparison with the empirically obtained
uMFD from the city of Yokohama validates the method. Still,
this technique does not have into consideration the particular-
ities of other speciﬁc transport means (e.g., bus ﬂeets). The
latest advances in this investigation line are covered at the
introduction of [23] and [24], in the case of further reading
needs.
C. Trafﬁc forecasting and graph representation
As a subset of Machine Learning, deep learning [25] has
gained momentum in recent years, thanks to the impressive
results obtained in several ﬁelds such as natural language pro-
cessing [26] or computer vision [27]. The excellent modeling
capabilities of deep learning architectures expanded the com-
petence of multiple research ﬁelds, though these improvements
were temporally constrained to Euclidean data (i.e., data that
can be expressed in a m-dimensional Euclidean space) [28].
Trafﬁc forecasting is a problem that can be formulated in an
Euclidean space. Trafﬁc ﬂow, speed or travel time are usually
expressed as time series. A forecasting model receives as input
the trafﬁc state at times {t−n, . . . , t} and outputs the expected
trafﬁc state at t + h, where t is the current time instant,
n represents a time window of past trafﬁc values, and h is
the forecasting horizon. The superior modeling capabilities of
deep learning made authors concentrate their research efforts
on solving trafﬁc forecasting problems with this family of
learning models. Different deep learning architectures have
been proposed over the last years: from basic convolutional
and recurrent networks to more complex and deep architec-
tures such as those based on the attention mechanism [29]
(a more comprehensive analysis of related efforts to date is
provided in [3]). State-of-the-art architectures from other ﬁelds
were applied to trafﬁc forecasting, expecting similar levels of
predictive performance. However, as demonstrated in [3], deep
learning architectures do not necessarily outperform conven-
tional machine learning methods (e.g. ensemble learning). The
trafﬁc state at previous instants {t−n, . . . , t} contains enough
valuable information given the high persistence of the trafﬁc

5
time series to be predicted. Even a na¨ıve model where the
latest recorded trafﬁc state value serves as the predicted trafﬁc
value can be shown to yield a sufﬁciently good forecast for
low values of the horizon h. In summary, the feature learning
capability of deep learning models is not differential for this
speciﬁc application scenario, and poses further problems such
as the interpretability of the knowledge captured by such
black-box models once they have learned to forecast trafﬁc
[30].
It was not until the upsurge of geometric deep learning
[31] when multiple techniques arose towards developing new
applications concerning non-Euclidean data: those tasks where
data can be described as a graph [32] or as a manifold [33]. As
for the subject of this manuscript, trafﬁc networks can be easily
deﬁned as graphs, where the road segments are the edges, and
the crossroads are the nodes (although some authors prefer the
opposite representation). This way, an abstraction of the trafﬁc
network can be deﬁned as a graph G = (V, E, A), where V is
a set of N nodes representing the junction of road segments,
E is a set of edges symbolizing those road segments, and A
is a binary adjacency matrix in which element ai,j represents
the reachability between nodes i and j of the trafﬁc network:
node j can be reached from node i if ai,j = 1.
Bearing the above deﬁnitions in mind, graph neural net-
works (GNNs) are a type of deep learning architecture that
is speciﬁcally designed to exploit the information represented
by graph data structures [34]. From the development of novel
GNNs, researchers achieved to apply this technology towards
trafﬁc forecasting [35], as the trafﬁc state (e.g., ﬂow or mean
speed) can be easily encapsulated as node features. This way,
each node of the graph has a collection of features, composed
by its trafﬁc state of previous time instants. According to the
reachability deﬁned by A, the GNN can perform operations
with not only the trafﬁc features of one node but also merging
the information of its neighbor nodes.
Given the ability of graph representations to condense the
characteristics of a road network into a non-Euclidean space,
the surroundings of a road segment should be able to be
expressed as a collection of graph-based features that conforms
to intuition and domain knowledge about behavioral patterns
of trafﬁc ﬂows in urban networks with different topologies.
For this reason, the road segment similarity ﬁnding method
proposed in this work is based on features distilled from a
graph representation which is intended to portray the topology
and context of the neighboring.
III. MATERIALS AND METHODS
It can be inferred from the literature review that a compar-
ison between two roads of a trafﬁc network can be performed
by contrasting their topological features. Likewise, graphs
have been proven to be a competent trafﬁc network repre-
sentation in previous literature. In this section, we exploit this
information to create a method for comparing the similarity of
two road segments without the need of trafﬁc measurements.
Figure 1 represents the workﬂow of this investigation, which
is designed to provide an overview of all the processes to be
explained. First, available real-world trafﬁc data is obtained
from the data source at hand, along with the coordinates
of every sensed and non-sensed road segment (Subsection
III-A). These coordinates are used to compute a set of features
which are intended to portray the context and topology of
such locations: a road feature embedding (Subsection III-B).
By comparing these embeddings, a sensed road is selected
(Subsection III-C). Similarly, the nearest sensed road is se-
lected by inspecting the coordinates of every location (i.e.,
geographical selection method). The performance of both
selection methods is analyzed by comparing the trafﬁc proﬁle
of the target and selected roads (Subsection III-D). Finally,
three generative methods are introduced, towards analyzing
the quality of the produced synthetic trafﬁc data (Subsection
III-E). Algorithm 1 summarizes the data and steps involved
in a generic implementation of the proposed methodology for
the sensorless estimation of road trafﬁc proﬁles.
Algorithm 1: Methodology for the sensorless estima-
tion of road trafﬁc proﬁles
Input: Coordinates C of target t and sensed road
segments s = {s1, . . . , sn}, historic records of
trafﬁc ﬂows F[s], ego-graph eG, road feature
embedding E = [f1, . . . , f7] composed by
features f, generative model m, and date of
day to be predicted d
Output: Trafﬁc data estimation at target location
1 For t and s
2
Compute eG according to C
3
Compute graph-based features
Eg[eG] = [f1, . . . , f5], Expressions (1) and (2)
4
Obtain topological features Er[C] = [f6, f7]
5
Arrange all features E = [Eg[eG], Er[C]]
6
Standardize E
7 Find s that minimizes d(E[t], E[s]), Expression (3)
8 Train m with F[s]
9 Estimate trafﬁc ﬂow at the target location t as m[d]
A. Trafﬁc data and graph representation
The trafﬁc data for this investigation, is obtained from the
city council of Madrid, Spain [36]. It provides access to
multiple ATRs (i.e., inductive loops), that have collected trafﬁc
variables like ﬂow, occupation or speed for several years.
Speciﬁcally, the time span of the selected datasets for this
investigation covers the 2018 and 2019 years. The coordinates
of a total of 55 considered road segments is stored in a tabular
ﬁle. Standard preprocessing techniques are applied to each
trafﬁc dataset, towards dealing with outliers or missing data,
among other common data anomalies.
The location of the ATRs is displayed in Figure 2. Here,
it can be observed that all considered locations correspond
to secondary, tertiary, or residential roads. Motorways and
primary roads are excluded on purpose, as they are meant to be
the infrastructure for in/out city journeys. The trafﬁc behavior
on these driveways is expected to be differentiated regarding
the trafﬁc ﬂow of the lower-rank roads contemplated for this
investigation.

6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
Fig. 2. Location of the deployed sensors in the neighborhood of Chamart´ın in
Madrid, Spain. Several road types are considered. Namely: secondary, tertiary,
and residential roads, along with road links between distinct road types.
The trafﬁc network graph representation G is computed
via the OSMnx Python package [37], which allows obtaining
geospatial data from OpenStreetMap [38]. From the coordi-
nates of each ATR, a directed graph is built within a 2km
radius. Such distance has been established after a systematic
search but must be long enough so every inﬂuential street
is captured. This way, the road segments conform the graph
edges E, whereas the nodes V represent the crossroads. The
road length, maximum speed, and travel time of the road
(computed from the previous characteristics) are assigned as
edge attributes for E. Since the graph is obtained from the
coordinates of an ATR, and this one is placed in a road
segment, the focal point of the graph would be an edge.
However, for the sake of an easier graph processing, the ATR
should be placed as the central node of the network. To this
end, the corresponding edge is split into two smaller segments
which are, at the same time, connected to an artiﬁcial central
node. In the following, the artiﬁcial node is considered as the
focal point of the graph, which shares the coordinates of the
ATR, and is ultimately referred to as central node.
B. Road feature embedding
A road feature embedding is designed to compare street
segments. Some of the features that conform the embedding
are based on a graph representation. However, the graph repre-
sentation G is too wide to represent only the particularities of
the target road. Therefore, an ego-graph eG [39] is obtained by
pruning all nodes in the original graph G, that need more than
N hops to be reached from the central node. The parameter
N regulates the relevance of the surroundings during road
segment comparisons. Low values for N will make the system
to focus on the topological aspects of the target street, while
high N values can make ego-graphs similar to each other,
only because distant road segments regarding the central node
are overlaid. This last case neglects the particular traits of the
target road, which can produce non desirable resemblances.
With these concerns in mind and after a grid search, a value
of N = 5 is set for this investigation. This parameter can be
tuned according to the trafﬁc map and feedback delivered by
experts in trafﬁc management with experience in the urban
area under study. Complex trafﬁc network designs might need
higher values of N, since road segments are usually shorter,
and hence small surfaces can be well represented by eG.
Conversely, the characterization of long road segments might
require low N values to avoid the overlap of similar graph
representations.
From the ego-graph centered in the target location, a set
of features is arranged. The NetworkX Python package [40]
provides the methods used to compute them. A ﬁrst subset of
such features is meant to express the centrality of the central
node and its neighbor nodes. As its name suggests, these
metrics are intended to quantify the prominence of an agent
(node or edge) in a network [41]. This concept is motivated
from the data networks domain, which often shares properties
with trafﬁc networks [42]. Among the existing centrality mea-
sures available in the state-of-the-art [43], we have selected
the shortest path betweenness centrality (SPBC) which, for
a node v, is the count of all pairs shortest paths that pass
through it. Mathematically:
SPBC(v) =
X
s,t∈V
σ(s, t|v)
σ(s, t)
(1)
where V is the set of considered nodes (neighbors of v), σ(s, t)
is the number of shortest (s, t) paths, and σ(s, t|v) is the total
of those paths passing through node v, as deﬁned in [44].
Since in a graph representation crossroads serve as the
edge split criterion, the streets represented in E are usually
divided into multiple edges. Some long road segments are
partitioned several times, while others with a reduced number
of crossroads are represented by fewer, yet longer road seg-
ments. Upon this principle, the shortest path is computed by
comparing the travel time assuming free-ﬂow speed, instead
of the number of hops (which is the default metric). From
Expression 1, the following metrics are computed:
1) SPBC of the central node: Higher values should correlate
with high ﬂow proﬁles.
2) Maximum SPBC among neighbors: It searches for other
more essential nodes in eG, regarding the central node.
3) Median SPBC among neighbors; It helps ﬁgure out the
distribution of centrality, among nodes in eG.
Other centrality measures have been considered but ex-
cluded, as they do not reﬂect well the trafﬁc proﬁle of a
road segment, or more precisely, it was intended to get rid
of those features that could be ambiguous (road similarity
or disparity could be argued with the same value). It is the
case of degree, which in the context of trafﬁc networks is
the number of links a crossroad has. Multiple connections to
other road segments do not directly imply that a crossroad is
heavily used, as many of these links can be scarcely frequented
streets. In turn, a low-degree arterial road can be an essential
milestone for numerous paths that go across the area. The
closeness of a node is the distance to all other connected

7
nodes in the graph, or in other words, it measures how long
it will take to spread information (or vehicles in this context),
from the central node to all other nodes sequentially. While
closeness is oriented to measure the broadcast capabilities of
the nodes, it is a centrality measure focused on information
networks. In contrast to data packages, vehicles are treated
as individuals with no capacity for duplication. Instead of
granting importance to the reachability of all other nodes,
only certain points of the network should be interesting to
be close to, as drivers are prone to searching for higher-rank
road segments (e.g., primary roads). Departing from this idea,
new embedding features are deﬁned further on.
The neighborhood of Chamart´ın is enclosed by a primary
road at the west, and by a motorway at the east (see Figure
2). In a large city like Madrid, the population usually travels
in/out of the district through the fastest route, which gener-
ally compromises high-rank roads. The travel time towards
reaching the closest primary road and/or motorway can elicit
insightful features. This concept can be expressed as:
TT(v, type) = min ∆(v, etype)∀etype ∈E,
(2)
where TT(v, type) is the expected travel time for a vehicle
in node v, towards reaching the closest road of certain rank
type (in terms of travel time), and ∆(v, etype) is the expected
travel time from v to the closest node of a street segment e
of a certain rank type belonging to a set of edges E.
This time, instead of using the ego-graph, the overall graph
G is employed, as high rank roads could not fall into eG. From
Equation 2 the following features are obtained:
4) Travel time to the nearest motorway: Motorways can be
oriented to trips out of town.
5) Travel time to the nearest primary road: Primary roads
can be oriented to trips to the city center.
During rush hours, ﬂow spikes can be narrow or wider
depending on the overall ﬂow. In the case of dormitory towns,
most drivers go out of the city in the morning and return home
in the evening, while major cities oppositely receive trafﬁc.
These previous features are tailored towards characterizing the
events that impact trafﬁc proﬁle during rush hours.
Additionally to the features obtained from analyzing the
graph, two extra features based on road characteristics are
included for characterizing the road segments: the road type
and the number of lanes. Each road type is encoded as an
ascending scale where zero represents residential roads and
the unit value corresponds to a motorway. Intermediate road
types (namely tertiary, secondary, and primary) are encoded as
in-between numbers, ensuring that all values are uniformly dis-
tributed. In contrast, the number of lanes is directly expressed
by its original value. However, it is worth mentioning that
although the NetworkX Python package provides methods for
obtaining this road feature, there are some aggregation errors
(i.e., merging the lanes of both directions), and missing values
(generally in residential and tertiary single lane roads). Under
this premise, each of the ATRs considered for this investigation
has been manually inspected via Google Street View, to verify
and rewrite the number of lanes if necessary. In those cases
where the number of lanes varies, the predominant number of
lanes across the entire length of the road segment is selected.
The above topological features are meant to give some
notion about the trafﬁc behavior in the studied road segments.
Roads are classiﬁed in classes or ranks towards denoting
their importance within the road network as a whole. Their
structure, capacity, speed limits and even lane width varies
between high and lower-rank roads. The number of lanes is
just one speciﬁc parameter that deﬁnes the road structure.
Nonetheless, it can produce more insights about the trafﬁc
ﬂow regarding other road design features, such as the speed
limit, which in the context of urban networks is most of the
time equal or below 50 kph. Still, even if road networks are
designed bearing in mind the expected trafﬁc demand, real
daily trafﬁc proﬁles might not correlate with the expectations
[45]. Bearing this in mind, the last features that conform to
the road feature embedding are deﬁned as:
6) Road type: Higher rank road types are expected to portray
higher daily trafﬁc ﬂow proﬁles.
7) Number of lanes: Directly deﬁnes the road capacity and,
henceforth the contemplated trafﬁc ﬂow.
For the sake of a better understanding of the concepts
beneath each topological and contextual feature, Figure 3 il-
lustrates how such features are extracted from a road segment.
While some features (i.e. those based on centrality, road
type, and the number of lanes) can be useful for any target
area, features 4) and 5) are developed ad-hoc based on
discussions held with experts in trafﬁc analysis. The area
considered in the case study (see Figure 2) is surrounded by
a motorway and a primary road. These two arterials can be
regarded as the major in- and out- trafﬁc gates ﬂowing into
and out of the district, so their proximity to them (in terms of
travel time) might be an interesting trait for characterizing
road segments. Trafﬁc managers may use their knowledge
of local trafﬁc dynamics even further for designing more
features that represent other particular characteristics of the
road segments, so the accuracy of the road feature embedding
comparison can be enhanced. At this point we remark that
this work is constrained by the available data of the target
region. Nevertheless, future implementations can also beneﬁt
from accessing additional valuable information, such as the
lane width or the existence of parking slots along the roadside.
1) SPBC of central node
2) Maximum SPBC among neighbors
3) Median SPBC among neighbors
4) Travel time to the nearest motorway
5) Travel time to the nearest primary road
6) Road type
7) Number of lanes
Graph representation
Target road segment
Fig. 3. Graphical representation of the topological and contextual factors that
conform the road feature embedding.

8
C. Selection of a sensed road segment
Road feature embeddings are intended to portray the charac-
teristics of the road segments. Therefore, two locations with a
close trafﬁc proﬁle, should share similar values for the features
that compose their respective embeddings. After a feature
normalization, road feature embeddings can be represented as
single points in a N-dimensional space. From this, by selecting
the road feature embedding of the target road as origin, the
Euclidean distance to any of the other road feature embeddings
can be computed [46]:
D(u, v) =
N
X
n=1
p
|(un −vn)|2
(3)
where D(u, v) is the Euclidean distance between two N-
dimensional vectors u and v, whereas un and vn are the fea-
tures for the corresponding vector in position n ∈{1, . . . , N}.
Since similar road feature embeddings should likewise have
(according to our hypothesis) close values of their feature
values, the minimal Euclidean distance among all available
sensed road segments can be found.
After selecting one road via the road feature embedding
method, a second location is selected according to the co-
ordinates of the ATRs and the target location. This way, the
performance of both geographical and road feature embedding
selection methods can be analyzed.
D. Trafﬁc proﬁles and selection performance
The main objective of the current manuscript is to present
a method that allows to ﬁnd similar roads in terms of trafﬁc
proﬁle, without the need to compare the real trafﬁc proﬁles
between roads. However, for the sake of evaluating the perfor-
mance of the road selection, the trafﬁc proﬁles of both sensed
and target roads must be set side by side and compared. Every
road segment receives interactions from the surroundings,
which uniquely condition its trafﬁc proﬁle, making perfect
matches between target and selected locations unattainable.
Still, as this method is intended to provide an alternative real
trafﬁc data source drawn from an analogous road for the target
location, it is mandatory to pursue suchlike trafﬁc proﬁles.
A trafﬁc proﬁle is a ﬂow pattern that expresses the trafﬁc
behavior at a certain location of the trafﬁc network. At a
road segment, trafﬁc ﬂow varies with regard to the time of
the day, the day of the week, holidays, and so on [47],
making it arduous to condense all the trafﬁc information in
a single trafﬁc pattern. Even so, a trafﬁc proﬁle must be
computed in order to characterize distinct points of the city.
Daily trafﬁc ﬂow metrics are more likely to be similar for
two road segments that possess analogous trafﬁc patterns and
vice-versa. Henceforth, the comparison of trafﬁc proﬁles for
each of the 55 considered road segments is employed as a
performance gauge for the proposed system.
We propose to compute the median ﬂow to obtain such
trafﬁc proﬁles. Since trafﬁc highly differs between daily hours,
the trafﬁc ﬂow for a certain timestamp is computed as the
median of all recordings at that speciﬁc time. The median
ﬁlters extreme ﬂow values that can occur during special events
such as Christmas, the beginning and return of the summer
0
500
Flow
Weekdays
Weekends
0
1000
Flow
00:00
02:00
04:00
06:00
08:00
10:00
12:00
14:00
16:00
18:00
20:00
22:00
Time of day
0
1000
2000
Flow
Fig. 4. Trafﬁc proﬁles computed from weekdays or weekends only, for three
of the considered road segments. The continuous line represents the median
ﬂow value for each timestamp during a two-year period. Standard deviation
is also displayed for each timestamp.
holidays, etc. The mean, on the other hand, would produce
unrealistic trafﬁc proﬁles, triggered by the aforementioned
outliers. When it comes to ﬁltering atypical values, only week-
days are considered for computing the trafﬁc pattern, leaving
out the trafﬁc recordings from weekends. Trafﬁc proﬁle at
weekends has fewer particularities than during weekdays,
where usually the trafﬁc proﬁle is more restrained, as can be
seen in Figure 4. In addition to this, the weekends-only trafﬁc
patterns usually share a similar shape, to the point that with a
proper scaling factor, the majority of these ﬂow patterns could
be obtained. By comparison, weekdays-only trafﬁc patterns
are more insightful towards characterizing distinct points of
a trafﬁc network, as they draw silhouettes that differ on the
width and location of spikes. Additionally, Figure 4 also
showcases that the standard deviation for weekends, obtained
from all the ﬂow recordings for a certain timestamp, is more
uniform across the daytime. Putting all together, by excluding
weekends in the calculation, more distinctive trafﬁc patterns
would be obtained. Therefore, the trafﬁc proﬁle is obtained
exclusively from weekdays as:
y(r, t) = median(x(r, t, d)) ∀d ∈D : d is weekday
(4)
where y(r, t) is the trafﬁc proﬁle at a timestamp t for a
certain ATR r whose trafﬁc metrics are contained in dataset
D, median(·) denotes median statistic, and x(r, t, d) denote
the trafﬁc ﬂow available in day d ∈D at a timestamp t.
E. Methods for generating synthetic samples
From the trafﬁc data of the selected sensed road segment,
synthetic samples can be generated for the target location. In
the experimental framework of [9], the authors select the two

9
closest sensed road segments for generating data at the target
location. This criterion does not ensure similar trafﬁc proﬁles
at the selected points of the trafﬁc network, so a GAN is
employed towards mixing the information of such locations.
This way, a more stable solution is sought. On the contrary, the
road feature embedding approach is designed to identify road
segments with expected comparable trafﬁc patterns. Under this
premise, the ﬁrst candidate to be chosen should be a more
accurate substitute for the target location, regarding second and
third proposals. Therefore, only one sensed road is employed
for generating data.
Within the context of this work, GAN based solutions could
not be the best approach. The GAN based approach presented
in [9] loses its purpose when a single trafﬁc dataset conforms
the data source, as there is not information to be combined.
Several data generation approaches are suggested in this sec-
tion, which are further analyzed considering their complexity
(i.e., computational effort), and prediction performance.
Trafﬁc data usually follows several distributions or modes.
One distribution could deﬁne how trafﬁc behaves on workdays,
whereas other distribution can model trafﬁc under extreme
weather conditions (e.g., heavy rain or snowfall). Thus, char-
acterizing properly all modes of a sensed road segment is
a complex task, which deserves its own research line [48].
Nevertheless, when generating trafﬁc data, it is critical to select
the correct distribution from which to compute the synthetic
sample. Without identifying data distributions, a generation
query could be answered with any plausible trafﬁc proﬁle
from the desired location, which will provoke inaccurate
predictions.
Operation modes have been reduced to 14, as per deﬁned in
[9], obtained from the combination of weekdays and holidays.
Since this criterion is merely based on calendar features, data
can be labelled without the need of ﬂow-based features. Every
generation approach is adjusted using as training data the
selected dataset from the road feature embedding system. The
performance of each generative approach is then analyzed by
employing the trafﬁc recordings of the target location as test
data. A trafﬁc pattern is generated for all days in the test
dataset (giving a total of 730 days). Henceforth, for each of the
55 considered target locations, 730 error metrics are computed,
by comparing the real trafﬁc with the generated trafﬁc pattern.
The ﬁrst generation approach revolves around training a
conditional GAN [49], conditioned with the 14 classes deﬁned
above. The goal is not to produce a top performance generation
method, but to analyze distinct generation approaches. Under
this premise, the approach A
⃝proposed in [9] has already
showcased a prominent performance for this task, so it is
selected as the generation method. A ReLU layer is added at
the end of the generator model, so no negative trafﬁc ﬂow
can be generated. The generative model receives as input
the class of the desired day to be generated and a noise
vector. Conceptually, this solution is based under the concept
of learning several data distributions and taking as output a
random sample of the selected mode.
The second generation approach inherits concepts from the
long-term estimation framework presented in [50]. Here, trafﬁc
data is grouped by ﬂow similarity into clusters. Each cluster
disposes of a Representative Trafﬁc Pattern (RTP), computed
as the median of all the trafﬁc samples within the cluster.
From the value of certain calendar features, incoming days to
be predicted are assigned to a cluster, and the aforementioned
RTP serve as the trafﬁc pattern that is going to be used as
generated data. The framework is modiﬁed, so trafﬁc data is
grouped according to the aforementioned 14 classes. Given
a date, that particular day is associated to one cluster. The
RTP of the designated cluster is taken as the generated trafﬁc
pattern.
The last and third generation approach is the simplest and
more easily interpretable by a user without any background
on machine learning. If the target and selected road segments
are considered similar, the trafﬁc ﬂow at a speciﬁc date
should be similar in both locations. Under this premise, a
Na¨ıve Similarity-based Estimation (NSE) method is proposed,
where the generated trafﬁc samples for the target location are
taken from the real trafﬁc measurements at the selected road
segment, for the same date. This approach is constrained to
the disposal of trafﬁc data for the date to be predicted. Hence,
no trafﬁc data can be generated for future dates, denying the
prospective use of the system.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
The design of our experimental setup departs from the
ﬁndings and research directions reported in [9], which empha-
sized that in order to improve the performance of generative
methods for trafﬁc data, a better criterion for selecting similar
road segments should be conceived. The selection of the right
trafﬁc dataset originates another dilemma, since synthetic data
produced by a generative model could be no more accurate
than taking as prediction the trafﬁc record of the desired
date from the selected dataset. Aiming to condensate these
concerns, we formulate several research questions (RQ) to be
answered with empirical evidence:
• RQ1: Can two road segments with similar trafﬁc proﬁles be
identiﬁed from a set of topological features?
• RQ2: Is there any relationship between road feature em-
bedding similarity and the performance of our selection
method?
• RQ3: Which is the best approach for generating synthetic
data in the target location?
Towards assessing quantitatively the performance of the
different trafﬁc generation methods, error metrics must be
computed. This can be achieved by comparing the trafﬁc
proﬁles of two road segments. The Root Mean Square Error
(RMSE) has been chosen as error metric, due to its explain-
ability. Obtained deviations can be interpreted as the number of
vehicles that might be under/over predicted. Given a desired
trafﬁc pattern, the RMSE measures the performance of the
selection system:
RMSE(y, by) =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i
(yi −byi)2,
(5)
where RMSE(y, by) is the RMSE computed over a trafﬁc
proﬁle y from a target location and a trafﬁc proﬁle by from

10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55
Target road segment
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
RMSE
Selection method
Embedding
Geographical
Fig. 5. Performance of the selection methods for every considered road segment. Black lines showcase the lowest RMSE that would be obtained by selecting
the most similar location among sensed ones if trafﬁc measurements were available for comparison. Black crosses denote the mean ﬂow value for the target
road (considering only weekdays).
a sensed point of the network, and N is the total number of
samples that conform the trafﬁc proﬁles over which the error
is computed.
Being RMSE a scale dependent error metric, its normalized
version or nRMSE is also employed in this section. There
is no single normalization criterion in the literature; as such,
commonly adopted options imply dividing the measure by the
mean, standard deviation or the range of the data. The chosen
approach is to normalize the RMSE by the mean ﬂow of all
weekdays from target location. In the context of this work,
the standard deviation expresses how much the ﬂow can vary
among distinct days and conditions, so a normalization using
this metric will be more punishing for those road segments
with a ﬂuctuating ﬂow. Similarly, the range of data is also
discarded towards normalizing the obtained error. The majority
of roads have certain time periods where trafﬁc ﬂow is close to
zero (i.e., early morning hours). This entails that the range of
data is almost equal to the maximum ﬂow value of the trafﬁc
proﬁle. By normalizing the RMSE with the mean ﬂow value,
extreme values are smoothed, producing a more robust metric.
Before proceeding with the discussion of the obtained
results, we note that, for the sake of reproducibility, all datasets
in use, source code and results have been made available at
https://github.com/Eric-L-Manibardo/Road embedding.
RQ1: Can two road segments with similar trafﬁc proﬁles be
identiﬁed from a set of topological features?
As previously introduced, the performance metrics of the
road segment selection methods are obtained by comparing
trafﬁc proﬁles. For each target road, two performance metrics
are calculated: one for the embedding selection method; a sec-
ond one for the geographical selection method. Both metrics
can be directly compared since they are computed using the
same trafﬁc proﬁle as the ideal generated pattern. Additionally,
the RMSE that would be obtained from the best ﬁtting trafﬁc
proﬁle among sensed road segments is also considered. This
metric is intended to gauge the lower boundary error that could
be obtained. To conclude, the mean ﬂow value of all weekdays
(since trafﬁc proﬁle calculation also excludes weekends) of the
target road, portrays an upper boundary error. Putting all this
together, Figure 5 presents the obtained results.
From a total of 55 considered road segments, comparing
their road feature embeddings produces a better selection
for 30 cases. The geographical criterion excels our proposed
system in 12 cases. For the rest of the analyzed target roads,
both selection methods output the same location (13 draws).
Furthermore, a closer look reveals that the selection system
based on road feature embedding produces more restrained
errors, whereas the average committed error is far greater for
the geographical method. The nearest sensed road segment
does not have to share any topological relationship regarding
the target location (e.g., road type or number of lanes).
Figure 5 also includes the mean ﬂow value for each target
road segment, computed from weekdays only (as trafﬁc pro-
ﬁles are computed from the same date range). Although there
is not a consensus that relates the average trafﬁc ﬂow with the
minimum accuracy for a system to be appealing, these values
help to showcase the dimensions of each scenario. The same
committed error has a different impact on the quality of the
selection. When comparing trafﬁc proﬁles, a difference of 50
vehicles is meaningful for a 100 average ﬂow road. However, if
the mean trafﬁc ﬂow is around 1000 vehicles, the performance
of the system would be acceptable.
If trafﬁc measurements were available at target location, the
black horizontal lines denote the error that would be obtained
by selecting the road segment with the most similar trafﬁc
proﬁle. Therefore, it is the lowest error that can be obtained
with the current set of sensed road segments. This metric helps
to contextualize the performance of the selection criteria. If
the best selection performance that can be obtained from the
current set of sensed locations is not acceptable, it means
that either the target location has a peculiar trafﬁc proﬁle or
more sensors should be deployed towards collecting trafﬁc
data at an analogous location. While the disposal of more
sensed locations can enhance the performance of the selection
method, the key point should be to gain the ability to spot those
road segments of the network with unusual trafﬁc proﬁles.
This way, only a representative road segment for each type of
trafﬁc proﬁle would be needed to be sensed, opening the gates
to more restricted budget plans.

11
RQ2: Is there any relationship between road feature embed-
ding similarity and the performance of our selection method?
Being the Euclidean distance the criterion for searching the
most similar road feature embedding, it is worth studying
if there is any kind of relationship between this metric and
the performance of the system. In order to extract insights
from comparing the results of every road segment, a scale
independent metric is needed. Therefore, the performance of
each selection procedure is measured by the nRMSE score.
Along with the embedding selection method, we also an-
alyze the embedding similarity that would be obtained from
the locations with the most similar trafﬁc proﬁle (i.e., those
that produce the lowest RMSE possible). By contrast, the
geographical selection method is not considered for this topic,
as this criterion is unpredictable: the closest sensed location
does not have to possess a similar road feature embedding.
Road feature embeddings are compared by computing the
Euclidean distance between a couple of embeddings. Since
the seven considered features (see Figure 3) are normalized to
the range (0,1), from Expression (3) the maximum Euclidean
distance can be computed as
p
7 · (0 + 1)2. This way, two
identical road feature embeddings would produce an Euclidean
distance of zero, whereas the most dissimilar couple of road
feature embeddings would be at an Euclidean distance of
√
7.
From this, the embedding similarity can be expressed as a
percentage.
Figure 6 shows the relationship between selection perfor-
mance and embedding similarity. In addition to the road
segments with the most similar road feature embedding, for
each target location, the road feature embeddings of the
sensed locations with the most similar trafﬁc proﬁles are also
represented.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Selection performance (nRMSE)
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Embedding similarity (%)
Selection criteria
Embedding
Traffic profile
Fig. 6. Road feature embedding similarity against selection performance for
each of the analyzed road segments. In green, the selected location is the one
with the most similar embedding. In blue, the selected location is the one
with the most similar trafﬁc proﬁle (so trafﬁc measurements at target location
would be needed for this comparison).
No correlation between embedding similarity and selection
performance is found. On one hand, the performance of the
road feature embedding selection method is not optimal. There
are a few cases where even with an embedding similarity above
80% the selection performance is above the unit (i.e., RMSE
above the mean ﬂow of target location). On the other hand,
the selection performance of the trafﬁc proﬁle selection cri-
terion demonstrates that for the majority of considered target
locations there is a sensed road segment with a comparable
trafﬁc pattern. However, it should be point out that some
sensed locations exhibit a low embedding similarity while still
producing a high selection performance. Therefore, analogous
trafﬁc proﬁles can exist at road segments of distinct contextual
and topological characteristics. Under this premise, optimal
selection performance could not be possible to achieve for
every considered target location, as unrelated roads can also
produce a similar ﬂow.
To ﬁnish this second discussion, it is worth pointing out
those cases with an almost identical road feature embedding
(i.e., similarity near to 100%). As some sensors are deployed
geographically close to each other, their graph representation
is similar. Road type and number of lanes is also shared.
Sometimes, there are two sensed road segments with a direct
connection between them. In other cases, both directions of
the same avenue are present in the data collection. Sensors
that share most of their context and surrounding network, also
share most of their embedding feature values. This fact might
produce sub-optimal road selections, where almost identical
points of the network have distinct trafﬁc behaviors.
00:00
02:00
04:00
06:00
08:00
10:00
12:00
14:00
16:00
18:00
20:00
22:00
Time of day
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
Flow
Traﬃc proﬁle of road segment #15
Target #15
Embedding #7
Best #11
7
11
15
Fig. 7. Comparative of trafﬁc proﬁles. In blue, the target road. In orange, the
trafﬁc pattern of the most similar road according to its road feature embedding.
In green, the best ﬁtting trafﬁc proﬁle among sensed locations.
Figure 7 illustrates the above issue. Road segment #15 and
#7 are placed in the same avenue, just in opposite directions
(see Figure 2). As can be appreciated however, their trafﬁc
proﬁles highly differ after the morning rush hour. Being both
primary roads, #15 heads up to the city center, whereas #7
conducts trafﬁc towards the outskirts. Madrid is a city that
receives daily trafﬁc from the surrounding towns, in the form
of workers going to complete a work shift. They leave the
city center when returning home, which is why a high ﬂow is
maintained at #7 until evening. Among sensed locations, the

12
road segment #11 is located in the same avenue and direction
than #15, producing an analogous trafﬁc pattern (colored in
green). Clearly, #11 is a good representation of the trafﬁc ﬂow
of #15. Still, the road feature embedding of #7 is closer to
#15, which is why a high error is obtained.
Nevertheless, in the context of this investigation the target
location is not sensed, so no trafﬁc measurements are available
at that point of the trafﬁc network. Without trafﬁc data, only
topological and contextual data can be used as criteria for
selecting one sensed road. From the example of Figure 7 it
could be justiﬁed the need of an additional feature towards
representing if a sensed road shares avenue and direction with
the target location. However, road segments are connected
by intersections that can highly alter the trafﬁc proﬁle (both
adding or subtracting ﬂow). Without any information of the
inﬂuence of such intersections the previous statement is not
straightforward. This is the reason for not modeling this aspect
in the road feature embedding.
RQ3: Which is the best approach for generating synthetic data
in the target location?
For each target location, trafﬁc data is generated for a total
of 730 days from the 2018-2019 year period. This process
is replicated for the three considered generation approaches:
GAN, Cluster and NSE. Synthetic samples are compared to the
real trafﬁc ﬂow measurements, thus obtaining a set of error
scores.
Table I shows the mean and standard deviation of the 730
error values for each target location and generative approach.
The normalized version of the RMSE allows comparing per-
formance between considered road segments. Figure 5 repre-
sents the selection performance but can also be interpreted as
an estimation of the generative performance for the same time
period (if the selection error is normalized by the mean ﬂow).
The obtained normalized selection performance is close to the
best generative performance obtained for the same location.
This fact demonstrates the viability of weekday-only trafﬁc
proﬁles for characterizing road segments. However, since the
computed trafﬁc proﬁles are smoothed representations of the
trafﬁc behavior (i.e., no weekends or holidays are represented),
the particularities of the daily trafﬁc produce slightly worse
performance results for the generative approaches.
High standard deviation values are reported concerning the
mean performance error. This aspect is justiﬁed both by the
size of the trafﬁc datasets and by the analyzed task itself.
Two whole years compose the test holdout. Special days like
holidays and summer vacations can highly differ between
the selected road segment and the target location, even if
during the rest of the year they share a similar trafﬁc proﬁle.
Likewise, not prediction methods are analyzed, but generative
approaches instead. As synthetic data is not built from the
trafﬁc recordings of the target location, higher error metrics
should be expected regarding short-term forecasting methods
where the input features of the model is the past trafﬁc state
at target location.
Due to the high standard deviations exposed above, we
inspect further the statistical signiﬁcance of the differences
found between the GAN, Cluster and NSE approaches by
ranking them considering the outcomes of a hypothesis test.
Speciﬁcally, for every target road segment, we perform a
global Friedman test [51] for repeated measurements to
ascertain whether any signiﬁcant differences exist over the
RMSE results obtained with every approach in comparison.
If such signiﬁcance holds at level α = 0.05, a Nemenyi post
hoc test for unreplicated blocked data [52] is performed over
the RMSE results of every pair of generative approaches,
so that wins, losses and ties among the three comparison
counterparts can be resolved taking into account the statistical
signiﬁcance of the differences in the means of the results.
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE RESULTS FOR CONSIDERED GENERATIVE APPROACHES
FOR EVERY TARGET ROAD SEGMENT.
GAN
Cluster
NSE
Road type
Best
1
0.50 ± 0.17
0.44 ± 0.18
0.38 ± 0.16
Secondary
NSE
2
0.78 ± 0.31
0.59 ± 0.21
0.61 ± 0.22
Tertiary
Cluster
3
0.60 ± 0.18
0.51 ± 0.18
0.49 ± 0.13
Residential
Cluster, NSE
4
0.60 ± 0.19
0.66 ± 0.21
0.64 ± 0.17
Secondary
GAN
5
0.59 ± 0.21
0.55 ± 0.22
0.49 ± 0.17
Residential
NSE
6
0.70 ± 0.28
0.66 ± 0.23
0.71 ±0.25
Residential
Cluster
7
0.53 ± 0.18
0.49 ± 0.18
0.45 ± 0.14
Secondary
NSE
8
1.31 ± 0.30
1.42 ± 0.40
1.40 ± 0.38
Secondary
GAN
9
0.43 ± 0.12
0.30 ± 0.16
0.21 ± 0.11
Secondary
NSE
10
0.50 ± 0.19
0.45 ± 0.18
0.37 ± 0.15
Secondary
NSE
11
0.70 ± 0.26
0.56 ± 0.25
0.48 ± 0.20
Secondary
NSE
12
0.53 ± 0.18
0.51 ± 0.19
0.46 ± 0.17
Tertiary
NSE
13
0.54 ± 0.16
0.44 ± 0.19
0.44 ± 0.14
Secondary
NSE
14
0.44 ± 0.17
0.39 ± 0.14
0.34 ± 0.11
Secondary
NSE
15
0.78 ± 0.26
0.69 ± 0.26
0.66 ± 0.21
Secondary
NSE
16
0.40 ± 0.15
0.29 ± 0.16
0.14 ± 0.10
Secondary
NSE
17
0.42 ± 0.12
0.28 ± 0.13
0.14 ± 0.10
Secondary
NSE
18
0.75 ± 0.21
0.75 ± 0.22
0.74 ± 0.18
Secondary
NSE
19
0.52 ± 0.16
0.57 ± 0.20
0.55 ± 0.15
Residential
GAN, NSE
20
0.97 ± 0.27
0.95 ± 0.29
0.95 ± 0.27
Residential
Cluster
21
0.56 ± 0.15
0.43 ± 0.18
0.41 ± 0.16
Tertiary
NSE
22
0.65 ± 0.23
0.59 ± 0.25
0.57 ± 0.21
Tertiary
NSE
23
0.52 ± 0.29
0.45 ± 0.30
0.40 ± 0.31
Tertiary
NSE
24
0.73 ± 0.26
0.45 ± 0.21
0.26 ± 0.16
Tertiary
NSE
25
0.60 ± 0.21
0.50 ± 0.20
0.40 ± 0.14
Tertiary
NSE
26
0.56 ± 0.24
0.49 ± 0.24
0.23 ± 0.14
Tertiary
NSE
27
1.97 ± 0.30
1.82 ± 0.29
1.87 ± 0.39
Residential
Cluster
28
0.65 ± 0.19
0.59 ± 0.21
0.53 ± 0.13
Secondary
Cluster, NSE
29
0.48 ± 0.17
0.35 ± 0.10
0.33 ± 0.11
Secondary
Cluster, NSE
30
0.48 ± 0.18
0.34 ± 0.13
0.31 ± 0.13
Secondary
Cluster, NSE
31
0.44 ± 0.14
0.40 ± 0.17
0.30 ± 0.15
Secondary
NSE
32
0.44 ± 0.12
0.42 ± 0.15
0.34 ± 0.12
Secondary
NSE
33
0.39 ± 0.10
0.37 ± 0.13
0.27 ± 0.09
Secondary
NSE
34
0.50 ± 0.12
0.45 ± 0.16
0.36 ± 0.12
Residential
NSE
35
0.85 ± 0.20
0.85 ± 0.20
0.84 ± 0.18
Residential
GAN, NSE
36
0.50 ± 0.18
0.40 ± 0.15
0.36 ± 0.18
Tertiary
NSE
37
2.22 ± 0.61
2.12 ± 0.51
2.25 ± 0.70
Tertiary
Cluster
38
2.36 ± 0.51
1.94 ± 0.43
2.00 ± 0.53
Residential
Cluster
39
0.80 ± 0.17
0.46 ± 0.16
0.49 ± 0.25
Residential
Cluster
40
0.56 ± 0.22
0.52 ± 0.20
0.45 ± 0.16
Tertiary
NSE
41
0.66 ± 0.19
0.52 ± 0.22
0.51 ± 0.20
Tertiary
NSE
42
0.53 ± 0.22
0.43 ± 0.22
0.40 ± 0.21
Tertiary
Cluster, NSE
43
1.99 ± 0.65
2.03 ± 0.39
2.06 ± 0.50
Secondary
GAN
44
0.61 ± 0.56
0.58 ± 0.58
0.55 ± 0.58
Residential
NSE
45
0.98 ± 0.27
0.90 ± 0.26
0.89 ± 0.24
Residential
NSE
46
0.48 ± 0.15
0.32 ± 0.14
0.27 ± 0.10
Secondary
NSE
47
0.52 ± 0.17
0.56 ± 0.18
0.52 ± 0.14
Residential
GAN, NSE
48
0.84 ± 0.25
0.85 ± 0.24
0.84 ± 0.22
Residential
GAN, NSE
49
0.45 ± 0.17
0.40 ± 0.17
0.29 ± 0.12
Tertiary
NSE
50
0.54 ± 0.24
0.44 ± 0.26
0.62 ± 0.59
Residential
Cluster
51
0.41 ± 0.13
0.28 ± 0.15
0.21 ± 0.13
Secondary
NSE
52
0.74 ± 0.20
0.77 ± 0.24
0.75 ± 0.20
Residential
GAN, NSE
53
0.66 ± 0.20
0.58 ± 0.19
0.58 ± 0.15
Secondary
Cluster, NSE
54
0.61 ± 0.22
0.52 ± 0.22
0.50 ± 0.19
Residential
Cluster, NSE
55
0.56 ± 0.17
0.58 ± 0.18
0.56 ± 0.15
Residential
GAN
Note: displayed results are rounded due to space constraints. For performance
assessment, all decimals are considered.

13
The NSE approach dominates the benchmark, where for
78% of the analyzed cases, is declared as the best by the
Nemenyi test. Furthermore, the standard deviation denotes less
statistical dispersion for the committed error. Even so, results
are close among the three considered generation approaches.
Model complexity and computational resources might be prop-
erties of concern for selecting one approach over the others.
Coincidentally, performance decrease as the complexity of
the generation approaches increases. In line with this, the
inconveniences of the NSE method are twofold: 1) the need for
trafﬁc measurements for the desired date to be generated; 2)
the inability for generating trafﬁc for future dates. The selected
data source for this investigation has been selected explicitly
to not have missing data, so trafﬁc recordings are available
for the NSE generative approach. Likewise, aggregation errors
and other data anomalies have been cleaned. Otherwise, the
NSE method would have output these corrupted data as syn-
thetic samples, producing inaccurate predictions. The second
concern might not be critical for some implementations, as the
system is aimed at data generation. However, due to the nature
of trafﬁc data, synthetic samples can also serve as future trafﬁc
estimations, so the inability to be used for trafﬁc prediction
might be a hindrance for the NSE approach. Nevertheless, both
issues emanate from the nature of the technique itself, thus
being unbridgeable. At this juncture, we advocate for the use
of the Cluster method. While still being simple to implement,
delivered results are close to the NSE approach without the
inconveniences of it.
The Cluster approach could provide enhanced performance
with a dedicated set of grouping criteria. For the sake of
simplicity and not delving into the particularities of the trafﬁc
behavior at the city of Madrid, we have presented an approach
based on weekdays and holidays only. Still, how to group
available training samples is the key element towards optimal
performance. Daily trafﬁc patterns can be grouped considering
additional criteria such as weather or events (for instance,
football matches). Another option is to perform an autonomous
search of clusters with tools like DBSCAN or K-means [53],
[54], which ﬁnd trafﬁc samples with a similar ﬂow trafﬁc
pattern, without considering other criteria. A ﬁnal innovative
approach could be focusing on the search of atypical trafﬁc
samples sizes. Trafﬁc ﬂow follows a daily pattern, but this
proﬁle can also be fragmented into shorter segments (e.g.,
hourly segments). While early morning ﬂow is often shared
among all days, the ﬂow spike observed during rush hours
can present distinct shapes. In this way, partial daily segments
could produce further clusters, providing more accurate pre-
dictions. In conclusion, the goal should be to produce clusters
where all samples have a similar trafﬁc distribution.
TABLE II
SUMMARY OF SENSED LOCATIONS
Secondary
Tertiary
Residential
# sensed locations
23
14
18
# GAN as the best approach
3
0
6
# Cluster as the best approach
4
3
8
# NSE as the best approach
20
12
11
Mean nRMSE
0.50
0.53
0.75
The contents of Table II are extracted from Table I. It is
intended to summarize certain statistics drawn from the road
type of the target locations. Among considered road segments,
road types are distributed as follows: 42% secondary, 25%
tertiary, and 33% residential. However, the mean performance
error is not evenly distributed, where the synthetic data for res-
idential roads is more different than real ﬂow measurements.
Coincidentally, whereas the NSE approach is the preferred
option for secondary and tertiary roads, residential roads do
not rely on NSE and also select the best generative approach
the GAN and Cluster methods. From Figure 5 it can be seen
that the mean ﬂow of residential roads is usually below 200
vehicles. As the nRMSE is normalized by this last metric,
it narrows the room for generation mistakes. This fact leads
to the real bottleneck towards a leading performance: the
selection of the sensed road segment. Of course, the same error
can be committed for other road types, but after normalization,
the nRMSE for residential roads is going to be higher. When
an appropriate sensed road segment is selected, the NSE
approach is most of the time the method that delivers the best
performance. This behavior is motivated by the functioning of
the generation method, where real trafﬁc ﬂow measurements
serve as synthetic data. In contrast, the GAN and Cluster
approaches output a smoothed trafﬁc pattern. If the target
road segments are analogous to the selected sensed location,
the details present in the NSE output provide a high-quality
prediction. On the opposite, after a poor choice of sensed road
segment, a less disordered trafﬁc pattern performs better.
In essence, the generative approach is not what determines
the quality of the synthetic samples, but the selection of the
road segment that provides the training data.
Discussion and limitations
Several conclusions can be drawn from this experimenta-
tion. To begin with, we have veriﬁed that the tailored selection
of the segment providing trafﬁc data for the estimation at the
target location outperforms a na¨ıve selection method based
on geographical proximity. This stresses on the importance
of topological and graph-based features to choose, in an
informed fashion, which trafﬁc data to use along the estimation
process. This has been noted to be more decisive than the
approach used to generate the trafﬁc proﬁle in the target
location. As a matter of fact, results have revealed that a na¨ıve
estimation method based on assigning the trafﬁc measurements
collected in the other most similar location for the same date
performs relatively better than other more sophisticated and
less interpretable model-based approaches, further highlighting
the signiﬁcance of our proposed road feature embeddings
for its competitive performance and its inherent algorithmic
transparency.
Despite the higher trustworthiness derived from its inception
from domain-speciﬁc knowledge and intuition, an evident
limitation of considering only topological and graph-based
features in the estimation of trafﬁc proﬁles is that other exoge-
nous factors are not explicitly considered along the process.
Instead, aspects such as sociological habits and cultural traits
are assumed to be embedded in the trafﬁc data itself, as

14
well as in the experience of trafﬁc experts from which road
features were formulated. This implicitness may not affect
when estimating data inside a city, or a neighborhood, but
may conversely hinder the transferability of trafﬁc proﬁles
across different cities even if strongly similar road feature
embeddings are discovered. In other words, estimating trafﬁc
proﬁles at one city using data collected by sensors of another
city might not be straightforward due to the aforementioned
factors. This last observation echoes our previous statement
about the generalization of this study to account for other
sources of information which, in the light of our experiments,
seems to be crucial for an accurate shaping of the trafﬁc
proﬁles in the location of interest.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This work has elaborated on the problem of estimating road
trafﬁc data over a location of a road network without any
deployed sensor nor prior collected trafﬁc data in the location
whatsoever. Under these circumstances, it becomes necessary
to resort to other sources of information to estimate the trafﬁc
proﬁles occurring at the target location. For this purpose, this
manuscript has proposed to exploit topological and graph-
based information around the location of interest to ﬁnd other
similar road segments. The overarching idea is that trafﬁc data
collected over those similar segments can be used to estimate
the trafﬁc in the target location. To compute the similarity
between any two road segments, we characterize each location
in the form of road feature embeddings, built upon a set of
topological and graph-based features. The deﬁnitions of these
features rely on intuition and domain-speciﬁc knowledge about
the trafﬁc dynamics in the location of interest, which ulti-
mately adds to the overall trustworthiness of trafﬁc estimations
by decision makers for which they are produced. Such road
embeddings are used together with a measure of distance to
compute the similarity between the segments at hand, so that
the location closest to the target can be identiﬁed and used for
trafﬁc estimation. It is important to note that the challenging
assumptions from which our work departs (unavailability of
any other source of information beyond the road network) do
not hinder the generalization of our developments to other
scenarios with further information available for the trafﬁc es-
timation process. Nevertheless, features within the road feature
embedding should be designed according to the knowledge of
trafﬁc managers regarding the target area, in a similar process
to the one in Madrid (Spain) showcased in this study. We have
herein focused on the trafﬁc map of a major city, but urban
areas in the countryside connected by interurban networks
might require further investigations to yield new topological
and graph-based features tailored for such particular scenarios.
Besides the limitation just exposed, other research lines
rooted on this work are projected for the near future. We
plan to investigate new and more insightful road embedding
features, potentially using meta-learning methods to infer them
automatically from data (e.g., symbolic regression, evolution-
ary programming with graph-based primitives). In partial con-
nection with this, we also foresee that a generalized distance
metric – for instance, a weighted Euclidean distance – could
be evolved via an evolutionary wrapper towards optimally
tuning the importance of every feature of the embedding in
the value of the distance. Finally, other sources of information
that can be retrieved from geographical information systems
can be valuable inputs to be considered in our road feature
embeddings, without drifting away from the assumed starting
point of this work. As such, hospitals and police stations can
regulate the average speed of the surrounding roads under the
legal limit, whereas entertainment venues surrounded by stores
and restaurants often have a high road occupation percentage
on holidays and weekends. The Santiago Bernabeu stadium
is located inside the area of the case study. Football matches
affect the trafﬁc of the surrounding roads, where the intensity
of its inﬂuence is inversely related to the distance to the
stadium [55]. The so-called Points of Interest (POIs) comprise
any kind of business, service center or important area that
might inﬂuence the trafﬁc behavior. Consequently, future work
will embrace such POI-based information (when available) to
produce better road feature embeddings that leverage even
further the existence of expert knowledge about the factors
affecting the trafﬁc at the target location. We envision that the
precision of the trafﬁc estimation process can be improved
further by extending the embedding deﬁned herein with graph
features that depend on the relative location of these POIs with
respect to the location for which trafﬁc data is to be estimated.
Therefore, much of our future effort will be conducted towards
this promising research direction.
