Weakly-supervised Disentangling with
Recurrent Transformations for 3D View Synthesis
Jimei Yang1,3
Scott Reed2
Ming-Hsuan Yang1
Honglak Lee2
1University of California, Merced

2University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

3Adobe Research

Abstract
An important problem for both graphics and vision is to synthesize novel views
of a 3D object from a single image. This is particularly challenging due to the
partial observability inherent in projecting a 3D object onto the image space, and
the ill-posedness of inferring object shape and pose. However, we can train a neu-
ral network to address the problem if we restrict our attention to speciﬁc object
categories (in our case faces and chairs) for which we can gather ample training
data. In this paper, we propose a novel recurrent convolutional encoder-decoder
network that is trained end-to-end on the task of rendering rotated objects start-
ing from a single image. The recurrent structure allows our model to capture
long-term dependencies along a sequence of transformations. We demonstrate
the quality of its predictions for human faces on the Multi-PIE dataset and for a
dataset of 3D chair models, and also show its ability to disentangle latent factors
of variation (e.g., identity and pose) without using full supervision.
1
Introduction
Numerous graphics algorithms have been established to synthesize photorealistic images from 3D
models and environmental variables (lighting and viewpoints), commonly known as rendering. At
the same time, recent advances in vision algorithms enable computers to gain some form of un-
derstanding of objects contained in images, such as classiﬁcation [17], detection [11], segmenta-
tion [19], and caption generation [28], to name a few. These approaches typically aim to deduce
abstract representations from raw image pixels. However, it has been a long-standing problem for
both graphics and vision to automatically synthesize novel images by applying intrinsic transfor-
mations (e.g., 3D rotation and deformation) to the subject of an input image. From an artiﬁcial
intelligence perspective, this can be viewed as answering questions about object appearance when
the view angle or illumination is changed, or some action is taken. These synthesized images may
then be perceived by humans in photo editing [15], or evaluated by other machine vision systems,
such as the game playing agent with vision-based reinforcement learning [21, 22].
In this paper, we consider the problem of predicting transformed appearances of an object when
it is rotated in 3D from a single image. In general, this is an ill-posed problem due to the loss of
information inherent in projecting a 3D object into the image space. Classic geometry-based ap-
proaches either recover a 3D object model from multiple related images, i.e., multi-view stereo and
structure-from-motion, or register a single image of a known object category to its prior 3D model,
e.g., faces [5]. The resulting mesh can be used to re-render the scene from novel viewpoints. How-
ever, having 3D meshes as intermediate representations, these methods are 1) limited to particular
object categories, 2) vulnerable to image alignment mistakes and 3) easy to generate artifacts dur-
ing unseen texture synthesis. To overcome these limitations, we propose a learning-based approach
without explicit 3D model recovery. Having observed rotations of similar 3D objects (e.g., faces,
chairs, household objects), the trained model can both 1) better infer the true pose, shape and texture
1
arXiv:1601.00706v1  [cs.LG]  5 Jan 2016

of the object, and 2) make plausible assumptions about potentially ambiguous aspects of appearance
in novel viewpoints. Thus, the learning algorithm relies on mappings between Euclidean image
space and underlying nonlinear manifold. In particular, 3D view synthesis can be cast as pose man-
ifold traversal where a desired rotation can be decomposed into a sequence of small steps. A major
challenge arises due to the long-term dependency among multiple rotation steps; the key identify-
ing information (e.g., shape, texture) from the original input must be remembered along the entire
trajectory. Furthermore, the local rotation at each step must generate the correct result on the data
manifold, or subsequent steps will also fail.
Closely related to the image generation task considered in this paper is the problem of 3D invariant
recognition, which involves comparing object images from different viewpoints or poses with dra-
matic changes of appearance. Shepard and Metzler in their mental rotation experiments [24] found
that the time taken for humans to match 3D objects from two different views increased proportion-
ally with the angular rotational difference between them. It was as if the humans were rotating their
mental images at a steady rate. Inspired by this mental rotation phenomenon, we propose a recur-
rent convolutional encoder-decoder network with action units to model the process of pose manifold
traversal. The network consists of four components: a deep convolutional encoder [17], shared
identity units, recurrent pose units with rotation action inputs, and a deep convolutional decoder [8].
Rather than training the network to model a speciﬁc rotation sequence, we provide control signals
at each time step instructing the model how to move locally along the pose manifold. The rotation
sequences can be of varying length. To improve the ease of training, we employed curriculum learn-
ing, similar to that used in other sequence prediction problems [29]. Intuitively, the model should
learn how to make one-step 15˝ rotation before learning how to make a series of such rotations.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows. First, a novel recurrent convolu-
tional encoder-decoder network is developed for learning to apply out-of-plane rotations to human
faces and 3D chair models. Second, the learned model can generate realistic rotation trajectories
with a control signal supplied at each step by the user. Third, despite only being trained to synthe-
size images, our model learns discriminative view-invariant features without using class labels. This
weakly-supervised disentangling is especially notable with longer-term prediction.
2
Related Work
The transforming autoencoder [13] introduces the notion of capsules in deep networks, which tracks
both the presence and position of visual features in the input image. These models can apply afﬁne
transformations and 3D rotations to images. We address a similar task of rendering object appear-
ance undergoing 3D rotations, but we use a convolutional network architecture in lieu of capsules,
and incorporate action inputs and recurrent structure to handle repeated rotation steps. The Predic-
tive Gating Pyramid [20] is developed for time-series prediction and can learn image transformations
including shifts and rotation over multiple time steps. Our task is related to this time-series predic-
tion, but our formulation includes a control signal, uses disentangled latent features, and uses con-
volutional encoder and decoder networks to model detailed images. Ding and Taylor [7] proposed
a gating network to directly model mental rotation by optimizing transforming distance. Instead of
extracting invariant recognition features in one shot, their model learns to perform recognition by
exploring a space of relevant transformations. Similarly, our model can explore the space of rotation
about an object image by setting the control signal at each time step of our recurrent network.
The problem of training neural networks that generate images is studied in [27]. Dosovitskiy et al.
[8] proposed a convolutional network mapping shape, pose and transformation labels to images for
generating chairs. It is able to control these factors of variation and generate high-quality render-
ings. We also generate chair renderings in this paper, but our model adds several additional features:
a deep encoder network (so that we can generalize to novel images, rather than only decode), dis-
tributed representations for appearance and pose, and recurrent structure for long-term prediction.
Contemporary to our work, the Inverse Graphics Network (IGN) [18] also adds an encoding func-
tion to learn graphics codes of images, along with a decoder similar to that in the chair generating
network. As in our model, IGN uses a deep convolutional encoder to extract image representations,
apply modiﬁcations to these, and then re-render. Our model differs in that 1) we train a recur-
rent network to perform trajectories of multiple transformations, 2) we add control signal input at
each step, and 3) we use deterministic feed-forward training rather than the variational auto-encoder
(VAE) framework [16] (although our approach could be extended to a VAE version).
2

Figure 1: Deep convolutional encoder-decoder network for learning 3d rotation
A related line of work to ours is disentangling the latent factors of variation that generate natural
images. Bilinear models for separating style and content are developed in [26], and are shown to
be capable of separating handwriting style and character identity, and also separating face iden-
tity and pose. The disentangling Boltzmann Machine (disBM) [23] applies this idea to augment
the Restricted Boltzmann Machine by partitioning its hidden state into distinct factors of variation
and modeling their higher-order interaction. The multi-view perceptron [31] employs a stochastic
feedforward network to disentangle the identity and pose factors of face images in order to achieve
view-invariant recognition. The encoder network for IGN is also trained to learn a disentangled rep-
resentation of images by extracting a graphics code for each factor. In [6], the (potentially unknown)
latent factors of variation are both discovered and disentangled using a novel hidden unit regularizer.
Our work is also loosely related to the “DeepStereo" algorithm [10] that synthesizes novel views of
scenes from multiple images using deep convolutional networks.
3
Recurrent Convolutional Encoder-Decoder Network
In this section we describe our model formulation. Given an image of 3D object, our goal is to syn-
thesize its rotated views. Inspired by recent success of convolutional networks (CNNs) in mapping
images to high-level abstract representations [17] and synthesizing images from graphics codes [8],
we base our model on deep convolutional encoder-decoder networks. One example network struc-
ture is shown in Figure 1. The encoder network used 5 ˆ 5 convolution-relu layers with stride 2 and
2-pixel padding so that the dimension is halved at each convolution layer, followed by two fully-
connected layers. In the bottleneck layer, we deﬁne a group of units to represent the pose (pose
units) where the desired transformations can be applied. The other group of units represent what
does not change during transformations, named as identity units. The decoder network is symmetric
to the encoder. To increase dimensionality we use ﬁxed upsampling as in [8]. We found that ﬁxed
stride-2 convolution and upsampling worked better than max-pooling and unpooling with switches,
because when applying transformations the encoder pooling switches would not in general match
the switches produced by the target image. The desired transformations are reﬂected by the action
units. We used a 1-of-3 encoding, in which r100s encoded a clockwise rotation, r010s encoded a no-
op, and r001s encoded a counter-clockwise rotation. The triangle indicates a tensor product taking
as input the pose units and action units, and producing the transformed pose units. Equivalently, the
action unit selects the matrix that transforms the input pose units to the output pose units.
The action units introduce a small linear increment to the pose units, which essentially model the
local transformations in the nonlinear pose manifold. However, in order to achieve longer rotation
trajectories, if we simply accumulate the linear increments from the action units (e.g., [2 0 0] for
two-step clockwise rotation, the pose units will fall off the manifold resulting in bad predictions.
To overcome this problem, we generalize the model to a recurrent neural network, which have
been shown to capture long-term dependencies for a wide variety of sequence modeling problems.
In essence, we use recurrent pose units to model the step-by-step pose manifold traversals. The
identity units are shared across all time steps since we assume that all training sequences preserve
the identity while only changing the pose. Figure 2 shows the unrolled version of our RNN model.
We only perform encoding at the ﬁrst time step, and all transformations are carried out in the latent
space; i.e., the model predictions at time step t are not fed into the next time step input. The training
objective is based on pixel-wise prediction over all time steps for training sequences:
Lrnn “
N
ÿ
i“1
Tÿ
t“1
||ypi,tq ´ gpfposepxpiq, apiq, tq, fidpxpiqqq||2
2
(1)
3

Figure 2: Unrolled recurrent convolutional network for learning to rotate 3d objects. The convolutional encoder
and decoder have been abstracted out, represented here as vertical rectangles.
where apiq is the sequence of T actions, fidpxpiqq produces the identity features invariant to all the
time steps, fposepxpiq, apiq, tq produces the transformed pose features at time step t, gp¨, ¨q is the
image decoder producing an image given the output of fidp¨q and fposep¨, ¨, ¨q, xpiq is the i-th image,
ypi,tq is the i-th training image target at step t.
3.1
Curriculum Training
We trained the network parameters using backpropagation through time and the ADAM optimization
method [3]. To effectively train our recurrent network, we found it beneﬁcial to use curriculum
learning [4], in which we gradually increase the difﬁculty of training by increasing the trajectory
length. This appears to be useful for sequence prediction with recurrent networks in other domains
as well [22, 29]. In Section 4, we show that increasing the training sequence length improves both
the model’s image prediction performance as well as the pose-invariant recognition performance of
identity features.
Also, longer training sequences force the identity units to better disentangle themselves from the
pose. If the same identity units need to be used to predict both a 15˝-rotated and a 120˝-rotated
image during training, these units cannot pick up pose-related information. In this way, our model
can learn disentangled features (i.e., identity units can do invariant identity recognition but are not
informative of pose, and vice versa) without explicitly regularizing to achieve this effect. We did not
ﬁnd it necessary to use gradient clipping.
4
Experiments
We carry out experiments to achieve the following objectives. First, we examine the ability of our
model to synthesize high-quality images of both face and complex 3D objects (chairs) in a wide
range of rotational angles. Second, we evaluate the discriminative performance of disentangled
identity units through cross-view object recognition. Third, we demonstrate the ability to generate
and rotate novel object classes by interpolating identity units of query objects.
4.1
Datasets
Multi-PIE.
The Multi-PIE [12] dataset consists of 754,204 face images from 337 people. The
images are captured from 15 viewpoints under 20 illumination conditions in different sessions. To
evaluate our model for rotating faces, we select a subset of Multi-PIE that covers 7 viewpoints
evenly from ´45˝ to 45˝ under neutral illumination. Each face image is aligned through manually
annotated landmarks on eyes, nose and mouth corners, and then cropped to 80 ˆ 60 ˆ 3 pixels. We
use the images of ﬁrst 200 people for training and the remaining 137 people for testing.
Chairs.
This dataset contains 1393 chair CAD models made publicly available by Aubry et al. [2].
Each chair model is rendered from 31 azimuth angles (with steps of 11˝ or 12˝) and 2 elevation
angles (20˝ and 30˝) at a ﬁxed distance to the virtual camera. We use a subset of 809 chair models
in our experiments, which are selected out of 1393 by Dosovitskiy et al. [8] in order to remove near-
duplicate models (e.g., models differing only in color) or low-quality models. We crop the rendered
images to have a small border and resize them to a common size of 64 ˆ 64 ˆ 3 pixels. We also
prepare their binary masks by subtracting the white background. We use the images of the ﬁrst 500
models as the training set and the remaining 309 models as the test set.
4

´45˝
´30˝ ´15˝
0˝
15˝
30˝
45˝
´45˝
´30˝ ´15˝
0˝
15˝
30˝
45˝
Figure 3: 3D view synthesis on Multi-PIE. For each panel, the ﬁrst row shows the ground truth from ´45˝
to 45˝, the second and third rows show the re-renderings of 6-step clockwise rotation from an input image of
´45˝ (red box) and of 6-step counter-clockwise rotation from an input image of 45˝ (red box), respectively.
45˝
30˝
15˝
´15˝
´30˝
´45˝
45˝
30˝
15˝
´15˝
´30˝
´45˝
Input
RNN
3D
model
Figure 4: Comparing face pose normalization results with 3D morphable model [30].
4.2
Network Architectures and Training Details
Multi-PIE.
The encoder network for the Multi-PIE dataset used two convolution-relu layers with
stride 2 and 2-pixel padding, followed by one fully-connected layer: 5ˆ5ˆ64´5ˆ5ˆ128´1024. The
number of identity and pose units are 512 and 128, respectively. The decoder network is symmetric
to the encoder. The curriculum training procedure starts with the single-step rotation model which
we call RNN1.
We prepare the training samples by pairing face images of the same person captured in the same
session with adjacent camera viewpoints. For example, xpiq at ´30˝ is mapped to ypiq at ´15˝ with
action apiq “ r001s; xpiq at ´15˝ is mapped to ypiq at ´30˝ with action apiq “ r100s; and xpiq at
´30˝ is mapped to ypiq at ´30˝ with action apiq “ r010s. For face images with ending viewpoints
´45˝ and 45˝, only one-way rotation is feasible. We train the network using the ADAM optimizer
with ﬁxed learning rate 10´4 for 400 epochs.1
Since there are 7 viewpoints per person per session, we schedule the curriculum training with t“2,
t “ 4 and t “ 6 stages, which we call RNN2, RNN4 and RNN6, respectively. To sample training
sequences with ﬁxed length, we allow both clockwise and counter-clockwise rotations. For example,
when t“4, one input image xpiq at 30˝ is mapped to pypi,1q, ypi,2q, ypi,3q, ypi,4qq with corresponding
angles p45˝, 30˝, 15˝, 0˝q and action inputs pr001s, r100s, r100s, r100sq. In each stage, we initialize
the network parameters with the previous stage and ﬁne-tune the network with ﬁxed learning rate
10´5 for 10 additional epochs.
Chairs.
The encoder network for chairs used three convolution-relu layers with stride 2 and 2-pixel
padding, followed by two fully-connected layers: 5ˆ5ˆ64´5ˆ5ˆ128´5ˆ5ˆ256´1024´1024.
The decoder network is symmetric, except that after the fully-connected layers it branches into image
and mask prediction layers. The mask prediction indicates whether a pixel belongs to foreground or
background. We adopted this idea from the generative CNN [8] and found it beneﬁcial to training
efﬁciency and image synthesis quality. A tradeoff parameter λ“0.1 is applied to the mask prediction
loss. We train the single-step network parameters with ﬁxed learning rate 10´4 for 500 epochs. We
schedule the curriculum training with t “ 2, t “ 4, t “ 8 and t “ 16, which we call RNN2, RNN4,
RNN8 and RNN16. Note that the curriculum training stops at t “ 16 because we reached the limit
of GPU memory. Since the images of each chair model are rendered from 31 viewpoints evenly
sampled between 0˝ and 360˝, we can easily prepare training sequences of clockwise or counter-
clockwise t-step rotations around the circle. Similarly, the network parameters of the current stage
are initialized with those of previous stage and ﬁne-tuned with the learning rate 10´5 for 50 epochs.
1We carry out experiments using Caffe [14] on Nvidia K40c and Titan X GPUs.
5

4.3
3D View Synthesis of Novel Objects
We ﬁrst examine the re-rendering quality of our RNN models for novel object instances that were
not seen during training. On the Multi-PIE dataset, given one input image from the test set with
possible views between ´45˝ to 45˝, the encoder produces identity units and pose units and then
the decoder renders images progressively with ﬁxed identity units and action-driven recurrent pose
units up to t-steps. Examples are shown in Figure 3 of the longest rotations, i.e., clockwise from
´45˝ to 45˝ and counter-clockwise from 45˝ to ´45˝ with RNN6. High-quality renderings are
generated with smooth transformations between adjacent views. The characteristics of faces, such
as gender, expression, eyes, nose and glasses are also preserved during rotation. We also compare
our RNN model with a state-of-the-art 3D morphable model for face pose normalization [30] in
Figure 4. It can be observed that our RNN model produces stable renderings while 3D morphable
model is sensitive to facial landmark localization. One of the advantages of 3D morphable model is
that it preserves facial textures well.
On the chair dataset, we use RNN16 to synthesize 16 rotated views of novel chairs in the test set.
Given a chair image of a certain view, we deﬁne two action sequences; one for progressive clock-
wise rotation and another for counter-clockwise rotation. It is a more challenging task compared
to rotating faces due to the complex 3D shapes of chairs and the large rotation angles (more than
180˝ after 16-step rotations). Since no previous methods tackle the exact same chair re-rendering
problem, we use a k-nearest-neighbor (KNN) method for baseline comparisons. The KNN baseline
is implemented as follows. We ﬁrst extract the CNN features “fc7” from VGG-16 net [25] for all
the chair images. For each test chair image, we ﬁnd its K-nearest neighbors in the training set by
comparing their “fc7” features. The retrieved top-K images are expected to be similar to the query
in terms of both style and pose [1]. Given a desired rotation angle, we synthesize rotated views of
the test image by averaging the corresponding rotated views of the retrieved top-K images in the
training set at the pixel level. We tune the K value in [1,3,5,7], namely KNN1, KNN3, KNN5 and
KNN7 to achieve the best performance. Two examples are shown in Figure 5. In our RNN model,
the 3D shapes are well preserved with clear boundaries for all the 16 rotated views from different
input, and the appearance changes smoothly between adjacent views with a consistent style.
RNN
KNN
RNN
KNN
RNN
KNN
RNN
KNN
Input t=1
t=2
t=3
t=4
t=5
t=6
t=7
t=8
t=9
t=10 t=11 t=12 t=13 t=14 t=15 t=16
Figure 5: 3D view synthesis of 16-step rotations on Chairs. In each panel, we compare synthesis results of
the RNN16 model (top) and of the KNN5 baseline (bottom). The ﬁrst two panels belong to the same chair of
different starting views while the last two panels are from another chair of two starting views. Input images are
marked with red boxes.
Note that conceptually the learned network parameters during different stages of curriculum training
can be used to process an arbitrary number of rotation steps. The RNN1 model (the ﬁrst row in
Figure 6) works well in the ﬁrst rotation step, but it produces degenerate results from the second
step. The RNN2 (the second row), trained with two-step rotations, generates reasonable results in
the third step. Progressively, the RNN4 and RNN8 seem to generalize well on chairs with longer
6

RNN1
RNN2
RNN4
RNN8
RNN16
GT
Model
t=1
t=2
t=3
t=4
t=6
t=8 t=12 t=16
Figure 6: Comparing chair synthesis results from
RNN at different curriculum stages.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
# of rotation steps
Reconstruction error
 
 
KNN1
KNN3
KNN5
KNN7
RNN1
RNN2
RNN4
RNN8
RNN16
Figure 7: Comparing reconstruction mean squared
errors (MSE) on chairs with RNNs and KNNs.
predictions (t “ 6 for RNN4 and t “ 12 for RNN8). We measure the quantitative performance of
KNN and our RNN by the mean squared error (MSE) in (1) in Figure 7. As a result, the best KNN
with 5 retrievals (KNN5) obtains „310 MSE, which is comparable to our RNN4 model, but our
RNN16 model signiﬁcantly outperforms KNN5 („179 MSE) with a 42% relative improvement.
4.4
Cross-View Object Recognition
In this experiment, we examine and compare the discriminative performance of disentangled repre-
sentations through cross-view object recognition.
Multi-PIE.
We create 7 gallery/probe splits from the test set. In each split, the face images of
the same view, e.g., ´45˝ are collected as gallery and the rest of other views as probes. We extract
512-d features from the identity units of RNNs for all the test images so that the probes are matched
to the gallery by their cosine distance. It is considered as a success if the matched gallery image
has the same identity with one probe. We also categorize the probes in each split by measuring
their angle offsets from the gallery. In particular, the angle offsets range from 15˝ to 90˝. The
recognition difﬁculties increase with angle offsets. To demonstrate the discriminative performance
of our learned representations, we also implement a convolutional network classiﬁer. The CNN
architecture is set up by connecting our encoder and identity units with a 200-way softmax output
layer, and its parameters are learned on the training set with ground truth class labels. The 512-d
features extracted from the layer before the softmax layer are used to perform cross-view object
recognition as above. Figure 8 (left) compares the average success rates of RNNs and CNN with
their standard deviations over 7 splits for each angle offset. The success rates of RNN1 drop more
than 20% from angle offset 15˝ to 90˝. The success rates keep improving in general with curriculum
training of RNNs, and the best results are achieved with RNN6. As expected, the performance gap
for RNN6 between 15˝ to 90˝ reduces to 10%. This phenomenon demonstrates that our RNN model
gradually learns pose/viewpoint-invariant representations for 3D face recognition. Without using
any class labels, our RNN model achieves competitive results against the CNN.
Chairs.
The experimental setup is similar to Multi-PIE. There are in total 31 azimuth views per
chair instance. For each view, we create its gallery/probe split so that we have 31 splits. We ex-
tract 512-d features from identity units of RNN1, RNN2, RNN4, RNN8 and RNN16. The probes
for each split are sorted by their angle offsets from the gallery images. Note that this experiment
is particularly challenging because chair matching is a ﬁne-grained recognition task and chair ap-
pearances change signiﬁcantly with 3D rotations. We also compare our model against CNN, but
instead of training CNN from scratch we use the pre-trained VGG-16 net [25] to extract the 4096-d
“fc7” features for chair matching. The success rates are shown in Figure 8 (right). The performance
drops quickly when the angle offset is greater than 45˝, but the RNN16 signiﬁcantly improves the
overall success rates especially for large angle offsets. We notice that the standard deviations are
large around the angle offsets 70˝ to 120˝. This is because some views contain more information
about the chair 3D shapes than the other views so that we see performance variations. Interestingly,
the performance of VGG-16 net surpasses our RNN model when the angle offset is greater than
120˝. We hypothesize that this phenomenon results from the symmetric structures of most of the
chairs. The VGG-16 net was trained with mirroring data augmentation to achieve certain symmetric
invariance while our RNN model does not explore this structure.
7

To further demonstrate the disentangling property of our RNN model, we use the pose units extracted
from the input images to repeat the above cross-view recognition experiments. The mean success
rates are shown in Table 1. It turns out that the better the identity units perform the worse the pose
units perform. When the identity units achieve near-perfect recognition on Multi-PIE, the pose units
only obtain a mean success rate 1.4%, which is close to the random guess 0.5% for 200 classes.
Angle offset
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Classification success rates (%)
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
RNN1
RNN2
RNN4
RNN6
CNN
Angle offset
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Classification success rates (%)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
RNN1
RNN2
RNN4
RNN8
RNN16
VGG-16
Figure 8: Comparing cross-view recognition success rates for faces (left) and chairs (right).
Models
RNN: identity
RNN: pose
CNN
Multi-PIE
93.3
1.4
92.6
Chairs
56.8
9.0
52.5
Table 1: Comparing mean cross-view recognition success rates (%) with identity and pose units.
4.5
Class Interpolation and View Synthesis
In this experiment, we demonstrate the ability of our RNN model to generate novel chairs by
interpolating between two existing ones.
Given two chair images of the same view from dif-
ferent instances, the encoder network is used to compute their identity units z1
id, z2
id and pose
units z1
pose, z2
pose, respectively. The interpolation is computed by zid “ βz1
id ` p1 ´ βqz2
id and
zpose “ βz1
pose ` p1 ´ βqz2
pose, where β “ r0.0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0s. The interpolated zid and
zpose are then fed into the recurrent decoder network to render its rotated views. Example interpo-
lations between four chair instances are shown in Figure 9. The Interpolated chairs present smooth
stylistic transformations between any pair of input classes (each row in Figure 9), and their unique
stylistic characteristics are also well preserved among its rotated views (each column in Figure 9).
Input
t=1
t=5
t=9
t=13
β
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 9: Chair style interpolation and view synthesis. Given four chair images of the same view (ﬁrst row)
from test set, each row presents renderings of style manifold traversal with a ﬁxed view while each column
presents the renderings of pose manifold traversal with a ﬁxed interpolated identity.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we develop a recurrent convolutional encoder-decoder network and demonstrate its
effectiveness for synthesizing 3D views of unseen object instances. On the Multi-PIE dataset and
a database of 3D chair CAD models, the model predicts accurate renderings across trajectories of
8

repeated rotations. The proposed curriculum training by gradually increasing trajectory length of
training sequences yields both better image appearance and more discriminative features for pose-
invariant recognition. We also show that a trained model could interpolate across the identity mani-
fold of chairs at ﬁxed pose, and traverse the pose manifold while ﬁxing the identity. This generative
disentangling of chair identity and pose emerged from our recurrent rotation prediction objective,
even though we do not explicitly regularize the hidden units to be disentangled. Our future work
includes introducing more actions into the proposed model other than rotation, handling objects em-
bedded in complex scenes, and handling one-to-many mappings for which a transformation yields a
multi-modal distribution over future states in the trajectory.
