Non-Parametric Transformation Networks
Dipan K. Pal
Marios Savvides
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Abstract
ConvNets, through their architecture, only enforce invariance
to translation. In this paper, we introduce a new class of deep
convolutional architectures called Non-Parametric Transfor-
mation Networks (NPTNs) which can learn general invari-
ances and symmetries directly from data. NPTNs are a natu-
ral generalization of ConvNets and can be optimized directly
using gradient descent. Unlike almost all previous works in
deep architectures, they make no assumption regarding the
structure of the invariances present in the data and in that
aspect are ﬂexible and powerful. We also model ConvNets
and NPTNs under a uniﬁed framework called Transformation
Networks (TN), which yields a better understanding of the
connection between the two. We demonstrate the efﬁcacy of
NPTNs on data such as MNIST with extreme transformations
and CIFAR10 where they outperform baselines, and further
outperform several recent algorithms on ETH-80. They do so
while having the same number of parameters. We also show
that they are more effective than ConvNets in modelling sym-
metries and invariances from data, without the explicit knowl-
edge of the added arbitrary nuisance transformations. Finally,
we replace ConvNets with NPTNs within Capsule Networks
and show that this enables Capsule Nets to perform even bet-
ter.
Introduction
The Fundamental Problem. One of the central problems of
machine learning, has been supervised classiﬁcation. A core
challenge towards these problems is the encoding or learn-
ing of invariances and symmetries that exist in the training
data. Indeed, methods which incorporate some known in-
variances or promote learning of more powerful invariances
for a learning problem perform better in the target task given
a certain amount of data. A number of ways exist to achieve
this. One can present transformed versions of the train-
ing data Burges and Sch¨olkopf (1997); Niyogi, Girosi, and
Poggio (1998), minimize auxiliary objectives promoting in-
variance during training Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin
(2015); Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun (2006) or pool over
transformed versions of the representation itself Liao, Leibo,
and Poggio (2013); Pal, Juefei-Xu, and Savvides (2016); Pal
et al. (2017).
Copyright c⃝2019, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
(a) A single NPTN node
Invariance in Deep
Networks
Parametric Invariance
Non-Parametric Invariance
ConvNets [23]  G-CNN [6]
FRPC [39]  ScatNet [35]
DREN [25]  Warped CNN [14]
SiCNN [40]  Go network [5]
SymNets [10]
NPTN
Steerable CNN [7]  Galaxy Net [8]
(b) Types of Invariances in Deep Networks
Figure 1: (a) Operation performed by a single Transforma-
tion Network (TN) node (single channel input and single
channel output, Non-Parametric Transformation Networks
are a kind of TN). TNs (and NPTNs) are a generalization of
ConvNets towards learning general invariances and symme-
tries. The node has two main components (i) Convolution
and (ii) Transformation Pooling. The dot-product between
the input patch (x) and a set of |G| number of ﬁlters gw
(green) is computed (this results in convolution when imple-
mented with spatially replicated nodes). Here |G| = 6 (dif-
ferent shades of green indicate transformed templates). g in-
dicates the transformation applied to the template or ﬁlter w
. The resultant six output scalars (red) are then max-pooled
over to produce the ﬁnal output s (black). The pooling oper-
ation here is not spatially (as in vanilla ConvNets) but rather
across the |G| channels which encode non-parametric trans-
formations. The output s is now invariant to the transfor-
mation encoded by the set of ﬁlters G. Each plane indi-
cates a single feature map/ﬁlter. (b) Most previous works
in deep learning have focused on invariances to transforma-
tions that are parametric in nature and ﬁxed. SymNets Gens
and Domingos (2014) and NPTNs to the best of our knowl-
edge are the only architectures to learn invariances from data
towards transformations that are not modelled by any ex-
pression in the network itself, i.e. the symmetries that are
captured are non-parametric in nature.

Convolutional Networks and Beyond.
Towards this
goal, ideas proposed in LeCun et al. (1998) with the in-
troduction of convolutional neural networks have proved to
be very useful. Weight sharing implemented as convolutions
followed by pooling resulted in the hard encoding of trans-
lation invariances (and symmetries) in the network. This
made it one of the ﬁrst applications of modelling invariance
through a network’s architecture itself. Such a mechanism
resulted in greater regularization in the form of a structural
or inductive bias in the network. With this motivation in
mind, it is almost natural to ask whether networks which
model more complicated invariances and symmetries per-
form better? Investigating architectures which invoke invari-
ances not implicitly through the model’s functional map but
explicitly through an architectural property seems important.
New Dimensions in Network Architecture. Over the
years, deep convolutional networks (ConvNets) have en-
joyed a wide array of improvements in architecture. It was
observed early on that a larger number of ﬁlters (width) in
ConvNets led to improved performance, though with dimin-
ishing returns. Another signiﬁcant milestone was the devel-
opment and maturity of residual connections and dense skip
connections He et al. (2016); Huang et al. (2016). Though
there have been more advances in network architecture,
many of the improvements have been derivatives of these
two ideas Zagoruyko and Komodakis (2016); Chen et al.
(2017); Hu, Shen, and Sun (2017). Recently however, Cap-
sule Nets were introduced Sabour, Frosst, and Hinton (2017)
which presented another potentially fundamental idea of en-
coding properties of an entity or an object in an activity vec-
tor rather than a scalar. With the goal of designing more
powerful networks, ideas presented in this paper for mod-
elling general invariances in the same framework as Con-
vNets, open up a new and potentially key dimension for ar-
chitecture development.
Primary Contribution. In this work, we explore one
such architecture class, called Transformation Networks
(TN) which is a generalization of ConvNets. Additionally,
we introduce a new type of TN using which a new class
of networks can be built called Non-Parametric Transforma-
tion Networks (NPTNs). NPTNs networks have the ability
to learn invariances to general transformations that are ob-
served in the data which are non-parametric in nature (dif-
ﬁcult to express mathematically). They can be easily im-
plemented using standard off-the-shelf deep learning frame-
works and libraries. Further, they can be optimized using
vanilla gradient descent methods such as SGD. Unlike other
methods that enforce additional invariances in convolutional
architectures Teney and Hebert (2016); Wu, Hu, and Kong
(2015); Li et al. (2017), NPTNs do not need to transform the
input, activation maps or the ﬁlters at any stage of the learn-
ing/testing process. They enjoy beneﬁts of a standard con-
volutional architecture such as speed and memory efﬁciency
while being more powerful in modelling invariances and be-
ing elegant in their operation. When forced to ignore any
learnable transformation invariances in data, they gracefully
reduce to vanilla ConvNets in theory and practice. However,
when allowed to do so, they outperform ConvNets by cap-
turing more general invariances.
Some properties of NPTNs. The architecture itself of an
NPTN allows it to be able to learn powerful invariances from
data provided the transformations are observable in data (a
single node is illustrated in Fig. 1(a)). NPTNs do not en-
force any invariance that is not observed in the data (al-
though translation invariance can still be enforced through
spatial pooling). Learning invariances from data is different
and more powerful than enforcing known and speciﬁc in-
variances as is more common in literature (see Fig. 1(b)).
Networks which enforce predeﬁned symmetries (including
vanilla ConvNets) force the same invariances at all layers
which is a strong prior. More complex invariances are left
for the network to learn using the implicit functional map as
opposed to the explicit architecture. The proposed NPTNs
have the ability to learn different and independent invari-
ances for different layers and in fact for different channel
paths themselves. Vanilla ConvNets enforce translation in-
variance through the convolution operation followed by a
aggregation operation (either pooling or a second convo-
lution layer) and only need to learn the ﬁlter instantiation.
However, an NPTN node needs to learn 1) the instantiation
of the ﬁlter and 2) the transformation that the particular node
is invariant towards encoded as a set of ﬁlters. Each node
learns these entities independently of each other which al-
lows for a more ﬂexible invariance model as opposed to ar-
chitectures which replicate invariances across the network.
Prior Art
Although past applications of incorporating invariances
were more speciﬁc and relatively narrow, development of
such methods offers a better understanding of the impor-
tance of the problem. Though in this work we focus on
deep architectures, it is important to note a number of
works on modiﬁcations of Markov Random Fields and Re-
stricted Boltzman Machines to achieve rotational invariance
Schmidt and Roth (2012); Kivinen and Williams (2011);
Sohn and Lee (2012).
Incorporating known invariances using deep net-
works.
Convolutional architectures have seen many ef-
forts to produce rotation invariant representations. Fasel and
Gatica-Perez (2006) and Dieleman, Willett, and Dambre
(2015) rotate the input itself before feeding it into stacks
of CNNs and generating rotation invariant representations
through gradual pooling or parameter sharing. Teney and
Hebert (2016); Wu, Hu, and Kong (2015); Li et al. (2017)
rotate the convolution ﬁlters (a cheaper albeit still expen-
sive operation) instead of transforming the input followed
by pooling. A similar approach was explored for scale by
Xu et al. (2014) and for Go by Clark and Storkey (2015).
An interesting direction of research was explored by Sifre
and Mallat (2013) where the rotation, scale and translation
invariant ﬁlters were ﬁxed and non-trainable. Cohen and
Welling (2016a); Henriques and Vedaldi (2017) presented
methods to incorporate parametric invariances using groups
and warped convolutions. The transformations in Henriques
and Vedaldi (2017); Cohen and Welling (2016b) are known
apriori and the sample grids and steerable ﬁlters are gen-
erated ofﬂine. This limits the capability to learn arbitrary
and adaptive transformations. NPTNs need no such apri-

ori knowledge apart that enocded in its architecture, can
learn arbitrary non-parametric transformations and ﬁnally
are simpler and more elegant in implementation.
Learning unknown invariances from data. In most real
world problems, nuisance transformations present in data
are unknown or too complicated to be parameterized by
some function. Anselmi et al. (2013) proposed a theory of
group invariances called I-theory and explored its connec-
tion to general classiﬁcation problems and deep networks.
Based off the core idea of measuring moments of a group
invariant distribution, multiple works had demonstrated efﬁ-
cacy of the ideas in more challenging real-world problems
such as face recognition, though not in a neural network
setting Liao, Leibo, and Poggio (2013); Pal, Juefei-Xu, and
Savvides (2016); Pal et al. (2017).
Learning unknown invariances from data using deep
networks. Very few works have explored incorporating un-
known invariances into deep networks. To the best of our
knowledge, SymNets Gens and Domingos (2014) was only
one other previous study proposed deep networks which
learn more general transformations. They were introduced
as one of the ﬁrst to model general invariances with back
propagation. They utilize kernel based interpolation to tie
weights enable them to model general symmetries. Nonethe-
less, the approach is complicated and difﬁcult to scale.
Anselmi et al. (2017) provide sufﬁcient conditions to en-
force the learned representation to have symmetries learned
from data. Kavukcuoglu et al. (2009) modelled local invari-
ances using pooling over sparse coefﬁcients of a dictionary
of basis functions. Ngiam et al. (2010) achieved local in-
variance through complex weight sharing. Optimization was
carried out through Topographic ICA and only carried out
layer wise for deep networks. A separate approach towards
modelling invariances was also developed where a normal-
izing transformation is applied to every input independently.
This approach was applied to transforming auto encoders
Hinton, Krizhevsky, and Wang (2011) and Spatial Trans-
former Networks Jaderberg et al. (2015).
The Transformation Network Paradigm
A Transformation Network (TN) is a feed forward network
with its architecture designed to enforce invariance to some
class of transformations through pooling. At the core of the
framework is the TN node. A TN network consists of multi-
ple such nodes stacked in layers. A single TN node is analo-
gous to a single convolution layer with single channel input
and single channel output.
Each TN node (single input channel and single output
channel) internally consists of two operations 1) (convolu-
tion) the convolution operation with a bank of ﬁlters and
2) (transformation pooling) a max pooling operation across
the set of the resultant convolution feature maps from the
single input channel. Note the pooling is not spatial but
rather across channels originating from the same input chan-
nel (this is different from MaxOut Goodfellow et al. (2013)
which pools over all input channels1). Fig. 1(a) illustrates
1We discuss deviation from MaxOut in more detail in the sup-
plementary.
the operation of single TN node with a single input/output
channel for a single patch. The single channel illustrated in
the ﬁgure takes in a single input feature map and convolves
it with a bank of |G| ﬁlters. Here |G| is the cardinality (or
size) of the set of transformations that the TN node is in-
variant towards, with G being the actual set itself. Next, the
transformation max pooling operation max pools across the
|G| feature values to obtain a single TN activation value.
When this node is replicated spatially, standard convolution
layers can be utilized. Formally, a TN node denoted by Υ
acting on a 2D image patch vectorized as x ∈Rd can be
deﬁned as follows.
Υ(x) = max
g∈G(⟨x, gw⟩)
(1)
Here, ⟨
⟩denotes a dot product and G is formally deﬁned
as a unitary group, i.e. a ﬁnite set obeying group axioms
with each element being unitary. w ∈Rd is the weight or
ﬁlter, and gw is the group element g acting on w2. There-
fore, the convolution kernel weights of a TN node are sim-
ply the transformed versions of w as transformed by the uni-
tary group G. The TN node has to, only in theory, transform
weight template w according to G to generate the rest of
the ﬁlters to be pooled over during the transformation pool-
ing stage. In practice however, these are simply stored as a
set of templates or ﬁlters which only implicitly encode G
through some constraints. For instance, vanilla ConvNets
model the group G to be the translation group by enforc-
ing it through the convolution operation. Thus, a ConvNet
can be exactly modelled by the TN framework when G is the
translation group. Gradient descent updates the ﬁlter w for a
single node which immediately speciﬁes the other ﬁlters in
that node since they are the translated versions of w.
Signiﬁcance of the Modeling of Transformations as
Unitary Groups. The use of unitary groups to model trans-
formations and invariances has emerged as a prominent the-
oretical tool Anselmi et al. (2013); Pal et al. (2017). Group
structure allows the computing of invariant objects such as
group integrals. However, the signiﬁcance of the unitary
group lies in the fact that the vanilla ConvNet is invariant to
translations, which is the simplest unitary group. Any frame-
work that models invariance using the unitary group can be
directly generalized to more complex groups such as rota-
tions (rotation is an unitary transformation). This allows for
seamless integration of the vanilla ConvNet into the theo-
retical framework and provides clear theoretical and practi-
cal connections to the same. Unitary groups in TNs allow
them to exactly model ConvNets while generalizing to more
complex networks invoking more complex invariances. The
unitary group condition thus is only a useful theoretical tool,
however should not be considered as a practical constraint.
Invariances in a TN node. Invariance in the TN node
arises directly due to the symmetry of the unitary group
structure of the ﬁlters. The max operation simply measures
the inﬁnite moment of an invariant distribution which in-
vokes invariance. We demonstrate this in the form of the fol-
lowing simple result3.
2We use this shorter notation to reduce clutter.
3Proof in the supplementary.

Lemma 1. (Invariance Property) Given vectors x, w ∈Rd,
a unitary group G and Υ(x) = maxg∈G(⟨x, gw⟩), for any
ﬁxed g′ ∈G, then Υ(x) = Υ(g′x).
Lemma 1 shows that for any input x (including test in-
puts), the node output is invariant to the transformation
group G. Note that invariance to test samples arises from two
components. First, the group structure of G provides exact
invariance and second, the unitary condition allows for the
invariance properties to be extended to unseen test samples.
This is interesting, since one does not need to observe any
transformed version of say a test sample x during training
which reduces sample complexity Anselmi et al. (2013). In-
variance is invoked for any arbitrary input x during test time,
thereby demonstrating good generalization properties.
Relaxing towards Non-group and Non-Unitary Struc-
ture in a TN node (Towards NPTNs). Lemma 1 guaran-
tees exact invariance perfectly for vanilla ConvNets and TNs
which model G as having a group-structure and the uni-
tary condition. For methods that do not enforce these con-
ditions (unitary group conditions) in theory, no test gener-
alization claim can be made. However, a number of stud-
ies have observed approximate albeit sufﬁcient invariances
in practice under this setting Anselmi et al. (2013, 2017);
Pal, Juefei-Xu, and Savvides (2016); Pal et al. (2017); Liao,
Leibo, and Poggio (2013). The main motive for modelling
transformations as unitary groups was to provide a theoreti-
cal connection to ConvNets and other methods that enforce
other kinds of unitary invariance such as rotation invariance
Li et al. (2017); Wu, Hu, and Kong (2015). However, real-
world data experiences a large array of transformations act-
ing, which certainly lie outside the span of unitary trans-
formations. Keeping this in mind, constraining the network
to model only unitary transformations limits their ability to
learn these more general invariances which are difﬁcult to
characterize.
In the following section, we introduce a new kind of TN
called the NPTN which is free from the constraints and lim-
itations of unitary modelling, thereby being more expres-
sive. Indeed, in our experiments, we observe that the NPTN
architectures are able to perform better by learning invari-
ance (signiﬁed by better test generalization) towards both
1) group structured, unitary and parametric transformations
such as translations and rotations, and also towards 2) gen-
eral non-group structured and non-parametric transforma-
tions (as in general object classiﬁcation) which are difﬁcult
to characterize. Note that Lemma 1 only serve as a result for
ConvNets and TNs, they do not characterize the invariance
properties on NPTNs and general non-group non-unitary
transformation. Investigation of such properties of NPTNs
under the general setting is arduous and is outside the scope
of this paper. Further, note that developing TNs and relating
the unitary condition is not necessary for the development or
motivation of NPTNs. TNs however provide a more elegant
story and more importantly clarify the connection to vanilla
ConvNets and helps to put our contribution in perspective.
Non-Parametric Transformation Networks
A Non-Parametric Transformation Network (NPTN) is a
kind of TN that lacks any constraints on set of weights/ﬁlters
w for any particular node. Here the set of ﬁlters G has
two relaxations 1) need not have any group structure and
2) need not model any parametric and/or unitary transfor-
mations such as the translations or rotations. The term G in
an NPTN represents simply a set of arbitrary ﬁlters mod-
elling arbitrary transformations which are (potentially) non-
parametric. One might think of the analogy from statistics
where the Gaussian distribution is parametric, however for
many real-world distributions a non-parametric tool such as
a histogram is more appropriate. Note that however, there is
no constraint that prevents a NPTN from learning translation
and rotation invariance. In fact, in one of our experiments
this is exactly the requirement. Under the two relaxations,
the invariance invoked to these arbitrary transformations in
an NPTN would only be approximate. Nonetheless and con-
sistent with previous work, we ﬁnd in our experiments that
despite the approximation, there is much to be gained overall
and the invariance invoked sufﬁces in practice as also found
by Liao, Leibo, and Poggio (2013); Pal, Juefei-Xu, and Sav-
vides (2016).
In an NPTN, both the entities (w, G) are learned, i.e. a
NPTN node is tasked with learning both the ﬁlter instan-
tiation w, and the set of transformations G to which the
node is to be invariant towards. Nonetheless and rather im-
portantly, no generation of transformed ﬁlters is necessary
during any forward pass of a NPTN layer since the set G
of transformed ﬁlters is always maintained and updated by
gradient descent. This signiﬁcantly reduces computational
complexity compared to some previous works Teney and
Hebert (2016); Wu, Hu, and Kong (2015). Learning G from
data is in sharp contrast with the vanilla convolutional node
in which only the ﬁlter instantiation w is learned and where
G is hard coded to be the translation group which is a para-
metric transformation (and also arguably the most elemen-
tary). Thus, ConvNets are a kind of Parametric Transforma-
tion Networks (PTNs) (see Fig. 2(c)). It is also important to
note that however, setting |G| = 1 and incorporating spatial
pooling, a NPTN is reduced to a vanilla ConvNet in practice.
Compared to other approaches to learn and model general
invariances such as SymNets Gens and Domingos (2014),
the NPTN architecture is elegantly simple and also a close
generalization of ConvNets. Further, they can replace any
convolution layer in any architecture making them versatile.
We now describe the NPTN layer in more detail and discuss
its characteristics.
NPTN Layer Structure, Forward Pass and Training.
Fig. 2 illustrates a NPTN layer and compares it to a vanilla
ConvNet layer. The NPTN layer shown has 2 input chan-
nels, 2 output channels and |G| = 3. For a NPTN layer
with M input channels and N output channels, there would
be MN NPTN nodes each identical to the one shown in
Fig. 1(a). There are |G| ﬁlters learned for each of the MN
nodes, which each are convolved over the image similar to a
vanilla ConvNet. Consider Fig. 2(b), once the input is con-
volved with the M×|G| ﬁlters, the M sets each with |G| fea-
ture maps each are max pooled across the |G| feature maps.

(a) Convolution layer
(b) NPTN layer
Transformation Network (TN)
Non-Parametric and 
 non-group structured G
Parametric and 
group structured G
ConvNet
NPTN
(c) Relation between ConvNets and NPTNs
Figure 2: Comparison between (a) a standard Convolution layer and (b) a NPTN layer with |G| = 3. Each layer depicted has 2
input (shades of grey) and 2 output channels (shades of blue). The light grey rectangle encloses a single TN node (see Fig. 1(a))
The convolution layer has therefore, 2 × 2 = 4 ﬁlters, whereas the NPTN layer has 2 × 2 × 3 = 12 ﬁlters. The different shades
of ﬁlters in the NPTN layer denote transformed versions of the same ﬁlter (same color) which are max pooled over (support
denoted by inverted curly bracket). The + operation denotes channel addition. In our experiments, we adjust the input/output
channels of the NPTN layer to have the same number of parameters as the ConvNet baselines. (c) Shows how ConvNets and
NPTNs are categorized under the TN framework.
More speciﬁcally, each of |G| feature maps from a single
input channel results in one intermediate feature map after
max pooling (across the |G| channels). This is the primary
step that invokes invariances to transformations. After this
operation there are MN intermediate feature maps which
are transformation invariant. Now, the sum (alternatively the
mean) of these M feature maps results in one output feature
map or channel. This is repeated for each of the N output
channels4. Note that there is no operation in this forward
pass where the input or the ﬁlters need to be transformed
on-the-ﬂy, which makes it NPTNs computationally efﬁcient
compared to some previous models Fasel and Gatica-Perez
(2006); Dieleman, Willett, and Dambre (2015); Teney and
Hebert (2016); Wu, Hu, and Kong (2015); Li et al. (2017).
In fact, the computation complexity for NPTNs only in-
creases with the order |G| relative to a vanilla convolution
layer. This is countered in our experiments by decreasing
M and N, primarily to preserve the number of parame-
ters. The NPTN layer can be trained using standard back-
propagation. Back-propagation updates each of the |G| ﬁl-
ters of the NPTN independently depending on which of the
|G| ﬁlters is the ‘winner’ during the channel max pooling op-
eration. Note again that this operation is very different from
MaxOut which pools over inputs from all channels, whereas
here each max operation pools over |G| channels only from
the same input channel5. Since the ﬁlters are not constrained
to form any group, we do not expect to see any regular trans-
formations being observed in the ﬁlters (for instance, rotated
ﬁlters for rotation invariance). This might seem as a slight
hindrance to interpretibility, nonetheless in our experiments,
we ﬁnd NPTNs perform well in speciﬁc applications where
learning invariance from the data is necessary.
Invariance Modelling in NPTNs is Data Driven and
4We provide implementation details of NPTNs using standard
libraries in the supplementary.
5We discuss deviation from MaxOut in more detail in the sup-
plementary.
Highly Flexible. It is important to note that though the archi-
tecture of NPTNs allows it to learn invariances, it does not in
fact enforce any particular invariance by itself. NPTNs can
only learn invariances to transformations that are observed
in data, and thereby are even more beneﬁted from data aug-
mentation and natural variation. This is a critical difference
between NPTNs and other works which do enforce speciﬁc
invariances through design (see under Parametric Invariance
in Fig. 1(b)). Another important and powerful property that
emerges from having independent ﬁlter sets for each of the
NPTN nodes in an entire network, is that each individual
node can model invariance to a completely different trans-
formation. Concretely, a single NPTN layer with M input
channels and N output channels potentially can model MN
different kinds of invariances. This is again in sharp contrast
to ConvNets and other previous works such as Teney and
Hebert (2016); Wu, Hu, and Kong (2015); Li et al. (2017)
where each layer and in fact each of the channel paths model
exact same invariance, either translation, rotation or scale.
NPTNs thus offers immense ﬂexibility in invariance mod-
elling.
Empirical Evaluation of NPTNs
Benchmarking against ConvNets on CIFAR10
In our ﬁrst set of experiments, we benchmark and character-
ize the behavior of NPTNs against the standard ConvNets
augmented with Batch Normalization Ioffe and Szegedy
(2015). The goal of this set of experiments is to observe
whether learning non-parametric transformation invariance
from complex visual data itself helps with object classiﬁca-
tion. For this experiment, we utilize the CIFAR10 dataset6.
The networks we experiment with are not designed to com-
pete with state-of-the-arts on this data but rather throw light
6With standard data augmentation of random cropping after a
4 pixel pad, and random horizontal ﬂipping. Training was for 300
epochs with the learning rate being 0.1 and decreased at epoch 150,
and 225 by a factor of 10.

(48, 1)
(24, 2)
(16, 3)
(12, 4)
(9, 5)
(Channel, |G|)
0.6
0.62
0.64
Test loss
ConvNet
NPTN
Figure 3: Test losses on CIFAR10 for the two layered net-
work. Each network listed has the same number of ﬁlters.
Method
Accuracy (%)
ConvNet Khasanova and Frossard (2017)
80.1
STN Jaderberg et al. (2015)
45.1
DeepScat Oyallon and Mallat (2015)
87.3
HarmNet Worrall et al. (2017)
94.0
TIGradNet Khasanova and Frossard (2017)
95.1
NPTN (Ours)
96.2
Table 1: Test accuracy on ETH-80. All models including
NPTNs and the ConvNet had roughly the same number of
parameters (about 1.4M). Models followed the architecture
described in Khasanova and Frossard (2017). Results for
models other than NPTN are cited as is from Khasanova and
Frossard (2017).
into the behavior of NPTNs. We therefore utilize a small
network, speciﬁcally a two layered network, for these ex-
periments. Each layer block of the baseline ConvNets con-
sist of the convolution layer, followed by batch normaliza-
tion and the non-linearity (PReLU) and ﬁnally by a 2 by 2
spatial max pooling layer. Each corresponding NPTN net-
work replaces only the convolution layer with the NPTN
layer. Thus, NPTN is allowed to model non-parametric in-
variance in addition to the typically enforced translation in-
variance due to spatial max pooling. The two layered net-
work baseline ConvNet has channels [3, 48, 16] with a total
of 3×48+48×16 = 912 ﬁlters. The NPTN variants in this
experiment keep the total number of ﬁlters constant with 48
channels with |G| = 1 denoted by (48 1), 24 channels with
|G| = 2 denoted by (24 2), and so on up until 9 channels
with |G| = 5 (9 5). Fig. 3 shows the testing losses. Each
network experimented with has the same number of param-
eters. We ﬁnd all NPTN variants which learn a non-trivial
set of transformations (|G| > 1) outperform the ConvNet
baseline signiﬁcantly, with NPTN |G| = 3 performing the
best.
Benchmarking against other approaches: ETH-80
We now benchmark NPTNs against other approaches learn-
ing invariances on the ETH-80 dataset Leibe and Schiele
(2003). As our baseline, we follow the experimental setup
and the speciﬁcations of the models described in Khasanova
Rotations
0◦
30◦
60◦
90◦
ConvNet (36)
0.75
1.16
2.05
3.32
NPTN (36, 1)
0.68
1.27
2.01
3.36
NPTN (18, 2)
0.66
1.09 )
1.72
2.88
NPTN (12, 3)
0.63
1.08
1.71
2.76
NPTN (9, 4)
0.66
1.17
1.83
2.94
Translations
0 pix
4 pix
8 pix
12 pix
ConvNet (36)
0.62
0.95
1.97
7.00
NPTN (36, 1)
0.62
0.88
1.84
7.22
NPTN (18, 2)
0.74
0.75
1.70
6.26
NPTN (12, 3)
0.66
0.70
1.58
6.20
NPTN (9, 4)
0.64
0.76
1.59
6.37
Table 2: Test error on progressively transformed MNIST
with (a) random rotations and (b) random pixel shifts.
NPTNs can learn invariances to arbitrary transformations
from the data itself without any a priori knowledge. All mod-
els have same number of parameters.
and Frossard (2017). Note that for this experiment, our goal
is not to attain state-of-the-art results, but rather benchmark
against other related methods under a comparable setting.
The dataset has 80 objects belonging to 8 classes. Each ob-
ject has 41 images taken from a grid of different viewpoints
on a hemisphere. Following Khasanova and Frossard (2017),
we resize the images to 50 × 50 and train on 2,300 im-
ages and test on the rest. The isometric transformations in
the dataset present a good challenge for approaches to in-
voke invariance in a real-world setting. For this experiment,
we compare against standard ConvNets, Spatial Transformer
Networks Jaderberg et al. (2015), DeepScat Oyallon and
Mallat (2015), HarmNet Worrall et al. (2017) and TIGrad-
Net Khasanova and Frossard (2017). The NPTN architec-
ture was chosen to by replacing the convolution layers in
the ConvNet architecture in Khasanova and Frossard (2017)
with NPTN layers while setting |G| = 3 and reducing
the number of channels to preserve the number of parame-
ters. All models in this experiment (including NPTNs) have
about 1.4M parameters. Table 1 presents the test accuracy on
ETH-80. We ﬁnd that NPTN outperforms these other high-
performing algorithms on this task with an accuracy of 96.2
%. Thus, NPTNs despite having much simpler architecture
and the same number of parameters, is able to perform well
in a task where the primary nuisance transformation is due
to varying 3D pose of the objects.
Learning Unknown Transformation Invariances
from Data
We now demonstrate the ability of NPTN networks to learn
invariances directly from data without any apriori knowl-
edge. For this experiment, we augment MNIST with extreme
a) random rotations b) random translations, both in train-
ing and testing data thereby increasing the complexity of the
learning problem itself. For each sample, a random instan-
tiation of the transformation was applied. For rotation, the
angular range was increased, whereas for translations it was
the pixel shift range. Table 2 presents these results. All net-
works in the table are two layered and have the exact same

(128)
(64, 2)
(42, 3)
(32, 4)
(Channel, |G|)
1
1.5
2
Test Error %
Figure 4: Test errors on MNIST for Capsule Nets aug-
mented with NPTNs. (128) denotes a Capsule Network
with a vanilla ConvNet. Other labels are NPTNs with
(channels, |G|). The number of ﬁlters from left to right is
{4224, 4160, 4074, 4128}. NPTNs signiﬁcantly outperform
ConvNets in Capsule Nets with fewer ﬁlters.
number of parameters. As expected, NPTNs match the per-
formance of vanilla ConvNets when there were no additional
transformations added (0◦and 0 pixels)7. However, as the
transformation intensity (range) is increased, NPTNs per-
form signiﬁcantly better than ConvNets. Trends consistent
with previous experiments were observed with the highest
performance observed with NPTN (|G| = 3). This high-
lights the main feature of NPTNs, i.e. their ability to model
arbitrary transformations observed in data without any apri-
ori information and without changes in architecture whatso-
ever. They exhibit better performance in settings where both
rotation invariance and stronger translation invariance is re-
quired (even though ConvNets are designed speciﬁcally to
handle translations). This ability is something that previous
deep architectures did not possess nor demonstrate.
NPTNs with Capsule Networks
Capsule Networks with dynamic routing were recently intro-
duced as an extension of standard neural networks Sabour,
Frosst, and Hinton (2017). Since the original architecture
is implemented using vanilla convolution layers, invariance
properties of the networks are limited. Our goal for this ex-
periment is to replace Convolution Capsule Nets with NPTN
Capsules. We replace the convolution layers in the Primary
Capsule layer of the published architecture with NPTN lay-
ers while maintaining the same number of parameters (by
reducing number of channels and increasing |G|). Our base-
line is the proposed CapsuleNet with 3 layers using a third
party implementation in PyTorch8. The baseline convolution
capsule layer had 128 output channels. The NPTN variants
progressively decreased the number of channels as |G| was
increased. All other hyperparameters were preserved. The
networks were trained on the 2-pixel shifted MNIST for 50
epochs with a learning rate of 10−3. The performance statis-
tics of 5 runs are reported in Fig. 4. We ﬁnd that for roughly
the same number of kernel ﬁlters (and parameters), Capsule
7NPTNs perform slightly better than ConvNets for 0◦rotations
because for all rotation experiments, small translations up to 2 pix-
els were applied only in training.
8https://github.com/dragen1860/CapsNet-Pytorch.git
Nets have much to gain from the use of NPTN layers (a sig-
niﬁcant test error decrease from 1.90 to 0.78 for 1
3 of the
baseline number of channels and |G| = 3). The learning of
invariances within each capsule signiﬁcantly increases efﬁ-
cacy and performance of the overall architecture.
Current Limitations
We observed that NPTNs and the idea of learning gen-
eral non-parametric invariances form the data itself has po-
tential and merits further investigation as a component in
more broder studies. Nonetheless, our current implementa-
tion of NPTN in PyTorch suffers from high memory usage
and high computation time partly due to channel shufﬂing.
Given our limited computation resources as this time, the
size and depth of the networks that we can train is subse-
quently limited. We therefore focus more on a systematic
and thorough investigation and benchmarking of a smaller
network on multiple tasks and experiments rather than larger
scale experiments. Such studies will be within scope once
more efﬁcient function routines for speciﬁc tasks are avail-
able in deep learning packages. Nonetheless, even with the
manageable size of our networks, NPTNs outperform sev-
eral recent approaches on ETH-80 with the same number of
parameters. Further, they can be incorporated into newer ar-
chitectures such as Capsule Nets and improve performance.
Discussion
It is clear that the success of ConvNets is not the whole story
towards solving perception. Studies into different aspects of
network design will prove to be paramount in addressing the
complex problem of not just visual but general perception.
The development of NPTNs offer one such design as-
pect, i.e. learning non-parametric invariances and symme-
tries directly from data. Through our experiments, we found
that NPTNs can indeed effectively learn general invariances
without any apriori information. Further, they are effective
and improve upon vanilla ConvNets even when applied to
general vision data as presented in CIFAR10 and ETH-80
with complex unknown symmetries. This seems to be a crit-
ical requirement for any system that is aimed at taking a step
towards general perception. Assuming detailed knowledge
of symmetries in real-world data (not just visual) is imprac-
tical and successful models would need to adapt accordingly.
In all of our experiments, NPTNs were compared to
vanilla ConvNet baselines with the same number of ﬁlters
(and thereby more channels). Interestingly, the superior per-
formance of NPTNs despite having fewer channels indicates
that better modelling of invariances is a useful goal to pur-
sue during design. Explicit and efﬁcient modelling of invari-
ances has the potential to improve many existing architec-
tures. Indeed, we outperform several state-of-the-art algo-
rithms on ETH-80. In our experiments, we also ﬁnd that
Capsule Networks which utilized NPTNs instead of vanilla
ConvNets performed much better. This motivates and justi-
ﬁes more attention towards architectures and other solutions
that efﬁciently model general invariances in deep networks.
Such an endeavour might not only produce networks per-
forming better in practice, it also promises to deepen our
understanding of deep networks and perception in general.
