Learning Conﬁguration Space Belief Model from
Collision Checks for Motion Planning
Sumit Kumar∗
Shushman Choudhary
Siddhartha Srinivasa
Abstract
For motion planning in high dimensional conﬁguration spaces, a signiﬁcant com-
putational bottleneck is collision detection. Our aim is to reduce the expected
number of collision checks by creating a belief model of the conﬁguration space
using results from collision tests. We assume the robot’s conﬁguration space to be
a continuous ambient space whereby neighbouring points tend to share the same
collision state. This enables us to formulate a probabilistic model that assigns
to unevaluated conﬁgurations a belief estimate of being collision-free. We have
presented a detailed comparative analysis of various kNN methods and distance
metrics used to evaluate C-space belief. We have also proposed a weighting matrix
in C-space to improve the performance of kNN methods. Moreover, we have pro-
posed a topological method that exploits the higher order structure of the C-space
to generate a belief model. Our results indicate that our proposed topological
method outperforms kNN methods by achieving higher model accuracy while
being computationally efﬁcient.
1
Introduction
Motion planning can be deﬁned as the task of ﬁnding a continuous path between a start conﬁguration
S and a goal conﬁguration G while avoiding any collision with obstacles present in the environment.
The robot and obstacle geometry are expressed in 2D or 3D workspace while the path is represented in
robot’s conﬁguration space (C-space). Robotic motion planning requires exploration of C-space. As
the dimensionality of C-space increases, complete exploration becomes computationally intractable.
For higher dimensional C-space, sampling-based planning algorithms are considered state-of-the-art.
It constructs a connectivity graph that implicitly represents the structure of C-space, thus minimizing
exploration. The main computations involved in path planning are generating C-space samples,
joining nearby collision-free samples and evaluating the collision state (in Cfree or in Cobs) of
a conﬁguration or a local path by a collision detection module. The latter step, performing a
collision check, provides exact information about the conﬁguration but comes at the cost of increased
computational load making even the sampling based techniques intractable sometimes. One way to
solve the problem is to use C-space belief as a heuristic to guide the search for feasible paths. C-space
belief which refers to the belief of unevaluated conﬁgurations to be collision-free is evaluated with
the help of a probabilistic model of the robot’s world.
A number of different nearest neighbour methods and distance metrics have been used by researchers
so far to generate the belief model. We have performed a detailed comparative analysis of these in the
same validation environment to create a benchmark. To the best of our knowledge, however, all the
traditional kNN methods work in the higher dimensional C-space and do not utilize any embedded
∗This work was carried out as an internship at Carnegie Mellon University. Contact: sumit.sks4[at]gmail.com
Preprint. Work in progress.
arXiv:1901.07646v2  [cs.RO]  10 Feb 2019

topological information. We have projected the C-space to a lower dimensional space and proposed
a topological method in this projected space to generate the belief model. In the end, we have also
presented a comparative analysis of our topological method and the traditional nearest neighbour
ones present in the literature.
2
Related Work
Path planning algorithms have widely used graph-based and sampling-based techniques. Graph-
based planning algorithms like Dijkstra’s algorithm [1], A* [2] and D*-Lite [3] are used mostly in
low dimensional C-spaces where explicit representation is computationally feasible. On the other
hand, sampling based techniques are generally applied in high dimensional C-spaces where explicit
representation becomes infeasible. Probabilistic Roadmap [4] (PRM) planner constructs a graph or a
roadmap of sampled conﬁgurations and tries to ﬁnd a path from start to goal state. Rapidly-exploring
Random Tree [5] (RRT) planner expands a tree from start state and terminates after reaching the goal
state.
The original probabilistic roadmap approach explicitly evaluated all nodes and edges of the roadmap
for feasibility of path planning. As a result of the expensive nature of collision-checking, the idea
of reducing the number of collision checks by generating a probabilistic model of the conﬁguration
space and estimating the collision probability of conﬁgurations and paths became popular. Recent
works have been done on creating a belief model of the C-space and using the probability of collision
as a heuristic to guide the search over paths to obtain a feasible path [6]. Burns et al. incrementally
constructs and reﬁnes an approximate statistical model of the entire conﬁguration space [7]. The
model is used to estimate the feasibility of an edge in the roadmap reducing the need to invoke collision
checker. Pan et al. [8] improves the performance of sample-based motion planners by learning from
prior instances. They perform instance-based learning on the approximate C-space and compute
collision probability. Choudhary et al. [9] builds up an incremental model of the conﬁguration space
using data from previous collision tests and uses this model to search for successively shorter paths
that are likely to be feasible.
For robots with large number of DOFs, planning in conﬁguration space can often be computationally
expensive. To speed up the computation, one approach is to split the planning problem into two
lower-dimensional sub-problems - planning for the shoulder and elbow joints and that for the wrist
joints [10]. Researchers have often projected the conﬁguration space to a lower dimensional space
and used topological methods for path planning. Pokorny et al. [11] shows that under some constraints
the topological properties are preserved upon projection.
3
Problem Deﬁnition
We formulate an inexpensive probabilistic model Φ that takes in a conﬁguration and outputs its belief
of being collision-free. The belief depends on the model and its parameters Θ. It is a mapping from
robot’s conﬁguration space C to a set S = (−1, 1). A positive value predicts the query conﬁguration
to be in Cobs while a negative value estimates it to be in Cfree, higher the magnitude higher is the
corresponding probability. Mathematically, this mapping can be expressed as B(Φ, Θ) : C 7→S.
The performance of the model Φ is evaluated using two metrics: accuracy and average error. Accuracy
refers to the fraction of number of query conﬁgurations for whom the model correctly predicts its
collision state. Average error refers to the mean L2 deviation between the actual collision state and
the predicted collision probability of all the query conﬁgurations.
4
Approach
The robotic platform used in our work is HERB (Home Exploring Robot Butler) at Personal Robotics
Lab, Carnegie Mellon University. HERB is a bimanual mobile manipulator comprising of two 7 DOF
Barret WAM arms on a Segway base equipped with a suite of image and range sensors. The C-space
mentioned in this project is the 7-dimensional joint space of HERB’s right arm. We assume that the
C-space is a continuous ambient space whereby neighbouring points tend to share the same collision
state, i.e., either both or neither of them are in Cfree.
2

(a) shelf
(b) table
(c) kitchen
Figure 1: Typical environments HERB works in.
4.1
Sobol Sequences
We created 8 environments typical to what HERB will ﬁnd itself in everyday life like a kitchen, a
room with shelf and table. 3 of these are shown in Figure 1. In each of these environments, we
generated a training set of N (model parameter) samples using Sobol sequences. The motivation
behind preferring Sobol sequences over randomly generated ones is that the former are quasi-random
low discrepancy sequences, hence, cover the space more uniformly and leave less number of voids. A
Sobol sequence S is a 7D vector whose each element is a non-negative number less than or equal to 1.
It is then linearly transformed to the robot’s C-space as follows:
q = L + (U −L) ◦S
where, q is the conﬁguration in C-space, L and U are the vectors of minimum and maximum values
of the arm joint angles respectively. Operator ◦carries out element wise multiplication of the two
matrices.
(a) 500 2D randomly generated sequences
(b) 500 2D Sobol sequences
Figure 2: Randomly generated sequences leave larger voids compared to Sobol sequences in the same conﬁgura-
tion space.
Each sample is a unique conﬁguration of the robot’s arm in its C-space which can belong to any one
of the three categories:
• self-collision - a link of the arm is in collision with another
• Cobs - arm is in collision with some object in the environment
• Cfree - not in any collision at all
Obviously, it can happen that a sample is both in self-collision and in Cobs. In those cases, we
consider the sample to be in self-collision.
Collision checker module is called on the sample to determine its collision state. If it in self-collision
it is discarded, otherwise included in the training set. We maintain an equal number of Cfree samples
and Cobs samples in the training set. In this way, we generate a training set of N samples comprising
of N/2 Cfree and N/2 Cobs samples. Moreover, for each of the Cobs samples, a collision report is
3

obtained from the collision checker module which contains information regarding the 3D position
and orientation of all the in-collision points of arm. Pseudocode for generating training set having N
samples is shown below:
generate_training_set(N_train):
Cfree_samples = []
Cobs_samples = []
collision_reports = []
seed = 1
while Cobs_sample_count < N_train/2
sobol_sequence = generate_sobol_sequence(seed)
seed = seed + 1
sample = transform_to_Cspace(sobol_sequence)
state = collision_check(sample,report)
if state == Cfree
add sample to Cfree_samples
elif state == Cobs
add sample to Cobs_samples
add report to collision_reports
Cfree_samples = C_free_samples[1:N_train/2]
return Cfree_samples, Cobs_samples, collision_reports
The belief of a query conﬁguration q’ to be collision-free is evaluated as the weighted average of the
collision state (-1 for Cfree and 1 for Cobs sample) of some of its neighbouring conﬁgurations from
the training set.
belief(q′) = Σq∈P wqS(q)
Σq∈P wq
where, P is the set of neighbouring conﬁgurations of query q′, wq and S(q) are the weight and true
collision state of neighbour q respectively. Here, there are two parameters in estimating belief are set
P, and weights wq ∀q ∈P.
The neighbouring conﬁgurations are found out using various methods as discussed in the subsequent
subsections. The weight of a neighbouring conﬁguration q is a measure of its importance in
determining the collision probability of q’. Closer is q from q’, higher is the probability of q’
sharing the same collision state as q as per the assumption of continuous ambient space, hence higher
is the weight of q.
(a) Fixed k
(b) Fixed N
Figure 3: (a) shows the performance of NN method as a function of N for k = 10. In (b), NN method is
evaluated for different values of k for N = 20000.
4.2
Exact Nearest Neighbours
The ﬁrst method used to ﬁnd the neighbouring conﬁgurations is the exact nearest neighbours or
simply the nearest neighbour (NN) method [12]. k nearest neighbours of the query conﬁguration
q collectively evaluate its collision probability or the belief of being collision-free. The weight of
4

(a) Fixed k
(b) Fixed N
Figure 4: In (a), the performance of ANN method as a function of N is shown for a ﬁxed k = 10. In (b), ANN
method is evaluated for different values of k for N = 20000.
conﬁguration q′ is taken to be the reciprocal of the euclidean distance between q′ and q, i.e,
wq =
1
∥q −q′∥
This weight metric is consistent with the assumption of continuous ambient space. Larger the value of
1
∥q−q′∥, closer are q’ and q, hence higher should be the weight. Figure 3a shows the performance of
NN method as a function of k for a ﬁxed value of N (size of training set). We also varied N keeping
k constant and the corresponding results are shown in Figure 3b.
4.3
Approximate Nearest Neighbours
Although NN method gives the k closest training samples to the query but is computationally
expensive both from the time and memory consumption point of view. In such circumstances, it
may be a good idea to settle for a ’good guess’ of nearest neighbours in the exchange of reduced
computational load. Approximate Nearest Neighbours [13] (ANN) method fulﬁlls the requirements.
Although, it doesn’t guarantee to return the closest neighbours but is computationally faster and
consumes less memory than the NN method. After determining the required number of neighbours,
their weights are computed in the exact same manner as in the case of NN method. Figure 4a shows
the performance of ANN method as a function of k for a ﬁxed N. Also, the results of varying N
keeping k constant are shown in Figure 4b.
4.4
Fixed Radius Near Neighbours
Both the NN and ANN methods ﬁnd a pre-determined number of neighbours of a query conﬁguration
q’. However, it may be useful to relax this constraint on the quantity of neighbours and instead
determine all the neighbours residing inside a 7-dimensional sphere of radius r centred at q’. In this
case, we computed the weight wq of conﬁguration q using either of the two kernels:
• Gaussian kernel: It is a second-order non-parametric kernel. However, it is not compact as
its support runs over the entire space.
wq = exp(−∥q −q′∥2
σ2
)
where σ is the variance of the training set.
• Epanechnikov kernel: It is a smooth non-parametric kernel. Among all the kernels it
minimizes asymptotic mean integrated square error and is therefore optimal.
wq =
(
3
4(1 −∥q−q′∥2
r2
) if ∥q −q′∥2 < r2
0 otherwise
The results of using Gaussian and Epanechnikov kernel [14] are shown in Figure 5 and 6 respectively.
Each of the three methods used to compute wq is a function of the similarity (or closeness) of
neighbour q to query q’. We refer to this quantity as the similarity estimate between conﬁgurations q
and q’ denoted by sim(q, q′). Table 1 lists the three methods used to estimate wq.
5

(a) Fixed k
(b) Fixed N
Figure 5: (a) shows the performance of a model using Gaussian kernel as a function of N for r = 1.5. In (b),
the same model is evaluated for different values of r for N = 20000.
(a) Fixed k
(b) Fixed N
Figure 6: (a) shows the performance of a model using Epanechnikov kernel as a function of N for r = 1.5. In
(b), the same model is evaluated for different values of r for N = 20000.
4.5
Importance weights
All the three weight metrics discussed so far- reciprocal of euclidean distance, Gaussian and Epanech-
nikov kernels- compute ∥q −q′∥giving equal importance to all the dimensions of the C-space.
Physically, it means that all the joints of the arm are assigned equal weight in estimating the C-space
belief. In other words, what matters is the absolute difference between q’ and q and not the individual
difference in each joint values. But, intuitively not all the joints should be equally important. For any
manipulator, the base joint have more inﬂuence on a conﬁguration than the wrist joints as a small
perturbation in the base joint results in the motion of all the links while that in wrist joint (closer
to the end-effector) affect only the wrist ones. This whole idea is illustrated in case of a planar 3R
manipulator in Figure 7.
Let, q′ = [θ1; θ2; θ3] be the query conﬁguration whose belief of being collision-free is to be estimated.
We take two neighbouring conﬁgurations q1 = [θ1 +∆θ, θ2, θ3] and q2 = [θ1, θ2, θ3 +∆θ]. Clearly,
the weight of the two conﬁgurations q2 and q2 are equal as ∥q′ −q1∥= ∥q′ −q2∥. However, as
we can observe from the ﬁgure itself, q2 is a closer neighbour of q′ than is q1, hence q2 should have
a comparatively higher weight than q1 in estimating the collision probability of q′. This ambiguity
can be resolved by assigning importance weights to each joint of the robot’s arm and then computing
weighted L2 norm rather than the simple L2 norm. We will refer to these weights as ’importance
weight’ of joint in order to avoid any confusion with the weight of the training samples.
Distance metric
wq
Inverse
1
sim(q,q′)
Gaussian
exp(−sim(q,q′)2
σ2
)
Epanechnikov
3
4(1 −sim(q,q′)2
r2
)
Table 1: Distance metrics and their corresponding weight formula
6

Figure 7: The black links show the initial conﬁguration of 3R manipulator whereas the grey ones show the
neighbouring ones. With respect to the original conﬁguration, the grey link on the right is a closer neighbour
than is the one on the left.
The importance weight of a joint is a measure of its dominance on the arm conﬁguration. A joint
which when actuated by a small amount results in a large deviation from the current conﬁguration of
the arm will have higher importance weight than others. Intuitively, shoulder joints should have higher
weights than wrist joints. From the very deﬁnition, it is clear that the importance weights depend
on the conﬁguration itself. So, rather than allotting a constant weight to each joint, we assigned
weight to each joint of a conﬁguration depending on its ability to disturb the original state of the arm.
Moreover, the interpretation and hence the calculation of importance weights of a Cfree sample is
different from that of a Cobs sample as explained below. We denote the vector of the importance
weight of conﬁguration q as Ωq. The importance weight of jth joint of C is given by the jth element
of Ωq[j].
For Cfree samples, the deviation from the original conﬁguration is measured as the deﬂection in
the position of the end-effector when a joint is perturbed by 0.01 radian. the initial position of
end-effector be v. Ωq can be computed as follows:
1. Increase q[j] by 0.01 radians keeping all other joint angles ﬁxed
2. Determine the new position v′
j of the end-effector
3. Compute sqj = ∥v′
j −v∥
Construct a vector sq whose jth element is sqj as computed above. Ωq is given by the following
formula:
Ωq =
sq
∥sq∥
In case of Cobs samples, the calculation of Ωq is a bit more involved. Since some link of the arm is
in collision with some object(s) in the environment, the ability of a joint to perturb the conﬁguration
from its original state is not the same as in the previous case. Depending on the link in-collision,
some joints can alter the collision state while the rest can’t. In order to calculate Ωq for Cobs sample
q, we need to compute two things beforehand with the help of collision report:
• the link in-collision with the environment. Although there can be multiple such links, we
have considered only the ﬁrst link, i.e., the one closest to the shoulder of HERB. Let the
index of this link be l.
• the centre of mass P of all the in-collision meshes of link l. Lets call the vector to be vP
According to our convention, both joint index and link index start from 0 with link 0 being the ﬁxed
link and joint j connects link j and link j + 1. Note that if link l of sample q is in collision, then
actuating any joint between link l and the end-effector will not affect the link l hence the collision
state of the arm. In other words, whatever be the values of joint l, l + 1, .., 6, the arm will always
7

be in collision. This suggests that the difference in values of these joints between query q′ and q
is immaterial in the computation of the weight of q. Hence, the importance weight of these joints
is assigned to be zero. However, the remaining joints can affect the state of conﬁguration q′. The
importance weight of joint j (0 ≤j ≤l −1) is computed in a similar manner to that in Cfree
conﬁgurations. Only this time the role of end-effector is supplanted by the point P. Ωq can be
computed as follows:
1. Increase q[j] by 0.01 radians keeping all other joint angles ﬁxed
2. Determine the new position v′
P of the point P
3. Compute sqj = ∥v′
P −vP∥
For j ≥l , sqj = 0. We construct a 7-dimensional vector sq whose jth element is sqj as computed
above. Finally,
Ωq =
sq
∥sq∥
For sample q, we construct a 7X7 diagonal matrix Wq whose ith diagonal element is Ωq[i]. The
weighted L2 norm can thus be computed as:
∥q −q′∥2
w = (q −q′)T Wq(q −q′)
So far, we have mentioned two measures of estimating similarity between two conﬁgurations q and
q′ - L2 norm and weighted L2 norm. This similarity estimate is then used in the calculation of weight
of a training sample. In addition, we have also used scale-invariant mahalanobis distance [15] as the
similarity measure. In sum, we have used four different measures for estimating similarity between
conﬁgurations q and q′ as summarised below:
Measure
sim(q, q′)2
Euclidean
(q −q′)T (q −q′)
Weighted Euclidean
(q −q′)T Wq(q −q′)
Mahalanobis
(q −q′)T Σ−1(q −q′)
Weighted Mahalanobis
(q −q′)T WqΣ−1(q −q′)
where Σ is the covariance matrix of the training set.
4.6
Topological method
All the methods discussed so far to compute the C-space belief are applicable in the 7D C-space of
the robot and does not capture any higher order topological structure of the environment. Exploiting
the embedded structure has proved to be of signiﬁcant importance in motion planning. The methods
that seek to determine and exploit such structures and the topology of the space are called topological
methods. They do not rely on the exact metric information and hence are robust to errors.
However, the computational complexity of such methods increase exponentially with the dimension-
ality of the space. Hence, practically these methods can’t be applied in a high dimensional space like
the 7-D C-space. We solved the high dimensionality problem by projecting the 7-D C-space to a 4-D
space referred as the ’topological space’. For any vector v in the C-space, its projection vp in the
topological space is given by the following rule:
v = v[1 : 4]
where v[1 : 4] means the ﬁrst four elements of vector v. This projected space is constructed by
removing the last 3 axes of the C-space. In other words, it is the state space of the ﬁrst four arm
joints, i.e., shoulder and elbow joints. The motivation behind this projection rule is embedded in the
mechanical design of the arm itself. HERB’s arm has 2 shoulder, 2 elbow and 3 wrist joints with the
wrist links being much smaller than the other links. Since the latter joints can actuate only the wrist
links, they have little inﬂuence on the arm conﬁguration as compared to the shoulder and elbow joints
together. Hence neglecting them is a fairly reasonable step and does not result in much signiﬁcant
information loss.
8

Figure 8: Delaunay triangulation of a set of 2D points. The neighbours of the conﬁguration shown by red dot are
the three vertices shown with blue dots.
One of the ways to capture the topological structure of a set of 2D points is Delaunay triangulation.
Triangulation of a set of 2D points results in the formation of triangles such that no point lies inside
the circumcircle of any triangle. Tessellation in n-dimensional space is a general form of triangulation
in 2-D space. Tessellation forms simplices such that no point lies inside the circum-hypersphere of
any simplex. Simplex is the generalization of triangle or tetrahedron to any arbitrary dimension. A
2-simplex is the triangle and 3-simplex is tetrahedron. In general, a k-simplex is a k-dimensional
polytope and the convex hull of its k+1 vertices. Some pre-processing is required:
1. Project the entire training set to the topological space as per the projection rule
2. Construct the Delaunay Tessellation of the projected training set
Like in the previous methods, the belief of a conﬁguration to be collision-free is the weighted average
of the collision state of its neighbours. The steps to determine the neighbours of query q′ are as
follows:
1. Find the projection q′ of query q′ to the topological space
2. Determine the simplex which circumscribes q′.
The neighbours of the projected query conﬁguration q′ are the vertices of the circumscribing simplex.
Obviously, it is possible that q′ may not lie inside any simplex of the tessellation. In that case, we
have assumed that the query is equally probable to be in Cfree or in Cobs and hence its belief is 0.0
(remember in our case belief varies from -1.0 to 1.0).
In this method, the weight of a neighbour q of query q′ is taken as the reciprocal of sim(q, q′). In
the case of weighted euclidean and weighted mahalanobis similarity measure, the importance weights
used are also projected to the topological space using the projection rule. Moreover, the covariance
matrix used in the mahalanobis and weighted mahanlanobis similarity measure is of the projected
training. We call the belief of q′ thus computed as bel1(q′).
In order to make up for the lose of information due to projection, we compute a secondary belief
bel2(q′). The process of estimating bel2(q′) is same as that of bel1(q′) except the projection step.
All the conﬁgurations and their joints importance weights are projected to a 3D space by taking their
last three joint values which is ignored in the topological space. Note that the neighbours of query q
are estimated from the topological space only and the same neighbours are used to compute bel2(q′)
also. The net belief of conﬁguration q to be collision-free is the weighted average of bel1(q′) and
bel2(q′). Here, the weight of bel1(q′) is taken to be 100 times that of bel2(q′).
5
Result
Apart from the training size N, each of the four methods - Nearest Neighbours, Approximate Nearest
Neighbours, Epanechnikov Kernel and Gaussian Kernel - has a parameter which inﬂuences the
9

(a) Nearest Neighbors
(b) Approximate Nearest Neighbors
(c) Epanechnikov Kernel
(d) Gaussian Kernel
Figure 9: The four ﬁgures show the results of the performance of a model using different methods (mentioned in
the respective title) with different distance metric measures. (a) and (b) are plotted for k = 10 while (c) and (d)
for r = 1.5.
performance of the model. Number of neighbors k is that parameter in the ﬁrst two methods while
the rest have the radius of sphere r. Out of all the set of parameters tried, the optimum performance
is observed at k = 10 for the ﬁrst two methods and r = 1.5 for the last two.
We analyzed the performance of the proposed weighted euclidean measure of computing distance
metrics. The accuracy and average error of the model using the weighted euclidean measure were
compared with that of the model invoking the typical euclidean measure. The results show that the
weighted Euclidean measure performs better than the non-weighted one that too by a considerable
margin for all the methods over the entire range of training set size. Our experiments demonstrated
that it achieves higher accuracy than the latter one. In addition, the average error encountered in
estimating C-space belief using this measure is less as compared to the Euclidean measure.
Moreover, we analyzed the results of using scale invariant mahalanobis distance measure over
euclidean measure in computing distance metrics. The model implementing the former measure
results in higher accuracy and lower average error compared to the one which invokes euclidean
measure. Figure 9 shows the results of using four different measures for evaluating distance metrics
in different methods.
We compared the performance of our proposed topological method with the four other methods
discussed above. The results are plotted in Figure 10a. As evident from the ﬁgure, the accuracy
of our method is signiﬁcantly higher than that of all the other baselines. In addition, the average
error encountered in using topological methods is considerably lower than that in others. Figure 10b
presents the comparative analysis of four measures used to evaluate the distance metrics.
6
Discussion and Future Work
In this work, we have proposed a diagonal matrix W to capture the unequal signiﬁcance of arm joints.
Weighted L2 norm with W as the weighting matrix is a more appropriate measure of the weight of a
sample as compared to L2 norm. Currently, we have used the ability of a joint to move a reference
point (end-effector in Cfree samples and collision center of mass in Cobs samples) as a measure of
the importance weight of the sample. However, the displacement of a single point in a 7 DOF arm
does not capture the manipulability of the arm in the particular conﬁguration. We believe that a better
10

(a)
(b)
Figure 10: (a) The accuracy and error of all the 5 methods are compared as a function of N. NN and ANN
methods have k = 10 neighbors while the kernel methods have radius r = 1.5. In (b), the results of implementing
various distance metric measures in the topological method are shown.
estimate of a joint weight can be the total volume swept by the arm due to small perturbation the
joint.
W is a diagonal matrix because of our method of estimating joint weights. Diagonal elements are
the weight of the corresponding joint in the conﬁguration. By the same analogy, non-diagonal terms
represent the coupled weight of two joints. In other words, it is like correlation between two joints. It
may be an interesting idea to reason about the non-diagonal terms of the matrix and whether they can
be anything non-zero.
We have used Delaunay Triangulation as the topological structure of the projected space. The
neighbours of a query are taken as the vertices of the circumscribing simplex. The results of this
method are better than all the other ones that are used in the C-space itself. However, when the
sampling density is high, the higher order structure is lost because of the presence of large number
of simplices. To overcome these shortcomings, we plan to use neighbourhood graphs like Relative
Neighbourhood Graph [16] (RNG) as the topological structure. The motivation behind doing so is
the fact that RNG of a set of points closely matches human perception of the shape of the set. The
neighbours of a query can be taken as the vertices of the polygon enclosing the query.
