1
DeepPhysiNet: Bridging Deep Learning and
Atmospheric Physics for Accurate and Continuous
Weather Modeling
Wenyuan Li1, 3†, Zili Liu1, 2†, Keyan Chen1, Hao Chen1, 2, Shunlin Liang3, Zhengxia Zou1* and Zhenwei Shi1*
1Beihang University,
2Shanghai AI Laboratory,
3University of Hong Kong
Abstract—Accurate weather forecasting holds significant im-
portance to human activities. Currently, there are two paradigms
for weather forecasting: Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP)
and Deep Learning-based Prediction (DLP). NWP utilizes at-
mospheric physics for weather modeling but suffers from poor
data utilization and high computational costs, while DLP can
learn weather patterns from vast amounts of data directly but
struggles to incorporate physical laws. Both paradigms possess
their respective strengths and weaknesses, and are incompatible,
because physical laws adopted in NWP describe the relationship
between coordinates and meteorological variables, while DLP
directly learns the relationships between meteorological variables
without consideration of coordinates. To address these problems,
we introduce the DeepPhysiNet framework, incorporating phys-
ical laws into deep learning models for accurate and continuous
weather system modeling. First, we construct physics networks
based on multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) for individual mete-
orological variable, such as temperature, pressure, and wind
speed. Physics networks establish relationships between variables
and coordinates by taking coordinates as input and producing
variable values as output. The physical laws in the form of
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) can be incorporated as a
part of loss function. Next, we construct hyper-networks based
on deep learning methods to directly learn weather patterns
from a large amount of meteorological data. The output of
hyper-networks constitutes a part of the weights for the physics
networks. Experimental results demonstrate that, upon successful
integration of physical laws, DeepPhysiNet can accomplish mul-
tiple tasks simultaneously, not only enhancing forecast accuracy
but also obtaining continuous spatiotemporal resolution results,
which is unattainable by either the NWP or DLP. DeepPhysiNet
effectively combines the complementary strengths of NWP and
DLP within a unified framework, facilitating seamless integration
of the latest advancements from both paradigms and unlocking
their full potential for weather forecasting. Code for Deep-
PhysiNet is available as an open source repository on GitHub
https://github.com/flyakon/DeepPhysiNet.
Index Terms—Deep learning, numerical weather prediction,
atmosphere physics, weather forecast
I. INTRODUCTION
Weather forecasting with various temporal and spatial scales
has far-reaching effects on multiple aspects of human society.
The accuracy of weather forecasting hinges on the accurate
modeling of complex weather dynamics and systems. Mete-
orological experts have continuously devoted themselves to
the development of weather models. The present stage of
advancement has predominantly led to the emergence of two
†Equal contribution
modeling paradigms. One encompasses the widely-recognized
Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) methods [1–3]. The
other encompasses data-driven machine learning, especially
for Deep Learning-based Prediction (DLP) methods, which
have notably gained momentum recently [4–13]. The success
of these two paradigms can be ascribed to their powerful abil-
ities in weather system modeling, along with other unique ad-
vantages. Nevertheless, each of these paradigms also presents
its own set of challenges, demanding additional research to
bridge the gap towards the ideal weather model.
The remarkable progress of NWP is closely linked to the
breakthrough of classical physics and mathematics princi-
ples. The fundamental atmospheric equations, in the form
of multiple Partial Differential Equations (PDEs), together
with numerical optimization methods, form the cornerstone
of modern NWP [14]. This also endows NWP methods with a
solid foundation in terms of physical interpretability. However,
it is precisely due to the characteristics of modeling based
on PDEs and numerical optimization methods that inher-
ent limitations exist within NWP methods. These limitations
include incomplete differential equations resulting from the
highly nonlinear, chaotic nature of atmospheric systems, the
under-utilization of extensive historical observational data and
discrete forecast results due to the intrinsic limitations of nu-
merical optimization methods, as well as significant additional
computational costs. Despite the aforementioned challenges,
the development process of NWP has produced large-scale
meteorological analysis and reanalysis datasets, such as ERA-
5 reanalysis [15] and others, paving the way for the rapid
advancement of data-driven methods.
Thanks to the massive meteorological data generated by
NWP and the observational data collected from various sen-
sors, such as satellites and weather stations, the adoption
of data-driven methods has emerged as a new opportunity.
These methods, represented by Deep Learning-based Pre-
diction (DLP), which has been widely demonstrated across
numerous fields for knowledge extraction from large datasets
[5, 16–21], enable the direct utilization of vast data for weather
forecasts. It offers not only simplified operations but also
a significantly reduced demand for computational resources
compared to NWP [6, 22–25]. In addition to their direct appli-
cation in weather forecasting, deep learning methods can also
enhance the accuracy or resolution of NWP results. This can
be achieved by using deep learning for bias correction [22, 26–
31] or downscaling [32–35], thereby producing more refined
arXiv:2401.04125v1  [physics.ao-ph]  4 Jan 2024

2
Numerical 
Weather 
Prediction (NWP)
Deep Learning- 
based Prediction 
(DLP)
DeepPhysiNet
(Ours)
Data Driven
×


Physical Laws 
Incorporation

×

Continuous 
Resolution
×
×

a) 
b)
c)
Atmospheric 
Physics
Deep 
Learning
Powered by vast 
amount of data
Physically 
Interpretable 
Continuous 
Spatiotemporal 
Modeling
Hyper-networks
DeepPhysiNet: Bridging Deep Learning and Atmospheric Physics
Field Input
Coordinate
Input
𝑥
𝑦
𝑡
𝑥
𝑦
𝑡
Physics Networks
…
𝒅𝝆
𝒅𝒕+ 𝝆(𝝏𝒖
𝝏𝒙+ 𝝏𝒗
𝝏𝒙) = 𝟎
𝒄𝒑
𝒅𝑻
𝒅𝒕−𝟏
𝝆
𝒅𝝆
𝒅𝒕= −𝑳𝒅𝒒
𝒅𝒕
𝒅𝒒
𝒅𝒕= 𝜹𝑭
𝒑
𝒅𝝆
𝒅𝒕
𝒑= 𝝆(𝟏+ 𝟎. 𝟔𝟏𝟖𝒒)𝑹𝒅𝑻
𝒅𝒖
𝒅𝒕= −𝟏
𝝆
𝝏𝒑
𝝏𝒚−𝒇𝒖
𝒅𝒖
𝒅𝒕= −𝟏
𝝆
𝝏𝒑
𝝏𝒙+ 𝒇𝒗
Physical 
laws
𝑥
𝑦
𝑡
…
t
x
y
PDEs
…
𝒕
𝒚
𝒙
𝒕
𝒚
𝒙
𝒕
𝒚
𝒙
𝒕
Task #1 Downscaling
𝑥, 𝑦∈{𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑙𝑜𝑐}
𝑡∈{𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛}
Task #2 Bias Correction 
𝑥, 𝑦∈{𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑙𝑜𝑐}
𝑡∈{𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛}
Task #3 Forecasting 
𝑥, 𝑦∈{𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑙𝑜𝑐}
𝑡∈{𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛}
Continuous Modeling
Fig. 1.
a) Overall of the proposed DeepPhysiNet, which incorporates atmospheric physics into deep learning methods for accurate and continuous weather
modeling. It combines the advantages of NWP and DLP at the same time. b) Properties of DeepPhysiNet, compared to NWP and DLP. Data Driven. It
utilizes deep learning methods to extract spatiotemporal features from large-scale datasets. Physical Laws Incorporation. With the differentiable nature of
neural networks, PDEs describing atmospheric physics can be incorporated into deep learning models with the form of loss function. Continuous Resolution.
After trained, it can generate forecast results with a continuous resolution with the input of various sample points. c) Once trained, DeepPhysiNet is capable
of performing various tasks, such as downscaling, bias correction, and forecasting, using multiple form of input coordinates.
forecasting results. However, the DLP also faces the limitation
of producing forecasts at fixed resolutions due to the fixed
training pipeline transplanted from computer vision tasks.
Obtaining forecasts at different resolutions necessitates ap-
proximations through interpolation or re-training. Additionally,
DLP can implicitly learn relationships between atmospheric
variables from extensive data. Transferring the physical laws
governing the atmosphere, in the forms of partial differential
equations (PDEs) used in NWP, into deep learning methods
poses significant challenges. As a result, DLP suffers not only
from a lack of interpretability but also from the inability to
guarantee full adherence to physical laws, potentially yielding
results that defy conventional knowledge [36].
Recent advancements in physics-informed neural networks
(PINNs) [37–41] present a successful attempt to incorporate
physical laws into the data-driven methods. By employing
Multilayer Perceptron (MLPs) to learn the mapping from
spatiotemporal coordinates to state values and integrating
soft constraints from differential equations, PINNs can offer
continuous modeling of states described by PDEs through
an optimization process, even with very limited observational
data. As a result, optimization-based PINN methods have
been extensively applied in various fields such as solving
differential equations [38] and modeling fluid dynamics [39].
There are also some early attempts in weather and climate
modeling [42]. Although neural networks can now be utilized
to find numerical solutions for partial differential equations,
this approach, much like numerical methods, fails to fully
leverage the vast wealth of meteorological data [37–39, 42–
44].
To address these problems, we propose a unified framework,
namely DeepPhysiNet, which can incorporate atmospheric
physics into deep learning methods for accurate and continu-
ous weather modeling. In particular, as shown in Fig. 1a), it has
two major components, physics networks and hyper-networks.
The physics networks are constructed based on multilayer
perceptrons (MLPs) for individual meteorological variables.
The meteorological variables we focus include surface wind
speed at 10 meters (u, v) in the east and north directions, air
temperature at 2 meters (T), surface pressure (p), air density
(ρ), and specific humidity (q). Physics networks establish
relationships between variables and coordinates (x, y, t) by
taking coordinates as input and producing variable values as
output. Physics networks can leverage the differentiable nature
of neural networks to construct a partial differential equation
(PDE) loss based on atmospheric dynamics and thermody-
namic equations. Deep learning-based hyper-networks [45, 46]
extracts spatiotemporal information from input meteorological

3
field variables to generates the weights of physics networks.
Under this framework, we transfer the weather information
learned by the hyper-networks from a large amount of data
to physical networks, thereby ensuring that physical networks
obtain better weather modeling and physical embedding ef-
fects.
As shown in Fig. 1b), compared with NWP and DLP, Deep-
PhysiNet possesses a large data capacity like deep learning
methods, while also explicitly incorporating physical laws.
This allows it to generate results that adhere more closely
to the physical laws, akin to Numerical Weather Prediction
(NWP) methods. More importantly, once the model is trained,
it can produce continuous-resolution results by inputting coor-
dinates in various arrangements, a benefit that is unattainable
by either NWP or deep learning methods.
DeepPhysiNet can also be considered as a general mod-
eling framework for weather systems. As depicted in Fig.
1c), it can be generalized to various downstream tasks by
modifying the coordinate inputs of the physics networks.
Therefore, we validate the effectiveness of the proposed frame-
work through experiments on various tasks, including post-
processing (downscaling and bias correction) and weather
forecasting. The experimental results demonstrate that our
p framework outperforms the currently operational weather
forecasting systems on multiple tasks.
II. FRAMEWORK
In this section, we will introduce the general structure of
the DeepPhysiNet framework, as shown in Fig. 2.
Both in the training and inference stages, the input of
DeepPhysiNet comprises two parts: meteorological field se-
quences and spatiotemporal coordinates. The former is fed
into a Transformer-based [47, 48] hyper-networks and, through
self-attention operations, generates high-level spatiotemporal
features. The generated features are subsequently transformed
into the shallow-layer weights of physics networks through
a linear projection. Simultaneously, the spatiotemporal coor-
dinates, comprising both grid points and inner points, pass
through the multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), which predict the
desired variable states at corresponding input coordinates. Six
surface meteorological variables are output by DeepPhysiNet,
which include surface wind speed at 10 meters (u, v) in the
east and north directions, air temperature at 2 meters (T),
surface pressure (p), air density (ρ), and specific humidity
(q). According to the vertical level, the input meteorological
field data can be divided into two groups. UU, V V , TT, Q
and z are all collected from various isobaric pressure levels,
representing wind speed in the east and north directions,
temperature, specific humidity and geopotential height, while
u, v, P, T, q and ρ are related the surface level, which are
also the output variables of physics networks.
The physics networks, which can be treated as neural solvers
for atmospheric partial differential equations, are guided by
the received high-level spatiotemporal features and learn con-
tinuous mappings of coordinates and various target physical
states. It also incorporates atmospheric physics in the form
of soft constraints during the training phase. Specifically, the
grid points refer to those which have corresponding ground
truth, while inner points refer to those without ground truth
sampled from arbitrary locations. For inner points, we leverage
the differentiable nature of neural networks to calculate partial
differential equation (PDE) losses. For grid points, besides
the PDE losses, regression losses are also added. Due to
the imposition of PDE constraints on inner points, we can
change the input coordinates to the physics networks during
the inference stage, to obtain meteorological variables at any
desired location. It should be noted that for specific tasks,
such as downscaling, bias correction, or forecasting, there are
differences in the details of the model’s input and output.
III. RESULTS
A. Experiment settings
The proposed DeepPhysiNet framework is capable of per-
forming a wide range of meteorological tasks, relying on
the input meteorological data and coordinates. We choose
three specific tasks including downscaling, bias correction,
and weather forecasting, to validate the effectiveness of the
framework. These three tasks encompass two pivotal stages
within operational forecasting: forecasting and post-processing
(downscaling and bias correction). In the subsequent sections,
we will offer a succinct overview of these three tasks and their
corresponding experimental setups.
Downscaling and Bias Correction: The objectives of
downscaling and bias correction are to post-process the fore-
cast results generated by NWP. The downscaling task takes
the NWP’s coarse-resolution forecast results as input and
generates fine-grained forecast results with higher resolutions
or at station level. Meanwhile, the bias correction task aims to
rectify the biases in the NWP’s forecast results, yielding more
accurate forecasts.
Both tasks can be performed using numerical methods
by solving partial differential equations on a fine-grained
grid, coupled with parameterizations. Similarly, data-driven
methods often draw inspiration from existing models and
tasks in the computer vision domain, analogizing downscaling
and bias correction to super-resolution [49, 50] and denoising
[51, 52] tasks. However, both approaches are constrained by
the inherent limitations of fixed super-resolution, and data-
driven methods tend to disregard physical laws, resulting in
poorer interpretability.
In contrast, DeepPhysiNet enables the downscaling of in-
put coarse-resolution meteorological fields to a continuous
high resolution while incorporating soft physical constraints.
Specifically, we input forecast results with coarse spatiotem-
poral resolution into the hyper-networks and continuous spa-
tiotemporal coordinates into the physics networks. High-
resolution reanalysis data and physical soft constraints are
utilized to supervise model training. It allows us to obtain
corrected downscaled results at continuous resolutions.
Weather Forecasting: To further assess the weather system
modeling capabilities of the proposed DeepPhysiNet, we con-
duct preliminary experiments to evaluate its forecasting ability
for future weather states. Unlike operational numerical weather
forecasts [53] and recent deep learning-based forecast methods

4
𝑥
𝑦
𝑡
...
Data normalization and input projection
Liner projection layers for weights
Q 500 hpa
UU 500 hpa
TT 850 hpa
VV 1000 hpa
u10 surface
…
…
…
…
Input Gridded Meterological Field Sequence
𝐼1
𝐼𝑚
𝐼2𝑚
𝐼3𝑚
𝐼𝑀
𝑂𝐻
1
𝑂𝐻
𝑚
𝑂𝐻
2𝑚
𝑂𝐻
3𝑚
𝑂𝐻
𝑀
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
𝑊ℎ
𝑏ℎ
𝑊𝑜
𝑏𝑜
𝑊ℎ
𝑏ℎ
𝑊𝑜
𝑏𝑜
𝑊ℎ
𝑏ℎ
𝑊𝑜
𝑏𝑜
Hyper-Networks
(Transformer-based)
Physics Networks Outputs
at Grid Points
Physical laws
Gridded Reanalysis 
Ground Truth
Regression Loss
PDE Loss
Physics Networks
Physics Networks Outputs
at Inner Points
2) Training Phase
sun
surface
wind
cloud
reflectance
cloud
rainfall
vapor
𝒅𝝆
𝒅𝒕+ 𝝆(𝝏𝒖
𝝏𝒙+ 𝝏𝒗
𝝏𝒙) = 𝟎
𝒄𝒑
𝒅𝑻
𝒅𝒕−𝟏
𝝆
𝒅𝝆
𝒅𝒕= −𝑳𝒅𝒒
𝒅𝒕
𝒅𝒒
𝒅𝒕= 𝜹𝑭
𝒑
𝒅𝝆
𝒅𝒕
𝒑= 𝝆(𝟏+ 𝟎. 𝟔𝟏𝟖𝒒)𝑹𝒅𝑻
𝒅𝒗
𝝏𝒕= −𝟏
𝝆
𝝏𝒑
𝝏𝒚−𝒇𝒖
𝒅𝒖
𝒅𝒕= −𝟏
𝝆
𝝏𝒑
𝝏𝒙+ 𝒇𝒗
Fundamental Equations of Atmosphere
...
𝑥
𝑦
𝑡
𝑥
𝑦
𝑡
1) Inference Phase
T
u
vp
𝑞
𝜌
T
u
vp
𝑞
𝜌
T
u
vp
𝑞
𝜌
...
...
...
...
...
𝒕
𝒙
𝒚
Grid points 
Inner points 
Input Coordinates
Fig. 2. Details of our proposed framework, DeepPhysiNet. It consists of two main components, hyper-networks and physics networks. The hyper-networks
are responsible for extracting high-level spatiotemporal features from a large volume of historical meteorological field data and passing these features to the
physics networks. The physics networks serve as neural solvers for partial differential equations describing near-surface meteorological variables.
[9–11], our method does not primarily focus on comparing per-
formance in weather forecasting. Instead, we aim to validate
DeepPhysiNet’s effectiveness in incorporating physical laws.
We design experiments to predict meteorological data for the
next 24 hours (0h →24h) based on discrete initial fields
from the past 24 hours (−24h →0h). We employ discrete
24-hour reanalysis data for supervision, obtaining continuous
spatiotemporal resolution forecasts. More importantly, we ex-
trapolate from 24 hours to 48 hours by altering the input time
coordinate t, where only physical laws are used as supervision.
Additionally, we have designed specific experiments to
analyze the physical interpretability of DeepPhysiNet. Further
details about these experiments can be found in Appendix A.
B. Data and Study Area
In the validation of the DeepPhysiNet framework, we em-
ploy three types of datasets. Firstly, we utilize Numerical
Weather Prediction (NWP) results obtained from the TIGGE
project [54], which is designed for inter-comparing various
countries’ or regions’ integrated forecasting systems (IFS).
In this paper, we employ integrated forecast results from the
United States National Centers for Environmental Prediction
(NCEP IFS) and the European Centre for Medium-Range
Weather Forecasts (ECMWF IFS). Specifically, NCEP IFS
serves as the input for DeepPhysiNet in the tasks of continuous
downscaling and bias correction. ECMWF IFS, being one of
the most effective numerical forecasting models to date, serves
as a crucial benchmark method in our experiments. All NWP
results from TIGGE exhibit a spatial resolution of 0.5 degrees,
a temporal resolution of 6 hours, and a forecast period of 360
hours.
For the tasks of continuous downscaling and bias correction,
the input data of DeepPhysiNet are from NCEP IFS. The
forecast results are released at 00:00 and 12:00 each day,
but we only use the data released at 00:00 as input. We
separate the forecast data into distinct input groups with step
of 24 hours. Each group’s forecast time can be represented
as [24n, 24(n + 1)], where n is selected from the range
{0, 1, ..., 15}. The input time forecast in hyper-networks and
physics networks is 24n. The meteorological variables input in
the physics networks are obtained by interpolation of the input
data according to coordinates and time. In addition to the input
data, the input of hyper-networks also includes geographical
information about the study area, such as its altitude, location,
and proportion of land / sea. All input variables are re-sampled
to the resolution of 1 degree.
Reanalysis data from ECMWF (ERA5) [15] is employed
as both the labels for training the DeepPhysiNet framework
and the input for weather forecasting task. The ERA5 dataset
exhibits a spatial resolution of 0.25 degrees and a temporal
resolution of 1 hour.
Lastly, we incorporate a subset of observational data to
assess the performance of DeepPhysiNet. The observational
data is derived from Weather2K dataset [55]. From this dataset,
we uniformly select 200 observational stations for validation
purposes. The validation data covers the period from January
1, 2021, to August 1, 2021.
Fig. 3 illustrates the locations of the observational stations

5
and study area with boundary with 72◦E to 136◦E and 18◦N
to 54◦N used in this experiment. The red circles represent the
observational station from Weather2K dataset. More detailed
information about the used datasets can be found in Appendix
B.
Fig. 3. Study area with boundary with 72◦E to 136◦E and 18◦N to 54◦N.
The red circles represent the observational station from Weather2K dataset.
C. Evaluate Metric
We utilize the surface temperature (T), wind speed (SPD),
and relative humidity (RH) as the variables for validation.
These three variables can be calculated from the six me-
teorological variables from outputs of DeepPhysiNet. The
calculation formulas for wind speed and relative humidity are
as follows:
SPD =
p
u2 + v2,
(1)
where u, v represent the surface wind speed at 10 meters in
the east and north directions, respectively.
RH =
q
(1 −q)ws
,
(2)
where ws is the saturation mixing ratio, which can be calcu-
lated from: r = 0.622e/p −e. e represents saturation water
vapor (partial) pressure. It can be calculated as follows:
e = 6.112e
17.67T ′
T ′+243.5 ,
(3)
where T ′ = T −273.15 is the temperature in degrees Celsius.
Briefly, relative humidity is related to the three variables tem-
perature, air pressure, and specific humidity that DeepPhysiNet
outputs.
We employ root mean square error (RMSE) and the cor-
relation coefficient (COR) as evaluation metrics. The formula
for calculating RMSE is as follows:
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
X
i=1
(Yi −Xi)2.
(4)
n represents the number of samples. Yi denotes the label
values. Xi denotes the forecasting values.
The formula for calculating the correlation coefficient
(COR) is as follows:
COR =
Pn
i=1(Yi −¯Y )(Xi −¯X)
qPn
i=1(Yi −¯Y )2
qPn
i=1(Xi −¯
X)
2 .
(5)
TABLE I
STATION SITE-LEVEL DOWNSCALING RESULTS FOR WIND SPEED (SPD),
TEMPERATURE (T) AND RELATIVE HUMIDITY (RH) OF VARIOUS
METHODS.
Method
SPD
T
RH
RMSE
COR
RMSE
COR
RMSE
COR
NCEP IFS
2.055
0.439
4.178
0.937
19.364
0.711
ECMWF IFS
1.844
0.430
4.099
0.944
17.471
0.757
DeepPhysiNet
1.686
0.443
3.788
0.949
16.686
0.761
¯Y denotes the mean of label values, while ¯X denotes the
mean of forecasting values. A larger correlation coefficient
value indicates a higher degree of agreement between label
and output data.
In addition, we also use Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL-
divergence, denoted as DKL) to quantify the difference be-
tween two probability distributions. Here is the formula for
KL-divergence:
DKL(P∥Q) =
X
i
P(i) log
P(i)
Q(i)

.
(6)
In this formula, P and Q represent two probability distribu-
tions, while P(i) and Q(i) denote the probabilities of event i
in these distributions.
D. Downscaling with Continuous Resolutions
In this section, we first evaluate the continuous downscaling
performance of DeepPhysiNet using station observational data.
Despite DeepPhysiNet utilizing input data with a resolution
of 1 degree and labels with a resolution of 0.25 degrees,
it is capable of providing accurate results with continuous
resolutions on station-level without re-training. It can be
performed just by giving the coordinates of the observational
stations to the physics networks during the inference stage.
Table I displays station site-level downscaling results for wind
speed (SPD), temperature (T), and relative humidity (RH) of
various methods.
It is evident that our method, which utilizes NCEP’s coarse-
grained forecast results as input, substantially improves the
accuracy and precision of weather forecasts, resulting in
more refined station site-level forecasts. What’s even more
noteworthy is that our method, whether it pertains to input
data or labels, relies solely on coarse-grained meteorological
data and PDE constraints to ensure the validity of predictions
at any location. Once the training is completed, there is no
need for any special operations to achieve downscaling to the
station-level.
Fig. 4 employs bar and line charts to illustrate the station
site-level downscaling results for wind speed, temperature,
and relative humidity at different forecast duration with 24-
hour intervals. Our method significantly reduces forecast errors
and outperforms current state-of-the-art forecasting models.
Notably, the improvement in wind speed forecasting is most
significant. This is attributed to the fact that actual wind
speeds exhibit the most substantial variability, as compared
to temperature and relative humidity. The experimental results
also indicate that our method exhibits a more substantial

6
a) Wind speed (SPD)
b) Temperature (T)
c) Relative humidity (RH)
Fig. 4. Station-level downscaling results for wind speed (SPD), temperature (T), and relative humidity (RH) at different forecast periods with 24-hour intervals.
improvement in forecasts beyond the 192-hour steps. This
is due to the absence of cumulative errors in our method as
opposed to numerical forecasting methods, which tend to have
larger errors for longer forecast periods.
Furthermore, we select three sub-regions with varying ter-
rain characteristics in the study area. Using the DeepPhysiNet
method, we obtain downscaling temperature forecasts for these
sub-regions at resolutions of 1 degree, 0.5 degrees, 0.1 degrees,
and 0.01 degrees, as shown in Fig. 5. It can be observed that
in the 1-degree and 0.5-degree outputs, pronounced jagged
patterns are evident. However, as the resolution increases, our
method effectively enhances the refinement of forecast results.
What’s more significant is that from the figure, it can be seen
that in regions with only one result in low-resolution data, our
method can generate diverse results, all of which conform to
the original data’s patterns. A more intuitive demonstration is
that the obtained temperature field data corresponds to real-
world conditions as altitude and terrain change.
E. Bias Correction at Grid Points
In this section, we assess the bias correction performance
of DeepPhysiNet on grid points. We utilize forecast data from
NCEP and ECMWF for 2021 to 2022 as a comparison. The
spatial resolution of the test data is 1 degree with a temporal
resolution of 6 hours (consistent with the input NCEP forecast
data).
Table II presents the bias correction results for different
methods. During the inference process, we select two months
from both 2021 and 2022 for each season as validation data.
Additionally, NCEP forecasts serve as input data for our
method, whereas ECMWF forecasts are not used for model
training but rather as a benchmark for the best current forecast-
ing model. Fig. 6 illustrates the bias correction performance
for wind speed, temperature, and relative humidity at different
forecast periods with intervals of 24 hours.
Overall, our method exhibits noticeable bias correction
performance on input NCEP forecasts. For temperature and
relative humidity, our method still outperforms ECMWF fore-
casts, yielding the best results. However, for wind speed, there

7
Study area
a) 1 degree
b) 0.5 degree
c) 0.1 degree
d) 0.01 degree
Fig. 5. Continuous downscaling temperature forecasts for sub-regions at resolutions of 1 degree, 0.5 degrees, 0.1 degrees, and 0.01 degrees.
TABLE II
BIAS CORRECTION PERFORMANCE AT GRID POINTS FOR WIND SPEED (SPD), TEMPERATURE (T) AND RELATIVE HUMIDITY (RH) OF VARIOUS METHODS.
Variables
Method
Spring
Summer
Fall
Winter
RMSE
COR
RMSE
COR
RMSE
COR
RMSE
COR
SPD
NCEP IFS
2.477
0.598
2.446
0.583
2.221
0.682
2.188
0.746
ECMWF IFS
1.916
0.696
1.854
0.695
1.876
0.742
1.843
0.802
DeepPhysiNet
2.056
0.659
2.073
0.629
2.004
0.718
1.965
0.791
T
NCEP IFS
3.683
0.960
3.301
0.927
3.663
0.972
4.221
0.967
ECMWF IFS
3.244
0.969
2.753
0.950
3.330
0.977
3.876
0.972
DeepPhysiNet
3.139
0.970
2.646
0.952
3.288
0.978
3.577
0.976
RH
NCEP IFS
19.152
0.750
16.592
0.793
16.583
0.748
16.583
0.748
ECMWF IFS
15.254
0.834
12.794
0.854
13.634
0.807
13.882
0.788
DeepPhysiNet
13.969
0.841
11.887
0.860
13.138
0.800
14.225
0.756
is still some gap compared to ECMWF forecasts. This is
primarily because the wind speed in grid data is a result
of substantial averaging, whereas our method, due to PDE
constraints, tends to capture instantaneous wind speed even in
the training process, which does not fully correspond to the
ground truth from ERA5 data. Through comparisons of station
data and grid data, our method yields superior performance
on station data. This can be partly attributed to our ability to
effectively integrate atmospheric physics into the forecasting
process, rendering predictions more consistent with real-world
patterns. Moreover, grid data represents averaged wind speeds
and may not always conform to physical laws.
In addition, Fig. 6 also give some visualization results for
each variable. The results are obtained by calculating errors
with ERA5 data (ground truth). It can be seen from the results
that after bias correction by our method, the forecast results
are more closer with ERA5 than NCEP IFS and perform more
consistently with ECMWF IFS.
F. Weather Forecast
Besides post-processing forecast results, our method can
also enable direct weather forecasting. In this section, we
utilize ERA5 data with a spatial resolution of 1 degree and
a temporal resolution of 6 hours for weather forecasting,
specifically predicting weather conditions for the next 48
hours. However, distinct supervision information is employed
during training for forecasts within the first 24 hours and those
between 24 and 48 hours. For forecasts within the initial 24
hours, we incorporated corresponding ERA5 data and physical
laws as supervision. In contrast, for the 24-hour to 48-hour
forecasts, only the PDE losses are added, making predictions
beyond 24 hours a form of extrapolation.
Table III presents the results of weather forecasting, with
”DeepPhysiNet (ext)” denoting the extrapolated forecasts for
the 24-hour to 48-hour period, which rely solely on PDE
loss for supervision. It is worth noting that even with this
weak supervision, the performance of our method is not
much worse than NCEP IFS, emphasizing its effectiveness.

8
NCEP Forecast (baseline)
ECMWF Forecast
ERA5 (ground truth)
DeepPhysiNet bias correct
NCEP Forecast (baseline)
ECMWF Forecast
10m-wind 
speed
2m-
temperature
Relative 
humidity
ERA5 (ground truth)
DeepPhysiNet bias correct
ERA5 (ground truth)
DeepPhysiNet bias correct
NCEP Forecast (baseline)
ECMWF Forecast
Fig. 6. The bias correction performance at grid points for wind speed (SPD), temperature (T), and relative humidity (RH) at different forecast periods with
24-hour intervals. For each variable, some visualization results are given for comparison, including data from ERA5 as ground truth, NCEP IFS results as
baseline, results corrected by our proposed DeepPhysiNet and ECMWF IFS results. The results are obtained by calculating errors with ERA5 data (ground
truth).
TABLE III
FORECAST PERFORMANCE FOR WIND SPEED, TEMPERATURE AND
RELATIVE HUMIDITY WITH THE METRIC OF RMSE.
Period
Method
SPD
T
RH
0 - 24h
NCEP IFS
1.403
2.435
13.953
DeepPhysiNet
1.409
2.078
11.555
24 - 48h
NCEP IFS
1.539
2.544
14.464
DeepPhysiNet (ext)
1.954
3.107
13.542
Moreover, for forecasts within the tightly constrained 24-hour
range, our method significantly outperforms the NCEP IFS.
Experimental results illustrate that our method is proficient
at weather forecasting, and our proposed framework exhibits
strong extrapolation capabilities. With the assistance of data
and physical laws, we can employ straightforward extrapo-
lation of sampled coordinates to obtain reasonable forecast
results.
Fig. 7 illustrates the visualization of forecast results. From
the forecast results, it can be observed that, firstly, in the 24-
hour forecast, our method can produce results very close to
ERA5 due to the constraint of strong supervision information.
For forecasts from 24 to 48 hours, our method does not surpass
NCEP IFS in terms of quantitative results. However, even un-
der the soft constraint of only using PDEs losses, our method’s
forecast results are spatially very close to NCEP IFS and
ERA5 data. This strongly demonstrates the effectiveness of
incorporating PDEs. Since the PDEs we adopt are significantly

9
DeepPhysiNet, forecast time 24 hours
NCEP, forecast time 24 hours
ERA5 (ground truth)
2-m tempretrue
Tempreture (K)
Wind Speed (m/s)
10m-wind speed
Relative humidity
Relative humidity (%)
DeepPhysiNet, forecast time 48 hours
DeepPhysiNet, forecast time 24 hours
DeepPhysiNet, forecast time 48 hours
DeepPhysiNet, forecast time 24 hours
DeepPhysiNet, forecast time 48 hours
NCEP, forecast time 48 hours
NCEP, forecast time 24 hours
NCEP, forecast time 48 hours
NCEP, forecast time 24 hours
NCEP, forecast time 48 hours
ERA5 (ground truth)
ERA5 (ground truth)
ERA5 (ground truth)
ERA5 (ground truth)
ERA5 (ground truth)
Fig. 7. Visualization of forecast results. The 24 hours and 48 hours forecast results of 2m temperature and 10m wind speed from our proposed DeepPhysiNet,
NCEP operational forecast and ERA5 ground truth are shown.

10
simplified, the absence of any strong supervision information
will inevitably cause larger deviations over time.
G. Model Interpretability
In this section, we analyze the roles played by atmospheric
physics and input meteorological variables, validating the
model’s interpretability.
One essential role of physical laws is to ensure that fore-
cast meteorological variables adhere to physical laws. Deep
learning-based methods can only learn these patterns from
extensive data. In this section, we compare the distribution
of downscaled results from observational stations with ground
truth to validate the influence of physical laws. We select wind
speed and relative humidity as the validation variables, con-
sidering them as synthetic meteorological variables. Notably,
relative humidity can simultaneously reflect the relationships
among temperature, air pressure, specific humidity, and air
density. To visually compare the impact of incorporating
physical laws on the results, we also train a network model
without including physical constraints (without PDE loss). We
employ KL divergence as a metric to measure distribution
distances. Fig. 8 illustrates the comparison of the statistical
distribution of downscaling results obtained with and without
adding PDEs constraint.
It can be observed that the inclusion of physical con-
straints leads to results that are closer to the distribution of
ground truth. Particularly for relative humidity, which involves
multiple meteorological variables, incorporating physical con-
straints ensures that the variations of these variables align
more closely with physical laws. For wind speed, incorporating
physical constraints also yields a certain improvement. The
incorporation of physical constraints provides an additional
rational constraint to deep learning methods, ensuring more
reasonable forecasts for various meteorological variables. Cer-
tainly, it can attain a high degree of consistency even in the
absence of physical laws (PDEs). This can be attributed to two
main reasons. First, the deep learning method allows for the
identification and assimilation of underlying physical patterns
from the training data. Second, we have utilized one of the
simplest form of atmospheric physics. Due to the chaotic
nature of atmospheric motion, some processes are difficult to
describe using explicit partial differential equations (PDEs).
Consequently, the PDEs we employ may introduce consider-
able errors. For the sake of feasibility in model construction,
we have further simplified equations, making our use of PDEs
a rough constraint rather than a fully accurate representation.
We also employ the smoothGrad method [56] to investigate
the contributions of different input variables to the model
results. The contribution factor of each input variable I can
be expressed as follows:
f = 1
N
N
X
i=1
∇f(x + ϵi)
(7)
N is the number of samples, ϵi represents noise samples drawn
from a standard normal distribution, and ∇f(x+ϵi) indicates
the computed gradient after adding noise ϵi. Among them, the
larger the contribution factor f obtained, the greater the impact
of the input variable on the result.
Fig 9 illustrates the contribution factors of input variables
for eastward wind speed u, southward wind speed (v), tem-
perature (T), and surface pressure (P) individually. It can be
observed that, for these four variables, the impact of pressure
variables on the results is the most significant, while the
influence of surface variables is comparatively small. Among
the variables at different pressure levels, wind speed has the
most substantial impact on the results. This is because, even
though we primarily focus on surface variables, the surface
weather conditions are closely linked to variations in the ver-
tical atmosphere. The uneven heating of the atmosphere leads
to the occurrence of various weather phenomena and induces
horizontal and vertical motions at different atmospheric levels.
Therefore, through the movement of the vertical atmosphere
and changes in variables such as temperature, we can indirectly
infer changes in surface variables.
IV. METHOD
In this section, we present an in-depth description of the pro-
posed framework, DeepPhysiNet, which includes the hyper-
networks, physics networks, and the design of the training
objective that incorporates atmospheric physics into deep
learning methods.
A. Hyper-networks
We first construct hyper-networks H based on the trans-
former model [47, 48], which uses low-resolution meteoro-
logical fields to extract spatial and time series features. The
outputs of hyper-networks are used to calculate the physics
network’s weights.
The low-resolution meteorological field data are reorganized
into a format that can be inputted into the hyper-networks.
Each pressure level is used as an independent input variable
when multiple pressure levels are present in the input data. All
variables are then transformed into vector form. Following this
processing, there are k input variables in each time step. For m
time steps, k×m input variables are available, denoted by MD.
In order to indicate which parts of hyper-networks’ outputs
will be used to calculate the weight of physics networks, a
group of learnable parameters WL with the number of ML
are connected to the end of input data. After that processing,
the input data can be recorded as D ∈RM×N, where N
represents its dimension and M = MD + ML.
In order for hyper-networks to recognize the times and
relative positions relationship of the input variables, it is also
necessary to encode the relative positions of the variables
into the input data using positional encoding. The following
formula is used to compute positional encoding:
γ(i) = {sin(20πi), cos(20πi), . . . , sin(2N−1πi), cos(2N−1πi)},
(8)
where i represents the position of each variables, with range
of (1, M).
The transformer consists of a series of identically-structured
blocks. Each block contains a multi-head self-attention (MSA)

11
𝐷𝐾𝐿: 0.074
𝐷𝐾𝐿: 0.074
𝐷𝐾𝐿: 0.012
𝐷𝐾𝐿: 0.012
a) Wind speed distribution 
b) Relative humidity distribution
𝐷𝐾𝐿: 0.018
𝐷𝐾𝐿: 0.018
𝐷𝐾𝐿: 0.016
𝐷𝐾𝐿: 0.016
Fig. 8. Comparison of the statistical distribution of downscaling results obtained with and without adding PDEs constraint.
a) attribution analysis of eastward wind speed 𝑢
b) attribution analysis of southward wind speed 𝑣
c) attribution analysis of temperature 𝑇
d) attribution analysis of surface pressure 𝑃
Fig. 9. Contribution analysis results for eastward and southward wind speed (u and v), temperature (T), and surface pressure (P).

12
module, a norm module and a feed-forward module. The self-
attention module is the core part of the transformer network.
The input of the block is the sum of the output of the previous
block and the positional encoding. For the first block, it is
the sum of the input data and position encoding, denoted as
I = PE + D.
The self-attention module initially employs three learnable
parameters W Q, W K, W V
to map the input to a triplet
Q, K, V :
Q = I × W Q,
K = I × W K,
V = I × W V .
(9)
The output of the self-attention module can be obtained by the
following formula:
Z = softmax(Q × KT
√
N
) × V.
(10)
We construct n self-attention modules and separately calcu-
late the results of n outputs: [Z1, Z2, . . . , Zn−1, Zn]. A single
fully connected layer is used to obtain the output of the multi-
head self-attention (MSA) module:
Z = [Z1, Z2, . . . , Zn−1, Zn] × W O.
(11)
In order to make the training of hyper-networks more stable,
we use layernorm [47] to normalize the outputs of MSA.
Finally, through the feed-forward network composed of multi-
layer perceptrons (MLPs) and layer norm layer, we can get the
output of the block. After the concatenation of multiple layers
of blocks, we can finally get the outputs of hyper-networks,
denoted as OH.
B. Physics networks
The outputs of the hyper-networks can be used to calcu-
late the weights of physics networks, which can apply the
features by the hyper-networks to the physics networks and
aid in establishing the mapping of coordinates and variables.
Each output meteorological variable corresponds to a physics
network, and each physics network has two sets of weights
that are determined using hyper-networks. In order to make
the learning of physics networks more efficient, in addition
to the input coordinates, we also use the interpolation method
to obtain the reference values of the output variables from the
low-resolution input meteorological field data according to the
coordinates as an additional input to the physics network. In
addition, time information is also added to the input of the
network through position encoding.
For the input branch of coordinates, all network weights and
biases are obtained from the hyper-network’s outputs. Each
physics network has two sets of weights and biases that need
to be calculated, which are the weights from the input layer to
the hidden layer: Wh ∈RDI×DH, the biases from the input
layer to the hidden layer: bh ∈RDH, the weights from the
hidden layer to the output layer: WO ∈RDH×DO and the
bias from the hidden layer to the output layer: bo ∈RDO.
The dimension of the input coordinates is increased accord-
ing to the Eq. 8, which is recorded as CI ∈RDI. Then, we
calculate the output of this branch at specific coordinates with
the following formula:
OH = CI × WH + bH,
EC = OH × WO + bO.
(12)
The input branch of time and the reference data share the
same network architecture. First, the position encoding method
is used to increase the dimension of the input data, which
are recorded as TI and VI respectively, and then the linear
projection layer transforms it:
ET = TI × WT + bT ,
EV = VI × WV + bV .
(13)
ET and EV
represent the embedding of input time and
reference data, respectively. WT and WV represent weights
of linear projection layer. bT and bV represent biases of linear
projection layer.
The embedding obtained by the three input branches con-
tains different information, but their dimensions are identical,
so they can be combined to produce the input embedding as
I = EC +ET +EV . In order to accelerate network training, a
residual MLP (ResMLP) [57] module is incorporated to further
transform the connected emending I. We employ two residual
MLP modules in series to get the improved outputs for each
variable. The detailed architecture of both hyper-networks and
physics networks can be found in Appendix C.
C. Training object
The DeepPhysiNet’s training object consists of two types
of loss function: the regression loss and the partial differential
equation (PDE) loss. For input coordinate points with cor-
responding ground-truth values, the regression loss between
the physics network’s outputs and the ground-truth can be
calculated.
Both variables on these two types of points these points
must conform to the physical laws. By employing the par-
tial differential equation (PDE) loss function, we impose
constraints on the meteorological variables generated by the
physics networks to adhere to the fundamental principles of
physics. The partial differential equations (PDEs) chosen for
this paper encompass the motion equation, the continuity
equation, the energy equation, the water vapor equation, and
the ideal gas state equation.
1) Regression Loss: The regression loss is defined based
on smooth L1 loss [58], with the following specific form:
S(A, ˜A) =
(
0.5(A −˜A)2/β,
if |A −˜A| < β
|A −˜A| −0.5 ∗β,
otherwise
,
(14)
where β is set to 0.1.
Assuming that A represents any of the output variables
u, v, p, T, q, ρ and that
˜A represents the ground truth, the
regression loss function can be expressed as follows:
Lr =
X
A∈{u,v,p,T,q,ρ}
αA ∗S(A, ˜A),
(15)
where α is the balance coefficient. The regression loss function
is used to constrain the output of the network at grid points.

13
2) PDE Loss: The PDE loss is calculated according to
the basic equations of the atmosphere, including the motion
equation, the continuous equation, the energy equation, the
water vapor equation and the ideal gas state equation. In order
to calculate PDE loss, it is necessary to convert the network’s
outputs to the original dimension of the variable. Nonetheless,
the range gap between different variables may be relatively
large, resulting in a significant disparity between PDE losses.
To balance each PDE loss, we set the balance coefficients so
that the value of the loss function is approximately the same.
In this paper, the specific form of the motion equation we
adopt is as follows:
du
dt = −1
ρ
∂p
∂x + fv,
dv
dt = −1
ρ
∂p
∂y −fu,
(16)
where x, y, t represent the horizontal position and time, respec-
tively. f represents the Coriolis coefficient, f = 2Ωsin ϕ. Ω
denotes the earth’s rotational angular velocity, which is equal
to 7.29 × 10−5s−1.
d
dt refers to
∂
∂t + u ∂
∂x + v ∂
∂y.
The PDE loss of motion equation is defined as follows:
Lu = αu ∗MSE(du
dt , −1
ρ
∂p
∂x + fv),
Lv = αv ∗MSE(dv
dt , −1
ρ
∂p
∂y −fu).
(17)
MSE(. . . ) represents the mean square error (MSE) loss
function. αu and αv represent the balance factors, which are
both set to 1e3.
The form of the continuous equation is as follows:
dρ
dt + ρ(∂u
∂x + ∂v
∂y ) = 0.
(18)
The PDE loss of the continuous equation is defined as follows:
Lc = αc ∗MSE(dρ
dt + ρ(∂u
∂x + ∂v
∂y ), 0).
(19)
αc represents the balance factors, which is set to 1e10.
We simplify the thermodynamic equation by omitting ex-
ternal work on the atmosphere and considering only the
heat released by water vapor condensation. The form of this
equation is as follows:
cp
dT
dt −1
ρ
dp
dt = −Ldq
dt .
(20)
The PDE loss of the thermodynamic equation is defined as
follows:
Le = αe ∗MSE(cp
dT
dt −1
ρ
dp
dt , −Ldq
dt ).
(21)
αc represents the balance factor, which is set to 1e1.
The following is the form of the water vapor equation:
dq
dt = δF
p
dp
dt .
(22)
δ =
(
0,
dp
dt < 0 and q ≥qs
1, else
(23)
F = qsT LR −cpRvT
cpRvT 2 + L2qs
.
(24)
qs is the value for saturated specific humidity, which is
determined using the saturated water vapor pressure and the
empirical formula. The improved Stellen formula can be used
to calculate the saturated vapor pressure es:
es = 6.112 ∗exp
17.67T ′
T ′ + 243.5,
(25)
where T ′ = T −273.15 is the temperature in degrees Celsius.
The saturated specific humidity can be calculated using the
following empirical formula after obtaining the saturated water
vapor pressure:
qs =
0.622es
p −0.378es
.
(26)
The PDE loss of the water vapor equation is defined as follows:
Lw = αw ∗MSE(dq
dt , δF
p
dp
dt ).
(27)
αw represents the balance factor, which is set to 1e14.
The form of the ideal gas state equation is as follows:
p = ρ(1 + 0.608q)RdT.
(28)
The PDE loss of this equation is defined as follows:
Lg = αg ∗MSE(p, ρ(1 + 0.608q)RdT.
(29)
αg represents the balance factor, which is set to 1e−7. The
total PDE loss is defined as Lp = αuLu + αvLv + αcLc +
αeLe + αwLw.
The PDE loss function can be calculated at grid points and
interior points in order to constrain the network output to
comply with physical laws. These points’ PDE loss functions
are denoted by the symbols Lg
p, and Li
p, respectively.
The total loss function for network training is the sum of
all the above loss functions:
L = Lg
r + Lg
p + Li
p.
(30)
For each training step, the number of grid points and inner
points we randomly selected are 20480 and 4096, respectively.
