Bayesian Veriﬁcation under Model Uncertainty
Lenz Belzner
Institute for Informatics
LMU Munich

Thomas Gabor
Institute for Informatics
LMU Munich

Abstract—Machine learning enables systems to build and up-
date domain models based on runtime observations. In this paper,
we study statistical model checking and runtime veriﬁcation for
systems with this ability. Two challenges arise: (1) Models built
from limited runtime data yield uncertainty to be dealt with. (2)
There is no deﬁnition of satisfaction w.r.t. uncertain hypotheses.
We propose such a deﬁnition of subjective satisfaction based
on recently introduced satisfaction functions. We also propose
the BV algorithm as a Bayesian solution to runtime veriﬁcation
of subjective satisfaction under model uncertainty. BV provides
user-deﬁnable stochastic bounds for type I and II errors. We
discuss empirical results of a toy experiment.
I. INTRODUCTION
Statistical approaches to model checking and runtime ver-
iﬁcation exploit a domain model in order to evaluate system
properties at design and runtime [1]. The system simulates po-
tential traces based on the domain model in order to establish
some statistical guarantees about properties of interest.
Statistical veriﬁcation is often based on a singular domain
model [2], [3], [4]. Machine learning enables systems to build
and adapt models about their application domains based on
runtime observations (see e.g. [5], [6]). In particular, Bayesian
statistics generally allow to infer and reason about an inﬁnite
amount of models [7]. Bayesian approaches allow to quantify
the likelihood of a particular model, given prior beliefs and
observed data. A system that veriﬁes itself at runtime has to
cope with model uncertainty to establish reliable veriﬁcation
results: Which hypothesis to assume when assessing system
properties?
Model uncertainty induced by learning from limited runtime
information also raises another issue: What does it exactly
mean for a system to satisfy a particular property, given many
model hypotheses and their respective plausibilities?
In this paper, we study statistical veriﬁcation for systems
that are able to build and update their models based on runtime
information. The paper’s contributions are twofold:
• We propose a deﬁnition of subjective satisfaction for sys-
tems that perform runtime veriﬁcation based on limited
information and possibly inﬁnite hypothesis spaces.
• We also propose a Bayesian veriﬁcation algorithm, BV,
that enables learning systems to decide on satisfaction or
violation of required subjective satisfaction. BV provides
user-deﬁnable stochastic bounds for type I and II errors
(false negatives/positives). By construction, these error
bounds are independent of the number of observations
a system made about its environment.
• We empirically establish the validity of BV’s error bounds
on a toy example.
The paper is structured as follows. Section II recaps
Bayesian model checking and satisfaction functions for sys-
tems with parametrized models. In Section III we introduce
our deﬁnition of subjective satisfaction. In Section IV we
discuss the Bayesian treatment of veriﬁcation under model
uncertainty with the BV algorithm. In Section V, we describe
setup and results of an empirical evaluation of BV. We
discuss related work in Section VI. Section VII concludes and
discusses venues for further research.
II. PRELIMINARIES
This Section recalls Bayesian model checking and satisfac-
tion functions for parametrized models.
A. Bayesian Model Checking
Bayesian model checking (BMC) is based on Bayesian
sequential hypothesis testing, and aims to infer the posterior
distribution of the probability that a system satisﬁes its require-
ments [3], [4]. In contrast to point estimation (e.g. maximum
likelihood), the Bayesian posterior captures the uncertainty
about the true probability that arises from only performing
a ﬁnite number of system assessments.
Requirements may be formally speciﬁed in a suitable prob-
abilistic temporal logic [8], [9].
BMC treats a bounded simulation run of a system with a
particular conﬁguration as a Bernoulli experiment: The run
may either satisfy or violate requirements. As the simulation
captures probabilistic domain dynamics, the result of a simu-
lation run is Bernoulli distributed with a probability p ∈[0, 1].
BMC infers a posterior distribution over p based on the
observed simulation results and a prior assumption about the
distribution of p. In general, the posterior is proportional to the
likelihood of observed data D (i.e. the results of simulation),
multiplied by the prior distribution P(θ) over the parameters
of interest, θ = p in the case of BMC (Equation 1).
P(θ|D) ∝P(D|θ)P(θ)
(1)
BMC models the uncertainty about p by a Beta distribution,
the conjugate prior of the Bernoulli distribution. This approach
ensures that the posterior is of the same form as the prior
distribution, and thus enables efﬁcient sequential updating of
the distribution. The Beta distribution is parametrized by two
parameters a, b ∈R+. In the case of BMC, a and b are given
arXiv:1702.08725v1  [cs.SE]  28 Feb 2017

by the successes and failures of the simulation runs. Given s
successes, f failures, and assuming a uniform prior over p,
the posterior (for θ = p) is determined by Equation 2.
P(p|D) = Beta(s + 1, f + 1)
(2)
Termination can be determined by assessing whether the
probability mass above or below the required value of preq
meets a particular conﬁdence requirement creq ∈(0; 1). For
alternative termination criteria, we refer to [4].
B. Satisfaction Functions
Many modern systems operate with models of the envi-
ronment that are stochastic and parametrized, e.g. models
build by machine learning. Classical statistical model checking
algorithms, including classical BMC, enable to assess require-
ment satisfaction for a single parametrization of the model.
Recently, the satisfaction function was introduced as a concept
to allow for efﬁcient, regressive assessment of requirement sat-
isfaction for parametrizable models with potentially inﬁnitely
many parameters [10]. At its core, the satisfaction function is
deﬁned as follows.
fsat(θ) = P(sat|θ)
(3)
Here, sat denotes a boolean variable indicating requirement
satisfaction or violation, and θ are the model parameters.
The satisfaction probability is depending on the particular
parametrization of the model. However, note that the deﬁnition
of the satisfaction function does not make any assumptions
about the distribution of the parameters themselves. We will
now turn to combine estimations about the parameters and the
satisfaction function in order to deﬁne what we label subjective
satisfaction.
III. SUBJECTIVE SATISFACTION
Consider a system that was able to make a limited number
of observations about the dynamics of its environment. For
example, consider a mobile agent whose moves may fail to
have an effect with Bernoulli probability pfail ∈[0; 1]. The
agent may observe whether its moves are effective or not.
Consider a situation where the agent observed its moves 10
times, out of which two had no effect. The following questions
naturally arise:
• What is pfail?
• How conﬁdent can the agent be in its estimate of pfail?
With these two questions in mind, consider now the situation
that the agent ﬁnds itself in a grid world with obstacles
at particular positions. Also, the agent has a sequence of
movements to be executed in order to fulﬁll some given
task, e.g. computed by a planning component. Consider that
there is a requirement that the agent is only allowed to hit a
limited number of obstacles (e.g. 2), with at most a speciﬁed
probability preq ∈[0; 1]. Another question arises:
• What is the probability psat that the sequence of move-
ments will satisfy the requirements, given the limited
observations about pfail?
In this setup, an agent has to cope with various uncertainties:
1) Domain uncertainty is inherent to the environment, in
our example given by pfail. It is aleatoric, therefore
irreducible and originates from the physical setup of
the domain (e.g. sensory abstraction, laws of physics,
etc.). Note that domain uncertainty in combination with
requirements uniquely deﬁnes a satisfaction function (cf.
Section II-B).
2) Model uncertainty is the epistemic uncertainty about the
aleatoric domain uncertainty. It arises from the limited
number of observations that the agent is able to collect
from its environment. Note that model uncertainty not
only arises from models learned at runtime. All empiri-
cally assessed models convey this kind of uncertainty,
in particular all models built with machine learning
approaches, regardless of the position in the a system’s
development lifecycle.
3) Subjective satisfaction, the uncertainty about a plan
satisfying (or violating) a requirement in a particular
situation, is also epistemic. It is a consequence of
domain and model uncertainty, and the given system
requirements.
The relation of domain and model uncertainty can be
modeled in a Bayesian way. This is a widely adopted view,
and a vast body of literature and techniques exists for esti-
mating model uncertainty P(θ|D) based on available domain
observations D [5], [7]. For readability, we write P(θ) for
P(θ|D) in the remainder of the paper.
We now combine model uncertainty with the satisfaction
function to deﬁne subjective satisfaction psat.
psat =
Z
θ
P(sat|θ)P(θ)dθ
(4)
Subjective satisfaction psat can be interpreted as the param-
eter of a Bernoulli distribution that models uncertainty about
satisfaction of the requirements. Intuitively, Eq. 4 weights
the satisfaction probability for given parameters w.r.t. the the
probability that these parameter represent the ground truth.
Subjective satisfaction is considering all possible hypothetic
domain parametrizations at once, and weights their respective
satisfaction probabilities according to their plausibility (which
is based on domain observations).
IV. BAYESIAN VERIFICATION UNDER MODEL
UNCERTAINTY
We now deﬁne Bayesian Veriﬁcation (BV), an algorithm for
estimating subjective satisfaction by Monte Carlo simulation.
By taking a Bayesian stance, we also get a conﬁdence measure
for this estimate. In fact, due to assessment of satisfaction
with a limited number of simulations, an additional source of
uncertainty arises: The uncertainty about the estimate of psat.
BV establishes and updates a probability distribution P(sat) to
quantify this uncertainty, and uses it to decide on termination.
BV takes the following inputs.
• The current system state s.
• P(θ), the system’s model uncertainty.

• A probabilistic simulation model of the domain dynamics
M, parametrized by θ. M takes a state, a plan, a require-
ment and a parametrization, and yields a boolean vari-
able indicating requirement satisfaction. I.e. this model
implicitly provides the satisfaction function P(sat|θ).
• The system’s plan π to be assessed.
• A system requirement φ, e.g. a temporal logic formula.
• A required probability preq of satisfying φ.
• A required conﬁdence creq in the estimate of psat.
BV is shown in Algorithm 1. BV ﬁrst initializes it estimate
of psat. As satisfaction of a requirement in a stochastic domain
can be interpreted as a Bernoulli random variable we use a
uniform prior, which is a Beta(1, 1) distribution (line 2).
We deﬁne the conﬁdence in the estimate of psat that is above
the required satisfaction probability preq by determining the
probability mass of P(psat) above preq.
csat =
1
Z
preq
P(psat)dpsat
(5)
BV updates its estimate P(psat) and uses it in order to decide
whether the estimate of satisfaction (or violation) can be done
with at least required conﬁdence (cf. Equation 5). To this end,
it performs the following steps in repetition.
1) A sample parametrization is drawn from the model
uncertainty P(θ) (line 4).
2) A simulation run is performed w.r.t. state, plan, require-
ment and parameters (line 5). Note that the simulation
result is distributed accounting for both model uncer-
tainty and satisfaction function, as the parameterization
has been sampled from model uncertainty before. That
is, sat ∼P(sat|θ)P(θ) at this point.
3) The simulation result is used to update the belief distri-
bution about psat (line 6).
4) The probability mass of the belief distribution is used
to determine whether satisfaction or violation have been
assessed with at least required conﬁdence (Eq. 5). If so,
the algorithm terminates accordingly (lines 7 and 8).
Algorithm 1 The BV algorithm for Bayesian veriﬁcation
under model uncertainty.
1: procedure BV(s, P(θ), M, π, φ, preq, creq)
2:
P(psat) ←Beta(1, 1)
3:
loop
4:
θ ∼P(θ)
5:
sat ∼M(s, π, φ, θ)
▷sat ∼P(sat|θ)P(θ)
6:
update P(sat) according to sat
▷Eq. 2
7:
if csat ≥creq then return true
8:
if 1 −csat ≥creq then return false
V. EMPIRICAL RESULTS
We empirically assessed BV on a toy example. While we
modeled a very simple example, it may be worth noting that
in general the Bayesian approach to model uncertainty scales
up to much larger models. There exist varied and powerful
tools for sampling from complex, high-dimensional posteriors
P(θ), such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo (see e.g. [11] for a
very interesting read), or variational inference (e.g. [12]).
A. Setup
The state s is constituted by a 10 x 10 grid world, with the
agent at position (0, 0). Obstacles are randomly positioned,
at an obstacle to free position ratio of 0.2. The agent is
presented a plan π (an action sequence) of 10 movements
(up, down, left, right, with obvious semantics). The agent has
a Bernoulli action failure probability pfail uniformly sampled
from [0; 1]. Action failure results in the inverse movement (e.g.
failing up yields down). The agent is presented a number of
observations about its failure probability before running BV.
We build model uncertainty P(θ) about θ = pfail with a Beta
distribution (cf. Eq. 2 and Section IV).
In our setting, φ is the requirement to hit less than three
obstacles while executing the plan. We set preq = 0.9. This
means we allow the agent to classify a plan as satisfying the
requirement if it hits less than three obstacles in ninety percent
of executions. We use a conﬁdence requirement of creq = 0.95.
We approximate the ground truth satisfaction probability
of a plan π by taking the maximum likelihood estimate of
satisfaction probability based on 10000 simulation runs. We
assessed two error types.
• A type I error is an incorrect rejection. This occurs if
a plan π satisﬁes φ with at least probability preq and is
falsely rejected.
• A type II error is a false accept. This occurs if a plan π
violates the requirements (i.e. φ is not satisﬁed with at
least probability preq) and is falsely accepted.
We also assessed a variant of BV that does not explicitly
build model uncertainty from observations, but rather builds a
corresponding maximum likelihood estimate (ˆpfail = observed
failures / number of observations). Line 4 is correspondingly
changed to θ ←ˆpfail in Algorithm 1.
Our implementation of the setup and BV is available at
https://github.com/jazzbob/bv.
B. Results
Results are recorded for 10 randomly sampled observations
of action failure probability. An exemplary result of our exper-
iments is shown in Figure 1. The former shows accumulated
type I errors over the course of different setups (i.e. randomly
generated environments paired with random plans), the latter
type II errors respectively. The dashed line shows the required
statistical error bound (0.05 for creq = 0.95).
In particular, BV is able to establish the required statistical
error bounds for both error types, while the MLE approach that
is not explicitly using model uncertainty for inference fails to
do so for type II errors. We observed this behavior for various
numbers of observations presented to the system.

Fig. 1.
Type I (left) and II (right) errors. X-axis shows number of tested
situations (s, π). Vertical axis shows accumulated number of type I and II
errors.
VI. RELATED WORK
BV is an instance of statistical model checking in general
[2], and Bayesian statistical model checking in particular
[3], [4]. Typically, these approaches are assuming a perfect
available model, and do not deal with explicitly quantiﬁed
epistemic model uncertainty. One of the starting points of
the current article is the work on smoothed model checking
[10]. SMC approximates a satisfaction function w.r.t. uncertain
model parameters by Gaussian process regression. However,
SMC does not incorporate distributions over model parameters
for system assessment. Our deﬁnition of subjective satisfac-
tion is a direct consequence of combining quantiﬁed model
uncertainty with SMC’s satisfaction function. Parametrized
Bayesian model checking for DBNs [13] does deal with
quantiﬁed model uncertainty. However, the author does not
exploit the posterior for bounding or estimating errors. The
algorithm terminates when the posterior variance “is less than
some user-speciﬁed threshold”. This approach does not yield
statistical error estimates or bounds. We argue that in the
context of software engineering, quantiﬁable error guarantees
or estimates play a key role for system assessment. A quite dif-
ferent approach to quantitative system assessment under model
uncertainty is formal veriﬁcation with conﬁdence intervals
(FACT) [14]. It is based on (exhaustive) probabilistic model
checking, and therefore allows to perform more thorough
analysis than BV, which is approximate and (temporally)
bounded. However, for the same reason, FACT suffers from
the state space explosion. FACT models uncertainty in terms of
frequentist conﬁdence intervals, in contrast to BV’s Bayesian
modeling approach.
VII. CONCLUSION
We have presented a Bayesian approach to statistical model
checking under model uncertainty. We introduced the notion
of subjective satisfaction as a result of combining recently
introduced satisfaction functions with model uncertainty. We
also presented Bayesian Veriﬁcation (BV), an approximate
Monte Carlo style algorithm for assessing subjective sys-
tem satisfaction based on a simulation. BV allows for user-
speciﬁed conﬁdence bounds, and thus enables to statistically
bound veriﬁcation errors. We empirically evaluated BV on a
toy example with positive results.
There are some limitations to the BV algorithm. When psat
is close to preq, BV may take a many iterations to establish
the required conﬁdence. Note that this property is independent
from the absolute value of psat. Similar to Bayesian model
checking based on a ﬁxed model, BV scales well with required
satisfaction probabilities close to one (see e.g. [4]). BV’s
obtained error bounds are statistical: They do not provide a
hard upper bound. I.e. this bound may be surpassed temporar-
ily when operating BV (e.g. an error may occur even when
running BV only once, yielding an error rate of one). Also,
while we could empirically observe that the error bound was
not severely violated for our toy problem, there may be an
intimate connection to the choice of prior for P(θ). To study
the connection of prior and error bound would probably yield
interesting directions for further research. Another limitation
of BV is its boundedness in terms of search depth. To this end,
it would be interesting to increase the quality of satisfaction
estimates, for example by adding global, previously trained
satisfaction estimators to BV.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Martin Wirsing and
Matthias H¨olzl for many inspiring discussions that led us into
the direction of research presented in this paper.
