International Journal of Research in Computer Science 
eISSN 2249-8265 Volume 4 Issue 1 (2014) pp. 1-9 
www.ijorcs.org, A Unit of White Globe Publications 
doi: 10.7815/ijorcs.41.2014.075 
 
 
www.ijorcs.org 
LB2CO: A SEMANTIC ONTOLOGY FRAMEWORK FOR 
B2C ECOMMERCE TRANSACTION ON THE INTERNET 
Akanbi Adeyinka K. 
Institute of Science & Technology, Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad 500085, A.P, India. 

 
Abstract: 
Business 
ontology 
can 
enhance 
the 
successful development of complex enterprise system; 
this is being achieved through knowledge sharing and 
the ease of communication between every entity in the 
domain. Through human semantic interaction with the 
web resources, machines to interpret the data 
published in a machine interpretable form under web. 
However, the theoretical practice of business ontology 
in eCommerce domain is quite a few especially in the 
section of electronic transaction, and the various 
techniques used to obtain efficient communication 
across spheres are error prone and are not always 
guaranteed to be efficient in obtaining desired result 
due to poor semantic integration between entities. To 
overcome the poor semantic integration this research 
focuses on proposed ontology called LB2CO, which 
combines the framework of IDEF5 & SNAP as an 
analysis tool, for automated recommendation of 
product and services and create effective ontological 
framework for B2C transaction & communication 
across different business domains that facilitates the 
interoperability & integration of B2C transactions 
over the web. 
Keywords: B2C, eCommerce, Ontology, Semantic 
Web. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The popularity of the internet and the huge growth 
of new internet technologies have led in the last decade 
to the creation of great amount of eCommerce 
applications7. The context of B2C eCommerce 
application requires that an effective communication 
between the machines is possible. In other words, 
semantic interoperability between the information 
systems involved in the communication is crucial [1]. 
As online shopping has become an important part in 
people's lives in this 21st century, the product 
information retrieval mechanism is becoming more 
and more important, as well as secure communication 
amongst domains. Information retrieval is the most 
frequently used method to obtain information in the 
web, and the purchaser must get access to the product 
information before a transaction could be performed. 
However, the current way of information organization 
and expression is defective, in that it was designed for 
user decision making needs, rather than to provide 
semantic information that computer can process 
automatically, 
thereby 
limiting 
the 
computer’s 
capacity of automatic analysis and further intelligent 
process in information retrieval, that enhances 
information and data sharing across various platforms. 
However, two extremely important factors that can 
contribute to this effective non-human communication 
are: (1) a common language in which the resources 
implied in the communication can be specified, and (2) 
a shared knowledge framework and vocabulary 
between the different systems that are present in the 
eCommerce domain8. They are syntactic and semantic 
dimensions. The first, syntactic dimension has led to 
the creation of varied representation languages for the 
specification of web resources (XOL, SHOE, RDF, 
RDF Schema, OIL and DAML+OIL). The semantic 
dimension is related with the knowledge framework 
and vocabulary used by the systems involved in the 
communication. Therefore, the use of a shared and 
common knowledge framework and vocabulary 
increases the interoperability among existing and 
future eCommerce systems [2].  
The major motive of this research is to develop and 
propose an ontology framework that will facilitate the 
interoperability 
and 
integration 
of 
eCommerce 
transaction on the Internet, by focusing on the semi-
automatic integration of existing standards and 
initiatives in a multilayered eCommerce knowledge 
model for eCommerce applications through ontology 
evolution. Ontology evolution is the process that leads 
to the creation of new ontological models to 
accommodate future modification of ontology. This 
process may lead to changes on the design of the 
ontology, which must be implemented carefully and 
tailored carefully to achieve the desired outcome. In 
this research, we employ two promising semantic 
ontologies SNAP and IDEF5, for comparison and 
analysis, and the limitations mitigating against this 
existing model are removed. Thus, using the process of 
ontology evolution to create the standard ontology 
framework, which is the aim of this research.  

2 
 
Akanbi Adeyinka K 
 
www.ijorcs.org 
The motivation for this evaluation is two-fold. On 
the one hand there is need to understand the 
similarities and differences between the two ontologies 
and thus enhance the understanding of what 
eCommerce ontological framework actually are, On 
the other hand the second aim is to integrate this two 
ontologies in order to improve the representation, 
design, analysis, & interoperability of eCommerce 
ontology framework in the domain. The expected 
result is a multi-layered ontological framework called 
LB2CO, which present a graphical and structured 
ontology, which is independent across different 
business domains, gives rich semantic relationships 
among entities in a domain for easy searching and 
communication, and can be implemented using 
different languages to allow the interoperability of 
vertical markets and integration between different B2C 
eCommerce transactions. 
The first implementation of LB2CO focuses on 
online eCommerce business model, by specifically 
allowing developers to create “ontologydriven” B2C 
eCommerce websites. The framework is demonstrated 
with the “Semantic AUTO Store”, which uses the 
LB2CO 
ontology 
for 
effective 
searching 
& 
interoperability across different domains. In section 2, 
related terminologies and limitations in the current 
eCommerce model are discussed. Section 3 discusses 
SNAP & IDEF5, Section 4 introduces the architecture 
of 
proposed 
LB2CO 
semantic 
ontology 
for 
eCommerce applications, and the case study is 
explained in section 5. Finally the conclusion is given. 
II. RELATED TERMINOLOGY  
A. E-Commerce 
Electronic Commerce or eCommerce can be 
defined as the exchange of goods and services by 
means of the Internet or other computer network 
infrastructures. eCommerce follows the same basic 
principles as traditional commerce—that is, buyers and 
sellers come together to exchange goods for money. In 
eCommerce, buyers and sellers transact business over 
networked computers, which can be across cities, 
countries or continents. There are two major 
eCommerce styles, they are: Business-2-Consumer and 
Business-2-Business eCommerce models. 
The B2C models operation is the one that uses the 
Internet to sell products or services directly to 
consumers or end users. In the B2C eCommerce the 
Internet and particularly the web is the medium for 
marketing, sale and post POS channel. The B2B 
eCommerce model involves Companies doing business 
with each other such as: manufacturers selling to 
distributors and wholesalers selling to retailers. In this 
research effort is concentrated only on B2C 
ecommerce. 
B. Current E-Commerce 
A search for any product offers is the starting point 
for most eCommerce transactions. ECommerce web 
applications are designed to return the most 
appropriate data to the user based on limited keywords 
supplied by the user, and the current applications are 
failing in returning the relevant data to the consumers. 
Limitations in the Current E-Commerce are: 
- Interoperability in an inconsistent environment: This 
situation occurs where the consumer is in the 
conflicting state to choose the best option from the 
available websites. 
- Information retrieval & search Disparity: This 
situation 
occurs 
when 
the 
machine 
cannot 
intelligently recommend products based on existing 
search indexes.  
C. Semantic Web 
The Semantic Web is not a separate web but an 
extension of the current one, in which the semantics of 
information and the services of the web is defined, 
making it possible for the web to understand and 
satisfy the requirements of the people to use the web 
content [3, 4], better enabling computers and people to 
work in cooperation.  To make the web semantic, there 
is a need for new standard web ontology languages. 
Ontology is a key and prerequisite for a working 
semantic web. Ontology’s are used to express 
information in a machine interpretable form, but due to 
the early developmental stages of the semantic web, 
many people are not interested in producing ontology. 
One way of overcoming this problem is to semi-
automatically create business ontology from existing 
resources like knowledge base model, to enhance the 
rapid development of semantic web. 
D. Ontology 
Ontologies can be defined as "formal and explicit 
specifications 
of 
a 
shared 
conceptualization". 
Ontologies are central to the implementation of the 
Semantic Web. They contain domain knowledge, 
specific data regarding a certain subject field, in a very 
structured way, if we compare this definition with the 
one given for the Semantic Web in [5], "the conceptual 
structuring of the web in an explicit machine-readable 
way”. It helps to achieve interoperability and 
communication among software systems, improve the 
design and quality of software systems and play a key 
role in agent communication. As it improves the 
accuracy of searching and enables the development of 
powerful applications that tackle complicated queries, 
whose answers do not reside on a single web page. 
Some basic ontology languages are XML/XML 
Schemas, RDF and RDF Schemas. 

LB2CO: A Semantic Ontology Framework for B2C eCommerce Transaction on the Internet 
3 
 
www.ijorcs.org 
E. XML/XML Schemas 
XML (Extensible Markup Language) is a formal 
language that conforms to the SGML specifications. It 
can be seen as a subset of SGML, which is simpler and 
more practical in its use than SGML. XML enables 
clear unambiguous data representation with well-
defined syntactic means. While XML is highly helpful 
for a syntactic interoperability and integration, it 
carries as much semantics as HTML. Nevertheless, 
XML solved many problems, which have earlier been 
impossible to solve using HTML, that is, data 
exchange and integration in a well précised manner. A 
well-formed XML document creates a balanced tree of 
nested sets of open and closed tags, each of which can 
include several attribute-value pairs. The following 
structure shows an example of an XML document 
identifying a “Contact” resource. The document 
includes various metadata markup tags, such as 

provide various details about a contact. 
<Contact contact_id=“033220”> 
<first_name> Arun</first_name> 
<last_name> Kumar </last_name> 
<college> Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University 
</college> 
<state> Andhra Pradesh </state> 
<country> India </country> 

<phone> 91********* </phone> 
</Contact> 
Code Snippet 1: XML Schemas 
F. RDF (Resource Description Framework) 
RDF is a language for expressing data models in 
XML syntax. XML provides an elemental syntax to 
structure the data [6]. It provides the meaning to that 
structured data [4,5]. RDF is used to describe web 
resources. RDF uses XML and it is at the base of 
semantic 
web, 
so 
that 
all 
other 
languages 
corresponding to the upper layers are built on it. RDF 
is a formal data model for machine understandable 
metadata used to provide standard descriptions of web 
resources. RDF assertion consists of a triplet subject, 
predicate, object in which a subject has a property that 
property value can be either a string literal or a 
reference to another resource. With RDF it is possible 
to add predefined modeling primitives for expressing 
semantics of data to a document without making any 
assumptions about the structure of the document. RDF 
defines a resource as any object that is uniquely 
identifiable by a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI). 
G. RDF Schema 
The RDF Schema (RDFS) provides a type system 
for RDF. The RDFS is technologically advanced 
compared to RDF since it provides a way of building 
an object model from which the actual data is 
referenced and which tells us what things really mean. 
Briefly, the RDF schema (RDFS) allows users to 
define resources with classes, properties, and values. A 
class is a structure of similar things and inheritance is 
allowed [8]. This allows resources to be defined as 
instances of classes, and subclasses of classes. 
<?xml version=”2 .0”?> 
<rdf:RDF 
xmlns:rdf= “http://www.w.org/ 999/0 / -rdf-syntax-ns#” 
xmlns:rdfs=”http://www.w.org/ 000/0 /rdf-schema#” 
xml:base= “http://www.hr.com/humanresources#“> 
<rdf:Description rdf:ID=”faculty”> 
<rdf:type 
rdf:resource="http://www.w.org/000/0 
/rdfschema#Class"/> 
</rdf:Description> 
<rdf:Description rdf:ID="Associate Professor"> 
<rdf:type 
rdf:resource="http://www.w.org/000/0 
/rdfschema#Class"/> 
<rdfs:subClassOf rdf:resource="#faculty"/> 
</rdf:Description> 
</rdf:RDF> 
Code Snippet 2: Resource Description Framework Schemas 
(RDFS) 
H. Components of Ontology 
There have been different representation & 
formalization 
of 
ontologies. 
Each 
of 
which 
incorporates different components that is used during 
ontological processes and task execution. However, 
they share the following minimal set of components 
namely: 
- Classes: This represents concepts, within a specified 
domain. For instance, in the tourism domain, 
concepts are: locations (cities, villages, etc.), 
lodgings (hotels, camping, etc.) and means of 
transport (planes, trains, cars, yacht, and ships). 
Classes in the ontology are usually organized based 
on the level of semantic used, where they are 
interrelated through class inheritance. 
- Relations: Relations represent a type of association 
between concepts of the domain. They are formally 
defined as any subset of a product of n sets, that is: R 
⊂ C1 x C2 x ... x Cn. Ontologies usually contain 
binary relations. The first argument is known as the 
domain of the relation, and the second argument is 
the range. For instance, the binary relation 
arrivalPlace has the concept Travel as its domain and 
the concept Location as its range.  
- Instances: Instances are used to represent elements or 
individuals in the domain of the ontology [13]. 
I. Level of Semantics 
- Semantics is the study of the meaning of signs, such 
as terms or words. Depending on the models, or 
methods used to add semantics to terms, different 
degrees of semantics can be achieved. There are four 

4 
 
Akanbi Adeyinka K 
 
www.ijorcs.org 
levels of semantic representations that can be used to 
semantically describe terms, they are, controlled 
vocabularies, taxonomies, thesaurus, and ontologies 
[14]. These four model representations are illustrated 
in below. 
 
Figure 1: Levels of Semantic 
- Controlled Vocabulary: Controlled vocabularies are 
at the lowest level of the semantic spectrum. A 
controlled vocabulary is a list of terms. All terms in 
a controlled vocabulary should have an explicit, 
non-redundant definition and are the lowest level of 
classification. A controlled vocabulary is the 
simplest of all metadata methods of classification 
and it’s the most commonly used method of 
classification. For example, flipkart.com has the 
following of controlled vocabulary below. 
Table 1: Controlled Vocabulary 
Books                    Electronics                   Travel 
Comic Books     Camera & Photo            Motorcycle 
Educational              Books                 Television Outlet 
   Novels               Mobile Phones                Auctions 
   Yellow Pages    Jewelry & Watches      Automotive 
 
- Taxonomies: 
Taxonomy 
is 
a 
category-based 
classification that arranges the terms in a controlled 
vocabulary into a hierarchy. Taxonomy classifies the 
terms in the shape of a hierarchy or tree such as a 
subset of class. It describes a word by making 
explicit its relationship with other words. The 
hierarchy 
of 
taxonomy 
contains 
parent-child 
relationships 
- Thesaurus: A thesaurus is a networked collection of 
controlled vocabulary terms with basic relationships 
between terms. A thesaurus is an extension of 
taxonomy by allowing terms to be arranged in a 
hierarchy and also allowing other statements and 
relationships to be made about the terms. [15] 
Taxonomies: 
Taxonomy 
is 
a 
category-based 
classification that arranges the terms in a controlled 
vocabulary into a hierarchy. Taxonomy classifies the 
terms in the shape of a hierarchy or tree such as a 
subset of class. It describes a word by making 
explicit its relationship with other words. The 
hierarchy 
of 
taxonomy 
contains 
parent-child 
relationships 
- Thesaurus: A thesaurus is a networked collection of 
controlled vocabulary terms with basic relationships 
between terms. A thesaurus is an extension of 
taxonomy by allowing terms to be arranged in a 
hierarchy and also allowing other statements and 
relationships to be made about the terms. [15] 
III. METHODOLOGY 
 
In the previous section the limitations of the 
current eCommerce and its drawbacks are stated and 
how the Semantic web ontology can overcome these 
drawbacks. The section deals with the development of 
the proposed LB2CO semantic ontology framework 
for eCommerce transactions. 
A. Semantic Web Ecommerce Architecture 
The figure below shows the architecture of the 
semantic web based eCommerce application. The 
Producer manufactures the products and advertises the 
details in the web market. Consumer is an individual 
or end user who buys products or services for personal 
use over the Internet or over networked connections. 
Agents are meant to reduce the consumer’s work and 
information overload [7]. In the increasing growth of 
eCommerce technology, services and information 
available on the Internet, an agent plays a very 
important role. Agents are active personalized 
software's to which tasks can be delegated. 
In this semantic architecture, we have two types of 
agents, namely: 
1. Search agent 
2. Ontology agent 
The consumer directly communicates with search 
agent, either through the search box; the agent is 
responsible for retrieving the metadata of documents, 
based on user defined keyword inputs. The Producer 
communicates with ontology agent, who provides the 
knowledge of ontology to answer queries about the 
domain and its structure.  
From the architecture it has shown that, any product 
or service should be described ontologically to retrieve 
the result in semantic manner. For example, the 
company provides the related terms and reference 
related to the database of the domain of the agent. The 
agent generates the RDF based on the user search 
query. Therefore, whenever the consumer or user 
wants to search for information, the search query is 
passed to the search agent; the search agent searches 
the related information based on the ontology model.
Taxonomies 
Thesaurus 
Ontology 
Controlled 

LB2CO: A Semantic Ontology Framework for B2C eCommerce Transaction on the Internet 
5 
 
www.ijorcs.org 
B. Ontology Design Process 
There are currently many methods used for building 
ontologies for eCommerce transactions on the Internet. 
To develop ontologies in eCommerce, there is a need 
for a tool to analyze the case of study, while enhancing 
effectiveness and reducing its limitations. In this 
research, comparison of SNAP and IDEF5 is done to 
ultimately arrive at a more comprehensive ontology 
called LB2CO for the design and analysis of business 
models for the eCommerce. The aim is at identifying 
the similarities and differences of both business 
models in order to merge and integrate them, thus 
eliminating the limitation.  However, this leads to 
further research to connect both ontologies, such that 
both SNAP and IDEF5 are employ for the design, 
schematics representation and integration of the 
business models into semantic web. However, it is 
necessary to give an insight into both existing 
ontologies, to know their differences and utilize their 
effectiveness. Only then it is possible to produce a 
consistent 
and 
well-related 
overall 
ontological 
framework. 
 
Figure 2: Semantic Architecture showing role of Ontology 
Agents. 
Most methods used in ontology design process 
tends to balance and enhance ontology models through 
the incorporation of existing standards or simply by 
building an ontology by eliminating the limitations of 
existing ontological models [12]. This section explains 
the main steps of the method used for building 
eCommerce ontologies, with insight into SNAP and 
IDEF5 as a major tool for the ontology development 
process. 
- Selection of standards, joint initiatives, laws, etc., of 
classification of products and services:  Standards, 
joint initiatives, laws are a good starting point for the 
creation of ontologies, since they are pieces of 
information that have been agreed by consensus or 
are followed by a community or domain & provide a 
commonly agreed taxonomy of products and/or 
services. Several proposals that have arisen, in the 
context of the eCommerce domain, for the 
classification of products: UNSPSC, RosettaNet and 

ease the information exchange between customers 
and suppliers.  
- Enrichment of the integrated Ontology: Current 
ontology standards do not include detailed attributes 
of 
products, 
relations 
between 
products 
& 
effectiveness of search queries. They are just 
categorized using taxonomies and thesaurus. They 
can be enriched further with information through the 
use of detailed metadata, such as provided by using 
XML. 
- Design of multi-layered knowledge architecture: 
This step embroils taking into account the main 
features of the selected sources of information for 
the particular domain, the aim of this step, is for the 
identification of relationships between components 
in the different taxonomies. 
- Knowledge models extraction: This step involves 
automating the process of knowledge acquisition 
from the sources of information previously selected 
by taxonomy, adapting them to the knowledge 
model, which can be then represented in XML or 
RDF schema, and using its import functionality to 
upload them into the domain platform. 
- Integration of knowledge models: The knowledge 
models that have been represented by XML or RDF 
platform are integrated in the layered architecture, 
using the semantic relationships identified at the 
design phase [9]. 
 
Figure 3: eCommerce model of LB2CO 
C. SNAP (Situation, Needs, Actions and Plans) 
This is eCommerce model developed for an 
automated system for recommending products and 
services to consumers. The automated system was 
originally developed for the domains of financial 
planning and banking and has since been extended for 
insurance, eCommerce telephony applications. SNAP 
utilizes two sorts of relations: basic relations, and 

6 
 
Akanbi Adeyinka K 
 
www.ijorcs.org 
derived relations, which are built out of basic relations 
using the construction operators of regular expressions. 
These derived relations allow great expressivity. In 
contrast to many eCommerce ontologies, which are 
primarily organized around the concept of product and 
service, SNAP is based on a commonsense theory of 
agent interaction between user & the domain.  
The basic concepts of SNAP are based on AI 
theories, and integrated with the concepts of situation, 
fluent, and actions towards achieving a target goal. 
Situations and fluent: A situation is a time slice of the 
world: it describes the way the world is at a particular 
moment in time. As in the situation/fluent calculus, we 
speak of a fluent f being true in situation s—Holds (s,f 
) to capture this notion. There are several important 
types of fluents, enumerated below: 
- Life Stages: Life Stages depict the fluents that 
describe some major stage of a domain. e.g A 
person’s life. Age life stages, Career stages, and 
Family stages. 
- Demographics: These include such facts as marital 
status, income, and address. 
- Life Style: These include a person’s habits, such as 
living expensively, or high-class, middle-class & 
lower class. 
- Obligations: Obligations include financial and non-
financial commitments. 
- Needs: A need represents something useful, which 
an agent does not have. It is quite similar to the 
standard AI concept of a goal.  
- Events: An event is defined as a noteworthy 
happening or occurrence. Any event can be 
categorized as either an action or a behavior. Actions 
are those events, which are planned; behaviors are 
those events that are observed. 
- Relations: These are the basic relations and derived 
relations. The derived relations are composed from 
the concepts and basic relations. The use of basic or 
derived relations between events makes SNAP a 
near perfect ontology with limitation of not 
explicitly representing and reasoning about multiple 
agents. 
D. IDEF 5 
IDEF5 ontology development process consists of 
the following five activities. 
- Organizing and Scoping: The organizing and 
scoping activity establishes the purpose, viewpoint, 
and context for the ontology development project.  
- Data Collection: During data collection, raw data 
needed for ontology development is acquired. 
- Data Analysis: Data analysis involves analyzing the 
data to facilitate ontology extraction. 
- Initial Ontology Development: The initial ontology 
development 
activity 
develops 
a 
preliminary 
ontology from the data gathered.  
- Ontology Refinement and Validation: The ontology 
is refined and validated the ontology to complete the 
development process [10]. 
E. IDEF5 ONTOLOGY LANGUAGES 
Supporting the ontology development process are 
IDEF5’s ontology languages. There are two such 
languages that are involved in IDEF5 ontological 
process: the IDEF5 schematic language & IDEF5 
elaboration language. The schematic language is a 
graphical language, specifically used by domain 
experts to express the most common forms of 
ontological information in a graphical detail manner 
using the construct below in figure 4. This enables 
average users both to input the basic information 
needed for a first-cut ontology and to augment or 
revise existing ontologies with new information. The 
other language is the IDEF5 elaboration language, a 
structured textual language that allows detailed 
characterization of the elements in the ontology [11]. 
Various pictorial schematics can be constructed in 
the IDEF5 Schematic Language. The purpose of these 
schematics, like that of any graphical depiction, is to 
represent information in a pictorial format. Thus, 
semantic rules must be provided for interpreting every 
possible 
schematic 
relationship. 
However, 
the 
character of the semantics for the Schematic Language 
differs from the character of the semantics for other 
graphical languages. The reason for this is that the 
chief purpose of the Schematic Language is to serve as 
an aid for the construction of ontologies; they are not 
the primary representational medium for storing them. 
The Schematic Language is, however, useful for 
constructing first-cut ontologies.  
 
Figure 4: IDEF5 Schematics

LB2CO: A Semantic Ontology Framework for B2C eCommerce Transaction on the Internet 
7 
 
www.ijorcs.org 
However, the basic paradigms of the Schematic 
Language are designed specifically to capture simple 
but detailed relationship information about real-world 
objects & their properties.  
F. LB2CO 
This is an integrated eCommerce ontology 
framework that is being developed as the very basis of 
this research, for an automated system for facilitating 
B2C eCommerce transactions. It utilizes the basic 
concept of SNAP and uses IDEF5 ontology 
development process and thus eliminating their 
limitation of SNAP & IDEF5 towards the development 
of enhanced eCommerce Ontological framework. 
IV. CASE STUDY-PROTOTYPE SYSTEM USING 
LB2CO ONTOLOGY FRAMEWORK 
This section aims to define the basic methodology 
of the proposed eCommerce model literature one step 
further, by applying a case study approach to show the 
implementation of the model & framework adopted. 
The model ontology framework has in some ways 
been inspired by the different ontology enterprise 
projects described in academic literature [15]. 
Ontology essentially gives a common understanding of 
a specific domain by defining its elements and the 
relationships between these elements [15].  
In this research, an eCommerce experimental 
prototype website that implements LB2CO ontology 
development method, the prototype website is a type 
of eCommerce website that deals with selling of car 
spare parts & accessories to it customers. This 
prototype is built to facilitate the illustration of the 
feasibility and the validity of this framework. This 
section, demonstrates an application of the prototype. 
The prototype eCommerce website is designed to 
apply the concept of business ontology to an actual 
business case. This case is a typical style of B2C 
eCommerce. 
 
Figure 5: Semantic Auto Store 
The “Semantic Auto Stores” offered for sale, 
different spare parts and accessories of automobiles. 
The knowledge base is used to analyze the 
interrelations between the different entities. The 
queries can be either input by the user on the semantic 
auto stores via the text input box and POST, or they 
can be passed in via an encoded URL in a GET request 
or through other forms of input methods or 
classification on the site. 
To develop the ontology LB2CO for the prototype 
website, the basic essential and elements of 
eCommerce 
transaction 
between 
the 
business 
enterprise and the consumers and also the relationship 
between this various elements are identified. SNAP 
methodology will be used to study the rich semantic 
relationship of the entities involved in the transaction 
and the inter-relationship between the various entities 
of the domain.  
Afterwards, the Description Summary Form and the 
Term Description Form are used as tools to show the 
various entities involved before the application of the 
LB2CO ontology framework or model. The LB2CO is 
fully implemented after analyzing the rich semantic 
relationships between the entities of the domain by 
finally depicting it in LB2CO semantic language 
format. The “Semantic Auto Store” demonstrates how 
ontologies are appropriate as the backend knowledge 
base to sell the products in the prototype semantic 
website and how they overcome the limitations of 
cataloging & recommendation. 
 
Figure 6: Semantic Auto Store 
A. Term Description Entity Form 
This form contains the entity terms and their 
descriptions are fully enumerated below: 
Table 2: Term Description Entity Form for Semantic Auto 
Store 
SEMANTIC AUTO STORE ONTOLOGY 
PROJECT: - 
PROTOTYPE 
eCOMMERCE 
WEBSITE 
ANALYST: - DR. XXXX 
XXXXXXX 

8 
 
Akanbi Adeyinka K 
 
www.ijorcs.org 
 
TERM 
DESCRIPTION 
1 Semantic Auto  The authorized dealer of 
Semantic Auto Co. 
2 Steering 
Wheel 
An Automobile Steering wheel. 
3 Power Steering 
Wheel 
A variant of steering wheel. 
4 Wiper Blade 
An Automobile wiper set 
5 Rims 
The automobile rims that is 
available on sematic auto store. 
6 
Door 
Visor/Sun 
Visor 
The set of automobile visor that 
is sold on sematic auto store. 
7 Wash & Wax 
Kit 
An Automobile washing kit 
B. Description Summary Form 
The Description Summary form contains the 
semantic syntax for project description purposes. 
Table 3: Description Summary Form for Semantic Auto 
Store. 
Description Summary Form  
Project: Semantic 
Auto Store 
Ontology 
Analyst: xxxx 
xxxxxxx 
Reviewer: Prof. 
xxxx xxxxxx 
Version:2.0 
Review 
Starting Date: 
Review 
completion Date: 
Purpose: To develop an ontology framework for 
Semantic Auto Store 
Context: The information acquired must be enough 
to describe the content of the web page of Semantic 
Auto Store 
Viewpoint: Web Page Visitor 
V. RESULT & DISCUSSION 
The implementation of the LB2CO ontology 
framework to the latter on Semantic Auto Store 
provides the inter-operability of this store across 
different domains on semantic web. 
A. Ontology For The Semantic Auto Store Using                      
LB2CO Schematics 
The pictorial representation below shows the 
Ontology of Semantic Auto Store using LB2CO 
schematics displaying the rich relationships that’s 
existed between the various entities in the domain. The 
content of this ontology is completely the same as the 
ontology that can be presented using other ontology 
methods. The only difference is the framework 
adopted for the presentation. 
 
Figure 7: Using LB2CO Ontological framework Schematics 
to present the Ontology for Semantic Auto Store. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
In this research, a business ontology framework 
called LB2CO has been developed for a typical B2C 
eCommerce transaction. The ontology framework used 
to develop business ontology for Semantic Auto Store 
can also be used to develop business ontology for most 
of small and medium enterprises transactions on the 
net. However, the fantastic advantage of LB2CO 
ontological framework is that it can be implemented 
on different platforms for different domains using 
different ontological languages. 
In 
this 
research 
work, 
some 
theoretical 
methodologies proposed by previous researchers have 
been verified, and new methodology proposed. Further 
study in this field can focus on the tangible 
implementation of this methodology on eCommerce 
website like Amazon.com etc.  
VII. REFERENCES 
[1] Oscar Corcho, Asunción Gómez-pérez, Facultad De 
Informática, “Solving Integration Problems of E-
Commerce 
Standards 
and 
Initiatives 
Through 
Ontological 
Mappings”. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Intelligent Systems, vol. 16, no. 16, 2001.  
[2] Mike Uschold, Martin King, Stuart Moralee, and 
Yannis Zorgios, “The Enterprise Ontology The

LB2CO: A Semantic Ontology Framework for B2C eCommerce Transaction on the Internet 
9 
 
www.ijorcs.org 
Knowledge Engineering Review”, vol. 13, no.1, pp. 31-
89, 1998. doi: 10.1017/S0269888998001088 
[3] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler and O. Lassila. “The 
semantic web” The Scientific American, 284(5), pp. 29-
37, 2001.  
[4] T. Berners-Lee and J. Hendler. (2001). “Scientific 
Publishing on the semantic web”. Nature Science 
Journals. [Online]. Available: http://www.nature.com/ 
nature/debates/e-access/Articles/bernerslee.html 
[5] M. Uschold, M. Gruninger, “Ontologies: Principles, 
Methods 
and 
Applications”, 
In: 
Knowledge 
Engineering Review, vol. 11, no.2, pp. 93-155, 1996.  
[6] Deborah L. McGuinness, “Ontologies Come of Age”, 
Spinning the Semantic Web: Bringing the World Wide 
Web to Its Full Potential, MIT Press, 2003.  
[7] Decker Stefan, Brickley D, Saarela J, Angele J, "A 
query and inference service for RDF." Proceedings of 
the W3C Query Language Workshop (QL-98), vol. 96, 
1998. 
[8] Elena Simperl, Christoph Tempich, Tobias Bürger, 
“Methodologies for the creation of semantic data”, 
Miguel-Angel Sicilia (ed.) Handbook of Metadata, 
Semantics and Ontologies, World Scientific Publishing 
Co, 
2011. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www-ksl-
svc.stanford.edu:5915/ 
doc/frame-editor/glossary-of-
terms.html 
[9] Knowledge Based Systems, Inc. (KBSI). “IDEF5 
Ontology Description Capture Overview”, IDEF5 
Overview [Online]. Available:  http://www.idef.com/ 
idef5.html 
[10] Zhang Pengyi, Yan Qu, Chen Huang, "Designing a 
Multi-Layered 
Ontology 
for 
the 
Science 
and 
Technology Innovation Concept Knowledge-Base", 
44th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences 
(HICSS), 
pp. 
1-10, 
2011. 
doi: 
10.1109/HICSS.2011.147 
[11] T.R. Gruber, “A translation approach to portable 
ontology specifications”, Knowledge Acquisition”, vol. 
5, no.2, pp.199-220, 1993. doi: 0.1006/knac.1993.1008 
[12] Adam Farquhar, Richard Fikes, James Rice, “The 
Ontolingua Server: a Tool for Collaborative Ontology 
Construction”. [Online]. Available: http://ksi.cpsc. 
ucalgary.ca/KAW/KAW96/farquhar/farquhar.html 
[13] Hongbing Wang, Joshua Zhexue Huang, Yuzhong Qu, 
Junyuan Xie, "Web services: problems and future 
directions", Web Semantics: Science, Services and 
Agents on the World Wide Web, vol 1, issue 3, pp. 309-
320, 2004. doi: 10.1016/j.websem.2004.02.001 
[14] Bertolazzi, P., Krusich, C., Missikoff, M. An Approach 
to the Definition of a Core Enterprise Ontology: CEO, 
International Workshop on Open Enterprise Solutions: 
Systems, Experiences, and Organizations, 2001. 
[15] Norma J. Slattery. “A Study of Ontology and its uses in 
Information 
Technology 
Systems”. 
The 
MITRE 
Corporation Economic and Decision Analysis Center 
and George Mason University School of Information 
Technology and Engineering, pp.1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How to cite 
Akanbi Adeyinka K, “LB2CO: A Semantic Ontology Framework for B2C eCommerce Transaction on the Internet ”. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Research 
in 
Computer 
Science, 
4 
(1): 
pp. 
1-9, 
January 
2014. 
doi: 
10.7815/ijorcs.41.2014.075
