Exponential Family Hybrid Semi-Supervised Learning
Arvind Agarwal
School of Computing
University of Utah

Hal Daum´e III
School of Computing
University of Utah

Abstract
We present an approach to semi-supervised learn-
ing based on an exponential family characteriza-
tion. Our approach generalizes previous work on
coupled priors for hybrid generative/discriminative
models. Our model is more ﬂexible and natural
than previous approaches. Experimental results on
several data sets show that our approach also per-
forms better in practice.
1
Introduction
Labeled data on which to train machine learning algorithms
is often scarce or expensive. This has led to signiﬁcant in-
terest in semi-supervised learning methods that can take ad-
vantage of unlabeled data [Cozman et al., 2003; Zhu, 2005].
While it is straightforward to integrate unlabeled data in a
generative learning framework [Nigam et al., 2000], it is
not so in a discriminative framework. Unfortunately, it is
well-known both empirically and theoretically [Ng and Jor-
dan, 2002] that discriminative approaches tend to outperform
generative approaches when there is enough labeled data.
This has led to many recent developments in hybrid genera-
tive/discriminative models that are able to leverage the power
of both frameworks (see Section 4). One particular such ex-
ample is the work of Lasserre et al. [2006], who describe a
hybrid framework (“PCP”) in which a generative model and
discriminative model are jointly estimated, using a prior that
encourages them to have similar parameters.
In this paper, we generalize the parameter coupling prior1
(PCP) method [Lasserre et al., 2006] to arbitrary distributions
belonging to the exponential family. Unlike the PCP method,
we do not restrict ourselves to the Gaussian prior, but in-
stead choose a prior that is natural to the model. Other au-
thors [Bouchard, 2007] have also noted the inappropriateness
of the Gaussian prior to couple the generative and discrim-
inative models. Our resulting approach for hybridizing dis-
criminative and generative models is: (1) not restricted to a
particular class of the models; (2) more ﬂexible in choosing
1Terms parameter coupling prior and coupled prior were intro-
duced in [Druck et al., 2007] and do not appear in [Lasserre et al.,
2006] though they refer to the framework introduced in [Lasserre et
al., 2006].
the way these two models can be combined; (3) enables us to
achieve a closed form solution for the generative parameters,
unlike PCP method, where one has to resort to the numeri-
cal optimization. We demonstrate our framework on using a
Beta/Binomial conjugate pair on the text categorization prob-
lems addressed by Druck et al. [2007].
2
Background
In general, machine learning approaches to classiﬁcation can
be divided into two categories: generative approaches and
discriminative approaches. Generative approaches assume
that the data is generated though an underlying process. One
simple example is document categorization: for each exam-
ple (x, y), we ﬁrst choose a category y, and then produce a
document x conditioned on the category y. The goal in gener-
ative modeling is to approximate the joint distribution p(x, y)
that represents this process. On the other hand, discrimina-
tive approaches do not assume any underlying process and
directly model the probability of category given the document
p(y|x). Ng and Jordan [2002] compare these two approaches
and show that while discriminative models are asymptotically
better than generative models, generative models need less
data to train.
In semi-supervised settings, one has access to lots of un-
labeled data but only a small amount of labeled data. It is
easy to see that unlabeled data is not directly useful in a
discriminative setting but can be easily used in generative
setting. However, since discriminative methods asymptoti-
cally tend to outperform generative methods [Ng and Jordan,
2002], this naturally leads to combining these two approaches
and building a hybrid model that does better than the indi-
vidual models. Earlier work [Bouchard and Triggs, 2004;
Lasserre et al., 2006; Druck et al., 2007] has shown the ef-
ﬁcacy of the hybrid approach.
2.1
Exponential Family and Conjugate Priors
For the sake of completeness, we brieﬂy deﬁne the exponen-
tial family which we will use as the basis of our hybrid model.
The exponential family is a set of distributions whose prob-
ability density function2 can be expressed in the following
2“Density” can be replaced by “mass” in the case of discrete ran-
dom variable.
arXiv:1003.0696v1  [cs.LG]  2 Mar 2010

form:
f(x; θ) = h(x) exp(⟨η(θ)T(x)⟩−A(θ))
(1)
Here T(x) is sufﬁcient statistics, η(θ) is a function of natu-
ral parameters θ, and A(θ) is a normalization constant (also
known as log-partition function).
One important property of the exponential family is the ex-
istence of conjugate priors. Given any member of the expo-
nential family in Eq (1), the conjugate prior is a distribution
over its parameters with the following form:
p(θ|α, β) = m(α, β) exp(⟨η(θ), α⟩−βA(θ))
Here ⟨a, b⟩denotes the dot product of vectors a and b. Both
α and β are hyperparameters of the conjugate prior. Impor-
tantly, function A(·) is the same between the exponential fam-
ily member and the conjugate prior.
A second important property of the exponential family is
the relationship between the log-partition function A(θ) and
the sufﬁcient statistics. In particular, we have:
∂A
∂θ = Eθ [T(x)]
(2)
2.2
Hybrid Model with Coupled Prior
We ﬁrst deﬁne the problem and some of the notations that we
will use through-out the paper. Our task is to learn a model
that predicts a label y given an example x. We are given
the data D = DL ∪DU where DL represents the labeled
data and DU represents the unlabeled data. Each instance
of the labeled data consists of a pair (x, y) where x is fea-
ture vector and y is the corresponding label. Each instance
of unlabeled data consists of only feature vector x. The xs
are M-dimensional feature vectors, and xd denotes the dth
feature.
We now give a brief overview of the hybrid model pre-
sented by Lasserre et al. [2006]. The hybrid model is a mix-
ture of discriminative and generative components, both of
which have separate sets of parameters. These two sets of
parameters (hence two models) are combined using a prior
called coupled prior. Considering only one data point (the
extension to multiple data points is straightforward and pre-
sented later), the model is deﬁned as follows:
p(x, y, θ, ˜θ)
=
p(˜θ, θ)p(y|x, θ)p(x|˜θ)
=
p(˜θ, θ)p(y|x, θ)
X
y′
p(x, y′|˜θ)
Here θ is a set of discriminative parameters, ˜θ a set of gen-
erative parameters, and p(˜θ, θ) provides the natural coupling
between these two sets of parameters. p(y|x, θ) is the dis-
criminative component; p(x|˜θ) = P
y′ p(x, y′|˜θ) is the gen-
erative component.
The most important aspect of this model is the coupled
prior p(˜θ, θ), which interpolates the hybrid model between
two extremes; generative model when θ = ˜θ and discrimina-
tive when θ is independent of ˜θ. In other cases, the goal of the
coupled prior is to encourage the generative model and the
discriminative model to have similar parameters. In earlier
work [Lasserre et al., 2006; Druck et al., 2007], a Gaussian
prior was used as the coupled prior:
p(˜θ, θ) ∝exp

−1
2σ2

˜θ −θ


2
Unfortunately, the Gaussian prior is not always appropriate
[Bouchard, 2007].
3
Exponential Family Hybrid Model
In this section, we provide a more general prior for the hybrid
model that is not only mathematically convenient but also al-
lows choosing a problem speciﬁc prior.
3.1
Exponential Family Generalization
First, we generalize the hybrid model deﬁned in Section 2.2
for the distributions that come from the exponential family.
In other words, all of the distributions (generative, discrim-
inative and coupled prior) of the generalized hybrid model
belong to the exponential family. We ﬁrst provide the def-
initions of discriminative and generative models in terms of
exponential family.
Generative model:
p(x, y|˜θ) = h(x, y) exp(⟨˜θ, T(x, y)⟩−A(˜θ))
(3)
Discriminative model:
p(y|x, θ) = g(y) exp(⟨θ, T(x, y)⟩−B(θ, x))
(4)
Next, we break the coupled prior p(˜θ, θ) into two parts;
an independent prior on the discriminative parameters p(θ)
and a prior on the generative parameters given discriminative
parameters p(˜θ|θ). This formulation lets us model the depen-
dency of the generative component over the discriminative
component. Our new hybrid model is now deﬁned as:
p(x, y, θ, ˜θ) =
h
p(θ)p(y|x, θ)
i
p(˜θ|θ)
h X
y′
p(x, y′|˜θ)
i
(5)
For convenience and interpretability (later we will show that
it also improves the performance), we choose the coupled
prior p(˜θ|θ) to be conjugate with the generative model.
Conjugate prior:
p(˜θ|θ) = m(θ) exp(⟨˜θ, α(θ)⟩−β(θ)A(˜θ))
(6)
Here, α(·) and β(·) are user-deﬁned functions that map the
discriminative parameters θ into hyperparameters for the con-
jugate prior. We discuss suitable choices of these functions in
Section 3.4.
Substituting the exponential deﬁnitions of generative
model Eq (3), discriminative model Eq (4), and coupled prior
Eq (6) in Eq (5), and taking a log, we obtain a log joint prob-
ability of data and parameters:
L = log p(x, y, θ, ˜θ) =
(7)
log p(θ) +
log m(θ) + ⟨˜θα(θ)⟩−β(θ)A(˜θ) +
log g(y) +
X
(x,y)∈DL
h
⟨θ, T(x, y)⟩−B(θ, x)
i
+
X
x∈D
log
X
y′
h
h(x, y′) exp(⟨˜θ, T(x, y′)⟩−A(˜θ))
i

Note that here discriminative part is deﬁned only for labeled
data while generative part is deﬁned for both labeled and un-
labeled data.
3.2
Parameter Optimization
We perform parameter optimization by a coordinate descent
method, alternating between optimizing the discriminative
parameters θ and optimizing the generative parameters ˜θ.
For the generative parameters, we take the partial deriva-
tive of the log probability in Eq (7) with respect to ˜θ:
∂L
∂˜θ
=
α(θ) −β(θ)A′(˜θ) +
X
x∈D
X
y′
p(y′|x, ˜θ)(T(x, y′) −A′(˜θ))
Here, p(y′|x, ˜θ) is the probability based on the parameters
estimated in the last iteration p(y′|x, ˜θold). Substituting this
in the above equation and setting it equal to zero, we obtain:
A′(˜θ)
=
P
x∈D
P
y′ p(y′|x, ˜θold)T(x, y′) + α(θ)
N + β(θ)
=
ˆEx∼D Ey∼˜θold(T(x, y′)) + α(θ)
N + β(θ)
(8)
Here A′(˜θ) denotes the partial derivative of A(˜θ) with re-
spect to ˜θ. As discussed in Section 1, choosing a conjugate
prior gives us a closed form solution for A′(˜θ). From Eq (2),
we know that A′(˜θ) is equivalent to the expected sufﬁcient
statistics of the generative model.
Having solved for the generative parameters ˜θ, we now
solve the hybrid model for discriminative parameters θ.
∂L
∂θ
=
∂log p(θ)
∂θ
+ ∂log m(θ)
∂θ
+ ˜θα′(θ) −
β′(θ)A(˜θ) +
X
(x,y)∈DL
(T(y, x) −B′(θ, x))
(9)
There is no closed form solution to the above expression
therefore we solve it using numerical methods. In our im-
plementation, we use stochastic gradient descent.
3.3
Hybrid Multiple Binomial Model
In this section, we see how this hybrid model can be applied
in practice. We ﬁrst choose a generative model that is suitable
to our application. We next choose the coupled prior conju-
gate to the generative model. Since later on, we intend to use
the hybrid model for the document classiﬁcation task, we use
a naive Bayes3 (NB) model for the generative part and logistic
regression for the discriminative part, akin to the study of Ng
and Jordan [2002]. The generative part of our model (naive
Bayes) is given by:
p(y, x|π, v)
=
p(y|π)p(x|y, v)
=
Y
k
π
1{y=k}
k
Y
d
vxd
yd(1 −vyd)1−xd(10)
3It should be noted that “naive Bayes” classiﬁers come into (at
least) two different versions: the “multivariate Bernoulli version”
and the “multinomial version” [Mccallum and Nigam, 1998]. Be-
cause of its generality, in our implementation, we use multivariate
Bernoulli.
Here, P
y′ πy′ = 1 and 0 ≤vyd ≤1. 1{y=k} is an indicator
function that takes value 1 if y = k and 0 otherwise.
The discriminative part is:
p(y|x, w, b)
=
1
Zx
exp

by +
X
d
xdwyd

(11)
Where Zx = P
y′ exp
 by′ + P
d xdwy′d

is a normaliza-
tion constant. Note here that since these models form genera-
tive/discriminative pair, number of parameters is same in both
models. It is easy to see that there is one-to-one relationship
between these two sets of parameters. by in the discriminative
model behaves similar to πy in the generative model, and wyd
behaves similar to vyd. Since wyd and vyd are the parameters
that capture most of the information, we use coupled prior
to couple these sets of parameters and do not couple by and
πy. It is important to note the difference between the canoni-
cal parameters of the exponential family representation of the
model and the mean parameters. In the generative(or discrim-
inative) model, ˜θyd (or θyd) denote the canonical parameters
while vyd (or wyd) denote the mean parameters.
Having deﬁned the appropriate discriminative and gener-
ative models, now we can get equivalent exponential family
forms of these models. First we show the exponential form
of the generative model. The generative model in Eq (10)
can be broken into two parts: one is class probability p(y|π)
and other class conditional probability p(x|y, v). Since the
parameters of these distributions are independent, we can get
their exponential representations separately. Considering the
class conditional probability for one feature, Eq (10) can be
written in the following form:
p(xd|y, vyd) = exp

xd log
vyd
1 −vyd + log(1 −vyd)

Comparing this with Eq (3) gives ˜θyd
=
log
vyd
1−vyd ;
A(˜θyd) = log(1+e˜θyd) and T(y, x) = xd. Substituting these
along with the appropriate conjugate prior in Eq (8) gives us
a closed form solution for A′(˜θyd), which, in the naive Bayes
model is equal to vyd.
A′(˜θyd) = vyd =
P
x∈D p(y|x, ˜θold)xd + α(θ)
N + β(θ)
(12)
In other words, vyd is the normalized expected count of the
dth feature in class y, with smoothing parameters that are
controlled by the coupled prior hyperparameters α(θ) and
β(θ).
Next we solve for πy by directly optimizing the objective
function Eq (10) with respect to πy with the given constraints.
This gives us πy =
P
x∈D p(y|x,˜θold)
N
which is the normalized
expected number of examples in class y.
Having solved for generative parameters, we now solve for
the discriminative parameters. Ideally, we would like to ﬁrst
get an equivalent exponential form of Eq (11) and then solve
it using Eq (9). Since Eq (9) is only deﬁned for discrimina-
tive parameters that are coupled (w), we can not use Eq (9)
unless we break Eq (11) into two exponential forms separate
for w and b and, it is not clear how to do so. Therefore, we
solve for discriminative parameters directly, without convert-
ing Eq (11) into exponential form. It is important to note here

that mean parameters w in Eq (11) is equal to the canonical
parameters θyd. We place Gaussian prior p(θ) = N(θ|0, σ2)
on w = θ and an improper uniform prior on b. Taking deriva-
tives, we obtain:
∂L
∂wyd = −w
σ2 + ∂log m(wyd)
∂wyd
+ ⟨˜θydα′(wyd)⟩−β′(wyd)A(˜θyd)
+
X
(x,y′)∈DL
n
1{xd=1} −1
Zx exp(by′ +
X
d
xdwy′d)1{xd=1}
o
∂L
∂by =
X
(x,y′)∈DL
n
1{y=y′} −1
Zx exp(by +
X
d
xdwyd)
o
3.4
Conjugate Beta Prior
Recall that our conjugate prior crucially depends on two func-
tions: α(θ) and β(θ) that “convert” the discriminative param-
eters θ into a prior on the generative parameters p(˜θ|θ). In the
case of the binomial likelihood, the conjugate prior is Beta.
Exponential form of Beta prior is deﬁned as:
p(˜θyd|θyd) = m(θyd) exp(˜θydα(θyd) −β(θyd)A(˜θyd))
Where
m(θyd)
=
Γ(β(˜θyd)+2)
Γ(α(˜θyd)+1)Γ(β(θyd)−α(θyd)+1)
and
A(˜θyd = log(1 + e˜θyd).
We select the function α(θyd) and β(θyd) to be such that:
(1) the mode of the conjugate prior is θyd and (2) the vari-
ance of the conjugate prior is controllable by the hyperpa-
rameter γ. As noted from Figure 1, as γ goes to ∞, vari-
ance goes to 0 and prior forces generative parameters to
be equal to the discriminative parameters (pure generative
model) and as γ goes to 0, variance goes to ∞which im-
plies the independence between generative and discrimina-
tive parameters (pure discriminative model). Other values of
γ interpolate between these two extremes. Thus, we choose
α(θyd) = γ/(1 + e−θyd) and β(θyd) = γ. This gives mode
of p(˜θyd|θyd) at θyd with the variance that decreases in γ, as
desired.
It is important to note that our choice of hyperparam-
eters for the conjugate prior is not speciﬁc to this exam-
ple, but holds true in general.
In the general case, let A
be the log-partition function associated with the generative
model, then, the conjugate prior hyperparameters should be
α(θ) = γA′(θ) and β(θ) = γ. This gives us the mode of con-
jugate prior at θ with the variance that decreases in γ. In the
beta/binomial hybrid model, A′(θ) = A′(w) = 1/(1+e−w).
Also note that in the beta/binomial example, A′(θ) is also the
transformation function T that transforms the discriminative
mean parameters w to the generative mean parameters v.
In Figure 1, we also compare the Beta prior (solid blue
curves) to an “equivalent” logistic-Normal prior (dashed
black curves) for four settings of γ. The logistic-Normal is
parameterized to have the same mode and variance as the
Beta prior. As we can see, for high values of γ (wherein the
model is essentially generative), the two behave quite simi-
larly. However, for more moderate settings of γ, the priors
are qualitatively quite different.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Figure 1: Effect of gamma on the Beta prior (solid curve) and
logistic-Normal prior (dashed curve) for gamma=0.1, 1, 10,
100 (top-left, top-right, bottom-left, bottom-right) and for the
transformed discriminative parameter T(w) = 0.2
4
Related Work
There have been a number of efforts to combine generative
and discriminative models to obtain a hybrid model that per-
forms better than either individually.
Some of the earlier
works [Raina et al., 2003; Bouchard and Triggs, 2004] use
completely different approaches to hybridize these models;
Raina et al. [2003] present a model for the document classiﬁ-
cation task where a document is split into multiple regions
and complementary properties of generative/discriminative
models are exploited by training a large set of the parameters
generatively and only a small set of parameters discrimina-
tively. Bouchard and Triggs [2004] build a hybrid model by
taking a linear combination of generative and discriminative
model. This model is similar to the multi-conditional learn-
ing model presented by McCallum et al. [2006]. Jaakkola and
Haussler [1999] describe a scheme in which the kernel of a
discriminative classiﬁer is extracted from a generative model.
Though these models have shown to perform better than just
the discriminative or generative model, none of them combine
the hybrid model in natural way.
Our work builds on the work of Lasserre et al. [2006]
and Druck et al. [2007], which are discussed in Section 2.2.
Along these lines, Fujino et al. [2007] present another hy-
brid approach where a generative model is trained using a
small number of labeled examples.
Since the generative
model has high bias, a generative “bias-correction” model is
trained in a discriminative manner to discriminatively com-
bine the bias-correction model with the generative model.
Most of these work focus on the application and little on
the theory of the hybrid model.
There has been a recent
work by Bouchard [2007] that presents a uniﬁed framework
for the “PCP” model and the “convex-combination” model
[Bouchard and Triggs, 2004], and proves performance prop-
erties.

No. of
Dataset
Features
Dataset description
movie
24, 841
classiﬁes the sentiments of the review
of the movies from IMDB as positive
or negative
webkb
22, 824
classiﬁes webpages from university as
student, course, faculty or project
sraa
77, 494
classiﬁes
messages
by
the
news-
group to which they were posted:
simulated-aviation,
real-aviation,
simulated-autoracing, real-autoracing
Table 1: Description of the datasets used in the experiments
5
Experiments
5.1
Experimental Setup
In this section, we show empirical results of our approach
and compare them with the existing (and most related to our
method) state-of-the-art semi-supervised methods [Druck et
al., 2007]. In order to have a fair comparison, we use ex-
perimental setup of Druck et al. [2007] and perform experi-
ments only for the datasets where PCP model have shown to
perform best, There are three such datasets: movie, sraa and
webkb. Description of these datasets is given in Table 1.
Although all of the examples in these datasets are labeled,
we perform experiments by taking a subset of dataset as la-
beled and treating the rest of the examples as unlabeled. We
use either 10 or 25 labeled examples from each class and vary
unlabeled examples from 0 to a maximum of 1000. Number
of unlabeled examples are same in each class. We show our
results for two sets of experiments: (1) we show how per-
formance varies as we vary the number of unlabeled exam-
ples; (2) we show how performance varies with respect to λ.
Here λ normalizes the γ ∈[∞, 0] in the range of [0, 1] using
γ = ((1−λ)/λ)2. Now λ = 0 corresponds to the pure gener-
ative case while λ = 1 corresponds to the pure discriminative
case. As in the work of Druck et al. [2007], the success of
the semi-supervised learning depends on the quality of the la-
beled examples, therefore we choose ﬁve random labeled sets
and report the average on them. In our results, we report the
percentage classiﬁcation accuracy which is the ratio of num-
ber of examples correctly classiﬁed to the total number of test
examples.
5.2
Results and Discussion
Results on the above mentioned three datasets are presented
in Table 2. Table shows the results for the PCP model with the
Gaussian prior (PCP-Gauss) and with the Beta prior (PCP-
Beta).
Since PCP-Beta uses the binomial version of NB,
we reimplemented the PCP-Gaussfor the binomial version of
NB and compare the results with it. Though we also show
the results for PCP-Gauss multinomial [Druck et al., 2007],
a fair comparison would be to compare only binomial mod-
els. %change is the change in PCP-Beta with respect to the
PCP-Gauss binomial version. As we see, PCP-Beta performs
better than PCP-Gauss binomial in all experiments and bet-
ter than PCP-Gauss multinomial in all experiments except
pcp-Gauss
pcp-Gauss
pcp-Beta
%
Dataset
Mult
Bin
Bin
change
movie (10)
64.6
63.4 (3.2)
68.3 (5.5)
+7.7%
movie (25)
68.6
69.0 (1.5)
76.7 (1.2)
+11.1%
webkb (10)
72.5
73.7 (3.7)
75.3 (2.9)
+2.2%
webkb (25)
76.7
83.8 (1.3)
83.9 (1.6)
+1.1%
sraa (10)
81.6
67.7 (6.8)
79.1 (4.0)
+16.8%
sraa (25)
84.1
76.6 (3.5)
86.1 (1.0)
+12.4%
Table 2: Comparative results for pcp with Gaussian prior and
pcp with Beta prior. Parenthesized values denote the number
of labeled examples per class and the standard deviation.
sraa(10). Compared to PCP-Gauss binomial, PCP-Beta per-
forms signiﬁcantly better on sraa and movie datasets.
Comparing multinomial and binomial versions of PCP-
Gauss, we see that for movie and webkbb datasets, binomial
version performs better (or almost equal) than the multino-
mial while for sraa dataset, multinomial performs better. We
conjecture that reason for this behavior could be because sraa
has a large number of features and feature independence as-
sumption is less violated in multinomial NB than in bino-
mial NB. When datasets do not have too many features, bi-
nomial version tends to perform better because binomial NB
accounts for both presence and absence of the features, in
contrast to multinomial NB which only accounts for the pres-
ence of the features.
Figure 2 and Figure 3 show the results for accuracy vs.
λ for different number of unlabeled examples for sraa and
movie datasets respectively. Remember that λ = 0 is the
purely generative model and λ = 1 is the purely discrim-
inative model. In both of these ﬁgures, we see that as we
increase the number of unlabeled examples, performance im-
proves. In sraa, we observe that increasing the number of
unlabeled examples results in the shifting of optimal λ (λ∗)
towards rights. We get an optimal λ∗= 0.2 for a fully su-
pervised model while for 1000 unlabeled examples, we get
λ∗= 0.5. All the curves in this experiment are uni-modal
which means that there is a unique value of λ where hybrid
model performs best.
Unfortunately, these nearly-perfectly shaped curves are not
common to all settings. We do not observe it in the other
dataset (Figure 3). There are values of λ where a fully su-
pervised model performs better than the best semi-supervised
model. This experiment emphasizes the need for choosing the
right value of λ and also shows the importance of the hybrid
model. If we do not choose the right value of λ, we might
end up hurting the model by using the unlabeled data. We
also observe that movie dataset gives us a bi-modal curve in
contrast to the uni-modal curve obtained in the sraa. We see
that curve is a uni-modal in the supervised setting but as we
introduce unlabeled examples, the curves not only become
bi-modal but also shift towards the left-hand side (best accu-
racy is achieved close to the generative end). This naturally
suggests that generative model is actually affecting the hybrid
model in a positive manner and exploiting the strength of the
unlabeled examples.

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
Lambda
Accuracy
 
 
ulab=0
ulab=25
ulab=100
ulab=1000
Figure 2: Results for sraa dataset for different number of un-
labeled examples. Number of labeled examples=10.
6
Conclusion and Future Work
We have presented a generalized “PCP” hybrid model for
the exponential family distributions and have experimentally
shown that the prior conjugate to the generative model is more
appropriate than the Gaussian prior. In addition to the perfor-
mance advantage, the conjugate prior also gives us a closed
form solution for the generative parameters. In the future,
we aim at interpreting these results in a theoretical way and
answer questions like: (1) Under what conditions will the hy-
brid model perform better than both the generative and dis-
criminative models? (2) What is the optimal value of γ? (3)
Is a PAC-style analysis of the hybrid model possible for the
ﬁnite sample case as opposed the asymptotic analysis mostly
found in the literature?
