1
UFA-FUSE: A novel deep supervised and hybrid
model for multi-focus image fusion
Yongsheng Zang, Dongming Zhou, Changcheng Wang, Rencan Nie, and Yanbu Guo
Abstract—Traditional and deep learning-based fusion methods
generated the intermediate decision map to obtain the fusion
image through a series of post-processing procedures. However,
the fusion results generated by these methods are easy to lose
some source image details or results in artifacts. Inspired by
the image reconstruction techniques based on deep learning, we
propose a multi-focus image fusion network framework without
any post-processing to solve these problems in the end-to-end
and supervised learning ways. To sufﬁciently train the fusion
model, we have generated a large-scale multi-focus image dataset
with ground-truth fusion images. What’s more, to obtain a more
informative fusion image, we further designed a novel fusion
strategy based on unity fusion attention, which is composed
of a channel attention module and a spatial attention module.
Speciﬁcally, the proposed fusion approach mainly comprises three
key components: feature extraction, feature fusion and image
reconstruction. We ﬁrst utilize seven convolutional blocks to ex-
tract the image features from source images. Then, the extracted
convolutional features are fused by the proposed fusion strategy
in the feature fusion layer. Finally, the fused image features are
reconstructed by four convolutional blocks. Experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed approach for multi-focus image
fusion achieves remarkable fusion performance and superior time
efﬁciency compared to 19 state-of-the-art fusion methods.
Index Terms—Image fusion, Multi-focus image, Attention
model, Large-scale multi-focus image dataset, Supervised learn-
ing.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
Mage fusion [1] is an effective approach to extend the
measurement of optical lenses to integrate two or more
input images to produce a more informative fused image.
Image fusion includes several fusion subareas such as multi-
focus image fusion, infrared and visible image fusion [2], [3]
and medical image fusion [4], [5]. Speciﬁcally, multi-focus
image fusion aims to get clear images that obtain all objects
of a scene in focus. Multi-focus image fusion has become more
closely related to our daily lives, while playing a crucial role in
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grants 62066047, 61966037, 61365001 and 61463052, and
Yunnan Province University Key Laboratory Construction Plan Funding,
China. (Corresponding author: Dongming Zhou.)
Y. Zang is with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan

D. Zhou is with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan

C.
Wang
is
with
the
School
of
Information
Science
and
Engineering,
Yunnan
University,
Kunming
650091,
China

R. Nie is with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan

Y. Guo is with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan

biological, industrial and medical ﬁelds. For example, multi-
focus image fusion is used to fuse microscopic cervical cell
images for disease diagnosis [6], and can also be applied to
structural measurement of nonwoven fabrics [7]. Also, multi-
focus image fusion is a guarantee for the precise acquisition
of pap smear images [8].
Generally speaking, there exist three categories of multi-
focus image fusion techniques according to imaging principles.
The fusion techniques are broadly divided into transform
domain techniques [9], spatial domain techniques and deep
learning-based methods. The transform domain techniques
are prevailing in the ﬁrst phase of image fusion. The image
algorithms based on transform domain share a universal three
main steps to fuse image, which are generally summarized as
decomposition, fusion and reconstruction. Some representative
examples include pyramid-based and wavelet-based methods,
such as the morphological pyramid-based method [10], the
discrete wavelet transform-based method [11], the stationary
wavelet transform-based method [12], the dual-tree complex
wavelet transform-based method [13], the adjustable non-
subsampled shearlet transform [1] and the non-subsampled
contourlet transform-based method [14].
The spatial domain methods do not require the source image
to be converted to another feature domain like the transform
domain methods. Spatial domain-based methods operate on
pixels or regions directly and use linear or nonlinear methods
to fuse the multi-focus images. Spatial domain-based methods
can be roughly divided into three categories [15], which often
include pixel-based [16], block-based [15] and region-based
[17] algorithms. The block-based algorithms decompose the
input images into blocks with equal size according to block-
based strategy. Then the decomposed blocks are fused by the
designed activity level measurement. However, the selected
block-size has a great impact on the quality of the fused
image, the unsuitable size of block restricts the performance
of these block-based algorithms. The region-based algorithms
ﬁrstly use image segmentation to split up the input images
into regions. Then, the clarities of corresponding regions
are measured and image fusion is performed by integrating
the sharply focused regions. Clearly, the accuracy of image
segmentation greatly affects the efﬁciency of the region-based
algorithms. Different from the fusion algorithms mentioned
above, pixel-based algorithms directly use activity level mea-
surement strategy to generate the decision map for fusion.
Some novel pixel-based spatial domain methods have been
proposed, such as multi-scale weighted gradient (MWGF)
[18], guided ﬁltering (GFF) [16] and dense SIFT [19].
Although the traditional fusion methods have indicated
arXiv:2101.04506v4  [cs.CV]  20 Apr 2021

2
some signiﬁcant advantages, these fusion methods still exist
some weaknesses as follows: (i) The fusion methods rely
highly on activity level measurement strategy and transform
domain, which leads to poor robustness of these fusion meth-
ods. (ii) These fusion methods have poor fusion performance
when the input images are complex. To ameliorate these short-
comings, a series of deep learning-based fusion algorithms
have been proposed and obtained good results. For example,
Liu et al. [20] proposed convolutional neural network (CNN)-
based fusion model which can recognize whether the image
area is in-focus to generate the decision map for image fusion.
Based on this, Tang et al. [21] optimized the structure of
CNN from the perspective of pixel to obtain the decision
map. Besides, Ma et al. [22] proposed an unsupervised deep
learning fusion framework, SESF, to generate a well decision
map for image fusion. It is no doubt that these fusion models
reached a better performance compared to traditional methods
because of the strong and stabilized representation capability.
However, the fusion image generated by these methods heavily
rely on the decision map reﬁned by some post-processing
procedures, which is hard to obtain the fusion image with
high quality. Therefore, other fusion models, such as DeepFuse
[23], DenseFuse [24] and IFCNN [25] directly fused the deep
image features rather than generating the decision map to
reconstruct the fusion image. Although the above methods
have achieved relatively good performance in image fusion,
the new problems which are lacking of rich image details
yielded with simple fusion strategy remain unsolved in these
image fusion methods. The conclusion of the existing SOTA
methods is shown in Table I.
To address these problems mentioned above, in this paper,
A novel fusion model is proposed for multi-focus images.
The fusion model can be trained in end-to-end manner with-
out any post-processing procedures, and directly obtain the
fusion image without generating the intermediate decision
map. To effectively train the fusion model, we have cre-
ated a large-scale multi-focus image dataset with ground-
truth fusion image. Moreover, to obtain a high quality of
fusion image, we design a novel fusion strategy based on
unity fusion attention mechanism. Speciﬁcally, the source
images were ﬁrstly extracted in feature extraction module
by seven stacked convolutional blocks. Then the extracted
image features are fused by the proposed fusion strategy.
Finally, the fused image features were reconstructed by four
stacked convolutional blocks to generate the fusion image.
Furthermore, we conducted extensive experiments to evaluate
the performance of our proposed fusion model. The results
of qualitative evaluation and quantitative evaluation show that
our fusion model achieves the remarkable performance, which
is superior to the state-of-the-art multi-focus image fusion
algorithms. Overall, the main contributions of our work for
multi-focus image fusion are fourfold:
• A large-scale multi-focus image dataset is generated for
multi-focus image fusion. The generated multi-focus im-
ages in data sets are partially-focused and have different
levels of blur, which is suitable for training the fusion
model. Moreover, we introduced how to generate the
large-scale multi-focus image dataset, which is of great
reference signiﬁcance for making the dataset.
• A novel and appropriate fusion strategy is designed. The
proposed fusion strategy based on proposed unity fusion
attention can effectively integrate the extracted image
features and meanwhile is more ﬂexible than other simple
fusion strategies.
• An end-to-end fusion framework without any post-
processing procedures is proposed. So, all the parameters
in the fusion model can be jointly optimized and the fu-
sion network can directly input the fusion image without
generating the intermediate decision map. In addition,
the fusion framework is very efﬁcient and fast in pro-
cessing images, substantially ahead of other comparison
algorithms.
• Some expanded experiments on the infrared and visible
image dataset and medical image dataset are conducted.
Furtherly, the potential applications of our proposed fu-
sion model for other fusion tasks are presented.
The remainder of our paper is structured as follows: we
brieﬂy review related works about fusion algorithms based
on deep learning in Section II. Then Section III describes the
proposed fusion framework and introduces the generated large-
scale multi-focus image dataset in detail. In Section IV, we
present the extensive experimental results and the expanded
experiments. We also discuss the application of the proposed
framework and the prospects for future research work in
Section V. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in Section V.
The codes of our proposed UFA-Fusion are accessible on
https://github.com/ReckonerInheritor/UFA-Fusion.
II. RELATED WORKS
With the development of deep learning in recent years, a
series of fusion algorithms based on deep learning have been
proposed and also obtained remarkable results in computer im-
age processing [30] and biomedicine [31]. Moreover, various-
deep learning-based methods have shown their own unique
theories and advantages for image fusion. Consequently, we
brieﬂy introduce several representative image fusion methods
in this section. Then we present the application of attention
mechanism in various image fusion tasks.
A. Deep learning-Based Algorithms
As is well-known, the ﬁrst deep learning-based algorithm
is CNN-based fusion network which was proposed by Liu et
al. in 2017 [20]. The CNN-based network treated the image
fusion task as image classiﬁcation task, the image patches
with different blur versions are fed into the fusion network
to predict the focus map. Another CNN-based algorithm [13]
proposed by Tang et al. used the CNN model to learn an
effective focus-measure from the perspective of image pixel,
and then compared the value of focus-measures to generate
the decision map. Similar to these two CNN-based fusion
methods, SESF [22] used an encoder network to extract image
features, and then calculated the spatial frequency of image
features to obtain the decision map. Afterward, the above all

3
TABLE I
THE CONCLUSION OF THE EXISTING SOTA METHODS
Classes
Methods
Advantages
Disadvantages
Transform
domain-based
methods
MP [10]
DWT [11]
CVT [26]
SWT [12]
DTCWT [13]
1.These methods have superior expansion
performance and can be used to fuse
different types of images.
2. These methods can utilize local and
multi-resolution image features more
effectively, and the fusion results are
richer in details.
1. The fusion results of these methods
are susceptible to artifacts due to
the halo and blurring effect.
2. The performance of these methods is
limited by the ﬁnite choice of fusion
rules and the complexity of manual
design, and salient image features are
easily lost during the fusion process.
Spatial
domain-based
methods
IMF [27]
GFF [16]
SF [17]
MWGF [18]
Dense SIFT [19]
1. The performance of these algorithms is
robust and not easily affected by noise
and mis-alignment.
2. These methods do notneed to transform
the image to some other feature domain
to achieve fusion, which can effectively
reduce blurring effects and spatial
distortion.
1. these methods tend to lose the
original image information due to the
inaccurate fusion decision map.
2. These algorithms usually contain
more complex processing procedures and
have high computational overhead. In
addition, the algorithms are
inefﬁcient and time-consuming when
fusing source images.
Deep
learning-based
methods
CNN [20]
p-CNN [21]
SESF [22]
IFCNN [25]
DenseFuse [24]
DeepFuse [23]
DRPL [28]
MFF [29]
1. These deep learning-based methods can
automatically learn to extract features
without the need to design complex
extraction approaches.
2. Deep learning based methods can
preserve more informative image features
than complex handcrafted feature
extraction operators.
1.Some deep learning-based methods
rely on generating intermediate
decision maps toachieve image fusion,
and the generated fused images are
prone to artifacts.
2.The fusion strategy is too common to
effectively achieve the fusion of deep
features.
three fusion algorithms adopted a series of post-processing
procedures, such as morphological operations and small block
ﬁlter, to reﬁne the generated decision map. The quality of
fusion image depends heavily on how well the decision map
is reﬁned. Furthermore, image detail information is inevitably
lost during post-processing, resulting in the artifacts in fusion
image.
What’s more, there are also some deep learning-based
networks applied to image fusion tasks. Ram et al. [23]
proposed a deep learning-based fusion network, DeepFuse,
for fusing the exposure images. In DeepFuse, two pre-fusion
convolutional layers which that shared the same weights were
used to extract low-level image features, and then the features
are fused in a single merge layer by an elementwise-add fusion
strategy. Finally, the fused image was reconstructed by three
convolutional layers. Inspired by DeepFuse, Li et al. [20] pro-
posed an unsupervised encoder-decoder network, DenseFuse,
for the infrared and visible fusion problem. DenseFuse consists
of three parts: ﬁrstly, the encoder network was used to extract
the image features, and fused them in a fusion layer by an
L1-norm fusion strategy or elementwise-add fusion strategy,
then reconstructed by the decoder network. These two fu-
sion models do not require the post-processing procedures
to optimize the intermediate decision map. Consequently,
these two fusion models can also fuse other types of images
such as multi-focus images and medical images. Similar to
DeepFuse and DenseFuse, Zhang et al. [25] proposed the
IFCNN which is a general fusion network based on CNN
without any post-processing procedures. In IFCNN, the pre-
trained convolutional layer of ResNet101 was ﬁrstly used
to extract the image features, and then the image features
were fused by different fusion rules according to the type of
input image. The fusion rules include elementwise-maximum,
elementwise-sum, and elementwise-mean. Finally, the fusion
image was reconstructed by two convolutional layers. All
these three fusion models do not require the post-processing
procedures to produce fusion images and their models can
be fully optimized for image fusion. However, there is a
problem in these methods, namely, these methods adopted
the fusion strategy based on simple mathematical operations,
which ignored the deep image details in the process of feature
fusion.
B. Attention Mechanism
Attention mechanism has been widely applied in computer
vision tasks since the SENet [32] was proposed by Hu et
al. in 2017. It is proved that the attention mechanism was
useful for deep learning as an effective component. In SENet,
it ﬁrstly introduced channel-wise attention which calculated
the correlation between different channels by global average
pooling and fully connection layers. Since it is a simple and
‘plug and play’ component, it is also gradually applied in
image fusion tasks. In SESF, the SE module was inserted to the
encoder network to enhance the feature extraction capabilities
of the network. Li et al. [33] introduced the attention module
into the infrared and visible image fusion framework to explore
multi-scale features and force the fusion framework to pay
more attention to the discriminative regions. In NestFuse [34],
Li et al. proposed the cascaded spatial attention and channel
attention as the fusion strategy to fuse the deep features in
the infrared and visible image fusion framework. In GEU-
Net [35], Xiao et al. construct attention-based upsampling
modules to efﬁciently extract and exploit global semantic
and edge information to achieve superior fusion performance.
What’s more, based on SENet, Sanghyun Woo et al. proposed
the convolutional block attention module (CBAM) [36]. The
module calculated the attention map along separate channels

4
UFA
Source image
Feature extraction
Feature fusion
Image construction
Fusion image
Shared 
weights
FEB1
FEB2
FEB7
FEB1
FEB2
FEB7
FFB
ICB1
ICB2
ICB4
Fig. 1. The demonstration of the image fusion framework.
and spatial dimensions. Although CBAM is an effective and
lightweight module, it is rarely seen to be applied in image
fusion tasks. In fact, CBAM is suitable for application in
single-image processing task and can improve the network’s
feature representation capability. As we all know, multi-focus
image fusion aims to integrate as many clear image features as
possible from source images. Therefore, inspired by CBAM,
we want to design a fusion strategy which can focus image
features from channel and spatial these two dimensions. Based
on this, this fusion strategy can preserve more image details
compared to other simple fusion strategy based elementwise
operations.
III. THE PROPOSED FUSION METHOD
In this section, we will amply introduce the proposed fusion
network. Firstly, the fusion framework is presented in Section
A. Then, we introduce the details of our proposed fusion
strategy based on a novel attention model. Finally, we present
a new way to generate a large-scale multi-focus image dataset.
A. Image fusion framework
As shown in Fig. 1, our proposed fusion framework contains
three main portions: feature extraction, feature fusion and
image construction. Firstly, we adopt seven feature extraction
blocks (FEB) to extract image features from multi-focus
source images in the feature extraction module, and each of
the FEB consists of a convolutional layer with kernel size of
3×3 and leakyRelu activation function. For each convolutional
feature of input source images, our proposed feature fusion
module is utilized to fuse the resulting features. Finally, the
image construction module, which is composed of four image
reconstruction blocks (ICB), is used to reconstruct the fused
image features to generate the fusion image. The network
settings of the fusion framework are shown in detail in Table
II. Furthermore, to obtain a more accurate fusion image, we
use the loss function L to train our fusion network in the
training phase.
The loss function L is deﬁned as follows,
L = λL1 + (1 −λ)LSSIM,
(1)
where L1 and LSSIM denote the L1-norm loss function and
structure similarity (SSIM) loss function, and the λ is the trade-
off parameters between L1 and LSSIM.
TABLE II
THE NETWORK SETTINGS OF THE FUSION FRAMEWORK
Layer
Size Stride Channel
(input)
Channel
(output) Activation
Feature
extraciton
Conv(FEB1)
3
1
3
64
LeakyRelu
Conv(FEB2)
3
1
64
64
LeakyRelu
Conv(FEB3)
3
1
64
64
LeakyRelu
Conv(FEB4)
3
1
64
64
LeakyRelu
Conv(FEB5)
3
1
64
64
LeakyRelu
Conv(FEB6)
3
1
64
64
LeakyRelu
Conv(FEB7)
3
1
64
64
LeakyRelu
Feature
fusion
Conv(f7×7)
7
1
2
1
Null
Conv(FFB)
1
1
128
64
Null
Image
constrction
Conv(ICB1)
3
1
64
64
LeakyRelu
Conv(ICB2)
3
1
64
64
LeakyRelu
Conv(ICB3)
3
1
64
64
LeakyRelu
Conv(ICB4)
3
1
64
3
Sigmod
The deﬁnition of L1 loss function is described as below,
L1 = |O −I|1,
(2)
where I and O denote the predicted fusion image and ground-
truth fusion image, respectively.
The LSSIM loss function is calculated as below,
SSIM(O, I) =
(2µOµI + C1) (σOI + C2)
(µ2
O + µ2
I + C1) (µ2
O + µ2
I + C2),
(3)
LSSIM = 1 −SSIM(O, I),
(4)
where SSIM(∗) denotes the structural similarity operation,
which represents the structural similarity between the pre-
dicted fusion image and ground-truth fusion image. µO and
µI indicate the mean value of O and I, σO and σI indicate
the standard deviation of O and I, respectively. σOI denotes
the covariance between O and I. C1 and C2 are constants to
avoid the case where the denominator is 0. The parameter λ
was set to 0.2 by experimental and reference a priori empirical
values [37]. A detailed analysis of the values of the parameter
λ is presented in the ablation study given in Section IV-B.
B. Fusion strategy
According to previous works [23]–[25], we can know
that most fusion strategies are based on straightforward fu-
sion operators, such as elementwise-add, elementwise-mean,
elementwise-maximum, and elementwise-sum. These simple
fusion strategies fuse all extracted image features equally,

5
A 
B 
: average-pool operation
: max-pool operation
Conv
Softmax
Conv
Softmax
A
M
A
A
A
M
M
A
C
C : concat operation
: element-wise multiplication operation
F1
F2
A1
A2
1
c
M
2
c
M
'
1
F
'
2
F
( ,
)
1
s avg
F
( ,max)
1
s
F
( ,max)
2
s
F
( ,
)
2
s avg
F
1
AM
2
AM
1
s
M
2
s
M
''
2
F
''
1
F
Fig. 2. Diagram of the unity fusion attention module.
which causes the loss of informative image features. This is
why the fusion algorithms with simple fusion strategies are
hard to recover a high visual quality fusion image to some
extent.
As we have learned, the application of attention mechanism
in infrared and visible image fusion task [33]–[35] and inspired
by CBAM [36], we further propose a novel fusion strategy
based on attention mechanism in the process of feature fusion.
The feature weights of the attention-based feature fusion
structure are learned adaptively by the attention module. The
fusion strategy based on the attention mechanism will give
more weight to important features, and this will be more
reasonable than the fusion strategy with directly speciﬁed
weights. Speciﬁcally, our fusion strategy is based on unity
fusion attention, and we exploit both channel and spatial at-
tention based on this efﬁcient architecture. The demonstration
of the UFA module shows in Fig. 2.
Given an intermediate feature map Fk ∈RC×H×W , k ∈
1, · · · , K, where K=2 is set as the number of input images.
Then the channel attention maps M c
k ∈RC×1×1 and spatial
attention map M s
k ∈R1×H×W can be obtained through dif-
ferent operations. The whole fusion process can be formulated
as below:
F ′
k = M c
k (Fk) ⊗Fk,
(5)
F ′′
k = M s
k (F ′
k) ⊗F ′
k,
(6)
where the ⊗denotes element-wise multiplication. F ′′
k is the
ﬁnal output of the UFA module. Besides, it should be noted
that the ﬁnal outputs of the UFA module are concatenated at
the trail of module. Then, the concatenated features are fed
into the feature fusion block(FFB) for channel compression
and feature fusion. Finally, the output of the FFB is input to
the reconstruction module to generate the fusion image.
1) Channel attention block: The channel attention provides
more ﬂexibility to handle different types of information, fo-
cusing more attention on the important channel information.
The channel attention maps are produced by calculating the
channel relationship between different image features. In order
to effectively compute the channel attention, the average-
pooling operation is used to aggregating spatial information.
As we know, the average-pooling operation can compute the
spatial statistics. We empirically conﬁrm that the average-
pooling operation greatly improves the representation power
of neural networks. The computation process of features is
formulated as below.
Ak = AP (Fk) ,
(7)
M c
k =
eAk
PK
i=1 eAi ,
(8)
where the AP(·) denotes average-pooling operation, and Ak
denotes the average-pooled features. Then the features are
forwarded to a Softmax activation function to generate the
channel attention maps M c
k ∈RC×1×1.
2) Spatial attention block: Spatial attention is different
from channel attention, which concentrates on the informa-
tive region from the spatial dimension. The spatial attention
maps are obtained from computing the spatial relationship of
features. We apply the average-pooling operation and max-
pooling operation in given image feature maps, and then the
average-pooled features F (s,avg)
k
∈R1×H×W and the max-
pooled features F (s,max)
k
∈R1×H×W are concatenated and the
concatenated features are fed into a standard convolution layer
to generate the spatial attention map AM k. Afterward, the
spatial attention map AM k are fed into the Softmax function
to generate the ﬁnal attention map M s
k.
AMk = f 7×7 ([AvgPool (F ′
k) ; MaxPool (F ′
k)]) ,
= f 7×7 h
F (s,vy)
k
; F (s,max)
k
i
,
(9)
M s
k =
eAMk
PK
i=1 eAMi ,
(10)
where f 7×7 denotes the standard convolution layer with the
sizes of 7×7. AvgPool (·) and MaxPool (·) represent the
average-pooling operation and max-pooling operation, respec-
tively.
To intuitively verify the effectiveness of the proposed
unity attention mechanism, we visualize the channel-wise and
spatial-wise feature weight maps of the output of the attention

6
(a) Input source image A
(b) Input source image B
(c) Spatial attention map
(d) Spatial attention map
s
1
M
2
s
M
(e) Channel attention map
c
1
M
(f) Channel attention map
c
2
M
Fig. 3. The Visualized attention feature maps.
module. It can be clearly observed that the feature maps
of different dimensions are adaptively learned with differ-
ent weights. The proposed attention module treats different
features unequally in different dimensions, while providing
additional ﬂexibility for the processing of different types of
information. As shown in Fig. 3 (c) and (d), the spatial feature
map M s
1 and M s
2 have greater weights at the boundaries as
well as the salient target regions and edges within the image.
This shows that the proposed attention mechanism makes
the fusion module pay more attention to salient targets and
edge regions from the spatial dimension during the fusion
process. Fig. 3 (e) and (f) show the visualized channel weights
maps, the output of the attention module in the channel
dimension also clearly shows that different features can learn
completely different weights adaptively. In conclusion, the
proposed attention mechanism allows the fusion module to
focus more on the salient target and edge regions during the
fusion process.
C. Training dataset
As is well-known, the models based on CNN are data-
driven. Therefore, a well-generated large-scale image dataset
plays an important role in the process of network training
for deep learning-based models. In terms of training datasets,
many works have tried different solutions. In [20], Liu et al.
assumed that two states exist per pair of multi-focus image
patches: the ﬁrst state is that if one patch is focused and
another patch is blurred, the second state is opposite to the
ﬁrst state. Based on this assumption, they created a huge image
dataset which randomly cropped from the ImageNet dataset.
The generated dataset contains approximately 2,000,000 pairs
of image patches with sizes 16×16. Besides, all the blurred
patches in the generated dataset are obtained by blurring the
focused patches with different levels of Gaussian ﬁlter. Similar
to CNN, Tang et al. formulated multi-focus image fusion as
a classiﬁcation task in p-CNN [21], they broadly divided the
image patches into three categories: focused, blurred, or un-
known. Therefore, they generated a large-scale image dataset
which was rendered with 12 handcrafted blurring masks. This
generated dataset has a total of 1450000 image patches with
sizes 32×32, speciﬁcally, it contains 650000 focused patches,
700000 blurred patches and 100000 unknown types of patches.
Lacking large-scale dataset is not unique in other image fusion
ﬁelds as well. For instance, the training dataset in DeepFuse
[23] is obtained by randomly cropped image patches from
another small scale multi-exposure dataset. What’s more, the
dataset applied in DenseFuse [24] is the MS-COCO dataset
[38] which is generated for object detection. But the dataset
is not speciﬁc and deliberate to train the infrared and visible
image fusion model, which will absolutely limit the perfor-
mance of the network.
As we have learned in [20], the dataset for training fusion
model proposed in CNN only contains one type of image patch
pairs (i.e., if one patch is blurred and another patch in the same
image patch pair is focused). In addition, the same question ex-
ists in p-CNN, the training image patches have been classiﬁed
into focused, unknown and defocused these three types to train
the fusion model. We knew that these two datasets applied on
CNN and p-CNN are essentially used to train classiﬁcation
tasks. Therefore, these two datasets are not appropriate for
training the end-to-end image fusion network with supervised
learning strategy. Compared to the two datasets mentioned
above, the datasets in DeepFuse and DenseFuse are suitable
for training an end-to-end fusion framework. However, the
dataset applied in DeepFuse is obtained by randomly cropped
on a small-scale multi-exposure image set, and the generated
dataset lacks ground-truth fusion images. The DeepFuse fusion
model has to be trained with the unsupervised learning strat-
egy. Similar to DeepFuse, the training dataset in DenseFuse
also lacks the ground-truth fusion image. DenseFuse trained
on the MS-COCO dataset with the unsupervised SSIM [39]
loss function. It is no doubt that no ground-truth fusion image
will absolutely restrict the performance of the trained fusion
models. Besides, most datasets have been cropped with the
small sizes 16×16, 32×32 and 64×64 in the pretreatment
processing according to previous works. Due to the small

7
(a) Source image
(b) Blurred image
(c) Image label
(d) Focus map
(e) Difference focus map 
(g) Near blurred part
(f) Near focused part
(h) Far blurred part
(i) Far focused part
(j) Near focused image
(k) Far focused image
Fig. 4. The demonstration of generating an multi-focus image dataset.
size of training image patches, it will lose some texture and
contextual information in the training process of fusion model.
This is not suitable for image fusion, since image fusion tasks
need discriminative image features.
As shown in the previous Refs. [20], [23], [24], a beﬁtting
dataset is important for image fusion models. To our minds,
a qualiﬁed multi-focus image dataset should have at least
two basic points: one point is that the ground-truth fusion
images of the multi-focus images should be obtained from
the generated dataset. Another point is that the number and
the size of composite multi-focus images cannot be small
and the composite should simulate real multi-focus images
as much as possible. Inspired by previous works [20], [23],
[24], we proposed a new way to generate a multi-focus image
dataset based on the DUTS dataset reasonably and intuitively.
DUTS [40] dataset is proposed for salient object detection at
ﬁrst, which consists of 15572 labeled images. Speciﬁcally, our
multi-focus image dataset is generated from the DUTS dataset
as the following steps:
(i) The source image Is from the DUTS dataset is blurred
by the mean ﬁlter, and then the complete blurry image Ib is
obtained. Besides, when we use the mean ﬁlter with different
sizes, we can obtain the images with varying degrees of blur.
(ii) Finding the focus map is an important procedure for the
dataset generation method. The focus map is obtained from the
image label, but the image label is not a binary map. Therefore,
we choose a threshold function to normalize the image label
into a binary map (i.e., focus map If).
(iii) Then a pair of multi-focus images could be generated
according to source image Is, blurry image Ib and focus map
If, as formulated below
 Inear = Is ⊙If + Ib ⊙(1 −If) ,
Ifar = Ib ⊙If + Is ⊙(1 −If) ,
(11)
where Inear denotes the near focused image, and Ifar denotes
the far focused image, they are a pair of multi-focus images,
⊙means dot product operation. 1 stands for an all one matrix
and it has the same size with Is and If.
The multi-focus image dataset can be obtained according
to these generation procedures. What’s more, as illustrated in
step (i), we adopted the mean ﬁlter with different sizes to blur
the image to make the generated dataset more natural. We set
the size of the mean ﬁlter to four different intervals, which are
[2, 3], [4, 5], [5, 7] and [8, 10], respectively. So, the generated
dataset consists of four groups of images with different levels
of blur. In addition, the number of our multi-focus image pairs
is theoretically inﬁnite according to this generation method.
Overall, the dataset based on our generation method is more
diverse and closer to reality than the previous works. Our
dataset generation method shows in Fig. 4, which visualizes
the state of the image after each generation procedure. Fig.
4 (a) is the source image and it is also taken as the ground-
truth fusion image in the generated dataset. The blurred image
shown in Fig. 4 (b) is generated through step (i), and the image
label shown in Fig. 4 (c) is obtained from the original DUTS
dataset. Then the focus map shown in Fig. 4 (d) is generated
by step (ii) and the difference focus map, as expressed in Fig.
4 (e), is obtained by all one matrix subtracting the focus map.
Finally, according to the step (iii), we would further obtain the
near-focused multi-focus image and far focused multi-focus
image.
In general, our generated multi-focus image dataset has
three advantages compared to the previous dataset, for in-
stance: (I) It is easy to implement when ﬁnding a salient
objects detection dataset with image labels. (II) It can generate
a sufﬁcient number of multi-focus image pairs according to the
training needs. (III) It owns ground-truth fusion images for
each generated multi-focus image pairs. Based on these char-

8
Fig. 5. The multi-focus image dataset.
acteristics, we can train an end-to-end image fusion network
based on our generated dataset.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, we have conducted extensive experiments
on publicly available datasets to validate the performance
of the proposed image fusion model from a qualitative and
quantitative perspective. Firstly, some experimental details are
introduced. Then, the ablation study is conducted to discuss
the setting of parameter λ in the loss function and validate the
effectiveness of the proposed unity fusion attention. Afterward,
the qualitative evaluation results and quantitative evaluation
results are illustrated. Finally, we evaluate the performance of
other image fusion tasks to further demonstrate the effective-
ness of our proposed fusion model.
A. Experimental settings
First of all, we introduce the training details which are
important for the training of fusion models. The proposed
fusion model is trained by using the generated dataset, which
consists of 84424 images. In each training batch, we randomly
extract 8 images with the sizes of 256×256. We implement our
proposed fusion model with Pytorch framework and update it
with Adam optimizer [41]. The learning rate is initialized to
1e-4 for all layers and divided into ten for every 200 epochs.
The proposed fusion framework is trained for a total of 300
epochs, and the total training time is 60h. The proposed model
is trained and tested on an eight-core PC with an Intel 9700KF
3.5 GHz CPU (with 16 GB RAM) and a GTX 2070Super GPU
(with 8GB memory).
To objectively verify the superiority of our proposed fusion
method over other fusion methods, we have compared it with
nineteen representative fusion algorithms. What’s more, the
comparison algorithms we chose are diverse and not limited to
those deep learning-based methods. Speciﬁcally, the compari-
son algorithms contain such as sparse representation (SR) [42],
curvelet transform (CVT) [26], discrete wavelet transform
(DWT) [11], dual-tree complex wavelet transform (DTCWT),
non-subsampled contourlet transform (NSCT) [14] these trans-
form domain-based fusion algorithms; dense SIFT (DSIFT)
[19], guiding ﬁlter fusion (GFF) [16], matting fusion (IMF)
[27], multi-scale weighted gradient fusion (MWGF) [18] and
spatial frequency (SF) [17] these spatial domain-based algo-
rithms; convolutional neural network (CNN) [20], DeepFuse
[23], SESF, DenseFuse [24] (including elementwise-add and
L1 fusion strategy), DRPL [28], MFF [29] and IFCNN [25]
(including elementwise-maximum fusion strategy) these deep
learning-based algorithms. Compared with these traditional
comparison algorithms (including transform domain-based and
spatial domain-based algorithms), the proposed algorithm has
stronger feature representation capability and can effectively
extract more informative image features. Moreover, compared
with these deep learning-based comparison algorithms, the
proposed algorithm is an end-to-end network structure and
does not require the generation of an intermediate decision
map to achieve image fusion. In addition, the proposed al-
gorithm designs the novel attention mechanism-based fusion
strategies, which can provide additional ﬂexibility for fusing
different types of image features.
What’s more, we have discriminated against the perfor-
mance of different fusion models through qualitative and quan-
titative evaluation methods. From the perspective of qualitative
evaluation methods, whether the visual effects of the fusion
image differ from the source images is the main discriminating

9
0
10
20
30
40
50
Epoch
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Loss
= 0
= 0.2
= 0.4
= 0.6
= 0.8
= 1
5
10
15
Epoch
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Loss
= 0
= 0.2
= 0.4
= 0.6
= 0.8
= 1
Fig. 6. The line charts of Loss in training phase.
method. Speciﬁcally, the fused image should contain as many
distinct and sharp features from source images in multi-focus
image fusion, and does not exist additional artifacts. Since
only evaluating the performance of fusion methods from the
qualitative perspective is not comprehensive. Consequently, we
further use seven metrics to evaluate the performance of the
fusion algorithms on the multi-focus image fusion. The seven
metrics are respectively the visual information ﬁdelity (VIFF)
[43], standard deviation (STD) [44], average gradient (AVG)
[45], gradient-based fusion performance (Qabf) [46], shannon
entropy (SEN) [47], Qc [48] and Qm [49].
VIFF, which is an evaluation metric based on human visual
perception, measures the visual information ﬁdelity between
the fusion image and source images. STD and AVG, which
are two image features-based evaluation metrics, measure the
textural information of the fusion image from a statistical point
of view. Qabf is an evaluation metric based on source images
and the fusion image, and Qabf evaluates the performance
of fusion methods based on gradient. SEN is an evaluation
metric based on information theory. Qm retrieves the edge
information from the high and band-pass components of
the decomposition by using the two-level Haar wavelet. Qc
employs the major features in human visual system model to
evaluate the perceptual quality of image fusion. There is no
doubt that these seven metrics cover different types of fusion
evaluation metrics. So, it is enough to evaluate the fusion
results of different fusion models through these seven metrics.
These seven metrics can objectively reﬂect the abilities of
fusion methods on merging the clear image features and on
integrating the texture information. It is certainly appropriate
to choose these seven metrics to evaluate the performance of
different fusion algorithms. In addition, it should be noted that
qualitative evaluation and quantitative evaluation perform on
the ‘Lytro’ multi-focus image dataset [50], as shown in Fig.
5, the dataset contains 20 pairs of multi-focus images.
TABLE III
THE METRICS VALUES WITH DIFFERENT λ
AVG
STD
SEN
Qabf
λ = 0
8.1440
62.2940
7.5523
0.7312
λ = 0.2
8.2149
62.6244
7.5689
0.7300
λ = 0.4
8.1690
62.5130
7.5608
0.7214
λ = 0.6
8.1764
62.5121
7.5584
0.7278
λ = 0.8
8.2644
62.2040
7.5427
0.7228
λ = 1
8.0715
61.7889
7.5570
0.7240
B. Ablation study
1) Parameter(λ) in Loss Function: As stated in Section
III-A, the value of the parameter λ in the loss function L is
set to 0.2 with reference to the priori empirical value [37].
We need to experimentally verify whether the parameter λ
is appropriate when it takes the value of 0.2. Therefore, we
trained the network by taking different values of the parameter
λ and visualized the loss function curves of the network with
different parameters λ. During the experiments, the parameters
λ were set to 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 and 1. The visualized
loss function curves are shown in Fig. 6. In Fig. 6, we can
see that the convergence of the fusion network slows down
as the parameter λ increases. When λ = 0 or λ = 0.2, the
convergence speed of the fusion network is the fastest and the
two curves are almost indistinguishable. Furthermore, to verify
which parameter λ makes the fusion network achieve the best
results. We selected four metrics to quantify the performance
of the network with different values of λ on the test image set
after 50 epochs of training. These quantiﬁed values are shown
in Table III, with the best value in green and the second-best
value in blue. As shown in Table III, we can clearly see that
the fusion network achieves better fusion results when λ is
taken to be 0.2. This also shows that it is appropriate to take
a value of 0.2 for the parameter λ in our experiments with
reference to the priori empirical value.
2) The inﬂuence of the proposed attention model: We eval-
uated our proposed fusion model with ablation experiments to

10
(f) DWT
(g) CVT
(c) DTCWT
(d) NSCT
(e) SR
(h) SF
(i) GFF
(j) IMF
(k) MWGF
(l) DSIFT
(m) CNN
(n) DeepFuse
(q) IFCNN-MAX
(t) PROPOSED
(a) source image A
(b) source image B
(r) DRPL
(s) MFF
(o) DenseFuse-ADD
(p) DenseFuse-L1
Fig. 7. The visualization of “Volleyball court” fused results.
verify the contribution of the designed unity fusion attention
module. We picked four different modes to train the image
fusion model with 50 epochs. There are ‘NO-UFA’, ‘NO-SA’,
‘NO-CA’ and UFA, respectively. ‘NO-UFA’ denotes that the
fusion model does not contain the unity attention module.
‘NO-SA’ denotes the UFA module in the fusion model has
removed the spatial attention module. ‘NO-CA’ denotes that
the UFA module in the fusion model has been removed from
the channel attention module. ‘UFA’ denotes our proposed
fusion model which contains a complete UFA module. For
a more intuitive comparison, we quantify the performance of
these four trained modes on the ‘Lytro’ multi-focus image
dataset through the metrics of AVG, SEN and STD. Table
IV shows the quantitative results of these four fusion modes.
It can be seen from Table IV that the fusion mode obtains
the relatively low value on three evaluation metrics when the
UFA module is removed. Besides, we can clearly observe that
the fusion modes with CA or SA could perform better than
the fusion mode without CA or SA. Of course, there is no
TABLE IV
THE QUANTITATIVE RESULTS OF ABLATION STUDY
AVG
SEN
STD
NO-UFA
8.1859
7.5629
61.6871
NO-SA
8.1956
7.5660
61.8769
NO-CA
8.1964
7.5668
62.2399
UFA
8.2149
7.5689
62.6244
doubt that the fusion mode with UFA module achieves the best
performance on three evaluation metrics. These comparisons
ﬁrmly demonstrate the effectiveness of UFA and indicate the
fusion mode with UFA is more effective than the fusion mode
with CA or SA. In summary, the proposed UFA module is
applicable to achieve effective and powerful fusion network
for image fusion.
C. Multi-focus image fusion
Since our proposed model has been trained on the multi-
focus image dataset we created, we ﬁrstly want to authenticate

11
(a) DWT
(b) CVT
(c) DTCWT
(d) NSCT
(e) SR
(g) SF
(i) GFF
(j) IMF
(k) MWGF
(l) DSIFT
(m) CNN
(n) DeepFuse
(q) IFCNN-MAX
(t) PROPOSED
(a) source image A
(b) source image B
(r) DRPL
(s) MFF
(o) DenseFuse-ADD
(p) DenseFuse-L1
Fig. 8. The visualization of “Toy monkey” fused results.
the performance of the trained model on fusing multi-focus
images, and then compare it with other advanced multi-
focus image fusion algorithms to verify the superiority of our
proposed fusion model. We show three comparison examples
in Fig. 7, Fig. 8 and Fig. 9.
Fig. 7(a)-(t) show the fusion results of source images Fig.
7(a) and (b), the source images show the far focused volleyball
court and the near focused chain-link fence, respectively. The
fusion image is to integrate the clear visual information from
source images into a completely clear image as much as
possible. As shown in Fig. 7, not all the fusion algorithms
have achieved desirable performance. It can be seen from
Fig. 7(f) that DWT fails to fuse the near- focused chain-
link fence, the partially enlarged screenshot clearly shows the
fusion image losses some texture information about the chain-
link fence. Fig. 7(d) shows that the fusion image of NSCT
shows oblique artifacts in chain-link fence. Fig. 7(e), Fig. 7(h)
and Fig. 7(r) show that the fusion image of SR, SF and DRPL
are more blurry than other fusion images. As shown in Fig.
7(i)-(l), the fusion image of GFF, IMF, MWGF and DSIFT
all have not well integrated the clear image features from
the source images, blocks of blur and artifacts can be easily
observed in closeups. It can be seen from Fig. 7(n)-(p) that
DeepFuse and DenseFuse abnormally increase the luminance
of the fusion image. As for Fig. 7(c), (g), (m), (q), (s) and
(t), the fusion images of DTCWT, CVT, CNN, IFCNN, MFF
and the proposed model all have well merged the clear visual
information from source images, and showed pleasant visual
effects that are different from other fusion algorithms.
In Fig. 8, we visualize the fused results of Fig. 8(a) and
(b), which captured a toy monkey in front of two buildings.
The ideal fusion image should combine the near-focused toy
monkey and the far-focused two buildings. As shown in the
magniﬁed region which is placed in the lower-right corner
in each image, Fig. 8(f), (j), (l) and (r) show that the fusion
images of DWT, IMF, DSIFT and DRPL suffer from blurring
effects around the toy monkey’s hat. What’s more, it can
be seen from Fig. 8(d) that the boundary of the building is

12
(f) DWT
(g) CVT
(c) DTCWT
(d) NSCT
(e) SR
(h) SF
(i) GFF
(j) IMF
(k) MWGF
(l) DSIFT
(m) CNN
(n) DeepFuse
(q) IFCNN-MAX
(t) PROPOSED
(a) source image A
(b) source image B
(r) DRPL
(s) MFF
(p) DenseFuse-L1
(o) DenseFuse-ADD
Fig. 9. The visualization of “Heart-shaped label” fused results.
distorted. Fig. 8(h), (i) and (k) show that SF, GFF and MWGF
are weak for integrating the clear image features from both
source images. The building does not show clear boundaries.
Besides, although the DeepFuse performs image fusion not
bad, the fusion image as shown in Fig. 8(n) is brighter than
other fusion images. Fig. 8(o) and (p) show that the fusion
images of DenseFuse are low-contrast, which means that the
DenseFuse lacks strong ability to fuse multi-focus images.
Finally, as shown in Fig. 8(g), (m), (q), (s) and (t), CVT, CNN,
IFCNN, MFF and our proposed model perform image fusion
well, and achieves remarkable fusion effect.
Fig. 9(a)-(t) show the fusion results of images Fig. 9(a) and
(b), which captured a heart-shaped label in front of buildings.
As the closeups demonstrated, Fig. 9(h), (i), (n), (o) and
(p) show that the fusion results of SF, GFF, DeepFuse and
DenseFuse fail to fuse the clear image features at the border,
the building looks blurry. It can be seen from Fig. 9(j) that
the border of the heart-shaped label is almost blurred, which
might be caused by excessive smoothing. What’s more, it is
easy to be disturbed by noise in the process of image fusion.
We can observe that the fusion results of DWT, CVT, DTCWT,
NSCT, DSIFT and DRPL exist point of blurring in the border
of the building. In the end, our proposed model, CNN and
IFCNN have ﬁnely integrated the clear image features into
fusion images, generating comparable fusion images.
Besides the qualitative evaluation for each fusion result, we
have also used the seven objective metrics to quantitatively
evaluate the performance of the different fusion algorithms.
Table V lists the quantitative results, each value in this table
denotes the mean metric value on the full “Lytro” dataset
which is fused by different fusion methods. Moreover, the
best value is shown in green and the second-best value is
shown in blue in the corresponding metric column of this
table. We can see from the quantitative comparison in Table
V that our proposed model and SESF clearly outperform the
other 19 fusion methods on the value of the AVG, STD, SEN,

13
TABLE V
THE QUANTITATIVE RESULTS OF COMPARISON ALGORITHMS
Methods
AVG
STD
SEN
VIFF
Qabf
Qc
Qm
Time
DWT(Li and Manjunath et al. 1995)
8.3285
61.6849
7.5676
0.8730
0.6839
0.7925
2.9613
11.34
CVT(Nencini et al. 1995)
8.2652
62.2107
7.5701
0.9359
0.7113
0.7993
2.9662
12.98
DTCWT(Lewis et al. 2007)
8.3016
62.2172
7.5682
0.9368
0.7245
0.8077
2.9693
11.68
NSCT(Zhang and Li et al. 2009)
8.2761
62.3538
7.5661
0.9524
0.7250
0.8160
2.9682
17.94
SR(Yang an Li et al.2010)
8.2142
62.2011
7.5656
0.9510
0.7299
0.8132
2.9704
155.65
SF(Li and Kork et al. 2011)
5.2123
59.8217
7.5421
0.7085
0.5854
0.7905
2.8363
1.78
GFF(Li and Kang et al. 2014)
5.4857
60.5329
7.5468
0.7489
0.5651
0.7921
2.8423
28.32
IMF(Chen and Guan et al. 2015)
6.3718
60.8008
7.5462
0.7644
0.6189
0.7135
2.8756
30.55
MWGF(Zhou et al. 2014)
8.1591
62.2509
7.5700
0.9598
0.7322
0.8119
2.9666
23.16
DSIFT(Liu et al. 2015)
8.3142
62.3776
7.5675
0.9657
0.7555
0.8139
2.9726
41.95
CNN(Liu et al. 2017)
8.2537
62.3058
7.5694
0.9580
0.7394
0.8177
2.9707
96.73
DeepFuse(Li et al. 2017)
4.8398
54.9187
7.3964
0.5718
0.4969
0.6936
2.8116
0.62
DenseFuse-ADD(Li et al. 2019)
5.1821
59.6207
7.5391
0.7030
0.5834
0.7894
2.8350
3.31
DenseFuse-L1(Li et al. 2019)
5.3261
59.4228
7.5385
0.6927
0.6030
0.7923
2.8379
19.40
IFCNN-MAX(Zhang et al. 2020)
8.0665
62.0851
7.5618
0.9562
0.7113
0.8176
2.9529
null
SESF(Ma et al. 2020)
8.3345
62.4297
7.5686
0.9676
0.7375
0.8160
2.9731
2.53
DRPL(Li et al. 2020)
8.3086
62.3017
7.5751
0.9643
0.7342
0.8102
2.9666
0.33
MFF(Zhang et al. 2021)
8.2952
62.6967
7.4035
0.9673
0.7364
0.7444
2.9163
1.14
Proposed
8.3401
62.7020
7.5791
0.9679
0.7417
0.8187
2.9742
0.26
VIFF, Qc and Qm fusing evaluation metrics, which implies our
proposed model and SESF have obtained better image features,
edge information and higher visual information ﬁdelity. As
for the Qabf metric, the DSIFT achieved the highest value
and our proposed model ranks second. According to the all-
inclusive evaluation on the public multi-focus image dataset,
our proposed fusion model can sustain relatively higher visual
information ﬁdelity, preserve more gradient and textural infor-
mation, and produce visually-pleasing fusion image compared
to other comparison algorithms. Thus, our proposed fusion
model has demonstrated better performance on the multi-
focus image dataset compared to other state-of-art algorithms.
In addition, we compare the time efﬁciency of each fusion
framework by calculating the average time to process an
image. Apparently, the average time for processing an image
is the least for our proposed framework which takes only 0.26
seconds, while the fastest of all other comparison methods
takes 0.33 seconds. This also indicates that the proposed
framework has efﬁcient processing efﬁciency while recovering
high-quality fused images.
D. Expanded experiments
Our proposed fusion network also serves as a fusion model
for other image fusion tasks. We evaluate the infrared and
visible image fusion performance and medical image fusion
performance to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
fusion model. Here we choose ﬁve representative algorithms
to compare with our fusion model. Three of these ﬁve
comparison algorithms are designed for infrared and visible
image fusion and medical image fusion. They are GTF [51],
DenseFuse-ADD [24] and IFCNN-SUM [25]. As for CVT
[26] and DeepFuse [23], they are two general image fusion
methods which can be applied in different image fusion tasks.
Besides, we choose four metrics from seven metrics which
are mentioned above to quantify the performance of these
algorithms on infrared and visible image fusion and medical
fusion. They are AVG, STD, VIFF and Qabf, respectively. To
objectively verify the performance of these methods, we also
evaluate the performance of these fusion tasks from qualitative
and quantitative perspectives.
1) Infrared and visible image fusion: Fig. 10 shows the
comparison examples, and the source visible and infrared
images are from the ‘TNO’ visible and infrared dataset [52]
which includes 14 image pairs. It is well known that a
good fusion image should integrate as much as visible image
features from visible image and the salient bright image
features from the infrared image [34]. It can be seen from
Fig. 10 (c)-(g) that the fusion images of CVT, GTF, DeepFuse,
DenseFuse-ADD and IFCNN-SUM fail to preserve the bright
image features, the infrared imaging of the human ﬁgures
which can be observed in closeups are dim compared to the
source infrared image. However, our proposed fusion model
has integrated the salient bright image features into the fusion
image successfully. Fig. 10 (h) shows that the people ﬁgure
in fusion image is brighter than other methods. Although our
proposed fusion model achieves good performance compared
to other algorithms, there are some shortcomings in the fusion
image. Our proposed fusion model is not designed for infrared
and visible image fusion, so the fusion model does not
integrate the meaningful image feature from the source image
completely. The trees in the fusion image are not as clear as in
the visible image, and this problem also exists in other fusion
images. Broadly speaking, our proposed fusion model achieves
the best performance in comparison algorithms.
Table VI shows the performance of the fusion algorithms
on the ‘TNO’ infrared and visible image dataset. Each metric
value listed in Table VI is the mean metric value on the
full infrared and visible image dataset. In the evaluation of
four metrics, our fusion model outperforms other methods.
Our fusion model obtains the high value on AVG, STD and
VIFF, these high metric values on these three metrics in
consistence to our visual judgment. Moreover, the high values
on metrics mean that our fusion model can integrate more rich
information and texture information from source images into
the fusion image. Absolutely, the thing worth commenting on
is that the correlation between the visible image and infrared

14
(a) Visible image
(b) Infrared image
(c) CVT
(d) GTF
(e) DeepFuse
(f) DenseFuse-ADD
(g) IFCNN-SUM
(h) Proposed
Fig. 10. The comparison example of infrared and visible images.
TABLE VI
THE QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION RESULTS ON THE VISIBLE AND INFRARED DATASET.
Methods
CVT
GTF
DenseFuse-ADD
DeepFuse
IFCNN-SUM
Proposed
AVG
4.558
3.014
3.810
2.921
4.525
4.802
STD
25.551
24.157
31.310
22.644
24.212
29.214
VIFF
0.311
0.257
0.352
0.292
0.301
0.313
Qabf
0.509
0.412
0.456
0.392
0.517
0.489
image is relatively low [53], which differs from the multi-
focus images. Therefore, a poorly fused image is more similar
to the source image because it integrates only part of the
image’s features, while a well-fused image is more different
from the source image because it integrates most of the source
image’s features. This is why IFCNN-SUM, which is poorly
fused, obtains a higher value for the metric Qabf based on the
evaluation of source images and the fusion image.
2) Medical image fusion: In this subsection, we also eval-
uate the performance of our proposed model performs on
the multi-modal medical image dataset [54]. The multi-modal
medical image dataset contains eight pairs of images, namely
eight CT images and eight MR images. Fig. 11 (a) and (b)
show a pair of CT and MR slices which are obtained by
scanning the human brain. As everyone knows [55], [56], an
ideal medical fusion image should preserve as much as textural
tissue features from the source MR image and bright skull
features from the source CT image. As shown in Fig. 11 (c)
and (d), the fusion image of CVT and GTF fails to integrate
some portions of bright skull features from the source CT
image. It can be seen from Fig. 11 (e) and (f) that DeepFuse
and DenseFuse-ADD have successfully injected the salient
image features from source CT and MR images into the fusion
image, but the luminance of the fusion images has changed a
lot compared to the source images. Fig. 11 (g) and (h) show
that IFCNN-SUM and our proposed model have successfully
integrated most of the textural tissue and bright skull features
from source images. Besides, the fusion image generated by
our proposed fusion model has a better visual quality than
IFCNN-SUM, which can be easily observed in closeups.
Table VII shows the evaluation results of the fusion algo-
rithms on the medical image dataset, and each value listed in
Table VII is the mean metric value on the total eight pairs
of medical images. As shown in Table VII, our proposed
fusion model is superior to other fusion algorithms, such as
the quantitative evaluation results of AVG and STD rank in the
ﬁrst place, the quantitative evaluation result of VIFF ranks in
second place, which indicates our proposed fusion model could
inject more textural and bright image features from source CT
and MR images into the fusion image. Similar to the infrared
and visible images, the medical images with different modal-
ities have a low correlation. So the IFCNN-SUM and CVT
achieve the best performance on the metric Qabf. Overall, our
proposed fusion model achieves comparable performance for
multi-modal medical images.
V. DISCUSSION
As a tool to expand the measurement of optical lenses,
multi-focus image fusion technology has the advantages of
high efﬁciency and low cost, and in recent years, it has
also been widely used in industrial, biological and medical
ﬁelds. Speciﬁcally, it has been successfully applied to optical
microscopes to enhance the imaging quality of microscopic
views of microorganisms [57] and to collect tiny biological
samples [58]. In medical-related ﬁelds, multi-focus image
fusion technology is used to fuse microscopic cervical cell im-
ages for disease diagnosis [6], and it is also used to accurately
acquire Pap smear images [8]. In industry, multi-focus image
fusion can be applied to structural measurements of nonwoven
fabrics [7] and can be equipped to microscope systems to
improve the quality of the acquired printed circuit board (PCB)
images [59]. In general, multi-focus image fusion technology
is relevant to our real life and therefore the proposed fusion
framework is applicable for practical applications. However,
there are some limitations to the implementation of multi-
focus image fusion techniques. The multi-focus image fusion

15
(a) CT image
(b) MR image
(c) CVT
(d) GTF
(e) DeepFuse
(f) DenseFuse-ADD
(g) IFCNN-SUM
(h) Proposed
Fig. 11. The comparison example of medical images.
TABLE VII
THE QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION RESULTS ON THE MEDICAL IMAGE DATASET.
Methods
CVT
GTF
DenseFuse-ADD
DeepFuse
IFCNN-SUM
Proposed
AVG
8.718
6.433
5.976
5.919
8.949
9.003
STD
58.272
50.522
57.561
51.518
57.611
67.270
VIFF
0.243
0.250
0.287
0.257
0.257
0.264
Qabf
0.523
0.450
0.464
0.391
0.543
0.479
technique is more suitable for fusing static aligned images,
and the real-time performance of the fusion technique still has
much potential for improvement. Based on this, in our future
research work, we will further improve the multi-focus image
fusion algorithm from two aspects, namely, improving the
processing speed of the algorithm and the implementation of
real-time image alignment. Of course, this is also a reasonable
discussion based on the problems of multi-focus image fusion
technology in practical applications, and we hope to verify
the feasibility of the improvement direction in the subsequent
work.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a novel and effective image
fusion model which can be trained in an end-to-end manner
with supervised learning strategy. It avoids generating the
intermediate decision map and utilizing post-process proce-
dures to reﬁne decision map for image fusion. Besides, to
ﬁnely train the proposed fusion model, we have generated
a large-scale multi-focus image dataset with ground-truth
fusion images, and designed a novel fusion strategy based on
the unity fusion attention, which can preserve more image
information in the process of feature fusion. Speciﬁcally, the
salient image features are ﬁrstly extracted from multiple input
images. Then the proposed unity fusion attention is utilized to
fuse these extracted convolutional features. Finally, the fused
image features are fed into the cascaded convolutional blocks
to reconstruct the fusion image. Extensive experiments are
conducted to compare with other state-of-art fusion algorithms,
which demonstrates that our proposed fusion approach can
generate high-quality fusion images. In addition, the qual-
itative evaluation and quantitative evaluation performed on
expanded experiments also indicated that our proposed fusion
framework is effective in other image fusion tasks.
