Combinational Q-Learning for Dou Di Zhu
Yang You 1 Liangwei Li 1 Baisong Guo 1 Weiming Wang 1 Cewu Lu 1
Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has gained
a lot of attention in recent years, and has been
proven to be able to play Atari games and Go at
or above human levels. However, those games
are assumed to have a small ﬁxed number of ac-
tions and could be trained with a simple CNN
network. In this paper, we study a special class
of Asian popular card games called Dou Di Zhu,
in which two adversarial groups of agents must
consider numerous card combinations at each
time step, leading to huge number of actions.
We propose a novel method to handle combina-
torial actions, which we call combinational Q-
learning (CQL). We employ a two-stage network
to reduce action space and also leverage order-
invariant max-pooling operations to extract re-
lationships between primitive actions.
Results
show that our method prevails over state-of-the
art methods like naive Q-learning and A3C. We
develop an easy-to-use card game environments
and train all agents adversarially from sractch,
with only knowledge of game rules and verify
that our agents are comparative to humans. Our
code to reproduce all reported results will be
available online2.
1. Introduction
Recently, deep reinforcement learning has gained its ad-
vancement in games. AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016) ﬁrst
uses deep neural networks in board game Go to reduce the
effective depth and breath of the search tree. AlphaGo efﬁ-
ciently combines the policy and value networks with Monte
Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) and achieves superhuman per-
formance in the game of Go. AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al.,
2017) is proposed and trained solely by self-play reinforce-
ment learning, starting from random play, without any su-
pervision or use of human data and it only uses only the
black and white stones from the board as input features. In
addition to board games, card games are a kind of games
1Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. Correspon-

2https://github.com/qq456cvb/doudizhu-C
that also have an exponential number of states and are hard
to solve. DeepStack (Moravˇc´ık et al., 2017) is an algo-
rithm that is able to solve Poker under imperfect informa-
tion settings. It combines recursive reasoning to handle in-
formation asymmetry, decomposition to focus computation
on the relevant decision, and a form of intuition that is au-
tomatically learned from self-play using deep learning.
Though many games can be well solved by DRL, current
DRL techniques, such as A3C (Mnih et al., 2016) and dou-
ble Q-learning (Van Hasselt et al., 2016), can not handle an-
other card game called Dou Di Zhu. In this paper, we study
Dou Di Zhu and explore a new solution to extent the abil-
ity of DRL. Dou Di Zhu is a popular game in China with
a large number of players. In 2018, Tencent online game
platform reported 30 million players attending annual Dou
Di Zhu chaimpionship (Tencent).
There are three remarkable properties that make Dou Di
Zhu totally different from previously mentioned board or
card games. We list them as follows,
• Unconventional Representations. The assumption
of convolutional features in 2D board games and video
games fails in Dou Di Zhu, since the knowledge lies
in different combinations of cards at hand. Therefore,
we should introduce an unconventional representation
for such kind of problem.
• Huge Action Space. In Dou Di Zhu, the number of
possible actions increases exponentially with the num-
ber of cards. At each round, a player needs to con-
sider an action which is a subset of current handheld
cards. Due to the complexity of Dou Di Zhu’s game
rule, there are a great variety of actions that one needs
to consider and human players typically choose one
valid action based on their rich experience and some-
times intuition.
• Complicated Action Relationships. The quality of
each action depends largely on the conjunct inﬂuence
of the cards to be handed out and those to be left.
One not only needs to consider the current action but
also needs to consider what to give in the next several
rounds. Thus relations between different cards needs
to be taken in to consideration and this is what a hu-
man expert would do.
arXiv:1901.08925v2  [cs.LG]  19 Feb 2019

Combinational Q-Learning for Dou Di Zhu
To solve these challenges, we develop a two-stage hier-
archical reinforcement learning approach, which contains
two parts: Decomposition Proposal Network (DPN) and
Move Proposal Network (MPN). During DPN, we choose
the most promising decomposition based on its Q-value
computed by order-invariant max-pooling operations; then
during MPN, we pick up the ﬁnal card group to be handed
out.
In addition, we random sample decompositions in
DPN. Therefore, the dimension of action space at each
level is considerably reduced and thus becomes computa-
tionally acceptable. Besides, we introduce special designed
1D-convolutional card representations which give enough
information required by our networks.
In conclusion, we propose a novel network architecture to
handle combinational actions and show that it solves Dou
Di Zhu by prevailing state-of-the-art methods like A3C and
naive DQN (Mnih et al., 2013) and achieving human-level
performance. We train three heterogeneous agents adver-
sarially from scratch, without any domain knowledge ex-
cept the game rules.
2. Related Work
Previous work on solving Dou Di Zhu (Whitehouse et al.,
2011) uses determinization to make decisions with stochas-
ticity and imperfect information by sampling instances of
the equivalent deterministic game of perfect information.
They introduce a novel variant of MCTS that operates di-
rectly on trees of information sets. However, their perfor-
mance is evaluated against relatively weak opponents and
is not comparable to human players.
Card games like Dou Di Zhu can be seen as a multi-
step combinatorial bandits (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2012),
which is a combinatorial generalization of multi-step con-
textual bandits. Combinatorial generalizations of single-
step contextual bandits (Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2012;
Dani et al., 2008) has been studied recently (Swaminathan
et al., 2017). In their work, for each context (state), a pol-
icy selects a slate (action) consisting of component actions,
after which a reward for the entire slate is observed. They
also introduce a new practical estimator to evaluate a pol-
icy’s performance.
Deep reinforcement learning with large discrete action
spaces has also been studied (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2015).
However, they strongly rely on prior information about the
actions to embed them in a continuous space upon which
their approach can generalize.
3. Dou Di Zhu
Dou Di Zhu (Wikipedia) is a 3-player gambling card game,
in the class of climbing games but also with bidding ele-
ments similar to trick taking games. Dou Di Zhu originated
in China, and has increased in popularity there in recent
years, particularly with internet versions of the game. We
adopt the rules from (Whitehouse et al., 2011).
Player Setting.
There are three players, Landlord, Peas-
ant Up, Peasant Down.
During the game, players take
their turns in a counterclockwise order; Peasant Up denotes
the player who plays right before Landlord while Peasant
Down denotes the player who players right after Landlord.
Card Deck.
A 3-player Dou Di Zhu uses a deck of 54
cards, which contains 15 different type of cards. These
types are {3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, T, J, Q, K, A, 2, black joker,
red joker}, sorted by their ranks. There are four duplicate
cards for each type, except for black joker and red joker. At
the beginning of the game, cards are randomly distributed
to the three players and each player does not know others’
cards.
Bidding Phase.
Each player takes turns to bid on their
hand with the possible bids being 1, 2 or 3 chips. Bids
must be strictly higher than the current bid but each player
has the option to pass. This continues until two of the play-
ers pass consecutively. If any player bids 3 chips then the
bidding phase immediately ends. If all three players ini-
tially pass, the cards are shufﬂed and dealt again. The win-
ner of the bidding phase is designated as the Landlord and
this player adds the three extra cards on the table into their
hand, and plays ﬁrst. The winning bid determines the stake
for the game.
Card Play Phase.
The goal of the game is to be the ﬁrst
to get rid of all cards in hand. If the Landlord wins, the
other two players must each pay the stake to the Landlord.
However if either of the other two players wins, the Land-
lord pays the stake to both opponents. This means the two
non- Landlord players must cooperate to beat the Land-
lord. The Landlord always plays ﬁrst and then play moves
around the table in a ﬁxed direction. At the end of the game
the stake is doubled if a player has failed to remove any
cards from their hand.
The card play takes place in a number of rounds until a
player has no cards left. Whoever plays ﬁrst can play any
group of cards from their hand provided this group is a
member of one of the legal move categories (see Table 1).
The next player can play a group of cards from their hand
provided this group is in the same category and has a higher
rank than the group played by the previous player. If a
player has no compatible group they must pass. This con-
tinues until two players pass, at which point the next player
wins that round and may start a new round by playing a
group of cards from any category.

Combinational Q-Learning for Dou Di Zhu
Some categories allow extra kicker cards to be played with
the group which have no effect on the category or rank of
the move being played. A kicker can be any card provided
it is of different rank to all the cards in the main group. If
the kicker cards are single cards they must be of different
rank and if the kicker cards are pairs they must be differ-
ently ranked pairs. Also a Nuke cannot be used as a kicker.
If a move with kickers is played, the next player must play
a move in the same category with the same number of kick-
ers, although the ranks of the kicker cards are ignored.
Name
Description
Solo
Any individual card, for example A or 2.
It is also possible to play runs of sequen-
tial cards with length at least 5, for exam-
ple 345678 or 89TJQKA.
Pair
Any pair of identically ranked cards for
example 55 or 77. It is possible to play
runs of sequential pairs with length at least
3, for example 334455 or TTJJQQKK.
Trio
Any three identically ranked cards for ex-
ample AAA or 888. It is possible to play
runs of sequential trios of any length, for
example 444555 or TTTJJJQQQ. Each
trio may also have a kicker attached, for
example 444555TJ or 999QQ.
Quadplex
Any four identically ranked cards with
two
kickers
attached,
for
examples
4444TJ or 999955KK.
Bomb
Any four identically ranked cards, for ex-
ample 5555 or 2222.
Nuke
The red joker and the black joker together.
4. Combinational Q-Learning in Dou Di Zhu
4.1. Stochastic Game with Imperfect Information
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning can be deﬁned un-
der the framework of Stochastic Game (van der Wal et al.,
1981; Yang et al., 2018). An N-agent stochastic game G
is expressed by a tuple ⟨S, A, p, r, γ⟩, where S denotes the
state space and A is the joint action of all agents. Action
space A can be factorized into each agent’s action space
Aj, where j = 1, . . . , N is the agent index. Likewise,
r is the reward function for all agents and can be factor-
ized into rj : S × A →R.
At each timestep, each
agent takes an action aj ∈Aj, forming a joint action
a ∈A = ×{j=1,...,N}Aj; then each agent receives a re-
ward rj(s, a). State transition probabilities are deﬁned by
p(s′|s, a) : S × A × S →[0, 1]. γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount
factor (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
The policy for each agent j is πj : S →Ω(Aj) where
Ω(Aj) is the probability measure in space Aj and for ﬁnite
dimension dim(Aj), Ω(Aj) is just a simplex with dimen-
sion dim(Aj)−1. π = π1, . . . , πN denotes the joint policy
of all N agents. π is often considered time-homogeneous,
which means that it is independent of current timestep. Our
aim is to maximize the value function for each agent:
V j
π (s) =
∞
X
t=0
γtEπ,p[rj
t|s0 = s; π].
(1)
Notice that it is a function of all agents’ policy π and state
s ∈S.
We can then deﬁne the Q value as:
Qj
π(s, a) = rj(s, a) + γEs′∼p[V j
π (s′)].
(2)
Note that this is a function of actions of all N agents.
Notice that Dou Di Zhu is an imperfect information game
where the full state s (including all agents’ handheld cards)
is not observable to any individual so we resort to indepen-
dent Q-learning (Tan, 1993). In independent Q-learning,
which is the simplest and most popular approach to multi-
agent RL, each agent learns its own Q-function that condi-
tions only on its observed state sj and its own action aj. In
deep RL, this is often done by having each agent perform
deep Q-learning using the state and its own action. If we
denote independent Q operator as [IndQj] for each agent
j,
[IndQj](sj, aj) ≡r(sj, aj) + Esj ′∼p[γV j(sj′)].
(3)
Speciﬁcally, in Dou Di Zhu, each state sj corresponds to
one’s handheld cards and the cards handed out by the other
two at this round. Besides, we augment the state with in-
ferred handheld cards of the other two, which is done by
calculating the distribution of remaining cards. Each ac-
tion aj represents a legal move given the cards handed out
by the other two. Positive one is given as rewards when
the agent wins the game and negative one is given when it
loses. For all other state-action pairs (sj, aj), reward zero
is given. For simplicity, we omit the bidding phase. In the
following sections, we abuse the notation s and a for sj and
aj, ignoring their agent index.
4.2. Combinational Q-Learning
The original problem can be hard to solve and rarely con-
verges due to our experiments in Section 5.2. The reason
for this lies in the fact that there are over hundreds up to
thousands of possible actions given one’s handheld cards
and standard Q-learning performs poorly on such a large
combinational action space.
When considering a human playing Dou Di Zhu, it is com-
mon that human players tend to decompose their handheld

Combinational Q-Learning for Dou Di Zhu
cards according to the current situation. For example, when
opponents hand “A” out as Solo, a smart player would con-
sider decomposing his cards if he holds two “2” in his hand.
He would play “2” as Solo instead of Pair to take control.
This kind of decomposition also takes the relationship be-
tween card groups into consideration. Again consider some
other player hands “3” out as Solo, if a player holds three
“4”, it is not a good idea to split them to give “4” as Solo.
This is because, “4” is of rather small rank and leaving two
“4” in hand is not a good choice; instead, making three “4”
a Trio with extra kicker cards is a more promising action.
Inspired by how a human plays Dou Di Zhu, we employ a
two-stage combinational Q-learning (CQL) algorithm that
at each stage, only tens to a hundred actions need to be con-
sidered. For state s in each agent’s original Markov Deci-
sion Process (MDP), we replace it with two states, called sc
and sf (“c” for “combination” and “f” for “ﬁne-grained ac-
tion”). When in sc, agents choose the best decomposition
and then in sf, agents choose the best ﬁnal move within
previously selected decompisition. At each stage, a new
set of actions need to be deﬁned, Ac and Af respectively.
Denote current handheld cards as a set H, all legal moves
as L, which is a set of card sets. Ac and Af are deﬁned as
follows:
Ac := {A(1)
f , A(2)
f , . . . , A(D)
f
}
(4)
A(i)
f
:= {C1
(i), C2
(i), . . . , CK
(i)}
(5)
where D is the number of possible decompositions given
current handheld cards and K is the number of card groups
within each decomposition. Cj
(i) (j = 1, 2, . . . , K) is the
card group to play at each round, described in section 3. To
ensure that A(i)
f
is a valid decomposition, we need:
∪K
j=1Cj
(i) = H,
(6)
∩K
j=1Cj
(i) = Ø,
(7)
Cj
(i) ∈L,
for all j = 1, 2, . . . , K
(8)
During online update of Q-learning, the original trajectory
sample (s, a, r) is replaced with two samples (sc, ac, 0) and
(sf, af, r), forming a two-stage hierarchical MDP, shown
in Figure 1. To this end, we design two novel networks:
Decomposition Proposal Network (DPN) and Move Pro-
posal Network (MPN), to evaluate corresponding Q values.
DPN.
In DPN, to get Q(i)
c
:=
Q(sc, a(i)
c ) where
a(i)
c
:= A(i)
f , we adopt the idea of PointNet (Qi et al.,
2017).
For each card group Cj
(i)
⊆
H represented
as a 1D binary vector, we extract its 1D feature fCj
(i)
through 1D convolution layers (with average pooling in
the end) followed by fully connected layers:
fCj
(i)
=
FC(CONV (Cj
(i))).
Then we perform maxpooling on
all card groups’ features to get a global feature: f (i)
g
=
MAXPOOL(fC1
(i), fC2
(i), . . . , fCK
(i)).
Fully connected
layers follow and Q(i)
c
= FC(f (i)
g ).
MPN.
After choosing the best decomposition A(i⋆)
f
, in
MPN, to get Q(j)
f
:= Q(sf, a(j)
f ) where a(j)
f
:= Cj
(i⋆), we
concatenate each card group’s local feature fCj
(i⋆) with the
global feature f (i⋆)
g
, passing it through fully connected lay-
ers: Q(j)
f
= FC(CONCAT(fCj
(i⋆), f (i⋆)
g
)). The whole
network architecture is shown in Figure 2.
There are two advantages of employing this two-stage com-
binational Q-learning.
• First, it greatly reduces the original action space into
a hierarchical action space. In DPN, only the sampled
decompositions need to be considered. Besides, after
choosing the appropriate decomposition, MPN only
considers each possible moves in this chosen decom-
position.
• Secondly, in DPN, the relationship among all card
groups (legal moves) in a single decomposition is also
considered, analogy to human players’ strategy on
Dou Di Zhu. This relationship is extracted by a global
order-invariant element-wise maxpooling, forming a
global feature. This global feature is representative for
the decomposition and can be used to get its Q value.
5. Experiments
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the implementation de-
tails and then compare CQL with state-of-the-art reinforce-
ment learning methods. Finally, we compare our self-play
trained agents with other Dou Di Zhu baselines including
human players.
5.1. Implementation Details
Fast Handheld Cards Decomposition. In our implemen-
tation, to ﬁnd legal card groups that form a decomposition
effectively, we leverage the method of dancing link (Knuth,
2000).
Compared with naive depth-ﬁrst-search algorithm, it dra-
matically reduces computational time of decomposing
handheld cards (from tens of seconds to tens of millisec-
onds), especially when there are more than ten handheld
cards. However, dancing link algorithm may miss some
uncommon decompositions because of our ordered binary
encoding scheme. Thus we employ dancing-link algorithm

Combinational Q-Learning for Dou Di Zhu
Figure 1. Augmented MDP in Dou Di Zhu. When in sc, agents choose the best decomposition among Ac; then in sf, agents choose
the best ﬁnal move among Af within previously selected decompisition.
Figure 2. Our network structure of CQL on Dou Di Zhu. We evaluate each decomposition with an order-invariant maxpooling
operation in the end (DPN) and then each move’s evaluation concatenates with this global feature (MPN). Networks in a single block
share the same weights.
only when there are more than ten handheld cards and uti-
lize naive depth-ﬁrst-search otherwise. In practice, we ﬁnd
that this works well by keeping a balance between accuracy
and efﬁciency.
Card Group Auto-Encoder. For each card group Cj
(i) ⊆
H, we extract its 1D feature through 1D convolution layers
(CONV), as shown in Figure 2. Due to the special rule of
Dou Di Zhu, we need to extract information for card group
categories Solo, Pair, Trio, Quadplex respectively. Thus we
build four convolutional layers that differ in kernel size and
stride within CONV.
We pre-train these convolutional layers as an auto-encoder.
Variational Auto-Encoder (Doersch, 2016; Kingma &
Welling, 2013) is possible but considering there are only
13K+ ﬁxed number of actions, a simple deterministic auto-
encoder works well.
Networks. In our experiments, we use double Q-learning
(Van Hasselt et al., 2016) and replay buffers (Schaul et al.,
2015) to stabilize our learning progress. As shown in Fig-
ure 2, for CONV, we use eight ResNet residual blocks; for
FC1, we use three ResNet-like residual fully connected
blocks with number of units 256, 512, 1024; for FC2,
FC3, FC4, we use three ResNet-like residual fully con-
nected blocks with number of units 512, 256, 128. We refer
readers to supplementary material for the full details of our
network.
Hyperparameters.
In our model, hyperparameters are
chosen with Bayesian optimization together with memory
and computational limits. Our chosen hyperparameters are
shown in Table 1.
5.2. Comparison to State-of-the-Art Methods
In this section, we show that how our proposed combina-
tional Q-learning outperforms other baseline methods.
We train a single agent with a Recursive Handheld Cards

Combinational Q-Learning for Dou Di Zhu
Name
Value
Batch Size
8
Steps per Epoch
2,500
Update Frequency
4
Memory Size
3,000
Random Sampling Size
100
Table 1. Hyperparameters in our experiments.
Steps per
Epoch: number of parameter updates per epoch; Update Fre-
quency: number of experience generation per network update;
Memory Size: maximum size of replay buffer; Random Sampling
Size: maximum number of samples of handheld card decomposi-
tions.
Partitioning algorithm (CSDN blog) (RHCP, see details of
this algorithm in supplementary material) as opponents.
Here, we only train the agent Landlord. We compare the
winning rate of our algorithm with those of A3C (Mnih
et al., 2016) and naive DQN (Mnih et al., 2015; Van Has-
selt et al., 2016). Combinational Q-learning shows a su-
perior performance as shown in Figure 3. The results are
obtained by playing against the other two RHCP agents as
environments for 50 episodes after each epoch.
Figure 3. Winning rate of the agent Landlord trained with
combinational Q-learning, A3C and naive Q-learning meth-
ods. All methods use RHCP as opponents (two Peasants). 2
From Figure 3, we see that our proposed combinational
Q-learning wins over all other baselines with a large gap
(30%).
Naive DQN does not even converge since there are plenty
of actions (more than 13K); the off-policy learning target
2Naive Q-learning’s gradient explodes up even with learning
rate smaller than 1e-6 and we use the winning rate of the model
with random assigned weights.
with max-Q operation in Bellman equation becomes ex-
tremely unstable and overoptimistic given large discrete ac-
tion spaces.
A3C works but only up to a limit. A3C introduces a value
approximator and in some extent, it reduces variance intro-
duced by large action spaces. However, it is still too hard
for A3C to learn the special combinational structures of ac-
tions in card games like Dou Di Zhu.
Combinational Q-learning solves this problem with a
huge improvement. It greatly raise the upper bound that
could be obtained by deep learning approach. When utiliz-
ing combinational decompositions of handheld cards, train-
ing becomes much more stable.
5.3. Comparison to Dou Di Zhu Baselines
There are three different roles in Dou Di Zhu namely Land-
lord and two Peasants. We utilize independent Q-learning
in an asynchronous manner. To realize this, we train our
agents simultaneously from scratch with only the informa-
tion of game rules. During each training iteration, individ-
uals behave in an environment with the other two agents
as opponents. All parameters are updated online. We train
the model on a server with one 32-core AMD Threadripper
CPU and one 1080Ti GPU for 130 epochs in 20 days.
Learning Curve.
Learning curve is shown in Figure 4.
From the bottom ﬁgure, we see that at ﬁrst, Landlord is
rather weak and wins much less than Peasants.
How-
ever, through purely adversarial play, Landlord becomes
stronger quickly and can obtain a comparable winning rate
with Peasants. Throughout the whole training process, we
see that Landlord and Peasants keep a balance in winning
rates, meaning that our network is not likely to fall into lo-
cal minima within which, one could easily defeat another.
From the top ﬁgure, we see that gradually, all three agents
become stronger and stronger.
Landlord achieves the
biggest improvement since Landlord seldom wins under
random actions. Besides Landlord, the two Peasants also
learn from playing against Landlord and obtain an im-
provement in learning rate of about ﬁve percent.
Performance Against RHCP and Random Agents.
Since there is no “oracle” or public rankings for Dou Di
Zhu, to evaluate our model against other baseline models
(random, RHCP), we let them play against each other. For
example, to test the performance of a single agent of our
model, this agent would play against the other two random
or RHCP based agents, which are considered as environ-
ments. All three agents’ performance will be evaluated in
this way and the results are shown in Figure 5. The results
are obtained by playing 100 episodes for 10 times with dif-

Combinational Q-Learning for Dou Di Zhu
Figure 4. Learning curves for CQL. Left: Winning rates of different agents during training, evaluated using RHCP as opponents
(environments) for 50 episodes after each epoch. Right: Adversarial winning rates of Landlord and Peasants during training.
ferent random seeds.
We can see that CQL based agents achieve a comparable
performance by playing against RHCP based agents. In
contrast, we do not hard-code the conditions that agents
may meet and our agents could potentially learn some pat-
terns that beyond human’s interpretation.
Figure 6. Winning rates of human players against our agents.
Different bars represent different roles of human players. Stan-
dard derivations are shown in black lines.
Performance Against Humans
We invite 20 people to
play against our self-trained Dou Di Zhu agents.
Each
player plays about 35 games and the total number of games
is 717. The winning rate of human players under different
roles is shown in Figure 6. We see that when human players
being Landlord, our agents have approximately 30% win-
ning rate; if human players are Peasants, our agents could
obtain 60% winning rate. This indicates that our Landlord
agent is relatively stronger than two Peasant agents and
there exists a difﬁculty in cooperation between two Peas-
ant agents. In spite of the difﬁculty, we ﬁnd that in some
games, two Peasants learn to cooperate without any super-
vision. For example, after Landlord plays a card, Peasant
Down will hand out a big-rank card to take control, and
then he hands out a small-rank card to let Peasant Up hand
out all his handheld cards in order to win. Table 2 visual-
izes one whole game process. More detailed game records
can be found in supplemetary material.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce Dou Di Zhu as a challenging
reinforcement learning environment. Then we propose a
novel learning method combinational Q-learning (CQL) to
handle combinational action space and compilcated action
relationships in Dou Di Zhu. Our proposed DPN and MPN
together not only outperforms other state-of-the-art rein-
forcement learning methods but also achieve a comparable
performance against human players.
This work explores combinational action spaces in deep re-
inforcement learning and provides a new approach to solve
it. While it solves the problem to a large extent, there are
still potentials to further reduce action space by pruning ac-
tions based on some priors, given the current environment.
It would also be of interest to explore the application of
CQL in a more complex task or environment such as graph
clustering or resource distribution.
Our proposed CQL also reveals some relations with hierar-
chical Q-learning. CQL can be seen as a special structured
two-level hierarchical Q-learning with augmented MDPs.
We leave investigation of this relationship as future work.

Combinational Q-Learning for Dou Di Zhu
Figure 5. Winning rates of different models playing against each other. Y-axis denotes the type of model used as agent, which has
three roles Landlord, Peasant Down and Peasant Up. X-axis denotes the type of model used as environments (the other two agents). For
example, the left bottom ﬁgure shows the winning rate of our {Landlord, Peasant Down, Peasant Up} player playing against the other
two random players, respectively. Standard derivations are shown in black lines.
No. Rounds
Role
Current Hand Cards
Current Move
1
Landlord: Human Player 1
3,4,4,4,4,5,6,6,7,8,9,T,J,Q,Q,A,A,A,2,2
5,6,7,8,9,T,J
1
Peasant Down: CQL
3,3,5,5,6,7,8,8,9,9,T,J,J,J,Q,K,K
None
1
Peasant Up: CQL
3,5,6,7,7,8,9,T,T,Q,K,K,A,2,2,*,$
None
2
Landlord: Human Player 1
3,4,4,4,4,6,Q,Q,A,A,A,2,2
3,4,4,4,4,6
2
Peasant Down: CQL
3,3,5,5,6,7,8,8,9,9,T,J,J,J,Q,K,K
None
2
Peasant Up: CQL
3,5,6,7,7,8,9,T,T,Q,K,K,A,2,2,*,$
None
3
Landlord: Human Player 1
Q,Q,A,A,A,2,2
Q,Q,A,A,A
3
Peasant Down: CQL
3,3,5,5,6,7,8,8,9,9,T,J,J,J,Q,K,K
None
3
Peasant Up: CQL
3,5,6,7,7,8,9,T,T,Q,K,K,A,2,2,*,$
*,$
4
Landlord: Human Player 1
2,2
None
4
Peasant Down: CQL
3,3,5,5,6,7,8,8,9,9,T,J,J,J,Q,K,K
None
4
Peasant Up: CQL
3,5,6,7,7,8,9,T,T,Q,K,K,A,2,2
5,6,7,8,9
5
Landlord: Human Player 1
2,2
None
5
Peasant Down: CQL
3,3,5,5,6,7,8,8,9,9,T,J,J,J,Q,K,K
6,7,8,9,T
5
Peasant Up: CQL
3,7,T,T,Q,K,K,A,2,2
None
6
Landlord: Human Player 1
2,2
None
6
Peasant Down: CQL
3,3,5,5,8,9,J,J,J,Q,K,K
5,5
6
Peasant Up: CQL
3,7,T,T,Q,K,K,A,2,2
2,2
7
Landlord: Human Player 1
2,2
None
7
Peasant Down: CQL
3,3,8,9,J,J,J,Q,K,K
None
7
Peasant Up: CQL
3,7,T,T,Q,K,K,A
T,T
8
Landlord: Human Player 1
2,2
2,2
Table 2. Game records played by Human Player 1 and CQL based agents. Human Player 1 takes the role of Landlord while the
other two Peasants are CQL based agents. Current Hand Cards column denotes their handheld cards at the current round and Current
Move column denotes their handed out cards at this round. Note that ”T” represents card ”10”, ”*” represents ”black joker” and ”$”
represents ”red joker”. Human Player 1 wins.

Combinational Q-Learning for Dou Di Zhu
