Sentence based Semantic Similarity Measure for 
Blog-Posts  
Mehwish Aziz  
Computer Science Department  
National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences, 
Karachi Campus  

Muhammad Rafi 
Computer Science Department  
National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences, 
Karachi Campus  

 
 
Abstract— Blogs-Online digital diary like application on web 
2.0 has opened new and easy way to voice opinion, thoughts, 
and like-dislike of every Internet user to the World. 
Blogosphere has no doubt the largest user-generated content 
repository full of knowledge. The potential of this knowledge is 
still to be explored. Knowledge discovery from this new genre 
is quite difficult and challenging as it is totally different from 
other popular genre of web-applications like World Wide Web 
(WWW).  Blog-posts unlike web documents are small in size, 
thus lack in context and contain relaxed grammatical 
structures. Hence, standard text similarity measure fails to 
provide good results. In this paper, specialized requirements 
for comparing a pair of blog-posts is thoroughly investigated. 
Based on this we proposed a novel algorithm for sentence 
oriented semantic similarity measure of a pair of blog-posts. 
We applied this algorithm on a subset of political blogosphere 
of Pakistan, to cluster the blogs on different issues of political 
realm and to identify the influential bloggers.  
Keywords-semantic similarity, algorithm, text mining  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Blogs-online digital diary like application on World Wide 
Web (www) opens new horizons for all internet users to 
voice their opinions, thoughts, and likes-dislikes to the 
entire world. The rapid popularity of blogging is due to fast, 
easy and effective content creation, collaboration and 
dissemination.  The potential of this users’ generated 
knowledge repository is theoretically unlimited.  Recently, 
researchers introduced new approaches for opinion 
extraction, community identification, clustering blog-posts, 
and identifying influential bloggers from the blogosphere.  
They also highlighted that the traditional text mining 
methods are not well suited for this new genre of web-
application. The careful analysis of blog-post vs. web-
document reveals that the blog-post requires special 
consideration due to its special post structures, short length, 
lack of context and relaxed grammars [1].  It is often 
required to compare a pair of posts for various types of 
processing; one such application is to cluster the blog-post 
on certain topics. Similarity measure is critical in 
determining the relatedness between a pair of blog-posts so 
an effective clustering can be done.  The traditional 
similarity measures of text are based on term matching, 
which fails to capture the semantic of the text. Several 
efforts have been made to define semantic similarity 
measures for text; most of them determine the language 
semantic through word annotations and relating the concept 
space through replacement of equivalent concepts by using 
a lexical database like WordNet. It is often difficult to build 
and determine context of a short segment of text through 
these approaches. We suggest here a novel approach, which 
annotates sentence through part-of-speech taggers, then we 
collect noun phrases as it usually represents the common 
semantic of the text from the pair of blog-posts. Our 
similarity measure utilizes weighted similarity measure of 
noun phrases, verb phrases and the common bag- of- words, 
hence it is generalized enough to capture true semantic of 
the blog-post. The experiment performed on the dataset 
clearly exhibited that the similarity measure defined in this 
paper is practicable.     
   
In the next section we will discuss the related work from our 
fellow researchers, followed by description and discussion 
of our approach, and thereafter, the experimental data and 
set-up will be discussed followed by the illustration of the 
result of the experiment. This paper concludes with a 
discussion on future extension of this work along with the 
possible application of the suggested algorithms on blog-
posts similarity measure based on sentence-semantic.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
Web 2.0 has brought interactive and easy mechanism for 
user generated knowledge contents. Blogs is one genre that 
is growing in popularity and application. It is the largest 
user generated knowledge repository on the web. The 
potential for this knowledge is still to be explored by both 
individual and corporate users of Internet, who are slowly 
discovering the business value of it. Researchers recently 
inclined towards knowledge discovery in the blogs [1], 
particularly identifying and mining sentiments or opinions 
[2], [3] and [4], identifying influential bloggers [5] and [6], 
community identification and clustering of blog-posts [7], 
[8] and [9]. A thorough analysis of blogosphere demands 
that the traditional metrics of information mining must be 

redefined for the blogosphere.  An information measure that 
is widely used in information retrieval and mining is 
similarity measure.  Similarity measure is a function that 
gives a numerical value to a pair of entities; this numerical 
value represents the similarity between them. Higher 
numerical value demonstrates high similarity between 
entities like; pair of documents, images, products, and 
services. This similarity measure can be used in a variety of 
scenarios where the sense-of-relatedness is used for 
evaluation. One such example is to cluster the blog-posts on 
some given topic. Approaches to text similarity measure 
[10] can be subdivided into two broad categories (i) 
Dictionary/Thesaurus based and (ii) information theoretic 
based (corpus based). The dictionary based approach is 
particularly useful with highly constrained taxonomies like 
domain specific semantic net, a detailed discussion can be 
found in [11]. One major drawback of this approach is that 
it only considers IS-A relationships by considering 
Hyponymy/ Hypernymy. It does not include antonymy, and 
part-whole relationship. The other approach based on 
information theory is introduced by Resnik at. el. [12], 
which defines the similarity between two concepts as a 
maximum information content related to concept that 
subsumes them in the taxonomy hierarchy. A combined 
approach like our approach is first introduced by Jiang and 
Conrath [13], it define the similarity between two concepts 
as the path based information contents that maximize the 
semantic of the concept. This is computed as the weighted-
edge path along the shortest path linking the two concepts.  
III. 
BLOG-POSTS SIMILARITY MEASURE 
 
The semantic similarities of two blog-posts mean that 
the knowledge contents of the two posts are similar. 
Thus the concepts that the two posts discuss are 
relevant. The short text, grammar-free and lack of 
context 
are 
the 
challenging 
issues 
for 
computing 
semantic similarity of blog-posts. We proposed a 
novel 
algorithm 
named 
“Blog-Post 
Similarity 
Measure” i.e. BPSM. This algorithm is evaluated over 
all the pairs of distinct blog posts in the dataset. In 
order 
to 
capture 
the 
semantically 
true 
similarity 
measure of the blog posts, the algorithm performs 
certain steps which are explained below. 
At first the algorithm performs iteration over entire 
dataset so as to pair-up all distinct blog posts (say Pk 
and Pl) to measure sentence-based similarity. The 
next step is to utilize the sentence-based parts of 
speech taggers for identifying distinct set of noun 
phrase, verb phrase and common bag–of-words of 
blog posts Pk and Pl. Following these steps, the next 
step would identify the set of similar noun phrases, 
verb phrases and common bag-of-words from the 
distinct sets of both the blog posts Pk and Pl named as 
sim_noun, 
sim_verb 
and 
sim_common 
respectively. 
In order to capture the semantically true similarity, 
convex combination (variation of weighted mean) is 
calculated. For convex combination , weights are 
assigned 
for 
sim_noun, 
sim_verb, 
sim_common 
named as alpha (α), beta (β) , gamma (γ) using 
equation (1), (2) and (3) respectively. 
  = (sim_noun / (sim_verb + sim_common)) (1) 
  = (sim_verb / (sim_noun + sim_common)) (2) 
     = (sim_common / (sim_verb + sim_noun))               (3) 
 
Finally, 
the 
algorithm 
utilizes 
these 
weighted 
similarity measures of noun phrases, verb phrases and 
the common bag-of-words to calculate the similarity 
measure between blog posts Pk and Pl using convex 
combination in equation (4) shown below. 
 
SIM_Measure =(((  * sim_noun) + (  * sim_verb) + (  * 
sim_common)) / total_word_list) 
 (4) 
 
Here, total_word_list indicates the accumulation of 
sim_noun, sim_verb and sim_common as shown in equation 
(5). 
 
total_word_list =(sim_noun + sim_verb + sim_common) (5) 
 
The similarity measure is mainly using noun and verb 
weights for actual semantic extraction from the sentence 
whereas common bag-of-words’ weights are used due to the 
probabilistic nature of the language. 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENT  
 
The suggested algorithm is used to perform an experiment on 
a sub-set of political blogosphere, from the Pakistani 
political blogs. As the purpose of this paper is to show the 
sentence-based similarity measure, therefore, we gathered 
the blog posts of a particular category “Pakistani Politics” 
from RSSFeeds generated by different blog sites. For 
analyzing the performance of the algorithm, an offline data 
set of 2700 Blog Posts is collected from different Blogs over 
“Pakistani Politics” in the time duration of Jul, 2007 till Feb, 
2010.  As the Blog Posts’ data set is huge and it becomes 
cumbersome to measure the efficiency of the algorithm over 
Blog Posts holding variant political issues within Pakistani 
politics. The data set is further categorized from “Pakistani 
Politics” into the sub-categories named as “Political Issues” 
which are stated below:  
 
0. Politicians 
1. Judiciary 
2. Musharraf 
3. Terrorism 
4. Taliban 
5. War on Terror 
 
Similarity measure over the Blog Posts is performed 
using the entire dataset but a partial subset of 60 Blog 

Posts relevant to the “Political Issue“ stated above is 
extracted 
by 
performing 
soft 
clustering 
to 
better 
understand the algorithm results. Thus, only 10 Blog 
Posts relevant to each political issue is assigned in a 
cluster. A single blog-post can be assigned to more 
than one cluster due to the content relevancy in 
different blog-posts. The Blog Posts (identified by 
their unique IDs) and their distribution over the 
political issues are shown below in the figure 1. 
 
Figure 1: Distribution of 60 Blog Posts over the 
political issues. Here Political Issues are identified as 
0 = Politicians, 1 = Judiciary,   2 = Musharaf, 3 = 
Terrorism, 4 = Taliban, 5 = War on Terror. And Blog 
Posts are identified over the range of Post IDs from 
3800 to 5500 on x-axis. 0 to 1 on y-axis shows the 
similarity measure value for corresponding Post IDs. 
 
In order to help in understanding the results obtained 
from the testing dataset defined in Figure 1, the 
testing data set is further summarized by selecting 
only 20 Blog Posts i.e. at least 3 unique Blog Posts 
from each political issue. Now lets’ review the 20 
Blog Posts’ distribution in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2: Distribution of 20 Blog Posts over the 
Political Issues (subset of original testing dataset). 
Here Political Issues are identified as 0 = Politicians, 
1 = Judiciary,   2 = Musharaf, 3 = Terrorism, 4 = 
Taliban, 5 = War on Terror. And Blog Posts are 
identified over the range of Post IDs from 3800 to 
5500 on x-axis. 0 to 1 on y-axis shows similarity 
measure value for corresponding Post IDs. 
 
All these blog posts collected as an offline data set are 
stored in a relational database in an XML-Format 
shown in Figure 3. These blog posts’ texts comprise 
of both English and Roman Language based words. 
 
Figure 3: Example of an XML-Format Blog Post 
received through RSSFeeds. 
 
First, these blog posts are parsed into sentences by 
extracting the blog-post content from XML-Format. 
Then the sentences of blog-posts are further extracted 
into words with their parts of speech, synonym list 
(synset) and words’ origin/category using hypernym 
relationship 
by 
using 
natural 
language 
processing 
functionalities in nltk-python by the help of WordNet 
knowledge base. All these extracted sentences and 
words are stored post-wise in a relational database – a 
snapshot of which is shown below in Figure 4. 

 
Figure 4: Blog Post stored with all the sentences 
where each sentence’s words are stored with their 
parts of speech, category and synonym list. 
Once 
the 
blog-posts 
are 
processed 
using 
natural 
language processing task by the help of WordNet, 
then this testing dataset is ready to evaluate the 
algorithm 
(BPSM) 
devised 
for 
sentence-based 
semantic similarity measure between the blog-posts. 
The 
algorithm 
(BPSM) 
used 
for 
such 
similarity 
measure is given below. 
V. 
BPSM-ALGORITHM 
Algorithm – Blog Post Similarity Measure (BPSM) 
Step 1: For each post Pk where k = 1 to n do 
1.1) For each post Pl where Pl = 1 to n Λ Pk ≠ Pl do 
i) 
For Pk and Pl, calculate total count of sentences in 
blog post as count_sentences respectively 
ii) 
Move to Step 2 and identify distinct set of noun, verb 
and common bag-of-words as nounlist, verblist, 
commonlist respectively 
iii) 
Calculate sum of similar nouns, similar verbs and 
similar common bag-of-words as sim_noun, sim_verb, 
and sim_common respectively, as follows: 
a) For each noun ni in Pk where i = 1 to count_noun do 
                For each noun nj in Pl where j= 1 to                      
count_noun do 
- 
if  (ni equals to nj ) or  (ni’s synonym list 
contains nj  ) or  (ni’s category contains nj  ) 
then add 1 in sim_noun  
b) Do the same as Step 1 – iii – a for both verbs and 
common bag-of-words and store the result in 
sim_verb and sim_common respectively  
iv) Calculate total_word_list, α(for sim_noun), β (for 
sim_verb) and  γ (for sim_common) using equation (5), 
(1), (2) and (3) respectively  
v) Calculate Similarity Measure for Pk and Pl by using 
equation (4) 
Step 2: For a Post - identify the distinct nounlist, verblist 
and commonlist 
2.1)  For each Sentence Si where i = 1 to count_sentences 
i) 
Update nounlist, verblist and commonlist by  adding all 
words/phrases of Si if: 
a)  Parts_of_Speech is either of the following: 
Proper_noun + singular / Noun + singular_or_mass / 
Noun + plural. Then update nounlist and add 1 in 
count_noun 
b) Parts_of_Speech is either of the following: Verb + 
non-3rd_ps.sing.present/ Verb + 
gerund/present_participle/ Verb + 
gerund/present_participle/ Verb + base_form/ Verb + 
past_tense. Then update verblist and add 1 in 
count_verb 
c) Parts_of_Speech matches neither of above. Update 
commonlist, add 1 in count_common 
2.2) Update nounlist:  for each noun ni where i = 1 to 
count_noun do 
i) 
for each noun nj where j = i+1 to count_noun do 
- 
if  (ni is equals to nj ) or  (ni’s synonym list contains nj ) 
or  (ni’s category contains nj  ) then remove nj and 
update count_noun 
2.3) Do the same as Step 2.2 for both verblist and 
commonlist. Then move to Step 1-iii 
 
For better understanding of the algorithm (BPSM), its 
processing is shown as flowcharts. The first flowchart 
in Figure 5 shows the flow of measuring similarity 
between blog-posts of the same category. Figure 6 
also 
shows 
the 
process 
of 
measuring 
similarity 
between blog posts Pk and Pl. 
 
Figure 5: Process of measuring similarity between 
blog-posts of a particular category 
 

 
Figure 
6: 
Process 
of 
measuring 
sentence-based 
similarity between two posts Pk and Pl 
This sentence-based similarity measure between blog 
posts in a category shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6 is 
using the words on the basis of WordNet knowledge 
base as per their existence in the sentences post-wise. 
This means that instead of matching two words as 
terms; the words in the sentences of two posts are 
matched to update the similarity measure. This update 
is possible only if the words of sentences in the posts 
satisfy any of the following criteria: 
- Word Wi existent in the sentence Sj of post Pk is 
matched exactly with Word Wr in the sentence Sm of 
the post Pl 
- Word Wi’s synonym list has a word that matches exactly 
with Word Wr in the sentence Sm of the post Pl 
- Word Wi’s origin entity matches exactly with Word 
Wr in the Sentence Sm of the Post Pl 
In the flowchart, post Pk is iterated over all the blog-posts in 
the blogging community, where Sj denotes j
th sentence 
iterated from 1 till the total number of sentences in the post 
Pk. Similarly, Wi is referring to i
th word from 1 till the total 
number of words in the sentence Sj of post Pk.  
 
Now for each sentence Sj of Post Pk, all the sentences Sm 
of post Pl are traversed to measure the similarity in such a 
way that for each distinct word Wi of Sentences Sj of Post 
Pk is matched for similarity measure with all the distinct 
words of all the sentences Sm of post Pl. Figure 7 and 
Figure 8 given below explains the above stated criteria to 
pdate 
similarity 
measure 
for 
two 
blog 
posts. 
 
Figure 7: Create distinct noun list, verb list and common 
list 
 
Figure 8: Similarity measure criteria for sentences of blog-
posts 

 
It is empirically evident that (NLP based) natural 
language 
processing 
based 
semantic 
similarity 
measure proposed in this paper is superior to tf-idf 
based approaches. As tf-idf based approaches only 
consider the term but not the kind of word of the 
language. 
VI. 
RESULT  
 
The results obtained from the algorithm of sentence-
based semantic similarity measure between blog posts 
is considered appropriate within the range of <0 – 1>. 
It means that the more similar the blog posts are; the 
similarity measure is more close to 1. Likewise, the 
least similar are the blog posts; the similarity measure 
is more close to 0. A graphical representation of the 
results 
of 
Sentence-Based 
Semantic 
Similarity 
Measure obtained on the testing dataset comprising of 
20 blog-posts of particular political issues is shown in 
the Figure 9. 
 
Figure 
9: 
Results 
of 
Sentence-Based 
Semantic 
Similarity Measure between blog posts over various 
political issues 
 
It has been observed that the blog posts collected for 
measuring similarity belong to the same category “Pakistani 
Politics” and also to the same sub-category “Political Issue”. 
Therefore, all the blog-posts compared over the same 
“Political Issues” have an average similarity of 70%. 
 
VII. FUTURE WORK 
 
A new approach for measuring semantic similarity of 
two blog-posts is proposed in this paper. Semantic 
similarity measure of text contents are widely used in 
various 
disciplines 
like 
language 
modeling, 
word 
sense 
disambiguation, 
document 
clustering, 
and 
search filtering. It is the sentence-based algorithm that 
extracts the noun-phrases, verb-phrases and common-
bag-of-words to compute the similarity. The approach 
is a mix of corpus based and dictionary based 
semantic mining.  We propose this methodology to be 
further used 
to identify 
influential bloggers 
from 
blogging community. This would involve sentence-
based similarity measure as one of the effective 
influence measuring factors utilized in an effective 
algorithm for deducing influential bloggers’ list. As 
we have observed that a lot of research work is carried 
out on influential bloggers mining systems, but all 
these systems suffer from drawbacks like: domain 
driven, generalized shallow influential measure and 
validation and verification. Therefore, our effort is to 
create an effective algorithm using semantic measures 
to identify the influential bloggers from the blogging 
community.
