Decomposable Probability-of-Success Metrics in Algorithmic Search
Tyler Sam1
a, Jake Williams1
b, Abel Tadesse2
c, Huey Sun3
d, and George Monta˜nez1
e
1 Harvey Mudd College, California, USA
2 Claremont McKenna College, California, USA
3 Pomona College, California, USA

Keywords:
Decomposable Probability-of-Success Metric, Machine Learning as Search, Algorithmic Search Framework
Abstract:
Previous studies have used a speciﬁc success metric within an algorithmic search framework to prove machine
learning impossibility results. However, this speciﬁc success metric prevents us from applying these results
on other forms of machine learning, e.g. transfer learning. We deﬁne decomposable metrics as a category of
success metrics for search problems which can be expressed as a linear operation on a probability distribution
to solve this issue. Using an arbitrary decomposable metric to measure the success of a search, we demonstrate
theorems which bound success in various ways, generalizing several existing results in the literature.
1
INTRODUCTION
Many machine learning tasks, such as classiﬁcation,
regression and clustering, can be reduced to search
problems (Monta˜nez, 2017). Through this reduction,
one can apply concepts from information theory to
derive results about machine learning. To compare the
success of different algorithms, or the expected proba-
bility of ﬁnding a desired element, Monta˜nez deﬁned
a metric of success that averaged the probability of
success over all iterations of an algorithm (Monta˜nez,
2017). While this metric has many applications, it
is not appropriate for cases where the probability of
success for a given iteration of an algorithm is re-
quired. An example of this is transfer learning, where
the probability of success at the ﬁnal step of the algo-
rithm is more relevant than the average probability of
success.
Building on this work, we deﬁne decomposabil-
ity as a property of probability-of-success metrics and
show that the expected per-query probability of suc-
cess (Monta˜nez, 2017) and more general probability
of success metrics are decomposable. We then show
that the results previously proven for the expected per-
query probability of success hold for all decompos-
a
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7974-3226
b
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9714-1851
c
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3337-9454
d
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0949-3169
e
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1333-4611
able probability-of-success metrics. Under this gener-
alization,we can prove results related to the probabil-
ity of success for speciﬁc iterations of a search rather
than just uniformly averaged over the entire search,
giving the results much broader applicability.
2
RELATED WORK
Several decades ago, Mitchell proposed that clas-
siﬁcation could be viewed as search, and reduced
the problem of learning generalizations to a search
problem within a hypothesis space (Mitchell, 1980;
Mitchell, 1982).
Monta˜nez subsequently expanded
this idea into a formal search framework (Monta˜nez,
2017).
Monta˜nez showed that for a given algorithm with
a ﬁxed information resource, favorable target sets, or
the target sets on which the algorithm would perform
better than uniform random sampling, are rare. He
did this by proving that the proportion of b-bit favor-
able problems has an exponentially decaying restric-
tive bound (Monta˜nez, 2017). He further showed that
this scarcity of favorable problems exists even for k-
sparse target sets.
Monta˜nez et al. later deﬁned bias, the degree to
which an algorithm is predisposed to a ﬁxed target,
with respect to the expected per-query probability of
success metric, and proved that there were a limited
number of favorable information resources for a given
bias (Monta˜nez et al., 2019). Using the search frame-
arXiv:2001.00742v1  [stat.ML]  3 Jan 2020

work, they proved that an algorithm cannot be favor-
ably biased towards many distinct targets simultane-
ously.
As machine learning grew in prominence, re-
searchers began to probe what was possible within
machine learning. Valiant considered learnability of
a task as the ability to generate a program for per-
forming the task without explicit programming of the
task (Valiant, 1984).
By restricting the tasks to a
speciﬁc context, Valiant demonstrated a set of tasks
which were provably learnable.
Schaffer provided an early foundation to the
idea of bounding universal performance of an algo-
rithm (Schaffer, 1994). Schaffer analyzed general-
ization performance, the ability of a learner to clas-
sify objects outside of its training set, in a classiﬁ-
cation task. Using a baseline of uniform sampling
from the classiﬁers, he showed that, over the set of
all learning situations, a learner’s generalization per-
formance sums to zero, which makes generalization
performance a conserved quantity.
Wolpert and Macready demonstrated that the his-
torical performance of a deterministic optimization
algorithm provides no a priori justiﬁcation whatso-
ever for its continued use over any other alternative
going forward (Wolpert and Macready, 1997), imply-
ing that there is no utility in rationally choosing a
thus-far better algorithm over choosing the opposite.
Furthermore, just as there does not exist a single al-
gorithm that performs better than random on all possi-
ble optimization problems, they proved that there also
does not exist an optimization problem on which all
algorithms perform better than average.
Continuing the application of prior knowledge
to learning and optimization, G¨ulc¸ehre and Bengio
showed that the worse-than-chance performance of
certain machine learning algorithms can be improved
through learning with hints, namely, guidance using a
curriculum (G¨ulc¸ehre and Bengio, 2016). So, while
Wolpert’s results might make certain tasks seem fu-
tile and infeasible, G¨ulc¸ehre’s empirical results show
that there exist some alternate means through which
we can utilize prior knowledge to get better results in
both learning and optimization.
Others have worked towards meaningful bounds
on algorithmic success through different approaches.
Sterkenburg approached this concept from the per-
spective of Putnam, who originally claimed that a uni-
versal learning machine is impossible through the use
of a diagonalization argument (Sterkenburg, 2019).
Sterkenburg follows up on this claim, attempting to
ﬁnd a universal inductive rule by exploring a measure
which cannot be diagonalized. Even when attempting
to evade Putnam’s original diagonalization, Sterken-
burg is able to apply a new diagonalization that rein-
forces Putnam’s original claim of the impossibility of
a universal learning machine.
There has also been work on proving learn-
ing bounds for speciﬁc problems.
Kumagai and
Kanamori analyzed the theoretical bounds of param-
eter transfer algorithms and self-taught learning (Ku-
magai and Kanamori, 2019). By looking at the local
stability, or the degree to which a feature is affected
by shifting parameters, they developed a deﬁnition for
parameter transfer learnability, which describes the
probability of effective transfer.
2.1
Distinctions from Prior Work
The expected per-query probability of success metric
previously deﬁned in the algorithmic search frame-
work (Monta˜nez, 2017) tells us, for a given informa-
tion resource, algorithm, and target set, how often (in
expectation) our algorithm will successfully locate el-
ements of the target set. While this metric is useful
when making general claims about the performance
of an algorithm or the favorability of an algorithm
and information resource to the target set, it lacks
the speciﬁcity to make claims about similar perfor-
mance and favorability on a per-iteration basis. This
trade-off calls for a more general metric that can be
used to make both general and speciﬁc (per iteration)
claims. For instance, in transfer learning tasks, the
performance and favorability of the last pre-transfer
iteration is more relevant than the overall expected
per-query probability of success. The general proba-
bility of success, which we will deﬁne as a particular
decomposable probability-of-success metric, is a tool
through which we can make claims at such speciﬁc
and relevant steps.
3
BACKGROUND
In this section, we will present deﬁnitions for the main
framework that we will use throughout this paper.
3.1
The Search Framework
Monta˜nez describes a framework which formalizes
search problems in order to analyze search and learn-
ing algorithms (Monta˜nez, 2017).
There are three
components to a search problem. The ﬁrst is the ﬁnite
discrete search space, Ω, which is the set of elements
to be examined. Next is the target set, T, which is a
nonempty subset of the search space that we are try-
ing to ﬁnd. Finally, we have an external information
resource, F, which provides an evaluation of elements

of the search space. Typically, there is a tight relation-
ship between the target set and the external informa-
tion resource, as the resource is expected to lead to or
describe the target set in some way, such as the tar-
get set being elements which meet a certain threshold
under the external information resource.
Within the framework, we have an iterative algo-
rithm which seeks to ﬁnd elements of the target set,
shown in Figure 1. The algorithm is a black-box that
has access to a search history and produces a proba-
bility distribution over the search space. At each step,
the algorithm samples over the search space using the
probability distribution, evaluates that element using
the information resource, adds the result to the search
history, and determines the next probability distribu-
tion.
The abstraction of ﬁnding the next probabil-
ity distribution as a black-box algorithm allows the
search framework to work with all types of search
problems.
Ω
P
BLACK-BOX
ALGORITHM
HISTORY
ω₀, F(ω₀)
ω₃, F(ω₃)
ω₈, F(ω₈)
ω₅, F(ω₅)
ω₂, F(ω₂)
i
i − 6
i − 5
i − 4
i − 3
i − 2
i − 1
ω₆, F(ω₆)
CHOOSE NEXT POINT AT TIME STEP i
ω, F(ω)
Figure 1: Black-box search algorithm. We iteratively popu-
late the history with samples from a distribution that is de-
termined by the black-box at each iteration, using the his-
tory (Monta˜nez, 2017).
The ML-as-search framework is valuable because
it provides a structure to understand and reason about
different machine learning problems within the same
formalism. For example, we can understand regres-
sion as a search through a space of possible regression
functions, or parameter estimation as a search through
possible vectors for a black-box process (Monta˜nez,
2017). Therefore, we can apply results about search
problems to any machine learning problem we can
cast into the search framework.
3.2
Expected Per-Query Probability of
Success
In order to compare search algorithms, Monta˜nez de-
ﬁned the expected per-query probability of success,
q(t, f) = E ˜P,H

1
| ˜P|
| ˜P|
∑
i=1
Pi(w ∈t)
 f

= P(X ∈t|f) (3.1)
where ˜P is the sequence of probability distributions
generated by the black box, H is the search history,
and t and f are the target set and information resource
of the search problem, respectively (Monta˜nez, 2017).
This metric of success is particularly useful because
it can be shown that q(t, f) = t⊤Pf , where Pf is the
average of the vector representation of the probability
distribution from the search algorithm at each step,
conditioned on an information resource f.
Measuring
success
using
the
expected
per-
query probability of success, Monta˜nez demon-
strated bounds on the success of any search algo-
rithm (Monta˜nez, 2017). The Famine of Forte states
that for a given algorithm, the proportion of target-
information resource pairs yielding a success level
above a given threshold is inversely related to the
threshold.
Thus, the greater the threshold for suc-
cess, the fewer problems you can be successful on,
regardless of the algorithm. The expected per-query
probability of success can also be used to prove a ver-
sion of the No Free Lunch theorems, demonstrating
that all algorithms perform the same averaged over
all target sets and information resources, as is done in
Theorem 1 of the current manuscript.
3.3
Bias
Using the search framework, Monta˜nez deﬁned a
measure of bias between a distribution over infor-
mation resources and a ﬁxed target (Monta˜nez et al.,
2019). For a distribution D over a collection of possi-
ble information resources F , with F ∼D, and a ﬁxed
k-hot1 target t, the bias between the distribution and
the target is deﬁned as
Bias(D,t) = ED[t⊤PF]−k
|Ω|
(3.2)
= t⊤ED[PF]−∥t∥2
|Ω|
(3.3)
= t⊤
Z
F PfD(f)df −∥t∥2
|Ω| .
(3.4)
Recall from above that Pf was the averaged probabil-
ity distribution over Ωfrom a search.
The bias term measures the performance of an al-
gorithm in expectation (over a given distribution of in-
formation resources) compared to uniform sampling.
Mathematically, this is computed by taking the dif-
ference between the expected value of the average
performance of an algorithm and the performance of
uniform sampling. The distribution D captures what
1k-hot vectors are binary vectors of length |Ω| with ex-
actly k ones.

information resources (e.g., datasets) one is likely to
encounter.
For a non-mathematical example of the effect of
bias, suppose we are searching for parking space
within a parking lot. If we randomly choose parking
spaces to check, we are searching without bias. How-
ever, if we consider the location of the parking spaces,
we may ﬁnd that parking spaces furthest from the en-
trance are usually free, and could ﬁnd an open parking
space with a higher probability. Here, the information
resource telling us the distance of each parking space
from the entrance and our belief that parking spaces
further from the entrance tend to be open creates a dis-
tribution over possible parking spaces, favoring those
that are further away for being checked ﬁrst.
4
PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we introduce a new property of success
metrics called decomposability, which allows us to
generalize concepts of success and bias. We provide
a number of prelimimary lemmata, with full proofs
given in the Appendix.
4.1
Decomposability
We now give a formal deﬁnition for a decompos-
able probability-of-success metric, which will be used
throughout the rest of the paper.
Deﬁnition 4.1. A probability-of-success metric φ is
decomposable if and only if there exists a Pφ,f such
that
φ(t, f) = t⊤Pφ,f = Pφ(X ∈t|f),
(4.1)
where Pφ,f is not a function of t, being conditionally
independent of it given f.
As we stated previously, what makes the expected
per-query probability of success particularly useful
is that it can be represented as a linear function of
a probability distribution. This deﬁnition allows us
to reference any probability-of-success metric having
this property.
As a ﬁrst example, we show that the expected
per-query probability of success is a decomposable
probability-of-success metric.
Lemma 4.2 (Decomposability of the Expected Per–
Query Probability of Success ). The expected per-
query probability of success is decomposable, namely,
q(t, f) = t⊤P f .
(4.2)
Our goal is to show that the theorems proved for the
expected per-query probability of success hold for all
decomposable metrics.
Showing that the expected
per-query probability of success is decomposable sug-
gests that these theorems may be generalizable to any
metrics sharing that property.
4.1.1
The General Probability of Success
While the expected per-query probability of success
averages the probability of success over each of the
queries in a search history, we may care more about
a speciﬁc query in the search history, e.g., the ﬁnal
query of a sequence. Thus, we can generalize the ex-
pected per-query probability of success by replacing
the averaging with an arbitrary distribution α over the
probability distributions in the search history. We de-
ﬁne the General Probability of Success as
qα(t, f) = E ˜P,H


| ˜P|
∑
i=1
αiPi(w ∈t)
f

= Pα(X ∈t|f) (4.3)
where Pα is a valid probability distribution on the
search space Ωand αi is the weight allocated to the
ith probability distribution in our sequence. This for-
mula allows us to consider a wide variety of success
metrics as being instances of the general probability
of success metric.
For example, the expected per-
query probability of success is equivalent to setting
Pα,f = Pf , with αi = 1/| ˜P|. Similarly, a metric of
success which only cares about the ﬁnal query can
be represented by letting Pα,f = Pn,f where n is the
length of the sequence of queries, and Pn,f is the av-
erage of the distributions from the n-th iteration of our
search.
It should be noted that α within the expectation
will be random, being deﬁned over the random num-
ber of steps within ˜P. Our operative deﬁnition of the
α distribution, however, will allow us to generate the
corresponding distribution for the needed number of
steps, such as when we place all mass on the n-th it-
eration of the search. With a slight abuse of notation,
we thus let α signify both the process by which the
distribution is generated as well as the particular dis-
tribution produced for a given number of steps.
As the general probability of success provides
a layer of abstraction above the expected per-query
probability of success, if we prove that results about
the expected per-query probability of success also
hold for the general probability of success, we gain
a more powerful tool set. To do so, we must ﬁrst
demonstrate that the general probability of success is
a decomposable probability-of-success metric.
Lemma 4.3 (Decomposability of the General Proba-
bility of Success Metric). The general probability of
success is decomposable, namely,
qα(t, f) = t⊤Pα,f .
(4.4)

These lemmata allow us to apply later theorems about
decomposable metrics to these two useful metrics.
Given a metric of interest, performing a similar proof
of decomposability will allow for the application of
the subsequent theorems.
Lemma 4.4 (Decomposability closed under expec-
tation). Given a set S = {φi} of decomposable
probability-of-success metrics and a distribution D
over S, it holds that
φ′(t, f) = ED[φ(t, f)]
(4.5)
is also a decomposable probability-of-success metric.
Lemma 4.4 gives us an easy way to construct a new
decomposable metric from a set of known decompos-
able metrics. Note that not every success metric is
decomposable; we can create non-decomposable suc-
cess metrics by taking non-convex combinations of
decomposable probability-of-success metrics.
4.2
Generalization of Bias
Our deﬁnition of decomposability allows us to re-
deﬁne bias in terms of any decomposable metric,
φ(T,F). We replace PF with Pφ,F and obtain
Bias(D,t) = ED[t⊤Pφ,F]−k
|Ω|.
(4.6)
= t⊤ED[Pφ,F]−∥t∥2
|Ω|
(4.7)
= t⊤
Z
F Pφ,fD(f)d f −∥t∥2
|Ω| .
(4.8)
Because φ(t, f) is decomposable, it is equal to t⊤Pφ,f .
This makes results about the bias particularly inter-
esting, since they relate directly to any probability-
of-success metric we create, so long as the metric is
decomposable.
5
RESULTS
Monta˜nez proved a number of results and bounds on
the success of machine learning algorithms relative to
the expected per-query probability of success, along
with its corresponding deﬁnition of bias (Monta˜nez,
2017; Monta˜nez et al., 2019).
We now generalize
these to apply to any decomposable probability-of-
success metric, with full proofs given in the Appendix
(available online).
5.1
No Free Lunch for Search
First, we prove a version of the No Free Lunch The-
orems for any decomposable probability-of-success
metric within the search framework.
Theorem 1 (No Free Lunch for Search and Ma-
chine Learning). For any pair of search/learning al-
gorithms A1, A2 operating on discrete ﬁnite search
space Ω, any closed under permutation set of target
sets τ, any set of information resources B, and de-
composable probability-of-success metric φ,
∑
t∈τ ∑
f∈B
φA1(t, f) = ∑
t∈τ ∑
f∈B
φA2(t, f).
(5.1)
This means that performance, in terms of our decom-
posable probability-of-success metric, is conserved in
the sense that increased performance of one algorithm
over another on some information resource-target pair
comes at the cost of a loss in performance elsewhere.
5.2
The Fraction of Favorable Targets
Monta˜nez proved that for a ﬁxed information re-
source, a given algorithm A will perform favor-
ably relative to uniform random sampling on only a
few target sets, under the expected per-query prob-
ability of success (Monta˜nez, 2017).
We general-
ize this result with a decomposable probability-of-
success metric and deﬁne a version of active in-
formation of expectations for decomposable metrics
Iφ(t,f) := −log2
p
φ(t,f).
This transforms the ratio of
success probabilities into bits where p = |t|/|Ω|, the
per-query probability of success for uniform random
sampling with replacement. Iφ(t,f) denotes the advan-
tage A has over uniform random sampling with re-
placement, in bits.
Theorem 2 (The Fraction of Favorable Targets). Let
τ = {t | t ⊆Ω}, τb = {t | /0 ̸= t ⊆Ω,Iφ(t,f) ≥b}, and
decomposable probability-of-success metric φ. Then
for b ≥3,
|τb|
|τ| ≤2−b.
(5.2)
Thus, the scarcity of b-bit favorable targets still holds
under for any decomposable probability-of-success
metric.
5.3
The Famine of Favorable Targets
Following up on the previous result, we can show a
similar bound in terms of the success of a given algo-
rithm, for targets of a ﬁxed size.
Theorem 3 (The Famine of Favorable Targets). For
ﬁxed k ∈N, ﬁxed information resource f, and decom-
posable probability-of-success metric φ, deﬁne
τ = {T | T ⊆Ω,|T| = k}, and
τqmin = {T | T ⊆Ω,|T| = k,φ(T, f) ≥qmin}.

Then,
|τqmin|
|τ|
≤
p
qmin
(5.3)
where p =
k
|Ω|.
Here, we compare success not against uniform
sampling but against a ﬁxed constant qmin. This the-
orem thus upper bounds the number of targets for
which the probability of success of the search is
greater than qmin.
5.4
Famine of Forte
We generalize the Famine of Forte (Monta˜nez, 2017),
showing a bound that holds in the k-sparse case using
any decomposable probability-of-success metric.
Theorem 4 (The Famine of Forte). Deﬁne
τk = {T | T ⊆Ω,|T| = k ∈N}
and let Bm denote any set of binary strings, such that
the strings are of length m or less. Let
R = {(T,F) | T ∈τk,F ∈Bm}, and
Rqmin = {(T,F) | T ∈τk,F ∈Bm,φ(T,F) ≥qmin},
where φ(T,F) is the decomposable probability-of-
success metric for algorithm A on problem (Ω,T,F).
Then for any m ∈N,
|Rqmin|
|R|
≤
p
qmin
.
(5.4)
This demonstrates that for any decomposable met-
ric there is an upper bound on the proportion of prob-
lems an algorithm is successful on. Here, we measure
success as being above a certain threshold with re-
spect to a decomposable metric, and the upper bound
is inversely related to this threshold.
5.5
Learning Under Dependence
While the previous theorems highlight cases where
an algorithm is unlikely to succeed, we now consider
the conditions that make an algorithm likely to suc-
ceed. To begin, we consider how the target and infor-
mation resource can inﬂuence an algorithm’s success
by generalizing the Learning Under Dependence the-
orem (Monta˜nez, 2017).
Theorem 5 (Learning Under Dependence). Deﬁne
τk = {T | T ⊆Ω,|T| = k ∈N} and let Bm denote
any set of binary strings (information resources), such
that the strings are of length m or less. Deﬁne q as
the expected decomposable probability of success un-
der the joint distribution on T ∈τk and F ∈Bm for
any ﬁxed algorithm A, such that q := ET,F [φ(T,F)],
namely,
q = ET,F

Pφ(ω ∈T|F)

= Pr(ω ∈T;A).
Then,
q ≤I(T;F)+D(PT∥UT)+1
IΩ
(5.5)
where IΩ= −logk/|Ω|, D(PT∥UT) is the Kullback-
Liebler divergence between the marginal distribution
on T and the uniform distribution on T, and I(T;F)
is the mutual information. Alternatively, we can write
Pr(ω ∈T;A) ≤H(UT)−H(T | F)+1
IΩ
(5.6)
where H(UT) = log
 |Ω|
k

.
The value of q deﬁned here represents the ex-
pected single-query probability of success of an algo-
rithm relative to a randomly selected target and infor-
mation resource, distributed according to some joint
distribution. The probability of success for a single
query (marginalized over information resources) is
equivalent to the expectation of the conditional proba-
bility of success, conditioned on the random informa-
tion resource. Upper bounding this value states that
regardless of the choice of decomposable probability-
of-success metric, the probability of success depends
on the amount of information regarding the target
contained within the information resource, as mea-
sured by the mutual information.
5.6
Famine of Favorable Information
Resources
We now demonstrate the effect of the general bias
term deﬁned earlier on the probability of a suc-
cess of an algorithm.
We begin with a general-
ization of the Famine of Favorable Information Re-
sources (Monta˜nez et al., 2019).
Theorem 6 (Famine of Favorable Information Re-
sources). Let B be a ﬁnite set of information re-
sources and let t ⊆Ωbe an arbitrary ﬁxed k-size tar-
get set with corresponding target function t. Deﬁne
Bqmin = {f | f ∈B,φ(t, f) ≥qmin},
where
φ(t, f)
is
an
arbitrary
decomposable
probability-of-success
metric
for
algorithm
A
on search problem (Ω,t, f) and qmin ∈(0,1] repre-
sents the minimally acceptable probability of success.
Then,
|Bqmin|
|B|
≤p+Bias(B,t)
qmin
(5.7)
where p =
k
|Ω|.

This result demonstrates the mathematical effect
of bias, of which we have previously provided one hy-
pothetical example (car parking). Now, we can show
that the bias of our expected information resources
towards the target upper bounds the probability of
a given information resource leading to a successful
search.
5.7
Futility of Bias-Free Search
We can also use our deﬁnition of bias to generalize the
Futility of Bias-Free Search (Monta˜nez, 2017), which
demonstrates the inability of an algorithm to perform
better than uniform random sampling without bias,
deﬁned with respect to the expected per-query prob-
ability of success. Our generalization proves that the
theorem holds for bias deﬁned with respect to any de-
composable probability-of-success metric.
Theorem 7 (Futility of Bias-Free Search). For any
ﬁxed algorithm A, ﬁxed target t ⊆Ωwith correspond-
ing target function t, and distribution over informa-
tion resources D, if Bias(D,t) = 0, then
Pr(ω ∈t;A) = p
(5.8)
where Pr(ω ∈t;A) represents the expected decompos-
able probability of successfully sampling an element
of t using A, marginalized over information resources
F ∼D, and p is the single-query probability of suc-
cess under uniform random sampling.
This result demonstrates that, regardless of how
we measure the success of an algorithm with respect
to a decomposable metric, it cannot perform better
than uniform random sampling without bias.
5.8
Famine of Favorable Biasing
Distributions
Monta˜nez proved that the percentage of minimally fa-
vorable distributions (biased over some threshold to-
wards some speciﬁc target) is inversely proportional
to the threshold value and directly proportional to
the bias between the information resource and target
function (Monta˜nez, 2017). We will show that this
scarcity of favorable biasing distributions holds, in
general, for bias under any decomposable probability-
of-success metric.
Theorem 8 (Famine of Favorable Biasing Distribu-
tions). Given a ﬁxed target function t, a ﬁnite set
of information resources B, a distribution over in-
formation resources D, and a set P = {D | D ∈
R|B|,∑f∈B D(f) = 1} of all discrete |B|-dimensional
simplex vectors,
µ(Gt,qmin)
µ(P)
≤p+Bias(B,t)
qmin
(5.9)
where Gt,qmin = {D | D ∈P,Bias(D,t) ≥qmin}, p =
k
Ω, and µ is Lebesgue measure.
This result shows that the more bias there is be-
tween our set of information resources B and the tar-
get function t, the easier it is to ﬁnd a minimally fa-
vorable distribution, and the higher the threshold for
what qualiﬁes as a minimally favorable distribution,
the harder our search becomes. Thus, unless we want
to suppose that we begin with a set of information
resources already favorable towards our ﬁxed target,
ﬁnding a highly favorable distribution is difﬁcult.
6
CONCLUSION
Casting machine learning problems as search pro-
vides a common formalism within which to prove
bounds and impossibility results for a wide variety
of learning algorithms and tasks. In this paper, we
introduce a property of probability-of-success met-
rics called decomposability, and show that the ex-
pected per-query probability of success and general
probability of success are decomposable. To demon-
strate the value of this property, we prove that a num-
ber of existing algorithmic search framework results
continue to hold for all decomposable probability-
of-success metrics. These results provide a number
of useful insights: we show that algorithmic perfor-
mance is conserved with respect to all decomposable
probability-of-success metrics, favorable targets are
scarce no matter your decomposable probability-of-
success metric, and that without the generalized bias
deﬁned here, an algorithm will not perform better than
uniform random sampling.
The goal of this work is to offer additional ma-
chinery within the search framework, allowing for
more general application.
Concretely, we can de-
velop decomposable probability-of-success metrics
for problems concerned with the state of an algorithm
at speciﬁc steps, and leverage existing results as a
foundation for additional insight into those problems.
