1
Holographic Graph Neuron: a Bio-Inspired
Architecture for Pattern Processing
Denis Kleyko, Evgeny Osipov, Alexander Senior, Asad I. Khan, and Y. Ahmet ¸Sekercio˘glu
Abstract—This article proposes the use of Vector Symbolic
Architectures for implementing Hierarchical Graph Neuron, an
architecture for memorizing patterns of generic sensor stimuli.
The adoption of a Vector Symbolic representation ensures a
one-layered design for the approach, while maintaining the
previously reported properties and performance characteristics
of Hierarchical Graph Neuron, and also improving the noise
resistance of the architecture. The proposed architecture enables
a linear (with respect to the number of stored entries) time search
for an arbitrary sub-pattern.
Index Terms—Holographic Graph Neuron, Pattern recogni-
tion, Vector Symbolic Architecture, Associative memory, hyper-
dimensional computing.
I. INTRODUCTION
G
RAPH Neuron (GN) is an approach for memorizing
patterns of generic sensor stimuli for later template
matching. It is based on the hypothesis that a better associative
memory resource can be created by changing the empha-
sis from high speed sequential CPU processing to parallel
network-centric processing [2], [3]. In contrast to contempo-
rary machine learning approaches, GN allows introduction of
new patterns in the learning set without the need for retraining.
Whilst doing so, it exhibits a high level of scalability i.e. its
performance and accuracy do not degrade as the number of
stored patterns increases over time.
Vector Symbolic Architectures (VSA) [4] are a bio-inspired
method of representing concepts and their meaning for mod-
eling cognitive reasoning. It exhibits a set of unique prop-
erties which make it suitable for implementation of artiﬁcial
general intelligence [5], [6], [7], and so, creation of complex
systems for sensing and pattern recognition without reliance
on complex computation. In the biological world, extremely
successful applications of these approaches can be found. One
example is the ordinary house ﬂy. A house ﬂy is capable of
conducting very complex maneuvers albeit it possesses very
This work was initially presented at IEEE International Conference on
Computer and Information Sciences, ICCOINS 2014 [1].
D. Kleyko and E. Osipov are with the Department of Computer Science
Electrical and Space Engineering, Luleå University of Technology, 971 87

A.I. Khan is with Clayton School of Information Technology, Monash

A. Senior and Y. A. ¸Sekercio˘glu are with the Department of Elec-
trical
and
Computer
Systems
Engineering,
Monash
University,
Clay-

little computational capacity1. Another interesting biological
example is the compound eyes of arthropods. These compound
eyes consist of large number of sensors with limited and local-
ized processing capabilities for performing relatively complex
sensing tasks [9].
This article presents contributions in two domains: organi-
zation of associative memory and properties of connectionist
distributed representation. In the ﬁrst area the article introduces
a novel bio-inspired architecture, called Holographic Graph
Neuron (HoloGN), for one-shot pattern learning, which is
build upon Graph Neuron’s ﬂexible input encoding abstraction
and strong reasoning capabilities of the VSA representation.
In the second area this article extends understanding of the
performance proprieties of distributed representation, which
opens a way for new applications.
The article is structured as follows. Section II presents an
overview of the work related to the matter presented in this
article. The background information on the theories, concepts
and approaches used in HoloGN is described in Section III.
Sections IV through VI present the main contribution of
this article – the design of the HoloGN architecture and its
performance characteristics. The conclusions are presented in
Section VII.
II. RELATED WORK
Associative memory (AM) is a sub-domain of artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks, which utilises the beneﬁts of content-addressable
memory (CAM) [10] in microcomputers. The AM concept
was originally developed in an effort to utilise the power and
speed of existing computer systems for solving large-scale and
computationally intensive problems by simulating biological
neurosystems.
The Hierarchical Graph Neuron (HGN) approach [2] is a
type of associative memory which signiﬁes the hierarchical
structure in its implementation. Hierarchical structures in
associative memory models are of interest as these have been
shown to improve the rate of recall in pattern recognition
applications. The distributed HGN scheme also allows for
better control of the network resources. This scheme compares
well with contemporary approaches such as Self-Organizing
Map and Support Vector Machine in terms of speed and
accuracy.
1In [8], a house ﬂy’s properties are compared and contrasted with an
advanced ﬁghter plane as follows: “Whereas the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, the
most advanced ﬁghter plane in the world, takes a few measurements - airspeed,
rate of climb, rotations, and so on and then plugs them into complex equations,
which it must solve in real time, the ﬂy relies on many measurements from
a variety of sensors but does relatively little computation.”
arXiv:1501.03784v1  [cs.AI]  15 Jan 2015

2
Vector Symbolic Architectures [5] are a class of connection-
ist models that use hyper-dimensional vectors (i.e. vectors of
several thousand elements) to encode structured information
as distributed or holographic representation. In this technique
structured data is represented by performing basic arithmetic
operations on ﬁeld-value tuples. Distributed representations
of data structures are an approach actively used in the area
of cognitive computing for representing and reasoning upon
semantically bound information [4], [11].
In [12] a VSA-based knowledge-representation architecture
is proposed for learning arbitrarily complex, hierarchical, sym-
bolic relationships (patterns) between sensors and actuators in
robotics. Recently the theory of hyper-dimensional computing,
and VSA in particular, were adopted for implementing novel
communication protocols and architectures for collective com-
munications in machine-to-machine communication scenarios
[13], [14]. The ﬁrst work demonstrates unique reliability and
timing properties essential in the context of industrial machine-
to-machine communications. The latter work shows the feasi-
bility of implementing collective communications using cur-
rent radio technology. This article presents an algorithmic
ground for further design of the distributed HoloGN on top
of the architecture presented in [13].
III. OVERVIEW OF ESSENTIAL PARTS OF RELEVANT
CONCEPTS AND THEORIES
A. Hierarchical Graph Neuron
Figure 1 illustrates the Hierarchical Graph Neuron approach.
Consider only the bottom layer of the construction without
the hierarchy of upper nodes; this bottom level is the original
ﬂat network of Graph Neurons [2]. Each GN is a model for
a set of generic sensory values. When seen as a network,
graph neurons can be modeled by an array where columns are
individual GNs and rows are possible symbols, which a neuron
can recognize. For example, if there are only two possible
symbols, say “X” and “Y”, in the alphabet of a pattern, then
only two rows are needed to represent those symbols. The
number of columns2 in the GN array determines the size of
patterns, which it can analyse.
An input pattern is deﬁned as a stimulus produced within
the network. In Figure 1, each GN can analyse a symbol (“X”
or “Y”) of a pattern comprising of ﬁve elements. In each
GN (column) only the element with matching value (a row
ID) would respond. For example, if the pattern is “YXYYX”,
then in the second column “X” element will be activated as
response to this input stimulus. If a particular element in the
GN-column is activated it sends a report to all adjacent GNs.
The report contains the activated GN’s element ID (the row
index). Otherwise, it simply ignores the stimulus and returns
to the idle state.
During the next phase, all GNs communicate the indices of
the activated elements with the adjacent columns at their level,
and additionally communicate the stored bias information to
2In this articles words “column” and GN are used interchangeably and refer
to a single Graph Neuron. Term “GN array” refers to several GNs used to
recognize a pattern of several elements, where one neuron is used to recognize
one element of the pattern.
Fig. 1.
Hierarchical GNs with ﬁve elements’ pattern of two symbols. The
short arrows in the ﬁgure show how GNs communicate indices of the activated
GN-elements with their neighbours creating logical connectivity. Null GN
numbers are assigned at the start and at the end of the array for maintaining
a consistent reporting scheme where every activated GN reports to both the
adjacent GNs.
the layer above. The procedure continues in an ascending
manner until the collective bias information reaches the top of
the hierarchy. The higher level GNs can thus provide a more
authoritative assessment of the input pattern. The accuracy of
HGN was demonstrated to be comparable to the accuracy of
Neural Network with back-propagation [2].
B. Fundamentals of Vector Symbolic Architecture and Binary
Spatter Codes
Vector Symbolic Architecture is an approach for encoding
and operations on distributed representation of information.
VSA has previously been used mainly in the area of cognitive
computing for representing and reasoning upon semantically
bound information [4], [15].
The fundamental difference between distributed and localist
representations of data is as follows: in traditional (localist)
computing architectures each bit and its position within a
structure of bits are signiﬁcant (for example, a ﬁeld in a
database has a predeﬁned offset amongst other ﬁelds and a
symbolic value has unique representation in ASCII codes);
whereas in a distributed representation all entities are rep-
resented by binary random vectors of very high dimension.
These representations are also called Binary Spatter Codes
(BSC), though for the remainder of the article we use term
HD-vector when referring to BSC codes, for reasons of
brevity. High dimensionality refers to that fact that in HD-
vectors, several thousand positions (of binary numbers) are
used for representing a single entity; [4] proposes the use
of vectors of 10000 binary elements. Such entities have the
following useful properties:
1) Randomness: Randomness means that the values on
each position of an HD-vector are independent of each other,
and "0" and "1" components are equally probable. In very high
dimensions, the distances from any arbitrary chosen HD-vector
to more than 99.99 % of all other vectors in the representation
space are concentrated around 0.5 Hamming distance. Inter-
ested readers are referred to [4] and [16] for comprehensive
analysis of probabilistic properties of the hyperdimensional
representation space.

3
Denote the density of a randomly generated HD-vector (i.e.
the number of ones in a HD-vector) as k. The probability of
picking a random vector of length d with density k, where
the probability of 1’s appearance equals p is described by
described by the binomial distribution (1):
Pr(k, d, p) =
d
k

pk(1 −p)d−k.
(1)
When d is in the range of several thousand binary el-
ements, the calculation of the binomial coefﬁcient requires
sophisticated computations. The following equations use an
approximation of the binomial distribution, via the de Moivre-
Laplace theorem:
Pr(k, d, p) ≈
e
−(k−dp)2
2dp(1−p)
p
2πdp(1 −p)
(2)
2) Similarity metric: A similarity between two binary rep-
resentation is characterized by Hamming distance, which (for
two vectors) measures the number of positions in which they
differ:
∆H(A, B) = ∥A⊗B∥1
d
=
Pd−1
i=0 ai⊗bi
d
,
where ai, bi are bits on positions i in vectors A and B
of dimension d, and where ⊗denotes the bit-wise XOR
operation.
3) Generation of HD-vectors: Random binary vectors with
the above properties can be generated with Zadoff-Chu se-
quences [17], a method widely used in telecommunications to
generate pseudo-orthogonal preambles. Using this approach a
sequence of K vectors, which are pseudo-orthogonal to a given
initial random HD-vector A (i.e. Hamming distance between
them approximately equals 0.5) are obtained by cyclically
shifting A by i positions, where 1 < i ≤K ≤d. Further
in the article this operation is denoted as Sh(A, i). The cyclic
shift operation has the following properties:
• it is invertible, i.e. if B = Sh(A, i) then A = Sh(B, −i);
• it is associative in the sense that Sh(B, i + j)
=
Sh(Sh(B, i), j) = Sh(Sh(B, j), i);
• it preserves Hamming weight of the result:
∥B∥1 = ∥Sh(B, i)∥1; and
• the result is dissimilar to the vector being shifted:
∥B⊗Sh(B,i)∥1
d
≈0.5.
Note that the cyclic shift is a special case of the permutation
operation [4]. In the context of VSA, permutations were
previously used to encode sequences of semantically bound
elements.
4) Bundling of vectors: Joining several entities into one
structure is done by the bundling operation; it is implemented
by a thresholded sum of the HD-vectors representing the
entities. A bit-wise thresholded sum of n vectors results in
0 when n/2 or more arguments are 0, and 1 otherwise.
Furthermore terms "thresholded sum" and "majority sum" are
used interchangeably and denoted as [A+B+C]. The relevant
properties of the majority sum are:
• the result is a random vector, i.e. the number of ‘1’
components is approximately equal to the number of ‘0’
components;
Fig. 2.
A High level illustration of the proposed solution: representation of
the Hierarchical Graph Neuron using Vector Symbolic Architecture.
• the result is similar to all vectors included in the sum;
• the number of vectors involved into MAJORITY sum
must be odd;
• the more HD-vectors that are involved in a majority
operation, the closer the Hamming distance between the
resultant vector and any HD-vector component is to 0.5;
and
• if several copies of any vector are included into a majority
sum, the resultant vector is closer to the dominating
vector than to other components.
The algebra on VSA includes other operations e.g., binding,
permutation [4]. Since we do not use them in this article, we
omit their deﬁnitions and properties.
IV. HOLOGRAPHIC GRAPH NEURON
This section presents one of the main contributions of
this paper: the adoption of the VSA data representation for
implementation of the HGN approach.
A. Motivation for Holographic Graph Neuron and outline of
the solution
An important issue in hierarchical models is the overhead of
resource requirements, speciﬁcally with regards to the number
of processing elements required. We propose a holographic
approach, which enables a ﬂat GN array to operate with higher
level of accuracy and comparable recall time than that of HGN,
without the need for a complex topology and additional nodes.
The high-level logic of the proposed solution is illustrated
in Figure 2. Essentially, we replace the need for maintaining
topological relationships by compacting parts of the pattern
observed by GNs into one holographic representation.
B. Encoding
In the case of HoloGN, all its elements (i.e. symbols of
individual neurons) are indexed uniquely and the index of a
particular element is derived as a function of the GN’s ID.
Let IVj be an initialization high-dimensional vector for GN
j. The initialized vectors for different GNs are chosen to be
mutually orthogonal. Then the HD-index of element i in GN j
is computed as EHD
(j,i) = Sh(IVj, i), where Sh() is a cyclic shift
operation resulting in the generation of a vector orthogonal to
IVj HD-vector [17], [18].

4
C. Construction of VSA-representation of activated GNs
Let n be the number of individual Graph Neurons. When
a GN array is exposed to a pattern, the activated elements
communicate their HD-represented indices to all other GNs;
the holographic representation of the activated elements is
then:
HGN = [
n
X
j=1
(EHD
j
)],
(3)
where EHD
j
is the HD-index of the activated element in
textGN j, and the addition operation is the bundling opera-
tion, or thresholded sum as described in III-B. As discussed
previously, in the resultant HD-vector the Hamming distances
between each component and the composition vector is strictly
less than 0.5. We will utilize this property later when construct-
ing data structures for recall of patterns in HoloGN.
D. Data structures for storing and retrieving holographic
representations in HGN elements
HoloGN will store the holographic representation of the
entire pattern (3) observed across all GNs. A possible archi-
tecture is for all memorized patterns to be collected and stored
centrally at a processing node.
Depending on the particular application of HoloGN, the
memorized patterns could be stored either in an unsorted list
or in bundles. The ﬁrst mode of storing HoloGN patterns
corresponds to the case where the structure of the observed
patterns is unknown; the latter mode is used in the case of
a supervised learning. The next section describes different
HoloGN usage and recall strategies.
V. HOLOGN RECALL STRATEGIES
This section introduces and evaluates the performance of
two major recall modes: the one-shot case and the case of
supervised learning.
A. Time-efﬁcient ξ-accurate recall in an unsorted HoloGN
storage
The common steps in both recall modes is the proce-
dure for the time-efﬁcient search over an (unsorted) list of
HoloGN records. Recall that all manipulations with VSA-
encoded entities are done using simple bit-wise arithmetic
operations as well, and calculations to obtain the Hamming
distance between entities. However, for this article we assume
no particular optimized implementation of VSA’s bit-wise
operations; this is because such operations are tailored to the
architectures of speciﬁc microprocessors, which operate with
words of substantially lower dimensionalities (typically 32 or
64 bits). Therefore, adopting these methods for implementing
the bit-wise operations on words of thousands of bits would
be cumbersome. Instead, an easily analyzable computational
model is adopted in this article, which could also be adapted
to an implementation on specialized computing architectures.
In what follows, each HoloGN pattern hi is modelled as a
row vector of d elements. The list of stored HoloGN patterns
is therefore modelled as an l×d matrix, where l is the number
of the learned (stored) HoloGN patterns. Denote this matrix
as H. The task of recalling a pattern with a target accuracy
of ξ (ξ < 0.5) is formulated as ﬁnding the rows hi in H with
Hamming distance to the query pattern hq less than or equal
to ξ.
The conventional way of computing Hamming distance
between vectors would be to perform the following sequence
of computations for each row in H: 1) perform an element-
wise XOR with the vector query; 2) sum up all elements in
the intermediate result; and then 3) divide the result by the
dimensionality of the vectors. The performance of the two
implementations of this method using Matlab’s repmat and
bxfun functions are shown by the top two curves in Figure 3.
The curves demonstrate linear but rapid increase in the recall
time with the increase in the number of the stored patterns. The
lowest curve in the ﬁgure shows the performance of matrix-
vector multiplication of the same size, which is chosen as the
reference case. The results were obtained on a Intel Core i7-
3520M 2.9 GHz machine with Windows 7 operating system
using one processor.
1) Binary spatter codes as complex numbers: In order to
improve the efﬁciency of calculating Hamming distances over
a vast number of HoloGN patterns, we propose representing
HoloGN patterns using complex numbers, where a binary
0 would be represented by √−1 (i.e. the complex number)
and a binary 1 would remain 1. The intuition behind this
transformation is simple: multiplication of bits in the same
position should produce three outcomes: −1 = j×j, 1 = 1×1
and j = 1 × j. That is, the multiplication of two similar
bits would produce a real number and the multiplication of
two different bits produces a imaginary number. In this way
the sum of the imaginary parts over all positions in the
resulting vector, divided by dimensionality d, will correspond
to the Hamming distance between the two vectors. Thus, the
suggested method allows us to implement the calculation of
Hamming distance through the standard method of matrix-
vector multiplication, as illustrated below:
H × hq =





√−1
1
· · ·
√−1
1
1
· · ·
√−1
...
...
...
...
√−1
√−1
· · ·
1




×





√−1
1
...
√−1




=
=




254 + 1633j
617 + 3824j
...
548 + 4952j



.
(4)
The performance of the proposed method is illustrated by
the red dashed curve in Figure 3. It demonstrates that the
calculation of the Hamming distance is only two times slower
than the usual matrix-vector multiplication. Speciﬁcally, to
compute Hamming distance from the target vector to each of
20 000 stored patterns takes approximately 200 ms on the test
machine. Further optimization of the matrix multiplication and
execution on parallel architectures hint on realistic bounds on
the recall time over extremely large numbers of patterns.

5
Fig. 3.
A comparison of the different approaches to recalling patterns,
showing the time taken to calculate the Hamming distance against the number
of previously presented patterns.
B. Case-study 1: Best-match probing under one-shot learning
The ﬁrst usage of HoloGN is probing the existence of
the target query pattern amongst the previously memorized
patterns. The perfect match in this case would be indicated
by a Hamming distance of zero. The deviation from zero,
therefore, reﬂects the degree of proximity of the query to one
or several stored HoloGN patterns. In the following example
the accuracy of the HoloGN recall was compared to the
performance of the original HGN approach. For the sake of
fair comparison the 7 by 5 pixels letters of the Roman alphabet
(as in [2]) were used.
Fig. 4.
List of letters images for comparison.
In the memorizing phase a set of noise-free images of letters
illustrated in Figure 4 was presented to both architectures.
In the recall phase images of the same letters distorted with
different levels of random distortions (between 1 bit corre-
sponding to a distortion of 2.9% of the pattern’s size and
5 bits equivalent to 14.3% distortion) were presented to the
architectures for the recall. An example of a noisy input is
presented in Figure 5. In the case of HoloGN the pattern with
the lowest Hamming distance to the presented distorted pattern
was returned as the output.
Figure 6 presents the results of the accuracy comparison
between the recall results for the HoloGN approach and the
reference HGN architecture. To obtain the results 1000 dis-
torted images of each letter for every level of distortion were
presented for recall. The charts show the percentage of the
Fig. 5.
An example of presented for recall images distorted by 14.3%.
correct recall output. The analysis shows that the performance
of the HoloGN-based associative memory at least matches that
of the original approach. In most of cases HoloGN appears to
be more accurate when recalling patterns with high level of
distortion.
C. Case-study 2: HoloGN recall under the supervised learn-
ing
The analysis presented above is a very positive result for
the proposed bio-inspired associative memory based pattern
processing architecture, since the accuracy of the original
HGN approach was demonstrated to be as accurate as artiﬁcial
neural networks with back-propagation [2]. While establishing
formal relationships to the framework of artiﬁcial neural
networksis outside the scope of this work, this section presents
the results of the pattern recognition accuracy of the HoloGN
architecture under the supervised learning. In this case the
HoloGN is presented with a series of randomly distorted pat-
terns for each letter with different level of distortion (between
3% and 43%) as exempliﬁed in Figure 5. In the experiments
up to 500 patterns for each letter and every level of distortion
were presented for memorizing. For the particular level of
distortion i all e presented patterns of the particular letter Li
were bundled to a single HoloGN representation as
h(L) = [
e
X
i=1
(HGN(Li))].
(5)
Thus by the end of the learning phase the HoloGN list will
contain 26 high dimensional bundles, each jointly representing
all (presented) distorted variants of the particular letter. In the
recall phase for each distortion level HoloGN was presented
with 500 new distorted patterns of each letter. The accuracy
of the recall was measured as the percentage of the correctly
recognized letters averaged over the alphabet.
Figure 7 illustrates the obtained results: 90% accurate recall
was observed when learning symbols distorted up to 15%.
While the accuracy predictably decreases rapidly with the
increase of distortion in the presented patterns, a reasonable
80% recall accuracy was observed for learning sets with 7 bits
distortion (20%).
Figure 8 illustrates the convergence of the HoloGN recall
accuracy with the number of presented noisy samples for the
case of 14.3% distortion (5 bits). This is a deﬁnitely positive
result for the presented architecture, which illustrates the
suitability of the HoloGN in applications requiring supervised
learning.

6
Fig. 6.
Results from testing black and white images of letters using recall patterns with distortions ranging from 2.9 % to 14.3 % .
Fig. 7.
Average accuracy of HoloGN recall under the supervised learning
memorization as a function of the distortion level.
VI. PATTERN DECODING AND SUBPATTERN-BASED
ANALYSIS
There is a class of pattern recognition applications which
requires an understanding of the details of the recall results.
For example, when a recall returns several possible patterns
of given recall accuracy, the task would be to understand the
overlapping elements. This section considers two aspects of
this task: a robust decoding of elementary components out of
a distributed VSA representation; and a quantitative metric of
the similarity via direct comparison of distributed representa-
tions, without the need for decoding those representations.
The VSA approach of representing data structures by
deﬁnition makes decoding of the individual components a
tedious task, requiring a brute force test on the inclusion of
Fig. 8.
Accuracy of HoloGN under the supervised learning memorization as
a function of the number of presented examples for a given level of distortion.
all possible high-dimensional codewords for each GN. The
majority sum, which is used for creating HoloGN representa-
tions of the observed patterns imposes a limit on the number
high-dimensional codewords operands, above which a robust
decoding of the individual operands is impossible.
A. Preliminaries
Denote the density of a randomly generated HD-vector (i.e.
the number of ones in a HD-vector) as k. The probability of
picking a random vector of length d with density k, where the
probability of 1’s appearance, deﬁned as p, is described by (2).
The mean density of a random vector is equal to d·p. Note that
in reality the density of randomly generated HD-vectors will

7
obviously deviate from the mean value. However, according to
(1) density k is approaches the mean value with the increase of
dimensionality d. In other, words the probability of generating
HD-vector with k >> d · p or k << d · p decreases with the
increase of dimensionality d.
Fig. 9.
Binomial distribution and its parameters describing HD-vectors.
Deﬁne thr as the threshold probability of generating a
vector with a certain deviation of density being negligibly
small. Let k−and k+ characterize the lower and the upper
bounds of the interval of possible densities. This is illustrated
in Figure 9. The bounds for a given d, p and thr are calculated
using (2). The bounds are calculated according to (6) and (7).
The value of threshold is chosen to be small (10−6).
k−(d, p, thr) = max
k (Pr(k, d, p) <= thr|k < (d · p))
(6)
k+(d, p, thr) = min
k (Pr(k, d, p) <= thr|k > (d · p))
(7)
B. Capacity of HoloGN representations
Suppose there exists an item memory [4] containing HD-
vectors representing atomic concepts3. Recall that when sev-
eral HD-vectors are bundled by the majority sum the noise
of ﬂipped bits increases with the number of components. For
a given dimensionality d there is a limit on the number of
bundled HD-vectors beyond which the resulting HD-vector
becomes orthogonal to every component vector; hence the A
capacity of the resulting vector is deﬁned as the maximal
number of mutually orthogonal HD-vectors which can be
robustly decoded from their majority sum composition by
probing the item memory.
In order to characterize the capacity of the composition
vector for a given dimensionality, one needs to characterize
the level of noise pn introduced by the bundling operation.
This is calculated as in [19] by (8), where n is a number of
atomic vectors in the resulting majority sum vector.
pn(n) =
1
2 −

n −1
0.5 · (n −1)

2n
.
(8)
Consider an arbitrary HD-vector A to be decoded from
a majority sum composition. Let N be a vector of noise
imposed by the majority sum operation. Since the components
3In the case of HoloGN an atomic concept is the code for the particular
HoloGN element.
Fig. 10.
Explanation of vector’s capacity. Solid line represents random HD-
vector. Dashed line corresponds to noise introduced by majority sum.
are mutually orthogonal, the density of ones in the noise
vector is also described the binomial distribution Pr(k, d, pn).
As each new vector is added the level of noise increases,
hence the mean of the noise vector density will approach
0.5 as illustrated in Figure 11. Due to the properties of high
dimensional space, vector A will be undecodable when the
upper bound k+(d, pn, thr) of the density of noise vector
N approaches the lower bound k−(d, 0.5, thr). That is, the
noisy version of A becomes orthogonal to its clean version.
This logic is illustrated in Figure 10, where the resulting
majority sum vector is orthogonal to all components. Thus the
capacity of the distributed representation with dimensionality
d is computed by:
Capacity(d, thr) =
= max
n (k+(d, pn(n), thr) ≤k−(d, 0.5, thr))
(9)
Fig. 11.
Capacity of the component vector versus the dimensionality. The
calculations use a the threshold of thr = 10−6
Figure 11 presents the capacity of HD-vector of different
dimensionalities calculated for threshold probability thr =
10−6. Speciﬁcally for d = 10000 bits the capacity of the
robustly decodable VSA is 89 vectors.
C. Calculation of the number of common component vectors
in two resulting vectors
Given the rather conservative limits on the number of
robustly decodable elements in a distributed representation it is

8
important that the proposed HoloGN architecture can estimate
the similarity between different patterns without decoding
them. This subsection provides a method for the quantitatively
measuring the number of overlapping elements as a function of
their relative Hamming distance. Denote m and n as lengths
of two patterns, m <= n, and denote c as the number of
common elements in these patterns. Let M be a c × d matrix
of common elements where each row contains a random HD-
vector of dimension d encoding element ci. Denote an arbitrary
column of matrix M as C. Since rows in M are independent,
the density of ones in each column also follows the binomial
distribution with p = 0.5 and length c. Denote the number of
ones in column C as ||C||1.
In order to calculate the Hamming distance between the
distributed representations of two patterns with known m,
n and c, consider all possible cases when bits in the same
position are different. The Hamming distance between two
patterns can be estimated with equation (10):
∆H = p(c, m, n) =
c
X
||C||1=0
 c
||C||1

2c
· (p1(m, c, ||C||1)·
·p0(n, c, ||C||1)+p0(m, c, ||C||1) · p1(n, c, ||C||1));
(10)
where pi(j, c, ||C||1) stands for the probability of having i
(0 or 1), when the representation consists of j = m or j = n
atomic vectors and c of these vectors are overlapped.
Due to the symmetry in the calculation of probabil-
ities,
pi(j, c, ||C||1)
is
presented
only
for
the
case
of
p1(m, c, ||C||1). There are three possible cases for calculation
of p1(m, c, ||C||1):
• if ||C||1 is more than m/2, then the result of the majority
sum is ‘1’, i.e. p1 is 1;
• if number of possible ‘1’s is less than m/2, then proba-
bility of p1 is 0;
• otherwise the probability should take into account all
possible combinations, and their probabilities.
Equation (11) speciﬁes probability for p1(m, c, ||C||1), and
equation (12) does the same for p0(m, c, ||C||1).
p1(m, c, ||C||1) =















1, when ||C||1 > m
2
0, when (m −c) < m+1
2
−||C||1
(m−c)
X
i=( m+1
2
−||C||1)
m −c
i

2(m−c)
, otherwise
(11)
p0(m, c, ||C||1) =















1, when (c −||C||1) > m
2
0, when (m −c) < m+1
2
−(c −||C||1)
(m−c)
X
i=( m+1
2
−(c−||C||1))
m −c
i

2(m−c)
, otherwise
(12)
Figure 12 shows the Hamming distances between two result-
ing vectors for different numbers of overlapping vectors. The
Fig. 12.
The Hamming distance between two resulting vectors against
number of components in common. The number of atomic vectors is the
same, m = n.
results show that the larger the number of common elements,
the smaller the Hamming distance between resulting vectors.
This method opens a way towards constructing and ana-
lyzing patterns far beyond VSA’s robustly decodable capac-
ity. The problem with practical application of this method,
however, comes with the rapid convergence of the Hamming
distance indicator to 0.5, making the difference between ana-
lyzable patterns indistinguishable as illustrated in Figure 12.
For example, for HoloGN representations of patterns with 15
elements, sub-patterns of 3 overlapped elements are robustly
detected, while patterns with fewer overlapped elements are
indistinguishable. Thus, the minimal number of overlapped
elements in two patterns which can be robustly detected using
the Hamming distance indicator is called bundle’s sensitivity.
The analysis of the sensitivity is similar to the analysis
of the capacity of VSA representation in section VI-B. For
two patterns of length m and n elements, and c overlapped
components, the sensitivity is calculated by (13):
Sensitivity(d, thr, m, n) =
min
c (k+(d, p(c, n, m), thr) <= k−(d, 0.5, thr))
(13)
Figure 13 demonstrates the development of the sensitivity
threshold with the number of elements in the compared
patterns. The results show that the number of components
for robust detection grows linearly with the size of pattern.
Patterns with more than 500 elements should contain at least
14 % overlapped elements to be robustly detected by the
proposed method.
VII. CONCLUSION
This article presented Holographic Graph Neuron - a novel
approach for memorizing patterns of generic sensor stimuli.
HoloGN is built upon the previous Graph Neuron algorithm
and adopts a Vector Symbolic representation for encoding
of the Graph Neuron’s states. The adoption of the Vector
Symbolic representation ensures a one-layered design for the
approach, which implies the computational simplicity of the
operations. The presented approach possesses the number of

9
Fig. 13. Minimal number of common components, which is sensible between
two patterns of the same size against the size of patterns, d = 10000, thr =
10−6.
uniques properties. Prior to all, it enables a linear (with respect
to the number of stored entries) time search for an arbitrary
sub-pattern. While maintaining the previously reported proper-
ties of Hierarchical Graph Neuron, HoloGN is also improving
the noise resistance of the architecture by this substantially
improving the accuracy of pattern recall.
