arXiv:1202.6153v1  [cs.AI]  28 Feb 2012
One Decade of Universal Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Marcus Hutter

Canberra, ACT, 0200, Australia
&
Department of Computer Science
ETH Z¨urich, Switzerland
February 2012
Abstract
The ﬁrst decade of this century has seen the nascency of the ﬁrst mathe-
matical theory of general artiﬁcial intelligence. This theory of Universal Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence (UAI) has made signiﬁcant contributions to many theoretical,
philosophical, and practical AI questions. In a series of papers culminating in
book (Hutter, 2005), an exciting sound and complete mathematical model for
a super intelligent agent (AIXI) has been developed and rigorously analyzed.
While nowadays most AI researchers avoid discussing intelligence, the award-
winning PhD thesis (Legg, 2008) provided the philosophical embedding and
investigated the UAI-based universal measure of rational intelligence, which
is formal, objective and non-anthropocentric. Recently, eﬀective approxima-
tions of AIXI have been derived and experimentally investigated in JAIR
paper (Veness et al. 2011). This practical breakthrough has resulted in some
impressive applications, ﬁnally muting earlier critique that UAI is only a the-
ory. For the ﬁrst time, without providing any domain knowledge, the same
agent is able to self-adapt to a diverse range of interactive environments. For
instance, AIXI is able to learn from scratch to play TicTacToe, Pacman, Kuhn
Poker, and other games by trial and error, without even providing the rules
of the games.
These achievements give new hope that the grand goal of Artiﬁcial General
Intelligence is not elusive.
This article provides an informal overview of UAI in context. It attempts
to gently introduce a very theoretical, formal, and mathematical subject, and
discusses philosophical and technical ingredients, traits of intelligence, some
social questions, and the past and future of UAI.
1

Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
The AGI Problem
4
3
Universal Artiﬁcial Intelligence
7
4
Facets of Intelligence
10
5
Social Questions
12
6
State of the Art
13
7
Discussion
15
