Cost Based Satisﬁcing Search Considered Harmful
William Cushing and J. Benton and Subbarao Kambhampati∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Eng.
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85281
Abstract
Recently, several researchers have found that cost-based sat-
isﬁcing search with A* often runs into problems. Although
some ”work arounds” have been proposed to ameliorate the
problem, there has not been any concerted effort to pinpoint
its origin. In this paper, we argue that the origins can be
traced back to the wide variance in action costs that is ob-
served in most planning domains. We show that such cost
variance misleads A* search, and that this is no triﬂing de-
tail or accidental phenomenon, but a systemic weakness of
the very concept of “cost-based evaluation functions + sys-
tematic search + combinatorial graphs”. We show that satis-
ﬁcing search with sized-based evaluation functions is largely
immune to this problem.
1
Introduction
Much of the scale-up, as well as the research focus, in the
automated planning community in the recent years has been
on satisﬁcing planning.
Unfortunately, there hasn’t been
a concomitant increase in our understanding of satisﬁcing
search. Too often, the “theory” of satisﬁcing search defaults
to doing A* with inadmissible heuristics. While removing
the requirement of admissible heuristics certainly relaxes the
guarantee of optimality, there is no implied guarantee of ef-
ﬁciency. A combinatorial search can be seen to consist of
two parts: a “discovery” part where the (optimal) solution
is found and a “proof” part where the optimality of the so-
lution is veriﬁed. While an optimizing search depends cru-
cially on both these phases, a satisﬁcing search is instead
affected more directly by the discovery phase. Now, stan-
dard A* search conﬂates the discovery and proof phases to-
gether and terminates only when it picks the optimal path
for expansion. By default, satisﬁcing planners use the same
search regime, but relax the admissibility requirement on the
heuristics. This may not cause too much of a problem in do-
mains with uniform action costs, but when actions can have
non-uniform costs, the the optimal and second optimal so-
lution can be arbitrarily apart in depth. Consequently, A*
search with cost-based evaluation functions can be an arbi-
trarily bad strategy for satisﬁcing search, as it waits until the
solution is both discovered and proved to be optimal.
∗An extended abstract of this paper appeared in the proceed-
ings of SOCS 2010. This research is supported in part by ONR
grants N00014-09-1- 0017 and N00014-07-1-1049, and the NSF
grant IIS-0905672.
To be more speciﬁc, consider a planning problem for
which the cost-optimal and second-best solution to a prob-
lem exist on 10 and 1000 unspeciﬁed actions. The optimal
solution may be the larger one. How long should it take
just to ﬁnd the 10 action plan? How long should it take to
prove (or disprove) its optimality? In general (presuming
PSPACE/EXPSPACE ̸= P):
1. Discovery should require time exponential in, at most, 10.
2. Proof should require time exponential in, at least, 1000.
That is, in principle, the only way to (domain-independently)
prove that the 10 action plan is better or worse than the 1000
action one is to in fact go and discover the 1000 action plan.
Thus, A* search with cost-based evaluation function will
take time proportional to b1000 for either discovery or proof.
Using both abstract and benchmark problems, we will
demonstrate that this is a systematic weakness of any search
that uses cost-based evaluation function. In particular, we
shall see that if ε is the smallest cost action (after all costs
are normalized so the maximal cost action costs 1 unit), then
the time taken to discover a depth d optimal solution will be
b
d
ε . If all actions have same cost, then ε ≈1 where as if
the actions have signiﬁcant cost variance, then ε ≪1. We
shall see that for a variety of reasons, most real-world plan-
ning domains do exhibit high cost variance, thus presenting
an “ε-cost trap” that forces any cost-based satisﬁcing search
to dig its own ( 1
ε deep) grave.
Consequently, we argue that satisﬁcing search should re-
sist the temptation to directly use cost-based evaluation func-
tions (i.e., f functions that return answers in cost units)
even if they are interested in the quality (cost measure) of
the resulting plan. We will consider two size-based branch-
and-bound alternatives: the straightforward one which com-
pletely ignores costs and sticks to a purely size-based evalua-
tion function, and a more subtle one that uses a cost-sensitive
size-based evaluation function (speciﬁcally, the heuristic re-
turns the size of the cheapest cost path; see Section 2). We
show that both of these outperform cost-based evaluation
functions in the presence of ε-cost traps, with the second one
providing better quality plans (for the same run time limits)
than the ﬁrst in our empirical studies.
While some of the problems with cost-based satisﬁcing
search have also been observed, in passing, by other re-
searchers (e.g. (Benton et al. 2010; Richter and Westphal
2010), and some work-arounds have been suggested, our
arXiv:1103.3687v1  [cs.AI]  18 Mar 2011

main contribution is to bring to the fore its fundamental na-
ture. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the
next section, we present some preliminary notation to for-
mally specify cost-based, size-based as well as cost-sensitive
size-based search alternatives. Next, we present two abstract
and fundamental search spaces, which demonstrate that cost-
based evaluation functions are ‘always’ needlessly prone to
such traps (Section 3). Section 4 strengthens the intuitions
behind this analysis by viewing A* search as ﬂooding topo-
logical surfaces set up by evaluation functions. We will ar-
gue that of all possible topological surfaces (i.e., evaluation
functions) to choose for search, cost-based is the worst. In
Section 5, we put all this analysis to empirical validation
by experimenting with LAMA (Richter and Westphal 2010)
and SapaReplan. The experiments do show that size-based
alternatives out-perform cost-based search. Modern plan-
ners such as LAMA use a plethora of improvements beyond
vanilla A* search, and in the appendix we provide a deeper
analysis on which extensions of LAMA seem to help it mask
(but not fully overcome) the pernicious effects of cost-based
evaluation functions.
2
Setup and Notation
We gear the problem set up to be in line with the prevalent
view of state-space search in modern, state-of-the-art satis-
ﬁcing planners. First, we assume the current popular ap-
proach of reducing planning to graph search. That is, plan-
ners typically model the state-space in a causal direction,
so the problem becomes one of extracting paths, meaning
plans do not need to be stored in each state.
More im-
portant is that the structure of the graph is given implic-
itly by a procedure Γ, the child generator, with Γ(v) re-
turning the local subgraph leaving v; i.e., Γ(v) computes
the subgraph (N +[v], E({v}, V −v)) = ({u | vu ∈E} +
v, {vu | vu ∈E}) along with all associated labels, weights,
and so forth. That is, our analysis depends on the assumption
that an implicit representation of the graph is the only com-
putationally feasible representation, a common requirement
for analyzing the A∗family of algorithms (Hart, Nilsson,
and Raphael 1968; Dechter and Pearl 1985).
The search problem is to ﬁnd a path from an initial state,
i, to some goal state in G.
Let costs be represented as
edge weights, say c(uv) is the cost of an edge from u to
v. Let g∗
c(v) be the (optimal) cost-to-reach v (from i), and
h∗
c(v) be the (optimal) cost-to-go from v (to the goal). Then
f ∗
c (v) := g∗
c(v)+h∗
c(v), the cost-through v, is the cost of the
cheapest i-G path passing through v. For discussing smallest
solutions, let f ∗
s (v) denote the smallest i-G path through v.
It is also interesting to consider the size of the cheapest i-G
path passing through v, say ˆf ∗
s (v).
We deﬁne a search node n as equivalent to a path rep-
resented as a linked list. In particular, we distinguish this
from the state of n (its last vertex), n .v. We say n .a (for
action) is the last edge of the path and n.p (for parent) is
the subpath excluding n .a and n.v.
With n .a an edge
from v to u the function gc(n) (g-cost) is just the recur-
sive formulation of path cost: gc(n) := gc(n.p) + c(vu)
(gc(n) := 0 if n is the trivial path). So g∗(v) ≤gc(n) for all
i-v paths n, with equality for at least one of them. Similarly
let gs(n) := gs(n.p) + 1 (initialized at 0), so that gs is an
upper bound on g∗
s.
A goal is a target vertex where a plan may stop and be a
valid solution. We ﬁx a computed predicate G(t) (a black-
box) encoding the set of goal vertices. Let hc(v), the heuris-
tic, be a procedure to estimate h∗
c(v). We call hc admissible
if it is a guaranteed lower bound. Let hs(v) estimate the re-
maining depth to the nearest goal, and let ˆhs(v) estimate the
remaining depth to the cheapest reachable goal.
We focus on two different deﬁnitions of f (the evaluation
function). Since we study cost-based planning, we consider
fc(n) := gc(n)+hc(n .v); this is the (standard, cost-valued)
evaluation function of A∗: cheapest-completion-ﬁrst. We
compare this to fs(n) := gs(n) + hs(n.v), the canonical
size-valued (or search distance) evaluation function, equiv-
alent to fc under uniform weights. Any combination of gc
and hc is cost-based; any combination of gs and hs is size-
based (e.g., breadth-ﬁrst search is size-based). The evalua-
tion function ˆfs(n) := gs(n) + ˆhs(n.v) is also size-valued,
but cost-sensitive and preferable.
BEST-FIRST-SEARCH(i, G, Γ, hc, EVALUATE)
1
INITIALIZE-SEARCH()
2
while open not empty
3
n = open .remove()
4
s = n .v
5
if BOUND-TEST() then continue
6
if GOAL-TEST() then continue
7
if DUPLICATE-TEST() then continue
8
star = Γ(s)
// Expand s
9
for each edge a from s to a child s′ in star
10
n′ = n⟨sas′⟩
// Extend the path n
11
f = EVALUATE(n′)
12
open .add(n′, f)
13
return best-known-plan
// Optimality is proven.
EVALUATE(n)
// What is the best measure on paths, γ(), to use?
1
s = n .v
2
n′ = RELAXED-SOLVE(s, G, . . . )
3
f = γ(nn′)
// With f = g + h the ﬁrst variations to consider are:
// g = gc(n),
h = gc(n′), and
// g = gs(n),
h = gs(n′).
4
return f
INITIALIZE-SEARCH()
1
open = empty priority queue
2
closed = empty map from vertices to paths
3
f +
c = ∞
// An upper bound on f ∗
c (i)
4
best-known-plan = NULL
5
n = ⟨i⟩
6
f = EVALUATE(n)
7
open .add(n, f)
BOUND-TEST()
// hc() must be a lower bound on h∗
c()
1
return gc(n) + hc(s) ≥f +
c

GOAL-TEST()
1
if G(s) then
2
f +
c = gc(n)
3
best-known-plan = n
4
report best-known-plan
5
return TRUE
6
return FALSE
DUPLICATE-TEST()
1
n′ = closed .get(s)
2
if n′ not null then
3
if gc(n′) ≤gc(n) then
4
return TRUE
// Need to re-expand s, eventually.
// Doing nothing here is one strategy.
5
closed .put(s, n)
6
return FALSE
Pseudo-code for best-ﬁrst branch-and-bound search of
implicit graphs is shown above. It continues searching af-
ter a solution is encountered and uses the current best solu-
tion value to prune the search space (line 5). The search is
performed on a graph implicitly represented by Γ, with the
assumption being that the explicit graph is so large that it
is better to invoke expensive heuristics (EVALUATE) during
the search than it is to just compute the graph up front. The
pseudo-code given for EVALUATE shows one particular ap-
proach (solving relaxed problems) to automatically devising
guidance; in that setting, the question considered by this pa-
per is whether to measure the sizes or the costs of the two
paths (n and n′).
With respect to normalizing costs, we can let ε
:=
mina c(a)
maxa c(a), that is, ε is the least cost edge after normalizing
costs by the maximum cost (to bring costs into the range
[0, 1]). We use the symbol ε for this ratio as we anticipate
actions with high cost variance in real world planning prob-
lems. For example: boarding versus ﬂying (ZenoTravel),
mode-switching versus machine operation (Job-Shop), and
(unskilled) labor versus (precious) material cost.
3
ε-cost Trap: Two Canonical Cases
In this section we argue that the mere presence of ε-cost
misleads cost-based search, and that this is no triﬂing detail
or accidental phenomenon, but a systemic weakness of the
very concept of “cost-based evaluation functions + system-
atic search + combinatorial graphs”. We base this analysis
in two abstract search spaces, in order to demonstrate the
fundamental nature of such traps. The ﬁrst abstract space
we consider is the simplest non-trivial (non-uniform cost)
search space, the search space of a (large) cycle with one
expensive edge. The second abstract space we consider is
a more natural model of search (in planning), a uniform
branching tree. Traps in these spaces are just exponentially
sized and connected sets of ε-cost edges: not the common
result of a typical random model of search (sampling edges
independently). We brieﬂy consider why planning bench-
marks naturally give rise to such structure.
3.1
Cycle Trap
In this section we consider the simplest abstract example
of the ε-cost ‘trap’, where applying increasingly powerful
heuristics and domain analysis to ones search problem gives
rise to an ‘effective graph’ — the graph for which Dijkstra’s
algorithm produces isomorphic behavior. (In particular take
h = 0 in this section.) Presumably such graphs have rather
complex shape; but certainly complex graphs contain sim-
ple graphs as subgraphs. So if there is a problem with search
behavior in an exceedingly simple (non-uniformly weighted)
graph then we can suppose that no amount of domain anal-
ysis, learning, heuristics, and so forth, will incidentally ad-
dress the problem: the inference must speciﬁcally address
the issue of non-uniform weights. So we are arguing that ε-
cost is by itself a fundamental challenge to be overcome in
planning: unsubsumed by other challenges.
The state-space we will consider is the cycle, with an as-
sociated exceedingly simple metric consisting of all uniform
weights but for a single expensive edge.
There are sev-
eral other candidates for simple non-trivial state-spaces (e.g.,
cliques), but clearly the cycle is fundamental.
Its search
space is certainly the simplest non-trivial search space: the
rooted tree on two leaves. So the single decision to be made
is in which direction to traverse the cycle: clockwise or
counter-clockwise. Formally:
ε-cost Trap: Consider the problem of making some counter,
say x, on k bits contain one less than its maximum value
(2k −2), starting from 0, using only the operations of in-
crement and decrement. There are 2 minimal solutions: in-
crementing 2k −2 times, or decrementing twice (exploiting
overﬂow). Set the cost of incrementing and decrementing to
1, except that overﬂow (in either direction) costs, say, 2k−1.
Then the 2 minimal solutions cost 2k −2 and 2k−1 + 1, or,
normalized, 2(1 −ε) and 1 + ε.
Cost-based search is the clear loser on this problem.
While both approaches prove optimality in exponential time
(O(2k)), size-based discovers the optimal plan in constant
time.
Of course the goal 2k −2 is chosen to best illus-
trate the trap. So consider the discovery problem for other
goals: from 2k[0, 1
2] cost-based search is twice as fast, from
2k[ 1
2, 2
3] the performance gap narrows to break-even, and
from 2k[ 2
3, 1) the size-based approach takes the lead — by
an enormous margin. Note that between 2k[ 2
3, 3
4] there is a
trade-off: size-based ﬁnds a solution before cost-based, but
cost-based ﬁnds the optimal solution ﬁrst. (Of course, time
till optimality is proven monotonically favors the cost-based
approach: by a factor of 2 in the region 2k[0, 1
2], by a factor
of 1 in the region 2k[ 3
4, 1), and by 1 < ( 1
2 + 2α)−1 < 2 for
goals of the form 2k( 1
2 + α).)
Then, even across all goals, cost-based search is still quite
inferior: the margins of victory either way are extremely lop-
sided. To illustrate, consider ‘large’ k, say, k = 1000. Even
the most patient reader will have forcibly terminated either
search long before receiving any useful output — except if
the goal is of the form 0 ± f(k) for some sub-exponential
f(k). Both approaches discover and prove the optimal so-
lution in the positive case in time O(f(k)) (with size-based
performing twice as much work). In the negative case, only
the size-based approach manages to discover a solution (in
time O(f(k))) before being killed. Moreover, while it will
fail to produce a proof before death, we, based on superior
understanding of the domain, can show it to be posthumously

correct (and have: 2k −f(k) > 2k 3
4 for large k).
In summary, cost-based search on the single-decision tree
“only explores left”. Hence the trap: There is no reason
to suppose that one direction is much worse than another
in very large, weighted, graphs just because the ﬁrst step is
quite expensive.
3.2
Branching Trap
In the counter problem the trap is not even combinatorial;
the search problem consists of a single decision at the root,
and the trap is just an exponentially deep path.
Then it
is abundantly clear that appending Towers of Hanoi to a
planning benchmark, setting its actions at ε-cost, will kill
cost-based search — even given the perfect heuristic for the
puzzle!
Besides Hanoi, though, exponentially deep paths
are not typical of planning benchmarks. So in this section
we demonstrate that exponentially large subtrees on ε-cost
edges are also traps.
Consider x > 1 high cost actions and y > 1 low
cost actions in a uniform branching tree model of search
space.
(A typical model for analysis, appropriate up to
the point where duplicate state checking becomes signiﬁ-
cant. See (Pearl 1984) for similar analysis on more com-
plex models of search.)
Suppose the solution of interest
costs C, in normalized units, so the solution lies at depth
C or greater. Then cost-based search faces a grave situation:
O((x + y
1
ε )C) possibilities will be explored before consid-
ering all potential solutions of cost C.
A size-based search only ever considers at most O((x +
y)d) = O(bd) possibilities before consideration of all poten-
tial solutions of size d; of course the more interesting ques-
tion is how long it takes to ﬁnd solutions of ﬁxed cost rather
than ﬁxed depth—note C
ε ≥d ≥C. Assuming the high cost
actions are relevant, that is, some number of them are needed
by solutions, then we have that solutions are not actually hid-
den as deep as C
ε . Suppose, for example, that solutions tend
to be a mix of high and low cost actions in equal proportion.
Then the depth of those solutions with cost C is d = 2
C
1+ε
( d
2 · 1 + d
2 · ε = C). At such depths the size-based approach
is the clear winner: O((x + y)
2C
1+ε ) ≪O((x + y
1
ε )C) (nor-
mally). Consider, say, y = b
2, then:
b
2C
1+ε /

x + y
1
ε
C
< b
2C
1+ε /y
C
ε ,
< 2
C
ε /b
C
ε
1−ε
1+ε ,
<
2
b
1−ε
1+ε
C
ε
,
and, provided ε < 1−logb 2
1+logb 2 (for b = 4, ε < 1
3), the last is
always less than 1 and, for that matter, goes, quickly, to 0 as
C increases and/or b increases and/or ε decreases.
Generalizing, the size-based approach is faster at ﬁnding
solutions of any given cost, as long as (1) high-cost actions
constitute at least some constant fraction of the solutions
considered, (2) the ratio between high-cost and low-cost is
sufﬁciently large,(3) the effective search graph (post addi-
tional inference) is reasonably well modeled by an inﬁnite
uniform branching tree (i.e., huge), and (4) the search is sys-
tematic.
4
Search Effort as Flooding Topological
Surfaces of Evaluation Functions
We view evaluation functions (f) as topological surfaces
over search nodes, so that generated nodes are visited in,
roughly, order of f-altitude. With non-monotone evaluation
functions, the set of nodes visited before a given node is all
those contained within some basin of the appropriate depth
— picture water ﬂowing from the initial state: if there are
dams then such a ﬂood could temporarily visit high altitude
nodes before low altitude nodes. (With very inconsistent
heuristics — large heuristic weights — the metaphor loses
explanatory power, as there is nowhere to go but downhill.
See (Dechter and Pearl 1985) for comprehensive details.)
If we take a single point inside such a basin (but not one
deﬁning the brim) and alter its altitude over the entire range
of that basin’s depth, we will not have changed the set of
states inundated prior to the brim. If there were no solutions
prior to the brim, then we will not have altered any externally
visible behavior of the search: Whenever best-ﬁrst search
ﬁnally ﬁnds a solution it will no longer have mattered how
all the prior nodes were ordered. To illustrate, IDA∗deserves
its name, despite exploring the space in an entirely different
order from A∗in any given iteration.
In particular, controlling the behavior of search by alter-
ing the evaluation function is a very different proposition in
the two contexts of local search and best-ﬁrst search. For the
latter, preventing exploration of some choice requires raising
its altitude (or that of a cut-set) to past that of a solution of
interest, actually, past the altitude of every cut-set separat-
ing that solution from the initial vertex (the altitude of a set
is the minimum over its elements), i.e., past the rim of the
deepest basin preventing inundation of the solution. For the
former, mitigating exploration is merely a matter of making
the choice worse than its best sibling; the ideal amount of pe-
nalization depends on the nature of randomization applied.1
Formally, but with narrower context: Consider an hc that
is derived by optimally solving relaxed problems, or just di-
rectly suppose that hc is guaranteed to be admissible and
consistent (Pearl 1984). Consider the altitude (f ∗
c (i)) of the
cost-optimal solution in fc. All lower-altitude nodes com-
prise the cost-optimal footprint. Exhausting the footprint is a
proof, relative to hc being admissible, of the purported opti-
mality of the known solution (with hc consistent, exhaustion
is moreover necessary for proof by search). As the order of
doing so does not affect correctness of the proof, there is sig-
niﬁcant freedom/futility (depending on your perspective) in
the choice of evaluation function: Every systematic search
is equivalent (does the same amount of total work) if hc and
f ∗
c (i) are given. When re-expansion is a signiﬁcant possi-
bility, then the appropriate statement is that the same set of
states are expanded, some, hopefully few, more than once. It
follows that performing two levels of search, the outer search
taking guesses at f ∗
c (i), is a powerful idea (as in IDA∗, or in
the standard treatment of optimization problems as decision
problems).
That is, it is futile to attempt to expand less than A∗, but,
one is free to expand that set in any order. For example,
with an oracular guess of f ∗
c (i), it is possible to terminate
1The second best sibling could be second most likely to be cho-
sen, but it could also be the least likely to be chosen.

in equal time yet print the optimal solution sooner than A∗:
take the evaluation function to be −fc, so that the optimal
solution is expanded as soon as it is generated, at which
time, perhaps, the open list still contains some states with
−fc(s) > −f ∗
c (i). Indeed, as the optimal solution is guar-
anteed to be the last path expanded, up to tie-breaking, under
the evaluation function fc, any (other) evaluation function
(monotonically) improves upon the performance of A∗, with
respect to the problem of ﬁnding the optimal solution.
Worst-case: The minimum gradient in g bounds the worst-
case of the discovery problem: it puts a limit on the num-
ber of search nodes that could conceivably be considered
just as good as some solution of interest. For example, in
uniformly branching trees the absolute worst-case bound is
bd max ∇g
min ∇g (with d the depth of the unique solution). Insisting
on a fairer distribution of edge costs and/or considering non-
zero heuristics (but still imperfect) lowers the bound, but not
asymptotically: still O(bd max ∇g
min ∇g ) many search nodes might
be expanded before ﬁnding the solution (in the worst-case of
a unique solution on d maximum cost actions). Other search
models yield different bounding expressions, but all will be
increasing functions of d max ∇g
min ∇g . Considering normalized
representations then max ∇g is just 1, and so we have that fs
enjoys the tightest bound, since min ∇gs = 1. In contrast,
fc suffers from the ‘loosest’ bound, as min ∇gc = ε ≪1,
in the sense that one presumably devotes bits to specifying
costs (in binary), so one cannot do worse than exponentially
small except by permitting zero costs. Taking worst-case for
some speciﬁc f to mean a problem with maximum search
nodes at every altitude, with a unique solution of maximum
cost (given its size), then, for the discovery problem: (1)
Size-based search achieves the asymptotically best-possible
worst-case performance. (2) Cost-based search ‘achieves’
the asymptotically worst-possible worst-case performance.
Note that all that is being said is that a malicious problem-
setter has control of the metric, so any quality-sensitive
search can be misdirected.
Typical-case: Every choice of search topology will even-
tually lead to identiﬁcation of the optimal solution and ex-
haustion of the cost-optimal footprint. Some will produce a
whole slew of suboptimal solutions along the way, eventu-
ally reaching a point where one begins to wonder if the most
recently reported solution is optimal. Others report nothing
until ﬁnishing. The former are interruptible, and are rather
more desirable than the latter. That is, admissible cost-based
topology is the worst possible choice: it is the least interrupt-
ible. There is no point at which one can forcibly terminate
and receive anything2 for ones investment of computational
resources. Gaining interruptibility is a matter of raising the
altitude of large portions of the footprint in exchange for
lowering the altitude of a smaller set of non-footprint search
nodes (leaving the solution of interest ﬁxed). Note that there
must be a trade-off (else one has devised a better heuristic):
interruptibility comes at the expense of total work.
With size-based topology, the large set is the set of longer
yet cheaper plans, while the small set is the shorter yet
costlier plans. In general one expects there to be many more
longer plans than shorter plans in combinatorial problems,
2Besides a better lower bound.
but that changes if the problem is hardest possible in ﬁnite
spaces, i.e., all goal states are as far away as possible so
that cheap solutions are also necessarily long. There is no
reason to suppose that size-based topology is the best pos-
sible trade-off; it just demonstrates existence of better ap-
proaches than admissible cost-based topology. Inadmissible
cost-based topology, such as WA∗, can also demonstrate ex-
istence of better approaches.
Weighting the heuristic, though, magniﬁes depth-ﬁrst be-
havior, which is great up until ﬁnding a solution, but af-
terwards leads to poor backtracking behavior. For exam-
ple, depth-ﬁrst bias in a non-uniformly weighted uniform
branching tree permits catastrophic backtracking behavior:
exhaustion of maximum size ε-cost traps. (And tree models
are better ﬁts under depth-ﬁrst bias, as state re-expansion is
more likely due to ﬁnding better paths later.) Dynamically
weighting the heuristic is one approach (Pohl 1973), attack-
ing the contribution that non-uniform accuracy of heuris-
tics has on such backtracking, one could also consider ran-
domized restarts of WA∗along with a decreasing sched-
ule of weights.3
Employing multiple open lists (as in
LAMA) is a different approach (than restarting) to permit-
ting non-local backtracking; EES (Thayer and Ruml 2010)
does so while also, unlike the preceding, explicitly con-
sidering the further impact that non-uniform weights have,
achieving an interesting blend of cost and size considera-
tions. One could characterize it as cost-bounded size opti-
mization; it is also interesting to consider reformulating EES
as size-bounded cost optimization, particularly considering
the behavior of GraphPlan/BlackBox (Blum and Furst 1995;
Kautz and Selman 1999) and relatives.
5
ε-cost Trap in Practice
In this section we demonstrate existence of the problematic
planner behavior in a realistic setting: running LAMA on
problems in the travel domain (simpliﬁed ZenoTravel, zoom
and fuel removed), as well as two other IPC domains. Anal-
ysis of LAMA is complicated by many factors, so we also
test the behavior of SapaReplan on simpler instances (but in
all of ZenoTravel). The ﬁrst set of problems concern a ren-
dezvous at the center city in the location graph depicted in
Figure 1; the optimal plan arranges a rendezvous at the cen-
ter city. The second set of problems is to swap the positions
of passengers located at the endpoints of a chain of cities.
5.1
LAMA
In this section we demonstrate the performance problem
wrought by ε-cost in a state-of-the-art (2008) planner —
LAMA (Richter and Westphal 2010), the leader of the cost-
sensitive (satisﬁcing) track of IPC’08 (Helmert, Do, and Re-
fanidis 2008). With a completely trivial recompilation (set
a ﬂag) one can make it ignore the given cost function, ef-
fectively searching by fs. With slightly more work one can
do better and have it use ˆfs as its evaluation function, i.e.,
have the heuristic estimate ˆd and the search be size-based,
but still compute costs correctly for branch-and-bound. Call
3The possibility of state re-expansion greatly exacerbates poor
backtracking behavior, so it is worthwhile to keep in mind that an
iterated search need not re-expand states immediately.

A
B
B
A
B
A
C
D
E
Figure 1: Rendezvous problems. Diagonal edges cost 7,000,
exterior edges cost 10,000. Board/Debark cost 1.
Domain
LAMA
LAMA-size
Rendezvous
70.8%
83.0%
Elevators
79.2%
93.6%
Woodworking
76.6%
64.1%
Table 1: IPC metric on LAMA variants.
this latter modiﬁcation LAMA-size. Ultimately, the obser-
vation is that LAMA-size outperforms LAMA — no trivial
feat, particularly for such a small change in implementation.
LAMA4 deﬁes analysis in a number of ways: landmarks,
preferred operators, dynamic evaluation functions, multiple
open lists, and delayed evaluation, all of which effect po-
tential search plateaus in complex ways. Nonetheless, it is
essentially a cost-based approach.
Results.5 With more than about 8 total passengers, LAMA
is unable to complete any search stage except the ﬁrst (the
greedy search). For the same problems, LAMA-size ﬁnds
the same ﬁrst plan (the heuristic values differ, but not the
structure), but is then subsequently able to complete further
stages of search. In so doing it sees marked improvement in
cost; on the larger problems this is due only to ﬁnding bet-
ter variants on the greedy plan. Other domains are included
for broader perspective, woodworking in particular was cho-
sen as a likely counter-example, as all the actions concern
just one type of physical object and the costs are not wildly
different. For the same reasons we would expect LAMA
to out-perform LAMA-size in some cost-enhanced version
of Blocksworld. For a comprehensive empirical analysis,
see (Richter and Westphal 2010).
5.2
SapaReplan
We also consider the behavior of SapaReplan on the simpler
set of problems.6 This planner is much less sophisticated
in terms of its search than LAMA, in the sense of being
much closer to a straight up implementation of weighted A*
search. The problem is just to swap the locations of passen-
gers located on either side of a chain of cities. A plane starts
on each side, but there is no actual advantage to using more
than one (for optimizing either of size or cost): the second
4Options: ‘fFlLi’.
5New best plans for Elevators were found (largely by LAMA-
size). The baseline planner’s score is 71.8% against the better ref-
erence plans.
6Except that these problems are run on all of ZenoTravel.
plane exists to confuse the planner. Observe that smallest
and cheapest plans are the same. So in some sense the con-
cepts have become only superﬁcially different; but this is
just what makes the problem interesting, as despite this sim-
ilarity, still the behavior of search is strongly affected by the
nature of the evaluation function. We test the performance
of ˆfs and fc, as well as a hybrid evaluation function similar
to ˆfs + fc (with costs normalized). We also test hybridizing
via tie-breaking conditions, which ought to have little effect
given the rest of the search framework.
Results.7
The size-based evaluation functions ﬁnd better
cost plans faster (within the deadline) than cost-based evalu-
ation functions. The hybrid evaluation function also does
relatively well, but not as well as could be hoped.
Tie-
breaking has little effect, sometimes negative.
We note that Richter and Westphal (2010) also report that
replacing cost-based evaluation function with a pure size-
based one improves performance over LAMA in multiple
other domains.
Our version of LAMA-Size uses a cost-
sensitive size-based search, and our results, in the domains
we investigated, seem to show bigger improvements over
LAMA.
Finally, while LAMA-size outperforms LAMA, our the-
ory of ε-cost traps suggests that cost-based search should fail
even more spectacularly. In the appendix, we take a much
closer look at one domain–the travel domain–and present a
detailed study of which extensions of LAMA help it tem-
porarily mask the pernicious effects of cost-based search.
Our conclusion is that both LAMA and SapaReplan man-
age to ﬁnd solutions to problems in the travel domain despite
the use of a cost-based evaluation function by using various
tricks to induce a limited amount of depth-ﬁrst behavior in
an A∗-framework. This has the potential effect of delaying
exploration of the ε-cost plateaus slightly, past the discovery
of a solution, but still each planner is ultimately trapped by
such plateaus before being able to ﬁnd really good solutions.
In other words, such tricks are mostly serving to mask the
problems of cost-based search (and ε-cost), as they merely
delay failure by just enough that one can imagine that the
planner is now effective (because it returns a solution where
before it returned none). Using a size-based evaluation func-
tion more directly addresses the existence of cost plateaus,
and not surprisingly leads to improvement over the equiva-
lent cost-based approach — even with LAMA.
6
Conclusion
The practice of combinatorial search in automated planning
is satisﬁcing. There is a great call for deeper theories of satis-
ﬁcing search, and one perhaps signiﬁcant obstacle in the way
of such research is the pervasive notion that perfect problem
solvers are the ones giving only perfect solutions. Actually
implementing cost-based, systematic, combinatorial, search
reinforces this notion, and therein lies its greatest harm.
7The results differ markedly between the 2 and 3 city sets of
problems because the sub-optimal relaxed plan extraction in the
2-cities problems coincidentally produces an essentially perfect
heuristic in many of them. One should infer that the solutions found
in the 2-cities problems are sharply bimodal in quality and that the
meaning of the average is then signiﬁcantly different than in the
3-cities problems.

2 Cities
3 Cities
Mode
Score
Rank
Score
Rank
Hybrid
88.8%
1
43.1%
2
Size
83.4%
2
43.7%
1
Size, tie-break on cost
82.1%
3
43.1%
2
Cost, tie-break on size
77.8%
4
33.3%
3
Cost
77.8%
4
33.3%
3
Table 2: IPC metric on SapaReplan variants in ZenoTravel.
In support of the position we demonstrated the technical
difﬁculties arising from such use of a cost-based evaluation
function, largely by arguing that the size-based alternative
is a notably more effective default strategy. We argued that
using cost as the basis for plan evaluation is a purely ex-
ploitative perspective, leading to least interruptible behavior.
Being least interruptible, it follows that implementing cost-
based search will typically be immediately harmful to that
particular application. But regardless of whether the partic-
ular instance demonstrates the rule or the exception, the last-
ing harm is in reinforcing the wrong deﬁnition of satisﬁcing
search in the ﬁrst place. In conclusion, as a rule: Cost-based
search is harmful.
