Artificial Immune Systems Metaphor for Agent Based 
Modeling of Crisis Response Operations 
Khaled M. Khalil1, M. Abdel-Aziz1, Taymour T. Nazmy1,  
Abdel-Badeeh M. Salem1 
 
1Faculty of Computer and Information Science Ain shams University Cairo, Egypt 

Abstract. Crisis response requires information intensive efforts utilized for 
reducing uncertainty, calculating and comparing costs and benefits, and 
managing resources in a fashion beyond those regularly available to handle 
routine problems. This paper presents an Artificial Immune Systems (AIS) 
metaphor for agent based modeling of crisis response operations. The presented 
model proposes integration of hybrid set of aspects (multi-agent systems, built-
in defensive model of AIS, situation management, and intensity-based learning) 
for crisis response operations. In addition, the proposed response model is 
applied on the spread of pandemic influenza in Egypt as a case study. 
Keywords: Crisis Response, Multi-agent Systems, Agent-Based Modeling, 
Artificial Immune Systems, Process Model.  
1   Introduction 
The challenge of crisis response is reducing the influence crises cause to society, the 
economy, and the lives of individuals and communities. This challenge is extreme in 
several dimensions. The demand is highly diverse and largely unpredictable in terms 
of location, time, and specific resources needed. Moreover, the urgency associated 
with crisis has many implications, such as the need to rapidly identify information 
about the developing situation, and to have the capability to make good decisions in 
the face of an inevitable degree of uncertainty and incompleteness of information. An 
efficient crisis response is of paramount importance, because if not responded to 
promptly and managed properly, even a small mishap could lead to a very big 
catastrophe with significantly severe consequences. Being equipped with a profusion 
of resources does not ensure a successful response to the crisis situation. Thus, the key 
to the successful response necessitates an effective and expedited allocation of the 
requested resources to the emergency locations. Such complexity suggests the use of 
intelligent agents for adaptive real-time modeling of the crisis response operations 
[16]. Multi-agent Systems are computational systems where software agents 
cooperate or compete with each other to achieve an individual or collective task [30].  
In order to build multi-agent architecture, and increase the effectiveness of the 
crisis response operations, a similar metaphor is required that mimics the crisis 
response operations. AIS metaphor is selected in this study. AIS are a computational 

systems inspired by the principles and processes of the biological immune system [5] 
[9]. AIS represent an area of vast research over the last few years. For example, 
developed AIS in a variety of domains, such as machine learning [14], anomaly 
detection [4] [10], data mining [21], computer security [20] [6], adaptive control [24] 
and fault detection [7]. The biological immune system is a robust, complex, adaptive 
system that defends the body from foreign pathogens. It is able to categorize all cells 
(or molecules) within the body as self-cells or non-self cells. It does this with the help 
of a distributed task force that has the intelligence to take action from a local and also 
a global perspective using its network of chemical messengers for communication [6]. 
A more detailed overview of the immune system can be found in many textbooks [23] 
[26]. The immune system combines a priori knowledge with the adapting capabilities 
of a biological immune system to provide a powerful alternative to currently available 
techniques for pattern recognition, learning and optimization [22]. It uses several 
computational models and algorithms such as Bone Marrow Model, Negative 
Selection Algorithm, and Clonal Selection Algorithm [13].  
In this paper we propose a multi-agent based model for crisis response. The 
proposed model architecture and operations process are adopted from AIS. Then the 
proposed response model is applied on controlling pandemic influenza in Egypt. 
Section 2 provides the proposed response model, while section 3 presents design of 
the proposed model for pandemic influenza in Egypt. Section 4 includes experiments. 
Finally, section 5 includes conclusions.  
2   The Proposed Response Model 
The view of the biological immune system provides the basis for a representation of 
AIS as systems of autonomous agents which exist within a distributed and 
compartmentalized environment [29]. In what follows, we present the multi-agent 
model based on the AIS metaphor for crisis response operations. 
2.1   Proposed Hierarchical Architecture for Multi-Agent Response Model 
The architecture of the AIS can be abstracted into hierarchy of three levels (cells, 
tissue, and host) (see Fig. 1). Cells are able to interact with their environment and 
communicate and coordinate their behavior with other cells by synthesizing and 
responding to a range of molecules. Cells within the body aggregate to form tissue, 
such as muscle or connective tissue. Tissues themselves combine to form hosts, such 
as the heart, brain, or thymus. Hosts work together to form the immune system. 
The proposed multi-agent architecture follows the same hierarchical architecture of 
the biological immune systems with mapping of the functionalities of cells to agents 
and adopting crisis response domain attributes and operations levels (operational, 
tactical and strategic levels [2] [3]) (see Table 1). Pathogens represent source of 
danger to the body entity, in which immune systems antibody cells tries to detect and 
kill. Pathogens are mapped to danger sources or undesired situations in the crisis 
domain, in which agents have to detect and overcome. Cells are represented by agents 

working as first responders and voluntaries. Cells contain different type of receptors 
which affect their capability to match pathogens and to kill them. Thus, receptors are 
mapped to agents skills or resources required to overcome danger. Agents are working 
in groups belonging to certain organization (tissue) which provide help by other 
agents teams dedicated in the tactical level. Host represents the grouping of different 
tissues working together. This can be mapped to emergency operations center (EOC) 
of different working divisions and each division contains specialized teams.  
Host
Tissues
Cells
Host
Tissues
Cells
Host
Tissues
Cells
.....
.....
.....
Human Immune System
 
Fig. 1. Hierarchical architecture of human immune system 
Table 1. Mapping biological immune system levels to crisis response operations and levels 
Biological Immune 
System Level 
Crisis 
Response Level 
Crisis Domain 
Pathogens 
- 
Danger sources – harmful situations 
Cellular 
Operational 
First Responders and Voluntaries 
Tissue 
Tactical 
Helper Agents staff 
Host 
Strategic 
Emergency Operations Centers 
System 
- 
Human Society and Important Properties 
2.2   AIS Operational Architecture for Multi-Agent Model 
However, the AIS layered structure which is adopted in previous section is not 
complete from the conceptual framework perspective, which is required to allow 
effective algorithms to be developed [28]. Brownlee [1] said that "The acquired 
immune system provides a general pattern recognition and defense system that 
modifies itself, adapting to improve its capability with experience".  
Decision Making Process of AIS (Conceptual Model Formalization) 
The effectiveness of the system is due to a set of internal strategies to cope with 
pathogenic challenges. Such strategies remodel over time as the organism develops, 
matures, and then ages. Towards determining the decision making process of AIS, 

rational reconstructions approach is used. Rational reconstructions operate so as to 
transform a given problematic philosophical scientific account-particularly of a 
terminological, methodological or theoretical entity-into a similar, but more precise, 
consistent interpretation [8]. Proposed rational reconstruction of AIS follows the same 
steps of Grant et al. work [12]. Grant et al. steps include: definition of requirements of 
the model, definition of the top-level use-cases, selection of notation, formalization of 
the process model by walking through use-cases, implementation, and evaluation. 
Definition of requirements of the proposed response model follows crisis response 
systems design requirements [17] [18]. The following requirements were defined as: 
• 
The model processes are concurrent. 
• 
Support multiple instances of agents. 
• 
Agents located in different layers should share required information only. 
• 
Allow continuous monitoring of the situation and available resources. 
• 
Permit relationships between agents to be collaborative.  
• 
Allow separate behavior of each agent based on its role and objectives. 
• 
Allow removal and adding of new agents and components at run time. 
• 
Allow continuous planning/re-planning. 
• 
Integrate planning and learning processes.  
• 
Each process defined can be done by one or more agents. Agents with 
different roles differ by their allocated processes.  
Definition of the top-level use cases is as follows (see Fig. 2): 
• 
Use-case (0): no change in environment. This use-case applies when no 
pathogens found in the environment. 
• 
Use-case (1): antibody found a pathogen. This use-case applies when the 
antibody finds a pathogen in the environment. 
• 
Use-case (2): antibody receptors detect the required response for pathogens. 
This use-case applies when the antibody receptors match the pathogen, and 
can provide required response. 
• 
Use-case (3): antibody receptors cannot detect the type of the pathogen thus 
failed to provide required response. This use-case applies when the antibody 
failed to match the pathogen and failed to provide response. 
• 
Use-case (4): antibody cell asks for help for handling the unknown pathogen. 
This use-case applies when antibody failed to response to the pathogen. 
Antibody sends signals to activate the adaptive response. 
• 
Use-case (5): adaptive cells mutate to match the pathogen and generate 
required receptors. This use-case applies when the adaptive cells mutate to 
match the pathogen and generate the required receptors. 
• 
Use-case (6): required receptors are cloned to be applied to pathogen. This 
use-case applies when the required receptors for response are cloned to 
provide response to pathogen. 
• 
Use-case (7): successful response is sustained as memory cells. This use-case 
applies when a successful response is executed; the receptors are stored in 
memory cells for later usage. Go to use-case (0). 
• 
Use-case (8): failed response is ignored. This use-case applies when a failed 
response is gained; the receptors are ignored and not stored in memory. Go 
to use-case (5). 

Selection of Notation includes selection of process notation for representing the 
process model. Integrated DEFinition Methods Technique (IDEFS0) [15] represents a 
common notation used in process modeling which is highly suited to specifying 
systems in terms of functional processes [12].  
 
Fig. 2. Rationally reconstructed AIS model, formalized using SADT notation 
The rationally reconstructed model (see Fig. 2) can be explained by starting at the 
environment and considering the activity of a typical Cell. Antibody cell checks other 
cells in the environment. Antibody cell determines if the examined cell is self or non-
self based on the available receptors in the system using specific discrimination 
method. If cell is identified as non-self, cell immediately tries to match the receptors 
of the cell with existing receptors for response using matching method. If response 
receptors are found, clonal of the antibodies using clonal algorithm is applied to attack 
the pathogen cell. In case of new pathogen receptors not currently recognized, cell 
activates the adaptive response mechanism. Cells in the adaptive response mechanism 
mutate to match the non-self receptors using available genes library and negative 
selection algorithm. When reach an acceptable receptors form, the generated 
antibodies are cloned to provide response to the pathogen cell. Then, the newly 
generated receptors are added to the receptors library.  
Table 2 shows comparison between the AIS rational reconstructed model and other 
process models such as OODA, RPDM, and Rasmussen models. Comparison criteria 
and OODA, RPDM, and Rasmussen models values are presented by Grant et al. [11]. 
 

Table 2. Comparing proposed AIS, OODA, RPDM, and Rasmussen models 
Criteria/Process Model 
OODA 
Rasmussen 
RPDM 
AIS Model 
Control Loop 
√ 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Detailed 
× 
× 
√ 
√ 
Tempo (fast decision making) 
√ 
× 
× 
× 
Planning 
× 
√ 
× 
√ 
Learning 
× 
× 
× 
√ 
 
Formalizing the process model by walking through use-case. Use case (8) 
represents failing to response to pathogen cells. To formalize the process model, steps 
of the use case are presented as follows (see Fig. 3):  
1. Antibody cell examines other cells looking for pathogens. 
2. Antibody cell detects that cell is non-self. 
3. Antibody cell tries to find proper receptors to kill the pathogen. 
4. Antibody cell failed to response. 
5. Antibody cell activates the adaptive system to generate proper receptors. 
6. Adaptive cells mutate to match the pathogen and generate required receptors. 
7. Required receptors are cloned and response is provided. 
8. Failed response is reported as the pathogen is detected again which backs to 
step 1.  
 
Fig. 3. Walk through use case (8), failed response to pathogen 
 

Mapping AIS Operational Model to Crisis Response Multi-Agent Model 
After definition of the conceptual model of the AIS, mapping the proposed model to 
multi-agent model for crisis response is a straight forward process (see Tables 3 and 
4). An agent can examine environment searching for danger sources or undesired 
feature. This can be mapped to operational agents. When agent finds an un-desired 
situation in environment, agent tries to handle the problem using available procedures. 
If the situation exceeds the available routine procedures, agents ask for help from 
tactical agents. Tactical agents check available memory for similar situations and 
check if the old experienced situation can be adopted for the current situation or not. 
If an old situation matches the current state of the environment, apply the course of 
actions coupled with the experienced situation. Otherwise, tactical agent asks for 
decision making (strategic) agent help. Using nearest matched situation, decision 
making agent mutates different course of actions to handle the current situation till 
reach an acceptable course of actions (intensity-based learning [25]). Decision making 
agent allocates course of actions to tactical agents to be deployed (cloned). During the 
execution of actions, operational agents report status of tasks execution, and in case of 
failed task re-planning is presented. Finally, generation and death of agents are related 
to the application domain of the proposed model. In crisis response death of cells and 
generation of new cells can be mapped to deployment of effective actions and 
neglecting others, or removal and adding new responders to the response field.  
Table 3. Mapping AIS operational model to crisis response multi-agent model 
Biological Immune System Level
Crisis Response Domain
Cells 
Operational agent 
Helper Cells 
Tactical agents 
Cells mutation 
Decision making agents 
Memory Cells 
Case Memory 
Table 4. Mapping AIS Operational Model Processes to agents' roles 
Biological Immune System 
Process 
Crisis Domain 
Agent Role 
Self or non-self discrimination 
Reporting un-desired situation 
Operational  
Matching existing receptors 
Situation Recognition 
Tactical  
Identify new receptors 
Planning (Situation Assessment) 
Decision making  
Clone required receptors 
Allocation of plan tasks 
Tactical  
Response 
Executing plan tasks  
Operational  
Cells generation and death 
Deployment of effective actions 
and neglecting non-effective 
actions
 
3   Crisis Response to Pandemic Influenza in Egypt 
This section presents the design, and implementation of the proposed response model 
for pandemic influenza in Egypt. Agent environment includes two parts: the pandemic 

model which is implemented in the previous work [19], and the available resources 
(control strategies or actions). Agent retrieves the current pandemic situation based on 
the agents' health states. Each control strategy is represented by (resource type, 
amount, cost, from/to date, and efficiency [19]). Agents' roles argue that each agent 
has its own profile and roles which specify its responsibilities and skills. For example 
decision making agent has the role of making decisions and adding new memory 
cases, while tactical agent has the role of processing information and allocating tasks 
to operational agents. Table 5 shows different agent roles, role responsibilities, and 
number of agents allowed per emergency operations center. Added here a new role 
titled tactical communication agent. Actually tactical communication agent is a 
tactical agent which is specialized for managing communication among the EOC 
parties. Tactical communication agent has to receive reports from operation agents, 
send reports to other tactical agents, deliver reports to crisis decision maker, and 
deliver plans back to the tactical agents.  
Crisis decision making agent follows the BDI (Belief-Desire-Intention) cognitive 
model [27]. While, tactical and operational agents are recognized as reactive helper 
agents for the decision making agents, and do not have believes nor desires. Decision 
making agents need to work with other agents in EOC through collaboration to deliver 
resources information and to deploy actions. Decision making agents need to make 
decisions to control the spread of pandemic influenza using available effective 
resources. Decision making agents need to determine the course of actions to be 
deployed to control the pandemic.  
Table 5. Agent roles and number of agents per EOC 
Agent Role 
Responsibilities 
# of Agents 
Decision 
Making Agent 
Providing course of actions
1
Adding new cases to memory
Tactical 
Communication 
Agent 
Receiving reports from operational agents 
1 
Receiving resources reports from tactical agents 
Sending reports to decision making agent 
Receiving plan from decision making agent 
Assigning plan tasks to tactical agents
Receiving status of plan execution
Sending plans status to decision making agent 
Tactical Agent 
Handling reports from communication agent 
1 or more 
Processing available resources 
Operational 
Agent 
Reporting current environment state 
1 or more 
Deployment of course of actions
Design of the AIS Planning Methodology in the Proposed Response Model 
Design of AIS planning methodology follows Stepney et al. [28] structure of AIS 
engineering. Pandemic situation is represented as a record of the total number of 
agents based on agents' health states. For example, situation can be represented by: 
(Susceptible: 50 agents, In-Contact: 10 agents, Infectious: 20 agents, Isolated 
Infected: 10 agents, Recovered: 1 agent, and Dead: 3 agents). The required course of 

actions to control given pandemic situation is represented as follows: (identifier, 
successfulness of the course of actions, and current pandemic situation). In addition 
the course of actions is coupled with deployed actions.  The entry of course of actions 
and its coupled actions constructs a memory case.  
The city block distance is used here to find the similarity between situations. For 
example: distance between situation 1 (Infectious: 2 agents, Isolated Infectious: 1 
agent) and situation 2 (Immunized: 31 agents) is:
33
0
31
1
0
2
0
=
−
+
−
+
−
. 
Immune algorithms present the mutation (dynamic) behavior of AIS. Bone marrow 
algorithm, positive selection algorithm, clonal selection is used in the proposed model 
implementation.  
4   Experiments 
The main goal of experiments scenarios is to validate the proposed response model. 
Scenarios basically include simulation of pandemic influenza in a closed population 
of 1000 agents and initially three infected agents located in Cairo. Cairo EOC 
contains 3 operational agents, 2 tactical agents, and one decision making agent. The 
duration of the simulation round is 50 days. All simulation rounds involve randomly 
generated resources pool. Each action in the resource pool has efficacy of (0.75). The 
basic simulation round with no control strategies gives pandemic peak on day 10 with 
%60.8 infected agents [19]. 
Fig. 4 shows the flow of control during a simulation round, and the total cost of 
deployed actions (total cost = 2821.4 and plan certainty = 0 due to there are no 
previous plans in the system). While, Fig. 5 shows the stored case memory for the 
finished simulation round (case id = 174, successfulness = 0.001198). It is found that 
the pandemic peak is shifted to day 16 with %55 infected agents of the population. 
 
Fig. 4. Round 1 - Crisis Response Log 

 
Fig. 5. Round 1 - Case Memory 
5   Conclusions 
Currently, multi-agent architecture is the essence of response systems. The original 
idea comes out from agent characteristics in MAS, such as autonomy, local view of 
environment, capability of learning, planning, coordination and decentralized decision 
making. The incorporation of multi-agent systems can be clarified by discussing 
major disciplines involved during crisis response operations; situation management, 
and decision making and planning.  
The study of biological systems is of interest to scientists and engineers as they 
turn out to be a source of rich theories. They are useful in constructing novel 
computer algorithms to solve complex engineering problems. Immunology as a study 
of the immune system inspired the evolution of artificial immune system, which is an 
area of vast research over the last few years. Detecting non-self, matching receptors, 
clone antibodies, response then detecting non-self cells again represents the control 
loop in the AIS metaphor. This process loop (control loop) is the core of the decision 
making process in AIS metaphor. The AIS model allows learning by mutating genes 
to generate acceptable receptors and store them in memory cells. Selection of required 
antibodies to be cloned and the cloning process represents the planning methodology 
of AIS. Artificial immune systems represent an interesting metaphor for building 
effective based and defensive multi-agent crisis response operations model. The 
proposed architecture proposed by AIS, promises effective operations and system 
architecture for crisis response. 
According to experiments scenarios, AIS model shows slow learning process but it 
is very fast in handling desired or un-desired situations. Number of cases represents 
the growth of the system. While, scenarios results show that the effectiveness of 
response operations and utilization of resources are improved within the growth of the 
response model by ignoring low successfulness memory cases while deliberating new 

course of actions. The simulation process is very slow and consumes a lot of 
computation power. Each round takes at least 10 minutes to complete. It is 
recommended to implement the model using high performance computing to enable 
fast growth of case memory.
