Creating Intelligent Linking for Information Threading in  Knowledge Networks
Dr T.R. Gopalakrishnan Nair                                
(Director): Research & Industry Incubation Center  
Advanced AI and Bio Computing Research Group 
D. S. Institutions 
Bangalore, India 

Meenakshi Malhotra                                              
(A. Member): Research & Industry Incubation Center 
D. S. Institutions, 
(Lecturer): Department of Information Science Engg 
 The Oxford College of Engineering, 
Bangalore, India 

              
 
Abstract — Informledge System (ILS) is a knowledge 
network with autonomous nodes and intelligent links that 
integrate and structure the pieces of knowledge. In this 
paper, we aim to put forward the link dynamics involved in 
intelligent processing of information in ILS. There has been 
advancement in knowledge management field which involve 
managing information in databases from a single domain. 
ILS works with information from multiple domains stored 
in distributed way in the autonomous nodes termed as 
Knowledge Network Node (KNN). Along with the concept 
under consideration, KNNs store the processed information 
linking concepts and processors leading to the appropriate 
processing of information. 
Keywords- Informledge System (ILS); Knowledge Network 
Node (KNN); Multi-lateral links;  Link Manager; Ontology 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The research in the field of knowledge processing has 
been active for the last few decades. Researchers in the 
field 
of 
knowledge 
representations 
and 
Ontology 
development has been concentrating on structuring the 
information. 
There has been some development in the field of 
encoding domain knowledge in a fuzzy multi-layer 
perceptron (MLP) [1]. It restricts to domain knowledge 
being encoded but lacks in structuring of the knowledge 
network. Knowledge does not exist discretely from one 
domain alone but it becomes usually complete when the 
inter-domain knowledge is also linked. Although there 
have 
been 
efforts 
to 
interconnect 
heterogeneous 
knowledge bases [2], but these systems needed to be 
connected on the knowledge grid for doing so.  
Conversely, there is no system at hand that would 
encode inter-domain knowledge effectively to provide a 
network of interlinked knowledge units that could be later 
used 
to 
retrieve 
information 
systematically 
and 
intelligently. 
 To overcome this, we had suggested Informledge 
System (ILS) in our work published earlier [3] [4].  In ILS, 
knowledge units belonging to same or different knowledge 
domains are linked together to form a knowledge network 
using the autonomous nodes and intelligent links. This 
interlinking of knowledge units for the knowledge network 
is by virtue of nodes with intelligence and multi-lateral 
links that have ingrained processing properties. These 
links play an important role in connecting correlated 
concepts.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses 
Research Background. We present our Research Objective 
in section III. Section IV gives the Conceptual Model of 
the Informledge System and in section V we discuss the 
Link Dynamics of ILS and section VI details about system 
Simulation and Evaluation. Finally, we conclude in section 
VII. 
II. 
RESEARCH  BACKGROUND 
The research in the field of knowledge management 
has shown that knowledge can be viewed in four different 
ways that primarily includes ontological, epistemological, 
commodity and community views of knowledge [5]. 
Knowledge bases have been constructed using 
ontologies. Ontology originated in the field of philosophy 
and is defined as a specification of what exists [6]. 
However in the field of computer science it is stated as 
“ontology is formal, explicit specification of a shared 
conceptualization”. For different understanding of a 
concept stated in language, different representations are 
stated which involve ontological construction [7]. Standard 
Upper Ontologies [8] have been used to define general 
concepts at higher-level. However, it is not yet possible to 
represent the existing knowledge completely using one 
kind of ontology [9] [10]. 
Furthermore, ontology construction involves every 
concept to be represented in terms of words. Whereas in 
ILS, knowledge is represented by interlinked knowledge 
units, which are ordered set of entities [3]. This knowledge 
unit can represent a whole concept or a part of it [11].  The 
field of neuroscience also states that different regions of 
brain are responsible for concept formation and its 
representation into different languages. Every individual 
tend to think about a concept and then only represent that 
into a specific language [12]. 
Epistemological view is defined as the scientific view 
of 
knowledge. 
The 
commodity 
view 
understands 
knowledge as a static organizational resource, and 
community view assumes that knowledge is a social 

construct. Information stored in ILS can take up any of 
these forms by virtue of its homogeneous autonomous 
nodes and multilateral links. 
Recently more focus is given on development of Brain 
Machine Interface (BMI) that aims at translating neuronal 
waves into a reality concept. BMI can translate raw 
neuronal signals into motor commands that reproduce arm 
reaching and hand grasping movements in artificial 
actuators [13]. It can be considered, if at all, it can be of 
any value to translate knowledge of brain to another 
format. 
Researchers in the field of cognition and artificial 
intelligence have been endeavoring to simulate the 
knowledge of human brain. Although few have been able 
to understand the deep working patterns of neurons [16], 
but still a large amount of work need to be done to create 
knowledge bases that would be able to embed knowledge 
and links, and link each other in respective models. Our 
objective here is not to simulate the human brain per say 
but to map the information processing nature of the 
knowledge stored in the clustered neurons or any other 
nodes having ability to do processing. The knowledge 
units meaningfully connect to form the required 
knowledge as the clustered linked neurons connect to each 
other to produce a valid thought based on connected facts. 
While creating knowledge bases emphasis has been on 
the word and sentences, which are part of information 
sharing, rather than the concepts [14]. But ILS emphasizes 
on inter-linking of concepts to encode and reproduce direct 
and derivative of them by pulling several threads through 
them. 
Even human brain uses prior knowledge for decision 
making, through the use of concepts which are formed 
through abstraction, capture the shared meaning of similar 
entities [15]. In ILS decision making is backed by, 
subnormal manipulation of knowledge units. 
III. 
RESEARCH OBJECTIVE 
Concepts linkages and the type-and-intensity of the 
linkage reveal the hidden structure. Together they explain 
the individual category in a coherent fashion. Through 
concepts, categories and relations that an individual make 
give understanding of our world. In ILS, we create 
knowledge dynamically from the existing knowledge units 
and links, while whatever was once embedded could only 
be extracted. Linkages form directed graph which can be 
an open or cyclic graph. 
Knowledge unit is one entity along with its attributes. 
Creation of links leads to knowledge embedding. In ILS 
knowledge embedding is eventually connectivity of 
entities identified as autonomous nodes using ordered 
links. Meaningful links consist of coherent and incoherent 
knowledge. At present ILS embeds only coherent 
knowledge, which is explicitly embedded and does not 
include the knowledge formed by cross-linking of 
knowledge units. The knowledge of ILS is like a sphere as 
shown in Fig. 1 whose inner-most sphere consists of the 
interlinked knowledge units as part of a knowledge, outer 
to it is the knowledge encoder (KE) [2] which helps in 
knowledge embedding and retrieval, next to it is the 
knowledge validation sphere which helps in validation of 
this knowledge with the stored facts in ILS and the outer-
most sphere provide the knowledge representation to 
interlinked knowledge units to form an understandable 
knowledge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.   Sphere of Knowledge 
In our previous paper, we had talked about the 
knowledge embedding and retrieval strategies [3]. Links 
which form the vital part of ILS helps in linking 
knowledge units intelligently. The intelligence of the 
system lies with linkages. In the following sections we 
discuss about ILS and how the link decides where to 
connect. 
IV. 
INFORMLEDGE SYSTEM 
ILS is a modified knowledge network system dealing 
with logical storage and connectivity of information base 
to form knowledge using autonomous nodes and multi-
lateral links [3]. The node in ILS is termed as Knowledge 
Network Node (KNN). KNNs are autonomous by virtue of 
their capability to store, infer and reason the creation of the 
knowledge thread. The nodes in the ILS are homogeneous. 
The structure of the KNN encompasses four quadrants 
namely input/output, storage and parser, link database and 
link manager, as discussed in our last paper [2]. 
Links are the significant constituent of ILS. They 
characterize the intelligence of the system. During 
knowledge embedding the knowledge units, KNNs, get 
connected based on the following link properties: 
directional and performance properties, which include 
exclusive or inclusive, additive or subtractive and 
integrative or differentiative [3]. In the following section 
we discuss how these properties help in building the 
knowledge thread. 
V. 
LINK DYNAMICS 
ILS is an organized system in which connectivity and 
search is done through an ordered set of links. Properties 
of links leads to processing where by several logics can be 

retrieved through it. Intelligence of understanding is in 
links 
which 
includes 
classifying, 
correlating 
and 
extrapolating the information.  
 
Figure 2.  Knowledge Thread formed by linking KNNs 
Knowledge thread is like a string of beads where the 
knowledge units, KNN, are the beads and the thread 
connecting the knowledge units is the link. The knowledge 
thread shown in Fig. 2 can be represented as: 
Knowledge Thread, Kt= αLij+αLjk+αLkl+αLlm+αLmn 
 ൌ෌
൫α௅௫,௬൯
௠,௡
௫ୀ௜,௬ୀ௝
             
  (1) 
In Equation (1), αLij represent the link between the ith 
and jth nodes that is KNNi and KNNj. From equation (1), it 
is clear that the knowledge thread formed after linking n 
nodes is summation of all the links. αL12  is defined as 
combination of all the three properties between the two 
nodes as follows: 
 
αL12 = (αp11,2+αp21,2+αp31,2)     
            (2) 
Hence, equation (1) could now be expanded using 
equation (2) to  
 
Kt ൌ
෍ቀ൫α୮ଵ୶,୷൅α୮ଶ୶,୷൅α୮ଷ୶,୷൯൅ڮ ቁ
୫,୬
୶ୀ୧,୷ୀ୨
 
Thus for any link between KNNx and KNNy, the link 
formed is the combination of the properties p1,p2, p3 and 
p4, As discussed in our paper[3], p1 denotes the 
directional properties(source/destination KNN), p2 is a 
combination of three performance properties and p3 is the 
temporal property. The performance property, p2 gets a 
value which is a combination of the link properties that 
includes the following: 
• 
P21 – Additive / Subtractive 
• 
P22 – Inclusive / Exclusive  
• 
P23 – Integrative / Differentiative 
A. Structural Rules 
While substituting the values for the structural 
properties of a link the following structural rules are 
followed: 
1) And/or connectivity between concepts is not listed 
explicitly: To represent AND the two concepts are 
individually linked to the concerned fact. The same is 
represented logically as shown in Fig. 3. The Fig. 3 shows 
that if the knowledge is “Computer can store, retrieve and 
process information” then the three concepts about 
storage, retrieval and processing are linked to the computer 
concept incoherently. 
2) Each knowledge unit is a concept: Each knowledge 
unit is like a concept and each concept can be represented 
via a KNN i.e. each concept is a KNN. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.   Three links showing the AND connection 
3) Assigning the performance properties 
a) Additive/Subtractive: Some of the concepts add 
some additional information to other concept, in those 
cases the link connecting those concepts are called 
additive. Consider the knowledge “Some plants have big 
leaves like banana”, here the two concepts represented by 
KNN (big) and KNN (leaves) share the additive property. 
Negation between two concepts is represented by 
subtractive property e.g. for the knowledge “Some plants 
cannot stand straight”, so the two concepts KNN (stand) 
and KNN (straight) have the link with subtractive 
property. 
b) Integrative/Differentiative:  One concept  is said 
to share integrative property with other concepts when 
they aggregate to form a single concept eg considering the 
knowledge “computer have one CPU and main memory”, 
CPU and main memory concepts integrate to form a 
computer concept. 
c) Inclusive/Exclusive: The two concepts that are 
linked via inclusive property share the ‘belongs-to’ 
relationship. If that relationship does not exist then the link 
is marked to have exclusive relationship. Eg: botany is a 
branch of biology- has two main concepts botany and 
biology whereas branch linking attribute depicts that 
botany is inclusive of biology. 

B. Link Formation 
Knowledge embedding is micro-fined using millions 
of knowledge nodes via highly processing intelligent links. 
List of links are stored by the parser in Link Database and 
the parser takes the direction to complete the knowledge 
thread. Link Manager comprises of the processor channel 
which process the directional and the performance 
properties of the links. The link is a combination of 
directional and the weightage of the three performance 
properties. The link may have value for one, two or all the 
three of these performance properties as shown in Fig. 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Link Properties  
There are natural links which are created during 
knowledge embedding. In addition to that there are 
unnatural links that are the result of interconnectivity of 
the links. Now as the knowledge is retrieved the various 
knowledge components, KNNs, which were earlier not 
connected are also linked which would span to multiple 
planes on which the components exists as shown in Fig. 5. 
 
Figure 5.  KNN linked to other KNNs on multiple planes 
These unnatural links are validated during knowledge 
retrieval when the knowledge pass through the knowledge 
validation sphere. 
VI. 
SIMULATION AND EVALUATION 
The link size grows as the knowledge grows. As more 
and more knowledge is embedded into the system the 
knowledge thread increases. In our simulation, we 
embedded knowledge from different domains as what 
exist in the world, Continent, Computers, etc.   
ILS is synonymous to a box of beads from which if we 
pull out a bead different thread of beads could be taken 
out. Similarly, from ILS if we take a concept, we can 
retrieve different knowledge threads from it. Every 
knowledge thread extracted would have different number 
of links processed. 
TABLE 1      THREAD LINKS FOR KNNS 
KNN 
Number of Links in each Thread 
Knn11 
1 
2 
7 
3 
4 
4 
7 
10 
11 
8 
9 
Knn72 
3 
4 
4 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
 
 
 
Knn16 
2 
2 
5 
6 
6 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
10 
 
Table 1 depicts the simulation result of retrieving 
knowledge threads for three KNNs from the pool of linked 
knowledge nodes. The strength of the thread, which is 
given by number of links processed in a thread, varies in 
the three cases. For knowledge node, knn11 few threads 
span to second and fourth level while few threads went up 
to eleventh level.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.   Knowledge Thread Lengths 
The same has been depicted in Fig. 6. The gridlines in 
the figure denote the links connected for each thread. In 
case of knn11, the first knowledge thread has only one 
link, third one has seven and the ninth thread has eleven 
links. As more and more knowledge is embedded, the 
length of the thread retrieved also increases. 
Table 2 depicts that the number of threads retrieved 
from a knowledge node would be more if the KNN at 
higher level of knowledge cone whereas it would be quite 
less for the KNN which is at the base of the knowledge 
cone. 
TABLE 2 THREADS RETRIEVED 
Knowledge Node 
knn16 
knn39 
knn53 
knn74 
knn96 
Number of 
Threads Retrieved 
28 
12 
18 
10 
1 
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we presented the Informledge approach 
for creating information by link dynamics which 
intelligently process the information to form a network of 
knowledge. The link processor at the links formalizes an 
ordered collection of links by processing the performance 
properties. ILS has been validated to work for few 
 

domains, leading to formation of small and light-weight 
links. The future work include formulating links that 
traverse across multiple domains leading to bigger and 
heavy-weight links. This also includes the heuristic search 
involved in the link selection during knowledge 
embedding and retrieval. The future work also includes 
validation of the retrieved knowledge across the standard 
logic of assertions.
