MACHINE LEARNING APPLIED TO PERUVIAN
VEGETABLES IMPORTS
Ticona-Salluca Hugo
Faculty of Statistic and Computer Engineering,
Universidad Nacional del Altiplano de Puno, P.O. Box 291
Puno - Peru.

Torres-Cruz Fred
Faculty of Statistic and Computer Engineering,
Universidad Nacional del Altiplano de Puno, P.O. Box 291
Puno - Peru.

Tumi-Figueroa Ernesto Nayer
Faculty of Statistic and Computer Engineering,
Universidad Nacional del Altiplano de Puno, P.O. Box 291
Puno - Peru.

Abstract—The current research work is being developed as a
training and evaluation object. the performance of a predictive
model to apply it to the imports of vegetable products into
Peru using artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms, specifying for this
study the Machine Learning models: LSTM and PROPHET.
The forecast is made with data from the monthly record of
imports of vegetable products(in kilograms) from Peru, collected
from the years 2021 to 2022. As part of applying the training
methodology for automatic learning algorithms, the exploration
and construction of an appropriate dataset according to the
parameters of a Time Series. Subsequently, the model with better
performance will be selected, evaluating the precision of the
predicted values so that they account for sufﬁcient reliability to
consider it a useful resource in the forecast of imports in Peru.
Keywords—Machine Learning: forecasting; time series; im-
ports;artiﬁcial intelligence;dataset
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Machine Learning methodology is one of the most
valuable technologies in the Industry 4.0, and advances in Ma-
chine Learning have provided signiﬁcant beneﬁts in strategic
decision-making in organizations[1]. In recent years, predictive
models using Machine Learning algorithms have been imple-
mented in real environments of different organizations, and
as in this particular case that concerns us, it also operates in
the agriculture industry and optimal results are expected from
these technologies.
Likewise, Machine Learning technology has a high poten-
tial to optimize your processes and, consequently, make correct
and anticipated decisions. For this reason, Learning Algorithms
should also be considered as the next innovative direction to
signiﬁcantly improve the prediction of these use cases. [2].
Therefore, this research will seek to demonstrate and
encourage the use of Machine Learning applications in the
ﬁeld of agribusiness in Peru. Through the present work, the
examination and modeling of real data will be developed in
order to forecast future values with the least possible prediction
error. In this sense, this applied research work covers the
design, training, validation, and evaluation of 2 predictive
models. The research models to be explored are LSTM and
Prophet models, these being adequate and recommended to
develop applied foresting, on the one hand, LSTM is rec-
ognized for its hyperparameters which have the ability to
capture non-linear patterns using the grid search method[3]
and PROPHET for their modular regression with intuitive and
adjustable interpretation parameters applied on Time Series[4].
.
II.
DATASET
According to the purpose of the study, the ofﬁcial records
of the export volume (in kilograms) of vegetables in Peru were
used, collected from 2021 to 2022 in the National Open Data
Platform,[5], ofﬁcially uploaded by the Ministry of Agrarian
Development and Irrigation of Peru.
Table 1
Description of the variables in the Vegetable Import Dataset
in Peru 2021-2022.
Based on this dataset, it is proposed to make a reliable
prediction, and according to the models to be developed, we
will therefore need the continuous quantitative variable, PESO.
Also according to the observed data, we ﬁnd it necessary to
adapt a proper timeline; therefore, we must join the variables
A ˜NO and MES to foresee a more accurate seasonality, spec-
ifying the variables to forecast. Subsequently, to get a more
accurate overview of our data regarding products, we deﬁne
IDs for each product.
From the dataset, we highlight 3P: Soja, cake with 23.1%
in 1st position, in second position 5P: Apple, fresh fruit
with 6.3% and in third position 27P: Soja, grain with 4.2%.
The data ranges from 2021-05-01 to 2022-06-01, with 34,364
observations on imports of a total of 848 plant products.
1 | P a g e
arXiv:2301.03587v1  [cs.LG]  8 Jan 2023

Fig. 1.
Percentage description of each vegetable product imported in Peru
III.
METHODS
In this section, we will describe the models used for the
predictions.
A. LSTM MODEL
The LSTM name refers to the analogy that a standard RNN
has both ’long-term memory’ and ’short-term memory’. The
connection weights and biases in the network change once
per training episode, analogous to how physiological changes
in synaptic strengths store long-term memories; activation
patterns in the network change once per time step, analogous
to how moment-to-moment changes in electrical activation
patterns in the general brain store short-term memories. The
LSTM architecture aims to provide a short-term memory for
RNNs that can last for thousands of time steps and continue
to be reliable, hence ’short-term long-term memory’[6].
LSTM is considered a special type of recurrent neural
network (RNN), developed to solve the potential problem of
descending gradient found in traditional RNN training, and is
able to learn both short-term and long-term dependencies[7]
and is constructed of four main components: an entry gate, an
exit gate, memory cell and a forget gate.
Input Gate: controls the sending addition of information to
the cell state. In other words, the gateway will consider what
information needs to be added to the cell state to ensure that
important information is added and that there is no redundant
information or noise.
Memory Cell: controls the value that might be deleted or
updated, and contains a value that might need to be kept as
additional information for many other time steps.
Output Gate: controls the selection of useful learning
information from the current state of the cell as output.
Forget Gate: controls the removal of information that is no
longer needed for LTSM to learn things or, less importantly,
the state of the cell. This helps to optimize the performance
of the LSTM proposed network.
Also, The LSTM model follows the sequence:
1. Decide to discard the cell state information by a Sigmoid
layer called ”forget gate”.
2. Decide new information to store in the cell state. The
Sigmoid layer called the ”gateway layer” decides which values
will be updated. the tan coat creates a vector of new candidate
values that could be added to the state.
3. Update the old cell state to the new cell state.
4. Decide the ﬁltered output based on the state of the cell.
Fig. 2.
MODEL LSTM
Considered for a normal LSTM model is the Tanh property,
which is a non-linear activation function. It regulates the values
that ﬂow through the network, keeping the values between -
1 and 1. To avoid information fading, a function is needed
whose second derivative can survive longer. There might be a
case where some values become huge, causing the values to
be irrelevant.
And of course an LSTM principal property: The Sigmoid
that belongs to the family of nonlinear activation functions.
Unlike Tanh, the Sigmoid holds values between 0 and 1. It
helps the network update or forget data. If the multiplication
results in 0, the information is considered forgotten. Similarly,
the information is kept if the value is relevant[8].
This will assist the network in determining what data can
be lost and what data should be kept.
B. PROPHET MODEL
PROPHET is a procedure for forecasting time series data
based on an additive model in which nonlinear trends are
adjusted for annual, weekly, and daily seasonality. It works best
with time series that have strong seasonal effects and multiple
seasons of historical data.
2 | P a g e

In the speciﬁcation of this Prophet model, there are several
places where we can alter the model to apply your experience
and external expert knowledge without needing to understand
the underlying statistics.[4]
For the Prophet model with general theory:
We use a mathematical decomposable time series model[9]
and this model has these components: trend, seasonality, and
holidays. They are combined into the following equation:
Series Model Formula.
Here g(t) is the trend function that models non-periodic
changes in the value of the time series, s(t) represents periodic
changes (for example, weekly and yearly seasonality), and h(t)
represents the effects of the seasons, The error term represents
any idiosyncratic changes that do not ﬁt the model.
In PROPHET we incorporate trend changes into the growth
model by explicitly determining the change points where the
growth rate is allowed to change. Suppose there are exchange
points at moments j,j= 1,..., S. We give N a vector of adjust-
ments, where only the rate change occurs at moment j. The
rate at any time is then the base rate k, plus all adjustments
up to the point of This is best represented by the vectors as
follows:
Adjustments represented.
When rate k is adjusted, the parameter set must also be
adjusted to connect the endpoints of the segments. The correct
ﬁt at the shift point is easily calculated as:
That would be the Adjust at shift point.
The logistic piece of the growth model then looks as
follows:
The Fourier series is also applied in Prophet to provide
a ﬂexible model of periodic effects[10]. Let P be the regular
period that we expect the time series to have (for example, P=
365:25 for annual data or P= 7 for weekly data, when we scale
our indices of time variables). We can approximate arbitrary
uniform seasonal effects with this deﬁnition:
Fourier Deﬁnition
Sometimes we can’t just randomly split the data accord-
ingly. PROPHET develops simulated historical forecasts by
producing K forecasts at various cut-off points in history,
chosen such that the horizons are within the historical record
and the total error can be evaluated.
This procedure is based on the classic ’rolling source’ fore-
cast evaluation procedures[11], but uses only a small sequence
of target dates instead of forecasting by historical date) is that
it saves on computation and provides less correlated precision
measurements.
C. Work Sequence
•
We apply an EDA (Exploratory Data Analysis) it is
necessary to clean the data and adapt it for the job.
•
Normalization of the data, we adapt the data to follow
a supervised sequence model according to a time
series.
•
Let’s divide our dataset into proof and validation tests.
•
Coding and implementation of the models according
to the Prophet or LSTM case.
•
Adjustment of the parameters and extraction of pre-
dictions with their respective evaluation metrics.
IV.
RESULTS
The results using PROPHET and LSTM are shown in this
section together with the general comparison of the mentioned
models.
We will also appreciate the comparisons and metrics de-
veloped according to the models applied to the study variable:
PESO.
Result according to the validation of the LSTM model:
Fig. 3.
LSTM VALIDATION
3 | P a g e

Result according to the validation of the PROPHET model:
Fig. 4.
PROPHET VALIDATION
Comparison to the validation of the PROPHET and LSTM
model:
Fig. 5.
LSTM AND PROPHET COMPARISON
MSE(mean squared error) and the RMSE(root mean
squared error) of both models:
We can appreciate each model according to its evaluation.
Fig. 6.
RMSE Y MSE
V.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In keeping with the theory, all machine learning algorithms
are unique, which is the root cause of why the prediction
results are different algorithms on the same data set differ.
LSTM was proposed for being an improvement of the RNNs
and Prophet for its versatility in data with less presence of
seasonality.
Given what was taken into consideration for LSTM, the
applied model was with the minimum parameters and show
results with much better conditioning than was expected,
remembering that in different studies the superiority of LSTM
is detailed over the basic algorithms that apply Recurrent
Neural Networks. Furthermore, it is noted from the theory
that the number of training times, known as the ’epoch’ in
learning[12], did not take into account the expected effect on
the performance of the trained forecast model and exhibited
mostly random behavior. How intuitive The developed model
based on LSTM incorporates additional ’gates’ in order to store
longer sequences of input data.
One of the main questions when developing and analyzing is
whether the gates incorporated in the LSTM architecture would
give a good prediction and if additional data training would
be needed to further improve the prediction[13] and in this
case, we can deduce that the quantity of data was acceptable
but the predictions were affected by the not very well deﬁned
seasonality of the dataset. A more effective solution would be
to add exact dates and continuous seasonalities.
For the Prophet model, we should have some more
intuitive results according to its theory, the application of
the Fourier series could develop more precision. The model
is expected to obtain a reasonable forecast on disordered
data without too much manual effort, unlike LSTM, which
has more hyperparameters. Prophet proved to be resistant
to outliers, missing data, and drastic changes in its time
series, the intention to ﬁt the timeline is noted. Compared
to other classical forecasting methods, Prophet should be
fast and easy to apply to time series, which is what it
was designed for in the ﬁrst place; however, it could be
considerably less accurate[14] and in this case, we conﬁrm
this appreciation by highlighting once again its intuitive factor.
The Prophet procedure should include more parameters for
users to modify and adjust the forecasts in a more effective
way. Also, a hybrid model could improve signiﬁcantly.
According to the RMSE results of the import predictions,
we can conclude that the LSTM model presents a signiﬁcantly
better performance and reliability with respect to the Prophet
model, however, as we deduced previously, the seasonality
of the dataset was an important key in the variation of the
development of the models and their predictions. Therefore,
increasing the size of the dataset and adapting an exact timeline
for our dataset of vegetable imports from Peru should be a
priority, in this way, we would undoubtedly obtain results
with better relevance and reliability and, of course, the ﬁeld of
application with the use of machine learning techniques would
be widely used and its results would be of a strongly necessary
relevance.
