192 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
Likelihood Computations Using Value Abstraction 
Nir Friedman 
School of Computer Science & Engineering 
Hebrew University 
Dan Geiger 
Computer Science Department 
Technion 
NoamLotner 
School of Computer Science & Engineering 
Hebrew University 
Jerusalem, 91904, ISRAEL 
nir®cs.huji.ac.il 
Haifa, Israel 
dang®cs.technion.ac.il 
Jerusalem, 91904, ISRAEL 
noaml®cs.huji.ac.il 
Abstract 
In this paper, we use evidence-specific value ab­
straction for speeding Bayesian networks infer­
ence. This is done by grouping variable val­
ues and treating the combined values as a sin­
gle entity. As we show, such abstractions can ex­
ploit regularities in conditional probability distri­
butions and also the specific values of observed 
variables. To formally justify value abstraction, 
we define the notion of safe value abstraction 
and devise inference algorithms that use it to re­
duce the cost of inference. Our procedure is par­
ticularly useful for learning complex networks 
with many hidden variables. In such cases, re­
peated likelihood computations are required for 
E M  or other parameter optimization techniques. 
Since these computations are repeated with re­
spect to the same evidence set, our methods can 
provide significant speedup to the learning pro­
cedure. We demonstrate the algorithm on genetic 
linkage problems where the use of value abstrac­
tion sometimes differentiates between a feasible 
and non-feasible solution. 
1 
Introduction 
Inference in probabilistic models plays a significant role in 
many applications. In this paper we focus on an applica­
tion in genetics: linkage analysis. Linkage analysis is a 
crucial tool for locating the genes responsible for complex 
traits (e.g., genetically transmitted diseases or susceptibil­
ity to diseases) . This analysis uses statistical tools to locate 
genes and identify the biological function of proteins they 
encode. 
Linkage analysis is based on a clear probabilistic model 
of genetic events. Mapping of disease genes is done by 
performing parameter optimization to find the genetic map 
location that maximizes the likelihood of the evidence (i.e., 
maximum likelihood estimation). This probabilistic infer­
ence is closely related to Bayesian network inference. 
Our starting point is the V ITE S SE algorithm [11], a fairly 
recent algorithm for linkage analysis that implements some 
interesting heuristics for speeding up computations. These 
heuristics achieve impressive speedups that allow to an­
alyze linkage problems that could not be dealt with us­
ing the prior state of the art procedures. In the language 
of Bayesian networks these heuristics can be understood 
as finding Value abstractions (reminiscent of the abstrac­
tions studied by [1 5]). These abstractions are found in an 
evidence-specific manner to save computations for a spe­
cific training example. 
In the remainder of this paper we review genetic linkage 
analysis problems. Then we develop a method to find value 
abstractions that generalizes the ideas of [11] in a manner 
that is independent of the inference procedure used. We 
then extend these ideas in combination with clique-tree in­
ference procedures. Finally, we describe experimental re­
sults that examine the effectiveness of these ideas. 
2 
Genetic Linkage Analysis 
We now briefly introduce the relevant genetic notions that 
are needed for the discussion below. We refer the reader to 
[12] for a comprehensive introduction to linkage analysis. 
The human genetic material consists of 22 pairs of auto­
somal chromosomes, and a pair of the sex chromosomes. 
The situation with the later pair is slightly different, and we 
will restrict the discussion here to the autosomal case, al­
though all the techniques we discuss apply to this case with 
minor modifications. In each pair of chromosomes, one 
chromosome is the paternal chromosome, inherited from 
the father, and the other is the maternal chromosome, in­
herited from the mother. We distinguish particular loci in 
each chromosome pair. Loci that are biologically expressed 
are called genes. At each locus, a chromosome encodes a 
particular sequence of D NA nucleotides. The variations 
in these sequences are the source of the variations we see 
among species members. The possible variants that might 
appear at a particular locus are called alleles. In general, 
the maternal copy and paternal copy of the same locus can 
be different. 
The aim of linkage analysis to construct genetic maps of 
known loci, and to position newly discovered loci with re­
spect to such maps. Genetic maps describe the relative 
positions of loci of interest (which can be genes, or ge-

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
193 
No crossover between A and B 
eta 
!SSi 
A 
B 
Crossover between A and B 
: g * g;; 
: 
---------
Figure 1: Illustration of recombination during meiosis. 
netic markers) in terms of their genetic distance. This dis­
tance measures the probability of crossovers between pairs 
of loci during meiosis, the process of cell division leading 
to creation of gemetes (either sperms or egg cells). During 
the formation of gemetes, the genetic material undergoes 
recombination, as shown in a schematic form in Figure 1. 
The genetic distance between two loci is measured in 
terms of the recombination fraction between two loci, 
which is just the probability of recombination of the two 
loci. The smaller this fraction is, the closer the two loci 
are. A recombination fraction close to 0.5 indicates that the 
two loci are sufficiently far so that their inheritance appears 
independent. 
Estimation of these fractions is complicated by the fact 
that we do not observe alleles on chromosomes. Instead 
we can observe phenotype, which might be traits, such as 
blood type, eye color, or onset of a disease, or they might 
oe the result of genetic typing. Genetic typing provides 
the alleles present in each locus, but does not provide an 
alignment with the maternal/paternal chromosome. Thus, 
when genetic typing shows an individual has alleles a and 
A in one locus, and alleles b and B in another locus, we 
do not know if a and b where in inherited from the same 
parent. In such a situation there are 4 four possible con­
figurations (ab/AB, aB/Ab, AbfaB, ABfab). When we 
consider multiple loci, the number of possible configura­
tions grows exponentially. 
2.1 
Probabilistic Networks Models of Pedigrees 
We start by showing how the underlying model of linkage 
analysis problems can be represented by probabilistic net­
works, and then discuss standard approached for comput­
ing likelihoods in pedigrees. We note that the representa­
tion of pedigrees in terms of graphical models, have been 
discussed in [6, 8]. 
A pedigree defines a joint distribution over the genotype 
and phenotype of the individuals. We denote the genotype 
and phenotype of individual i as G[i] and P[i], respectively. 
The semantics of a pedigree are: given the genotype of i's 
parents, G[i] is independent from G[j] for any ancestor j 
of i; and given the genotype G[i], the phenotype P[i] is 
independent of all other variables in the pedigree. We can 
represent these assumptions on the distribution of G[i] and 
P[i] by a network where the parents of G[i] are the G[j] 
and G[k] where j and k are i's parents, and the parent of 
P[i] is G[i]. Not surprisingly, this network has essentially 
the same topology as the original pedigree. 
The local probability models in the network have one of 
the following forms: 
• General population genotype probabilities: Pr ( G(i] ), 
when i is a founder. 
• Transmission models: Pr(G(i] I G(j], G[k]) where j 
and k are i's parents in the pedigree_! 
• Penetrance models: Pr(P[i] I G[i]). 
This discussion shows that there is a simple transforma­
tion from pedigrees to probabilistic networks. This simple 
transformation obscures many of the details of the pedigree 
model within the transition and penetrance models. Both of 
these local probability models are quite complex. We gain 
more insight into the "structure" of the joint distribution if 
we model the pedigree at a more detailed level. This can 
be done in various ways; e.g., [6, 8]. We find it most con­
venient to use a representation that is motivated by Lander 
and Green's [ 9] representation of pedigrees. For this repre­
sentation we introduce several types of random variables: 
Genetic Loci. We denote by A, B, C, ... the loci of in­
terest in the genetic analysis. For example, these can be 
marker loci and disease loci. For each individual i and lo­
cus A, we define random variables A[i,p], A[i, m] whose 
values are the specific value of the locus A in individual i's 
parental and maternal haplotypes (chromosomes), respec­
tively. That is, A[i,p] was inherited from i's father, and 
A[i, m] was inherited from i's mother. 
Phenotypes. We denote by F, G, ... the phenotypes that 
are involved in the analysis. These might include disease 
manifestations, genetic typing, or other observed pheno­
type such as blood types. For each individual i and pheno­
type F, we define a random variable F[i] that denote the 
value of the phenotype for the individual i. 
Selector variables. Similar to Lander and Green [ 9], we 
use auxiliary variables that denote the inheritance pattern 
in the pedigree. We denote by SA[i,p] and SA[i, m] the 
selection made by the meiosis that resulted in i's genetic 
makeup. Formally, if j and k denote i's father and mother, 
1 We make the standard assumption that if individual i is not a 
founder, then both of her parents are in the pedigree. 

194 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
Figure 2: A fragment of a probabilistic network represen­
tation of the transmission model, and the penetrance model 
in a 3-loci analysis. 
respectively, then 
A[i p] = { A[;,p] 
' 
A[J,m] 
if SA[i,p] = 0 
if SA[i,p] = 1 
and similarly A[i, m] depends on SA[i, m], A[k,p], and 
A[k,m]. 
Using this finer grain representation of the genotype and 
phenotype we can capture more of the independencies 
among the variables. For example, A[i,p] and A[i, m] are 
independent given the genotype of i's parents. Note that, 
they are dependent given evidence on i's children, or on 
phenotype that depends on both. Another example, occurs 
when we know that loci A and B are unlinked (say they are 
on different chromosomes), then A[i,p] is independent of 
B[i, p] given the genotype of i's father. 
Figure 2 shows a fragment of the network that describes 
parents-child interaction in a simple 3-loci analysis. The 
dashed boxes contain all of the variables that describe a 
single individual's genotypes or phenotype. In this model 
we assume that loci are mapped in the order A, B, and C. 
This assumption is reflected in the lack of an edge from 
SA[i,p] to Sc[i,p], which implies that the two are inde­
pendent given the value of Sn[i,p]. Figure 2 also shows 
the penetrance model for this simple 3-loci analysis. In this 
model we assume that each phenotype variable depends on 
the genotype at single locus. Again, this is reflected by the 
fact that each phenotype has edges only from the two hap­
lotypes of a single loci. 
2.1.1 
Likelihood Computation in Pedigrees 
There are two main approaches to likelihood computation 
on pedigrees: Elston- Stewart [3, 5] and Lander- Green [ 9]. 
The representation of pedigrees as probabilistic networks 
allows us to give a unified perspective of both. Broadly 
speaking, both are variants of variable elimination methods 
that depend on different strategies for finding elimination 
ordering, or equivalently, cluster-tree separators. 
Figure 3 shows an example of a pedigree. 
Elston­
Stewart's algorithm and later extensions essentially tra­
verse this network along the structure of the family tree. 
Figure 3: Schematic of a network corresponding to three­
loci pedigree. The dark nodes are loci variables in the 
model (e.g., A[i,p]), the dark gray nodes are phenotype 
variables, and the light gray nodes are selector variables 
(e.g., SA[i,p]). Each tree-like "slice" corresponds to one 
locus, and represents the inheritance model for that locus. 
At each cluster they aggregate variables that correspond to 
an individual across all slices. On the other-hand, Lander­
Green's algorithm traverses this network from one slice to 
another. At each step they aggregate all the separator vari­
ables at one slice. In this sense, Lander- Green's algorithms 
treats a pedigree as a factorial HMM. 
This discussion makes the (known) properties and restric­
tions of each procedure visible. When the pedigree has 
loops, the genotypes of individuals are no longer neces­
sarily separators. Thus, one has to resort to approaches for 
breaking loops. On the other hand, the Lander- Green pro­
cedure is not sensitive to loops in the pedigree. However, 
their procedure cannot applied for pedigree's with many 
selector variables in each slice and thus, their algorithm is 
limited to small pedigrees. 
2.2 
Genetic Mapping 
The main task for linkage analysis is identifying the map 
location of disease genes from pedigree data. The standard 
approach for performing this analysis is to use non-linear 
optimization procedures that attempt to maximize the like­
lihood function. Such procedures evaluate the likelihood 
in several points that are close to each other and estimate 
the derivative by examining the differences in likelihood 
between these points. This approach requires several eval­
uations of the likelihood. 
It is important to note that during this optimization, there 
are many repeated likelihood computations with respect 
to the same evidence. 
Moreover, the only parameters 
that change are the recombination fractions. That is, the 
only variables whose conditional probability distribution 
changes are the selector variables. 
These repeated computation have been optimized by vari­
ous approaches. In particular, current linkage analysis soft-

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
195 
ware perform some amount of genotype exclusion [13]. 
These exclusions use several rules of deduction to deter­
mine which genotypes are possible for individuals given 
their phenotype, or the possible genotypes of their direct 
relatives. 
In addition, several researchers made the observation that 
maintaining the distinction between some of a these values 
often does not change the probability of the observations. 
This fact has been exploited in F A S T L I N K  to combine all 
marker alleles that do not appear in any typed individual 
in the pedigree [13]. A more powerful use of this idea has 
been proposed by O'Connell and Weeks [11] and imple­
mented in the V I T E S S E  program, where there is localized 
allele grouping for each individual in the pedigree. The cur­
rent V I T E S S E  algorithm applies only to Ioopless pedigree 
within the framework of bottom-up Elston- Stewart style 
variable elimination. 
3 
Safe Value Abstractions 
In the next sections we develop theory and algorithms that 
exploit value abstraction in contexts similar to the genetics 
linkage analysis problems we describe above. 
Let X be a variable with a finite domain Val(X) and 
a probability distribution function P(X 
= x). An ab­
straction of the domain of X is a collection A of subsets 
of Val(X) that form a non-trivial partition of Val(X): 
no set in A is empty, every two sets in A are disjoint, 
and the union of all sets in A equals Val(X). For every 
v E Val(X), let va stand for the set in A that contains 
v. We call va the abstract value corresponding to v. Each 
abstraction defines a partition function a : Val(X) -+ C 
which maps a value v to its abstract value va via va = a( v). 
An abstraction of X, denoted by xa, is a variable with a 
domain Val(Xa) = A which is an abstraction of Val(X), 
and a probability distribution function pa given by 
P(X = v), 
{ vE Val(X) lva=u(v)} 
or in a shorter notation by, 
The set of abstractions for Val(X) forms a natural par­
tial order (or more precisely, a lattice) as follows. 
An 
abstraction A1 is finer than abstraction A2 if every set in 
A1 is a subset of a set in A2, in which case we also say 
A2 is coarser than A1. An abstraction A1 is strictly finer 
(coarser) than abstraction A2 if A1 is finer (coarser) than 
A2 and A1 ,P A2• The maximal abstraction consists of one 
set and the minimal abstraction consists of singletons. 
A refinement of two abstractions A1 and A2 is an ab­
straction A such that A is finer than A1 and finer than A2. 
A tight refinement of two abstractions A1 and A2 is a re­
finement A such that every other refinement A' of A1 and 
A2 is finer than A. In other words, suppose that a1 and 
a2 are the two partition functions defined by abstractions 
A1 and A2, respectively. Then, the partition function of 
their tight refinement A is given by a = a1 1\ a2 defined 
such that a( v) = a( v') if and only if a1 ( v) = a1 ( v') and 
a2 ( v) = a2 ( v'). Intuitively, the refinement of two partition 
functions defines a partition function that preserves the dis­
tinctions made by both partition functions and introduces 
no new distinctions. When two abstractions are not related 
through refinement, they are said to be incomparable. 
Evidence with respect to a variable X is an assertion e that 
the value observed for X is among a subset 0 C Val(X) 
of the possible values. When 0 is a singleton, X is said to 
have been observed. 
An abstraction a of X is safe with respect to e if P(e I 
X = x) = P(e I X = x') for all x, x' such that a(x) = 
a(x'). That is, the distinctions blurred by the abstraction 
a do not effect the probability of the evidence. We can 
always find a safe abstraction, since the trivial abstraction 
that consists of singletons is always safe. Moreover, it is 
clear that there exist a maximally safe abstraction which is 
the coarsest safe abstraction. 
As a simple example, consider a game where a player can 
bet on a dice outcome and wins if the outcome matches 
his bets. To formalize, suppose we have three variables 
Bet that can take the values odd and even, Dice that can 
take the values 1, . . .  , 6, and Win that can be either yes or 
no. Suppose also that we observe that the player won, that 
is Win = yes. Clearly, the likelihood P(Win = yesiDice) 
does not depend on the distinction between all possible out­
comes of the dice. Since the player can only bet on even or 
odd outcome, the abstraction of values {1, 3, 5}, {2, 4, 6} 
is a safe one. This abstraction is clearly the maximally safe 
abstraction of Dice. However, there are many other safe ab­
stractions. Note that in this example, if the dice is fair, then 
P(Win,Dice = x) is the same for all values of x in the 
same partition. However, the abstraction is still safe even 
if the dice is not fair. The point is that we can compute 
P(Dice E {1, 3, 5}) without worrying about the rest of the 
domain (e.g., probability of various bets, etc.). 
This simple example suggests that it suffices to consider 
an abstraction of the dice when we compute the proba­
bility of winning in the betting game. This can lead to 
saving in the number of operations we perform in our 
calculations. 
Such computational savings can be much 
more drastic when one is presented with many intercon­
nected variables as is the case with Bayesian networks. Let 
X = {X 1, ... , X n} be a set of variables each associated 
with a finite domain Val(Xi)· Also, let B, with a directed 
acyclic graph G, stand for a Bayesian network over X and 
let Pa(Xi) be the parents of each Xi in B. An abstraction 
Ba of B is a Bayesian network with the same set of vertices 
and edges as in B, and where each variable Xi is replaced 
with an abstraction Xf. 
We now want to determine the conditional probability 
distributions in Ba. We start by defining the probability 
of an abstraction given the "un-abstracted" parents: 
P(Xf = xf I pa(Xi) = u) = 

196 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
ALGORITHM ValueAbstract(B,e) 
Input: A Bayesian network B and evidence e 
Output: A safe abstraction sa wrt e 
Discard: 
For every X; in S, remove from 
Val(X;) all values that are ir.compatible 
withe (e.g., using arc-consistency algorithm) 
Comment: Nodes in e remain with one value 
Abstract: 
Set I:; := { Val(X;)}, fori = 1, ... , n 
Iterate over X; in reverse topological order: 
Suppose that Pa(X;) = { X1, ... , Xk}. 
1. Set ai = 1\ L:; 
Comment: This defines Xf. 
2. Find partition functions ai, . . . , a1 
of xl' ... 'xk such that 
P(Xia I x1, ... , xk) = P(Xf I x9, ... , xU 
whenever 
a1(xi) =a1(x:, ), ... , a1(xk) =a1(xU. 
3. for each Xi E Pa(Xi) 
Zj := Zj U {a}} 
Construct Tables: 
Iterate over Xi in reverse topological order: 
Abstract the table P(Xf I pa(X;)a) 
according P(X; I pa(X;)). 
Figure 4: Computing Value Abstraction 
where x't is an abstract value of x;. We say that an abstrac­
tion of X;'s parents is cautious if P(Xf = x't I pa(Xi) = 
u) = P(Xf = x't I pa(X;) = u') for all values u of 
Pa(X;) that are mapped to the same partition. In this case, 
we define 
P(Xf = x't I pa(X;)a = ua) = 
P(Xf = va I pa(X;) = u) for u E ua. 
Note that the notion of an abstract value of a variable is 
naturally extended to a set of variables via the Cartesian 
product of the domains of the individual variables. 
An abstracted Bayesian network Ba is a a (safe and cau­
tious) abstraction of a Bayesian networkS over X wrt ev­
idence e if P(eiS) = P(eiSa). It is also maximal if for 
any other Bayesian network sa' with this property either 
Val(Xj') is finer than Val(Xf) or the two sets are incom­
parable for all variables X;. 
4 
Finding Safe & Cautious Abstractions 
We now describe a simple iterative algorithm, ValueAb­
stract, which finds a safe abstraction of a Bayesian network 
S with respect to evidence e. The algorithm consists of 
three phases: 
Discard The algorithm starts by examining the variables 
in the network, and for each Xi, discarding all values that 
are incompatible with the evidence e. This is done via any 
arc-consistency algorithm as described in the C S P  litera­
ture. 
Abstract In this phase the algorithm traverses the net­
work from the leafs upwards and computes cautious ab­
stractions for the parents of each abstracted variable. Since 
a variable Xi can be a parent of several variables, we need 
to collect the abstractions that are cautious with respect to 
each of these children. Thus, during this phase, the algo­
rithm maintains a set of abstractions, L:i, that contains the 
abstractions required for Xi by Xi's children. When the 
procedure processes X;, it finds the minimal refinement of 
all these abstractions of Xi. We denote by 1\ L:i the tightest 
refinement of all the abstractions in I:;. 
Construct Tables In the last phase the algorithm con­
structs the conditional probabilities in the abstracted net­
work. 
The full algorithm is given in Figure 4. 
Theorem 4.1: The network sa returned by Value Abstract 
is a safe, cautious abstraction of 
S wrt e. 
Ignoring for the moment the cost of the Discard phase, 
we see that each iteration (either of Abstract, or Construct 
Tables phase) examines a single family. The cost of such an 
iteration can be exponential in the number of parents in the 
family. Thus, the running time of ValueAbstract is linear in 
the number of variables in the network, but exponential in 
the maximal indegree of the network. We stress, however, 
that for networks in which conditional probabilities are rep­
resented by tables, the running time is linear in the size of 
the network description (since the description of the condi­
tional probability tables are also exponential in the number 
of parents). 
This implies that the running time of this algorithm is not 
sensitive to the topology of the network, and the complex­
ity of inference with it. VI TE S SE [11] (see Section 2) is 
a specialized version of ValueAbstract that yields impres­
sive speedup in likelihood calculations in a genetic analy­
sis domain. Thus, this simple algorithm can often make the 
difference between feasible and infeasible calculations. 
5 
Message-Specific Abstraction 
The ValueAbstract algorithm has a desirable property: it is 
independent of the particulars of the inference procedure 
we use for computing likelihoods. Thus, it can be applied 
as a preprocessing step before likelihood computation. The 
simplicity and low complexity of the algorithm make it at­
tractive. 
Nonetheless, there are some regularities that are missed 
by ValueAbstract. 
First, the main processing is strictly 
bottom-up: the abstraction is constructed from the leaves 

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
197 
of the network upward. However, we note that the first 
phase (Discard using edge-consistency) can propagate im­
plication of evidence to lower nodes. 
Second, we considered each variable separately from the 
others. This limits us to abstractions that are the Carte­
sian products of the abstractions of variables in the par­
ents set. Thus, rather than holding abstractions per vari­
able, we may wish to hold abstractions for select groups of 
variables. Suppose, for example, that we have two binary 
variables X and Y each with values {0, 1 }. Suppose the 
evidence e is such that X and Y must have had the same 
values but e does not determine which one of their values. 
A maximal abstraction of Val (X) x Val(Y) wrt e is the set 
{ eq = { ( 0, 0), ( 1, 1)}, neq = { ( 0, 1), ( 1, 0)}}. There exist 
no maximal abstractions wrt e for Val(X) or for Val (Y) 
which are strictly coarser than the original sets of values. 
Finally, another opportunity for improvement rests on the 
observation that rather than holding one abstraction per 
variable, we can hold several abstractions per variable, so 
that the likelihood computations of different parts of e can 
be treated more efficiently. Suppose, for example, that we 
have a Markov chain XI -+ X2 · · · -+ Xn and that XI and 
Xn are observed. That is, the evidence e is composed of 
two parts ei and en. Then, for any Xi, 1 < i < n, we can 
think of two natural abstractions, one is a maximal abstrac­
tion wrt ei, and the other is a maximal abstraction wrt en. 
To compute the posterior P (Xi I e) one would need the tight 
refinement of both abstractions. However, to pass messages 
to its neighbors ala Pearl propagation style, we only need 
to use one of the abstractions, which in general are coarser 
than their tight refinement, and thus more efficient. 
To deal with these issues, we need to develop abstractions 
that depend on the details of the of the inference procedure 
we use. We now address these issues within the context 
of cluster-tree (aka clique tree) algorithms [7, 10, 14]. We 
start with a presentation of one variant of tree-based algo­
rithms. The other variants have slightly different details, 
but our algorithm can be easily adopted to deal with these. 
5.1 
Clique Tree Propagation Algorithm 
Assume that B is a fixed network. A cluster-tree forB is a 
tree over k nodes such that: 
• Each node l in the tree is annotated with a cluster 
Ct _ {XI, ... ,Xn}· 
• Each variable xi is assigned to one cluster cl(X;) 
such that Xi E Ct(X;) and Pa(Xi) _ Ct(X;)· 
• If Xi E Ct and Xi E Cm, then Xi E Cj for any node 
jon the path from l tom. 
Let l be a node. By definition, if Xi is assigned to l, then 
Xi and Pa(Xi) are subsets of Ct. Thus, we can define a 
function on values Ct E Val(Ct) 
9t(ct) = II 
P(xi I Pa(Xi)) 
i,l(X;)=l 
(If l is a node that is not assigned any variable, then we 
define 9t(ct) = 1.) 
It is easy to see that by simple rearrangement of products 
the probability P(xi, ... , Xn I B) can be rewritten as: 
If we have evidence, say on a set of variables E, we can up­
date the functions to reflect that. For example, if XI = a. 
We can multiple 9l(XI) by a function oi(XI) such that 
oi (xi) 
= 1 if XI 
= 
a and oi (xi) = 0 otherwise. If 
we update the nodes in this manner for all variables in E 
according to the specific evidence e then 
To see this, note that if XI, ... , Xn is consistent withe, then 
its value is not changed by the modification to the g1• On 
the other hand, if it is not consistent, then one of the 91 is 0, 
and thus, the probability of the joint assignment is 0. 
Let l and m be adjacent nodes in the tree. We define the 
separator St,m = Ct nCm. A separator defines a partitions 
of the clusters { CI, ... , Ck} into two sets: the clusters on 
the l-side of the separator, and the clusters on the m-side 
of the separator. We denote these sets A:·m and A\m. In 
addition, we define the sets of variables in both groups of 
clusters x:·m = uA:·m, and x\m = UA\m 
The key property of separators is that they allow us to 
factor the computation of probabilities into two separate 
cases. Using the properties of the tree, it is easy to show 
that 
Proposition 5.1: 
P(e I B) 
XI 
Xn 
l 
L 
f;;,m(sl,m, e)ff'm(sl,m, 
e) 
s1,] E Val(S,,]) 
where 
2::: 
II 
2::: 
II 
The key property of this factorization is that it is recur­
sive. 
Proposition 5.2: Consider a node l whose adjacent nodes 
are mi, . .. , mk. Then 
fl,m1( 
) 
l 
St,m,,e 
= 
L 
9t(ct) II f;;,;'i(sl,mi,e). 
yEVal(C,-5,,]1) 
j>I 
(1) 
Thus, to compute the message ff'm1 (st,m,, e) we need to 
combine the messages from the other clusters adjacent to 
l with conditional probabilities that are assigned to l and 
then sum out all of the variables except these on St,m,. 

198 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
Using this recursive rule we can compute the likelihood 
P(e I B). We choose a separator S1,m· According to 
Proposition 5.1, all we need do is to compute the messages 
ff'm and fSm and then sum over the values of variables in 
Sl,m· To compute these two messages, we apply the recur­
sion rule of Proposition 5.2 until we get to the leafs of the 
tree. It is easy to see that this procedure is closely related 
to variable elimination algorithms [3, 4, 16], except that 
we eliminated several variables at each step. Moreover, the 
structure of the clique tree determines the order of elimina­
tion. 
In addition to likelihood computations, we can also com­
pute the posterior for every cluster: P(e, c1 / B). We do so 
by combining the messages from all of l's adjacent nodes: 
P(e,cl I B)= g1(c1) IT!T',"i(sl,mi'e) 
j 
Cluster tree algorithm compute such a posterior for each 
cluster. This can be done efficiently by dynamic program­
ming: for each separator we only need to compute two mes­
sages. By appropriate use of dynamic programming all of 
these messages can be computed in two passes over the tree 
[7, 14]. 
5.2 
Clique Tree Abstractions 
Suppose we are given a cluster tree and an evidence e. Can 
we abstract the values of cliques and separators? The ideas 
from the previous section can be applied here in a straight­
forward fashion. Let S1,m be a separator. An abstraction 
af'm of Val(SL,m) is safe for ff'm(st,m, e) if 
fl,m( 
) 
Jl,m( 
1 
) 
l 
S[,m, e = l 
sl,m• e 
for all S!,m and sLm such that af'm(sl,m) = af'm(sLm). 
To construct a safe abstraction for the message ff'm, 
we examine the recursive definition given Proposition 5.2. 
This definition implies that ff'm is a function of gl and 
!U':'' for nodes m' adjacent to l. Thus, if we have safe 
abstractions to all these terms, we only need to preserves 
values of 
L 
gl(c't). II fT',"i(s't,mi'e) 
yEC1-S1,m1 
j>l 
We construct these abstraction using a dynamic program­
ming procedure that is analogous to the clique-tree propa­
gation algorithm. The difference is that instead of propa­
gating probabilistic messages we are propagating abstrac­
tions. We define two operations on abstractions that are the 
analogs of message multiplication and of marginalization. 
We start by combination of abstractions. 
Definition 5.3: Suppose that ax, ay are abstractions that 
are safe with respect to f(X) and g(Y), respectively. (The 
sets X andY can overlap.) Let Z = XUY. The combined 
abstraction a = ax · ay over Val(Z) is such that a(z) = 
a(z') whenax(x) = ax(x') anday(y) = ay(y' ), where 
x and y are the values of X and Y specified by z (and 
similarly for x' andy'). I 
It is easy to check that if ax and ay are safe for /(X) and 
g(Y), then ax· ay is safe for f(X)g(Y). 
The second operation we need to examine is marginaliza­
tion. Let f(X, 
Y) be a factor. We want to find an abstrac­
tion that is safe with respect to g(y) = Ex f(x, 
y). To do 
so, we need to identify values y for which we are going to 
add the same values in the same order. 
Definition 5.4 : 
Suppose that a is an abstraction of 
Val(X, Y) that is safe with respect to f(X, 
Y). We de­
fine the abstraction a -!-Y over Val(Y) so that 
aty (y) =aty (y')if 
a(x, 
y) = a(x, 
y') for all x 
I 
Given these two operations, we can define the abstraction 
algorithm for clique-trees. We start by computing an ab­
straction a1 of g1 ( c1) for each clique l. This can be done 
either by combining abstractions for the conditional dis­
tributions of variables that are assigned to l or by first con­
structing g1 () and then finding the coarsest safe abstraction. 
The first option can introduce unnecessary distinctions, but 
can be more efficient. 
Next, we define the analog of the recursive rule of Propo­
sition 5.2. Consider a node l whose adjacent nodes are 
m1, ... , mk. Then, 
al,mt = (a . al,m2 .... al,mk) 
I 
I 
I 
m2 
mk 
+SI,mt 
To construct the abstraction we perform dynamic pro­
gramming that determines the abstraction for each mes­
sage in terms of the abstractions for neighboring separators. 
This dynamic programming is analogous to the propaga­
tion of messages in the probabilistic inference algorithm 
on clique-trees. 
Once we compute the abstraction of the messages we can 
perform inference. The key saving of the abstraction is 
that in computation we perform multiplication and addition 
once for every abstract value. Thus, if sa is the abstracted 
version of S, the saving in computation in construction of 
the message on Sis I ValSal/1 ValSI. 
We can show that the resulting algorithm preserves cor­
rectness of inferences. 
Theorem 5.5: Inference on the abstracted clique tree com­
putes exactly all queries of the form P( C1 I e) for the evi­
dence e specified at the construction of the abstraction. 
We note that the cost of the construction of the clique-tree 
abstractions depends on the cost of the basic operations. In 
the most naive instantiation, we represent abstractions as 
tables. In this case, the cost of the operations is exactly the 
same as the cost of probabilistic computation on the clique­
tree. 
6 
Abstractions and 0 values 
Our algorithm can be easily extended to exploit an addi­
tional "structural" feature in conditional probability distri-

UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
199 
10000 
1e+OB 
.. ·•·• 
18+07 
... /'/ 
... / 
1e+06 
••• io 
1e+07 
·.fl 
::: 
::: 
"' 
Ui 
Ui 
::: 
100000 
-.!' 
1000 
.. 
S 
1e+06 
Ui 
W 
0 
T 
C" 
" 
"'·· 
" 
z .., 
" 
1l 
100 
U 
1h 
.0 ... 
10 
10 
fl/ 
... . 
	 
d.•' o  
oo 
100 
1000 
(3 .., 
^ 
U 
1h 
.0 ... 
10000 
100000 
10000 
1000 
100 
/1/. 
0 
/. •§.X. 
,t' • 
• " 
/ 
·.t· 
• • 0 
... 
0 
....... 
0 
10 . 
100 
1e+4 
1e+6 
" 
10000 
C" 
(3 
·8i: 
 
It 
0 
1000 
0 
8.RY·· 
V 
a: 
100 
Z·. 
10 
·""''/> • 
1 
. -:""' ·. 
1e+8 
1e+10 
1 
10 
100 
1000 
10000 
Original Network Size 
Original Clique Size 
# individuals * genotype size 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 5: Display of the saving achieved by Value Abstract on 280 linkage analysis networks. Each point corresponds to a 
network. Graph (a) shows reduction in network size (x-axis is original network size andy-axis is reduced network size); 
Graph (b) shows reduction in clique tree size (x-axis is original clique tree size andy-axis is the size of the clique tree of 
the abstracted network); and graph (c) relates the ratio of reduction in clique tree size (y-axis) the a complexity estimate of 
the linkage analysis problem (x-axis). 
butions. If at some stage in the algorithm ff'm(st,m) = 0, 
then multiplications by this value will always result in 0. 
We can record this fact in our abstractions by introducing 
a special abstract value 0 that corresponds to all the values 
of the variables that are given a value 0. Then, we modify 
the definition of combination and marginalization to take 
the special properties of 0 into account: 
• (ax· ay )(x) = 0 if either ax(x) = 0 or ay(y) = 0. 
• a -l..x (y) = 0 if a(x, y) = 0 for all x. 
These modifications allow us to deal with evidence more 
easily. Suppose that a variable X E Ct is assigned the 
value x in the evidence. Then we combine at() with an 
abstraction ax such that all values x' E Val(X) - { x} are 
assigned to the abstract value 0, and x is assigned to the 
singleton set { x}. When we combine this abstraction with 
the clique abstraction we ensure that all assignments to Ct 
in which X f. x are assigned to 0. 
We note that this simple modification of our procedure 
essentially implements partial constraint satisfication prop­
agation to discover unattainable joint assignments to clus­
ters/separators. 
7 
Evaluation 
We tested our methods on a collection of standard bench­
mark pedigrees that are reported in [1, 13]. These pedi­
grees come from 10 different studies and contain 90 dif­
ferent pedigrees of sizes varying from 5 to 200 individu­
als. From these we generated 280 different linkage analy­
sis problems by including different numbers of loci in the 
analysis. These were translated into a Bayesian network of 
the form described in Section 2.1. For each network we 
also constructed evidence assignment based on the original 
findings in the studies and used these in the analysis below. 
In the first phase of our experiments we tested the Value­
Abstract procedure. This procedure implements the ideas 
of V ITE S SE combined with constraint propagation to re­
move impossible values. Figure 5 (a) shows the reduction 
10000 
::: 
Ui 
-.!' 
1000 
.. 
0 
T 
fl . / 
" 
z 
. 
.., " 
. 
1l 
100 
 
W 
k 
.... . 
. 
10 
10 
100 
1000 
10000 
Original Network Size 
Figure 6: Display of the saving achieved by abstracting val­
ues inside the clique tree on the network returned by Val­
ue Abstract. The x-axis is the size of the clique tree before 
abstraction and the y-axis is the size of the clique tree after 
abstraction. 
in the size of the network achieved by Value Abstract. This 
reduction is due to eliminating and combining values of 
variables. The reduction in the network size can be ap­
proximated as 2.6 · n°·68 (the line in Figure 5 (a)). 
However, since the computation time depends linearly on 
the size of the clique tree constructed from the network, 
we also want to measure the reduction in this size. This is 
shown in Figure 5 (b). As we can see, the ratio of reduc­
tion can vary significantly. We believe that this is due to 
structural features of the pedigree. Figure 5 (c) shows that 
the ratio of improvement in the clique tree size is roughly 
proportional to the product of the number of individuals in 
the pedigree and the number of genotype values for each 
individual. This later quantity is a rough estimate of the 
complexity of the problem. 
In the next stage we applied the clique tree abstract proce­
dure described in Section 5. Here we measured the reduc­
tion in effective size of the clique tree due to the abstraction 
of values in cliques and separators. Figure 6 compares the 
sizes before and after we applied this procedure to the net­
work returned by Value Abstract. As we can see, we get ad-

200 
UNCERTAINTY IN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PROCEEDINGS 2000 
ditional saving, especially for networks with large cliques. 
The reduction is estimated as 5.2·n°·64 (the line in Figure 6. 
As we can see, the savings can be drastic. 
8 
Concluding Remarks 
In this paper we introduced an approach to exploit regular 
structure in Bayesian networks to reduce computation time. 
This approach exploits symmetry to merge values of vari­
ables or groups of variables at different stages of the com­
putation. Our motivation is from linkage analysis, where 
this type of heuristics have been very successful [ 11]. We 
are currently extending our implementation to deal with 
larger networks and plan to incorporate our methods within 
a linkage analysis software. 
It is clear that this approach can be beneficial to other 
forms of structured Bayesian networks. In particular, net­
works with C S I  [2]. Value abstraction suggests a general 
framework within which we can evaluate the utility of al­
gorithms that work with tree C P Ts. A structured represen­
tation of message (i.e., [ 17]) is essentially an abstraction. If 
an algorithm is exact, then the representation it uses must 
be a refinement of the abstraction our algorithm constructs. 
We plan to exploit this to design "optimal" structure repre­
sentations for message passing with C S I.
