Lifelong Federated Reinforcement Learning: A Learning Architecture for
Navigation in Cloud Robotic Systems
Boyi Liu1,3, Lujia Wang1 and Ming Liu2
Abstract— This paper was motivated by the problem of how
to make robots fuse and transfer their experience so that
they can effectively use prior knowledge and quickly adapt
to new environments. To address the problem, we present a
learning architecture for navigation in cloud robotic systems:
Lifelong Federated Reinforcement Learning (LFRL). In the
work, we propose a knowledge fusion algorithm for upgrading
a shared model deployed on the cloud. Then, effective transfer
learning methods in LFRL are introduced. LFRL is consistent
with human cognitive science and ﬁts well in cloud robotic
systems. Experiments show that LFRL greatly improves the
efﬁciency of reinforcement learning for robot navigation. The
cloud robotic system deployment also shows that LFRL is capable
of fusing prior knowledge. In addition, we release a cloud
robotic navigation-learning website to provide the service based
on LFRL: www.shared-robotics.com.
I. INTRODUCTION
Autonomous navigation is one of the core issues in mobile
robotics. It is raised among various techniques of avoiding
obstacles and reaching target position for mobile robotic
navigation. Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
are widely used to tackle the task of navigation. RL is a
kind of reactive navigation method, which is an important
meaning to improve the real-time performance and adaptability
of mobile robots in unknown environments. Nevertheless,
there still exists a number of problems in the application of
reinforcement learning in navigation such as reducing training
time, storing data over long time, separating from computation,
adapting rapidly to new environments etc [1].
In this paper, we address the problem of how to make
robots learn efﬁciently in a new environment and extend
their experience so that they can effectively use prior
knowledge. We focus on cloud computing and cloud robotic
technologies [2], which can enhance robotic systems by fa-
cilitating the process of sharing trajectories, control policies
and outcomes of collective robot learning. Inspired by human
congnitive science present in Fig.1, we propose a Lifelong
Federated Reinforcement Learning (LFRL) architecture to
realize the goal. With the scalable architecture and knowledge
fusion algorithm, LFRL achieves exceptionally efﬁciency in
*This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China No. 61603376; Guangdong-Hongkong Joint Scheme (Y86400); Shen-
zhen Science, Technology and Innovation Commission (SZSTI) Y79804101S
awarded to Dr. Lujia Wang.
1Boyi
liu,
Lujia
Wang
are
with
Cloud
Computing
Lab
of
Shenzhen
Institutes
of
Advanced
Technology,
Chinese
Academy
of

2Ming liu, is with Department of ECE, Hong Kong University of Science

3Boyi liu is also with the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Actor1:  The next  step may 
have little effect.
Actor3:For the next step, 
there are two better choices.
Actor2:  For the next step, there 
is a very certain decision.
¼¼
Chess
The man needs to make decisions based on the 
rules of the chess, his chess experience and the 
chess experience of others he has seen.
Fig. 1.
The person on the right is considering where should the next step go.
The chess he has played and the chess he has seen are the most two inﬂuential
factors on making decisions. His memory fused into his policy model. So
how can robots remember and make decisions like humans? Motivated by
this human cognitive science, we propose the LFRL in cloud robot systems.
LFRL makes the cloud remember what robots learned before like a human
brain.
reinforcement learning for cloud robot navigation. LFRL en-
ables robots to remember what they have learned and what
other robots have learned with cloud robotic systems. LFRL
contains both asynchronization and synchronization learning
rather than limited to synchronous learning as A3C [3] or
UNREAL [4]. To demonstrate the efﬁcacy of LFRL, we test
LFRL in some public and self-made training environments.
Experimental result indicates that LFRL is capable of enabling
robots effectively use prior knowledge and quickly adapt to
new environments. Overall, this paper makes the following
contributions:
• We present a Lifelong Federated Reinforcement Learning
architecture based on human cognitive science. It makes
robots perform lifelong learning of navigation in cloud
robotic systems.
• We propose a knowledge fusion algorithm. It is able to
fuse prior knowledge of robots and evolve the shared
model in cloud robotic systems.
• Two effective transfer learning approaches are introduced
to make robots quickly adapt to new environments.
• A cloud robotic navigation-learning website is built in the
work: www.shared-robotics.com. It provides the service
based on LFRL.
II. RELATED THEORY
A. Reinforcement learning for navigation
Eliminating the requirements for location, mapping or path
planning procedures, several DRL works have been presented
arXiv:1901.06455v3  [cs.RO]  13 May 2019

that successful learning navigation policies can be achieved
directly from raw sensor inputs: target-driven navigation [5],
successor feature RL for transferring navigation policies [6],
and using auxiliary tasks to boost DRL training [7]. Many
follow-up works have also been proposed, such as embedding
SLAM-like structure into DRL networks [8], or utilizing DRL
for multi-robot collision avoidance [9]. Tai et al [10] suc-
cessfully appplied DRL for mapless navigation by taking the
sqarse 10-dimensional range ﬁndings and the target position
, deﬁning mobile robot coordinate frame as input and contin-
uous steering commands as output. Zhu et al. [5] input both
the ﬁrst-person view and the image of the target object to the
A3C model, formulating a target-driven navigation problem
based on the universal value function approximators [11]. To
make the robot learn to navigate, we adopt a reinforcement
learning perspective, which is built on recent success of deep
RL algorithms for solving challenging control tasks [12-15].
Zhang [16] presented a solution that can quickly adapt to new
situations (e.g., changing navigation goals and environments).
Making the robot quickly adapt to new situations is not
enough, we also need to consider how to make robots capable
of memory and evolution, which is similar to the main purpose
of lifelong learning.
B. Lifelong machine learning
Lifelong machine learning, or LML [17], considers system
that can learn many tasks from one or more domains over its
lifetime. The goal is to sequentially store learned knowledge
and to selectively transfer that knowledge when a robot learns
a new task, so as to develop more accurate hypotheses or poli-
cies. Robots are confronted with different obstacles in different
environments, including static and dynamic ones, which are
similar to the multi-task learning in lifelong learning. Although
learning tasks are the same, including reaching goals and
avoiding obstacles, their obstacle types are different. There
are static obstacles, dynamic obstacles, as well as different
ways of movement in dynamic obstacles. Therefore, it can be
regarded as a low-level multitasking learning.
A lifelong learning should be able to efﬁciently retain
knowledge. This is typically done by sharing a representation
among tasks, using distillation or a latent basis [18]. The agent
should also learn to selectively use its past knowledge to solve
new tasks efﬁciently. Most works have focused on a special
transfer mechanism, i.e., they suggested learning differentiable
weights are from a shared representation to the new tasks [4,
19]. In contrast, Brunskill and Li [20] suggested a temporal
transfer mechanism, which identiﬁes an optimal set of skills
in new tasks. Finally, the agent should have a systematic
approach that allows it to efﬁciently retain the knowledge of
multiple tasks as well as an efﬁcient mechanism to transfer
knowledge for solving new tasks. Chen [21] proposed a
lifelong learning system that has the ability to reuse and
transfer knowledge from one task to another while efﬁciently
retaining the previously learned knowledge-base in Minecraft.
Although this method has achieved good results in Mincraft,
there is a lack of multi-agent cooperative learning model.
Learning different tasks in a same scene is similar but different
for robot navigation learning.
C. Federated learning
LFRL realizes federated learning of multi robots through
knowledge fusion. Federated learning was ﬁrst proposed in
[22], which showed its effectiveness through experiments on
various datasets. In federated learning systems, the raw data
is collected and stored at multiple edge nodes, and a machine
learning model is trained from the distributed data without
sending the raw data from the nodes to a central place [23,
24]. Different from the traditional joint learning method where
multiple edges are learning at the same time, LFRL adopts the
method of ﬁrst training then fusing to reduce the dependence
on the quality of communication[25, 26].
D. Cloud robotic system
LFRL ﬁts well with cloud robotic system. Cloud robotic
system usually relies on many other resources from a network
to support its operation. Since the concept of the cloud robot
was proposed by Dr. Kuffner of Carnegie Mellon University
(now working at Google company) in 2010 [27], the research
on cloud robots is rising gradually. At the beginning of
2011, the cloud robotic study program of RoboEarth [28] was
initiated by the Eindhoven University of Technology. Google
engineers have developed robot software based on the Android
platform, which can be used for remote control based on the
Lego mind-storms, iRobot Create and Vex Pro, etc. [29]. Wang
et al. present a framework targeting near real-time MSDR,
which grants asynchronous access to the cloud from the robots
[30]. However, no speciﬁc navigation method for cloud robots
has been proposed up to now. We believe that this is the ﬁrst
navigation learning architecture for cloud robotic systems.
Generally, this paper focuses on developing a reinforcement
learning architecture for robot navigation, which is capable of
lifelong federated learning and multi robots federated learning.
This architecture is well ﬁt in cloud robot systems.
III. METHODOLOGY
LFRL is capable of reducing training time without sacri-
ﬁcing accuracy of navigating decision in cloud robotic sys-
tems. LFRL uses Cloud-Robot-Environment setup to learn
the navigation policy. LFRL consists of a cloud server, a
set of environments, and one or more robots. We develop a
federated learning algorithm to fuse private models into the
shared model in the cloud. The cloud server fuses private
models into the shared model, then evolves the shared model.
As illustrated in Fig.2, LFRL is an implementation of lifelong
learning for navigation in cloud robotic systems. Compared
with A3C or UNREAL approaches which update parame-
ters of the policy network at the same time, the proposed
knowledge fusion approach is more suitable for the federated
architecture of LFRL. The proposed approach is capable of
fusing models with asynchronous evolution. The approach of
updating parameters at the same time has certain requirements
for environments, while the proposed knowledge fusion algo-
rithm has no requirements for environments. Using generative
network and dynamic weight labels are able to realize the
integration of memory instead of A3C or UNREAL method,
which only generates a decision model during learning and

Transfor-
reinforcement 
learning
Shared 
Model 2G
Transfor-
reinforcement 
learning
Transfor-reinforcement 
learning
Private 
Models
Shared 
Model 4G ……
……
……
Ability
Lifelong 
learning
Shared 
Model 1G
Shared 
Model-1G
Private 
Models
Shared 
Model-2G
Private 
Models
Shared 
Model 3G
Shared 
Model-3G
Environment 1
Environment 2
Environment 3
Federated 
Learning
Fig. 2.
Proposed Architecture. In Robot→Environment, the robot learns to avoid some new types of obstacles in the new environment through reinforcement
learning and obtains the private Q-network model. Not only from one robot training in different environments, private models can also be resulted from
multiple robots. It is a type of federated learning. After that, the private network will be uploaded to the cloud. The cloud server evolves the shared model
by fusing private models to the shared model. In Cloud→Robot, inspired by transfer learning, successor features are used to transfer the strategy to unknown
environment. We input the output of the shared model as added features to the Q-network in reinforcement learning, or simply transfer all parameters to the
Q-network. Iterating this step, models on the cloud become increasingly powerful.
…
A3C/UNREAL
LFRL
Fig. 3.
LFRL compared with A3C or UNREAL
has no memory. As illustrated in Fig.3. In the algorithm of
A3C or UNREAL, the training environment is constant. States
of agents are countable. The central node only needs to fuse
parameters, which can be performed at the same time. The
two methods are capable of fusing parameters while training.
Network structures of agents must be the same. However, in
LFRL, the training environment is variable. State of agents
are uncountable with more training environments uploading.
In different agents, the structure of hiden layers of the policy
network can be different. The cloud fuse training results. The
robots are trained in new environments based on the shared
model. Robots and the cloud have interactions in upload and
download procedures. LFRL is more suitable for the cloud
robot system where the environment is uncountable, especially
in the lifelong learning framework.
A. Procedure of LFRL
This section displays a practical example of LFRL: there
are 4 robots, 3 different environments and cloud servers.
The ﬁrst robot obtains its private strategy model Q1 through
reinforcement learning in Environment 1 and upload it to the
cloud server as the shared model 1G. After a while, Robot
2 and Robot 3 desire to learn navigation by reinforcement
learning in Environment 2 and Environment 3. In LFRL, Robot
2 and Robot 3 download the shared model 1G as the initial
actor model in reinforcement learning. Then they can get their
private networks Q2 and Q3 through reinforcement learning
in Environment 2 and Environment 3. After completing the
training, LFRL uploads Q2 and Q3 to the cloud. In the cloud,
strategy models Q2 and Q3 will be fused into shared model
1G, and then shared model 2G will be generated. In the future,
the shared model 2G can be used by other cloud robots. Other
robots will also upload their private strategy models to the
cloud server to promote the evolution of the shared model.
The more complicated tasks responded to more kinds of
obstacles in robot navigation. The learning environment is
gigantic in robot navigation learning. This case is different
from the chess. So we borrow the idea of lifelong learning.
Local robots will learn to avoid more kinds of obstacles and
the cloud will fuse these skills. These skills will be used
in more deﬁned and undeﬁned environments. For a cloud
robotic system, the cloud generates a shared model for a time,
which means an evolution in lifelong learning. The continuous
evolution of the shared model in cloud is a lifelong learning
pattern. In LFRL, the cloud server achieves the knowledge
storage and fusion of a robot in different environments. Thus,
the shared model becomes powerful through fusing the skills
to avoid multi types of obstacles.
For an individual robot, when the robot downloads the cloud
model, the initial Q-network has been deﬁned. Therefore,
the initial Q-network has the ability to reach the target and
avoid some types of obstacles. It is conceivable that LFRL
can reduce the training time for robots to learn navigation.
Furthermore, there is a surprising experiment result that the

robot can get higher scores in navigation with LFRL. However,
Algorithm 1: Processing Algorithm in LFRL
Initialize action-value Q-network with random weights θ;
Input: θa: The parameters of the a-th shared model in
cloud ; m: The number of private networks.
Output: The evolved θa
while cloud server is running do
if service request=True then
Transfer θa to π;
for i = 1;i ≤m;i++ do
θi ←robot(i) perform reinforcement learning
with π in environment.;
Send θi to cloud;
end
end
if evolve time=True then
Generate θa+1 = fuse(θ1,θ2,··· ,θm,θa)
θa ←θa+1
end
end
in actual operation, the cloud does not necessarily fuse models
every time it receives a private network, but fuses at a ﬁxed
frequency rate. So, we present the processing ﬂow of LFRL
shown in Algorithm 1. Key algorithms in LFRL include
knowledge function algorithm and transferring approaches, as
introduced in the following.
B. Knowledge fusion algorithm in cloud
Inspired by images style transfer algorithm, we develop a
knowledge fusion algorithm to evolve the shared model. This
algorithm is based on generative networks and it is efﬁcient
to fuse parameters of networks trained from different robots
or a robot in different environments. The algorithm deployed
in the cloud server receives the privately transmitted network
and upgrades the sharing network parameters. To address
knowledge fusion, the algorithm generates a new shared model
from private models and the shared model in cloud. This new
shared model is the evolved model.
Fig.4 illustrates the process of generating a policy network.
The structure of the policy network has the same input
and output dimensions with the private policy network. The
number of outputs is equal to the number of action types
that robots can act. The dimensions of input also correspond
with sensor data and human-made features. The training data
of the network is randomly generated based on sensor data
attributes. The label on each piece of data is dynamically
weighted, which is based on the “conﬁdence value” of each
robot in each piece of data. We deﬁne robots as actors in
reinforcement learning. Different robots or the same robot in
different environments are different actors.
The “conﬁdence value” motioned above of the actor is the
degree of conﬁrmation on which action the robot chooses to
perform. For example, in a piece of sample from training
data, the private Network 1 evaluates Q-values of different
actions to (85, 85, 84, 83, 86), but the evaluation of the k-
G sharing network is (20, 20, 100, 10, 10). In this case,
we are more conﬁdent on actor of k-G sharing network,
because it has signiﬁcant differentiation in the scoring process.
On the contrary, the scores from actor of private Network
1 are confusing. Therefore, when generating the labels, the
algorithm calculates the conﬁdence value according to the
score of different actors. Then the scores are weighted with
conﬁdence value and summed up. Finally, we obtain labels
of training data by executing the above steps for each piece
of data. There are several approaches to deﬁne conﬁdence,
such as variance, standard deviation, and information entropy.
From the deﬁnition of the above statistical indicators we can
infer that using variance to describe uncertainty will fail in
some cases because it requires uniform distribution of data
and ignores the occurrence of extreme events. The variance
needs to meet the relevant premise to describe the uncertainty
of the information. Entropy is more suitable for describing
the uncertainty of information than variance, which comes
from the deﬁnition of entropy. Uncertainty is the embodiment
of conﬁdence. So, In this work, we use information entropy
to deﬁne conﬁdence. Formula (1) is quantitative function of
robotic conﬁdence (information entropy):
Robot j ”conﬁdence”:
cj = −1
lnm
m
∑
i=1

scoreij
∑m
i=1 scoreij
·ln

scoreij
∑m
i=1 scoreij

(1)
m is the action size of robot, n is the number of private
networks. Memory weight of robot j:
w j =
(1−cj)
∑n
j=1 (1−cj)
(2)
Knowledge fusion function:
labelj = score ×(c1,c2,···cm)T
(3)
It should be noted that Fig.4 only shows the process of one
sample generating one label. Actually, we need to generate a
large number of samples. For each data sample, the conﬁdence
values of the actors are different, so the weight of each actor is
not the same. For example, when we generate 50,000 different
pieces of data, there are nearly 50,000 kinds of different
combinations of conﬁdence. These changing weights can be
incorporated into the data labels, and enable the generated
network to dynamically adjust the weights on different sensor
data. In conclusion, knowledge fusion algorithm in cloud can
be deﬁned as:
ω j = (1−cj)÷
n
∑
j=1
(1−c j)
(4)
yi =
num
∑
j=1
cj ·ωj
(5)
L(y,hθ (xi)) = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
(yi −hθ (xi))2
(6)
θ ∗= argmin
θ
1
N
N
∑
i=1
L(yi ·hθ (xi))
(7)

Random Sensor 
Data
Random data 
about target
Feature 1
Feature2
Feature 
x
 
Get human-made features from sensor data
Sharing Network 
(k+1)G(in cloud)
Action 1
Action 2
Action m
Score 1
Score 2
Score m
 
 
Sharing Network 
kG(in cloud)
Private Network 1
Score 11
Score 21
Score m1
 
Private Network n
 
Score 1n
Score 2n
Score mn
 
Score 1(n+1)
Score 2(n+1)
Score m(n+1)
 
Score 11
Score 21
Score m1
Score 1n
Score 2n
Score mn
Score 1(n+1)
Score 2(n+1)
Score m(n+1)
Score Matrix (knowledge storage)
 
 
 
 
 
 
Knowledge Fusion based 
 Confidence of  robots
Score=
Score 1
Score 2
Score 3
Score m
Label
Generative  Networks Training
Generate large amounts of sample data
Normalize each column
Fig. 4.
Knowledge Fusion Algorithm in LFRL: We generate a large amount of training data based on sensor data, target data, and human-deﬁned features.
Each training sample is added into the private network and the k-th generation sharing network, while different actors are scored for different actions. Then,
we store the scores and calculate the conﬁdence values of all actors in this training sample data. The “conﬁdence value” is used as a weight, while the scores
are weighted and summed to obtain the label of the current sample data. By analogy, all sample data labels are generated. Finally, a network is generated and
ﬁts the sample data as much as possible. The generated network is the (k+1)th generation. This step of fusion is ﬁnished.
Formula 4 takes the proportion of the conﬁdence of robots
as a weight. Formula 5 obtains the label of the sensor data
by weighted summation. Formula 6 deﬁnes the error in the
training process of generative network. Formula 7 is the goal
of the training process. We discribe our approach in details in
Algorithm 2. For a single robot, private network is obtained
in different environments. Therefore, it can be regarded as
asynchronous learning of the robot in LFRL. When there are
multiple robots, we just need to treat them as the same robot
in different environments. At this time, the evolution process
is asynchronous, and multiple robots are synchronized.
It should be explained that the shared model in the cloud
is not the ﬁnal policy model of the local robot. We only use
the shared model in the cloud as a pre-trained model or a
feature extractor. The shared model maintained in the cloud is
a cautious policy model but not the optimal for every robot.
That is to say, the shared model in the cloud will not make
serious mistakes in some private unstructured environments
but the action is not the best. It is necessary for the robot to
train its own policy model based on the shared model from
the cloud, otherwise the error rate will be high in its private
unstructured environment. As the saying goes, the older the
person, the smaller the courage. In the process of lifelong
learning, the cloud model will become more and more timid.
In order to remove the error rate, we should transfer the shared
model and train a new private model through reinforcement
learning in a new environment. This responded to the transfer
learning process in LFRL.
C. Transfer the shared model
Various approaches of transfer reinforcement learning have
been proposed. In the speciﬁc task that a robot learns to
navigate, we found that there are two applied approaches.
The ﬁrst one is taking the shared model as initial actor
network. While the other one is using the shared model as a
feature extractor. If we adopt the ﬁrst approach that takes the
shared model as an initial actor network, abilities of avoiding
obstacles and reaching targets can remain the same. In this
approach, the robot deserves a good score at the beginning.
The experimental data shows that the ﬁnal score of the robot
has been greatly improved at the same time. However, every
coin has two sides, this approach is unstable. The training time
depends on the adjustment of parameters in some extent. For
example, we should accelerate updating speed, increase the
punishment, reduce the probability of random action etc.
The shared model also can be used as a feature extractor
in transfer reinforcement learning. As illustrated in Fig.5, this
method increases the dimension of the features. So, it can
improve the effect stably. One problem that needs to be solved
in experiment is that there is a structural difference between
input layer of the shared network and private network. The
approach in LFRL is that the number of nodes in the input
layer is consistent with the number of elements in the original
feature vector, as shown in Fig.5. The features from transfer
learning are not used as inputs to the shared network. They
are just inputs of training private networks. This approach has
high applicability, even though the shared model and private
models have different network structures.
It is also worth noting that if the robot uses image sensors
to acquire images as feature data. It is recommended to use the
traditional transfer learning method that taking the output of
some convolutional layers as features because the Q-network
is a convolutional neural network. If a non-image sensor such
as a laser radar is used, the Q-network is not a convolutional
neural network, then we will use the output of the entire

Algorithm 2: Knowledge Fusion Algorithm
Initialize the shared network with random Parameters θ ;
Input: K: The number of data samples generated ; N:
The number of private networks; M: Action sizes
of the robot;
Output: θ
for i=1,i ≤N,i++ do
ˆxi ←Calculate indirct features from ˜xi;
xi ←[ ˜xi, ˆxi] ;
for n=1,n ≤K,n++ do
scorein ←fn(xi);
scorei ←score append scorein
end
for n=1,n ≤K,n++ do
for m=1,m ≤M,m++ do
cin ←Calculate the conﬁdence value of the
n-th private network in the i-th data based
on formula (1)
end
end
labeli ←Calculate the labeli based on formula (2)
and (3);
label ←label append labeli;
end
θ ←training the shared network from (x,label);
network as additional features, as Fig.5 shows. The learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hidden Layer
Hidden Layer
Features Features
Features
Q network of robot reinforcement learning 
Private 
network
The shared network 1G
 
 
 
Features
The shared network 2G
The shared 
network 1G
Fig. 5.
A transfer learning method of LFRL
process of the robot can roughly divided into two stages,
the stage of avoiding obstacles and the stage of reaching the
target. With the former transfer algorithm, it is possible to
utilize the obstacle avoidance skills of the cloud model. In the
latter transfer method, it is obvious that the evaluation of the
directions by cloud model is valuable, which is useful features
for navigation.
D. Explanation from human cognitive science
The design of the LFRL is inspired by the human decision-
making process in cognitive science. For example, when play-
ing chess, the chess player will make decisions based on the
rules and his own experiences. The chess experiences include
his own experiences and the experiences of other chess players
he has seen. We can regard the chess player as a decision
model. The quality of the decision model represents the
performance level of the chess player. In general, this policy
model will become increasingly excellent through experience
accumulation, and the chess player’s skill will be improved.
This is the iteratively evolutionary process in LFRL. After each
chess player ﬁnishing playing chess, his chess level or policy
model evolves, which is analogous to the process of knowledge
fusion in LFRL. And these experiences will also be used in
later chess player, which is analogous to the process of transfer
learning in LFRL. Fig. 1 demonstrates a concrete example. The
person on the right is considering where should the next step
goes. The chess he has played and the chess he has seen are
the most two inﬂuential factors on making decision. But his
chess experiences may inﬂuence the next step differently. At
this time, according to human cognitive science, the man will
be more inﬂuenced by experiences with clear judgments. An
experience with a clear judgment will have a higher weight in
decision making. This procedure of humans makes decisions
is analogous to knowledge fusion algorithm in LFRL. The
inﬂuence of different chess experience is always dynamic in
the decision of each step. The knowledge fusion algorithm
in LFRL achieves this cognitive phenomenon by adaptively
weighting the labels of training data. The chess player is a
decision model that incorporates his own experiences. Corre-
sponding to this opinion, LFRL integrates experience into one
decision model by generating a network. This process is also
analogous to the operation of human cognitive science.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we intend to answer three questions: 1) Can
LFRL help reduce training time without sacriﬁce accuracy of
navigation in cloud robotic systems? 2) Does the knowledge
fusion algorithm is effective to increase the shared model?
3) Are transfer learning approaches effective to transfer the
shared model to speciﬁc task? To answer the former question,
we conduct experiments to compare the performance of the
generic approach and LFRL. To answer the second ques-
tion, we conduct experiments to compare the performance of
generic models and the shared model in transfer reinforcement
learning. To answer the third question, we conduct experiments
to compare the performance of the two transfer learning
approaches and the native reinforcement learning.
A. Experimental setup
The training procedure of the LFRL was implemented
in virtual environment simulated by gazebo. Four training
environments were constructed to show the different conse-
quence between the generic approach training from scratch
and LFRL, as shown in Fig.6. There is no obstacle in Env-
1 except the walls. There are four static cylindrical obstacles
in Env-2, four moving cylindrical obstacles in Env-3. More
complex static obstacles are in Env-4. In every environment,
a Turtlebot3 equipped with a laser range sensor is used as
the robot platform. The scanning range is from 0.13m to 4m.
The target is represented by a red square object. During the
training process, the starting pose of the robot is the geometric
center of the ground in the training environment. The target
is randomly generated in pose where there are no obstacles
in the environment. An episode is terminated after the agent
either reaches the goal, collides with an obstacle, or after a
maximum of 6000 steps during training and 1000 for testing.
We calculated the average reward of the robot every two
minutes. We end the training when the average reward of the

(a) Env-1
(b) Env-2
(c) Env-3
(d) Env-4
-600
-100
400
900
1400
1900
2400
2900
3400
3900
0
50
100
(e) Env-1 score
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
0
20
40
60
80
(f) Env-2 score
-600
-100
400
900
1400
1900
2400
2900
0
20
40
60
80
100
(g) Env-3 score
-1600
-600
400
1400
2400
3400
4400
5400
6400
0
20
40
60
80
(h) Env-4 score
Fig. 6.
We present both quantitative and compared results: Subﬁgure a to Subﬁgure d are the training environments. Subﬁgure e to h present scores of the
generic approach (blue) compared with LFRL approach (red) in training process.In the training procedure of Env-1, LFRL has the same result with generic
approaches. Because there is no antecedent shared models for the robot. In the training procedure of Env-2, LFRL obtained the shared model 1G, which made
LFRL get higher reward in less time compared with the generic approach. In Env-3 and Env-4, LFRL evolve the shared model to 2G and 3G and obtained
excellent result. From this ﬁgure, we demonstrate that LFRL can get higher reward in less time compared with the generic approach.
agent is enough and stable. We trained the model from scratch
on a single Nvidia GeForce GTX 1070 GPU. The actor-critic
network used two fully connected layers with 64 units. The
output is used to produce the discrete action probabilities by
a linear layer followed by a softmax, and the value function
by a linear layer.
B. Evaluation for the architecture
To show the performance of LFRL, we tested it and com-
pared with generic methods in the four environments. Then we
started the training procedure of LFRL. As mentioned before,
we initialized the shared model and evolved it as Algorithm 2
after training in Env-1. In the cloud robotic system, the robot
downloaded the shared model 1G. Then, the robot performed
reinforcement learning based on the shared model. The robot
got a private model after training and it would be uploaded to
the cloud server. The cloud server fused the private model and
the shared model 1G to obstain the shared model 2G. With
the same mode, follow-up evolutions would be performed. We
constructed four environments, so the shared model upgraded
to 4G. Performance of LFRL shown in Fig.6 where also shows
generic methods performance. In Env2-Env4, LFRL increased
accuracy of navigating decision and reduced training time in
the cloud robotic system. From the last row of Fig.6, we
can observe that the improvement are more efﬁcient with the
shared model. LFRL is highly effective for learning a policy
over all considered obstacles. It improves the generalization
capability of our trained model across commonly encountered
environments. Experiments demonstrate that LFRL is capable
of reducing training time without sacriﬁcing accuracy of
navigating decision in cloud robotic systems.
C. Evaluation for the knowledge fusion algorithm
In order to verify the effectiveness of the knowledge fu-
sion algorithm, we conducted a comparative experiment. We
created three new environments that were not present in the
previous experiments. These environments are more similar
to real situations: Static obstacles such as cardboard boxes,
dustbin, cans are in the Test-Env-1. Moving obstacles such as
stakes are in Test-Env-2. Test-Env-3 includes more complex
static obstacles and moving cylindrical obstacles. We still used
the Turtlebot3 created by gazebo as the testing platform. In
order to vertify the advancement of the shared model, we
trained the navigation policy based on the generic model
1, model 2, model 3, model 4 in Test-Env-1, Test-Env-2
and Test-Env-3 respectively. The generic models are from
the previous generic approaches experiments. These policy
models are trained from one environment without knowledge
fusion. According to the hyper-parameters and complexity of
environments, the average score goal (5 consecutive times
above a certain score) in Test-Env-1 is 4000, Test-Env-2 is
3000, Test-Env-3 is 2600.
In the following, we present compared results in Fig.7 and
quantitative results in Table 1. The shared model steadily
reduces training time. In particular, we can observe that
the generic method models are only able to make excellent
decisions in individual environments; while the shared model
is able to make excellent decisions in plenty of different
environments. So, the proposed knowledge fusion algorithm
in this paper is effective.

(a) Env-1
(b) Env-2
(c) Env-3
0
5000
10000
15000
1
5
9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53 57 61 65 69
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Shared model
(d) Env-1 stacked scores
-1500
500
2500
4500
6500
1
5
9
13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53 57
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Shared model
(e) Env-2 stacked scores
-6000
-1000
4000
9000
14000
1
5
9
13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53 57 61
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Shared model
(f) Env-3 stacked scores (sampling)
Fig. 7.
We present both quantitative and compared results: Subﬁgure a to Subﬁgure c are the testing environments. Because of the large amount of data, we
present the stacked ﬁgure to better repersent the comparison. From the subﬁgure d to subﬁgure f, it can seen that the reward of the shared model accounts for
a larger proportion in all positive rewards (greater than 0) models in the later stage of training.
TABLE I
RESULTS OF THE CONTRAST EXPERIMENT
Time to meet requirement
Averange scores
Averange of the last ﬁve scores
Test-Env-1
Test-Env-2
Test-Env-3
Test-Env-1
Test-Env-2
Test-Env-3
Test-Env-1
Test-Env-2
Test-Env-3
model 1
1h 32min
>3h
>6 h
1353.36
46.5
-953.56
1421.54
314.948
-914.16
model 2
33min
>3h
>6 h
2631.57
71.91
288.61
3516.34
794.02
-132.07
model 3
37min
>3h
5h 50min
2925.53
166.5
318.04
3097.64
-244.17
1919.12
model 4
4h 41min
2h 30min
5h 38min
1989.51
1557.24
1477.5
2483.18
2471.07
3087.83
Shared model
55min
2h 18min
4h 48min
2725.16
1327.76
1625.61
3497.66
2617.02
3670.92
The background color of the cell reﬂects the performance of the corresponding model. The darker the color, the better the performance.
D. Evaluation for the two transfer learning approaches
In order to verify and compare the two transfer learning
approaches, we conducted a comparative experiment. The
result is present in Fig.8. It can be seen from the ﬁgure
that both transfer learning approaches can effectively improve
the efﬁciency of reinforcement learning. Among them, the
approach of parameter transferring has faster learning speed
and the approach of feature extractor has higher stability.
Blue has a better beginning
Red has better stability
Fig. 8.
Transfer learning approaches comparison
E. Real world experiments
Fig. 9.
Trajectory tracking in the real environment
We also conducted real-world experiments to test the per-
formance of our approach with different sensor noise. We
use Turtlebot 3 platform, which is shown in Fig.9. The
shared model 4G in the cloud was downloaded. Then we
performed transferring reinforcement learning in Env-4 and
got the policy ﬁnally. The Turtlebot navigates automatically
in an indoor ofﬁce environment as shown in Fig.9 under the

policy. The experiment indicates that the policy is reliable
in real environment. The reference [10] also corroborates the
conclusion.
V. CONCLUSION
We presented a learning architecture LFRL for navigation
in cloud robotic systems. The architecture is able to make
navigation-learning robots effectively use prior knowledge
and quickly adapt to new environment. Additionally, we pre-
sented a knowleged fusion algorithm in LFRL and introduced
transfer methods. Our approach is able to fuse models and
asynchronously evolve the shared model. We validated our
architecture and algorithmes in policy-learning experiments
and realsed a website to provide the service.
The architecture has ﬁxed requirements for the dimensions
of input sensor signal and the dimensions of action. We leave
it as future work to make LFRL ﬂexible to deal with different
input and output dimensions. The more ﬂexible LFRL will
offer a wider range of services in cloud robotic systems.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by National Natural Science
Foundation of China No. 61603376; Guangdong-Hongkong
Joint Scheme (Y86400); Shenzhen Science, Technology and
Innovation Commission (SZSTI) Y79804101S awarded to
Dr. Lujia Wang. The work also inspired and supported by
Chengzhong Xu from University of Macau.
