Optimal Decision-Making in Mixed-Agent Partially Observable Stochastic
Environments via Reinforcement Learning
by
Roi Ceren
(Under the Direction of Shannon Quinn)
Abstract
Optimal decision making with limited or no information in stochastic environments where
multiple agents interact is a challenging topic in the realm of artiﬁcial intelligence. Reinforcement
learning (RL) is a popular approach for arriving at optimal strategies by predicating stimuli, such
as the reward for following a strategy, on experience. RL is heavily explored in the single-agent
context, but is a nascent concept in multiagent problems. To this end, I propose several principled
model-free and partially model-based reinforcement learning approaches for several multiagent
settings. In the realm of normative reinforcement learning, I introduce scalable extensions to
Monte Carlo exploring starts for partially observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDP), dubbed
MCES-P, where I expand the theory and algorithm to the multiagent setting. I ﬁrst examine
MCES-P with probably approximately correct (PAC) bounds in the context of multiagent setting,
showing MCESP+PAC holds in the presence of other agents. I then propose a more sample-eﬃcient
methodology for antagonistic settings, MCESIP+PAC. For cooperative settings, I extend MCES-
P to the Multiagent POMDP, dubbed MCESMP+PAC. I then explore the use of reinforcement
learning as a methodology in searching for optima in realistic and latent model environments.
First, I explore a parameterized Q-learning approach in modeling humans learning to reason in an
uncertain, multiagent environment. Next, I propose an implementation of MCES-P, along with
image segmentation, to create an adaptive team-based reinforcement learning technique to positively
identify the presence of phenotypically-expressed water and pathogen stress in crop ﬁelds.
Index words:
human modeling, precision agriculture, reinforcement learning, model-free
learning, probably approximately correct learning
arXiv:1901.01325v1  [cs.LG]  4 Jan 2019

Optimal Decision-Making in Mixed-Agent Partially Observable Stochastic
Environments via Reinforcement Learning
by
Roi Ceren
B.S., The University of Georgia, Athens, GA, 2010
A Dissertation Submitted to the Graduate Faculty
of The University of Georgia in Partial Fulﬁllment
of the
Requirements for the Degree
Doctor of Philosophy
Athens, Georgia
2018

c⃝2018
Roi Ceren
All Rights Reserved

Optimal Decision-Making in Mixed-Agent Partially Observable Stochastic
Environments via Reinforcement Learning
by
Roi Ceren
Approved:
Major Professor:
Shannon Quinn
Committee:
Khaled Rasheed
Glen Rains
Electronic Version Approved:
Suzanne Barbour
Dean of the Graduate School
The University of Georgia
December 2018

Dedicated to the people who drive me to pursue my dreams:
my wife Alex, my son Peter, my mother Esther, and my alter egos Nathan and Robert.
iv
