Search Combinators
Tom Schrijvers · Guido Tack · Pieter Wuille ·
Horst Samulowitz · Peter J. Stuckey
Abstract The ability to model search in a constraint solver can be an essential asset for solv-
ing combinatorial problems. However, existing infrastructure for deﬁning search heuristics
is often inadequate. Either modeling capabilities are extremely limited or users are faced
with a general-purpose programming language whose features are not tailored towards writ-
ing search heuristics. As a result, major improvements in performance may remain unex-
plored.
This article introduces search combinators, a lightweight and solver-independent method
that bridges the gap between a conceptually simple modeling language for search (high-
level, functional and naturally compositional) and an efﬁcient implementation (low-level,
imperative and highly non-modular). By allowing the user to deﬁne application-tailored
search strategies from a small set of primitives, search combinators effectively provide a
rich domain-speciﬁc language (DSL) for modeling search to the user. Remarkably, this DSL
comes at a low implementation cost to the developer of a constraint solver.
The article discusses two modular implementation approaches and shows, by empirical
evaluation, that search combinators can be implemented without overhead compared to a
native, direct implementation in a constraint solver.
Tom Schrijvers · Pieter Wuille
Universiteit Gent, Belgium

Guido Tack
Monash University, Victoria, Australia

Pieter Wuille
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium

Horst Samulowitz
IBM Research, New York, USA

Peter J. Stuckey
National ICT Australia (NICTA) and University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia

arXiv:1203.1095v1  [cs.AI]  6 Mar 2012

2
Tom Schrijvers et al.
1 Introduction
Search heuristics often make all the difference between effectively solving a combinato-
rial problem and utter failure. Heuristics make a search algorithm efﬁcient for a variety of
reasons, e.g., incorporation of domain knowledge, or randomization to avoid heavy-tailed
runtimes. Hence, the ability to swiftly design search heuristics that are tailored towards a
problem domain is essential for performance. This article introduces search combinators, a
versatile, modular, and efﬁciently implementable language for expressing search heuristics.
1.1 Status Quo
In CP, much attention has been devoted to facilitating the modeling of combinatorial prob-
lems. A range of high-level modeling languages, such as Zinc [13], OPL [29] or Comet [27],
enable quick development and exploration of problem models. However, we see very little
support on the side of formulating accompanying search heuristics. Most languages and
systems, e.g. MiniZinc [14], Comet [27], Gecode [23], or ECLiPSe [7] provide a small
set of predeﬁned heuristics “off the shelf”. Some systems also support user-deﬁned search
based on a general-purpose programming language (e.g., all of the above systems except
MiniZinc). The former is clearly too conﬁning, while the latter leaves to be desired in terms
of productivity, since implementing a search heuristic quickly becomes a non-negligible ef-
fort. This also explains why the set of predeﬁned heuristics is typically small: it takes a lot of
time for CP system developers to implement heuristics, too – time they would much rather
spend otherwise improving their system.
1.2 Contributions
In this article we show how to resolve this stand-off between solver developers and users,
by introducing a domain-speciﬁc modular search language based on combinators, as well as
a modular, extensible implementation architecture.
For the user, we provide a modeling language for expressing complex search heuristics
based on an (extensible) set of primitive combinators. Even if the users are only pro-
vided with a small set of combinators, they can already express a vast range of combi-
nations. Moreover, using combinators to program application-tailored search is vastly
more productive than resorting to a general-purpose language.
For the system developer, we show how to design and implement modular combinators.
The modularity of the language thus carries over directly to modularity of the imple-
mentation. Developers do not have to cater explicitly for all possible combinator com-
binations. Small implementation efforts result in providing the user with a lot of expres-
sive power. Moreover, the cost of adding one more combinator is small, yet the return in
terms of additional expressiveness can be quite large.
The technical challenge is to bridge the gap between a conceptually simple search lan-
guage and an efﬁcient implementation, which is typically low-level, imperative and highly
non-modular. This is where existing approaches fail; they restrict the expressiveness of their
search speciﬁcation language to face up to implementation limitations, or they raise errors
when the user strays out of the implemented subset.

Search Combinators
3
The contribution is therefore the novel design of an expressive, high-level, composi-
tional search language with an equally modular, extensible, and efﬁcient implementation
architecture.
1.3 Approach
We overcome the modularity challenge by implementing the primitives of our search lan-
guage as mixin components [4]. As in Aspect-Oriented Programming [10], mixin compo-
nents neatly encapsulate the cross-cutting behavior of primitive search concepts, which are
highly entangled in conventional approaches. Cross-cutting means that a mixin component
can interfere with the behavior of its sub-components (in this case, sub-searches). The com-
bination of encapsulation and cross-cutting behavior is essential for systematic reuse of
search combinators. Without this degree of modularity, minor modiﬁcations require rewrit-
ing from scratch.
An added advantage of mixin components is extensibility. We can add new features to
the language by adding more mixin components. The cost of adding such a new component
is small, because it does not require changes to the existing ones. Moreover, experimental
evaluation bears out that this modular approach has no signiﬁcant overhead compared to the
traditional monolithic approach. Finally, our approach is solver-independent and therefore
makes search combinators a potential standard for designing search.
1.4 Plan of the Article
The rest of the article is structured as follows. The next section deﬁnes the high-level search
language in terms of basic heuristics and combinators. Sect. 3 shows how the modular lan-
guage is mapped to a modular design of the combinator implementations. Sect. 4 presents
two concrete implementation approaches for combinators and gives an overview of how we
integrate search combinators into the MiniZinc toolchain. Sect. 5 veriﬁes that combinators
can be implemented with low overhead. Finally, Sect. 6 discusses related approaches, and
Sect. 7 concludes the article.
1.5 Note to Reviewers
This article is an extended version of a paper [21] that appeared in the proceedings of the
17th International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming (CP)
2011. That paper further developed the ideas laid out in our earlier paper [19], which was
presented at ModRef 2010.
Compared to the CP’11 conference version, this article features a completely rewrit-
ten and more detailed introduction of the combinator language, both from the high-level
(Sect. 2) and the implementation-level (Sect. 3) point of view. We have completed the inte-
gration into MiniZinc and present a full toolchain in Sect. 4.3. In addition, the discussion of
related work (Sect. 6) has been extended with much more detail.

4
Tom Schrijvers et al.
s
::=
prune
|
ifthenelse(c,s1,s2)
prunes the node
perform s1 until c is false, then perform s2
|
base_search(vars,var-select,domain-split)
|
and([s1,s2,...,sn])
label
perform s1, on success s2 otherwise fail, . . .
|
let(v,e,s)
|
or([s1,s2,...,sn])
introduce new variable v with
perform s1, on termination start s2, . . .
initial value e, then perform s
|
portfolio([s1,s2,...,sn])
|
assign(v,e)
perform s1, if not exhaustive start s2, . . .
assign e to variable v and succeed
|
restart(c,s)
|
post(c,s)
restart s as long as c holds
post constraint c at every node during s
Fig. 1: Catalog of primitive search heuristics and combinators
2 High-Level Search Language
This section introduces the syntax of our high-level search language and illustrates its ex-
pressive power and modularity by means of examples. The rest of the article then presents
an architecture that maps the modularity of the language down to the implementation level.
The search language is used to deﬁne a search heuristic, which a search engine applies
to each node of the search tree. For each node, the heuristic determines whether to continue
search by creating child nodes, or to prune the tree at that node. The queuing strategy, i.e., the
strategy by which new nodes are selected for further search (such as depth-ﬁrst traversal), is
determined separately by the search engine, it is thus orthogonal to the search language. The
search language features a number of primitives, listed in the catalog of Fig. 1. These are
the building blocks in terms of which more complex heuristics can be deﬁned, and they can
be grouped into basic heuristics (base_search and prune), combinators (ifthenelse, and, or,
portfolio, and restart), and state management (let, assign, post). This section introduces the
three groups of primitives in turn.
We emphasize that this catalog is open-ended; we will see that the language implemen-
tation explicitly supports adding new primitives.
The concrete syntax we chose for presentation uses simple nested terms, which makes
it compatible with the annotation language of MiniZinc [14]. Sect. 4.3 discusses our imple-
mentation of MiniZinc with combinator support. However, other concrete syntax forms are
easily supported (e.g., we support C++ and Haskell).
2.1 Basic Heuristics
Let us ﬁrst discuss the two basic primitives, base_search and prune.
base_search. The most widely used method for specifying a basic heuristic for a constraint
problem is to deﬁne it in terms of a variable selection strategy which picks the next variable
to constrain, and a domain splitting strategy which splits the set of possible values of the
selected variable into two (or more) disjoint sets. Common variable selection strategies are:
– ﬁrstfail: select the variable with the smallest current domain,
– smallest: select the variable which can take the smallest possible value,
– domwdeg [2]: select the variable with smallest ratio of size of current domain and num-
ber of failures the variable has been involved in, and
– impact [18]: select the variable that will (based on past experience) reduce the raw search
space of the problem the most.

Search Combinators
5
Common domain splitting strategies are:
– min: set the variable to its minimum value or greater than its minimum,
– max: set the variable to its maximum value or less than its maximum,
– median: set the variable to its median value, or not equal to this value, and
– split: constrain the variable to the lower half of its range of possible values, or its upper
half.
The CP community has spent a considerable amount of work on deﬁning and exploring
the above and many other variable selection and domain splitting heuristics. The provision
of a ﬂexible language for deﬁning new basic searches is an interesting problem in its own
right, but in this article we concentrate on search combinators that combine and modify
basic searches.
To this end, our search language provides the primitive base_search(vars, var-select,
domain-split), which speciﬁes a systematic search. If any of the variables vars are still not
ﬁxed at the current node, it creates child nodes according to var-select and domain-split as
variable selection and domain splitting strategies respectively.
Note that base_search is a CP-speciﬁc primitive; other kinds of solvers provide their
own search primitives. The rest of the search language is essentially solver-independent.
While the solver provides few basic heuristics, the search language adds great expressive
power by allowing these to be combined arbitrarily using combinators.
prune. The second basic primitive, prune, simply cuts the search tree below the current
node. Obviously, this primitive is useless on its own, but we will see shortly how prune can
be used together with combinators.
2.2 Combinators
The expressive power of the search language relies on combinators, which combine search
heuristics (which can be basic or themselves constructed using combinators) into more com-
plex heuristics.
and/or. Probably the most widely used combination of heuristics is sequential composition.
For instance, it is often useful to ﬁrst label one set of problem variables before starting to
label a second set. The following heuristic uses the and combinator to ﬁrst label all the xs
variables using a ﬁrst-fail strategy, followed by the ys variables with a different strategy:
and([base_search(xs,ﬁrstfail,min),
base_search(ys,smallest,max)])
As you can see in Fig. 1, the and combinator accepts a list of searches s1,...,sn, and
performs their and-sequential composition. And-sequential means, intuitively, that solutions
are found by performing all the sub-searches sequentially down one branch of the search
tree, as illustrated in Fig. 2.1.
The dual combinator, or([s1,...,sn]), performs a disjunctive combination of its sub-
searches – a solution is found using any of the sub-searches (Fig. 2.2), trying them in the
given order.

6
Tom Schrijvers et al.
s1
s2
and([s1, s2])
or([s1, s2])
s1
s2
if(c, s1, s2)
¬c
s2
s1
c
c
c
s1
s1
s1
s1
s2
portfolio([s1, s2, s3])
s
s
s
s
c
c
c
c
restart(c, s)
s
s
s
c
c
c
¬c
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
Fig. 2: Primitive combinators
Statistics and ifthenelse. The ifthenelse combinator is centered around a conditional ex-
pression c. As long as c is true for the current node, the sub-search s1 is used. Once c is false,
s2 is used for the complete subtree below the current node (see Fig. 2.3).
We do not specify the expression language for conditions in detail, we simply assume
that it comprises the typical arithmetic and comparison operators and literals that require
no further explanation. It is notable though that the language can refer to the constraint
variables and parameters of the underlying model. Additionally, a condition may refer to one
or more statistics variables. Such statistics are collected for the duration of a subsearch until
the condition is met. For instance ifthenelse(depth < 10,s1,s2) maintains the search depth
statistic during subsearch s1. At depth 10, the ifthenelse combinator switches to subsearch
s2.
We distinguish two forms of statistics: Local statistics such as depth and discrepancies
express properties of individual nodes. Global statistics such as number of explored nodes,
encountered failures, solution, and time are computed for entire search trees.
It is worthwhile to mention that developers (and advanced users) can also deﬁne their
own statistics, just like combinators, to complement any predeﬁned ones. In fact, Sect. 3 will
show that statistics can be implemented as a subtype of combinators that can be queried for
the statistic’s value.
Abstraction. Our search language draws its expressive power from the combination of
primitive heuristics using combinators. An important aspect of the search language is ab-
straction: the ability to create new combinators by effectively deﬁning macros in terms of
existing combinators.
For example, we can deﬁne the limiting combinator limit(c,s) to perform s while condi-
tion c is satisﬁed, and otherwise cut the search tree using prune:

Search Combinators
7
limit(c,s) ≡ifthenelse(c,s,prune)
The well-known once(s) combinator is a special case of the limiting combinator where the
number of solutions is less than one. This is simply achieved by maintaining and accessing
the solutions statistic:
once(s) ≡limit(solutions < 1,s)
Exhaustiveness and portfolio/restart. The behavior of the ﬁnal two combinators, portfo-
lio and restart, depends on whether their sub-search was exhaustive. Exhaustiveness simply
means that the search has explored the entire subtree without ever invoking the prune prim-
itive.
The portfolio([s1,...,sn]) combinator performs s1 until it has explored the whole subtree.
If s1 was exhaustive, i.e., if it did not call prune during the exploration of the subtree, the
search is ﬁnished. Otherwise, it continues with portfolio([s2,...,sn]). This is illustrated in
Fig. 2.4, where the subtree of s1 represents a non-exhaustive search, s2 is exhaustive and
therefore s3 is never invoked.
An example for the use of portfolio is the hotstart(c,s1,c2) combinator. It performs
search heuristic s1 while condition c holds to initialize global parameters for a second search
s2. This heuristic can for example be used to initialize the widely applied Impact heuristic
[18]. Note that we assume here that the parameters to be initialized are maintained by the
underlying solver, so we omit an explicit reference to them.
hotstart(c,s1,s2) ≡portfolio([limit(c,s1),s2])
The restart(c,s) combinator repeatedly runs s in full. If s was not exhaustive, it is
restarted, until condition c no longer holds. Fig. 2.5 shows the two cases, on the left ter-
minating with an exhaustive search s, on the right terminating because c is no longer true.
The following implements random restarts, where search is stopped after 1000 failures
and restarted with a random strategy:
restart(true,limit(failures < 1000,base_search(xs,randomvar,randomval)))
Clearly, this strategy has a ﬂaw: If it takes more than 1000 failures to ﬁnd the solution,
the search will never ﬁnish. We will shortly see how to ﬁx this by introducing user-deﬁned
search variables.
The prune primitive is the only source of non-exhaustiveness. Combinators propagate
exhaustiveness in the obvious way:
– and([s1,...,sn]) is exhaustive if all si are
– or([s1,...,sn]) is exhaustive if all si are
– portfolio([s1,...,sn]) is exhaustive if one si is
– restart(c,s) is exhaustive if the last iteration is exhaustive
– ifthenelse(c,s1,s2) is exhaustive if s1 and s2 are
2.3 State Access and Manipulation
The remaining three primitives, let, assign, and post, are used to access and manipulate the
state of the search:

8
Tom Schrijvers et al.
– let(v,e,s) introduces a new search variable v with initial value of the expression e and
visible in the search s, then continues with s. Note that search variables are distinct from
the decision variables of the model.
– assign(v,e): assigns the value of the expression e to search variable v and succeeds.
– post(c,s): provides access to the underlying constraint solver, posting a constraint c at
every node during s. If s is omitted, it posts the constraint and immediately succeeds.
These primitives add a great deal of expressivity to the language, as the following ex-
amples demonstrate.
Random restarts: Let us reconsider the example using random restarts from the previous
section, which suffered from incompleteness because it only ever explored 1000 failures. A
standard way to make this strategy complete is to increase the limit geometrically with each
iteration:
geom_restart(s) ≡let(maxfails,100,
restart(true,portfolio([limit(failures < maxfails,s),
assign(maxfails,maxfails∗1.5),
prune]))
The search initializes the search variable maxfails to 100, and then calls search s with
maxfails as the limit. If the search is exhaustive, both the portfolio and the restart combi-
nators are ﬁnished. If the search is not exhaustive, the limit is multiplied by 1.5, and the
search starts over. Note that assign succeeds, so we need to call prune afterwards in order
to propagate the non-exhaustiveness of s to the restart combinator.
Branch-and-bound: A slightly more advanced example is the branch-and-bound optimiza-
tion strategy:
bab(obj,s) ≡let(best,∞, post(obj < best,and([s,assign(best,obj)])))
It introduces a variable best that initially takes value ∞(for minimization). In every node, it
posts a constraint to bound the objective variable by best. Whenever a new solution is found,
the bound is updated accordingly using assign.
The bab example demonstrates how search variables (like best) and model variables
(like obj) can be mixed in expressions. This makes it possible to remember the state of the
search between invocations of a heuristic. All of the following combinators make use of this
feature.
Restarting branch-and-bound: This is a twist on regular branch-and-bound that restarts
whenever a solution is found.
restart_bab(obj,s) ≡let(best,∞, restart(true, and([post(obj < best),once(s),
assign(best,obj)])))
Radiotherapy treatment planning: The following search heuristic can be used to solve ra-
diotherapy treatment planning problems [1]. The heuristic minimizes a variable k using
branch-and-bound (bab), ﬁrst searching the variables N, and then verifying the solution
by partitioning the problem along the rowi variables for each row i one at a time (expressed
as a MiniZinc array comprehension). Failure on one row must be caused by the search on
the variables in N, and consequently search never backtracks into other rows.

Search Combinators
9
This behavior is similar to the once combinator deﬁned above. However, when a single
solution is found, the search should be considered exhaustive. We therefore need an exhaus-
tive variant of once, which can be implemented by replacing prune with post(false):
exh_once(s) ≡ifthenelse(solutions < 1,s,post(false))
This allows us to express the entire search strategy for radiotherapy treatment planning:
bab(k, and([base_search(N,...)]++
[exh_once(base_search(rowi,...)) | i in 1..n]))
For: The for loop construct (v ∈[l,u]) can be deﬁned as:
for(v,l,u,s) ≡let(v,l,restart(v ≤u,
portfolio([s,and([assign(v,v+1),prune])])))
It simply runs u −l + 1 times the search s, which of course is only sensible if s makes
use of side effects or the loop variable v. As in the geom_restart combinator above, prune
propagates the non-exhaustiveness of s to the restart combinator.
Limited discrepancy search [9] with an upper limit of l discrepancies for an underlying
search s.
lds(l,s) ≡for(n, 0, l, limit(discrepancies ≤n,s))
The for construct iterates the maximum number of discrepancies n from 0 to l, while limit
executes s as long as the number of discrepancies is smaller than n. The search makes use
of the discrepancies statistic that is maintained by the search infrastructure. The original
LDS [9] visits the nodes in a speciﬁc order. The search described here visits the same nodes
in the same order of discrepancies, but possibly in a different individual order – as this is
determined by the global queuing strategy.
The following is a combination of branch-and-bound and limited discrepancy search
for solving job shop scheduling problems, as described in [9]. The heuristic searches the
Boolean variables prec, which determine the order of all pairs of tasks on the same machine.
As the order completely determines the schedule, we then ﬁx the start times using exh_once.
bab(makespan, lds(∞,and([base_search(prec,...),
exh_once(base_search(start,...))])))
Fully expanded, this heuristic consists of 17 combinators and is 11 combinators deep.
Iterative deepening [11] for an underlying search s is a particular instance of the more
general pattern of restarting with an updated bound, which we have already seen in the
geom_restart example. Here, we generalize this idea:
id(s) ≡ir(depth,0,+,1,∞,s)
ir(p,l,⊕,i,u,s) ≡let(n,l, restart(n ≤u,and([assign(n,n⊕i),
limit(p ≤n,s)])))
With let, bound n is initialized to l. Search s is pruned when statistic p exceeds n, but itera-
tively restarted by restart with n updated to n⊕i. The repetition stops when n exceeds u or
when s has been fully explored. The bound increases geometrically, if we supply ∗for ⊕, as
in the restart_ﬂip heuristic:
restart_ﬂip(p,l,i,u,s1,s2) ≡let(ﬂip,1,ir(p,l,∗,i,u,and([assign(ﬂip,1−ﬂip),
ifthenelse(ﬂip = 1,s1,s2)])))

10
Tom Schrijvers et al.
The restart_ﬂip search alternates between two search heuristics s1 and s2. Using this as its
default strategy in the free search category, the lazy clause generation solver Chuffed scored
most points in the 2010 and 2011 MiniZinc Challenges.1
Probe search: Try out two searches s1 and s2 to a limited extent deﬁned by condition c.
Then, for the remainder, use the search that resulted in the best solution so far.
probe(c,obj,s1,s2) ≡let(best1,∞, let(best2,∞,
portfolio([ limit(c,and([s1,assign(best1,obj)]))
limit(c,and([s2,assign(best2,obj)]))
ifthenelse(best1 ≤best2,s1,s2)])))
Dichotomic search [24] solves an optimization problem by repeatedly partitioning the in-
terval in which the possible optimal solution can lie. It can be implemented by restarting as
long the lower bound has not met the upper bound (line 2), computing the middle (line 3),
and then using an or combinator to try the lower half (line 5). If it succeeds, obj −1 is the
new upper bound, otherwise, the lower bound is increased (line 6).
dicho(s,obj,lb,ub) ≡let(l,lb,let(u,ub,
restart(l < u,
let(h,l +⌈(u−l)/2⌉,
once(or([
and([post(l ≤obj ≤h),s,assign(u,obj−1)]),
and([assign(l,h+1),prune])]))
))))
3 Modular Combinator Design
The previous section caters for the user’s needs, presenting a high-level modular syntax
for our combinator-based search language. To cater for the system developer’s needs, this
section goes beyond modularity of syntax, introducing modularity of design.
Modularity of design is the one property that makes our approach practical. Each combina-
tor corresponds to a separate module that has a meaning and an implementation independent
of the other combinators. This enables us to actually realize the search speciﬁcations deﬁned
by modular syntax.
Modularity of design also enables growing a system from a small set of combinators
(e.g., those listed in Fig. 1), gradually adding more as the need arises. Advanced users can
complement the system’s generic combinators with a few application-speciﬁc ones.
Solver independence is another notable property of our approach. While a few combinators
access solver-speciﬁc functionality (e.g., base_search and post), the approach as such and
most combinators listed in Fig. 1 are in fact generic (solver- and even CP-independent); their
design and implementation is reusable.
The solver-independence of our approach is reﬂected in the minimal interface that solvers
must implement. This interface consists of an abstract type State which represents a state
1 http://www.g12.csse.unimelb.edu.au/minizinc/challenge2011/

Search Combinators
11
combinator 
1
combinator
2
combinator 
n-1
combinator
n
exit(p,status)
enter(p)
for every child c
init(p,c)
start(r)
Fig. 3: The modular message protocol
of the solver (e.g., the variable domains and accumulated constraint propagators) which sup-
ports copying. Truly no more is needed for the approach or all of the primitive combinators
in Fig. 1, except for base_search and post which require CP-aware operations for querying
variable domains, solver status and posting constraints, and possibly interacting with statis-
tics maintained by the solver. Note that there need not be a 1-to-1 correspondence between
an implementation of the abstract State type and the solver’s actual state representation;
e.g., for solvers based on trailing, recomputation techniques [15] can be used. We have im-
plementations of the interface based on both copying and trailing.
In the following we explain our design in detail by means of code implementations of most
of the primitive combinators we have covered in the previous section.
3.1 The Message Protocol
To obtain a modular design of search combinators we step away from the idea that the be-
havior of a search combinator, like the and combinator, forms an indivisible whole; this
leaves no room for interaction. The key insight here is that we must identify ﬁner-grained
steps, deﬁning how different combinators interact at each node in the search tree. Interleav-
ing these ﬁner-grained steps of different combinators in an appropriate manner yields the
composite behavior of the overall search heuristic, where each combinator is able to cross-
cut the others’ behavior.
Considering the diversity of combinators and the fact that not all units of behavior are ex-
plicitly present in all of them, designing this protocol of interaction is non-trivial. It requires
studying the intended behavior and interaction of combinators to isolate the ﬁne-grained
units of behavior and the manner of interaction. The contribution of this section is an ele-
gant and conceptually uniform design that is powerful enough to express all the combinators
presented in this article.
We present this design in the form of a message protocol. The protocol speciﬁes a set
of messages (i.e., an interface with one procedure for each ﬁne-grained step) that have to be

12
Tom Schrijvers et al.
implemented by all combinators. In pseudo-code, this protocol for combinators consists of
four different messages:
protocol combinator
start(rootNode);
enter(currentNode);
exit(currentNode,status);
init(parentNode,childNode);
All of the message signatures specify one or two search tree nodes as parameters. Each
such node keeps track of a solver State and the information associated by combinators to
that State. We observe three different access patterns of nodes:
1. In keeping with the solver independence stipulated above, we will see that most combi-
nators only query and update their associated information and do not access the under-
lying solver State at all.
2. Restarting-based combinators, like restart and portfolio, copy nodes. This means
copying the underlying solver State and all associated information.
3. Finally, selected solver-speciﬁc combinators like base_search do perform solver-
speciﬁc operations on the underlying State, like querying variable domains and post-
ing constraints.
In addition to the message signatures, the protocol also stipulates in what order the
messages are sent among the combinators (see Fig. 3). While in general a combinator com-
position is tree-shaped, the processing of any single search tree node p only involves a stack
of combinators. For example, given or([and([s1,s2]),and([s3,s4])]), either s1,s2 or s3,s4 are
active for p. The picture shows this stack of active combinators on the left. Every combina-
tor in the stack has both a super-combinator above and a sub-combinator below, except for
the top and the bottom combinators. The bottom is always a basic heuristic (base_search,
prune, assign, or post). The important aspect to take away from the picture is the direction
of the four different messages, either top-down or bottom-up.
3.2 Basic Setup
Before we delve into the interesting search combinators, we ﬁrst present an example imple-
mentation of the basic setup consisting of a base search (base_search) and a search engine
(dfs). This allows us to express overall search speciﬁcations of the form:
dfs(base_search(vars,var-select,domain-split)).
Base Search. We do not provide full details on a base_search combinator, as it is not the
focus of this article. However, we will point out the aspects relevant to our protocol.
In the enter message, the node’s solver state is propagated. Subsequently, the condi-
tion isLeaf(c,vars) checks whether the solver state is unsatisﬁable or there are no more
variables to assign. If either is the case, the exit status (respectively failure or success)
is sent to the parent combinator. For now, the parent combinator is just the search en-
gine, but later we will see how how other combinators can be inserted between the search
engine and the base search.
If neither is the case, the search branches depending on the variable selection and domain
splitting strategies. This involves creating a child node for each branch, determining the
variable and value for that child and posting the assignment to the child’s state. Then, the

Search Combinators
13
top combinator (i.e., the engine) is asked to initialize the child node. Finally the child node
is pushed onto the search queue.
combinator base_search(vars,var-select,domain-select)
enter(c):
c.propagate
if isLeaf(c,vars)
parent.exit(leafstatus(c))
pos = ...
// from vars based on var-select
for each child: // based on domain-select
val = ...
// from values of var based on domain-select
child.post(vars[pos]=val)
top.init(c,child)
queue.push(child)
Note that, as the base_search combinator is a base combinator, its exit message is im-
material (there is no child heuristic of base_search that could ever call it). The start and
init messages are empty. Many variants on and generalizations of the above implementa-
tion are possible.
Depth-ﬁrst search engine. The engine dfs serves as a pseudo-combinator at the top of a
combinator expression heuristic and serves as the heuristic’s immediate parent as
well. It maintains the queue of nodes, a stack in this case. The search starts from a given
root node by starting the heuristic with that node and then entering it. Each time
a node has been processed, new nodes may have been pushed onto the queue. These are
popped and entered successively.
combinator dfs(heuristic)
start(root):
top=this
heuristic.parent=this
queue=new stack()
heuristic.start(root)
heuristic.enter(root)
while not queue.empty
heuristic.enter(queue.pop())
init(n,c):
heuristic.init(n,c)
The engine’s exit message is empty, the enter message is never called and the init
message delegates initialization to the heuristic.
Other engines may be formulated with different queuing strategies.
3.3 Combinator Composition
The idea of search combinators is to augment a base_search. We illustrate this with a very
simple print combinator that prints out every solution as it is found. For simplicity we assume

14
Tom Schrijvers et al.
a solution is just a set of constraint variables vars that is supplied as a parameter. Hence, we
obtain the basic search setup with solution printing with:
dfs(print(vars,base_search(vars,strategy)))
Print. The print combinator is parametrized by a set of variables vars and a search combi-
nator child. Implicitly, in a composition, that child’s parent is set to the print instance.
The same holds for all following search combinators with one or more children.
The only message of interest for print is exit. When the exit status is success, the
combinator prints the variables and propagates the message to its parent.
combinator
print (vars,child)
exit(c,status):
if status==success
print c.vars
parent.exit(c,status)
The other messages are omitted. Their behavior is default: they all propagate to the child.
The same holds for the omitted messages of following unary combinators.
3.4 Binary Combinators
Binary combinators are one step up from unary ones. They combine two complete search
heuristics into a composite one. The most basic binary combinator is the binary version of
and. For instance, if we need to label two sets of variables, we can do so with
and(base_search(vars1,...),base_search(vars2,...))
The principle shown here easily generalizes to n-ary combinators.
And. The (binary) and combinator has two children, left and right. In order to keep
track of what child combinator is handling a particular node, the and combinator associates
with every node an inLeft Boolean variable. The local keyword indicates that every
node has its own instance of that variable. We denote the instance of the inLeft variable
associated with node c as c.inLeft.
When entering a node, it is delegated to the left or right combinator based on
inLeft. At the start, the root node is delegated to the left combinator, so its inLeft
variable is set to true. The value of inLeft is inherited in init from the current node
to its children. Upon a successful exit for left, the leaf node becomes the root of a new
subtree that is further handled by the right combinator.
combinator and(left,right) {
local bool inLeft
start(root):
root.inLeft=true
left.start(root)
enter(c):
if c.inLeft

Search Combinators
15
left.enter(c)
else
right.enter(c)
exit(c,status):
if c.inLeft and status==success
c.inLeft=false
right.start(c)
right.enter(c)
else
parent.exit(c,status)
init(p,c):
c.inLeft=p.inLeft
if c.inLeft
left.init(p,c)
else
right.init(p,c)
Note that the right combinator is started repeatedly, once for each leaf node of
left. In general, each combinator can be managing multiple subtrees of the search.
Multiple and combinators may be handling a search node at the same time. For instance
in a heuristic of the form and(and(s1,s2),s3), two and combinators are active at the same
time. The scoping of the associated variables works in such a way that each and has its own
instance of inLeft for each node.
3.5 Reusable Combinators
Now we show how a monolithic combinator can be decomposed into more primitive com-
binators that can be reused for other purposes.
Monolithic Combinator. We start from the following limitsolutions combinator that prunes
the search after cutoff solutions have been found. One new concept is the notion of a
global variable associated with a (sub)tree: all descendants of root (implicitly) share the
same instance of count. Hence, any update of count by one node is seen by all other
nodes in the (sub)tree.
combinator limitsolutions(cutoff,child)
global int count
start(root):
root.count = 0
child.start(root)
enter(c):
if count == cutoff
parent.exit(abort)
else

16
Tom Schrijvers et al.
if
solutionslimit
s
prune
cond
left
right
child
Fig. 4: The decomposition of the limitsolutions combinator
child.enter(c)
exit(c,status):
if status==success
c.count++
parent.exit(c,status)
Decomposition. We can split up the above limitsolutions combinator into three different
combinators: ifthenelse, solutionslimit and prune. They form a directed acyclic graph as
depicted in Figure 4 or denoted as an expression with sharing below:
limitsolutions(cutoff,s) = ifthenelse(s’,s’,prune)
where
s’ = solutionslimit(cutoff,s)
Here, solutionslimit monitors the number of solutions produced by s. If this number reaches
the cutoff, then ifthenelse switches to prune, which discards the remaining nodes in the
tree.
We now elaborate on each of these combinators individually.
Prune. The prune combinator is a minimal base combinator that immediately exits every
node with the abort status. The start message is empty, and the exit and init mes-
sages are never called.
combinator
prune ()
enter(c):
parent.exit(c,abort)
Solutions Count. The solutionslimit combinator below illustrates how statistics gathering
combinators are implemented. It implements a sub-protocol of combinator with an extra
message eval that queries the current Boolean value:
protocol condition extends combinator
eval(currentNode);

Search Combinators
17
In the case of solutionslimit, the returned Boolean value is whether a particular number
(cutoff) of solutions has not yet been reached by its child. For this purpose it maintains
the number of solutions found so far in a global variable.
condition solutionslimit(cutoff,child)
global int count
start(root):
root.count = 0
child.start(root)
exit(c,status):
if status==success
c.count++
parent.exit(c,status)
eval(c):
return c.count <= cutoff
Ifthenelse. The ifthenelse combinator is parametrized by one condition and two child
combinators. It associates with every node whether it is handled by the left child (inLeft);
this is the case for the root node. Whenever a node c is entered that is inLeft, the condi-
tion is checked. If the condition fails, c becomes the root of a subtree that is further handled
by right.
combinator ifthenelse(cond,left,right)
local bool inLeft
start(root):
root.inLeft=true
left.start(root)
enter(c):
if not c.inLeft
right.enter(c)
else if cond.eval()
left.enter(c)
else
c.inLeft=false
right.start(c)
right.enter(c)
init(p,c):
c.inLeft=p.inLeft
if c.inLeft
left.init(p,c)
else
right.init(p,c)

18
Tom Schrijvers et al.
3.6 Restarting Combinators
Restarting the search is common to several combinators; the mechanic is illustrated below
in the portfolio combinator.
Portfolio. Like the ifthenelse and and combinators, the portfolio combinator switches be-
tween child combinators. Only the logic for switching is more complex. In order to simplify
presentation, we again restrict the code to the binary case; the n-ary variant is a straightfor-
ward generalization.
Firstly, portfolio keeps track of a global “reference” count ref of unprocessed nodes
to be handled by the s1 child. This count is incremented whenever a new child node is
initialized, and decremented whenever a node is entered for actual processing.
When the last node of s1 exits (witnessed by the reference count being 0) and the search
was not exhaustive, the search starts over from the root, but now with the s2 child. In order
to decide about exhaustiveness, the portfolio combinator registers whether any exit with
status abort occurred. At the same time it converts an abort inside s1 into a failure,
because the s2 combinator may still perform an exhaustive search and avoid overall non-
exhaustiveness. In order to restart from the root, a copy of the root node is made at the
start.
Upon a successful exit, the leaf node becomes the root of a new subtree that is further
handled by the s2 combinator.
combinator portfolio(s1,s2)
global node copy
global bool inLeft
global bool exhaustive
global int ref
start(root):
copy=root.copy()
root.inLeft=true
root.exhaustive=true
root.ref=1
s1.start(root)
enter(c):
if c.inLeft
ref--
s1.enter(c)
else
s2.enter(c)
exit(c,status):
if not c.inLeft
parent.exit(c,status)
else
if status==abort
status=failure
c.exhaustive=false

Search Combinators
19
if c.ref==0
if c.exhaustive
parent.exit(c,status)
else
copy.inLeft=false
s2.start(copy)
self.enter(copy)
else
parent.exit(c,status)
init(p,c):
ref++;
if c.inLeft
s1.init(p,c)
else
s2.init(p,c)
4 Modular Combinator Implementation
The message-based combinator approach lends itself well to different implementation strate-
gies. In the following we brieﬂy discuss two diametrically opposed approaches we have
explored: dynamic composition (interpretation) and static composition (compilation). Us-
ing these different approaches, combinators can be adapted to the implementation choices
of existing solvers. Sect. 5 shows that both implementation approaches have competitive
performance.
4.1 Dynamic Composition
To support dynamic composition, we have implemented our combinators as C++ classes
whose objects can be allocated and composed into a search speciﬁcation at runtime. The
protocol events correspond to virtual method calls between these objects. For the delegation
mechanism from one object to another, we explicitly encode a form of dynamic inheritance
called open recursion or mixin inheritance [4]. In contrast to the OOP inheritance built into
C++ and Java, this mixin inheritance provides two essential abilities: 1) to determine the in-
heritance graph at runtime and 2) to use multiple copies of the same combinator class at
different points in the inheritance graph. In contrast, C++’s built-in static inheritance provides
neither.
The C++ library currently builds on top of the Gecode constraint solver [23]. However, the
solver is accessed through a layer of abstraction that is easily adapted to other solvers (e.g.,
we have a prototype interface to the Gurobi MIP solver). The complete library weighs in at
around 2500 lines of code, which is even less than Gecode’s native search and branching
components.

20
Tom Schrijvers et al.
4.2 Static Composition
In a second approach, also on top of Gecode, we statically compile a search speciﬁcation to
a tight C++ loop. Again, every combinator is a separate module independent of other com-
binator modules. A combinator module now does not directly implement the combinator’s
behavior. Instead it implements a code generator (in Haskell), which in turn produces the
C++ code with the expected behavior.
Hence, our search language compiler parses a search speciﬁcation, and composes (in
mixin-style) the corresponding code generators. Then it runs the composite code generator
according to the message protocol. The code generators produce appropriate C++ code frag-
ments for the different messages, which are combined according to the protocol into the
monolithic C++ loop. This C++ code is further post-processed by the C++ compiler to yield a
highly optimized executable.
As for dynamic composition, the mixin approach is crucial, allowing us to add more
combinators without touching the existing ones. At the same time we obtain with the press
of a button several 1000 lines of custom low-level code for the composition of just a few
combinators. In contrast, the development cost of hand crafted code is prohibitive.
A compromise between the above two approaches, itself static, is to employ the built-in
mixin mechanism (also called traits) available in object-oriented languages such as Scala [6]
to compose combinators. A dynamic alternative is to generate the combinator implemen-
tations using dynamic compilation techniques, for instance using the LLVM (Low Level
Virtual Machine) framework. These options remain to be explored.
4.3 MiniZinc with Combinators
As a proof of concept and platform for experiments, we have integrated search combinators
into a complete MiniZinc toolchain, comprising a pre-compiler and a FlatZinc interpreter.
The pre-compiler is necessary to support arbitrary expressions in annotations, such as
the condition expressions for an ifthenelse. The expressions are translated into standard
MiniZinc annotations that are understood by the FlatZinc interpreter. User-deﬁned variables
have type-inst svar int and can be introduced using the standard MiniZinc let construct.
The annotation construct of MiniZinc has been extended to support simple function
deﬁnitions. The following example shows a MiniZinc version of the restart-based branch-
and-bound heuristic from Sect. 2.3:
annotation limit(var bool: c, ann: s) =
ifthenelse(c,s,prune);
annotation once(ann: s) = limit(solutions < 1, s);
annotation rbab(var int: obj, ann: s) =
let { svar int: best = MAXINT } in
restart(true, and([
post(obj < best),
once(s),
assign(best,obj)]));
solve ::rbab(x,int_search(y,input_order,assign_lb)) satisfy;

Search Combinators
21
The pre-compiler translates this code as follows:
solve :: sh_let(sh_letvar("best"), sh_int(MAXINT),
sh_restart(sh_cond_true, sh_and([
sh_post_succeed(sh_cond_lt(sh_intvar(objective),
sh_letvar("best"))),
sh_let(sh_letvar("solutioncount"), 0,
sh_ifthenelse(sh_cond_lt(sh_letvar("solutioncount"),
sh_int(1)),
sh_solutioncount(sh_letvar("solutioncount"),
sh_int_search(x, sh_var_input_order,
sh_val_assign_lb)),
sh_prune)),
sh_assign(sh_letvar("best"), sh_intvar(objective))])))
satisfy;
All literals are quoted (e.g. sh_int(1)), user-deﬁned search variables are turned into
quoted strings (lv("best")), expressions like obj < best are translated into annota-
tion terms (sh_cond_lt . . . ), and statistics are made explicit, introducing search variables
and special combinators (sh_solutioncount). The result of the pre-compilation is valid,
well-typed MiniZinc, which is then passed through the standard mzn2fzn translator to pro-
duce FlatZinc ready for solving. We intend to incorporate the translations done by the pre-
compiler into the standard mzn2fzn in the future.
We extended the Gecode FlatZinc interpreter to parse the search combinator annota-
tion and construct the corresponding heuristic using the Dynamic Composition approach
described above. The three tools, pre-compiler, mzn2fzn, and the modiﬁed FlatZinc inter-
preter thus form a complete toolchain for solving MiniZinc models using search combina-
tors. The source code including examples can be downloaded from
http://www.gecode.org/flatzinc.html.
5 Experiments
This section evaluates the performance of our two implementations. It establishes that a
search heuristic speciﬁed using combinators is competitive with a custom implementation
of the same heuristic, exploring exactly the same tree.
Sect. 3.1 introduced a message protocol that deﬁnes the communication between the
different combinators for one node of the search tree. Any overhead of a combinator-based
implementation must therefore come from the processing of each node using this protocol.
All combinators discussed earlier process each message of the protocol in constant time
(except for the base_search combinators, of course). Hence, we expect at most a constant
overhead per node compared to a native implementation of the heuristic.
In the following, two sets of experiments conﬁrm this expectation. The ﬁrst set consists
of artiﬁcial benchmarks designed to expose the overhead per node. The second set consists
of realistic combinatorial problems with complex search strategies.
The experiments were run on a 2.26 GHz Intel Core 2 Duo running Mac OS X. The
results are the averages of 10 runs, with a coefﬁcient of deviation less than 1.5%.
Stress Test. The ﬁrst set of experiments measures the overhead of calling a single combina-
tor during search. We ran a complete search of a tree generated by 7 variables with domain

22
Tom Schrijvers et al.
{0,...,6} and no constraints (1 647 085 nodes). To measure the overhead, we constructed a
basic search heuristic s and a stack of n combinators:
portfolio([portfolio([...portfolio([s,prune])...,prune]),prune])
where n ranges from 0 to 20 (realistic combinator stacks, such as those from the examples
in this article, are usually not deeper than 10). The numbers in the following table report
the runtime with respect to using the plain heuristic s, for both the static and the dynamic
approach:
n
1
2
5
10
20
static %
106.6
107.7
112.0
148.3
157.5
dynamic %
107.3
117.6
145.2
192.6
260.9
A single combinator generates an overhead of around 7%, and 10 combinators add 50% for
the static and 90% for the dynamic approach. In absolute runtime, however, this translates
to an overhead of around 17 ms (70 ms) per million nodes and combinator for the static
(dynamic) approach. Note that this is a worst-case experiment, since there is no constraint
propagation and almost all the time is spent in the combinators.
Benchmarks. The second set of experiments shows that in practice, this overhead is dwarfed
by the cost of constraint propagation and backtracking. Note that the experiments are not
supposed to demonstrate the best possible search heuristics for the given problems, but that
a search heuristic implemented using combinators is just as efﬁcient as a native implemen-
tation.
Fig. 5 compares Gecode’s optimization search engines with branch-and-bound imple-
mented using combinators. On the well-known Golomb Rulers problem, both dynamic com-
binators and native Gecode are slightly slower than static combinators. Native Gecode uses
dynamically combined search heuristics, but is much less expressive. That is why the static
approach with its specialization yields better results.
On the radiotherapy problem (see Sect. 2.3), the dynamic combinators show an over-
head of 6–11%. For native Gecode, exh_once must be implemented as a nested search,
which performs similarly to the dynamic combinators. However, in instances 5 and 6, the
compiled combinators lose their advantage over native Gecode. This is due to the processing
of exh_once: As soon as it is ﬁnished, the combinator approach processes all nodes of the
exh_once tree that are still in the search queue, which are now pruned by exh_once. The na-
tive Gecode implementation simply discards the tree. We will investigate how to incorporate
this optimization into the combinator approach.
The job shop scheduling examples, using the combination of branch-and-bound and
discrepancy limit discussed in Sect. 2.3, show similar behavior. In ABZ1-5 and mt10, the
interpreted combinators show much less overhead than in the short-running instances. This
is due to more expensive propagation and backtracking in these instances, reducing the
relative overhead of executing the combinators.
In summary, the experiments show that the expressiveness and ﬂexibility of a rich
combinator-based search language can be achieved without any runtime overhead in the
case of the static approach, and little overhead for the dynamic version.
6 Related Work
This section explores and discusses previous work that is closely related to search combina-
tors as presented in this article.

Search Combinators
23
Compiled
Interpreted
Gecode
Golomb 10
0.61 s
101.8%
102.5%
Golomb 11
12.72 s
102.9%
101.8%
Golomb 12
125.40 s
100.6%
101.9%
Radiotherapy 1
71.13 s
105.9%
107.3%
Radiotherapy 2
6.22 s
110.9%
110.1%
Radiotherapy 3
11.78 s
108.3%
108.1%
Radiotherapy 4
16.44 s
107.5%
106.9%
Radiotherapy 5
69.89 s
108.1%
98.7%
Radiotherapy 6
106.04 s
109.2%
99.1%
Job Shop G2
7.25 s
146.3%
101.2%
Job-Shop G4
6.96 s
164.0%
107.75%
Job-Shop H1
38.05 s
153.1%
103.81%
Job Shop H3
52.02 s
162.5%
102.8%
Job Shop H5
20.88 s
153.2%
107.0%
Job Shop ABZ1-5
2319.00 s
103.7%
100.1%
Job Shop mt10
2181.00 s
104.5%
99.9%
Fig. 5: Experimental results
6.1 MCP
This work directly extends our earlier work on Monadic Constraint Programming (MCP)
[20]. MCP introduces stackable search transformers, which are a simple form of search
combinators, but only provide a much more limited and low level form of search control. In
trying to overcome its limitations we arrived at search combinators.
6.2 Constraint Logic Programming
Constraint logic programming languages such as ECLiPSe [7] and SICStus Prolog [25]
provide programmable search via the built-in search of the paradigm, allowing the user to
deﬁne goals in terms of conjunctive or disjunctive sub-goals.
Prolog’s limitation is that it does not permit cross-cutting between goals. For instance,
disjunctions inside goals are too well encapsulated to observe them or interfere with them
from outside that goal. Hence, combinators that inject additional behavior in disjunctions,
i.e. to observe and/or prune the number of branches, cannot be expressed in a modular
way. In contrast, cross-cutting is a crucial feature of our combinator approach, where a
combinator higher up in the stack can interfere with a sub-combinator, while remaining
fully compositional. In summary, apart from conjunction and disjunction, Prolog’s goal-
based heuristics cannot be combined arbitrarily.
ECLiPSe copes with this limitation by combining a limited number of search heuristics
into a monolithic search/6 predicate. With various parameters the user controls which of
the heuristics is enabled (e.g., depth-bounded, node-bounded or limited discrepancy search).
A ﬁxed number of compositions are supported, such as changing strategy when the depth
bound ﬁnishes. The labeling itself is user programmable. If a user is not happy with the set
of supported heuristics in search/6, he has to program his own from scratch.
IBM ILOG CP Optimizer [5] supports Prolog-style goals in C++ [16], and like Prolog
goals, these do not support cross-cutting.

24
Tom Schrijvers et al.
6.3 The Comet Language
The Comet [27] system features fully programmable search [28], built upon the basic con-
cept of continuations, which make it easy to capture the state of the solver and write non-
deterministic code.
The Comet library provides abstractions like the non-deterministic primitives try and
tryall that split the search speciﬁcation in two (orthogonal) parts: 1) the speciﬁcation
of the search tree which corresponds to our to our base_search heuristics, and 2) the ex-
ploration of that search tree by means of a search controller. In terms of our approach,
the search controller determines both the queueing strategy and the behavior of the search
heuristic (minus the base search) within a single entity. In other words, it deﬁnes what to do
when starting or ending a search, failing, or adding a new choice.
Complex heuristics can be constructed as custom controllers, either by inheriting from
existing controllers or implementing them from scratch.
Albeit at a different level of abstraction (e.g., compare the Comet deﬁnition of depth-
bounded search in Figure 6 to the combinator deﬁnition dbs(n,s) ≡limit(depth ≤n,s)),
search controllers are quite similar to combinators as presented in this article. However,
there is one essential difference. Our combinators are meant to be compositional, whereas
search controllers are not. This difference in spirit is clearly reﬂected in 1) the design of the
interface and its associated protocol, and 2) the instances:
1. The design of search controllers is simpler than that of search combinators because it
does not take compositionality into account. While many of the messages in the two ap-
proaches are similar in spirit, the search combinator approach also stipulates the ﬂow of
messages within a search combinator composition. Notably, while most of the messages
propagate top-down through a combinator stack, it is vital to compositionality that the
exit message proceeds in a bottom-up manner. For instance, this bottom-up ﬂow en-
ables the inner and combinator in the composition and(and(s1,s2),s3) to intercept leaf
nodes of s1 and start s2 before its parent starts s3. The other way around would clearly
exhibit an undesirable semantics.
In Comet, this compositional protocol is entirely absent. All messages are directed at
the single search controller.
2. In terms of instantiation, because of their compositional nature, we promote many “small”
combinator instances that each capture a single primitive feature. This approach provides
us with a high-level modeling language for search, as the primitive combinators are con-
veniently assembled into many different search heuristics. In contrast, all Comet search
controller instances we are aware of2 are essentially monolithic implementations of a
particular search heuristic; none of them takes other search controllers as arguments.
Through a common abstract base class the instances share some basic infrastructure, but
to implement a new search controller one basically starts from scratch.
The fact that search controllers have not been designed with compositionality in mind
obviously does not mean that compositionality cannot be achieved in Comet. On the con-
trary, we believe that it is most easily achieved by integrating search controllers with the
compositional design of our search combinators. In fact, because of Comet’s powerful prim-
itives for non-determinism, this would lead to a particularly elegant implementation.
2 i.e., those published in papers and shipped with the Comet library.

Search Combinators
25
class DBS extends AbstractSearchController {
stack{Continuation} s;
int limit;
DBS(SearchSolver so, int n) : AbstractSearchController(so) {
s = new stack{Continuation}();
limit = n;
}
void startTry() {
if (s.getSize() > limit) fail();
}
void addChoice(Continuation f) {
s.push(f);
}
void fail() {
if (s.empty())
exit();
else
call(s.pop());
}
}
Fig. 6: Deﬁnition of depth-bounded search in Comet.
6.4 Other Systems
The Salsa [12] language is an imperative domain-speciﬁc language for implementing search
algorithms on top of constraint solvers. Its center of focus is a node in the search process.
Programmers can write custom Choice strategies for generating next nodes from the current
one; Salsa provides a regular-expression-like language for combining these Choices into
more complex ones. In addition, Salsa can run custom procedures at the exits of each node,
right after visiting it. We believe that Salsa’s Choice construct is orthogonal to our approach
and could be incorporated. Custom exit procedures show similarity to combinators, but no
support is provided for arbitrary composition.
Oz [26] was the ﬁrst language to truly separate the deﬁnition of the constraint model
from the exploration strategy [22]. Computation spaces capture the solver state and the pos-
sible choices. Strategies such as DFS, BFS, LDS, Branch and Bound and Best First Search
are implemented by a combination of copying and recomputation of computation spaces.
The strategies are monolithic, there is no notion of search combinators.
Zinc/MiniZinc [13,14] lets the user specify search in its annotation language. There is
a proposal for a more expressive search language for MiniZinc [19], but it is limited to basic
variable ordering and domain splitting strategies. For Zinc, a language extension is available
for implementing variable selection and domain splitting [17] but again it does not address
more than basic search.
6.5 Autonomous Search
Autonomous search (AS) [8] addresses the challenge of providing complex application-
tailored search heuristics in a different way. Rather than leaving the speciﬁcation and tuning
of search heuristics to the programmer, AS promotes systems that autonomously self-tune
their performance while solving problems. Hence, while search combinators make writing

26
Tom Schrijvers et al.
search heuristics easier, AS takes it out of the hands of the programmer altogether. Well-
known instances of this approach are Impact Based Search [18] or the weighted degree
heuristic [3].
AS has advantages for 1) smaller problems where it produces a decent heuristic without
programmer investment, and for 2) novice users who don’t know how to obtain a decent
heuristic. However, loss of programmer control is a liability for hard problems where AS
can be ineffective and often only expert knowledge makes the difference.
7 Conclusion
We have shown how combinators provide a powerful high-level language for modeling com-
plex search heuristics. To make this approach useful in practice, we devised an architecture
in which the modularity of the language is matched by the modularity of the implementation.
This relieves system developers from a high implementation cost and yet, as our experiments
show, imposes no runtime penalty.
For future work, parallel search on multi-core hardware ﬁts perfectly in our combina-
tor framework. We have already performed a number of preliminary experiments and will
further explore the beneﬁts of search combinators in a parallel setting. We will also explore
potential optimizations (such as the short-circuit of exh_once from Sect. 5) and different
compilation strategies (e.g., combining the static and dynamic approaches from Sect. 4).
In addition we consider to apply search combinators in other problem domains like
Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) and A∗where search strategies have a major impact on
performance and no dominant default search exists. Finally, combinators need not necessar-
ily be heuristics that control the search. They may also monitor search, e.g., by gathering
statistics or visualizing the search tree.
Acknowledgements NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as represented by the Department of
Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy and the Australian Research Council. This work was
partially supported by Asian Ofﬁce of Aerospace Research and Development grant 10-4123.
