arXiv:2401.00661v1  [eess.SY]  1 Jan 2024
Personalized Dynamic Pricing Policy for Electric
Vehicles: Reinforcement learning approach
Sangjun Baea, Bal´azs Kulcs´arb, S´ebastien Grosb,c
aAI/Big Data Optimization Team, LG Display, 10845 Paju-si, South Korea
bDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, 412 96
G¨oteborg, Sweden
cDepartment of Engineering Cybernetics, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
7491 Trondheim, Norway
Abstract
With the increasing number of fast-electric vehicle charging stations (fast-EVCSs)
and the popularization of information technology, electricity price competition
between fast-EVCSs is highly expected, in which the utilization of public and/or
privacy-preserved information will play a crucial role. Self-interest electric ve-
hicle (EV) users, on the other hand, try to select a fast-EVCS for charging in
a way to maximize their utilities based on electricity price, estimated waiting
time, and their state of charge.
While existing studies have largely focused
on ﬁnding equilibrium prices, this study proposes a personalized dynamic pric-
ing policy (PeDP) for a fast-EVCS to maximize revenue using a reinforcement
learning (RL) approach. We ﬁrst propose a multiple fast-EVCSs competing
simulation environment to model the selﬁsh behavior of EV users using a game-
based charging station selection model with a monetary utility function. In the
environment, we propose a Q-learning-based PeDP to maximize fast-EVCS’ rev-
enue. Through numerical simulations based on the environment: (1) we identify
the importance of waiting time in the EV charging market by comparing the
classic Bertrand competition model with the proposed PeDP for fast-EVCSs
(from the system perspective); (2) we evaluate the performance of the proposed
PeDP and analyze the eﬀects of the information on the policy (from the service

Preprint submitted to Transportation Research Part C: Emerging TechnologiesJanuary 2, 2024

provider perspective); and (3) it can be seen that privacy-preserved informa-
tion sharing can be misused by artiﬁcial intelligence-based PeDP in a certain
situation in the EV charging market (from the customer perspective).
Keywords:
Electric vehicle; Fast-electric vehicle charging station; Game
theory; Personalized dynamic pricing; Reinforcement learning.
1. Introduction
With increasing concerns about environmental issues around the world, elec-
tric vehicles (EVs) are emerging as a sustainable and environmentally friendly
alternative to conventional combustion vehicles. In the Nordic region, especially,
approximately 250,000 EVs were registered by the end of 2017, which made up
roughly 8% of the global total of EVs in 2016 [1].
One limitation of the EVs is their low battery capacity and their long charg-
ing time, which require an extensive charging station network. Many studies
have been conducted on deploying public fast-electric vehicle charging stations
(fast-EVCSs), especially on highways (motorways/freeways) [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7],
as well as home-based charging facilities [1, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. For example, the
electric mobility-related initial funding of the European Commission mostly in-
vested in research on developing a cost-eﬃcient fast-charging network, followed
by installing fast-charging stations along highways. In Norway, a company es-
tablished a scheme to deploy a public fast-EVCS at least every 50km on the
highway network, and except for the far northern part of Norway, all highways
were served by the end of 2017 [13]. In Sweden, ’Klimatklivet’ (Climate Leap)
is making huge investments in charging stations (over 12,000 charging points,
including fast-EVCSs along several key highways). In such a situation, the elec-
tricity price competition among the fast-EVCSs will become a practical and
important issue.
From the EV user perspective, on the other hand, EV users might selﬁshly
select one fast-EVCS based on the information obtained. Through the internet
2

Table 1: Nomenclature
Symbol
Description
B
a set of nb EV users
bi
the i-th EV user
E
a set of ne fast-EVCSs
ej
the j-th fast-EVCS
cj
the number of total charging slots of fast-EVCS ej
cocc,t
j
the number of occupied charging slots of fast-EVCS ej
at time t
pt
(i,j)
the personalized electricity price to EV user bi oﬀered by
fast-EVCS ej at time t
pt
(·,j)
the public electricity price broadcasted by fast-EVCS ej
at time t
SOCt
i
the state of charge of EV user bi at time t
eSOC(i,j)
the estimated state of charge of EV user bi arrival at the
fast-EVCS ej
SOCfull
the full charged SOC
di,j
the binary decision variable indicating whether or not EV
user bi charges at fast-EVCS ej
ˇs(i,j)
the binary variable indicating whether bi can travel to ej
s(·)
the strategy of EV user bi corresponds to its fast-EVCS
selection
tch
(i,j)
the actual charging time for EV user bi at fast-EVCS ej
wt
(i,j)
the expected waiting time of EV user bi at fast-EVCS ej
at time t
ut
(i,j)
EV user bi’s monetary utility function for fast-EVCS ej
at time t
B
the capacity of the battery
cf
the ﬁxed cost per charging
ks
the SOC weighting for the monetary utility function
kt
the waiting time weighting
keff
the energy eﬃciency of EVs
kct
the maximum charging time per EV
pvtt
the value of travel time
gj
the group of EV users who selects the fast-EVCS ej
P
a Nash stable partition
or mobile applications, the EV users are able to identify nearby fast-EVCSs
and their status, such as electricity prices, locations, available charging slots,
etc. Therefore, the interaction between the fast-EVCSs, between the EV users,
and between the fast-EVCSs and the EV users will dynamically inﬂuence each
other’s decision-making.
3

1.1. Decision-making for pricing problem
There has been a considerable amount of research recently to shed some in-
sight into the decision-making problem. The following studies have been focus-
ing on power grid stability and incorporating pricing from a network balancing
perspective. In order to achieve this, we modeled the EV user’s behavior with
diﬀerent levels of accuracy. In the following, we hence outline them as price-
responsive algorithms with the following attributes: i) optimization/solution
method; ii) detailedness of EV models. Most of the methods simplify the EV
user’s decision and propose multilayer, centralized, or distributed (and often
game-theoretic) solutions.
In [14], the authors considered both the charging station pricing problem and
the charging station selection problem using a two-stage Stackelberg model. The
authors assumed the same state of charge for the EVs (i.e., same charging cost,
same driving range). In [15], the authors proposed a fast-EVCS pricing strategy
for the voltage control of electricity distribution networks using a double-layer
optimization model to minimize the total voltage magnitude deviation of dis-
tribution networks without loss of income. The authors could not consider the
user’s willingness, which determines the demand for the electricity distribution
network. In [16], the authors proposed the joint admission and pricing approach
to maximize a charging station’s proﬁt, which also allows them to ﬁnd a trade-
oﬀbetween the revenue of the charging station and the EV users’ satisfaction
(waiting time).
The authors assumed that a charging station makes admis-
sion decisions for homogeneous EV users’ charging (i.e., the charging station
can refuse some EV users to charge to maximize their proﬁt). In [17], pricing
mechanisms were proposed under non-cooperative and cooperative scenarios, re-
spectively, for the evenly distributed charging load with the assumption that the
charging decisions were made by an aggregator. In [18], a single-leader-multi-
follower Stackelberg game is proposed, in which the charging network operator
acts as the leader and the EV customers are the followers. The leader optimizes
the prices of charging stations, and each follower makes a selection between
the nearest charging station and a less busy one. For maintaining power grid
4

stability, in [19], the authors proposed the customer allocation algorithm for
maximizing their utility based on the waiting time. In [20], the authors stud-
ied the pricing of charging stations using a non-cooperative oligopoly game with
assumptions such as homogeneous charging stations, homogeneous electric vehi-
cles, and no road system constraints. In [21], the authors resolved the charging
station selection problem based on the electricity price oﬀered by the charging
station, its distance from the charging station, and EV users’ preferences for
a certain charging station. They assumed that the demand for each charging
station increases as its charging price decreases. In [22], the authors resolved
the overlapping issues that occur at peak time by dynamically adjusting the
prices of the charging stations. Here, it is assumed that the charging stations
cooperatively determine the prices. In [23], the authors conducted a survey to
understand how electric vehicle drivers respond to uncertain future prices when
they charge their vehicles away from home. The motivation of the authors is
that dynamic pricing of electricity can help operators spread the demand for
electricity to avoid costly infrastructure investments. The results suggest that
electric vehicle drivers are generally risk-averse when it comes to uncertain pric-
ing, and there is a non-linearity in their choices. In [24], the authors proposed
a centralized EV charging-control model that schedules the charging of EVs.
Through the case study, they showed the beneﬁts of the model in reducing
charging costs, negative impacts on the distribution system, and unserved EV
charging demand compared to simpler heuristics.
Finally, in [25], the authors proposed dynamic demand-responsive price ad-
justment schemes based on charging station queue lengths. The results showed
that these schemes were eﬀective in balancing charging demand across fast-
charging stations, reducing average waiting time, increasing charging station
revenue, and improving social welfare.
As indicated in [25], using more so-
phisticated charging and EV user models in combination with scalable price
shaping algorithms is of capital importance.
In this line of thought, data-
dependable methods may bring new aspects to naturally integrating model pa-
rameter changes into price decision algorithms.
5

1.2. Simulation environment
Electric vehicle charging stations are categorized as follows: 1) Level-1 charg-
ers, which are often used at home, use 120 V alternating current (AC). Unlike
other chargers, level-1 chargers do not require the installation of any additional
equipment; 2) Level-2 chargers, which are often used for both residential and
commercial EVCSs, use a 240 V (for residential) or 208 V (for commercial) plug;
and 3) Level-3 chargers, also known as direct current (DC) fast chargers, are
only used in commercial and industrial applications.
Most of the existing studies focused on level-1 or level-2 charging stations due
to the low penetration rate of fast-EVCSs (level-3 charging stations) and their
limited data. Also, in order to solve the equilibrium problem analytically, the
existing studies disregarded the dynamic environment and practical factors in
it such as the travel range of the EV users, diﬀerent charging times, the number
of charging slots, etc. In practice, however, the dynamical situation and these
factors are expected to play a critical role in EV users’ charging station selections
due to the high penetration rate of internet applications. In addition, recently,
sharing information about vehicles and customers has become an issue [26, 27,
28, 29, 30, 31]. For example, personal data protection is a big issue in optimizing
the sharing mobility operation [26]. As another example, in the ride-sourcing
system, information sharing and disclosure of customers and sources (vehicles)
is an important issue [27]. Hence, it is necessary to analyze and investigate the
eﬀects of this personal information on the EV charging market, such as revenue
improvement for service providers, misuse of privacy-preserved information, etc.
Especially, privacy protection is now a great concern of persons, industries,
governments, etc. in the new era of cloud and big data. There are research
projects focusing on privacy-preserved information sharing [32, 33, 34, 35]. In
this study, we assume that the personal information used is protected.
The main aim of this study is to investigate this highly interdependent and
complex decision-making problem, in which all stakeholders make self-interested
decisions. In this way, we will focus on demand reponsive pricing algorithms (in
6

!!
!"
"!
""
"#
"$
!"#$%&'%()*+,-
.#&,&'%(,&/0-
1$&2&'%($#'%0-
3$&2#)456$0+0$207(
&'8*$/#,&*'(9!"#$!"#$%:
3;<=&)(&'8*$/#,&*'
9%&
'& '(&
':
30$+*'#=&>07(74'#/&)(
6$&)0(9%!$#$%
'
& )& %!(#$%
'
:
3;<=&)(&'8*$/#,&*'
9'($
':
Figure 1: Conceptual image for our system model (highway scenario). Each fast-EVCS adjusts
its charging price based on public (green box) and/or privacy-preserved (red box) information.
Each selﬁsh EV user selects a fast-EVCS for charging based on the public and/or personalized
(yellow box) information.
contrast to the price-responsible approaches presented in Section 1.1.)
with
detailed EV models.
We propose a 1-dimensional highway simulation envi-
ronment that is dynamically interacting and includes more practical factors,
such as estimated state of charge (driving distance to empty), the number of
available charging slots, the self-interested decision-making of all stakeholders,
non-cooperative decision-making, and a monetary utility function, than the ex-
isting studies [14, 16, 18, 22]. Then, we propose a personalized dynamic pricing
policy (PeDP) for fast-EVCSs using a reinforcement learning (RL) approach
[36], since it is highly expected that fast-EVCSs might apply pricing policies
using artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) to maximize their revenue because the charging
environment is highly coupled with many agents’ decisions, competitors pricing
policies, government policies, etc., which are hard to expect/predict. In such an
environment, it is hard to utilize rule-based approaches or optimization-based
approaches. It is assumed that the EV user’s privacy is already protected and
available based on a technique discussed in [32, 33, 34]. As shown in Figure 1,
EV users transfer information on their estimated state of charge (eSOC, privacy-
preserved information, i.e., the information is only shared with the fast-EVCS)
to the fast-EVCSs while they are on the highway. An AI fast-EVCS dynam-
ically adjusts the personalized electricity price (action) that is oﬀered to the
corresponding EV user, in which the price is aﬀected by public and/or privacy-
7

preserved information from the competing fast-EVCSs and the EV users, re-
spectively (environment).
Each self-interested EV user updates its charging
station selections based on the oﬀered personalized electricity price and other
given information (eSOC, available charging slots), in which a game-theoretical
approach is applied to model the selﬁsh behavior of the EV users. When the
EV users arrive at the AI fast-EVCS for charging, the AI fast-EVCS charges an
electricity bill to the EV users (reward). We conduct numerical simulations in
the proposed environment with fast-EVCSs and dynamically arriving EV users
in order to 1) ﬁgure out the systemic diﬀerences regarding the waiting time be-
tween the petrol stations and fast-EVCSs, the proposed PeDP is compared with
the classic Bertrand competition model (from the system perspective); 2) eval-
uate the performance of the proposed PeDP and analyze the importance of the
information on the policy (from the fast-EVCS perspective); and 3) show that
sharing the privacy-preserved information can be misused by AI-based PeDP in
a certain situation in the EV charging market (from the EV user perspective).
Our main contributions are summarized as follows.
• A system model: The proposed environment considers practical factors
such as heterogeneous EVs (e.g., EV-dependent charging time, SOC (travel
range)) and dynamically changing capability of the fast-EVCSs, where the
parameters for the EVs and fast-EVCSs are based on the public perfor-
mance data [37] (Q3-1). We model the charging station selection problem
as an anonymous hedonic game [38, 39], which is suitable for modeling
the situation where the EV users greedily select fast-EVCSs based on
their utility function. Here, we propose a monetary utility function for
EV users by transforming the expected waiting time into money using the
value of travel time (VTT) [40]. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the ﬁrst work that proposes a ﬂexible and extensible EV charging market
simulation environment for the personalized dynamic pricing problem.
• Personalized dynamic pricing policy: Due to the dynamical and highly
interdependent interactions between EV users and fast-EVCSs in the pro-
8

posed environment, it might not be easy to apply the existing approaches,
such as the Stackelberg game model [41]. We propose the PeDP using
the Q-learning algorithm that interacts with the proposed environment.
Diﬀerent from existing pricing literature, the proposed approach ﬁnds the
PeDP of the fast-EVCS according to the dynamic environment instead of
ﬁnding the price equilibrium in the static environment.
Finally, the above-mentioned methodological solutions have been tested in
a numerical simulation context, demonstrating the beneﬁts of dynamic price
shaping.
As such, we evaluate the PeDP and investigate the importance of
information usage in the EV charging market. Firstly, we show the importance
of the waiting time in the EV charging market by comparing the PeDP and the
classic Bertrand model. Secondly, we evaluate the performance of the PeDP
and investigate the eﬀect of the public and/or privacy-preserved information by
varying the observable states for the AI fast-EVCS from the service provider
perspective. Finally, we present a privacy-preserved information misuse case by
the AI-based PeDP in a certain geographical condition.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the
EV charging market simulation environment, which is used as the environment
for the model-free reinforcement learning approach. In Section 3, we propose
a charging station selection game (CSSG) model that is a key part of the en-
vironment. In Section 4, we propose a PeDP algorithm using a model-free RL
approach. Numerical simulations are provided in Section 5. Finally, conclusions
and future work are presented in Section 6.
2. System Model
In the EV charging market simulation environment as shown in Figure 1,
we consider fast-EVCSs and multiple EVs along the highway. There exists a
set of EV users B = {b1, b2, . . . , bnb} and their state of charge SOCt
i , ∀bi ∈B
at time t and a set of fast-EVCSs E = {e1, e2, . . . , ene} with the number of
charging slots cj and the number of occupied charging slots cocc,t
j
, ∀ej ∈E at
9

time t (cocc,t
j
≤cj). The fast-EVCS ej who adopts the PeDP oﬀers personalized
electricity price pt
(i,j) to the corresponding EV user bi at time t.
Note that
the personalized electricity price information is shared neither with competing
fast-EVCSs nor with other EV users.
The fast-EVCS ej, which adopts the
public dynamic pricing policy (PuDP), broadcasts public electricity price pt
(·,j)
at time t. Then, EV users charge at one of the fast-EVCSs along the highway.
The environment shown in Figure 1 works by interacting with the following two
stages:
• Each fast-EVCS adjusts the personalized or public electricity price in ac-
cordance with the PeDP or PuDP, respectively, which is based on both
the public information (the number of available charging slots, electricity
prices of competitors), and the privacy-preserved information (estimated
SOCs of anonymous EV users). The fast-EVCSs announce their current
status that is somehow required to be broadcast, such as the number of
available charging slots, locations, and public electricity price (if the price
is not the personalized electricity price).
• Each EV user greedily selects a fast-EVCS for charging in a way to max-
imize its utility using the public information from the fast-EVCSs. Note
that every EV user can access public information such as public electricity
price (personalized electricity price, if the fast-EVCS adopts the PeDP),
the number of available charging slots, and location of each fast-EVCS.
In the environment, the following assumptions are made: (1) for simpliﬁca-
tion, in the environment, there is only one entrance and exit (i.e., the EV users
leave the highway at the same exit), see [14]; (2) the EV users can only drive
in one direction (left to right in the ﬁgure) on the multi-lane highway, see [14];
(3) for excluding unfair markets such as collusion, monopoly market, etc., it is
assumed that each fast-EVCS is owned by a diﬀerent service provider and they
are competing with each other by adjusting only the public or personalized elec-
tricity price, see [14]; (4) the EV users who have the same vehicle speciﬁcation
behave selﬁshly with regard to charging station selections in a way to maximize
10

their own utility, see [14, 15, 17]; (5) due to the limitation of the lithium-ion
battery capacity, charging is necessary, but EV users will charge only once be-
fore leaving the highway without exception, see [14, 18]; (6) for simplicity and
considering a rational EV charging strategy, EV users charge up to 80% of their
full SOC; (7) fast-EVCSs provide charging service on a ﬁrst come ﬁrst served
basis (i.e., no reservation system is considered in this study), see [15, 19]; and
(9) as it is “personalized price”, we assume that no one will share the price with
others.
3. Charging Station Selection Game (CSSG)
In this section, we propose the charging station selection game (CSSG) model
for selﬁsh EV users who are willing to maximize their utilities, in which a mon-
etary utility function is also proposed.
Then, we introduce a decentralized
algorithm to ﬁnd the equilibrium of the CSSG model, which is used for the
demand of the fast-EVCSs.
The CSSG is deﬁned as follows:
• Players: The EV users
• Strategies: The strategy of an EV user bi corresponds to its fast-EVCS
selection si(·) ∈E, where si is a function of estimated SOC (eSOC, i.e.,
SOC at arrival), public or personalized electricity price and estimated
waiting time.
3.1. A monetary utility function
Due to the lack of data or accurate models for the EV charging market, we
propose a new monetary utility function rather than using coeﬃcient-dependent
price elasticity models [42, 43, 44, 45]. EV users selﬁshly determine a fast-EVCS
for charging in a way that minimizes the cost of charging. To represent the EV
user’s perspective, in this study, we propose a monetary utility function, ut
(i,j),
for EV user bi corresponding to ej at time t. The monetary utility function can
11

be deﬁned as follows:
ut
(i,j) = −
 ˇs(i,j)(cf + pt
(i,j)∆SOC(i,j)0.8B)
∆SOC(i,j)
+ pvttwt
(i,j)

(1)
where ˇs(i,j) is a binary variable that indicates whether EV user bi can travel to
ej, cf is a ﬁxed cost1 (5 [euro/charging]), and B is the capacity of the battery
(800 [kWh]). Total charging amount is deﬁned as ∆SOC(i,j) = 0.8SOCfull −
eSOC(i,j), where eSOC(i,j) is estimated SOC of the EV bi arrival at the fast-
EVCS ej [37].
- Electricity price:
Electricity price is one of the most dominant factors
that inﬂuence the EV users’ charging station selections.
For simplicity, we
assume that the minimum and the maximum electricity price are determined
by wholesale electricity price and government restrictions, respectively.
The
lower and upper bounds for public and personalized electricity price pt
(i,j) is as
follow:
pmin ≤pt
(i,j) ≤pmax,
∀bi ∈B, ∀ej ∈E,
(2)
where we assume that the pmin = 0.35 [euro/kWh] and pmax = 0.55 [euro/kWh]
are applied to all fast-EVCSs. While the lower and upper price bounds are
public, the personalized electricity price is not public. The boundary prices are
approximately determined based on “Price ranges for a selection of charging
practices in the Nordic region” on page 45 in [1].
- Estimated state of charge (eSOC): Due to the long charging time and
the limited number of fast-EVCSs in public places, the SOC plays a critical role
in its charging station selection. The EVs’ SOCs determine the travel range as
well as the income of the fast-EVCS. For example, a short travel range might
constrain the charging station selection options.
In addition, the eSOC(i,j)
aﬀects the term cf/∆SOC(i,j), which determines drivers who want to minimize
1This is the cost that EV users pay each time they visit the charging station, which is
inversely proportional to the SOC level. In other words, it is more eﬃcient to charge up to
70% of SOC than to charge up to 50% of SOC when an EV user visits a fast-EVCS. Also, it
is divided by ∆SOC(i,j) to consider the EV user’s saving behavior.
12

the ﬁxed cost. The time taken to complete a full charge is longer compared to
Figure 2: Battery SOC obtained versus charging time spent on a Li-ion battery. Typically,
the last phase of the charging curve indicates that the available battery SOC has a nonlinear
dependence on the charging time spent [46]
the initial phase of charging, which is between 0% and 80%, approximately as
shown in Figure 2 [46]. For considering a rational charging strategy due to these
charging characteristics, it is assumed that EV users charge up to 80% of their
full SOC. Also, it is assumed that there are no uncertainties in the travel range
of the EVs. Therefore, we deﬁne the estimated state of charge eSOC(i,j) of EV
user bi arrival at fast-EVCS ej as follows:
eSOC(i,j) = SOC(i,j)−1
keﬀ
· dist(i, j),
∀bi ∈B, ej ∈E
(3)
where dist(i, j) and keﬀare the euclidean distance between EV user bi and
fast-EVCS ej, and energy eﬃciency that is assumed as a constant (keﬀ=
800[km/SOC]) in this study, respectively.
Note that it is assumed that the
speed of each EV is constant (100[km/h]), and factors that impact the energy
eﬃciency, such as temperatures, aging eﬀects, etc., are constant.
- Expected waiting time: As EV users have to share energy resources from
the power grid, which has a ﬁnite set of charging slots, the expected waiting
time may be considerable. Therefore, the expected waiting time will greatly
inﬂuence the decision-making of the EV users. For example, the EV users will
visit a fast-EVCS with a short expected waiting time because other fast-EVCSs
do not have enough available charging slots. Unlike the utility functions of the
13

existing studies, which depend on weighting factors [42, 43, 44, 45], we convert
the waiting time to money by using the value of travel time (VTT), pvtt, which
refers to the cost of time spent on transport [40].
pvtt is multiplied by the
expected waiting time wt
(i,j), which is deﬁned as follows:
wt
(i,j) =









0,
if ∆ct
j > 0 & ∆ct
j ≥gj
kch
gj
cj+∆ct
j ,
else if ∆ct
j > 0 & ∆ct
j < gj
kch
|∆ct
j|+gj
cj
,
otherwise
, ∀bi ∈B, ∀ej ∈E,
(4)
where kch is a constant value for the charging time from 0.2 to 0.82, which
takes 3/10 hours [37]. gj is the number of tentative decisions of anonymous
EV users who want to charge at ej. cj is the number of total charging slots
of ej. ∆ct
j is the number of available charging slots at ej at time t, deﬁned
as ∆ct
j = cj −cocc,t
j
. cocc,t
j
is the number of occupied charging slots of ej at
time t. The ﬁrst condition of Eq.(4) is when there is more than one available
charging slot and the number of tentative EV users is less than or equal to the
number of available charging slots at ej at time t. The second condition is when
there is more than one available charging slot and the number of tentative EV
users is greater than the number of available charging slots at ej at time t. The
third condition is when there is no available charging slot and there is more
than one EV user who tentatively wants to visit at ej at time t. The expected
waiting time is converted to money by multiplying the VTT, pvtt, which is 29
[euro/hour] [40].
3.2. Algorithm for CSSG
The CSSG is solved using a decentralized algorithm [47]. Each time step,
which is the same update frequency as the fast-EVCS status update in this
2Maintaining the SOC between 0.2 and 0.8 is to keep the battery health the SOC level,
which is well-known information. In this study, we assume that the EV users try to maintain
the range.
14

study, each EV user makes a decision to maximize their monetary utility. EV
users’ competitive and strategic behaviors can be modeled from game-theoretic
perspectives. Here, it is assumed that each EV user is able to access information
from the fast-EVCSs, such as locations, electricity prices, and the number of
available charging slots. If every EV user is satisﬁed with their charging station
selection, it can be considered that they are mutual-exclusively grouped3 for
each of the fast-EVCSs. This status can be described as the concept called
Nash stable partition, which is denoted by P. A Nash stable partition always
exists and is computed by Algorithm 2. More details of the algorithm are given
in Appendix A.
4. Personalized Dynamic Pricing Policy Using RL
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the PeDP problem to maximize the fast-
EVCS’ revenue in the proposed environment presented in the previous section.
Then, we propose a reinforcement learning approach so that the fast-EVCS will
learn its PeDP in the environment.
4.1. Personalized Dynamic Pricing Problem
The fast-EVCSs compete with each other to maximize their revenue by ad-
justing their personalized electricity prices dynamically. The revenue of each
fast-EVCSs is determined by the number of visited EVs and the amount of
electricity they charge. Here, we assume that other operating costs of charging
stations are ﬁxed and not included in mitigating other eﬀects. Therefore, the
goal of the fast-EVCS is to perform personalized dynamic pricing that maxi-
3For the sake of convenience, we use the term “group” that only indicates the EV users
who select the same fast-EVCS.
15

mizes its revenue as follows:
max
{pt
(i,j)}
∞
X
t=1
X
∀bi∈gj
pt
(i,j)(eSOC(i,j))d(i,j)
subject to
P is a Nash stable partition
pmin ≤pt
(i,j) ≤pmax
d(i,j) ∈{0, 1}
, ∀bi ∈B
(5)
where gj and P are the groups of EV users who select the fast-EVCS ej and a
Nash stable partition has been found in Section 3, respectively. d(i,j) is a binary
decision variable that indicates whether or not EV user bi charges at fast-EVCS
ej. In the following section, we propose a RL algorithm to solve Eq.(5).
4.2. Reinforcement Learning Approach
Charging station operators will be able to access a wide variety of informa-
tion. Also, the charging environment includes many uncertainties, especially due
to the drivers’ strategic charging decisions. The Reinforcement Learning (RL)
approach is known as one of the suitable approaches in an unknown environment
with uncertainties where ordinary dynamic programming is not scalable. Re-
inforcement Learning (RL) is suitable for addressing complex decision-making
problems [48], [49]. We consider the fast-EVCS revenue maximization problem
in which an agent (AI fast-EVCS, e¯j) interacts with the proposed environment
in a sequence of actions, observations, and rewards. As shown in Figure 3, the
AI fast-EVCS serves as the agent; competing fast-EVCSs and strategically be-
having EV users are the environment; adjusting personalized electricity prices
of the AI fast-EVCS denotes the action that the AI fast-EVCS oﬀers to each
corresponding EV user; the public electricity price and the number of available
charging slots of the competing fast-EVCSs, and the privacy-preserved infor-
mation of the EV users represent the state; and the AI fast-EVCS revenue is
a reward. In this paper, the personalized dynamic pricing problem is modeled
as a Markov decision process (MDP) because it is a decision-making problem
16

!!
"#$%&
!"
!#!
!$
!
'$
'!
'%
'&
''
'(
'#"
!"#$%&"'(")
*+(")
!"#$%& ! "#$%&'()*+#,--#)#./$*.*/0-"$*.#
! !"#
$
" ! %"#
$
" # " ! &""#
$
'()*+, ! #)#./$*.*/0-1*))
-#*#( ! "21)*.3"$*4(.05"$#%#$4#,-*'6&7-
!"
Figure 3: The reinforcement learning framework of PeDP: a fast-EVCS oﬀers personalized
electricity prices (action) in the environment, which are interpreted into electricity bills (re-
ward) and the public/privacy-information (state), which are fed back into the fast-EVCS.
in an unknown stochastic environment. In this MDP model, an agent selects
an action to execute with respect to the current state based on its policy. The
agent receives an immediate reward and transitions to the next state, in which
the reward depends only on EV users’ charging station decisions and their SOC
in this study. The objective of reinforcement learning is to ﬁnd the policy that
maximizes the expected discounted return
R =
∞
X
t=1
γtrt
(6)
where rt is the reward at step t, and γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount factor. The key
components for the problem to be modeled includes: discrete time t, action
(personalized electricity price) A(pt
(i,¯j)), state S(vt
P, ˜et
j, ˜et
¯j), and reward (rev-
enue) R(vt
P, ˜et
j, ˜et
¯j). Depending on the fast-EVCS’ pricing policy, the action can
be determined. If the fast-EVCS adopts the PeDP, the action is the personalized
electricity price, and if the fast-EVCS adopts the PuDP, the action is the public
electricity price. Also, the set of observable states might change depending on
fast-EVCS’ policy.
• t is the discrete time at which personalized dynamic price actions are
executed. ∆t is ﬁxed in this study.
17

• pt
(i,¯j) is personalized electricity price that the AI fast-EVCS e¯j oﬀers at
time t for each corresponding EV user bi, ∀i ∈B.
• vt
P indicates the state of the EV users at time t, in which the state is
eSOC(i,¯j).
• ˜et
¯j and ˜et
j indicate the state of the AI fast-EVCS (i.e., ∆ct
¯j) and the com-
peting fast-EVCSs (i.e., pt
(·,j), ∆ct
j, ∀ej ∈E), respectively.
• rt(˜et
j, ˜et
¯j, vt
P) is the AI fast-EVCS revenue, which speciﬁes the expected
reward gained by executing action pt
(i,¯j) for each corresponding EV user
bi, ∀i ∈B at a given state.
We apply one of the most intuitive and well-known approaches, Q-learning,
because the main focus of this study is on personalized pricing using a RL
approach (Q1-1). Q-learning is a type of reinforcement learning to learn the
policy (known as the Q-function), which is a prediction of reward associated
with each action for all actions in each state. The approach is a model-free
algorithm that does not use the transition probability distribution and reward
function associated with the MDP. In the proposed environment, the fast-EVCS
cannot make predictions about the next state and reward before it takes each
action due to the EV users’ decisions. The algorithm estimates the expected
return of executing an action in a given state.
These estimated returns are
known as Q-values. Q-values are iteratively learned by updating the current
Q-value estimate towards the observed reward plus the maximum Q-value over
all actions in the resulting state:
Q(˜et
j, ˜et
¯j, vt
P, pt
(i,¯j)) = Q(˜et
j, ˜et
¯j, vt
P, pt
(i,¯j))
+ α

rt(˜et
j, ˜et
¯j, vt
P) + γ max
pt+1
(i,¯j)
Q(˜et+1
j
, ˜et+1
¯j
, vt+1
P , pt+1
(i,¯j)) −Q(˜et
j, ˜et
¯j, vt
P, pt
(i,¯j))

.
(7)
Due to the exponentially increasing dimension of traditional Q-learning for the
problem with a relatively large number of states and actions, we use a fully con-
nected Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) function approximator to estimate the
18

Q-function. We expect that the ANN helps to estimate the unknown underlying
function, as it is well known that the ANN is a universal approximator in theory
[50]. The neural network with one nonlinear hidden layer is parameterized by θ
to represent Q(˜ej, ˜e¯j, vP, p(i,¯j); θ)4.
The learning process is presented in Algorithm 1, First, we initialize the
parameters of the Q-network with θ. As the charging station operates 24/7,
the algorithm runs until the convergence criterion is met. Note that the con-
vergence time might be inﬂuenced by the parameters of the simulation environ-
ments (e.g., EVUs rate, the number of fast-EVCS on the highway, etc.). In most
of the cases in this study, it takes 15-30 simulation days to converge. In prac-
tical situations, fast-EVCS owners who want to apply the proposed approach
might need either a simulation environment or some reference data that applies
personalized pricing for an initial PeDP. At each time step, the AI fast-EVCS
adjusts the personalized electricity price based on the ǫ-greedy strategy and
oﬀers the price to the corresponding EVU. Accordingly, the immediate reward
and the next observation are obtained from the environment. The transition is
stored sequentially. To update the Q-network, we randomly sample a sequence
of transitions

St, At, Rt, St+1

.
The entire process of the proposed approach is presented in Figure 4. First,
we initialize the environment using Algorithm 2, replay memory, and Q-network
weights θ. We adopt the replay memory (experience replay) to have the advan-
tages of improving learning speed and mitigating the undesirable temporal cor-
relations [51]. Once the AI fast-EVCS starts to apply the proposed approach, it
receives public and privacy-preserved information from competing fast-EVCSs
and EV users, respectively. Then, the AI fast-EVCS eˆj adjusts personalized
electricity price pt
(i,¯j) to corresponding EV user bi using the ǫ−greedy policy,
4Note that it is not easy to take deeper and wider networks and say it is better. We have
attempted many diﬀerent settings with diﬀerent depths and widths of ANNs, but neither the
convergence nor the accuracy changed signiﬁcantly. Based on our simulation environment, a
single hidden layer with 128 neurons was suﬃcient.
19

Algorithm 1 Q-learning for the personalized dynamic pricing problem
//Initialization
1: Initialize environment, replay memory N, t = 1
2: Initialize Q-network with θ
3: while Stopping criterion has not been met do
4:
Choose an action At at state St with probability ǫ
5:
otherwise choose action At = maxA Qπ(St, A; θ)
6:
Execute action At in the environment Algorithm 2
7:
Observe reward Rt and St+1
8:
Store transition

St, At, Rt, St+1

in N
9:
Sample random mini-batch of transitions
10:

Sl, Al, Rl, Sl+1

from N
11:
Compute target tgl = Rl + γ maxAl Q(Sl+1, A′; θ)
12:
Perform the gradient of
 tgl −Q(Sl, Al; θ)
2 to update θ
13:
t = t + 1
14: end while
which randomly chooses an action with probability ǫ and most of behaves in a
greedy manner. We set ǫ as 0.2, and its discounting factor is 0.99 for all numer-
ical experiments in this study. It oﬀers the price pt
(i,¯j) to each corresponding
EV user. The environment, which includes EV users’ charging station selections
and competing fast-EVCSs public electricity prices and the number of available
charging slots, is updated using Algorithm 2. It observes individual revenue
from each EV user and updates pricing policies: 1) Yes (arrival and charging)
- update pricing policy; 2) Not arrived - no update; and 3) No (pass by the
charging station) - update pricing policy. During the training stage, the pricing
policy of the AI fast-EVCS is trained only when EV user bi is charging at the AI
fast-EVCS or when it has passed the AI fast-EVCS. To avoid excessive training
time, this process runs until the criterion is met, ∆L = |Lt(θ) −Lt−1(θ)| ≤λ
where λ (=0.005) is a stopping criterion, in which the criterion is the loss dif-
ference between the last two iterations. Finally, the AI fast-EVCS will obtain
20

the PeDP.
Figure 4: Flowchart for implementing the Q-learning algorithm to the personalized dynamic
pricing problem (training stage)
21

4.2.1. Convergence
The convergence of Algorithm 1 is an important concept to ensure that the
learning process produces a pricing policy that achieves the optimal performance
in the charging environment. One way to ensure the convergence of the RL ap-
proach is known as Greedy in the Limit of Inﬁnite Exploration (GLIE). GLIE is
a property of the learning algorithm that guarantees convergence of an optimal
policy under certain conditions. It requires that the reward function is station-
ary and the state-action space is ﬁnite, and the agent inﬁnitely explores the
environment, in which case we use the stopping criterion ∆L instead in order
to avoid excessive exploration. Also, as the number of iterations of the learning
process increases, the probability of a random action decreases. In the limit, the
agent selects the greedy action with probability 1, and thus the learning process
converges to the optimal policy.
5. Numerical simulations
For ease of illustration, we conduct the simulations in either the duopoly
market (two fast-EVCSs) or the oligopoly market (three fast-EVCSs) with a
large number of EV users after training AI fast-EVCS by tuning the hyperpa-
rameters of the function approximator. Note that we use the term “simulation
(with training or validation)” for “training” or “validation” widely used in ma-
chine learning society because we conduct them in the simulation environment
only. It is assumed that the speciﬁcations of the fast-EVCSs and the EVs in the
study are the same as shown in Table 2. For the sake of comparison, the time
cycle is divided into 24(hours)×60(minutes). Electricity prices are determined
according to the pricing policy of each charging station. Once an AI fast-EVCS
has decided to use PuDP or PeDP, they follow that policy and do not change.
In the case of the PeDP, the AI fast-EVCS oﬀers personalized electricity prices
every minute to corresponding EV users. The prices are valid until the EV user
enters the AI fast-EVCS or is no longer interested in the AI fast-EVCS (i.e., they
are valid until the EV users pass the AI fast-EVCS). In the case of the PuDP,
22

unlike the PeDP, the AI fast-EVCS broadcasts the public electricity price every
minute5. Conventional fast-EVCS that adopts the gas station’s pricing policy
broadcasts the public electricity price every half-hour based on Algorithm 3.
Note that the time interval for the price update needs social agreements as it
might create confusion and fear of uncertainties when the interval is very short
or not deﬁned, and EV users should change their decisions often. However, in
this study, we exclude the EV users’ confusion and fear.
Table 2: Environment settings
Environment for fast-EVCSs
# of fast-EVCSs
{ e1, e2, · · · }
Charger type
Level 3 (DC charger)
Eﬃciency [SOC/min]
0.0267
# of charging slots
4 for each
Wholesale price [AC/kWh]
0.35 [1]
Regulated price [AC/kWh]
0.55 [1]
Environment for EVs6
Travel Range [km]
800
Initial SOC
Random btw 0.25 and 0.75
Speed of EVs [km/h]
100
Maximum SOC
0.8
Utility function
Eq.(1) or Eq.(8)
It should be pointed out that all the parameters and environmental settings
in the numerical simulations are speciﬁc and can be changed according to other
factors such as the electricity market, the characteristics of the fast-EVCSs and
the EV users, etc. Namely, the proposed approach can be suitably applied in
other given environment settings. The hyperparameters used for the training in
this study are as shown in Table 3.
Using the optimal pricing policy obtained through the proposed approach in
the given environmental setting, 30-day simulations are performed. At each iter-
5Note that although the time interval for updating prices can be varied depending on
pricing policies, operators, etc., the social agreement between customers and business owners
should be discussed for the fairness of the service later.
23

Table 3: Hyperparameters for training
Learning rate
0.01
Epsilon (ǫ)
0.15
Discount factor
0.99
ation of the simulation, the AI fast-EVCS receives the public/privacy-preserved
information; then the AI fast-EVCS adjusts the personalized electricity prices
and oﬀers them to corresponding EV users based on the optimal pricing policy;
and the AI fast-EVCS receives the rewards. When electricity prices are pro-
vided by each fast-EVCS, EV users select a fast-EVCS in a way to maximize
the monetary utility function.
The following sections present 30-day simulation results to validate the per-
formance of the proposed PuDP and investigate the importance of information
usage from three diﬀerent perspectives: (Case 1) from the system perspective
— we present the importance of expected waiting time in the EV charging
market by comparing the proposed PeDP and the classic Bertrand competition
model; (Case 2) from the fast-EVCS perspective — we verify the performance
of the PeDP and compare the simulation results for various information sets to
analyze the importance of using each information; (Case 3) from the EV user
perspective — we show a privacy-preserved information misuse case in the EV
charging market. Note that, in the numerical simulations, all the environment
settings are the same as described in Table 2 unless it is mentioned otherwise.
5.1. Case 1: from the system perspective
In the EV charging market, not only the electricity price but also the ex-
pected waiting time play a very important role in the EV user’s charging station
decision. In this numerical simulation, we show the importance of the expected
waiting time by comparing the following three cases. First, we show the conven-
tional fast-EVCSs pricing competition using the classic Bertrand competition
model in Appendix A. Second, we show the pricing competition in the duopoly
market using the proposed PuDP, where a utility function of the EV users is
24

Eq.(8) (i.e., the EV users only consider the electricity price).
ut
(i,j) = ks
ˇsij(cf + pt
(i,j)∆SOC(i,j)B)
∆SOC(i,j)
.
(8)
We show the simulation results with the expected waiting time using the pro-
posed approach in the same environment. The utility function of the EV users
is Eq.(1). Figure 5 is the simulation environment where two fast-EVCSs are
located at the same place and a large number of EVs are dynamically entering
the highway and charging at one of the two fast-EVCSs necessarily.
!!
!"
"!
"#
""
"$
"%
Figure 5: System model for case 1 and case 2. Two fast-EVCSs are located at the same place
[e1 = 250km, e2 = 250km]
- Classic Bertrand competition model (no waiting):
In the classic
Bertrand competition model, it is well known that two ﬁrms’ competitive pric-
ing converges to the marginal cost (wholesale price in this study), which is a
Nash equilibrium price. In order to show the price competition, we utilize Algo-
rithm 3 in Appendix A, in which the algorithm is based on the classic Bertrand
competition model. Figure 6 shows that when the two fast-EVCSs start to com-
pete at the regulated price, the highest price, the optimal electricity prices of
both fast-EVCSs converge to the wholesale price, which is equal to the equilib-
rium price. Figure 7(a) shows the 30-day simulation results when both of the
fast-EVCSs set the public electricity prices as the equilibrium price. Since their
public electricity prices are equal to the wholesale price, no revenue is obtained
even if both fast-EVCSs have EV customers.
- PuDP without expected waiting time: In the same environment, we
apply the PuDP without expected waiting time to both fast-EVCSs, in which
Eq.(8) is used as the utility function of the EV users.
The main diﬀerence
between Bertrand competition and PuDP without expected waiting time is the
customer demand model. For the former one, the whole demand is determined
25

0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
WP
WP
RP
RP
Figure 6: Best response price trajectories for both fast-EVCSs (e1 = ‘ × ’ (red), e2 = ‘ ∗’
(blue)). RP: Retail Price, and WP: Wholesale Price
-50
0
50
300
350
400
450
(a)
-50
0
50
300
350
400
450
(b)
1
1.2
1.4
104
300
350
400
450
(c)
Figure 7: Boxplot of 30-day numerical simulation results for each case: (a) Classic Bertrand
competition model; (b) PuDP without expected waiting time; (c) PuDP with expected waiting
time.
by the price, while the demand is determined by the individual driver’s decision
for the later one. It is assumed that both fast-EVCSs are AI, and they compete
with each other by adjusting only public electricity prices, from which they
26

can access public information. For example, the AI fast-EVCS e1 can observe
(pt
(·,2), ∆ct
2) and the AI fast-EVCS e2 can observe (pt
(·,1), ∆ct
1). In other words,
each fast-EVCS determines the public electricity price based on the information.
The pricing policies obtained through the proposed approach converge to the
wholesale electricity price for both AI fast-EVCSs. In Figure 7(b), therefore, no
revenue is obtained for both fast-EVCSs. This is due to the utility function that
changes all charging demands with a small price diﬀerence, like the Bertrand
model.
- PuDP policy with expected waiting time: In this case, we also apply the
PuDP policy to the same environment as in the two previous cases. In order to
show the importance of the expected waiting time to the EV charging market,
we use Eq.(1) as the utility function of the EV users. As in the previous case,
each AI fast-EVCS can observe the number of available charging slots and the
public electricity prices. Unlike the two previous pricing policies, when the EV
users consider the expected waiting time, the pricing policies of both AI fast-
EVCSs converge to the maximum electricity price. The training trajectories of
two charging stations are shown in Figure 8. From the ﬁgure, we can observe
that both of the charging stations have been stable since day 350. Before the
point, we can see that e1 makes high revenue when e2 makes low revenue, and
vice versa. It is mostly because of the electricity price. For example, e1 will
make high revenue when the electricity price of e1 is lower than e2’s electricity
price (Q1-8).
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
5000
10000
15000
Figure 8: Training trajectories of two AI fast-EVCSs’ revenue where the proposed monetary
utility function Eq.(1) is utilized for the EV users’ utility.
27

The results are due to the expected waiting time, also, the AI fast-EVCSs
empirically learn that EV users come to their charging stations for charging
in certain situations. For example, even though the public electricity price of
the AI fast-EVCS e1 is higher than the personalized electricity price of the AI
fast-EVCS e2, the EV users will select e1 if the value of the estimated waiting
time at e2 is greater than the electricity price diﬀerence between them. In other
words, if the expected waiting time of a competitive fast-EVCS is long, the AI
fast-EVCS learns empirically that it is possible to increase the public electricity
price without a speciﬁc model and information. Figure 7(c) shows that in this
case, both AI fast-EVCSs yield considerably high revenue.
Due to the long charging time of EVs, the EV charging market has been
expected to be diﬀerent from the petrol station market. From the three com-
parison simulation results, it is found that the expected waiting time plays a
very important role in the pricing policy of the fast-EVCSs. Additionally, we
ﬁnd that the PuDP without expected waiting time converges to the same Nash
equilibrium price as the classic Bertrand competition model’s Nash equilibrium
price in the duopoly EV charging market.
5.2. Case 2: from the fast-EVCS perspective
- Veriﬁcation of the PeDP: We show a 30-day simulation result to evaluate
the performance of the PeDP in the given environment shown in Figure 9.
The simulation is conducted based on one AI fast-EVCS (e2[200km]), and two
conventional fast-EVCS (e1[150km], e3[400km]). The AI fast-EVCS applies the
PeDP while the other two fast-EVCSs adjust the public electricity prices every
30 minutes based on Algorithm 37. The rest of the simulation settings are shown
in Table 2.
The main outputs of the simulation are the revenue and the number of
7For exploration in terms of the electricity price, in this simulation, one of two fast-EVCSs
(e1, e3) randomly selects a public electricity price, and another fast-EVCS determines its
public electricity price based on only one iteration step of Algorithm 3.
28

!!
!"
"#
""
"!
"$
!"#$%&'()*+,
+-./0#$%&'()*+,
!#
+-./0#$%&'()*+,
Figure 9: Three fast-EVCSs are located at the diﬀerent places in the oligopoly market [e1 =
150km, e2 = 200km, e3 = 400km].
0
2000
4000
(a)
0
50
100
150
200
(b)
250
300
350
400
450
(c)
0
10
20
30
40
(d)
Figure 10: Median values of 30-day simulation results for three fast-EVCSs. (a) accumulative
revenue; (b) the number of charged EVs; (c) electricity cost to EV users; (d) waiting cost to
EV users.
charged EV users for each fast-EVCS. Figure 10(a) and (b) show the accumu-
lative revenue and the number of charged EVs at each fast-EVCS. Figure 10(a)
and (b) clearly show that the AI-fast EVCS e2 with the PeDP makes the most
revenue among them by attracting most of the EV users. Figure 10(c) and (d)
show that the EV users who select e2 pay less electricity cost but cost more on
waiting time than the EV users who select either e1 or e3. From Figure 11, we
can see the more detailed PeDP. Figure 11(a) shows the trajectories of the num-
ber of available charging slots and the personalized electricity price over time
for each fast-EVCS based on their PeDP. Based on the public/privacy-preserved
information, such as the number of available charging slots, the public electricity
prices of competitors, etc., the AI fast-EVCS adjusts the personalized electric-
ity price and oﬀers it to the corresponding EV user. Each EV user selects one
fast-EVCS among them to charge based on the public or personalized electricity
prices and the number of available charging slots of the fast-EVCSs, as shown
29

0
100
200
300
400
500
600
-40
-20
0
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
0.5
1
1.5
-2
0
2
4
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
100
200
300
400
Figure 11: Simulation results of the PeDP for the individual EV users in the given environment
shown in Figure 9.
in Figure 11(b). In other words, the EV users choose fast-EVCSs based on the
proposed monetary utility function, Eq.(1). Figure 11(c) shows the monetary
utility of the EV users for the fast-EVCS e2. In Figure 11(b), for example, let
us see the decision-making process of the EV user, bi, who enters the highway at
197 minutes with SOC level 0.67 and visits the AI fast-EVCS, e2, at 319 minutes
with SOC level 0.43. As shown in Figure 11(a) the lower personalized electricity
price of e2 attracts the EV user despite the lack of available charging slots at the
fast-EVCS e2. Exceptionally, even with the lower personalized electricity price
and no waiting cost between 244 minutes and 258 minutes, the EV user selects
e3, which is 200km further away from e2. This is due to the lack of available
charging slots at e2. We can see a small decrease in the total monetary utility
value in Figure 11(c). In other words, EV users always try to make economical
30

choices, and the AI-fast EVCS oﬀers marginal prices to attract EV users.
- Information importance analysis: From the above simulation results of
the performance veriﬁcation, the AI fast-EVCS adapts to the given environment
and ﬁnds the optimal pricing policy based on the given information. In this case,
we analyze how the public/privacy-preserved information aﬀects pricing policies
for maximizing revenue through numerical simulations with diﬀerent state sets.
For the fair and simple comparison as shown in Figure 5, we place one AI
fast-EVCS e1 and one conventional fast-EVCS e2 at the same location, which is
250km from the entrance of the highway. In addition, we ﬁx the public electricity
price of the competing fast-EVCS (p2 = 0.52) to observe the inﬂuence and
importance of the diﬀerent state sets. We ﬁnd the PeDP or PuDP and conduct
30-day simulations for four cases: Case 2.1: s(pt
(·,j)); Case 2.2: s(pt
(·,j), vt
P);
Case 2.3: s(pt
(·,j), ∆ct
j, ∆ct
¯j); and Case 2.4: s(pt
(·,j), vt
P, ∆ct
j, ∆ct
ˆj), ∀ej ∈E \ e¯j.
The simulation results are shown in Table 4. Note that Case 2.1 and 2.3 do
not have privacy-preserved information about EV users, so they broadcast the
public electricity price to all EV users. That is, the two cases are the PuDP.
Table 4: Median values of 30-day numerical simulation results for the four cases in Figure
5.
Case 2.1: s(pt
(·,j)); Case 2.2: s(pt
(·,j), vt
P); Case 2.3: s(pt
(·,j), ∆ct
j, ∆ct
¯j); and Case 2.4:
s(pt
(·,j), vt
P, ∆ct
j, ∆ct
ˆj)
Fast-EVCSs (e1/e2)
EV users’ utility to fast EVCSs (e1/e2) [euro]
Case
Revenue [euro]
# of EVs
Total utility
Electricity utility
Waiting utility
2.1
(4392.2/0.0)
(193/0)
(359.3/0.0)
(326.1/0.0)
(32.9/0.0)
2.2
(4958.6/0.0)
(193/0)
(373.6/0.0)
(333.4/0.0)
(40.0/0.0)
2.3
(6725.1/447.1)
(186/8)
(385.6/400.93)
(356.7/400.9)
(28.7/0.0)
2.4
(6832.5/1175.2)
(173/20)
(385.4/402.2)
(364.4/401.6)
(20.9/0.3)
Case 2.1 shows the lowest revenue while the number of charged EVs is high,
as shown in Table 4. Because of the limited information, the AI fast-EVCS
e1 conservatively adjusts the public electricity price. For example, the AI fast-
EVCS e1 somehow assumes that the number of available charging slots ∆ct
2 is
always the maximum value because the AI fast-EVCS e1 does not observe ∆ct
2
for the pricing policy.
31

In Case 2.2, the AI fast-EVCS e1 receives the privacy-preserved information
vt
P, which is eSOC(i,1), ∀bi ∈B. Based on the information, the AI fast-EVCS
adjusts the personalized electricity price for each corresponding EV user. This
case shows the advantage of observing the privacy-preserved information. The
AI fast-EVCS can implicitly consider the ﬁxed cost cf in Eq.(1) because the cost
depends on the ∆SOC(i,j). For example, the monetary utility of EV user bi is
higher than that of EV user bi′ when eSOC(i,1) > eSOC(i′,1). Therefore, based
on the information, the AI fast-EVCS determines personalized electricity prices
to attract customers with 12.9% more revenue than Case 2.1.
Case 2.3 shows the simulation results when the AI fast-EVCS e1 considers
the number of available charging slots ∆ct
2 and the public electricity price pt
(·,2)
as the state. ∆ct
2 is directly related to the expected waiting time at e2 which
aﬀects the EV user’s decision-making. In other words, if the public electricity
price gap between two fast-EVCSs, pt
(·,2) −pt
(·,1), is bigger than the waiting cost
at e1, which is the latter term of Eq.(1), the EV user selects the AI fast-EVCS
e1 for charging. Table 4 shows that Case 2.3 yields 53.12% and 35.63% higher
returns than Case 2.1 and Case 2.2, respectively. In other words, to increase
revenue, it is shown that it is more important to utilize the number of charging
slots ∆ct
2 rather than utilizing other information.
In Case 2.4, ﬁnally, the AI fast-EVCS e1 considers the public electricity
price pt
(·,2) and the number of available charging slots ∆ct
2 and estimated SOC
eSOC(i,1), ∀bi ∈B as the state. The AI fast-EVCS has the highest revenue
among the other cases, even if the AI fast-EVCS loses some EV users. Never-
theless, the reason for the high revenue can be found in the electricity utility
in Table 4. In Case 2.4, the AI fast-EVCS beneﬁts from EV users by oﬀering
higher personalized electricity prices than in any other case. Note that the pur-
pose of the simulation results is not to show a quantitative comparison but to
analyze the importance of the information as the states of the AI fast-EVCS.
32

5.3. Case 3: from the EV user perspective
In the previous two cases, we showed the importance of the information and
the performance of the proposed approach. In Case 3, we present a case where
even the privacy-preserved information could be abused by the AI fast-EVCS.
In the duopoly EV charging market, when two fast-EVCSs are in diﬀerent loca-
tions, the AI fast-EVCS close to the entrance of the highway is likely to misuse
the privacy-preserved information for its revenue improvement.
We show a
misuse case in the duopoly EV charging market using the PeDP in the environ-
ment, as shown in Figure 12. Except for the fast-EVCS locations (e1 =200km
and e2 =400km), the environment is the same as the environment for Case 2.2.
!!
!"
""
"!
"#
"$
!"#$%&'()*+,
+-./0#$%&'()*+,
Figure 12: Two fast-EVCSs are located at the diﬀerent places in the duopoly market [e1 =
200km, e2 = 400km].
(a)
(b)
Figure 13: The PeDP with regards to the eSOC for (a) the environment shown in Figure 12;
and for (b) the environment for Case 2.2 shown in Figure 5.
As similar to Case 2.2, the AI fast-EVCS attracts most of the EV users with
33

marginal peronalized electricity prices. However, due to the low SOC, some EV
users cannot reach e2. In other words, these EV users are forced to charge at
e1 regardless of the electricity price. In such a situation where two fast-EVCSs
are separated from each other, simply sharing eSOC, which is privacy-preserved
information, can lead to an unfair pricing policy (i.e., causing a transformation
from the duopoly market to the monopoly market). The misused PeDP obtained
using the proposed approach for the environment is shown in Figure 13(a). As
we discussed, the reason for the dramatically increasing personalized electricity
price is obvious. Since the EV users do not have enough SOC to reach e2, they
only have the option to charge at e1. The AI fast-EVCS empirically knows the
facts and utilizes them. On the other hand, Figure 13(b) shows the PeDP of Case
2.2, which has no abuse of the privacy-preserved information. Therefore, EV
users are always in the duopoly market when two fast-EVCSs are located in the
same place. From the simulation results, we conclude that sharing the privacy-
preserved information, which is the eSOCs of anonymous EVs, could implicitly
change the duopoly market to the monopoly market and could be misused by the
AI fast-EVCS. Therefore, in order to avoid misuse cases, policymakers should
be more careful in permitting the utilization of privacy-preserved information
or in the placement of fast-EVCSs such as Figure 9 (i.e., the oligopoly market).
6. Discussion, conclusions, and future research
In this paper, the PeDP algorithm is proposed, wherein the AI fast-EVCS
can adaptively adjust the personalized electricity price in the proposed environ-
ment using the RL methodology according to the public information from com-
peting fast-EVCSs and the privacy-preserved information from the EV users.
Through the use of the proposed approach, the AI fast-EVCS does not re-
quire any speciﬁc model of the environment on which an action for personalized
electricity price needs to be selected. Instead, the proposed approach utilizes
the relationship between states, actions, and rewards for learning through the
dynamic interaction between the AI fast-EVCS, the competing fast-EVCSs, and
34

EV users. Therefore, such a learning approach might be useful for managing the
fast-charging stations in the near future, where we should be concerned about
the electricity shortage. Apart from the methodological ﬁndings for the appli-
cation, the numerical simulation results show 1) the radical diﬀerence between
conventional refueling and fast-EVCS charging due to the long charging time
as shown in Section 5.1; 2) the performance of the PeDP is evaluated and the
importance of information is analyzed with the diﬀerent sets of states as shown
in Section 5.2; and 3) the AI fast-EVCSs could misuse the privacy-preserved in-
formation of anonymous EVs for maximizing their revenue, which is forbidden
in the competitive market as shown in Section 5.3. For the implementation of
the proposed approach, users might be required to provide a data set without
applying the approach for training for some period of time. As Q-learning is an
oﬀ-policy RL approach, it is easy to implement, update, or change the policy
with a trained model. The computational time to real-time run it is relatively
of low cost.
To apply this research to real-world systems, there are still several open ques-
tions that need consideration. Obtaining charging station decision-making data
from EV users is crucial. In this study and many previous ones, the lack of such
information led us to model them and use assumptions. If the decision-making
data in real environments were available, it would enable the development of a
more meaningful decision model for EV users. Despite the assumptions made
in our research and others, the consideration of a 1-D scenario, even on high-
ways, has inherent limitations in many real-world cases. In complex network
situations, such as highways, it becomes necessary to address these limitations.
Game-based methodologies may face increased modeling complexity in such sce-
narios, making it challenging to model and ﬁnd equilibrium. In the case of the
methodology we proposed, careful consideration is needed regarding computa-
tional complexity. Additionally, our study focused solely on decision-making
aspects and did not consider power grid stability. This constraint should be
acknowledged and addressed.
In the future, the presented framework could be utilized to investigate the
35

following practical problem: 1) revenue maximization problem in competitive
environments with multiple AI fast-EVCSs; 2) electricity pricing policy opti-
mization around the city center by considering the traﬃc networks; and 3) sta-
ble energy distribution problem by pricing. We also suggest readers investigate
the following directions: policy gradient-based RL approaches for the person-
alized dynamic pricing policy; include the following question in the problem
statement: “Which type of pricing policy (PeDP or PuDP) an AI fast-EVCS
should select?”; when a service provider owns and operates multiple charging
stations, which might require synchronization and/or coordination algorithms;
when smart EV users select their most cost-eﬀective EVCS. Finally, such per-
sonalized policies should be discussed and agreed upon from a social-ethical
equity perspective and approved by authorities.
Acknowledgment
B. Kulcs´ar acknowledges the contribution of Transport Area of Advance
at Chalmers University of Technology.
The project has been partially sup-
ported by European Comision(F-ENUAC-2022-0003) and Energimyndigheten
(2023-00021) through the project E-LaaS:Energy optimal urban Logistics As A
Service.
Appendix A. Appendix A: Algorithm for CSSG
In this appendix, we describe the algorithm for solving the charging station
selection game described in Section 2. Nash stable partition is formally deﬁned
as follows.
Deﬁnition 1 (Deviated partition). Given an instance of CSSG deﬁned as a
tuple (B, E, P), EV user bi may unilaterally deviate to group gj since the user
prefers to fast-EVCS ej in the context. We refer to the resultant partition as a
deviated partition, denoted by Pi→j.
Deﬁnition 2 (Nash stable partition). A partition P is Nash stable if, for every
EV user bi ∈B, it holds that ui(P) ≥ui(Pi→j), ∀ej ∈E.
36

Given an instance of charging station selection game (CSSG), the algorithm
to ﬁnd a Nash stable partition is presented in Algorithm 2. Here, superscripts
indicate local information known to EV users.
Every EV user bi ∈B has local variables for its decision such as Pi, ri,
si, and satisﬁedi (line 2). Here, Pi is the EV user’s locally known partition;
ri ∈Z> is a positive integer variable to represent how many times Pi has
evolved; and si ∈[0, 1] is a uniform random variable that is generated whenever
Pi is updated; and satisﬁedi is a binary array that includes the information
whether or not each EV user is satisﬁed with Pi such that it does not want to
deviate from its current fast-EVCS. Given Pi, EV user bi examines which fast-
EVCS is the most preferred among other fast-EVCSs, assuming that the other
EV users stay at the current fast-EVCSs (line 5). Then the EV user selects
the newly found fast-EVCS if it is more preferred than the current fast-EVCS.
In this case, the EV user updates Pi to reﬂect its new decision, increases ri,
and generates a random time stamp si (line 6-10). In any case, the EV user
ascertained that the current fast-EVCS is the most preferred one, so the EV
user satisﬁes with Pi (line 11). Then, EV user bi sends its status to the selected
fast-EVCS via a message M i := {ri, si, Pi, satisﬁedi}, and receives M j from all
fast-EVCSs (line 15).
Since every EV user updates their locally known partition obtained from
the fast-EVCSs simultaneously, one of the partitions should be considered as if
it were the partition updated by a deciding EV user at the previous iteration
(refer to this partition as the valid partition). The distributed mutual exclusion
part of Algorithm 2 enables the EV users to identify the valid partition. Once
each EV user bi collects all the messages from all fast-EVCSs Mi
rvc (line 16).
Based on the message set, the EV user identiﬁes whether or not their partition
Pi is valid. In the case if there are partitions Pk such that ri < rk, then the
EV user judges that partition Pk is more valid then Pi. When ri = rk, a higher
time stamp si and sk determine the valid partition. Now, since Pk is judged
as more valid, EV user bi needs to re-examine whether or not there is a more
preferred fast-EVCS in the next iteration (line 17-21). Depending on satisﬁedi,
37

Algorithm 2 Decision-making of each EV user bi
1: function CSSG(P)
// Initialization
2:
Pi ←P; ri ←0; si ←0; satisﬁedi ←0nα×1
3:
repeat
// Make a new decision if necessary
4:
if satisﬁedi[i] = 0 then
5:
ˆPi ←arg max∀Pi
i→j∈ePi
i ui(Pi
i→j)
6:
if ˆPi ̸= Pi then
7:
Pi ←ˆPi
8:
ri ←ri + 1; si ∈unif[0, 1]
9:
satisﬁedi ←0nα×1
10:
end if
11:
satisﬁedi[i] ←1
12:
end if
// Distributed Mutual Exclusion
13:
Broadcast M i = {ri, si, Pi, satisﬁedi}
14:
to the selected EVCS and
15:
receive M k from EVCSs ∀ej ∈E
16:
Collect all the messages Mi
rcv = {M i, ∀M k}
17:
for each message M k ∈Mi
rcv do
18:
if (rk > ri) or (rk = ri & sk > si) then
19:
M i ←M k
20:
end if
21:
end for
22:
until satisﬁedi = 1nα×1
23:
return Pi
24: end function
each EV proceeds the decision-making process again until satisﬁedi = 1nα×1.
In Algorithm 2, the behavior of each EV user is to pursue its highest mon-
38

etary utility greedily and unilaterally. EV users executing this straightforward
local algorithm can ﬁnd a stable outcome as a collective behavior under cer-
tain conditions. One of them is called SPAO (Single-Peaked-At-One)[47], and
this condition enables the agents in Algorithm 2 to converge to a Nash stable
partition. In the context of this paper, SPAO can be rephrased as follows:
Deﬁnition 3 (SPAO condition). Given P, for EV user bi, let eP−i = ∪∀bl∈B\{bi} ePl
denote all the possible deviated partitions by any of all the other EV users. The
individual utility of EV user bi is SPAO (Single-Peaked-At-One) if it holds for
any P that ui(P) ≥ui(P′) for ∀P′ ∈eP−i such that |gP(i)| < |gP′(i)|.
In other words, the condition can be interpreted as that each EV user utility
is monotonically decreased whenever a new EV user joins the same group where
the former belonged to, regardless of the current partition. This fact implies
that EV users satisfying this condition tend to avoid crowdedness.
Lemma 1. If an instance (B, E, P) in which the current partition is Nash stable
holds SPAO, the new instance ( ˆB, E, ˆP) that has a new EV bq /∈B holding SPAO
with regard to every EVCS ej ∈E also, (1) satisﬁes SPAO; (2) contains a Nash
stable partition; and (3) the maximum number of iterations required to converge
to a Nash stable partition is | ˆB|.
Theorem 1 (Existence of Algorithm 2). If an instance (B, E, P) holds SPAO
condition, then a Nash stable partition always exists.
Theorem 2 (Convergence of Algorithm 2). If an instance (B, E, P) holds SPAO
condition, then the number of iterations required to determine a Nash stable
partition is at most |B| · (|B| + 1)/2.
More details of the proofs of Lemma 1, Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 can be
found in [47, 52]
Appendix B: Algorithm for the classic Bertrand competition model
This model is based on the following assumptions: 1) at least two fast-EVCSs
providing the same quality electricity (i.e., homogeneous goods); 2) they cannot
39

cooperative each other; 3) they competes by adjusting public electricity prices
simultaneously; 4) EV users want to charge from a fast-EVCS with a lower
public electricity price; and 5) if the fast-EVCSs set the same public electricity
price, EV users’ demand is splits evenly between them. We suggest a simple
algorithm to ﬁnd the equilibrium price of the model [53].
Algorithm 3 Algorithm for the Bertrand model
1: First day p1 and p2 are set RP
2: for day = 2, end day do
3:
if p1 >= p2 then
4:
p1 = p2 −ǫ
5:
else if p1 < p2 then
6:
p2 = p1 −ǫ
7:
end if
8:
if pi < WP then
9:
pi = WP
10:
end if
11: end for
where we assume that ǫ is very small value between. In the ﬁrst day, both of
the fast-EVCS set public electricity prices to the regulated price. Any of two
decrease its public electricity price if the price is higher than that of another
fast-EVCS. The public electricity prices of the two fast-EVCSs converge to the
marginal electricity price, which is a Nash equilibrium price.
Appendix C: Loss function minimization
The artiﬁcial neural network is trained by minimizing the following loss
function:
L(θ) =
 ytg
k −Q(˜et
j, ˜et
¯j, vt
P, pt
(i,¯j); θ)
2
where ytg
t
= ri(˜et
j, ˜et
¯j, vt
P) + γ maxpt+1
(i,¯j) Q(˜et+1
j
, ˜et+1
¯j
, vt+1
P , pt+1
(i,¯j); θ−) denotes the
target value of action pt
(i,¯j) given state ˜et
j, ˜et
¯j, vt
P. Here, θ−is cloned from θ
40

every ﬁxed number of iterations. At each training iteration t, an experience
nt =

˜et
j, ˜et
¯j, vt
P, pt
(i,¯j), rt(˜et
j, ˜et
¯j, vt
P), ˜et+1
j
, ˜et+1
¯j
, vt+1
P

is sampled uniformly from
the replay memory N [51]. When the AI fast-EVCS selects and oﬀers personal-
ized electricity prices according to an ǫ−greedy. Note that this algorithm solves
the problem directly using samples from the proposed environment without ex-
plicitly modeling the environment (model-free).
