Lost in Algorithms
Andrew N. Sloss
Seattle, Washington State, USA

ABSTRACT
Algorithms are becoming more capable, and with that comes hic
sunt dracones (“here be dragons”). The term symbolizes areas beyond
our known maps. We use this term since we are stepping into an
exciting, potentially dangerous, and unknown area with algorithms.
Our curiosity to understand the natural world drives our search for
new methods. For this reason, it is crucial to explore this subject.
In this document, we look for future algorithms and styles. Each
era in computing has had an algorithm focus. Examples include
periods when military range prediction was necessary, weather
prediction, and, more recently, machine learning. The 1940s saw
the starting point when electronic machines replaced humans [4].
Procedures became too complex to be handled by people. This time
and other historical periods have accelerated additional specific
algorithm development and the associated hardware architectures.
The question for this paper is, what next? As we explore this ques-
tion, we will introduce a set of practical terms to help classify the
various algorithms and hopefully provide a straightforward method
of understanding. At the highest level, algorithms are recipes for
solving problems. Problems range from the small & simple to the
large & complex.
This project covers the behavior of algorithms and the hardware
styles to execute those algorithms. In other words, we will cover
what the algorithms do rather than how they do it. The world of al-
gorithms is a large and complicated subject. To assist in the process,
we will separate the world into three main areas: computer science,
artificial intelligence, and finally quantum computing.
The project’s objective is to overlay the information obtained,
in conjunction with the state of hardware today, to see if we can
determine the likely directions for future algorithms’. Even though
we slightly cover non-classical computing in this paper, our primary
focus is on classical computing (i.e., digital computers). It is worth
noting that non-classical quantum computing requires classical
computers to operate; they are not mutually exclusive.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Mathematics of computing; • Theory of computation →
Models of computation;
KEYWORDS
algorithms, theory, mathematics, software, hardware
1
INTRODUCTION
Figure 1: Algorithm-Environment
Algorithms are critical for industry, research, and ideas. And
have an increasing influence on society. We can say every part of
our lives involves some form of an algorithm. It is a ubiquitous
tool for problem-solving. To run an algorithm, we have many ma-
chines: mechanical, biological, analog, digital, quantum, and even
human-social. We use them to optimize (e.g., repetition), explore
(e.g., search), and even predict (e.g., models). The subject attracts
arXiv:2301.10333v1  [cs.OH]  2 Jan 2023

some of the brightest and most innovative people wanting to dis-
cover better solutions. These people are always at the cutting edge,
striving to do the next complicated task.
Figure 1 shows how we will approach the subject. An algorithm
or recipe has inputs and outputs and lives inside an environment.
The inputs-outputs come as part of the executing environment,
e.g., a digital computer. We will look at algorithms from a behavioral
viewpoint. In other words, what do the algorithms do?, and less on
how they do it?. It is essential to understand the distinctions; we are
not explaining the algorithms themselves but how they affect or
take from the environment. Because of the vast nature of the field,
the focus is mainly on digital computing to help prune the domain.
We have hopefully explained our approach, and the next stage is
to show the relationship between hardware and software. The Venn
diagram shown in Figure 2 attempts to establish the relationship
between hardware, software, and algorithms. We are separating
the worlds, so it is easier to see the connections. Each world has its
styles of thought and process. For instance, algorithms + software
gives us applications, and hardware + software + algorithms give
us an end product. A complete solution is about all three worlds
aligning together.
What came first, hardware or algorithms? This is a chicken or egg
question. Algorithms are probably first, with the role of hardware
being initially human and algorithms being mathematical equa-
tions. Historically, hardware has had to catch up with algorithms.
This catch-up is why sizable effort is applied to optimize a new
algorithm for existing hardware. With one exception, hardware
jumps in capability every so often, forcing algorithms to catch up,
e.g., quantum hardware. Hardware provides the enabling canvass
for the exploration and optimization of algorithms.
Figure
2:
Relationship
between
Hardware-Software-
Algorithms
An algorithm describes a method to utilize software and hard-
ware for problem-solving. There is usually an objective, but not
always. A problem belongs to a problem domain. A problem do-
main is a search space. For example, if a company has a problem
with obtaining electronic components, the problem domain would
probably include suppliers, the ordering process, and the manu-
facturing department. The algorithm should search those areas to
determine a solution. The environment consists of the execution
machine, data input, and a place for the final output decision. The
execution machine is any computation system. Data input comes
from the environment as filtered or noisy real-world data. Lastly,
output decisions can be anything from classification to an action
that makes an environmental change
As computer scientists, we have historically relied on famous
texts. For instance, Robert Sedgewick et al. book on Algorithms [37],
or Donald Knuth book series on The Art of Computer Programming
[24] to provide libraries of known solutions. The knowledge in-
cludes such algorithms as recursive tree structure walking or the
shortest path between two nodes on a graph. These libraries were
the result of decades of experimentation. If we fast forward to today,
we see statistical and probabilistic algorithms becoming ever more
popular. These algorithms are less concerned with precision (i.e.,
absolutes) and more concerned with good enough (i.e., levels-of-
certainty). This trend does not mean the older algorithms are any
less important, but currently, they are not at the cutting edge.
Mathematics allows us to express complex processes or prove
correctness. It is probably our most significant accomplishment.
The language of mathematics underpins the world of algorithms,
and it is how we formally describe recipes. We will start this journey
by looking first at the general objectives, i.e., what should algorithms
explore?.
1.1
General objectives
Algorithms optimize, summarize and discover the world around
us. These pursuits are related to us humans, either to augment or
to move beyond our capabilities. We separate objectives into three
distinct areas:
• What we know
Using historical knowledge and skills
• What we think we want to know
Using investigative methods of exploration
• What we can’t imagine
Going beyond human perception and capability
In the beginning, we described an algorithm as a recipe. The
recipe is a proven sequence of operations that find an answer or
execute computation. Historically, algorithms were optimizations of
what we knew —replicating human procedures. The early hardware
had significant constraints, limiting what algorithms existed. These
early solutions, even though primitive by today’s standards, could
operate 24 hours a day, seven days a week (provided the thermionic
valves did not burn out). The hardware was a digital replacement. As
time has progressed, improvements in computation have allowed
us to shift from “what we know” to “what we think we want to
know”. In other words, the hardware allows us to explore, i.e., find
new knowledge. Exploring involves some form of guessing and, by
implication, takes time. Guessing allows for mistakes. Lastly, this
brings us to the third objective “what we can’t imagine”, these are
the algorithms at the edge of a discovery that cannot necessarily
2

Figure 3: Ideal algorithm
be 100% explained or show a reasoned causal path. Their forms and
structures are still in flux.
Certainty requires some form of confirmation. We used the word
proven, in an earlier paragraph, as an aside. A mathematical proof
is used for validation and differs from an algorithm. In that, what
is computable and what can be proven may be different. We have
an arsenal of automated mechanisms to help verify algorithms.
These include formal methods and the modern trend to explore
complexity hierarchies with various forms of computation. It is
worth mentioning that Kurt Gödel, in 1933, presented the infamous
Incompleteness theorem, showing that not all algorithms can be
proven [23]. Another critical example is David Hilbert’s’s Halting
problem [43], where Alan Turing proved that it is impossible to
determine when an algorithm will stop (or not) given an arbitrary
program and inputs.
As the objectives become more abstract, uncertainty increases.
We can divide uncertainty into two ideas. There is uncertainty
due to the complexity of nature, and there is uncertainty due to
our lack of knowledge. Both play a critical role as we explore our
environment. The first idea is called ontological uncertainty (e.g.,
associated with biology and quantum mechanics), and the second
idea is called epistemological uncertainty (e.g., we do not know the
precise number of people who are left-handed?) [33].
“What we know”, “what we think we want to know”, and “what
we can’t imagine” are the three high-level objectives; we next look
at the aspirations. What should we consider as ideal attributes for a
good algorithm?
1.2
Ideals
There are many ways to think about algorithms. We can look at
demands that an algorithm has to satisfy (e.g., best voice compres-
sion algorithm or highest security level for buying online). The
approach we have decided to adopt is to look at the attributes we
want algorithms to have, the set of ideals. Platonic idealism is the
contemplation of ideal forms. Or, more realistically, a subset of ideal
forms. An ideal involves attempting to find an algorithm without
sacrificing other essential attributes. These attributes include being
efficient with time (the temporal dimension) and using appropri-
ate resources (the spatial dimension). Resources include physical
storage, communication, and computation.
We should make it clear this is not about what is possible with
today’s technology or even in the future but what we want algo-
rithms to achieve, i.e., our expectations. The following list is our
first attempt:
I-1. Perfect solution, is an obvious first ideal. A good outcome is
to have several solutions, each providing a different path and
varying levels of precision & accuracy. Human biases, such
as symmetry, are removed from the outcome unless there is a
requirement for a human-biased result, i.e., a decision is made
between impartial (ethical) or partial (practical) solutions [29].
Finally, the algorithm maps directly onto available hardware
per the spatial dimension.
I-2. Confidence through consistency, we want consistency; an
algorithm creates confidence by providing reliable results.
I-3. Self-selection of the objective, one of the essential activities
humans undertake is determining the purpose. For an ideal
algorithm, we want the goal or sub-goals set by the algorithm
or offered as a set of options, i.e., negotiation.
I-4. Automatic problem decomposition, we want the algorithm
to break down a problem into testable modules. The breakdown
occurs automatically. This process is essential if we want to
handle more significant issues, i.e., more extensive problems.
I-5. Replication when required, specific problems lend themselves
towards parallel processing. For these classes of problems, we
want the algorithm to self-replicate. The replication allows
solutions to scale automatically; some problems require scale.
As much as possible, the algorithms should also work out how
to scale linearly for a solution to be ideal.
3

I-6. Handling the known and unknown, we want an algorithm
to handle problems that are either known (with related so-
lutions) or entirely unknown (where exploration occurs). An
unknown answer, once found, transfers to the known. It learns.
I-7. No preconditions on input data, from an ideal perspective,
we want to remove the format strictness imposed on the input
data. Data acts as an interface for algorithm negotiations. Ana-
lyzing the data means the data format is deducible, removing
the requirement of a fixed interface. Note Machine Learning
has different criteria that are more to do with the quality of the
input data.
I-8. Self-aware, ideally, we want an algorithm to be aware of the
implications of a decision. This implication is especially true
regarding safety-critical problems where a decision could have
dire consequences and, more generally, the emotional or moral
side of a decision. It weighs the effect of the outcome.
I-9. Secure and private, we want an algorithm to handle data so
that it is secure, and if human information is concerned, it
provides privacy.
I-10. Being adaptive, an ideal algorithm can change as the environ-
ment changes and continuously learns from new knowledge.
Knowledge comes from experimenting with the environment
and subsequently improves the algorithm.
I-11. Causal chain, where applicable, we want the causal chain
that produced the result. We want to understand why.
I-12. Total knowledge, an ideal algorithm has all the necessary his-
torical knowledge for a particular area. The algorithm does not
follow information blindly but has all the knowledge about a
specific subject. New knowledge can be identified as an emer-
gent property if an unknown pattern appears. The ideal algo-
rithm becomes an encyclopedia on a particular subject. Maybe
different weights are placed on the knowledge that is correct or
contradictory. Maturity means the topic under study is wholly
understood and has well-defined boundaries.
I-13. Explainable, we want results explained in human understand-
able terms. As the problem becomes more complicated, so do
the answers. We want the algorithms to explain the answer
and, potentially, the context.
I-14. Continuous learning and improvement, as alluded to in
previous ideals, we want the algorithm to continue to learn
and to continue attempts to improve the techniques to produce
a better, faster, less resource-draining solution.
I-15. Cooperative or competitive, the ideal algorithm works in a
multi-agent environment, where agents are assistants for or
detractors against a zero-sum scenario. [35]—the ideal looks
for an alliance with other agents. If an alliance is not possible,
it goes out on its own to solve the problem (Nash equilibrium
[32]). In other words, we want an algorithm to have Games
Theory skills.
I-16. Law-abiding, we need an algorithm to be a law-abiding cit-
izen. It works within the confines of legal law (not scientific
laws). This confinement is essential for algorithms involved in
safety-critical or financial activities.
I-17. Nice and forgiving, is more of a human constraint. We want
algorithms to take the most friendly society approach in a multi-
agent environment; if harm occurs to the algorithm, then a
counter-reaction could be implemented. Within reason, an al-
gorithm can forget any malicious act. This reaction is essential
when only partial information is available [35]. We can argue
whether this is a constraint or an ideal, but we want algorithms
to have some human-like tendencies, e.g., compassion over
revenge).
As pointed out, these are first-pass ideals. We are certain ideals
are missing or need modification. Even though algorithms are likely
to be unique, ideal characteristics define the algorithms’ bound-
aries (or extremes). The limits provide the universal goals for an
algorithm.
We now move the journey to the problem domains. At this point,
we have discussed the importance of algorithms and what the high-
level ideals should be. Hopefully, these ideals indicate why we are
potentially entering unknown territory.
1.3
Computation
Problems make an algorithm attractive, from the challenge of chas-
ing a solution to the actual application. A solution is a map of a
complex world, making it understandable. The map comes from
a boundless library of ideas, e.g., The Library of Babel concept [6].
Each room in the infinite library includes varying truths and falsi-
ties.
As mentioned, problem domains determine the search space of
possibilities, ranging from simple to complex and small to large.
A simple mathematical problem domain tends to have a simple
solution; likewise, a chaotic problem domain leans towards a com-
plicated answer. There is an underlying belief and a hope that a
problem domain is reducible [28]. For example, Sir Isaac Newton
created the Laws of Motion [31] that reduces the complexity of
movement to a set of rules. By contrast, we have failed to reduce
gravitation, electromagnetism, weak nuclear, and strong nuclear
forces to an agreed-upon single solution, i.e., a Grand Unified The-
ory (GUT). We have controversial ideas, such as String Theory, but
no provable solutions [21]. There is a possibility and hope a future
algorithm will eventually solve this problem.
Algorithms rely on reducibility. The likelihood of finding a re-
ducible form is dependent on the complexity level. How we reduce
a problem also depends on the spatial and temporal constraints. A
good example of an external constraint is the timing required for a
successful commercial product. Missing the timing window means
a potential loss of revenue.
Figure 4: Searching, ordering, and compression
A solution to a problem domain involves a combination, and
sequence, of searching, ordering, and compression, see Figure 4. The
4

searching function involves looking for a solution within the prob-
lem domain. Searching is about discovering knowledge. The sorting
function organizes the problem domain in a logical order, i.e., infor-
mation. Finally, the compression function converts the elements to
a new form, i.e., meta-data. These three functions find solutions to
problems.
There are three embarrassing worlds. We have gone over the
goal of reducing complexity and the functions to map complexity
to some form of reasoning; now, we look at the types of problem
domains. We start with the first, embarrassingly parallel problems;
these are problems that map perfectly onto parallel solutions. These
problem types do exist but are relatively rare. Performance is pro-
portional to the available parallel machines, i.e., the more parallel
machines available, the faster the processing. These improvements
remain accurate, while the serial sections are minimal (i.e., tak-
ing into account Amdahl’s law, i.e., parallel performance becomes
limited by the serial parts [2]).
The second embarrassing style is sequential data, i.e., embar-
rassingly sequential. Embarrassingly sequential data follows a strict
structure that can be mechanically optimized. We can design ef-
ficient computation to work best on embarrassingly sequential
data. These problem spaces map efficiently onto software-hardware
systems. They are less chaotic and random.
As we move to real-world situations, the domain types require
complicated synchronizations (a mixture of parallel and serial com-
ponents) and deal with unstructured data. The problems end up be-
ing embarrassingly unhelpful. Bringing the focus back to hardware
efficiency, the prior (i.e., embarrassingly parallel and sequential)
leans towards specialization. The latter (i.e., embarrassingly un-
helpful) leans towards general-purpose machines. General-purpose
machines move towards the Principle of Universality. As-in is capa-
ble of handling all problems. General-purpose machines are better
for embarrassingly unhelpful problems since they reduce complex-
ity using less specialized operations. The embarrassing aspects of
data drive computation design.
Figure 5: Process function
What is computation? It is the act of running an algorithmic
recipe on a machine. A computation process takes input data and
outputs some form of result; see Figure 5. A process can be serially
sequenced or run in parallel. Optional auxiliary feedback is taken
from the output and placed as input, giving an algorithm the ability
to adapt. This characteristic allows for the creation of complex
hardware architectures. Conditional control mechanisms (i.e., if-
then-else) determine the order and flow of the computation either
between processes or within the process.
Figure 6: Computation machines
Figure 6 shows a subset of machines, with combinational logic
as a foundation for the other levels. In this diagram, we place Prob-
abilistic Turing Machine at the top of the computation stack. This
decision will hopefully become self-apparent as we journey further
into algorithms.
Energy is a requirement for computation and, as such, has direct
influence on the choice of algorithms. Carrying out any calculation
requires a form of energy imbalance (following the Laws of Ther-
modynamics). To achieve energy imbalance in classical computing,
we either supply energy directly or harvest the energy from the
environment. Once energy is supplied, execution results in the pro-
duction of heat. Maybe someday we can recycle that heat for further
computation. With future machines, reversibility may become an
essential requirement to reduce energy and to allow more capable
algorithms, i.e., reversible computing [3].
1.4
Input-output relationship
What are the general relationships between the input and output
data? Below are some connections from simple to complex. Finding
any relationship from the data, even a good-enough one, can be
highly complicated.
• Linear relationship, shows a straightforward relationship be-
tween input data and result, example equation 𝑦= 2𝑥.
• Exponential relationship, shows a growth factor between in-
put and output, example equation, 𝑦= 𝑒𝑥.
5

• Nonlinear relationship, difficult to determine the relationship,
a more complex pattern is emerging, example equation 𝑥2 +𝑦2 =
42
• Chaotic relationship, at first sight appears to have no relation-
ship, due to complexity, example equation 𝑥𝑡+1 = 𝑘𝑥𝑡(1 −𝑥𝑡)
• Random/stochastic relationship, the relationship is truly ran-
dom, example equation 𝑦= 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑(𝑥) + 42
1.5
Exploitative vs exploratory
Algorithms handle the known or unknown, namely exploitative or
exploratory. The first relies on knowledge and provides hopefully a
known outcome, for example, following an applied mathematics
equation to determine whether a beam is in tension or compres-
sion. The second type, exploratory algorithms, explores a problem
domain when the exact answer, and maybe even the environment,
is unknown or changing —, for example, an algorithm learning
to fly on a different planet. The alien world will have unknown
gravitational or magnetic challenges. The former concept leans
towards precision and accuracy, whereas the latter is comfortable
with good-enough results, i.e., compromise or palliative.
What comes first, exploitative or exploratory? This is a cart before
the horse question. Whether human or machine, exploratory takes
place before exploitation. It is part of the learning process because
we first have to understand before we can look for a solution. As
we move into the future, we will rely more on algorithms to explore
and find new solutions. And hence, hardware will need to increase
support for more experimental methods. An example of increasing
exploratory support is the trend towards efficient hardware for
training learning systems. Efficiencies in both speeds of training
and power consumption.
Newer algorithms can take advantage of both techniques, i.e.,
explore first and then optimize or exploit until further exploration
is required. This shift is a form of simulated annealing. Annealing
is the method of toughening metals using different cooling rates;
simulation annealing is the algorithm equivalent. Forward simu-
lated annealing starts by first exploring global points (e.g. random
jumps) and then shifts to local points (e.g. simple movements) as
the perceived solution becomes more visible.
Hardware-software: the software can play directly with ex-
ploitative and exploratory algorithms. By contrast, hardware is
dedicated to the exploitative side, i.e., getting the most out of a
known algorithm. Hardware is static and fixed. And the software
provides the ability to adapt and re-configure dynamically. In the
digital context, the software is the nearest we have to adaptive
biological systems. Exploitation allows for hardware-software opti-
mizations.
1.6
Where do algorithms come from?
Are algorithms entirely invented, or are they driven by the problems?
This is a time-old question with deep philosophical arguments from
many sides. If we believe algorithms are invented, anticipating
the future could be difficult. For this reason, we have chosen the
view that problems define algorithms. To make this even easier, we
will state that problems fall under the following four categories: i.
Physics, ii. Evolution, iii. Biology, and iv. Nature. Where algorithmic
ideas develop from one or a combination of categories.
i. Physics gives us the exploration of thermodynamics, quantum
mechanics, and the fabric of the universe. Problems from a
planetary scale to the sub-atomic
ii. Evolution, gives us exciting ways to create future options. Al-
lows algorithms to explore their problem domains, i.e., survival
of the fittest, natural selection, crossover, and mutation
iii. Biology, introduces complex parallel networks, e.g., cell in-
teractions and neuron communications
iv. Nature, provides us with big system problems, e.g., climate
change
As previously pointed out, mathematics is the language to de-
scribe or express algorithms. It is not necessarily a vital source of
inspiration. We believe that the discovery and understanding of the
natural world create algorithms. By observing the natural world,
we can play with predicting future directions and possibilities.
1.7
Measuring computational complexity
Many subjects are concerned with complexity. For example, safety-
critical systems are susceptible to increases in complexity. Com-
puter science has an area of research labeled Computation Complex-
ity Theory dedicated to the subject. The theory translates complex-
ity into time to solve. It is worth mentioning that time taken and
energy is closely connected. Our tentative goal is always to remain
within an energy boundary. Problems break down into different
time relationships as shown in the now infamous Euler diagram
(see Figure 7). Why should we care? Because there exist problems
that are impossible to solve efficiently or are just unsolvable. Pro-
viding more engineering time or effort will not culminate in a faster
solution in these cases.
• Polynomial (P) time, represents computational problems that
are solvable in deterministic polynomial time. These problems
are relatively straightforward to solve on a Turing machine (see
Section 1.3). Low in complexity. The input length determines the
time required for an algorithm to produce a solution.
• Nondeterministic Polynomial (NP) time, are solvable prob-
lems but in nondeterministic polynomial-time. The algorithm can
be proven correct using a deterministic Turing machine. Still, the
search for the solution uses a nondeterministic Turing machine.
The search involves some form of best guess.
• Nondeterministic Polynomial-complete (NP-complete) time,
similar to NP problem, the verification can occur in quick poly-
nomial time but solution requires a brute-force algorithm. Brute
force means there is no efficient path to a solution. These prob-
lems are the most complicated to solve in the NP set. Also, each
problem is reducible in polynomial time. The reducibility allows
for simulation.
• Nondeterministic Polynomial-Hard (NP-hard) time, covers
the truly difficult problems, the hardest NP problems and contin-
ues outside the NP scope. It also includes potential problems that
may not have an answer.
Suppose we look at complexity through an exploitative and
exploratory lens. We see that P covers the exploitative algorithms,
and generally, NP covers the exploratory side, i.e., experimentation.
6

Exploitative
Exploratory
Specialized
General purpose
Narrow
Broad
Focused
Unfocused
Known, well understood
Unknown, and less understood
Best result
Good enough
Turing complete/incomplete
Turing complete
Table 1: Exploitation vs Exploratory
Figure 7: A Euler diagram on complexity - Computer Science
1.8
Measuring probabilistic complexity
Continuing our journey, it becomes apparent that probability is
becoming increasingly important. For this reason, we should try to
understand probabilistic complexity, where good enough, averages,
and certainty play a more critical role. Probability is fundamental
for artificial intelligence, probabilistic computers [13], and quantum
computing, as described later.
These are problems only solvable by a probabilistic Turing ma-
chine [30]. This Turing machine operates with a probability dis-
tribution, which means that a distribution governs the transitions.
This setup gives a probabilistic Turing machine-specific unique
characteristics.
The characteristics are nondeterministic behavior, transition
availability by a probability distribution, and stochastic (random)
results. The stochastic effects require repeatability before a level
of certainty can be established. The behavior means that the same
input and algorithm may produce different run times. There is also a
potential that the machine will fail to halt. Or the inputs are accepted
or rejected on the same machine with varying execution runs. This
variability is why an average of execution runs is required.
Figure 8 shows an extension to the traditional Euler diagram
with probabilistic complexity [30]. Rather than covering all the
different options, permit us to focus on three especially relevant
examples:
Figure 8: Probabilistic complexity (Wikipedia)
• Bounded-error Probabilistic Polynomial (BPP) time, an al-
gorithm that is a member of BPP runs on a classical computer
to make arbitrary decisions that run in polynomial time. The
probability of an answer being wrong is at most 1
3, whether the
answer is heads or tails (i.e., a coin flip).
• Pounded-error quantum Polynomial (BQP) time,
an algorithm that is a member of BQP can decide if there exists a
quantum algorithm running on a quantum computer with high
probability and guaranteed to run in polynomial time. As with
BPP, the algorithm’s run will correctly solve the decision problem
with a probability of at least 2
3.
• Probabilistic Turing machine in Polynomial time (PP) time,
is simply a algorithm were the probability of error is less than 1
2
for all instances.
Finally, probability complexity is linked directly to the probabil-
ity of being wrong. Errors are part of the process and, as such, need
to be handled or mitigated.
Note that Figure 8 captures the relative topology, but not the
algorithmic class size. How important each member will be in
comparison is still to be determined.
Now that we have described some parts of measuring complexity,
we can move on to the objective.
7

1.9
Algorithm objective
An algorithm has to have some form of direction. The direction
can take one of three forms single objective, multi-objective, and
objective-less. A single objective means only one search goal, e.g.,
performance or power. Single search goals tend to be simpler prob-
lems to solve but not always. A multi-objective is more complicated
with multiple search goals to satisfy, e.g., performance, power, and
area. Multi-objective searches look for a compromise between the
solutions. These compromises live on what is called the Pareto op-
timal, see Figure 9. Finally, objective-less relies on gaining new
experiences in an environment rather than moving towards any
particular goal [40]. The idea is that by gaining experience, a better
understanding of the problem domain occurs, thus allowing for
significantly better solutions.
Figure 9: Multi-objective Pareto Curve
For most of this century, the focus has been on a single objec-
tive, but problems have changed in the last fifty years, and multi-
objective problems are more typical. Figure 9 shows two objectives
for an electric car. These objectives are the best acceleration on
the x-axis and the lowest power consumption on the y-axis. p1
represents the fastest option (e.g., fast tires, higher voltage, and per-
formance electric motors), whereas p2 represents the lowest power
consumption (e.g., aerodynamic tires, voltage limited, and balanced
electric motors). The edge between the two extremes is the Pareto
front, a point on the front (e.g., p3) is Pareto optimal. The best solu-
tion must be a compromise between acceleration times and power
consumption. There are no perfect solutions, just compromises of
opposing objectives.
As a counter-intuitive idea, objective-less is an exciting alterna-
tive. The algorithm is placed in an environment and then left to
discover. Progress occurs when a new experience is discovered and
recorded. An example of this exploration style is Novelty Search (see
Section 2.2.8). Potentially these algorithms can find new knowledge.
The objective-based algorithms look for something known, and the
solution is biased by implication. Whereas objective-less algorithms
learn by experience, removing implicit bias.
As well as the objectives, there are constraints (or limitations).
These constraints impose restrictions on any possible solution. For
example, the conditions may include limited resource availability,
specific time windows, or simply restrictions on power consump-
tion. A general mathematical goal is to provide constraint satisfac-
tion, where each object in the potential solution must satisfy the
constraints.
1.10
Environment and data
There are many properties concerned with problem-domain land-
scapes. The first is the environment the algorithms operate within;
see Figure 10. For example, one environment could have the prop-
erties of solitary, relaxed, and completely observable. A domain
can make the problem space more or less difficult to cover. The
landscape diagram shows some of the variations. The variations
act as a filter to determine which class of algorithms is more likely
to be successful and rule out other ones that are unlikely. It seems
common sense that an algorithm should be chosen by first assessing
the environment.
Figure 10: Landscape [36]
Data comes in many different forms. From simple unimodal data
with an obvious solution to the more complex data that includes
noise or deception [26], see Figure 11. The format of the input data
determines the algorithm.
By increasing the dimensions of the input data, we can extract
hidden information [10]. More advanced algorithms use this tech-
nique to handle more complicated problems. The hope is to remove
some of the noise in the data. The opposite approach can also be
valid; reducing dimensions simplifies the input data.
1.11
Determinism, repeatability, and
randomness
Algorithms have different characteristics, these include determinism,
repeatability, and randomness. Taking each characteristic in turn.
Determinism is when an algorithm given a set of inputs provides
a result in the same amount of time. Consistency is essential for
applications that are time constrained. These applications come
under the term Real-Time. Where the algorithm flow consistently
takes the same amount of time to complete. Real-Time is an arbitrary
measurement since the definition of time can cover a wide range.
8

Figure 11: Problem style [26]
Repeatability is the concept that given the same input, the same
output occurs. Many problems require this type of characteristic. It
is fundamental to most mathematical equations. It is more aligned
with perfection and means that the problem space is wholly under-
stood.
Randomness is the opposite of repeatability, as the results can
differ or even not occur. Randomness allows some degree of uncer-
tainty to provide variation in the answers, i.e., flexibility in discov-
ery. It goes against mathematical perfection because it allows for
greater exploration of complex spaces. Algorithmic complexity can
appear random because the patterns are so difficult to comprehend.
Random numbers in computers are called pseudo-random num-
bers. This label is because they follow some form of artificial distri-
bution. A pseudo random number generator (PRNG) creates these
numbers. As an important example, pseudo-random numbers can
simulate noise. The simulated noise can help transition a high-
dimensional problem into a more accessible lower-dimensional
problem [33]. Achieving this transition occurs by replacing some of
the state variables with guesses. This transition makes an otherwise
impossible situation searchable (e.g., weather prediction).
1.12
Prediction, causality, and counterfactual
Prediction, causality, and counterfactual are at the cutting edge of
what algorithms are capable of achieving. Prediction is probably
one of the most exciting areas for modern algorithms—the ability
to predict a future with some degree of certainty. Science as a disci-
pline has had its challenges with prediction. Prediction is a difficult
subject; it includes everything from software to determine the next
actions for a self-driving car to consistent economic forecasting
on a specific stock. Probably the best-known of all the algorith-
mic predictions is weather prediction. Weather prediction is highly
accurate for the next three hours but becomes less certain as we
increase the time.
Casualty is the ability to show cause-and-effect [34]. The reason
a pencil moved was that a person pushed the pencil. In many ways,
humans want more than just an answer from an algorithm; they
want to understand why. It is problematic for algorithms because
it requires more understanding of how actions are connected and
chained together.
Finally, there are counterfactuals—a combination of prediction
and causality. Counterfactual is an alternative history where a
decision not to do something affects a prognosis. This action can
play with the future. Again an exciting area to play with from an
algorithm point of view [34].
1.13
Creativity and diversity
Creativity and diversity are terms primarily associated with humans
rather than algorithms. Creativity is some form of inspirational
jump that allows complex problems to be solved. There is an ongo-
ing debate whether an algorithm can be creative [12]? And if so,
how do we measure creativity? If an algorithm paints a scenery, is
it being creative? These are difficult questions, but when it comes
to algorithms, this is the new frontier.
Figure 12: Creativity [5]
What is creativity? Margaret Boden, a Research Professor of Cog-
nitive Science, broke down creativity into three useful mechanisms
[5], namely exploration - playing within the rules, combination -
applying one set of rules to another domain, and transformation
- rewriting the rules by removing a critical constraint. See Figure
12. For algorithms, exploration creativity is risk-averse and limited,
and at the other end of the scale, the transformation has the highest
risk with potential novelty.
On the same lines of creativity, we have diversity. Diversity
brings about novelty or new solutions by offering variation in
the algorithms. A diverse set of algorithms can search multiple
directions in parallel.
1.14
Byzantine style algorithms
Distributed systems, safety-critical systems, and financial systems
need to have some resilience. Resilience is an attempt to avoid
9

wrong decisions. Wrong decisions occur due to system errors or an
intentional lousy agent. This area is called the Byzantine General
Problem, description outlined below:
B-1. Lieutenant generals need to come to a decision.
B-2. Unfortunately, there are potential traitors.
B-3. How do the loyal generals decide on a correct decision?
Redundancy is essential in several areas. For example, hardware
or software has the potential to exhibit problems. It is necessary
if the ramifications of such a situation occur to be able to mitigate
those problems. This avoidance is crucial in safety-critical systems
where failure results in harm or significant financial loss. The solu-
tion is to have redundancy and not rely on one or two agents for a
decision.
1.15
No free lunch theorem
When we described the Ideals in Section 1.1, we were skirting
around the concept of a free lunch. This idealism is a reverse play
on the No Free Lunch (NFL) theorem. David Wolpert and William
McReady formalized the theorem, and it states that “all optimization
algorithms perform equally well when averaged over all possible
problems” [47]. The theorem means no algorithms stand out as
being better or worse than any other. Solving different problems
involves specific knowledge of that problem area.
A modern algorithm has to deal with a knowledge question. The
question is whether an algorithm starts from a clean slate (i.e., no
knowledge —Tabula rasa) or some known captured experience (i.e.,
known knowledge —Socratic recollection). We need to decide how
an algorithm starts; by learning with no expertise or giving the
algorithm, a jump starts with knowledge.
1.16
Network thinking
In algorithms, it is crucial to mention networks. Networks play
an essential role in modeling and analyzing complex systems. Net-
works are everywhere, from the interconnection between neurons
in the brain to aircraft flight patterns between airports. Electrical
engineering uses networks to design circuitry. Probably one of the
most famous technology networks is The internet which allows us
to communicate efficiently. We commonly describe networks in
terms of nodes and links. There are at least two helpful methods of
describing networks:
• Small-world networks are networks where all nodes are closely
connected, i.e., requiring only a small number of jumps. Most
nodes are not neighbors but are closely linked. For example, the
aircraft flight patterns we already mentioned. Another example
is Karinthy’s 1929 concept of six degrees of separation [22, 33],
where just six links connect everyone.
• A scale-free network, follows a Power law distribution. The
Power law states that a change in one quantity will cause a
proportional change in another. All changes are relative—for
example, a social network.
Preferential attachment is a process where a quantity distributes
across several nodes. Where each node already has value. The nodes
with more value gain even more, and the nodes with less value
gain less. This value transfer is necessary when algorithms model
wealth distribution or contribution-rewards in an organization.
Lastly, network thinking is all about modern graph theory. Graph
theory covers graph knowledge models to graph databases (e.g.,
temporal-spacial databases). It is an important area for algorithms,
and it is constantly expanding.
2
CATEGORY
In this section, we will attempt to describe algorithms as categories
or classes; it is a complicated process. Again more from the behav-
ioral viewpoint. We will divide the world into three main categories
computer science, artificial intelligence, and quantum computing. We
cover what we think are the more interesting behavioral classes,
but this is by no means exhaustive.
2.1
Computer science, Cs
Computer science has been creating and formulating algorithms for
the past 50 years. This length of time means there is an abundance
of algorithms. In this subsection, we collect the various essential
concepts. As an academic subject, computer science is still relatively
young as a discipline, but it acts as a universal provider. As-in it
provides a service to all other fields. Note we included the first two
descriptions as fundamental concepts rather than algorithms.
2.1.1
Cs, Propositional logic. Proposition logic is a language. It is
used by algorithms to provide Boolean answers, i.e., True or False.
Combining logic (OR, AND, Exclusive OR, and NOT operations)
together we can create an algorithm. Digital hardware circuits
derive from propositional logic.
2.1.2
Cs, Predicate calculus. Predicate calculus is a language. Algo-
rithms use it to produce correct statements. This correctness means
that all statements are provable and true within the algorithm. Sym-
bols represent logical statements. For example, ∀𝑥∈𝑁: 𝑥2 ≥𝑥
translates to “for all 𝑥, where 𝑥is a natural number, it is true that
𝑥2 is equal or greater than 𝑥”. Thus satisfying the predicate calcu-
lus rules that all statements are sound and true. Another example,
∃𝑥∈𝑁: 𝑥≥42 translates to “there exists an 𝑥, where 𝑥is a natural
number, that 𝑥is greater than 42”, again sound and true.
2.1.3
Cs, Recursive algorithms. A recursive algorithm calls itself.
For example, 𝑓(𝑥) = 𝑥−𝑓(𝑥−1), where the function 𝑓is on
both sides of the equation. Recursive algorithms have interesting
behavioral properties because they can converge or diverge. A
convergent recursive function concludes. A divergent recursive
algorithm never stops. In computer terms, memory resources can
be pre-calculated in a convergent algorithm. Divergence means the
opposite; an equation will fail to conclude, potentially resulting in
an out of memory error. We can use proof-by-induction to determine
correctness.
Recursion can be seen in many natural objects, for instance,
leaves, trees, and snowflakes. These occurrences mean there are
many examples in nature where recursion is employed. Figure 13
shows recursion in the form of a fractal.
2.1.4
Cs, Divide-and-conquer algorithms. The divide-and-conquer
algorithms separate a problem into easier-to-manage problems.
They help handle situations that are either too big in their entirety
or too difficult.
10

Figure 13: Recursive fractal (Public Domain)
Figure 14: Divide and conquer
These algorithms are best employed when the divided problem
is less complicated than the added communication and distribution
overhead. If true, a parallel architecture can lend itself to this type
of problem. And this is especially true if the sub-problems are all
solved deterministically, i.e., taking the same time to process. Divide-
and-conquer serves as a helpful method for debugging complex
systems. This technique is closely related to the Scientific Method.
2.1.5
Cs, Dynamic programming algorithms. Dynamic program-
ming (or DP), is related to the divide-and-conquer algorithms, see
Section 2.1.4. Unlike the divide-and-conquer, DP uses the result of
the sub-problems to find the optimum solution to the main prob-
lem. These algorithms find the shortest path (e.g., map navigation),
optimal search solutions, and operating system schedulers.
2.1.6
Cs, Randomized algorithm. Randomized algorithms use ar-
tificially generated randomness to solve complex problems, e.g.,
molecular interactions. One of the most famous algorithms in this
class is called the Monte Carlo algorithm. Monte Carlo takes an
initial configuration, let us call it the status quo, and, driven by
a probability distribution, a state is randomly changed (e.g., on
a coin, heads go to tails) [27]. A calculation then determines the
energy of the new configuration. With that information, the energy
acceptance criteria can determine whether the new configuration
becomes the status quo. These algorithms model probabilistic real-
world systems. And as such require significant amounts of compu-
tational resources, not to mention the time is taken to set them up.
Their primary use is in particle Physics, Biochemistry, and financial
modeling.
2.1.7
Cs, Fractional factorial design. Fractional factorial designs
are included primarily because of their behavioral characteristics.
They use a concept called sparsity-of-effects principle [42]. This
principle brings out important features from the data. The claim is
that only a fraction of the processing extracts the most interesting
data features. This characteristic is an important behavioral style
for many problem domains, i.e., using less work to identify the most
interesting features.
2.1.8
Cs, Greedy algorithms. A greedy algorithms discover a so-
lution a little piece at a time. These algorithms find near-optimal
solutions for NP-Hard style problems. The algorithm takes the direc-
tion of the most advantage at each point (i.e., local optima strategy).
This algorithm is relatively easy to implement for optimization
problems.
2.1.9
Cs, Brute force algorithm. A brute force algorithm, as the
name implies, involves looking at every possible solution to find the
best. In other words, no shortcuts. We use these algorithms when
there are no alternatives. From a behavioral point of view, running
these algorithms requires significant resources. These algorithms
best suit problems with no known better solution and can get away
with no time constraints. We default to these algorithms when there
is no other solution. Replacement of these algorithms occurs when
there are economic or environmental pressures. For example, we
can see this with cryptocurrencies as they change from brute force
to be more environmentally friendly methods, i.e., proof-of-work to
proof-of-stake [15].
2.1.10
Cs, Backtracking algorithm. Backtracking algorithms move
forward step by step. Constraints control each step. If a potential
solution cannot achieve its objective, the path halts, and the algo-
rithm backtracks to explore another possible solution path. This
approach is robust at exploring different options for success. This
algorithm can stop early if a solution option reaches a good-enough
level of success.
2.1.11
Cs, Graph traversal algorithms. Graph traversal is simply
the process of visiting nodes in a graph. The visit can involve either
reading or updating the node. There are different methods on the
order of visits, e.g., depth-first and breadth-first. Where depth-first
attempts systematically to visit the farthest nodes, by contrast,
breadth-first attempts to visit all the nearest nodes first. Graphs are
popular for many applications, including graph databases, spatial
graph databases, and spatial-temporal graph databases.
2.1.12
Cs, Shortest path algorithm. Where graph traversal tech-
niques are general graph algorithms, shortest-path algorithms dis-
cover the shortest path between nodes in a graph. One of the more
famous algorithms in this category is the Dijkstra algorithm. A
popular variant uses a source node and calculates the shortest path
to any other node in the graph. Common usages include navigating
between two points on a map.
2.1.13
Cs, Linear programming. The linear programming is a math-
ematical modeling technique where a linear function is either max-
imized or minimized under constraints. The behavioral outcome
11

makes processes more efficient or economically cost-effective. This
behavior means that any problem that requires more efficiency
can take advantage of linear programming, whether the situation
involves improving energy distribution or mathematical problem
solving.
2.2
Artificial intelligence, Ai
Artificial intelligence encompasses many algorithms, from object
recognition (i.e., correlation) to the far-out attempts to create arti-
ficial life. We can crudely subdivide the subject into people-types
connectionist, evolutionist, bayesian, analogizer, and symbolist. In
the early days, artificial intelligence covered everything we could
not achieve. Today, a broader definition is used that defines the
subject by problems. The general goal is to tackle evermore difficult
challenges where the path is less well known.
As with Computer science, we do not cover all the algorithms
in the field, but we will try to cover some interesting behavioral
classes.
2.2.1
Ai, Reinforcement learning. Reinforcement learning is an award-
style algorithm. The algorithm rewards a path that gets closer to a
solution. It encourages forward progression. The disadvantage is
overlooking a better solution, a single-minded approach; neverthe-
less, it is a powerful algorithmic technique. The single-mindedness
makes it potentially dangerous without some form of safeguards.
2.2.2
Ai, Evolutionary algorithms. Use a synthetic form of evolu-
tion to explore problem domains; if we consider the world as a
two-dimensional graph with data on the x-axis and algorithms on
the y-axis. Neural networks live near the x-axis, and evolutionary
algorithms live near the y-axis. They modify algorithms. Either by
playing with the variables or creating & modifying the potential
solutions directly. Similar to biological evolution, there is, for the
most part, a population of potential solutions, and that population
goes through generational changes. These changes occur through
mutation and crossover. Each member of the population, in a gen-
eration, is valued by their fitness towards the potential solution. A
population can either start as an initial random seed (i.e., tabular
rasa) or with a known working solution. We use these algorithms
for optimization and discovery. These algorithms are powerful,
especially when the problem domain is too big or the solution is
beyond human knowledge [38].
2.2.3
Ai, Correlation. Correlation allows pattern recognition with
a level of certainty. For example, “we are 87% sure that the orange is
behind the pineapple”. Neural nets provide certainty of recognition.
Convolution neural networks and deep learning rely on this tech-
nique to solve problems. Hyperparameters configure the network,
which is a complicated process. The network learns a response
using training data. The quality of the training data determines the
effectiveness of the correlation. This technique is good at image
and speech recognition.
2.2.4
Ai, Gradient descent. Gradient descent is about finding the
best descent path down a steep hill. The technique reduces the cost
and loss of setting up a neural network model by looking for the
fastest descent. In other words, it is about finding the optimal mini-
mum and avoiding the local minimum of a differentiable function.
As the algorithm proceeds, it sets up the various parameters of a
neural net model. Both Machine learning and, more specifically,
deep learning use this technique.
2.2.5
Ai, Ensemble learning. Ensemble learning uses multiple learn-
ing algorithms to obtain better predictive performance. Like predict-
ing the weather, numerous futures are provided, from the extremes
to the most likely. In other words, the ensemble method uses mul-
tiple learning algorithms to obtain better predictive performance
than could be obtained from a single algorithm. An ensemble learn-
ing system consists of a set of different models: with diversity in
structure (and hyperparameters). Its outward behavior is to produce
several solutions in the hope of finding a better solution.
2.2.6
Ai, Random forest. Random forest is a type of ensemble learn-
ing. Random forests apply to classification (the act of classifying
due to shared properties), regression (finding cause and effect be-
tween variables), and tasks that involve building multiple decision
trees (decisions represented by a tree leading to a consequence). The
random forests method generally outperforms traditional decision
trees, but their accuracy can be lower than other methods.
2.2.7
Ai, Continuous learning. Continuous learning has a long his-
tory with traditional evolutionary algorithms. An algorithm is left
to learn in an environment with resources. The algorithm continu-
ously adapts. Experiments have shown these algorithms exhibit the
most significant learning jumps at the beginning of the cycle, and
as time progresses, jumps become ever fewer, if not at all. This situ-
ation can alter if changes occur in the environment (e.g., additional
resources or objectives).
2.2.8
Ai, Novelty search. Novelty search is a different approach to,
say, reinforcement Learning (see Section 2.2.1), where the rewards
are for learning new experiences rather than moving nearer to
a goal [39]. Novelty search has the behavioral advantage of not
requiring an initial objective for learning to occur. For example,
learning to walk occurs by learning how to fall over. Falling over is
not directly linked to the act of walking.
2.2.9
Ai, Generative adversarial network, GAN. Generative adver-
sarial network is, in fact, two networks —each one vying to attain
different goals. One side is a creator (i.e., the generative network),
and the other is a critic (i.e., the discriminative network). The cre-
ator’s role is to outsmart the critic, meaning the creator can mimic
the dataset. From a behavioral view, this algorithm can create a fake
version (or deep fake output) of existing material. As of writing
this text, this technique is taking over many traditional learning
algorithms.
2.2.10
Ai, Supervised learning. This class is a more generalized
version of the correlation mentioned in Section 2.2.3. Supervised
learning is a system using input-output pairs. In other words, known
input samples connect to known outputs. The system learns how
to connect the input to the output. The input data is labeled. Cur-
rently, the majority of machine learning is of this form. From a
behavioral view, this algorithm requires human supervision, as the
name implies. The quality of training data is paramount.
2.2.11
Ai, Unsupervised learning. Unsupervised learning is the op-
posite of supervised learning (Section 2.2.10). The input data is
12

unlabeled, meaning it is not of a particular form. For example, no
pictures labeled cats. This algorithm class attempts to find connec-
tions between the data and output. The unsupervised means no
human has gone along labeling the data. From a behavioral view,
this is a desired attribute but more challenging to control and get
right —for example, the risk of connecting uninteresting features
to an outcome.
2.2.12
Ai, Self-supervised learning. It is a compromise between su-
pervised and unsupervised learning. Self-supervised learning learns
from unlabeled sample data, similar to unsupervised learning. What
makes it an in-between form is a two-step process. The first step
initializes the network with pseudo-labels. The second step can
be to use either supervised or unsupervised learning on the par-
tially trained model from step one. From the behavioral view, not
sure it shows any difference between supervised and unsupervised
learning.
2.2.13
Ai, Bayesian probabilism. Bayesian probabilism is classical
logic, as far as the known is concerned. New variables represent
an unknown. Probabilism refers to the amount that remains un-
known. This class of algorithms is best for robotics, particularly
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM). These algorithms
are good at mitigating multiple sources of information to establish
the best-known consensus. For example, while a robot tracks its
path, it always runs on a minimal amount of information and makes
decisions based on statistical likelihood.
2.2.14
Ai, Knowledge graphs. As the name implies, knowledge
graphs use data models as graph structures. The graphs link in-
formation together. The information can be semantic (hold mean-
ing). Knowledge-engine algorithms use knowledge graphs to pro-
vide question-answer-like services, i.e., expert systems. These al-
gorithms, in theory, can provide some form of causality mapping
since the graphs store the knowledge relationships.
2.2.15
Ai, Iterative deepening A* search. Lastly for artificial intelli-
gence, we decided to include one traditional artificial intelligence
algorithm from the past. Iterative deepening A* search is a graph
traversal search algorithm to find the shortest path between a start
node and a set of goal nodes in a weighted graph. It is a variant
of the iterative deepening search since it is a depth-first search
algorithm. We use these algorithms in simple game-playing —for
example, tik-tac-toe or, potentially, chess.
2.3
Quantum computing, Qc
Figure 15: Sum-over-histories (Feynman diagram)
Quantum computing is relatively new in the context of algo-
rithms since hardware devices are rare and, if not difficult, at least
different to program. When describing the world of quantum com-
puting in a few paragraphs, it quickly becomes apparent that we
could slide into an overly complex explanation. To avoid some of
the complexity and remain relatively helpful, we decided to explain
quantum computing from the perspective of how it differs to classi-
cal digital computing [8]. Keep in mind quantum computers require
a lot of classical computing to operate.
Quantum computers follow a different set of rules or principles.
These rules come from atomic and subatomic particle physics, i.e.,
the notoriously complicated world of quantum mechanics [4, 14].
Classical digital computing uses transistors to implement bits. Quan-
tum computers use even smaller atomic-scale elements to represent
quantum bits, also known as qubits. A qubit is the unit of infor-
mation for quantum computers. Transistors represent either 0 or
1, binary qubits represent 0 and 1 simultaneously by including a
continuous phase. Qubits, therefore, have the unique property of
simultaneously being in a combination of all possible states. This
fundamental principle of quantum mechanics is called superposition.
Superposition enables a quantum computer to have non-classical
behavior. This non-classical behavior means we can probe many
possibilities at the same time [19] with the potential for saving
considerable energy over classical computing.
Another principle used in quantum computers is entanglement.
The basic concept is that quantum systems can correlate so that a
measured state of one can be used to predict the state of another.
This connection enables the construction of quantum computers to
include linkages between sets of qubits. It reinforces other phys-
ical principles, such as causality limiting communications to no
more than the speed of light. Entanglement and superposition are
intimately connected, in subtle ways, even across long distances.
Relative to a classical computer, a contemporary quantum com-
puter has higher error rates, better data analysis capabilities, and
continuous intermediate states. Compare this with classical com-
puting, which has far lower error rates, is better for day-to-day
processing, and uses discrete states [8]. A quantum computer com-
prises a set of qubits, data transfer technology, and a set of classical
computers. These classical computers initialize the system, control
it, and read the results. Where the qubits carry out the computa-
tion, the transfer technology moves information in and out of the
machine. At the conclusion of the calculation, measurements of
quantum states will return definite classical values at the outputs.
Different runs on the same inputs return a distribution of results
whose magnitudes squared are interpreted as a probability distribu-
tion. After completing the quantum calculation and measurements,
classical computers do error correction, interpolation, and filtering
across many runs of the same program. The information involves
quantum (superposing and entangling qubits) and classical (config-
uring the initial values and reading out the classical final values).
Modern quantum computers can efficiently collect statistics. These
statistics provide more probable answers to more complex problems
instead of definitive answers to simpler ones.
As with computer science and artificial intelligence, we will
explore quantum algorithms, not from the quantum computing
perspective but the algorithm perspective, i.e., what can they do?.
In keeping with the previous discussions, we provide a subset of
13

algorithms. This technology has enormous potential but maybe ten
or more years away. We believe it is essential to include this area
when exploring future algorithms.
2.3.1
Qc, Shor’s algorithm. Shor’s algorithm appears to be cur-
rently the most important, or most practical, in quantum computing.
Shor’s algorithm takes an integer 𝑁and returns the prime factors.
This is achieved in polynomial time (NP, see Section 1.7). An al-
ternative to Fourier transform. Shor’s algorithm uses the quantum
Fourier transform to find factors. This behavior has implications
for cryptography. It is an exponential speedup from the ability of
a classical digital computer to break the types of cryptographic
codes used for authentication and signatures (e.g., common meth-
ods such as RSA or ECC). This capability gives quantum computers
the concerning potential to break today’s security algorithms.
Note: In the press and academia, we now hear the term Post-
Quantum Encryption (PQE). PQE is a classical computing response
to this capability. The response is a set of classical algorithms resis-
tant to quantum methods. Many meta versions can exist because
they can be dynamically updated and modified. Making the ap-
proach less reliant on the underlying hardware.
2.3.2
Qc, Grover’s algorithm. Grover’s algorithm is probably the
next most important quantum algorithm. Grover is said to be a
quantum search algorithm. The algorithm carries out an unstruc-
tured search. And, as such is potentially useful to speed up database
searches. There is a potential that classical algorithms could be
equally competitive. The algorithm finds a unique input with the
highest probability for a particular output value. This in theory can
be achieved in 𝑂(
√
𝑁) time. Where 𝑁is defined as the size of the
function domain.
2.3.3
Qc, Quantum annealing. Quantum annealing (QA) is a meta-
heuristic. A metaheuristic is a problem-independent algorithm nor-
mally operating at a higher level. Metaheuristics look at a set of
strategies to determine the best approach. Quantum annealing finds
a given objective function’s extreme, either minimum or maximum,
over a set of solutions. In other words, it finds the procedure that
finds an absolute minimum for size, length, cost, or distance from a
possibly sizable set of solutions. Quantum annealing is used mainly
for problems where the search space is discrete with many extremes
—limited only by available resources.
2.3.4
Qc, Adiabatic quantum computation (AQC). Adiabatic quan-
tum computation is reversible [3]. The word adiabatic means no
heat transfer, allowing for reversible computing, see Section 1.3. Cal-
culations occur as a result of the adiabatic theorem. Optimization is
the first application for these algorithms, but there are potentially
many others. It is an alternative to the circuit model (from digital
computing). This alternative makes it useful for both classical and
quantum computation.
2.3.5
Qc, Quantum walks. Lastly, Quantum walks is the quantum
equivalent of the classical random walk algorithm [44]. Similar
to the other quantum solutions, a quantum walk operates with
different rules. On certain graphs, quantum walks are faster and,
by implication, more energy efficient than the classical equivalent
[20].
3
HARDWARE OPTIONS
"without hardware, we don’t have algorithms, and
without algorithms, there is no purpose for the
hardware"
Even though we are mindful of analog solutions and the excit-
ing developments in quantum hardware, we will focus primarily
on digital solutions. We are also aware of Moore’s Law’s limita-
tion, which may affect the future direction of computation, e.g.,
neuromorphic computing, DNA computing, analog computing, or
unconventional computing. Maybe over time, there will be a change
of emphasis toward analog, but today, digital systems lead. Digital
systems include some form of traditional Turing machine. Turing
machines are either fully implemented (e.g., a general-purpose pro-
cessor moving towards the Principle of Universality) or partially
implemented devices (e.g., a specialized accelerator missing some
control elements).
Compute systems fall into two categories based on input data.
The data is either embarrassingly helpful (i.e., sequential or parallel)
or embarrassingly unhelpful. For the former, embarrassingly help-
ful, we design specialized hardware. For the latter, embarrassingly
unhelpful, we design universal hardware to accommodate a broader
range of problems.
It is challenging to map hardware developments to algorithm
advancements, so we created the best guess using chronological
ordering and the effects, see Table 2. We combined inflection points,
and technology jumps to represent hardware advancements. This
list is endlessly complicated, even when constrained. It is not clear
when a technology caused an effect. If we look at history, what
does it show us? It shows at least three emerging patterns:
(i) Long-term serial speed-ups have been the priority for hard-
ware until relatively recently. In more modern times, we can
see a steady increase in parallelism at all levels of the compu-
tation stack. Endless gains in parallelism from bit patterns to
network scaling. Parallelism gives performance advantages
for problems that can explicitly exploit such designs. The
exploitation allows for more sophisticated algorithms and to
scale out.
(ii) History of hardware has seen a constant struggle for and
against the Principle of Universality. In other words, a con-
tinuous fight between computing engines that can handle
everything (Turing-complete) and specialized ones (Turing-
incomplete).
(iii) Sophistication of hardware has increased exponentially, al-
lowing algorithms to be more capable and less efficient. Opti-
mization is more complicated, and the likelihood of hitting
an unusual anomaly is more likely.
4
NEXT ALGORITHMS
What next for algorithms? Making any prediction is difficult, but
there are some standard frameworks we can apply. Firstly, we must
determine where future algorithms will likely come from and why.
To get this moving, we look at the existing algorithms; let us call
this the 𝛼"alpha" future.
The 𝛼future involves taking what we have and improving either
the performance or efficiency of the algorithms. Conversely, we
could also take an older algorithm and run it on modern hardware.
14

Year
Cause
Effect
1912
JK Flip flop
Start of Boolean logic in circuits
1914
Floating point
Algorithms to handle real-world problems
1936
Turing machine
Universal computation model
1943
Finite automata
Original pattern recognition method
1945
ENIAC
First programmable computer, draft EDVAC report
1946
Automatic Computing Engine (ACE)
RISC-style computation
1948
Digital Signal Processing
Analysis and processing of continuous data
1954
SR, D, T
Adding temporal logic
1955
Finite State Machine (FSM)
Complex pattern matching
1959
Metal–Oxide–Semi. Field-Eff. Transistor (MOSFET)
Enabled far more sophisticated algorithms
1961
Transistor–transistor logic (TTL)
Continuing to enable increased complexity
1961
Virtual memory
Decoupling from physical constraints
1964
IBM System/360
Inflection point in architectures
1965
Memory Management Unit
Standard control of decoupling
1966
Single Instruction, Multiple Data (SIMD)
Fast method of handling one dimensional arrays
1967
Virtualization
Make the underlying hardware virtual
1968
IBM ACS-360 SMT
Full utilization of the processor
1971
Intel 4004
Allow for hard-coded algorithms (no stack)
1972
Single Instruction, Multiple Threads (SIMT)
SIMD array processing algorithms
1972
Packed SIMD
Speed-up software CODECs
1973
Ethernet
Distributed (networked) algorithms
1975
Dataflow
Execution flows on context
1976
Harvard cache
Separating data and instruction efficiencies
1976
RCA’s “Pixie” video chip GPU
Geometry based algorithms
1978
Ikonas RDS-3000 (claim first GPGPU)
Machine learning & Crytocurrency
1979
Motorola 68000 (CISC)
Execute sophisticated programming languages
1979
Berkeley RISC
Change in algorithms to support load/store
1981
Quantum computing
Probabilistic mathematics i.e., qubits
1983
Networks (ARPANET)
Adoption of the TCP/IP protocol
1984
SPMD
Messaging passing
1984
VLIW
Instruction level parallelism
1985
Intel 80386
Mainstream MMU
1990
Liquid Crystal Display
Ubiquitous flat screen monitors
1994
Beowulf clusters
Using standard hardware for massive scale
1997
Samsung DDR memory
Algorithms could be bigger and faster
2006
MPMD
Games console (Sony PlayStation 3)
2013
MIMD systems
Ubiquitous parallel compute nodes
2013
Predicated SIMD
Associative processing
2020
Unified memory
Heterogeneous compute sharing memory
Table 2: Cause-and-effect table for classical hardware (best guess)
Both these concepts are increments. These improvements should
occur naturally and not necessarily cause a change apart from
maybe more modularization and specialization. Algorithms that fit
this category include fast Fourier transforms, geometric mathematics,
and regular expression. These algorithms rely on steady incremental
improvements in both software and hardware.
Next, and remaining with the 𝛼future, are the algorithms that
initially start executing on much larger computer systems and
eventually migrate over time to smaller systems. We predict that
many of today’s offline cloud algorithms, requiring specialized
computation and vast resources, will ultimately become online
algorithms on mobile devices (assuming some form of Moore’s
law still exists). For example, learning will move from the cloud
to smaller devices in the coming decades. Learning algorithms are
offline high-intensity applications, so processing does not occur
in real time. A shift towards lighter real-time mobile variations
will likely happen in the future, partly due to privacy concerns and
partly due to economic ones (end users foot the bill).
The improvement in the 𝛼algorithms allows a jump (not an
increment) in new future algorithms. These new algorithms rep-
resent what we call the 𝛼′ "alpha prime" future. Many technologi-
cal advances coincide, e.g., speech recognition, natural language
processing, and gesture recognition. These technologies require
improvements in existing algorithms and can be combined to help
15

discover the new 𝛼′ algorithms [11, 18]. For example, natural lan-
guage processing will likely assist in creating future algorithms,
i.e., moving away from programming languages toward negoti-
ation, where we negotiate with existing ideas to produce a new
solution. We need this to happen if we want to explore more of
the natural world. It requires us to hide some development details,
makes problem exploration more abstract, and leverages existing
knowledge.
This abstraction means algorithm construction will likely change
in that algorithms will be designed for re-purposing, modification,
and interface negotiation. The modifiable part is to allow for multi-
objective goals (see Section 1.9). Many next-generation algorithms
expect insertion into bigger systems, where discovery and negoti-
ation occur. Traditional methods are too rigid for the next set of
problem domains. This change means algorithm development is
more about setting the multi-objectives and goal-driven negotia-
tion than gluing pieces of low-level code together. Below are some
interface types that might be involved in an 𝛼′ future:
• No interface - potentially entirely machine-driven, no human
standard mechanisms are defined. In other words, an automation
system works out its communication language. For example, Face-
book proved this possible when two machine learning systems
created their language for communication [25].
• Static interface - human, and strict mathematical interface. Re-
stricted to the lowest level if the compute node or pointers-to-
memory provides basic types.
• Dynamic interface - again human and strict mathematical in-
terface, similar in characteristics to static interfaces but not fixed
to the image, i.e., late binding.
• Messaging passing - human, less mathematical, unstructured,
and non-standard, propriety concept. Powerful since it can handle
heterogeneous systems.
• Messaging passing with ontological information - human,
semantic representation, structured so that the data can be dis-
covered and assessed. Data is self-described over raw data.
• Evolutionary interfacing, where a method of evolution de-
cides on a dynamic process of interfacing. The interface changes
depending on workloads and a temporal element.
Lastly, we have the 𝛽"beta" future. The 𝛽future for algorithms is
more about the computing substrate. The substrate may change into
an exotic computing zoo, e.g., quantum computing, DNA comput-
ing, optical computing, biological computing, and unconventional
computing. Silicon will remain the digital workhorse, but the edge
of algorithm development may shift. And with this change come
very different approaches to algorithms and datatypes. It is exciting
to look at new algorithms on these new computing options.
As well as the substrate, the types of algorithms in a 𝛽future
are different—for example, artificial general intelligence. Artificial
general intelligence is currently a theoretical goal to create a uni-
versal intelligence that can solve many problems. A significant
part of these algorithms is driving the decomposition (breaking a
problem into smaller sub-problems) and recombination (taking the
sub-problems and putting them back together to solve the main
problem). Where the algorithms are much more general solutions
than specialized ones, this is important as we try to handle problem
domains at a much larger scale.
4.1
Major meta-trends
We see potentially three overarching meta-trends occurring in 𝛼,
𝛼′ and potentially 𝛽futures, namely parallelism, probability, and
interaction. Under those headings, we can link other subjects, such
as artificial intelligence, quantum computing, and computer science.
4.1.1
Parallelism. Is there any more parallelism to be extracted? We
have taken what we call algorithmic structural parallelism (e.g., data-
level parallelism, instruction-level parallelism, and thread-level par-
allelism) to an extreme. Structural parallelism is when a problem
breaks neatly into similar-looking sub-problems—covering embar-
rassingly sequential and parallel problem domains. But there are
other forms of parallelism, for example, biological parallelism. Inde-
pendent cells work together in parallel to form complex structures.
Analogous to these natural processes are Carl Hewitt’s concept of
actors [16] and John Hollands’ view on complexity [17].
An actor is a small computational element comprising compute,
memory, evolving rules, and adaptable communication (i.e., mes-
sage based). Actors can have reason-response capabilities. It moves
away from mathematics and appears more like particle physics.
Together with evolutionary techniques, actors can solve complex
problems. Actors have to be free-flowing and can connect loosely;
the loosely based connections are the reason for more message-
passing style interfaces for communication. We have not fully uti-
lized these technologies because (a) the success of classical parallel
systems, (b) the lack of biological level scaling, and (c) advanced
interfacing. Actors will likely play a much more important role
in the future as more evolutionary technologies glue everything
together.
4.1.2
Probability. Computer science has long predicted the im-
portance of probability. As we approach limitations in computa-
tion, uncertainty will start to dominate. We believe the subsequent
algorithms will have to link directly or indirectly to probability.
Whether quantum or classical computing, they all rely on statistical
approximation over precision and accuracy.
For quantum computing, error correction will be paramount un-
less we can make them less noisy (highly unlikely). Error correction
will most likely have to reside in classical computing. Even though
quantum computing opens up new possibilities for algorithms in
one direction, it causes problems in another (error correction). It
is worth pointing out that voting systems (a class of Byzantine
algorithms) are likely to become more common. Error correction
codes are suitable for a specific problem, whereas voting systems
are helpful for system-level corrections.
4.1.3
Interaction. Interaction is a different take on future algo-
rithms. What does the term interaction mean in this context? It is to
do with the process of creating new algorithms. This meta-trend
brings new algorithms, old algorithms, and humans together [11].
In other words, future systems can solve problems by selecting
an old algorithm or creating a new one. This flexibility is possi-
ble by building advanced tools to explore the algorithm space, i.e.,
algorithms exploring algorithms. We are starting to see this with
new programming languages, and libraries, allowing for greater
expressiveness.
This greater expressiveness improves productivity by combin-
ing new tools with future user interface technologies (e.g., natural
16

language processing, speech recognition, gesture recognition, pat-
terning recognition, and goal-oriented design). We can see a meta-
trend toward a more integrated algorithm exploration framework,
moving away from implementation details. Transition is only made
possible due to the advancements in digital hardware.
The interaction is to accommodate all the added complexity, vast
data, and navigation required to find a new algorithm. No longer
can algorithm development occur without such advanced tooling.
This becomes especially interesting if the tooling involved virtual
reality (VR), and augmented reality (AR). Advancing mathematics
by guiding human intuition with AI [11] by Davis et al., published
in Nature in 2021, highlights that machine learning, with human
assistance, is beginning to tackle hard mathematical problems. As
algorithms become more expressive, they can be re-applied, with
human assistance, to create even more algorithms. Solving previ-
ously intractable problems.
To provide a glimpse of future capabilities, let us look briefly at
human intent as part of a negotiated search for a new algorithm.
Human intent is essential for many technology areas since it is
about second-guessing what a human intends to do. This guessing
may become one of algorithm development’s most potent tools.
Allowing a computer system to understand the intent of a human
objective.
4.2
Other trends in algorithms
In this section, we discuss some of the other potential trends in
algorithms, some are just a continuation of existing trends, but
others are emerging trends that may become important.
OT-1. Automation of everything, algorithms continue to auto-
mate activities at every level —, for example, the automation
level required to process package distribution within a ware-
house.
OT-2. Growth of exploration over exploitation, exploitation re-
mains in common practice, but the use of exploration is
rising. We want to understand more about the natural world.
This change will increasingly occur as we shift to problems
beyond human capability.
OT-3. Mathematics becomes a target. Algorithms can optimize
older equations and formulas [18]. Algorithms can search a
much bigger problem domain than any human in the past
[18]. We will see the optimization of traditional mathematics
using modern techniques. A future mathematician will most
likely be very different from the past.
OT-4. Spiking neurons, basically any algorithms that allow back-
ward information feed, i.e., from a higher level back to a
lower level, improve recognition or optimization. This bio-
logical method can potentially reduce the size of the required
networks and, in many cases, could enhance the quality of
results (connection to neuromorphic computing).
OT-5. Development through negotiation, already mentioned but
worth repeating is the creation of algorithms that allow hu-
mans to define goals. The goal is a starting point for navi-
gating complex problem domains. Solutions are developed
over time through negotiation [45].
OT-6. Pressure on better knowledge representation. Knowledge
representation is at the core of all the activities around algo-
rithms. The pressure is due to the problem domains becom-
ing more complicated. This trend will continue, and we will
likely see an expansion of basic data types.
OT-7. Pattern recognition through increased dimensionality.
With increasing resources, adding data dimensions will con-
tinue as a style of pattern extraction from complex and noisy
data.
OT-8. Single shot learning algorithms, is the ability to learn
with minimum data sets. We see a continuous trend to reduce
the data required to train the next-generation algorithms.
OT-9. Sparse data structures will continue to be important. Us-
ing these structures is a desperate attempt to reduce resource
requirements and improve performance. This measure be-
comes especially important for algorithms that require enor-
mous data sets.
OT-10. Prediction, we can say that predictive model will occur in ev-
ery critical area, from social decision-making to instruction
pre-fetchers. This trend continues unabated for the foresee-
able future.
OT-11. Physical three-dimensional algorithms, these are algo-
rithms that deal with the layout and positioning of physical
components. Important for 3D transistor layout, virtual real-
ity systems escaping the real world, and augmented reality
systems that add to the real world.
OT-12. Map between physical and virtual worlds will increase
in importance. This mapping is required if we want to accel-
erate the adoption of simulation, i.e., transferring environ-
ments quickly into virtual representations.
OT-13. Byzantine algorithms become more critical as society de-
ploys machine learning models. Multiple model voting in-
creases the likelihood of a correct prediction; machine learn-
ing will move quickly in this direction to avoid biases.
OT-14. Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) continues to be
more successful and valuable along with traditional machine
learning systems.
OT-15. Built-in multi-objective capability. These options allow
for more of a weather prediction-type approach to solutions.
The variations can range from maximum optimization to
zero optimization or likely to most unlikely; see Figure 9.
5
AUXILIARY SUPPORT
We have created a list of what might be next for algorithms, but
what about auxiliary support?
HG-1. Multi-level randomness. The requirement for much more
sophisticated randomness. Having multiple levels of good
randomness becomes imperative. What we mean by good
randomness is having everything from, as near as possible,
true randomness to pseudo-randomness. We require an abil-
ity to dial randomness to a particular level, including some
form of stochastic numbers.
HG-2. Probabilistic operators, extension of operations to include
probabilistic helper functions. We have integer, fixed point,
and floating point operations. We need probabilistic opera-
tors.
17

Figure 16: Meta-Learning
HG-3. P-adic datatypes and operators, we add this as a potential
auxiliary extension. p-adic extends the standard number sys-
tems adopted by digital computers [33, 46]. Based on prime
numbers, p-adic allows for a different style of flexibility from
the traditional extension of real and complex numbers.
HG-4. Stochastic rounding, is already gaining momentum. It rounds
real numbers using a probability distribution compared to
the traditional fixed rounding up or rounding down to the
nearest number [9, 33]. This method is increasing in pop-
ularity, especially with the machine learning community,
opening the door to lower precision numbers.
HG-5. Biological neuron mimicking. If we compare artificial and
biological neurons, the biological neurons have many more
links. We predict a change in the base neuron for future
machine learning.
HG-6. Memory management optimization, as memory systems
become more sophisticated and complicated, we need new
methods to help algorithms optimize memory efficiency and
usage. This help may reside in hardware or future tooling.
HG-7. Agent or chaotic based parallelism, as mentioned previ-
ously, structural parallelism continues at all levels. Still, there
is a potential for a hardware-assisted agent or chaotic, based
parallelisms.
HG-8. Error-correction, is an old subject with a new set of focuses
coming from critical areas such as quantum computing, prob-
abilistic systems, and traditional digital systems where geom-
etry shrinkage goes to the limits. Any system that operates
at the boundaries of stability where minor errors can result
in significant problems [7].
HG-9. Spatial-temporal datatypes, as we move into more graph-
ing problems (e.g., Virtual Reality, Augmented Reality, Digi-
tal Twin, and Physical Simulators), there is a requirement to
make spatial-temporal datatypes a first-class citizen. A uni-
versal datatype for physical systems with potential sparse
recursive scaling coordinate systems and velocity coordi-
nates to represent n-body problems [33].
6
CONCLUSION
We have taken a journey through the algorithm world. It has in-
volved crawling through tunnels, jumping over fences, and running
across fields. As with many subjects, we picked a few tunnels,
fences, and fields, realizing this is a staggeringly small subset of the
ideas. The algorithm world is complex, dynamic, and full of old and
exciting new directions. As we see it today, there is an undertone
that probability and statistics have an increasingly critical role in
tackling complex applications. These problem solutions are less
amenable to simple absolutes.
Over time, the application focus has shifted from calculating the
ordnance range for artillery to pattern correlation using machine
learning. These shifts have transitioned the algorithm world in
different directions. We see, through our journey, new transitions
towards data-directed outcomes, adaptability, and meta-learning.
Data-directed outcomes replace rule-based systems. This tran-
sition is not new; we see this as a continuation. Rule-based systems
can handle specific problem domains, but they fail when a none
pre-programmed pattern occurs, i.e., they lack flexibility. Data-
directed outcomes can circumvent, within reason, many of these
problems, which are difficult for rule-based systems. For rule-based
systems, the value often is in the exceptions, not the rules, and for
data-directed outcomes, the value comes down to the quality of
the training data. We may see a mixture of the two systems, with
rule-based systems ensuring the other operates within required
boundaries.
Adaptability replaces precision. Precision deals with perfec-
tion, whereas adaptability is handling imperfection. For example,
we design robots to perfect specifications. And algorithms rely on
those perfections for length, pressure, and movement. Adaptability
in robots has algorithms that constantly learn and change as the
robot matures or the environment changes. In other words, the new
algorithms handle environmental changes, wear, and poor design.
Meta-learning enhances capability. Increasing capability is
important; it is a horizontal activity. See Figure 16. We want to
expand algorithm capability, so they tackle evermore exciting tasks.
At the same time, we also want to accelerate the actual learning
and creative process. Meta-learning is the process of learning to
learn, moving away from the specific problems and focusing on
common patterns. These generalizations force algorithms up the
abstract tree. In that, common patterns can transfer to other prob-
lem types. In the coming decades, we predict much more activity
around meta-learning and integrating more abstract approaches.
In addition, this could mean more weather-predicting style algo-
rithms, i.e., ensemble prediction, that provide a range of solutions
with different characteristics. In other words, a group of solutions
with different probabilities of certainty and uncertainty [33, 41]. We
18

can potentially build these systems using multiple models based on
physics and probability. It allows us to explore the unlikely so we
can create anticipating actions with cost-loss attributes. For exam-
ple, moving people out of danger to avoid a unlikely but possible
catastrophic weather system [33].
In any modern algorithm discussion, it is essential to mention
quantum algorithms. The quantum world is attractive for its po-
tential energy saving advantages [3]. We are still in an exploratory
phase and starting to learn how to build basic systems and deter-
mine possible algorithms. One of the many concerns about quantum
computing is the quick drive to optimization before the benefits are
genuinely discovered, i.e., the race to be valuable. Also, the problem
domains that quantum computing can explore may not be that
exciting, and traditional computation may remain dominant for
the majority. One true unarguable benefit of quantum computing
is exploring the quantum world itself [1]. Quantum algorithms’
ultimate achievement may be to push classical computing in new
directions.
Hic sunt dracones (“Here be dragons”) is the term used at the
beginning of this exploration. The term describes the world beyond
the edge of the map. We are entering an exciting time around
algorithms and what they can accomplish, but concerns about how
they can be abused or used for badness come with that excitement.
For example, we have seen algorithms manipulate people on a mass
scale through social media. Or the various fake images and videos
depicting people saying fictional opposites or non-truths. Just the
mechanical process of validation and verification becomes more of
a challenge as algorithms exhibit more extraordinary capabilities.
We want algorithms to be benevolent in our society. We have
seen how algorithms can influence people away from acting in their
best interests. For this reason, we provided a list of ideals at the
beginning of our journey. These ideals are possible areas of further
exploration, but they are not rules. At best, guidelines.
Lastly, Richard Hamming, Albert Einstein, Neil deGrasse Tyson,
and many others pointed out a common mistake: assuming the new
is just like the past. The mistake prevents many from contributing
significantly to the next revolution. For Hamming, this thought
came as he observed the transition to digital filters [7].
7
