1
Progressive Interpretation Synthesis: Interpret-
ing Task Solving by Quantifying Previously Used
and Unused Information
Zhengqi He a 1
Taro Toyoizumi a, b 2
aLab for Neural Computation and Adaptation, RIKEN Center for Brain Science, Saitama,
Japan.
bDepartment of Mathematical Informatics, Graduate School of Information Science and
Technology, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
Keywords: mutual information, information bottleneck, auto-encoding, indepen-
dent representation

arXiv:2101.02879v2  [cs.AI]  12 Aug 2022

Abstract
A deep neural network is a good task solver, but it is difﬁcult to make sense of its
operation. People have different ideas about how to form the interpretation about its op-
eration. We look at this problem from a new perspective where the interpretation of task
solving is synthesized by quantifying how much and what previously unused informa-
tion is exploited in addition to the information used to solve previous tasks. First, after
learning several tasks, the network acquires several information partitions related to
each task. We propose that the network, then, learns the minimal information partition
that supplements previously learned information partitions to more accurately represent
the input. This extra partition is associated with un-conceptualized information that
has not been used in previous tasks. We manage to identify what un-conceptualized
information is used and quantify the amount. To interpret how the network solves a
new task, we quantify as meta-information how much information from each partition
is extracted. We implement this framework with the variational information bottleneck
technique. We test the framework with the MNIST and the CLEVR dataset. The frame-
work is shown to be able to compose information partitions and synthesize experience-
dependent interpretation in the form of meta-information. This system progressively
improves the resolution of interpretation upon new experience by converting a part of
the un-conceptualized information partition to a task-related partition. It can also pro-
vide a visual interpretation by imaging what is the part of previously un-conceptualized
information that is needed to solve a new task.
2

1
Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made great achievements in ﬁelds such as image
recognition (Krizhevsky et al., 2017), speech recognition (Hinton et al., 2012), natu-
ral language processing (Vaswani et al., 2017), and game-playing beyond human-level
performance (Silver et al., 2016). On the other hand, DNNs are famous black-box
models. They fail under certain circumstances, such as adversarial attack (Goodfel-
low et al., 2014). This motivates an increasing trend of research into understanding
of how DNNs solve tasks, or model interpretation. Later research also suggests better
model interpretation can be useful to, for example, explanation about model behavior,
knowledge-mining, ethics, and trust. (Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017; Lipton, 2018)
People have proposed different approaches to proceed with model interpretation.
Concerning the interpretation style, there are the post-hoc style, which tries to separate
the model training step and model interpretation step, and the concurrent style, which
aims simultaneously for task performance as well as interpretation (Lipton, 2018). As
for the applicability of interpretation methods, there is the model-speciﬁc type, target-
ing a certain class of models, and the model-agnostic type, where the interpretation
method doesn’t depend on the model (Arrieta et al., 2020). Considering the interpre-
tation scope, there are the global interpretation and the local interpretation, where the
global interpretation gives information about how the task is solved from a broader view
while the local interpretation is more focused on certain examples or parts of the model
(Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017). There are also diverse forms of interpretation, such as
information feature (Chen et al., 2018), relevance feature (Bach et al., 2015), a hot spot
of attention (Hudson and Manning, 2018), or gradient information (Sundararajan et al.,
3

2017). Another stream of research proposes that interpretable model are usually simple
models like discrete-state models (Hou and Zhou, 2018), shallower decision trees (Fre-
itas, 2014; Wu et al., 2017), graph models (Zhang et al., 2017), or a small number of
neurons (Lechner et al., 2020). The readers can refer to Arrieta et al. (2020) for a more
complete overview.
One particular dimension for model interpretation related to our paper is how much
pre-established human knowledge is needed. Methods that require high human involve-
ment, such as interpretation with human pre-deﬁned concepts (Koh et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2020) or with large human-annotated datasets (Kim et al., 2018), implicitly as-
sume the background knowledge of an average human to make sense of the interpreta-
tion, which is hard to be deﬁned rigorously. Contrarily, existing human-agnostic meth-
ods transfer interpretation into some measurable form such as the depth of the decision
tree (Freitas, 2014; Wu et al., 2017). However, how well this kind of measure is related
to human-style interpretation is under debate.
Within the human-agnostic dimension of interpretation, we extend the discussion
along with two new perspectives. One perspective starts with the simple idea that “in-
terpretation should be experience-dependent”. Motivated by this idea, we focus on the
situation where the model learns a sequence of tasks by assuming that later tasks can be
explained using earlier experiences. In other words, model interpretation in our frame-
work is deﬁned as meta-information describing how the information used to solve the
new task is related to previous ones. The second perspective is motivated by the idea
that “interpretation should be able to handle the out-of-experience situation”. In a situ-
ation where a new task cannot be fully solved by experience, the model interpretation
4

method should be able to report new knowledge, mimicking a human explaining what
is newly learned. We demonstrate this framework can cast insight onto how later tasks
can be solved based on previous experience on MNIST and CLEVR datasets (Johnson
et al., 2017) and express ignorance when experience is not applicable.
Our work is related to the Concept Bottleneck Model (CBM) and Concept Whiten-
ing Model (CWM) (Koh et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020) in the sense that meaningful
interpretation of the current task depends on previously learned knowledge. However,
these methods do not capture reasonable interpretation when the human-deﬁned con-
cepts alone are insufﬁcient to solve downstream tasks (Margeloiu et al., 2021). In
our framework, we add the un-conceptualized region to take care of information not
yet associated with tasks. Moreover, a recent study also shows that contamination of
concept-irrelevant information in the pre-deﬁned feature space can hamper interpreta-
tion (Mahinpei et al., 2021). We implement Information Bottleneck (IB) (Tishby et al.,
2000) as a remedy to this information leak problem. Our method also shares similarities
with Variational Information Bottleneck for Interpretation (VIBI) method (Bang et al.,
2019) and the Multi-view Information Bottleneck method (Wang et al., 2019) in the
sense that these methods use IB to obtain minimal latent representation from previously
given representations. However, unlike the multi-view IB method for problem-solving,
the goal of our framework is to synthesize interpretation. Furthermore, our framework
does so using macroscopic task-level representations, which is different from micro-
scopic input-level representations used in VIBI.
5

2
Intuitions
This section discusses the intuition behind our framework for model interpretation.
2.1
Interpretation as Meta-Information
To quantify how a new task is solved using the experience of previous tasks, we eval-
uate meta-information. We deﬁne meta-information as a vector of mutual information,
where each element of the vector describes how much the corresponding information
partition is used for the new task.
Interpretation in right level: In this work, a machine learns a series of different
tasks. The aim is to ascribe an interpretation of how the model solves the new task based
on previous experience. If we did this using low-level features, such as the intensity and
color of each pixel, the task description would become complicated. Instead, we aim to
give an interpretation at a more abstract level, for example, “This new task is solved by
combining the knowledge about tasks 2 and 4.” To achieve this goal, information about
the input is partitioned at the task level. We, therefore, prepare information partitions
that encode useful features for each task.
Inducing independence: So what conditions do these partitions have to satisfy?
If these information partitions are redundant, we will have arbitrariness in assigning
meta-information since a task can equally be solved using different partitions (Wibral
et al., 2017). Therefore, to have unambiguous meta-information, inducing indepen-
dence among partitions is preferred. Useful methods are widely available in machine
learning ﬁelds such as independent component analysis (Bell and Sejnowski, 1995;
Hyv¨arinen and Oja, 2000) and variational auto-encoders (Kingma and Welling, 2013).
6

Meaning assignment: As described above, the meta-information we deﬁned is
a vector of Shannon information measured in bits (i.e., how much each information
partition is used). While the number of bits itself doesn’t have any meaning, each entry
of the vector is linked to a corresponding task. Hence, the meta-information can be
mapped to the relevance of previous tasks.
2.2
Progressive Nature of Interpretation
Progressive interpretation: One important but usually ignored property of interpreta-
tion is that we interpret based on experience (Council et al., 2002; Bada and Olusegun,
2015). Progressively learning multiple tasks is not a rare setting in machine learning
(Andreas et al., 2016; Rusu et al., 2016; Parisi et al., 2019), which is usually named
“lifelong learning”, “sequential learning” or “incremental learning”. However, these
studies usually focus on avoiding catastrophic forgetting and do not investigate how
progressiveness contributes to interpretation. In one example (Kim et al., 2018), the au-
thors point out that interpretability emerges when lower-level modules are progressively
made use of. We propose that interpretation should be synthesized in a progressive man-
ner, where the model behavior is interpreted by how much the current task is related to
previously experienced tasks.
Knowing you don’t know: An experience-based progressive interpretation frame-
work may inevitably encounter the situation when its previous experience does not help
interpret the current task. To solve this problem, we introduce an “un-conceptualized
partition” storing information not yet included in the existing information partitions.
We noticed that this un-conceptualized partition generates a “knowing you don’t know”
7

type of interpretation, a meta-cognition ability that allows a person to reﬂect on their
knowledge, including what they don’t know (Glucksberg and McCloskey, 1981). Un-
der this situation, the design of the framework should be able to interpret “knowing you
don’t know” when faced with out-of-experience tasks.
We will formalize the intuitions in the language of information theory in the follow-
ing sections.
3
The Progressive Interpretation Framework
Assume we have a model with stochastic input X, which is statistically the same re-
gardless of a task. Task i is deﬁned as predicting a series of stochastic labels Zi. Its
corresponding internal representation is Yi. The progressive interpretation framework
is formalized as iteratively as follows:
1. Assume after task n, a model has a minimal internal representation Y = {Y1, Y2,
. . . , Yn, Yelse} that encodes the input X. Yi describes the internal representation
learnt to solve task i. The optimization in the ideal case yields independence
among the previous task-relevant partitions:
I(Yi; Yj) = 0, (i ̸= j ∈[1, n] ∪else).
Here, we deﬁne the notation [1, n] to be {1, 2, 3, ..., n}.
2. Then, the model is faced with the new task n+1, and learns to predict Zn+1. After
learning Zn+1, the model distills the necessary part Y(i∩n+1) from each partition
8

Yi(i = [1, n] ∪else) for solving task n + 1. This is achieved by minimizing
I(Y(i∩n+1); Yi), (i ∈[1, n] ∪else)
while maintaining the best task performance, i.e., by maintaining ideally all the
task relevant information:
I(∪n,else
i=1 Yi; Zn+1) = I(∪n,else
i=1 Y(i∩n+1); Zn+1).
3. The interpretation is deﬁned as the meta-information of how much the individual
partitions {Yi} for previous tasks i ∈[1, n] ∪else are utilized to solve task n +
1. Namely, the composition of the mutual information I(Y(i∩n+1); Yi) over the
different partitions i = [1, n] ∪else is the meta-information we use to interpret
the global operation of the neural network. Then, local interpretation for each
example is available from {Y(i∩n+1)}.
4. After task n + 1, the model updates the representation partition by splitting
Yelse into the newly added representation Y(else∩n+1) and its complement Yelse \
Y(else∩n+1). Then, the former is denoted as Yn+1, and the latter is denoted as new
Yelse. The model would continue this for further iteration and interpretation of the
tasks.
The intuition of the process is shown in Fig. 1.
4
Implementation
Our particular interest is in the system involving neural networks. Since our framework
is information-theoretic, all types of neural networks are treated equally as segments of
9

information processing pipelines. Which type of neural network to choose is decided
by the speciﬁc problem.
Neural network implementation of progressive interpretation can be implemented as
loops over the four steps described in Section 3. In step 1, we assume a network already
has information maps for task 1-to-n. After that, we extract the un-conceptualized
partition that is unrelated to task 1-to-n by IB. In step 2, the model learns a new task
n + 1. Then, interpretation is gained by knowing how much information is needed
from each sub-region as in step 3. In step 4, we repeat step 1 with a new map for task
n + 1 and prepare for the next loop. By adding new tasks and looping over the steps, a
progressively more informative interpretation can be gained. The information ﬂowing
graph to implement in the following sections is shown in Fig. 2.
4.1
Information Bottleneck
In our framework, IB plays an important role in manipulating information ﬂow. To pre-
dict label Z from statistical input X with inner representation Y , IB would maximize:
max
θ [I(Y ; Z) −γI(Y ; X)], Y = fθ(X, ϵ)
(1)
where γ ∈[0, 1] is the scaling factor controlling the balance between the task perfor-
mance (when γ is small) and having non-redundant information representation (when γ
is large). f is a neural network parameterized by the parameter θ, and ϵ is a noise term
that is important to suppress task-irrelevant information out of X.
We choose the variational information bottleneck (VIB) implementation (Alemi
10

et al., 2016; Chalk et al., 2016; Li and Eisner, 2019) with loss function
L(p, q, r) = EY,Z [−log q (Z | Y )] + γEX{KL [p (Y | X) , r(Y )]}
(2)
to optimize encoding distribution p(Y |X), decoding distribution q(Z|Y ), and the prior
distribution r(Y ) for p. EX describes taking the expectation over random variable
X. Note that EY,Z = EXEY |XEZ|X. During the optimization, EXEZ|X is computed
by averaging over N training samples of input {xj|j = 1, . . . , N} and label {zj|j =
1, . . . , N}. EY |X is the average over the encoding distribution p(Y |X), which is com-
puted using the mapping Y = fθ(X, ϵ) of the encoding neural network. Y can be a
vector of either continuous or discrete variables (Li and Eisner, 2019) (see appendix
Section 8.3 for details). For clarity, we further simplify the notation of loss function to
be
L = Q(Z|Y ) + γKL(Y )
(3)
for future use, where the Q term corresponds to the log-likelihood term trying to approx-
imate Z from internal representation Y . The KL term corresponds to the KL-divergence
term trying to control the expressiveness of Y .
4.2
Task Training and Information Partition Splitting
Suppose a new model with task input X learns its ﬁrst task to predict label Z1. It is not
difﬁcult to train a neural network for this task by optimization: minθ D(f1,θ(X)||Z1),
where D is a distance function, such as KL-divergence or mean-square error, which is
decided by the problem. f1,θ is an encoder network parameterized by θ. After train-
ing, we will be able to obtain the representation of task 1 as Y1 = f1(X, ϵ), where f1
11

indicates a neural networkf1,θ after optimizing θ.
Then, our next problem is how to obtain task 1 unrelated representation Yelse, which
ideally satisﬁes I(Y1; Yelse) = 0, to complement the intermediate representation about
the input. Here, we propose that Yelse can be obtained via the implementation of IB on
an auto-encoding task:
max
θ [I(Y1, Yelse; X) −γI(Yelse; X)],
Yelse = felse,θ(X, ϵ),
(4)
where γ is again the scaling factor controlling the trade-off between including and ex-
cluding different information. Note that the learned f1 function is ﬁxed while felse,θ is
trained. The intuition behind Eq. 4 is described as follows. I(Y1; Yelse) > 0 implies re-
dundant information about Y1 contained in Yelse. This redundant information wouldn’t
improve I(Y1, Yelse; X). However, removing this redundant information can decrease
I(Yelse; X), thus contributing to our optimization goal. Note that we assume γ is less
than one.
With the simpliﬁed notation of the VIB introduced above, the loss function
L = Q(X|Y1, Yelse) + γKL(Yelse)
(5)
is minimized. The loss function seeks to auto-encode X given previously learned Y1
(which is ﬁxed) together with Yelse, while controlling expressiveness of Yelse.
4.3
New Task Interpretation
Now assume the model has internal representation Y = {Y1, Y2, ..., Yn, Yelse} after
learning tasks 1 to n. When the new task n + 1 is introduced, the model learns to
12

predict Zn+1. Task n + 1 relevant information can be extracted from Y by the IB as
follows:
max
θ
"
I(∪n,else
i=1 Y(i∩n+1); Zn+1) −γ
n,else
X
i=1
I(Y(i∩n+1); Yi)
#
,
Y(i∩n+1) = f(i∩n+1),θ(Yi, ϵ)
(6)
where Y(i∩n+1), (i ∈[1, n] ∪else) is the information needed from Yi to solve task n + 1.
Again, ϵ is the noise term required to eliminate information irrelevant to task n+1. Since
Y(i∩n+1) = f(i∩n+1),θ(Yi, ϵ) depends on Yi, together with IB, Y(i∩n+1) is then a minimum
sub-partition of Yi required for task n + 1. We again implement the variational IB loss
function with simpliﬁed notation:
L = Q(Zn+1| ∪n,else
i=1
Y(i∩n+1)) +
γ
n + 1
n,else
X
i=1
KL(Y(i∩n+1))
(7)
The loss function seeks to maximize the prediction of Zn+1 while controlling the needed
information from Yi. Index i speciﬁes a representation partition.
After getting {Y(i∩n+1)}, we can get interpretation as the meta-information I(Y(i∩n+1); Yi)
needed from each partition Yi as deﬁned in Sec. 3. We can also look into the represen-
tations of Y(i∩n+1) to gain insight about how task n + 1 is solved for each example.
Y(else∩n+1) is the information needed from the un-conceptualized partition Yelse to
solve task n + 1. We can rewrite this to be Yn+1 and deﬁne the new un-conceptualized
partition as Yelse ←Yelse \ Y(else;n+1). We can then go back to Step 1 and continue the
iteration for task n + 2.
13

5
Experiments
5.1
MNIST Dataset
We ﬁrst illustrate our progressive interpretation framework on the MNIST dataset (60K/10K
train/test splits). We set task 1 as digit recognition. For task 2, we propose three kinds
of tasks: telling if a number is even or odd (parity task), predicting the sum of pixel
intensities (ink task), or a task that involves both digit information and pixel intensity
information with a certain resolution (see below). First, we train a network f1 to per-
form digit recognition, and then we train an auto-encoder with IB to train a network
felse to obtain a digit-independent partition. Then, we extend the network to train on a
second task and obtain interpretation from the information ﬂow. We choose continu-
ous latent representation for this section. See appendix Sec.8.1 8.2 for implementation
details.
5.1.1
IB Removes Task-relevant Information from the Un-conceptualized Region
Un-conceptualized representation can be obtained after the auto-encoding step. We can
check what has been learned by scanning this latent code. Fig. 3a shows the scanning
result of the top ﬁve latent representation units, ordered by descending mutual infor-
mation with X. Note that changing these features doesn’t change the digit. Moreover,
mutual information between Ydigit and Yelse is estimated by training a neural network
that predicts Ydigit from Yelse. The estimated information is smaller than 0.1 Nat when
γ is larger than 5e-4, which indicates that digit information is removed from the un-
conceptualized region by IB.
14

5.1.2
The Framework Explains How a New Task is Solved
After the auto-encoding step, we proceed to solve either the parity task or ink task
to study the interpretation that the framework provides. For the parity task, mutual
information from Ydigit and from Yelse are 0.702 Nat and 0.002 Nat respectively, and
for the ink task, 1.498 Nat and 2.045 Nat. The result shows that the parity task doesn’t
need information from Yelse, while the ink task does. Clues of how the tasks are solved
can also be found by looking into the representation obtained after IB. For the parity
task, different digits are clustered into two groups according to their parity. For the ink
task, digits are aligned in an order corresponding to their actual average ink amount
(0 > 8 > 2 > 3 > 6 > 5 > 9 > 4 > 7 > 1) as Fig. 4 shows.
5.1.3
Experience-dependence of the ELSE Partition
After learning the digit task and, then, the ink task, we can update the auto-encoder
felse to exclude the ink-task-related information. On the one hand, Yink (ﬁrst row of
Fig. 3b) represents the average pixel intensity. On the other hand, this information is
suppressed in Yelse (rows 2-5). The suppression can be measured by feature correlation
between Yink and Yelse. Before ink task, the correlations are (0.295, 0.414, 0.080, 0.492,
0.100) for the 5 units visualized, but after the ink task, the correlation becomes (0.030,
0.194, 0.019, 0.028, 0.001). We also present the result of the average ink intensity
v.s. latent code of the 5 units. It can clearly be seen that, before the ink task, the
knowledge of average intensity is distributed across all 5 units. However, after the ink
task, the knowledge of average intensity is extracted as Yink and removed from Yelse (Fig.
3c). The result indicates that the un-conceptualized region is experience-dependent and
15

information about the already learned task is excluded. Unlike other frameworks such
as variational auto-encoder (Kingma and Welling, 2013) and infoGAN (Chen et al.,
2016) which usually have no explicit control over partitioning latent representation, our
framework allows latent representation re-organization through progressive tasks.
5.1.4
Quantitative benchmark of interpretation
After that, we ask if our proposed interpretation is quantitatively useful. Because we are
not aware of task-level human-agnostic interpretation algorithms directly comparable to
ours, we study how the interpretation changes as we systematically modify the required
type of information for task 2. Task 2 is designed to require both digit information and
digit-independent ink information involving different resolutions. For digit information,
we have 4 resolutions: d1, d2, d5, d10. For example, d5 means 10 digits are separated
into 5 equally sized groups and the task is to tell which group the image belongs to.
As a result, (0, 0.693, 1.609, 2.303) Nat of information about digit is theoretically
needed, respectively. For digit-independent ink information, we also have 4 resolutions
(according to the percentile-based grouping for each digit by the amounts of ink used):
s1, s2, s3, s4, which theoretically require (0, 0.693, 1.099, 1.386) Nat of information.
By combining them, we get 16 different possibilities for task 2, and the interpretation
measured as mutual information and the corresponding theoretical values are shown in
Fig. 5. The ﬁgure shows that information needed from Ydigit, I(Ydigit∩2; Ydigit), can be
precisely predicted. The required non-digit information I(Yelse∩2; Yelse) from Yelse via
auto-encoding correlates with the required amount to solve the task. However, due to
the imperfection of the variational IB algorithm to purely extract relevant information,
16

more than the theoretically required amount of information from Yelse is used for good
performance. This problem can be practically remedied by allowing Yelse to be re-
trained by adding an auxiliary auto-encoding task when learning task 2. Since input
data is available during task 2, adding an auxiliary auto-encoding task during task 2
training increases task 2 performance without needing extra data. See appendix Section
8.9 for further discussion.
5.2
CLEVR Dataset
In this section, we demonstrate the progressive interpretation framework on the CLEVR
dataset (Johnson et al., 2017). The CLEVR dataset is a large collection of 3D rendered
scenes (70K/15K train/test splits) with multiple objects with compositionally different
properties. The CLEVR dataset is originally designed for a visual question-answering
task but we train the model without using natural language. For example, we train the
model to classify the color of an object or conduct a multiple-choice (MC) task using
only the pictures. For the multiple-choice task, the model is trained on a large set of
four pictures and learns to choose one of the four pictures that includes a target object
(100K/20K train/test splits).
In this section, we divide the tasks into two groups. Task group 1: the model that
is pre-trained to tell objects apart learns to recognize part of the important properties
among shape, size, color, material, and position. Task group 2: the model is asked
to perform a multiple-choice task selecting a picture according to a speciﬁc context,
for example, “choose the picture with red cubes,” which needs information learned or
not yet learned in task 1. For task group 1, we ﬁrst use convolutional neural networks
17

(CNNs) to report the image properties by supervise learning and then obtain the un-
conceptualized region via auto-encoding. After that, task group 2 is performed with
interpretation synthesized. We choose discrete latent representation for this section.
See appendix Section 8.1 8.2 for Implementation details.
5.2.1
Interpretation by Information Flow
The result of interpretation by information ﬂow is shown in Table 1. The mutual in-
formation I(Y(i∩MC); Yi) for i ∈{posi, color, material, else} is measured in Nat per
object, where MC represents the multiple-choice task. Different rows represent differ-
ent question types. We sample 5 random initializations of the networks for each task
and present both the average and standard deviation. The theoretical amount of infor-
mation required for feature i is shown in parentheses. We can interpret how the model
is solving the task by calculating mutual information coming from each information
partition. For example, the task to “choose the picture with a green metal” needs 0.345
Nat of information from the color domain and 0.686 Nat from the material domain.
Information coming from other domains is judged as irrelevant to this task, which is
as expected. If the task is “choose the picture with a small yellow object,” the model
then needs 0.343 Nat from the color domain, plus 0.70 Nat of information from the
un-conceptualized region since the model has not yet explicitly learned about using ob-
ject size. If the task is “choose the picture with a large sphere,” the model ﬁnds out all
previously learned properties are useless and has to pick 0.31 Nat of information from
the un-conceptualized region. This is because neither size nor shape information has
been used in previous tasks.
18

Table 1: Table for Task2 interpretation, information unit (Nat/object), inside parenthe-
ses is the theoretical value.
Question Type
Position
Color
Material
Unknown
Correct rate
Green Metal
< 0.001 (0)
0.345 ± 0.001 (0.377)
0.686 ± 0.008 (0.693)
< 0.001 (0)
99.3 ± 0.1%
Left Rubber
0.56 ± 0.02(0.52)
< 0.001 (0)
0.688 ± 0.001 (0.693)
0.01 ± 0.02 (0)
97.0 ± 0.7%
Small Yellow
< 0.001 (0)
0.343 ± 0.002 (0.377)
< 0.001 (0)
0.70 ± 0.01 (0.693)
99.2 ± 0.1%
Red Cube
< 0.001 (0)
0.381 ± 0.002 (0.377)
< 0.001 (0)
0.89 ± 0.06 (0.637)
95.8 ± 0.4%
Right Cylinder
0.59 ± 0.03 (0.51)
< 0.001 (0)
< 0.001 (0)
0.88 ± 0.06 (0.637)
94.8 ± 0.7%
Large Sphere
< 0.001 (0)
< 0.001 (0)
< 0.001 (0)
0.31 ± 0.01 (0.451)
99.4 ± 0.1%
5.2.2
Single Example Interpretation and Un-conceptualized Representation
After getting the model, it is also possible to synthesize interpretation for a single exam-
ple by looking into the discrete representation Y(i∩MC) for i ∈{posi, color, material, else}.
A typical example is shown in Fig. 6. This example corresponds to a “small yellow ob-
ject.” We can see the model discriminates if the object has the color “yellow” while
neglecting position and material information. To solve the problem, the model also
needs information from the un-conceptualized partition which is representing the size
“small.” The behavior of the model is consistent with the expectation of the question
regarding the “small yellow object.”
We examine the correctness of the un-conceptualized representation by comparing
it with the true label. For example, if the task is “choose the small yellow object,”
the un-conceptualized region should represent the size “small.” We can cross-check
by calculating their mutual information, which is 0.662 Nat per object. For the case
“choosing red cube”, mutual information with the label “cube” is 0.432 Nat per object.
19

For the case “choosing cylinder on the right side”, mutual information with the label
“cylinder” is 0.408 Nat per object. All these numbers exceed the chance level (the
99, 95, and 90-percentile by chance are 0.637, 0.495, and 0.368 Nat respectively for
balanced binary random variables like size, and 0.583, 0.449, 0.332 Nat for cases with
three alternatives like shape).
5.2.3
Visualizing the Un-conceptualized Representation
After getting the un-conceptualized representation useful for the new task, we can con-
tinue the framework by splitting the un-conceptualized representation into the learned
useful part and its complement. Separating this new useful representation is non-trivial
because labels of the MC task jointly depend on multiple image properties. While pre-
vious methods (Koh et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020) need feature-speciﬁc labels to learn
a new property, the proposed framework automatically segregates a new useful repre-
sentation from previously learned representations. Furthermore, the proposed system
can visualize what a new representation has just been learned.
Here, we demonstrate the result after learning the task ”choose the picture with a
small yellow object.” We mentioned above that after learning this new task, the model
is expected to learn new concept about size as the new representation YMC = Y(else∩MC).
Note, again, that we never provided the model labels speciﬁcally about size. Then we
can continue the framework by performing another round of auto-encoding, which splits
Yelse into YMC and Yelse \ YMC. After that, the model explains what property is newly
learned by generating the image of an object and changing its size as the newly latent
representation YMC is altered (Fig. 7). This visualization also helps humans interpret
20

the operation of the model.
Information about other studies on the CLEVR dataset can be found in Section 8.4
to section 8.8. We also perform more discussions about our method in appendix Section
8.9, and discuss about limitations of our method in appendix 8.10.
6
Conclusion
This paper proposes a progressive framework based-on information theory to synthesize
interpretation. We show that interpretation involves independence, is progressive, and
can be given at a macroscopic level using meta-information. Changing the receiver of
the interpretation from a human to a target model helps deﬁne interpretation clearly. Our
interpretation framework divides the input representations into independent partitions
by tasks and synthesizes interpretation for the next task. This framework can also visu-
alize what conceptualized and un-conceptualized partitions code by generating images.
The framework is implemented with a VIB technique and is tested on the MNIST and
the CLEVR dataset. The framework can solve the task and synthesize non-trivial inter-
pretation in the form of meta-information. The framework is also shown to be able to
progressively form meaningful new representation partitions. Our information-theoretic
framework capable of forming quantiﬁable interpretations is expected to inspire future
understanding-driven deep learning.
21

7
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Ho Ka Chan, Yuri Kinoshita and Qian-Yuan Tang for use-
ful discussions about the work.
This study was supported by Brain/MINDS from
Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED) under Grant Number
JP15dm0207001, Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI Grant
Number JP18H05432, and RIKEN Center for Brain Science.
8
Appendix
8.1
Experiment Details
8.1.1
MNIST Case
Step 1, the property learning and information partition splitting step (Fig. 8a).
To solve task 1, we train a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) MLP1 to predict the digit.
We use cross-entropy loss between the softmax outputs and the digit labels. The digit
representation Ydigit is obtained by sampling from the output distribution, which is a
10-dimension one-hot vector. Note that the noise introduced by sampling here helps
remove task-irrelevant information. The network is trained with loss back-propagation
with the help of Pytorch’s auto-gradient framework. AdamW with a weight decay of
0.01 is chosen as the optimizer and the learning rate is ﬁxed at 1e-4. After training, we
get 98.15% of correct rate on the test set.
After getting the digit information, we train MLPelse to get complementary repre-
sentation Yelse with the help of IB. The scaling factor of IB is γ = 4e −4. Yelse is a
22

64-dimension continuous vector, with each dimension sampled from a Gaussian distri-
bution N(µ, σ) where µ and σ are calculated by Yelse. Ydigit concatenated with Yelse is
sent to another MLP to proceed auto-encoding. Pixel-by-pixel mean-square error loss
is used.
Step 2, second task interpretation step (Fig. 8b). By feeding Ydigit and Yelse to
two separated IB regularized MLPs, a series of second tasks, including parity task, ink
task, and matrix tasks, can be solved and interpreted. For parity task and ink task, we
choose the dimension of Ydigit∩task2 and Yelse∩task2 to be 1 and for matrix task, we choose
the dimension of Ydigit∩task2 to be 1 and that of Yelse∩task2 to be 4. The scaling factor
of IB is chosen to be 0.005, 0.002, or 0.05 for each task, which is usually decided by
scanning while balancing interpretation versus precision. The experiment is conducted
on a single Tesla V100S GPU.
8.1.2
CLEVR Case
Step 1, the property learning (Fig. 9a) and information partition splitting step
(Fig. 9b). Before the multiple-choice task, we pre-train the model to tell different ob-
jects apart and train it to recognize certain properties. To tell objects apart, the ﬁrst step
we need to do is image segmentation. We implement image segmentation with Mask R-
CNN (He et al., 2017) via ﬁne-tuning a pre-trained Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019) Mask
R-CNN on a mini-CLEVR dataset where 4000 pictures are annotated with masks (Yi
et al., 2018). The CLEVR dataset contains the ground truth of the rendered position,
color, shape, size, and material of each object. Since our framework is progressive, we
assume that the model will learn about the position, color, and material of the objects
23

ﬁrst. Following the segmentation process, the masked image of an object is sent to a
Res-Net (He et al., 2016) that learns position, color, and material with supervision. The
network output for object position is a continuous number. The root-mean-square er-
ror loss is used to quantify the position prediction. We add to the network estimated
position Gaussian noise with a standard deviation equivalent to 0.2% of the image
size to eliminate the small amount of position-independent information. In contrast,
color and material labels are categorical. The corresponding softmax outputs of the
network represent the underlying probability of the one-hot categorical representation.
The cross-entropy loss between the softmax outputs and the categorical labels is used
for color and material prediction. Then, the internal representation for color and mate-
rial is obtained by sampling from the softmax outputs. Again, this sampling step helps
to eliminate task-irrelevant information encoded in the network outputs. The network is
trained with loss back-propagation with the help of Pytorch’s auto-gradient framework.
Adam is chosen as the optimizer and the learning rate is ﬁxed at 1e-4.
After getting the position, color, and material-related information partitions, IB-
induced auto-encoding can be used as the next step to extract the complementary rep-
resentation Yelse. f1−3 = CNN1−3 trained in the last step is ﬁxed in this step, providing
information about the position, color, and material. CNN represents a convolutional
neural network (LeCun et al., 1989). felse,θ = CNNelse is trained to encode informa-
tion other than that previously learned with the help of an IB. The scaling factor of IB
is γ = 8e −3. Information coming from both CNN1−3 and CNNelse are combined
and fed into a de-convolutional neural network (DECNN) (Zeiler et al., 2010) to do
self-prediction. Pixel-by-pixel mean-square error loss is used for self-prediction. In
24

practice, we found out that reconstructing a cropped region where the target object is in
the center instead of the original masked picture with a large background area signiﬁ-
cantly improves the auto-encoding precision.
After this step, we obtain an internal representation of Y = {Yposi, Ycolor, Ymaterial,
Yelse}, where each partition represents information for the position, color, material, and
other un-conceptualized properties about the input. Yposi is a 2D ﬂoat number between
0 and 1 representing normalized X and Y positions. Ycolor is a one-hot vector with
thr length 8, representing 8 different colors. Ymaterial is a one-hot vector with length
2, representing 2 different kinds of materials. Yelse is the Bernoulli distribution with
dimension size 64. This internal representation will be used to solve the multiple-choice
task described below and serve as the basis for the task interpretation.
Step 2, the multiple-choice task interpretation step (Fig. 9c). The task is a
multiple-choice task regarding the categorized position (right, middle, and left), color,
material, shape, and size. After choosing a certain criterion, for example: “chose the
picture with a green ball,” the model is asked to pick the picture with a green ball
from four candidates. To keep the task simple, we do not provide the explicit question
description in natural language, and instead, we present the model with a lot of multiple-
choice task examples and choice answers, and the model is supposed to ﬁnd out how to
solve the task without having access to the question context in natural language. In our
task example generation system, only one of four images would satisfy the requirement.
The pictures are randomly shufﬂed so that the probability of the correct choice is equal
to 1/4 for all four options.
The CNN1−3 trained in previous Step 1, which receives a masked image of an object
25

and outputs information partition Y = {Yposi, Ycolor, Ymaterial, Yelse}, per object, will be
ﬁxed in this step. Each information partition is then fed into an IB regularized MLP
separately, followed by a feed-forward style neural network. The scaling factor of IB is
chosen to be γ = 0.04 for this step. The feed-forward network will ﬁrst do convolution
with an MLP kernel over the object dimension followed by another MLP over four
scenes to solve the multiple-choice problem. The experiment is conducted on a single
Tesla V100 GPU.
8.1.3
Other Implementation Details
Temperature Schedule for Gumbel Softmax: Instead of ﬁxing the temperature in
Gumbel softmax at a constant low temperature, we found out that multiple scans of
the temperature from high to low beneﬁt training. We use an exponential schedule to
control the Gumbel softmax temperature τ = exp(−5(n × s −⌊n × s⌋)) where n is
the total number of scans, and s is the training schedule that starts with 0 and ends with
1. ⌊...⌋is the ﬂoor operator.
IB scaling factor γ Schedule: The work of Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby (2017) claims
that training a deep network usually consists of two phases: training the label-ﬁtting
phase and the information-compression phase. Inspired by this work, we try adding
a warm-up training phase where IB scaling factor γ is set to zero and use learning
rate 1e-4 to train the network. After that, the IB scaling factor is set back to normal,
and information starts to get compressed. This strategy especially works well with the
multiple-choice task, where we encountered some cases where the loss function never
goes down if we start training with a non-zero IB scaling factor.
26

Mutual Information Estimation: For mutual information (MI) estimation, in the
MNIST case where the latent representation is continuous, we ﬁnd that IB would decou-
ple each dimension, so we calculate the MI of each dimension separately and add them
up. In the CLEVR case where the latent representations are discrete, we can directly
use the deﬁnition to calculate MI.
8.2
Network Implementation Detail
8.2.1
MNIST Case
In this section, we describe the detailed implementation of neural networks solving the
MNIST tasks. We use mainly MLP. MLP1, which does digit recognition, MLPelse,
which does auto-encoding, and MLPq, which decodes the image, are all MLPs with 5
hidden layers with dimension 800 for each layer. The latent code vector produced by
MLPelse has a dimension of 64. All the other auxiliary MLPs share the same structure
with 5 hidden layers with dimension 128 for each layer. We also noticed that providing
the digit information predicted by MLP1 to MLPelse can help remove digit information,
so we concatenate a linear mapping of the predicted digit together with the image as the
input to MLPelse.
8.2.2
CLEVR Case
In this section, we describe the detailed implementation of neural networks solving the
CLEVR tasks. Fig 10 shows the topology of the convolutional network for CNN1−3
and CNNelse of the auto-encoding step. The model parameters are listed in Table 2.
Fig 11 shows the topology of the deconvolutional neural network DECNN of the auto-
27

encoding step. Detailed model shape parameters are listed in Table 3. MLP modules
of the interpretation step map the target dimension of the input tensors from a cer-
tain input size to a certain output size with several hidden layers. Each hidden layer
is followed by a layer-wise normalization and a ReLU activation. Detailed shape pa-
rameters for each MLP module are shown in Table 4. (Abbreviations, CNN: convo-
lutional neural network. DECNN: deconvolutional neural network. MLP: multi-layer
perceptron. Conv2D: 2D convolutional layer. ResConv: convolutional layer with skip
connection. LayerNorm: layer normalization. Linear: linear transformation layer. Con-
vTranspose2D: 2D deconvolutional layer.)
8.3
Reparameterization
The internal representation of a VIB Y can be reparameterized into a vector of either
continuous or discrete variables.
8.3.1
Continuous Representation
One standard way to reparameterize Y is to assume multi-dimensional Gaussian distri-
bution. The d-th element of Y is given by:
[Y ]d = N([fµ(X)]d, [fσ(X)]d)
(8)
where N is Gaussian distribution. [fµ(X)]d is the d-th element of a vector calculated
from X by the neural network fµ representing the mean, and [fσ(X)]d representing the
variance. And we usually choose r(Yd) = N(0, 1), or unit Gaussian with 0 mean and
unit variance as the prior distribution. Then, the KL-divergence between p(Y |X) and
r(Y ) can be analytically calculated.
28

Table 2: CNN1−3 and CNNelse parameter, CNNelse shares the same network topology
with CNN1−3 except for the MLP module which is shown below.
Module Name
Size [in(x,y), out(x,y)]
Channel (in, out)
Kernel
Stride
Padding
CNN1−3 parameter
Conv2D1
[(480, 320), (237, 157)]
(3, 16)
7
2
0
MaxPool2D1
[(237, 157), (118, 78)]
(16, 16)
2
2
0
ResConv1
[(118, 78), (118, 78)]
(16, 16)
5
1
2
Conv2D2
[(118, 78), (114, 74)]
(16, 32)
5
1
0
MaxPool2D2
[(114, 74), (57, 37)]
(32, 32)
2
2
0
ResConv2
[(57, 37), (57, 37)]
(32, 32)
5
1
2
Conv2D3
[(57, 37), (53, 33)]
(32, 32)
5
1
0
MaxPool2D3
[(53, 33), (26, 16)]
(32, 32)
2
2
0
ResConv3
[(26, 16), (26, 16)]
(32, 32)
5
1
2
Conv2D4
[(26, 16), (22, 12)]
(32, 32)
5
1
0
MaxPool2D4
[(22, 12), (11, 6)]
(32, 32)
2
2
0
ResConv4
[(11, 6), (11, 6)]
(32, 32)
5
1
2
Linear i2h
(2112, 128)
-
-
-
-
Linear h1
(128, 64)
-
-
-
-
Linear h2o
(64, 12)
-
-
-
-
CNNelse parameter
Linear i2h
(2112, 512)
-
-
-
-
Linear h1
(512, 256)
-
-
-
-
Linear h2o
(256, 128)
-
-
-
-
29

Table 3: DECNN parameter, note that the images which DECNN works with has equal
x and y sizes.
Module Name
Size (in, out)
Channel (in, out)
Kernel
Stride
Padding
Linear i2h
(140, 256)
-
-
-
-
Linear h1
(256, 512)
-
-
-
-
Linear h2o
(512, 1152)
-
-
-
-
ResConv1
(6, 6)
(32, 32)
5
1
2
ConvTranspose2D1 1
(6, 12)
(32, 32)
2
2
0
ConvTranspose2D1 2
(12, 16)
(32, 32)
5
1
0
ResConv2
(16, 16)
(32, 32)
5
1
2
ConvTranspose2D2 1
(16, 32)
(32, 16)
2
2
0
ConvTranspose2D2 2
(32, 36)
(16, 16)
5
1
0
ResConv3
(36, 36)
(16, 16)
5
1
2
ConvTranspose2D3 1
(36, 72)
(16, 16)
2
2
0
ConvTranspose2D3 2
(72, 147)
(16, 3)
5
2
0
30

Table 4: MLP module parameters for multiple-choice tasks, x size equals y size. b
stands for batch size.
Module Name
Input data shape
Input size
Output size
Hidden size
MLP:Yposi
(b, 4, 10, 2)
2
8
(16, 16)
MLP:Ycolor
(b, 4, 10, 8)
8
8
(16, 16)
MLP:Ymaterial
(b, 4, 10, 8)
2
8
(16, 16)
MLP:Yelse
(b, 4, 10, 64)
64
16
(32, 32)
MLP:Y to hidden
(b, 4, 10, 40)
40
1
(32, 16, 8)
MLP:hidden to out
(b, 4, 10)
10
1
(5)
8.3.2
Discrete Representation
We can assume Y to be a vector of binary elements with multi-dimensional Bernoulli
distributions. One merit of multi-dimensional Bernoulli distribution is that we can reg-
ularize the prior distribution’s entropy to induce sparsity and make the following analy-
sis easier, which is usually not the case for continuous prior such as multi-dimensional
Gaussian. The merit of entropy regularization is more thoroughly discussed in the work
of deterministic information bottleneck of Strouse and Schwab (2017). Speciﬁcally, we
use the Gumbel-Softmax reparameterization trick (Jang et al., 2016) to draw samples
from the multi-dimensional Bernoulli distribution without blocking gradient informa-
tion. The d-th element of Y is given by:
[Y ]d = Sigmoid

log
[fθ(X)]d
1 −[fθ(X)]d
+ ∆gd

/τ

(9)
where Sigmoid[x] = 1/(1+e−x) is the Sigmoid function, τ is a temperature parameter,
and ∆gd is the difference of two Gumbel variables, while each of them is generated by
31

−log log(1/σ) with σ being a sample from uniform distribution Uniform(0,1) between
0 and 1. Theoretically, we consider the zero temperature limit τ →0 of Eq. 9 to obtain
the binary representation, namely, [Y ]d = 1 with probability [felse,θ(X)]d and [Y ]d = 0
otherwise. In practice, however, we observed that scanning the temperature from high
to low multiple times helps the network to converge. r(Y ) = Q
d(ˆrd)[Y ]d(1−ˆrd)1−[Y ]d is
the Bernoulli prior distribution for p with parameters {ˆrd}, which should be optimized.
Note that the KL-divergence between p(Y |X) and r(Y ) can be analytically calculated.
8.4
Splitted Information Map Combinatory Test
The auto-encoding step splits input representation Y into Y1, which is needed to solve
task 1, and Yelse, which ideally satisﬁes I(Y1; Yelse) = 0. This means Y1 and Yelse should
be independent. To check the quality of this auto-encoding step, except for calculating
mutual information and scanning latent variables as shown in the MNIST example,
another way is to test the combinatory property of Y1 and Yelse visually. We demonstrate
it using the CLEVR dataset. For example, Fig. 12a shows when Y1 classiﬁes object
color. Since Y1 is a one-hot vector with eight possible color choices, it is straightforward
to change the one-hot vector, combine it with Yelse and generate new auto-encoded
pictures. The result shows that, after changing the color representation, the output image
color also changes accordingly, while other visual properties are ﬁxed. One can even try
to mix the color component by mixing the color representation vectors and generating
an object with new color outside the dataset. The same experiment can be done when
Y1 classiﬁes object material. One can easily switch the object material between rubber
and metal without changing other visual properties. This experiment conﬁrms that the
32

information splitting method can generate combinatory information partitions.
8.5
Hyper Parameter Scan
The scaling factor γ is a hyper-parameter balancing inclusion of more information for
better performance and exclusion of information for simplicity. To study the effect of
γ, we perform γ scanning in this section. We study the CLEVR dataset as an example.
8.5.1
γ in Auto-encoding step
The ﬁrst γ subject to scan is the γ in Eq. 1 of the main manuscript. We pick γ from {
0.0, 1e-3, 8e-3, 2e-2, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0 }. Note that since the auto-encoding step uses RMS
error as the training loss, which is not an information metric, the absolute value of γ has
no meaning. Fig. 13 shows the result of reconstructed objects with different γ. It shows
that generally speaking, higher γ leads to a more generic picture. One interesting thing
to notice is that when γ becomes 1.0, the model decides to ﬁll in the covered parts of
the image.
Fig 14 shows the information metric about Yelse with different γ. With γ increasing,
total mutual information I(X; Yelse) goes down. Mutual information about the position,
color, and material, which is supposed to be compressed out, decreases since they are
already encoded by Y1−3. However, as a side effect, mutual information about the
unknown property (shape and size), which should be kept, slightly goes down. Feasible
γ ranges from 0 to 0.02. Note that choosing γ to be 0 doesn’t mean the information
bottleneck is not needed, since discretization itself is already a very strong bottleneck.
We choose γ = 8e −3 with higher mutual information about shape and size, granting
33

better downstream tasks performance.
8.5.2
γ in Multiple-choice Task
Fig. 15 shows the scan of γ of the multiple-choice step in Eq. 4 of the main manuscript.
Among the six tasks, we choose “exist a small yellow object” as the example. We pick
γ from { 0.0, 1e-3, 1e-2, 2e-2, 4e-2, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 2.0 }. As shown by the
result, the correct rate doesn’t change much when γ is smaller than 0.5 and drops fast
afterward. If γ is too small, for example, 0 as an extreme case, information is coming
from all sub-partitions, including the unnecessary position and material partitions for
solving this task. Hence, too small γ hampers the interpretation due to the contamina-
tion. Feasible γ with both high correct rate and high-quality interpretation ranges from
0.01 to 0.2.
8.6
Failure Case Analysis
Table 1 of the main manuscript shows that there is still a signiﬁcant amount of failure
cases for the CLEVR task, especially the “red cube” task and “right side cylinder”
task. Then, an interesting question to ask is, can our interpretation framework detect
the reason for failure?
The answer is yes. Fig. 16 shows the single example interpretation plot of a failed
“red cube” detection case. By checking the representation matrix, we noticed that the
model is quite stable at predicting “red” objects, but missed multiple times about “cube”
in this particular case. For example, object 4 in picture 2, which is a cube, is missed.
Object 3 in picture 3, which is a cylinder, is incorrectly identiﬁed as a cube.
34

After checking more failure examples, we hypothesize that the model may have dif-
ﬁculty telling cube and cylinder apart due to the side-effect of information-bottleneck-
induced auto-encoding. The hypothesis is also supported by a visual check of the auto-
encoding result. Two examples are shown in Fig. 17 where the original object lies on
the left of the arrow and the reconstructed object lies on the right. The reconstructed
object shows some tendency to mix cylinder and cube.
8.7
Importance of information splitting
One key step of our proposed framework is the information partition splitting shown by
Eq. 1. After splitting the input into task 1 related partition Y1 and unrelated partition
Yelse, later task then has to go to Y1 for task 1 related information since Yelse doesn’t
contain the necessary information. And the information accessing pattern is the key to
the interpretation in our framework.
Then, as an ablation study, it would be interesting to ask, what would happen if we
remove the information partition splitting step and replace Yelse with simply the hidden
representation Yauto for auto-encoding of the input. Since now Yauto also contains in-
formation of Y1, there would be ambiguity for the later task to access information about
task 1. We perform the same CLEVR dataset multiple-choice task described in the main
manuscript with Yelse replaced by Yauto. Note that since information compression is not
needed, we also remove the information bottleneck when building Yauto. The result is
shown in Table 5.
As can be seen from the result, there is no problem for the model to solve the tasks.
However, if we check the information ﬂow pattern, we can see that the model fails
35

to relate the new task with previously learned features and get information only from
the auto-encoded part. From a meta-information point of view, the information ﬂow
pattern degenerates, and the interpretation is viewed to be low quality since it cannot
tell different tasks apart.
Table 5: Table for multiple-choice task interpretation, without information partitioning,
information unit (Nat/object)
QUESTION TYPE
POSITION
COLOR
MATERIAL
AUTO-CODE
CORRECT RATE
GREEN METAL
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
0.201
99.6%
LEFT SIDE RUBBER
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
0.330
99.1%
SMALL YELLOW
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
0.193
99.5%
RED CUBE
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
0.249
99.3%
RIGHT SIDE CYLINDER
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
0.270
98.2%
LARGE SPHERE
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
0.244
99.9%
8.8
Higher-order Information
One common question about this framework is how this can handle high-order infor-
mation. Imagine the following scenario, where the correct output of a new task is
independent of each partition but computed from a combination of some partitions. In
this case, the task is solvable only by using high-order information. We argue that our
interpretation framework can handle this situation. Recall that the contribution of the
ith partition for solving task n + 1 is quantiﬁed by the minimal amount of information
36

need from this partition, I(Y(i;n+1), Yi). This quantity is distinct from the mutual infor-
mation between the ith partition and the output, I(Y(i;n+1); Z), which should be 0 in our
example. In other words, the amount of information kept in Y(i;n+1) despite the appli-
cation of the information bottleneck directly indicates the contribution of this partition
for the task.
We demonstrate our claim with a similar CLEVR dataset multiple-choice task. Ev-
erything remains the same except that we change the logical operation between two ob-
ject properties from AND to XOR in the multiple-choice tasks. For example, the task
“green metal” becomes “green XOR metal”, which means “ﬁnding the picture with the
object being either green or metal but not both.” In the CLEVR dataset, “green XOR
metal” is independent of either “green” or “metal”, and the information needed to solve
the task is of the second order. The interpretation result is shown in Table 6. We can see
from the result that even though “green XOR metal” is independent of either “green”
or “metal”, the model can still successfully relate “green XOR metal” with “green” and
“metal”. An extra partition can still be formed when needed just as expected.
8.9
Discussions
Motivation and usefulness of this framework.
Many works try to make sense of a
neural network’s operation at a microscopic level, while our proposal aims at a more
macroscopic level interpretation. We showed that we can learn a lot by examining
how the machine solves each task utilizing partitioned information relevant to previous
tasks. Also different from many existing works where the goal is to interpret an already-
trained network, our framework emphasizes the utilization of experience, which can be
37

Table 6: Table for multiple-choice task interpretation, XOR case, information unit
(Nat/object)
QUESTION TYPE
POSITION
COLOR
MATERIAL
UNKNOWN
CORRECT RATE
GREEN XOR METAL
< 0.001
0.388
0.575
< 0.001
99.4%
LEFT SIDE XOR RUBBER
0.528
< 0.001
0.615
< 0.001
99.1%
SMALL XOR YELLOW
< 0.001
0.362
< 0.001
0.574
99.8%
RED XOR CUBE
< 0.001
0.301
< 0.001
0.581
97.5%
RIGHT SIDE XOR CYLINDER
0.515
< 0.001
< 0.001
0.772
94.8%
LARGE XOR SPHERE
< 0.001
< 0.001
< 0.001
0.443
99.9%
viewed as an interpretation-enhancing framework, since without information splitting,
later task doesn’t automatically relate to earlier tasks (see Sec. 8.7). Another common
concern is about the usefulness of this framework since a mutually related sequence
of tasks is needed. The author agrees that, for the current stage, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd
such a dataset since the current trend is end-to-end training of a single high-level task.
However, it also implies that research on related task ensembles receives non-adequate
attention since we human beings naturally learn progressively. The author would like
to attract more attention to this direction with this proposed framework. It will be
important for future studies to learn from resources such as textbooks that are naturally
organized progressively and to extend the framework onto auxiliary tasks like those
used in unsupervised pretraining.
38

Relationship with partial information decomposition (PID).
Our proposed frame-
work shares some similarities with the PID framework (Williams and Beer, 2010) in
the sense that both of them are trying to explain data by splitting the information map.
However, the difference is also obvious. One obvious difference is that PID focuses on
characterizing the data currently under consideration while our framework is progres-
sive and learning-order dependent (see above), focusing on characterizing future data.
Importantly, the number of information maps grows combinatorially with the number
of neurons in the PID framework, while in our framework, the number of information
splits grows linearly with tasks thanks to the training framework that actively simpliﬁes
the information map by introducing independence. Note that even though our frame-
work tends to remove redundancy, synergy can still exist between current information
splits and future tasks (See Sec. 8.8).
Relationship between interpretation quality and performance.
As we explored in
Sec. 8.5, there exists a trade-off between interpretation quality and model performance
in our proposed framework. In practice, we noticed that lowering IB regularization
may result in better task performance at the cost of using more information than nec-
essary. This leads to more redundant information partitions and an overestimation of
task-relevant information. However, exchanging model performance for better under-
standing is not just an issue particular to our framework but is something universal.
This is also the case for scientiﬁc theorems. An appropriate level of abstraction is cru-
cial for intuitiveness and interpretability. Thus, a good balance between interpretation
and performance may be the key to upgrading a model into insightful knowledge.
39

Intuition behind auxiliary auto-encoding.
We mentioned in Sec. 5.1.4 that allow-
ing Yelse to be re-trained by adding an auxiliary auto-encoding task when learning task
2 would boost the task performance. Here, we discuss the intuition why we sometimes
need this auxiliary auto-encoding task. Ideally, Yelse should contain all accessible in-
formation complementary to already learned representations. However, in practice, the
Yelse we get via auto-encoding is a lossy compression based on the latent feature salience
with respect to the auto-encoding lost function. Information needed in a following task
may already be compressed away since which information will be useful in the future
is unknown. Allowing Yelse to be re-trained gives a chance for the lost information to
be recovered.
Changes in input statistics.
The current framework requires that input space X stays
the same for all the following tasks to maximize interpretation. If X are completely
different, those tasks must be solved separately. What would happen if X is slightly
different? How to handle the situation depends on the strategy. For example, if the
model working on the CLEVR dataset encounters a new shape: “cone,” following the
current framework, the model would ﬁrst classify it as a “cylinder” until the model
comes across some task that needs to tell apart “cone” from “cylinder.” Then the model
would pick some extra information from an un-conceptualized part like “sharp top” to
help distinguish “cone” from “cylinder.” As a result, the model would think “cone” is
a sub-class of “cylinder” with “sharp top” and can further imagine a new shape like
“square” with “sharp top,” which is a “square cone.” Another example is when the
distribution partially changes. Let’s imagine, with the CLEVR dataset, a change where
40

all balls suddenly become red. Under this situation, the color and shape representation
still works as before. However, since once independent representation color and shape
now become dependent, interpretation for the following task now has ambiguity due to
the redundancy.
Relationship with the biological brain.
The interpretation as meta-information is
related to meta-cognition in the brain (Tobias and Everson, 2002). Especially, the un-
conceptualized information map Yelse is related to the meta-cognition aspect “knowing
what you do not know,” which is very important for the proposed interpretation frame-
work. Brain development study also supports the idea of progressive learning, with
the most famous example being the critical period hypothesis (Lenneberg, 1967; Toy-
oizumi et al., 2013). Our interpretation framework is explicitly introducing indepen-
dence among information maps. Meanwhile, there exist clues about the brain capable
of performing independent component analysis only using local information available
in each neuron (Isomura and Toyoizumi, 2016). Whether the brain is actively making
use of this capability for task interpretation is not yet clear.
8.10
Limitations
We deﬁne the scope of the paper as a proposal of a new theoretical framework for
progressive interpretation with simple proof-of-concept examples. This framework is
still in its preliminary stage with limitations when considering practical implementation,
which we will discuss as follows.
Independence induction with IB: The framework assumes that the information
41

about the world can be divided into mutually independent partitions. Does this assump-
tion really holds in the real world can be in question. However, there is no guarantee
that our proposed IB-based method can ﬁnd the right information map partition practi-
cally. As shown in Fig 14, instead of an ideal black-or-white information separation, in
practice, our IB based-method has to balance separation quality and task performance.
This limitation is related to the point “relationship between interpretation quality and
performance.” in the previous discussion section.
About tasks order. It should be pointed out that, the interpretation generated via
our framework is sensitive to the order of the tasks. Then the natural question to ask is,
what is the optimum task sequence. The authors believe that it is still an open question
and an exciting research direction since we know the order of the task sequence matters
not only for humans but also for machines (Bengio et al., 2009). On the other hand,
it is also possible that the model’s interpretability can be boosted by carefully ordering
tasks during learning. For example, using the example of CLEVR, one could explore
the task order, where the model learns about “red cube/sphere/cylinder” ﬁrst and then
tries to tell “red”. In this case, the model should use all information from the previous
three tasks and learn to perform the “or” operation. As a future direction, guidelines on
how to decide the optimal order can be a useful addition to the current work.
Lack of suitable dataset: The framework requires a sequence of mutually related
tasks to generate useful interpretation. The lack of datasets organized in a sequentially
organized manner is also a big issue limiting the practical usefulness of this frame-
work. This problem can be mitigated either by developing new datasets with a clear
curriculum design, such as textbook-like datasets, or by utilizing other techniques such
42

as unsupervised sub-task generation (Kulkarni et al., 2016).
Unchangeable inner representations: In our framework, we assume that the inner
representations, once formed, will not change over time. This assumption is clearly a
simpliﬁcation since, in reality, people’s inner representations of the world are always
subject to change. As a future direction, a mechanism is needed to constantly update
the formed representations, delete inefﬁcient ones, propose new ones, or even create a
new level of representations by combining existing ones.
