arXiv:2301.00944v3  [cs.LG]  4 Jun 2024
Temporal Diﬀerence Learning with Compressed Updates:
Error-Feedback meets Reinforcement Learning
Aritra Mitra, George J. Pappas, and Hamed Hassani ∗
Abstract
In large-scale distributed machine learning, recent works have studied the eﬀects of com-
pressing gradients in stochastic optimization to alleviate the communication bottleneck. These
works have collectively revealed that stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is robust to structured
perturbations such as quantization, sparsiﬁcation, and delays.
Perhaps surprisingly, despite
the surge of interest in multi-agent reinforcement learning, almost nothing is known about the
analogous question: Are common reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms also robust to simi-
lar perturbations? We investigate this question by studying a variant of the classical temporal
diﬀerence (TD) learning algorithm with a perturbed update direction, where a general com-
pression operator is used to model the perturbation. Our work makes three important technical
contributions. First, we prove that compressed TD algorithms, coupled with an error-feedback
mechanism used widely in optimization, exhibit the same non-asymptotic theoretical guarantees
as their SGD counterparts. Second, we show that our analysis framework extends seamlessly
to nonlinear stochastic approximation schemes that subsume Q-learning. Third, we prove that
for multi-agent TD learning, one can achieve linear convergence speedups with respect to the
number of agents while communicating just ˜O(1) bits per iteration.
Notably, these are the
ﬁrst ﬁnite-time results in RL that account for general compression operators and error-feedback
in tandem with linear function approximation and Markovian sampling. Our proofs hinge on
the construction of novel Lyapunov functions that capture the dynamics of a memory variable
introduced by error-feedback.
1
Introduction
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is at the heart of large-scale distributed machine learning
paradigms such as federated learning (FL) [1]. In these applications, the task of training high-
dimensional weight vectors is distributed among several workers that exchange information over
networks of limited bandwidth. While parallelization at such an immense scale helps to reduce
the computational burden, it creates several other challenges: delays, asynchrony, and most im-
portantly, a signiﬁcant communication bottleneck.
The popularity and success of SGD can be
attributed in no small part to the fact that it is extremely robust to such deviations from ideal
operating conditions. In fact, by now, there is a rich literature that analyzes the robustness of
SGD to a host of structured perturbations that include lossy gradient-quantization [2,3] and spar-
siﬁcation [4,5]. For instance, SignSGD - a variant of SGD where each coordinate of the gradient is

H. Hassani and G. Pappas are with the Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering,

1837253, NSF CAREER award CIF 1943064, and The Institute for Learning-enabled Optimization at Scale (TILOS),
under award number NSF-CCF-2112665.

replaced by its sign - is extensively used to train deep neural networks [6,7]. Inspired by these ﬁnd-
ings, in this paper, we ask a diﬀerent question: Are common reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
also robust to similar structured perturbations?
Motivation. Perhaps surprisingly, despite the recent surge of interest in multi-agent/federated
RL, almost nothing is known about the above question. To ﬁll this void, we initiate the study of
a robustness theory for iterative RL algorithms with compressed update directions. We primarily
focus on the problem of evaluating the value function associated with a ﬁxed policy µ in a Markov
decision process (MDP). Just as SGD is the workhorse of stochastic optimization, the classical
temporal diﬀerence (TD) learning algorithm [8] for policy evaluation forms the core subroutine in
a variety of decision-making algorithms in RL (e.g., Watkin’s Q-learning algorithm). In fact, in
their book [9], Sutton and Barto mention: “If one had to identify one idea as central and novel
to reinforcement learning, it would undoubtedly be temporal-diﬀerence (TD) learning.” Thus, it
stands to reason that we center our investigation around a variant of the TD(0) learning algorithm
with linear function approximation, where the TD(0) update direction is replaced by a compressed
version of it. Moreover, to account for general biased compression operators (e.g., sign and Top-k),
we couple this scheme with an error-feedback mechanism that retains some memory of TD(0) update
directions from the past.
Other than the robustness angle, a key motivation of our work is to design communication-
eﬃcient algorithms for the emerging paradigms of multi-agent RL (MARL) and federated RL
(FRL). In existing works on these topics [10–13], agents typically exchange high-dimensional mod-
els (parameters) or model-diﬀerentials (i.e., gradient-like update directions) over low-bandwidth
channels, keeping their personal data (i.e., rewards, states, and actions) private. In the recent
survey paper on FRL by [11], the authors explain how the above issues contribute to a major
communication bottleneck, just as in the standard FL setting. However, no work on MARL or
FRL provides any theory whatsoever when it comes to compression/quantization in RL. Our work
takes a signiﬁcant step towards ﬁlling this gap via a suite of comprehensive theoretical results that
we discuss below.
1.1
Our Contributions
The main contributions of this work are as follows.
1. Algorithmic Framework for Compressed Stochastic Approximation. We develop
a general framework for analyzing iterative compressed stochastic approximation (SA) algo-
rithms with error-feedback. The generality of this framework stems from two salient features:
(i) it applies to nonlinear SA with Markovian noise; and (ii) the compression operator covers
several common quantization and (biased) sparsiﬁcation schemes studied in optimization. As
an instance of our framework, we propose a new algorithm called EF-TD (Algorithm 1) to
study extreme distortions to the TD(0) update direction. Examples of such distortion include,
but are not limited to, replacing each coordinate of the TD(0) update direction with just its
sign, or just retaining the coordinate with the largest magnitude. While such distortions have
been extensively studied for SGD, we are unaware of any analagous algorithms or analysis in
the context of RL.
2. Analysis under Markovian Sampling. In Theorem 1, we show that with a constant step-
size, EF-TD guarantees linear convergence to a ball centered around the optimal parameter.
Up to a compression factor, our result mirrors existing rates in RL without compression [14].
Moreover, the eﬀect of the compression factor exactly mirrors that for compressed SGD [15].

The signiﬁcance of this result is twofold: (i) It is the ﬁrst result in RL that accounts for gen-
eral compression operators and error-feedback in tandem with Markovian sampling and linear
function approximation; and (ii) It is the ﬁrst theoretical result on the robustness of TD learn-
ing algorithms to structured perturbations. One interesting takeaway from Theorem 1 is that
“slowly-mixing” Markov chains have more inherent robustness to distortions/compression.
This appears to be a new observation that we elaborate on in Section 4.
3. Analysis for General Nonlinear Stochastic Approximation. In Section 5, we study
Algorithm 1 in its full generality by considering a compressed nonlinear SA scheme with error-
feedback, and establishing an analog of Theorem 1 in Theorem 2. The signiﬁcance of this
result lies in revealing that the power and scope of the popular error-feedback mechanism [2]
in large-scale ML is not limited to the optimization problems it has been used for thus
far.
In particular, since the nonlinear SA scheme we study captures certain instances of
Q-learning [16], Theorem 2 conveys that our results extend well beyond policy evaluation to
decision-making (control) problems as well.
4. Communication-Eﬃcient MARL. Since one of our main goals is to facilitate communication-
eﬃcient MARL, we consider a collaborative MARL setting that has shown up in several recent
works [10,13,17]. Here, M agents interact with the same MDP, but observe potentially dif-
ferent realizations of rewards and state transitions. These agents exchange compressed TD
update directions via a central server to speed up the process of evaluating a speciﬁc pol-
icy.
In this context, we ask the following fundamental question: How much information
needs to be transmitted to achieve the optimal linear-speedup (w.r.t. the number of agents)
for policy-evaluation? To answer this question, we propose a multi-agent version of EF-TD.
In Theorem 3, we prove that by collaborating, each agent can achieve an M-fold speedup
in the dominant term of the convergence rate. Importantly, the eﬀect of compression only
shows up in higher-order terms, leaving the dominant term unaﬀected. Thus, we prove that
by transmitting just ˜O(1) bits per-agent per-round, one can preserve the same
asymptotic rates as vanilla TD(0), while achieving an optimal linear convergence
speedup w.r.t. the number of agents. We envision this result will have important im-
plications for MARL. Our analysis also leads to a tighter linear dependence on the mixing
time compared to the quadratic dependence in the only other paper that establishes linear
speedups under Markovian sampling [13].
5. Technical Challenges and Novel Proof Techniques. One might wonder whether our
results above follow as simple extensions of known analysis techniques in RL. In what follows,
we explain why this isn’t the case by outlining the key technical challenges unique to our
setup, and our novel proof ideas to overcome them. First, a non-asymptotic analysis of even
vanilla TD(0) under Markovian sampling is known to be extremely challenging due to complex
temporal correlations. Our setting is further complicated by the fact that the dynamics of the
parameter and the memory variable are intricately coupled with the temporally-correlated
Markov data tuples. This leads to a complex stochastic dynamical system that has not been
analyzed before in RL. Second, we cannot directly appeal to existing proofs of compression
in optimization since the problems we study do not involve minimizing a static loss function.
Moreover, the aspect of temporally correlated observations is completely absent in compressed
optimization since one deals with i.i.d. data. The above discussion motivates the need for
new analysis tools beyond what are known for both RL and optimization.
• New Proof Ingredients for Theorems 1 and 2. To prove Theorem 1, our ﬁrst inno-
vation is to construct a novel Lyapunov function that accounts for the joint dynamics of the

parameter and the memory variable introduced by error-feedback. The next natural step is
to then analyze the drift of this Lyapunov function by appealing to mixing time arguments -
as is typically done in ﬁnite-time RL proofs [14,18]. This is where we again run into diﬃcul-
ties since the presence of the memory variable due to error-feedback introduces non-standard
delay terms in the drift bound. Notably, this diﬃculty does not show up when one analyzes
error-feedback in optimization since there is no need for mixing time arguments of Markov
chains. To overcome this challenge, we make a connection to what might at ﬁrst appear
unrelated: the Incremental Aggregated Gradient (IAG) method for ﬁnite-sum optimization.
Our main observation here is that the elegant analysis of the IAG method in [19] shows how
one can handle the eﬀect of “shocks” (delayed terms), as long as the amplitude and duration
of the shocks is not too large. This ends up being precisely what we need for our purpose:
we carefully relate the amplitude of the shocks to our constructed Lyapunov function, and
their duration to the mixing time of the underlying Markov chain. We spell out these details
explicitly in Section 7.
• New Proof Ingredients for Theorem 3. Despite the long list of papers on MARL, the
only one that establishes a linear speedup (w.r.t. the number of agents) in sample-complexity
under Markovian sampling is the very recent paper by [13]; all other papers end up making
a restrictive i.i.d. sampling assumption [10, 17, 20] to show a speedup.1 The proof in [13]
is quite involved, and relies on Generalized Moreau Envelopes. This makes it particularly
challenging to extend their proof framework to our setting where we need to additionally
contend with the eﬀects of compression and error-feedback. As such, we provide an alternate
proof technique for establishing the linear speedup eﬀect that relies crucially on a new variance
reduction lemma under Markovian data, namely Lemma 2. This lemma is not just limited to
TD learning, and may be of independent interest to the MARL literature. Lemma 2, coupled
with a ﬁner Lyapunov function (relative to that for proving Theorem 1) enable us to establish
the desired linear speedup result under Markovian sampling for our setting. We elaborate on
these points in Section 7.
Scope of our Work. We note that our work is primarily theoretical in nature, in the same
spirit as several recent ﬁnite-time RL papers [10,13,14,18,26]. We do, however, report simulations
on moderately sized (100 states) MDPs that reveal: (i) without error-feedback (EF), compressed
TD(0) can end up making little to no progress; and (ii) with EF, the performance of compressed
TD(0) complies with our theory. These simulations are in line with those known in optimization
for deep learning [5,6,27,28], where one empirically observes signiﬁcant beneﬁts of performing EF.
Succinctly, we convey: compressed TD learning algorithms with EF are just as robust as their SGD
counterparts, and exhibit similar convergence guarantees.
1.2
Related Work
In what follows, we discuss the most relevant threads of related work.
• Analysis of TD Learning Algorithms. An analysis of the classical temporal diﬀerence
learning algorithm [8] with value function approximation was ﬁrst provided by [29]. They employed
the ODE method [30] - commonly used to study stochastic approximation algorithms - to provide
an asymptotic convergence rate analysis of TD learning algorithms.
Finite-time rates for such
algorithms remained elusive for several years, till the work by [31]. Soon after, [32] noted some
issues with the proofs in [31]. Under an i.i.d. sampling assumption, [33] and [26] went on to provide
1After the ﬁrst version of this paper was released, and while the current version was under review, some other
recent works managed to establish linear speedup results under various settings [21–25].

ﬁnite-time rates for TD learning algorithms. For the more challenging Markovian setting, ﬁnite-
time rates have been recently derived using various perspectives: (i) by making explicit connections
to optimization [18]; (ii) by taking a control-theoretic approach and studying the drift of a suitable
Lyapunov function [14]; and (iii) by arguing that the mean-path temporal diﬀerence direction acts
as a “gradient-splitting” of an appropriately chosen function [34]. Each of these interpretations
provides interesting new insights into the dynamics of TD algorithms.
The above works focus on the vanilla TD learning rule. Our work adds to this literature by
providing an understanding of the robustness of TD learning algorithms subject to structured
distortions.
• Communication-Eﬃcient Algorithms for (Distributed) Optimization and Learn-
ing. In the last decade or so, a variety of both scalar [2–4, 7], and vector [35, 36] quantization
schemes have been explored for optimization/empirical risk minimization. In particular, an aggres-
sive compression scheme employed popularly in deep learning is gradient sparsiﬁcation, where one
only transmits a few components of the gradient vector that have the largest magnitudes. While
empirical studies [6,27] have revealed the beneﬁts of extreme sparsiﬁcation, theoretical guarantees
for such methods are much harder to establish due to their biased nature: the output of the com-
pression operator is not an unbiased version of its argument. In fact, for biased schemes, naively
compressing gradients can lead to diverging iterates [15,37]. In [5,38], and later in [37,39], it was
shown that the above issue can be “ﬁxed” by using a mechanism known as error-feedback that
exploits memory. This idea is also related to modulation techniques in coding theory [40]. Re-
cently, [15] and [41] provided theoretical results on biased sparsiﬁcation for a master-worker type
distributed architecture, and [42] studied sparsiﬁcation in a federated learning context. For more
recent work on the error-feedback idea, we refer the reader to [43,44].
Our work can be seen as the ﬁrst analog of the above results in general, and the error-feedback
idea in particular, in the context of iterative algorithms for RL.
Finally, we note that while several compression algorithms have been proposed and analyzed
over the years, fundamental performance bounds were only recently identiﬁed in [35], [36], and [39].
Computationally eﬃcient algorithms that match such performance bounds were developed in [45].
While all the above results pertain to static optimization, some recent works have also explored
quantization schemes in the context of sequential-decision making problems, focusing on multi-
armed bandits [46–48].
2
Model and Problem Setup
We consider a Markov Decision Process (MDP) denoted by M = (S, A, P, R, γ), where S is a ﬁnite
state space of size n, A is a ﬁnite action space, P is a set of action-dependent Markov transition
kernels, R is a reward function, and γ ∈(0, 1) is the discount factor. For the majority of the
paper, we will be interested in the policy evaluation problem where the goal is to evaluate the value
function Vµ of a given policy µ; here, µ : S →A. The policy µ induces a Markov reward process
(MRP) characterized by a transition matrix P, and a reward function R.2 In particular, P(s, s′)
denotes the probability of transitioning from state s to state s′ under the action µ(s); R(s) denotes
the expected instantaneous reward from an initial state s under the action of the policy µ. The
discounted expected cumulative reward obtained by playing policy µ starting from initial state s is
given by:
Vµ(s) = E
" ∞
X
t=0
γtR(st)|s0 = s
#
,
(1)
2For simplicity of notation, we have dropped the dependence of P and R on the policy µ.

where st represents the state of the Markov chain (induced by µ) at time t, when initiated from
s0 = s. It is well-known [29] that Vµ is the ﬁxed point of the policy-speciﬁc Bellman operator
Tµ : Rn →Rn, i.e., TµVµ = Vµ, where for any V ∈Rn,
(TµV )(s) = R(s) + γ
X
s′∈S
P(s, s′)V (s′), ∀s ∈S.
Linear Function Approximation. In practice, the size of the state space S can be extremely
large. This renders the task of estimating Vµ exactly (based on observations of rewards and state
transitions) intractable. One common approach to tackle this diﬃculty is to consider a parametric
approximation ˆVθ of Vµ in the linear subspace spanned by a set {φk}k∈[K] of K ≪n basis vectors,
where φk = [φk(1), . . . , φk(n)]⊤∈Rn. Speciﬁcally, we have ˆVθ(s) = PK
k=1 θ(k)φk(s), where θ =
[θ(1), . . . , θ(K)]⊤∈RK is a weight vector. Let Φ ∈Rn×K be a matrix with φk as its k-th column;
we will denote the s-th row of Φ by φ(s) ∈RK, and refer to it as the feature vector corresponding to
state s. Compactly, ˆVθ = Φθ, and for each s ∈S, we have that ˆVθ(s) = ⟨φ(s), θ⟩. As is standard, we
assume that the columns of Φ are linearly independent, and that the feature vectors are normalized,
i.e., for each s ∈S, ∥φ(s)∥2
2 ≤1.
The TD(0) Algorithm. The goal now is to ﬁnd the best parameter vector θ∗that minimizes the
distance (in a suitable norm) between ˆVθ and Vµ. To that end, we will focus on the classical TD(0)
algorithm within the family of TD learning algorithms. Starting from an initial estimate θ0, at each
time-step t = 0, 1, . . ., this algorithm receives as observation a data tuple Xt = (st, st+1, rt = R(st))
comprising of the current state, the next state reached by playing action µ(st), and the instantaneous
reward rt. Given this tuple Xt, let us deﬁne gt(θ) = g(Xt, θ) as:
gt(θ) ≜(rt + γ⟨φ(st+1), θ⟩−⟨φ(st), θ⟩) φ(st), ∀θ ∈RK.
The TD(0) update to the current parameter θt with step-size αt ∈(0, 1) can now be described
succinctly as:
θt+1 = θt + αtgt(θt).
(2)
Under some mild technical conditions, it was shown in [29] that the iterates generated by TD(0)
converge almost surely to the best linear approximator in the span of {φk}k∈[K]. In particular,
θt →θ∗, where θ∗is the unique solution of the projected Bellman equation ΠDTµ(Φθ∗) = Φθ∗.
Here, D is a diagonal matrix with entries given by the elements of the stationary distribution π of
the kernel P. Moreover, ΠD(·) is the projection operator onto the subspace spanned by {φk}k∈[K]
with respect to the inner product ⟨·, ·⟩D. The key question we explore in this paper is: What can
be said of the convergence of TD(0) when the update direction gt(θt) in equation 2 is replaced by
a distorted/compressed version of it? In the next section, we will make the notion of distortion
precise, and outline the various technical challenges that make it non-trivial to answer the question
that we posed above.
3
Error-Feedback meets TD Learning
In this section, we propose a general framework for analyzing TD learning algorithms with distorted
update directions. Extreme forms of such distortion could involve replacing each coordinate of the
TD(0) direction with just its sign, or retaining just k ∈[K] of the largest magnitude coordinates
and zeroing out the rest. In the sequel, we will refer to these variants of TD(0) as SignTD(0) and
Topk-TD(0), respectively. Coupled with a memory mechanism known as error-feedback, it is known
that analogous variants of SGD exhibit, almost remarkably, the same behavior as SGD itself [5].

Figure 1: A geometric interpretation of the operator Qδ(·) in Algorithm 1. A larger δ induces more
distortion.
Algorithm 1 The EF-TD Algorithm
1: Input: Initial estimate θ0 ∈RK, initial error e−1 = 0, and step-size α ∈(0, 1).
2: for t = 0, 1, . . . do
3:
Observe tuple Xt = (st, st+1, rt).
4:
Compute perturbed TD(0) direction ht:
ht = Qδ (et−1 + gt(θt)) .
(3)
5:
Update parameter: θt+1 = θt + αht.
6:
Update error: et = et−1 + gt(θt) −ht.
7: end for
Inspired by these ﬁndings, we ask: Does compressed TD(0) with error-feedback exhibit behavior
similar to that of TD(0)?
Our motivation behind studying the above question is to build an understanding of: (i) communication-
eﬃcient versions of MARL algorithms where agents exchange compressed model-diﬀerentials, i.e.,
the gradient-like updates (see Section 6); and (ii) the robustness of TD learning algorithms to struc-
tured perturbations. It is important to reiterate here that our motivation mirrors that of studying
perturbed versions of SGD in the context of optimization.
Description of EF-TD. In Algorithm 1, we propose the compressed TD(0) algorithm with error-
feedback (EF-TD). Compared to equation 2, we note that the parameter θt is updated based on ht
- a compressed version of the actual TD(0) direction gt(θt), where the compression is due to the
operator Qδ : RK →RK. The information lost up to time t −1 due to compression is accumulated
in the memory variable et−1, and injected back into the current step as in equation 3. In line with
compressors used for optimization, we consider a fairly general operator Qδ that is required to only
satisfy the following contraction property for some δ ≥1:
∥Qδ(θ) −θ∥2
2 ≤

1 −1
δ

∥θ∥2
2, ∀θ ∈RK.
(4)
A distortion perspective. For θ ̸= 0, it is easy to verify based on equation 4 that ⟨Qδ(θ), θ⟩≥
1/(2δ)∥θ∥2
2 > 0, i.e., the angle between Qδ(θ) and θ is acute. This provides an alternative view
to the compression perspective: one can think of Qδ(θ) as a tilted version of θ, with a larger δ
implying more tilt, and δ = 1 implying no distortion at all. See Figure 1 for a visual interpretation
of this point.
The contraction property in equation 4 is satisﬁed by several popular quantization/sparsiﬁcation
schemes. These include the sign operator, and the Top-k operator that selects k coordinates with
the largest magnitude, zeroing out the rest.
Importantly, note that the operator Qδ does not

necessarily yield an unbiased version of its argument. In optimization, error-feedback serves to
counter the bias introduced by Qδ. In fact, without error-feedback, algorithms like SignSGD can
converge very slowly, or not converge at all [37]. In a similar spirit, we empirically observe in Fig. 2
(later in Section 8) that without error-feedback, SignTD(0) can end up making little to no progress
towards θ∗. However, understanding whether error-feedback guarantees convergence to θ∗is quite
non-trivial. We now provide some intuition as to why this is the case.
Need for Technical Novelty. Error-feedback ensures that past (pseudo)-gradient information
is injected with some delay. Thus, for optimization, error-feedback essentially leads to a delayed
SGD algorithm. As long as the objective function is smooth, the gradient does not change much,
and the delay-eﬀect can be controlled. This intuition does not carry over to our setting since the
TD(0) update direction is not a stochastic gradient of any ﬁxed objective function.3 Thus, controlling
the eﬀect of the compressor-induced delay requires new techniques for our setting. Moreover, unlike
the SGD noise, the data tuples {Xt} are part of the same Markov trajectory, introducing further
complications. Finally, since the parameter updates of Algorithm 1 are intricately linked with the
error variable et, to analyze their joint behavior, we need to perform a more reﬁned Lyapunov drift
analysis relative to the standard TD(0) analysis. Despite these challenges, in the sequel, we will
establish that EF-TD retains almost the same convergence guarantees as vanilla TD(0).
Remark 1. It is important to emphasize that even though the error vector et in EF-TD might
be dense, et never gets transmitted. The communication-eﬃcient aspect of EF-TD stems from the
fact that it only requires communicating the compressed update direction ht - a vector that can be
represented by using just a few bits (depending on the level of compression). This fact is further
clariﬁed in our description of the multi-agent version of EF-TD in Section 6 (see line 6 of Algorithm 2
in Section 6).
4
Analysis of EF-TD under Markovian Sampling
The goal of this section is to provide a rigorous ﬁnite-time analysis of EF-TD under Markovian
sampling. To that end, we need to introduce a few concepts and make certain standard assumptions.
We start by assuming that all rewards are uniformly bounded by some ¯r > 0, i.e., |R(s)| ≤¯r, ∀s ∈S.
This ensures that the value functions exist. Next, we state a standard assumption that shows up
in the ﬁnite-time analysis of iterative RL algorithms [10,13,14,16,18,49].
Assumption 1. The Markov chain induced by the policy µ is aperiodic and irreducible.
The above assumption implies that the Markov chain induced by µ admits a unique stationary
distribution π [50]. Let Σ = Φ⊤DΦ. Since Φ is full column rank, Σ is full rank with a strictly
positive smallest eigenvalue ω < 1. To appreciate the implication of the above assumption, let us
deﬁne the “steady-state” version of the TD update direction as follows: for a ﬁxed θ ∈RK, let
¯g(θ) ≜Est∼π,st+1∼Pµ(·|st) [g(Xt, θ)] .
We now introduce the notion of the mixing time τǫ.
Deﬁnition 1. Deﬁne τǫ ≜min{t ≥1 : ∥E [g(Xk, θ)|X0] −¯g(θ)∥2 ≤ǫ (∥θ∥2 + 1) , ∀k ≥t, ∀θ ∈
RK, ∀X0}.
3As observed by [18] and [34], this can be seen from the fact that the derivative of the TD update direction produces
a matrix that is not necessarily symmetric, unlike the symmetric Hessian matrix of a ﬁxed objective function.

Assumption 1 implies that the total variation distance between the conditional distribution
P (st = ·|s0 = s) and the stationary distribution π decays geometrically fast for all t ≥0, regardless
of the initial state s ∈S [50]. As a consequence of this geometric mixing of the Markov chain, it is
not hard to show that τǫ in Deﬁnition 1 is O (log(1/ǫ)); see, for instance, [16]. The precision that
suﬃces for all results in this paper is ǫ = α2, where recall that α is the step-size. Henceforth, we
will simply use τ as a shorthand for τα. Finally, let us deﬁne σ ≜max{1, ¯r, ∥θ∗∥2} as the variance
of our noise model, and dt ≜∥θt −θ∗∥2. We can now state the ﬁrst main result of this paper.
Theorem 1. Suppose Assumption 1 holds. There exist universal constants c, C ≥1 such that the
iterates generated by EF-TD with step-size α ≤
ω(1−γ)
c max{δ,τ} satisfy the following ∀T ≥τ:
E

d2
T

≤C1

1 −αω(1 −γ)
Cτ
T−τ
+ O
α(τ + δ)σ2
ω(1 −γ)

, where C1 = O(d2
0 + σ2).
(5)
The proof of Theorem 1 is provided in Appendix D. We now discuss the key implications of
this result.
Discussion. Theorem 1 tells us that EF-TD guarantees linear convergence of the iterates to
a ball around θ∗, where the size of the ball scales with the variance σ2; this exactly matches the
behavior of vanilla TD [14,18]. Since the step-size α scales inversely with the distortion factor δ, we
observe from equation 5 that the exponent of linear convergence gets slackened by δ; once again,
this is consistent with analogous results for SGD with (biased) compression [15]. The variance
term, namely the second term in equation 5, has the exact same dependence on τ, ω, and γ as
one observes for vanilla TD [18, Theorem 3]. Observe that in this term, the eﬀects of τ and δ in
inﬂating the variance are additive. Moreover, even in the absence of compression, the dependence
of the variance term on the mixing time τ is known to be unavoidable [51]. This immediately leads
to the following interesting conclusion: when the underlying Markov chain induced by the policy
mixes “slowly”, i.e., has a large mixing time τ, one can aﬀord to be more aggressive in terms
of compression, i.e., use a larger δ, since this would lead to a variance bound that is no worse
than in the uncompressed setting. Said diﬀerently, Theorem 1 reveals that slowly-mixing Markov
chains have a higher tolerance to distortions. This observation is novel since no prior work has
studied the eﬀect of distortions to RL algorithms under Markovian sampling. It is also interesting
to note here that the phenomenon described above shows up in other contexts too: for instance, the
authors in [36] showed that certain quantization mechanisms in optimization automatically come
with privacy guarantees.
Theorem 1 is signiﬁcant in that it is the ﬁrst result to reveal that coupled with
error-feedback, EF-TD is robust to extreme distortions. We will corroborate this phenomenon
empirically as well in Section 8. The other key takeaway from Theorem 1 is that the scope of the
error-feedback mechanism - now popularly used in distributed learning - extends to stochastic
approximation problems well beyond just static optimization settings.
In Appendix B, we analyze a simpler steady-state version of EF-TD to help build intuition.
There, we also provide an analysis of compressed TD learning algorithms that do not employ any
error-feedback mechanism. Our analysis reveals that such schemes can also converge, provided the
compression parameter δ satisﬁes a restrictive condition. Notably, as evident from the statement
of Theorem 1, we do not need to impose any restrictions on δ for the convergence of EF-TD.

5
Compressed Nonlinear Stochastic Approximation with Error-
Feedback
For the TD(0) algorithm, the update direction gt(θ) is aﬃne in the parameter θ, i.e., gt(θ) is of the
form A(Xt)θ −b(Xt). As such, the recursion in equation 2 can be seen as an instance of linear
stochastic approximation (SA), where the end goal is to use the data samples {Xt} to ﬁnd a θ that
solves the linear equation Aθ = b; here, A and b are the steady-state versions of A(Xt) and b(Xt),
respectively. The more involved TD(λ) algorithms within the TD learning family also turn out to be
instances of linear SA. Instead of deriving versions of our results for TD(λ) algorithms in particular,
we will instead consider a much more general nonlinear SA setting. Accordingly, we now study a
variant of Algorithm 1 where g(Xt, θ) is a general nonlinear map, and as before, Xt comes from
a ﬁnite-state Markov chain that is assumed to be aperiodic and irreducible. We assume that the
nonlinear map satisﬁes the following regularity conditions.
Assumption 2. There exist L, σ ≥1 s.t. the following hold for any X in the space of data tuples:
(i) ∥g(X, θ1)−g(X, θ2)∥2 ≤L∥θ1 −θ2∥2, ∀θ1, θ2 ∈RK, and (ii) ∥g(X, θ)∥2 ≤L(∥θ∥2 +σ), ∀θ ∈RK.
Assumption 3. Let ¯g(θ) ≜EXt∼π [g(Xt, θ)], ∀θ ∈RK, where π is the stationary distribution of
the Markov process {Xt}. The equation ¯g(θ) = 0 has a solution θ∗, and ∃β > 0 s.t.
⟨θ −θ∗, ¯g(θ) −¯g(θ∗)⟩≤−β∥θ −θ∗∥2
2, ∀θ ∈RK.
(6)
In words, Assumption 2 says that g(X, θ) is globally uniformly (w.r.t.
X) Lipschitz in the
parameter θ. Assumption 3 is a strong monotone property of the map −¯g(θ) that guarantees that
the iterates generated by the steady-state version of equation 2 converge exponentially fast to θ∗.
To provide some context, consider the TD(0) setting. Under feature normalization and the bounded
rewards assumption, the global Lipschitz property is immediate. Moreover, Assumption 3 corre-
sponds to negative-deﬁniteness of the steady-state matrix A = EXt∼π[A(Xt)]; this negative-deﬁnite
property is also easy to verify [14]. For optimization, Assumptions 2 and 3 simply correspond to
L-smoothness and β-strong-convexity of the loss function, respectively. For simplicity, we state the
main result of this section for L = 2; the analysis for a general L follows identical arguments.
Theorem 2. Suppose Assumption 2 holds with L = 2, and Assumption
3 holds.
Let ¯β =
min{β, 1/β}. There exist universal constants c, C ≥1 such that Algorithm 1 with step-size α ≤
¯β
c max{δ,τ} guarantees
E

d2
T

≤C1

1 −αβ
Cτ
T−τ
+ O
α(τ + δ)σ2
β

, ∀T ≥τ, where C1 = O(d2
0 + σ2).
(7)
Discussion. We note that the guarantee in Theorem 2 mirrors that in Theorem 1, and repre-
sents our setting in its full generality, accounting for nonlinear SA, Markovian noise, compression,
and error-feedback. Providing an explicit ﬁnite-time analysis for this setting is one of the main
contributions of our paper. Now let us comment on the applications of this result. As noted earlier,
our result applies to TD(λ) algorithms and SGD under Markovian noise [52]; the eﬀect of com-
pression and error-feedback was previously unknown for both these settings. More importantly,
certain instances of Q-learning with linear function approximation can also be captured via As-
sumptions 2 and 3 [16]. The key implication is that our analysis framework is not just limited to
policy evaluation, but rather extends gracefully to decision-making (control) problems. This speaks
to the signiﬁcance of Theorem 2.

Algorithm 2 Multi-Agent EF-TD
1: Input: Initial estimate θ0 ∈RK, initial errors ei,−1 = 0, ∀i ∈[M], and step-size α ∈(0, 1).
2: for t = 0, 1, . . . do
3:
Server sends θt to all agents.
4:
for i ∈[M] do
5:
Observe tuple Xi,t = (si,t, si,t+1, ri,t).
6:
Compute compressed TD(0) direction hi,t = Qδ (ei,t−1 + gi,t(θt)), and send hi,t to server.
7:
Update error: ei,t = ei,t−1 + gi,t(θt) −hi,t.
8:
end for
9:
Server updates the model as follows: θt+1 = θt + α¯ht, where ht = (1/M) P
i∈[M] hi,t.
10: end for
6
Communication-Eﬃcient Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
(MARL)
A key motivation of our work is to develop communication-eﬃcient algorithms for MARL. This
is particularly relevant for networked/federated versions of RL problems where communication
imposes a major bottleneck [11]. To that end, we consider a collaborative MARL setting that has
appeared in various recent works [10–13, 17, 20]. The setup comprises of M agents, all of whom
interact with the same MDP, and can communicate via a central server. Every agent seeks to
evaluate the same policy µ. The purpose of collaboration is as in the standard FL setting: to
achieve a M-fold reduction in sample-complexity by leveraging information from all agents. In
particular, we ask: By exchanging compressed information via the server, is it possible to expedite
the process of learning by achieving a linear speedup in the number of agents? While such questions
have been extensively studied for supervised learning, we are unaware of any work that addresses
them in the context of MARL. We further note that even without compression or error-feedback,
establishing linear speedups under Markovian sampling is highly non-trivial, and the only other
paper that does so is the very recent work of [13]. As we explain later in Section 7, our proof
technique departs signiﬁcantly from [13].
We propose and analyze a natural multi-agent version of EF-TD, outlined as Algorithm 2. In a
nutshell, multi-agent EF-TD operates as follows. At each time-step, the server sends down a model
θt; each agent i observes a local data sample, computes and uploads the compressed direction hi,t,
and updates its local error. The server then updates the model. Transmitting compressed TD(0)
pseudo-gradients is consistent with both works in FL [53], and in MARL [10, 11, 13], where the
agents essentially exchange model-diﬀerentials (i.e., the update directions), keeping their raw data
private. It is worth noting here that while all agents play the same policy, the realizations of the
data tuples {Xi,t} may vary across agents. Let ˜θt = θt + α¯et−1, where ¯et = (1/M) P
i∈[M] ei,t, and
deﬁne ˜dt ≜∥˜θt −θ∗∥2. We can now state our main convergence result for Algorithm 2.
Theorem 3. Suppose Assumption 1 holds. There exist universal constants c, C ≥1 such that with
step-size α ≤
ω(1−γ)
c max{δ,τ}, and C1 = O(d2
0 + σ2), Algorithm 2 guarantees the following ∀T ≥2τ:
E
h
˜d2
T
i
≤C1

1 −αω(1 −γ)
Cτ
T−2τ
|
{z
}
T1
+ O

ατ
ω(1 −γ)
 σ2
M
|
{z
}
T2
+ O
α2 max{δ, τ}δ
ω2(1 −γ)2

σ2
|
{z
}
T3
.
(8)
The proof of Theorem 3 is deferred to Appendix E. There are several key messages conveyed
by Theorem 3. We discuss them below.

Message 1: Linear Speedup. Observe that the noise variance terms in equation 8 are T2
and T3, where T3 is O(α2), i.e., a higher-order term in α. Thus, for small α, T2 is the dominant
noise term. Compared to the noise term for vanilla TD in [18, Theorem 3], T2 in our bound has
exactly the same dependence on τ, ω, and γ, and importantly, exhibits an inverse scaling w.r.t. M,
implying a M-fold reduction in the variance σ2 relative to the single agent setting. This is precisely
what we wanted. For exact convergence, we can set α = O(log(MT 2)/T) to make T1 and T3 of
order ˜O(1/T 2), and the dominant term T2 = ˜O(σ2/(MT)). Thus, relative to the O(σ2/T) rate of
TD(0), we achieve a linear speedup w.r.t. the number of agents M in our dominant term T2.
Message 2: Communication-eﬃciency comes (nearly) for free. The second key thing
to note is that the dominant T2 term is completely unaﬀected by the compression factor δ. Indeed,
the compression factor δ only aﬀects higher-order terms that decay much faster than T2. This
means that we can signiﬁcantly ramp up δ, thereby communicating very little, while preserving the
asymptotic rate of convergence of TD(0) and achieving optimal speedup in the number of agents, i.e.,
communication-eﬃciency comes almost for free. For instance, suppose Qδ(·) is a top-1 operator,
i.e., hi,t has only one non-zero entry which can be encoded using ˜O(1) bits. In this case, although
δ = K, where K is the potentially large number of features, the dominant ˜O
 σ2/(MT)

term
remains unaﬀected by K. Thus, in the context of MARL, our work is the ﬁrst to show
that asymptotically optimal rates can be achieved by transmitting just ˜O(1) bits per-
agent per time-step.
Message 3:
Tight Dependence on the Mixing Time.
Compared to [13] - the only
other paper in MARL that provides a linear speedup under Markovian sampling - our dominant
term T2 has a tighter O(τ) dependence on the mixing time τ as compared to the O(τ 2) dependence
in [13, Theorem 4.1]. It should be noted here that the O(τ) dependence is known to be information-
theoretically optimal [51].
A few remarks are in order before we end this section.
Remark 2. We note that the bound in Theorem 3 is stated for ˜θT , not θT . Since ˜θT = θT +α¯eT−1,
to output ˜θT , the server needs to query ei,T−1 from each agent i only once at time T −1. We believe
that this one extra step of communication can also be avoided via a slightly sharper analysis. We
provide such an analysis in Appendix F, albeit under a common i.i.d. sampling model [10,17,26].
Remark 3. While our MARL result in Theorem 3 is for TD learning, in light of the developments
in Section 5, we note that one can develop analogs of Theorem 3 for multi-agent Q-learning as well.
Remark 4. Suppose we set M = 1 in equation 8, and compare the resulting bound with that
in equation 5. While the eﬀect of the distortion δ shows up as a higher-order O(α2) term in the
former, it manifests as a O(α) term in the latter. The diﬀerence in these bounds can be attributed
to the fact that we use a ﬁner Lyapunov function to prove Theorem 3 relative to that which we use
to prove Theorem 1. We do so primarily for the sake of exposition: the relatively simpler proof of
Theorem 1 (compared to Theorem 3) helps build much of the key intuition needed to understand
the proof of Theorem 3.
7
Technical Challenges in Analysis and Overview of our Proof
Techniques
We now discuss the novel steps in our analysis. Complete proof details are provided in the Appendix.
Proof Sketch for Theorem 1. Inspired by the perturbed iterate framework of [54], our ﬁrst
step is to deﬁne the perturbed iterate ˜θt = θt+αet−1. Simple calculations reveal: ˜θt+1 = ˜θt+αgt(θt).

Notice that this recursion is almost the same as equation 2, other than the fact that the TD(0) update
direction is evaluated at θt instead of ˜θt. Thus, to analyze the above recursion, we need to account
for the gap between θt and ˜θt, the cause of which is the memory variable et−1. Accordingly, our
next key step is to construct a novel Lyapunov function ψt that captures the joint dynamics of ˜θt
and et−1:
ψt ≜E[ ˜d2
t + α2∥et−1∥2
2], where ˜d2
t = ∥˜θt −θ∗∥2
2.
(9)
As far as we are aware, a potential function of the above form has not been analyzed in prior RL
work. Our goal now is to exploit the geometric mixing property in Assumption 1 to establish that
ψt decays over time (up to noise terms). This is precisely where the intricate coupling between the
parameter ˜θt, the memory variable et, and the Markovian data tuples {Xt} makes the analysis quite
challenging. Let us elaborate. To exploit mixing-time arguments, we need to condition suﬃciently
into the past and bound drift terms of the form ∥˜θt −˜θt−τ∥2. This is where the coupling between
˜θt and et introduces non-standard delay terms, precluding the direct use of prior approaches in
RL [14, 16, 18]. This diﬃculty does not show up in compressed optimization since one deals with
i.i.d. data, precluding the need for mixing-time arguments. A workaround here is to employ a
projection step (as in [10, 18]) to simplify the analysis. This is not satisfying for two reasons: (i)
as we show in the Appendix, the simpliﬁcation in the analysis comes at the cost of a sub-optimal
dependence on the distortion δ; and (ii) to project, one needs prior knowledge of the set containing
θ∗; this turns out to be unnecessary. Our key innovation here to bound the drift ∥˜θt −˜θt−τ∥is the
following technical lemma.
Lemma 1. (Relating Drift to Past Shocks) For EF-TD, the following is true ∀t ≥τ:
E[∥˜θt −˜θt−τ∥2
2] = O(α2τ 2)
max
t−τ≤ℓ≤t ψℓ+ O(α2τ 2σ2).
(10)
The above lemma relates the drift to damped “shocks” (delay terms) from the past, where (i)
the amplitude of the shocks is captured by our Lyapunov function; (ii) the duration of these shocks
is the mixing time τ; and (iii) the damping arises from the fact that shocks are scaled by α2. In
attempting to overcome one diﬃculty, we have created another for ourselves via the “max” term
in equation 10. This is where we make a connection to the analysis of the IAG algorithm in [19]
where a similar “max” term shows up. Via this connection, we are able to analyze the following
ﬁnal recursion:
ψt+1 ≤(1 −cαω(1 −γ))ψt + O(α2τ)
max
t−τ≤ℓ≤t ψℓ+ O(α2)(τ + δ)σ2, where c < 1.
(11)
Proof Sketch for Theorem 3. To establish the linear speedup property, we need a ﬁner Lyapunov
function (and much ﬁner analysis) relative to Theorem 1. Accordingly, we construct:
Ξt ≜E
h
∥˜θt −θ∗∥2
2
i
+ Cα3Et−1, where Et ≜1
M E
" M
X
i=1
∥ei,t∥2
2
#
,
(12)
and C is a suitable design parameter. Using the techniques in [18], [14], and [16] to bound ∥gi,t(θ)∥2
unfortunately do not yield the desired linear speedup. Moreover, it is unclear whether the Gen-
eralized Moreau Envelope framework in [13] can be extended to analyze equation 12. As such,
we depart from these works by establishing the following key result by carefully exploiting the
geometric mixing property.
Lemma 2. Let zt(θt) ≜(1/M) P
i∈[M] gi,t(θt). Under Assumption 1, the following bound holds for
Algorithm 2: E[∥zt(θt)∥2
2] = O(1)E[ ˜d2
t ] + O(α2)Et−1 + O(1/M + α4)σ2, ∀t ≥τ.

100
101
102
103
104
101
102
103
104
100
101
102
103
104
101
102
103
104
Figure 2: Plots of the mean-squared error Et = ∥θT −θ∗∥2
2 for vanilla TD(0) without compression,
and SignTD(0) with (EF-SignTD) and without (SignTD) error-feedback.
(Left) Discount factor
γ = 0.5. (Right) Discount factor γ = 0.9.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Figure 3: Plot of the mean-squared error Et = ∥θT −θ∗∥2
2 for EF-TD (Algo. 1), with Qδ(·) chosen
to be the top-k operator. We study the eﬀect of varying the number of components transmitted k.
The above norm bound on the average TD direction turns out to be the main ingredient in
bounding the drift terms for Algorithm 2, and eventually establishing a recursion of the form in
equation 11 for Ξt.
8
Simulations
To corroborate our theory, we construct a MDP with 100 states, and use a feature matrix Φ
with K = 10 independent basis vectors. Using this MDP, we generate the state transition matrix
Pµ and reward vector Rµ associated with a ﬁxed policy µ. We compare the performance of the
vanilla uncompressed TD(0) algorithm with linear function approximation to SignTD(0) with and
without error-feedback. We perform 30 independent trials, and average the errors from each of
these trials to report the mean-squared error Et = ∥θT −θ∗∥2
2 for each of the algorithms mentioned
above. The results of this experiment are reported in Fig. 2. We observe that in the absence of
error-feedback, SignTD(0) can make little to no progress towards θ∗. In contrast, the behavior of

100
101
102
103
104
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
100
101
102
103
104
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
Figure 4: Plots of the mean-squared error Et = ∥θT −θ∗∥2
2 for multi-agent EF-TD (Algorithm 2).
(Left) Qδ(·) is the sign operator. (Right) Qδ(·) is the Top-k operator with k = 2.
SignTD(0) with error-feedback almost exactly matches that of vanilla uncompressed TD(0). Our
results align with similar observations made in the context of optimization, where SignSGD with
error-feedback retains almost the same behavior as SGD with no compression [5, 37]. We provide
some additional experiments below.
• Simulation of Topk-TD(0) with Error-Feedback. We simulate the behavior of EF-TD
with the operator Qδ(·) chosen to be a top-k operator. We consider the same MDP as above, with
the rewards for this experiment chosen from the interval

0
1

. The size of the parameter vector K
is 50, and the discount factor γ is set to be 0.5. We vary the level of distortion introduced by Qδ(·)
by changing the number of components k transmitted. Note that δ = K/k. As one might expect,
increasing the distortion δ by transmitting fewer components impacts the exponential decay rate;
this is clearly reﬂected in Fig. 3.
Simulation of Multi-Agent EF-TD. To simulate the behavior of multi-agent EF-TD (Algo-
rithm 2), we consider the same MDP on 100 states as before with rewards in [0 1]. The dimension
K of the parameter vector is set to 10 and the discount factor γ to 0.3. We consider two cases: one
where Qδ(·) is the sign operator, and another where it is a top-2 operator, i.e., only two components
are transmitted by each agent at every time-step. We report our ﬁndings in Fig. 4, where we vary
the number of agents M, and observe that for both the sign- and top-k operator experiments, the
residual mean-squared error goes down as we scale up M. Since the residual error is essentially an
indicator of the noise variance, our plots display a clear eﬀect of variance reduction by increasing
the number of agents. Our observations thus align with Theorem 3.
9
Conclusion and Future Work
We contributed to the development of a robustness theory for iterative RL algorithms subject
to general compression schemes. In particular, we proposed and analyzed EF-TD - a compressed
version of the classical TD(0) algorithm coupled with error-compensation. We then signiﬁcantly
generalized our analysis to nonlinear stochastic approximation and multi-agent settings. Concretely,
our work conveys the following key messages: (i) compressed TD learning algorithms with error-
feedback can be just as robust as their optimization counterparts; (ii) the popular error-feedback
mechanism extends gracefully beyond the static optimization problems it has been explored for
thus far; and (iii) linear convergence speedups in multi-agent TD learning can be achieved with
very little communication.
Our work opens up several research directions.
Studying alternate
quantization schemes for RL and exploring other RL algorithms (beyond TD and Q-learning) are
immediate next steps. A more open-ended question is the following. SignSGD with momentum [7]

is known to exhibit convergence behavior very similar to that of adaptive optimization algorithms
such as ADAM [55], explaining their use in fast training of deep neural networks. In a similar spirit,
can we make connections between SignTD and adaptive RL algorithms?
This is an interesting
question to explore since its resolution can potentially lead to faster RL algorithms.
