A high-performance analog Max-SAT solver and its application to
Ramsey numbers
Botond Moln´ar,1, 2 Melinda Varga,3, 4 Zolt´an Toroczkai,3, ∗and M´aria Ercsey-Ravasz1, 2, 5, †
1Faculty of Physics, Babe¸s-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, 400084 Romania
2Romanian Institute of Science and Technology, Cluj-Napoca, 400487 Romania
3Department of Physics and the Interdisciplinary Center for Network Science and Applications,
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, 46556 USA
4Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program,
The College of Wooster, Wooster, OH, 44691 USA
5Transylvanian Institute of Neuroscience, Cluj-Napoca, 400157 Romania
(Dated: January 30, 2018)
We introduce a continuous-time analog solver for MaxSAT, a quintessential class
of NP-hard discrete optimization problems, where the task is to ﬁnd a truth assign-
ment for a set of Boolean variables satisfying the maximum number of given logical
constraints. We show that the scaling of an invariant of the solver’s dynamics, the
escape rate, as function of the number of unsatisﬁed clauses can predict the global
optimum value, often well before reaching the corresponding state. We demonstrate
the performance of the solver on hard MaxSAT competition problems.
We then
consider the two-color Ramsey number R(m, m) problem, translate it to SAT, and
apply our algorithm to the still unknown R(5, 5). We ﬁnd edge colorings without
monochromatic 5-cliques for complete graphs up to 42 vertices, while on 43 vertices
we ﬁnd colorings with only two monochromatic 5-cliques, the best coloring found so
far, supporting the conjecture that R(5, 5) = 43.
Digital computing, or Turing’s model of universal computing is currently the reigning
computational paradigm. However, there are large classes of problems that are intractable
on digital computers, requiring resources (time, memory and/or hardware) for their solution
that scale exponentially in the input size of the problem (NP-hard) [1]. Such problems, un-
fortunately, are abundant in sciences and engineering, for example, the ground-state problem
of spin-glasses in statistical physics [2, 3], the traveling salesman problem [4], protein folding
[5], bioinformatics [6], medical imaging [7, 8], scheduling [9], design debugging, FPGA rout-
ing [10], probabilistic reasoning [11, 12], etc. As CMOS-based digital computing is reaching
its limits [13], alternative approaches are being explored, such as analog computing and
quantum computing. While the latter seems promising, there are fundamental physics chal-
lenges that still need to be solved before it realizes its potential, leaving analog computing as
a currently exploitable option. Although it was explored in the ’50s, it has been abandoned
in the favor of the digital approach, due to the technical challenges it posed; for a historical
survey on analog machines see [14]. By now, however, technology matured enough to control
well the physics at the small-scale and thus it makes worthwhile revisiting the analog branch
of computing, at least at an application-speciﬁc level. For this reason, there has been an
increasing eﬀort dedicated recently to analog computing methods and devices specialized to

arXiv:1801.06620v2  [cs.CC]  28 Jan 2018

2
address certain classes of problems [15–31]. However, there have been recent advances also
in general purpose analog computing, see the reviews [32–35], and in analog computability
theory [35–37].
Here we focus on fully analog (continuous-time) systems, in which both the state vari-
ables s = (s1, . . . , sN) and the time variable t are real numbers, si ∈R, t ∈R, updated
continuously by the algorithm (software), in form of a set of ordinary diﬀerential equations
(ODEs) ds/dt = F (s(t), t), t ∈R, [35]. The process of computation is interpreted as the
evolution of the trajectory (the solution to the ODEs) s(t) = Ψt(s0), towards an attractive
ﬁxed-point state s∗: limt→∞Ψt(s0) = s∗, representing the answer/solution to the problem.
Clearly, we want to ﬁnd s∗, and the challenge is to design F such that the solutions to the
problem (when they exist) appear as attractive ﬁxed points for the dynamics and no other,
non-solution attractors exist that could trap the dynamics. One such, ﬁrst-principles based,
continuous-time deterministic dynamical system (CTDS) has recently been proposed as an
analog solver for Boolean satisﬁability (SAT) in [38].
In SAT we are given a set of M logical clauses in conjunctive normal form (CNF),
C1, C2, . . . , CM over Boolean variables x1, . . . , xN, xi ∈{0, 1}. Typically, one studies k-SAT
problems where every clause involves k literals (a literal is a variable or its negation). The
task is to set the truth values of all the variables such that all the clauses evaluate to TRUE
(“0” = FALSE, “1” = TRUE). It is well known that k-SAT with k ≥3 is NP-complete
and thus any eﬃcient solver for 3-SAT implies an eﬃcient solver for all problems in the
NP class (Cook-Levin theorem, 1971) [39, 40]. The NP class is the set of all decision-type
problems where one can check in polynomial time the correctness of a proposed solution
(but ﬁnding such a solution can be exponentially costly). SAT has a very large number of
applications in both science and industry, becoming a dominant back-end technology, lately.
Applications include scheduling (crop rotation schedules, ﬂight schedules), planning and
automated reasoning (AI, robotics), electronic design automation, circuit design veriﬁcation,
bounded model checking for software/hardware systems (industrial-property veriﬁcation),
design of experiments, correlation clustering, coding theory, cryptography, drug design, etc.
SAT is part of sub-problems in many domains such as test pattern generation, optimal
control, protocol design (routing), image processing in medical diagnosis, electronic trading
and e-auctions. For reviews see [41, 42] and the book [43].
The SAT solving system of ODEs proposed in [38] was designed such that all SAT so-
lutions appear as attractive ﬁxed points for the dynamics while no other, non-solution at-
tractors exist that could trap the dynamics. Note that for hard problems the dynamics of
this solver becomes chaotic, showing that problem hardness and chaos [44, 45] are related
notions within this context, and thus chaos theory provides a novel set of tools to study
computational complexity. When the SAT problem admits solutions, the chaos is neces-
sarily transient [46, 47], as the trajectory eventually settles onto one of its attracting ﬁxed
points (a SAT solution). The CTDS was shown to solve hard SAT problems in polynomial
time [38], but at the expense of auxiliary variables growing exponentially. In a hardware
realization, this implies a trade-oﬀbetween time and energy costs. However, since one can
control/generate energy much better than time itself, this presents a viable option for time-
critical applications. [48] proposes an analog circuit design for the CTDS from [38], showing
a 104-fold speedup (nanoseconds vs. milliseconds) on hard 3-SAT problems, when compared
to the solution times by state-of-the-art digital SAT solvers (MiniSAT and variants [49, 50])
on the latest digital processors.
Here we propose a variant of the CTDS of [38], to solve MaxSAT problems. MaxSAT,

3
or k-MaxSAT, has the same formulation as SAT (or k-SAT), but the task is to maximize
the number of satisﬁed clauses (alternatively, to minimize the number of unsatisﬁed ones)
and thus one cannot guarantee in polynomial time the optimality of the solution (unlike
for SAT), for problems that do not admit full satisﬁability. For this reason, MaxSAT is
NP-hard.
The idea behind our approach is based on the observation that the operation of the CTDS
SAT solver from [38] does not assume full satisﬁability and thus, even for SAT problems that
do not admit full solution, the dynamics will still minimize the number of unsatisﬁed clauses.
What we need to provide, however, is a method by which one can determine the likelihood
of the optimality of the best solution found by analog time t, as function of t. We achieve
this heuristically, by analyzing the statistical properties of the chaotic behavior of the solver
for hard problems, through one of its dynamical invariants, the escape rate [46, 47]. Note
that when the SAT problem admits no full solution (a true MaxSAT problem) there are
no attractive ﬁxed points, so the system is permanently chaotic. Deﬁning the “energy” of
the system as the number of unsatisﬁed clauses (in a given instant), here we introduce the
notion of “energy”-dependent escape rate. The dependence of this measure on the number
of unsatisﬁed constraints (energy) helps us to predict the energy level of the global optimum
and to estimate the expected analog time needed by the solver to ﬁnd it.
We ﬁrst perform a statistical analysis of the solver’s performance on random 3-MaxSAT
problems and demonstrate that the solver works well for problems with good statistics
on energy levels and thus for large problems. We then demonstrate the performance of the
solver on very hard MaxSAT benchmark problems taken from recent MaxSAT competitions,
including on problems that no competition solver could handle.
Finally, we turn to the famous problem of Ramsey numbers [51, 52] and we show how
it can be translated into CNF SAT and then tackled with our solver. The Ramsey number
R(m, m) is the smallest order, complete graph such that no matter how we color its edges
with two colors, we cannot avoid creating monochromatic cliques of order m. Thus, for
complete graphs of order less than the Ramsey number, the coloring is a fully solvable SAT
problem, whereas at the Ramsey number, the coloring problem becomes MaxSAT for the
ﬁrst time. The case of m = 5 Ramsey number is still an open problem, only the bounds
43 ≤R(5, 5) ≤48 are known [53, 54]. Finding R(m, m) for a given m is very challenging
because the search space is huge: there are 2(N
2) possible colorings of a complete graph
on N nodes. Thus, if N = 43 is the Ramsey number for m = 5, then the search space
has ≈10271 possible colorings, impossible to search na¨ıvely.
Ramsey theory in general,
deals with the unavoidable appearance of order in large sets of objects partitioned into few
classes [51, 52]. It has deep implications virtually in all areas of mathematics, including
graph theory, combinatorics, set theory, logic, analysis and geometry [55]. It has practical
applications for example, in communications, information retrieval and decision making [56].
Here we show how our algorithm ﬁnds good colorings (avoiding monochromatic m-cliques)
for complete graphs of order less than the Ramsey number and then a prediction on the
Ramsey number itself; for example, ﬁnding R(4, 4) = 18 (a known result). For m = 5
(equivalent to a 10-SAT/MaxSAT problem) it ﬁnds good colorings for up to N = 42 vertex
complete graphs, whereas for N = 43 it ﬁnds a coloring with only two monochromatic 5-
cliques sitting on 6 nodes, the lowest energy coloring found so far, to our best knowledge.
Given the eﬃciency of our algorithm to ﬁnd solutions, this adds further support to the
conjecture that R(5, 5) = 43.
In all cases (competition and the Ramsey problems) we
provide the solutions and the matrix of colorings in the Supplementary Information Section.

4
We conclude with a brief discussion on analog solvers and their realization in hardware.
Results
The MaxSAT problem
Boolean satisﬁability in conjunctive normal form (CNF) is a constraint satisfaction prob-
lem formulated on N Boolean variables xi ∈{0, 1}, i = 1, . . . , N and M clauses C1, . . . , CM.
A clause is the disjunction (OR operation) of a set of literals, a literal being either the
normal (xi) or the negated (NOT) form (xi) of a variable, an example clause being:
C4 = (x9 ∨x10 ∨x27). The task is to ﬁnd an assignment for the variables such that all
clauses are satisiﬁed, or alternatively, the conjunctive formula F = C1 ∧. . . ∧CM evaluates
to 1 (TRUE). If all clauses contain exactly k literals, the problem is k-SAT. For k ≥3
this is an NP-complete decision problem [39], meaning that a candidate solution is easily
(poly-time) checked for satisﬁability, but ﬁnding a solution can be hard (exp-time). Often-
times, when studying the performance of algorithms over sets of randomly chosen problems
the constraint density α = M/N is used as a rough statistical guide to problem hardness
[57, 58].
Max-SAT is a more general version of SAT in that we must ﬁnd an assignment that
satisﬁes the maximum number of constraints (clearly, when the formula is satisﬁable it is
the same as SAT). We will deﬁne as the “energy” variable the number E(x) of unsatisﬁed
clauses given an assignment x, and thus our task is to ﬁnd an assignment of the variables
corresponding to the global minimum of this energy function. For both SAT and MaxSAT,
all known algorithms require exponentially many computational steps (in N) in the worst
case, to ﬁnd a solution. However, unlike for SAT, checking the correctness for MaxSAT is
as hard as ﬁnding the solution itself, thus making the problem harder than SAT (NP-hard).
A continuous-time dynamical system solver for SAT
Here we brieﬂy review the CTDS SAT solver introduced in [38] and then modify it such as
to be able to handle MaxSAT problems as well. The main strength of the solver is a one-to-
one correspondence between the stable attractors of the dynamical system and the solutions
of the SAT problem without introducing non-solution attractors. Starting the dynamics
from almost all random initial conditions, it will keep searching until it ﬁnds a solution. For
hard SAT formulas, the dynamics is transiently chaotic, revealing an interesting relation
between chaos and problem hardness [38, 45]. However, when there is no solution satisfying
all constraints, the global optimum is not a stable attractor anymore and we have to provide
a method that can estimate the likelihood that the best solution found by analog time t is
the optimal MaxSAT solution.
To introduce the analog solver, we assign a variable si = 2xi−1 to every Boolean variable
xi (when xi = 0, si = −1 and when xi = 1, si = 1), but allow si to vary continuously in the
[−1, 1] interval. The continuous dynamical system ds
dt = ˙s = F thus generates a trajectory
conﬁned to the hypercube HN = [−1, 1]N. Clearly, the SAT solutions s∗are all located in
the corners of HN. To every clause Cm (constraint) we associate the analog clause function
Km(s) = 2−k QN
j=1(1 −cmjsj), where cmj = 1 (-1) if variable xi appears in normal (negated)
form in clause Cm, and cmj = 0 if it is missing (in either form) from Cm. The normalization

5
2−k ensures that Km ∈[0, 1]. One can easily check that Km = 0 only in the corners of
HN and if and only if (iﬀ) clause Cm is satisﬁed. To deﬁne the dynamics of the system we
introduce a “potential energy” function V that depends on the Km-s such that V = 0 iﬀall
the clauses are satisﬁed, that is, Km = 0, ∀m = 1, . . . , M. A natural form for the potential
energy is:
V (s, a) =
M
X
m=1
amKm(s)2 .
(1)
Here the am are time-dependent, positive weights, am > 0, ∀m = 1, . . . , M, ∀t ≥0. If these
weights were constants, the dynamics would easily get stuck in non-solution attractors. To
prevent that, the dynamics of the auxiliary variables am is coupled with the evolution of the
clause functions Km. The dynamics for the s variables is a simple gradient descent on the
potential energy function V , the full system being:









ds
dt = ˙s = −∇sV
da
dt = ˙a = Ka, K = diag(Km) ,
(2)
(3)
where a is to be interpreted as a column vector with components am. Clearly, Eq. (3) pre-
serves the positivity of the auxiliary variables at all times, since the analog clause functions
stay non-negative at all times. According to (3) the auxiliary variables grow exponentially
whenever the corresponding clause functions are not satisﬁed, however, once Km = 0, ˙am = 0
and it stops growing. Eq. (3) ensures that whenever the dynamics would get stuck in a
local, non-solution minimum of V , the exponential acceleration changes the shape of V
such as to eliminate that local minimum. This can be seen by ﬁrst solving formally (3):
am(t) = am0 exp
R t
0 dτKm(s(τ))

, then inserting it into (1): V = PM
m=1 am0e
R t
0 dτKmK2
m.
Due to the exponentially growing weights, the changes in V are dominated by the clause
that was unsatisﬁed the longest. Keeping only that term in V and inserting it into (2), it is
easily seen that the dynamics drives the corresponding clause function towards zero expo-
nentially fast, until another clause function takes over and this is repeated until all clauses
are satisﬁed, for solvable SAT problems. In this sense, this is also a focused search dynamics
[59]. The properties and performance of this solver have been discussed in previous pub-
lications [38, 44, 45]. For hard (but satisﬁable) SAT formulas the dynamics is transiently
chaotic, but eventually all trajectories will converge to a solution. Since the dynamics is
hyperbolic [38], the probability p(t) of a trajectory not ﬁnding a solution by analog time t
decreases exponentially: p(t) ∼e−κt. The decay rate κ is an invariant of transient chaos,
called the escape rate [60, 61], and it well characterizes the hardness of the given SAT for-
mula/instance. In [44] we demonstrated this on Sudoku puzzles (all Sudoku problems can
easily be translated into SAT), showing that η = −log κ indeed provides a hardness measure
that correlates well also with human ratings of puzzle hardness.
A continuous-time dynamical system solver for MaxSAT
Next we introduce a modiﬁed version of the above solver to solve the optimization type
MaxSAT problem. In the dynamics presented in Eqs. (2-3), if the global optimum s∗is

6
not a solution with V = 0, then V will keep changing in time as function of the auxiliary
variables. The dynamics is still biased to ﬂow towards the orthants of the HN hypercube
with low energy, and as shown, in Fig.1a, it will ﬁnd the global optimum, but it will never
actually halt there.
Naturally, the question arises: How do we know when we have hit
an optimal assignment? To tackle this question, we use a heuristic based on a statistical
approach: we start many (relatively short) trajectories from random initial conditions, look
for the lowest energy found by each trajectory and then exploit this statistic to help predict
the lowest energy state and the time needed to get there by the solver.
However, the dynamics (1-3) cannot directly be applied for MaxSAT problems, one needs
to modify the potential energy function, ﬁrst. To see why, notice that the potential V in the
center of HN, in s = 0, is always V (0, a) = 2−2k PM
m=1 am, because Km(0) = 2−k, ∀m. On
the other hand, in a corner s′ of the hypercube, where |s′
i| = 1 ∀i, the value of each Km(s′)
clause function is 0 if the clause is satisﬁed or 1 if it is unsatisﬁed, so the potential V in
a corner is just the sum of auxiliary variables corresponding to the unsatisﬁed clauses, i.e.,
V (s′, a) = P
{m:Km̸=0} am. Let a be the average value of the auxiliary variables in a given
time instance t, a =
1
M
PM
m=1 am. Thus V (0, a) = 2−2kaM and V (s′, a) ≃aE(s′), where
E(s′) is the number of unsatisﬁed clauses in s′ (energy). If s′ is the global optimum and it
is large enough (typically at large constraint densities α), the center of the hypercube may
have a smaller potential energy value (due to the 2−2k factor), than any of the corners of
the hypercube, and it may become a stable attractor trapping the dynamics there. Figure
1 shows an example of how this can happen on a small MaxSAT problem with N = 10
variables and M = 80 clauses, given in the Supplementary Information (Table S1). To
prevent such trapping, we need to modify the potential energy function. We do this by
adding a term V ′(s, a) to V (s, a) such that it satisﬁes the following conditions: 1) it is
symmetric in all si so that there is no bias introduced in the search dynamics, 2) the energy
in s = 0 is always suﬃciently large so that it never becomes an attractor 3) the added
term does not modify the energy in the corners of the hypercube, and 4) similarly to the
original dynamics, s always stays within the hypercube HN, which demands that all the
partial derivatives ∂V ′/∂si vanish along the boundary of HN. We may imagine this added
term in the form of a “hat” function: it has a maximum at s = 0 that keeps growing
together with the time-dependent auxiliary variables (never to become permanently smaller
than the potential energy in the global optimum), but vanishing at the boundary surface of
the hypercube. There are several possibilities for such terms, here we focus on one version
that works well in simulations:
V (s, a) =
M
X
m=1
amKm(s)2 + bαa
N
X
i=1
cos2 π
2 si

,
(4)
where a is the average value of the auxiliary variables, α = M/N is the constraint density
and b is a constant factor tuning the strength of the last term to be always larger than the
ﬁrst, when chosen properly. The sum with the cos2 (πsi/2) terms ensures the symmetric hat
form, vanishing in the corners of HN. Note that the ﬁrst term on the rhs of (4) is never
larger than aM. We now have V (0, a) =
 2−2k + b

aM and b can be chosen such as to avoid
the trapping phenomenon by the origin as described above, see also Fig.1b. To do that, we
simply demand that the potential in the origin V (0, a) keeps growing approximately at the
same rate as the potentials in the corners of the hypercube, never getting smaller than the
potential in the global minimum (the smallest potential value in the corners). Thus, as long

7
Figure 1: MaxSAT solver dynamics. The 3-MaxSAT formula used here has N = 10, M = 80
(clauses given in the Supplementary Table S1.) (a) The potential V , the radius R =
qP
i s2
i , and
the number of unsatisﬁed clauses (energy) E as function of analog time t for the original dynamics
corresponding to b = 0 (red) and the modiﬁed dynamics with b = 0.0725 (black). (b) Colormaps
of the potential V (s(t), a(t)) in the plane (s1, s2).
At a given time instant t we ﬁx all values
sj(t), j = 3, . . . , N and am(t), ∀m and change only s1, s2 in the [−1, 1] × [−1, 1] plane, showing the
instantaneous potential energy landscape V in this plane. The curves indicate the projection of
the trajectory onto (s1, s2) up to the indicated time t. In t = 0, s1 = s2 = −1. For b = 0, the
dynamics converges to s = 0, which is the centre of a deep well in the potential landscape. For
b = 0.0725, the centre is not a minimum anymore and at time t = 10 the orthant with minimal
energy Emin = 3 is found (the solution), shown as a blue dotted line in the E(t) ﬁgure.
as V (0, a) ≥V (s′, a), where s′ is some corner of the hypercube accessed by the dynamics,
the dynamics will not get attracted by the origin of the hypercube. Since V (s′, a) ≃aE(s′),
this implies that b ≥
1
M E(s′) −2−2k, where E(s′)/M is the fraction of unsatisﬁed clauses
in s′. Clearly, the b value can be chosen arbitrarily large, however, if it is too large, then
it forces the dynamics to keep running close to the surface of the hypercube, somewhat
lowering its performance. In practice, an E′ = E(s′) is easily found by running a trajectory
with a suﬃciently large b value for some short time, then resetting b ≥E′
M −2−2k. If chosen
this way the search dynamics itself is not sensitive to this parameter b. The new dynamical
system thus becomes:







˙si = −∂V
∂si
=
M
X
m=1
2amcmiKmi(s)Km(s) + π
2 bαa sin (πsi) ,
∀i = 1, . . . , N
˙am = amKm ,
∀m = 1, . . . , m
(5)
(6)
where in Eq. 5 we used the notation Kmi(s) = Km(s)/(1 −cmisi).

8
Fig. 1 illustrates the diﬀerence between the two dynamics (see also Fig. S1). While for
b = 0 (original system) the dynamics converges rapidly to s = 0 (seen, e.g., by monitoring
the radius R2 = P
i s2
i →0), the modiﬁed system with a properly chosen b > 0 continues
the search. It ﬁnds an orthant with the minimum energy quite quickly (by t = 10), but
it does not halt there, it continues the dynamics and returns to this minimum repeatedly
(e.g., around t ≈16, 22, 41). Fig. 1b shows the potential energy function landscape V (s, a)
in the (s1, s2) plane.
An energy-dependent escape rate
The escape rate is an invariant measure of the dynamics introduced for characterizing
transiently chaotic systems [60, 61]. In a transiently chaotic system the asymptotic dynamics
is not chaotic, but, for example, settles onto a simple attractor, or escapes to inﬁnity (in
open systems), however, the non-asymptotic dynamics is chaotic, usually governed by a
chaotic repeller. It is well known that for hyperbolic, transiently chaotic dynamical systems
the probability of a randomly started trajectory not converging to an attractor by time t
(i.e., not ﬁnding a SAT solution in our case) decreases exponentially in time: p(t) ∼e−κt,
where κ is the escape rate [46, 47, 60]. The escape rate can also be interpreted as the inverse
Figure 2: Energy dependent escape rate. (a) The p(E, t) distributions for a hard, benchmark
MaxSAT competition problem with N = 250, M = 1000 (α = 4.0) (source: [62, 63], also the
ﬁrst row in table of Fig. 5). We obtain Emin = 5 with our algorithm after running Γ = 2 × 105
trajectories with b = 0.002375.
The escape rates are obtained from ﬁtting p ∼e−κt onto the
last section of the distributions (black lines). (b) The energy E vs the escape rate κ using the
values obtained from ﬁtting shown in a) (black) and using the rough estimation for the escape
rates κ(E) ≃−ln(p(E, tmax))/tmax (blue). This estimation is convenient, as it is much easier to
automate in the algorithm than the ﬁtting procedure itself (see Methods). The dashed line curves
show the ﬁtting of Eq. (7). Both curves result in E0 ∈(4, 5] thus predicting the global optimum
Epred
min = 5.
of the average lifetime τ of trajectories κ = 1/τ. For permanently chaotic systems, such as
our MaxSAT solver, however, this deﬁnition does not work, as there is no simple asymptotic
attractor in the dynamics and the system is closed. To be able to use a similar notion also
for MaxSAT, we use a thresholding on the energy of the visited states. More precisely, we
monitor the probability p(E, t) that a trajectory has not yet found an orthant of energy

9
smaller than E by analog time t. Here E acts as a parameter of the distribution. This can be
measured by starting many trajectories from random initial conditions and monitoring the
fraction of those that have not yet found a state with an energy less than E by analog time
t. In Fig.2a we show these distributions for diﬀerent E values for a MaxSAT problem. For
large E, all trajectories almost immediately ﬁnd orthants with fewer unsatisﬁed clauses, but
for lower E values the distributions decay exponentially. We call their decay rates energy-
dependent escape rates κ(E). Naturally, if an energy level does not exist in the system (e.g.,
for E < Emin), the escape rate for that energy level is meaningless (extrapolates to zero
or a negative number). This suggests that the κ(E) dependence could be used to predict
where this minimum energy is reached. However, to capture this energy limit, it is more
convenient to plot the E(κ) function, instead (see Fig.2b). From extensive simulations, we
observe a power-law behavior with an intercept E0:
E = E0 + cκβ .
(7)
Since E0 is not an integer in general, we have Emin = ⌊E0⌋+ 1. This observation is at the
basis of our method to predict the global energy minimum for MaxSAT.
Procedure for predicting the global minimum
Here we describe the algorithm that also provides the halting criterion for the system (5-
6) searching for solutions, with details of the computations presented in the Methods section
along with an algorithm ﬂowchart shown in Fig. S2. The exponentially decaying nature of
the p(E, t) distributions implies that sooner or later every trajectory will eventually visit
the orthant with the lowest energy. Nevertheless, instead of leaving one trajectory to run for
a very long time, it is more eﬃcient to start many shorter trajectories from random initial
conditions while tracking the lowest energy reached by each trajectory (see Fig. S3 and
the Discussion section). This also generates good statistics for p(E, t), and for obtaining
the properties of the chaotic dynamics that are then exploited along with (7) to predict the
value of the global minimum and to decide on the additional number of trajectories needed
to ﬁnd a lower energy state with high probability.
The basic step of the algorithm is to run a trajectory ω from a random initial condition
up to a given time tmax and record the lowest energy found by this particular trajectory,
denoted by Es(ω). Let Γ denote the total number of trajectories run so far, T the set of these
trajectories (thus Γ = |T |), and E(Γ) = minω∈T Es(ω) be the lowest energy found by all
these trajectories. Using statistical methods and the relation between energy and escape rate
κ(E) (shown in (7)), the algorithm repeatedly predicts (as Γ grows) the expected number
of trajectories we need to run in total to ﬁnd the lower energy value E −1, i.e., Γpred(E −1)
and the global minimum energy Epred
min .
We then monitor Epred
min for saturation and once
the saturation criterion is reached, it outputs a decision Edec
min, representing the ﬁnal energy
value predicted by the algorithm as the global minimum. If this energy value has actually
already been attained (found at least one assignment for it), the algorithm outputs the
corresponding assignment(s). If it did not attain it then it keeps running until ﬁnds such
an assignment or reaches the preset maximum limit Γmax on the number of runs. In the
latter case it outputs the lowest energy value attained and the corresponding assignment(s)
and the consistency status of the predicted value. In the Methods section we provide the
description of the algorithm.

10
Performance on random 3-MaxSAT problems
We ﬁrst tested our algorithm and its prediction power on a large set (in total 4000)
of random 3-MaxSAT problems with N = 30, 50, 100 variables and constraint densities
α = 8, 10. (In 3-SAT the SAT-UNSAT transition is around α ≃4.267 [64]). We compare
our results with the true minimum values (Emin) provided by the exact algorithm MaxSATZ
[65, 66]. In Fig. 3 we compare the lowest energy found by the algorithm E, the predicted
Figure 3: Algorithm statistics over random 3-MaxSAT problems. Distribution of diﬀer-
ences between the real global minimum Emin obtained with the exact algorithm MaxSatz and (a)
the smallest energy found by the algorithm E, (b) the predicted minimum value Epred
min and (c)
the ﬁnal decision of the algorithm Edec
min shown for problems with diﬀerent N and α values (see
legends). (d) The percentage of instances indicated by color (see color bar) for diﬀerent values of
the error Epred
min −Emin and hardness η. Most instances are in the Epred
min −Emin = 0 row indicating
correct prediction. Large errors occur mainly at smaller η values, and are dominantly negative.
minimum Epred
min and the ﬁnal decision by the algorithm Edec
min with the true optimum Emin,
by showing the distribution of diﬀerences across many random problem instances. We apply
tmax = 25 and limit the number of trajectories to Γmax = 150 000, after which we stop
the algorithm even if the prediction and the decision are not ﬁnal. For that reason, it is
expected that the performance of the algorithm decreases as N increases, (e.g., at N = 100),
we would need to run more trajectories to obtain the same performance. Nevertheless, the

11
results show that all three distributions have a large peak at 0. Naturally, the most errors
occur in the prediction phase, but many of these can be signiﬁcantly reduced through simple
decision rules (see Methods), because they occur most of the time in easy/small problems,
where the statistics is insuﬃcient (e.g., too few points since there are only few energy values).
To show how the error in prediction depends on the hardness of problems, we studied the
a
b
c
Figure 4: Performance of the algorithm illustrated on a hard benchmark problem. We
use the same problem as in Fig. 2. (a) Γ is the number of trajectories, E the lowest energy found
until that point, n(E) is the number of times this energy has been found, E0 is the parameter
obtained from ﬁtting of Eq. (7), Epred
min and estimating Γpred(E −1). The algorithm estimates the
escape rate and performs a prediction at each Γ shown in the table and for the colored lines we
show the ﬁtting curves in (b). (c) The relevant parameter E0 is shown as function of Γ. While it
wildly ﬂuctuates at the beginning when the statistics is small, it remains in the E0 ∈[4, 5) interval,
convincingly predicting Epred
min = 5 already after Γ = 7 000 up until the point that it ﬁnds this
energy at Γ = 189 562. At this point it could be expected that we do not have a good estimate for
κ(5) because it has been found only once (n(5) = 1), nevertheless the estimation Epred
min remains
consistently the same, convincing our algorithm to accept Edec
min = 5 and stop.
correlation between the error Epred
min −Emin and the hardness measure applicable to individual
instances η = −ln κ/ ln N (for the origin and deﬁnition of this hardness measure see [44]).
In Fig. 3d we show the distribution of these values (also see Fig. S4). Interestingly, larger
errors occur mainly at the easiest problems with η < 2. Calculating the Pearson correlation
coeﬃcient between |Epred
min −Emin| and η (excluding instances where the prediction is correct)
we obtain a clear indication that often smaller η (thus for easier problems) generates larger
errors. Positive errors are much smaller and are shifted towards harder problems. There
are somewhat more negative errors, which means that the algorithm consistently predicts
a slightly lower energy value than the optimum, which is good, since this way we have an

12
increased assurance that the algorithm has found the optimum state. In Fig. S4b we show
the correlation coeﬃcients calculated separately for problems with diﬀerent N, α settings.
Performance evaluation on hard MaxSAT competition problems
We next present the performance of our solver on very hard MaxSAT problems taken
from competitions, listed on the site [62, 63]. For illustration purposes, here we focus on an
extremely hard competition problem instance, called HG-3SAT-V250-C1000-1.cnf, which
was reposted (for several years) with N = 250 variables and M = 1000 clauses, shown as
problem No. 1 in the table of Fig. 5. This problem was also used in Fig. 2. No competition
algorithm could solve this problem, or even predict the minimum energy value within the
allotted time (30 mins). We ran our algorithm on a regular 2012 iMac 21.5, 3.1GHz, Intel
Core i7 computer and it predicted the lowest energy of 5 (unsatisﬁed clauses), after 21min
24sec of running time and produced an assignment for it after 9.168h of running time. The
minimum energy prediction was achieved already after Γ = 7000 trajectories, whereas an
assignment with this minimum energy took a total of Γ = 189 562 trajectories to run. The
minimum energy assignment corresponding to Edec
min = 5 found by our algorithm is provided
in the Supplementary Information section, Table S2. (The problem itself can be downloaded
from the competition site [63]). We ran the complete and exact algorithm, MaxSatz [65, 66]
for more than 5 weeks on this problem and the smallest energy it found was E = 9! The
details of how the algorithm performs are shown in Fig. 4. Similar ﬁgures for other hard
problems such as for a 4-SAT problem and a spin-glass problem are shown in Figs. S5, S6.
Figure 5: Algorithm performance on competition MaxSAT problems. The SAT instances
can be downloaded from [62, 63]. The best solutions found by our algorithm are given in the SI.
The table of Fig. 5 shows the performance of the algorithm on several hard competition
MaxSAT problems taken from the same source (notice, 9 out of 12 problems are 4-MaxSAT).
Instances No. 1-3, 11, 12 were not solved by any competition solver, but our solver made
a low energy prediction for all of them and for problems 1 and 11 it also did ﬁnd an as-
signment corresponding to the predicted energy value. For No. 2, 3 and 12, it did not ﬁnd
a corresponding assignment, but, consistently ﬁnds an energy value that is only one higher
(i.e., for 7 instead of 6, for 8 instead of 7 and 2 instead of 1). The reason for this is that
the solver, by the nature of the ﬁtting, sometimes predicts a lower energy value than the
correct minimum one, as discussed previously. Note that the corresponding best assignment

13
is found relatively early (even if the algorithm was run much longer, hoping to ﬁnd a re-
alization for the predicted value). Problems No. 4-10 were also solved by the competition
solvers, achieving the best known solution (of 2 unsatisﬁed clauses in all cases), which was
also found by our algorithm. In one instance, that of problem 4, it predicted an energy value
of 0 (consistently with the observation of predicting lower values than than the minimum),
which, of course it could not ﬁnd, but it did ﬁnd an assignment for the correct value of 2.
In all these cases it found assignments faster than the competition solvers, often nearly ten
times faster. In the Supplementary Information section we provide the minimum energy
values and solution assignments for all the problems presented in Fig. 5.
Application to Ramsey numbers
Next we further demonstrate the ability of our analog algorithm to solve exceptionally
hard MaxSAT problems.
The problem of Ramsey numbers or Ramsey theory is a very
active area in mathematics with applications to virtually every ﬁeld of mathematics [52, 55].
Although it has several variants, in the standard, two-color Ramsey number problem we
have to ﬁnd the order for the smallest complete graph for which no matter how we color its
edges with two colors (red and blue), we cannot avoid creating a monochromatic m-clique.
The number of nodes for the smallest such complete graph is denoted by R(m, m). The
more popular formulation for m = 3 is going back to Paul Erd˝os: minimum how many
people R(3, 3) should we invite to a party to make sure that there are either 3 people
who mutually all know each other or 3 people who mutually do not know each other? (In
this case one edge color corresponds to people knowing each other and the other to not
knowing each other).
The proof that R(3, 3) = 6 is trivial.
For m = 4 the answer is
R(4, 4) = 18 and it is harder to prove [67]. The m = 5 case is still open, only the bounds
43 ≤R(5, 5) ≤48 are known [53]. The best lower bound of 43 was ﬁrst found in 1989 by
Exoo [68], and the upper bound was only recently reduced from 49 [54] to 48 by Angeltveit
and McKay [69].
Using various heuristic methods, including simulated annealing, tabu
search and genetic algorithms, researchers have found in total 656 solutions (328 graphs and
their complements) for the complete graph on 42 nodes [54]. It has been conjectured by
McKay and Radziszowski [54] that there are no other solutions for N = 42. Starting from
these solutions they searched for a 5-clique-free coloring in 43 and as no solution was found,
McKay, Radziszowski and Exoo made the strong conjecture that R(5, 5) = 43 [54]. Other
variants of Ramsey problems include specifying diﬀerent clique orders for diﬀerent colors
and/or using more than two colors [52].
Ramsey number problems are very challenging because the search space is huge: it grows
as 2N(N−1)/2 = O(2N2) with the order N of the complete graph to be colored. To tackle
Ramsey number problems with our algorithm, we ﬁrst transform them into k-SAT: every
edge i (i = 1, . . . , N(N −1)/2) to be colored is represented by a Boolean variable xi (with
xi ∈{0, 1}, 1 = blue, 0 = red). A clique of size m has m(m −1)/2 edges. We are satisﬁed
with a coloring (a solution) when no m-clique is monochromatic, in other words, every m-
clique with set of edges

i1, . . . , im(m−1)/2
	
must have both colors, expressed as the statement
formed by the conjunction of the two clauses

xi1 ∨. . . ∨xim(m−1)/2

∧

xi1 ∨. . . ∨xim(m−1)/2

(8)
being true. This means that for every m-clique we have two clauses and thus there are a

14
Figure 6: Finding the Ramsey number R(4, 4). The E(κ) relationship for the 6-SAT problems
corresponding to the KN complete graph colorings with two colors. E0 is the extrapolated value
based on the ﬁt from Eq. (7) (dashed lines). The long vertical bars indicate the lower end of
the ﬁtting range. Note that for N = 16, 17, E0 is a negative value indicating full colorability (the
corresponding 6-SAT problem is fully satisﬁable), whereas for N ≥18, E0 > 0, and thus the 6-SAT
problem becomes MaxSAT.
total of 2
 N
m

clauses to satisfy. Since the number of clauses (O(N m)) for m ≥2 grows
faster in N than the number of variables N, there will be a lowest N value corresponding
to UNSAT, which is the sought R(m, m) Ramsey number. Thus, for m = 3 we have a
3-SAT problem, for m = 4 a 6-SAT problem and for m = 5 a 10-SAT problem.
For
graphs with N = 42 nodes the number of clauses is 1 701 336 and the search space has over
2861 ≃1.5 × 10259 graphs! If we were to compute the familiar constraint density α, it would
be α = 2
 42
5

/(21 × 42) = 1976, indeed above the SAT/UNSAT transition point for random
10-SAT, which is estimated to be αs
10-SAT ≃707 [70].
Applying our algorithm for the m = 4 Ramsey problem, we can easily ﬁnd coloring
solutions for N ≤17, while for N = 18 it predicts that there is no solution, indeed conﬁrming
that R(4, 4) = 18. This is seen from the plot of E vs κ in Fig 6. For N ≤17 the smooth
portion of the curve ﬁtted by (7) suddenly cuts oﬀ, κ being the same for all energy values
lower than a threshold value, meaning that after reaching a state corresponding to the
threshold energy level, the solution (i.e., E = 0) is immediately found. This is simply due to
the fact that the behavior (7) is a statistical average behavior characteristic of the chaotic
trajectory, from the neighborhood of the chaotic repeller of the dynamics and away from
the region in which the solution resides. However, once the trajectory enters the basin of
attraction and nears the solution, the dynamics becomes simple, non-chaotic and runs into
the solution, reﬂected by the sudden drop in energy. This is not due to statistical errors,
because the curve remains consistent when plotting it using 103, 104 or 105 initial conditions
(the ﬁgure shows 105 initial conditions).
Searching for the value of R(5, 5) one can relatively easily ﬁnd coloring solutions without

15
a
c
b
d
Figure 7: Colorings for the R(5, 5) Ramsey number problem. (a) A coloring of the complete
graph on N = 42 nodes that avoids monochromatic 5-cliques. (b) The adjacency matrix corre-
sponding to the coloring in (a). (c) The best coloring of the complete graph on N = 43 nodes
containing only 2 monochromatic (red) 5-cliques, sitting on 6 nodes (highlighted with thicker
edges). (d) The adjacency matrix corresponding to the coloring in (c).
5-cliques up to N = 35 for which the number of variables is 595 and the number of clauses
649 264, already huge for a 10-SAT problem for other types of SAT and MaxSAT solvers. To
ﬁnd solutions faster for N ≥36, however, we employ a strategy based on circulant matrices
[71] helping us ﬁnd solutions (proper colorings) up to and including N = 42 in a relatively
short time (on the order of hours), which we describe next.
Kalbﬂeisch [71] argued that there should be coloring solutions of complete graphs for

16
the Ramsey problem that can be described with a circulant form adjacency matrix (e.g.,
all red edges are 1-s, blue edges are 0-s in this matrix), or matrices that are close to such
a circulant form. This was then later applied by many authors in improving bounds for
Ramsey numbers and ﬁnding corresponding colorings. Although there is no formal proof of
this statement, one expects this to be true also from the SAT formulation of the Ramsey
problem. In the SAT formulation, the clauses have a very high degree of symmetry: all
variables participate in the same way (8) in all the clauses, which run over all the possible
m-cliques. This observation on symmetry can be exploited, allowing us to do part of the
search in a much smaller space than the original space, where all the variables could in
principle change independently from one another. More precisely, we ﬁrst deﬁne a MaxSAT
problem which has only N −1 variables (instead of the full N(N −1)/2) by choosing, e.g.,
those associated with the links of the ﬁrst node: x1 = a1,2, x2 = a1,3, . . . , xN−1 = a1,N as
problem variables (here ai,j denotes the adjacency matrix) and deﬁning the variables of the
links of the other nodes by the circular permutation of this vector x, to obtain a circulant
matrix (e.g., a2,3 = a1,2, ai,j = ai−1,j−1). Taking the MaxSAT form of the Ramsey problem
we replace the variable of a link ai,j with xj−i, thus reducing the number of independent
variables from N(N −1)/2 to N −1. The number of clauses will also be reduced, because we
can now eliminate the repeated ones. This way we obtain a much smaller MaxSAT problem,
on which we apply our solver and starting from random initial conditions we search for
low-energy states, which are relatively easily found. We save the x vectors (the Boolean
values) corresponding to such low-energy circulant matrix states. For N = 42 we have found
circulant type matrices having only 6, 14, 20, 26 etc. monochromatic 5-cliques, indicating
that they may already be close to a solution. After saving these circulant matrix states
(with small number of monochromatic 5-cliques) we return to the original 10-SAT problem
(with N(N −1)/2 variables, without the symmetry constraint), and start a new trajectory
from the corner of the hypercube corresponding to the saved matrix state, but now without
symmetry restriction.
This places the trajectories relatively close to the solution and a
proper coloring can be found in hours even for N = 42, (see Fig. 7a, b, and Table S15
for an easily readable list of edge colorings), for which other heuristic algorithms take many
days of computational time [54], even with the circulant matrix strategy. Applying the same
strategy for N = 43 we did not ﬁnd any complete coloring solutions, however, we did ﬁnd
a coloring that creates only two (out of 962 598 possible) monochromatic 5-cliques, see Fig.
7c, d, and the speciﬁc coloring provided in the Supplementary Information Table S16. This
adds further support to the conjecture that R(5, 5) = 43.
Discussion
In summary, here we presented a novel, continuous-time dynamical system approach
to solve a quintessential discrete optimization problem, MaxSAT. The solver is based on
a deterministic set of ordinary diﬀerential equations and a heuristic method that is used
to predict the likelihood that the optimal solution has been found by analog time t. The
prediction part of the algorithm uses the statistics of the ensemble of trajectories started from
random initial conditions, by introducing the notion of energy-dependent escape rate and
extrapolating this dependence to predict both the minimum energy value (lowest number of
unsatisﬁed clauses) and the expected time needed by the algorithm to reach that value. The
statistical analysis of the ensemble of trajectories presented here is very simple; it is quite
possible that more sophisticated, extreme value statistical methods can be used to better

17
predict minima values and time lengths. Due to its general character, the presented approach
is generalizable to other optimization problems as well, to be presented in forthcoming
publications.
Despite the fact that we are running our solver on digital computers (using a Runge-Kutta
algorithm with adaptive step-size, 5th order Cash-Karp method for solving the ODEs) and
not on an analog device, it still shows superior performance on very hard MaxSAT problems,
compared to competition solvers. This is because analog dynamical systems represent an en-
tirely novel family of solvers and search dynamics, and for this reason they behave diﬀerently
and thus can perform better than existing algorithms on hard problems or certain classes of
hard problems. Trying to solve large, but simple MaxSAT problems on digital computers
with this method, however, would show a weaker performance than digital MaxSAT solvers,
simply because evolving a large number of coupled ODEs on digital machines is costly. Di-
rect hardware implementations, however, for example, via analog circuits are expected to
run orders of magnitude faster than any state-of-the-art SAT solver run on the latest digital
computers, as shown in [48]. One reason for this is that in such analog circuits the von Neu-
mann bottleneck is eliminated, with the circuit itself serving its own processor and memory,
see [48] for details. It is also important to note that the system (5-6) is not unique, other
ODEs can be designed with similar or even better properties. This is useful, because the
form given in (5-6) is not readily amenable to simple hardware implementations, due to the
constantly growing auxiliary variable dynamics (all variables represent a physical character-
istic such as a voltage or a current and thus they will have to have an upper limit value for
a given device). However, the auxiliary variables do not need to grow always exponentially,
there are other solver variants in which they only grow exponentially when needed, otherwise
they can decay as well [72], allowing for better hardware implementations.
To illustrate the eﬀectiveness of our solver, as an application, we used it to ﬁnd colorings
in the famous two-color Ramsey problem and in particular for R(5, 5), which is still open.
We have shown, that the two-color Ramsey problem avoiding monochromatic m-cliques can
be translated into an
m(m−1)
2
-SAT problem and thus into a 10-SAT problem for m = 5.
Note that most digital SAT solving algorithms focus on 3-SAT or 4-SAT problems, and
usually are unable to handle directly the much harder 10-SAT. Our solver when run on the
corresponding 10-SAT (or 10-MaxSAT) was able to ﬁnd colorings of the complete graph of
order 42 avoiding monochromatic 5-cliques, and a coloring with only two (!) monochromatic
5-cliques on 6 nodes for the complete graph on 43 vertices (existing colorings in the literature
for N = 43 quote 500+ monochromatic 5-cliques), adding further support to the conjecture
that R(5, 5) = 43.
Methods
1. Algorithm description
Here we give a simple, non-optimized variant of the algorithm (see ﬂowchart in Fig. S2).
Certainly, better implementations can be devised, for example with better ﬁtting routines,
however the description below is easier to follow and works well. Given a SAT problem, we
ﬁrst determine the b parameter as described previously, then:
1. Initially we set E = M, Γmin, Γmax ≫Γmin, Γpred  E −1

= Γmin+1 and tmax. Unless
speciﬁed otherwise, in our simulations we used Γmin = 100, Γmax = 2×106, tmax = 50.

18
2. To initialize our statistics, we run Γmin trajectories up to tmax, each from a random
initial condition. For every such trajectory ω we update the p(E, t) distributions as
function of the energies of the orthants visited by ω. We record the lowest energy
value found E(Γmin).
3. Starting from Γ = Γmin + 1 and up to Γmax, we continue running trajectories in the
same way and for each one of them check:
a) if Es ≤E, set E ..= min(Es, E), update p(E, t) and go to step 4.
b) if Γ just reached Γpred  E −1

, go to step 4.
c) if Γ = Γmax, output “Maximum number of steps reached, increase Γmax.”, output
the lowest energy value found, the predicted Epred
min and the quality of ﬁt for Epred
min ,
then halt.
4. Using the p(E, t) distributions, estimate the escape rates κ(E) as described in Methods
section 2.
5. The κ(E) curve is extrapolated to the E −1 value obtaining κ(E −1) and then using
this we predict Γpred  E −1

(Methods section 3). Further extrapolating the κ(E)
curve to κ = 0 we obtain Epred
min (see Methods section 4).
6. We check the consistency of the prediction deﬁned here as saturation of the predicted
values. We call it consistent, if Epred
min has not changed during the last 5 predictions. If
it is not consistent yet, we go to step 4 and continue running new trajectories. If the
prediction is consistent, we check for the following halting conditions:
– if Epred
min = E(Γ) then we decide the global optimum has been found: Edec
min =
Epred
min = E(Γ) and go to step 7.
– if the ﬁtting is consistently predicting Epred
min > E(Γ) (usually it is very close,
E(Γ) + 1) we check the number of trajectories that has attained states with
E(Γ), i.e., n(E) =

1 −p(E(Γ), tmax)

Γ. If it is large enough (e.g. > 100), we
decide to stop running new trajectories and set Edec
min = E(Γ) and go to step 7.
– if Epred
min < E(Γ) then we most probably have not found the global optimum yet
and we go to step 4.
We added additional stopping conditions that can shorten the algorithm in case of
easy problems, see Methods section 5, but these are not so relevant.
7. The algorithm ends and outputs Epred
min , Edec
min, E values, the Boolean variables corre-
sponding to the optimal state found, along with the quality of ﬁt.
2. Estimation of the escape rates κ(E)
As seen in Fig. 2 and Fig. S1 the exponential decay of the p(E, t) distribution settles
in after a short transient period. Theoretically the escape rate can be obtained by ﬁtting
the exponential on that last part of the curves (Fig.
2a).
However, while running the
algorithm it would be diﬃcult to automatically estimate the region where the exponential

19
should be ﬁtted.
The simple approach that works well is to estimate the escape rates
as κ(E) ≃−ln(p(E, tmax)/tmax, which practically would correspond to the exponential
behavior being valid on the whole (0, tmax) interval.
Note, the p(E, t) is a cumulative
distribution with p(E, 0) = 1. Usually this estimation is very close to the ﬁtted values
(Fig. 2b), but notice that what matters here is the scaling behavior of the escape rates, and
this is quite precisely obtained this way because it simply uses the scaling behavior of the
p(E, tmax) values, instead of the ﬁttings, which is sensitive to the chosen interval.
3. Predicting the number of trajectories needed to ﬁnd a lower energy
After calculating the escape rates κ(E) one can estimate the number of expected trajecto-
ries needed to ﬁnd a lower energy value: Γpred(E −1) as described below. Clearly, p(E, tmax)
is the probability that a trajectory has not reached the energy level E up to time tmax. This
means that 1−p(E, tmax) is the probability that a trajectory did reach energy E, up to time
tmax. Running Γ trajectories, thus n(E) = [1 −p(E, tmax)]Γ will give the expected number
of trajectories that reached energy E. Thus, the expected number of trajectories we need
to run in total to ﬁnd the E −1 energy value at least once is:
Γpred(E −1) =
1
1 −p(tmax, E −1) .
(9)
However, no trajectory has reached energy E −1 yet, and thus we don’t have p(E −1, tmax).
Instead, it is computed from p(E −1, tmax) ≃e−κ(E−1)tmax, after extrapolating the κ(E)
curve to obtain κ(E −1).
4. Predicting the global optimum
When ﬁtting the curve E = E0 + aκβ on our data points we used the Numerical Recipes
implementation [73] of the Levenberg-Marquardt non-linear curve ﬁtting method [74, 75].
This implementation has some weaknesses, one could choose to use other implementations
or other methods. Sometimes a 3-parameter ﬁtting is too sensitive and does not give good
results. Because we do not need a very precise value for E0 (we just need to ﬁnd the integer
interval it falls into, because Epred
min = [E0] + 1, [.] meaning the integer part) we perform a
series of ﬁttings always ﬁxing E0 and leaving only 2 unknown parameters (a, β). For each
E0 = E, E −0.1, E −0.2, .... we then perform a ﬁtting and check the χ2 error. The ﬁtting
with minimal error is chosen as the ﬁnal E0 and ﬁnal ﬁtted curve.
5. Additional stopping conditions
There are cases usually for easy problems, when the ﬁtting using the form (7) does not
work well, but based on certain simple conditions we can trust that the global optimum has
been found. For example:
• if there are not enough (e.g less than 5) data points in the κ(E) curve ﬁtted (this
partly explains why the ﬁtting does not give good prediction), but the lowest energy

20
has already been found many times (n(E) > nmax, e.g. nmax = 1000). This happens
for very easy problems.
• The ﬁtting is consistently predicting another Epred
min ̸= E, but n(E) is very large and
Γ > Γpred(E −1), so according to the dynamics, it seems a lower energy should have
been found already.
In such cases we exit the algorithm (step 7) with the decision: E ̸= Epred
min , Edec
min = E.
[1] Moore, C. & Mertens, S. The nature of computation (Oxford University Press, 2011).
[2] Barahona, F. On the computational complexity of Ising spin glass models. J. Phys. A: Math.
Gen. 15, 3241–3253 (1982).
[3] Istrail, S. Statistical mechanics, three-dimensionality and NP-completeness: I. Universality
of intractability for the partition function of the Ising model across non-planar surfaces. In
Proceedings of the thirty-second annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing (STOC00),
87–96 (ACM Press, 2000).
[4] Lawler, E. L., Lenstra, J. K., Kan, A. R., Shmoys, D. B. et al. The traveling salesman problem:
a guided tour of combinatorial optimization (Wiley New York, 1985).
[5] Fraenkel, A. S. Complexity of protein folding. Bulletin of mathematical biology 55, 1199–1210
(1993).
[6] Sperschneider, V. Bioinformatics: Problem solving paradigms (Springer Science & Business
Media, 2008).
[7] Asano, T., Brimkov, V. E. & Barneva, R. P. Some theoretical challenges in digital geometry:
A perspective. Discrete Applied Mathematics 157, 3362–3371 (2009).
[8] Wang, J. et al. Segmenting subcellular structures in histology tissue images. In Biomedical
Imaging (ISBI), 2015 IEEE 12th International Symposium, 556–559 (IEEE, 2015).
[9] Garey, M. & Johnson, D.
Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-
Completeness (W. H. Freeman & Co Ltd, New York, USA, 1990).
[10] Wu, Y.-L., Tsukiyama, S. & Marek-Sadowska, M. On computational complexity of a detailed
routing problem in two dimensional FPGAs.
In Design Automation of High Performance
VLSI Systems. GLSV’94, 70–75 (IEEE, 1994).
[11] Cooper, G. F. The computational complexity of probabilistic inference using Bayesian belief
networks. Artiﬁcial intelligence 42, 393–405 (1990).
[12] Dagum, P. & Luby, M. Approximating probabilistic inference in Bayesian belief networks is
NP-hard. Artiﬁcial intelligence 60, 141–153 (1993).
[13] Waldrop, M. M. More than Moore. Nature 530, 144–147 (2016).
[14] Ulmann, B. Analog computing (Walter de Gruyter, 2013).
[15] Inagaki, T. et al. A coherent Ising machine for 2000-node optimization problems. Science
354, 603–606 (2016).
[16] Takata, K. et al. A 16-bit coherent Ising machine for one-dimensional ring and cubic graph
problems. Scientiﬁc Reports 6, 34089 (2016).
[17] McMahon, P. L. et al. A fully-programmable 100-spin coherent Ising machine with all-to-all
connections. Science aah5178 (2016).
[18] Marandi, A., Wang, Z., Takata, K., Byer, R. L. & Yamamoto, Y. Network of time-multiplexed
optical parametric oscillators as a coherent Ising machine. Nature Photonics 8, 937–942 (2014).

21
[19] Joshi, S., Kim, C., Ha, S. & Cauwenberghs, G. From algorithms to devices: Enabling machine
learning through ultra-low-power VLSI mixed-signal array processing. In Custom Integrated
Circuits Conference (CICC), 2017 IEEE, 1–9 (IEEE, 2017).
[20] Mostafa, H., M¨uller, L. K. & Indiveri, G. An event-based architecture for solving constraint
satisfaction problems. Nature Communications 6, 8941 (2015).
[21] Parihar, A., Shukla, N., Jerry, M., Datta, S. & Raychowdhury, A. Vertex coloring of graphs
via phase dynamics of coupled oscillatory networks. Scientiﬁc Reports 7, 911 (2017).
[22] Parihar, A., Shukla, N., Datta, S. & Raychowdhury, A. Exploiting synchronization properties
of correlated electron devices in a non-Boolean computing fabric for template matching. IEEE
Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems 4, 450–459 (2014).
[23] Neftci, E. O., Augustine, C., Paul, S. & Detorakis, G. Event-driven random back-propagation:
Enabling neuromorphic deep learning machines. Frontiers in Neuroscience 11, 324 (2017).
[24] Hu, D., Ronhovde, P. & Nussinov, Z. Phase transitions in random Potts systems and the
community detection problem: Spin-glass type and dynamic perspectives. Philos. Mag. 92,
406 (2012).
[25] Nussinov, S. & Nussinov, Z.
A Novel approach to complex problems.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:cond-mat/0209155v1 (2002).
[26] Pershin, Y. V. & Di Ventra, M. Practical approach to programmable analog circuits with
memristors. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 57, 1857–1864
(2010).
[27] Traversa, F. L. & Di Ventra, M. Polynomial-time solution of prime factorization and NP-
complete problems with digital memcomputing machines. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal
of Nonlinear Science 27, 023107 (2017).
[28] Ahmadyan, S. N. & Vasudevan, S. Duplex: Simultaneous parameter-performance exploration
for optimizing analog circuits. In Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), 2016 IEEE/ACM Inter-
national Conference, 1–8 (IEEE, 2016).
[29] Haynes, N. D., Soriano, M. C., Rosin, D. P., Fischer, I. & Gauthier, D. J. Reservoir computing
with a single time-delay autonomous Boolean node. Physical Review E 91, 020801 (2015).
[30] Kumar, S., Strachan, J. P. & Williams, R. S. Chaotic dynamics in nanoscale NbO2 Mott
memristors for analogue computing. Nature 548, 318 (2017).
[31] Achour, S., Sarpeshkar, R. & Rinard, M. C. Conﬁguration synthesis for programmable analog
devices with Arco. In ACM SIGPLAN Notices, vol. 51, 177–193 (ACM, 2016).
[32] Orponen, P.
A survey of continous-time computation theory. In Advances in algorithms,
languages, and complexity, 209–224 (1997).
[33] MacLennan, B. J. Analog computation. In Encyclopedia of complexity and systems science,
271–294 (Springer, 2009).
[34] Bournez, O. & Campagnolo, M. New computational paradigms. Changing conceptions of what
is computable, chap. A survey on continuous time computations, 383–423 (Springer-Verlag,
2008).
[35] Bournez, O. & Pouly, A.
Handbook of Computability and Complexity in Analysis, chap.
A survey on analog models of computation (Springer in cooperation with the Association
Computability in Europe., in press).
[36] Bournez, O. & Pouly, A. A Universal Ordinary Diﬀerential Equation. In 44th International
Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2017), vol. 80, 116:1–116:14
(2017).
[37] Kia, B., Lindner, J. F. & Ditto, W. L. A simple nonlinear circuit contains an inﬁnite number

22
of functions.
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs 63, 944–948
(2016).
[38] Ercsey-Ravasz, M. & Toroczkai, Z. Optimization hardness as transient chaos in an analog
approach to constraint satisfaction. Nature Physics 7, 966 (2011).
[39] Cook, S. The complexity of theorem-proving procedures. In Proceedings of the Third Annual
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 151 (ACM, 1971).
[40] Garey, M. & Johnson, D.
Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-
Completeness (Series of Books in the Mathematical Sciences) (W. H. Freeman & Co Ltd,
1979).
[41] Claessen, K. et al. SAT-solving in practice, with a tutorial example from supervisory control.
Discrete Event Dynamic Systems 19, 495 (2009).
[42] Kautz, H. & Selman, B. The state of SAT. Discrete Applied Mathematics 155, 1514–1524
(2007).
[43] Biere, A., Heule, M. & van Maaren, H. Handbook of satisﬁability, vol. 185 (IOS press, 2009).
[44] Ercsey-Ravasz, M. & Toroczkai, Z. The chaos within Sudoku. Scientiﬁc Reports 2, 725 (2012).
[45] Varga, M., Sumi, R., Toroczkai, Z. & Ercsey-Ravasz, M. Order-to-chaos transition in the
hardness of random Boolean satisﬁability problems. Physical Review E 93, 052211 (2016).
[46] Lai, Y.-C. & T´el, T. Transient Chaos: Complex Dynamics on Finite-Time Scales (Springer,
2011).
[47] T´el, T. & Lai, Y.-C. Chaotic transients in spatially extended systems. Physics Reports 460,
245 (2008).
[48] Yin, X. et al. Eﬃcient analog circuits for Boolean satisﬁability. IEEE Transactions on Very
Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems 26, 155–167 (2017).
[49] E´en, N. & S¨orensson, N. An extensible SAT-solver. In International conference on theory and
applications of satisﬁability testing, 502–518 (Springer, 2003).
[50] Van Harmelen, F., Lifschitz, V. & Porter, B. Handbook of knowledge representation, vol. 1
(Elsevier, 2008).
[51] Graham, R. & Spencer, J. Ramsey theory. Stientiﬁc American 263, 112–117 (1990).
[52] Graham, R. L., Rothschild, B. L. & Spencer, J. H. Ramsey theory, vol. 20 (John Wiley &
Sons, 1990).
[53] Radziszowski, S. P. Small Ramsey numbers. The Electronic Journal of Combinatorics DS1
(2014).
[54] McKay, B. D. & Radziszowski, S. P. Subgraph counting identities and Ramsey numbers.
Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B 69, 193–209 (1997).
[55] Bollob´as, B. Modern graph theory, vol. 184 (Springer Science & Business Media, 2013).
[56] Roberts, F. S. Applications of Ramsey theory. Discrete Applied Mathematics 9, 251–261
(1984).
[57] Kirkpatrick, S. & Selman, B. Critical-behavior in the satisﬁability of random Boolean expres-
sions. Science 264, 1297–1301 (1994).
[58] Mezard, M., Parisi, G. & Zecchina, R. Analytic and algorithmic solution of random satisﬁa-
bility problems. Science 297, 812–815 (2002).
[59] Seitz, S., Alava, M. & Orponen, P. Focused local search for random 3-satisﬁability. Journal
of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2005, P06006 (2005).
[60] Kadanoﬀ, L. & Tang, C. Escape rate from strange repellers. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science, USA 81, 1276 (1984).
[61] Cvitanovi´c, P., Artuso, R., Mainieri, R., Tanner, G. & Vattay, G.
Chaos: Classical and

23
Quantum (Niels Bohr Institute, Copenhagen, 2009).
[62] http://www.maxsat.udl.cat/14/benchmarks/index.html.
[63] http://www.maxsat.udl.cat/16/benchmarks/index.html.
[64] M´ezard, M. & Zecchina, R. Random k-satisﬁability problem: From an analytic solution to an
eﬃcient algorithm. Physical Review E 66, 056126 (2002).
[65] Li, C., Many`a, F. & Planes, J. Detecting disjoint inconsistent subformulas for computing lower
bounds for max-SAT. In Proceedings, The Twenty-First National Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and the Eihteenth Innovative Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Conference
(AAAI Press, 2006).
[66] Li, C., Many`a, F. & Planes, J. New inference rules for max-SAT. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 30,
321–359 (2007).
[67] Greenwood, R. E. & Gleason, A. M. Combinatorial relations and chromatic graphs. Canad.
J. Math 7, 7 (1955).
[68] Exoo, G. A lower bound for R(5, 5). Journal of graph theory 13, 97–98 (1989).
[69] Angeltveit, V. & McKay, B. D. R(5, 5) ≤48. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.08768 (2017).
[70] Mertens, S., M´ezard, M. & Zecchina, R. Threshold values of random k-SAT from the cavity
method. Random Structures & Algorithms 28, 340–373 (2006).
[71] Kalbﬂeisch, J. Construction of special edge-chromatic graphs. Canadian Mathematical Bul-
letin 8, 575–584 (1965).
[72] Toroczkai, Z. et al. A continuous-time SAT solver with exponentially suppressed auxiliary
variable dynamics. Preprint, to be submitted.
[73] Press, W. H., Teukolsky, S. A., Vetterling, W. T. & Flannery, B. P. Numerical Recipes in C.
The Art of Scientiﬁc Computing (Cambridge University Press, 1992), 2nd edn.
[74] Levenberg, K.
A method for the solution of certain non-linear problems in least squares.
Quarterly of Applied Mathematics 2, 164–168 (1944).
[75] Marquardt, D. An algorithm for least-squares estimation of nonlinear parameters. SIAM
Journal on Applied Mathematics 11, 431–441 (1963).
