DeepType: Multilingual Entity Linking by Neural Type System Evolution
Jonathan Raiman
OpenAI
San Francisco, California

Olivier Raiman
Agilience
Paris, France

Abstract
The wealth of structured (e.g. Wikidata) and unstructured
data about the world available today presents an incredible
opportunity for tomorrow’s Artiﬁcial Intelligence. So far, in-
tegration of these two different modalities is a difﬁcult pro-
cess, involving many decisions concerning how best to repre-
sent the information so that it will be captured or useful, and
hand-labeling large amounts of data. DeepType overcomes
this challenge by explicitly integrating symbolic information
into the reasoning process of a neural network with a type
system. First we construct a type system, and second, we use
it to constrain the outputs of a neural network to respect the
symbolic structure. We achieve this by reformulating the de-
sign problem into a mixed integer problem: create a type sys-
tem and subsequently train a neural network with it. In this
reformulation discrete variables select which parent-child re-
lations from an ontology are types within the type system,
while continuous variables control a classiﬁer ﬁt to the type
system. The original problem cannot be solved exactly, so we
propose a 2-step algorithm: 1) heuristic search or stochastic
optimization over discrete variables that deﬁne a type system
informed by an Oracle and a Learnability heuristic, 2) gradi-
ent descent to ﬁt classiﬁer parameters. We apply DeepType to
the problem of Entity Linking on three standard datasets (i.e.
WikiDisamb30, CoNLL (YAGO), TAC KBP 2010) and ﬁnd
that it outperforms all existing solutions by a wide margin,
including approaches that rely on a human-designed type sys-
tem or recent deep learning-based entity embeddings, while
explicitly using symbolic information lets it integrate new en-
tities without retraining.
1
Introduction
Online encyclopedias, knowledge bases, ontologies (e.g.
Wikipedia, Wikidata, Wordnet), alongside image and video
datasets with their associated label and category hierarchies
(e.g. Imagenet (Deng et al. 2009), Youtube-8M (Abu-El-
Haija et al. 2016), Kinetics (Kay et al. 2017)) offer an un-
precedented opportunity for incorporating symbolic repre-
sentations within distributed and neural representations in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence systems. Several approaches exist for
integrating rich symbolic structures within the behavior of
neural networks: a label hierarchy aware loss function that
relies on the ultrametric tree distance between labels (e.g.
it is worse to confuse sheepdogs and skyscrapers than it is
to confuse sheepdogs and poodles) (Wu, Tygert, and LeCun
2017), a loss function that trades off speciﬁcity for accu-
racy by incorporating hypo/hypernymy relations (Deng et
al. 2012), using NER types to constrain the behavior of an
Entity Linking system (Ling, Singh, and Weld 2015), or
more recently integrating explicit type constraints within a
decoder’s grammar for neural semantic parsing (Krishna-
murthy, Dasigi, and Gardner 2017). However, current ap-
proaches face several difﬁculties:
• Selection of the right symbolic information based on the
utility or information gain for a target task.
• Design of the representation for symbolic information (hi-
erarchy, grammar, constraints).
• Hand-labelling large amounts of data.
DeepType overcomes these difﬁculties by explicitly in-
tegrating symbolic information into the reasoning process
of a neural network with a type system that is automati-
cally designed without human effort for a target task. We
achieve this by reformulating the design problem into a
mixed integer problem: create a type system by selecting
roots and edges from an ontology that serve as types in a type
system, and subsequently train a neural network with it. The
original problem cannot be solved exactly, so we propose a
2-step algorithm:
1. heuristic search or stochastic optimization over the dis-
crete variable assignments controlling type system design,
using an Oracle and a Learnability heuristic to ensure that
design decisions will be easy to learn by a neural network,
and will provide improvements on the target task,
2. gradient descent to ﬁt classiﬁer parameters to predict the
behavior of the type system.
In order to validate the beneﬁts of our approach, we fo-
cus on applying DeepType to Entity Linking (EL), the task
of resolving ambiguous mentions of entities to their referent
entities in a knowledge base (KB) (e.g. Wikipedia). Specif-
ically we compare our results to state of the art systems on
three standard datasets (WikiDisamb30, CoNLL (YAGO),
TAC KBP 2010). We verify whether our approach can work
in multiple languages, and whether optimization of the type
system for a particular language generalizes to other lan-
guages1 by training our full system in a monolingual (En-
glish) and bilingual setup (English and French), and also
1e.g. Do we overﬁt to a particular set of symbolic structures use-
arXiv:1802.01021v1  [cs.CL]  3 Feb 2018

evaluate our Oracle (performance upper bound) on German
and Spanish test datasets. We compare stochastic optimiza-
tion and heuristic search to solve our mixed integer problem
by comparing the ﬁnal performance of systems whose type
systems came from different search methodologies. We also
investigate whether symbolic information is captured by us-
ing DeepType as pretraining for Named Entity Recognition
(NER) on two standard datasets (i.e. CoNLL 2003 (Sang and
Meulder 2003), OntoNotes 5.0 (CoNLL 2012) (Pradhan et
al. 2012)).
Our key contributions in this work are as follows:
• A system for integrating symbolic knowledge into the rea-
soning process of a neural network through a type system,
to constrain the behavior to respect the desired symbolic
structure, and automatically design the type system with-
out human effort.
• An approach to EL that uses type constraints, reduces
disambiguation resolution complexity from O(N 2) to
O(N), incorporates new entities into the system with-
out retraining, and outperforms all existing solutions by
a wide margin.
We release code for designing, evolving, and training neural
type systems2. Moreover, we observe that disambiguation
accuracy reaches 99.0% on CoNLL (YAGO) and 98.6% on
TAC KBP 2010 when entity types are predicted by an Or-
acle, suggesting that EL would be almost solved if we can
improve type prediction accuracy.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Sec-
tion 2 we introduce EL and EL with Types, in Section 3
we describe DeepType for EL, In Section 4 we provide ex-
perimental results for DeepType applied to EL and evidence
of cross-lingual and cross-domain transfer of the represen-
tation learned by a DeepType system. In Section 5 we relate
our work to existing approaches. Conclusions and directions
for future work are given in Section 6.
2
Task
Before we deﬁne how DeepType can be used to constrain
the outputs of a neural network using a type system, we will
ﬁrst deﬁne the goal task of Entity Linking.
Entity Linking
The goal is to recover the ground truth en-
tities in a KB referred to in a document by locating mentions
(text spans), and for each mention properly disambiguating
the referent entity. Commonly, a lookup table that maps each
mention to a proposal set of entities for each mention m:
Em = {e1, . . . , en} (e.g. “Washington” could mean Wash-
ington, D.C. or George Washington). Disambiguation is
ﬁnding for each mention m the a ground truth entity eGT in
Em. Typically, disambiguation operates according to two cri-
teria: in a large corpus, how often does a mention point to an
entity, LinkCount(m, e), and how often does entity e1 co-
occur with entity e2, an O(N 2) process, often named coher-
ful only in English, or can we discover a knowledge representation
that works across languages?
2http://github.com/openai/deeptype
ence (Milne and Witten 2008; Ferragina and Scaiella 2010;
Yamada et al. 2016).
Entity Linking with Types
In this work we extend the EL task to associate with each
entity a series of types (e.g. Person, Place, etc.) that if
known, would rule out invalid answers, and therefore ease
linking (e.g. the context now enables types to disambiguate
“Washington”). Knowledge of the types T associated with a
mention can also help prune entities from the the proposal
set, to produce a constrained set: Em,T ⊆Em. In a proba-
bilistic setting it is also possible to rank an entity e in doc-
ument x according to its likelihood under the type system
prediction and under the entity model:
P(e|x) ∝Ptype(types(e)|x) · Pentity(e|x, types(e)). (1)
In prior work, the 112 FIGER Types (Ling and Weld 2012)
were associated with entities to combine an NER tagger with
an EL system (Ling, Singh, and Weld 2015). In their work,
they found that regular NER types were unhelpful, while
ﬁner grain FIGER types improved system performance.
3
DeepType for Entity Linking
DeepType is a strategy for integrating symbolic knowledge
into the reasoning process of a neural network through a type
system. When we apply this technique to EL, we constrain
the behavior of an entity prediction model to respect the
symbolic structure deﬁned by types. As an example, when
we attempt to disambiguate “Jaguar” the beneﬁts of this ap-
proach are apparent: our decision can be based on whether
the predicted type is Animal or Road Vehicle as shown visu-
ally in Figure 1.
In this section, we will ﬁrst deﬁne key terminology, then
explain the model and its sub-components separately.
Terminology
Relation
Given some knowledge graph or feature set, a re-
lation is a set of inheritance rules that deﬁne membership or
exclusion from a particular group. For instance the relation
instance of(city) selects all children of the root city
connected by instance of as members of the group, de-
picted by outlined boxes in Figure 2.
Type
In this work a type is a label deﬁned by a relation
(e.g. IsHuman is the type applied to all children of Human
connected by instance of).
Type Axis
A set of mutually exclusive types (e.g.
IsHuman ∧IsPlant = {}).
Type System
A grouping of type axes, A, along with a
type labelling function: {t1, . . . , tk} = TypeLabeler(e, A).
For instance a type system with two axes {IsA, Topic}
assigns to George Washington: {Person, Politics},
and to Washington, D.C.: {Place, Geography}).
Model
To construct an EL system that uses type constraints we re-
quire: a type system, the associated type classiﬁer, and a

The prey saw a jaguar cross in the jungle.
The man saw a Jaguar speed on the highway.
Animal
Road vehicle
Region
Physical Object
1.0
0.0
Type Probability
0.999
5e-7
2e-7
0
0.5
Animal
Road vehicle
Region
Physical Object
4e-3
4e-3
0.35
0.24
Animal
Road vehicle
Region
Physical Object
0.25
0.56
1e-5
2e-3
Animal
Road vehicle
Region
Physical Object
1e-4
3e-2
1e-3
0.80
“jungle”
“jaguar”
“Jaguar”
“highway”
Sentence
Entity
jaguar
Jaguar 
jungle
jungle
jaguar
Jaguar
highway
Highway
Type
Animal Road vehicle
Region
Music
Animal
Road vehicle
Physical Object
Film
only link Prob.
0.29
0.60
0.35
0.17
0.29
0.60
0.85
0.04
Prob. w/. types
1.0
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
Figure 1: Example model output: “jaguar” refers to different entities depending on context. Predicting the type associated with
each word (e.g. animal, region, etc.) helps eliminate options that do not match, and recover the true entity. Bar charts give the
system’s belief over the type-axis “IsA”, and the table shows how types affects entity probabilities given by Wikipedia links.
Type relation root
Child entity, member
non-member entity
active edge
…
inactive edge
instance of
city
Paris
Fortaleza
Alhambra
instance of
Mona Lisa
located in
instance of
subclass of
human 
settlement
neighborhood
kibbutz
subclass of
Upper East Side
instance of
Figure 2: Deﬁning group membership with a knowledge
graph relation: children of root (city) via edge (instance of).
model for predicting and ranking entities given a mention.
Instead of assuming we receive a type system, classiﬁer, en-
tity prediction model, we will instead create the type sys-
tem and its classiﬁer starting from a given entity predic-
tion model and ontology with text snippets containing entity
mentions (e.g. Wikidata and Wikipedia). For simplicity we
use LinkCount(e, m) as our entity prediction model.
We restrict the types in our type systems to use a set of
parent-child relations over the ontology in Wikipedia and
Wikidata, where each type axis has a root node r and an
edge type g, that sets membership or exclusion from the axis
(e.g. r = human, e = instance of, splits entities into:
human vs. non-human3).
We then reformulate the problem into a mixed inte-
ger problem, where discrete variables control which roots
r1, . . . , rk and edge types g1, . . . , gk among all roots R and
edge types G will deﬁne type axes, while the continuous
variables θ parametrize a classiﬁer ﬁt to the type system.
Our goal in type system design is to select parent-child re-
lations that a classiﬁer easily predicts, and where the types
improve disambiguation accuracy.
Objective
To formally deﬁne our mixed integer problem, let us
ﬁrst denote A as the assignment for the discrete vari-
3Type “instance of:human” mimics the NER PER label.
ables that deﬁne our type system (i.e. boolean variables
deﬁning if a parent-child relation gets included in our
type system), θ as the parameters for our entity predic-
tion model and type classiﬁer, and Smodel(A, θ) as the
disambiguation accuracy given a test corpus containing
mentions M =

(m0, eGT
0
, Em0), . . . , (mn, eGT
n , Emn)
	
.
We now assume our model produces some score for
each proposed entity e given a mention m in a doc-
ument D, deﬁned EntityScore(e, m, D, A, θ). The pre-
dicted
entity
for
a
given
mention
is
thus:
e∗
=
argmaxe∈Em EntityScore(e, m, D, A, θ). If e∗= eGT, the
mention is disambiguated. Our problem is thus deﬁned as:
max
A max
θ
Smodel(A, θ) =
P
(m,eGT,Em)∈M
1eGT(e∗)
|M|
.
(2)
This original formulation cannot be solved exactly4. To
make this problem tractable we propose a 2-step algorithm:
1. Discrete Optimization of Type System: Heuristic search
or stochastic optimization over the discrete variables of
the type system, A, informed by a Learnability heuristic
and an Oracle.
2. Type classiﬁer: Gradient descent over continuous vari-
ables θ to ﬁt type classiﬁer and entity prediction model.
We will now explain in more detail discrete optimization
of a type system, our heuristics (Oracle and Learnability
heuristic), the type classiﬁer, and inference in this model.
Discrete Optimization of a Type System
The original objective Smodel(A, θ) cannot be solved ex-
actly, thus we rely on heuristic search or stochastic opti-
mization to ﬁnd suitable assignments for A. To avoid train-
ing an entire type classiﬁer and entity prediction model for
each evaluation of the objective function, we instead use a
4There are ∼22.4·107 choices if each Wikipedia article can be
a type within our type system.

proxy objective J for the discrete optimization5. To ensure
that maximizing J(A) also maximizes Smodel(A, θ), we in-
troduce a Learnability heuristic and an Oracle that quantify
the disambiguation power of a proposed type system, an es-
timate of how learnable the type axes in the selected solution
will be. We measure an upper bound for the disambiguation
power by measuring disambiguation accuracy Soracle for a
type classiﬁer Oracle over a test corpus.
To ensure that the additional disambiguation power of a
solution A translates in practice we weigh by an estimate of
solution’s learnability Learnability(A) improvements be-
tween Soracle and the accuracy of a system that predicts only
according to the entity prediction model6, Sgreedy.
Selecting a large number of type axes will provide strong
disambiguation power, but may lead to degenerate solu-
tions that are harder to train, slow down inference, and lack
higher-level concepts that provide similar accuracy with less
axes. We prevent this by adding a per type axis penalty of λ.
Combining these three terms gives us the equation for J:
J(A) =(Soracle −Sgreedy) · Learnability(A) +
Sgreedy −|A| · λ.
(3)
Oracle
Our Oracle is a methodology for abstracting away
machine learning performance from the underlying repre-
sentational power of a type system A. It operates on a test
corpus with a set of mentions, entities, and proposal sets:
mi, eGT
i
, Emi. The Oracle prunes each proposal set to only
contain entities whose types match those of eGT
i
, yielding
Em,oracle. Types fully disambiguate when |Em,oracle| = 1,
otherwise we use the entity prediction model to select the
right entity in the remainder set Emi,oracle:
Oracle(m) = argmax
e∈Em,oracle
Pentity(e|m, types(x)).
(4)
If Oracle(m)
=
eGT, the mention is disambiguated.
Oracle accuracy is denoted Soracle given a type sys-
tem over a test corpus containing mentions M
=

(m0, eGT
0
, Em0), . . . , (mn, eGT
n , Emn)
	
:
Soracle =
P
(m,eGT,Em)∈M 1eGT(Oracle(m))
|M|
.
(5)
Learnability
To ensure that disambiguation gains ob-
tained during the discrete optimization are available when
we train our type classiﬁer, we want to ensure that the types
selected are easy to predict. The Learnability heuristic em-
pirically measures the average performance of classiﬁers at
predicting the presence of a type within some Learnability-
speciﬁc training set.
To efﬁciently estimate Learnability for a full type sys-
tem we make an independence assumption and model it as
the mean of the Learnability for each individual axis, ig-
noring positive or negative transfer effects between differ-
ent type axes. This assumption lets us parallelize training of
5Training of the type classiﬁer takes ∼3 days on a Titan X Pas-
cal, while our Oracle can run over the test set in 100ms.
6For an entity prediction model based only on link counts, this
means always picking the most linked entity.
a
jaguar
cross the Jungle
saw
prey
Word embedding
Fully-connected layer
concat
dropout
FC
Is Animal?
휎
(a)
Stacked Bi-LSTM
dropout
…
Word 1
Word n
FC
FC
…
softmax
softmax
Type Axis 1
Type Axis k
…
(b)
Figure 3: Text window classiﬁer in (a) serves as type Learn-
ability estimator, while the network in (b) takes longer to
train, but discovers long-term dependencies to predict types
and jointly produces a distribution for multiple type axes.
simpler classiﬁers for each type axis. We measure the area
under its receiver operating characteristics curve (AUC) for
each classiﬁer and compute the type system’s learnability:
Learnability(A) =
P
t∈A AUC(t)
|A|
. We use a text window
classiﬁer trained over windows of 10 words before and after
a mention. Words are represented with randomly initialized
word embeddings; the classiﬁer is illustrated in Figure 3a.
AUC is averaged over 4 training runs for each type axis.
Type Classiﬁer
After the discrete optimization has completed we now have
a type system A. We can now use this type system to label
data in multiple languages from text snippets associated with
the ontology7, and supervize a Type classiﬁer.
The goal for this classiﬁer is to discover long-term de-
pendencies in the input data that let it reliably predict types
across many contexts and languages. For this reason we se-
lect a bidirectional-LSTM (Lample et al. 2016) with word,
preﬁx, and sufﬁx embeddings as done in (Andor et al. 2016).
Our network is shown pictorially in Figure 3b. Our clas-
siﬁer is trained to minimize the negative log likelihood of
the per-token types for each type axis in the document D
with L tokens: −Pk
i=1 log Pi(ti,1, . . . , ti,L|D). When us-
ing Wikipedia as our source of text snippets our label super-
vision is partial8, so we make a conditional independence
assumption about our predictions and use Softmax as our
output activation: −Pk
i=1
PL
j=1 log Pi(ti,j|wj, D).
Inference
At inference-time we incorporate classiﬁer belief into our
decision process by ﬁrst running it over the full context
and obtaining a belief over each type axis for each in-
put word w0, . . . , wL. For each mention m covering words
wx, . . . , wy, we obtain the type conditional probability for
all type axes i: {Pi(·|wx, D), . . . , Pi(·|wy, D)}. In multi-
word mentions we must combine beliefs over multiple to-
kens x . . . y: the product of the beliefs over the mention’s
tokens is correct but numerically unstable and slightly less
7Wikidata’s ontology has cross-links with Wikipedia, IMDB,
Discogs, MusicBrainz, and other encyclopaedias with snippets.
8We obtain type labels only on the intra-wiki link anchor text.

performant than max-over-time9, which we denote for the
i-th type axis: Pi,∗(·|m, D).
The score se,m,D,A,θ = EntityScore(e, m, D, A, θ) of
an entity e given these conditional probability distributions
P1,∗(·|m, D), . . . , Pk,∗(·|m, D), and the entities’ types in
each axis t1, . . . , tk can then be combined to rank entities
according to how predicted they were by both the entity pre-
diction model and the type system. The chosen entity e∗
for a mention m is chosen by taking the option that maxi-
mizes the score among the Em possible entities; the equa-
tion for scoring and e∗is given below, with PLink(e|m) =
LinkCount(m,e)
P
j∈Em LinkCount(m,j), αi a per type axis smoothing param-
eter, β is a smoothing parameter over all types:
se,m,D,A,θ =PLink(e|m) ·

1 −β + β ·
( k
Y
i=1
(1 −αi + αi · Pi,∗(ti|m, D))
) 
.
(6)
4
Results
Type System Discovery
In the following experiments we evaluate the behavior
of different search methodologies for type system discov-
ery: which method best scales to large numbers of types,
achieves high accuracy on the target EL task, and whether
the choice of search impacts learnability by a classiﬁer or
generalisability to held-out EL datasets.
For the following experiments we optimize DeepType’s
type system over a held-out set of 1000 randomly sam-
pled articles taken from the Feb. 2017 English Wikipedia
dump, with the Learnability heuristic text window classiﬁers
trained only on those articles. The type classiﬁer is trained
jointly on English and French articles, totalling 800 million
tokens for training, 1 million tokens for validation, sampled
equally from either language.
We restrict roots R and edges G to the most common
1.5·105 entities that are entity parents through wikipedia
category or instance of edges, and eliminate type
axes where Learnability(·) is 0, leaving 53,626 type axes.
Human Type System Baseline
To isolate discrete opti-
mization from system performance and gain perspective on
the difﬁculty and nature of the type system design we in-
corporate a human-designed type system. Human design-
ers have access to the full set of entities and relations
in Wikipedia and Wikidata, and compose different inheri-
tance rules through Boolean algebra to obtain higher level
concepts (e.g. woman
=
IsHuman ∧IsFemale, or
animal = IsTaxon∧¬{IsHuman∨IsPlant}10). The
ﬁnal human system uses 5 type axes11, and 1218 inheritance
rules.
9The choice of max-over-time is empirically motivated: we
compared product mean, min, max, and found that max was com-
parable to mean, and slightly better than the alternatives.
10Taxon is the general parent of living items in Wikidata.
11IsA, Topic, Location, Continent, and Time.
Search methodologies
Beam Search and Greedy selection
We iteratively con-
struct a type system by choosing among all remaining type
axes and evaluating whether the inclusion of a new type axis
improves our objective: J(A ∪{tj}) > J(A). We use a
beam size of b and stop the search when all solutions stop
growing.
Cross-Entropy Method
(CEM) (Rubinstein 1999) is a
stochastic optimization procedure applicable to the selection
of types. We begin with a probability vector ⃗P0 set to pstart,
and at each iteration we sample MCEM vectors ⃗s from the
Bernoulli distribution given by ⃗Pi, and measure each sam-
ple’s ﬁtness with Eq. 3. The NCEM highest ﬁtness elements
are our winning population St at iteration t. Our probabili-
ties are ﬁt to St giving Pt+1 =
P
⃗s∈St ⃗s
NCEM . The optimization is
complete when the probability vector is binary.
Genetic Algorithm
The best subset of type axes can
be found by representing type axes as genes carried by
Npopulation individuals in a population undergoing muta-
tions and crossovers (Harvey 2009) over G generations. We
select individuals using Eq. 3 as our ﬁtness function.
Search Methodology Performance Impact
To validate
that λ controls type system size, and ﬁnd the best trade-
off between size and accuracy, we experiment with a range
of values and ﬁnd that accuracy grows more slowly below
0.00007, while system size still increases.
From this point on we keep λ = 0.00007, and we com-
pare the number of iterations needed by different search
methods to converge, against two baselines: the empty set
and the mean performance of 100 randomly sampled sets of
128 types (Table 1a). We observe that the performance of
stochastic optimizers GA and CEM is similar to heuristic
search, but requires orders of magnitude less function eval-
uations.
Next, we compare the behavior of the different search
methods to a human designed system and state of the art ap-
proaches on three standard datasets (i.e. WIKI-DISAMB30
(WKD30) (Ferragina and Scaiella 2010)12, CoNLL(YAGO)
(Hoffart et al. 2011), and TAC KBP 2010 (Ji et al. 2010)),
along with test sets built by randomly sampling 1000 ar-
ticles from Wikipedia’s February 2017 dump in English,
French, German, and Spanish which were excluded from
training the classiﬁers. Table 1c has Oracle performance for
the different search methods on the test sets, where we re-
port disambiguation accuracy per annotation. A LinkCount
baseline is included that selects the mention’s most fre-
quently linked entity13. All search techniques’ Oracle ac-
12We apply the preprocessing and link pruning as (Ferragina and
Scaiella 2010) to ensure the comparison is fair.
13Note that LinkCount accuracy is stronger than the one found
in (Ferragina and Scaiella 2010) or (Milne and Witten 2008) be-
cause newer Wikipedia dumps improve link coverage and reduce
link distribution noisiness.

Table 1: Method comparisons. Highest value in bold, excluding oracles.
(a) Type system discovery method comparison
Approach
Evals
Accuracy
Items
BeamSearch
5.12 · 107
97.84
130
Greedy
6.40 · 106
97.83
130
GA
116, 000
96.959
128
CEM
43, 000
96.26
89
Random
N/A
92.9 ± 0.28
128
No types
0
92.10
0
(b) NER F1 score comparison for DeepType pretraining vs. baselines.
Model
CoNLL 2003
OntoNotes
Dev
Test
Dev
Test
Bi-LSTM
-
76.29
-
77.77
(Chiu and Nichols 2015)
Bi-LSTM-CNN + emb + lex
94.31
91.62
84.57
86.28
(Chiu and Nichols 2015)
Bi-LSTM (Ours)
89.49
83.40
82.75
81.03
Bi-LSTM-CNN (Ours)
90.54
84.74
83.17
82.35
Bi-LSTM-CNN (Ours) + types
93.54
88.67
85.11
83.12
(c) Entity Linking model Comparison. Signiﬁcant improvements over prior work denoted by ∗for p < 0.05, and ∗∗for p < 0.01.
Model
enwiki
frwiki
dewiki
eswiki
WKD30
CoNLL
TAC 2010
M&W(Milne and Witten 2008)
84.6
-
-
TagMe (Ferragina and Scaiella 2010)
83.224
80.711
90.9
-
-
(Globerson et al. 2016)
-
91.7
87.2
(Yamada et al. 2016)
-
91.5
85.2
NTEE (Yamada et al. 2017)
-
-
87.7
LinkCount only
89.064∗∗
92.013
92.013∗∗
89.980
82.710
68.614
81.485
Ours
manual
94.331∗∗
92.967
91.888∗∗
93.108∗∗
90.743∗
manual (oracle)
97.734
98.026
98.632
98.178
95.872
98.217
98.601
greedy
93.725∗∗
92.984
92.375∗∗
94.151∗∗
90.850∗
greedy (oracle)
98.002
97.222
97.915
98.246
97.293
98.982
98.278
CEM
93.707∗∗
92.415
92.247∗∗
93.962∗∗
90.302∗
CEM (oracle)
97.500
96.648
97.480
97.599
96.481
99.005
96.767
GA
93.684∗∗
92.027
92.062∗∗
94.879∗∗
90.312∗
GA (oracle)
97.297
96.783
97.408
97.609
96.268
98.461
96.663
GA (English only)
93.029∗∗
91.743∗∗
93.701∗∗
-
curacy signiﬁcantly improve over LinkCount, and achieve
near perfect accuracy on all datasets (97-99%); furthermore
we notice that performance between the held-out Wikipedia
sets and standard datasets sets is similar, supporting the
claim that the discovered type systems generalize well. We
note that machine discovered type systems outperform hu-
man designed systems: CEM beats the human type sys-
tem on English Wikipedia, and all search method’s type
systems outperform human systems on WIKI-DISAMB30,
CoNLL(YAGO), and TAC KBP 2010.
Search Methodology Learnability Impact
To under-
stand whether the type systems produced by different search
methods can be trained similarly well we compare the type
system built by GA, CEM, greedy, and the one constructed
manually. EL Disambiguation accuracy is shown in Table
1c, where we compare with recent deep-learning based ap-
proaches (Globerson et al. 2016), or recent work by Ya-
mada et al. for embedding word and entities (Yamada et
al. 2016), or documents and entities (Yamada et al. 2017),
along with count and coherence based techniques Tagme
(Ferragina and Scaiella 2010) and Milne & Witten (Milne
and Witten 2008). To obtain Tagme’s Feb. 2017 Wikipedia
accuracy we query the public web API14 available in Ger-
man and English, while other methods can be compared on
CoNLL(YAGO) and TAC KBP 2010. Models trained on a
human type system outperform all previous approaches to
entity linking, while type systems discovered by machines
lead to even higher performance on all datasets except En-
glish Wikipedia.
Cross-Lingual Transfer
Type systems are deﬁned over Wikidata/Wikipedia, a multi-
lingual knowledge base/encyclopaedia, thus type axes are
language independent and can produce cross-lingual super-
vision. To verify whether this cross-lingual ability is use-
ful we train a type system on an English dataset and ver-
ify whether it can successfully supervize French data. We
also measure using the Oracle (performance upper bound)
whether the type system is useful in Spanish or German. Or-
acle performance across multiple languages does not appear
to degrade when transferring to other languages (Table 1c).
We also notice that training in French with an English type
system still yields improvements over LinkCount for CEM,
greedy, and human systems.
14https://tagme.d4science.org/tagme/

Because multi-lingual training might oversubscribe the
model, we veriﬁed if monolingual would outperform bilin-
gual training: we compare GA in English + French with only
English (last row of Table 1c). Bilingual training does not
appear to hurt, and might in fact be helpful.
We follow-up by inspecting whether the bilingual word
vector space led to shared representations: common nouns
have their English-French translation close-by, while proper
nouns do not (French and US politicians cluster separately).
Named Entity Recognition Transfer
The goal of our NER experiment is to verify whether Deep-
Type produces a type sensitive language representation use-
ful for transfer to other downstream tasks. To measure this
we pre-train a type classiﬁer with a character-CNN and word
embeddings as inputs, following (Kim et al. 2015), and re-
place the output layer with a linear-chain CRF (Lample et al.
2016) to ﬁne-tune to NER data. Our model’s F1 scores when
transferring to the CoNLL 2003 NER task and OntoNotes
5.0 (CoNLL 2012) split are given in Table 1b. We com-
pare with two baselines that share the architecture but are
not pre-trained, along with the current state of the art (Chiu
and Nichols 2015).
We see positive transfer on Ontonotes and CoNLL: our
baseline Bi-LSTM strongly outperforms (Chiu and Nichols
2015)’s baseline, while pre-training gives an additional 3-4
F1 points, with our best model outperforming the state of
the art on the OntoNotes development split. While our base-
line LSTM-CRF performs better than in the literature, our
strongest baseline (CNN+LSTM+CRF) does not match the
state of the art with a lexicon. We ﬁnd that DeepType al-
ways improves over baselines and partially recovers lexicon
performance gains, but does not fully replace lexicons.
5
Related Work
Neural Network Reasoning with Symbolic structures
Several approaches exist for incorporating symbolic struc-
tures into the reasoning process of a neural network by de-
signing a loss function that is deﬁned with a label hierar-
chy. In particular the work of (Deng et al. 2012) trades off
speciﬁcity for accuracy, by leveraging the hyper/hyponymy
relation to make a model aware of different granularity lev-
els. Our work differs from this approach in that we design
our type system within an ontology to meet speciﬁc accu-
racy goals, while they make the accuracy/speciﬁcity tradeoff
at training time, with a ﬁxed structure. More recently (Wu,
Tygert, and LeCun 2017) use a hierarchical loss to increase
the penalty for distant branches of a label hierarchy using the
ultrametric tree distance. We also aim to capture the most
important aspects of the symbolic structure and shape our
loss function accordingly, however our loss shaping is a re-
sult of discrete optimization and incorporates a learnability
heuristic to choose aspects that can easily be acquired.
A different direction for integrating structure stems from
constraining model outputs, or enforcing a grammar. In the
work of (Ling, Singh, and Weld 2015), the authors use
NER and FIGER types to ensure that an EL model follows
the constraints given by types. We also use a type system
and constrain our model’s output, however our type system
is task-speciﬁc and designed by a machine with a disam-
biguation accuracy objective, and unlike the authors we ﬁnd
that types improve accuracy. The work of (Krishnamurthy,
Dasigi, and Gardner 2017) uses a type-aware grammar to
constrain the decoding of a neural semantic parser. Our work
makes use of type constraints during decoding, however the
grammar and types in their system require human engineer-
ing to ﬁt each individual semantic parsing task, while our
type systems are based on online encyclopaedias and on-
tologies, with applications beyond EL.
Neural Entity Linking
Current approaches to entity link-
ing make extensive use of deep neural networks, distributed
representations. In (Globerson et al. 2016) a neural net-
work uses attention to focus on contextual entities to dis-
ambiguate. While our work does not make use of attention,
RNNs allow context information to affect disambiguation
decisions. In the work of (Yamada et al. 2016) and (Yamada
et al. 2017), the authors adopt a distributed representation
of context which either models words and entities, or doc-
uments and entities such that distances between vectors in-
forms disambiguation. We also rely on word and document
vectors produced by RNNs, however entities are not explic-
itly represented in our neural network, and we use context to
predict entity types, thereby allowing us to incorporate new
entities without retraining.
6
Conclusion
In this work we introduce DeepType, a method for integrat-
ing symbolic knowledge into the reasoning process of a neu-
ral network. We’ve proposed a mixed integer reformulation
for jointly designing type systems and training a classiﬁer
for a target task, and empirically validated that when this
technique is applied to EL it is effective at integrating sym-
bolic information in the neural network reasoning process.
When pre-training with DeepType for NER, we observe im-
proved performance over baselines and a new state of the art
on the OntoNotes dev set, suggesting there is cross-domain
transfer: symbolic information is incorporated in the neural
network’s distributed representation. Furthermore we ﬁnd
that type systems designed by machines outperform those
designed by humans on three benchmark datasets, which
is attributable to incorporating learnability and target task
performance goals within the design process. Our approach
naturally enables multilingual training, and our experiments
show that bilingual training improves over monolingual, and
type systems optimized for English operate at similar accu-
racies in French, German, and Spanish, supporting the claim
that the type system optimization leads to the discovery of
high level cross-lingual concepts useful for knowledge rep-
resentation. We compare different search techniques, and
observe that stochastic optimization has comparable perfor-
mance to heuristic search, but with orders of magnitude less
objective function evaluations.
The main contributions of this work are a joint formu-
lation for designing and integrating symbolic information
into neural networks, that enable us to constrain the out-

puts to obey symbolic structure, and an approach to EL that
uses type constraints. Our approach reduces EL resolution
complexity from O(N 2) to O(N), while allowing new en-
tities to be incorporated without retraining, and we ﬁnd on
three standard datasets (WikiDisamb30, CoNLL (YAGO),
TAC KBP 2010) that our approach outperforms all existing
solutions by a wide margin, including approaches that rely
on a human-designed type system (Ling, Singh, and Weld
2015) and the more recent work by Yamada et al. for embed-
ding words and entities (Yamada et al. 2016), or document
and entities (Yamada et al. 2017). As a result of our experi-
ments, we observe that disambiguation accuracy using Ora-
cles reaches 99.0% on CoNLL (YAGO) and 98.6% on TAC
KBP 2010, suggesting that EL would be almost solved if we
can close the gap between type classiﬁers and the Oracle.
The results presented in this work suggest many direc-
tions for future research: we may test how DeepType can
be applied to other problems where incorporating symbolic
structure is beneﬁcial, whether making type system design
more expressive by allowing hierarchies can help close the
gap between model and Oracle accuracy, and seeing if addi-
tional gains can be obtained by relaxing the classiﬁer’s con-
ditional independence assumption.
