arXiv:1501.05724v1  [cs.AI]  23 Jan 2015
Uncertainty in Ontology Matching: a Decision
Rule-based Approach
Amira Essaid1,2, Arnaud Martin2, Gr´egory Smits2, and Boutheina Ben
Yaghlane3
1 LARODEC, University of Tunis, ISG Tunis, Tunisia
2IRISA, University of Rennes1, Lannion, France
3 LARODEC, University of Carthage, IHEC Carthage, Tunisia
Abstract. Considering the high heterogeneity of the ontologies pub-
lished on the web, ontology matching is a crucial issue whose aim is to
establish links between an entity of a source ontology and one or several
entities from a target ontology. Perfectible similarity measures, consid-
ered as sources of information, are combined to establish these links. The
theory of belief functions is a powerful mathematical tool for combining
such uncertain information. In this paper, we introduce a decision pro-
cess based on a distance measure to identify the best possible matching
entities for a given source entity.
Keywords: Theory of belief functions, decision rule, Jousselme dis-
tance, ontology matching.
1
Introduction
This paper proposes a decision rule based on a distance measure. This rule
calculates the distance between a combined mass function and a categorical mass
function and keep the hypotheses with the lowest distance. We propose this rule
for its ability to give decision on composite hypotheses as well as its convenience
to our domain of application, namely the semantic web and particularly the
ontology matching where decision making is an important step.
Ontology matching is the process of ﬁnding for each entity of a source ontol-
ogy O1 its corresponding entity in a target ontology O2. This process can focus
on ﬁnding simple mappings (1:1) or complex mappings (1:n or n:1). The ﬁrst
consists in matching only one entity of O1 with only one entity of O2 whereas
the second consists in ﬁnding either for one entity of O1 its multiple correspon-
dences of entities in O2 or matching multiple entities of O1 with only one entity
of O2. We are interested in this paper in ﬁnding simple mappings as well as the
complex one of the form (1:n).
The matching process is performed through the application of matching tech-
niques which are mainly based on the use of similarity measures. Since no similar-
ity measure applied individually is able to give a perfect alignment, the exploita-
tion of the complementarity of diﬀerent similarity measures can yield to a better

2
Amira Essaid et al.
alignment. Combining these similarity measures may raise conﬂicts between the
diﬀerent results which should be modeled and resolved.
We suggest to use the theory of belief functions [4,12] as a tool for modeling
the ontology matching and especially for combining the results of the diﬀerent
similarity measures. Due to the fact that we are working on an uncertain aspect
and we are interested in ﬁnding complex matching which can be viewed as ﬁnding
composite hypotheses formed from entities of two ontologies, we suggest to apply
our proposed decision rule on the combined information and to choose for each
entity of the source ontology, the entities of the target ontology with the lowest
distance.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: we are interested in sec-
tion 2 in deﬁning the ontology matching process. In section 3, we recall the basic
concepts underlying the theory of belief functions. In section 4, we present our
decision rule based on a distance measure. Section 5 is devoted to the description
of the credibilistic decision process for matching ontologies as well as the appli-
cation of our proposed decision rule. Section 6 discusses an overview of some
ontology matching approaches dealing with uncertainty. Finally, we conclude in
section 7 and present future work.
2
Ontology Matching
The open nature of the semantic web [2] tends to encourage the development, for
a domain of interest, of heterogeneous ontologies which diﬀer from each other at
the terminological level and/or the representational one. In order to mitigate the
eﬀect of semantic heterogeneity and to assure interoperability between applica-
tions that make use of these ontologies, a key challenge is to deﬁne an eﬃcient
and reliable matching between ontologies [7].
Formally, ontology matching is deﬁned as a function A = f(O1, O2, A’, p, r).
In fact, from a pair of ontologies to match O1 and O2, an input alignment A’, a
set of parameters p, a set of oracles and resources r, the function f returns an
alignment A between these ontologies. We note that parameters and resources
refer to thresholds and external resources respectively.
With the new vision of the web that tends to make applications understand-
able by machines, an automatic and semi automatic discovery of correspondences
between ontologies is required. The reader may refer to [7] for an exhaustive state
of the art of ontology matching techniques.
3
The Theory of Belief Functions
3.1
Deﬁnitions
The frame of discernment Θ = {θ1, θ2, . . . , θn} is a ﬁnite non empty set of n
elementary and mutually exclusive and exhaustive hypotheses related to a given
problem. The power set of Θ, denoted by 2Θ is deﬁned as the set of singleton

Uncertainty in Ontology Matching: a Decision Rule-based Approach
3
hypotheses of Θ, all possible disjunctions of these hypotheses as well as the
empty set.
The basic belief assignment (bba) is the mapping from elements of the power
set 2Θ onto [0, 1] that satisﬁes:
m(∅) = 0,
X
A⊆Θ
m(A) = 1.
(1)
The value m(A) quantiﬁes the part of belief exactly committed to the subset
A of Θ.
A focal element A is an element of 2Θ such that m(A) ̸= 0.
From a given bba , the corresponding credibility and plausibility functions
are respectively deﬁned as:
bel(A) =
X
B⊆A,B̸=∅
m(B).
(2)
and
pl(A) =
X
A∩B̸=∅
m(B).
(3)
The value bel(A) expresses the total belief that one allocates to A whereas
the pl(A) quantiﬁes the maximum amount of belief that might support a subset
A of Θ.
Some special bbas are deﬁned in the theory of belief functions. Among them,
the categorical bba which is a bba with a unique focal element diﬀerent from the
frame of discernment Θ and the empty set ∅, and which is deﬁned as mX(X) = 1.
3.2
Combination of Belief Functions
Let S1 and S2 be two distinct and independent sources providing two diﬀerent
bbas m1 and m2 deﬁned on the same frame of discernment Θ. These two bbas
are combined by either the conjunctive rule of combination or the disjunctive
rule.
– The conjunctive rule of combination is used when the two sources are fully
reliable. This rule is deﬁned in [14] as :
m1 ∩⃝2(A) =
X
B∩C=A
m1(B) × m2(C).
(4)
The conjunctive rule can be seen as an unnormalized Dempster’s rule of
combination [4] which is deﬁned by:
m1⊕2(A) =











X
B∩C=A
m1(B) × m2(C)
1−
X
B∩C=∅
m1(B) × m2(C)
∀A ⊆Θ, A ̸= ∅
0
if A = ∅
(5)

4
Amira Essaid et al.
The Dempster’s rule of combination is normalized through 1−
X
B∩C=∅
m1(B)×
m2(C) and it works under the closed world assumption where all the possible
hypotheses of the studied problem are supposed to be enumerated on Θ.
– The disjunctive rule is used when at least one of the sources is reliable
without knowing which one of them. It is deﬁned in [14] by:
m1 ∪⃝2(A) =
X
B∪C=A
m1(B) × m2(C).
(6)
3.3
Decision Making
Combining information provided by the diﬀerent sources leads to a global one
that has to be analyzed in order to choose the most likely hypothesis. Decision
making can be held in two diﬀerent ways.
– Decision on singletons: It means that the most likely solution to a given
problem is one of the hypothesis of Θ. To determine this most likely solution,
one may:
• Maximize the credibility: It consists on retaining the most credible hy-
pothesis by giving the minimum of chances to each of the disjunctions.
• Maximize the plausibility: It consists on retaining the most plausible
hypothesis by giving the maximum of chances to each of the singletons.
• Maximize the pignistic probability: It was introduced in [15] and it is
the common used decision function because it represents a compromise
between the maximum of credibility and the maximum of plausibility.
The pignistic probability consists on choosing the most probable sin-
gleton hypothesis by dividing the mass attributed to each hypothesis,
diﬀerent from the singleton hypothesis, by the hypotheses composing it.
It is given for each A ∈2Θ, A ̸= ∅by:
betP(X) =
X
A∈2Θ,X∈A
m(A)
|A|(1 −m(∅)).
(7)
where |A| represents the cardinality of A.
– Decision on unions of singletons: Few works were interested in making de-
cision on composite hypotheses ([5], [1], [9]). The approach proposed in [1]
helps to choose a solution of a given problem by considering all the elements
contained in 2Θ. This approach weights the decision functions listed previ-
ously by an utility function depending on the cardinality of the elements.
For each A ∈2Θ we have:
A = argmax
X∈2Θ (md(X)pl(X))
(8)
where md is a mass deﬁned by:
md(X) = KdλX(
1
|X|r )
(9)

Uncertainty in Ontology Matching: a Decision Rule-based Approach
5
r is a parameter in [0, 1] for choosing a decision. When r is equal to 0 it reﬂects a
total indecision and when it is equal to 1 it means that we decide on a singleton.
The value λX is used to integrate the lack of knowledge about one of the elements
X of 2Θ. Kd is a normalization factor.
4
Decision Rule Based on a Distance Measure
We aim in this paper to propose a decision rule helping us to choose the most
likely hypothesis for a given problem after combining the information provided
by diﬀerent sources of information, i.e. bbas. This rule, based on a distance
measure, is inspired from [13] and is deﬁned as:
A = argmin(d(m, mX))
(10)
The proposed rule aims at calculating the distance between m which is a com-
bined bba (obtained after applying a combination rule) and mX is the categorical
bba of X such that X ∈2Θ. The most likely hypothesis to choose is the hypoth-
esis whose categorical bba is the nearest to the combined bba.
In order to make a decision:
– First, we have to identify the elements for which we have to construct the
categorical bba. In fact, we choose to work on elements of 2Θ such that the
cardinality of the element is less or equal to 2. This ﬁltering is due to the
fact that we want to limit the number of elements to be considered especially
with a power set 2Θ of large cardinality.
– Then, we construct the categorical bba for each of the selected element.
– Finally, we calculate the distance between the combined bba and each of
the categorical bbas. The minimum distance is kept and our decision corre-
sponds to the categorical bba’s element having the lowest distance with the
combined bba.
For the calculation of the distance between the bbas, we use the Jousselme
distance [8] which is speciﬁc to the theory of belief functions because of the
matrix D deﬁned on 2Θ. This distance has the advantage to take into account
the cardinality of the focal elements. This distance is deﬁned for two bbas m1
and m2 as follows:
d(m1, m2) =
r
1
2(m1 −m2)tD(m1 −m2)
(11)
where D is a matrix based on Jaccard distance as a similarity measure between
focal elements. This matrix is deﬁned as:
D(A, B) =
(
1
if A=B=∅
|A∩B|
|A∪B| ∀A, B ∈2Θ
(12)

6
Amira Essaid et al.
To illustrate the proposed decision rule, we take the following example. Let’s
consider the frame of discernment Θ = {θ1, θ2, θ3}. The list of elements for which
we have to construct their categorical bba are {θ1, θ2, θ3, θ1 ∪θ2, θ1 ∪θ3, θ2 ∪θ3}.
Suppose that we have two sources S1 and S2 providing two diﬀerent bbas m1
and m2 deﬁned on the frame of discernment Θ. The table 1 illustrates these two
bbas as well as their combined bba obtained after applying the Dempster’s rule
of combination.
Table 1. bba1 and bba2 and their combined bba
bba1
bba2
combined bba
m1(θ1) = 0.4
m2(θ2) = 0.2
mcomb(θ1) = 0.3478
m1(θ2 ∪θ3) = 0.2 m2(Θ) = 0.8
mcomb(θ2) = 0.1304
m1(Θ) = 0.4
mcomb(Θ) = 0.3478
mcomb(θ2 ∪θ3) = 0.1739
The application of our proposed decision rule gives the results illustrated
in table 2 where it shows for every element the distance obtained between the
categorical bba of this element and the combined bba.
Table 2. Results of the proposed decision rule
Element Distance
θ1
0.537
θ2
0.647
θ3
0.741
θ1 ∪θ2
0.472
θ1 ∪θ3
0.536
θ2 ∪θ3
0.529
Based on the results obtained in table 2, the most likely hypothesis to choose
is the element θ1 ∪θ2.
5
Credibilistic Decision Process for Ontology Matching
In [6], we proposed a credibilistic decision process for ontology matching. In the
following, we describe this process occurring mainly in three steps, then we will
apply the proposed decision rule in order to ﬁnd a correspondence for a given
entity of the source ontology.

Uncertainty in Ontology Matching: a Decision Rule-based Approach
7
1- Matching ontologies: We apply three name-based techniques (Levenshtein
distance, Jaro distance and Hamming distance) for matching two ontologies O1
and O2 related to conference organization1. We have the following results:
Table 3. Results of matching the entity ConferenceMember of O1 with entities of O2
method
e2 ∈O2
n
Levenshtein Conference fees 0.687
Jaro
Conference
0.516
Hamming
Conference
0.625
This table shows that using the levenshtein distance, the entity Conference-
Member matches to Conference fees with a conﬁdence value of 0.687.
2- Modeling the matching under the theory of belief functions: We are
interested here in modeling the matching results obtained in the previous step
under the theory of belief functions.
– Frame of discernment: It contains all the entities of the target ontology O2
for which a corresponding entity in the source ontology O1 exists.
– Source of information: Every correspondence established by one of the match-
ing techniques is considered as an information given by a source.
– Basic Belief Assignments (bba): Once we get all the correspondences, we
keep only those where an entity source e1 ∈O1 has a correspondence
when applying the three techniques. Then, we construct for each of the
selected correspondence its mass function. The similarity measure obtained
after applying a matching technique is interpreted as a mass. Due to the
fact that for a source of information, the sum of mass functions has to be
equal to 1, a mass will be aﬀected to the total ignorance. Let’s take the
results illustrated in Table 3. In this table, we have information provided
by three diﬀerent sources respectively denoted by Se1
lev, Se1
jars and Se1
hamming,
where e1 = ConferenceMember. The bba related to the source Se1
lev is:
mSe1
lev(Conference fees) = 0.687 and mSe1
lev(Θ) = 1 −0.687 = 0.313. The
bbas for the other sources are constructed in the same manner.
– Combination: Let’s resume the obtained bbas of the three sources. We have:
• mSe1
lev(Conference fees) = 0.687 and mSe1
lev(Θ) = 0.313
• mSe1
jaro(Conference) = 0.516 and mSe1
jaro(Θ) = 0.484
• mSe1
hamming(Conference) = 0.625 and mSe1
hamming(Θ) = 0.375
Once we apply the Dempster’s rule of combination, we obtain the following
results:
• me1
comb(Conference fees) = 0.2849
• me1
comb(Conference) = 0.5853
• me1
comb(Θ) = 0.1298
1 http ://oaei.ontologymatching.org/2013/conference/index.html

8
Amira Essaid et al.
3- Decision Making: Based on the combined bba which takes into account
all the information provided by the diﬀerent sources, we will be able in this
step to choose for each entity of the source ontology its corresponding in the
target ontology. For example, for the entity ConferenceMember, we will be able
to decide if we have to match it with Conference fees or Conference or simply we
will not have a precise decision but rather an uncertain one where we can match
ConferenceMember to Conference fees∪Conference. We are interested in our
credibilistic process to get an uncertain decision. For this purpose, we apply our
proposed decision rule. First, we construct the categorical bba of elements having
a cardinality equal to 2. For the example illustrated in ﬁgure 1 we have:
– m(conference document ∪conference) = 1
– m(conference ∪conference fees) = 1
– m(conference volume ∪committee) = 1
– . . .
Then we calculate the distance between the combined bba obtained previ-
ously and each of the categorical bba. Our best alignment corresponds to the
nearest element to the combined bba in other words the element whose cate-
gorical bba has the minimum distance with the combined bba. For the entity
ConferenceMember of the ontology O1 we ﬁnd conference fees ∪conference
with a distance equal to 0.52. This process is repeated for each entity of the
source ontology in order to identify the most signiﬁcant correspondences in the
target ontology.
6
Related Works
Only few ontology matching methods have considered that dealing with uncer-
tainty in a matching process is a crucial issue. We are interested in this section
to present some of them where the probability theory [11] and the Dempster-
Shafer theory ([3],[10],[16]) are the main mathematical models used. In [11],
the authors proposed an approach for matching ontologies based on bayesian
networks which is an extension of the BayesOWL. The BayesOWL consists in
translating an OWL ontology into a bayesian network (BN) through the appli-
cation of a set of rules and procedures. In order to match two ontologies, ﬁrst
the source and target ontologies are translated into BN1 and BN2 respectively.
The mapping is processed between the two ontologies as an evidential reason-
ing between BN1 and BN2. The authors assume that the similarity information
between a concept C1 from a source ontology and a concept C2 from a target
ontology is measured by the joint probability distribution P(C1, C2).
In [3], the author viewed ontology matching as a decision making process
that must be handled under uncertainty. He presented a generic framework that
uses Dempster-Shafer theory as a mathematical model for representing uncertain
mappings as well as combining the results of the diﬀerent matchers. Given two
ontologies O1 and O2, the frame of discernment represents the Cartesian product
e x O2 where each hypothesis is the couple < e, ei > such as e ∈O1 and

Uncertainty in Ontology Matching: a Decision Rule-based Approach
9
ei ∈O2. Each matcher is considered as an expert that returns a similarity
measure converted into a basic belief mass. The Dempster rule of combination is
used to combine the results provided by a matcher. The pairs with plausibility
and belief below a given threshold are discarded. The remaining pairs represent
the best mapping for a given entity.
Although, the authors in [10] handle uncertainty in the matching process,
their proposal diﬀer from that proposed in [3]. In fact, they use the Dempster-
Shafer theory in a speciﬁc context of question answering where including un-
certainty may yield to better results. Not like in [3], they did not give in depth
how the frame of discernment is constructed. In addition to that, uncertainty
is handled only once the matching is processed. In fact, the similarity matrix
is constructed for each matcher. Based on this matrix, the results are modeled
using the theory of belief functions and then they are combined.
In [16], the authors focused on integrating uncertainty when matching ontolo-
gies. The proposed method modeled and combined the outputs of three ontology
matchers. For an entity e ∈O1, the frame of discernment Θ is composed of map-
pings between e and all the concepts in an ontology O2. The diﬀerent similarity
values obtained through the application of the three matchers are interpreted
as mass values. Then, a combination of the results of the three matchers is
performed.
7
Conclusion and Perspectives
In this paper, we proposed a decision rule based on a distance measure. This
decision rule helps to choose the most likely hypothesis for a given problem.
It is based on the calculation of the distance between a combined bba and a
categorical bba. We apply this rule in our proposed credibilistic decision process
for the ontology matching. First, we match two ontologies. Then, the obtained
correspondences are modeled under the theory of belief functions. Based on
the obtained results, a decision making is performed by applying our proposed
decision rule.
In the future, we aim at applying other matching techniques. We are inter-
ested also in constructing an uncertain ontology based on the obtained results
after a decision making and handling experimentations to qualitatively assess
the relevance of our approach.
