Proc. of 28th IEEE ACE, pp. 171-174, Dec-2002, Science City, Kolkata. 
 
Segmentation of Offline  
Handwritten Bengali Script 
 
S. Basu +, C. Chaudhuri*, M. Kundu*,  
M. Nasipuri*, D.K. Basu* 
 
+ Computer Sc. & Engg. Dept., MCKV Institute of 
Engineering, Liluah, Howrah-711204, India 
* Computer Sc. & Engg. Dept., Jadavpur University, 
Kolkata-700032, India 
 
Abstract: Character segmentation has long been one of 
the most critical areas of optical character recognition 
process. Through this operation, an image of a sequence 
of characters, which may be connected in some cases, is 
decomposed into sub-images of individual alphabetic 
symbols. 
In 
this 
paper, 
segmentation 
of 
cursive 
handwritten script of world’s fourth popular language, 
Bengali, is considered. Unlike English script, Bengali 
handwritten characters and its components often encircle 
the 
main 
character, 
making 
the 
conventional 
segmentation methodologies inapplicable. Experimental 
results, using the proposed segmentation technique, on 
sample cursive handwritten data containing 218 ideal 
segmentation points show a success rate of 97.7%. 
Further feature-analysis on these segments may lead to 
actual recognition of handwritten cursive Bengali script. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Character segmentation is one of the most important 
decision processes for optical character recognition 
(OCR). Isolating individual alphabetic characters in the 
script image is often significant enough to make a 
decisive contribution towards the success rate of the 
overall system.  
An OCR system may be designed to work for 
either of on-line and off-line purposes. On-line OCR 
systems collect input data by recording the order of 
strokes made by the write on an electronic bit-pad, and 
off-line OCR systems do the same by recording the 
pixel by pixel digital image of the entire writing with a 
digital scanner. OCR has a wide field of application 
covering handwritten document transcription, automatic 
mail address recognition, machine processing of bank-
checks, faxes etc. 
Off-line OCR of hand written words has long 
been an active area research. Some important 
contributions so far made in this field involve analysis 
of English texts [1], [2], [3], [5], Chinese script [6] and 
Arabic characters [9]. With this background of research, 
the present work considers Bengali script for developing 
suitable techniques for off-line OCR with it. About 200 
million people of Eastern India and Bangladesh use 
Bengali script for communication. So there is an urgent 
need for development of OCR systems capable of 
handling handwritten Bengali script. The OCR 
involving printed Bengali script has already been 
addressed in [8]. But problems related to OCR of hand 
written Bengali script still constitute an unexplored area 
of research. 
Segmentation and subsequent analysis of 
handwritten Bengali script is a challenging pattern 
recognition problem. Firstly, the vocabulary is very 
large. The modern Bengali script alphabet consists of 11 
vowels, 39 consonants (shown in fig 1a and fig 1b). 
Secondly, Bengali characters are very complex. Thirdly, 
many Bengali characters look very similar to each other 
and there are great pattern variations between samples 
of the same character written by the same person. 
Most characters in this script have horizontal 
lines at the top called head-lines. In cursive writing, 
these head-lines mostly join with one another in a word 
and the word appears as a single component hanging 
from the head line. In Bengali script a vowel followed 
by a consonant takes a modified shape (shown in fig 
1c), which is placed at the left, right, top, bottom (or 
their combinations) of the consonant depending on the 
vowel. These modified shapes often overlap and 
encircle the original character. If other shapes or 
characters combine with the original character, then 
they are called compound characters. A consonant or 
vowel following a consonant often takes a compound 
orthographic shape, which may be termed as compound 
character. There are 10 modified shapes and around 250 
compound characters in Bengali script [4]. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1a. Sample Bengali vowels 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1b. Sample Bengali consonants  
 
 
 
Fig. 1c. Sample modified shapes of Bengali script 
 
In this paper, a hybrid model of image based 
dissection and recognition based segmentation is 
proposed. Through image based dissection approach, 
segments are identified based on ‘character-like’ 
properties and are cut into meaningful components, 

Proc. of 28th IEEE ACE, pp. 171-174, Dec-2002, Science City, Kolkata. 
 
whereas in recognition based segmentation approach, 
the system searches the image components based on 
image features that match classes of its pattern [1].  
The system and the approach that we propose in 
this paper has several favorable practical advantages. It 
is designed to work with most general handwriting 
styles with mixed combinations of discrete and cursive 
handwritten Bengali scripts. The overall design is 
modular (shown in fig. 2) and each module can be fine 
tuned or replaced with improved versions without major 
impact on other modules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.2. Schematic of the segmentation process 
 
2. THE SEGMENTATION PROCESS 
To capture data from a handwritten document, a 
conventional flatbed scanner of resolution 300 dpi is 
used. In the database collected for this research, words 
were written on plain, white sheet of paper with black 
pen, which gave clear stroke with sharp edges. The 
collected data is assumed to be slope corrected. 
As mentioned earlier, the proposed process of 
segmentation consists of several structured modules. 
Following subsections discuss these modules in details. 
 
2.1. Pre-processing 
Several pre-processing steps are done on the composite 
raw image before actual segmentation process starts. 
Firstly, the input scanned image is converted into its 
corresponding binary equivalent data. Following sub-
modules subsequently attempt to classify the input data. 
 
2.1.1. Word Segmentation 
The basic objective of this step is to segment each 
scanned image page into isolated words. A single 
scanned image may contain several lines of data and 
each line subsequently contains several disjoint words. 
The basic word segmentation algorithm scans the input 
image horizontally; generates a horizontal pixel density 
histogram for the input data. Comparing the row-wise 
intensity between successive rows of the histogram with 
a predefined threshold k1 , individual lines are isolated 
(shown in fig. 3a).  
 
 
 
Fig. 3a. Line segmentation using row histograms  
 
 
Fig. 3b. Word segmentation using column  
 
Each isolated line is then scanned vertically and 
a vertical pixel density histogram is generated. By 
comparing the column-wise intensity of the histogram 
with a predefine threshold k2 , word segmentation 
boundaries are identified (shown in fig. 3b). 
 
2.1.2. Format Analysis 
Each of the isolated words is subdivided into four 
horizontal imaginary regions (shown in fig.4). Selection 
of these regions is based on the basic characteristics of 
Bengali script. Experimental analysis reveals that in 
most of the words in Bengali script, character 
components or modified shapes extend above the head-
line or lie below the actual characters. The components 
that extend over head-line are called ascendants and the 
character components or modified shapes that lie below 
the actual character are called descendents. Ascendants 
normally lie in region-1, whereas the descendents 
generally lie in region-4 and the main character body is 
dominated in region-2 and region-3. 
 
 
Region-1 
Region-2 
Region-3 
Region-4 
Fig.4.  Format analysis of a sample handwritten  word 
 
The format analysis algorithm divides the input 
word data into four equal-width regions. Line 
segmentation threshold k1 is chosen carefully to classify 
between region-1 and region-4 of successive lines. In 
Pre-processing 
Head-line 
Estimation 
Preliminary 
Segmentation 
Component 
Labeling 
Isolated Segments 
Scanned Image 
Segment 
Classification 

Proc. of 28th IEEE ACE, pp. 171-174, Dec-2002, Science City, Kolkata. 
 
the proposed segmentation process, the presences of 
character contours in different regions are considered to 
be the most important guideline factors for handwritten 
character segmentation. This format analysis phase acts 
as a building block for the subsequent steps like head-
line estimation and preliminary segmentation. 
 
2.2. Head-line Estimation 
In Bengali script, head-line, common in most of the 
characters, is considered to be the most prominent 
feature element. The character occurrence statistics in 
Bengali script confirms that out of twelve most frequent 
characters, only one character has no head-line [4]. So, 
it is likely that most Bengali words will have head-line 
too. In continuous writing, these characters are often 
connected through head-lines and appear as a single 
component in a word. 
 
Fig. 5. Approximate head-line estimation  
 
Proper identification of this head-line is a 
challenging task for character segmentation. Several 
modified shapes often encircle the main character and 
the head-line. Format analysis on the input word data 
shows that the probability of occurrence of the head-line 
is highest along the boundary of region-1 and region-2. 
The head-line estimation algorithm generates a 
horizontal histogram for the input word data. Maximum 
pixel density row within region-1 and region-2 is 
identified. This row is identified as the most significant 
headline row, having pixel intensity equals to MAX 
(say). If the other neighbouring rows of MAX have 
frequency greater than w * MAX (w is a predefined 
experimental constant and  0 <= w <= 1), then those 
neighbouring rows are considered to be the head-line 
rows of the input data word (shown in fig. 5).  
 
2.3. Preliminary Segmentation 
In this module, segments are identified based on 
‘character-like’ features. The process of cutting up the 
image into meaningful components is given the name 
‘dissection’. Each word is analyzed with the following 
features to identify preliminary segmentation points.  
Table 1 shows the few important features used 
to compute the segmentation weightage along the head-
line. If the calculated segmentation weightage of a point 
Feature 
ID 
Feature Description 
1 
Vertical Density Histogram of image 
through Region-2 and Region-3 
2 
Vertical Density Histogram of image 
through Region-1 
3 
Vertical Area Histogram of image 
through region-2 and region-3 
4 
Vertical Thickness ratio of the head-line 
along the head-line region 
5 
Vertical Area Histogram of the head-line 
along the head-line region 
6 
Connectivity of Region-1 and Region-2 
with  head-line 
Table 1. List of Segmentation features 
 
along the head-line is greater than a pre-defined 
threshold δ, then the columnar strip along the head-line 
is considered to be a preliminary segmentation point. 
 
 
Fig. 6.  Identified Preliminary Segmentation points  
 
Once the preliminary segmentation points are 
identified, the input image is segmented along the head-
line region through vertical strips depending on their 
segmentation weightage (shown in fig. 6). 
 
2.3. Component Labeling 
Preliminary segmentation points disjoin the characters, 
character components and modified shapes along the 
head-line. But these components often encircle each 
other making the process of isolating the components 
difficult. The connected component-labeling algorithm 
[8] is implemented to isolate each preliminary segment 
(as shown in fig 7). 
 
Fig. 7. Preliminary segments being isolated through 
connected component labeling 
 
2.4. Segment Classification 
Each of the isolated segments may not necessarily 
represent a character or a modified shape. In Bengali 

Proc. of 28th IEEE ACE, pp. 171-174, Dec-2002, Science City, Kolkata. 
 
character set, few characters (classified in fig.8), may 
generate 
disjoint 
character 
components 
through 
preliminary segmentation process. These characters get 
segmented within them. Proper classification and re-
unification of these components using recognition based 
segmentation 
is 
another 
challenging 
task 
for 
segmentation of handwritten Bengali script 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.8. Sample characters with isolated broken segments 
 
3. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The purpose of these experiments is to test the potential 
of the proposed segmentation process for handwritten 
Bengali script. For the experiment, several handwritten 
text documents were collected. Samples taken from ten 
different persons have been analyzed. Both cursive and 
isolated text inputs were considered.  
 
Input Data 
After 
Preliminary 
Segmentation 
Final 
Segmented 
Output 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9. Segmentation results on some sample 
handwritten data 
 
The proposed algorithm was tested on a sample 
sheet of paper containing 218 ideal segmentation points. 
The inputs were so chosen, that they roughly represent 
the variety of the input data. Word segmentation and 
head-line estimation modules produced 100% success 
results on the test data. Sample results on preliminary 
segmentation and final classification are shown in fig.9. 
The overall segmentation process fares a 97.7% success 
rate on the sample data.  
 
4. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, several component modules and a system 
organization for offline handwritten Bengali script 
segmentation process is described. The experiment has 
demonstrated the system’s ability to identify majority of 
the segmentation points of the handwritten words. 
Future research works may concentrate on the analysis 
of recognition based segmentation approach. The 
experiment excluded the compound characters available 
in Bengali script. Extensive analysis on these compound 
characters may lead to an overall improvement in the 
generality of the process. Future work may also include 
identification of overlapping pen-strokes with an 
improvement of all the existing modules.
