BERT & Family Eat Word Salad: Experiments with Text Understanding
Ashim Gupta, Giorgi Kvernadze, Vivek Srikumar
University of Utah

Abstract
In this paper, we study the response of large models from
the BERT family to incoherent inputs that should confuse
any model that claims to understand natural language. We de-
ﬁne simple heuristics to construct such examples. Our exper-
iments show that state-of-the-art models consistently fail to
recognize them as ill-formed, and instead produce high con-
ﬁdence predictions on them. As a consequence of this phe-
nomenon, models trained on sentences with randomly per-
muted word order perform close to state-of-the-art models.
To alleviate these issues, we show that if models are explic-
itly trained to recognize invalid inputs, they can be robust to
such attacks without a drop in performance.
Introduction
The BERT family of models (Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al.
2019, and others) form the backbone of today’s NLP sys-
tems. At the time of writing, all eleven systems deemed to
outperform humans in the GLUE benchmark suite (Wang
et al. 2018) belong to this family. Do these models under-
stand language? Recent work suggests otherwise. For exam-
ple, Bender and Koller (2020) point out that models trained
to mimic linguistic form (i.e., language models) may be de-
ﬁcient in understanding the meaning conveyed by language.
In this paper, we show that such models struggle even
with the form of language by demonstrating that they force
meaning onto token sequences devoid of any. For instance,
consider the natural language inference (NLI) example in
ﬁg. 1. A RoBERTa-based model that scores ∼89% on the
Multi-NLI dataset (Williams, Nangia, and Bowman 2018)
identiﬁes that the premise entails the hypothesis. However,
when the words in the hypothesis are sorted alphabetically
(thereby rendering the sequence meaningless), the model
still makes the same prediction with high conﬁdence. In-
deed, across Multi-NLI, when the hypotheses are sorted al-
phabetically, the model retains the same prediction in 79%
of the cases, with a surprisingly high average conﬁdence of
∼95%! We argue that a reliable model should not be insen-
sitive to such a drastic change in word order.
We study the response of large neural models to de-
structive transformations: perturbations of inputs that ren-
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Premise
In reviewing this history, it’s important
to make some crucial distinctions.
Original
Making certain distinctions is
Hypothesis
imperative in looking back on the past.
ENTAILMENT with probability 0.99
Sorted
back certain distinctions imperative in
Hypothesis
is looking making on past the .
ENTAILMENT with probability 0.97
Figure 1: An Example for Natural Language Inference from
the MNLI (-m) validation set. For the original premise and
hypothesis, RoBERTa ﬁne-tuned model makes the correct
prediction that the premise entails the hypothesis. Alphabet-
ically sorting the hypothesis makes it meaningless, but the
model still retains the prediction with high conﬁdence.
der them meaningless. Figure 1 shows an example. We de-
ﬁne several such transformations, all of which erase mean-
ing from the input text and produce token sequences that are
not natural language (i.e., word salad).
We characterize the response of models to such transfor-
mations using two metrics: its ability to predict valid labels
for invalid inputs, and its conﬁdence on these predictions.
Via experiments on three tasks from the GLUE benchmark,
we show that the labels predicted by state-of-the-art mod-
els for destructively transformed inputs bear high agreement
with the original ones. Moreover, the models are highly con-
ﬁdent in these predictions. We also ﬁnd that models trained
on meaningless examples perform comparably to the orig-
inal model on unperturbed examples, despite never hav-
ing encountered any well-formed training examples. Specif-
ically, models trained on meaningless sentences constructed
by permuting the word order perform almost as well as the
state-of-the-art models. These observations suggest that, far
from actually understanding natural language, today’s state-
of-the-art models have trouble even recognizing it.
Finally, we evaluate strategies to mitigate these weak-
nesses using regularization that makes models less conﬁdent
in their predictions, or by allowing models to reject inputs.
In summary, our contributions are1:
1Our code is available at https://github.com/utahnlp/word-salad
arXiv:2101.03453v2  [cs.CL]  17 Mar 2021

Dataset
Transform
Input
Prediction
Natural
Language
Inference
MNLI
P: As with other types of internal controls, this is a cycle of activity, not an
exercise with a deﬁned beginning and end.
Original
H: There is no clear beginning and end, it’s a continuous cycle.
Ent (99.48%)
Shuffled
H′
1: , beginning end no there clear ’s continuous is a it and cycle .
Ent (99.60%)
PBSMT-E
H′
2: The relationship of this is not a thing in the beginning .
Ent (94.82%)
Paraphrase
Detection
QQP
Q1: How do I ﬁnd out what operating system I have on my Macbook?
Original
Q2: How do I ﬁnd out what operating system I have?
Yes (99.53%)
Repeat
Q2: out out i ﬁnd out what out out i ﬁnd?
Yes (99.98%)
CopySort
Q2: ? do ﬁnd have how i i macbook my on operating out system what
Yes (98.52%)
Sentiment
Analysis
SST-2
Original
A by-the-numbers effort that won’t do much to enhance the franchise.
–ve (99.96%)
Sort
a by-the-numbers do effort enhance franchise much n’t that the to wo.
–ve (99.92%)
Drop
a–n won do to franchise.
–ve (99.96%)
Table 1: We generate invalid token sequences using destructive transformations that render the inputs meaningless. A ﬁne-
tuned RoBERTa model assigns a high probability (in parenthesis) to the same label as the original example. For NLI, the model
chooses between entail, contradict, and neutral. For sentiment analysis, possible labels are –ve or +ve. For paraphrase detection,
model answers if the two texts are paraphrases of each other (Yes or No). The appendix contains more such examples.
1. We deﬁne the notion of destructive input transformations
to test the ability of text understanding models at process-
ing word salad. We introduce nine such transformation
functions that can be used by practitioners for diagnostic
purposes without requiring additional annotated data.
2. We show via experiments that today’s best models force
meaning upon invalid inputs; i.e., they are not using the
right kind of information to arrive at their predictions.
3. We show that simple mitigation strategies can teach mod-
els to recognize and reject invalid inputs.
Tasks and Datasets
Our goal is to demonstrate that state-of-the-art models based
on the BERT family do not differentiate between valid and
invalid inputs, and that this phenomenon is ubiquitous. To
illustrate this, we focus on three tasks (table 1) , which also
serve as running examples.
Natural language inference (NLI) is the task of deter-
mining if a premise entails, contradicts, or is unrelated to a
hypothesis. We use the MNLI (Williams, Nangia, and Bow-
man 2018) and SNLI (Bowman et al. 2015) datasets.
Paraphrase detection involves deciding if two sentences
are paraphrases of each other. For this task, we use the
Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus (MRPC, Dolan and
Brockett 2005), and Quora Question Pair (QQP) dataset2.
Sentiment classiﬁcation requires predicting whether a
sentence has a positive or negative sentiment. We use the
Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST-2, Socher et al. 2013).
Destructive Transformations
There has been a growing interest in studying input pertur-
bations (e.g., Ebrahimi et al. 2018; Alzantot et al. 2018; Wal-
lace et al. 2019; Jin et al. 2020; Ren et al. 2019; Garg et al.
2https://www.quora.com/q/quoradata/First-Quora-Dataset-
Release-Question-Pairs
2020). Given a model for a task, some input perturbations
preserve labels. For example, a true paraphrase of a sentence
should not change its sentiment. Certain other perturbations
force labels to change in controlled ways. For example, a
negated hypothesis should change the label in the NLI task.
In this paper, we focus on a new class of perturbations—
destructive transformations—which render inputs invalid.
Because any informative signal in the input is erased, the
transformed examples should not have any correct label.3
For example, in the NLI task, a hypothesis whose words
are shufﬂed is (with high probability) not a valid English
sentence. The transformed hypothesis cannot contain infor-
mation to support an entail or a contradict decision. More-
over, it is not a sentence that is unrelated to the premise—it
is not a sentence at all! Indeed, the transformation creates an
example that lies outside the scope of the NLI task.
Yet, the premise and transformed hypothesis ﬁt the in-
terface of the problem. This gives us our key observation:
While NLP models are typically trained to work on well-
formed sentential inputs, they accept any sequence of strings
as inputs. Of course, not all token sequences are meaningful
sentences; we argue that we can gain insights about models
by studying their response to meaningless input sequences
(i.e., invalid inputs) that are carefully crafted from valid in-
puts. One advantage of this protocol of using transforma-
tions is that we do not need to collect any new data and can
use original training and validation sets.
Let us formally deﬁne destructive transformations. Con-
sider a task with input x ∈X and an oracle function f that
maps inputs to labels y ∈Y . A destructive transformation
π : X →X is a function that operates on x to produce
transformed inputs x′ = π(x) such that f(x′) is undeﬁned.
That is, none of the labels (i.e., the set Y ) can apply to x′.
3We refer to such changes to inputs as transformations, instead
of perturbations (as in adversarial perturbations), to highlight the
fact that change in the inputs need not be small.

Name
Description
Sort
Sort the input tokens
Reverse
Reverse the token sequence
Shuffle
Randomly shufﬂe tokens
CopySort
Copy one of the input texts and then sort
it to create the second text. (Only appli-
cable when the input is a pair of texts)
Table 2: Lexical-overlap based transformations
Destructive transformations can be chained: if π1 and π2
are destructive transformations for a given input x, then
π1(π2(x)) is also a destructive transformation. We can think
of such chaining as combining different diagnostic heuris-
tics. For tasks whose input is a pair of texts, x = (x1, x2),
transforming either or both the components should destroy
any meaningful signal in the input x. For example, in the
NLI task, given an input premise and hypothesis, destroying
either of them renders the example invalid. For tasks with
a pair of texts as input, for our analyses, we only transform
one of the inputs, although there is no such requirement.
Next, let us look at different classes of transformations.
Lexical Overlap-based Transformations
These transformation operators preserve the bag-of-words
representation of the original input but change the word or-
der. They are designed to diagnose the sensitivity of mod-
els to the order of tokens in inputs. Table 2 shows the four
lexical-overlap based transformations we deﬁne here.
We ensure that Shuffle sufﬁciently changes the input
by repeatedly shufﬂing till no bigram from original input
is retained. The CopySort operation only applies to tasks
that have multiple input texts such as NLI and paraphrase
detection. As an example, for the NLI task, given a premise-
hypothesis pair, it creates a transformed pair whose hypoth-
esis is the alphabetically sorted premise.
Gradient-based Transformations
These transformations seek to study the impact of remov-
ing, repeating, and replacing tokens. To decide which to-
kens to replace, they score input tokens in proportion to
their relative contribution to the output. One (admittedly in-
efﬁcient) way to compute token importance is to calculate
the change in output probability when it is removed. Recent
work (e.g., Ebrahimi et al. 2018; Feng et al. 2018) suggests
that a gradient-based method is a good enough approxima-
tion and is much more efﬁcient. We adopt this strategy here.
Given a trained neural model M, and the task loss func-
tion L, the change in the loss for the ith input token is ap-
proximated by the dot product of its token embedding ti and
the gradient of the loss propagated back to the input layer
∇ti,ML. That is, the ith token is scored by t⊺
i ∇ti,ML.
These token scores approximate the relative importance
of a token; a higher score denotes a more important token.
We use the tokens in the bottom r% as per their score—the
least important tokens—to deﬁne our gradient-based trans-
Name
Description
Drop
Drop the least important tokens.
Repeat
Replace the least important tokens with one
of the most important ones.
Replace
Replace the least important tokens with ran-
dom tokens from the vocabulary
CopyOne
Copy the most important token from one
text as the sole token in the other. (Only ap-
plicable when the input is a pair of texts)
Table 3: Gradient-based transformations
formations. We use r = 50%. Table 3 summarizes the trans-
formations that use importance ranking of the tokens.
Statistical transformation: PBSMT
Recent analyses on the NLI task have shown that neural
models rely excessively on shallow heuristics (Gururangan
et al. 2018; Poliak et al. 2018; McCoy, Pavlick, and Linzen
2019). In particular, Gururangan et al. (2018) showed that
annotation artifacts lead to certain words being highly cor-
related with certain inference classes. For example, in the
SNLI data, words such as animal, outdoors are spuriously
correlated with the entail label.
Inspired by this observation, we design a transforma-
tion scheme that creates invalid examples, and yet exhibit
such statistical correlations. We employ a traditional phrase-
based statistical machine translation (PBSMT) system to
generate examples that use phrasal co-occurrence statistics.
For each label in the task, we train a separate sequence
generator that uses co-occurrence statistics for that label.
For example, for the NLI task, we have three separate gen-
erators, one for each label. Suppose we have a premise-
hypothesis pair that is labeled as entail. We destroy it using
the premise as input to a PBSMT system that is trained only
on the entailment pairs in the training set. We use the Moses
SMT toolkit (Koehn et al. 2007) for our experiments.
Why should a system trained to generate a sentence that
has a certain label (e.g., an entailment) be a destructive trans-
former? To see this, note that unlike standard machine trans-
lation, we use very limited data for training. Moreover, the
language models employed (Heaﬁeld 2011) are also trained
only on examples of one class. As a result, we found that
the produced examples are non-grammatical, and often, out
of context. The hypothesis H′
2 in table 1, generated using
PBSMT-E (i.e., PBSMT for entailments), is one such se-
quence. We refer to this transformation as PBSMT.
Are the Transformations Destructive?
To ascertain whether our nine transformations render sen-
tences invalid, we asked crowd workers on Amazon’s Me-
chanical Turk to classify each instance as valid or invalid,
the latter category is deﬁned as an example that is incom-
prehensible, and is therefore meaningless.
We sampled 100 invalid sentences generated by each
transformation (900 in total) and an equal number of sen-
tences from the original (un-transformed) validation sets.

Transformation
% Invalid
Un-transformed
7.83
Sort
94.07
Reverse
95.59
Shuffle
94.20
CopySort
95.42
Avg. Lexical
94.82
Replace
91.21
Repeat
100.00
Drop
85.79
CopyOne
100.00
Avg. Gradient
94.25
PBSMT
79.92
Table 4: Results of crowdsourcing experiments where anno-
tators are asked to labels sentences as meaningful or not. We
aggregate sentence labels from three workers.
For each sentence, we collect validity judgments from three
crowd workers and use the majority label. Table 4 shows the
percent of sentences marked as invalid; we see that all the
transformations make their inputs incomprehensible.
Measuring Responses to Invalid Inputs
We will now deﬁne two metrics to quantify model behav-
ior for invalid inputs. Invalid inputs, by deﬁnition, are de-
void of information about the label. Consequently, they do
not have a correct label. If the transformations are truly de-
structive, a reliable model will pick one of the labels at ran-
dom and would do so with low conﬁdence. That is, a re-
liable model should exhibit the following behavior: a) the
agreement between original predictions and predictions on
their transformed invalid variants should be random, and, b)
predictions for invalid examples should be uncertain. These
expected behaviors motivate the following two metrics.
Agreement is the % of examples whose prediction remains
same after applying a destructive transformation. A model
with agreement closer to random handles invalid examples
better. For the operators designed for tasks with a pair of in-
puts, namely CopySort and CopyOne, tokens from one
of the inputs are copied into another. In such cases, mea-
suring agreement with original input is not useful. Instead,
we measure agreement with a default label. For the NLI task,
the default label is entail, because neural models tend to pre-
dict entailment when there is a lexical overlap between the
premise and hypothesis (McCoy, Pavlick, and Linzen 2019).
Following the same intuition, for paraphrase detection, the
default is to predict that the pair is a paraphrase.
Conﬁdence is deﬁned as the average probability of the pre-
dicted label. We want this number to be closer to 1
N , where
N is the number of classes.4
4We could alternatively deﬁne conﬁdence using the entropy of
the output distribution. In our experiments, we found that conﬁ-
dence, as deﬁned here, and entropy reveal the same insights.
Dataset
Accuracy
Conﬁdence
SNLI
90.87
98.38
MNLI
87.31
98.27
QQP
90.70
98.89
MRPC
89.46
98.40
SST-2
94.04
99.75
Table 5: Baseline Performance, Accuracy and Average
Conﬁdence for RoBERTa-base on validation sets. For
MNLI, we used MNLI-matched for experiments.
Transform
MNLI
SNLI
QQP
MRPC
SST2
Sort
79.1
82.6
88.3
81.1
83.3
Reverse
76.9
75.1
86.8
77.9
82.5
Shuffle
79.4
81.1
88.4
80.4
84.8
CopySort
90.5
81.3
93.5
96.8
–
Avg. Lex.
82.4
80.1
89.3
84.1
83.5
Replace
63.0
51.9
69.9
56.6
78.1
Repeat
49.7
68.5
77.1
68.1
81.3
Drop
69.4
72.7
80.4
76.7
82.5
CopyOne
80.4
83.7
98.9
100
–
Avg. Grad.
65.6
69.2
81.6
75.4
80.6
PBSMT
57.0
65.6
72.5
–
75.2
Random
33.3
33.3
50.0
50.0
50.0
Table 6: Agreement scores between predictions from trans-
formed validation set and original validation set. The closer
the numbers are to random better the model behavior is.‘–‘
means the transformation is not deﬁned for that dataset. We
do not use PBSMT for MRPC as it is a much smaller dataset.
Experiments
For our primary set of experiments, we use RoBERTa (Liu
et al. 2019) as a representative of the BERT family, whose
ﬁne-tuned versions have tended to outperform their BERT
counterparts on the GLUE tasks (Dodge et al. 2020). We
use the base variant of RoBERTa that is ﬁne-tuned for three
epochs across all our experiments, using hyperparameters
suggested by the original paper. These models constitute our
baseline. Table 5 shows the accuracy and average conﬁdence
of the baseline on the original validation sets.
Results and Observations
We apply the destructive transformation functions described
earlier to each task’s validation set. To account for the ran-
domness in the Shuffle transformation, its results are av-
eraged across ﬁve random seeds. For PBSMT on SST-2, we
use the ﬁrst half sentence as input and train to predict the
second half of the sentence. Table 6 shows the agreement
results, and table 7 shows average conﬁdence scores.
High Agreement Scores
The high agreement scores show
that models retain their original predictions even when label-

MNLI
SNLI
QQP
MRPC
SST-2
Baseline
94.63
92.46
98.78
97.77
99.13
Random
33.33
33.33
50.00
50.00
50.00
Table 7: Average Conﬁdence over predictions from trans-
formed validation set. We want the the numbers to be closer
to random (last row). Refer appendix for full results.
bearing information is removed from examples. This is a
puzzling result: the transformations render sentences mean-
ingless to humans, but the model knows the label. How can
the model make sense of these nonsensical inputs?
We argue that this behavior is not only undesirable but
also brings into question the extent to which these models
understand text. It is possible that, rather than understanding
text, they merely learn spurious correlations in the training
data. That is, models use the wrong information to arrive at
the right answer.
High Conﬁdence Predictions.
Not only do models retain
a large fraction of their predictions, they do so with high
conﬁdence (table 7). This behavior is also undesirable: a re-
liable model should know what it does not know, and should
not fail silently. It should, therefore, exhibit be uncertain on
examples that are uninformative about the label.
Research on reliability of predictions suggests that these
models are poorly calibrated (Guo et al. 2017).
Speciﬁc transformations.
Invalid examples constructed
by lexical transformations are more effective than others,
with all agreements over 80%. Examples from such trans-
formations have high lexical overlap with the original input.
Our results suggest that models do not use input token posi-
tions effectively. We need models that are more sensitive to
word order; lexical transformations can be used as a guide
without the need for new test sets.
We ﬁnd that SNLI models have higher agreement scores
than MNLI ones for both gradient and statistical correlation
based invalid examples. This could mean that the former
are more susceptible to gradient-based adversarial attacks.
Moreover, the lower scores for PBSMT on the MNLI model
shows that it relies less on these statistical clues than SNLI—
corroborating an observation by Gururangan et al. (2018).
Human response to transformed inputs.
Results in ta-
ble 4 show that transformed sentences are invalid. We now
perform another set of human experiments to determine if
the invalid examples generated (by transformations) make it
difﬁcult to perform the classiﬁcation task . This mimics the
exact setting that all models are evaluated on by asking hu-
mans to perform classiﬁcation tasks on invalid inputs. Con-
cretely, we ask turkers to perform the NLI task on 450 de-
structively transformed inputs (50 for each transformation)
by “reconstructing the inputs to the best of their abilities”.
We found that turkers can only ‘predict’ the correct label for
invalid examples in 35% of the cases as opposed to 77% for
Calibration Method
Accuracy
ECE
Baseline
87.31
0.11
Label Smoothing
86.89
0.06
Focal Loss
86.98
0.05
Temperature Scaling
87.31
0.09
Table 8: Accuracy on the original validation set and the
Expected Calibration Error (ECE) on the validation set for
MNLI. Accuracy with temperature scaling is the same as
baseline since it is a post-training method for calibration.
B
LS
FL
B + TS
Lexical
82.35
81.85
80.39
81.49
Gradient
60.65
59.51
60.32
59.18
PBSMT
57.02
56.30
56.49
57.04
Table 9: Average agreement for three calibration methods
on MNLI. Calibration does not improve model’s response to
invalid inputs. B: Baseline, LS: Label Smoothing, FL: Focal
Loss, B + TS: Temperature Scaling on baseline.
original un-transformed examples. These results reinforce
the message that large transformer models can make sense
of meaningless examples, whereas humans are near-random.
Analysis & Discussion
Are calibrated models more reliable?
Neural networks
have been shown to produce poorly calibrated probabili-
ties, resulting in high conﬁdence even on incorrect pre-
dictions (Guo et al. 2017). Research in computer vision
has shown that improving model calibration improves ad-
versarial robustness as well as out-of-distribution detec-
tion (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017; Thulasidasan et al. 2019;
Hendrycks, Lee, and Mazeika 2019). Given the conﬁdence
scores in table 7, a natural question is: Does improving the
calibration of BERT models improve their response to in-
valid examples? We answer this question by training conﬁ-
dence calibrated classiﬁers using three standard methods.
First we use label smoothing, in which training is done
on soft labels, with loss function being a weighted average
of labels and uniform probability distribution (Pereyra et al.
2017). Focal loss prevents the model from becoming over-
conﬁdent on examples where it is already correct. Mukhoti
et al. (2020) showed that focal loss improves calibration of
neural models. Temperature scaling is a simple calibration
method that scales the network’s logit values before apply-
ing the softmax (Guo et al. 2017; Desai and Durrett 2020).
We use Expected Calibration Error (ECE, Naeini,
Cooper, and Hauskrecht 2015) to measure a model’s cali-
bration error. Due to space constraints, we refer the reader
to the original work for a formal deﬁnition. Better calibrated
models have lower ECE. All three methods improve cali-
bration of the original model; table 8 shows results on the
MNLI validation data. However, table 9 shows that none of
them improve model response to invalid examples.

Impact of pretraining tasks.
We now investigate the im-
pact of pre-training tasks on a model’s response to in-
valid examples. Both BERT and RoBERTa use a word-
based masked language modeling (W-MLM) as the auto-
encoding objective. BERT uses Next Sentence Prediction
(NSP) as an additional pre-training task. We experiment
with other BERT variants pre-trained with different tasks:
ALBERT (Lan et al. 2019) uses Sentence Order Prediction
(SOP), SpanBERT (Joshi et al. 2020) and BART (Lewis
et al. 2020) use Span-based MLM (S-MLM) instead of
W-MLM. SpanBERT additionally uses NSP, while BART
uses a Sentence Shufﬂing (SS) pretraining objective. ELEC-
TRA (Clark et al. 2019) uses a Replaced Token Detection
(RTD) instead of an MLM objective.
These models are trained on different corpora, and use
different pre-training tasks. Despite their differences, the re-
sults presented in table 10 suggest that all of these models
are similar in their responses to invalid examples. These re-
sults highlight a potential weakness in our best text under-
standing systems.
Different Inductive Bias.
All variants of BERT consid-
ered thus far are trained with one of the auto-encoding (AE)
objectives and perform rather poorly. This raises a question:
Would models that explicitly inject a word order based in-
ductive bias into the model perform better?
To answer this question, we consider three auto-regressive
(AR) models with a recurrent inductive bias, namely, ESIM-
Glove (Chen et al. 2017), ESIM-ELMo, and XLNet (Yang
et al. 2019). Both ESIM models are LSTM based models,
while XLNet is a transformer-based model that is trained
using an auto-regressive language modeling objective along
with Permutation LM (P-LM). ESIM-Glove does not use
any other pre-training task, while ESIM-ELMo is based on
ELMo (Peters et al. 2018) which is pre-trained as a tradi-
tional auto-regressive LM.
The results are shown in table 10. Again, the results are
similar to models trained with auto-encoding objective. Sur-
prisingly, even a strong recurrent inductive bias is unable to
make the models sensitive to the order of words in their in-
puts: all the AR models have high agreement scores (over
75%) on lexical overlap-based transformations. We refer the
reader to the appendix for more results.
Bigger is not always better.
While larger BERT-like mod-
els show better performance (Devlin et al. 2019; Raffel et al.
2020), we ﬁnd that same does not hold for their response
on invalid examples. Table 10 shows that larger BERT mod-
els (Large vs Base) do not improve response to invalid ex-
amples (recall that smaller agreement scores are better). We
see that both BERT variants outperform the RoBERTa coun-
terparts; BERT-base provides over 4.5% improvement over
RoBERTa-base in terms of agreement on invalid examples.
Small vs. large perturbations.
Previous work on adver-
sarial robustness
(Alzantot et al. 2018; Jin et al. 2020;
Ebrahimi et al. 2018) suggests that robustness of the model
to small input perturbations is desirable, meaning that a
Class
Pretraining
Model
Agreement
AE
W-MLM + NSP
BERT-B
67.1
BERT-L
69.0
W-MLM
RoBERTa-B
71.7
RoBERTa-L
73.5
W-MLM + SOP
ALBERT-B
67.6
AE
S-MLM + NSP
SpanBERT-B
67.6
S/W-MLM + SS
BART-B
70.0
RTD
ELECTRA-B
68.8
AR
P-LM
XLNet-B
70.1
LM
ESIM- ELMo
75.8
-
ESIM- Glove
73.5
Table 10: Agreement score of different models on MNLI.
B refers to the base variant, L refers to the large one. AE
refers to models pretrained with auto-encoding objective,
AR refers to auto-regressive models. Refer text for full key.
MNLI
SNLI
QQP
MRPC
SST-2
Shufﬂed
84.56
89.44
92.15
84.80
91.97
Original
87.31
90.70
94.04
89.46
94.04
Table 11: Training on only invalid examples generated from
Shuffle, evaluation is on original validation data.
model’s prediction should not change for small perturba-
tions in the input. However, excessive invariance to large
input perturbations is undesirable (Jacobsen et al. 2019).
Our focus is not on small input changes, rather large ones
that destroy useful signals (i.e., destructive transformations).
The three types of transformations we discuss in this work
achieve this in different ways. We argue that language under-
standing systems should not only provide robustness against
small perturbations (adversarial robustness) but also recog-
nize and reject large perturbations (studied in this work).
Are models learning spurious correlations?
The results
presented in this work raise an important question: Why does
this undesirable model behavior occur in all models, irre-
spective of the pretraining tasks, and is even seen in models
with a recurrent inductive bias? We hypothesize that this be-
havior occurs because these large models learn spurious cor-
relations present in the training datasets, studied previously
by Gururangan et al. (2018); Min et al. (2020). A simple ex-
periment substantiates this claim. So far, we trained models
on valid data and evaluated them on both valid and invalid
examples. We now ﬂip this setting: we train on invalid inputs
generated by a transformation and evaluate on well-formed
examples from the validation sets.
Table 11 presents accuracies on the original validation ex-
amples for ﬁve datasets. We observe that models trained only
on shufﬂed examples perform nearly as well (within 97% for
MNLI) as the ones trained on valid examples (second row)!
These observations demonstrate that our models do not use
the right kind of evidence for their predictions, or at least, the

B + Th
Ent + Th
B + Invalid
MNLI
83.40/ 57.95
86.11/ 89.22
85.44/ 97.10
SNLI
88.01/ 54.68
89.65/ 93.54
90.88/ 98.41
QQP
90.25 / 29.20
90.29 / 88.72
90.08 / 95.24
MRPC
89.46 / 36.82
88.24 / 99.43
88.73 / 99.78
SST-2
90.37 / 35.79
92.66 / 95.41
92.78 / 96.35
Table 12: Comparison of mitigation strategies. First num-
ber in each cell is accuracy on original validation set. Second
number is the % of examples correctly classiﬁed as invalid.
Test set for invalid contains examples generated with all nine
transformation functions. B refers to the baseline model.
kind of evidence a human would use. This result should raise
further concerns about whether we have made real progress
on language understanding.
Mitigation Strategies
We evaluate three mitigation strategies to alleviate the prob-
lem of high certainty on invalid inputs. The goal is to give
models the capability to recognize invalid inputs. Two strate-
gies augment the training data with invalid examples. All
three introduce new hyperparameters, which are tuned on a
validation set constructed by sampling 10% of the training
set. The ﬁnal models are then trained on the full training set.
Entropic Regularization
The central problem that we
have is that the models have high certainty on invalid inputs.
To directly alleviate the issue, we can explicitly train them
to be less certain on invalid inputs. We do so by augment-
ing the loss function with a new term. Let D be the original
dataset and D
′ be its complementary invalid dataset. The
new training objective is then deﬁned as
L(model) = LD(model) + λHD′(model)
(1)
where LD is the standard cross-entropy loss, and HD′ de-
notes the entropy of model probabilities over invalid exam-
ples. The hyperparameter λ weighs the relative impact of the
two terms. Feng et al. (2018) used similar entropic regular-
ization to improve interpretability of neural models.
We initialize the model with ﬁne-tuned weights from the
baseline model and train for three more epochs with the new
training objective. The appendix provides further details.
Thresholding Model Probabilities
From our results in ta-
ble 7, we observe that although models are conﬁdent on in-
valid examples, their conﬁdence is higher on valid ones. Fol-
lowing this, we experiment with a straightforward approach
that thresholds output probabilities to tell valid and invalid
examples apart. We used temperature scaling to ensure that
the classiﬁer probabilities are calibrated.
This approach is parameterized by a threshold θ: if the
maximum probability of the classiﬁer’s output is below θ,
we deem the input invalid. We used grid search in the range
[ 1
N , 1.0] to ﬁnd the best performing θ on a separate valida-
tion set. Here, N represents the number of labels.
Invalid as an extra class (B + Invalid)
Since one of the
goals is to be able to recognize invalid inputs, we can explic-
itly introduce a new class, invalid, to our classiﬁcation task.
The training objective for this new N +1 class classiﬁcation
task remains the same, i.e. cross-entropy loss.
Results
With entropic regularization, we observe a signiﬁcant drop
in agreement scores on invalid examples. Indeed, the agree-
ment scores on invalid examples decrease to an average of
35% after regularization. We also notice a signiﬁcant in-
crease in uncertainty on invalid examples. However, we see
that in some cases, accuracies on the original validation set
drop by over 1%, suggesting a trade-off between accuracy on
valid examples and reliable response on invalid examples.
A well-behaved model should maintain high accuracy on
valid data and also reject invalid inputs. To compare the three
mitigation strategies on an equal footing, we measure accu-
racy on the original validation data and the percentage of
invalid examples correctly identiﬁed. Since entropic regular-
ization does not explicitly recognize invalid inputs, we apply
the thresholding strategy to it (Ent + Th).
Table 12 compares the three methods. We see that simple
thresholding (B + Th) does not work well and having the
model learn from invalid examples is beneﬁcial. It appears
that, out of the three methods, training with an extra invalid
label best maintains the balance between accuracy and in-
valid input detection.
We also studied if mitigating one kind of transformation
helps against others. Using (B + Invalid) we train on one
transformation and test on the rest. We found that mitigation
can be transferable. The appendix provides detailed results.
Final Words
The main message of this paper is that today’s state-of-the-
art models for text understanding have difﬁculties in telling
the difference between valid and invalid text. This observa-
tion is congruent with several other recent lines of work that
highlight the deﬁciencies of today’s text understanding sys-
tems. For example, Feng et al. (2018) construct irregular ex-
amples by successively removing words without affecting
a neural model’s predictions. Adversarial attacks on NLP
models (e.g. Jin et al. 2020) expose their vulnerabilities; for
example, Wallace et al. (2019) offer an illustrative example
where a model’s prediction can be arbitrarily changed.
Statistical models need not always get well-formed in-
puts. Consequently, when models are deployed, they should
be guarded against invalid inputs, not just in NLP, but also
beyond (e.g., Liang, Li, and Srikant 2018). Krishna et al.
(2020) showed that it is possible to steal BERT-like mod-
els by using their predictions on meaningless inputs. Our
work can be seen as highlighting why this might be possi-
ble: model predictions are largely not affected even if we
destructively transform inputs. Our work shows simple mit-
igation strategies that could become a part of the standard
modeling workﬂow.

Ethics Statement
Our work points to a major shortcoming of the BERT family
of models: they have a hard time recognizing ill-formed in-
puts. This observation may be used to construct targeted at-
tacks on trained models, especially publicly available ones.
We call for a broader awareness of such vulnerabilities
among NLP practitioners, and recommend that NLP models
should be actively equipped with mitigations against such
attacks.
