DEVELOPING RESPONSIBLE CHATBOTS FOR FINANCIAL
SERVICES: A PATTERN-ORIENTED RESPONSIBLE AI
ENGINEERING APPROACH
Qinghua Lu1, Yuxiu Luo2, Liming Zhu1, Mingjian Tang3, Xiwei Xu1, Jon Whittle1
1Data61, CSIRO, Australia
2Westpac, Australia
3Atlassian, Australia
February 28, 2023
ABSTRACT
The recent release of ChatGPT has gained huge attention and discussion worldwide, with responsible
AI being a key topic of discussion. How can we ensure that AI systems, including ChatGPT, are
developed and adopted in a responsible way? To tackle the responsible AI challenges, various
ethical principles have been released by governments, organisations, and companies. However, those
principles are very abstract and not practical enough. Further, signiﬁcant efforts have been put on
algorithm-level solutions that only address a narrow set of principles, such as fairness and privacy. To
ﬁll the gap, we adopt a pattern-oriented responsible AI engineering approach and build a Responsible
AI Pattern Catalogue to operationalise responsible AI from a system perspective. In this article, we
ﬁrst summarise the major challenges in operationalising responsible AI at scale and introduce how we
use the Responsible AI Pattern Catalogue to address those challenges. We then examine the risks at
each stage of the chatbot development process and recommend pattern-driven mitigations to evaluate
the the usefulness of the Responsible AI Pattern Catalogue in a real-world setting.
1
Introduction
ChatGPT has gained huge attention and discussion worldwide, with responsible AI being a crucial topic of discussion.
One key question is how we can ensure that AI systems, like ChatGPT, are developed and adopted in a responsible way?
Responsible AI is the practice of developing, deploying, and maintaining AI systems in a way that beneﬁts the humans,
society, and environment, while minimising the risk of negative consequences. To solve the challenge of responsible AI,
many AI ethics principles have been released recently by governments, organisations, and enterprises [1].
A principle-based approach provides technology-neutral and context-independent guidance while allowing context-
speciﬁc interpretations for implementing responsible AI. However, those principles are too abstract and high-level
for practitioners to use in practice. For example, it is a very challenging and complex task to operationalise the the
human-centered value principle regarding how it can be designed for, implemented and monitored throughout the
entire lifecycle of AI systems. In addition, the existing work mainly focuses on algorithm-level solutions for a subset
of mathematics-amenable AI ethics principles (such as privacy and fairness). However, responsible AI issues can
happen at any stage of the development lifecycle crosscutting various AI and non-AI components of systems beyond
AI algorithms and models. To try to bridge the principle-algorithmic gap, further guidance such as guidebooks12,
question banks, [2], checklists [3] and documentation templates [4, 5] have begun to emerge. Those attempts tend to be
ad-hoc and lack of systematic solutions to cover the entire lifecycle of AI systems taking into account different levels of
stakeholders.
1https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/haxtoolkit/
2https://pair.withgoogle.com/guidebook
arXiv:2301.05517v2  [cs.SE]  27 Feb 2023

A PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 28, 2023
We have adopted a pattern-oriented responsible AI engineering approach [6] and built a Responsible AI Pattern
Catalogue 3 for different types and levels of stakeholders in AI industry [7, 8]. In this article, we ﬁrst summarise
the major challenges in operationalising responsible AI at scale and introduce how responsible AI pattern catalogue
addresses those challenges. Then, we examine the risks at each stage of the chatbot development process and recommend
pattern-oriented mitigations to evaluate the usefulness of the Responsible AI Pattern Catalogue.
2
RELATED WORK
The concept of chatbots can be traced back to the 1950s when computer scientist and inventor Alan Turing proposed
the Turing Test, which aimed to determine whether a machine could exhibit intelligent behavior indistinguishable from
a human. In 1966, Joseph Weizenbaum created ELIZA, the ﬁrst known chatbot, which was designed to simulate a
psychotherapist by responding to user inputs with pre-programmed responses [9]. In the 1980s and 1990s, advances in
natural language processing and machine learning led to the development of more advanced chatbots, such as Parry
and ALICE. In the early 2000s, the rise of messaging platforms and mobile devices made it easier for businesses to
integrate chatbots into their customer service systems. In recent years, advancements in AI, such as deep learning and
natural language processing, have made it possible for chatbots (e.g., OpenAI’s ChatGPT4, IBM Watson Assistant5)
to handle more complex and natural conversations with users, leading to the widespread use of chatbots in various
industries, including ﬁnance, healthcare, and e-commerce. Despite the increasing popularity of chatbots, people have
many ethical concerns about chatbots. Some studies on chatbots have begun to emerge, such as human trust and
emotion [10, 11, 12]. Signiﬁcant efforts have been put on algorithm-level solutions which mainly focus on a subset of
ethical principles [13, 14, 15, 16], such as privacy, fairness, and explainability. However, there is lack of responsible
AI governance and engineering studies to assess and mitigate the ethical risks of chatbots against all the AI ethics
principles.
3
MAJOR CHALLENGES IN OPERATIONALISING RESPONSIBLE AI AT SCALE
Through our engagement with industry, we have summarised three major challenges in operationalising responsible AI
at scale:
• Challenge 1: Diverse Stakeholders and Risk Landscape. Organisations usually take a risk-based approach
to ensuring responsible AI. However, in AI ecosystems, different levels of stakeholders have various interests
on responsible AI risks. Industry-level stakeholders (e.g., responsible AI regulators) and organisation-level
stakeholders (e.g., board and executives) are more interested in harms and societal impacts, associated
preventive/corrective cost and governance mechanisms, while team-level stakeholders (e.g., developers)
care more about algorithmic risks, reliability and security techniques. AI technology/solution procurers
are a type of industry-level stakeholders who are interested in how to verify the ethical quality of third
party AI technologies/solutions without having full access to their proprietary models and how to deal with
accountability and contestability when third parties are involved. Those varying stakeholder interests in
responsible AI risk management demanding different but connected methods and tools.
• Challenge 2: Competing Risk Silos. Organisations usually create individual board risk committees to
manage different types of risks, such as ﬁnancial, reputation and legal risks with some dedicated cybersecurity
and privacy risk management. However, having dedicated risk committees including responsible AI risk
committees give rise to risk silos which usually have limited connections between risks assessed separately
and compete for resources. This makes risk management perceived as a forced and meaningless roll-up in
organisations.
• Challenge 3: Lack of Risk Expertise. Each organisation has existing and different governance and risk
approaches. There is a shortage of expertise to assess new risks, including responsible AI risks. Most of the
organisations do not have the necessary scope to handle responsible AI risks and the capacity to examine
each AI project deeply. Thus, the organisations heavily reply on the project teams to do self-assessment. The
current risk assessment practices include checklists, conversations, information sheets, rather than formal
or technical approaches. Organisations usually treat risk analysis as hazard/threat analysis, omitting system
vulnerability, exposure risks, and response/mitigation risk.
3https://research.csiro.au/ss/science/projects/responsible-ai-pattern-catalogue/
4https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/
5https://cloud.ibm.com/catalog/services/watson-assistant
2

A PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 28, 2023
• Supply chain
• System
• Operation
• Requirements
• Design
• Implementation
• Testing
• Deployment
• Monitoring
• Industry
• Organisation
• Team
• Governance
• Process
• Product
Angle
Stakeholders
Ecosystem
Lifecycle
Responsible AI 
Pattern Catalogue
Figure 1: Overview of responsible AI pattern catalogue.
Category
Level/Stage/Layer
Patterns
Governance 
patterns
Industry
/community
Responsible AI regulation, regulatory sandbox, building code, responsible AI 
standard, responsible AI maturity model, responsible AI certification, trust mark, 
independent oversight
Organisation
Leadership commitment for responsible AI, ethics committee, code of ethics, 
responsible AI risk assessment, standardized reporting, role-level accountability 
contract, responsible AI software bill of materials, ethics training
Team 
Customized agile process, tight coupling of AI and non-AI development, diverse 
team, stakeholder engagement, continuous documentation using templates, failure 
mode and effects analysis, fault tree analysis, verifiable claim
Process 
patterns
Requirements 
AI suitability assessment, verifiable ethical requirement, data requirement 
throughout the entire lifecycle, ethical user story
Design 
Multi-level co-architecting, envisioning card, design modelling for ethics, system-
level ethical simulation, human-centered interface design for explainable AI (XAI)
Implementation
Responsible AI governance of APIs,  responsible AI governance via APIs, ethical 
construction with reuse
Testing
Ethical acceptance testing, ethical assessment for test cases
Operation
Continuous deployment for responsible AI, extensible, adaptive and dynamic ethical 
risk assessment, multi-level co-versioning
Product 
patterns
Supply chain
Bill of materials registry,  verifiable ethical credential, co-versioning registry, 
federated learner
System
AI mode switcher, multi-model decision maker, homogeneous redundancy, fairness 
assessor, discrimination mitigator, encrypted–data-based trainer, secure aggregator,
random noise data generator, local explainer, global explainer
Operation 
infrastructure 
Continuous ethical validator, ethical sandbox, ethical knowledge base, ethical digital 
twin, incentive registry, ethical black box, global view auditor
Figure 2: List of responsible AI patterns.
3

A PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 28, 2023
4
PATTERN-ORIENTED RESPONSIBLE AI ENGINEERING APPROACH:
RESPONSIBLE AI PATTERN CATALOGUE
We have adopted a pattern-oriented responsible engineering approach and built a responsible AI pattern catalogue to
address the end-to-end/top-to-bottom responsible AI challenges [7, 8]. In software engineering, a pattern is a reusable
solution to a recurring problem within a given context during software development. Patterns are documented to capture
the knowledge about reusable solutions in an accessible and structure way for stakeholders to learn. A pattern catalogue
is a collection of patterns that are related to some extend and can be used together or independently.
Based on the results of a multivocal review [7], we analysed successful case studies and generalised best practices
into patterns. The current version of pattern catalogue has collected 63 patterns, including 24 governance patterns, 17
process patterns, and 22 product patterns. To describe the pattern, we extended the traditional pattern template with
additional elements, including summary, pattern type, objective, target users, impacted stakeholders, lifecycle stages
relevant AI ethics principles, context, problem, solution, consequences (i.e., beneﬁts and drawbacks), related patterns
and known uses. Each pattern provides meaningful analysis on consequences, where pointers are added to measurement
metrics and methods, residues of risk, and new risk introduced. Patterns are connected at multi-levels, multi-angles and
across AI system life cycles through the related patterns. The deﬁned ﬁelds in the pattern template can help efﬁciently
selecting the patterns for mitigating a certain risk.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the responsible AI pattern catalogue has the following characteristics to help stakeholders better
navigate the landscape and achieve responsible AI systems more successfully.
• Across multiple angles and connected – governance, process, and product. As listed in Fig. 2, the patterns
are organised into three interconnected categories for easier adoption for impact.
– Governance patterns for building multi-level governance for responsible AI;
– Process patterns for establishing responsible software development processes and AI engineering;
– Product patterns for building responsible-AI-by-design into AI systems [17].
The stakeholders should use product patterns as product features to enforce responsible AI principles directly
in the product and verify/validate the product. In the meantime, the stakeholders should also use process and
governance patterns to complement responsible AI further.
• Across multiple organization levels and connected – industry/community, organisation, and teams. The
patterns introduced are at different levels, so stakeholders can situate the practice areas in the bigger picture
and see how the patterns can ﬁt in and how different patterns inﬂuence and reinforce each other from an
industry/community, organisation, and team level.
• Across system lifecycle and connected – requirements, design, implementation, testing, deployment,
and post-deployment monitoring. Across the lifecycle of AI systems, different process patterns can be
applied at other times, with the outputs of one pattern becoming the input of another.
• Across the supply chain, system, and operation layer and connected. We connect the product patterns
through a system reference architecture across AI supply chain, AI system, and operation/deployment infras-
tructure layer.
• Beneﬁting multiple connected risks. Individual responsible AI risks should be managed in silos by using
risk-speciﬁc solutions. The patterns often help multiple risks together to raise the responsible AI posture of the
organization signiﬁcantly.
• Acknowledging drawbacks and additional risks introduced. Adopting pattern-oriented risk mitigation
may introduce additional risks and costs. We recognize them by incorporating drawbacks in the patterns and
connecting with other related ways to further address the challenges.
• Clear differentiation of trust and trustworthiness. Trustworthiness is the ability of an AI system to meet
responsible AI principles, while trust is stakeholders’ subjective estimates of the trustworthiness of the AI
system. We recognize that the importance of gaining stakeholder trust goes beyond the objective trustworthiness
of the systems[18]. Gaining trust is about diverse and inclusive engagement, setting realistic expectations, and
communicating trustworthiness evidence in a way that stakeholders can understand and meaningfully critique.
We include trust and trustworthiness as pattern objectives.
4

A PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 28, 2023
Member Name
POST NAME
Member Name
POST NAME
Member Name
POST NAME
Member Name
POST NAME
POST NAME
Member Name
POST NAME
ember Name
POST NAME
Member Name
POST NAME
POST NAME
Member Name
POST NAME
Subject matter expert
Developer
End user 
Business knowledge
Questions
User behaviour
Responses
Intents model
Entity classes
AI features
Dialogues 
Feedback
Chat logs
Chatbot platform
Auditor
Planning
Conversation Design
Implementation
Testing
Deployment
Monitoring
Figure 3: Stakeholders and stages in the chatbot development.
5
CASE STUDY: DEVELOPING CHATBOTS FOR THE FINANCIAL SERVICES
5.1
Development Process of Chatbots
In this section, we introduce the development process of chatbots using IBM Watson Assistant and discuss how patterns
can be used to address various responsible AI risks, as illustrated in Fig. 4. In the Responsible AI Pattern Catalogue,
each pattern includes the speciﬁcation of target users, lifecycle stages, and context, which can be used to locate the
relevant patterns.
The chatbot development starts with the planning stage. Once the planning is completed, a conversation is designed and
then built using the chosen chatbot platform, such as IBM Watson Assistant. The chatbot is then tested and deployed
into target production environments. The performance of the chatbot is continuously measured. The chatbot is improved
based the performance assessment and new requirements from business.
Responsible AI risk committee pattern can be adopted by the organisation to continuously assess the responsible AI
risks of AI projects including chatbot projects through a dedicated responsible AI risk committee or the existing risk
committee. Responsible AI risk assessment pattern can be used by the risk committee and project team to continuously
assess the potential risks that could happen at each stage of the lifecycle of chatbots.
5.1.1
Planning
At the planning stage, stakeholders such as business representatives and chatbot owners need to discuss the following
aspects:
• Overall purpose, such as customer service and internal help desk.
• Viewpoint which supports the purpose of the chatbot and provides a consistent experience to the user, such as
a ﬁnancial service chatbot providing help to the branch customer.
• Tone and personality, such as a pessimist or an optimist.
• Proative or/and reactive nature depending on the purpose and viewpoint. proactive means actively taking the
user towards a goal while reactive means letting the user lead the conversations by asking questions.
• Name of the chatbot which can be the ﬁrst thing a user will notice in the chat box.
• Scenario describing brief narratives of anticipated use of a chatbot.
Responsible AI risk assessment pattern needs to be applied to examine whether the purpose or viewpoint or scenario is
unethical, whether the tone or name is offensive to a group of people. Ethical user story pattern can be used to gather
ethical requirements from stakeholders on the chatbot. An example user story can be “As an indigenous person, I want
5

A PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 28, 2023
Stage
Task
Stakeholder
Risk
Pattern
Planning
Define:
-
Purpose
-
Viewpoint
-
Tone and personality
-
Nature
-
Name
-
Scenarios
Chatbot 
owner
-
Unethical purpose, 
viewpoint, scenario
-
Offensive tone, name
-
RAI risk assessment
-
RAI user story
-
Verifiable RAI requirement
Design
Design:
-
Scenarios
-
Questions
-
Contents
-
Conversation flows
-
User interface
Subject 
matter 
experts
-
Unethical narratives in 
scenarios
-
Sensitive data or bias 
issue in training dataset
-
Subject matter experts 
with similar background
-
RAI risk assessment
-
Lifecycle-driven data 
requirement
-
Verifiable claim
-
Diverse team
-
RAI training
-
XAI interface
Implementation
Configure:
-
Skill
-
Entities
-
Dialogue
-
Advanced features
-
Integration with 
downstream systems
Developers
-
Misconfiguration
-
Vulnerability in data 
integration or storage
-
Privacy or bias issues in 
sample questions for 
training
-
RAI risk assessment
-
Customised agile process 
-
Tight coupling of AI and 
non-AI development
-
AI mode switcher
-
Lifecycle-driven data 
requirement
-
Co-versioning registry
-
RAI construction with reuse
Testing
Test conversations with 
various testing methods
Testers, 
subject 
matter 
experts
-
Ethical risks with test 
cases
-
RAI risk assessment
-
RAI assessment for test cases
-
RAI acceptance testing
Deployment
Deploy the chatbot and 
release to production
Operators
-
Risk at scale
-
RAI risk assessment
-
Standardized reporting
-
Continuous deployment
-
RAI governance via APIs
Monitoring
Monitor and analyse the 
behaviors of chatbot
Operators
-
Missing or wrong metrics
-
Unethical questions from 
the users
-
Unethical responses 
generated by the chatbot
-
Bias in the user feedback
-
RAI risk assessment
-
RAI black box
-
Independent oversight
-
K-fold cross validation
-
Blind testing
Figure 4: Patterns for addressing risks in chatbot development.
the chatbot to respond my questions in both English and indigenous language”. The ethical user stories can be used to
trace the ethical requirements both backward to the stakeholders who developed the ethical user stories and forward
into the design modules, code pieces, and test cases. Veriﬁable ethical requirement pattern can be adopted to specify
the ethical requirements in a veriﬁable form, e.g., “all the responses must be provided with multiple language options
including indigenous language option”.
5.1.2
Conversation Design
At the stage of conversation design, content writers, who are subject matter experts, perform the following tasks to
provide the best user interaction based on the understanding of user behaviour.
• Further scenario development: The subject matter experts need to further deﬁne the scenarios that the chatbot
is expected to fulﬁll.
• Question analysis: In this step, the subject matter experts need to deﬁne what are the key questions for the
chatbot to answer within the scenario deﬁned. These key questions are built as intents in the chatbot later. The
subject matter experts also need to provide questions that chatbot developers can use to train the chatbot for
each key question/intent. Ideally, the training data are expected to be collected from existing data sources such
6

A PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 28, 2023
as call centre logs. However, these existing data are not easy to get. Thus, the subject matter experts need to
script or create the questions. For example, super business users in the business domain are grouped together
and asked to think how they would ask the question as if they ask the questions to their colleagues or think of
how they are asked for such type of questions in their day to day job. This group of uses are then asked to
write down the questions for each key questions.
• Content design: After deﬁning the key questions, the subject matter experts need to write responses to be
displayed to user by the chatbot.
• Conversation ﬂow design: Once the content is completed, the subject matter experts need to design the
dialogues that mimic human interaction. This step also needs to consider requirements on escalation to human
agent.
• Interface design: Sometimes subject matter experts contribute to the design of user interface.
Responsible AI risk assessment pattern needs to be adopted to check if the deﬁned scenarios describe any unethical
narratives, whether the training data collected from existing data sources have any sensitive data or bias issue, whether
the participated subject matter experts are diverse enough across gender, culture, race, age, expertise, etc. Ethical user
story pattern can be used to collect the non-functional and ethical requirements for chatbot interface design, e.g., the
chatbot interface design should consider the users who are colour blinded. Data requirement throughout the entire
lifecycle pattern is important to ensure that the data requirements are speciﬁed explicitly throughout the data lifecycle
including the model training stage which may involve training data collected from existing data sources or third parties.
Veriﬁable claim pattern allows the developers to verify the ethical qualities of the training data which are associated
with a veriﬁable claim on their ethical qualities. Diverse team pattern can be applied at the stage of conversation design.
Building a diverse team of subject matter experts can effectively eliminate bias in responses and improve the design of
dialogues. Ethics training pattern can be introduced to provide subject matter experts with knowledge and instructions
on how to implement responsible AI in practice. Human-centered interface design for explainable AI (XAI) pattern is
needed to provide helpful explanations to chatbot users, e.g., informing users that AI algorithms are used to generate
responses.
5.1.3
Implementation
After completing the conversation design, these ”raw materials” are handed over to a developer to conﬁgure into the
chatbot platform, i.e., IBM Watson Assistant in this study. The developer needs to do the following conﬁgurations.
• Skill: A skill is created with the chatbot name.
• Intents: Intents are conﬁgured for key questions provided by the subject matter experts. The intent is then
trained with with utterances (sample questions) accordingly.
• Entities: Entities are created to capture the context. For example, card type can be an entity class, while values
can be credit card, debit card.
• Dialogue: A dialogue is built to capture the responses in dialogue nodes. The conversation ﬂow is conﬁgured
by the ﬂow control mechanism such as ”jump to” and setting of Disambiguation or Digression.
• Advanced features: The developer could turn on the advanced features depending on the use case and business
requirements, e.g., intent recommendations which use machine learning to uncover common topics in existing
catalogues to quickly train the chatbot on the most frequent issues and questions; auto-learning that allows
business to learn from customer choices to improve the journey.
• Integration with downstream systems: The developer integrates the responses with downstream systems.
Responsible AI risk assessment pattern is needed to examine whether there is any misconﬁguration by developers or
machine learning algorithms, whether there is any vulnerability in data integration or storage, whether there is any
privacy or bias issue with the sample questions for training.
Customised agile process pattern can be used to adapt the agile development process by incorporating responsible
AI principles. Extension points could be artefacts, roles, ceremonies, practices, and culture. Ethical principles could
be implemented through modifying the exiting artefacts (e.g., user stories) or adding new artefacts (e.g., regulatory
requirements). There is also a need to promote responsible AI through existing roles (e.g., product) or new roles (e.g.,
ethicist). Similarly, modiﬁcation of the existing ceremonies (e.g., sprint planning) or introduction of new ceremonies
(e.g., ethics-oriented meetings) could be considered. Practices (e.g., user acceptance testing) and culture (e.g., hiring)
are two effective ways to address ethical concerns in the agile development process.
7

A PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 28, 2023
Tight coupling of AI and non-AI development pattern ensures the development of chatbot and other downstream systems
are tightly coupled. The teams can share the same sprints and stand-up meetings, and use common co-versioning
registry to manage the artifacts and track the progress.
AI mode switcher pattern is required for the conﬁgurations made by the machine learning algorithms. All the suggested
conﬁgurations need to be reviewed and approved by developers before being released into production.
Data requirements throughout the entire lifecycle pattern can be used to describe the requirements on data collection/in-
tegration and storage taking into account all the involved roles.
Co-versioning registry pattern can be used to capture the relationships and dependencies of conversation design
materials and implementation conﬁgurations.
Ethical construction with reuse pattern allows the developers to reuse the previous conﬁgurations (e.g., intents) that
have passed the responsible AI risk assessment.
5.1.4
Testing
This step is relatively straight forward. Conversations are tested with various testing methods such as unit testing,
regression testing. Responsible AI risk assessment pattern can be used to check if there is any ethical risks with the test
cases. Particularly, ethical assessment for test cases is required to assess all the test cases. Ethical acceptance testing
pattern is needed to determine if the ethical requirements are met. Subject matter experts are involved in the testing
process and perform the ethical acceptance testing.
5.1.5
Deployment
In this step, the tested chatbot is deployed throughout the pipeline and released to production for end user to use.
Oftentimes the ﬁnal step to release to production needs to be approved by the chatbot owner or conversation owner.
Responsible AI risk assessment pattern is needed to assess if there is any risk when integrating the chatbot with
other systems and deploying the chatbot at scale. Continuous deployment pattern can be used to implement different
deployment strategies. For example, phased deployment allows the chatbot to be only deployed for a subset group of
users initially. The new version of chatbot rolls out incrementally and serves alongside the old version to reduce the
ethical risk. Standardized reporting pattern is essential for governing AI systems. Organisations can setup standarized
process and templates for informing the new release of chatbot to different stakeholders, such as ﬁnancial service
regulators and customers.
5.1.6
Monitoring
In this step, the performance of chatbot is measured by multiple metrics, such as Net Promoter Score (NPS) value,
feedback from user, effectiveness and coverage of conversation. Most of the chatbot platforms provide analytic
capability. Various metrics can be chosen and applied depending on business cases and needs. Also, this step ensures
the chatbot answers the right questions, answers the questions in a right way, and answers enough questions. For the
proactive chatbot, it means the chatbot needs to take the right actions.
Responsible AI risk assessment pattern can be used to check if there are any missing or wrong metrics, whether there
are any ethical issues in the questions from users and responses generated by chatbot, whether there is any bias in the
results of user feedback.
Ethical black box pattern can be used to continuously record the monitored data for improvement or auditing. Various
approaches and methods can be applied to analyse the monitored data. Transaction review is one of the most popular
methods for data analysis. When end users have conversation with the chatbot, the chat history can be captured and
stored, e.g., by an immutable data ledger. Then all or a subset of the chat history can be review by the subject matter
experts or auditors.
Independent oversight pattern can be applied for auditing purposes Consistence issues need to be taken into consideration
if multiple people perform the review as they may have different understanding.
K-fold cross validation pattern and blind testing pattern can also be applied to evaluate the ethical performance of
chatbot. These two patterns are new patterns we identiﬁed through the case study.
Once the analysis is completed, the developers conﬁgure and build the improvements required into the chatbot. The
improvements can be as simple as retraining the chatbot or modifying the responses to provide more accurate and
helpful responses in a responsible manner. It can also mean building new dialogue branches or responses that are
8

A PREPRINT - FEBRUARY 28, 2023
required from the end users, or even integrating with new capability or other systems to provide more functionality for a
new use case.
6
CONCLUSION
In this article, we discuss how we use a pattern-oriented responsible engineering approach to address the responsible
AI challenges. We demonstrate the usefulness of the Responsible AI Pattern Catalogue in identifying and mitigating
responsible AI risks through the chatbot development use case. We are currently examining the responsible AI risks
of our internal AI projects across different domains and recommending pattern-driven migitations using the pattern
catalogue. To automate the risk assessment process, we are developing a knowledge graph supported tool which can
be used by different levels/types of stakeholders. The Responsible AI knowledge graph is constructed based on AI
incidents database, our Responsible AI Pattern Catalogue and Question Bank.
