Proc. National Conference on Recent Trends in Information Systems (2006) 200-203 
Handwritten Arabic Numeral Recognition using a Multi Layer Perceptron 
 
Nibaran Das+, Ayatullah Faruk Mollah*, Sudip Saha*, Syed Sahidul Haque* 
 
+ Computer Science and Engineering Department, 
Techno India, Kolkata-700091, India 
* Computer Science and Engineering Department, 
Jadavpur University, Kolkata-700032, India 
 

 
Abstract 
Handwritten numeral recognition is in general a 
benchmark problem of Pattern Recognition and Artificial 
Intelligence. Compared to the problem of printed numeral 
recognition, the problem of handwritten numeral 
recognition is compounded due to variations in shapes 
and sizes of handwritten characters. Considering all 
these, the problem of handwritten numeral recognition is 
addressed under the present work in respect to 
handwritten 
Arabic 
numerals. 
Arabic 
is 
spoken 
throughout the Arab World and the fifth most popular 
language in the world slightly before Portuguese and 
Bengali. For the present work, we have developed a 
feature set of 88 features is designed to represent samples 
of handwritten Arabic numerals for this work. It includes 
72 shadow and 16 octant features. A Multi Layer 
Perceptron (MLP) based classifier is used here for 
recognition handwritten Arabic digits represented with 
the said feature set. On experimentation with a database 
of 3000 samples, the technique yields an average 
recognition rate of 94.93% evaluated after three-fold 
cross validation of results. It is useful for applications 
related to OCR of handwritten Arabic Digit and can also 
be extended to include OCR of handwritten characters of 
Arabic alphabet 
  
1. Introduction 
 
 
 
The automatic recognition of digits on scanned images 
has wide commercial importance. It has applications in 
OCR systems, automatic pin code recognition, cheque 
reading, collecting data from filled in forms. Though there 
are some commercially available softwares, mainly for 
printed character recognition of some languages, But the 
success yet to be extended for hand written characters. 
Such technique is to facilitate smoother interaction 
between 
man 
and 
machine. 
The 
technique 
of  
Handwritten Arabic numeral recognition can contribute 
tremendously to the development of a complete OCR 
system. Therefore OCR of handwritten numerals is still 
an active area of research. 
               The past work on OCR of handwritten alphabets 
and numerals has mostly found to concentrate on Roman 
script[3] related to English and some other  European  
languages, and scripts related to Asian languages like 
Chinese [2], Korean, Japanese. Among Indian scripts, 
Devnagari, Tamil, Oriya and Bangle have started to 
receive attention for OCR related research in recent years. 
Compared to these, Arabic is one of the major languages 
in the world. It is spoken in a large area including North 
Africa, most of the Arabian Peninsula and other parts of 
the Middle East. About 500 million peoples speak in this 
language. Rankwise it is the fifth most popular language 
in the world. Popularity wise Portugese and Bengali 
slightly trail behind Arabic. Arabic  is the official 
language of  around 24 countries like Algeria, Baharain, 
Egypt etc and also the national language of Mali, Senegal, 
Somali.  More over Arabic is the liturgical language of 
Islam. It is sometimes difficult to translate Islamic 
concepts, and concepts specific to Arab culture, with out 
using original Arabic terminology.  The Arabic script has 
been adapted to such diverse languages as Persian (Farsi), 
Turkish, Spanish, Urdu, and Swahili. In spite of that, 
OCR of handwritten Arabic script including numerals has 
not so far received sufficient attention. Majority of the 
past work related to OCR of Arabic script was done with 
the printed characters[1]. 
 Arabic words and characters within the words are 
written from right to left. But Arabic number is written 
from left to right. In the light of above facts, the present 
work concentrates on the development of an MLP based 
pattern classifier for recognition of handwritten Arabic 
numerals with a feature set of 88 features. There is also 
enough scope for extension of this work to include 
handwritten characters of Arabic alphabet . Due to non-
availability of some standardized data set, recognition 
performances of the present work cannot be compared 
with others. However, for currently available data set, the 
work shows satisfactory recognition performances with 

 
some specific suggestions to be tried in future for further 
performance enhancement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roman 
Digit 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roman 
Digit 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
             Fig.1. The decimal digit set of Arabic script                                                    
 
2 The Feature Sets 
Choice of suitable features for pattern classes, as 
mentioned before, is a domain specific design Issue. In 
the present work, a feature set of 88 features are designed 
for classification of handwritten Arabic digit patterns. The 
feature set consists of two types of features. The features 
constituting this set are so selected that their values 
remain close to each other for the patterns of the same 
class and differ appreciably for the patterns of different 
classes. For extraction of features from the digit images, 
each digit image is first enclosed within minimal 
bounding boxes and then scaled to 32X32 pixel sizes. The 
scaled images, which are defined with gray scale pixel 
values, are finally converted to binary images through 
thresholding.  
 
2.1. Shadow Features 
                   Shadow 
features 
are 
computed 
by 
considering the lengths of projections of a digit image, as 
shown in Fig. 2, on the four sides and eight octant 
dividing sides of the minimal bounding box enclosing the 
same. Considering the lengths of projections on three 
sides of each such octant, 24 shadow features are 
extracted from each window of the digit image, which is 
divided into eight octants inside the minimal box. Each 
value of the shadow feature so computed is to be 
normalized by dividing it with the maximum possible 
length of the projections on the respective side. Here we 
have finally considered 3 overlapping windows, each 
producing 24 shadow features. Thus 72 features are 
considered with 3 overlapping windows. 
 
2.2. Centroid features 
               Coordinates of centroids of black pixels in all 
the 8 octants of a digit image are considered to add 16 
features in all to the feature set. Fig. 3(a-b) shows 
approximate locations of all such centroids on two 
different digit images. It is noteworthy how these features 
can be of help to distinguish the two images. 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Fig 2. An illustration for shadow features.  
(a-d) Direction of fictitious light rays as 
assume for taking the projection of an 
image segment on each side of all 
octants.  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3 An Illustration of the 16 Centroid features 
 
3. The MLP Classifier 
In the present work, an MLP classifier is employed for 
recognition of unknown digit patterns using the 88 
element feature set. The MLP is a special kind of 
Artificial Neural Network (ANN). ANNs are developed to 
replicate learning and generalization abilities of human’s 
behaviour with an attempt to model the functions of 
biological neural networks of the human brain. 
  
Nowadays MLP is the mostly used 
classifier in the field of handwritten character recognition 
among the researcher [4].Architecturally, an MLP is a 
feed-forward layered network of artificial neurons. Each 
artificial neuron in the MLP computes a sigmoid function 
of the weighted sum of all its inputs. An MLP consists of 
one input layer, one output layer and a number of hidden 
or intermediate layers, as shown in Fig 4. The output from 
every neuron in a layer of the MLP is connected to all 
inputs of each neuron in the immediate next layer of the 
same. Neurons in the input layer of the MLP are all 
basically dummy neurons as they are used simply to pass 
on the input to the next layer just by computing an 
identity function each. 

 
  
The numbers of neurons in the input and the 
output layers of an MLP are chosen depending on the 
problem to be solved. The number of neurons in other 
layers and the number of layers in the MLP are all 
determined by a trial and error method at the time of its 
training. An ANN requires training to learn an unknown 
input-output relationship to solve a problem.  
 
  Depending on the models of ANNs, training is 
performed either under supervision of some teacher (i.e., 
with labeled data of known input-output responses) or 
without supervision. The MLP to be used for the present 
work requires supervised training. During training of an 
MLP 
weights 
or 
strengths 
of 
neuron-to-neuron 
connections, also called synapses, are iteratively tuned so 
that it can respond appropriately to all training data and 
also to other data, not considered at the time of training. 
Learning and generalization abilities of an ANN is 
determined on the basis of how best it can respond under 
these two respective situations. 
 
The MLP classifier designed for the present 
work is trained with the Back Propagation (BP) 
algorithm. It minimizes the sum of the squared errors for 
the training samples by conducting a gradient descent 
search in the weight space. The number neurons in a 
hidden layer in the same are also adjusted during its 
training. 
      The problem of pattern classification involves two 
successive transformations as follows: 
M → F → D 
 
Where, M, F and D stand for the measurement 
space, the feature space and the decision space 
respectively. Once a feature set is fixed up, it is left with 
the design of a mapping (δ) as follows: 
 
δ: F → D 
 
ANNs with their learning and generalization 
abilities can approximate a general class of functions 
given below. 
 
f :
 
 
 
 
Pattern classification with ANNs requires 
approximating δ as a discrete valued function shown 
below. 
where, n and m denotes the number of features and the 
number of pattern classes respectively. So an ANN based 
pattern classifier requires n number of neurons in the 
input layer and m number of neurons in the output layer. 
Conventionally 1-out-of-m representation is used for its 
output. 
4. Results and Discussion 
For preparation of the training and the test sets of 
samples, a database of 3000 digit samples is formed by 
collecting optically scanned handwritten characters 
specimens of 10 symbols from each of 300 people of 
different age groups and sexes. A training set of 2000 
samples and a test set of 1000 samples are then formed. 
All these samples are scaled to 32X32 pixel images first 
and then converted to binary images through thresholding 
 
For the present work, a single layer MLP, i.e., an MLP 
with one hidden layer is chosen. This is mainly to keep 
the computational requirement of the MLP low without 
affecting its function approximation capability. According 
to Universal Approximation theorem [6] a single hidden 
layer is sufficient to compute a uniform approximation to 
a given training set. 
To design an MLP for classification of 
handwritten alphabetic characters, several runs of BP 
algorithm with learning rate (η) = 0.8 and momentum 
term (α)=0.7 are executed for different numbers of 
neurons in its hidden layer. Recognition performances of 
the MLP on the test sets observed from this 
 
 
Fig. 4. A block diagram of an MLP shown as a feed forward 
neural network. 
 
 
 
 
True 
Class 
3 
7 
3 
6 
4 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
Fig. 5 (a-e). Some test samples classified truly by the MLP 
classifier. 
 
 
 
 
 
True Class 
8 
6 
2 
6 
7 
Recognized 
Class 
6 
9 
3 
9 
2 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
 
Fig. 6 (a-e). Some test samples misclassified by the MLP 
classifier. 

 
experimentation are given in Table1 with three fold cross 
validation of results 
Curves showing variation of the Recognition 
performance of the MLP, for the three folds of test 
sampleswith increase in the number of neurons in its 
hidden layer are plotted in Fig. 7  from the Table 1 . It is 
required to fix up the number of neurons in the hidden 
layer of MLP so that it can show the optimal recognition 
performance on the test set. 
Recognition performances of the MLP, as 
observed from the curve shown in Fig. 7, initially rise as 
the number of neurons in the hidden layer is increased and 
fall after the same crosses some limiting value. It reflects 
the fact that for some fixed training and test sets, learning 
and generalization abilities of the MLP improve as the 
number of neurons in its hidden layer as increases up to 
certain limiting value and any further increase in the 
number of neurons in the hidden layer thereafter degrades 
the abilities. It is called the over-fitting problem. 
 
Table 1. Recognition performances of the MLP with different 
numbers of neurons in the hidden layers 
Percentage recognition rate of the 
MLP on test samples 
No of Hidden 
neurons 
Fold#1 
Fold#2 
Fold#3 
20 
94.90 
94.80 
93.20 
25 
95.10 
94.30 
93.20 
30 
95.00 
94.80 
93.00 
35 
95.30 
94.70 
93.50 
40 
95.40 
94.70 
93.20 
45 
95.40 
94.50 
93.00 
50 
95.30 
95.50 
93.30 
52 
95.40 
95.20 
93.00 
53 
95.60 
95.40 
93.70 
54 
95.80 
95.40 
93.80 
55 
95.60 
95.30 
93.50 
60 
95.30 
95.20 
92.80 
65 
95.30 
95.50 
92.80 
70 
95.30 
94.80 
93.30 
The optimal recognition performance of the 
MLP is observed at a point, on the curve of Fig. 7, where 
the number of neurons in its hidden layer is set to 54 on 
Set#1. Similarly, for Set#3 the optimal recognition 
performance is achieved where the number of neurons in 
its hidden layer is also 54. On Set#2, the optimal 
recognition performance is observed with 50 hidden layer 
neurons. However, the average recognition performance 
among the three sets is best with 54 neurons in the hidden 
layer. Thus the number of neurons in the hidden layer of 
the MLP is finally fixed up to 54. With this, the design 
process is completed producing an MLP (88-54-10) for 
recognition of handwritten numerals on the basis of the 
feature set explained before. The average Recognition 
performance of this MLP on the test sets, as observed 
with 54 hidden neurons, is 95% after 3-fold cross 
validation of results. 
 
 
Fig. 7. Curves show variation of recognition performances of 
the MLP as the number of neurons in its hidden layer is 
increased  
 
Acknowledgement 
 
Authors are thankful to the “Center for Microprocessor 
Application for Training Education and Research”, 
“Project on Storage Retrieval and Understanding of Video 
for Multimedia” and Computer Science & Engineering 
Department, 
Jadavpur 
University, 
for 
providing 
infrastructural facilities during progress of the work. One 
of the authors, Mr. Nibaran Das, is thankful to Techno 
India for kindly permitting him to carry on the research 
work.
