Approximate FPGA-based LSTMs under
Computation Time Constraints
Michalis Rizakis, Stylianos I. Venieris, Alexandros Kouris, and
Christos-Savvas Bouganis
Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London
{michail.rizakis14, stylianos.venieris10, a.kouris16,

Abstract. Recurrent Neural Networks and in particular Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM) networks have demonstrated state-of-the-art ac-
curacy in several emerging Artiﬁcial Intelligence tasks. However, the
models are becoming increasingly demanding in terms of computational
and memory load. Emerging latency-sensitive applications including mo-
bile robots and autonomous vehicles often operate under stringent com-
putation time constraints. In this paper, we address the challenge of de-
ploying computationally demanding LSTMs at a constrained time budget
by introducing an approximate computing scheme that combines itera-
tive low-rank compression and pruning, along with a novel FPGA-based
LSTM architecture. Combined in an end-to-end framework, the approx-
imation method’s parameters are optimised and the architecture is con-
ﬁgured to address the problem of high-performance LSTM execution in
time-constrained applications. Quantitative evaluation on a real-life im-
age captioning application indicates that the proposed methods required
up to 6.5× less time to achieve the same application-level accuracy com-
pared to a baseline method, while achieving an average of 25× higher
accuracy under the same computation time constraints.
Keywords: LSTM, Low-Rank Approximation, Pruning, FPGAs
1
Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) is a machine learning model which oﬀers
the capability of recognising long-range dependencies in sequential and temporal
data. RNN models, with the prevalence of Long Short-Term Memory (LSTMs)
networks, have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in various AI appli-
cations including scene labelling [1] and image generation [2]. Moreover, LSTMs
have been successfully employed for AI tasks in complex environments including
human trajectory prediction [3] and ground classiﬁcation [4] on mobile robots,
with more recent systems combining language and image processing in tasks
such as image captioning [5] and video understanding [6].
Despite the high predictive power of LSTMs, their computational and mem-
ory demands pose a challenge with respect to deployment in latency-sensitive
and power-constrained applications. Modern intelligent systems such as mobile
robots and drones that employ LSTMs to perceive their surroundings often oper-
ate under time-constrained, latency-sensitive settings. In such scenarios, retriev-
ing the best possible output from an LSTM given a constraint in computation
arXiv:1801.02190v1  [cs.CV]  7 Jan 2018

II
time may be necessary to ensure the timely operation of the system. Moreover,
the requirements of such applications for low absolute power consumption, which
would enable a longer battery life, prohibit the deployment of high-performance,
but power-hungry platforms, such as multi-core CPUs and GPUs. In this con-
text, reconﬁgurable computing in the form of Field-Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGAs) constitutes a promising target device that can combine customisation
and reconﬁgurability to achieve high performance at a low power envelope.
In this work, an approximate computing scheme along with a novel hardware
architecture for LSTMs are proposed as an end-to-end framework to address
the problem of high-performance LSTM execution in time-constrained settings.
Our approach proposes an iterative approximation method that applies simulta-
neously low-rank compression and pruning of the LSTM model with a tunable
number of reﬁnement iterations. The iterative property enables our framework to
(i) exploit the resilience of the target application to approximations, (ii) explore
the trade-oﬀbetween computational and memory load and application-level ac-
curacy and (iii) run the LSTM under a time constraint with increasing accuracy
as a function of computation time budget. At the hardware level, our system con-
sists of a novel reconﬁgurable architecture mapped on an FPGA which exploits
the inherent parallelism of the LSTM, parametrised with respect to the level of
compression and pruning. By optimising the parameters of the approximation
method, the proposed framework generates a system tailored to the target ap-
plication, the available FPGA resources and the computation time constraints.
2
Background
2.1
LSTM Model
A vanilla RNN typically processes an input and generates an output at each
time step. Internally, the network has recurrent connections from the output at
one time step to the hidden units at the next time step which enables it to cap-
ture sequential patterns. The LSTM model diﬀers from vanilla RNNs in that it
comprises control units named gates, instead of layers. A typical LSTM has four
gates. The input gate (Eq. (1)), along with the cell gate (Eq. (4)) are responsible
for determining how much of the current input will propagate to the output. The
forget gate (Eq. (2)) is responsible for determining whether the previous state of
the LSTM will be forgotten or not, while the output gate (Eq. (3)) determines
how much of the current state will be allowed to propagate to the ﬁnal output of
the LSTM at the current time step. Computationally, the gates are matrix-vector
multiplication blocks, followed by a nonlinear elementwise activation function.
The equations for the LSTM model are shown below:
i(t) = σ(W ixx(t) + W ihh(t−1))
(1)
f (t) = σ(W fxx(t) + W fhh(t−1))
(2)
o(t) = σ(W oxx(t) + W ohh(t−1))
(3)
c(t) = f (t) ⊙c(t−1) + i(t) ⊙tanh(W cxx + W chh(t−1))
(4)
h(t) = c(t) ⊙o(t)
(5)

III
i(t), f (t) and o(t) are the input, forget and output gates respectively, c(t) is the
current state of the LSTM, h(t−1) is the previous output, x(t) is the current
input at time t and σ(·) represents the sigmoid function. Eq. (5) is frequently
found in the literature as h(t) = c(t) ⊙tanh(o(t)) with tanh(·) applied to the
output gate. In this work, we follow the image captioning LSTM proposed in [5]
which removes the tanh(·) from the output gate and therefore we end up with
Eq. (5). Finally, all the W matrices denote the weight matrices that contain the
trainable parameters of the model, which are assumed to be provided.
3
Related Work
The eﬀectiveness of RNNs has attracted the attention of the architecture and
reconﬁgurable computing communities. Li et al. [7] proposed an FPGA-based
accelerator for the training of an RNN language model. In [8], the authors focus
on the optimised deployment of the Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) model [9] in
data centres with server-grade FPGAs, ASICs, GPUs and CPUs and propose
an algorithmic memoization-based method to reduce the computational load at
the expense of higher memory consumption. The authors of [10] present an em-
pirical study of the eﬀect of diﬀerent architectural designs on the computational
resource, on-chip memory capacity and oﬀ-chip memory bandwidth requirements
of an LSTM model. Finally, Guan et al. [11] proposed an FPGA-based LSTM
accelerator optimised for speech recognition on a Xilinx VC707 FPGA platform.
From an algorithmic perspective, recent works have followed a model-hardware
co-design approach. Han et al. [12] proposed an FPGA-based speech recognition
engine that employs a load-balance-aware compression scheme in order to com-
press the LSTM model size. Wang et al. [13] presented a method that addresses
compression at several levels including the use of circulant matrices for three of
the LSTM gates and the quantisation of the trained parameters, together with
the corresponding ASIC-based hardware architecture. Zhang et al. [14] presented
an FPGA-based accelerator for a Long-Term Recurrent Convolutional Network
(LRCN) for video footage description that consists of a CNN followed by an
LSTM. Their design focuses on balancing the resource allocation between the
layers of the LRCN and pruning the fully-connected and LSTM layers to min-
imise the oﬀ-chip memory accesses. [12], [13] and [14] deviate from the faithful
LSTM mapping of previous works but also require a retraining step in order
to compensate for the introduced error of each proposed method. Finally, He
et al. [15] investigated algorithmic strategies for CNN model selection under
computation time constraints for both training and testing.
Our work diﬀers from the majority of existing eﬀorts by proposing a hardware
architecture together with an approximate computational method for LSTMs
that is application-aware and tunable with respect to the required computation
time and the application-level error. Our framework follows the same spirit as
[12][13][14] by proposing an approximation to the model, but in contrast to
these methods our scheme does not require a retraining phase for the model and
assumes no access to the training set, while compensating for the induced error
by means of iterative reﬁnement, making it suitable for applications where the
dataset is privacy-critical and the quality of the approximation improves as the
time availability increases.

IV
4
Methodology
In this section, the main components of the proposed framework are presented
(Fig. 1). Given an LSTM model with its set of weight matrices and a small
application evaluation set, the proposed system searches for an appropriate ap-
proximation scheme that meets the application’s needs, by applying low-rank
compression and pruning on the model. The design space is traversed by means
of a rooﬂine model to determine the highest performing conﬁguration of the pro-
posed architecture on the target FPGA. In this manner, the trade-oﬀbetween
computation time and application-level error is explored for diﬀerent approxima-
tion schemes. The design point to be implemented on the device is selected based
on user-speciﬁed requirements of the maximum computation time or application-
level error tolerance.
Fig. 1. Design ﬂow of the proposed framework
4.1
Approximations for LSTMs
At the core of an LSTM’s computational workload lies the matrix-vector multi-
plications in each of the four gates. Neural networks have been extensively stud-
ied to have redundancy in terms of their trained parameters [16]. To reduce the
computational demands of the LSTM, we propose an approximate computing
scheme that enables the tuning between computational cost and application-
level accuracy. The proposed approach exploits the statistical redundancy of the
LSTM by acting at two levels: (i) approximating the weight matrices with a
low-rank, SVD-based decomposition and (ii) pruning the network by sparsifying
the weight matrices based on an importance criterion of their elements.
Low-rank approximation. Based on the set of LSTM equations (1)-(4), each
gate consists of two weight matrices corresponding to the current input and pre-
vious output vectors respectively. In our scheme, we construct an augmented ma-
trix by concatenating the input and output weight matrices as shown in Eq. (7).
Similarly, we concatenate the input and previous output vectors (Eq. (6)) and
thus the overall gate computation is given by Eq. (8).
˜x(t) =
h
x(t)T
h(t−1)T iT
(6)

V
W i = [W ix W ih] ,
∀i ∈[1, 4]
(7)
yi = nonlin(W i˜x(t)),
∀i ∈[1, 4]
(8)
where nonlin(·) is either the sigmoid function σ(·) or tanh. In this way, a sin-
gle weight matrix is formed for each gate, denoted by W i ∈RR×C for the ith
gate. We perform a full SVD decomposition on the four augmented matrices
independently as W i = U iΣiV T
i , ∀i ∈[1, 4], where U i ∈RR×R, Σi ∈RR×C
and V i ∈RC×C and utilise a rank-1 approximation to obtain g
W i = σi
1ui
1viT
1
by keeping the singular vectors that correspond to the largest singular value.
Pruning by means of network sparsiﬁcation. The second level of approx-
imation on the LSTM comprises the structured pruning of the connectivity be-
tween neurons. With each neural connection being captured as an element of
the weight matrices, we express network pruning as sparsiﬁcation applied on the
augmented weight matrices (Eq. (7)). To represent a sparse LSTM, we introduce
four binary mask matrices F i ∈{0, 1}R×C, i ∈[1, 4], with each entry represent-
ing whether a connection is pruned or not. Overall, we employ the following
notation for a (weight, mask) matrix pair {W i, F i | i ∈[1, 4]}.
In the proposed scheme, we explore sparsity with respect to the connections
per output neuron and constrain each output to have the same number of inputs.
We cast the LSTM pruning to an optimisation problem of the following form.
min
F i ||W i −F i ⊙W i||2
2,
s.t. ||f i
j||0 = NZ, ∀i ∈[1, 4], ∀j ∈[1, n]
(9)
where f i
j is the jth row of F i and NZ is the number of non-zero elements on
each row of F i. || · ||0 is the l0 pseudo-norm denoting the number of non-zero
entries in a vector. The solution to the optimisation problem in Eq. (9) is given
by keeping the NZ elements on each row of W i with the highest absolute value
and setting their indices to 1 in F i.
In contrast to the existing approaches, the proposed pruning method does
not employ a retraining step and hence removes the requirement for the training
set, which is important for privacy-critical applications, as well as the computa-
tionally expensive step of retraining. Even though our sparsiﬁcation method does
not explicitly capture the impact of pruning on the application-level accuracy,
our design space exploration, detailed in Section 5, searches over diﬀerent levels
of sparsity and as a result it explores the eﬀect of pruning on the application.
Hybrid compression and pruning. By applying both low-rank approxima-
tion and pruning, we end up with the following weight matrix approximation:
f
W i = F i ⊙(σi
1ui
1viT
1 )
(10)
In this setting, for the ith gate the ranking of the absolute values in each row of
the rank-1 approximation σi
1ui
1viT
1 depends only on vi
1, with each element of the
vector σi
1ui
1 operating as a scaling factor for all elements of a row. Therefore, for
the ith gate all the rows of F i become identical and hence can be represented
by a single mask vector f i ∈{0, 1}C. This leads to a weight matrix with zeros
along n−NZ of its columns, which is described by the following expression:

VI
f
W i = σi
1ui
1(f i ⊙viT
1 )
(11)
˜yi =
Nsteps
X
n=1
n
σi(n)
1
ui(n)
1

(f i(n) ⊙vi(n)
1
)T ˜x(t)o
(12)
In order to obtain a reﬁnement mechanism, we propose an iterative algorithm,
presented in Algorithm 1, that employs both the low-rank approximation and
pruning methods to progressively update the weight matrix. On lines 4-6 the
ﬁrst approximation of the weight matrix is constructed by obtaining the rank-1
approximation of the original matrix and applying pruning in order to have NZ
non-zero elements on each row, as in Eq. (11). Next, the weight matrix is reﬁned
for Nsteps iterations, by computing the error matrix E (line 10) and employing
its pruned, rank-1 approximation as our update (line 15).
Algorithm 1 Iterative LSTM Model Approximation
Inputs:
1: Weight matrices W i ∈RR×C, ∀i ∈[1, 4]
2: Number of non-zero elements, NZ
3: Number of reﬁnement steps, Nsteps
Steps:
1: - - For all gates - -
2: for i = 1 to 4 do
3:
- - Initialise weight matrix approximation - -
4:
h
ui(0)
1
, σi(0)
1
, vi(0)
1
i
= SVD(W i)1
5:
f i(0) ←solution to Eq. (9) for vector vi(0)
1
6:
f
W
(0)
i
= σi(0)
1
ui(0)
1

f i(0) ⊙vi(0)
1
T
7:
- - Apply reﬁnements - -
8:
for n = 1 to Nsteps do
9:
- - Compute error matrix - -
10:
E = W i −f
W
(0)
i
11:
- - Compute reﬁnement - -
12:
h
ui(n)
1
, σi(n)
1
, vi(n)
1
i
= SVD(E)1
13:
f i(n) ←solution to optimisation problem (9) for vector vi(n)
1
14:
- - Update weight matrix approximation - -
15:
f
W
(n)
i
= f
W
(n−1)
i
+ σi(n)
1
ui(n)
1

f i(n) ⊙vi(n)
1
T
16:
end for
17: end for
Notes: (i) SVD(X)1 returns the rank-1 SVD-based approximation of X.
Diﬀerent combinations of levels of sparsity and reﬁnement iterations cor-
respond to diﬀerent design points in the computation-accuracy space. In this
respect, the number of non-zero elements in each binary mask vector and the
number of iterations are exposed to the design space exploration as tunable
parameters (NZ, Nsteps) to explore the LSTM computation-accuracy trade-oﬀ.

VII
4.2
Architecture
The proposed FPGA architecture for LSTMs is illustrated in Fig. 2. The main
strategy of the architecture includes the exploitation of the coarse-grained par-
allelism between the four LSTM gates and is parametrised with respect to the
ﬁne-grained parallelism in the dot product and elementwise operations of the
LSTM, allowing for a compile-time tunable performance-resource trade-oﬀ.
SVD and Binary Masks Precomputation. In Algorithm 1, the number of
reﬁnement iterations (Nsteps), the level of sparsity (NZ) and the trained weight
matrices are data-independent and known at compile time. As such, the required
SVD decompositions along with the corresponding binary masks are precom-
puted for all Nsteps iterations at compile time. As a result, the singular values
σi(n)
1
, the vectors ui(n)
1
and only the non-zero elements of the sparse f i(n) ⊙vi(n)
1
are stored in the oﬀ-chip memory, so that they can be looked-up at run time.
Fig. 2. Diagram of proposed hardware architecture
Inter-gate and Intra-gate Parallelism. In the proposed architecture, each
gate is allocated a dedicated hardware gate unit with all gates operating in
parallel. At each LSTM time-step t, a hardware gate unit is computing its output
by performing Nsteps reﬁnement iterations as in Eq. (12). At the beginning of
the time-step, the current vector ˜x(t) is stored on-chip as it will be reused in each
iteration by all four gates. The vectors ui(n)
1
and vi(n)
1
for each gate, along with
their singular values σi(n)
1
, are streamed in the architecture from the oﬀ-chip
memory in a tiled manner. ui(n)
1
and vi(n)
1
are tiled with tile sizes of Tr and Tc
respectively, leading to R
Tr and C
Tc tiles sequentially streamed in the architecture.
At each gate, a dot product unit is responsible for computing the dot product
of the current tile of vi(n)
1
with the corresponding elements of the input ˜x(t). The
dot product unit is unrolled by a factor of Tc in order to process one tile of vi(n)
1
per cycle. After accumulating the partial results of all the
C
Tc tiles, the result is
produced and multiplied with the scalar σi(n)
1
. The multiplication result is passed
as a constant operand in a multiplier array, with ui(n)
1
as the other operand. The
multiplier array has a size of Tr in order to match the tiling of ui(n)
1
. As a ﬁnal
stage, an array of Tr accumulators performs the summation across the Nsteps
iterations, as expressed in Eq. (12) to produce the ﬁnal gate output.
The outputs from the input, forget and output gates are passed through a
sigmoid unit while the output of the cell gate is passed through a tanh unit. After

VIII
the nonlinearities stage, the produced outputs are multiplied element-by-element
as dictated by the LSTM equations to produce the cell state c(t) (Eq. (4)) and
the current output vector h(t) (Eq. (5)). The three multiplier arrays and the one
adder array all have a size of Tr to match the tile size of the incoming vectors
and exploit the available parallelism.
5
Design Space Exploration
Having parametrised the proposed approximation method over NZ and Nsteps
and its underlying architecture over NZ and tile sizes (Tr, Tc), corresponding
metrics need to be employed for exploring the eﬀects of each parameter on
performance and accuracy. The approximation method parameters are stud-
ied based on an application-level evaluation metric (discussed in Section 5.2),
that measures the impact of each applied approximation on the accuracy of the
target application. In terms of the hardware architecture, rooﬂine performance
modelling is employed for exhaustively exploring the design space formed by all
possible tile size combinations, to obtain the highest performing design point
(discussed in Section 5.1). Based on those two metrics, the computation time-
accuracy trade-oﬀis explored.
5.1
Rooﬂine Model
The design space of architectural conﬁgurations for all tile size combinations
of Tr and Tc is explored exhaustively by performance modelling. The rooﬂine
model [17] is used to develop a performance model for the proposed architecture
by relating the peak attainable performance (in terms of throughput) for each
conﬁguration on a particular FPGA device with its operational intensity, which
relates the ratio of computational load to oﬀ-chip memory traﬃc. Based on this
model, each design point’s performance can be bounded either by the peak plat-
form throughput or by the maximum performance that the platform’s memory
system can support. In this context, rooﬂine models are developed for predicting
the maximum attainable performance for varying levels of pruning (NZ).
Given a tile size pair, the performance of the architecture is calculated as:
Perf(ops/s) = workload(ops/input)
II(cycles/input)
= 4Nsteps(2NZ + 2R + 1) + 37R
max(Nstepsmax( R
Tr , NZ
Tc ), 37 R
Tr ) (13)
where each gate performs 2NZ+2R+1 operations per iteration and 37R accounts
for the rest of the operations to produce the ﬁnal outputs. The initiation interval
(II) is determined based on the slowest between the gate stage and the rest of
the computations. Similarly, a gate’s initiation interval depends on the slowest
between the dot product unit and the multiplier array (Fig. 2).
Respectively, the operational intensity of the architecture, also referred to in
the literature as Computation-to-Communication ratio (CTC), is formulated as:
CTC(ops/byte) =
operations(ops)
mem access(bytes) = 4Nsteps(2NZ + 2R + 1) + 37R
4(4Nsteps(NZ + R + 1) + 2R)
(14)
where the memory transfers include the singular vectors and the singular value
for each iteration of each gate and the write-back of the output and the cell state

IX
vectors to the oﬀ-chip memory. The augmented input vector ˜x(t) is stored on-
chip in order to be reused across the Nsteps iterations. All data are represented
with a single-precision ﬂoating-point format and require four bytes.
The number of design points allows enumerating all possible tile size com-
binations for each number of non-zero elements and obtaining the performance
and CTC values for the complete design space. Based on the target platform’s
peak performance, memory bandwidth and on-chip memory capacity, the sub-
space containing the platform-supported design points can be determined. The
proposed architecture is implemented by selecting the tile sizes (Tr, Tc) that
correspond to the highest performing design point within that subspace.
5.2
Evaluating the Impact of Approximations on the Application
The proposed framework requires a metric that would allow us to measure the
impact of the applied approximations on the application-level accuracy for dif-
ferent (NZ, Nsteps) pairs. In our methodology, the error induced by our approx-
imation methods is measured by running the target application end-to-end over
an evaluation set with both our approximated weight matrices given a selected
(NZ, Nsteps) pair and with the original pretrained LSTM, acting as a reference
model. By treating the output of the reference model as the ground truth, an
application-speciﬁc metric is employed that assesses the quality of the output
that was generated by the approximate model, exploring in this way the rela-
tionship between the level of approximation and the application-level accuracy.
6
Evaluation
The image captioning system presented by Vinyals et al. [5] (winner of the 2015
MSCOCO challenge) is examined as a case study for evaluating the proposed
framework. Input images are encoded by a CNN and fed to a trained LSTM
model to predict corresponding captions. In the proposed LSTM, each gate con-
sists of two R×R weight matrices, leading to a (R×C) augmented weight matrix
per gate with R = 512 and C = 2R for a total of 2.1 M parameters. To determine
the most suitable approximation scheme, we use a subset of the validation set
of the Common Objects in Context (COCO) dataset1, consisting of 35 images.
To obtain image captions that will act as ground truth for the evaluation of the
proposed approximation method, the reference image captioning application is
executed end-to-end over the evaluation set, using TensorFlow2. As a metric of
the eﬀect of low-rank approximation and pruning applied on the LSTM model,
we select Bi-lingual Evaluation Understudy (BLEU) [18], which is commonly
employed for the evaluation of machine translation’s quality by measuring the
number of matching words, or “blocks of words”, between a reference and a can-
didate translation. Due to space limitations, more information about adopting
BLEU as a quality metric for image captioning can be found in [5].
1 http://cocodataset.org
2 https://www.tensorﬂow.org

X
Experimental Setup. In our experiments, we target the Xilinx Zynq ZC706
board. All hardware designs were synthesised and placed-and-routed with Xilinx
Vivado HLS and Vivado Design Suite (v17.1) with a clock frequency of 100 MHz.
Single-precision ﬂoating-point representation was used in order to comply with
the typical precision requirements of LSTMs as used by the deep learning com-
munity. Existing work [7][12] has studied precision optimisation in speciﬁc LSTM
applications, which constitutes a complementary method to our framework as
an additional tunable parameter for the performance-accuracy trade-oﬀ.
Baseline Architecture. A hardware architecture of a faithful implementation
of the LSTM model is implemented to act as a baseline for the proposed system’s
evaluation. This baseline architecture consists of four gate units, implemented on
parallel hardware, that perform matrix-vector multiplication in a tiled manner.
Parametrisation with respect to the tiling along the rows (Tr) and columns (Tc)
of the weight matrices is applied to this architecture and rooﬂine modelling
is used to obtain the highest performing conﬁguration (Tr, Tc), similarly to
the proposed system’s architecture (Fig. 3). The maximum platform-supported
attainable performance was obtained for Tr = 2 and Tc = 1, utilising 308 DSPs
(34%), 69 kLUTs (31%), 437 kFFs (21%) and 26 18kbit BRAMs (2%). As Fig. 3
demonstrates, the designs are mainly memory bounded and as a result not all
the FPGA resources are utilised. To obtain the application-level accuracy of the
baseline design under time constrained scenarios, the BLEU of the intermediate
LSTM’s output at each tile step of Tr is examined (Fig. 4).
Fig. 3. Rooﬂine model of the proposed and baseline architectures on the ZC706 board
6.1
Comparisons at Constrained Computation Time
This section presents the gains of using the proposed methodology compared
to the baseline design under computation time constraints. This is investigated
by exploring the design space, deﬁned by (NZ, Tr, Tc), in terms of (i) perfor-
mance (Fig. 3) and (ii) the relationship between accuracy and computation time
(Fig. 4). As shown in Fig. 3, as the level of pruning increases and NZ becomes
smaller, the computational and memory load per reﬁnement iteration becomes
smaller and the elementwise operations gradually dominate the computational
intensity (Eq. (14)), with the corresponding designs moving to the right of the

XI
rooﬂine graph. With respect to the architectural parameters, as the tiling pa-
rameters Tr and Tc increase, the hardware design becomes increasingly unrolled
and moves towards the top of the rooﬂine graph. In all cases, the proposed ar-
chitecture demonstrates a higher performance compared to the baseline design
reaching up to 3.72× for a single non-zero element with an average of 3.35×
(3.31× geo. mean) across the sparsity levels shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 4. BLEU scores over time for all methods
To evaluate our methodology in time-constrained scenarios, for each spar-
sity level the highest performing design of the rooﬂine model is implemented.
Fig. 4 shows the achieved BLEU score of each design over the evaluation set
with respect to runtime, where higher runtime translates to higher number of
reﬁnements. In this context, for the target application the design with 512 non-
zero elements (50% sparsity) achieves the best trade-oﬀbetween performance
per reﬁnement iteration and additional information obtained at each iteration.
The highest performing architecture with NZ of 512 has a tiling pair of (32,
1) and the implemented design consumes 862 DSPs (95%), 209 kLUTs (95%),
437 kFFs (40%) and 34 18kbit BRAMs (3%). In the BLEU range between 0.4
and 0.8, our proposed system reaches the corresponding BLEU decile up to 6.51×
faster with an average speedup of 4.19× (3.78× geo. mean) across the deciles.
As demonstrated in Fig. 4, the highest performing design of the proposed
method (NZ=512) constantly outperforms the baseline architecture in terms of
BLEU score at every time instant up to 2.7 ms, at which a maximum BLEU
value of 0.9 has been achieved by both methods. As a result, given a speciﬁc time
budget below 2.7 ms, the proposed architecture achieves a 24.88× higher BLEU
score (geo. mean) compared to the baseline. Moreover, the proposed method
demonstrates signiﬁcantly higher application accuracy during the ﬁrst 1.5 ms
of the computation, reaching up to 31232× higher BLEU. In this respect, our
framework treats a BLEU of 0.9 and a time budget of 2.7 ms as switching points
to select between the baseline and the architecture that employs the proposed
approximation method and deploys the highest performing design for each case.
7
Conclusion
The high-performance deployment of LSTMs under stringent computation time
constraints poses a challenge in several emerging applications. This paper presents
a framework for mapping LSTMs on FPGAs in such scenarios. The proposed
methodology applies an iterative approximate computing scheme in order to

XII
compress and prune the target network and explores the computation time-
accuracy trade-oﬀ. A novel FPGA architecture is proposed that is tailored to the
degree of approximation and optimised for the target device. This formulation
enables the co-optimisation of the LSTM approximation and the architecture
in order to satisfy the application-level computation time constraints. Potential
future work would include the precision optimisation of the LSTM in order to
explore its complementary eﬀect on the performance-accuracy trade-oﬀ.
8
