Weak Supervision for Affordable Modeling of Electrocardiogram Data
Mononito Goswami, B.Tech.1, Benedikt Boecking, M.Sc.1, Artur Dubrawski, Ph.D.1
1Auton Lab, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Abstract
Analysing electrocardiograms (ECGs) is an inexpensive and non-invasive, yet powerful way to diagnose heart disease.
ECG studies using Machine Learning to automatically detect abnormal heartbeats so far depend on large, manually
annotated datasets. While collecting vast amounts of unlabeled data can be straightforward, the point-by-point an-
notation of abnormal heartbeats is tedious and expensive. We explore the use of multiple weak supervision sources to
learn diagnostic models of abnormal heartbeats via human designed heuristics, without using ground truth labels on
individual data points. Our work is among the ﬁrst to deﬁne weak supervision sources directly on time series data.
Results show that with as few as six intuitive time series heuristics, we are able to infer high quality probabilistic
label estimates for over 100,000 heartbeats with little human effort, and use the estimated labels to train competitive
classiﬁers evaluated on held out test data.
Introduction
Automatic analysis of electrocardiograms (ECGs) promises substantial improvements in critical care. ECGs offer an
inexpensive and non-invasive way to diagnose irregularities in heart functioning. Arrhythmias are abnormal heartbeats
which alter both the morphology and frequency of ECG waves, and can be detected in an ECG exam. However,
identifying and classifying arrhythmias manually is not only error-prone but also cumbersome. Clinicians may have to
analyze each heartbeat in an ECG record, and in critical care settings, carefully analysing each heartbeat is nearly im-
possible. As a consequence, the medical machine learning (ML) community has worked extensively on computational
models to automatically detect and characterize arrhythmias1,2.
Rajpurkar et al.3 demonstrated that modern ML models trained on a large and diverse corpus of patients can exceed
the performance of certiﬁed cardiologists in detecting abnormal heartbeats. But their Convolutional Neural Network
model was trained on a manually annotated dataset of more than 64,000 ECG records from over 29,000 patients.
Clearly, research on automated arrhythmia detection has moved the burden of monitoring ECG in critical care to
annotating and curating large databases on which ML models can be trained and validated. This currently prevailing
process involves laborious manual data labeling that is a major bottleneck of supervised medical ML applications in
practice. Popular ML techniques, in particular deep learning, require a large supply of reliably annotated training data,
containing records from a diverse cohort of patients. According to Moody et al.4 and our own experience, raw medical
data is abundant, but its thorough characterization can be involved and expensive. This reliance on labeled data forces
researchers to often use static and older datasets, despite evolving patient populations, systematic improvements in
understanding of diseases, and advances in medical equipment.
Recent developments in e.g. web-based tools to visualize and annotate ECG signals have not reduced the annotation
time and effort signiﬁcantly. For example, it took 4 doctors, almost 3 months to annotate 15, 000 short ECG records
using the LabelECG tool5. In general, gold standard expert annotations can be costly. Conservative estimates place
the hourly cost of highly qualiﬁed labor for the related task of EEG annotation between $50 and $200 per hour6.
In this work, we explore the use of multiple cheaper albeit perhaps noisier supervision sources to learn an arrhythmia
detector, without access to ground truth labels of individual samples. We follow the recently proposed data program-
ming (DP)7 framework in which a factor graph is used to model user-designed heuristics to obtain a probabilistic
label for each heartbeat instance. DP has gained attention from the medical imaging and general ML community and
has been used for various tasks such as automated detection of seizures from electroencephalography8, intracranial
hemorrhage detection with computed tomography, or automated triage of Extremity Radiograph Series9.
Our experiments with ECG data from the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database indicate that with as few as 6 heuristics,
we are able to train an arrhythmia detection model with only a small amount of human effort. The resulting model
arXiv:2201.02936v1  [eess.SP]  9 Jan 2022

Figure 1: Data programming with time series heuristics can affordably train competitive end models for automated
ECG adjudication. Instead of labeling each data point by hand (fully supervised setting), experts encode their domain
knowledge using noisy labeling functions (LFs). A label model then learns the unobserved empirical accuracy of LFs
and uses them to produce probabilistic data label estimates using weighted majority vote.
is competitively accurate when compared to a model trained on the same data with full supply of pointillistic ground
truth annotations. It can also outperform another alternative model trained using active learning, a popular technique
used to reduce data labeling efforts when they are expensive. We also show that domain heuristics can be automatically
tuned to account for inter-patient variability and further boost reliability of the resulting models.
While many different types of arrhythmias exist, for illustration purposes we focus on identifying heartbeats showing
Premature Ventricular Contractions (PVCs). Whereas isolated infrequent PVCs are usually benign, frequent PVCs
with exceptionally wide QRS complexes† may be indicative of heart disease and eventually lead to sudden cardiac
death10. However, our approach is general and applicable to all classes of abnormal heartbeats.
Related Work
Automated Arrhythmia Detection
Automatically detecting abnormal heartbeats is a widely studied problem. Most
researchers in the past relied on manually labeled corpora such as the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database, the AHA
Database for Evaluation of Ventricular Detectors, etc., to train and validate their models1,2. Rajpurkar et al.3 recently
demonstrated that a deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) can even exceed the performance of experienced
cardiologists. However, their model was trained on as many as 64,121 thirty-second ECG records from 29,163 patients,
manually-labeled by a group of certiﬁed cardiographic technicians. Hence, to fuel advances in automated arrhythmia
detection and, more generally, in ML-aided healthcare, there is a clear need to affordably label vast amounts of data.
Some recent studies have attempted to address the annotation bottleneck, albeit at a different context and scale. These
studies have used semi-supervised or active learning to incrementally improve the accuracy of models without sig-
niﬁcant expert intervention. For instance, to overcome inter-patient variability without additional manual labeling of
patient speciﬁc data, Zhai et al.11 iteratively updated the preliminary predictions of their trained CNN using a semi-
supervised approach. Correspondingly, Wang et al.12 used active learning on newly acquired data to choose the most
informative unlabeled data points and incorporate them in the training set. Sayantan et al.13 used active learning to
improve their model’s classiﬁcation results with the help of an expert. So far, the work which comes closest to address-
ing the problem of intelligently labeling vast quantities of ECG data is that of Pasolli et al.14. Starting from a small
sub-optimal training set, the authors proposed three active learning strategies to choose additional heartbeat instances
to further train an Support Vector Machine (SVM) model. Their work demonstrated that models trained using active
learning can achieve impressive performance while using few labeled samples. In this work, we also compare the
performance of our weakly supervised method with active learning. As against Pasolli et al.14 who used a manually
†QRS complexes are generally the most prominent spike seen on a typical ECG. They are a combination of the Q wave, R wave and S wave,
which occur in rapid succession, and represent an electrical impulse.

curated set of ECG features and trained an SVM using margin sampling, we train a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) which can automatically learn rich feature representations using uncertainty sampling, another popular active
learning strategy.
Weak Supervision
Of late, some studies have explored the use of multiple noisy heuristics to programmatically label
data at scale. The recently proposed Data Programming framework7, where experts express their domain knowledge
in terms of intuitive yet perhaps noisy labeling functions (LFs), is a prominent example. Recent studies have used
DP for a wide range of clinical applications, ranging from detecting aortic valve malformations using cardiac MRI
sequences15, seizures using EEG8 and brain hemorrhage using 3D head CT scans9. With the exception of Khattar et
al.16, most prior work on DP has been on image9,15 or natural language17 modalities. Moreover, prior DP research
either used weak annotations from lab technicians, students8, or heuristics built on auxiliary modalities (e.g., clinician
notes, text reports9, patient videos8), some of which only allow for coarse annotation of the entire time series rather
than of the individual segments. On the contrary, we deﬁne heuristics directly on time series. This enables seamless
labeling of entire time series or their segments using the same framework.
Methodology
In this section, we will describe how we use domain knowledge to deﬁne heuristics to detect PVC in ECG time series.
These heuristics will noisily label subsets of data. We will model these noisy labels to obtain an estimate of the
unknown true class label for each data point. We then use the estimated labels to train the ﬁnal classiﬁer, which will
be evaluated on held out test data and compared to alternative models trained using ground-truth labels directly. Fig. 1
describes the full workﬂow we follow to train the end model f.
Domain Knowledge to Identify PVC
A Premature Ventricular Contraction is a fairly common event when the
heartbeat is initiated by an impulse from an ectopic focus which may be located anywhere in the ventricles rather
than the sinoatrial node. On the ECG, a PVC beat appears earlier than usual with an abnormally tall and wide QRS-
complex, with its ST-T vector directed opposite to the QRS vector, Fig. 2(ii). These generic characteristics allowed
one non-domain-expert user to deﬁne 6 heuristics in less than 30 minutes. The user was initially unfamiliar with
clinical ECG interpretation and referred to an online textbook18 to develop heuristics. Expert clinicians are likely able
to deﬁne heuristics more rapidly and thoroughly. The heuristics listed below are deﬁned directly on time series. This
is in contrast to prior work which uses weak annotations or heuristics deﬁned on an auxiliary modality such as text or
images.
Heuristics: i. R-wave appears earlier than usual, ii. R-wave is taller than usual, iii. R-wave is wider than usual, iv.
QRS-vector is directed opposite to the ST-vector, v. QRS-complex is inverted, vi. Inverted R-wave is taller than usual.
Modeling Labeling Functions over Patient Time Series
We will now describe our formal assumptions about the
dataset and heuristics, and introduce the modeling procedure. Given an ECG dataset of p patients X = {xj}p
j=1,
where xj ∈RT are raw ECG vectors of length T, we can segment each ECG xj into B < T beats such that
xj = {xj
1, . . . , xj
B}. Each segment b ∈{1, . . . , B} has an unknown class label yb ∈{−1, 1}, where yj
b = 1
represents a premature ventricular contraction (PVC). Our goal is to use domain knowledge to model the unknown
yj
b, without having to annotate the instances individually, to then train an end classiﬁer f(xj
b) = yj
b for automatic
detection of PVC. We deﬁne m labeling functions (LFs) {λh(xj
b)}m
h=1 directly on the time series. These LFs noisily
label subsets of beats with λh(xj
b) = {−1, 0, 1} corresponding to votes for negative, abstain, or positive. These LFs
do not have to be perfect and may conﬂict on some samples, but must have accuracy better than random19. DP uses this
voting behavior to infer true labels by learning the empirical accuracies, propensities and, optionally, dependencies of
the LFs via a factor graph. We use a factor graph as introduced in Ratner et al.7 to model the m user deﬁned labeling
functions. For simplicity, we assume that the LFs are independent conditioned on the unobserved class label. Let
Y j = (yj
1, . . . , yj
B) ∈{−1, 1}B be the concatenated vector of the unobserved class variable for the B beat segments
of patient j and Λj = {−1, 0, 1}B×m be the LF output matrix where Λj
ik = λk(xj
i) is the output of LF k on beat i of

patient j. We deﬁne a factor for LF accuracy as
φAcc
i,k (Λ, Y ) ≜1{Λik = yi}
We also deﬁne a factor of LF propensity as
φLab
i,k (Λ, Y ) ≜1{Λik ̸= 0}
Then, the label model for a patient j is deﬁned as
pθ(Y j, Λj) ≜Z−1
θ
exp(
B
X
i=1
m
X
k=1
θkφAcc
i,k (Λj
i, yj
i ) +
B
X
i=1
m
X
k=1
θkφLab
i,k (Λj
i, yj
i ))
(1)
where Zθ is a normalizing constant. We use Snorkel17 to learn θ by minimizing the negative log marginal likelihood
given the observed Λj. Finally, as introduced in Ratner et al.7, the end classiﬁer f is trained with a noise aware loss
function that uses probabilistic labels ˆY j = pθ(Y j|Λj).
(i)
(ii)
Figure 2: Examples of a normal (i) and PVC (ii) heartbeat. Dotted green horizontal lines represent the ECG baselines
detected during pre-processing, blue and red vertical lines mark the QRS-complexes and T-waves.
From Domain Knowledge to an Automated Arrhythmia Detector
First, we minimally pre-processed the raw
ECG signals by removing baseline wandering using a forward/backward, fourth-order high-pass Butterworth ﬁlter20.
To segment ECG (xj) into individual beats (xj
b), we followed a simple segmentation procedure, where we considered
the time segment between two alternate QRS-complexes to be a heartbeat.
We had to determine the precise locations of the QRS-complexes and T-waves. As in most prior work, we used the
approximate locations of the R-wave available for each ECG record in the database, along with Scipy’s peak ﬁnding
algorithm21 to ﬁnd the exact locations of the R and T waves. Further, we used the RANSAC algorithm22 to ﬁt a robust
linear regression line to each ECG record, to determine its baseline (horizontal green lines in Fig. 2). The baselines
were used to accurately characterize the height and depth of the R and T-waves‡ (blue and red vertical lines in Fig. 2).
Next, we deﬁned 6 simple LFs based on the domain knowledge to assign probabilistic labels (PVC, OTHER or
ABSTAIN) to each beat. Fig. 4 provides example pseudocodes for two of the LFs that were deﬁned. To express
the loosely-deﬁned domain knowledge we described previously as LFs, we have to automatically assign thresholds to
them. For instance, one heuristic to identify a PVC beat is to check whether its “R-wave appears earlier than usual”.
To turn this heuristic into a LF (LFEarly R-wave), one has to determine the “usual” position of the R-wave. For this,
we used the Minimum Covariance Determinant algorithm23 to ﬁnd the covariance of the most-normal subset of the
frequency histogram. We then set the threshold to the value 2 standard deviations away from the estimated mean in the
direction of interest. For example, for a particular subject (Fig. 3) LFEarly R-wave returns PVC for any beat with the
R-wave appearing earlier than TEarly R-wave = 238 ms (vertical green line). To account for inter-patient variability,
we automatically compute these subjective thresholds for each heuristic and every patient separately. Note that some
of our heuristics did not require estimating any subject-speciﬁc parameters.
‡The topological prominence measure returned by Scipy’s peak ﬁnding algorithm was imprecise.

Figure 3: Distribution of the location, height (topological prominence), and width of QRS-complexes of one patient.
To turn a loosely deﬁned heuristic such as “R-wave appears earlier than usual” into an LF, we must characterize the
”usual” location of the R-wave. To accomplish this, we we ﬁt a robust Gaussian distribution to model the variance of
R-wave locations, and assume any beat located two standard deviations earlier (solid green line at TEarly R-wave =
292 ms), than the estimated mean, to be a PVC beat. Since these attributes vary widely from patient-to-patient, we
automatically compute these thresholds separately for each patient and heuristic.
Figure 4:
Example Python code for LFWide R-wave and LFEarly R-wave.
The findRwaveWidth() and
findRwave() sub-routines return the precise width and positions of the R-wave in a beat, while the variables
WIDTH RWAVE and TIME RWAVE APPEARS EARLIER reﬂect the thresholds TWide R-wave and TEarly R-wave.
The End-Model Classiﬁer
With these heuristics, we use the label model in Eq. (1) to obtain probabilistic labels
for heartbeats of all training patients in the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database. We use these probabilistic labels and the
segmented beats to train a noise-aware ResNet classiﬁer, in which we weigh each sample according to the maximum
probability that it belongs to either class. Recent studies have shown that ResNet not only performs on par with most
of the state-of-the-art time series classiﬁcation models24, but also works well for automatic arrhythmia detection1.
Experiments and Results
Data
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology – Beth Israel Hospital (MIT-BIH) Arrhythmia Database4 is one
of the most commonly used datasets to evaluate automated Arrhythmia detection models. It contains 48 half-hour
excerpts of two-lead ECG recordings from 47 subjects. In most records, the ﬁrst channel is the Modiﬁed Limb lead
II (MLII), obtained by placing electrodes on the chest. We only used the ﬁrst channel to detect PVC events, since
the QRS-complex is more prominent in MLII. The second channel is usually lead V1, but may also be V2, V4 or V5
depending on the subject. We refer the interested reader to Moody et al.4 for more details on how the database was
curated and originally annotated.
Experimental Setup
Our experimental setup follows the evaluation protocol of arrhythmia classiﬁcation models
stipulated by the American Association of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI) as described in25. The AAMI standard,
however, does not specify which heartbeats or patients should be used for training classiﬁcation models, and which for
evaluating them2. Hence, we used the inter-patient heartbeat division protocol proposed by De Chazal et al.26 to par-
tition the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database into subsets DS1 and DS2 to make model evaluation realistic. Furthermore,
in the MIT-BIH Database, PVCs only account for 8% of the 100, 000 beats, thus to prevent issues stemming from
high class imbalance, we randomly oversampled PVC beats in DS1 before using it to train the ResNet classiﬁer. The

architecture of our ResNet models is the same as in Fawaz et al.24. To tune the learning rate, batch size, and number
of feature maps hyper-parameters, we split the training data into train and validation subsets in the 70/30 proportion.
All the models were trained for 25 epochs. In the next subsection, we report the results of the ResNet models which
had the best true positive rate (TPR) at low false positive rate (FPR) on the validation data.
We also compare the performance of our weakly supervised model with an active learning (AL) alternative. For
AL, we used ResNet to iteratively identify data points for manual labeling using uncertainty sampling27. The model
initially had access to a randomly sampled balanced seed set of 100 labeled data points. In each AL iteration, we
retrained ResNet using the training data extended with 100 newly labeled data points. We continued this process until
the training set consisted of 4,000 points. AL hyper-parameters (the query size and size of the seed set) are similar to
Pasolli and Melgani’s setup14. Table 1 reports the performance of the ﬁnal ResNet model trained on 4000 data points
incrementally labeled using AL, averaged over 10 random initializations of the seed set.
Model
TPR
TNR
PPV
FPR
Acc
FPR50% TPR
FNR50% TNR
TPR1% FPR
TNR1% FNR
Fully sup.
0.884
0.970
0.664
0.030
96.25
0.005
0.028
0.793
0.266
Pr. labels
0.645
0.960
0.523
0.039
85.84
0.019
0.140
0.165
0.252
Active learn.
0.514
0.993
0.821
0.007
94.15
0.020
0.021
0.604
0.405
Weak sup.
0.892
0.965
0.629
0.036
97.25
0.004
0.013
0.707
0.466
Table 1: Results on held-out test set. Weakly supervised ResNet performs on par with the fully supervised model
and outperforms ResNet trained using active learning. FPR50% TPR and FNR50% TNR represent the FPR and FNR at
50% TPR and TNR, respectively. Similarly, TPR1% FPR and TNR1% FNR represent the TPR and TNR at 1% FPR and
FNR, respectively. The reported AL results are averaged over 10 independent initializations of the random seed set.
All measures are computed with PVC as the positive class.
Results
We trained ResNet models on DS1 as a training set, using either probabilistic labels or the full ground truth,
and evaluated them on the held-out set DS2. The results, summarized in Tab. 1, reveal that the end classiﬁer trained
using weak supervision is competitive with to the model trained on the full ground truth data. Moreover, our weakly
supervised model also outperformed the ResNet trained using 4,000 data points obtained via active learning.
Figure 5: Active learning results. Our weakly supervised model either exceeds or matches the performance of its AL
counterpart. The shaded red regions correspond to the 95% Wilson’s score intervals.
Let us review the key insights stemming from these results. First, the thresholds for the labeling functions that were
automatically determined by our proposed auto-thresholding algorithm varied quite drastically across subjects. For
instance, the threshold on the position of the R-wave, TEarly R-wave had a mean of 230 ms and a standard deviation of
77.14 ms. This simple personalization of the LF parameters turned out to be the key to good generalization properties
of the end-model; it failed to perform well when these parameters were ﬁxed to reasonable global settings. The auto-
thresholding algorithm is a practically important contribution of our work, at it allows our methods to scale across
diverse cohorts of subjects while mitigating potentially excessive manual effort in tuning LFs to speciﬁc patients.
However, unsurprisingly, even with auto-tuning, our LFs and the estimated probabilistic labels (denoted “Pr. labels” in
Tab. 1) were not perfect. In fact, we observed high variability in the performance of Pr. labels across different subjects,
when compared to ground truth. For example, while they had almost perfect sensitivity for Subject 228 (TPR = 0.994),

they performed extremely poorly for Subject 214 (TPR = 0). Overall, Pr. labels had low TPR and high TNR on their
own on the training set and held-out test set, which is understandable given the prior class imbalance.
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
Figure 6: Class Activation Maps for weakly [(i) - (iii)] and fully supervised [(iv) - (vi)] ResNet reveal that the models
discriminate between PVC and OTHER beats primarily based on the morphology of the QRS-complex. The models
appear to have learned to focus on similar regularities. Graphs (i) and (iv) represent an example OTHER beat, while
the others show two examples of PVC beats.
Tab. 1 summarizes performance metrics on the held-out test set (True Positive Rate (TPR), True Negative Rate (TNR),
Positive Predictive Value (PPV), False Positive Rate (FPR), and Accuracy (Acc)) measured at the 50-50 class like-
lihood threshold, chosen for consistency with prior literature on the PVC prediction task. The weakly supervised
ResNet (Weak sup.) signiﬁcantly improves sensitivity to the PVC class compared to just using the LF labels directly
(Pr. labels) to directly predict the test data. This illustrates that WS ResNet is able to generalize effectively beyond the
hypothesis learned by the noisy weak LFs. Our end model performs on par with the fully supervised ResNet (Fully
sup.) trained on the same data but using all the available pointillistic labels in the MIT-BIH Database.
Tab. 1 also compares performance of the four models under consideration at operational settings of pragmatic interest
in clinical practice, that is at very low error rates. We report the ability to conﬁdently identify positive cases at FPR of
1%, and the ability to conﬁdently identify negatives at FNR of 1%. We complement these results with the error rates
observed at 50% probability of detection of both negative and positive cases. The results show very little operational
utility potential from applying the inferred probabilistic labels directly. However, our weakly supervised ResNet model
trained on those inferred labels is highly competitive to the equivalently structured ResNet trained on the abundant
supply of manually annotated data. Weakly supervised ResNet appears particularly strong at identifying negative
cases, while its positive recall performance is close to the ground-truth based equivalent.
Next, we compare performance of the weakly supervised ResNet versus ResNet trained using active learning (“Active
learn.” in Tab. 1), and it looks better on all performance metrics barring TNR, PPV and FPR. Graphs in Fig. 5 show that
in the range of up to 4,000 pointillistically labeled training data points, weakly supervised models either outperforms
or matches its active learning counterpart, but at a drastically lower requirement of human effort.
To closely examine what the weakly and fully supervised ResNet models are learning, we plotted Class Activation
Maps28 of a normal and PVC beats in Fig. 6. It is evident that to discriminate between PVCs and other beats, our
models are primarily paying attention to the QRS complexes in these examples. Moreover, it also appears from these
plots that both models not only perform on par, but they also tend to focus on similar signatures of the ECG signals.
This observation suggests at least some equivalence between the model trained on ground-truth annotation and the one
trained on labels inferred from a small number of simple heuristics. These results reassure us that the more expensive
process can be effectively replaced by the proposed framework of weak supervision that uses a few labeling functions

based on high-level aspects of domain knowledge derived directly from the time series characteristics.
Discussion and Conclusion
We demonstrated that weak supervision with domain heuristics deﬁned directly on time series provides a promising
avenue for training medical ML models without the need for large, manually annotated datasets. To support this claim,
we developed an arrhythmia detection model which performs on par with its fully-supervised counterpart, and does
not need point-by-point data annotation. This weakly supervised model has been developed in a fraction of time that
would be required to provide a fully labeled training set.
We only needed a handful of heuristics to infer probabilistic labels sufﬁcient to yield a reliable end model. These
simple heuristics reﬂected basic clinical intuition that can be gleaned from ECG diagnostics tutorials. We expect that
engaging expert clinicians to harvest additional heuristics would allow further improvements. We stipulate that the
proposed approach does not only save effort and time, but it also aligns the process of knowledge acquisition from
domain experts better with human nature, than its tedious pointillistic data annotation alternative. Further, we show
that domain heuristics can be automatically tuned to patient speciﬁc characteristics by deﬁning parameter tuning rules.
In our example, auto-tuning of ECG waveform interpretations accounts for inter-patient variability, while keeping
manual labor at its minimum.
The ML community has devised several techniques to overcome the limitations of expensive pointillistic labeling such
as intelligently choosing the most informative training samples to label27, combining both labeled and unlabeled data29
and harnessing the power of crowds30,31. While semi-supervised learning has been successfully applied to improve
arrhythmia detection models without patient-speciﬁc data11, these methods still rely on a signiﬁcant proportion of
labeled training data to start with. On the other hand, crowdsourcing has shown promise in generating ground truth
for e.g. medical imaging, but prior research30 found several limitations such as the lack of trustworthiness, inability of
non-expert workers to annotate ﬁne-grained categories and ethical concerns around patient privacy. Active learning,
however, has by far been the most commonly utilized technique in settings where annotating large quantities of data
en-masse is prohibitively expensive32.
Multiple avenues of future work include modelling dependencies between LFs to improve both the efﬁciency and
accuracy of label models, and developing a library of time series primitives to streamline development of LFs for such
data. We would also like to build interfaces to support interactive discovery of LFs and to rigorously validate resulting
end models. Further, we intend to investigate hybrid approaches that will opportunistically combine weak supervision
with pointillistic active learning, and conduct user studies with clinicians to better understand the challenges and
opportunities for interactive harvesting of domain knowledge. We also aim to enable detection of other types of
abnormalities that can be seen in ECG data, and apply our approach to other types of hemodynamic monitoring
waveforms.
Time series data is prevalent in healthcare. However the costs of preparing such data for training and validation of new
models, as well as for the maintenance of already developed models, prohibit the otherwise realizable beneﬁts from
widespread adoption of machine learning in clinical decision support. We believe that approaches similar to the one
presented in this paper could help making a decisive push towards proliferating beneﬁcial uses of machine learning in
this important ﬁeld of its application.
