RGRecSys: A Toolkit for Robustness Evaluation
of Recommender Systems
Zohreh Ovaisi

University of Illinois at Chicago
Shelby Heinecke

Salesforce Research
Jia Li

Salesforce Research
Yongfeng Zhang

Rutgers University
Elena Zheleva

University of Illinois at Chicago
Caiming Xiong

Salesforce Research
ABSTRACT
Robust machine learning is an increasingly important topic that fo-
cuses on developing models resilient to various forms of imperfect
data. Due to the pervasiveness of recommender systems in online
technologies, researchers have carried out several robustness stud-
ies focusing on data sparsity and profile injection attacks. Instead,
we propose a more holistic view of robustness for recommender
systems that encompasses multiple dimensions - robustness with re-
spect to sub-populations, transformations, distributional disparity,
attack, and data sparsity. While there are several libraries that allow
users to compare different recommender system models, there is
no software library for comprehensive robustness evaluation of rec-
ommender system models under different scenarios. As our main
contribution, we present a robustness evaluation toolkit, Robust-
ness Gym for RecSys (RGRecSys),1 that allows us to quickly and
uniformly evaluate the robustness of recommender system models.
KEYWORDS
Recommender Systems; Robustness
1
INTRODUCTION
Recommender systems are a core component of many online per-
sonalization systems that assist users to discover their favorite
items among large choice sets. They have garnered considerable
interest among researchers due to their inevitably high impact on
both users’ experience when searching for their item of interest, as
well as content providers who seek enough exposure and visibility
for their products. Traditionally, recommender systems were built
and studied under simple yet unrealistic assumptions, such as i.i.d.
assumptions (training and testing data being independent and iden-
tically distributed) as well as noiseless and abundant data. Recent
studies relax these assumptions and focus on developing models
under more challenging, yet realistic scenarios where data fed into
recommender systems are maliciously attacked [24], sparse [28],
and bias [12, 16, 17]. However, there are other factors to consider
when evaluating robustness. For instance, some of the user and item
features may be corrupted (transformation), or the i.i.d. assumption
of training and testing data may be violated (distributional shift)
[3, 15]. The performance of recommender systems over-relying on
unrealistic assumptions can be highly degraded.
1https://www.github.com/salesforce/RGRecSys
Here, we propose a holistic definition of robustness for recom-
mendation systems that encompass and formalize several perspec-
tives of robustness - robustness with respect to sub-population,
transformations, distributional disparity, attack, and sparsity. More-
over, with the fast growth of recommender system models, it is
important to develop libraries to allow researchers to easily re-
produce and evaluate different models and test their robustness
in aforementioned directions. Thus, in addition to our conceptual
contribution, we present a robustness evaluation toolkit for rec-
ommendation systems, Robustness Gym for RecSys (RGRecSys),
which allows us to quickly and uniformly conduct a comprehensive
robustness evaluation for recommendation system models. In what
follows, we first discuss related work before proceeding to describe
the library capabilities in detail. We then present a case study that
demonstrates the features of our library. We conclude with our final
reflections and future directions.
2
RELATED WORK
With the fast growth of recommender system models, it becomes
essential to develop a library with built-in state-of-the-art models
to allow researchers for a fair and comprehensive comparison of
such models. To this end, a large number of recommender sys-
tem libraries have been developed recently, including Mahout2,
Duine3, Cofi4, LensKit [5], MyMediaLite5, PREA [13], LibRec [7],
and RecBole [26]. Mahout, Duine, and Cofi are libraries that de-
velop only memory-based models [13]. LensKit proposes a library
for collaborative filtering models in Java. MyMediaLite and PREA
are more advanced packages. MyMediaLite is a library based on C#
that addresses rating prediction and item prediction from implicit
feedback for collaborative filtering models. PREA is a library pro-
viding an evaluation for memory-based and matrix-factorization
recommender systems in Java. However, these libraries are barely
active for further improvement. LibRec introduces a Java-based
library that covers more built-in recommender system models such
as general, context-aware, social, and graphical models. Finally,
RecBole is a unified PyTorch-based framework that reproduces 73
models in several categories of general recommendation, sequential
recommendation, context-aware recommendation, and knowledge-
based recommendation on 28 benchmark datasets. All of these
libraries only evaluate models under strong assumptions like i.i.d.
2https://mahout.apache.org
3http://www.duineframework.org
4http://www.nongnu.org/cofi/
5http://www.mymedialite.net
arXiv:2201.04399v1  [cs.IR]  12 Jan 2022

assumptions as well as perfect and abundant data. However, data
fed into the recommender systems are often sparse (especially if
they are explicit feedback from users), and also inaccurate. Thus, it
is vital to design a library that evaluates models under such more
challenging scenarios. Our library is highly inspired by the work of
[6] that evaluate Natural Language Processing (NLP) models under
sub-population, transformation and attack. RGRecSys evaluates rec-
ommender system models’ robustness against data sub-population,
transformation, distributional shift, attack and sparsity.
3
OUR FRAMEWORK
3.1
Library Architecture and Contents
As RecBole [26] is the state-of-the-art recommender system library
with a broad set of models and advanced features, we use RecBole
built-in models to demonstrate RGRecSys usefulness. RecBole adopts
Pytorch in the entire library and proposes a unified framework with
data, model, and evaluation modules. This library has a compre-
hensive set of models on different categories of general, sequential,
context-aware, and knowledge-based recommendation. Its general
and extensible data structure ease the process of adding new mod-
els to this library and gives enough flexibility to its users to set up
experimental environments such as hyper-parameters and split-
ting criteria. RGRecSys has a robustness evaluation module that
allows us to conduct unified and comprehensive robustness evalua-
tions on recommender system models. Below, we discuss RGRecSys
robustness features in detail.
3.2
Subpopulation
Most existing recommender system libraries report the performance
metrics averaged on overall users and items. However, a single
high-performance metric does not guarantee that the model has
the same high performance for a sub-group of users or items. For
instance, a recommender system might have a great performance
averaged over all users but have a poor performance on a sub-group
of users like females or people of a certain race. With the recent
vital importance of fair recommender systems [21], it is critical to
report the performance for a slice of users or items. Our library
gives this flexibility to evaluate the model performance for any
sub-group of interest, such as users of a particular feature, users’
activeness based on their numbers of interactions as well as users’
critiques based on their rating score. That is, given a trained model,
the library can perform slicing on test data to conduct fine-grained
evaluation on models and evaluate their robustness to slicing.
3.3
Distributional shift
Many recommender system models are designed based on the as-
sumption that training and testing data have independent and iden-
tical distribution. However, this i.i.d. assumption is often violated in
real scenarios, which leaves the great performance of many existing
models questionable [20]. This is especially true for recommender
systems as the training data is collected using the existing produc-
tion system, the distribution of the data will be different when the
newly developed model is deployed online [3]. RGRecSys allows us
to evaluate recommender systems models under distributional shift.
To this end, RGRecSys first provides the users of our library with
the distribution of training data based on user features, and then
allow them to manipulate the testing data distribution by sampling
it so that its distribution becomes different from training data. For
instance, our library users can decide the female and male ratio in
testing data that is highly different from training data.
3.4
Transformations
Most recommender system models need to access user and item fea-
tures to provide users with a set of recommended items. Such data
can be either collected by asking the users and content providers
to complete a profile that includes some information about users
or items, or the recommender system may automatically extract
such data, e.g., from user’s reviews. However, this data might be
corrupted either due to misleading information, or any error that
can arise when recommender models aim to extract them, or by
some form of malicious attack. For instance, a user might misin-
form the system about his location by connecting through VPN, a
person who aims to sell an item on the eBay platform might not
mention certain classes (categories) that the item can fall into, a rec-
ommender system using machine learning algorithm may misjudge
when trying to extract some information about users and items in
a review comment or photo, or malicious attacks can corrupt such
features. Thus, it is more realistic to assume that user or item fea-
tures are inaccurate to some extent. RGRecSys allows us to evaluate
models under transformation on user or item features by giving
them the flexibility to choose feature(s) they want to transform,
and the severity of this transformation. This transformation can be
either random where the feature value can take any random value,
or structured where the feature value is within a certain distance
of its true value. The first one is indicative of a scenario where the
wrong user information or an attack misleads the system and the
second one is indicative of models’ inaccuracy when extracting
features (e.g., user age). Note that transformation on features only
occurs on testing data so as to evaluate if a model is robust to such
changes. This form of transformation is not applicable to general
recommender systems that do not use features in prediction pro-
cess. As some users in training data may appear in testing data
too, this transformation translates to the case where some users
have corrupted feature value in testing data while their feature in
training data is remained uncorrupted. This is true because model
training is time-consuming, and real-world recommender system
models are not re-trained very frequently. Thus, the time period be-
tween re-training model is long enough for some users’ and items’
features to be attacked or unintentionally changed due to data pro-
cessing errors. We expect models that overly rely on certain users
and items feature(s) would suffer when such features are corrupted.
3.5
Attack
With the huge economic impact of recommender systems, they
are highly prone to be attacked with the purpose of increasing
or decreasing some items rankings. Thus, it is critical to evaluate
recommender system models performance when dealing with ma-
licious attacks. While there are many types of attack designed to
degrade recommender system performance, RGRecSys allows us
to evaluate the models under Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF)
attack [2], where the attacker causes the victim user to carry out
an action unintentionally. For instance, the user may unwillingly

change his ratings, leading to corrupted interaction data in training
dataset. RGRecSys allows us to decide the severity of attack by
deciding what fraction of interaction would be corrupted.
3.6
Sparsity
Data fed into recommender systems usually contain explicit or
implicit feedback from users, e.g, ratings or clicks. Such data are
usually highly sparse, and recommender systems performance is
known to be degraded when fed by such sparse data. Our library
allows its users to compare the robustness of different models under
sparse data by randomly removing a fraction of user interaction
data. The sparsity level as well as which users (based on their
activity) one may want to drop interactions of, can be freely chosen.
4
CASE STUDY
Here, we demonstrate experimental results on robustness evalua-
tion on a variety of general and context-aware recommendation
models. The general recommendation models featured in the exam-
ples below are Pop (popular items), NeuMF, LightGCN, ItemKNN,
and SpectralCF [1, 9, 10, 27], whereas we chose DCN, DSSM, AFM,
LR, and FM [11, 18, 19, 22, 23] as the context-aware recommenda-
tion models for demonstration. We show example results on one
data set, MovieLens 100k [8]. This dataset contains 100, 000 ratings
∈[1, 5] from 943 users on 1, 682 movies. For equal comparison,
the train, validation, and test split are consistent throughout all ex-
amples (via the same random seed), and are ratio-based with 80%,
10% and 10% of data to be train, valid and test respectively. We
use the default model hyperparameters as defined in [26]. To define
robustness tests, one must simply create a robustness config
dictionary using the appropriate keys and values 6. We emphasize
that due to the limited trials and dataset used in the examples below,
these examples alone are not sufficient to draw strong conclusions.
Instead, the purpose is to highlight the capabilities of our library.
We leave extensive experiments and insights about the robustness
of various types of recommendation models to future work.
4.1
Subpopulation with Respect to User Gender
For many applications, model performance on subpopulations, such
as those defined by gender, are important to consider. In this ex-
ample, we create a subpopulation of the test set consisting of users
who identify as females (dark blue) and males (light blue). We first
train our general and context-aware recommendation models on
the same training data and evaluate each on both the original test
set containing all users and the subpopulation. Note that the general
recommendation models do not leverage user features, in contrast
to context-aware models, but we still use these features for filtering
the test set. For brevity, we show the percent change in nDCG and
AUC between the original test set and the subpopulation for gen-
eral and context-aware models in Figure 1 respectively. While more
insight in data statistics is required for any reasoning, it is shown
that the system performs much worse for females across models.
Also, SpectralCF and LR exhibit the largest performance gap for
females among the general and context-aware models respectively.
6See our documentation at https://www.github.com/salesforce/RGRecSys for more
details.
Figure 1: The percent change in nDCG and AUC between the
original test set and the subpopulation of test set consisting
of female (dark blue) and male (light blue).
4.2
Distributional Shift with Respect to User
Gender
To have a different distribution between training and testing data,
we sample the testing data based on user gender. The training
distribution contains 74% male and 26% female. We set the test set
distribution to 50% male and 50% female. Figure 2 shows that while
all models performance degraded, ItemKNN and DSSM are the least
vulnerable among general and context-aware models, respectively.
Figure 2: The percent change in nDCG and AUC between the
original and distributionally shifted test set.
4.3
Transformation with Respect to User Age
Here, we apply our structured transformation tool to perturb each
user’s age in the test set by no more than 10% deviation from its true
value and evaluate a variety of context-aware models. As shown in
Figure 3, DSSM exhibits the most vulnerability to this perturbation.
Figure 3: The percent change in AUC between the the origi-
nal and transformed test set.

4.4
Attack on Ratings History
In this example, we implement an attack to the rating history using
our library API for context-aware models. We randomly select 10%
of interactions from the training data set and change the rating to a
random value to mitigate the effect of CSRF attack [2]. We train all
models on both the original training set and the attacked training
set and evaluate on the same test sets. As depicted in Figure 4, the
performance of all context-aware models are shown to be degraded,
where LR is the least affected model.
Figure 4: The percent change in AUC between models
trained on the original and attacked train set.
4.5
Sparsifying Rating History
Here, we consider the sensitivity to sparse data across several gen-
eral and context-aware recommendation models. For each user, we
uniformly and randomly remove 25% of their interactions. We train
all models on both the original training data and the sparsified
training data and evaluate on the same test sets. As shown in in
Figure 5, NeuMF and DCN are most vulnerable models to sparsity.
Figure 5: The percent change in nDCG and AUC between the
model trained on the original and the sparsified train set.
5
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we present RGRecSys, a library that allows users to
perform a comprehensive robustness evaluation for recommender
systems. Our library is open-source and can be accessed at https:
//www.github.com/salesforce/RGRecSys. Our future work aims to
extend our library functionality to evaluate models under other
types of attacks and transformation, biased and noisy interactions,
and the cold-start issue [14]. In addition, we aim to incorporate
fairness [15] and explainability [25] metrics to our current metrics,
to allow users to test whether a model is fair and transparent [4, 21].
