Frame-Recurrent Video Super-Resolution
Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi1,2∗

Raviteja Vemulapalli2

Matthew Brown2

1Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
2Google
Abstract
Recent advances in video super-resolution have shown
that convolutional neural networks combined with motion
compensation are able to merge information from multi-
ple low-resolution (LR) frames to generate high-quality im-
ages. Current state-of-the-art methods process a batch of LR
frames to generate a single high-resolution (HR) frame and
run this scheme in a sliding window fashion over the entire
video, effectively treating the problem as a large number of
separate multi-frame super-resolution tasks. This approach
has two main weaknesses: 1) Each input frame is processed
and warped multiple times, increasing the computational
cost, and 2) each output frame is estimated independently
conditioned on the input frames, limiting the system’s ability
to produce temporally consistent results.
In this work, we propose an end-to-end trainable frame-
recurrent video super-resolution framework that uses the pre-
viously inferred HR estimate to super-resolve the subsequent
frame. This naturally encourages temporally consistent re-
sults and reduces the computational cost by warping only
one image in each step. Furthermore, due to its recurrent
nature, the proposed method has the ability to assimilate a
large number of previous frames without increased compu-
tational demands. Extensive evaluations and comparisons
with previous methods validate the strengths of our approach
and demonstrate that the proposed framework is able to sig-
niﬁcantly outperform the current state of the art.
1. Introduction
Super-resolution is a classic problem in image processing
that addresses the question of how to reconstruct a high-
resolution (HR) image from its downscaled low-resolution
(LR) version. With the rise of deep learning, super-resolution
has received signiﬁcant attention from the research commu-
nity over the past few years [3, 5, 20, 21, 26, 28, 35, 36, 39].
While high-frequency details need to be reconstructed exclu-
sively from spatial statistics in the case of single image super-
resolution, temporal relationships in the input can be ex-
∗This work was done when Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi was interning at Google.
Bicubic
Our result
HR frame
Figure 1: Side-by-side comparison of bicubic interpolation,
our FRVSR result, and HR ground truth for 4x upsampling.
ploited to improve reconstruction for video super-resolution.
It is therefore imperative to combine the information from
as many LR frames as possible to reach the best video super-
resolution results.
The latest state-of-the-art video super-resolution methods
approach the problem by combining a batch of LR frames to
estimate a single HR frame, effectively dividing the task of
video super-resolution into a large number of separate multi-
frame super-resolution subtasks [3, 28, 29, 39]. However,
this approach is computationally expensive since each input
frame needs to be processed several times. Furthermore, gen-
erating each output frame separately reduces the system’s
ability to produce temporally consistent frames, resulting in
unpleasing ﬂickering artifacts.
In this work, we propose an end-to-end trainable frame-
recurrent video super-resolution (FRVSR) framework to ad-
dress the above issues. Instead of estimating each video
frame separately, we use a recurrent approach that passes
the previously estimated HR frame as an input for the fol-
lowing iteration. Using this recurrent architecture has several
beneﬁts. Each input frame needs to be processed only once,
reducing the computational cost. Furthermore, information
from past frames can be propagated to later frames via the
HR estimate that is recurrently passed through time. Pass-
ing the previous HR estimate directly to the next step helps
the model to recreate ﬁne details and produce temporally
consistent videos.
arXiv:1801.04590v4  [cs.CV]  25 Mar 2018

To analyze the performance of the proposed framework,
we compare it with strong single image and video super-
resolution baselines using identical neural networks as build-
ing blocks. Our extensive set of experiments provides in-
sights into how the performance of FRVSR varies with the
number of recurrent steps used during training, the size of
the network, and the amount of noise, aliasing or compres-
sion artifacts present in the LR input. The proposed approach
clearly outperforms the baselines under various settings both
in terms of quality and efﬁciency. Finally, we also com-
pare FRVSR with several existing video super-resolution
approaches and show that it signiﬁcantly outperforms the
current state of the art on a standard benchmark dataset.
1.1. Our contributions
• We propose a recurrent framework that uses the HR es-
timate of the previous frame for generating the subsequent
frame, leading to an efﬁcient model that produces temporally
consistent results.
• Unlike existing approaches, the proposed framework can
propagate information over a large temporal range without
increasing computations.
• Our system is end-to-end trainable and does not require
any pre-training stages.
• We perform an extensive set of experiments to analyze the
proposed framework and relevant baselines under various
different settings.
• We show that the proposed framework signiﬁcantly out-
performs the current state of the art in video super-resolution
both qualitatively and quantitatively.
2. Video super-resolution
Let ILR
t
∈[0, 1]H×W ×C denote the t-th LR video frame
obtained by downsampling the original HR video frame
IHR
t
∈[0, 1]sH×sW ×C by scale factor s. Given a set of con-
secutive LR video frames, the goal of video super-resolution
is to generate HR estimates Iest
t
that approximate the original
HR frames IHR
t
under some metric.
2.1. Related work
Super-resolution is a classic ill-posed inverse problem
with approaches ranging from simple interpolation methods
such as Bilinear, Bicubic and Lanczos [9] to example-based
super-resolution [12, 13, 40, 42], dictionary learning [32,
43], and self-similarity approaches [16, 41]. We refer the
reader to Milanfar [30] and Nasrollahi and Moeslund [31]
for extensive overviews of prior art up to recent years.
The recent progress in deep learning, especially in con-
volutional neural networks, has shaken up the ﬁeld of super-
resolution. After Dong et al. [5] reached state-of-the-art re-
sults with shallow convolutional neural networks, many oth-
ers followed up with deeper network architectures, advancing
the ﬁeld tremendously [6, 21, 22, 25, 36, 37]. Parallel ef-
forts have studied alternative loss functions for more visually
pleasing reconstructions [26, 35]. Agustsson and Timofte [1]
provide a recent survey on the current state of the art in single
image super-resolution.
Video and multi-frame super-resolution approaches com-
bine information from multiple LR frames to reconstruct
details that are missing in individual frames which can lead
to higher quality results. Classical video and multi-frame
super-resolution methods are generally formulated as opti-
mization problems that are computationally very expensive
to solve [2, 11, 27, 38].
Most of the existing deep learning-based video super-
resolution methods divide the task of video super-resolution
into multiple separate sub-tasks, each of which generates
a single HR output frame from multiple LR input frames.
Kappeler et al. [20] warp video frames ILR
t−1 and ILR
t+1 onto
the frame ILR
t
using the optical ﬂow method of Drulea and
Nedevschi [8], concatenate the three frames and pass them
through a convolutional neural network that produces the
output frame Iest
t . Caballero et al. [3] follow the same ap-
proach but replace the optical ﬂow model with a trainable
motion compensation network. Makansi et al. [29] follow an
approach similar to [3] but combine warping and mapping
to HR space into a single step.
Tao et al. [39] rely on a batch of up to 7 input LR
frames to estimate a single HR frame. After computing the
motion from neighboring input frames to ILR
t , they map
the frames onto high-resolution grids. In a ﬁnal step, they
run an encoder-decoder style network with a Conv-LSTM
in the core yielding Iest
t . Liu et al. [28] process up to 5
LR frames using different numbers of input frames (ILR
t ),
(ILR
t−1, ILR
t , ILR
t+1), and (ILR
t−2, . . . , ILR
t+2) simultaneously to
produce separate HR estimates that are aggregated in a ﬁnal
step with dynamic weights to produce a single output Iest
t .
While a number of the above mentioned methods are end-
to-end trainable, the authors often note that they ﬁrst pre-train
each component before ﬁne-tuning the system as a whole in
a ﬁnal step [3, 28, 39].
Huang et al. [17] use a bidirectional recurrent architecture
for video super-resolution with shallow networks but do not
use any explicit motion compensation in their model. Recur-
rent architectures have also been used for other tasks such as
video deblurring [23] and stylization [4, 15]. While Kim et
al. [23] and Chen et al. [4] pass on a feature representation to
the next step, Gupta et al. [15] pass the previous output frame
to the next step to produce temporally consistent stylized
videos in concurrent work. A recurrent approach for video
super-resolution was proposed by Farsiu et al. [10] more
than a decade ago with motivations similar to ours. However,
this approach uses an approximation of the Kalman ﬁlter for
frame estimation and is constrained to translational motion.

𝐹𝑁𝑒𝑡
Warp
Space
to
depth
𝑆𝑅𝑁𝑒𝑡
𝐹'(
𝐹)(
𝐼+,-.
/0,
𝑆0(𝐼+,-.
/0, )
ℒ04
ℒ5678
𝐹'(
Warp
𝐼,-.
'(
𝐼,-.
/0,
𝐼,
/0,
𝐼,
/0,
𝐼,
)(
𝐼,
'(
𝐼,-.
'(
𝐼,
'(
Up-
scaling
Figure 2: Overview of the proposed FRVSR framework (left) and the loss functions used for training (right). After computing
the ﬂow F LR in LR space using FNet, we upsample it to F HR. We then use F HR to warp the HR-estimate of the previous
frame Iest
t−1 onto the current frame. Finally, we map the warped previous output ˜Iest
t−1 to LR-space using the space-to-depth
transformation and feed it to the super-resolution network SRNet along with the current input frame ILR
t . For training the
networks (shown in red), we apply a loss on Iest
t
as well as an additional loss on the warped previous LR frame to aid FNet.
3. Method
After presenting an overview of the FRVSR framework
in Sec. 3.1 and deﬁning the loss functions used for training
in Sec. 3.2, we justify our design choices in Sec. 3.3 and
give details on the implementation and training procedure in
Sec. 3.4 and 3.5, respectively.
3.1. FRVSR Framework
The proposed framework is illustrated in Fig. 2. Trainable
components (shown in red) include the optical ﬂow estima-
tion network FNet and the super-resolution network SRNet.
To produce the HR estimate Iest
t , our model makes use of
the current LR input frame ILR
t , the previous LR input frame
ILR
t−1, and the previous HR estimate Iest
t−1.
1. Flow estimation: As a ﬁrst step, FNet estimates the ﬂow
between the low-resolution inputs ILR
t−1 and ILR
t
yielding the
normalized low-resolution ﬂow map
F LR = FNet(ILR
t−1, ILR
t ) ∈[−1, 1]H×W ×2
(1)
that assigns a position in ILR
t−1 to each pixel location in ILR
t .
2. Upscaling ﬂow: Treating the ﬂow map F LR as an image,
we upscale it using bilinear interpolation with scaling factor
s which results in an HR ﬂow-map
F HR = UP(F LR) ∈[−1, 1]sH×sW ×2.
(2)
3. Warping previous output: We use the high-resolution
ﬂow map F HR to warp the previously estimated image Iest
t−1
according to the optical ﬂow from the previous frame onto
the current frame.
˜Iest
t−1 = WP(Iest
t−1, F HR)
(3)
We implemented warping as a differentiable function using
bilinear interpolation similar to Jaderberg et al. [19].
4. Mapping to LR space: We map the warped previous
output ˜Iest
t−1 to LR space using the space-to-depth transfor-
mation
Ss : [0, 1]sH×sW ×C →[0, 1]H×W ×s2C
(4)
which extracts shifted low-resolution grids from the image
and places them into the channel dimension, see Fig. 3 for
an illustration. The operator can be formally described as
Ss(I)i,j,k = Isi+k%s, sj+(k/s)%s, k/s2
(5)
with zero-based indexing, modulus % and integer division /.
5. Super-Resolution: In the ﬁnal step, we concatenate the
LR mapping of the warped previous output ˜Iest
t−1 with the cur-
rent low-resolution input frame ILR
t
in the channel dimension,
and feed the result ILR
t
⊕Ss(˜Iest
t−1) to the super-resolution
network SRNet.
Summary: The ﬁnal estimate Iest
t
of the framework is the
output of the super-resolution network SRNet:
SRNet(ILR
t ⊕Ss(WP(Iest
t−1, UP(FNet(ILR
t−1, ILR
t ))))) (6)
3.2. Loss functions
We use two loss terms to train our model, see Fig. 2,
right. The loss Lsr is applied on the output of SRNet and is
backpropagated through both SRNet and FNet:
Lsr = ||Iest
t
−IHR
t ||2
2
(7)
Since we do not have a ground truth optical ﬂow for our
video dataset, we calculate the spatial mean squared error
on the warped LR input frames leading to the auxiliary loss
term Lﬂow to aid FNet during training.
Lﬂow = || WP(ILR
t−1, F LR) −ILR
t ||2
2
(8)
The total loss used for training is L = Lsr + Lﬂow.

3.3. Justiﬁcations
The proposed FRVSR framework is motivated by the fol-
lowing ideas:
• Processing the input video frames more than once leads
to high computational cost. Hence, we avoid the sliding
window approach and process each input frame only once.
• Having direct access to the previous output can help
the network to produce a temporally consistent estimate
for the following frame. Furthermore, through a recurrent
architecture, the network can effectively use a large number
of previous LR frames to estimate the HR frame (see
Sec. 4.6) without tradeoffs in computational efﬁciency. For
this reason, we warp the previous HR estimate and feed it to
the super-resolution network.
• All computationally intensive operations should be per-
formed in LR space. To this end, we map the previous HR
estimate to LR space using the space-to-depth transforma-
tion, the inverse of which has been previously used by Shi et
al. [36] for upsampling. Running SRNet in LR space has
the additional advantages of reducing the memory footprint
and increasing the receptive ﬁeld when compared to a super-
resolution network that would operate in HR space.
3.4. Implementation
The proposed model in Fig. 2 is a ﬂexible framework that
leaves the choice for a speciﬁc network architecture open.
For our experiments, we use fully convolutional architectures
for both FNet and SRNet, see Fig. 4 for details. The design
of our optical ﬂow network FNet follows a simple encoder-
decoder style architecture to increase the receptive ﬁeld of
the convolutions. For SRNet, we follow the residual archi-
tecture used by Sajjadi et al. [35], but replace the upsampling
layers with transposed convolutions. Our choice of network
architectures strikes a balance between quality and complex-
ity. More recent methods for each subtask, especially more
complex optical ﬂow estimation methods [7, 18, 33] can be
easily incorporated and will lead to even better results.
3.5. Training and Inference
Our training dataset consists of 40 high-resolution videos
(720p, 1080p and 4k) downloaded from vimeo.com. We
downsample the original videos by a factor of 2 to have a
clean high-resolution ground truth and extract patches of
size 256×256 to generate the HR videos. To produce the
input LR videos, we apply Gaussian blur to the HR frames
and downscale them by sampling every 4-th pixel in each
dimension for s = 4. Unless speciﬁed otherwise, we use a
Gaussian blur with standard deviation σ = 1.5 (see Sec. 4.2).
To train the recurrent system, we extract clips of 10 con-
secutive frames from the videos using FFmpeg. We avoid
cuts or large scene changes in the clips by making sure that
Figure 3: Illustration of the space-to-depth transformation S2.
Regular LR grids with varying offsets are extracted from an
HR image and placed into the channel dimension, see Eq. 5
for a formal deﬁnition.
the clips do not contain keyframes. All losses are backprop-
agated through both networks SRNet and FNet as well as
through time, i.e., even the optical ﬂow network for the ﬁrst
frame in a clip receives gradients from the super-resolution
loss on the 10th frame. The model directly estimates the full
RGB video frames, so no post-processing is necessary.
To estimate the ﬁrst frame Iest
1 in each clip, we initialize
the previous estimate with a black image Iest
0
= 0 at both
training and testing time. The network will then simply up-
sample the input frame ILR
1
independently without additional
prior data, similar to a single image super-resolution network.
This has the additional beneﬁt of encouraging the network
to learn how to upsample single images independently early
on during training instead of only relying on copying the
previously generated image ˜Iest
t−1.
Our architecture is fully end-to-end trainable and does
not require component-wise pre-training. Initializing the net-
works with the Xavier method [14], we train the model on 2
million batches of size 4 using the Adam optimizer [24] with
a ﬁxed learning rate of 10−4. Note that each sample in the
batch is a set of 10 consecutive video frames, i.e., 40 video
frames are passed through the networks in each iteration.
As training progresses, the optical ﬂow estimation grad-
ually improves which gives the super-resolution network
higher-quality data to work with, helping it to rely more and
more on the warped previous estimate ˜Iest
t−1. At the same
time, the super-resolution network automatically learns to
ignore the previous image ˜Iest
t−1 when the optical ﬂow net-
work cannot ﬁnd a good correspondence between ILR
t−1 and
ILR
t , e.g., for the very ﬁrst video frame in each batch or for
occluded areas. These cases can be detected by the network
through a comparison of the low frequencies in ˜Iest
t−1 with
those in ILR
t . In areas where they do not match, the network
ignores the details in ˜Iest
t−1 and simply upscales the current
input frame independently. Once the model has been trained,
it can be run on videos of arbitrary size and length due to the
fully convolutional nature of the networks. To super-resolve a
video, the network is applied frame by frame in a single feed-
forward pass. Benchmarks for runtimes of different model
sizes are reported in Sec. 4.7.

Conv, 64
ReLU
Conv, 64
ReLU
Conv, 64
Conv Transpose, 64
Conv Transpose, 64
Conv, 3
ReLU
ReLU
⊕
⊕
Conv, 32
Leaky ReLU
Max pool 2x
Bilinear 2x
Tanh
Conv, 2
2x
Conv, 64
Leaky ReLU
Max pool 2x
2x
Conv, 128
Leaky ReLU
Max pool 2x
2x
Conv, 256
Leaky ReLU
2x
Bilinear 2x
Conv, 128
Leaky ReLU
2x
Bilinear 2x
Conv, 64
Leaky ReLU
2x
Conv, 32
Leaky ReLU
10 Residual blocks in total
+
Conv, 64
ReLU
Conv, 64
+
…
𝑆%(𝐼()*+
,-) )
𝐼/0
𝐼)*+
/0
𝐼)
/0
𝐼,-)
𝐹/0
Figure 4: Network architectures for SRNet (top) and FNet (bottom) for 4x upsampling. Both networks are fully convolutional
and work in LR space. For the inputs, ⊕denotes the concatenation of images in the channel dimension. All convolutions in
both networks use 3×3 kernels with stride 1, except for the transposed convolutions in SRNet which use stride 2 for spatial
upsampling. The leaky ReLU units in FNet use a leakage factor of 0.2 and the notation 2x indicates that the corresponding
block is duplicated.
4. Evaluation
For a fair evaluation of the proposed framework on equal
ground, we compare our model with two baselines that use
the same optical ﬂow and super-resolution networks. After
presenting the baselines in Sec. 4.1, we extensively investi-
gate the performance of FRVSR along with the baselines in
Sec. 4.2–4.7. All experiments are done for the challenging
case of 4x upsampling. For evaluation, we use a dataset of
ten 3–5s high-quality 1080p video clips downloaded from
youtube.com, which we refer to as YT10. Finally, we
compare our models with current state-of-the-art methods on
the standard Vid4 benchmark dataset [27] in Sec. 4.8. Fol-
lowing Caballero et al. [3], we compute video PSNR on the
brightness channel (ITU-R BT.601 YCbCr standard) using
the mean squared error over all pixels in the video.
For more results and video samples, we refer the reader
to our homepage at msajjadi.com.
4.1. Baselines
SISR: For the single image super-resolution baseline, we
omit optical ﬂow estimation from FRVSR and disregard any
prior information, feeding only ILR
t
into SRNet.
VSR: To compare with the sliding window approach for
video super-resolution, we include this baseline in which
a ﬁxed number of input frames are processed to produce
a single output frame. Following Kappeler et al. [20] and
Caballero et al. [3], we warp the previous and next input
frames onto the current frame, concatenate all three frames
and feed them to SRNet. Note that this model is compu-
tationally more expensive than FRVSR since it runs FNet
Figure 5: Performance for different blur sizes on YT10. For
all blur sizes, FRVSR gives the best results. The best PSNR
of FRVSR (σ = 1.5) is 1.00 dB and 0.39 dB higher than the
best of SISR (σ = 2.0) and VSR (σ = 1.5), respectively.
twice for each frame while the computation for SRNet is
almost identical to that of FRVSR.
As with FRVSR, both baselines are trained starting from a
Xavier initialization [14] using the Adam optimizer [24] with
a ﬁxed learning rate of 10−4. We trained the SISR network
for 500K steps and VSR for 2 million steps, both using a
batch size of 16. All networks are trained using the same
dataset, and their losses on a validation dataset have con-
verged at the end of the training.
4.2. Blur size
As mentioned in Sec. 3.5, we apply Gaussian blur to the
HR frames before downsampling them to generate the LR
input for the network. While a smaller blur kernel results in

aliasing, excessive blur leads to loss of high-frequency infor-
mation in the input, making it harder to reconstruct ﬁner de-
tails. To analyze how different approaches perform for blurry
or aliased inputs, we trained SISR, VSR and FRVSR on video
frames that have been downscaled using different values of
standard deviation for the Gaussian blur ranging from σ = 0
to σ = 5, see Fig. 5. The proposed framework FRVSR sig-
niﬁcantly outperforms SISR and VSR on all blur sizes. It is
interesting to note that SISR, which relies on a single LR
image for upsampling, beneﬁts the most from larger blur ker-
nels compared to VSR and FRVSR which perform best with
σ = 1.5. This is due to the fact that video super-resolution
methods are able to blend information from multiple frames
and therefore beneﬁt from sharper inputs. In the remaining
experiments, we use a value of σ = 1.5.
4.3. Training clip length
Since FRVSR is a recurrent network, it can be trained on
video clips of any length. To test the effect of the clip length
used to train the network on its performance, we trained the
same model using video clips of length 2, 5 and 10, yielding
average video PSNR values of 31.60, 32.01 and 32.10 on
YT10, respectively. These results show that the PSNR has
already started to saturate with a clip length of 5 and going
beyond 10 may not yield signiﬁcant improvements.
4.4. Degraded inputs
To see how different models perform under input degra-
dations, we trained and evaluated FRVSR and the baselines
using noisy and compressed input frames. Table 1 shows the
performance of these models on YT10 for varying levels of
Gaussian noise and JPEG compression quality. The proposed
framework consistently outperforms both SISR and VSR by
0.36–0.91 dB and 0.18–0.48 dB, respectively.
4.5. Temporal consistency
Analyzing the temporal consistency of the results is best
done by visual inspection of the video results. However, to
compare the results on paper, we follow Caballero et al. [3]
and show temporal proﬁles, see Fig. 6. A temporal proﬁle is
generated by taking the same horizontal row of pixels from
a number of frames in the video and stacking them vertically
into a new image. Flickering in the video will show up as
jitter and jagged lines in the temporal proﬁle. While VSR
produces sharper results than SISR, it still has signiﬁcant
ﬂickering artifacts since each output frame is estimated sep-
arately. In contrast, FRVSR produces the most consistent
results while containing even ﬁner details in each image.
4.6. Range of information ﬂow
Existing approaches to video super-resolution often use
a ﬁxed number (usually 3–7) of input frames to produce a
single output frame. Increasing this number increases the
SISR
VSR
FRVSR
HR
Figure 6: Temporal proﬁles for Calendar from Vid4. VSR
yields ﬁner details than SISR, but it’s output still contains
temporal inconsistencies (see red boxes). Only FRVSR is
able to produce temporally consistent results while reproduc-
ing ﬁne details. Best viewed on screen.
model
σ = 0.025
σ = 0.075
JPG 40
JPG 70
SISR
29.93
28.20
27.94
28.88
VSR
30.36
28.42
28.12
29.07
FRVSR
30.84
28.62
28.30
29.29
Table 1: Average video PSNR of various models under Gaus-
sian noise (left) and JPEG artifacts (right) on YT10. In all
experiments, FRVSR achieves the highest PSNR.
maximum number of frames over which details can be prop-
agated. While this can result in higher-quality videos, it also
substantially increases the computational cost, leading to a
tradeoff between efﬁciency and quality. In contrast, due to its
recurrent nature, FRVSR can pass information across a large
number of frames without increasing computations. Figure 7
shows the performance of FRVSR as a function of the num-
ber of frames processed. In the normal mode (blue curve)
in which a black frame is used as the ﬁrst frame’s previous
HR estimate, the performance steadily improves as more
frames are processed and it plateaus at 12 frames. When we
replace the ﬁrst previous HR estimate with the correspond-
ing groundtruth HR frame (red curve), FRVSR carries the
high-frequency details across a large number of frames and
performs better than the normal mode even after 50 frames.
To investigate the maximum effective range of informa-
tion ﬂow, we start the same model at different input frames
in the same video and compare the performance. Figure 8
shows such a comparison for the Foliage video from Vid4.
As we can see, the gap between the curves for the mod-
els that start at frame 1 and frame 11 only closes towards
the end of the clip, showing that FRVSR is propagating in-
formation over more than 30 frames. To propagate details
over such a large range, previous state-of-the-art methods
[3, 20, 28, 29, 39] would have to process an inhibiting num-
ber of input frames for each output image, which would be
computationally infeasible.

Figure 7: Performance of FRVSR on YT10 as a function
of the number of previous frames processed. In the normal
mode (blue), PSNR increases up to 12 frames, after which
it remains stable. When the ﬁrst HR image is given (red),
FRVSR propagates high-frequency details across a large
number of frames and performs better than the normal mode
even after 50 frames.
Figure 8: Performance of FRVSR started at the 1st and 11th
frame of Foliage from Vid4. The gap between the curves
only closes towards the end of the clip, showing FRVSR’s
ability to retain details over a large range of video frames.
4.7. Network size and computational efﬁciency
To see how the performance of different models varies
with the size of the network, we trained and evaluated FRVSR
and the baselines with different numbers of residual blocks
and convolution ﬁlters in SRNet, see Fig. 9. It is interest-
ing to note that the video super-resolution models FRVSR
and VSR clearly beneﬁt from larger models while the per-
formance of SISR does not change signiﬁcantly beyond 5
residual blocks. We can also see that FRVSR achieves better
results than VSR despite being faster: The FRVSR mod-
els with 5 residual blocks outperform the VSR models with
10 residual blocks, and the FRVSR models with 3 residual
blocks outperform the VSR models with 5 residual blocks
for the same number of convolution ﬁlters.
With our unoptimized TensorFlow implementation on an
Nvidia P100, producing a single Full HD frame for 4x up-
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
31.0
31.5
32.0
32.5
3 5
10
35
10
3
5
10
3
5
10
3
5
10
3
5
10
Full HD runtime (ms)
PSNR
FRVSR 64
FRVSR 128
VSR 64
VSR 128
SISR 64
SISR 128
Figure 9: Performance on YT10 for different numbers of
convolution ﬁlters (64 / 128) and residual blocks in SRNet.
FRVSR achieves better results than both baselines with sig-
niﬁcantly smaller super-resolution networks and less compu-
tation time. For example, FRVSR with 5 residual blocks is
both faster and better than VSR with 10 residual blocks.
scaling takes 74ms for FRVSR with 3 residual blocks and 64
ﬁlters, and 191ms for FRVSR with 10 blocks and 128 ﬁlters.
4.8. Comparison with prior art
Table 2 compares the proposed FRVSR approach with
various state-of-the-art video super-resolution approaches on
the standard Vid4 benchmark dataset by PSNR and SSIM.
We report results for two FRVSR networks: FRVSR 10-128,
which is our best model with 10 residual blocks and 128 con-
volution ﬁlters, and FRVSR 3-64, which is our most efﬁcient
model with only 3 residual blocks and 64 convolution ﬁlters.
For the baselines SISR and VSR, we report their best results
which correspond to 10 residual blocks and 128 convolution
ﬁlters. We also include RAISR [34] as an off-the-shelf single
image super-resolution alternative.
For all competing methods except [3, 17, 34], we used
the output images provided by the corresponding authors
to compute PSNR and SSIM. We did not use the ﬁrst and
last two frames in our evaluation since Liu et al. [28] do not
produce outputs for these frames. Also, for each video, we
removed border regions such that the LR input image is a
multiple of 8. For [3, 17], we use the PSNR and SSIM values
reported in the respective publications since we could not
conﬁrm them independently. For [34], we used the models
provided by the authors to generate the output images.
As shown in Tab. 2, FRVSR outperforms the current state
of the art by more than 0.5 dB. In fact, even our most efﬁ-
cient model FRVSR 3-64 produces state-of-the-art results by
PSNR and beats all previous neural network-based methods
by SSIM. It it interesting that our small model, despite being
much more efﬁcient, produces results that are very close to
the much larger model VSR 10-128 on the Vid4 dataset.
Figure 10 shows a visual comparison of the different ap-
proaches. We can see that our models are able to recover
ﬁne details and produce visually pleasing results. Even our
most efﬁcient network FRVSR 3-64 produces higher-quality
results than prior art.

Bicubic
Caballero et al. [3]
Liu et al. [28]
Tao et al. [39]
Liu and Sun [27]
SISR
VSR
FRVSR 3-64
FRVSR 10-128
HR ground truth
Figure 10: Visual comparison with previous methods on Foliage from Vid4. Amongst prior art, Liu and Sun [27] recover the
ﬁnest details, but their result has blocky artifacts, and their method uses a slow optimization procedure. Between the remaining
methods, even the result of our smallest model FRVSR 3-64 is sharper and contains more details than prior art, producing
results similar to the much bigger VSR model. Our larger model FRVSR 10-128 recovers the most accurate image.
Method
Bicubic
RAISR
BRCN
VESPCN
B1,2,3+T
DRVSR
Bayesian
SISR
VSR
FRVSR
FRVSR
[34]
[17]
[3]
[28]
[39]
[27]
10-128
10-128
3-64
10-128
PSNR
23.53
24.24
24.43*
25.35*
25.35
25.87
26.16
24.96
26.25
26.17
26.69
SSIM
0.628
0.665
0.662*
0.756*
0.738
0.772
0.815
0.721
0.803
0.798
0.822
Table 2: Comparison of average PSNR and SSIM on the standard Vid4 dataset for scaling factor s = 4. Our smallest model
FRVSR 3-64 already produces better results than all prior art including the computationally expensive optimization-based
method by Liu and Sun [27] by PSNR. Using a bigger super-resolution network helps FRVSR 10-128 to add an additional 0.5
dB on top and achieve state-of-the-art results by SSIM as well, showing that the proposed framework can greatly beneﬁt from
more powerful networks. Values marked with a star have been copied from the respective publications.
5. Future work
Since our framework relies on the HR estimate Iest for
propagating information, it can reconstruct details and propa-
gate them over a large number of frames (see Sec. 4.6). At the
same time, any detail can only persist in the system as long
as it is contained in Iest, as it is the only way through which
SRNet can pass information to future iterations. Due to the
spatial loss on Iest, SRNet has no way to pass on auxiliary
information that could potentially be useful for future frames
in the video, e.g., for occluded regions. As a result, occlu-
sions irreversibly destroy all previously aggregated details in
the affected areas and the best our model can do for the pre-
viously occluded areas is to match the performance of single
image super-resolution models. In contrast, models that use
a ﬁxed number of input frames can still combine information
from frames that do not have occlusions to produce better
results in these areas. To address this limitation, it is natural
to extend the framework with an additional memory channel.
However, preliminary experiments in this direction with both
static and motion-compensated memory did not improve the
overall performance of the architecture, so we leave further
investigations in this direction to future work.
Since the model is conceptually ﬂexible, it can be easily
extended to other applications. As an example, one may plug
in the original HR frame IHR
t−1 in place of the estimated frame
Iest
t−1 for every K-th frame. This could enable an efﬁcient
video compression method where only one in K HR-frames
needs to be stored while the remaining frames would be
reconstructed by the model.
A further extension of our framework would be the inclu-
sion of more advanced loss terms which have recently been
shown to produce more visually pleasing results [26, 35].
The recurrent architecture in FRVSR naturally encourages
the network to produce temporally consistent results, making
it an ideal candidate for further research in this direction.
6. Conclusion
We propose a ﬂexible end-to-end trainable framework for
video super-resolution that is able to generate higher quality
results while being more efﬁcient than existing sliding win-
dow approaches. In an extensive set of experiments, we show
that our model outperforms competing baselines in various
different settings. The proposed model also signiﬁcantly out-
performs state-of-the-art video super-resolution approaches
both quantitatively and qualitatively on a standard bench-
mark dataset.
