337 
 
AIN SHAMS UNIVERSITY 
FACULTY OF ENGINEERING 
 
 
 
 
 
Vol. 35, No. 3, Sept 30,2000 
 
 
SCIENTIFIC BULLETIN 
Received on : 3/9/2000 
Accepted on: 28/9/2000 
pp : 337-348 
 
GENETIC ALGORITHMS AND ITS USE WITH BACK-
PROPAGATION NETWORK 
Eng. Ayman M Bahaa Eldeen Sadeq, Prof. Dr. Abdel-Moneim A. Wahdan,  
Prof. Dr. Hani M. K. Mahdi 
Faculty of Engineering, Ain Shams University 
Abstract: 
Genetic algorithms are considered as one of the most efficient search techniques. Although they 
do not offer an optimal solution, their ability to reach a suitable solution in considerably short 
time gives them their respectable role in many AI techniques. This work introduces genetic 
algorithms and describes their characteristics. Then a novel method using genetic algorithm in 
best training set generation and selection for a back-propagation network is proposed.  This work 
also offers a new extension to the original genetic algorithms 
 
 ملخص
تعتبر الخوارزمات الجينية واحدة من أفضل طرق البحث من ناحية األداء .
 فبالرغم من أن استخدام هذه الطريقة ال يعطي الحل
األمثل ,
 إال أن وصول الخوارزم لحل مناسب في زمن قصير جداً يعطي هذه الطريقة دورها الهام في كثير من عمميات الذكاء
االصطناعي .وفي هذا البحث نقو م بعرض سريع لمخوارزمات الجينية ثم نقوم بعد ذلك بتقديم طريقة مبتكرة الستخدام
الخوارزمات الجينية النتقاء أفضل مجموعة تعميم لشبكة عصبية من نوع االنتشار العكسي .
 ولموصول لهذه الطريقة تم اقتراح
 تطوير لمخوارزمات الجينية األصمية 
 
1. Introduction 
 
This research targets the problem of finding the best training set for a back-propagation network. 
The choice of this training set highly affects both the training time and the efficiency of the 
network at recall time. The chosen set must be a super set for most, if not all, target domain of 
patterns. That means, when the network is trained by this set, it can recognize most of, if not all, 
the target domain patterns.  
A solution to the problem is to select a huge set of patterns to train the network with. In this case 
the coverage of the training process is guaranteed to some extent. 
The problem for this solution is the extremely large training time needed and the divergence 
problem. For large data sets, the network may suffer contradicting features that results in a 
divergence or a local minimum stuck, while these features may be of unnecessary role in the 
overall recognition process. The search of a set that holds all the important features of all the 
target domain patterns is the perfect solution for this problem. The importance of features, which 
are automatically extracted by the network, can be judged by the final recognition rate of a 
relatively large test set. The testing process takes a very few amount of time since each pattern is 

338 
propagated once in only one direction unlike the training process which takes very large number 
of iterations in both forward and backward directions to accomplish weights adjustment. 
The ability of genetic algorithms of finding solutions to optimization problems in a very fast way 
is considered a candidate solution to the training set selection problem. Starting with a set of 
training sets, and then applying the genetic algorithms to mate and mutate sets to generate new 
sets, which were never existing, can lead to the desired training set. This ability is studied in this 
paper and an extension to the genetic algorithms is proposed. A suitable fitness criterion is also 
proposed. 
 
2. Genetic algorithms 
 
In this section a brief description of genetic algorithm and its characteristics is introduced [1]. 
Holland (1969, 1975) proposed the use of genetic algorithm as an efficient search mechanism in 
artificially adaptive systems. This procedure was designed to incorporate specific operators, 
emphasizing especially crossover and inversion. Crossover was defined (Holland, 1975) as taking 
two coding sequences and exchanging the set of attributes that follow a randomly chosen 
position.  
 
2.1 Basic Description 
 
Genetic algorithms are typically implemented as follows, 
1.The problem to be addressed is defined and captured in an objective function that indicates 
the fitness of any potential solution. 
2.A population of candidate solutions is initialized subject to certain constraints.  
Typically, each trial is coded as a vector x, termed a chromosome, with elements being described 
as genes and varying values at specific positions called alleles. All solutions should be repre-
sented by binary strings. For example, if it is desired to find the scalar value x that maximizes 
F(x) = -x2, 
Then a finite range of values for x would be selected and the minimum possible value in the 
range would be represented by the string [0... 0], with the maximum value being represented by 
the string [1... 1]. The desired degree of precision would indicate the appropriate length of the 
binary coding. 
1.Each chromosome, Xi, i = 1,….,P, in the population is decoded into a form appropriate for 
evaluation and a fitness score is assigned to each chromosome, 
)
(
ix

, according to the 
objective. 
2.A probability of reproduction, pi, i = 1,..,P, is assigned to each chromosome, so that its 
likelihood of being selected is proportional to its fitness relative to the other chromosomes 
in the population. If the fitness of each chromosome is a strictly positive number to be 
maximized, this is traditionally accomplished using roulette wheel selection, Figure 1. 
  
 
3. According to the assigned probabilities of reproduction, p, i= I, P, a new population of 
chromosomes is generated by probabilistically selecting strings from the current 
population. The selected chromosomes generate offspring via the use of specific genetic 
operators, such as crossover and bit mutation. Crossover is applied to two chromosomes 
(parents) and creates two new chromosomes (offspring). This is done by selecting a 
random position along the coding and by exchanging the section that appears before the 

339 
selected position in the first string with the section that appears after the selected position 
in the second string, and vice versa. Figure 2 shows this process. Bit mutation simply 
offers the chance to flip some bits in the coding of a new solution. Typical values for the 
probabilities of crossover and bit mutation range from 0.25 to 0.95 and 0.001 to 0.01, 
respectively. 
 
4. The process is halted if a suitable solution is found or if the available computing time is 
expired. Otherwise, the process goes to step 3, where the new chromosomes are scored 
and the procedure iterates. 
 
For example, suppose the task is to find a vector of 100 bits {0, 1} such that the sum of all the 
bits in the vector is maximized. The objective function could be written as  



100
1
,
)
(
i
ix
x

 
 
Where x is a vector of 100 symbols from {0, 1}. Such vector x could be scored with respect to 
(x) and would receive fitness ranging from zero to 100. Let an initial population of 100 parents 
be selected completely at random and subjected to roulette wheel selection in light of (x), 
(fitness function) with the probabilities of crossover and bit mutation being 0.8 and 0.01, 
respectively. The process will rapidly converge to a vector of all l's. 
 
A number of issues must be addressed when using a genetic algorithm [1]. 
1.  Using of binary representation versus floating point representation especially in real values 
optimization.   
2. Selection in proportion to fitness can be problematic. Since (1) Roulette wheel selection 
depends on positive values, and (2) simply adding a large constant value to the objective 
function can eliminate selection. Other problems of fairness may arise for this selection 
technique.  
3. Premature convergence is another important concern in genetic algorithms. This occurs 
when the population of chromosomes reaches a configuration such that crossover no longer 
produces offspring that can outperform their parents, as must be the case in a homogeneous 
population. Under such circumstances, all standard forms of crossover simply regenerate the 
current parents. Any further optimization relies solely on bit mutation and can be quite slow. 
Although many open questions remain, genetic algorithms have been used to address diverse 
practical optimization problems successfully.  
 
3 Genetic Algorithm for best training set generation and selection 
 
The motivation of this paper was to find a solution for the problem of Arabic character 
recognition. Neural network approach is considered as a good solution for the pattern recognition 
problem. Back-propagation networks form a very good structure that can actually solve our 
recognition problem. A training set that covers the problem space must be constructed. Many 
questions arose for the neural network approach, such as network structure, activation function, 
and initial weights. New question is to be asked here. What is the best training set to be used with 
the BPN (Back-Propagation Network)? 
In the following an answer for this question is given. 

340 
3.1 Problem Formulation 
 
The system is required to recognize typed characters of different styles and sizes. Size problem 
can be solved by normalization and zooming. The problem of different styles, fonts, is currently 
solved by training the network by all possible patterns or fonts. This is actually a good but not an 
optimal solution since it rises the training time due to the large training set volume. Another 
solution is to find a covering, yet small, set that represents all the candidate patterns. For the 
current problem, we are trying to find a training set that used to train a BPN, and then the 
network can recognize the whole target set. As described earlier, the parameter that governs the 
learning quality of the network is the residual error of the network. That is the root mean square 
error of the patterns when compared with the desired output, i.e. if the network recognizes all the 
patterns; the residual error for all patterns is under the acceptable error tolerance. Figure 6 shows 
some Arabic letters written in different fonts. The presented subset of characters is selected to 
represent all character shapes, as will be explained later, also the most popular writing fonts are 
considered. 
Let us describe the network and give the solution without using optimization and GA (Genetic 
Algorithm). Each pattern is normalized and zoomed into a unified 16x16 window and digitized 
into a 256-bit vector. Our input layer size is going to be 256. The output layer size is 4 nodes 
since we have 12 different classes which can be decoded into 4-bit code. The hidden layer size is 
taken to be 32 nodes =
4
*
256
 [2], this value is found in many neural network literature and is 
advised to be taken as an initial guess, and the network has one hidden layer. As mentioned 
earlier, the problem can be solved by training the network by all the patterns, but this solution is 
very time consuming. This solution was tried and a total time of about 2 hours was taken to 
complete the training process (the 108 character forms are considered as the training set). So our 
problem is to find the best training set to be used with a back-propagation network such that this 
trained network can recognize correctly any character in the above array. 
 
3.2 Genetic Algorithm usage, a first proposal 
 
Let us consider genetic algorithm to solve the previous problem. There are two main 
characteristics of genetic algorithm that led this development: 
1. Genetic algorithm is an efficient search algorithm 
2. Within the process of genetic algorithm, new solutions are found by combining the original 
solutions in such a way that these new solutions were not members of the original set of 
solutions, first generation. 
Now we formulate the problem into genetic algorithm context. 
A first representation can be: 
1. Consider each training set to be a chromosome, i.e. each complete set of characters (each 
line in Figure 3) is considered to form a chromosome.  
2. Each pattern within a chromosome is considered a gene  
3. The genetic algorithm is then applied. 
 
The fitness function can be characterized by finding the residual error for all the given 
patterns after using the chromosome as a training set and use this value as the fitness score. It can 
be said that the network has learned to recognize the features describing the patterns of the given 
training set, chromosome. Then the network is used to recognize all the given original array of 
patterns. With each pattern the output of the network is obtained and compared to the desired 
output for this pattern and an error term is calculated. The maximum of those errors is used as the 

341 
measurement of how the chromosome can describe the whole array of characters. The genetic 
algorithm through its crossover and mutation operations results a chromosome with minimum 
fitness. Iterations continue until a chromosome resulting in an error less than the tolerance value. 
Figure 4 below shows the representation of the problem.  
 
3.3 Problems with the first proposal 
 
From the previous discussion a suitable formulation of the problem to fit the genetic algorithm is 
addressed. With this approach (representing the pattern by a gene and the set by a chromosome) 
we remark, 
1. 
Each pattern here is a gene, i.e. we are no longer dealing with binary GA. 
2. 
Crossover operation will produce new chromosomes with different combination of the 
original characters, and this must assume that a combination of the original characters 
actually holds a solution, which is not always the case. 
3. 
Mutation here must be done by inverting a gene i.e. getting the negative of an image, 
which is obviously has no role in producing a valid solution. 
So we can see that another encoding scheme must be used to overcome these problems. In the 
next section an extension of the genetic algorithm is proposed to alleviate the mentioned 
problems. 
 
3.4 Beings, An Extension to Genetic Algorithm 
 
Deep insight into the problem, one can find that a pattern, or a character, has got a big role in the 
training problem. Considering a pattern as a gene and not participating in the generation of the 
training set eliminates an important part that can be very useful. Again borrowing the nature 
terms let us propose a new construct and call it a being. As natural beings, it is bigger than a 
chromosome construct. It is actually constructed of chromosomes, just like chromosomes are 
constructed of genes. The being is subjected to the following definition and conditions 
 
1. 
Each Being has many chromosomes 
2. 
Each chromosome has many genes 
3. 
Each chromosome corresponds to a specific pattern and each gene corresponds to an 
image pixel 
4. 
Pure beings have all pure chromosomes 
5. 
Each being must have the same number and types of chromosomes (each being must have 
a pattern for each character) 
6. 
A population of pure beings forms pure tribe. 
7. 
Crossover of 2 beings happens on chromosomes of the same genetic type to produce  
 
New beings with different combination of chromosomes (if the crossover point 
happens on a chromosome boundary) 
 
New beings with hybrid chromosomes (if the crossover point happens inside a 
chromosome)  
8. 
Mutation is carried out on genes and represents noise 
9. 
Competition is between beings and not chromosomes. 
Figure 5 shows the construction of a being. 
Considering the above definition and conditions, then each character is encoded into a binary 
vector forming a chromosome. Each being is formed of twelve chromosomes where each 

342 
chromosome corresponds to a character in the set. The problems of the first proposal are solved. 
Binary representation is used back again since each gene represent an image pixel and is either 
binary 0 or 1 for white or black pixels respectively. Crossing over operation may produce hybrid 
patterns constructed from original patterns and these new patterns hold the features of the original 
ones. In the same time we did not lose the pattern exchanging operation as with the first proposal. 
Mutation here when carried out on genes actually helps to represent noise which is always found 
when using optical scanners to gain the characters images. By this proposal the process can be 
carried out to find the best training set by the same fitness function used before, namely, 
minimum residual error after training. The training for each being is started from the same set of 
initial weights. And the training continues until all the chromosomes, characters, of the being are 
recognized. Then the original set is tested for fitness calculation. 
Figure 6 shows the in-chromosome crossing over operation and shows how new patterns are 
generated from the original patterns. 
Note that selection actually happens on normalized patterns of the same size.  
Figure 7 shows the result of such crossing over. 
 
3.5 Application of the proposed algorithm to the character recognition problem 
 
The proposed algorithm was tested with the given set in Figure 3 with the aim to find a set that 
has one pattern for each character in concern and that must contains the features that describe all 
the given characters as described earlier. The neural network used is as follows 
Network type:  
 
 
 
Back-Propagation 
Number of hidden layers: 
 
 
 
1 
Input layer size: 
 
 
 
 
256 
Hidden layer size: 
 
 
 
 
32 
Output layer size: 
 
 
 
 
4 
Activation function:  
 
 
 
Sigmoid function in its basic shape 
Tolerance 
 
 
 
 
 
0.05  
For each being used, the network is initialized with the same set of weights and training 
continues until all being chromosomes are recognized. 
The genetic algorithm parameters are 
Being size: 
 
 
  
 
 
12 chromosomes 
Chromosome size: 
 
 
 
 
256 gene 
Maximum number of generations: 
 
 
40 generations 
Crossover probability:  
 
 
 
0.25 
Mutation probability:   
 
 
 
0.1 
Population size: 
 
 
 
 
9 beings 
Single point crossover is used and the initial population, generation one, was taken to be the 
original training set, all pure beings. 
The system is simulated and Figure 8 shows the residual error in each generation for the best 
being. 
As can be seen, the best result was obtained in generation 12 and was about 0.02 (residual error). 
This value is actually less than the tolerance, which was 0.05, but the experiment allowed the 
process to continue until the 40th generation to test the performance. 
Figure 9 shows the resulting which realizes the minimum fitness 
Comparing the resulting set to the original array, we find that actually each character holds the 
important features of all the corresponding characters in the original array.  

343 
The algorithm actually works and takes about 40 minutes to complete the process.  
We cannot take the time gain as actually a real gain, since the genetic algorithm is probabilistic 
by nature. If we were going to stop the process when a good satisfactory solution is achieved, 
much less time, in our case, is realized. The actual benefit of such a process is that we can 
improve the convergence of the neural network in the recognition process to a valid solution 
when a small sized training set is used. For large training sets, that assumption may not always 
hold. What we actually done is to help the neural network in selecting the best features to 
describe the problem space. In the same time we cannot rely completely on the automatic feature 
selection nature of a neural network to do the job. 
 
3.6. Defending the proposed extension 
 
Now let us say, Why bother with a new extension and definitions, Why not just view the problem 
as taking a large size chromosome where parts of this chromosome represents patterns and apply 
the normal genetic algorithm. Actually this point of view arose while developing the work. 
While the extension was just thoughts, one operation of the genetic algorithm was concerned very 
much. That was crossover operation. By our proposal two different crossing over operation can 
be defined and they are mentioned above,  
In-chromosome crossover and boundary-crossover. Variation of these operations provides 
situation suitable for different applications. Although single point crossover was used in the 
problem at hand which result in either of the two mentioned crossover operation, redefining the 
algorithm to have both operations in the same time can affect the performance of the system an it 
is a good point of further studies. The proposed extension is clearer and there are direct 
correspondences between problem blocks and algorithm constructs.  
 
4. Conclusion 
 
This paper introduced a novel way for constructing the best training set for a back-propagation 
network used for Arabic character recognition.  
A new extension to the basic genetic algorithms is also introduced to scale the algorithms up to 
fit the problem of character set selection. 
 
5.References. 
[1] David B. Fogel, Evolutionary Computation Toward a New Philosophy of Machine 
Intelligence, IEEE press 1995 
[2] Simon Haykin, Neural Networks, A Comprehensive Foundation, Macmillan College 
Publishing Company, 1994 
[3] O. R. Duda and P. E. Hart, Pattern classification and scene analysis, J. Wiely: New York, 
1973 
[4] Robert Schalkoff, Pattern Recognition Statistical, Structural, and Neural Approaches, 
chapter 1 pp 2-30, , John Wiley & Sons, Inc 1992 
[5] Holland L., “Genetic algorithms”, Scientific American pp. 66-72, July 1992. 
[6] Ben Kröse, and Patrick van der Smagt, An introduction to Neural Networks, Eights 
edition, 11/1996, http://www.robotic.dlr.de/smagt/books.  
 

344 
6.Figures. 
 
 
 
% total 
Function 
String 
Number 
14.4 
49.2 
5.5 
30.9 
169 
576 
64 
361 
011110110111 
011010010111 
101101111011 
111010010111 
1 
2 
3 
4 
100 
1170 
 
Total 
 
Figure 1. Roulette wheel selection mechanism 
 
 
 
    Crossover Point 
 
Parent #1: 
1101 0111101 
Offspring #1: 10100111101 
Parent #2: 
1010 0000100 
Offspring #2: 11010000100 
 
Figure 2. The one-point crossover operator applied to two parents. 
 
 
 
 
 

345 
Figure 3. The considered subset of Arabic characters written in different fonts. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Entire training set divided into chromosomes 
 
 

346 
 
Figure 5. A Being 
 
 
Figure 6 (a) and (b) original patterns of the same character “Ba” in Arabic (c) and (d) the selected 
portions of each image for crossing over 
 
 

347 
 
 
Figure 7. Result of in-chromosome crossover operation. 
 
 
Figure 8. Progress of fitness of beings. 

348 
 
Figure 9 Best training set
