Tractability through Exchangeability:
A New Perspective on Efﬁcient Probabilistic Inference
Mathias Niepert∗
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington, Seattle

Guy Van den Broeck∗
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract
Exchangeability is a central notion in statistics and
probability theory. The assumption that an inﬁnite se-
quence of data points is exchangeable is at the core
of Bayesian statistics. However, ﬁnite exchangeability
as a statistical property that renders probabilistic infer-
ence tractable is less well-understood. We develop a the-
ory of ﬁnite exchangeability and its relation to tractable
probabilistic inference. The theory is complementary
to that of independence and conditional independence.
We show that tractable inference in probabilistic mod-
els with high treewidth and millions of variables can be
explained with the notion of ﬁnite (partial) exchange-
ability. We also show that existing lifted inference al-
gorithms implicitly utilize a combination of conditional
independence and partial exchangeability.
1
Introduction
Probabilistic graphical models such as Bayesian and Markov
networks explicitly represent conditional independencies
of a probability distribution with their structure (Pearl
1988; Lauritzen 1996; Koller and Friedman 2009; Darwiche
2009). Their wide-spread use in research and industry can
largely be attributed to this structural property and their
declarative nature, separating representation and inference
algorithms. Conditional independencies often lead to a more
concise representation and facilitate efﬁcient algorithms for
parameter estimation and probabilistic inference. It is well-
known, for instance, that probabilistic graphical models with
a tree structure admit efﬁcient inference. In addition to con-
ditional independencies, modern inference algorithms ex-
ploit contextual independencies (Boutilier et al. 1996) to
speed up probabilistic inference.
The time complexity of classical probabilistic inference
algorithms is exponential in the treewidth (Robertson and
Seymour 1986) of the graphical model. Independence and its
various manifestations often reduce treewidth and treewidth
has been used in the literature as the decisive factor for as-
sessing the tractability of probabilistic inference (cf. Koller
and Friedman (2009), Darwiche (2009)). However, recent
algorithmic developments have shown that inference in
probabilistic graphical models can be highly tractable, even
∗Both authors contributed equally to the paper. Guy Van den
Broeck is also at KU Leuven, Belgium.
in high-treewidth models without any conditional indepen-
dencies. For instance, lifted probabilistic inference algo-
rithms (Poole 2003; Kersting 2012) often perform efﬁcient
inference in densely connected graphical models with mil-
lions of random variables. With the success of lifted infer-
ence, understanding these algorithms and their tractability
on a more fundamental level has become a central challenge.
The most pressing question concerns the underlying statisti-
cal principle that allows inference to be tractable in the ab-
sence of independence.
The present paper contributes to a deeper understanding
of the statistical properties that render inference tractable.
We consider an inference problem tractable when it is solved
by an efﬁcient algorithm, running in time polynomial in the
number of random variables. The crucial contribution is a
comprehensive theory that relates the notion of ﬁnite partial
exchangeability (Diaconis and Freedman 1980a) to tractabil-
ity. One instance is full exchangeability where the distribu-
tion is invariant under variable permutations. We develop a
theory of exchangeable decompositions that results in novel
tractability conditions. Similar to conditional independence,
partial exchangeability decomposes a probabilistic model so
as to facilitate efﬁcient inference. Most importantly, the no-
tions of conditional independence and partial exchangeabil-
ity are complementary, and when combined, deﬁne a much
larger class of tractable models than the class of models ren-
dered tractable by conditional independence alone.
Conditional and contextual independence are such pow-
erful concepts because they are statistical properties of the
distribution, regardless of the representation used. Partial ex-
changeability is such a statistical property that is indepen-
dent of any representation, be it a joint probability table, a
Bayesian network, or a statistical relational model. We intro-
duce novel forms of exchangeability, discuss their sufﬁcient
statistics, and efﬁcient inference algorithms. The resulting
exchangeability framework allows us to state known liftabil-
ity results as corollaries, providing a ﬁrst statistical charac-
terization of exact lifted inference. As an additional contri-
bution, we connect the semantic notion of exchangeability
to syntactic notions of tractability by showing that liftable
statistical relational models have the required exchangeabil-
ity properties due to their syntactic symmetries. We thereby
unify notions of lifting from the exact and approximate in-
ference community into a common framework.
arXiv:1401.1247v2  [cs.AI]  22 Apr 2014

2
A Case Study: Markov Logic
The analysis of exchangeability and tractable inference is
developed in the context of arbitrary discrete probability dis-
tributions, independent of a particular representational for-
malism. Nevertheless, for the sake of accessibility, we will
provide examples and intuitions for Markov logic, a well-
known statistical relational language that exhibits several
forms of exchangeability. Hence, after the derivation of the
theoretical results in each section, we apply the theory to the
problem of inference in Markov logic networks. This also
allows us to link the theory to existing results from the lifted
probabilistic inference literature.
Markov Logic Networks
We ﬁrst introduce some standard concepts from function-
free ﬁrst-order logic. An atom P(t1, . . . , tn) consists of a
predicate P/n of arity n followed by n argument terms ti,
which are either constants, {A, B, . . . } or logical variables
{x, y, . . . }. A unary atom has one argument and a binary
atom has two. A formula combines atoms with connectives
(e.g., ∧, ⇔). A formula is ground if it contains no logical
variables. The groundings of a formula are obtained by in-
stantiating the variables with particular constants.
Many statistical relational languages have been proposed
in recent years (Getoor and Taskar 2007; De Raedt et al.
2008). We will work with one such language, called Markov
logic networks (MLN) (Richardson and Domingos 2006).
An MLN is a set of tuples (w, f), where w is a real number
representing a weight and f is a formula in ﬁrst-order logic.
Let us, for example, consider the following MLN
1.3
Smokes(x) ⇒Cancer(x)
(1)
1.5
Smokes(x) ∧Friends(x, y) ⇒Smokes(y)
(2)
which states that smokers are more likely to (1) get cancer
and (2) be friends with other smokers.
Given a domain of constants D, a ﬁrst-order MLN ∆in-
duces a grounding, which is the MLN obtained by replacing
each formula in ∆with all its groundings (using the same
weight). Take for example the domain D = {A, B} (e.g.,
two people, Alice and Bob), the above ﬁrst-order MLN rep-
resents the following grounding.
1.3
Smokes(A) ⇒Cancer(A)
1.3
Smokes(B) ⇒Cancer(B)
1.5
Smokes(A) ∧Friends(A, A) ⇒Smokes(A)
1.5
Smokes(A) ∧Friends(A, B) ⇒Smokes(B)
1.5
Smokes(B) ∧Friends(B, A) ⇒Smokes(A)
1.5
Smokes(B) ∧Friends(B, B) ⇒Smokes(B)
This ground MLN contains eight different random variables,
which correspond to all groundings of atoms Smokes(x),
Cancer(x) and Friends(x, y). This leads to a distribution
over 28 possible worlds. The weight of each world is the
product of the expressions exp(w), where (w, f) is a ground
MLN formula and f is satisﬁed by the world. The probabil-
ities of worlds are obtained by normalizing their weights.
Without loss of generality (Jha et al. 2010), we assume that
ﬁrst-order formulas contain no constants.
Figure 1: An undirected graphical model with 9 ﬁnitely ex-
changeable Bernoulli variables. There are no (conditional)
independencies that hold among the variables.
Lifted Probabilistic Inference
The advent of statistical relational languages such as Markov
logic has motivated a new class of lifted inference algo-
rithms (Poole 2003). These algorithms exploit the high-level
structure and symmetries of the ﬁrst-order logic formulas to
speed up inference (Kersting 2012). Surprisingly, they per-
form tractable inference even in the absence of conditional
independencies. For example, when interpreting the above
MLN as an (undirected) probabilistic graphical model, all
pairs of random variables in {Smokes(A), Smokes(B), . . . }
are connected by an edge due to the groundings of For-
mula 2. The model has no conditional or contextual indepen-
dencies between the Smokes variables. Nevertheless, lifted
inference algorithms exactly compute its single marginal
probabilities in time linear in the size of the corresponding
graphical model (Van den Broeck et al. 2011), scaling up to
millions of random variables.
As lifted inference research makes algorithmic progress,
the quest for the source of tractability and its theoretical
properties becomes increasingly important. For exact lifted
inference, most theoretical results are based on the notion of
domain-lifted inference (Van den Broeck 2011).
Deﬁnition 1 (Domain-lifted). Domain-lifted inference algo-
rithms run in time polynomial in |D|.
Note that domain-lifted algorithms can be exponential in
other parameters, such as the number of formulas and pred-
icates. Our current understanding of exact lifted inference is
that syntactic properties of MLN formulas permit domain-
lifted inference (Van den Broeck 2011; Jaeger and Van den
Broeck 2012; Taghipour et al. 2013). We will review these
results where relevant. Moreover, the (fractional) automor-
phisms of the graphical model representation have been re-
lated to lifted inference (Niepert 2012b; Bui, Huynh, and
Riedel 2012; Noessner, Niepert, and Stuckenschmidt 2013;
Mladenov and Kersting 2013). While there are deep connec-
tions between automorphisms and exchangeability (Niepert
2012b; 2013; Bui, Huynh, and Riedel 2012; Bui, Huynh, and
de Salvo Braz 2012), we refer these to future work.
3
Finite Exchangeability
This section provides some background on the concept of
ﬁnite partial exchangeability. We proceed by showing that
particular forms of ﬁnite exchangeability permit tractable
inference. For the sake of simplicity and to provide links
to statistical relational models such as MLNs, we present

the theory for ﬁnite sets of (upper-case) binary random vari-
ables X = {X1, . . . , Xn}. However, the theory applies to
all distributions over ﬁnite valued discrete random variables.
Lower-case x denote an assignments to X.
We begin with the most basic form of exchangeability.
Deﬁnition 2 (Full Exchangeability). A set of variables X =
{X1, ..., Xn} is fully exchangeable if and only if Pr(X1 =
x1, . . . , Xn = xn) = Pr(X1 = xπ(1), . . . , Xn = xπ(n)) for
all permutations π of {1, . . . , n}.
Full exchangeability is best understood in the context of a
ﬁnite sequence of binary random variables such as a number
of coin tosses. Here, exchangeability means that it is only
the number of heads that matters and not their particular or-
der. Figure 1 depicts an undirected graphical model with 9
ﬁnitely exchangeable dependent Bernoulli variables.
Finite Partial Exchangeability
The assumption that all variables of a probabilistic model
are exchangeable is often too strong. Fortunately, exchange-
ability can be generalized to the concept of partial exchange-
ability using the notion of a sufﬁcient statistic (Diaconis and
Freedman 1980b; Lauritzen et al. 1984; Lauritzen 1988).
Particular instances of exchangeability such as full ﬁnite ex-
changeability correspond to particular statistics.
Deﬁnition 3 (Partial Exchangeability). Let Di be the do-
main of Xi, and let T be a ﬁnite set. A set of random vari-
ables X is partially exchangeable with respect to the statistic
T : D1 × · · · × Dn →T if and only if
T(x) = T(x′) implies Pr(x) = Pr(x′).
The following theorem states that the joint distribution of a
set of random variables that is partially exchangeable with a
statistic T is a unique mixture of uniform distributions.
Theorem 1 (Diaconis and Freedman (1980a)). Let T be
a ﬁnite set and let T
:
{0, 1}n
→
T be a statistic
of a partially exchangeable set X. Moreover, let St =
{x ∈D1 × · · · × Dn | T(x) = t}, let Ut be the uniform dis-
tribution over St, and let Pr(St) = Pr(T(x) = t). Then,
Pr(X) =
X
t∈T
Pr(St)Ut(X).
Hence, a distribution that is partially exchangeable with re-
spect to a statistic T can be parameterized as a unique mix-
ture of uniform distributions. We will see that several in-
stances of partial exchangeability render probabilistic infer-
ence tractable. Indeed, the major theme of the present paper
can be summarized as ﬁnding methods for constructing the
above representation and exploiting it for tractable proba-
bilistic inference for a given probabilistic model.
Let [[·]] be the indicator function. The uniform distribution
of each equivalence class St is Ut(X) = [[T(X) = t]]/|St|;
and the probability of St is Pr(St) = Pr(x)|St| for every
x ∈St. Hence, every value of the statistic T corresponds
to one equivalence class St of joint assignments with identi-
cal probability. We will refer to these equivalence classes as
orbits. We write x ∼e when assignments x and e agree
on the values of their shared variables (Darwiche 2009).
The suborbit St,e ⊆St for some evidence state e is the
set of those states in St that are compatible with e, that is,
St,e = {x | T(x) = t and x ∼e}.
Partial Exchangeability and Probabilistic Inference
We are now in the position to relate ﬁnite partial exchange-
ability to tractable probabilistic inference, using notions
from Theorem 1. The inference tasks we consider are
– MPE inference, i.e., ﬁnding arg maxy Pr(y, e) for any
given assignment e to variables E ⊆X, and
– marginal inference, i.e., computing Pr(e) for any given e.
For a set of variables X, we say that P(x) can be computed
efﬁciently iff it can be computed in time polynomial in |X|.
We make the following complexity claims
Theorem 2. Let X be partially exchangeable with statistic
T. If we can efﬁciently
– for all x, evaluate Pr(x), and
– for all e and t ∈T decide whether there exists an x ∈
St,e, and if so, construct it,
then the complexity of MPE inference is polynomial in |T |.
If we can additionally compute |St,e| efﬁciently, then the
complexity of marginal inference is also polynomial in |T |.
Proof. For MPE inference, we construct an xt ∈St,e for
each t ∈T , and return the one maximizing Pr(xt). For
marginal inference, we return P
t∈T Pr(xt)|St,e|.
If the above conditions for tractable inference are fulﬁlled
we say that a distribution is tractably partially exchangeable
for MPE or marginal inference. We will present notions of
exchangeability and related statistics T that make distribu-
tions tractably partially exchangeable. Please note that The-
orem 2 generalizes to situations in which we can only efﬁ-
ciently compute Pr(x) up to a constant factor Z, as is often
the case in undirected probabilistic graphical models.
Markov Logic Case Study
Exchangeability and independence are not mutually exclu-
sive. Independent and identically distributed (iid) random
variables are also exchangeable. Take for example the MLN
1.5
Smokes(x)
The random variables Smokes(A), Smokes(B), . . . are inde-
pendent. Hence, we can compute their marginal probabilities
independently as
Pr(Smokes(A)) = Pr(Smokes(B)) =
exp(1.5)
exp(1.5) + 1
The variables are also ﬁnitely exchangeable. For example,
the probability that A smokes and B does not is equal to
the probability that B smokes and A does not. The sufﬁcient
statistic T(x) counts how many people smoke in the state x
and the probability of a state in which n out of N people
smoke is exp(1.5n)/(exp(1.5) + 1)N.
Exchangeability can occur without independence, as in
the following Markov logic network
1.5
Smokes(x) ∧Smokes(y)

This distribution has neither independencies nor condi-
tional independencies. However, its variables are ﬁnitely ex-
changeable and the probability of a state x is only a func-
tion of the sufﬁcient statistic T(x) counting the number
of smokers in x. The probability of a state now increases
by a factor of exp(1.5) with every pair of smokers. When
n people smoke there are n2 pairs and, hence, Pr(x) =
exp
 1.5n2
/Z, where Z is a normalization constant. Let
Y consist of all Smokes(x) variables except for Smokes(A),
and let y be an assignment to Y in which m people smoke.
The probability that A smokes given y is
Pr (Smokes(A) | y) =
exp
 1.5(m + 1)2
exp (1.5(m + 1)2) + exp (1.5m2),
which clearly depends on the number of smokers in y.
Hence, Smokes(A) is not independent of Y but the random
variables are exchangeable with sufﬁcient statistic n. Fig-
ure 1 depicts the graphical representation of the correspond-
ing ground Markov logic network.
4
Exchangeable Decompositions
We now present novel instances of partial exchangeabil-
ity that render probabilistic inference tractable. These in-
stances generalize exchangeability of single variables to ex-
changeability of sets of variables. We describe the notion
of an exchangeable decomposition and prove that it fulﬁlls
the tractability requirements of Theorem 2. We proceed by
demonstrating that these forms commonly occur in MLNs.
Variable Decompositions
The notions of independent and exchangeable decomposi-
tions are at the core of the developed theoretical results.
Deﬁnition 4 (Variable Decomposition). A variable decom-
position X = {X1, . . . , Xk} partitions X into subsets Xi.
We call w = maxi |Xi| the width of the decomposition.
Deﬁnition 5 (Independent Decomposition). A variable de-
composition is independent if and only if Pr factorizes as
Pr (X) =
k
Y
i=1
Qi(Xi).
Deﬁnition 6 (Exchangeable Decomposition). A variable de-
composition is exchangeable iff for all permutations π,
Pr (X1 = x1, . . . , Xk = xk)
= Pr
 X1 = xπ(1), . . . , Xk = xπ(k)

.
Figure 2 depicts an example distribution Pr with 20 ran-
dom variables and a decomposition into 5 subsets of width 4.
The joint distribution is invariant under permutations of the
5 sequences. The corresponding sufﬁcient statistic T counts
the number of occurrences of each binary vector of length 4
and returns a tuple of counts.
Please note that the deﬁnition of full ﬁnite exchangeabil-
ity (Deﬁnition 2) is the special case when the exchangeable
decomposition has width 1. Also note that the size of all sub-
sets in an exchangeable decomposition equal the width.
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
Pr               = Pr             
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
...
1
0
0
0
2
...
1
1
0
1
2
...
0
1
0
1
1
...
1
1
1
1
0
T(x)
(
(
)
)
Vector    Count
Figure 2: An exchangeable decomposition of 20 binary ran-
dom variables (the boxes) into 5 components of width 4 (the
rows). The statistic T counts the occurrences of each unique
binary vector.
Tractable Variable Decompositions
The core observation of the present work is that variable de-
compositions that are exchangeable and/or independent re-
sult in tractable probabilistic models. For independent de-
compositions, the following tractability guarantee is used in
most existing inference algorithms.
Proposition 3. Given an independent decomposition of X
with bounded width, and a corresponding factorized repre-
sentation of the distribution (cf. Deﬁnition 5), the complexity
of MPE and marginal inference is polynomial in |X|.
While the decomposition into independent components is
a well-understood concept, the combination with ﬁnite ex-
changeability has not been previously investigated as a sta-
tistical property that facilitates tractable probabilistic infer-
ence. We can now prove the following result.
Theorem 4. Suppose we can compute Pr(x) in time polyno-
mial in |X|. Then, given an exchangeable decomposition of
X with bounded width, the complexity of MPE and marginal
inference is polynomial in |X|.
Proof. Following Theorem 2, we have to show that there
exists a statistic T so that (a) |T | is polynomial in |X|; (b) we
can efﬁciently decide whether an x ∈St,e exists and if so,
construct it; and (c) efﬁciently compute |St,e| for all e and
t ∈T . Statements (b) and (c) ensure that the assumptions
of Theorem 2 hold for exchangeable decompositions, which
combined with (a) proves the theorem.
To prove (a), let us ﬁrst construct a sufﬁcient statistic for
exchangeable decompositions. A full joint assignment X =
x decomposes into assignments X1 = x1, . . . , Xk = xk
in accordance with the given variable decomposition. Each
xℓis a bit string b ∈{0, 1}w. Consider a statistic T(x) =
(c1, . . . , c2w), where each ci has a corresponding unique bit
string bi ∈{0, 1}w and ci = Pk
ℓ=1[[xℓ= bi]]. The value ci
of the statistic thus represents the number of components in
the decomposition that are assigned bit string bi. Hence, we
have P2w
i=1 ci = k, and we prove (a) by observing that
|T | =
k + 2w −1
2w −1

≤k2w−1 ≤n2w−1.
To prove statements (b) and (c) we have to ﬁnd, for each
partial assignment E = e, an algorithm that generates an

x ∈St,e and that computes |St,e| in time polynomial in
|X|. To hint at the proof strategy, we give the formula for
the orbit without evidence |St|:
S(c1,...,c2w )
 =
 k
c1
k −c1
c2

. . .
k −P2w−2
i=1
ci
c2w−1

.
The proof is very technical and deferred to the appendix.
Markov Logic Case Study
Let us consider the following MLN
1.3
Smokes(x) ⇒Cancer(x)
1.5
Smokes(x) ∧Smokes(y)
It models a distribution in which every non-smoker or
smoker with cancer, that is, every x satisfying the ﬁrst for-
mula, increases the probability by a factor of exp(1.3). Each
pair of smokers increases the probability by a factor of
exp(1.5). This model is not fully exchangeable: swapping
Smokes(A) and Cancer(A) in a state yields a different prob-
ability. There are no (conditional) independencies between
the Smokes(x) atoms.
The variables in this MLN do have an exchangeable de-
composition whose width is two, namely
X = {{Smokes(A), Cancer(A)},
{Smokes(B), Cancer(B)},
{Smokes(C), Cancer(C)}, . . . }.
The sufﬁcient statistic of this decomposition counts the num-
ber of people in each of four groups, depending on whether
they smoke, and whether they have cancer. The probabil-
ity of a state only depends on the number of people in each
group and swapping people between groups does not change
the probability of a state. For example,
Pr(Smokes(A) = 0, Cancer(A) = 1,
Smokes(B) = 1, Cancer(B) = 0)
= Pr(Smokes(A) = 1, Cancer(A) = 0,
Smokes(B) = 0, Cancer(B) = 1).
Theorem 4 says that this MLN permits tractable inference.
The fact that this MLN has an exchangeable decomposi-
tion is not a coincidence. In general, we can show this for
MLNs of unary atoms, which are called monadic MLNs.
Theorem 5. The variables in a monadic MLN have an ex-
changeable decomposition. The width of this decomposition
is equal to the number of predicates.
The proof builds on syntactic symmetries of the MLN, called
renaming automorphisms (Bui, Huynh, and Riedel 2012;
Niepert 2012a). Please see the appendix for further details.
It now follows as a corollary of Theorems 4 and 5 that
MPE and marginal inference in monadic MLNs is polyno-
mial in |X|, and therefore also in the domain size |D|.
Corollary 6. Inference in monadic MLNs is domain-lifted.
5
Marginal and Conditional Exchangeability
Many distributions are not decomposable into independent
or exchangeable decompositions. Similar to conditional in-
dependence, the notion of exchangeability can be extended
to conditional exchangeability. We generalize exchangeabil-
ity to conditional distributions, and state the corresponding
tractability guarantees.
Marginal and Conditional Decomposition
Tractability results for exchangeable decompositions on all
variables under consideration also extend to subsets.
Deﬁnition 7 (Marginal Exchangeability). When a subset Y
of the variables under consideration has an exchangeable de-
composition Y, we say that Y is marginally exchangeable.
This means that Y is still an exchangeable decomposition
when considering the distribution Pr(Y) = P
X\Y Pr(X).
Theorem 7. Suppose we are given a marginally exchange-
able decomposition of Y with bounded width and let Z =
X \ Y. If computing Pr(y) = P
z Pr(y, z) is polynomial
in |X| for all y, then the complexity of MPE and marginal
inference over variables Y is polynomial in |X|.
Proof. Let T be the statistic associated with the given de-
composition, and let e be evidence given on E ⊆Y. Then,
P(e) =
X
t∈T
|St,e| ·
X
z
Pr(yt,e, z), where yt,e ∈St,e.
By the assumption that Y is marginally exchangeable and
the proof of Theorem 4, we can compute |St,e| and an
yt,e ∈St,e in time polynomial in |X|. An analogous ar-
gument holds for MPE inference on Pr(Y).
We now need to identify distributions Pr(Y, Z) for which
we can compute Pr(y) efﬁciently. This implies tractable
probabilistic inference over Y. Given a particular y, we
have already seen sufﬁcient conditions: when Z decomposes
exchangeably or independently conditioned on y, Proposi-
tion 3 and Theorem 4 guarantee that computing Pr(y) is
tractable. This suggests the following general notion.
Deﬁnition 8 (Conditional Decomposability). Let X be a set
of variables with Y ⊆X and Z = X \ Y. We say that
Z is exchangeably (independently) decomposable given Y
if and only if for each assignment y to Y, there exists an
exchangeable (independent) decomposition Zy of Z.
Furthermore, we say that Z is decomposable with bounded
width iff the width w of each Zy is bounded. When the de-
composition can be computed in time polynomial in |X| for
all y, we say that Z is efﬁciently decomposable.
Theorem 8. Let X be a set of variables with Y ⊆X and
Z = X \ Y. Suppose we are given a marginally exchange-
able decomposition of Y with bounded width. Suppose fur-
ther that Z is efﬁciently (exchangeably or independently) de-
composable given Y with bounded width. If we can compute
Pr(x) efﬁciently, then the complexity of MPE and marginal
inference over variables Y is polynomial in |X|.

Proof. Following Theorem 7, we only need to show that we
can compute Pr(y) = P
z Pr(y, z) in time polynomial in
|X| for all y. When Z is exchangeably decomposable given
Y, this follows from constructing Zy and employing the ar-
guments made in the proof of Theorem 4. The case when Z
is independently decomposable is analogous.
Theorems 7 and 8 are powerful results and allow us to
identify numerous probabilistic models for which inference
is tractable. For instance, we will prove liftability results for
Markov logic networks. However, we are only at the begin-
ning of leveraging these tractability results to their fullest
extent. Especially Theorem 7 is widely applicable because
the computation of P
z Pr(y, z) can be tractable for many
reasons. For instance, conditioned on the variables Y, the
distributions Pr(y, Z) could be bounded treewidth graphical
models, such as tree-structured Markov networks. Tractabil-
ity for Pr(Y) follows immediately from Theorem 7.
Since Theorem 7 only speaks to the tractability of query-
ing variables in Y, there is the question of when we can
also efﬁciently query the variables Z. Results from the lifted
inference literature may provide a solution by bounding or
approximating queries and evidence that includes Z to main-
tain marginal exchangeability (Van den Broeck and Dar-
wiche 2013). The next section shows that certain restricted
situations permit tractable inference on the variables in Z.
Markov Logic Case Study
Let us again consider the MLN
1.3
Smokes(x) ⇒Cancer(x)
1.5
Smokes(x) ∧Friends(x, y) ⇒Smokes(y)
having the marginally exchangeable decomposition
Y = {{Smokes(A)}, {Smokes(B)}, {Smokes(C)}, . . . }
whose width is one. To intuitively see why this decomposi-
tion is marginally exchangeable, let us consider two states
y and y′ of the Smokes(x) atoms in which only the val-
ues of two atoms, for example Smokes(A) and Smokes(B),
are swapped. There is a symmetry of the MLNs joint dis-
tribution that swaps these atoms: the renaming automor-
phism (Bui, Huynh, and Riedel 2012; Niepert 2012a) that
swaps constants A and B in all atoms. For marginal ex-
changeability, we need that P
z Pr(y, z) = P
z Pr(y′, z).
But this holds since the renaming automorphism is an auto-
morphism of the set of states {yz | z ∈DZ} – for every y,
y′, and z there exists an automorphism that maps yz to y′z′
with Pr(y, z) = Pr(y′, z′).
The given MLN has several marginally exchangeable de-
compositions, with the most general one being
Y = {{Smokes(A), Cancer(A), Friends(A, A)},
{Smokes(B), Cancer(B), Friends(B, B)},
{Smokes(C), Cancer(C), Friends(C, C)}, . . . }.
For that decomposition, the remaining Z variables
{Friends(A, B), Friends(B, A), Friends(A, C), . . . }
are independently decomposable given Y. The Z variables
appear at most once in any formula. In a probabilistic graphi-
cal model representation, evidence on the Y variables would
therefore decompose the graph into independent compo-
nents. Thus, it follows from Theorem 8 that we can efﬁ-
ciently answer any query over the variables in Y.
This insight generalizes to a large class of MLNs, called
the two-variable fragment. It consists of all MLNs whose
formulas contain at most two logical variables.
Theorem 9. In a two-variable fragment MLN, let Y and Z
be the ground atoms with one and two distinct arguments
respectively. Then there exists a marginally exchangeable
decomposition of Y, and Z is efﬁciently independently de-
composable given Y. Each decomposition’s width is at most
twice the number of predicates.
The proof of Theorem 9 is rather technical and we re-
fer the reader to the appendix for a detailed proof. It now
follows from Theorems 8 and 9 that the complexity of in-
ference over the unary atoms in the two-variable fragment is
polynomial in the domain size |D|.
What happens if our query involves variables from Z –
the binary atoms? It is known in the lifted inference liter-
ature that we cannot expect efﬁcient inference of general
queries that involve the binary atoms. Assignments to the
Z variables break symmetries and therefore break marginal
exchangeability. This causes inference to become #P-hard
as a function of the query (Van den Broeck and Davis 2012).
Nevertheless, if we bound the number of binary atoms in-
volved in the query, we can use the developed theory to show
a general liftability result.
Theorem 10. For any MLN in the two-variable fragment,
MPE and marginal inference over the unary atoms and a
bounded number of binary atoms is domain-lifted.
This corresponds to one of the strongest known theoretical
results in the lifted inference literature (Jaeger and Van den
Broeck 2012). We refer the interested reader to the appendix
for the proof. A consequence of Theorem 10 is that we can
efﬁciently compute all single marginals in the two-variable
fragment, given arbitrary evidence on the unary atoms.
6
Discussion and Conclusion
We conjecture that the concept of (partial) exchangeabil-
ity has potential to contribute to a deeper understanding
of tractable probabilistic models. The important role con-
ditional independence plays in the research ﬁeld of graphi-
cal models is evidence for this hypothesis. Similar to condi-
tional independence, it might be possible to develop a the-
ory of exchangeability that mirrors that of independence.
For instance, there might be a (graphical) structural repre-
sentations of particular types of partial exchangeability and
corresponding logical axiomatizations (Pearl 1988). More-
over, it would be interesting to develop graphical models
with exchangeability and independence, and notions like
d-separation to detect marginal exchangeability and condi-
tional decomposability from a structural representation. The
ﬁrst author has taken steps in this direction by introducing
exchangeable variable models, a class of (non-relational)

probabilistic models based on ﬁnite partial exchangeabil-
ity (Niepert and Domingos 2014).
Recently, there has been considerable interest in comput-
ing and exploiting the automorphisms of graphical mod-
els (Niepert 2012b; Bui, Huynh, and Riedel 2012). There
are several interesting connections between automorphisms,
exchangeability, and lifted inference (Niepert 2012a). More-
over, there are several group theoretical algorithms that one
could apply to the automorphism groups to discover the
structure of exchangeable variable decompositions from the
structure of the graphical models. Since we presently only
exploit renaming automorphisms, there is a potential for
tractable inference in MLNs that goes beyond what is known
in the lifted inference literature.
Partial exchangeability is related to collective graphi-
cal models (Sheldon and Dietterich 2011) (CGMs) and
cardinality-based potentials (Gupta, Diwan, and Sarawagi
2007) as these models also operate on sufﬁcient statistics.
However, probabilistic inference for CGMs is not tractable
and there are no theoretical results that identify tractable
CGMs models. The presented work may help to identify
such situations. The presented theory generalizes the statis-
tics of cardinality-based potentials.
Lifted Inference and Exchangeability
Our case stud-
ies identiﬁed a deep connection between lifted probabilis-
tic inference and the concepts of partial, marginal and
conditional exchangeability. In this new context, it ap-
pears that exact lifted inference algorithms (de Salvo Braz,
Amir, and Roth 2005; Milch et al. 2008; Jha et al. 2010;
Van den Broeck et al. 2011; Gogate and Domingos 2011;
Taghipour et al. 2012) can all be understood as perform-
ing essentially three steps: (i) construct a sufﬁcient statis-
tic T(x), (ii) generate all possible values of the sufﬁcient
statistic, and (iii) count suborbit sizes for a given statistic.
For an example of (i), we can show that a compiled ﬁrst-
order circuit (Van den Broeck et al. 2011) or the trace of
probabilistic theorem proving (Gogate and Domingos 2011)
encode a sufﬁcient statistic in their existential quantiﬁer and
splitting nodes. Steps (ii) and (iii) are manifested in all these
algorithms through summations and binomial coefﬁcients.
Between Corollary 6 and Theorem 10, we have re-proven
almost the entire range of liftability results from the lifted in-
ference literature (Jaeger and Van den Broeck 2012) within
the exchangeability framework, and extended these to MPE
inference. There is an essential difference though: liftabil-
ity results make assumptions about the syntax (e.g., MLNs),
whereas our exchangeability theorems apply to all distribu-
tions. We expect Theorem 8 to be used to show liftability,
and more general tractability results for many other repre-
sentation languages, including but not limited to the large
number of statistical relational languages that have been pro-
posed (Getoor and Taskar 2007; De Raedt et al. 2008).
