Fuzzy Ontology-based Sentiment Analysis of 
Transportation and City Feature Reviews for 
Safe Traveling 
Farman Ali1, Daehan Kwak2, Pervez Khan3, S. M. Riazul Islam1, Kye Hyun Kim1, K. S. Kwak1* 
1Inha University, South Korea  
2Rutgers University, USA  
3Incheon National University, South Korea. 

 
Abstract: Traffic congestion is rapidly increasing in urban areas, particularly in mega cities. To date, there exist a few sensor 
network based systems to address this problem. However, these techniques are not suitable enough in terms of monitoring an entire 
transportation system and delivering emergency services when needed. These techniques require real-time data and intelligent ways 
to quickly determine traffic activity from useful information. In addition, these existing systems and websites on city transportation 
and travel rely on rating scores for different factors (e.g., safety, low crime rate, cleanliness, etc.). These rating scores are not 
efficient enough to deliver precise information, whereas reviews or tweets are significant, because they help travelers and 
transportation administrators to know about each aspect of the city. However, it is difficult for travelers to read, and for 
transportation systems to process, all reviews and tweets to obtain expressive sentiments regarding the needs of the city. The 
optimum solution for this kind of problem is analyzing the information available on social network platforms and performing 
sentiment analysis. On the other hand, crisp ontology-based frameworks cannot extract blurred information from tweets and 
reviews; therefore, they produce inadequate results. In this regard, this paper proposes fuzzy ontology-based sentiment analysis 
and semantic web rule language (SWRL) rule-based decision-making to monitor transportation activities (accidents, vehicles, street 
conditions, traffic volume, etc.) and to make a city- feature polarity map for travelers. This system retrieves reviews and tweets 
related to city features and transportation activities. The feature opinions are extracted from these retrieved data, and then fuzzy 
ontology is used to determine the transportation and city-feature polarity. A fuzzy ontology and an intelligent system prototype are 
developed by using Protégé web ontology language (OWL) and Java, respectively. The experimental results show satisfactory 
improvement in tweet and review analysis and opinion mining. 
 Keywords: intelligent transportation system, safe traveling, transportation activities, city-feature polarity, fuzzy ontology.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1. Introduction 
Traffic monitoring and transportation facilities are two major concerns of intelligent transportation systems (ITSs). At present, sensor 
network based transportation systems are employed to monitor the entire traffic network and to provide emergency services in response 
to associated activities occurring on the roads. In addition, people use various devices in vehicles, such as small-scale collision radars, 
global positioning systems, radio transceivers, and sensing devices to retrieve real-time information in order to travel safely. Most of these 
systems are designed for short-range communications and are unable to collect all traffic-related data. They also fail to notify drivers 
before entering risk zones, resulting in wasted time and consumption of extra fuel. As a solution, precise information is needed that can 
be utilized to rapidly identify risky spots and activities. However, because of the wonderful trends in interpersonal organization during the 
most recent decade, network platforms, like the various community blogs, Facebook, Twitter, and online forums have turned into the 
richest sources of real-time data (Liu et al., 2005; Cao et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2006).  
Currently, people utilize social media sites to share their opinions on different issues associated with transportation (e.g., traffic collisions, 
traffic jams, and landslides or rockslides). New clients come across the reviews of others and react to them regarding the same subject 
(e.g., roads or city streets jammed, street-side organizations, and associations). Conversely, a large volume of tweets or reviews can puzzle 
web surfers trying to determine immediate and safe routes. In most cases, people give their assessments about transportation in terms of 
features like "the information of the traffic police officer was extremely definite and helpful"; or "at least three hurt in a two-vehicle 
mishap close to the downtown"; or "Victoria downtown has a ton of offices, yet the street is jammed". Opinion reviews are concealed in 
forums and blogs, making it difficult for the user to extract meaningful information. Sentiment-analysis or opinion mining is the process 
of extracting valuable information from public tweets and reviews about a specific topic using text analysis methods and natural language 
processing (Ali et al., 2015). Therefore, sentiment analysis can help ITSs to improve traffic monitoring and transportation facilities. 
Most of the present systems are not good enough to categorize the correct positive and negative sentiment words and to recognize terms 
for the degree of feature polarity. It is critical to determine whether a tweet or review represents a strongly positive, positive, neutral, 
negative, or strongly negative polarity. In addition, data extraction frameworks primarily take classic ontologies into account. The classic 
ontology addresses only crisp data, and cannot recover alluring results from the cloudy wellspring of social network data. Different systems 
and sites on transportation and travel give a rating score to a city, taking  rates of various variables into account, for example, green space, 
cleanliness, tourism offices (restaurants, hotels, parks, and so on.), safety, peacefulness, low crime rates, and so on (Gilboa et al., 2015). 
These rating scores do not convey precise information, in spite of the fact that tweets or reviews are significant because they offer some 
assistance to the transportation administrators and travelers so they will know about all positive and negative points of each feature. 
However, it is troublesome for ITSs and travelers to peruse every tweet and review and come to an important conclusion in regards to 
their necessities from city factors. For the most part, people shroud their feelings about a city, rather examining it in terms of city-features; 
for instance, "the marvelous foggy weather of our excellent Manhattan" (Bertrand et al., 2013). Therefore, it is critical to locate the 
individual city-feature polarity, and thereafter, the overall city polarity. On that, this paper presents fuzzy ontology-based sentiment 
analysis and semantic web rule language (SWRL) rule based decision-making knowledge that will help ITSs and travelers. Below are the 
main contributions of this research. 
 
The proposed system effectively retrieves reviews and tweets related to city features (e.g., bus and train stations, bridges, parks, 
restaurants, airports, medical centers, and hotels) and transportation activities (e.g., collisions, roadsides, congestions, and traffic 
jams). 
 
An unsupervised linear method is used to automatically extract related sentiments from online consumer tweets and reviews. 
 
Fuzzy ontology-based semantic knowledge is developed to extract individual transportation activities and city features with the 
opinion words. Then, fuzzy ontology is used to compute the polarity of transportation activities, city features and the overall 
city from the degrees of the terms (strongly negative, negative, neutral, positive, and strongly positive). 
 
SWRL rule based decision-making knowledge is proposed to find the major causes of traffic congestion and negative polarity. 
 
An opinion map of the city features and city transportation activities is automatically designed by using semantic knowledge 
and sentiment analysis results, which enrich the performance of ITSs by determining the traffic problems and providing safe 
routes for travelers. 
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the state-of-the-art work in this area. Section 3 illustrates the basic 
concept of the proposed system architecture. Fuzzy ontology based semantic knowledge is explained in Section 4. Section 5 briefly 
explains the overall scenario and internal process of the sentiment analysis and polarity computation. Section 6 presents the experimental 
results. 
2. Related works 
Transportation data processing and useful traffic information extraction from social networks are hot topics in intelligent transportation 
systems. Escalation in the amount of traffic-related data on the internet has made the task of ITSs more challenging. Presently, ITSs 
monitor every corner of the transportation system within range of a sensor network. These sensor network based systems cannot collect 

precise information related to traffic. In addition, people use small-scale devices in vehicles to retrieve information to travel safely. These 
devices can collect short-range information but are unable to retrieve all traffic-related data. As a solution, intelligent work is needed to 
automatically extract and compute traffic data and provide meaningful information. This can improve transportation safety, can solve 
traffic congestion problems in big cities, and can provide comfortable traveling in urban areas. A variety of research has been done on this 
issue, and several ideas have been proposed for vehicular network problems (Whaiduzzaman et al., 2014). 
Yu et al. (2013) proposed a hierarchical cloud architecture for vehicular networks. The main aim of this system is to design a ubiquitous 
cloud environment for mobile vehicles using various resources within ITS infrastructures, such as vehicles, data centers and roadside 
units. The system uses a three-layer architecture that allows vehicles to access the cloud services, provides satisfactory communications 
quality, and maintains the efficiency of the cloud services. A parallel hybrid genetic algorithm was proposed to update a vehicle’s place 
and time information (Nijanthan et al., 2015). In this research, the authors compared their system with conventional cloud computing and 
mentioned different research issues and future directions. The authors addressed security and privacy issues in the vehicular cloud concept 
to allow only authenticated users to access the system. The security protocol validates a sender by using a digital signature under the 
existing architecture. Naturalistic observation was used to define an overtaking vehicle’s trajectory (Papakostopoulos et al., 2015). The 
system compares clearance margins between an overtaking vehicle and the overtaken vehicle at the end of the maneuver. It examines this 
situation in two ways. First, the system determines whether a collision risk occurs at the end of the maneuver between the oncoming and 
the overtaken vehicles, and it then finds the balance between the vehicles to check whether the appearance of the vehicle is affected or not 
while overtaking. 
A cloud–based service framework was developed to conserve energy in an intelligent transportation system (Hsu et al., 2015). In this 
framework, a massive storage facility was designed for transportation information, which avoids the use of a hard disk at the user site and 
improves reliability. Mobile vision techniques are used to recognize real-time traffic conditions. This technique is based on road-side 
camera data. These data are used to develop fuel-efficient route navigation technology to save time and reduce fuel consumption. Various 
approaches have been proposed about transportation modeling challenges (Vlahogianni, 2015). One approach presented computational 
intelligence algorithms and deductive data analyses to extract useful patterns from big data in transportation, which increases flexibility 
and accuracy, and handles uncertain changes in big data. A leap frog method was proposed to improve the performance of a serial map-
matching algorithm for a transportation data center, which preserves location privacy and maintains accuracy (Huang et al., 2015). This 
system uses map-matching in the public cloud, while the travel paths are used within an organization’s private cloud to automatically 
arrange data segregation and location according to data privacy specifications. The NeverStop idea was proposed to utilize genetic 
algorithms and fuzzy logic in big data ITSs (Wang et al., 2016). It uses radio frequency identification (RFID) devices to retrieve 
information on vehicles that pass a green traffic light, and those that wait for at a red light, and stores this information in EBOX II devices 
in a central server for further monitoring. Botta et al. (2016) presented new challenges and research issues in the cloud’s Internet of Things 
(IoT) paradigm. In this literature survey, complementary details are discussed on the integration of cloud services and the IoT. Various 
available platforms are debated, and challenges are examined in detail to present recent problems in the research. 
During the past few years, information extraction and sentiment analysis have been used to facilitate the public sectors. Traffic sentiment 
analysis based on social data was proposed to meet the needs of safety and information exchange in ITSs (Cao et al., 2014). This existing 
work presented a step-by-step procedure to develop related bases for traffic sentiment analysis, proposing sentiment polarity computation 
algorithms using a rules base, comparing the good and bad aspects of rule-based and learning-based approaches. Sentiment analysis in the 
Twitter social network was used to predict an influx of tourists to Peru (Linares et al., 2015). The proposed system uses a web crawler to 
retrieve tweets, and a naïve Bayes algorithm to classify them. A real-time prototype was implemented to perform sentiment analysis for 
tweet and retweeting structures (Lin et al. 2014). This system uses a rule-mining algorithm to efficiently mine the sentiments for real-
world Weibo posting. In addition, a microblog-oriented lexicon is employed to deal with the precision of emotions and online languages. 
Sentiment analysis based on machine learning methods was proposed to identify tourist attraction targets (Lin et al., 2010). Both document 
and sentence-level opinions are considered, and the target opinions are determined after comparing all of them. However, document and 
sentence-level based sentiment cannot efficiently classify the users’ comments to find their real feelings. Pipelines and joint models are 
trained by using a large-margin prediction method to find the sentiment expressions in texts and to declare the polarity of the extracted 
expressions (Johansson et al., 2011). This model explains the extraction of integrating opinions and the classification of polarity using the 
features’ global polarity structures. The authors compare the proposed system with a previously published one using the Multi-Perspective 
Question Answering (MPQA) Opinion Corpus, and achieved significant improvement in 13 absolute points in a function measure. Online 
social media data were used to measure rider sentiments for transit rider satisfaction evaluation (Collins et al., 2013). The proposed system 
used the metrics to evaluate timeliness, safety, cleanliness, and ridership. Sentiment analysis accurately classified rider opinion over a 
period of time and showed the results in the form of positive, negative, and normal sentiments. Opinion mining of riders’ tweets was 
employed to find the popularity of bike-sharing in big cities (Das et al., 2015), also known as smart bike and capital bike share. This 
system deeply explained the extraction procedure of tweets and information from websites. Intelligent topical sentiment analysis was used 
to classify E-Learners (Ravichandran et al., 2015). The authors applied unsupervised algorithms Sentence level opinion classification, 
which is different from traditional document-level classification. It significantly improved the performance using bigrams, compared with 
a supervised algorithm. A sentiment analysis based system was developed to easily understand the trends in citizen behavior and their 

sentiments regarding city services and events (Villena-Roman et al., 2014). After identifying the negative sentiments, this system 
automatically alert the emergency system to improve efficiency.   
Recently, fuzzy logic and ontologies have been used in the field of transportation knowledge management, sentiment analysis, information 
retrieval, and information extraction. An ontology is the proper modification of a shared conceptualization in a specific domain, which is 
human-understandable and machine-readable format (Ali et al., 2015). An ontology was used to develop a traffic accidents management 
system (Yue et al., 2009). This ontology captured valuable information about pedestrians, climate, environments, and roads, which is 
necessary for traffic-safety situations. However, various organizations have developed traffic management systems according their needs, 
but there is a limited amount of fuzzy logic-based semantic knowledge for information retrieval and expression. Ali et al. (2016) proposed 
a fuzzy ontology-based opinion mining system to monitor the transportation network. This existing system computes the polarity 
of 6 features, which is not enough to monitor the entire transportation activities and city features. It does not provide the detail 
process of assigning initial values to the corresponding opinion words and the detail process of integrating the extracted opinionated 
phrases and their polarity values to verify the feature polarity. In addition, it uses simple web crawler and single keywords-based 
query to retrieve information. However, it is difficult to collect meaningful data about a specific topic, because most of the data are 
expressed in different ways, and the context of the writing is disorganized. Therefore, we proposed a fuzzy ontology-based crawler 
to collect data from vague sources. Further, the existing system employs resource description framework (RDF) datasets to classify 
the polarity. Also, sentiment analysis needs both SentiWordNet-based raw datasets along with RDF datasets to increase the 
precision and accuracy of polarity. Therefore, we proposed a fuzzy ontology, fuzzy inference layer, and support vector machine-
based system to overcome the limitation of the existing system. RahmathP et al. (2014) proposed fine-grained opinion classification 
of online product reviews. This system uses unsupervised machine learning and fuzzy linguistic modifiers for sentiment explanation. The 
fuzzy logic of sentiment words gives better accuracy than other approaches. However, this approach needed ontology-based smart 
semantic knowledge to determine the linguistic variable for product feature polarity. Sentiment analysis of product review documents was 
classified by oriented fuzzy logic (Indhuja et al., 2014; kawatheker and Kshirsagar, 2012). These systems classify movie reviews, 
emotions, and instance. Fuzzy logic deals with any proposition and computes the polarity value of documents, and combines them in an 
opinion classification task. A fuzzy and semantic approach was proposed to mine online reviews (Al-Maimani et al., 2014). This system 
solved the semantic problem in sentiment analysis. The fuzzy logic improved the extraction and summarization of sentiments with their 
strengths and weight. A mathematical model of information generation on websites was developed for sentiment analysis (Trung et al., 
2014). This decision support system finds the interaction between opinion words and online information, and then uses these opinion 
words in an efficient way to increase the effect of information generation. A classic ontology was employed to solve the feature 
classification problem in the domain of online reviews (Zhao and Li, 2009; Lau et al., 2009). This classic ontology is useful for 
extracting data from organized information. However, most tweets and reviews on social networks are unstructured or in blurred 
format. Therefore, the mentioned classic ontology cannot define feature fuzzy terms (e.g., traffic {jammed, fast, slow, medium and 
heavy}). The integration of fuzzy logic with a classic ontology works excellently during uncertain input execution. 
The discussion of previous studies revealed that most of the existing research is flawed in the areas of transportation data processing 
and traffic network monitoring. Most proposed traffic-monitoring systems are based on a sensor network. Unfortunately, sensor 
network based systems are unable retrieve all traffic-related data. In addition, a classic ontology is incapable of extracting data 
from imprecise information, and to perfectly address intensively blurred data related to transportation activities. Therefore, this 
proposed fuzzy ontology based semantic knowledge is a novel effort to automatically extract and process traffic data and provide 
useful information. 
(Fig. 1 is placed on page 16) 
3. The proposed system architecture 
This proposed architecture is based on a fuzzy logic and SWRL rule-based ontology to deal with any type of real scenario related to city 
and transportation reviews and tweets. Fig. 1 shows the architecture of the proposed system. In this proposed framework, the social 
network data will go through many phases in order to compute polarity as follows.  
 
In the data collection phase, this system uses the application programming interfaces (APIs) of e-commerce sites to retrieve 
reviews and tweets from social network sites (such as Twitter, Facebook, news, announcements, and traveling sites) for 
appropriate city and transportation activities. Tweets can be retrieved using representational state transfer (REST) APIs and 
Streaming APIs. Using REST APIs, users can retrieve 3,200 of the most recent tweets. The REST APIs allow users to employ 
queries for tweets retrieval. These queries contain a set of keywords, operators (AND and OR), radius and centroid (e.g., 
accident AND (car OR vehicle)). The limits of REST APIs include 350 queries per 15 minutes for single user and 3200 tweets 
per query. Different queries are designed to retrieve traffic related tweets. These queries are based on 500 keywords related 
transportation and city. Some usual queries related to transportation are as follows. Query 1: “traffic AND accident, car AND 
collision, vehicle OR Car OR bus AND crash, car AND accident, vehicle AND collision, car AND crash, bus AND accident”. 
Query 2: “road closed AND traffic congestion OR accident, slow traffic AND accident, traffic jammed AND accident”. Query 

3: “road AND traffic collision OR accident, street AND vehicle accident, traffic jam AND accident”. Query 4: “traffic light 
AND accident, traffic light AND street AND accident, traffic AND highway light AND accident”. While reviews from 
Facebook are manually collected because for every feature there is a separate Facebook places page. The data collection from 
news forums related to transportation activities is easy and valuable, but it is difficult to extract opinions from these data. 
Twitter, Facebook, and other traveling sites contain discussions on specific topics, which can easily be used for polarity 
computation. However, it is difficult to collect meaningful data about a specific topic, because most of the data are expressed 
in different ways, and the context of the writing is disorganized. Therefore, a fuzzy ontology-based crawler is used to collect 
data from vague sources. This crawler is restricted to pursuing appropriate links that hold transportation activities and city 
feature reviews and tweets. 
 
In the pre-processing phase, text collection and corpus pre-processing are the main objectives before sentiment mining. This 
phase converts the collected data into sentiment clues to easily extract features and sentiment words. Tweets and reviews are 

stemmed to reduce words to their roots, such as cleaned, cleaner, cleaned to the root word clean. Further, the text is tagged to 
identify the words’ parts of speech (POS). The tweets and reviews are split into sentences, which are then confirmed as complete 
clauses with nouns and a verb phrase. The splitting of this text makes fuzzy ontology-based feature tagging more easy.  
 
In the data cleaning phase, various queries are used to collect particular tweets and reviews from hazy social networks. These 
queries include different phrases with a city name, such as car accident on the highway or road or street; vehicle collision or 
crash; traffic jam on road or highway with an accident; highway or road or freeway and accident; slow traffic on highway or 
road and road closed and accident. The opinion mining or sentiment analysis dataset is prepared to retrieve those tweets and 
reviews that can describe the dataset topics.  
 
After pre-processing and data cleaning, the proposed system extracts the transportation activities and city features with 
sentiment words from tweets and reviews. This extraction pairs feature words with sentiment words. Subjects and objects are 
mostly extracted by text mining and document mining (Cao et al., 2014). A subjective set contains positive and negative sets 
of opinion words. Previous studies suggest that common and proper nouns are mostly employed as object, whereas personal 
pronouns are used as subject. People use the simple past tense to express their ideas as subjective texts for themselves and 
objective texts for others. Both adjectives and adverbs are used to express sentiments or opinions. However, superlative 
adjectives are rarely used while comparative adjectives are mostly used in tweets and reviews. Another dataset for positive text 
detection is superlative adverbs (quickest, fastest, longest, etc.) which shows a positive opinion. The past tense verbs in negative 
sets express negative opinions, because users always employ it to express a negative opinion regarding their dissatisfaction 
(died, jammed, lost, etc.). These three datasets (positive, neutral, and negative) with an n-gram technique are utilized to extract 
features with an opinionated phrase. The n-gram technique as a binary feature may extract a feature efficiently, but it may not 
be useful to indicate the overall opinion. Therefore, the proposed fuzzy ontology based semantic knowledge identifies features 
in a sentence and computes their polarity. Every extracted feature from tweets and reviews is checked with the mentioned 
features in the ontology, and only validated feature sentences are computed. Then, the opinion aggregation formula is used to 
compute the sentiment word scores of features, fi, in sentence sk (Ding et al., 2007).  
 
The fifth phase is SentiWordNet scoring. The SentiWordNet database contains three kinds of score for each opinionated word: 
positive, neutral, and negative. It is employed to compute each sentiment word score (Sayeedunnissa et al., 2013). If the score 
of a sentiment word is not present in the SentiWordNet database, then a zero is assigned to the opinion phrase. For example, in 
the term ‘big-city’, big is a sentiment word, and its score is 0.75. In order to compute the effect of linguistic fuzziness on 
sentiment word, fuzzy logic with the SentiWordNet tool and ontology is used. This method combines the sentiment words of 
each feature in a tweet or review sentence and determines the polarity value using a fuzzy logic technique. The polarity 
computation process is explained in Section 5.  
 
The sixth phase is an opinion lexicon. Opinion mining or sentiment analysis is mostly dependent on two associated components: 
an opinion lexicon, and polarity computation of opinion words. The opinion lexicon is necessary for accurate sentiment analysis. 
Therefore, a sentiment lexicon based on positive and negative opinion words is employed for sentiment analysis (Liu, 2010).  
Fuzzy ontology, SWRL rules, polarity computation and sentiment analysis of transportation and city feature are more deeply 
explained in the next sections. 
4. Fuzzy ontology-based semantic knowledge 
An ontology is shared knowledge of a specific domain among people and systems. It is written in a specific language called a web ontology 
language (OWL). To achieve efficiency for the proposed ontology, a classic ontology was designed using Protégé OWL. A fuzzy OWL 
plug-in was then employed to convert the classic ontology into a fuzzy ontology (Bobillo et al., 2011). The fuzzy OWL plug-in is used to 
assert fuzzy terms in the ontology. The classes, instances, concepts, and axioms of a classic and a fuzzy ontology are the same. However, 
all the concept values of a classic ontology are blurry terms. A classic ontology cannot handle uncertainty. A fuzzy ontology is generally 
defined to express vague knowledge using fuzzy concepts. Therefore, this system needs fuzzy ontology based semantic knowledge to 
handle any kind of situation related to sentiment analysis. Useful transportation knowledge is accumulated regarding traffic, accidents, 

roads, vehicles, climate, and the environment, and is delivered to the ontology for a traffic accident management system, as shown in Fig 
2. Mathematically, an ontology can be defined as follows: 
Ontology
̃
= (C, P, R, V, Vc)                                                                                                                                                                                    (1) 
 In the above equation, the notations C, P, R, V, and Vc stand for concepts, properties, relationships of classes, values, and constraint 
values of properties, respectively (Ali et al., 2015). Zadeh, (1965) presented the concept of a fuzzy set in 1965. Fuzzy set theory describes 
vague boundaries, such as negative, neutral and positive. A fuzzy set, F, over the universe of discourse A can be shown by its membership 
function μF, which presents an element ‘A’ in the interval [0, 1] (Ali et al., 2015). 
 μF(A): A′ →[0, 1]                                                                                                                                                                                                   (2) 
In the above equation, A′ belongs to A and  μF presents the membership degree by which A′ ∈A. A′ is considered a full member of 
set A if μF(A) = 1. A is considered a partial member of set A if   μF(A) is between zero and one (e.g., 0.63) (Ali et al., 2015).  
A fuzzy ontology exchanges the knowledge among feature extractions (Jeong et al., 2011), reviews classifications, and performs feature 
polarity identification. Therefore, the description of polarity for feature classification using a fuzzy ontology expedites the proposed 
transportation sentiment- analysis system. This system categorizes the features and extracts the correct feature polarity terms. The fuzzy 
ontology defines the concepts of transportation activities and city-feature polarity generation. The OWLViz plugin of Protégé is used 
to automatically generate the graphical representation of all features as shown in Fig. 2. In fig. 2, the arrow direction shows that 
every subclass is a feature of upper class such as ‘closed’ and ‘slow’ are subclasses or features of road and traffic, respectively. 
These features are used to find the major causes of upper class negative polarity. For example, if the polarity of traffic is strong 
negative, then subclasses (Jammed, slow, traffic collision, and heavy) can be employed to find the cause of traffic polarity. These 
classes along with their polarity terms are used to make a SWRL rules for polarity computation as shown in table 1.   
(Fig. 2 is placed on page 17) 
(Table 1 is placed on page 23) 
The fuzzy ontology efficiently employed for review and tweet classification. The main task is precise data collection, which can accelerate 
the fuzzy ontology development process. It contains the examined information such as "hospital" "is-a" feature of "medical centers"; "park 
ticket" "is-a" pass of "park"; "foods" "is-a" part of "restaurant." An ontology is a set of classes or concepts, properties (datatypes), instances, 
and relationships (object properties). A fuzzy concept of “park-ticket” is a concept where instances belong to a certain degree; hence 
“high-park-ticket” is a fuzzy concept because high is a blur predicate, and the concept is also blurry; thus, it should be considered a fuzzy 
concept. There are two types of relation; fuzzy object relations and fuzzy data type relations. Fuzzy object relations are used to link 
instances with a certain degree, such as “park-ticket has-rate high at a certain degree of 0.7.” A fuzzy data type is used to assign an instance 
(e.g., “p-ticket has-fuzzy-value high”) that includes the fuzzy predicate of ticket price. We gathered all information, such as medical 
centers, speed, cemeteries, parks, bridges, bus stations, tunnels, train stations, jails, sewage facilities, airports, streets, vehicles, crashes, 
accidents, and traffic, and delivered them to the fuzzy ontology. Fig. 3 shows our ontology classes, object properties, data properties, and 
fuzzy data types. These classes illustrate the concept of city features and transportation activity knowledge. Data and object properties 
define the relationships of the classes connected to the basic data types. The fuzzy data type shows the interval of membership variables. 
Sentiment analysis employs this fuzzy ontology-based semantic knowledge and evaluates pairs of city features and transportation activity 
polarity. In the last tasks, these feature polarity scores are gathered from all the tweets and reviews. The final sentiment analysis result and 
polarity values are obtained for transportation activities and city feature polarity. 
(Fig. 3 is placed on page 18) 
5. Sentiment analysis and polarity computation 
In this section, the internal process of the proposed polarity computation system is introduced. 
5.1. Tweet and review filtration 
The proposed system uses various queries with ontology words to retrieve highly related tweets and reviews. Different queries are designed 
for tweet retrieval, and then, queries with more than 85 % recall are used. After the retrieval of tweets and reviews, the precision rate is 
very low. Therefore, a support vector machine (SVM) classifier is employed to identify related reviews and tweets, while unrelated ones 
are removed (Ali et al., 2016). N-gram techniques are employed to extract features from tweets. Bigram and trigram refer to extracting 
two and three adjacent feature words, respectively. These bigram and trigram features are presented in Fig 4. The proposed system employs 
specific functions to identify the value of each tweet. If a tweet value is greater than 0, that specifies that the tweet is related to a 
transportation or city feature; otherwise, the tweet is filtered out. A simple example is presented to explain the Fig. 4 classification tweets 
using the SVM classifier function: f (tweet or review) = 0.5 * Road + 0.6 * Accident + 0.1 * close – 0.3 * city name. The Fig. 4 tweet 

result is f (tweet or review) = 0.5 * 1 + 0.6 * 1 + 0.1 * 1 – 0.3 * 1= 0.9. If f (tweet or review) > 0, then it is a positive tweet or review 
(related to transportation and city); otherwise, the tweet or review is negative (Chen et al., 2013). After filtering, fuzzy ontology is applied 
to reviews and tweets to calculate the polarity of each feature. The detail is shown in Algorithm 1. 
(Fig. 4 is placed on page 19) 
 5.2 Extraction of features and opinion words 
To more deeply explain the polarity computation, reviews for the city features parks and New-York were extracted to find their polarity, 
and then the overall city polarity. These reviews are, for example, “park is very clean, and the location is good”, and “New York has a lot 
of facilities but is crowded.” Before feature extraction, it is essential to eliminate stop words, articles (the, a, an) and prepositions (on, in, 
of) from reviews. After this, each sentence is checked to confirm that it is a complete clause with a noun and verb phrase. The conjunction 
and is used to separate the sentences in the above reviews. The first sentence in review 1 (Park is very clean and the location is good) and 
in review 2 (New-York has a lot of facility but crowded) has conjunctions and verbs. It should be split to classify complete clauses, which 
contain one noun, conjunction, and verb. The other sentences are composed of one noun and one verb and are recognized as complete 
sentences. The noun phrase of tweet or review is compared with fuzzy ontology classes (features). The matched feature with noun phrase 
shows that a given tweet or review is about a given feature. For example, park is a noun in the review sentence "Park is very clean” and 
can easily be identified. It shows that the review sentence is about park feature. The fuzzy ontology presents the concepts of transportation 
activities and city features and their relation to those concepts. The feature is extracted from the noun phrase in a single sentence. We 
imported feature extraction and polarity computation information into the fuzzy ontology. It is used to identify features in review sentences, 
such as accident, traffic, medical center, restaurant, hotel, and so on. Every extracted feature from tweets and reviews is compared with 
fuzzy ontology classes (features). The matched features are considered to predict polarity, and others are eliminated. Each feature has its 
own polarity words. For example, the feature park has clean and good opinion words with positive polarity values; dusty and small are 
opinion words with negative values, and medium, normal, and average are opinion words with neutral polarity values. Similarly, the 
opinion words of the feature New-York are a lot with a positive polarity value, and crowded with a negative polarity value.  
Algorithm 1: Algorithm for polarity computation of given tweets and reviews 
Input: Tweets and reviews of transportation activities and city features 
Output: Polarity of transportation activities and city features 
Main Procedure: 
1. 
Retrieve tweets and reviews from social network 
2. 

3. 
Split the tweets and reviews into sentences  
4. 
Confirm that each sentence is a complete clause with noun and verb phrase 
5. 
Remove stop words, and tag the sentences using POS tagging 
6. 
Collect particular tweets and reviews using various queries 
7. 
Identify features in noun phrases using ontology 
8. 
Extract transportation activities and city features with sentiment words 
9. 
Identify subjective and objective text of opinion words 
10. Assign the SentiWordNet score to opinion words  
11. Apply opinion lexicon for accurate sentiment analysis  
12. Apply fuzzy ontology and SWRL rule for feature polarity  
13. Compute the polarity of opinionated phrases 
14. Return the sentiment and polarity value for a particular feature 
 
5.3 SentiWordNet scoring and polarity interval in the ontology 
SentiWordNet find the initial value of the corresponding opinion words. SentiWordNet is a lexical resource in which each word is 
connected with three numerical scores: positive, objective, and negative (Baccianella et al., 2010). These scores show how much the terms 
contained in the synset are positive, neutral, or negative. The opinion word clean is used as an adverb, and its SentiWordNet value is 0.5, 
which is its linguistic value in the ontology. The interval for each output is as follows: the strongly positive interval is [0.75-1], positive 
is [0.5-0.75], neutral is [0.5], negative is [0.25-0.5] and the strongly negative interval is [0.0-0.25]. This proposed system is based on these 
intervals, which identify the polarity by applying the input opinion word value. The proposed ontology uses various rules to compute the 
polarity and to find the causes of negative and strong negative polarity and traffic congestion problem as shown in Fig. 3. Some rules are 
explained in Table 1, where a reader can more properly understand the use of all the rules. In table 1 rules, OW stands for opinionated 
word. Similarly, SP, P, Neu, Neg and SN stand for strong positive, positive, neutral, negative and strong negative, respectively. Every 
opinion word uses SentiWordNet values, and then, assigns them to the fuzzy inference layer to asses the value of polarity terms: SP, P, 
Neu, Neg and SN. In this approach, various opinion words (verb, adverb, and adjective) are inputs, and the parameters are classic values 

connected with SentiWordNet such as the word not as an adverb and its parameter values are P: 0 O: 0.375 N: 0.625. Similarly, the words 
noise and very are verb and adjective, respectively, and their parameter values are P: 0 O: 1 N: 0 and P: 0.5 O: 0.375 N: 0.125, respectively.   
(Fig. 5 is placed on page 20) 
(Table 2 is placed on page 24) 
5.4 Polarity computation based on fuzzy inference layer 
The framework of the fuzzy inference layer is based on the knowledge and rule-base ontology as shown in Fig. 5. The fuzzy inference 
layer integrates the extracted opinionated phrases and their polarity values to verify the feature polarity for transportation and city. The 
fuzzy inference layer contains four components. Those are fuzzification, inference, knowledge base and rule base, and defuzzification. 
The fuzzification unit achieves the membership value of the opinion words. Let us consider the tweet sentences in Table 2 related to road 
and accident features. In these sentences, the opinion words for Road are {very, busy and closed}, and for Accident, they {horrible, closed, 
and killed}. SentiWordNet associates these sentiment words with special degrees, for example, very: 0.5, busy: 0.375, closed: 0.25, 
horrible: 0, killed: 0.125. The SWRL rules and linguistic values are stored in the ontology as explained in sections 3 and 4. Inference 
applies these rules to the fuzzy interval membership function (MF). The triangular MF is described to find the membership value for each 
input opinion word. There are five linguistic values (SP, P, Neu, Neg and SN) for each input variable, as shown in Fig. 5. The 
defuzzification converts the fuzzy output into normal terms, and provides the result in the form of a value, which is called the polarity 
value. This polarity value can be obtained through the following steps. 
1. 
Apply the sentiment words to triangular MF for acquiring membership values as follows. 
Road {μ(very) = 0.9, μ(closed) = 1, μ(busy) = 0.7 in N interval and 0.23 in Neu interval }  
Accident {μ(horrible) = 1, μ(closed) = 1, μ(killed) = 3.5 in SN interval and 3.5 in N interval}  
2. 
Find the input polarity (IP) value of road and accident opinion words using the rules as follows. 
Road:   
Rule1: If μ(very) = 0.9, μ(busy) = 0.23 or 0.7, μ(closed) = 1 then IP is 0.25   
Accident:  
Rule2: If μ(horrible) = 1, μ(closed) = 1, μ(killed) = 3.4 or 3.6 then IP value is  0  
3. 
Select the minimum MF degree for the antecedents of road and accident opinion words and obtain the membership degree of 
consequent values using fitness function as follows. 
Road:   
Fitness [1] = min( μ(very): 0.9, μ(busy): 0.23, μ(closed): 1) = 0.23  
Fitness [2] = min( μ(very): 0.9, μ(busy): 0.7, μ(closed): 1) = 0.7  
Accident: 
 Fitness [1] = min( μ(horrible): 1, μ(closed): 1, μ(killed): 3.4) = 3.4  
 Fitness [2] = min( μ(horrible): 1, μ(closed): 1, μ(killed): 3.6) = 3.6  
4. 
Find the final polarity of road and accident using equations 3 and 4. 
 
Output[i] = fitness[i] ∗IP[i]                                                                                                                                                                         (3) 
 
Polarity =   
∑output[i] ∗fitness [i]
∑fitness[i]
                                                                                                                                                          (4) 
The road outputs 1 and 2 are equal to 0.057 and 0.175, respectively. Both accident outputs 1and 2 are equal to 0. The polarity value for 
the feature road and accident sentences are 0.14 and 0, respectively. The intervals for each output are defined as follows: the strong positive 
interval is [0.75-1], positive is [0.5-0.75], neutral is [0.5], negative is [0.25-0.5] and strong negative is [0.0-0.25]. Based on these intervals, 
the polarity of both features road and accident is strong negative. 

6. Experiment Results  
To assess the usefulness of the proposed system, the proposed fuzzy ontology’s performance was compared with classic ontology (Lau et 
al., 2009) and a simple fuzzy logic (RahmathP et al., 2014). Different types of search queries were composed to retrieve highly related, 
and the maximum number of tweets and reviews from e-commerce sites and Twitter. These tweets and reviews were stored in the database 
for further processing. The irrelevant reviews were filtered out, and every sentence confirmed to be in a valid format. This system retrieved 
1404 and 1851 tweet and review sentences related to 7 different transportation features and 13 different city features, respectively. The 
average length of a tweet was 35 words, and the average length of a review was 56 words. The total number of transportation opinion 
words and city opinion words were 1101 and 1775, respectively. SentiWordNet-based raw datasets along with RDF (resource description 
framework) datasets was developed to compute the polarity. Both classical ontology and fuzzy ontology was built and compared their 
performance by using the same datasets. At first, a simple classic ontology was used to classify the tweets and reviews, predict polarities, 
and record the rate of precision, recall, and accuracy, and the function measure. Later, the fuzzy ontology was used to record the results. 
The precision and recall are basic measures for information retrieval efficiency. Precision (P) is the ratio of retrieved elements that are 
relevant and recall (R) is the ratio of relevant elements that are retrieved. The concepts are defined in table 3.  
(Table 3 is placed on page 25) 
Mathematically, the rate of precision, recall, and accuracy, and the function measure can be calculated using the following equations (Cao 
et al., 2014). 
Precision (P) =
𝑇𝑃
(TP + FP) × 100%                                                                                                                                                                (5)  
Recall (R) =
𝑇𝑃
(TP + FN) × 100%                                                                                                                                                                     (6) 
Accuracy (Ac) =
(TP + TN)
(𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁+ 𝑇𝑁)                                                                                                                                                       (7) 
𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 (𝐹𝑀) = 2∗𝑃∗𝑅
𝑃 +  𝑅                                                                                                                                                                (8) 
where “TP,” “FP,” “FN,” and “TN” indicate “true positive,” “false positive,” “false negative,” and “true negative” in the information 
retrieval, respectively. The comparative results of the experimental classic ontology and fuzzy ontology regarding transportation features’ 
polarity are shown in Table 4.  
(Table 4 is placed on page 26) 
This result shows that the proposed system performs well for the transportation features with explicit transportation aspects. The classic 
ontology-based system cannot learn these explicit features, because many implicit transportation features are used for different purposes. 
This illustrates that the proposed fuzzy ontology based system is more effective than the classic ontology. In addition, SWRL rules boost 
the performance efficiency in order to find the main cause for features of negative and strong negative polarity. The classic ontology 
system achieves a 73% average precision, whereas the proposed system succeeds 96% of the time, which is a 23% improvement. The 
main reason is that the fuzzy ontology can effectively classify sentiments related to transportation activity and city features. As a result, 
the accuracy of the sentiment analysis is high. In contrast, the classic ontology based system yields many noisy associated rules due to 
unrelated sentiment word retrieval that links unrelated polarity variables with features. Fig. 6 shows the precision, recall, accuracy and 
function measure results pertaining to different transportation features. It shows that the average precision, accuracy, and function measure 
significantly increased from 73% to 96%, 66% to 89%, and 71% to 94%, respectively, and recall incurred a 0.03% decrease. The results 
prove that more information that is precise can be extracted from feature tweet and review sentences using the fuzzy ontology.  
(Fig. 6 is placed on page 21) 
The proposed fuzzy ontology based sentiment analysis was also employed to predict city-feature polarity. For the experimental classic 
ontology system, the semantic knowledge of city features is captured in a classic ontology to calculate the polarity of test comments. In 
particular, various equations (Polpinij et al., 2008) are used to find the polarity values of test comments, and then, equations 5, 6, 7 and 8 
are applied to compute the overall results. To facilitate the comparison with the proposed system results, the SentiWordNet tool was used 
to assign the opinion value to sentiment words. If the opinion word is used for negative expressions, the value will be high as negative. 
Otherwise, the opinion word will get the high value as positive. Table 5 illustrates the precision, recall, accuracy, and function measure 
results achieved by using the classic ontology and the fuzzy ontology. The average improvements in the proposed system over the classic 
ontology system across 13 city features were 32%, 24%, and 25% in terms of precision, accuracy and function measure, respectively, 

whereas recall resulted in a 1.5% decrease. Fig. 7 clearly shows the performance of the proposed approach regarding a city feature 
opinionated phrase based on a crisp ontology and a fuzzy ontology. 
(Table 5 is placed on page 27) 
(Fig. 7 is placed on page 22) 
 It is observed that the proposed system performance increased significantly during sentiment analysis under the fuzzy ontology, while 
the classic ontology based system outperforms when the reviews or tweets are intensively blurred. The proposed system performance is 
more effective in both transportation and city feature sentiment analysis because of the fuzzy logic technique and SVM classifier. The 
fuzzy logic and feature-based sentiments are captured in the fuzzy ontology, and are then applied to drastically increase the precision of 
feature-level sentiment analysis. In addition, the average precision rate of the existing system was 74.1 %, whereas the proposed system 
achieves 97%. It proves that the average improvement of the proposed system over the existing system (Ali et al., 2016) is 23% in terms 
of precision. These analysis results confirm that the proposed fuzzy logic with an ontology-based system is more effective for 
transportation and city feature-level sentiment analysis.   
7. Conclusion 
This paper proposes a framework with fuzzy ontology based sentiment analysis of transportation and city feature reviews to facilitate ITSs 
and travelers. Various reasonable issues are considered, including feature extraction, opinion word extraction, the assertion of feature 
polarity value in the ontology, and polarity determination by utilizing fuzzy logic. The proposed technique offers a transportation system 
that determines a real-time traffic congestion mapping and provides travelers with a city feature opinion map of the city so they can plan 
before travelling. Indeed, the proposed technique successfully categorizes extremely obscure reviews, and intelligently determines 
transportation and city feature polarity. This system can automatically collect all the traffic data, and analyze these data to notify drivers 
before they reach risk areas, which save time and fuel. It can also improve transportation safety, solve traffic congestion problems in big 
cities, and provide travelers with comfortable traveling experiences in urban areas. Furthermore, this system can be connected to different 
information retrieval, text classification, and opinion-mining systems, since it can extricate a feature from unclear tweets and reviews, 
extract feature opinion words, and classify these feature opinion words into terms with more degrees of polarity. This work can be extended 
by enhancing the extraction procedure of true and false opinionated phrases in the field of sentiment analysis of transportation activity 
reviews.  
Some future research works are debated as follows. Most of the proposed sentiment analysis ponder only polarity classification. However, 
in reality, reviews are intensively blurred. The proposed systems execute irrelevant reviews and consider the noun, verb, adjective, and 
adverb as sentiment words, which decrease the precision rate of sentiment analysis. Therefore, providing the required precision rate for 
effective sentiment analysis is complicated issue that must be addressed by using optimum mechanism. 
Another future research direction that we propose is to develop sentiment analysis-based health prescription system. Indeed, such a system 
is needed to effectively measure the polarity degree of public health related tweets and to suggest precise drugs in limited time. In this 
system, the disease ontology-based domain knowledge with neural network can be considered to identify the diseases and to facilitate the 
information extraction of drugs from social network. For information extraction in opinion mining, we propose to use semi-supervised 
learning techniques that are more efficient to filter out irrelevant data. 
Acknowledgement 
This research was supported by a grant (12-TI-C01) from the Advanced Water Management Research Program funded by Ministry 
of Land, Infrastructure, and Transport of the Korean government.
