Ancestral Instrument Method for Causal Inference without Complete Knowledge∗
Debo Cheng1 , Jiuyong Li1 , Lin Liu1 , Jiji Zhang2 , Thuc duy Le1 and Jixue Liu1
1 STEM, University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA, Australia
2 Department of Religion and Philosophy, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China

Abstract
Unobserved confounding is the main obstacle to
causal effect estimation from observational data.
Instrumental variables (IVs) are widely used for
causal effect estimation when there exist latent con-
founders. With the standard IV method, when a
given IV is valid, unbiased estimation can be ob-
tained, but the validity requirement on a standard
IV is strict and untestable. Conditional IVs have
been proposed to relax the requirement of standard
IVs by conditioning on a set of observed variables
(known as a conditioning set for a conditional IV).
However, the criterion for finding a conditioning
set for a conditional IV needs a directed acyclic
graph (DAG) representing the causal relationships
of both observed and unobserved variables. This
makes it challenging to discover a conditioning set
directly from data.
In this paper, by leveraging
maximal ancestral graphs (MAGs) for causal infer-
ence with latent variables, we study the graphical
properties of ancestral IVs, a type of conditional
IVs using MAGs, and develop the theory to support
data-driven discovery of the conditioning set for a
given ancestral IV in data under the pretreatment
variable assumption. Based on the theory, we de-
velop an algorithm for unbiased causal effect esti-
mation with a given ancestral IV and observational
data. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-
world datasets demonstrate the performance of the
algorithm in comparison with existing IV methods.
1
Introduction
Inferring the total causal effect of a treatment (a.k.a. exposure,
intervention or action) on an outcome of interest is a central
problem in scientific discovery and it is essential for decision
making in many areas such as epidemiology [Martinussen
et al., 2019] and economics [Card, 1993; Verbeek, 2008;
Imbens and Rubin, 2015]. With observational data, a ma-
jor hurdle to causal effect estimation is the bias caused by
confounders. Therefore the unconfoundedness assumption is
∗Appendices of the paper are available at https://arxiv.org/abs/
2201.03810.
commonly made by causal inference methods [Imbens and
Rubin, 2015].
When there are latent or unobserved confounders, the
unconfoundedness assumption becomes unreliable. In this
case, the instrumental variable (IV) approach [Card, 1993;
Martens et al., ] is considered a powerful way to achieve un-
biased causal effect estimation. The IV approach leverages
an IV (denoted as S), a variable known to be a cause of the
treatment W, controlling treatment assignment, to deal with
unobserved confounding. Given a valid IV, an unbiased es-
timate of the total causal effect of W on outcome Y can be
obtained based on the estimated causal effect of S on W and
the estimated causal effect of S on Y .
The requirements for a standard IV are very strong and it
is impossible to find a standard IV in many applications. For
a variable S to be a valid standard IV, it must be a cause of W
and satisfy the exclusion restriction (i.e. the causal effect of
S on Y must be only through W) and be exogenous (i.e. S
does not share common causes with Y ) [Martens et al., ;
Imbens, 2014]. These conditions are strict and can only be
justified by domain knowledge. In particular, the exogeneity
implies that S must be a factor “external” to the system un-
der consideration and connects to the system only through the
treatment W, which is impossible to validate in practice.
A conditional IV relaxes the requirements of a standard IV
significantly and it is more likely to exist in an application
than a standard IV [Pearl, 2009; Brito and Pearl, 2002]. With
the concept of a conditional IV, an “internal” variable S can
be a valid IV when conditioning on a set of observed vari-
ables Z. In this case, S is known as a conditional IV which
is instrumentalized by Z, and the key to the success of the
conditional IV method (in obtaining unbiased causal effect
estimation) is to find a proper conditioning set Z for a given
conditional IV.
However, the criterion for finding Z is based on complete
causal structure knowledge (i.e. a complete causal DAG with
observed and unobserved variables), which, if at all possi-
ble, can only be obtained from domain knowledge, not ob-
servational data. Moreover, recent work [Van der Zander et
al., 2015] has shown that the search for Z in a DAG is NP-
hard for a given conditional IV. The authors also proposed
the concept of an ancestral IV in a DAG, a restricted version
of a conditional IV, to work towards efficient search for Z.
Nonetheless, the search for Z for an ancestral IV in a DAG
arXiv:2201.03810v2  [cs.AI]  8 Dec 2023

still requires a DAG containing all the observed and unob-
served variables. Therefore, the majority of existing methods
for finding a conditioning set of a conditional IV need a causal
graph which may not be known in many applications.
There are some works which use the conditional IV with-
out complete causal knowledge, such as random forest for
IV [Athey et al., 2019], an estimator based on the assump-
tion of the existence of some invalid and some valid IVs (sis-
VIVE) [Kang et al., 2016], and IV.tetrad [Silva and Shimizu,
2017], but they do not identify conditioning sets. We differ-
entiate our work from these works in the Related Work sec-
tion in more detail and compare our method with them in the
Experiments section.
In this paper, we design an algorithm for identifying a con-
ditional set that instrumentalizes a given ancestral IV, a type
of conditional IVs, in data directly. In order to achieve this,
we study the graphical properties of an ancestral IV using
a MAG (maximal ancestral graph [Richardson and Spirtes,
2002; Zhang, 2008a]) and develop the theory for data-driven
discovery of a conditioning set for a given ancestral IV. To the
best of our knowledge, there is no existing method for finding
a conditioning set of a conditional IV directly from data.
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows.
• We study the novel graphical properties of an ancestral
IV using MAGs, which enables a data-driven approach
to applying the IV method to obtain unbiased causal ef-
fect estimation when there are latent confounders.
• We establish graphical criteria for determining a condi-
tioning set of a given ancestral IV via a MAG (PAG).
• Based on the theorems, we propose an effective algo-
rithm for unbiased causal effect estimation from data
with latent variables. The experiments on synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate the performance of the
proposed algorithm.
2
Background
2.1
Graphical Notation and Definitions
A graph G = (V, E) consists of a set of nodes V =
{V1, . . . , Vp}, denoting random variables, and a set of edges
E ⊆V × V, representing the relationships between nodes.
Two nodes linked by an edge are adjacent. In the paper, an
edge in E can be a directed edge →, a bi-directed edge ↔, or
a partially directed edge b→, where the circle at the left end
of the edge indicates uncertainty of the orientation.
A path π between Vi and Vj in a graph comprises a se-
quence of distinct nodes ⟨Vi, . . . , Vj⟩with every pair of suc-
cessive nodes being adjacent. Vi and Vj are end nodes of
π, and other nodes on π are non-end nodes. A path is a di-
rected or causal path if all edges along it are directed such as
Vi →. . . →Vj. We use ‘∗’ to indicate an arbitrary edge
mark of an edge, i.e. arrow (>), tail (−) or circle (◦). Vi is a
collider on a path if Vi−1*→Vi ←*Vi+1 is in G. A collider
path is a path on which every non-endpoint node is a collider.
A path of length one is a trivial collider path.
If there is Vi ↔Vj in a graph, Vi and Vj are called
spouses to each other.
We use Adj(V ), Pa(V ), Ch(V ),
An(Vi), De(Vi), Sp(V ) and PossAn(V ) to denote the sets
of all adjacent nodes, parents, children, ancestors, descen-
dants, spouses and possible ancestors of V , respectively, in
the same way as in [Perkovi´c et al., 2018]. The definitions of
a node’s parents, children, ancestors and descendants are pro-
vided in Appendix A [Cheng et al., 2022]. A directed cycle
occurs when the first and last nodes on a path are the same
node. A DAG contains directed edges without cycles. In a
DAG with observed and unobserved variables, if there exists
Vi ←U →Vj where U is a latent variable, Vi and Vj are
often called spouses to each other.
Ancestral graphs are often used to represent the mecha-
nisms of the data generation process that may involve la-
tent variables [Zhang, 2008a]. An ancestral graph is a graph
that does not contain directed cycles or almost directed cy-
cles [Richardson and Spirtes, 2002]. An almost directed cycle
occurs if Vi ↔Vj and Vj ∈An(Vi).
To save space, the definitions of Markov property, faithful-
ness, d-separation (denoted as ⊥⊥d), d-connecting (denoted
as ⊥̸⊥d), m-separation (denoted as ⊥⊥m), m-connecting (de-
noted as ⊥̸⊥m), and the graphical criteria of d-separation and
m-separation are introduced in Appendix A.
Definition 1 (MAG). An ancestral graph M = (V, E) is a
MAG when every pair of non-adjacent nodes Vi and Vj in M
are m-separated by a set Z ⊆V\{Vi, Vj}.
A DAG obviously meets the conditions of a MAG, so syn-
tactically, a DAG is also a MAG without bi-directed edges.
It is worth noting that a causal DAG over a set of observed
and unobserved variables can be converted to a MAG over
the observed variables uniquely according to the construction
rules [Zhang, 2008b]. A set of Markov equivalent MAGs can
be represented uniquely by a partial ancestral graph (PAG)
that is defined in Appendix A.
Definition 2 (Visibility [Zhang, 2008a]). Given a MAG M =
(V, E), a directed edge Vi →Vj is visible if there is a node
Vk /∈Adj(Vj), such that either there is an edge between Vk
and Vi that is into Vi, or there is a collider path between Vk
and Vi that is into Vi and every node on this path is a parent
of Vj. Otherwise, Vi →Vj is said to be invisible.
In a given DAG G, if Vi and Vj are not adjacent and Vi /∈
An(Vj), then Pa(Vi) blocks all paths between Vi to Vj. In a
given MAG M, there is a similar conclusion, but the blocked
set is D-SEP(Vi, Vj) as defined below, instead of Pa(Vi).
Definition 3 (D-SEP(Vi, Vj) in a MAG M [Spirtes et al.,
2000]). In a MAG M = (V, E), assume that Vi and Vj are
not adjacent. A node Vk ∈D-SEP(Vi, Vj) if Vk ̸= Vi, and
there is a collider path between Vk to Vi such that every node
on this path (including Vk) is in An(Vi) or An(Vj) in M.
2.2
Instrumental Variables
In this section, we introduce the concepts of standard IVs,
conditional IVs and ancestral IVs in a DAG G = (V, E) with
V = X ∪U ∪{W, Y }, where X is the set of all observed
variables and U is the set of unobserved variables.
Definition 4 (Standard IV). A variable S is said to be an IV
w.r.t. W →Y , if (i) S is a cause of W, (ii) S affects Y only
through W (i.e. exclusion restriction), and (iii) S does not
share common causes with Y (i.e. S is exogenous).

Figure 1: An example of a standard IV represented in two types of
causal graphs: (a) DAG; (b) MAG where W →Y is invisible.
The variable S in the DAG in Fig. 1 (a) depicts a standard
IV w.r.t. W →Y . Given a standard IV S, the causal effect
of W on Y , denoted as βwy can be calculated as σsy/σsw,
where σsy and σsw are the estimated causal effect of S on Y
and the causal effect of S on W, respectively.
A conditional IV in a DAG (Definition 7.4.1 on Page
248 [Pearl, 2009]) is defined as follows.
Definition 5 (Conditional IV). Given a DAG G = (V, E)
with V = X ∪U ∪{W, Y }, a variable S is said to be a
conditional IV w.r.t. W →Y if there exists a set of observed
variables Z ⊆X such that (i) S ⊥̸⊥d W | Z, (ii) S ⊥⊥d Y | Z
in GW , and (iii) ∀Z ∈Z, Z /∈De(Y ).
In the above definition, GW is the DAG obtained by remov-
ing W →Y from G. It is worth noting that Z is a set of
observed variables and Z ̸= ∅for a conditional IV S.
Detention 5 allows a conditional IV S such that S is not
related to W, but conditioning on Z, is related to W when Z
contains a descendant of S. This might lead to a misleading
result [Van der Zander et al., 2015]. The following defined
notion mitigates this issue.
Definition 6 (Ancestral IV in DAG [Van der Zander et al.,
2015]). Given a DAG G = (X ∪U ∪{W, Y }, E), a variable
S ∈X is said to be an ancestral IV w.r.t. W →Y , if there
exists a set of observed variables Z ⊆X \ {S} such that
(i) S ⊥̸⊥d W | Z, (ii) S ⊥⊥d Y | Z in GW , and (iii) Z ⊆
{An(Y ) ∪An(S)} and ∀Z ∈Z, Z /∈De(Y ).
In a given DAG G, an ancestral IV is a conditional IV, but
a conditional IV may not be an ancestral IV. However, the
application of a standard IV, conditional IV or ancestral IV
requires that a causal DAG G = (X ∪U ∪{W, Y }, E) must
be completely known. Often, it is impractical to get such
complete causal knowledge in real-world applications.
Using the IV approach, one way to estimate βwy from data
is to employ the generalized linear model. In this work, we
consider the potential outcome model [Imbens and Rubin,
2015] to calculate βwy as introduced in the following.
η{E(y | w, s, z)} −η{E(y0 | w, s, z)} = f T (z)wβwy (1)
where y, w, s and z denote the values of Y, W, S and Z re-
spectively for a given individual, y0 is the potential outcome
with w set to 0, and η is the identity, log or logit link. The
function f T (z) allows us to measure the interactions between
W and Z. As commonly done in literature, we utilize a two-
stage estimation to estimate βwy. The estimator requires two
regression models. The first stage is to build a regression
model ˆw = ˆE(w | s, z) for each individual from data. The
second stage is to fit the outcome by using Z and f T (z) ˆw
as regressors. Hence, the estimated coefficient of f T (z) ˆw is
ˆβwy. For more details on the estimator, please refer to the
literature [Sjolander and Martinussen, 2019].
3
Finding a Conditioning Set for an Ancestral
IV in Data
3.1
Problem Setting
In this work, we assume that an ancestral IV S has been
given, and there exists a conditioning set Z ⊆X \ {S}
and Z ̸= ∅for S in the underlying DAG G over X ∪U ∪
{W, Y }. We assume that X contains only pretreatment vari-
ables as often assumed in literature [Imbens and Rubin, 2015;
Silva and Shimizu, 2017], i.e. for each X ∈X, X /∈De(W)
and X /∈De(Y ) in G. The goal of the work is to provide
a practical solution for finding a set of observed variables Z
for a given ancestral IV without knowing the complete causal
knowledge. Clause (iii) in Definition 6 is too restrictive for
finding Z in data directly because in a PAG, an ancestor and
a spouse of a node may not be distinguished. Hence, we con-
sider a relaxed condition for clause (iii) of Definition 6, i.e. Z
does not contain a collider on a d-connecting path between S
and W since this is sufficient to address the original problem
with the notion of a conditional IV. Hereinafter, we consider
that in a DAG G, if a set Z ⊆X\{S} satisfies clauses (i) and
(ii) in Definition 6, and does not contain a collider between S
and W, then Z instrumentalizes S.
Furthermore, we consider the case that an ancestral IV
S in a DAG is a cause or spouse of W (i.e. a node in
{Pa(W) ∪Sp(W)}) because it is easy to know a cause of
W or a spouse of W that is not a direct cause or spouse of
Y . In the graphic term, S is adjacent to W but not to Y . For
example, when estimating causal effect of Smoking on Lung
Cancer, Income is a direct cause of Smoking, but not a direct
cause of Lung Cancer [Spirtes et al., 2000]. Hence, Income
can be used as an IV. It is feasible for users to find an S similar
to the case described above. When we infer causal effect from
data, we follow the convention in causal inference, that is, the
causal DAG G satisfies Markov property, the causal DAG G
and the data are faithful to each other [Spirtes et al., 2000;
Pearl, 2009]. All proofs in this section are provided in Ap-
pendix B.
3.2
Representing an Ancestral IV in MAG
An advantage of MAGs is their ability in representing causal
relationships between observed variables without involving
latent variables that exist in the system [Spirtes et al., 2000].
A PAG that represents the Markov equivalence class of
MAGs can be learned from data with latent variables. The
goal of our work is to study the graphical properties of an an-
cestral IV in a mapped MAG (or equivalently in a PAG) and
establish the corresponding theorems for supporting a practi-
cal algorithm to estimate βwy from data using ancestral IVs.
When we use a MAG M over X ∪{W, Y } to represent
the data generation mechanism involving latent variables U,
an IV in the underlying DAG over X ∪U ∪{W, Y } can be
mapped to M. As all types of IVs (standard, conditional or
ancestral IVs) have spurious associations with Y because of

the latent confounder between W and Y , we develop a lemma
for properly mapping an IV in a DAG to a MAG.
Lemma 1. Given a DAG G = (X ∪U ∪{W, Y }, E′) with
the edges W →Y and W ←U →Y in E′, and U ∈U. Let
M = (X ∪{W, Y }, E) be the MAG mapped from G based
on the construction rules [Zhang, 2008b]. Suppose that there
exists an ancestral IV S conditioning on a set Z ⊆X \ {S}
in G. In the mapped MAG M, the edge W →Y is invisible
and there is an edge S →Y or S ↔Y .
We take the standard IV S in the DAG of Fig. 1 (a) as an
example to explain the lemma. In this, S is a standard IV
w.r.t. W →Y and S ∈An(Y ), so the IV S in the mapped
MAG M has a directed edge S →Y as shown in Fig. 1 (b)
and the edge W →Y is invisible.
3.3
The Property of an Ancestral IV in MAG
First of all, we introduce the manipulated MAG MW eS that
is obtained by replacing W →Y with W ↔Y in M and
removing the edge between S and Y . We have the following
lemma to present the property of an ancestral IV S in the
MAG M mapped from a DAG G.
Lemma 2 (The property of an ancestral IV in the mapped
MAG). Given a DAG G = (X ∪U ∪{W, Y }, E′) with the
edges W →Y and W ←U →Y in E′, and U ∈U,
and let M = (X ∪{W, Y }, E) be the MAG mapped from G.
Suppose that there exists an ancestral IV S conditioning on
a set Z ⊆X \ {S} in G. In the mapped MAG M, if a set
Z ⊆X\{S} satisfies the conditions that (i) S and W are not
m-separated given Z in M, and (ii) S and Y are m-separated
by Z in MW eS, then Z instrumentalizes S in the DAG G.
3.4
Determining a Conditioning Set Using a MAG
The following lemma from the work in [Maathuis et al.,
2015] is useful for our purpose.
Lemma 3. Let X and Y be two non-adjacent nodes in a
MAG M, then X ⊥⊥m Y | D-SEP(X, Y ).
Therefore, we have the following corollary for finding a
set Z ⊆X \ {S} in a MAG M that instrumentalizes S in the
underlying DAG G.
Corollary 1. Given a DAG G = (X ∪U ∪{W, Y }, E′) with
the edges W →Y and W ←U →Y in E′, and U ∈U, and
let M = (X ∪{W, Y }, E) be the MAG mapped from G. For
a given ancestral IV S, D-SEP(S, Y ) in the mapped MAG
M is a set that instrumentalizes S in the DAG G.
Corollary 1 provides a theoretical solution for determining
a conditioning set that instrumentalizes a given ancestral IV
S in the underlying DAG. Taking a data-driven approach, we
can learn a PAG from data with latent variables, but for each
of the Markov equivalent MAGs represented by the PAG,
there is a corresponding D-SEP(S, Y ) for S. We do not
know which MAG is the ground-truth MAG that is mapped
from the underlying DAG, and hence we do not know which
D-SEP(S, Y ) is the true conditioning set for S. To provide
a precise causal effect estimation, in the next section, we pro-
pose a theorem to determine a conditioning set Z from a PAG,
in which non-ancestral nodes of S or Y may be contained in
Z, but do not result in bias.
Algorithm 1 Ancestral IV estimator in PAG (AIViP)
Input: Dataset D with the treatment W, the outcome Y , the
set of pretreatment variables X and ancestral IV S
Output: ˆβwy
1: Call the causal structure learning method, rFCI, to learn
a PAG P from D
2: Obtain the manipulated PAG PW eS
3: Obtain the set PossAn(S ∪Y ) \ {W, S} in PW eS
4: Z = PossAn(S ∪Y ) \ {W, S}
5: fit ˆw = ˆE(w | s, z)
6: fit ˆy = ˆE(y | f T (z) ˆw, z)
7: Let ˆβwy be the coefficient of f T (z) ˆw
8: return ˆβwy
3.5
Determining a Conditioning Set Z Using a
PAG
For a given ancestral IV S, we have the following theorem
for determining a set Z in a PAG P that instrumentalizes S.
Theorem 1. Given a DAG G = (X ∪U ∪{W, Y }, E′) with
the edges W →Y and W ←U →Y in E′, and U ∈U,
and let M = (X ∪{W, Y }, E) be the MAG mapped from
G. From data, the mapped MAG M is represented by a PAG
P = (X ∪{W, Y }, E′′). For a given ancestral IV S which is
a cause or spouse of W, the set PossAn(S ∪Y ) \ {W, S} in
the learned P is a set that instumentalizes S in the DAG G.
Note that PossAn(S ∪Y ) \ {W, S} is a superset of D-
SEP(S, Y ) since the former may contain non-ancestral
nodes of S or Y , and do not result in bias. Theorem 1 al-
lows us to discover the conditioning set as PossAn(S ∪Y ) \
{W, S} from the manipulated PAG PW eS for the given ances-
tral IV S without complete causal knowledge.
3.6
The Proposed Ancestral IV Based Estimator
In this section, we develop a data-driven estimator, Ancestral
IV estimator in PAG (AIViP) as shown in Algorithm 1, for
unbiased causal effect estimation with a given ancestral IV
and data with latent confounders.
As presented in Algorithm 1, AIViP (Line 1) employs a
global causal structure learning method to discover a PAG
from data with latent variables.
In this work, we employ
rFCI [Colombo et al., 2012] and use the function rfci in the
R package pcalg [Kalisch et al., 2012] to implement rFCI.
Lines 2 and 3 construct the manipulated PAG PW eS and get
PossAn(S ∪Y ) \ {W, S} from the PAG PW eS. Lines 4 to
7 estimate ˆβwy by the two-stage regression in Eq.(1). We
use the function glm in the R package stats to fit ˆw and the
function ivglm in the R package ivtools [Sjolander and Mar-
tinussen, 2019] to fit ˆy.
4
Experiments
The goal of the experiments is to evaluate the performance
of AIViP in obtaining the causal effect estimate ˆβwy, espe-
cially, when there is a latent confounder between W and
Y . Five benchmark causal effect estimators are used in the

comparison experiments, including the IV.tetrad in [Silva and
Shimizu, 2017]; some invalid some valid IV estimator (sis-
VIVE) [Kang et al., 2016]; two-stage least squares for stan-
dard IV (TSLS) [Angrist and Imbens, 1995], the most popular
estimator; An extension of TSLS for a conditional IV by con-
ditioning on the set of all variables X \ {S} (TSLSCIV) [Im-
bens, 2014]; the causal random forest for IV regression
(FIVR), with a given conditional IV [Athey et al., 2019].
It is worth noting that since IV.tetrad is the only other
data-driven conditional IV method, we also include the data-
driven standard IV method (sisVIVE), the most popular stan-
dard IV method (TSLS) and its extension to condition IVs
(TSLSCIV), and the popular random forest based estimator
with a given conditional IV (FIVR).
Implementation and Parameter Setting.
The implemen-
tation of IV.tetrad is retrieved from the authors’ site1. The
parameters of num ivs and num boot are set to 3 (1 for VitD)
and 500, respectively. We report the average result of 500
bootstrapping as the final estimated ˆβwy for IV.tetrad. The
implementation of TSLSCIV is based on the functions glm
and ivglm in the R packages stats and ivtools, respectively.
TSLS is implemented by using the function ivreg in the R
package AER [Greene, 2003]. FIVR is implemented by using
the function instrumental forest in the R package grf [Athey
et al., 2019]. The implementation of sisVIVE is based on the
function sisVIVE in the R package sisVIVE. The significance
level is set to 0.05 for rFCI used by AIViP.
Evaluation Metrics.
For the synthetic dataset with the true
βwy, we report the estimation bias, |(ˆβwy −βwy)/βwy| ∗100
(%). For the real-world datasets, we empirically evaluate the
performance of all estimators with the results reported in the
corresponding references since the true βwy is not available,
and we provide the corresponding 95% confidence interval
(C.I.) of ˆβwy for all estimators.
4.1
Simulation Study
We conduct simulation studies to evaluate the performance
of AIViP when W and Y share a latent confounder U. We
generate two groups of synthetic datasets with a range of
sample sizes: 2k (i.e. 2,000), 3k, 4k, 5k, 6k, 8k, 10k, 12k,
15k, 18k, and 20k.
The set of observed variables X is
{X1, X2, . . . , X23, S}. We add two and three latent variables
for Group I and Group II datasets respectively. The generated
synthetic datasets satisfy the three conditions of ancestral IV
in Definition 6. The details of the data generating process are
provided in Appendix C. To make the results reliable, each
reported result is the average of 20 repeated simulations. The
estimation biases of all estimators on both groups of synthetic
datasets are reported in Table 1.
Results.
From Table 1, we have the following observations:
(1) the large estimation biases of TSLS show that the con-
founding bias caused by the latent confounders between S
and Y is not controlled by TSLS at all. (2) TSLSCIV has the
largest estimation biases on both groups of synthetic datasets,
1http://www.homepages.ucl.ac.uk/∼ucgtrbd/code/iv discovery
Group I
n
AIViP
TSLS
TSLSCIV
FIVR
sisVIVE
IV.tetrad
2k
15.0
145.2
342.2
79.2
27.3
32.4
3k
6.6
143.9
340.4
94.6
184.3
28.0
4k
27.5
143.6
343.0
104.4
53.4
30.6
5k
20.9
143.9
347.7
114.5
27.7
24.1
6k
3.9
142.2
344.0
117.5
55.8
32.1
8k
11.8
144.7
340.6
119.9
15.8
31.9
10k
21.0
141.8
342.6
130.7
320.6
30.7
12k
0.2
144.2
340.4
132.7
23.0
29.1
15k
29.8
145.2
344.8
141.2
142.4
25.0
18k
36.7
144.4
342.4
142.3
312.7
30.6
20k
15.2
144.6
341.4
144.8
187.7
30.9
Group II
2k
63.8
284.4
884.7
534.4
199.4
35.8
3k
54.6
281.5
840.3
538.9
364.5
40.2
4k
47.0
286.1
813.9
529.5
327.8
33.5
5k
18.2
289.7
838.5
571.4
396.4
35.7
6k
31.5
283.1
837.1
581.7
353.2
39.5
8k
26.7
285.4
836.7
593.0
584.6
40.1
10k
41.5
280.5
807.6
572.5
653.1
37.0
12k
28.6
286.3
818.6
588.7
696.0
35.3
15k
40.1
285.4
824.5
604.4
652.8
35.0
18k
2.6
284.1
829.8
612.0
823.6
38.8
20k
16.4
291.0
821.9
608.8
634.8
39.8
Table 1: Summary of the estimation bias (%) on both groups of syn-
thetic datasets. The smallest estimation bias on each group is bold-
faced. AIViP consistently obtains good performance on all datasets.
which shows that conditioning on all variables is inappropri-
ate since the data contains collider bias. (3) The estimation bi-
ases of AIViP on both groups of datasets show that AIViP out-
performs FIVR and sisVIVE. This is because both methods
fail to detect either colliders or confounding bias in the data.
(4) AIViP slightly outperforms IV.tetrad in Group I datasets
and the two methods have similar performance in Group II
datasets.
Note that IV.tetrad performs well with synthetic
datasets, but not with real-world datasets since its data distri-
bution assumption may not be satisfied in real-world datasets.
4.2
Experiments on Real-World Datasets
In our experiments, we need to choose some datasets for
which the empirical estimates are widely acceptable since
there are no ground truths for the real-world datasets. Hence,
we evaluate the performance of AIViP on three real-world
datasets, Vitamin D data (VitD) [Martinussen et al., 2019],
Schoolingreturn [Card, 1993] and 401(k) data [Verbeek,
2008]. These datasets are widely utilized in the assessment of
IV methods. Each of the three datasets has a nominated con-
ditional IV for estimating the causal effects, but there is not
enough knowledge to determine the conditioning sets for the
nominated conditional IVs. The details of the three datasets
are introduced in Appendix C.
VitD contains 2,571 individuals and 5 variables: age, fi-
laggrin (an instrument), vitd (the treatment variable), time
(follow-up time), and death (the outcome variable) [Sjolander
and Martinussen, 2019]. We take the estimated ˆβwy = 2.01
with 95% C.I. (0.96, 4.26) from the work [Martinussen et al.,
2019] as the reference causal effect.
Schoolingreturn contains 3,010 individuals and 19 vari-
ables [Card, 1993]. The treatment is the education of em-
ployees. The outcome is raw wages in 1976 (in cents per
hour). A goal of the study is to investigate the causal effect of
education on earnings. Card [Card, 1993] uses geographical

Figure 2: The estimated ˆβwy on the three real-world datasets. The two dotted lines indicate empirical 95% confidence interval of the
references. Note that the performance of AIViP is consistent with the empirical values of the causal effects on all three real-world datasets.
proximity to a college, i.e. nearcollege as an instrument vari-
able. We take ˆβwy = 13.29% with 95% C.I. (0.0484, 0.2175)
from [Verbeek, 2008] as the reference causal effect.
401(k) contains 9,275 individuals from the survey of
income and program participation (SIPP) conducted in
1991 [Verbeek, 2008; Abadie, 2003]. The program participa-
tion is about the most popular tax-deferred programs, i.e. in-
dividual retirement accounts (IRAs) and 401 (k) plans. There
are 11 variables about the eligibility for participating in the
401 (k) plan. The treatment is p401k (an indicator of partic-
ipation in 401 (k)), and pira (a binary variable, pira = 1 de-
notes participation in IRA) is the outcome of interest. e401k
is used as an instrument for p401k (an indicator of eligibility
for 401 (k)). We take ˆβwy = 7.12% with 95% C.I. (0.047,
0.095) [Verbeek, 2008] as the reference causal effect.
Results.
All results on the three datasets are visualized in
Fig. 2. From Fig. 2, we have the following observations: (1)
AIViP obtains results consistent with the reference causal ef-
fect values since the estimated causal effects are either in or
close to the empirical 95% C.I. of the reference values on all
three datasets. (2) The results of each comparison method are
consistent with the reference values in at most two datasets.
We note that IV.tetrad performs badly and this may attribute
to the fact that its strong assumption on data distribution may
not be satisfied. (3) AIViP has consistent performance across
the three datasets, but all other methods’ performances are
not consistent across the three datasets and this may attribute
to their failure in using the correct conditioning sets to reduce
biases. The observations show the advantage of AIViP since
it identifies the conditioning sets for reducing biases and does
not have a strong assumption on data distributions.
5
Related Work
The IV method is a powerful tool in causal inference when
the treatment and outcome are confounded by latent vari-
ables [Angrist and Imbens, 1995; Hern´an and Robins, 2006].
It is impossible to test whether a variable is a valid standard
IV from observational data alone. Assuming that all vari-
ables have discrete values, Pearl proposed the instrumental
inequality to verify whether a variable is a valid IV [Pearl,
1995].
Kuroki and Cai proposed a criterion to find vari-
ables that satisfy the conditions of a standard IV in the lin-
ear structural model [Kuroki and Cai, 2005]. They provided
a tighter condition than Pearl’s [Pearl, 1995], and the devel-
oped method can be applied to data with continuous or dis-
crete variables. Chu et al. [Chu et al., 2001] proposed the
concept of a semi-instrumental variable for a continuous vari-
able. An IV is a semi-instrument, but the converse does not
hold. Under the linearity assumption, Zhang et al. [Zhang et
al., 2020] proposed a symbiotic approach to causal discovery
and identification by using a quasi-instrumental set. The four
works reviewed above are either theoretical solutions or on a
dataset with several variables (less than 5).
Kang et al. proposed a data-driven IV estimator, sis-
VIVE [Kang et al., 2016]. sisVIVE requires that a set of
candidate IVs and a set of observed variables are known and
less than 50% of the candidate IVs are invalid. Hartford et
al. proposed a deep learning based estimator to estimate βwy
from data [Hartford et al., 2021]. This method also requires
that less than 50% candidate IVs are invalid. Our work is dif-
ferent from these data-driven methods, as our work is about
ancestral IVs and how to find a conditioning set from data.
The
most
relevant
work
to
ours
is
the
IV.tetrad
method [Silva and Shimizu, 2017].
IV.tetrad aims to find
a pair of valid conditional IVs {Si, Sj} from data by using
the TETRAD constraint with the strong assumption of lin-
ear non-Gaussian causal models. In IV.tetrad, all observed
variables in X excluding Si and Sj are included in the con-
ditional set Z that instrumentalizes Si and Sj simultaneously.
This assumption does not always satisfied and this limits the
usefulness of IV.tetrad (as shown in our experiments). Dif-
ferent from IV.tetrad, we focus on finding a conditioning set
Z that instrumentalizes a given ancestral IV S, to enable the
practical use of conditional IVs.
6
Conclusion
One of the major challenges for the real-world application
of causal effect estimation is the latent variables in a system,
especially when the treatment and outcome share latent con-
founders. In this work, we study the graphical properties of
an ancestral IV using a MAG to estimate causal effect from
data with latent variables, including latent confounders. We
have proposed the theory for supporting the search for a set
of observed variables (a conditioning set) that instrumental-
izes a given ancestral IV in a mapped MAG, as well as in a
PAG for data-driven discovery of a conditioning set of a given
ancestral IV. Based on the theory, we propose an algorithm,
AIViP to achieve unbiased causal effect estimation from data
with latent variables. The extensive experiments on synthetic
and real-world datasets demonstrate that AIViP is very capa-
ble of handling data with latent confounders, even when the
data contains collider bias, and AIViP outperforms the state-
of-the-art estimators.
