arXiv:1501.06727v2  [stat.ML]  18 Nov 2015
Factorization, Inference and Parameter Learning
in Discrete AMP Chain Graphs
Jose M. Pe˜na
ADIT, IDA, Link¨oping University, SE-58183 Link¨oping, Sweden

Abstract. We address some computational issues that may hinder the
use of AMP chain graphs in practice. Speciﬁcally, we show how a discrete
probability distribution that satisﬁes all the independencies represented
by an AMP chain graph factorizes according to it. We show how this fac-
torization makes it possible to perform inference and parameter learning
eﬃciently, by adapting existing algorithms for Markov and Bayesian net-
works. Finally, we turn our attention to another issue that may hinder
the use of AMP CGs, namely the lack of an intuitive interpretation of
their edges. We provide one such interpretation.
1
Introduction
Chain graphs (CGs) are graphs with possibly directed and undirected edges, and
no semidirected cycle. They have been extensively studied as a formalism to rep-
resent independence models, because they can model symmetric and asymmetric
relationships between random variables. There are three diﬀerent interpretations
of CGs as independence models: The Lauritzen-Wermuth-Frydenberg (LWF) in-
terpretation [6], the multivariate regression (MVR) interpretation [3], and the
Andersson-Madigan-Perlman (AMP) interpretation [1]. No interpretation sub-
sumes another [1,11].
In this paper, we focus on AMP CGs. Despite being much more expressive
than Markov and Bayesian networks [10], AMP CGs have not enjoyed much
success in the literature or in practice. We believe this is due to mainly two
reasons. First, it is not known how to perform inference and parameter learning
for AMP CGs eﬃciently, because it is now known how to factorize a probability
distribution that satisﬁes all the independencies represented by an AMP CG.
Compare this situation to that of LWF CGs, where such a factorization exists
[4, Theorem 4.1] and thus inference can be performed eﬃciently [2, Section 6.5].
Second, AMP CGs do not appeal to intuition: Whereas the directed edges in a
Bayesian network may be interpreted as causal relationships and the undirected
edges in a Markov network as correlation relationships, it is not clear how to
combine these two interpretations to produce an intuitive interpretation of the
edges in an AMP CG.
In this paper, we address the two problems mentioned above. First, we intro-
duce a factorization for AMP CGs and show how it makes it possible to perform

inference and parameter learning eﬃciently, by adapting existing algorithms for
Markov and Bayesian networks. Second, we propose an intuitive interpretation
of the edges in an AMP CG. We start with some notation and deﬁnitions.
2
Preliminaries
Unless otherwise stated, all the graphs and probability distributions in this paper
are deﬁned over a ﬁnite set of discrete random variables V . We use uppercase
letters to denote random variables and lowercase letters to denote their states.
The elements of V are not distinguished from singletons. If a graph G contains
an undirected or directed edge between two nodes V1 and V2, then we write
that V1 −V2 or V1 →V2 is in G. The parents of a set of nodes X of G is the set
PaG(X) = {V1∣V1 →V2 is in G, V1 ∉X and V2 ∈X}. The adjacents of X is the set
AdG(X) = {V1∣V1 ←V2, V1 →V2 or V1 −V2 is in G, V1 ∉X and V2 ∈X}. A route
between a node V1 and a node Vn in G is a sequence of (not necessarily distinct)
nodes V1,... ,Vn st Vi ∈AdG(Vi+1) for all 1 ≤i < n. If the nodes in the route
are all distinct, then the route is called a path. A route is called descending if
Vi →Vi+1 or Vi −Vi+1 is in G for all 1 ≤i < n. A route is called strictly descending
if Vi →Vi+1 is in G for all 1 ≤i < n. The descendants of a set of nodes X of G is
the set DeG(X) = {Vn∣there is a descending route from V1 to Vn in G, V1 ∈X
and Vn ∉X}. The non-descendants of X is the set NdG(X) = V ∖X ∖DeG(X).
The strict ascendants of X is the set SaG(X) = {V1∣there is a strictly descending
route from V1 to Vn in G, V1 ∉X and Vn ∈X}. A route V1,... ,Vn in G is called
a cycle if Vn = V1. Moreover, it is called a semidirected cycle if Vn = V1, V1 →V2
is in G and Vi →Vi+1 or Vi −Vi+1 is in G for all 1 < i < n. An AMP chain graph
(AMP CG) is a graph whose every edge is directed or undirected st it has no
semidirected cycles. An AMP CG with only directed edges is called a directed
and acyclic graph (DAG), whereas an AMP CG with only undirected edges is
called an undirected graph (UG). A set of nodes of an AMP CG G is connected
if there exists a route in the CG between every pair of nodes in the set st all the
edges in the route are undirected. A connectivity component of G is a maximal
(wrt set inclusion) connected set of nodes. The connectivity components of G
are denoted as Cc(G), whereas CcG(X) denotes the connectivity component to
which the node X belongs. A set of nodes of G is complete if there exists an
undirected edge between every pair of nodes in the set. The complete sets of
nodes of G are denoted as Cs(G). A clique of G is a maximal (wrt set inclusion)
complete set of nodes. The cliques of G are denoted as Cl(G). The subgraph of
G induced by a set of its nodes X, denoted as GX, is the graph over X that has
all and only the edges in G whose both ends are in X.
We now recall the semantics of AMP CGs. A node B in a path ρ in an AMP
CG G is called a triplex node in ρ if A →B ←C, A →B −C, or A −B ←C is a
subpath of ρ. Moreover, ρ is said to be Z-open with Z ⊆V when
– every triplex node in ρ is in Z ∪SaG(Z), and
– every non-triplex node B in ρ is outside Z, unless A −B −C is a subpath of
ρ and PaG(B) ∖Z ≠∅.

Let X, Y and Z denote three disjoint subsets of V . When there is no Z-open
path in an AMP CG G between a node in X and a node in Y , we say that X is
separated from Y given Z in G and denote it as X ⊥GY ∣Z. The independence
model represented by G is the set of separations X ⊥GY ∣Z. The independence
model represented by G under marginalization of some nodes L ⊆V is the set
of separations X ⊥GY ∣Z with X,Y,Z ⊆V ∖L. Finally, we denote by X ⊥pY ∣Z
that X is independent of Y given Z in a probability distribution p. We say that
p is Markovian wrt an AMP CG G when, for all X, Y and Z disjoint subsets of
V , if X ⊥GY ∣Z then X ⊥pY ∣Z.
3
Factorization
A probability distribution p is Markovian wrt an AMP CG G iﬀthe following
three properties hold for all C ∈Cc(G) [1, Theorem 2]:
– C1: C ⊥pNdG(C) ∖CcG(PaG(C))∣CcG(PaG(C)).
– C2: p(C∣CcG(PaG(C))) is Markovian wrt GC.
– C3∗: For all D ⊆C, D⊥pCcG(PaG(C)) ∖PaG(D)∣PaG(D).
Then, C1 implies that p factorizes as
p =
∏
C∈Cc(G)
p(C∣CcG(PaG(C))).
The authors of [1, p. 50] note that if p were strictly positive and G were a
LWF CG, then each conditional distribution above would factorize further into
a product of potentials over certain subsets of the nodes in C∪PaG(C), as shown
in [4, Theorem 4.1]. However, the authors state that no such further factorization
appears to hold in general if G is an AMP CG. We show that this is not true
if p is strictly positive. Speciﬁcally, C2 together with [6, Theorems 3.7 and 3.9]
imply that
p(C∣CcG(PaG(C))) =
∏
K∈Cs(GC)
ϕ(K,CcG(PaG(C))).
However, one can show that ϕ(K,CcG(PaG(C))) is actually a function of K ∪
PaG(K), i.e. ϕ(K,CcG(PaG(C))) = ϕ(K,PaG(K)). It suﬃces to recall from
the proof of [6, Theorem 3.9] how ϕ(K,CcG(PaG(C))) can be obtained from
p(C∣CcG(PaG(C))), a method also known as canonical parameterization [5, Sec-
tion 4.4.2.1]. Speciﬁcally, let φ(K,CcG(PaG(C))) = log ϕ(K,CcG(PaG(C))).
Choose a ﬁxed but arbitrary state k∗of K. Then,
φ(k,CcG(PaG(C))) = ∑
q⊆k
(−1)∣k∖q∣log p(q,q∗∣CcG(PaG(C)))
where q∗denotes the elements of k∗corresponding to the elements of K∖Q. Now,
note that p(q,q∗∣CcG(PaG(C))) = p(q,q∗∣PaG(K)) by C3∗, because Q ⊆K.
Then, ϕ(K,CcG(PaG(C))) is actually a function of K ∪PaG(K).

Putting together the results above, we have that p factorizes as
p =
∏
C∈Cc(G)
∏
K∈Cs(GC)
ϕ(K,PaG(K)) =
∏
C∈Cc(G)
∏
K∈Cl(GC)
ψ(K,PaG(K)).
(1)
Note that the well-known factorizations induced by DAGs and UGs (see [6,
Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2]) are special cases of Equation 1.
4
Parameter Learning
The factorization in Equation 1 enables us to perform parameter learning for
AMP CGs eﬃciently by deploying the iterative proportional ﬁtting procedure
(IPFP) [8, Section 19.5.7], which returns the maximum likelihood estimates of
the entries of the potentials for some given data. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst simplify
further the factorization by multiplying its potentials until no potential domain
is included in another potential domain. Let Q1,... ,Qn denote the potential
domains in the resulting factorization. Note that each domain Qi is of the form
K ∪PaG(K) with K ∈Cl(GC) and C ∈Cc(G). Then, we run the IPFP per se:
1 For each potential ψ(Qi)
2
Set ψ0(Qi) = 1
3 Repeat until convergence
4
For each potential ψt(Qi)
5
Set ψt+1(Qi) = ψt(Qi) pe(Qi)
pt(Qi)
where pt = ∏n
i=1 ψt(Qi), and pe is the empirical probability distribution over V
obtained from the given data.
5
Inference
The factorization in Equation 1 also enables us to perform inference in AMP
CGs eﬃciently by deploying the algorithm for inference in DAGs developed by
[7], and upon which most other inference algorithms build. Speciﬁcally, we start
by transforming G into its moral graph Gm by running the procedure below.
This procedure diﬀers from the one in [7], because G is an AMP CG and not
a DAG. In any case, the moralization procedure in [7] is a special case of the
procedure below.
1 Set Gm = G
2 For each connectivity component C ∈Cc(G)
3
For each clique K ∈Cl(GC)
4
Add the edge X →Y to Gm for all X ∈PaG(K) and Y ∈K
5
Add the edge X −Y to Gm for all X,Y ∈PaG(K) st X ≠Y
6 Replace all the directed edges in Gm with undirected edges

The reason of why Gm has the edges it has will become clear later. We con-
tinue by transforming Gm into a triangulated graph Gt, and sorting its cliques
to satisfy the so-called running intersection property. The procedure below ac-
complishes these two objectives. An UG is triangulated when every cycle in it
contains a chord, i.e. an edge between two non-consecutive nodes in the cycle.
The cliques of a triangulated graph can be ordered as Q1,... ,Qn so that for all
1 < j ≤n, Qj ∩(Q1 ∪... ∪Qj−1) ⊆Qi for some 1 ≤i < j. This is known as the
running intersection property (RIP).
1 Set Gt = Gm
2 Repeat until all the nodes in Gt are marked
3
Select an unmarked node in Gt with the largest number of marked
neighbours
4
Mark the node and make its marked neighbours form a complete set
in Gt by adding undirected edges
5
Save the node plus its marked neighbours as a candidate clique
6 Remove every candidate clique that is included in another
7 Label every clique with the last iteration that marked one of its nodes
8 Sort the cliques in ascending order of their labels
Finally, let Q1,... ,Qn denote the ordering of the cliques of Gt returned by
the procedure above. Let Sj = Qj ∩(Q1 ∪...∪Qj−1) and Rj = Qj ∖Sj. Note that
for every K ∈Cl(GC) with C ∈Cc(G), there is some Qi st K ∪PaG(K) ⊆Qi,
because the moralization procedure above made K ∪PaG(K) a complete set in
Gm and thus in Gt. Then,
p(V ) =
∏
C∈Cc(G)
∏
K∈Cl(GC)
ψ(K,PaG(K)) =
n
∏
i=1
φ(Qi)
(2)
and thus
p(V ) = f([Q1 ∪... ∪Qn−1] ∖Sn,Sn)g(Sn,Rn)
and thus
Rn⊥p[Q1 ∪... ∪Qn−1] ∖Sn∣Sn
by [6, p. 29], and thus
p(V ) = p(Q1∪...∪Qn−1)p(Rn∣Q1∪...∪Qn−1) = p(Q1∪...∪Qn−1)p(Rn∣Sn). (3)
Note also that
p(Q1 ∪... ∪Qn−1) = ∑
rn
p(Q1 ∪... ∪Qn−1,rn) = [
n−1
∏
i=1
φ(Qi)]∑
rn
φ(Sn,rn).
(4)
Then, Equations 2-4 imply that
p(Rn∣Sn) = φ(Qn)/∑
rn
φ(Sn,rn).

Note that Sn ⊆Qj for some 1 ≤j < n by the RIP. Then, we replace φ(Qj) with
φ(Qj)∑rn φ(Sn,rn), after which Equation 4 implies that
p(Q1 ∪... ∪Qn−1) =
n−1
∏
i=1
φ(Qi).
We repeat the steps above for p(Q1 ∪... ∪Qn−1) and so we obtain p(Ri∣Si) for
all 1 ≤i ≤n. Now, note that S1 = ∅and, thus, p(Q1) = p(R1∣S1). Moreover, since
S2 ⊆Q1 by the RIP, then
p(S2) = ∑
q1∖s2
p(S2,q1 ∖s2)
and thus
p(Q2) = p(R2∣S2)p(S2).
We repeat the steps above for Q3,... ,Qn and so we obtain p(Qi) for all 1 ≤i ≤
n. To obtain p(Qi∣o) where o denotes some observations or evidence, we ﬁrst
remove all the entries of φ(Qj) that are inconsistent with o for all 1 ≤j ≤n,
then we repeat the steps above to get p(Qi,o) and, ﬁnally, we normalize by
p(o) = ∑qi p(qi,o). To obtain p(X∣o) where X ⊈Qi for all 1 ≤i ≤n, we compute
p(x,o) for all x as if {x, o} were the observations and, then, we normalize by
p(o) = ∑x p(x,o).
6
Error AMP CGs
So far in this article, we have shown how an AMP CG factorizes a probability
distribution, and how this helps in performing parameter learning and inference
eﬃciently. We believe that our ﬁndings solve some computational issues that have
hindered the use of AMP CGs in practice. In this section, we turn our attention
to another issue that may have also hindered the use of AMP CGs, namely the
lack of an intuitive interpretation of their edges. Whereas the directed edges
in a DAG may be interpreted as causal relationships and the undirected edges
in an UG as correlation relationships, it is not clear how to combine these two
interpretations to produce an intuitive interpretation of the edges in an AMP
CG. We propose here a way to do it by adapting to discrete AMP CGs the
interpretation for Gaussian AMP CGs presented in [1, Section 5] and further
studied in [9, Section 3]. Speciﬁcally, we propose to interpret the directed edges
in an AMP CG as causal relationships. In other words, the parents of a node
represent its causal mechanism. We propose to assume that this mechanism is
deterministic but it may sometimes work erroneously. We propose to interpret
the undirected edges in the AMP CG as the correlation structure of the errors
of the causal mechanisms of the diﬀerent nodes. To show the validity of this
interpretation, we will ﬁrst modify the AMP CG by adding a deterministic node
for each original node to represent explicitly the occurrence or not of an error in
its causal mechanism and, then, we will show that the original and the modiﬁed
AMP CGs are equivalent in some sense. We call the modiﬁed CG an error AMP
(EAMP) CG. Since an EAMP CG is an AMP CG with deterministic nodes, we
discuss these ﬁrst.

A
B
C
D
F
I
A
B
C
D
F
I
EA
EB
EC
ED
EF
EI
Fig. 1. An AMP CG and its corresponding EAMP CG.
6.1
AMP CGs with Deterministic Nodes
We say that a node X of an AMP CG is determined by some Z ⊆V when X ∈Z
or X is a function of Z in each probability distribution that is Markovian wrt
the CG. In that case, we also say that X is a deterministic node. We use D(Z)
to denote all the nodes that are determined by Z. From the point of view of
the separations in an AMP CG, that a node outside the conditioning set of a
separation is determined by it, has the same eﬀect as if the node were actually
in the conditioning set. We extend accordingly the deﬁnition of separation for
AMP CGs to the case where deterministic nodes may exist. Given an AMP CG
G, a path ρ in G is said to be Z-open when
– every triplex node in ρ is in D(Z) ∪SaG(D(Z)), and
– no non-triplex node B in ρ is in D(Z), unless A −B −C is a subpath of ρ
and PaG(B) ∖D(Z) ≠∅.
6.2
EAMP CGs
The EAMP CG H corresponding to an AMP CG G is an AMP CG over V ∪E,
where E denotes the error nodes. Speciﬁcally, there is an error node EX ∈E for
every node X ∈V , and it represents whether an error in the causal mechanism
of X occurs or not. We set PaH(X) = PaG(X) ∪EX to represent that EX
is part of the causal mechanism of X in H. This causal mechanism works as
follows: If EX = 0 (i.e. no error) then paG(X) determines the state of X to be
the distinguished state xpaG(X)
∗
, else X may take any state but the distinguished
one. The undirected edges in H are all between error nodes, and they represent
the correlation structure of the error nodes. Speciﬁcally, the undirected edge
EX −EY is in H iﬀthe undirected edge X −Y is in G. Note that the error
nodes are never observed, i.e. they are latent. The procedure below formalizes
the transformation just described. See Figure 1 for an example.
1 Set H = G
2 For each node X ∈V
3
Add the node EX and the edge EX →X to H
4 Replace every edge X −Y in H st X,Y ∈V with an edge EX −EY

Now, consider a probability distribution p(V,E) that is Markovian wrt the
EAMP CG H. Then,
p(V,E) = p(V ∣E)p(E) = [ ∏
X∈V
p(X∣PaG(X),EX)]p(E)
(5)
by C1 and C3∗. Moreover, in order for the causal mechanism of X in H to match
the description above, we restrict p(X∣PaG(X),EX) to be of the following form:
p(X∣paG(X),EX) =
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
1
if EX = 0 and X = xpaG(X)
∗
0
if EX = 0 and X ≠xpaG(X)
∗
q(X∣paG(X)) if EX = 1
(6)
where q(X∣paG(X)) is an arbitrary conditional probability distribution with the
only constraints that q(X∣paG(X)) = 0 if X = xpaG(X)
∗
, and q(X∣paG(X)) > 0
otherwise. The ﬁrst constraint follows from the description above of the causal
mechanism of X in H, whereas the second is necessary for p(V ) being strictly
positive. Note that EX is determined by PaG(X)∪X. Speciﬁcally, if X = xpaG(X)
∗
then EX = 0, else EX = 1. Then, E is determined by V . Hereinafter, when we
say that a probability distribution is Markovian wrt an EAMP CG, it should be
understood that it also satisﬁes the constraint in Equation 6.
We assume that p(E) is strictly positive, as a way to ensure that p(V ) is
strictly positive. This together with the fact that p(E) is Markovian wrt HE,
which follows from p(V,E) being Markovian wrt H, implies that p(E) factorizes
as shown in Equation 1 and, thus, Equation 5 becomes
p(V,E) = [ ∏
X∈V
p(X∣PaG(X),EX)][
∏
EC∈Cc(HE)
∏
EK∈Cl(HEC )
φ(EK)].
(7)
Thus, it is clear that the EAMP CG H can be interpreted as we wanted: Each
node is controlled by the causal mechanism speciﬁed in the AMP CG G, the
mechanism is deterministic if no error occurs and it is random otherwise, and the
errors of the diﬀerent mechanisms obey the correlation structure speciﬁed in G.
To see the last point, note that EC ∈Cc(HE) iﬀC ∈Cc(G), and EK ∈Cl(HEC)
iﬀK ∈Cl(GC). Thus, H somehow keeps the structural information in G. To
make this claim more speciﬁc, note that the independence model represented by
G coincides with that represented by H under marginalization of the error nodes
which, recall from above, are latent [9, Theorem 1].1 Recall that the independence
1 Unlike in this work, V is a Gaussian random variable in [9]. However, that is irrelevant
in the proof of [9, Theorem 1]. The proof builds upon the following two properties
which, as we show, also hold for the framework in this work:
– A node EX ∈E is determined by some Z ⊆V iﬀPaG(X)∪X ⊆Z. The if part follows
from the fact shown above that EX is determined by PaG(X)∪X. To see the only
if part, assume to the contrary that Z determines EX but PaG(X)∪X ⊈Z. Then,
X ∉Z or there is some Y ∈PaG(X) ∖Z. If X ∉Z, then let H′ be the EAMP CG
H′ over V ∪E whose only edge is EX →X, and let p′ be a probability distribution

model represented by H can be read oﬀas shown in Section 6.1. Note that that
the independence model represented by G coincides with that represented by H
under marginalization of the error nodes implies that the probability distribution
resulting from marginalizing E out of a distribution p(V,E) that is Markovian
wrt to H is Markovian wrt G and, thus, it factorizes as shown in Equation 1.
Speciﬁcally, recall that E is determined by V and, thus, p(V,E) is actually a
function of V . Then, it suﬃces to set each potential ψ(K,PaG(K)) in Equation
1 equal to the following product of the terms in Equation 7:
ψ(K,PaG(K)) = [ ∏
X∈K
p(X∣PaG(X),EX)]φ(EK)
bearing in mind that if X belongs to several cliques K, then p(X∣PaG(X),EX)
is assigned to only one (any) of the potentials ψ(K,PaG(K)). For instance, the
following is a valid assignment for the AMP and EAMP CGs in Figure 1:
ψ(A)
= p(A∣EA)φ(EA)
ψ(C,F,A)
= p(F∣EF )φ(EC,EF )
ψ(B,A)
= p(B∣A,EB)φ(EB)
ψ(D,I,A,B) = p(D∣A,B,ED)φ(ED,EI)
ψ(C,D,A,B) = p(C∣A,EC)φ(EC,ED) ψ(F,I)
= p(I∣EI)φ(EF ,EI)
Unfortunately, the opposite of the last result above does not hold. That is, not
every probability distribution that factorizes according to an AMP CG coincides
with the marginal of a distribution that is Markovian wrt the corresponding
EAMP CG. To see it, let G be the AMP CG A →B−C. Let H be the EAMP CG
corresponding to G, i.e. EA →A →B ←EB −EC →C. Consider a probability
distribution p(A,B,C,EA,EB,EC) that is Markovian wrt H. Since as shown
above {EA,EB,EC} is determined by {A,B,C}, Equation 7 implies that
p(a0,ba0
∗,C)
p(a1,ba1
∗,C) = p(a0∣EA)p(ba0
∗∣a0,EB)p(C∣EC)φ(EA)φ(EB,EC)
p(a1∣EA)p(ba1
∗∣a1,EB)p(C∣EC)φ(EA)φ(EB,EC) = p(a0∣EA)φ(EA)
p(a1∣EA)φ(EA)
(8)
because both {a0,ba0
∗} and {a1,ba1
∗} determine that EB = 0, which implies
that p(ba0
∗∣a0,EB) = p(ba1
∗∣a1,EB) = 1. Now, consider a probability distribution
p′(A,B,C) that factorizes according to G. Then, Equation 1 implies that
p′(a0,ba0
∗,C)
p′(a1,ba1
∗,C) = ψ(a0)ψ(a0,ba0
∗,C)
ψ(a1)ψ(a1,ba1
∗,C).
(9)
Note that the ratio in Equation 9 is a function of C whereas the ratio in Equation
8 is not. Therefore, p(A,B,C) ≠p′(A,B,C) in general.
that is Markovian wrt H′. Note that EX is a function of just X in p′. If X ∈Z,
then let H′ have the edges EX →X ←Y ←EY , and let p′ be Markovian wrt H′
st xy0
∗
≠xy1
∗. Note that EX is a function of just X ∪Y in p′. Note also that in
either case p′ is Markovian wrt H, because H′ is a subgraph of H. Note also that
in neither case EX is a function of Z in p′. This contradicts that Z determines EX.
– A node X ∈V is determined by some Z ⊆V iﬀX ∈Z. The if part is trivial. To see
the only if part, note that X is determined by Z only if X ∈Z or EX is determined
by Z. However, EX is determined by Z only if X ∈Z by the previous property.

Finally, note that every node X ∈V in an EAMP CG H forms a connectivity
component on its own. Therefore, the factorization in Equation 7 is actually of
the same form as the factorization in Equation 1. This comes as no surprise
because, after all, H is an AMP CG over V ∪E.
7
Discussion
We have addressed some issues that may hinder the use of AMP CGs in practice.
We hope that the results reported in this paper help others to deploy AMP CGs
in practical applications. Speciﬁcally, we have shown how a discrete probability
distribution that is Markovian wrt an AMP CG factorizes according to it. We
have also shown how this factorization makes it possible to perform inference
and parameter learning eﬃciently. Finally, we have provided an intuitive inter-
pretation of AMP CGs that sheds some light on what the diﬀerent edges may
mean. Unfortunately, the interpretation provided is not perfect, i.e. not every
probability distribution that factorizes according to an AMP CG coincides with
the marginal of a distribution that is Markovian wrt the corresponding EAMP
CG. We are working to solve this problem. We are also working on proving the
opposite of the result in Section 3, i.e. proving that every probability distribution
that factorizes according to an AMP CG is Markovian wrt it.
Acknowledgments. This work is funded by the Swedish Research Council (ref.
2010-4808), and by a so-called career contract at Link¨oping University.
