Net2Vec: Quantifying and Explaining how Concepts are Encoded by Filters in
Deep Neural Networks
Ruth Fong
University of Oxford

Andrea Vedaldi
University of Oxford

Abstract
In an effort to understand the meaning of the intermedi-
ate representations captured by deep networks, recent pa-
pers have tried to associate speciﬁc semantic concepts to
individual neural network ﬁlter responses, where interest-
ing correlations are often found, largely by focusing on ex-
tremal ﬁlter responses. In this paper, we show that this ap-
proach can favor easy-to-interpret cases that are not neces-
sarily representative of the average behavior of a represen-
tation.
A more realistic but harder-to-study hypothesis is that se-
mantic representations are distributed, and thus ﬁlters must
be studied in conjunction. In order to investigate this idea
while enabling systematic visualization and quantiﬁcation
of multiple ﬁlter responses, we introduce the Net2Vec frame-
work, in which semantic concepts are mapped to vectorial
embeddings based on corresponding ﬁlter responses. By
studying such embeddings, we are able to show that 1., in
most cases, multiple ﬁlters are required to code for a con-
cept, that 2., often ﬁlters are not concept speciﬁc and help
encode multiple concepts, and that 3., compared to single
ﬁlter activations, ﬁlter embeddings are able to better char-
acterize the meaning of a representation and its relationship
to other concepts.
1. Introduction
While deep neural networks keep setting new records in
almost all problems in computer vision, our understanding
of these black-box models remains very limited. Without
developing such an understanding, it is difﬁcult to charac-
terize and work around the limitations of deep networks,
and improvements may only come from intuition and trial-
and-error.
For deep learning to mature, a much better theoretical
and empirical understanding of deep networks is thus re-
quired. There are several questions that need answering,
such as how a deep network is able to solve a problem such
Figure 1. The diversity of BRODEN [4] images that most acti-
vate certain AlexNet conv5 ﬁlters motivates us to investigate to
what extent a single ﬁlter encodes a concept fully, without need-
ing other units, and exclusively, without encoding other concepts.
An image’s corner number n denotes that it is the n-th most max-
imally activating image for the given ﬁlter. Masks were generated
by our slightly modiﬁed NetDissect [4] approach (section 3.1.1)
and are upsampled ﬁrst before thresholding for smoothness.
as classifying an image, or how it can generalize so well de-
spite having access to limited training data in relation to its
own capacity [23]. In this paper, we ask in particular what a
convolutional neural network has learned to do once train-
ing is complete. A neural network can be seen as a sequence
of functions, each mapping an input image to some interme-
diate representation. While the ﬁnal output of a network is
usually easy to interpret (as it provides, hopefully, a solu-
tion to the task that the network was trained to solve), the
meaning of the intermediate layers is far less clear. Under-
standing the information carried by these representations is
arXiv:1801.03454v2  [cs.CV]  29 Mar 2018

a ﬁrst step to understanding how these networks work.
Several authors have researched the possibility that indi-
vidual ﬁlters in a deep network are responsible for captur-
ing particular semantic concepts. The idea is that low-level
primitives such as edges and textures are recognized by ear-
lier layers, and more complex objects and scenes by deeper
ones. An excellent representative of this line of research is
the recent Network Dissection approach by [4]. The authors
of this paper introduce a new dataset, BRODEN, which
contains pixel-level segmentation for hundreds of low- and
high-level visual concepts, from textures to parts and ob-
jects. They then study the correlation between extremal ﬁl-
ter responses and such concepts, seeking for ﬁlters that are
strongly responsive for particular ones.
While this and similar studies [24, 22, 10] did ﬁnd clear
correlations between feature responses and various con-
cepts, such an interpretation has intrinsic limitations. This
can be seen from a simple counting argument: the num-
ber of available feature channels is usually far smaller than
the number of different concepts that a neural network may
need to encode to interpret a complex visual scene. This
suggests that, at the very least, the representation must use
combinations of ﬁlter responses to represent concepts or, in
other words, be at least in part distributed.
Overview.
The goal of this paper is to go beyond looking
at individual ﬁlters, and to study instead what information
is captured by combinations of neural network ﬁlters. In
this paper, we conduct a thorough analysis to investigate
how semantic concepts, such as objects and their parts, are
encoded by CNN ﬁlters. In order to make this analysis man-
ageable, we introduce the Net2Vec framework (section 3),
which aligns semantic concepts with ﬁlter activations. It
does so via learned concept embeddings that are used to
weight ﬁlter activations to perform semantic tasks like seg-
mentation and classiﬁcation. Our concept vectors can be
used to investigate both quantitatively and qualitatively the
“overlap” of ﬁlters and concepts. Our novelty lies in outlin-
ing methods that go beyond simply demonstrating that mul-
tiple ﬁlters better encode concepts that single ones [2, 21] to
quantifying and describing how a concept is encoded. Prin-
cipally, we gain unique, interpretive power by formulating
concepts vectors as embeddings.
Using Net2Vec, we look ﬁrst at two questions (sec-
tion 4): (1) To what extent are individual ﬁlters sufﬁcient to
express a concept? Or, are multiple ﬁlters required to code
for a single concept? (2) To what extent does a ﬁlter exclu-
sively code for a single concept? Or, is a ﬁlter shared by
many, diverse concepts? While answers to these questions
depend on the speciﬁc ﬁlter or concept under consideration,
we demonstrate how to quantify the “overlap” between ﬁl-
ters and concepts and show that there are many cases in
which both notions of exclusive overlap do not hold. That
is, if we were to interpret semantic concepts and ﬁlter ac-
tivations as corresponding set of images, in the resulting
Venn’s diagram the sets would intersect partially but neither
kind of set would contain or be contained by the other.
While quantifying the relationship between concepts and
representation may seem an obvious aim, so far much of the
research on explaining how concepts are encoded by deep
networks roughly falls into two more qualitative categories:
(1) Interpretable visualizations of how single ﬁlters encode
semantic concepts; (2) Demonstrations of distributive en-
coding with limited explanatory power of how a concept
is encoded. In this work, we present methods that seek to
marry the interpretive beneﬁts of single ﬁlter visualizations
with quantitative demonstrations of how concepts are en-
coded across multiple ﬁlters (section 5).
As part of our analysis, we also highlight the problem
with visualizing only the inputs that maximally activate a
ﬁlter and propose evaluating the power of explanatory visu-
alizations by how well they can explain the whole distribu-
tion of ﬁlter activations (section 5.1).
2. Related Work
Visualizations.
Several methods have been proposed to
explain what a single ﬁlter encodes by visualizing a
real [22] or generated [10, 17, 14] input that most activates
a ﬁlter; these techniques are often used to argue that sin-
gle ﬁlters substantially encode a concept. In contrast, [20]
shows that visualizing the real image patches that most ac-
tivate a layer’s ﬁlters after a random basis has been applied
also yields semantically, coherent patches. [24, 4] visualize
segmentation masks extracted from ﬁlter activations for the
most conﬁdent or maximally activating images; they also
evaluate their visualizations using human judgments.
Distributed Encodings.
[2] demonstrates that most PAS-
CAL classes require more than a few hidden units to
perform classiﬁcation well.
Most similar to [24, 4], [6]
concludes that only a few hidden units encode semantic
concepts robustly by measuring the overlap between im-
age patches that most activate a hidden unit with ground
truth bounding boxes and collecting human judgments on
whether such patches encode systematic concepts. [21]
compares using individual ﬁlter activations with using clus-
ters of activations from all units in a layer and shows that
their clusters yielded better parts detectors and qualitatively
correlated well with semantic concepts. [3] probes mid-
layer ﬁlters by training linear classiﬁers on their activations
and analyzing them at different layers and points of training.
3. Net2Vec
With our Net2Vec paradigm, we propose aligning con-
cepts to ﬁlters in a CNN by (a) recording ﬁlter activations

of a pre-trained network when probed by inputs from a
reference, “probe” dataset and (b) learning how to weight
the collected probe activations to perform various semantic
tasks. In this way, for every concept in the probe dataset,
a concept weight is learned for the task of recognizing that
concept. The resulting weights can then be interpreted as
concept embeddings and analyzed to understand how con-
cepts are encoded. For example, the performance on se-
mantic tasks when using learned concept weights that span
all ﬁlters in a layer can be compared to when using only a
single ﬁlter or subset of ﬁlters.
In the remainder of the section, we provide details for
how we learn concept embeddings by learning to segment
(3.1) and classify (3.2) concepts. We also outline how we
compare embeddings arising from using only a restricted
set of ﬁlters, including single ﬁlters. Before we do so, we
brieﬂy discuss the dataset used to learn concepts.
Data.
We build on the BRODEN dataset recently intro-
duced by [4] and use it to primarily probe AlexNet [9]
trained on the ImageNet dataset [16] as a representative
model for image classiﬁcation.
BRODEN contains over
60,000 images with pixel- and image-level annotations for
1197 concepts across 6 categories: scenes (468), objects
(584), parts (234), materials (32), textures (47), and col-
ors (11).
We exclude 8 scene concepts for which there
were no validation examples. Thus, of the 1189 concepts
we consider, all had image-level annotations, but only 682
had segmentation annotations, as only image-level anno-
tations are provided for scene and texture concepts. Note
that our paradigm can be generalized to any probe dataset
that contains pixel- or image-level annotations for con-
cepts.
To compare the effects of different architectures
and supervision, we also probe VGG16 [18] conv5 3 and
GoogLeNet [19] inception5b trained on ImageNet [16] and
Places365 [25] as well as conv5 of the following self-
supervised, AlexNet networks: tracking [21], audio [15],
objectcentric [5], moving [1], and egomotion [7].
Post-
ReLU activations are used.
3.1. Concept Segmentation
In this section, we show how learning to segment con-
cepts can be used to induce concept embeddings using ei-
ther all the ﬁlters available in a CNN layer or just a single
ﬁlter. We also show how embeddings can be used to quan-
tify the degree of overlap between ﬁlter combinations and
concepts. This task is performed on all 682 Broden con-
cepts with segmentation annotations, which excludes scene
and texture concepts.
3.1.1
Concept Segmentation by a Single Filter
We start by considering single ﬁlter segmentation follow-
ing [4]’s paradigm with three minor modiﬁcations, listed
below. For every ﬁlter k, let ak be its corresponding activa-
tion (at a given pixel location and for a given input image).
The τ = 0.005 activation’s quantile Tk is determined such
that P(ak > Tk) = τ, and is computed with respect to the
distribution p(ak) of ﬁlter activations over all probe images
and spatial locations; we use this cut-off point to match [4].
Filter k in layer l is used to generate a segmentation
of an image by ﬁrst thresholding Ak(x) > Tk, where
Ak(x) ∈RHl×Wl is the activation map of ﬁlter k on in-
put x ∈RH×W ×3 and upsampling the result as needed to
match the resolution of the ground truth segmentation mask
Lc(x), i.e. Mk(x) = S(Ak(x) > Tk), where S denotes a
bilinear upsampling function.
Images may contain any number of different concepts,
indexed by c. We use the symbol x ∈Xc to denote the
probe images that contain concept c. To determine which
ﬁlter k best segments concept c, we compute a set IoU
score. This score is given by the formula
IoUset(c; Mk, s) =
P
x∈Xs,c |Mk(x) ∩Lc(x)|
P
x∈Xs,c |Mk(x) ∪Lc(x)|
(1)
which computes the intersection over union (Jakkard in-
dex) difference between the binary segmentation masks Mk
produced by the ﬁlter and the ground-truth segmentation
masks Lc.
Note that sets are merged for all images in
the subset Xs,c of the data, where s ∈{train, val}. The
best ﬁlter k∗(c) = argmaxk IoUset(c; Mk, train) is then
selected on the training set and the validation score IoU
IoUset(c; Mk∗, val) is reported.
We differ from [4] in the following ways: (1) we thresh-
old before upsampling, in order to more evenly compare
to the method described below; (2) we bilinearly upsample
without anchoring interpolants at the center of ﬁlter recep-
tive ﬁelds to speed up the upsampling part of the experimen-
tal pipeline; and (3) we determine the best ﬁlter for a con-
cept on the training split Xtrain,c rather than Xc whereas [4]
does not distinguish a training and validation set.
3.1.2
Concept Segmentation by Filter Combinations
In order to compare single-feature concept embeddings to
representations that use ﬁlter combinations, we also learn
to solve the segmentation task using combinations of ﬁlters
extracted by the neural network. For this, we learn weights
w ∈RK, where K is the number of ﬁlters in a layer, to
linearly combine thresholded activations. Then, the linear
combination is passed through the sigmoid function σ(z) =

1/(1+exp(−z)) to predict a segmentation mask M(x; w):
M(x; w) = σ
 X
k
wk · I(Ak(x) > Tk)
!
(2)
where I(·) is the indicator function of an event. The sigmoid
is irrelevant for evaluation, for which we threshold the mask
predicted by M(x; w) by 1
2, but has an effect in training the
weights w.
Similar to the single ﬁlter case, for each concept the
weights w are learned on Xtrain,c and the set IoU score com-
puted on thresholded masks for Xval,c is reported. In addi-
tion to evaluating on the set IoU score, per-image IoU scores
are computed as well:
IoUind(x, c; M) = |M(x) ∩Lc(x)|
|M(x) ∪Lc(x)|
(3)
Note that choosing a single ﬁlter is analogous to setting w
to a one-hot vector, where wk = 1 for the selected ﬁlter and
wk = 0 otherwise, recovering the single-ﬁlter segmenter
of section 3.1.1, with the output rescaled by the sigmoid
function (2).
Training
For each concept c, the segmentation concept
weights w are learned using SGD with momentum (lr =
10−4, momentum γ = 0.9, batch size 64, 30 epochs) to
minimize a per-pixel binary cross entropy loss weighted by
the mean concept size, i.e. 1-α:
L1 = −1
Ns,c
X
x∈Xs,c
αM(x; w)Lc(x)
+ (1 −α)(1 −M(x; w)(1 −Lc(x)),
(4)
where Ns,c = |Xs,c|, s ∈{train, val}, and α = 1 −
P
x∈Xtrain |Lc(x)|/S, where |Lc(x)| is the number of fore-
ground pixels for concept c in the ground truth (g.t.) mask
for x and S = hs · ws is the number of pixels in g.t. masks.
3.2. Concept Classiﬁcation
As an alternate task to concept segmentation, the prob-
lem of classifying concept (i.e., to tell whether the concept
occurs somewhere in the image) can be used to induce con-
cept embeddings. In this case, we discuss ﬁrst learning em-
beddings using generic ﬁlter combinations (3.2.1) and then
reducing those to only use a small subset of ﬁlters (3.2.2).
3.2.1
Concept Classiﬁcation by Filter Combinations
Similar to our segmentation paradigm, for each concept c, a
weight vector w ∈RK and a bias term b ∈R are learned to
combine the spatially-averaged ﬁlter activations k; the lin-
ear combination is then passed through the sigmoid function
σ to obtain the concept posterior probability:
f(x; w, b) = σ
 
b +
X
k
wk ·
PHl
i=1
PWl
j=1 Aijk(x)
HlWl
!
(5)
where Hl and Wl denote the height and width respectively
of layer l’s activation map Ak(x).
For each concept c, the training images Xtrain are divided
into the positive subset Xtrain,c+ of images that contain con-
cept c and its complement Xtrain,c−of images that do not.
While in general the positive and negative sets are unbal-
anced, during training, images from the two sets are sam-
pled with equal probability in order to re-balance the data
(supp. sec. 1.2). To evaluate performance, we calculate the
classiﬁcation accuracy over a balanced validation set.
3.2.2
Concept Classiﬁcation by a Subset of Filters
In order to compare using all ﬁlters in a layer to just a
subset of ﬁlters, or even individual ﬁlters, we must learn
corresponding concept classiﬁers.
Following [2], for
each concept c, after learning weights w as explained
before, we choose the top F by their absolute weight |wk|.
Then, we learn new weights w′ ∈RF and bias b′ that
are used to weight activations from only these F ﬁlters.
With respect to eq. (5), this is analogous to learning new
weights w′ ∈RK, where w′
k = 0 for all ﬁlters k that
are not the top F ones. We train such classiﬁers for F ∈
{1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 80, 100, 128}
for the last three AlexNet layers and for all its layers for
the special case F = 1, corresponding to a single ﬁlter.
For comparison, we use this same method to select subsets
of ﬁlters for the segmentation task on the last layer using
F ∈{1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 160, 192, 224}.
4. Quantifying the Filter-Concept Overlap
4.1. Are Filters Sufﬁcient Statistics for Concepts?
We start by investigating a popular hypothesis: whether
concepts are well represented by the activation of individual
ﬁlters or not. In order to quantify this, we consider how
our learned weights, which combine information from all
ﬁlter activations in a layer, compare to a single ﬁlter when
being used to perform segmentation and classiﬁcation on
BRODEN.
Figure 2 shows that, on average, using learned weights
to combine ﬁlters outperforms using a single ﬁlter on both
the segmentation and classiﬁcation tasks (sections 3.1.1
and 3.2.2) when being evaluated on validation data. The
improvements can be quite dramatic for some concepts and
starts in conv1. For instance, even for simple concepts like
colors, ﬁlter combinations outperform individual ﬁlters by
up to 4× (see supp. ﬁgs. 2-4 for graphs on the perfor-
mance of individual concepts). This suggests that, even if

Figure 2. Results by concept category on the segmentation (top)
and classiﬁcation (bottom) tasks show that, on average, using
learned weights to combine ﬁlters (left) out performs using a sin-
gle ﬁlter (right). Standard error is shown.
ﬁlters speciﬁc to a concept can be found, these do not op-
timally encode or fully “overlap” with the concept. In line
with the accepted notion that deep layers improve represen-
tational quality, task performance generally improves as the
layer depth increases, with trends for the color concepts be-
ing the notable exception. Furthermore, the average perfor-
mance varies signiﬁcantly by concept category and consis-
tently in both the single- and multi-ﬁlter classiﬁcation plots
(bottom). This suggests that certain concepts are less well-
aligned via linear combination to the ﬁlter space.
How many ﬁlters are required to encode a concept?
To
answer this question, we observe how varying the num-
ber of top conv5 ﬁlters, F, from which we learn concept
weights affects performance (section 3.2.2). Figure 3 shows
that mean performance saturates at different F for the var-
ious concept categories and tasks.
For the classiﬁcation
task (right), most concept categories saturate by F = 50;
however, scenes reaches near optimal performance around
F = 15, which is much more quickly than that of materials.
For the segmentation task (left), performance peaks much
earlier at F = 8 for materials and parts, F = 16 for ob-
jects, and F = 128 for colors. We also observe performance
drops after reaching optimal peaks for materials and parts in
the segmentation class. This highlights that the segmenta-
tion task is challenging for those concept categories in par-
ticular (i.e., object parts are much smaller and harder to seg-
ment, materials are most different from network’s original
ImageNet training examples of objects); with more ﬁlters
to optimize for, learning is more unstable and more likely
to reach a sub-optimal solution.
Failure Cases.
While on average our multi-ﬁlter ap-
proach signiﬁcantly outperforms a single-ﬁlter approach
Figure 3. Results by concept category and number of top conv5
ﬁlters used for segmentation and classiﬁcation show that different
categories and tasks saturate in performance at different F.
Table 1. Percent of concepts for which the evaluation metric (set
IoU for segmentation and accuracy for classiﬁcation) is equal to or
better when using learned weights than the best single ﬁlter.
conv1 conv2 conv3 conv4 conv5
Segmentation 91.6% 86.8% 84.0% 82.3% 75.7%
Classiﬁcation 87.8% 90.2% 85.0% 87.9% 88.1%
on both segmentation and classiﬁcation tasks (ﬁg. 2), Ta-
ble 1 shows that for around 10% of concepts, this does not
hold. For segmentation, this percentage increases with layer
depth. Upon investigation, we discovered that the concepts
for which our learned weights do not outperform the best
ﬁlter either have very few examples for that concept, i.e.
mostly |Xtrain,c| ∈[10, 100] which leads to overﬁtting; or
are very small objects, of average size less than 1% of an
image, and thus training with the size weighted (4) loss is
unstable and difﬁcult, particularly at later layers where there
is low spatial resolution. A similar analysis on the classiﬁ-
cation results shows that small concept dataset size is also
causing overﬁtting in failure cases: Of the 133 conv5 fail-
ure cases, 103 had at most 20 positive training examples
and all but one had less than 100 positive training examples
(supplementary material ﬁgs. 7 and 8).
4.2. Are Filters Shared between Concepts?
Next, we investigate the extent to which a single ﬁlter is
used to encode many concepts. Note that Figure 1 suggests
that a single ﬁlter might be activated by different concepts;
often, the different concepts a ﬁlter appears to be activated
by are related by a latent concept that may or may not be
human-interpretable, i.e., an ‘animal torso’ ﬁlter which also
is involved in characterizing animals like ‘sheep’, ‘cow’,
and ‘horse’ (ﬁg. 4, supp. ﬁg. 9).
Using the single best ﬁlters identiﬁed in both the seg-
mentation and classiﬁcation tasks, we explore how often a
ﬁlter is selected as the best ﬁlter to encode a concept. Fig-
ure 5 shows the distribution of how many ﬁlters (y-axis)
encode how many concepts (x-axis). Interestingly, around
15% of conv1 ﬁlters (as well as several in all the other lay-
ers) were selected for encoding at least 20 and 30 concepts
(# of concepts / # of conv1 ﬁlters = 10.7 and 18.6; supp.

Figure 4. AlexNet conv5 ﬁlter 66 appears selective for pastoral an-
imal’s torso. Validation examples for ‘sheep’, ‘horse’, and ‘cow’
with the highest individual IOU scores are given (masks are up-
sampled before thresholding for visual smoothness).
Figure 5. For each ﬁlter in a layer, the number of concepts for
which it is selected as the best ﬁlter in the segmentation (left) and
classiﬁcation (right) tasks is counted and binned.
tbl. 1) for the segmentation and classiﬁcation tasks respec-
tively and a substantial portion of ﬁlters in each layer (ex-
cept conv1 for the segmentation task) are never selected.
The ﬁlters selected to encode numerous concepts are not
exclusively “overlapped” by a single concept. The ﬁlters
that were not selected to encode any concepts are likely not
be involved in detecting highly discriminative features.
4.3. More Architectures, Datasets, and Tasks
Figure 6 shows segmentation (top) and classiﬁcation
(bottom) results when using AlexNet (AN) conv5, VGG16
(VGG) conv5 3, and GoogLeNet (GN) inception5b trained
on both ImageNet (IN) and Places365 (P) as well as conv5
of these self-supervised (SS), AlexNet networks: track-
ing, audio, objectcentric, moving, and egomotion. GN per-
formed worse than VGG because of its lower spatial resolu-
tion (7×7 vs. 14×14); GN-IN inception4e (14×14) outper-
forms VGG-IN conv5 3 (supp. ﬁg. 11). In [4], GN detects
scenes well, which we exclude due to lack of segmentation
data. SS performance improves more than supervised net-
works (5-6x vs. 2-4x), suggesting that SS networks encode
Figure 6. Segmentation (top) and classiﬁcation (bottom) results for
additional networks & datasets.
BRODEN concepts more distributedly.
5. Interpretability
In this section, we propose a new standard for visu-
alizing non-extreme examples, show how the single- and
multi-ﬁlter perspectives can be uniﬁed, and demonstrate
how viewing concept weights as embeddings in ﬁlter space
give us novel explanatory power.
5.1. Visualizing Non-Maximal Examples
Many visual explanation methods demonstrate their
value by showing visualizations of inputs that maximally
activate a ﬁlter, whether that be real, maximally-activating
image patches [22]; learned, generated maximally-activated
inputs [11, 14]; or ﬁlter segmentation masks for maximally-
activating images from a probe dataset [4].
While useful, these approaches fail to consider how vi-
sualizations differ across the distribution of examples. Fig-
ure 7 shows that using a single ﬁlter to segment concepts [4]
yields IoUind scores of 0 for many examples; such examples
are simply not considered by the set IoU metric. This of-
ten occurs because no activations survive the τ-thresholding
step, which suggests that a single ﬁlter does not consistently
ﬁre strongly on a given concept.
We argue that a visualization technique should still work
on and be informative for non-maximal examples. In Fig-
ure 8, we automatically select and visualize examples at
each decile of the non-zero portion of the individual IoU
distribution (ﬁg. 7) using both learned concept weights and
the best ﬁlters identiﬁed for each of the visualized cate-
gories. For ‘dog’ and ‘airplane’ visualizations using our
weighted combination method, the predicted masks are in-
formative and salient for most of the examples, even the
lowest 10th percentile (leftmost column). Ideally, using this
decile sampling method, the visualizations should appear
salient even for examples from lower deciles. However, for
examples using the best single ﬁlter (odd rows), the visual-
izations are not interpretable until higher deciles (rightmost

Figure 7. The empirical IoUind distribution when using the best
single ﬁlter and the learned weights for ‘dog’ (left) and ‘train’
(right) (µ, σ computed on the non-zero part of each distribution).
columns). This is in contrast to the visually appealing, max-
imally activating examples shown in supp. ﬁg. 13.
5.2. Unifying Single- & Multi-Filter Views
Figure 9 highlights that single ﬁlter performance is of-
ten strongly, linearly correlated with the learned weights w,
thereby showing that individual ﬁlter performance is indica-
tive of how weighted it’d be in a linear ﬁlter combination.
Visually, a ﬁlter’s set IoU score appears correlated with
its associated weight value passed through a ReLU, i.e.,
max(wk, 0). For each of the 682 BRODEN segmentation
concepts and each AlexNet layer, we computed the correla-
tion between max(w, 0) and {IoUset(c; Mk, val)}k=1...K.
By conv3, around 80% of segmentation concepts are sig-
niﬁcantly correlated (p < 0.01): conv1: 47.33%, conv2:
69.12%, conv3: 81.14%, conv4: 79.13%, conv5: 82.47%.
Thus, we show how the single ﬁlter perspective can be uni-
ﬁed with and utilized to explain the distributive perspec-
tive: we can quantify how much a single ﬁlter k contributes
to concept c’s encoding from either
|wk|
∥w∥1 where w is c’s
learned weight vector or
IoUset(c;Mk∗,val)
IoUset(c;M(·;w),val).
5.3. Explanatory Power via Concept Embeddings
Finally, the learned weights can be considered as em-
beddings, where each dimension corresponds to a ﬁlter.
Then, we can leverage the rich literature [12, 13, 8] on word
embeddings derived from textual data to better understand
which concepts are similar to each other in network space.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work that learns seman-
tic embeddings aligned to the ﬁlter space of a network from
visual data alone. (For this section, concept weights are
normalized to be unit length, i.e., w′ =
w
∥w∥).
Table 2 shows the ﬁve closest concepts in cosine dis-
tance, where 1 denotes that w′
1 is 0◦from w′
2 and −1 de-
notes that w′
1 is 180◦from w′
2. These examples suggest
that the embeddings from the segmentation and classiﬁca-
tion tasks capture slightly different relationships between
concepts. Speciﬁcally, the nearby concepts in segmenta-
tion space appear to be similar-category objects (i.e., ani-
mals in the case of ‘cat’ and ‘horse’ being nearest to ‘dog’),
whereas the nearby concepts in classiﬁcation space appear
to be concepts that are related compositionally (i.e., parts of
an object in the case of ‘muzzle’ and ‘paw’ being nearest to
‘dog’). Note that ‘street’ and ‘bedroom’ are categorized as
scenes and thus lack segmentation annotations.
Understanding the Embedding Space.
Table 3 shows
that we can also do vector arithmetic by adding and sub-
tracting concept embeddings to get meaningful results.
For instance, we observe an analogy relationship between
‘grass’−‘green’ and ‘sky’−‘blue’ and other coherent re-
sults, such as non-green, ‘ground’-like concepts for ‘grass’
minus ‘green’ and ﬂoral concepts for ‘tree’ minus ‘wood’. t-
SNE visualizations and K-means clustering (see supp. table
2 and supp. ﬁgs. 16 and 17) also demonstrate that networks
learn meaningful, semantic relationships between concepts.
Comparing Embeddings from Different Learned Repre-
sentations.
The learned embeddings extracted from indi-
vidual networks can be compared with one another quanti-
tatively (as well as to other semantic representations). Let
d(W) : RC×K →RC×C = W · W T compute the cosine
distance matrix for C concepts of a given representation
(e.g., AlexNet), whose normalized embeddings w′ form the
rows of W. Then, Di,j = ∥d(W i) −d(W j)∥2
2 quantiﬁes
the distance between two embedding spaces W i, W j, and
Di,j,c = ∥d(W i)c −d(W j)c∥2
2 does that for concept c. Fig-
ure 10 (left) shows Di,j between 24 embedding spaces: 2
tasks × 11 network, WordNet (WN), and Word2Vec (W2V)
(C = 501, the number of BRODEN concepts available for
all embeddings; see supp. sec. 3.2.1). It shows that track-
ing and audio (T, A) classiﬁcation embeddings are quite dif-
ferent from others, and that classiﬁcation embeddings (-C)
are more aligned to WN and W2V than segmentation ones
(-S). Figure 10 (right) shows select mean Di,j,c distances
averaged over concept categories. It demonstrates that col-
ors are quite similar between WN and network embeddings
and that materials most differ between audio and the WN
and W2V embeddings.
6. Conclusion
We present a paradigm for learning concept embeddings
that are aligned to a CNN layer’s ﬁlter space. Not only do
we answer the binary questions, “does a single ﬁlter encode
a concept fully and exclusively?,” we also introduce the idea
of ﬁlter and concept “overlap” and outline methods for an-
swering the scalar extension questions, “to what extent...?”
We also propose a more fair standard for visualizing non-
extreme examples and show how to explain distributed con-
cept encodings via embeddings. While powerful and inter-
pretable, our approach is limited by its linear nature; future
work should explore non-linear ways concepts can be better

Figure 8. For the ‘dog’ and ‘airplane’ concepts, an example is automatically selected at each decile of the non-zero portion of the distribution
of individual IoU scores (Figure 7), and the predicted conv5 segmentation masks using the best ﬁlter (odd rows) as well as the learned
weights (even rows) are overlaid.
Table 2. Nearest concepts (in cos distance) using segmentation (left sub-columns) and classiﬁcation (right) conv5 embeddings.
dog
house
wheel
street
bedroom
cat (0.81)
muzzle (0.73)
building (0.77)
path (0.56)
bicycle (0.86)
headlight (0.66)
n/a
sidewalk (0.74)
n/a headboard (0.90)
horse (0.73)
paw (0.65)
henhouse (0.62)
dacha (0.54)
motorbike (0.66)
car (0.53)
n/a
streetlight (0.73)
n/a
bed (0.85)
muzzle (0.73)
tail (0.52)
balcony (0.56)
hovel (0.54)
carriage (0.54)
bicycle (0.52)
n/a license plate (0.73) n/a
pillow (0.84)
ear (0.72)
nose (0.47)
bandstand (0.54)
chimney (0.53) wheelchair (0.53)
road (0.51)
n/a
trafﬁc light (0.73)
n/a footboard (0.82)
tail (0.72)
torso (0.44)
watchtower (0.52)
earth (0.52)
water wheel (0.48) license plate (0.49) n/a
windshield (0.71)
n/a
shade (0.74)
Table 3. Vector arithmetic using segmentation, conv5 weights.
grass + blue −green grass −green tree −wood
person −torso
sky (0.17)
earth (0.22)
plant (0.36)
foot (0.12)
patio (0.10)
path (0.21)
ﬂower (0.29)
hand (0.10)
greenhouse (0.10)
brown (0.18)
brush (0.29)
grass (0.09)
purple (0.09)
sand (0.16)
bush (0.28)
mountn. pass (0.09)
water (0.09)
patio (0.15)
green (0.25)
backpack (0.09)
Figure 9. Correlation between learned segmentation weights and
each ﬁlter’s set IoU score for ‘dog’ (left) and ‘airplane’ (right).
aligned to the ﬁlter space.
Acknowledgements. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the
Rhodes Trust for Ruth Fong and ERC 677195-IDIU for Andrea Vedaldi.
Figure 10. Comparing Net2Vec embeddings quantitatively. Left:
Each cell corresponds to distance Di,j for embedding spaces i and
j (see section 4.3 for abbreviations). Right: Each cell corresponds
to mean distance Di,j,c for each concept category.
