DeepNAT: Deep Convolutional Neural Network for Segmenting Neuroanatomy
Christian Wachingera∗, Martin Reuterb,c, Tassilo Kleind
aDepartment of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatic and Psychotherapy, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Germany
bAthinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
cComputer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
dSAP SE, Berlin, Germany
Abstract
We introduce DeepNAT, a 3D Deep convolutional neural network for the automatic segmentation of NeuroAnaTomy in
T1-weighted magnetic resonance images. DeepNAT is an end-to-end learning-based approach to brain segmentation that
jointly learns an abstract feature representation and a multi-class classiﬁcation. We propose a 3D patch-based approach,
where we do not only predict the center voxel of the patch but also neighbors, which is formulated as multi-task learning.
To address a class imbalance problem, we arrange two networks hierarchically, where the ﬁrst one separates foreground
from background, and the second one identiﬁes 25 brain structures on the foreground.
Since patches lack spatial
context, we augment them with coordinates. To this end, we introduce a novel intrinsic parameterization of the brain
volume, formed by eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator. As network architecture, we use three convolutional
layers with pooling, batch normalization, and non-linearities, followed by fully connected layers with dropout. The ﬁnal
segmentation is inferred from the probabilistic output of the network with a 3D fully connected conditional random ﬁeld,
which ensures label agreement between close voxels. The roughly 2.7 million parameters in the network are learned with
stochastic gradient descent. Our results show that DeepNAT compares favorably to state-of-the-art methods. Finally,
the purely learning-based method may have a high potential for the adaptation to young, old, or diseased brains by
ﬁne-tuning the pre-trained network with a small training sample on the target application, where the availability of
larger datasets with manual annotations may boost the overall segmentation accuracy in the future.
Keywords:
Brain segmentation, deep learning, convolutional neural networks, multi-task learning, conditional random
ﬁeld
1. Introduction
The accurate segmentation of neuroanatomy forms the
basis for volume, thickness, and shape measurements from
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Such quantitative
measurements are widely studied in neuroscience to track
structural brain changes associated with aging and dis-
ease. Additionally, they provide a vast phenotypic char-
acterization of an individual and can serve as endophe-
notypes for disease.
Since the manual segmentation of
brain MRI scans is time consuming, computational tools
have been developed to automatically reconstruct neu-
roanatomy, which is particularly important for the vastly
growing number of large-scale brain studies. One of the
most commonly used software tools for whole brain seg-
mentation is FreeSurfer (Fischl et al., 2002), which applies
an atlas-based segmentation strategy with deformable reg-
istration. This seminal work encouraged research in atlas-
based segmentation, with a focus on multi-atlas techniques
and label fusion strategies (Ashburner and Friston, 2005;
∗Corresponding
Author.
Address:
Waltherstr.
23,

muenchen.de
Pohl et al., 2006; Heckemann et al., 2006; Rohlﬁng et al.,
2004, 2005; Svarer et al., 2005; Sabuncu et al., 2010; As-
man and Landman, 2012; Wang et al., 2013b; Wachinger
and Golland, 2014). A potential drawback of atlas-based
segmentation approaches is the computation of a deforma-
tion ﬁeld between subjects, which involves regularization
constraints to solve an ill-conditioned optimization prob-
lem. Typically smoothness constraints are enforced, which
may impede the correct spatial alignment of inter-subject
scans. Interestingly, the deformation ﬁeld is only used for
propagating the segmentation and not of interest by itself.
Learning-based approaches without deformable registra-
tion present an alternative avenue for image segmenta-
tion, where the atlas with manual segmentations serves
as training set for predicting the segmentation of a new
scan. Directly predicting the segmentation of the entire
image is challenging because of the high dimensionality,
i.e., the number of voxels, and the limited number of train-
ing scans with manual segmentations. Instead, the prob-
lem is reduced to predicting the label for small image re-
gions, known as patches. Good segmentation performance
was reported for patch-based approaches following a non-
local means strategy (Coup´e et al., 2011; Rousseau et al.,
Preprint submitted to NeuroImage
arXiv:1702.08192v1  [cs.CV]  27 Feb 2017

2011), which is similar to a nearest neighbor search in
patch space. Alternative patch classiﬁcation schemes have
been proposed, e.g., random forests (Zikic et al., 2013).
A potentially limiting factor of patch-based approaches is
that they operate on image intensities, where previous re-
sults in pattern recognition suggest that it is less the clas-
siﬁer but rather the representation that primarily impacts
the performance of a predictive model (Dickinson, 2009).
In a recent study, a wide range of image features for image
segmentation was compared and a signiﬁcant improvement
for augmenting intensity patches with features was mea-
sured (Wachinger et al., 2016).
While image features improve the segmentation, they
are handcrafted and may therefore not be optimal for the
application.
In contrast, neural networks autonomously
learn representations that are optimal for the given task,
without the need for manually deﬁning features.
Neu-
ral nets therefore break the common paradigm of patch-
based segmentation, which separates feature extraction
and classiﬁcation, and replaces it with an end-to-end learn-
ing framework that starts with the image data and pre-
dicts the anatomical label. Deep convolutional neural net-
works (DCNN) have had ample success in computer vi-
sion (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and increasingly in medical
imaging (Brosch et al., 2014; Cire¸san et al., 2013; Pra-
soon et al., 2013; Roth et al., 2014; Zheng et al., 2015;
Brosch et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015; Pereira et al., 2015).
Applications in computer vision are typically on 2D im-
ages, where 2D+t DCNNs were proposed for human action
recognition (Ji et al., 2013). In medical applications, 2.5D
techniques have been proposed (Prasoon et al., 2013; Roth
et al., 2014). The three orthogonal planes are integrated in
existing DCNNs frameworks by setting the planes in the
RGB channels. Diﬃculties in training 3D DCNNs have
been reported (Prasoon et al., 2013; Roth et al., 2014),
due to the increase in complexity by adding an additional
dimension. Yet, several articles describe successful appli-
cations of 3D networks on medical images. Brosch et al.
(2015) propose a 3D deep convolutional encoder for lesion
segmentation. Zheng et al. (2015) use a multi-layer percep-
tron for landmark detection. Most related to our work is
the application of 3D convolutional neural networks, which
is currently limited to few layers and small input patches.
Li et al. (2014) use a 3D CNN with one convolutional and
one fully connected layer for the prediction of PET from
MRI on patches of 153. Brebisson and Montana (2015) use
a combination of 2D and 3D inputs for whole brain seg-
mentation. The network uses one convolutional layer and
3D sub-volumes of size 133. The foreground mask, i.e., the
region that contains the labels of interest, is assumed to
be given, which is not the case for scans without manual
segmentation.
We propose a 3D deep convolutional network for brain
segmentation that has more layers and operates on larger
patches than existing 3D DCNNs, giving it the potential to
model more complex relationships necessary for identifying
ﬁne-grained brain structures. We use latest advances in
deep learning to initialize weights, to correct for internal
covariate shift, and to limit overﬁtting for training such
complex models. The main contributions in DeepNAT are:
• Multi-task learning: our network does not only pre-
dict the center label of the patch but also the labels
in a small neighborhood, formulated in the DCNN as
the simultaneous training of multiple tasks
• Hierarchical segmentation: we propose a hierarchical
learning approach that ﬁrst separates foreground from
background and then subdivides the foreground into
25 brain structures to account for the class imbalance
stemming from the large background class
• Spectral coordinates:
we introduce spectral coordi-
nates as an intrinsic brain parameterization by com-
puting eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami opera-
tor on the brain mask, retaining context information
in patches
The output of DeepNAT is a probabilistic label map that
needs to be discretized to obtain the ﬁnal segmentation.
Performing the discretization independently for each voxel
can result in spurious segmentation artifacts. Formulating
constraints among voxels, e.g., with pairwise potentials in
a random ﬁeld can improve the ﬁnal segmentation. Tra-
ditionally, such constraints have only been imposed in a
small neighborhood due to computational concerns (Wang
et al., 2013a). We use the eﬃcient implementation of a
fully connected conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) that es-
tablishes pairwise potentials on all voxel pairs (Kr¨ahenb¨uhl
and Koltun, 2011), which was shown to substantially im-
prove the segmentation. The fully connected CRF is used
in combination with DCNNs for natural image segmen-
tation in DeepLab (Chen et al., 2015, 2016).
It is also
employed for the segmentation of 2D medical images: Fu
et al. (2016) segment vessels in 2D retinal images and Gao
et al. (2016) segment the lung in 2D CT slices. In con-
trast to these approaches, we perform MAP inference of
the CRF in 3D on the entire image domain to obtain the
ﬁnal brain segmentation.
2. Method
Given a novel image I, we aim to infer its segmenta-
tion S based on training images I = {I1, . . . , In} with
segmentations S = {S1, . . . , Sn}.
A probabilistic label
map L = {L1, . . . , Lη} speciﬁes the likelihood for each
brain label l ∈{1, . . . , η}
Ll(x) = p(S(x) = l|I; I, S).
(1)
Let I(Nx) denote an image patch centered at location x,
the likelihood in a patch-based segmentation approach is
Ll(x) = p(S(x) = l|I(Nx); I, S).
(2)
2

MRI
Foreground-­‐
Background
Multi-­‐task	
  CNN
Segmentation
Multi-­‐task	
  CNN
Figure 1:
Overview of the hierarchical segmentation with spectral coordinates.
The ﬁrst multi-task DCNN separates foreground from
background on skull-stripped images; the second one identiﬁes 25 brain structures on the foreground.
3D Multi-Task Network Architecture
Layers
Speciﬁcation
Layers
Speciﬁcation
1. Convolution
7 × 7 × 7 × 32
10. Inner Product
Neurons: 1024
2. ReLU
11. ReLU
3. Max-Pooling
Size: 2, Stride: 2
12. Dropout
Rate: 0.5
4. Convolution
5 × 5 × 5 × 64
13. Concatenation
w/ coordinates
5. Batch normalization
14. Inner Product
Neurons: 512
6. ReLU
15. Batch normalization
7. Convolution
3 × 3 × 3 × 64
16. ReLU
8. Batch normalization
17. Dropout
Rate: 0.5
9. ReLU
Output: 1728
18. Inner Product (× tasks)
Neurons: 2 / 25
Table 1: DeepNAT network architecture with convolutional (left) and fully connected (right) parts. The size of the input patch is 233. The
last layer is replicated for multi-task learning according to the number of tasks. The cascaded networks are identical except for the number
of neurons in the last layer.
We estimate the likelihood by training a deep convolu-
tional neural network, where the patch inference corre-
sponds to multi-class classiﬁcation. We skull strip the im-
ages to focus the prediction on the brain mask; a brain
scan from which the skull and other non-brain tissue like
dura and eyes are removed.
2.1. Hierarchical Segmentation
Figure 1 illustrates the hierarchical approach for whole
brain segmentation in DeepNAT. In the ﬁrst cascade, brain
regions are classiﬁed into foreground and background. The
foreground consists of 25 major brain structures that are il-
lustrated in Figure 7. The background is the region within
the brain mask that is not part of the foreground. Data
that is classiﬁed as foreground undergoes the next cas-
caded step to identify separate brain structures.
Given
the inherent class imbalance, the hierarchical segmenta-
tion has the potential to perform better than a single-
step classiﬁcation, which classiﬁes into brain regions as
well as background.
Problems with a large background
class have previously been noted for atlas-based segmen-
tation (Wachinger and Golland, 2014). The background is
typically represented by a large pool of data, while small
brain structures are prone to being underrepresented. On
our data, we measured a foreground to background vol-
ume ratio of about 2 to 1. The background is therefore
substantially larger than any of the individual brain struc-
tures on the foreground. As data augmentation allows only
for crude and poor compensation, the cascaded approach
presents a viable alternative.
2.2. Network Architecture
Multi-layer convolutional neural networks pioneered
by LeCun et al. (1989) have led to breakthrough results,
constituting the state-of-the art technology for many chal-
lenges such as ImageNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). The
underlying idea is to create a deep hierarchical feature
representation that shares ﬁlter weights across the input
domain. This allows for the robust modeling of complex
relationships while requiring a reduced number of param-
eters, for which solutions can be obtained by stochastic
gradient descent.
Table 1 lists the details of the DeepNAT network archi-
tecture, where both networks (for each cascade) are iden-
tical except for the number of neurons in the last layer (2
and 25, respectively). The network consists of three con-
volutional layers, where in each layer the ﬁlter masks are
to be learned. A ﬁlter mask is speciﬁed by the spatial di-

3

Layer
Parameter calculation
# Parameters
Input Dimensionality
Output Dimensionality
Convolution I
7 × 7 × 7 × 1 × 32
10,976
23 × 23 × 23 × 1
17 × 17 × 17 × 32
Convolution II
5 × 5 × 5 × 32 × 64
256,000
9 × 9 × 9 × 32
5 × 5 × 5 × 64
Convolution III
3 × 3 × 3 × 64 × 64
110,592
5 × 5 × 5 × 64
3 × 3 × 3 × 64
Inner Product I
3 × 3 × 3 × 64 × 1024
1,769,472
3 × 3 × 3 × 64
1024
Inner Product II
(1024 + 6) × 512
527,360
1030
512
Inner Product III
512 × 25
12,800
512
25
Table 2: The number of parameters to be learned at each of the convolutional and inner product layers of the network. The total number of
parameters is 2,687,200. We also state the input and output dimensionality of each of the layers, which provides insights about the internal
representation. Note that max-pooling operates before convolution II and that spatial coordinates are concatenated before inner product II.
The list does not include bias parameters, which are negligible in size.

extends to all of the input channels. As an example, the
ﬁlters are of size 5 × 5 × 5 × 32 in the second convolution.
The total number of free parameters to be estimated is the
ﬁlter size times the number of ﬁlters, so 5×5×5×32×64
for the second convolution. Table 2 states the number of
parameters together with the input and output dimension-
ality for each layer. Note that for 2D DCNNs the ﬁlters
have 3 dimensions, whereas for 3D DCNNs the ﬁlters have
4 dimensions.
Each convolution is followed by a rectiﬁed linear unit
(ReLU) (Hahnloser et al., 2003; Glorot et al., 2011), which
supports the eﬃcient training of the network with re-
duced risk for vanishing gradient compared to other non-
linearities. The aim of the convolutional part of the net-
work is to reduce the dimensionality from the initial patch
size of 23 × 23 × 23 before entering the fully connected
stage. Although each convolution reduces the size, we use
an additional max-pooling layer with stride two to arrive
at a 33 block of neurons at the end of the convolutional
stage. The 33 block is an explicit design choice. A smaller
23 block would cause a lack of localization, with the patch
center being split into exterior blocks. A larger 43 block
would dramatically increase the number of parameters at
the end of the convolutional stage, where most free param-
eters occur at the intersection between convolutional and
fully connected layers, see Table 2.
We use batch normalization at several layers in the
network to reduce the internal covariate shift (Ioﬀe and
Szegedy, 2015). It accounts for the problem that the dis-
tribution of each layer’s inputs changes during training, as
the parameters of the previous layers change, which is more
pronounced in 3D networks. We further use two dropout
layers, which randomly disable neurons in the network.
This helps with the generalizability of the network by act-
ing as a regularizer and mitigating overﬁtting. To resolve
potential location ambiguity, coordinates of the patches
are given to the network, see Sec. 2.4. This is achieved by
concatenating the image content after the ﬁrst fully con-
nected layer with the location information in layer 13. In
the training stage, we compute the multinomial logistic
loss as last layer, where the probability distribution over
classes is inferred from the last inner product layer with a
softmax.
For the initialization of the weights, we use the Xavier
algorithm that automatically determines the scale of ini-
tialization based on the number of input and output neu-
rons (Glorot and Bengio, 2010). This initialization sup-
ports training deep networks without requiring per-layer
pre-training because signals can reach deep into the net-
work without shrinking or growing too much.
2.3. Multi-task Learning
In Eq.(2), we use an image patch to predict the tissue
label of the center voxel.
Performing this inference on
the entire image results in a single vote per voxel. Pre-
vious results in patch-based segmentation have, however,
demonstrated the advantage of propagating not only the
center label but also neighboring labels (Rousseau et al.,
2011). With such an approach, the voxel label is not only
inferred from a single patch, but also from neighboring
patches. Rousseau et al. (2011) refer to this as the multi-
point method in the context of non-local means segmen-
tation. We propose to replicate the multi-point method
for DCNN segmentation by employing multi-task learning.
Instead of learning a single task, which predicts the center
label, we simultaneously learn multiple tasks, which pre-
dict the center and surrounding neighborhood. The neigh-
borhood size determines the number of tasks. While there
have been applications for deep multi-task learning (Yim
et al., 2015; Luong et al., 2015), we are not aware of pre-
vious applications for image segmentation.
We implement multi-task learning in the CDNN archi-
tecture by replicating the last inner product layer (#18)
according to the number of tasks. The increase in the num-
ber of parameters to be learned is limited by this setup be-
cause all tasks share the same network, except for last in-
ner product layer that specializes on the task. Each task t
predicts the likelihood pt(S(xt) = l|I(Nx); I, S) for loca-
tions xt in the neighborhood Mx centered around x. We
compute the multi-task likelihood for the label by averag-
ing likelihoods across tasks
Ll(x) =
1
|Mx|
X
xt∈Mx
p(S(x) = l|I(Nxt); I, S).
(3)
4

We experiment with 7 and 27 neighborhood systems M for
the prediction, where the 7 neighborhood consists of the 6
direct neighbors and the 27 neighborhood consists of the
full 33 region. From a diﬀerent perspective, this approach
of averaging among multiple predictions per voxel can also
be seen as an ensemble method.
2.4. Spectral Brain Coordinates
A downside of patch-based segmentation techniques is
the loss of spatial context (Wachinger et al., 2016). Con-
sidering the symmetry of the brain, it is easy to confuse
patches across hemispheres. In addition, context provides
valuable information for structures with low tissue con-
trast.
To increase the spatial information, we augment
patches with location information. Previous approaches
have, for instance, used Cartesian coordinates (Wachinger
et al., 2014) or distances to centroids (Brebisson and Mon-
tana, 2015). We propose spectral brain coordinates as an
alternative parameterization of the brain volume, which
we obtain by computing eigenfunctions of the Laplace-
Beltrami operator inside the 3D brain mask. Eigenfunc-
tions of the cortex surface have previously been used for
brain matching (Lombaert et al., 2013b,a) and eigenvalues
as shape descriptors (Wachinger et al., 2015b). In contrast,
we compute spectral coordinates on the solid (volume) and
use it as an intrinsic coordinate system for learning. On
the brain mask, we solve the Laplacian eigenvalue problem
∆f = −λf
(4)
with the Laplace-Beltrami operator ∆, eigenvalues λ and
eigenfunctions f. We approximate the Laplace-Beltrami
operator with the graph Laplacian (Chung, 1997).
The
weights in the adjacency matrix W between two points i
and j are set to 1 if both points are neighbors and within
the brain mask, otherwise they are set to 0. This yields a
sparse matrix W. The Laplacian operator on a graph is
L = D −W
Dii =
X
j
Wij
(5)
with the node degree matrix D.
We compute the ﬁrst three non-constant eigenvectors of
the Laplacian, where each eigenvector corresponds to a 3D
image and the ensemble of eigenvectors forms the spectral
brain coordinates. Fig. 2 illustrates the ﬁrst three eigen-
vectors, which roughly represent vibrations along primary
coordinate axes. The consistency of the coloring across the
four subjects highlights the potential for an accordant en-
coding of location information. Note that the eigenvectors
are isometry invariant to the object, meaning that they
do not change with rotations or translations. Hence they
present an intrinsic parameterization independent of the
brain orientation or location. This independence can be
seen from the graph construction encoded in the adjacency
matrix. The adjacency structure only depends on neigh-
borhood relationships, which do not change with image
translation or rotation.
Subject	
  1
Subject	
  2
Subject	
  3
Subject	
  4
First	
  EF
Sagittal
Second	
  EF
Coronal
Third	
  EF
Axial
Figure 2: Illustration of ﬁrst three eigenfunctions (EF) for four sub-
jects.
Each function is shown on the anatomical view that best
highlights the gradient.
Depending on the object to parameterize and the num-
ber of eigenfunctions, ﬂipping due to sign ambiguity or
swapping of eigenfunctions may hinder a direct compar-
ison. Lombaert et al. (2013a) proposed an approach for
spectrum ordering. In our application, with only comput-
ing the ﬁrst three eigenfunctions of the brain mask, no
correction was required. Note that we could also compute
more than three eigenfunctions to increase the amount of
spatial information in the DCNN, which may require a re-
ordering strategy. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the ﬁrst application of eigenfunctions of the 3D solid for
deﬁning an intrinsic brain coordinate system.
Following the idea of providing the neural net with all
the data and letting it pick the relevant information, we
input next to the three spectral coordinates also the three
Cartesian coordinates. We normalized the Cartesian co-
ordinates, by subtracting the center of mass of the brain
mask to make them more comparable across scans.
2.5. Fully Connected Conditional Random Field
The DCNN prediction results in a probabilistic brain
segmentation. To obtain the ﬁnal segmentation, we use
maximum a posteriori inference on a conditional ran-
dom ﬁeld (CRF). The CRF allows for formulating po-
tentials that ensure label agreement between close vox-
els with smoothness terms and follow the image content
with appearance terms. Traditionally, short-range CRFs
with connections between neighboring locations have been
used (Wang et al., 2013a), which can however yield exces-
sive smoothing of organ boundaries. In contrast, the fully
connected CRF deﬁnes pairwise potentials on all pairs of
image locations. The vast number of pairwise potentials to
be deﬁned makes conventional inference impractical. We
use the highly eﬃcient approximate inference algorithm
proposed by Kr¨ahenb¨uhl and Koltun (2011) to infer a fully
connected CRF model on the entire 3D brain. Key for the
eﬃcient computation is the deﬁnition of pairwise edge po-
tentials by a linear combination of Gaussian kernels.
5

Epoch
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Accuracy
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Center
Left
Right
Top
Bottom
Front
Back
Epoch
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Loss
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 3: Accuracy and loss for DeepNAT during training for 25 epochs. The accuracy is shown for all seven tasks, which predict the label
of the center voxel and neighbors.
The inference algorithm uses mean ﬁeld approximation
that is iteratively optimized with a series of message pass-
ing steps. Importantly, the message passing updates for
a fully decomposable mean ﬁeld approximation is identi-
cal to Gaussian ﬁltering in bilateral space. With the help
of eﬃcient approximate high-dimensional ﬁltering (Adams
et al., 2010), the computational complexity of message
passing is reduced from quadratic to linear in the num-
ber of variables.
The Gibbs energy of the CRF model is
E(y) =
X
i
ψu(yi) +
X
i≤j
ψp(yi, yj),
(6)
with the label assignment y and i, j ranging from 1 to
the number of voxels.
The unary potential ψu(yi) =
−log P(yi) is deﬁned as the negative log likelihood of the
label assignment probability from the multi-task DCNN in
Eq.(3). We use the pairwise potential from (Kr¨ahenb¨uhl
and Koltun, 2011), which allows for eﬃcient inference on
fully connected graphs. Given image intensities Ii and Ij
with locations pi and pj, the pairwise potential is
ψp(yi, yj) = µij
"
v1e
−
∥pi−pj ∥2
2σ2α
−
(Ii−Ij )2
2σ2
β
+ v2e
−
∥pi−pj ∥2
2σ2γ
#
.
(7)
The ﬁrst exponential term models the appearance where
nearby voxels with similar intensity are likely to show the
same structure, controlled by spatial σα and intensity σβ
parameters; this corresponds to a bilateral kernel.
The
second exponential term models the smoothness by con-
sidering spatial proximity, controlled by σγ. The appear-
ance and smoothness terms are weighted by parameters,
v1 and v2, respectively.
For the label compatibility the
Potts model is used, µij = [yi ̸= yj].
3. Results
We evaluate the segmentation on the dataset of the
MICCAI Multi-Atlas Labeling challenge1 (Landman and
Warﬁeld, 2012), which consists of T1-weighted MRI scans
from 30 subjects of OASIS (Marcus et al., 2007). Man-
ual segmentations were provided by Neuromorphometrics,
Inc.2 under academic subscription. The images are 1 mm
isotropic with a slice size of 256 × 256 pixels and the num-
ber of slices varying above 256. To improve the estimation
of the roughly 2.7 million parameters in the network, we
increase the number of training scans from 15 in the chal-
lenge to 20. The remaining 10 scans are used for testing.
We compare our results to PICSL (Wang et al., 2012),
the winner of the MICCAI labeling challenge that uses
deformable registration, label fusion, and corrective learn-
ing. In addition, we compare to spatial STAPLE (Asman
and Landman, 2012), which is an extension of the popu-
lar simultaneous truth and performance level estimation
(STAPLE) method (Warﬁeld et al., 2004).
It is among
the best performing methods in the challenge and allows
for a spatially varying performance of raters, i.e., regis-
tered atlas. Finally, we compare to the segmentation with
FreeSurfer v5.3 (Dale and Sereno, 1993; Dale et al., 1999;
Fischl et al., 1999a,b, 2002). In contrast to the other meth-
ods, FreeSurfer comes with its own atlas and does not
use the training data. We measure the segmentation ac-
curacy with the Dice volume overlap score (Dice, 1945)
between the automatic segmentation S and manual seg-
mentations ¯S
D(S, ¯S) = 2 |S ∩¯S|
|S| + | ¯S|.
(8)
We select a patch size of 23 × 23 × 23 as a trade-oﬀ
between a large enough image region for the label clas-
siﬁcation and memory consumption as well as processing
1https://masi.vuse.vanderbilt.edu/workshop2012
2http://Neuromorphometrics.com/
6

DeepNAT
Only Spectral
Only Cartesian
No Coordinates
One Step
27 Tasks
1 Task
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Method
Median Dice
DeepNAT
0.897
Only Spectral
0.895
Only Cartesian
0.892
No Coordinates
0.878
One Step
0.879
27 Tasks
0.885
1 Task
0.820
Figure 4: Segmentation results in Dice for diﬀerent conﬁgurations
of DeepNAT. In the ﬁgure, red line indicates the median, the boxes
extend to the 25th and 75th percentiles, and the whiskers reach to
the most extreme values not considered outliers (crosses). The table
lists the median Dice for the diﬀerent variations in the DeepNAT
conﬁguration.
speed.
DeepNAT is based on the Caﬀe framework (Jia
et al., 2014).
Gradients are computed on minibatches,
where each gradient update is the average of the individ-
ual gradients of the patches in the minibatch. The size of
the minibatch is constrained by the memory of the GPU,
where a size of 2,048 ﬁlls up most of the 12GB GPU mem-
ory on the NVIDIA Tesla K40 and TITAN X used in the
experiments. Large batch sizes are advisable as they bet-
ter approximate the true gradient.
We train the network with stochastic gradient descent
and the “poly” scheme (also applied by Chen et al. (2016))
using a base learning rate of 0.01.
The actual learning
rate at each iteration is the base learning rate multiplied
by (1−iteration/max iteration)0.9, promoting larger steps
at the beginning of the training period and smaller steps
towards the end. For the ﬁrst network, we randomly sam-
ple 30,000 patches from the foreground and background in
DeepNAT
DeepNATcrf
FreeSurfer
Spatial Staple
PICSL
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Method
Median Dice
DeepNAT
0.910
DeepNATcrf
0.920
FreeSurfer
0.819
Spatial STAPLE
0.897
PICSL
0.912
Figure 5:
Segmentation results in Dice for DeepNAT and Deep-
NATcrf together with alternative segmentation methods: FreeSurfer,
spatial STAPLE, and PICSL. In the ﬁgure, red lines indicate the
median, the boxes extend to the 25th and 75th percentiles, and the
whiskers reach to the most extreme values not considered outliers
(crosses).
The table lists the median Dice for the diﬀerent ap-
proaches. Note that the results for DeepNAT vary from Fig. 4 due
to longer training.
each training image, yielding 1.2 million training patches.
For the second network, we randomly sample at most 3,000
patches per structure, where we double the number of
patches for the white matter and gray matter to account
for the higher variability in these classes, yielding a total
of about 1.1 million training patches. We apply inhomo-
geneity correction and intensity normalization from the
FreeSurfer pipeline to the MRI scans. In light of a small
number of training images with manual segmentations, the
standardization yields higher homogeneity in the dataset
and should therefore facilitate the inference task. We set
the CRF parameter to standard settings v1 = v2 = 3,
σα = σγ = 3, and σβ = 10 (Chen et al., 2016).
Fig-
ure 3 shows the accuracy and loss during training for the
second network.
For the accuracy, we have a diﬀerent
line for each of the seven tasks. Notably, the center task
achieves the highest accuracy, where the remaining tasks
which predict labels for neighboring voxels show compa-
rable results. This is insofar surprising that all tasks have
7

DeepNAT
DeepNATcrf
FreeSurfer
Spatial Staple
PICSL
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
Dice
Method
Mean Dice
DeepNAT
0.894
DeepNATcrf
0.906
FreeSurfer
0.790
Spatial STAPLE
0.890
PICSL
0.904
Figure 6:
Segmentation results in Dice for DeepNAT and Deep-
NATcrf together with alternative segmentation methods: FreeSurfer,
spatial STAPLE, and PICSL. The bars show the mean Dice score and
the lines show the standard error. The table lists the mean Dice for
the diﬀerent approaches.
the same weight in the network and it suggests that it
is intrinsically easier for the network to predict the patch
center. Overall, we observe a fast convergence to a rela-
tively high classiﬁcation results, where prolonged training
yields a small but steady improvement of the accuracy.
First, we evaluate the impact of the proposed contribu-
tions in DeepNAT on the segmentation accuracy: (i) coor-
dinates, (ii) hierarchical architecture, and (iii) multi-task
learning. We perform the comparison by using the Deep-
NAT network, which uses seven tasks and combines spec-
tral and Cartesian coordinates.
We modify one of the
network settings while keeping the remaining conﬁgura-
tion. Figure 4 shows the segmentation results, where the
statistics are computed across all of the 25 brain struc-
tures. Each setting is trained for 8 epochs, which takes
about 1 day. The segmentation of a new scan at test time
takes about 1 hour. With respect to coordinates, we ob-
serve a clear drop when using no coordinates.
Spectral
coordinates perform slightly better than Cartesian coordi-
nates, where the combination of both in DeepNAT yields
the highest accuracy. Next we compare the hierarchical
approach to directly segmenting the 25 structures in one
step, where the one step approach yields a lower accuracy.
Finally, we evaluate the importance of multi-task learning.
We compare with single task prediction, which only pre-
dicts the center voxel of the patch, and with the prediction
of a larger number of tasks, 27. The results show in com-
parison to the seven tasks in DeepNAT a strong decrease
in accuracy for the single task and a small decrease in ac-
curacy for 27 tasks. We test the signiﬁcance of DeepNAT
to each of the variants with the pairwise non-parametric
Wilcoxon signed-rank test (two-sided). The improvement
of DeepNAT over only spectral is signiﬁcant with p < 0.05
and the improvement over all other variants is signiﬁcant
with p < 0.001.
We further evaluated diﬀerent parameters for the opti-
mization of the network. The reduction of the base learn-
ing rate to 0.005 leads to a median Dice score of 0.888.
The usage of a minibatch size of 512 yields a median Dice
score of 0.895. The application of the ADAGRAD (Duchi
et al., 2011) stochastic optimization results in a median
Dice score of 0.881, compared to 0.897 in DeepNAT.
For the second evaluation, we train DeepNAT for 25
epchos, which took about 3 days and compare it to alter-
native segmentation approaches: FreeSurfer, spatial STA-
PLE, and PICSL. Figures 5 shows the results over all 25
brain structures with the median and percentiles and Fig-
ure 6 shows the mean and standard error. DeepNATcrf
denotes the estimation of the ﬁnal segmentation with the
fully connected CRF, where for DeepNAT we infer the seg-
mentation independently for each voxel with weighted ma-
jority voting. The mean and median Dice for DeepNAT is
higher than for FreeSurfer or spatial STAPLE. The CRF
yields an increase in Dice by about 0.01 and the overall
highest segmentation accuracy. Figure 7 shows detailed
results for all of the 25 brain structures.
Across all structures, DeepNATcrf yields signiﬁcantly
higher Dice scores in comparison to DeepNAT (p < 0.001),
FreeSurfer (p < 0.001), and STAPLE (p < 0.001). The
diﬀerence to PICSL (p = 0.27) is not signiﬁcant.
We
further explore the diﬀerence between PICSL and Deep-
NATcrf on a per structure basis. Here DeepNATcrf yields
signiﬁcantly higher values for left cerebral gray matter
(p < 0.005), right cerebral gray matter (p < 0.005), right
cerebral white matter (p < 0.05), right cerebellar white
matter (p < 0.05), and left caudate (p < 0.05) while
PICSL yields signiﬁcantly higher values for left amygdala
(p < 0.01), right caudate (p < 0.05), and left hippocampus
(p < 0.01). The diﬀerent results for the left and right cau-
date are due to variations in median Dice in PICSL (left:
0.903, right 0.910) compared to more consistent results
across hemispheres for DeepNATcrf (left:
0.906, right:
0.908).
We note a lower Dice score for the amygdala in
comparison to other brain structures across all methods.
While the amygdala is a challenging structure to segment,
also the small size can entail a lower Dice score.
Figure 8 shows example segmentations for FreeSurfer,
PICSL, and DeepNATcrf together with the manual seg-
mentation. The results for PICSL and DeepNATcrf are
very similar to the manual segmentation, while FreeSurer
8

Cerebral
Gray	
  Matter
DeepNAT
DeepNATcrf
FreeSurfer
Spatial	
  Staple
PICSL	
  
Figure 7: Segmentation results in Dice for DeepNAT, DeepNATcrf, FreeSurfer, spatial STAPLE, and PICSL for 25 brain structures. Centerline
indicates the median, the boxes extend to the 25th and 75th percentiles, and the whiskers reach to the most extreme values not considered
outliers (crosses). We are grateful to Bennett Landmann for 3D renderings of brain structures.
shows stronger variations, consistent with the quantitative
results. Figures 9 and 10 illustrate zoomed in brain seg-
mentations for structures with signiﬁcant diﬀerences be-
tween PICSL and DeepNATcrf. In Figure 9, segmenta-
tions of the cerebral white and gray matter as well as the
cerebellar white and gray matter are more accurate with
DeepNATcrf, whereas segmentations of the hippocampus
and amygdala are more accurate with PICSL. Figure 10
illustrates the segmentation of the caudate. The segmen-
tation is illustrated by means of a segmentation map that
highlights agreement and disagreement with the manual
segmentation.
Overall, DeepNATcrf is more consistent
with the manual segmentation.
The convolutional layers in the DCNN can be inter-
preted as feature extractor from the image patch and the
fully connected layers as classiﬁer.
To get a better un-
derstanding of the feature extraction, we show the learned
convolutional ﬁlters of the ﬁrst layer in Figure 11. The ﬁrst
layer consists of 32 ﬁlters of size 7 × 7 × 7. The learned
features are similar to 3D Gabor ﬁlters and 3D blobs. This
is consistent with previous results on 2D DCNNs that re-
port 2D Gabor ﬁlters and 2D color blobs on the ﬁrst layer
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Yosinski et al., 2014). We do not
include visualizations of ﬁlters from the second and third
convolutional layers as they are less comprehensible due to
the smaller ﬁlter size and the more abstract representation.
Finally, we reduce the training set from 20 to 15 and
increase the testing set from 10 to 15 to have the identical
setup to the labeling challenge. We employ data augmen-
tation with jittering to counter the reduction in training
data and increase the training time to 50 epochs.
Fig-
ures 12 shows the results over all 25 brain structures with
the median and percentiles and Figure 13 shows the mean
9

Figure 8: Example segmentations for FreeSurfer, PICSL, and DeepNATcrf together with the corresponding manual segmentation. FreeSurfer
shows the largest variations with respect to the manual segmentation, particularly in cortical structures and the brainstem. The results of
PICSL and DeepNATcrf are highly similar to the manual segmentation.
and standard error. We note a slight overall decrease in
accuracy across all methods, compared to Figures 5 and 6,
as a result of modifying the testing data. For 15 train-
ing and 15 test images, DeepNATcrf yields signiﬁcantly
higher Dice scores in comparison to DeepNAT (p < 0.001),
FreeSurfer (p < 0.001), and STAPLE (p < 0.001), whereas
the diﬀerence to PICSL (p = 0.06) is not signiﬁcant. The
median of DeepNATcrf is 0.007 Dice points higher than
PICSL, whereas the mean Dice points are the same. The
decreasing gap between DeepNATcrf and PICSL in testing
accuracy is likely associated with the the reduction of the
training set for learning the network.
4. Discussion
DeepNAT architecture:
One of the biggest chal-
lenges when working with deep convolutional neural net-
works is the vast number of decisions to take for the spec-
iﬁcation of the architecture. Many of the decisions are a
trade-oﬀbetween additional discriminative power of the
network and training complexity as well as memory re-
quirements. For instance, we do not use a batch normal-
ization after the ﬁrst convolution to avoid the high memory
consumption. An alternative design for the convolutional
stage would have been to work with smaller kernels of size 3
and to build a deeper hierarchy, similar to VGG (Simonyan
and Zisserman, 2014). We have not fully explored this di-
rection, also due to long training times, but initial results
did not look very promising.
In this work, we used 3D convolutional neural networks
for brain segmentation. 3D DCNNs have been used for
medical applications before (Li et al., 2014; Brebisson and
Montana, 2015), however, the majority of work is on 2D
or 2.5D applications.
Given that we deal with the seg-
mentation of 3D MRI scans, it seems natural to work with
a 3D network for the classiﬁcation. Yet, working with a
3D network yields an increase in complexity because the
convolutional ﬁlters and the internal representations have
an additional dimension. By employing batch normaliza-
tion, dropout, and the Xavier initialization, we are able
to train 3D networks with more layers than previous 3D
DCNNs, where deeper networks can model more complex
relationships between input and output data.
In many image segmentation tasks, we are facing the
challenge of dealing with a large background class that
surrounds the structures of interest. The background typ-
ically consists of multiple structures that are of no fur-
ther interest to the application and merged into the back-
ground class. For multi-atlas segmentation, we have re-
ported that the dominant background class can cause an
under-segmentation of the target structure, because it in-
troduces a bias in the label estimation (Wachinger and
Golland, 2014).
Here, we address the class imbalance
problem with a hierarchical approach by ﬁrst separating
foreground from background and then identifying the in-
dividual brain structures on the foreground. Our results
show the beneﬁt of this cascaded approach in comparison
to directly segmenting brain structures.
Location information: A drawback of patch-based
segmentation methods is the loss of the larger image con-
text, given that brain scans from diﬀerent subjects are
overall fairly similar. Context information can be crucial
for diﬀerentiating small image regions across the brain that
can appear very similar due to symmetries. To retain con-
text information, we include location information in the
network. The results demonstrate that the addition of co-
ordinates leads to a substantial increase in segmentation
accuracy. In this work, we introduced spectral brain coor-
dinates, a parameterization of the brain solid with Laplace
eigenfunctions, which yielded an improvement over Carte-
sian coordinates. Interestingly, the combination of spectral
and Cartesian coordinates resulted in a further increase in
segmentation accuracy, indicating that they contain com-
plementary information.
10

DeepNATcrf
PICSL
Manual
Hippocampus
Amygdala
Figure 9: Example segmentations for PICSL and DeepNATcrf to-
gether with the corresponding manual segmentation.
Overall, the
segmentation quality of PICSL and DeepNATcrf is high, as already
indicated by the quantitative results. First row: Segmentation of
the left cerebral white and gray matter region.
DeepNATcrf bet-
ter matches the manual segmentation in the center of the image,
where PICSL produces an isolated region, see arrows. PICSL and
DeepNATcrf produce an error at the bottom left part of the image,
however the error is consistent among both approaches and the ﬁne
white matter region may have been skipped by the manual rater.
Second row:
Segmentation of the right cerebellar white and gray
matter. DeepNATcrf produces a more accurate segmentation of the
gray matter region in the center of the image and better captures the
thin white matter region at the bottom, as indicated by the arrows.
Third row: Segmentation of the hippocampus and amygdala. PICSL
produces a slightly more accurate segmentation of both structures.
Multi-task learning: Multi-task learning has several
applications in machine learning, but we have not yet seen
its application for image segmentation.
Instead of only
predicting the label of the center voxel, we simultaneously
learn and predict also the labels of the neighboring voxels.
Our results show that multi-task learning yields a signif-
icant improvement over single-task segmentation for all
brain structures. This is consistent with results from non-
local means segmentation, where results from the multi-
point method showed improvements over the single-point
approach (Rousseau et al., 2011).
Multi-task learning
leads to several predictions per voxel, which can generate
more robust segmentations by overruling incorrect predic-
tions. The tasks are learned by sharing the same network,
with only the last layer specializing on a single task. This
causes only a small increase in the overall number of pa-
rameters. We have experienced a faster convergence of the
multi-task network compared to the single-task network,
which may be attributed to the enforcement of promis-
ing gradient directions from all simultaneous tasks. This
is consistent with previous observations from multi-task
PICSL
Segmentation
DeepNATcrf
Figure 10: Example labeling of the left caudate, shown in dark blue
on the segmentation mask. Segmentation masks on the middle and
right panel show correct segmentations in white and segmentation
errors in gray. DeepNATcrf shows a more accurate segmentation on
the top left, center left, and bottom of the caudate.
learning for sequence to sequence modeling (Luong et al.,
2015).
We observe that the center task has a slightly but consis-
tently higher accuracy than the surrounding tasks. This is
surprising because no priority or higher weighting was as-
signed to the center task. One possible explanation could
be that the center location has a larger context but when
considering that a patch size of 23 was used, this should
not have a strong impact. It rather seems that the convo-
lutional stage of the network with convolution ﬁlters and
max-pooling better captures the information for predicting
the center label.
Comparison to state-of-the-art: In our results, we
compare to FreeSurfer and two methods from the MICCAI
labeling challenge, PICSL and spatial STAPLE. FreeSurfer
is one of the most commonly used tools for brain anatomy
reconstruction in practice. It performed worse than the
other methods in the comparison, however, all other meth-
ods used the provided training dataset, whereas FreeSurfer
uses its own atlas. Dataset bias may therefore play a role.
In addition, the protocol for the manual labeling of the
scans may not be entirely consistent. PICSL was the win-
ner of the segmentation challenge and spatial STAPLE
was among the best performing methods. Both of these
approaches are based on a multi-atlas approach, where all
atlas images are registered to the test image.
A single
registration takes about 2 hours of runtime, so that the
registration of all 15 training images takes about 30 hours.
The registration can be time-consuming for many image
pairs, consequently scaling such methods to larger atlases
seems challenging. In contrast, the inclusion of additional
training data does not aﬀect testing time for DeepNAT,
which is about 1 hour.
We trained the ﬁnal DeepNAT
model for about three days on the GPU, but also PICSL
is based on an extensive training of the corrective classiﬁer,
which was reported with 330 CPU hours. The runtime of
DeepNAT could be further improved by using cuDNN and
accounting for overlapping patches.
The results of DeepNAT resulted in statistically signif-
icant improvements over FreeSurfer and spatial STAPLE.
DeepNAT in combination with the CRF yielded the over-
11

Figure 11: The ﬁgure shows 3D ﬁlters that were learned by the network in the ﬁrst convolutional layer. The ﬁrst conv layer consists of 32
ﬁlters of size 7 × 7 × 7, as described in the architecture in Table 1. We show all slices from the 7 × 7 × 7 ﬁlter kernel vertically, so seven times
a 7 × 7 patch. A number of these ﬁlter kernels resemble Gabor ﬁlters. The kernel patters further resemble 3D blob ﬁlters but also express
more complex image patterns.
all highest median Dice score, but the improvement over
PICSL is not statistically signiﬁcant. Performing tests on
the per structure level resulted in advantages for Deep-
NAT for cortical structures, which may be explained by
the diﬃculty in registering complex folding patterns. For
subcortical structures, the results were not as clear. The
variation in signiﬁcance for the left and right caudate is
driven by varying results of PICSL, but the source of the
diﬀerence is not clear as no preference to one of the hemi-
spheres seems to be given in PICSL.
Conditional Random Field:
Our results demon-
strate the beneﬁt of inferring the ﬁnal, discrete segmenta-
tion from the probabilistic network outcome with the fully
connected conditional random ﬁeld. Previous applications
of the fully connected CRF have been for 2D applications.
The pairwise constraints formulated in the CRF ensure
label agreement between close voxels. In the appearance
term of the pairwise potential, we use the diﬀerence of
voxel intensities as a measure of similarity. Such similarity
terms have been extensively studied in spectral clustering
for image segmentation (Shi and Malik, 2000), where the
concept of the intervening contour was proposed (Fowlkes
et al., 2003) and adapted for medical image segmenta-
tion (Wachinger et al., 2015a).
Integrating the concept
of intervening contours into the pairwise potentials of the
CRF seems promising to further improve segmentation ac-
curacy. Note that we do not train the CRF, so while Deep-
NAT is an end-to-end learning system, DeepNATcrf is not.
Training Data: One of the big issues when using deep
learning in the medical domain is the access to a large
enough training dataset. The training set used in our ex-
periments seems small for training a deep convolutional
neural network with millions of parameters compared to
the millions of images from ImageNet typically used in
computer vision.
However, DeepNAT does not directly
predict the segmentation of the entire image but only of
image patches. Working with patches makes the training
feasible as each scan contains millions of patches that can
be extracted for learning. In the future, it would be inter-
esting to further explore ideas about directly estimating
the segmentation of the entire image without the reduc-
tion to patches. This can lead to a drastic speed-up, due
to the computational overhead when working with over-
lapping patches. Yet, such an approach would require a
12

DeepNAT
DeepNATcrf
FreeSurfer
Spatial Staple
PICSL
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Method
Median Dice
DeepNAT
0.906
DeepNATcrf
0.913
FreeSurfer
0.817
Spatial STAPLE
0.892
PICSL
0.906
Figure 12: Segmentation results similar to Fig. 5 for decreasing the
training set in DeepNAT from 20 to 15 images and increasing the
testing data for all methods from 10 to 15. In the ﬁgure, red lines in-
dicate the median, the boxes extend to the 25th and 75th percentiles,
and the whiskers reach to the most extreme values not considered
outliers (crosses). The table lists the median Dice for the diﬀerent
approaches.
much larger number of images with manual segmentations
for training, which are very time consuming to create.
Due to the limited size of the dataset, we have not
split between validation and testing set. We have directly
compared the diﬀerent contributions in DeepNAT (coor-
dinates, hierarchy, multi-task) on the testing set, see Fig-
ure 4. Consequently, there is a risk of overﬁtting on the
testing data. However, these comparisons involved con-
ceptual design decisions and not a detailed parameter ﬁne-
tuning, so we consider the risk of overﬁtting to be limited.
Further, the good performance of DeepNAT persisted af-
ter reducing the training dataset to 15 scans and increasing
the testing dataset to 15 scans.
DeepNAT may be speciﬁcally adapted for segmenting
young, old, or diseased brains by ﬁne-tuning. The large
potential of ﬁne-tuning pre-trained models for deep learn-
ing has been shown previously. In the medical imaging
domain, Gao et al. (2016) ﬁne-tuned weights trained on
ImageNet to detect lung disease in CT images. Yosinski
et al. (2014) show that transferability of features, e.g., con-
DeepNAT
DeepNATcrf
FreeSurfer
Spatial Staple
PICSL
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
Dice
Method
Mean Dice
DeepNAT
0.891
DeepNATcrf
0.897
FreeSurfer
0.788
Spatial STAPLE
0.878
PICSL
0.897
Figure 13: Segmentation results in Dice for DeepNAT and Deep-
NATcrf together with alternative segmentation methods: FreeSurfer,
spatial STAPLE, and PICSL. The bars show the mean Dice score and
the lines show the standard error. The table lists the mean Dice for
the diﬀerent approaches.
vnets trained on ImageNet and then ﬁne-tuned to other
tasks, depends on how general those features are; the
transferability gap increases as the distance between tasks
increases and features become less general. Notably, these
studies operate on 2D images and we are not aware of work
that ﬁne-tunes networks with volumetric input, where the
pre-trained models of DeepNAT can provide a ﬁrst step in
this direction.
5. Conclusion
We presented DeepNAT, a 3D deep convolutional neu-
ral network for brain segmentation of structural MRI
scans. The main contributions were (i) multi-task learn-
ing, (ii) hierarchical segmentation, (iii) spectral coordi-
nates, and (iv) a 3D fully connected conditional random
ﬁeld. Multi-task learning simultaneously learns the label
prediction in a small neighborhood. Spectral coordinates
form an intrinsic parameterization of the brain volume
and provide context information to patches. The hierar-
chical approach accounts for the class imbalance between
the background class and separate brain structures. And
ﬁnally, the conditional random ﬁeld ensures label agree-
13

ment between close voxels. We train the 3D network by
integrating latest advances in deep learning to initialize
weights, to correct for internal covariate shift, and to limit
overﬁtting for training such complex models. Our results
demonstrated the high potential of convolutional neural
networks for segmenting neuroanatomy.
All in all, image segmentation is a well-suited task
for convolutional neural nets, which are arguably at the
forefront of the the deep learning wave. The segmenta-
tion accuracy of convolutional neural nets is likely to fur-
ther improve in the future, given the increasing amount
of training data, methodological advances for deep net-
works, and progress in GPU hardware. We believe that
the purely learning-based approach with neural networks
oﬀers unique opportunities for tailoring segmentations to
young, old, or diseased brains. While it may be diﬃcult to
obtain enough training data on such speciﬁc applications,
ﬁne-tuning a pre-trained network seems like a promising
avenue.
Our extensions to caﬀe, network deﬁnitions and trained
networks are available for download:
https://tjklein.github.io/DeepNAT/.
6. Acknowledgement
Support for this research was provided in part by
the Humboldt foundation, SAP SE, F¨orderprogramm f¨ur
Forschung und Lehre, the Bavarian State Ministry of Edu-
cation, Science and the Arts in the framework of the Cen-
tre Digitisation.Bavaria (ZD.B), the National Cancer Insti-
tute (1K25CA181632-01), the Massachusetts Alzheimer’s
Disease Research Center (5P50AG005134), the MGH Neu-
rology Clinical Trials Unit, the Harvard NeuroDiscovery
Center, Genentech (G-40819), and the NVIDIA Corpora-
tion.
7. References
