arXiv:1105.0974v1  [cs.AI]  5 May 2011
GANC: Greedy Agglomerative Normalized Cut
Seyed Salim Tabatabaei1, Mark Coates2, Michael Rabbat3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, McConnell Engineering Building,
3480 University Street, Montreal, Quebec, H3A 2A7.
Abstract
This paper describes a graph clustering algorithm that aims to minimize the normalized cut
criterion and has a model order selection procedure. The performance of the proposed algo-
rithm is comparable to spectral approaches in terms of minimizing normalized cut. However,
unlike spectral approaches, the proposed algorithm scales to graphs with millions of nodes
and edges. The algorithm consists of three components that are processed sequentially: a
greedy agglomerative hierarchical clustering procedure, model order selection, and a local
reﬁnement.
For a graph of n nodes and O(n) edges, the computational complexity of the algorithm
is O(n log2 n), a major improvement over the O(n3) complexity of spectral methods. Ex-
periments are performed on real and synthetic networks to demonstrate the scalability of
the proposed approach, the eﬀectiveness of the model order selection procedure, and the
performance of the proposed algorithm in terms of minimizing the normalized cut metric.
Keywords:
Graph Clustering, Normalized Cut, Model Order Selection, Large Scale
1. Introduction
Clustering or partitioning of nodes in networks or graphs is an important task that has
many applications in a diverse range of ﬁelds. It has been used for many years to study
social networks [1] and continues to be employed in the ﬁeld of sociology to explore social
interactions. More recently it has been employed in the study of biochemical networks [2, 3],
biological neural networks [4, 5], and transport and communication networks.
There are three components to the clustering task: (i) choosing the number of clusters;
(ii) selecting a criterion that measures the merit of each candidate cluster allocation; and
(iii) identifying an algorithm that searches for the optimal clustering. Some performance
criteria can be used both to select the number of clusters and choose the clustering, e.g.,
modularity [6] or information-theoretic criteria based on the minimum description length [7].
There is no universally-accepted performance criterion and indeed the most appropri-
ate criterion can vary depending on the application domain and the goal of the clustering.
Modularity, for example, focuses on network structure and places primary value on direct
1Corresponding
author.
Tel.:
+1
514
677
0056;
fax:
+1
514
398
4470;

connections between nodes. On the other hand, clustering algorithms based on Markov ran-
dom walks [7, 8] also value indirect connections and network ﬂow. In this paper we select the
normalized cut criterion [9], which simultaneously encourages intra-cluster similarity while
penalizing inter-cluster similarities. Methods based on this criterion have been employed
successfully in a wide range of applications [5, 8–12]. The normalized cut criterion is related
to the conductance of the underlying graph [13]. Furthermore an implicit duality between
normalized cut and normalized association exists; the former encourages clusters that are less
connected to each other and the latter encourages clusters whose nodes are well-connected.
When partitioning a graph into clusters, the cut associated with cluster i is the sum
of the weights of the edges between nodes in i and nodes in other clusters.
Intuitively,
minimizing the maximum cut (or minimizing the average cut) identiﬁes clusters that have
the weakest ties between them. The problem is that the minimum cut will often be achieved
by identifying many very small clusters, which provides little insight into the underlying
structure of the graph. The normalized cut metric was introduced by Shi and Malik in [9]
to address this shortcoming. It normalizes each cut by dividing it by the total weight of
the associated cluster. This has the eﬀect of penalizing very small clusters because they
generally have low total weight.
Minimizing normalized cut is an NP-complete problem [9]. Shi and Malik illustrated
that the minimization could be relaxed to form a generalized eigenvalue system, whose (dis-
cretized) solution corresponds to the minimum normalized cut. This has led to the develop-
ment of a spectral clustering; it involves calculating eigenvectors of the identiﬁed system. In
order to identify a partitioning of n nodes to k clusters, some techniques perform recursive
bipartitioning [9], and thus require the repeated identiﬁcation of two eigenvectors. Other
approaches strive to identify k clusters directly by calculating the k smallest eigenvectors of
the underlying graph Laplacian. One of the concerns about these methods is computational
complexity; even when employing fast eigendecomposition methods such as the Lanczos
iterative technique, complexity grows rapidly with n.
In this paper, we propose an agglomerative clustering algorithm that strives to minimize
the normalized cut (or equivalently, maximize the normalized association).
It is a fast,
scalable algorithm, with almost linear complexity in the number of nodes for relatively
sparse graphs. Performance evaluation using a range of benchmark and observed graphs
indicates that the algorithm identiﬁes partitionings that have average normalized association
metrics as large as those of the partitions identiﬁed by the spectral clustering techniques.
We also propose a method for identifying important partitioning scales which can be used
to automatically select the number of clusters. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
model order selection method applicable to the normalized association maximization that
is scalable. Through our experiments, we will show how eﬀective our model order selection
criterion is for both synthetic and real networks.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 the major approaches for mini-
mization of normalized cut and model order selection are reviewed. The problem formulation
of normalized association is re-stated in Section 3. Our proposed algorithm is detailed in
Section 4. The proposed algorithm is then compared to the state-of-the-art clustering algo-
rithms in Section 5. The concluding remarks are provided in Section 6.
2

2. Related Work
The identiﬁcation of clusters in graphs and networks has received signiﬁcant attention. In
our review we focus on a representative set of algorithms that minimize the normalized cut
with or without spectral decomposition. We also review the existing methods for selecting
the number of clusters.
2.1. Optimization of Normalized Cut
Spectral partitioning of graphs was ﬁrst proposed by Donath and Hoﬀman in the 1970’s [14].
Interest in the techniques was renewed in the 1990’s when Pothen et al. described an algo-
rithm for bi-partitioning using the Fiedler vector [15]. Hendrickson et al. and Karypis et al.
contributed with multilevel algorithms for more eﬃcient spectral partitioning [16, 17].
The normalized cut metric was introduced by Shi and Malik in [9]. They demonstrated
how the bipartitioning task, with the objective of minimizing the normalized cut, could
be relaxed to construct a generalized eigenvalue problem, and was thus related to spectral
partitioning. The eigenvector corresponding to the second-smallest eigenvalue of the graph
Laplacian identiﬁes the bipartitioning (the real values in the eigenvector must be mapped to
two discrete values for partitioning). This established the connection between minimization
of normalized cut and spectral partitioning. Shi and Malik proposed a recursive bipartition-
ing scheme in order to partition a graph into k clusters. In [18], Meila and Shi proposed an
algorithm that calculates k eigenvectors (thereby associating k real values with each node
in the graph) and then uses a clustering algorithm, such as k-means, to do the partitioning
in ℜk. Ng et al. observed in [19] that the algorithm in [18] is susceptible to failure when
there is substantial variation in the degree of connectivity between clusters. They proposed
an alternative algorithm that uses a diﬀerent normalization in both the eigenvalue problem
and the construction of feature vectors prior to the application of k-means.
All of these algorithms involve a computationally expensive eigendecomposition.
To
address the computational diﬃculties for large graphs, Fowlkes et al. described a procedure
that uses the Nystr¨om method to reduce the complexity of the eigenvalue problem [10].
This does signiﬁcantly reduce the computational overhead, but it is not enough to make the
eigendecomposition algorithms scalable to large graphs. Yan et al. recently described an
algorithm for fast approximate spectral clustering [20], but the focus is not on clustering for
graphs (rather it addresses real-valued feature vectors).
Dhillon et al. introduced a much faster algorithm for minimizing normalized cut in [11];
the graph is ﬁrst greedily coarsened, then the coarsened graph is partitioned using a region
growing procedure [17] and ﬁnally weighted kernel k-means clustering is applied to each
partition to reﬁne the clustering.
Other methods also exist that strive to optimize related cost functions; for example
Sharon et al. proposed a scalable hierarchical clustering using ratio association (the normal-
ization term is the number of nodes in clusters) [21]. Other examples include the work by
Ding et al. [22], Sharon et al. [23], Akselrod-Ballin et al. [24], and Corso et al. [25] that use
the sum of internal weights of clusters as the normalization term.
2.2. Model Order Selection
The problem of selecting the number of clusters is almost as old as clustering itself. In
the following discussion, k∗denotes the number of clusters that a given approach identiﬁes
3

as the true number of clusters.
Numerous authors have used some notion of quality of clustering, usually based on some
deﬁnition of the inter- and intra-cluster distances, to identify the number of clusters. Let
F(k) denote this notion for a given partitioning to k clusters. F(k) is then examined for
various values of k. Partitionings for diﬀerent values of k can be obtained from a hierarchical
clustering, or alternatively, by several ﬂat partitionings.
If F is not a monotonic function of k, the approach is usually to take k∗= arg maxk F(k)
or k∗= arg mink F(k) (depending on the deﬁnition of F). The majority of the methods
discussed in [26] and [27] are of this type; Calinski and Harabasz [28], C-index [29], Baker
and Hubert [30], and cubic clustering criterion [31] are among the most eﬀective ones [26].
Tibshirani et al. [32] deﬁne F(k) as the gap, that is the diﬀerence of the average pairwise
distance of the data points of the clustering at kth level and the expected value of the same
measure of some reference model. This is similar to modularity [6] (discussed later) in the
sense that it compares the clustering results to a reference model. None of these methods
are directly applicable to graph clustering algorithms; the calculations of the deﬁned metrics
require pairwise distances which are not immediately available from a graph representation.
Possible distance metrics include the shortest path [33] or the diﬀusion distance [8]; however
the shortest path is very sensitive to noise and the calculation of the diﬀusion distance
requires eigendecomposition.
In the case where F is a monotonic function of k, the only extremal values of F(k)
correspond to trivial values of k. Hence, the value of F(k) corresponding to two or more
choices of k are examined to quantify the signiﬁcance of a given level of a hierarchical
clustering [34–36]. In order to assess the clustering at level k of the hierarchy, Gnanadesikan
et al. [34] propose the fraction F(k)/F(k −1), Arnold [37] use the value of F(k) −F(k −1),
Krzanowski and Lai [35] employ the fraction |F(k) −F(k −1)|/|F(k + 1) −F(k)|, and
Pederson and Kulkarni [36] suggest using the fraction 2×F(k)/ (F(k −1) + F(k + 1)). The
latter two approaches are the most similar to what we propose in Section 4 in the sense that
they use the preceding and succeeding levels of the hierarchy to obtain the signiﬁcance of
the clustering at level k. However the approaches in [35, 36] are potentially susceptible to
noise due to the division; small perturbations in the weights could lead to dramatic changes
in the selected model order.
Other approaches to selecting the number of clusters are based on the adoption of (semi-
)parametric models for the structure of the graph. This allows the application of model
selection techniques based on concepts such as the Bayesian InformationCriterion (BIC)
[38], and Akaike Information Criterion [39]. Despite the strong theoretical support for these
methods, the adoption of a parametric model for the graph structure is undesirable. The
models are often overly restrictive and do not adequately capture the properties of many
real-life networks. An example is the requirement in [40, 41] that the input data are normally
distributed (after projection of the graph into a real space). The more general methods based
on mixture models do not scale well to very large graphs; even the recent approaches have
only been applied to graphs with a few thousand nodes [42–44].
Some heuristics are based on the sizes of the clusters that are merged at diﬀerent levels
of the clustering hierarchy [45, 46].
The authors in [46] suggest that when two clusters
with large number of nodes are merged, a signiﬁcant amount of detail is lost; hence such an
instance is potentially where a hierarchical clustering algorithm should stop. The authors
4

of [45] propose a similar approach. The main drawback of these approaches is that only the
granularity of the clusters are taken into account and the number and the weights of the
edges are simply ignored.
A well-known and eﬀective method of selecting the number of clusters is to examine the
eigenvalues of the Laplacian of the graph that is to be clustered [19, 47, 48]. For a graph with
isolated connected components the multiplicity of the eigenvalue zero is equal to the number
of clusters. Any other graph with well-separated clusters can be considered as a perturbation
of this ideal case. Matrix perturbation theory states that the stability of the eigenvectors of
a matrix is proportional to the eigengap (the diﬀerence between two successive eigenvalues).
Von Luxburg [48] suggests using k∗= arg maxk (λk −λk+1). A large eigengap at k∗is the
case in which spectral algorithms using the Laplacian perform most successfully [19]. A
more robust criterion is proposed by Zelnik-Manor and Perona [49] that uses eigenvectors
instead. Despite the solid theoretical support behind these approaches, the requirement of
eigendecomposition makes them impractical when large graphs are being clustered.
There have been attempts to identify the number of clusters using stability analysis.
“Stability” has been deﬁned diﬀerently by diﬀerent authors, but they all based on the same
intuition; with respect to some algorithm, a stable clustering is one that behaves relatively
consistently in the presence of some controlled perturbation. The perturbation could be in
terms of noise [50], sampling subsets from the input [51, 52], or random projection of a high
dimensional data into a lower dimensional space [53]. These approaches require several runs
of clustering for every value of k which makes them computationally expensive. Furthermore,
Ben-David et al. [52] warn against using stability analysis in this context, and they suggest
that this family of model order selection techniques is not suitable for selecting the number
of clusters in general. The intuition behind their work is that when an underlying objective
function, F(k), has several local optima of relatively similar values, a clustering algorithm
might be trapped by any of them, even when k is the true number of clusters. The diﬀerence
in clustering solutions is interpreted as instability and the model order rejected, but the
behavior is caused by the imperfect nature of the clustering algorithm.
Two more recently proposed methods to select the number of clusters are based on
optimization of the quality metrics of modularity [6] and description length [7]. Both methods
simultaneously address both clustering and the selection of the number of clusters; they
strive to optimize the objective function over all possible partitionings. These methods are
discussed in more detail in Section 5.
3. Problem Formulation
Let G = (V, E, w) be a weighted graph having n = |V | nodes and m = |E| edges4.
We assume that edge weights w(u, v) = w(v, u) ≥0 are non-negative and symmetric, that
w(u, v) = 0 if (u, v) /∈E, and that for (u, v) ∈E, the weight w(u, v) ≥0 is indicative of the
similarity between nodes u and v; that is, the larger the weight, the more similar the nodes.
We also allow for self-weights, w(u, u) ≥0.
4In this work, we assume we are given the graph on which we wish to perform clustering. We do not
address the problem of forming a graph from data, which arises when one applies graph clustering methods
to general data sets; see, e.g., [48, 54, 55].
5

For a ﬁxed number of clusters, k, we measure the quality of the partition via the
normalized cut metric [9], deﬁned as follows.
For a node u, denote the degree of u by
d(u) = P
v∈V w(u, v), and for a subset U ⊂V of nodes, let d(U) = P
u∈U d(u) denote the
cumulative degree of the subset. Similarly, for two disjoint subsets of nodes, V1 and V2, let
w(V1, V2) = P
u∈V1
P
v∈V2 w(u, v) denote the sum of the weights of edges with one end in V1
and the other end in V2. Let Ck denote the partition of nodes to k clusters, Ck = {C1, . . . , Ck}
where Ci is the subset of nodes aﬃliated to cluster i. The normalized cut metric is deﬁned
as
NCut(Ck) =
k
X
i=1
w(Ci, V \ Ci)
d(Ci)
.
(1)
Minimizing the normalized cut can be interpreted as minimizing the similarity of nodes
in diﬀerent clusters, relative to the degree of each cluster. Alternatively, maximizing the
intra-cluster similarity can be achieved by maximizing the normalized association, deﬁned
as
NAssoc(Ck) =
k
X
i=1
w(Ci, Ci)
d(Ci)
.
(2)
Moreover, maximizing normalized association is equivalent to minimizing normalized cut
since w(Ci, Ci)+w(Ci, V \Ci) = d(Ci), and hence NAssoc(Ck) = k −NCut(Ck). For the sake
of readability, we adopt the maximization of normalized association as our goal in developing
a clustering procedure.
4. GANC: Greedy Agglomerative Normalized Cut
In this section, we describe a greedy algorithm for building an agglomerative clustering
on a graph. Although we do not make guarantees about its accuracy, the algorithm is fast
on sparse graphs and yields excellent performance on a variety of examples, as illustrated
in Section 5. Moreover, GANC has a model order selection criterion and does not have to
be provided with the number of clusters a priori. The algorithm consists of three steps:
agglomerative clustering, model order selection, and reﬁnement.
4.1. Agglomerative Clustering
We propose greedy maximization of normalized association via an agglomerative hierar-
chical clustering. In the following discussion, note that the number of clusters at stage k of
the hierarchy is k. At stage k of the hierarchy, using the given partition, Ck, two clusters are
merged to form a new partition, Ck−1. The two clusters to be merged are chosen greedily so
that normalized association of stage k −1 is maximized.5
Initially, Cn is a function that maps nodes to unique clusters, 1, . . . , n. The degree of
every node u, d(u), is calculated. Furthermore, for every edge, (u, v) ∈E, the improve-
ment in normalized association by its contraction to obtain Cn−1 is stored in ∆(u, v) =
5We note that a similar greedy merging algorithm is alluded to by Shi and Malik in [9], however they also
suggest ﬁrst projecting each node into ℜk using the ﬁrst k eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian, and running
an algorithm such as k-means to obtain an initial clustering. Our approach requires no eigendecomposition
and performs no such initialization. We also note that, although Shi and Malik mention having experimented
with greedy merging, results for this approach have not been reported in the literature.
6

2w(u, v)/ (d(u) + d(v)), so that a matrix of the improvements is constructed. Here we as-
sume that initially there are no self-loops, but if there are, the value of improvements are
computed by (4) presented shortly.
Throughout the agglomerative clustering procedure,
d(·), w(·, ·), and ∆(·, ·) are updated at each stage as described below.
At each iteration, the pair (u∗, v∗) = argmax(u,v)∆(u, v) is selected for merging to create
a larger cluster, uv∗. The degree is computed for the newly constructed cluster, d(uv∗) =
d(u∗)+d(v∗). The weights and the improvement matrices are updated by removing the rows
and columns corresponding to u∗and v∗, and inserting a new row and column corresponding
to uv∗(rows and columns are not removed or added in our implementation, but this is the
practical eﬀect). The weight matrix is updated as follows:
w(uv∗, x) =w(x, uv∗) = w(u∗, x) + w(v∗, x),
(3)
and the improvement matrix update is:
∆(uv∗, x) = w(uv∗, uv∗) + w(x, x) + 2w(uv∗, x)
d(uv∗) + d(x)
−w(uv∗, uv∗)
d(uv∗)
−w(x, x)
d(x) ,
(4)
for all the clusters, x, adjacent to either u∗or v∗. The self-weights are also calculated by:
w(uv∗, uv∗) = w(u∗, u∗) + w(v∗, v∗) + 2w(u∗, v∗).
(5)
For all pairs of nodes (u, v) not adjacent to u∗and v∗, the weights w(u, v) and improve-
ments ∆(u, v) remain unchanged. The above sequence of steps is repeated n −1 times to
form the clustering hierarchy.
4.2. Model Order Selection
Many of the clustering algorithms require the number of clusters to be provided to the
algorithm a priori. However such information is often not available in practical situations
making the decision about the number of clusters an issue in itself.
It is worth noting that the stage number (k) that maximizes NAssoc(Ck) does not neces-
sarily correspond to a meaningful number of clusters.6 Here we propose a simple but eﬀective
approach to model order selection. Let C∗
k = argmaxCkNAssoc(Ck) denote the partition that
maximizes normalized assocation over all partitions of V into k clusters. To carry out model
order selection, we examine the curvature7 of NAssoc(C∗
k) which we deﬁne as
Curv(k) =
 NAssoc(C∗
k) −NAssoc(C∗
k−1)

−
 NAssoc(C∗
k+1) −NAssoc(C∗
k)

=2NAssoc(C∗
k) −NAssoc(C∗
k−1) −NAssoc(C∗
k+1).
(6)
6To see this, consider an unweighted graph that consists of two isolated chains, each having 4 nodes. The
true number of clusters is trivially 2 resulting in NAssoc(C2) = 2; however if one groups the adjacent nodes
to obtain 4 groups of node pairs, the resulting value of normalized association would be NAssoc(C4) = 2.66.
7The reason we call this metric the curvature is its similarity to the central approximation of the
second order derivative which is deﬁned for a continuous function, f(·) as f ′′(x) ≈∂2
h[f](x)/h2 =
[f(x + h) −2f(x) + f(x −h)] /h2. By substituting h = 1, we get the negative of our curvature equation
(the negation is to have positive peaks).
7

The ﬁrst term of the above addition is the improvement of normalized association moving
from stage k to k −1 of the hierarchy and the second term is the improvement moving from
stage k + 1 to k.
The function Curv(k) captures the notion that a particular number of clusters, k, iden-
tiﬁes meaningful structural similarities embodied in the graph if it provides a normalized
association which is signiﬁcantly larger than the best partition with one additional cluster
(k + 1) and little can be gained by reducing the number of clusters to k −1.
In practice we do not have access to the optimal partitions, so we cannot evaluate the
exact value of the curvature function. Instead, we approximate the curvature by using the
normalized association values for the partitions returned by the agglomerative step of our
algorithm.
Note that the model order selection step of the algorithm could be used as a model
order selection step for any other algorithm that maximizes the normalized association and
generates a clustering hierarchy. Furthermore, this step of the algorithm can be considered
optional if there is a prior knowledge about the true number of clusters.
4.3. Reﬁnement
Greedy algorithms can get trapped by local optima.
This is also the case with the
agglomerative step of our algorithm, especially when the clusters are not clearly separated.
After selecting the number of clusters either using the model order selection rule described
previously or prior knowledge, a reﬁnement step is invoked in order to improve the initial
clustering results. The nodes are moved across the clusters to further improve the value of
normalized association. A similar approach is taken in [56], but groups of nodes are moved
from a cluster to another instead of individual nodes. If we try all possible moves, we end
up performing an exhaustive search of dividing n nodes into k clusters. This defeats the
purpose of developing the fast agglomerative clustering step. Instead, we look only at the
boundary nodes, i.e., the nodes that have at least one neighbor in another cluster.
Initially the set of all the boundary nodes is identiﬁed. We use an n × k matrix to keep
track of the neighborhood information of the boundary nodes. If B denotes this matrix, and
I denotes an n-dimensional vector:
B(u, i) =
( P
v∈Ci w(u, v)
if u ̸∈Ci
0
otherwise , I(u) =
X
v∈Ci
w(u, v) if u ∈Ci.
(7)
For each of the boundary nodes, improvements in normalized association by moving from
their current cluster to each of their neighbors are calculated. This improvement for node u
moving from cluster i to cluster j is
δ(u, i, j) =w(Ci, Ci) −2I(u)
d(Ci) −d(u)
+ w(Cj, Cj) + 2B(u, j)
d(Cj) + d(u)
−
w(Ci, Ci)
d(Ci)
+ w(Cj, Cj)
d(Cj)

.
(8)
If no move leads to improvement, the node stays in the cluster to which it belongs. If
one or more moves result in improvement, then the node is moved to the cluster that results
8

in maximum improvement. If u is moved from Ci to Cj, the corresponding cluster degrees
and associations are updated:
d(Ci)new = d(Ci)old −d(u)
(9)
d(Cj)new = d(Cj)old + d(u)
(10)
w(Ci, Ci)new = w(Ci, Ci)old −2I(u, i)old
(11)
w(Cj, Cj)new = w(Cj, Cj)old + 2B(u, j)old,
(12)
and for all the neighboring nodes of u denoted by v, entries of B and I are updated as
follows:
I(v)new = I(v)old + w(u, v)
B(v, i)new = B(v, i)old −w(u, v)
)
if v ∈Cj,
(13)
I(v)new = I(v)old −w(u, v)
B(v, j)new = B(v, j)old + w(u, v)
)
if v ∈Ci,
(14)
B(v, i)new = B(v, i)old −w(u, v)
B(v, j)new = B(v, j)old + w(u, v)
)
if v /∈Ci and v /∈Cj,
(15)
and ﬁnally
B(u, i)new = I(u)old,
(16)
I(u)new = B(u, j)old,
(17)
B(u, j)new = 0.
(18)
While performing the updates (9) to (18), the set of boundary nodes is also updated.
Whenever a node is moved from cluster i to cluster j, its neighbors in cluster i are added
to the set of boundary nodes. For some node v neighboring u, moving u might result in
B(v, i)new becoming zero in (15) for all i; i.e., some nodes might be removed from the set of
boundary nodes.
One pass through all the boundary nodes is considered a single reﬁnement iteration.
When an iteration causes no positive improvement, the reﬁnement procedure is stopped.
Alternatively, one could specify the maximum number of reﬁnement iterations. Note that
although we prohibit the reﬁnement step from emptying any cluster, we have not observed
such an attempt in our experiments.
4.4. Implementation and Computational Complexity of GANC
We take a similar approach to [57] when implementing the agglomerative clustering pro-
cedure of GANC. Max-heaps and balanced binary trees are used to store the rows of the ∆
matrix and the adjacency matrix. A separate heap is also used to store the maximum of
each row of ∆. This leads to the complexity of O(mh log(n)) for the agglomerative clustering
procedure, where h is the height of the generated dendrogram and m is the number of edges
with non-zero weight (see [57] for details).
The model order selection step of the algorithm requires O(n) computations. The com-
putational requirements are much less than those of the methods analyzing the eigenvalue
9

Algorithm 1 GANC: Greedy Agglomerative Normalized Cut
GREEDY AGGLOMERATION
1: Build the initial ∆matrix, and NAssoc(Cn) ←P
u∈V w(u, u)/d(u)
2: for k = n −1 to 1 do
3:
(i∗, j∗) ←arg maxi,j ∆(i, j)
4:
NAssoc(Ck) ←NAssoc(Ck+1) + ∆(i∗, j∗)
5:
Update rows and columns of ∆, the weights, and the degrees corresponding to clusters
i∗and j∗(3 - 5)
6: end for
MODEL ORDER SELECTION
1: for k = n −1 to 2 do
2:
Calculate Curv(k) (6)
3: end for
4: k∗←arg maxk Curv(k) or provided by the user
REFINEMENT
1: Obtain ﬂat partitioning for level k∗
2: Build the initial B and I (7), and reﬁne ←true
3: while reﬁne do
4:
¯δ ←0
5:
for u = 1 to n do
6:
if u ∈Ci is on the boundary and maxj δ(u, i, j) > 0 then
7:
Move u from Ci to Cj∗, where j∗= arg maxj δ(u, i, j)
8:
Update B, I, the weights, and the degrees (9 - 18)
9:
¯δ ←¯δ + δ(u, i, j∗)
10:
end if
11:
end for
12:
if ¯δ = 0 then
13:
reﬁne ←false
14:
end if
15: end while
fall-oﬀwhich require eigendecomposition (e.g., [49] and [47]). Performing an eigendecompo-
sition to study the eigenvalue fall-oﬀfor all of the eigenvalues requires O(n3) operations.
To implement the reﬁnement step, we use the map data structure to store and update
B. Every row of B is stored in a map (C++ STL implementation of the map data structure
is used [58]). Updates (9) to (12) are performed in constant time. To access each map entry
of a row of B to insert, update, or delete, no more than O(log k) operations are required,
because the maximum number of clusters connected to a boundary node is strictly less than
k. Updates (13), (14), and (15) each take no more than O(log k) operations and are repeated
for all neighbors of a node that is moved. We have observed through experiments that nodes
with larger degrees do not tend to be on the boundaries and hence the average number of
neighbors to be updated is practically smaller than the average node degree. (16), (18), and
any insertion to or deletion from the set of boundary nodes are performed in O(log k) time.
10

(17) is trivial and is performed in a constant time. Not more than n nodes can be moved
in a given iteration. When node i is moved, O(di log k) operations are required, where di
is the degree of node i. Summing over all boundary nodes, the complexity is O(m log k)
because Pn
i=1 di = 2m. Hence the number of operations in a single iteration is at most
O(m log k). Throughout our experiments we have observed very small number of reﬁnement
iterations even when the reﬁnement is applied to the networks with millions of nodes and
edges. Furthermore the algorithm is capable of limiting the number of iterations. Hence the
complexity of the average number of operations of the whole reﬁnement step does not exceed
O(m log k).
The total computational complexity of GANC is dominated by the agglomerative clus-
tering procedure. In practice, the height of the resulting dendrogram is often O(log n). Also,
the graphs that are studied are usually sparse and hence m = O(n). Therefore the com-
plexity of the agglomerative clustering step of our algorithm is O(n log2 n) for many real-life
graphs.
The worst case runtime happens when the graph is complete and the dendrogram is
totally unbalanced. There are n −1 agglomerations to construct the whole hierarchy each
of which requires at most O(n log n) operations. Hence the worst case complexity for the
agglomerative clustering step of the algorithm is O(n2 log n) which is not expected to occur
in practical situations.
The memory requirement of GANC is O(m) which is equivalent to O(n) for sparse graphs.
In summary, in many practical cases (relatively sparse graphs and balanced dendrograms),
the computational complexity is O(n log2 n) and the memory requirement is O(n). GANC
can be downloaded from http://www.ece.mcgill.ca/~coates/software/.
5. Experimental Results
In this section we provide a comparison of the performance and the runtime of our
proposed algorithm GANC with a selection of the state-of-the-art graph clustering algorithms
from the literature whose implementations were downloaded from the corresponding authors’
websites. Experiments were performed on an Intel 3.0 GHz Core 2 Quad CPU with 8 GB
of RAM and Ubuntu 9.10 operating system.
5.1. Comparing Algorithms
We compare to the following algorithms: Shi and Malik (recursive NCut) [9]; Meila and
Shi (k-way NCut) [18]; Ng, Jordan, and Weiss [19]; Dhillon, Gaun, and Kulis [11]; Rosvall
and Bergstrom [7]; and Blondel et al. [56]. The ﬁrst four algorithms focus on maximizing
NAssoc. Despite not addressing our criterion of interest directly, the other algorithms are
included because they are scalable and represent the state-of-the-art in graph clustering.
The discussed clustering algorithms ([9],[18],[19]) are not scalable as they include eigen-
decomposition. Dhillon, Guan, and Kulis proposed an algorithm that strives to maximize
normalized association without requiring any eigendecomposition [11]. Similar to the other
algorithms that address the maximization of normalized association, the Dhillon-Guan-Kulis
algorithm requires the user to provide the number of clusters. After specifying the number
of clusters, three steps are performed: a coarsening phase, a base clustering step using re-
gion growing, and ﬁnally a reﬁnement step using weighted kernel k-means with appropriate
choices of the kernel and the node weights to maximize the normalized association.
11

Minimization of the criterion proposed by Rosvall and Bergstrom [7] results in a coarse-
grained representation of the information ﬂow through the network. Their proposed clus-
tering objective aims to compress the underlying random walk on a graph without losing
important network structures. To facilitate this, a coding is designed as follows: every clus-
ter is assigned to a unique code; in a given cluster, every node is also assigned to a unique
code. However two nodes in diﬀerent clusters are allowed to be assigned to the same code.
The algorithm then strives to minimize the average description length of a single step of a
random walk.
The algorithm by Blondel et al. targets maximizing modularity [56]. Modularity (Q) is
deﬁned as the total fraction of intra-cluster sum-weight minus the expected fraction if the
edges (and weights) were distributed randomly while the node degrees were preserved:
Q =
k
X
i=1
w(Ci, Ci)
M
−d(Ci)2
M2

,
(19)
where M = P
i
P
j w(i, j). Modularity provides a valuable metric of the connectedness of
clusters, but a number of authors have demonstrated that it suﬀers from a resolution limit
when used to select the number of clusters [59]. The partitioning that maximizes modularity
will generally not isolate clusters if the number of edges in the cluster is a small fraction of the
total number of edges in the graph. The reason behind the resolution limit of modularity
is the second term in the summation of (19); when the network gets larger, M increases
monotonically. However the cluster degrees are not necessarily a function of the network size
and are often bounded, regardless of the number of nodes [60]. This results in d(Ci)2/M2 ≪1
and hence the value of modularity becomes dependent only on w(Ci)/M. By normalizing
the summation by d(Ci) as suggested in [12], the resolution limit phenomena is resolved; but
we have
Qnormalized =
k
X
i=1
1
d(Ci)
w(Ci, Ci)
M
−d(Ci)2
M2

= 1
M [NAssoc(Ck) −1] .
(20)
i.e., maximization of Qnormalized and normalized association are equivalent.
5.2. Synthetic Graphs
We ﬁrst analyze the performance on synthetic graphs, for which the true clustering be-
havior is known.
We use benchmark graphs developed by Lancichinetti, Fortunato, and
Radicchi [61] (LFR graphs). These random graphs are designed based on the planted par-
tition model [62]. Each node is assigned to one of k clusters. When edges are added to the
graph, the probability that the edge is between nodes in the same cluster is 1 −µ and the
probability that the edge joins nodes from diﬀerent clusters is µ. The LFR benchmarks have
heterogeneous cluster sizes with user-speciﬁed lower bound and upper bound, cmin and cmax,
respectively. Furthermore the node degrees are upper-bounded by dmax and the average node
degree is denoted by davg. As µ decreases, edges are increasingly likely to be intra-cluster,
making the partitioning task easier.
The Meila-Shi algorithm performs at least as well as the other spectral clustering algo-
rithms (Ng-Jordan-Weiss [19] and Shi-Malik [9]) and hence we only display the Meila-Shi
results. The local search of Dhillon-Guan-Kulis is also excluded often, because it results in
negligible improvement while it introduces a very large computational overhead.
12

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
µ
Normalized Association/k
 
 
GANC (refined)
Meila−Shi
Rosvall−Bergstrom
Blondel et al.
Dhillon−Guan−Kulis
GANC (not refined)
(a) n = 5, 000
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
µ
Jaccard Index
 
 
GANC (refined)
Meila−Shi
Rosvall−Bergstrom
Dhillon−Guan−Kulis
Blondel et al.
GANC (not refined)
(b) n = 5, 000
Figure 1: LFR benchmarks with cmin = 20, cmax = 50, dmax = 30, davg = 25, and variable proportions of
inter-cluster edges (µ). In all of the above ﬁgures, Meila-Shi, Rosvall-Bergstrom, and GANC(reﬁned) are
overlapping. In (b) and (d) Jaccard index = 1 for the overlapping algorithms that corresponds to perfect
extraction of the clusters.
5.2.1. Maximizing normalized association
Figure 1 examines how the algorithms perform with respect to maximizing NAssoc for
1,000-node LFR graphs. In order to observe how the algorithms perform on graphs with
heterogeneous clusters, we let the cluster sizes range from 20 to 50 nodes.8 For each value
of µ, 100 graph realizations are generated. The value of NAssoc is divided by k to obtain a
value between 0 and 1 which represents the average NAssoc per cluster.
The algorithms perform almost identically with the exception of the Dhillon et al. algo-
rithm [11]. The reﬁnement step of GANC results in a signiﬁcant improvement in the value
of NAssoc. However, the local search of Dhillon’s algorithm does not improve NAssoc sig-
niﬁcantly. Note that the Blondel et al. algorithm results in higher values of NAssoc due to
selecting smaller number of clusters than the true ones (NAssoc(Ck)/k is a monotonically
decreasing function of k); a fair comparison between algorithms is possible only when the
number of clusters are equal.
5.2.2. Comparing to the planted partitions
The advantage of exploring performance on synthetic graphs is that a ground-truth parti-
tioning is available. Because the LFR benchmarks are based on the planted partition model,
there is the additional advantage that NAssoc is an appropriate criterion to adopt. Apart
from some possible small errors due to the randomness inherent in the construction of the
benchmark graphs, the ground truth partitioning will correspond to a maximum of NAssoc
8In the real-life networks that we consider in this paper, the clusters have been observed to be of a limited
size, regardless of the network size [60]; for example the Dunbar number suggests an upper limit of 150 nodes
for clusters in a social network [63].
13

for a given value of k.
For comparing two partitions on the same graph, we use the Jaccard index [64] which for
two partitions, X and Y, is deﬁned as
JI =
a
(a + b + c),
(21)
where a, b, and c are, respectively, the total pair of nodes that are assigned to the same
cluster in both X and Y, the same cluster in X and diﬀerent clusters in Y, and the same
cluster in Y and diﬀerent clusters in X . When two partitions are identical, the Jaccard index
evaluates to one, and it decreases as the partitions deviate from each other.
Figures 1b show the closeness of the partitionings identiﬁed by the algorithms and the
ground truth in terms of the Jaccard index.
The algorithm by Blondel et al. deviates
dramatically from the true clustering (Figure 1b). The reason is that the minimum and
maximum cluster sizes are ﬁxed for all the networks in addition to the average node degree.
Hence the average number of edges per cluster remains the same making the proportion of
the intra-cluster edges decrease. Due to the resolution limit of modularity, as the proportion
of intra-cluster edges is decreased, modularity maximization algorithms tend to group several
clusters into a single cluster. If we reduce n to 1000, the Blondel et al. algorithm leads to
closer results to the ground truth. The algorithm by Dhillon et al. does not perform as well
as other algorithms that strive to maximize NAssoc and the local search results in negligible
improvement in terms of the Jaccard index.
(a) Ring graph
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
k=24
Number of Clusters (k)
Curvature
k=12
k=6
(b) Curvature plot of the ring
Figure 2: The ring of 24 cliques; the highest peak of curvature is at 24.
5.3. Model order selection: the curvature metric
We ﬁrst provide an illustrative example of the use of the curvature metric for selecting
the number of clusters in the partitioning. This example highlights the diﬀerence in behavior
compared to the modularity metric used by modularity maximization algorithms [56].
14

25
50
75
100
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
µ =0.1
25
50
75
100
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
µ =0.2
25
50
75
100
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
µ =0.3
25
50
75
100
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
µ =0.4
25
50
75
100
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
µ =0.5
25
50
75
100
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
µ =0.6
Figure 3: Curvature versus number of clusters for varying proportion of inter-cluster edges (µ). The true
clustering indicated by red X. The peak of the curvature becomes less and less distinguishable by increasing
µ. LFR benchmark graph with 1000 nodes and cmin = 20, cmax = 50, dmax = 30, davg = 25.
An example used by Good et al. [59], to illustrate the resolution limit is the ring of 24
cliques9, each of which has 5 nodes and is connected to its neighboring clique by a single
edge. The value of modularity is maximized by a 12-cluster partition that merges pairs
of cliques together. A more natural clustering is to consider each clique as an individual
cluster. Figure 2b shows the curvature plot for the case of the ring of cliques. In addition
to the peak of the curvature that is correctly located at 24 clusters, it is interesting to note
that the other local peaks of the curvature are also meaningful; e.g., the peak at 12 clusters
corresponds to the clustering that maximizes modularity.
To see how the curvature indicates the true number of clusters for networks with more
complex structures, we consider the LFR benchmarks. We ﬁx the LFR parameters for a
1,000-node graph and explore how the curvature changes as µ is varied. Figure 3 indicates
that the peak of the curvature plot correctly identiﬁes the true number of clusters for µ
in the range 0.1 – 0.5. As µ increases, the main peak becomes less distinct; for µ = 0.5,
the second highest peak is almost as large as the primary peak. As the clusters become
increasingly interconnected, the curvature plot provides a less clear indication of the true
9A clique is a subset of nodes in a graph which are fully connected.
15

number of clusters.
Note that Figure 3 corresponds to a single realization of the LFR benchmarks.
The
empirical probabilities that the highest peak of the curvature corresponds to the true number
of clusters for 100 realizations of the LFR benchmark with parameters as in Figure 3 are
p1 = [1.0 1.0 0.96 0.60 0.42 0.06], for µ = [0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6] when no reﬁnement
step is applied; furthermore the empirical probabilities that one of the two highest peaks
corresponds to the true number of clusters are p2 = [1.0 1.0 1.0 0.98 0.75 0.13].
These probabilities are obtained using the approximate curvatures derived from the ag-
glomerative clustering procedure. To achieve a better insight into the model selection capa-
bilities of the curvature metric, we derive better approximations by applying the reﬁnement
step to every level of the hierarchy and then recomputing curvature estimates. With this new
procedure, we obtain p1 = [1.0 0.99 0.99 0.95 0.87 0.77] and p2 = [1.0 0.99 0.99 0.96 0.88 0.78].
This indicates that curvature can provide a good indication of model order even for µ = 0.6.
The model order selection algorithm of Rosvall-Bergstrom algorithm quite successfully
indicates the true number of clusters in the case of LFR benchmarks; the empirical proba-
bilities for the Rosvall-Bergstrom algorithm is p1 = [1.0 1.0 1.0 0.98 0.85 0.83]. The Blondel
et al. algorithm does not successfully identify the true number of clusters when µ increases:
p1 = [1.0 0.99 0.98 0.79 0.07 0.0]. Note that when n = 5, 000, the failure of the Blondel et al.
algorithm becomes more evident and p1 turns to a 0% success for any µ (this is reﬂected in
Figure 1). However the reﬁned GANC and Rosvall-Bergstrom algorithms obtain the same
success ratios when n = 5, 000.
5.4. Real networks
In this section, we examine the behavior the GANC and compare it to the other al-
gorithms for graphs representing real networks. We ﬁrst examine the behavior for small
networks where there is knowledge of the ground truth partition. We then experiment with
large networks, which allows us to assess the scalability of GANC.
5.4.1. Small networks
We conduct experiments using the Zachary karate club network [65], the football network
[6], and the political books network10. The Zachary karate club network portrays friendships
in a karate club. During the polling period, there was a dispute between the manager and
the instructor which led to the establishment of a new club by the instructor. The karate
students then split into two groups, either staying with the original club or following the
instructor to the new club. The two clusters associated with the network correspond to these
two groups. Each node in the football networks corresponds to a team in US college football.
There are 11 conferences and 5 independent teams. Each edge corresponds to the existence
of a match between the connected nodes. The independent teams can be interpreted as
outliers.
Nodes of the political book network correspond to the political books sold by
Amazon.com and are categorized as neutral, conservative, and liberal. The edges between
pairs of nodes correspond to frequent co-buying of the pairs of books by the same buyers.
The three networks are unweighted.
10Collected by V. Krebs, http://www.orgnet.com
16

Tables 1 and 2 compare the performance of GANC with other clustering algorithms
for these small, well-known datasets. The tables provide the average NAssoc per cluster
(NAssoc/k) and the Jaccard index. The “true” number of clusters is indicated within paren-
theses beside the name of each network11. In Table 1, all algorithms (including GANC) are
informed of the true number of clusters and instructed to generate a partitioning with that
number of clusters. Table 1 indicates that the spectral clustering algorithms (Ng-Jordan-
Weiss, Meila-Shi, and Shi-Malik) achieve similar performance in terms of NAssoc. We note
that when k is speciﬁed for these three networks, GANC identiﬁes partitionings with average
NAssoc as large or larger than those of the partitionings identiﬁed by the spectral clustering
techniques, with the exception of Shi-Malik in the case of the football network.
Table 1: Small real networks: k known in advance (average NAssoc per cluster/Jaccard index). Maximum
NAssoc is indicated by bold text.
Karate(k = 2)
Football(k = 11)
PolBooks(k = 3)
GANC (reﬁned)
0.872/0.89
0.704/0.820
0.88/0.67
Dhillon-Guan-Kulis
0.820/0.64
0.700/0.820
0.87/0.64
Ng-Jordan-Weiss
0.872/1.00
0.701/0.825
0.82/0.57
Meila-Shi
0.869/0.89
0.696/0.820
0.88/0.67
Shi-Malik
0.872/1.00
0.706/0.825
0.86/0.67
Table 2 compares the performance of algorithms that select the number of clusters based
on some aspect of the data. The number of clusters selected by each algorithm is shown
within parentheses after the Jaccard index. Rosvall’s algorithm uses a description length
metric to select the number of clusters [7]; Blondel’s algorithm chooses the partitioning that
maximizes the modularity [56]. A direct comparison of NAssoc is not valid when k is not
ﬁxed. The ﬁrst row of this table shows the performance of GANC when the curvature plot
Table 2: Small real networks: Jaccard index for the estimated model orders.
Karate
Football
PolBooks
GANC (curv)
0.80 (k = 3)
0.76 (k = 13)
0.69 (k = 2))
Blondel et al.
0.53 (k = 4)
0.70 (k = 11)
0.67 (k = 3)
Rosvall-Bergstrom
0.71 (k = 3)
0.83 (k = 12)
0.63 (k = 5)
is used to select the number of clusters. Although the selected number of clusters does not
correspond to the true number of clusters for any of the networks, all three values can be
explained. In the karate club network there is a group of students who have weak ties to
other members of the network and these are identiﬁed as a third cluster; in the football
network, GANC isolates the independent teams; in the political books network, GANC does
not identify a neutral cluster and assigns each of the neutral books to either the liberal or
conservative cluster.
11Note that the “true” number of clusters is something of an artiﬁcial social construct and does not
necessarily correspond to a partitioning that maximizes any meaningful graph clustering metric.
17

5.4.2. Cortical Networks
Here we study the networks presented in [66] which are weighted graphs, each with 998
nodes. The nodes correspond to small regions of the human cerebral cortex and the edges
correspond to cortico-cortical axonal pathways. The networks are developed for ﬁve patients
(the extraction is performed twice for patient A). We ﬁrst perform a comparison of the
competing algorithms, then we discuss the clustering results of GANC.
When applying the Rosvall-Bergstrom and Blondel et al. algorithms the used does not
have the freedom to choose the number of clusters. Hence we repeat the experiment twice
to make a meaningful objective comparison in terms of NAssoc. Table 3 lists the average
NAssoc of every clustering algorithm and patient.
In the ﬁrst subtable, k is set to the
model order selected by the Rosvall-Bergstrom algorithm. Then, in the second subtable, k
is set to the model order selected by the Blondel et al. algorithm, and in the third subtable,
peaks of the model order selected by curvature are used. Note that the Shi-Malik algorithm
outperforms the other two spectral algorithms for these datasets; hence we only include the
Shi-Malik results.
Table 3: NAssoc of the cortical networks. Maximum NAssoc is indicated by bold text. The model order
selected for each column in each sub-table is identiﬁed within parentheses.
A-1
A-2
B
C
D
E
Rosvall-Bergstrom
0.725 (62)
0.706 (68)
0.738 (61)
0.706 (62)
0.691 (63)
0.706 (58)
GANC (reﬁned)
0.730
0.716
0.740
0.712
0.705
0.718
Dhillon-Guan-Kulis
0.696
0.682
0.712
0.688
0.670
0.684
Shi-Malik
0.715
0.692
0.727
0.690
0.686
0.694
Blondel et al.
0.873 (14)
0.872 (13)
0.885 (15)
0.862 (14)
0.856 (14)
0.828 (21)
GANC (reﬁned)
0.886
0.879
0.883
0.873
0.864
0.840
Dhillon-Guan-Kulis
0.860
0.865
0.872
0.859
0.851
0.810
Shi-Malik
0.877
0.874
0.877
0.860
0.870
0.826
GANC (reﬁned)
0.908 (10)
0.945 (4)
0.899 (12)
0.880 (13)
0.930 (5)
0.907(9)
Dhillon-Guan-Kulis
0.889
0.946
0.897
0.863
0.916
0.885
Shi-Malik
0.898
0.951
0.886
0.863
0.936
0.902
The clustering results corresponding to the curvature peaks include cluster(s) that contain
nodes from both of the brain hemispheres and clusters that include nodes from only one of
the hemispheres. In the following discussion, we call the clusters that contain nodes from
both of the hemispheres, the central clusters. Graphs A1, B, D, and E include only one
central cluster. Graphs A2 and C each include two central clusters.
The regions of the brain that are commonly grouped in the central clusters are posterior
cingulate cortex, precuneus, cuneus, paracentral lobule, pericalcarine cortex, caudal anterior
cingulate cortex, isthmuscingulate, isthmus of the cingulate cortex, and lingual gyrus, pro-
vided that graph B is excluded. If the second largest peak of the curvature is selected for B
(k = 5), the same regions are assigned to its central cluster. The ﬁrst ﬁve of the mentioned
regions are also classiﬁed as part of the structural core proposed by Hagmann et al. [66]; Hag-
mann et al. used cluster strengths, cluster degrees, k-Core, s-Core, betweenness centrality,
18

Table 4: Larger real networks: Partition metrics ( (Number of clusters) NAssoc per cluster/execution time).
Network
Cond-Mat
Googleweb
Amazon
AS-Skitter
# of Nodes/Edges
36458/171736
342408/1142134
403364/2443311
1694616/11094209
Avg/Max Degree
28.5/278
6.7/1367
12.1/2752
13.1/35455
GANC
(2121) 0.784/0m2s
(12213) 0.869/2m30s
(11237) 0.768/3m4s
(26399) 0.769/46m33s
Dhillon-Guan-Kulis
(2121) 0.669/0m3s
(12213) —
(11237) 0.679/6m0s
(26399) —
Rosvall-Bergstrom
(2121) 0.746/0m10s
(12213) 0.844/1m17s
(11237) 0.712/11m26s
(26399) 0.720/99m37s
GANC
(82) 0.957/0m2s
(239) 0.993/2m30s
(230) 0.984/3m4s
(1776) 0.933/46m33s
Dhillon-Guan-Kulis
(82) 0.784/<1s
(239) 0.935/0m2s
(230) 0.872/0m4s
(1776) 0.709/8m0s
Blondel et al.
(82) 0.849/0m1s
(239) 0.990/0m5s
(230) 0.952/0m14s
(1776) 0.859/0m4s
GANC
(37) 0.970/0m2s
(7) 0.999/2m30s
(22) 0.997/3m4s
(32) 0.994/46m33s
GANC
(526) 0.902/0m2s
(855) 0.984/2m30s
(206) 0.996/3m4s
—
and eﬃciency12 to propose a structural core of the brain consisting of eight regions.
The authors of [66] also used modularity maximization and found six modules, two of
which included nodes from both of the hemispheres (central clusters). The regions that are
assigned to the central clusters by modularity maximization are similar to the ones extracted
by GANC.
5.4.3. Larger networks
Here we illustrate the performance of our algorithm on large graphs.
We apply our
algorithm to four networks with diﬀerent natures: Cond-Mat (a collaboration network) [67],
Googleweb (a web graph) [60]13, Amazon (a product co-purchasing network)[68], and AS-
Skitter (an autonomous system graph)[69].
The nodes in Cond-Mat represent scientists
that submit their preprints to the condensed matter archive at www.arxiv.org; the edges
represent co-authorships. The nodes in Googleweb represent websites and the directed edges
represent the existence of hyperlinks.
Each node in Amazon network corresponds to a
product purchased at www.amazon.com. Each directed edge from a node to another means
that when the former is purchased, the latter is frequently also purchased. AS-Skitter is a
network of autonomous systems extracted by traceroute analysis.14
The Cond-Mat graph is weighted and the rest of the graphs are unweighted. In Table 4,
the average and maximum degrees do not take the weights into account; the number of edges
aﬀects the run-time of GANC, not the weight values. None of the above graphs are originally
connected. However each has a very large connected component that includes the majority
of the nodes and the edges. Here we conduct clustering analysis of the largest connected
component. Some of these graphs are directed, but we construct undirected graphs by adding
the adjacency matrix to its transpose.
12Cluster strength and degree are the weighted and unweighted degrees, respectively. k-Core (s-Core)
is the largest subgraph that includes nodes of degree (respectively, strength) at least k (respectively, s).
Betweenness centrality of a region is a measure of the proportion of the shortest paths passing through it.
Eﬃciency of a region indicates how short the region’s average path lengths to other regions are.
13Google programming contest: http://www.google.com/programming-contest/
14http://www.caida.org/tools/measurement/skitter

Table 4 compares the performance of the algorithms that are scalable to such large
networks.
The table shows the average NAssoc per cluster of the identiﬁed partitioning
and the time required for completion of the algorithm. The spectral clustering algorithms
cannot be executed on our test machine when either the number of nodes or the number
of clusters is very large. Both the computational time and the memory requirements are
excessive. We therefore compare the performance of GANC, Dhillon-Guan-Kulis (no local
search), Rosvall-Bergstrom, and the Blondel et al. algorithms.
The Rosvall-Bergstrom and Blondel et al. algorithms automatically select the number of
clusters. A meaningful comparison of the average NAssoc is only possible when the number
of clusters are equal; to facilitate comparisons, we therefore construct multiple partitionings
for GANC and the Dhillon-Guan-Kulis algorithms, each with a diﬀerent number of clusters.
We also construct a partitioning corresponding to one or more of the peaks in the curvature
plot (for some of the networks, there are two peaks that are very similar in value, so we
consider it useful to examine the partitionings corresponding to each). The last two rows of
Table 4 correspond to those peaks.
GANC is superior to other algorithms with respect to maximizing NAssoc in all of the
cases. GANC also signiﬁcantly outperforms the Dhillon-Guan-Kulis algorithm, which is also
striving to maximize NAssoc. The latter is also outperformed by Rosvall-Bergstrom and
Blondel et al. algorithms.
In terms of the computation time, GANC is often faster than Rosvall-Bergstrom, but the
scaling behavior is diﬀerent. To illustrate this, in addition to the graphs listed in Table 1, we
have applied the algorithms to the road network graph of California [60] which is extremely
sparse (the average degree is 2.8). The graph contains around 2 million nodes. While GANC
performs the clustering in 32 seconds, in takes 197 minutes for the Rosvall-Bergstrom algo-
rithm to converge to a solution. The complexity of GANC is dominated by the agglomerative
clustering procedure which requires O(mh log n) operations. Hence the speed of GANC de-
pends on the number of edges in the graph, and the height of the dendrogram. However the
graph sparsity does not show an impact on Rosvall-Bergstrom’s execution time. Blondel’s
algorithm is much faster than GANC, but as mentioned previously, it suﬀers from resolution
limit associated with clustering algorithms that maximize modularity. The Dhillon-Guan-
Kulis algorithm is also very fast for small values of k, but it gets slower and its memory
requirements become excessive if k becomes large.
To illustrate the properties of the algorithm outputs in terms of the cluster sizes and
the connectivity of individual clusters, we have examined the plots of NAssoc of individual
clusters versus the number of nodes in them. Each algorithm behaves similarly on diﬀer-
ent graphs presented in Table 4. Figure 4a compares GANC and Rosvall-Bergstrom when
applying these algorithms on Amazon co-purchasing graph. For the same number of clus-
ters, GANC produces clusters with higher values of NAssoc than Rosvall-Bergstrom. The
latter produces many small clusters with very low values of NAssoc. The behavior of the
Dhillon-Guan-Kulis and the Blondel et al. algorithms are discussed in our case study.
5.5. Case Study: US Patent Citation Graph
As a case study, we consider the undirected version of the citation graph released by
the National Bureau of Economic Research [70, 71]. The patents are classiﬁed into 6 broad
technological categories. A more reﬁned classiﬁcation leads to 36 sub-categories. We use
20

10
0
10
2
10
4
10
6
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
NAssoc
Cluster Size
 
 
GANC
GANC min.
Rosvall−Bergstrom
Rosvall−Bergstrom min.
(a) Amazon
10
0
10
2
10
4
10
6
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
NAssoc
Cluster Size
 
 
GANC
Blondel et al.
Dhillon−Guan−Kulis
(b) US Patent Citation
Figure 4: NAssoc of individual clusters.
each patent’s label (category or sub-category) in addition to NAssoc and runtime to perform
a comparison.
The original graph is not connected; however the largest connected component contains
more than 99.7% of the nodes and all of the edges. Hence we focus on the largest connected
component which contains 3,764,117 nodes and 16,511,740 edges. The maximum node degree
is 793.
5.5.1. Clustering Runtime
The Rosvall-Bergstrom algorithm [7] was terminated after more than 30 hours without
converging to a solution. GANC takes 77 minutes to construct the full hierarchy. After the
hierarchy has been generated, each ﬂat partitioning including the reﬁnement takes less than
35 seconds. The algorithm by Blondel et al. [56] takes 8 minutes. The Dhillon-Guan-Kulis
algorithm [11] takes 72 seconds for k = 57 and increases as k is increased.
5.5.2. Maximization of Normalized Association
In order to have a fair comparison in terms of NAssoc, we ﬁx k = 57 to match the number
of clusters of the Blondel et al. result. The values of NAssoc/k for GANC, Dhillon-Guan-
Kulis, and Blondel et al. are 0.964, 0.859, and 0.855, respectively. The values of NAssoc
of the individual clusters are shown in Figure 4b which illustrates the clear superiority of
GANC.
5.5.3. Extraction of True Clusters and Absence of Large Well-Deﬁned Clusters
We use the categories and sub-categories to classify the nodes in the patent citation
graph. We denote the maximum proportion of nodes from the same class in a given cluster
as the homogeneity proportion of that cluster. For the Blondel et al. and Dhillon-Guan-
Kulis algorithms, we use k = 57 and for GANC we use k = 52 (the closest peak of the
curvature plot). The clusters are sorted according to their homogeneity proportion in Figure
21

5a. The ﬁgure shows the superiority of GANC in extracting clusters of nodes from the same
categories. When sub-categories are employed for the assessment, the superiority of GANC
becomes more pronounced.
10
20
30
40
50
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Homogeneity proportion
Cluster #
 
 
Blondel et al.
GANC
Dhillon et al.
(a) Maximum Homogeneity Proportions
10
0
10
2
10
4
10
6
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Homogeneity proportion
Cluster Size
 
 
GANC
Dhillon−Guan−Kulis
Blondel et al.
(b) Homogeneity Proportion per Cluster
Figure 5: The 52 most homogeneous clusters out of 57 clusters using the Blondel et al. and the Dhillon-
Guan-Kulis algorithms.
Figure 5a alone does not provide a fair comparison as any singleton would have homo-
geneity proportion of 1. In Figure 5b, the homogeneity proportion is plotted versus the size
of the extracted clusters for the three algorithms.
The Blondel et al. algorithm produces clusters as small as 14 to as large as 250,000
nodes. However the largest homogeneous cluster that is extracted has 38 nodes. The quality
of clusters degrade as the size of the clusters increase. This trend is very likely to be due to
the resolution limit of modularity.
Both GANC and Dhillon-Guan-Kulis produce a very large cluster (the core cluster [60]).
Excluding the core, Dhillon-Guan-Kulis produces clusters of an average size of n/k which is
around 37,000 nodes in this example (See Figure 5b). This behavior of the Dhillon-Guan-
Kulis algorithm is due to the underlying region-growing procedure it adopts from Metis
[17].
The clusters extracted by GANC are much smaller than the other two algorithms. Ex-
cluding the core, the cluster sizes are between 7 and 225. Similar to previous observations
of Leskovec et al. [60], the strongly-connected clusters of the large graphs listed in Table 4
diminish in number as we move towards the center of the graph. Having a small homogene-
ity proportion is then expected for the core as it includes several clusters that are not very
well-connected and are lumped together. If we study a clustering that is in a lower level in
the hierarchy, further clusters would be extracted from the core and the core shrinks. The
resulting clusters are not as well-connected in terms of NAssoc though. In other words, the
most isolated and well-connected clusters are extracted at the higher levels of the hierarchy.
22

6. Conclusion
We proposed a novel algorithm to maximize normalized association that consists of three
steps: the agglomerative hierarchical clustering procedure, the model order selection step,
and the reﬁnement step.
The agglomerative clustering procedure requires O(n log2 n) operations for many real-life
graphs, where n is the number of nodes in the graph. This procedure dominates the compu-
tational complexity of the other steps of the algorithm. The second step of our algorithm, the
model order selection, is based on the relative improvement of normalized association when
changing the number of clusters; the curvature plot is used to select one or several model
orders for the ﬁnal clustering. Unlike modularity, the curvature metric does not exhibit an
intrinsic resolution limit. For a multi-resolution analysis, a user can specify a range on the
allowable number of clusters, and the algorithm will select the number of clusters with the
maximum curvature in that range. After selecting the number of clusters, the clusters are
passed to the reﬁnement step. This step of our algorithm iterates over the boundary nodes in
the clusters and explores possible improvements in normalized association by moving each
of the boundary nodes to their neighboring clusters. Using the map data structure, the
overhead added by the reﬁnement becomes negligible. Experiments show that despite the
negligible runtime of the reﬁnement step, it signiﬁcantly improves the initial results with
respect to the normalized association maximization.
Our experimental analysis on relatively small networks indicated that the proposed algo-
rithm identiﬁed partitions that have normalized association values comparable to the spectral
algorithms that involve an eigendecomposition. These algorithms are too computationally
complex to be applied to very large graphs. We demonstrated that our proposed algorithm
can be applied to large graphs (millions of nodes and edges). For these large graphs, the pro-
posed algorithm identiﬁes partitions that have larger values of normalized association than
those identiﬁed by the only comparable algorithm that directly addresses the normalized cut
metric.
A clustering algorithm can by no means be suitable for every application. For example,
despite the failure of Dhillon-Guan-Kulis algorithm to extract clusters with nodes of the same
categories in the patent citation network, it generates clusters of very similar sizes. This is
more suitable for VLSI applications for instance [72]. On the other hand, when clustering is
meant to extract “communities” (group of nodes with strong intra-connection), GANC and
Rosvall-Bergstrom are clearly preferred.
The Blondel et al. and Rosvall-Bergstrom algorithms are not able to generate a parti-
tioning to an arbitrary number of clusters15; even though they are agglomerative, they do
not generate the complete hierarchy because they merge several nodes/clusters in each of
their iterations. Hence if one is interested in several arbitrary clustering levels, GANC ﬁts
one’s requirement the best out of the competing algorithms discussed.
In this paper we only considered undirected graphs while the edge directions could carry
valuable information about the structure of a graph. An extension of GANC can be developed
by adopting the generalized normalized cut criterion [73].
15The available implementation of the Rosvall-Bergstrom algorithm is based on the Blondel et al. algorithm.
See http://www.tp.umu.se/~rosvall/algorithm.pdf.
23
