22
ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in
Projected Decision-Making Paths∗
ANDREAS HINTERREITER, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria and Imperial College London, UK
CHRISTIAN STEINPARZ, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
MORITZ SCHÖFL, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
HOLGER STITZ, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria and datavisyn GmbH, Austria
MARC STREIT, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
Fig. 1. The ProjectionPathExplorer visualization prototype allows exploration of patterns in decision-making
paths. Multiple series of high dimensional states are visualized as trajectories through a joint embedding
space.
∗This paper is an extended version of the workshop paper “Visualization of Rubik’s Cube Solution Algorithms” [46].
Authors’ addresses: Andreas Hinterreiter, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Altenberger Straße 69, Linz, Austria, 4040,

imperial.ac.at; Christian Steinparz, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Altenberger Straße 69, Linz, Austria, 4040, christian.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires

ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.
arXiv:2001.08372v3  [cs.AI]  18 Jul 2022

22:2
A. Hinterreiter, C. Steinparz, M. Schöfl, H. Stitz, and M. Streit
In problem-solving, a path towards solutions can be viewed as a sequence of decisions. The decisions, made by
humans or computers, describe a trajectory through a high-dimensional representation space of the problem.
By means of dimensionality reduction, these trajectories can be visualized in lower-dimensional space. Such
embedded trajectories have previously been applied to a wide variety of data, but analysis has focused almost
exclusively on the self-similarity of single trajectories. In contrast, we describe patterns emerging from drawing
many trajectories—for different initial conditions, end states, and solution strategies—in the same embedding
space. We argue that general statements about the problem-solving tasks and solving strategies can be made
by interpreting these patterns. We explore and characterize such patterns in trajectories resulting from human
and machine-made decisions in a variety of application domains: logic puzzles (Rubik’s cube), strategy games
(chess), and optimization problems (neural network training). We also discuss the importance of suitably
chosen representation spaces and similarity metrics for the embedding.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing →Visualization techniques; Information visualization;
Visualization systems and tools; • Computing methodologies →Visual analytics.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: algorithm visualization, game visualization, dimensionality reduction,
trajectories, multivariate time series
ACM Reference Format:
Andreas Hinterreiter, Christian Steinparz, Moritz Schöfl, Holger Stitz, and Marc Streit. 2021. ProjectionPath
Explorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 11,
3–4, Article 22 (December 2021), 30 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3387165
1
INTRODUCTION
The act of solving problems usually involves sequences of decisions. In most contexts, decisions can
be viewed as transitions between states in a representation space. For example, solving logic puzzles
such as the Rubik’s cube requires decisions about how to transform an object from a random initial
configuration to a solved final state. Strategy games can also be viewed as progressions through
game states; each decision transforms the board state and leads closer to a player’s victory or
defeat. Even optimization processes, such as the training of neural networks, involve decisions
about transitioning from one intermediate state to anotherin the hope that the process ultimately
converges to a final solution.
In many application domains, the decisions determining a transition from one state to another
are made consciously by human agents, often after a complex reasoning process. In other cases, the
transitions between states can be based on decisions made automatically by algorithms. Examining
patterns in the paths towards a problem solution can lead to a better understanding of approaches
used by humans and machines to solve complex tasks.
For almost all real-world problems, the possible representation spaces are not only vast, but also
high-dimensional. Many attributes are needed to accurately describe each intermediate state along
the pathway to a solution. The high dimensionality of the state spaces makes assessing patterns
in solution paths challenging. Previously, dimensionality reduction techniques have been used in
conjunction with trajectory visualizations to explore high-dimensional sequences of states [3].
Research has so far focused mostly on discovering patterns in single solution paths. However, the
exact path towards a solution may depend strongly on the initial state for that particular instance
of the problem. For example, in the case of optimization algorithms, paths of convergence might
depend on the chosen initialization. In other domains, for instance in strategy games such as chess,
the initialization is always the same. Here, early decisions might force the solution path along one
particular of many different tracks.
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
2160-6455/2021/12-ART22 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3387165
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths
22:3
In both cases, it is not enough to view single solution paths without the context of many other
paths. In fact, many interesting patterns emerge only from multiple paths. In this paper, we present
an extension of established trajectory techniques for visualizing high-dimensional paths through
complex representation spaces. We identify patterns emerging from sets of projected solution
trajectories. Using interactive visualization, we enable users to find such patterns and explore their
relationships with the underlying real-world processes.
We present a general interactive prototype for the visualization of multiple high-dimensional
solution trajectories and show how minimal adaptations can make this prototype useful in a diverse
range of application domains. Specifically, we present examples in which we compare Rubik’s
cube solution algorithms, find patterns in chess games, and assess meaningful representations of
neural network training processes. These examples show how extending the self-similarity concept
of single projected solution trajectories to include similarities between multiple trajectories can
provide more insights into problem-solving processes.
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of publications related to our work.
In Section 3 we introduce our technique and discuss how it extends existing work. In Section 3.3
we characterize the possible patterns emerging from our visualization technique. Section 4 is a
description of our prototype implementation of ProjectionPathExplorer, which we used to analyze
data from several application domains. In Section 5 we show the results of these analyses. The
general insights gained from these applications and ideas for future work are discussed in Section 6.
Section 7 concludes the paper.
2
RELATED WORK
We study patterns emerging from multiple dimensionality-reduced trajectories through a problem
state space. First we discuss the general importance of trajectories for time series visualization.
We then briefly review the most widely used dimensionality reduction techniques. Finally, and
most pertinently to our approach, we discuss previous attempts at using trajectories for visualizing
dimensionality-reduced data.
2.1
Trajectories for Time Series Visualization
Visualizing the progression of processes (algorithms, games, etc.) through different states is equiva-
lent to visualizing multivariate time series data. A dataset with two quantitative attributes that
change over time can be readily visualized as a trajectory through 2D data space, with time vary-
ing between the support points. The DimpVis system [27], for instance, demonstrated the use of
trajectories as an important factor in interactive displays of time series data.
Trajectories naturally play an important role in visual analytics of movement [1]. When many
trajectories (also known as trails) are shown at once, visual clutter can be a problem. To address
this issue, edge-bundling techniques [14, 25] have been adapted to trail visualization [11, 26, 40].
In order to gain additional insights from spatial trajectories, numerous trajectory data mining
techniques have been developed [57].
2.2
Similarity of Time Series
Assessing the similarity between multiple time series has been studied extensively for various
encodings of one-dimensional temporal data. This includes line charts, heatmaps/colorfields and
horizon graphs [18], and image encodings [55].
However, these encodings of one-dimensional data cannot exhibit many of the interesting
patterns that arise from trajectories. Such patterns are cycles, parallel segments, and/or points
visited multiple times, and they result from the fact that—in case of the trajectory encoding—time
varies implicitly along the path through multiple dimensions. From these patterns a notion of
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

22:4
A. Hinterreiter, C. Steinparz, M. Schöfl, H. Stitz, and M. Streit
self-similarity follows, which is arguably one of the strengths of the trajectory encoding. Plotting
multiple trajectories together enables assessment of both similarity between time series and self -
similarity of individual time series.
2.3
Dimensionality Reduction
Often the data to be visualized as trajectories has more than two dimensions. While some data
attributes can be encoded in additional channels (e.g., line color, line width, or marker shape),
dimensionality reduction becomes inevitable for 5 or more data dimensions. A multitude of dimen-
sionality reduction techniques has been developed [54], and their usefulness for data visualization
has been studied [12]. Principal component analysis (PCA) and multidimensional scaling (MDS) are
two classic techniques used for dimensionality reduction. In the 2000s, Isomap [48] and t-distributed
stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) [53] were presented—two non-linear techniques specifically
created for data visualization. Around the same time, deep autoencoder networks proved to be
capable of learning low-dimensional codes of high-dimensional data [23]. More recently, uniform
manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) has ben introduced as an alternative to t-SNE [34].
In the last years, projection techniques have been used increasingly for visualizations in explainable
AI [24]. Rauber et al., for instance, used t-SNE for visualizing how the activity of neural networks
evolves throughout training [42]. A recent survey by Espadoto et al. [15] compares over 40 different
dimensionality reduction techniques quantitatively.
2.4
Combining Dimensionality Reduction and Trajectories
As stated above, without any additional encoding, trajectories can be readily used only to visualize
time series with two attributes. For time series with more attributes, a combination of dimensionality
reduction with trajectory visualization can be a powerful approach.
Schreck et al. used self-organizing maps (SOMs) to display projected trajectories of high-
dimensional, time-resolved financial data [44]. For document visualization, Mao et al. derived
representations of n-gram data akin to phase-space trajectories used in theoretical physics [33].
Ward and Guo generalized the notion of n-grams to non-textual data, yielding a shape-space
representation of snippets of time series data [56]. In TimeSeriesPath, data points of multivariate
time series are projected using PCA, and shown as trajectories in 2D space [4]. Schreck et al. used
self organizing maps (SOMs) to display projected trajectories of high-dimensional, time-resolved
financial data [44]. In ThermalPlot [47], multi-attribute time-series data is reduced to a single point
by means a user-defined degree-of-interest (DOI) function and plotted in a DOI space. Items with
similar temporal development are clustered and show similar trajectories.
All these similar approaches are summarized in the Time Curve idiom by Bach et al. [3]. Time
Curves are “based on the metaphor of folding a timeline visualization into itself so as to bring similar
time points close to each other [3]”. The versatility of the Time Curves technique is reflected in the
diverse range of application domains: high-dimensional dynamic networks [5, 51], neural network
learning [42], user-interaction data [6], trend and outlier detection [7], sport-game visualization [58],
and temporal patterns in representation data [21].
One example application in the Time Curves paper is the visualization of document edit his-
tories [3]. In this domain, similar approaches had been used previously, by treating sequences of
n-grams similarly to multivariate time series. Using PCA and differentiation, Mao et al. derived
visualizations of n-gram data akin to phase space trajectories used in theoretical physics [33]. Ward
and Guo generalized the notion of n-grams to non-textual data, yielding a shape-space representa-
tion of snippets of time series data [56]. The shape-space representation was, in turn, projected by
PCA and visualized as trajectories in two dimensions.
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths
22:5
In an approach very similar to Time Curves, van den Elzen et al. used t-SNE, among other
projection techniques, to visualize high-dimensional states of dynamic networks [51]. A recent
Master’s thesis [5] features similar visualizations of network states.
Rauber et al. [42] used t-SNE to visualize the activations in neural networks over time. In
ModelSpace, Brown et al. [6] visualize user interaction data as projected trajectories, aiming to
reveal patterns in the users’ intentions. Cakmak et al. used a t-SNE visualization for trend and outlier
detection in projected time series [7]. Zhu and Chen created dimensionality-reduced trajectories
for basketball games, making use of landmark MDS [58].
Finally, He and Chen used a time-aware implementation of t-SNE to visualize temporal patterns
in representation data [21]. This temporal t-SNE variant places similar high dimensional states at
large distances in the embedding spaces, if the are temporally far away from each other.
2.5
Context of This Work
Among these related works, the Time Curves paper by Bach et al. [3]is perhaps the most relevant
one for our work. The usefulness of the Time Curves idiom is based on a number of characteristics
of the projected trajectories, such as point density and irregularity, as well as patterns such as
transitions, cycles, and oscillations [3]. However, Bach et al. focused on the interpretation of single
trajectories and only hinted at the power of constructing and interpreting multiple trajectories
together. We build upon their classification, but focus on additional patterns emerging from multiple
trajectories.
Other authors have demonstrated the potential of constructing multiple trajectories in the same
embedding space in particular contexts. Zhu and Chen were able to detect outliers among multiple
basketball games [58]. Brown et al. discovered differences in velocities along multiple trajectories
from interaction data, and traced back these differences to varying user speeds [6]. However, little
work has focused on identifying general patterns emerging from multiple embedded trajectories
throughout different application domains.
In this paper we apply our approach to data from diverse application domains, including games
(chess), puzzles (Rubik’s cube), and AI (neural network training). Depending on the application
context, the number of trajectories we plot conjointly in the same embedding space varies between
a few and several hundred. We argue that general statements about the visualized decision-making
processes can be made based on similarities between multiple trajectories.
3
TECHNIQUE
Prior to visualizing paths of problem solutions with trajectories through an embedding space, a
number of important decisions have to be made. The visualization depends strongly on how the
real-world states are represented as vectors. The distance metric for these vectors needs to be
chosen carefully, as must the dimensionality reduction technique. Finally, a suitable visual encoding
for the low-dimensional states and trajectories needs to be chosen. We discuss all these aspects in
the following section. We also present a discussion of possible patterns emerging from multiple
trajectories in the same embedding space.
3.1
State-Space Representation
As previously mentioned, our visualization approach is similar to the Time Curve technique
introduced by Bach et al. [3]. Time Curves are trajectories drawn through projections of high-
dimensional data points. They are constructed by defining a distance metric in the high-dimensional
domain and embedding the data points in two dimensions such that certain characteristics of the
high-dimensional distance metric are preserved. The projected points are connected depending on
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

22:6
A. Hinterreiter, C. Steinparz, M. Schöfl, H. Stitz, and M. Streit
Table 1. Key terms and definitions for the construction of Time Curves as given by Bach et al. [3], and our
own notations for state-space representations and dimensionality reduction.
Notation
Explanation
𝑡𝑖∈R
timestamp
S
snapshot domain (state space)
𝑠𝑖∈S
data snapshot (state)
𝑝𝑖= (𝑡𝑖,𝑠𝑖)
time point
𝑃= {𝑝1, . . . , 𝑝𝑛}
temporal dataset
𝑑: S2 →R+
distance metric
𝐷= [𝑑𝑖𝑗] = [𝑑(𝑝𝑖, 𝑝𝑗)]
distance matrix
𝑃𝐷= {𝑃, 𝐷}
temporal similarity dataset
𝑟: R →S
state-space representation
𝑓: S →R2 or 𝑓: S𝑛→(R2)𝑛
embedding*
* Domain and codomain of the embedding function depend on the technique chosen.
the timestamps associated with each high-dimensional data point. Table 1 lists the key terms and
definitions in the context of dimensionality-reduced trajectories.
The timestamps of the projected points are not relevant to their placement in the embedding
space. Only the relative temporal ordering is used for connecting the embedded points. In most
scenarios, projected trajectories are thus visualizations of sequences (or ordered sets) of states. This
trajectory technique can therefore be applied to any process that involves an object undergoing
several sequential states, and state indices can entirely replace actual timestamps. Bach et al. use
the term “data snapshot” to refer to the individual high-dimensional data items that—together with
the timestamps—make up the multivariate time series. They call the pairs of timestamps and data
snapshots time points. In contrast, we refer to data snapshots as states, and we call the snapshot
domain state space. This stresses our focus on sequential processes in which the actual time values
are not necessarily of interest or even unavailable (e.g., as in the guiding example below).
An essential requirement for constructing a meaningful visualization of trajectories through
an embedding space is the way in which the real-world object (that goes through the sequential
steps) is “digitized”. In our opinion, this is the first, and possibly most important decision when
combining projection with trajectories, but it was not discussed in detail by Bach et al. We refer to
this digitization as state-space representation and define it as a mapping from the “real world” R to
the state space S. Importantly, the state-space representation directly influences the meaning of
any potential distance metrics.
A state-space representation incorporates one of possibly many selections of an object’s attributes.
All data that is not included is potentially interesting metadata, which is not used directly to calculate
the trajectories’ support points, but can be encoded additionally (e.g., by coloring trajectories or
points categorically depending on the associated metadata). Thus, the actual value of the timestamp
𝑡𝑖of a time point (𝑡𝑖,𝑠𝑖) can also be treated as metadata.
As a guiding example throughout this section, we apply our visualization approach to data
from two well-known sorting algorithms: bubble sort and quicksort. We first create all possible
permutations of the list (1, . . . ,𝑛) for a given length 𝑛. We apply each of the two algorithms to each
permutation and record all intermediate steps. For visualizing the progression of the algorithms,
we first need to convert the list objects from R to a suitably chosen state space S by means of the
state-space representation 𝑟. We decide that we want to compare lists in terms of “how shuffled”
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths
22:7
they are. This similarity can be measured using an edit distance. There are now two approaches for
obtaining meaningful distances:
• We can directly use the symmetric group of all permutations of lists with length 𝑛as our
state space: S = 𝔖𝑛. This allows us to simply use an edit distance of our choice as metric 𝑑,
such as the Hamming distance or the Damerau–Levenshtein distance.
• Alternatively, we can use another representation of lists in which a distance of our choice
(e.g., the squared euclidean distance) corresponds to an edit distance. In the case of our
permuted lists, such a representation can be constructed by performing a one-hot encoding:
enc((𝑥1, . . . ,𝑥𝑛)) = flat((sparse𝑛(𝑥1), . . . , sparse𝑛(𝑥𝑛))). Here, flat(𝑀) flattens a matrix 𝑀
to a vector. The vector sparse𝑛(𝑖) = (𝛿1𝑖, . . . ,𝛿𝑛𝑖) is a vector of length 𝑛in which only
the 𝑖th entry is set to 1 and all other entries are set to 0. In the formula for sparse𝑛(𝑖), 𝛿
represents the Kronecker delta. The resulting vectors have a length of 𝑛2, and the state space
is S = {0, 1}(𝑛2). In this state space, 𝑑(𝑎,𝑏) = Euclidean(𝑎,𝑏)2/2 is exactly equivalent to the
Hamming distance.
Since most dimensionality reduction techniques accept distance matrices as input, or can be
readily adapted to accept non-numeric data, the first approach is usually preferable. However, the
second approach can help to construct meaningful distances via intermediate encodings, when
the “true” distance is computationally infeasible. This will become evident in the discussion of the
distance metric we used to compare states of a Rubik’s cube in Section 5.1.
3.2
Dimensionality Reduction
In this work, we focus on visualizing multiple trajectories conjointly. This also affects the calculation
of the embedding used for dimensionality reduction. In order to embed all trajectories in the same
space, the individual states of all sequences must be projected in conjunction. This means that
identical elements in the high-dimensional state space are more likely to occur multiple times. This
is especially the case when the visualized real-world process is constrained to always start from
the same initial state, always ends in the same final state, or has fixed intermediate states that
must be traversed (see also the discussion of patterns in Section 3.3). In our guiding example, each
application of either of the two sorting algorithms terminates in the same state, namely the sorted
array (1, . . . ,𝑛). This state will be present in our dataset a total of 𝑚times, where 𝑚is the number
of different initial states multiplied by the number of sorting algorithms used.
In our experience, most implementations of t-SNE exhibit the following behavior: when an input
set 𝑋= {𝑥1,𝑥2, . . . ,𝑥𝑛}, with some identical high-dimensional points 𝑥𝑖= 𝑥𝑗, is embedded, 𝑦𝑖= 𝑦𝑗
is not guaranteed to hold for the resulting embedding 𝑓(𝑋) = {𝑦1,𝑦2, . . . ,𝑦𝑛}. Since the objective
function of t-SNE is optimized for all points simultaneously, identical embedding coordinates for
identical input values cannot be guaranteed—although the embedding coordinates will typically be
very close together. Depending on the projection technique, keeping duplicates in the input set can
thus offset, and thereby highlight, points that are visited more often than others. If exact identity is
required, duplicates must be removed beforehand.
Figure 2 presents the sorting trajectories of all permutations of the list (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) for bubble
sort and quicksort. It shows results for projecting the states by means of t-SNE, UMAP, and Isomap.
To ensure comparability between the sorting algorithms, the results of bubble sort and quicksort
were projected together into a shared embedding space by using one of the three dimensionality
reduction techniques. We optimized the hyperparameters of each technique to obtain visually
appealing results. Regardless of the embedding routine, the visualizations for bubble sort (Figure 2 (a–
c)) exhibit long and winding trajectory bundles. Many different sorting trajectories must go through
the same few states before finally ending up in the sorted end state. For quicksort (Figure 2 (d–f)),
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

22:8
A. Hinterreiter, C. Steinparz, M. Schöfl, H. Stitz, and M. Streit
(a) Bubble sort (t-SNE)
(b) Bubble sort (UMAP)
(c) Bubble sort (Isomap)
(d) Quicksort (t-SNE)
(e) Quicksort (UMAP)
(f) Quicksort (Isomap)
Fig. 2. Sorting trajectories for bubble sort (a–c) and quicksort (d–f), applied to all permutations of a list of
length 6 with unique entries. Three different dimensionality reduction techniques are shown: (a, d) t-SNE
with a perplexity of 100 and an exaggeration factor of 2 during the main optimization; (b, e) UMAP with
25 nearest neighbors and a minimum distance of 0.1; and (c, f) Isomap with 75 nearest neighbors. For each
projection technique, data for quicksort and bubble sort was combined, to obtain a shared embedding space.
Duplicates were not removed prior to the embedding. For t-SNE and UMAP, the duplicate sorted arrays form
a pronounced cluster, and the shared intermediate points are more salient. All plots were rotated such that
the sorted end states are located to the right.
the paths from the initial states to the sorted state are generally shorter and do not overlap as
much as in the case of bubble sort. This reflects the fact that, on average, quicksort passes only
3.5 intermediate states from start to finish, while bubble sort takes 7.5 steps for the given lists of
length 6. Furthermore, bubble sort is limited to simple swapping actions, which forces many sorting
trajectories to take similar paths through the state space.
For all three embedding techniques, we did not remove duplicates prior to the embedding. For
Isomap, duplicates in the input list make no difference, as duplicate high-dimensional points are
mapped to to the same two-dimensional point. For t-SNE and UMAP, however, high-dimensional
duplicates are embedded as clusters in two dimensions. This behavior of t-SNE and UMAP is
especially relevant to the cluster of sorted end states near the right-hand side of the plots in
Figure 2 (a), (b), (d), and (e). The clusters make the trajectory bundles thicker and more easily
traceable.
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths
22:9
One insight from the comparison in Figure 2 is that, with the right parameter choice, t-SNE and
UMAP can yield very similar plots. This is the case when the chose perplexity parameter of t-SNE is
high enough for some global structure to be preserved. A typical argument in favor of UMAP is that
t-SNE becomes inefficient for high perplexity values. However, this depends strongly on the size of
the projected dataset, and on the chosen hyperparameters. In our guiding example, we projected
sorting trajectories for 720 different initial states, which resulted in a total of 8,640 non-unique
states (i.e., including duplicates). With the implementations we used (see Section 4.2), t-SNE with
perplexity 100 was in fact slightly faster than UMAP with 25 nearest neighbors. However, for larger
datasets, higher dimensionality, or different hyperparameters, UMAP may perform better by up to
two orders of magnitude, as reported by Espadoto et al. [15].
Note that the state space in the guiding example of sorting algorithms for lists of length 6 is small
enough for all possible initial states to be tested easily, and the state space can thus be projected
as a whole. For more complex problems, such as those described in Section 5, the state spaces are
much larger, rendering it impossible to project them as a whole. In these cases, only the subspace
of actually visited states is projected.
3.3
Patterns in Multiple Trajectories
As can be seen in the guiding example in Figure 2, when multiple trajectories are constructed
together, several different patterns can emerge. Figure 3 (a–f) shows the patterns we identified for
start, intermediate, or end points, depending on whether they are sparsely distributed over large
regions of the embedding space or form a dense cluster.
Obviously, tightly packed starting points (P1) can be observed when the visualized processes are
constrained to start from the same or from very similar states. This would be the case, for instance,
in games that always start from a fixed initial configuration. Likewise, many processes converge to
the same or to similar end states, which results in a dense cluster of end points (P3). Examples of
these processes are list sorting (see Figure 2), optimization routines that reach global optima, and
solution paths of puzzles such as the Rubik’s cube. As explained above, in most cases we chose not
to remove duplicate entries in the state lists prior to the embedding, which—in the case of t-SNE or
UMAP—leads to a tightly packed cluster rather than a single point in the embedding space even for
exactly identical states.
Sparse clouds of starting points (P4) in the embedding space typically arise from randomly dis-
tributed initial states. Certain optimization algorithms, for instance, start with randomly initialized
states. In high-dimensional space, the Euclidean distances between any two random states tend
to be similar, with a variance limit of only 7/120 [50]. Most nonlinear dimensionality reduction
techniques based on distances in high-dimensional space tend to spread out many similarly spaced
high-dimensional points onto a disk in the embedding space. Thus, also sparse clouds of end points
can emerge if the visualized processes can terminate at many different, but similarly distant, end
states. The list-sorting example from Figure 2 is difficult to categorize in terms of patterns of starting
points, since—due to the small state space—all possible states were used as starting points.
Perhaps the most interesting pattern among those described in Figure 3 (P1–P6) is the densely
packed cluster of intermediate points (P2) of multiple trajectories through the embedding space. This
pattern gives rise to trajectory bundles (P7)—groups of trajectories that share multiple consecutive
clusters of intermediate points. Trajectory bundles also play an important role in the guiding
example in Figure 2, as the two sorting algorithms differ mainly in whether or not distinct bundles
are present. In trajectory data mining, such bundles and similar structures have been described as
flocks, convoys, swarms, or gatherings [57].
Figure 3 (P7) shows how a trajectory bundle results from consecutive clusters of intermediate
states (possibly also involving clusters of start and/or end states). It also shows that the trajectories
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

22:10
A. Hinterreiter, C. Steinparz, M. Schöfl, H. Stitz, and M. Streit
Single states per curve
Multiple states per curve
P1
dense starting
points
P2
dense inter-
mediate points
P3
dense end
points
P7
bundle
P8
bundle with dif-
ferent directions
P4
sparse starting
points
P5
sparse inter-
mediate points
P6
sparse end
points
P9
bundle with dif-
ferent velocities
P10
similar shapes
Fig. 3. Possible patterns emerging from multiple trajectories. The different kinds of points—starting, intermedi-
ate, or end points–of several trajectories can be either sparsely distributed over large regions of the embedding
space, or more densely packed. This results in six patterns: dense starting points (P1), dense intermediate
points (P2), dense end points (P3), sparse starting points (P4), sparse intermediate points (P5), and sparse
end points (P6). Several consecutive intermediate point clusters (possibly together with starting and/or end
point clusters) lead to trajectory bundles (P7). Trajectory bundles can differ in terms of direction (P8), and/or
state space velocity (P9). The trajectories can also have similar shapes while populating entirely different
regions of the embedding space (P10).
within a bundle can differ in terms of direction (P8) and/or velocity (P9). However, interpreting
the velocity is not straightforward. As explained in Section 3.1, the timestamps (if present) are used
only for joining points to form trajectories and not for the projection of states. This means that two
points close to each other in the embedding space do not necessarily need to be close in a temporal
sense. A direct connection between two points means that the states they represent were visited
consecutively, but the viewer might still not know about the “sampling rate”, that is, the actual
time between two states. In our applications, we deal with indexed states that often do not have a
timestamp at all.
State space velocity can thus be interpreted as the number of state changes undergone between
two non-consecutive points. Consider two trajectories, 𝑎= {𝑎1, . . . ,𝑎𝑛} and 𝑏= {𝑏1, . . . ,𝑏𝑚}, that
have two shared intermediate point clusters 𝑋and 𝑌. Consider further that some 𝑎𝑖∈𝑋and
𝑎𝑖+1 ∈𝑌, which means that 𝑎progresses directly from 𝑋to 𝑌. If now some 𝑏𝑗∈𝑋and 𝑏𝑗+2 ∈𝑌,
but 𝑏𝑗+1 lies somewhere between 𝑋and 𝑌, then 𝑏has a lower state-space velocity near state 𝑗than
𝑎has at 𝑖, because 𝑏needs more intermediate steps to traverse from 𝑋to 𝑌. Such a scenario is
shown in Figure 3 (P9). A meaningful comparison of state-space velocities is only possible when
two trajectories share at least two intermediate point clusters.
Another pattern that can emerge from plotting multiple trajectories together is shown in Fig-
ure 3 (P10). Two or more trajectories can have similar overall shapes, but lie in completely different
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths
22:11
regions of the embedding space. In the case of nonlinear embedding techniques, such as t-SNE
and UMAP, such patterns must be interpreted with care. The actual transformation from high-
dimensional to low-dimensional manifold may differ considerably for two separate state-space
regions. The only true insight gained from such patterns is that none of the states are similar across
different trajectories. When the shapes of many, well-separated trajectories are very similar (asis the
case in the neural network application discussed in Section 5.3), then a certain similaritybetween the
paths in the high-dimensional space—and thusbetween behaviors of the real-world processes—can
be assumed.
4
INTERACTIVE VISUALIZATION PROTOTYPE
To explore the possible patterns described in Section 3.3, we implemented an interactive visualization
prototype. In this section, we describe the choices for the visual encoding and the implementation
details. In order to adapt this prototype to new application domains, only minimal changes to
one particular part of the encoding are necessary. While the general visualization principle will
be discussed here, the domain-specific changes will be covered with each application scenario in
Section 5.
4.1
Visual Encoding and Interaction
ProjectionPathExplorer is an interactive visualization prototype for exploring patterns in collections
of projected decision making paths. The ProjectionPathExplorer user interface (see Figure 1) consists
of two parts: a side panel with several controls and an interactive plot showing the projected
trajectories along with two inset detail views.
In the ProjectionPathExplorer visualization, all states are represented by plot markers whose
positions correspond to the results of some dimensionality reduction technique. A marker can be
used to encode additional metadata: Its shape can encode categorical metadata, and its size and
color can encode categorical or quantitative metadata.
Similar to Bach et al. [3], we use Bézier interpolation for connecting projected states to form
trajectories. The improved readability compared to straight lines is especially important, as Projec-
tionPathExplorer typically displays many trajectories in a shared embedding space. The color of
the connecting lines of the trajectories can be used to encode additional categorical metadata for
each path.
To allow full flexibility and rapid adaptation to new application domains, ProjectionPathEx-
plorer can visualize data from CSV files with minimal requirements: Only the coordinates of the
projected states, the trajectory indices, and the relative ordering of states along trajectories must
be given. ProjectionPathExplorer supports an unlimited number of additional metadata attributes
(i.e., additional columns in the CSV files). Users can choose interactively how these metadata
attributes are to be encoded in the different visual channels. Groups of paths and/or states can be
filtered by categorical attributes, and, additionally, paths can be filtered by path length.
Users can hover over state markers to see detailed information in an inset (“Hover State” in
Figure 1). Multiple states can be selected by drawing a lasso around them. A second detail view
shows a fingerprint of the selected set of states. This fingerprint view is typically an adapted version
of the detail view for single states, often based on a similarity or difference encoding. These two
insets—the detail view for single states and the fingerprint view for sets of states—are the only parts
of the ProjectionPathExplorer visualization prototype that must be adapted to each application
scenario. We will discuss possible similarity encodings for each application scenario separately in
Section 5, and we reflect on the design space of these encodings in Section 6.5.
Additionally, ProjectionPathExplorer allows interactive dimensionality reduction using t-SNE
or UMAP. This feature is helpful if no pre-computed projection has been supplied in the CSV, or if
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

22:12
A. Hinterreiter, C. Steinparz, M. Schöfl, H. Stitz, and M. Streit
users want to explore different hyperparameters of the embedding techniques. Users can select
which data attributes they want to consider when calculating the embedding. Since both t-SNE and
UMAP are computationally expensive, the results are shown in a progressively updated animation,
which can be terminated at any time.
An additional feature of ProjectionPathExplorer is the automatic detection of state clusters based
on hierarchical density estimates [8]. At the time of writing, this feature is still experimental and
requires a local Python backend.
4.2
Implementation
The ProjectionPathExplorer visualization prototype is implemented as a web application written in
TypeScript. We used the three.js framework1 for WebGL rendering of the trajectory plot. The user
interface was implemented using the React library.2 For the interactive dimensionality reduction
we used JavaScript implementations of t-SNE (tsnejs3) and UMAP (umap-js4). Automatic cluster
detection requires a local Python backend and uses the hdbscan5 package. The ProjectionPath
Explorer prototype can be accessed at https://jku-vds-lab.at/projection-path-explorer/.
While we used the ProjectionPathExplorer prototype for exploring our datasets, the static
visualizations in Section 5 were created in Python, based on openTSNE results [41]. For the
examples in Figure 2 we used openTSNE, the scikit-learn [38] implementation of Isomap, and the
official Python implementation of UMAP by McInnes [34].
5
APPLICATIONS
To analyze the usefulness of the patterns described in Section 3.3, we applied the ProjectionPath
Explorer visualization protoype (introduced in Section 4) to high-dimensional processes from three
different application domains: Rubik’s cube, chess games, and neural network training. For each
application scenario, we first introduce the most important domain-specific concepts, then we
describe the state-space representation (cf. Section 3.1), and finally we discuss how the different
patterns relate to the real-world processes.
5.1
Rubik’s Cube Solution Algorithms
Rubik’s cube is a famous puzzle toy devised in 1974 by the Hungarian inventor and professor of
architecture Ernő Rubik. The classic Rubik’s cube has six faces, with each face being made up by a
3 × 3 grid of colored facets. These facets are the faces of smaller cubes, the so-called cubies. The
cube consists of 26 such cubies: 8 corner cubies with three facets each, 12 edge cubies with two
facets each, and 6 center cubies with one facet each. The cube is considered solved when each of its
faces shows only one color.
Rubik’s cube is commonly known to be almost impossible to solve if no specific solution strategy
or algorithm is applied. The closer a cube is to being solved and the more cubies are in the
correct position, the more likely it is that any rotation made with the intention of solving another
part of the cube will scramble already correctly placed cubies. Therefore, precisely considered
sequences of rotationsmust be applied which ensure that only specific cubies are moved to their
intended destinations. Many solution strategies for Rubik’s cube have been developed. They differ
in complexity and speed, depending on thenumber of special patterns and conditions that are
detected and utilizedin the solving process. Generally, the faster a solution algorithm is and the
1https://threejs.org
2https://reactjs.org/
3https://github.com/karpathy/tsnejs
4https://github.com/PAIR-code/umap-js
5https://github.com/scikit-learn-contrib/hdbscan
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths
22:13
fewer rotations are needed, the more sub-algorithmsmust be learned and applied under the correct
conditions. The classic beginners’ method is highly inefficient, but has only a few sub-algorithms
to be memorized. More advanced methods, such as Fridrich’s CFOP method [16]and the Petrus
method [39], are harder to learn, but usually require significantly fewer moves. Generally, solution
algorithms often use checkpoints: special points in the state space of the cube (e.g., havinga yellow
cross on the yellow side). This state space in which the solution algorithms act is high-dimensional
and encompasses more than 4.3 × 1019 unique states.
5.1.1
State-Space Representation. The first step of visualizing the solution pathways is to transform
the cube states into numerical representations for further processing. We based the encoding of
the cube state on the data structure underlying a Python Rubik’s cube API [31], which we also
used for calculating the solutions. Each face of the cube is represented by a 3 × 3 matrix with one
entry for each facet. For the entries representing the facet colors, we chose a one-hot encoding (i.e.,
(0,0,0,0,0,1) for red, (0,0,0,0,1,0) for green, etc.). This encoding facilitates the definition of meaningful
distance metrics for the dimensionality reduction. Flattening the resulting 6 × (3 × 3) × 6 tensor
yielded a feature vector of length 324 for a single state.
Similarity in the original feature space is defined via a distance metric. We tried different metrics
and ultimately chose the Euclidean distance. Euclidean distance in the high-dimensional state space
does not take into account the number of operations (i.e., rotations of cube slices) necessary to go
from one state to the next. Instead, we argue that applying the Euclidean distance to our choice
of feature vectors yields a representation that is more in line with the intuitive judgment of how
scrambled the cube is. In fact, for this one-hot encoding, the Euclidean distance is equal to the
square root of the Hamming distance. The Euclidean distance thus corresponds to a “naive edit
distance”, that gives a measure of the number of cube facets with the wrong color, but not the
number of moves required to fix them.
5.1.2
Implementation and Visualization Details. The solutions were calculated from random initial
states. Using a Python Rubik’s cube API [31], the initial states were generated by performing a set
of random rotations on an initially solved cube. This ensured that only physically possible cube
states were used. We added a new solution algorithm and options for data export to the API. For
each state, we exported (i) the high-dimensional encoding and (ii) whether that state is a checkpoint
of the algorithm used. Finally, we projected the high-dimensional cube states using t-SNE. For the
200 solution trajectories we used a learning rate of 100 and a perplexity of 50. For the plots with
only 2 trajectories we used a perplexity of 20.
The trajectories for different solution algorithms are visually encoded by hue. The marker shape
encodes whether a state is an initial state, a final state, or a checkpoint of the algorithm. Disk markers
for intermediate states between checkpoints can be displayed on demand. The markers’ brightness
encodes the progression through the solution trajectory, with bright colors corresponding to early
states.
The single-state detail view (see Section 4) shows the colored facets of an unfolded cube. In
the fingerprint view for multiple selected states, only those cube facets that have the same colors
across all selected states are shown as full-sized, colored squares. For each remaining, non-constant
facet, the color values are counted across all selected states. Each facet is given the color with the
highest number of counts, that is, the most prevalent color for that facet. The non-constant facets
are additionally shrunk and made transparent, with both the facet area and the alpha value being
proportional to the count of the most prevalent color. This encoding ensures that constant facets
across multiple states can be quickly identified, while information about the non-constant facets is
preserved. An example of this similarity encoding can be seen in Figure 6.
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

22:14
A. Hinterreiter, C. Steinparz, M. Schöfl, H. Stitz, and M. Streit
Fig. 4. Projected solution pathways for 100 random Rubik’s cubes solved with the beginner’s method (left),
and with Fridrich’s method (right), respectively. Data for both algorithms was combined for the calculation
of the t-SNE projection, but is shown in two individual visualizations for easier interpretation. The random
initial states form a broad cluster (P4)
near the center of the projected state space (1). Both solution algorithms take similar intermediate
paths (2), and later checkpoints cluster densely (P2) near the final solution (3). Notably, Fridrich’s
algorithm avoids lengthy sequences of rotations to transform an almost solved cube into a solved
cube (4).
A deployed version of our prototype implementation with pre-selected Rubik’s cube solution
data can be accessed at https://jku-vds-lab.at/projection-path-explorer/?set=rubik.
5.1.3
Results . Figure 4 shows the projected solution trajectories for 100 randomly chosen initial
cube states, both for the beginner’s method and the more advanced Fridrich’s method. Clearly,
projecting the cube states with t-SNE leads to the formation of different clusters. Most prominently,
later checkpoints form dense clusters close to the final solution (see (3) in Figure 4). Earlier check-
points with fewer correctly positioned cube facets are much more spread out. These checkpoints
share a wide, sparse region with the randomly selected initial states (1). For the checkpoints, we
thus observe a correlation between the timestamp 𝑡𝑖(see Table 1) and the type of pattern: small 𝑡𝑖
correspond to P5, while larger 𝑡𝑖correspond to P2. In later stages along the solution paths, interme-
diate states also tend to form dense clusters (P2), which leads to bundles of parallel trajectories (P7)
between checkpoints (2).
Figure 5 shows solution trajectories for the beginner’s method and Fridrich’s method applied to
the same initial state (1). Our choice of color-mixing and the use of opacity reveal that the solution
trajectories overlap completely up to the second checkpoint (2). This almost perfect overlap—a
special case of the bundle pattern (P7)—shows that even without removing duplicates, t-SNE does
not always introduce significant spacing between identical points for certain hyperparameter
choices (in this case perplexity 20).
As, upon user demand, the visualization provides detailed views of unfolded cubes for all
intermediate states, it can be seen that two layers of the cube are already fully solved at the second
checkpoint. We found this behavior to be general, that is, independent of the initial state. Afterwards,
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths
22:15
Fig. 5. Projected solution trajectories of the same initial state (1) solved with the beginner’s method and
Fridrich’s method, respectively. The algorithms share the same path up to the second checkpoint (2), at which
two layers of the cube are already fully solved. Near the end, the beginner’s method requires additional
rotations, while Fridrich’s method approaches the solution much faster.
the more optimized Fridrich method uses a large number of different sub-algorithms. This avoids
additional lengthy sequences of rotations close to the final solution. For the beginner’s method,
these rotations show up as characteristic coils (3).
When more cube solutions are projected, the differences between the strategies due to the use of
sub-algorithms become even more apparent (see Figure 4). Our visualization shows large bundles
of trajectories (P7) as a result of clusters of similar intermediate points (P2). Up to a certain point,
these bundles appear similar for the two different techniques (2).
Inspection of multiple states by means of a lasso selection can help to understand the origin
of state clusters and trajectory bundles. As an example, we look at one state cluster along the
trajectory bundle on the upper right-hand side of Figure 4. The similarity encoding for the cluster
is shown in Figure 6 (b), along with the standard detail view for an individual state in the cluster (a).
The similarity encoding reveals that about 70 % of the facets have the same color across the states in
the cluster. This particular cluster of intermediate points (P2) has a clearly defined sub-cluster, with
four more white facets shared across all its states, as seen in Figure 6 (c). This more fine-grained
analysis is made possible by the similarity encoding in the fingerprint view.
Further along the solution paths, the beginner’s method’s inefficient approach to correctly
positioning the final cubies gives rise to a large cluster of many “avoidable” intermediate steps (P5,
see (4) in the left part of Figure 4). In the case of Fridrich’s method, many fewer steps are required
during the final stages of solving the cube, leading to a much smaller and less populated cluster of
intermediate points (see (4) in the right part of Figure 4).
Thus, the scalability of our visualization approach to hundreds of cubes allows us to reliably
detect differences between the beginner’s method and Fridrich’s method. These differences are
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

22:16
A. Hinterreiter, C. Steinparz, M. Schöfl, H. Stitz, and M. Streit
(a) Single state
(b) Cluster
(c) Sub-cluster
Fig. 6. Analysis of clusters and sub-clusters along trajectory bundles. Selecting a single point of a state in a
cluster of intermediate points reveals the corresponding cube in the standard detail view (a). Selecting the
whole cluster via brushing updates the similarity detail view (b). About 70 % of the cube facets are the same
across the whole cluster. Selecting only the small sub-cluster shows that four more facets are the same (white)
inside this sub-cluster (c).
most apparent in the different patterns of types P2 and P5. Furthermore, the detail views for single
and multiple state selections help users understand the structure of the embedding space. Thereby,
these views clarify how the different patterns in the embedding space relate to the real-world cubes.
To tighten this connection between patterns and real-world actions, we built an interactive
physical Rubik’s cube demonstrator. This demonstrator combines our visualization approach with
a Bluetooth Rubik’s cube and a Lego Mindstorms robot. The demonstrator is described in more
detail in the Supplementary Information.
5.2
Chess Games
The game of chess has a compact set of rules. For each piece—king, queen, rook, bishop, knight,
and pawn—only a limited set of movements is allowed. Nevertheless, chess is extremely rich in
tactics and strategy. Players need to continuously evaluate the positions of the pieces on the board
and adapt their future moves accordingly. To strengthen their skills, players typically study records
of games, often with annotations from experts.
A game of chess can be roughly divided into the three stages of opening, middlegame, and
endgame. In the opening phase, players aim to develop their pieces (i. e., move them to strategically
relevant positions), take control of the center of the board, ensure safety of their king, and structure
their pawns. The middlegame depends mostly on the openings chosen by the two players. It is
typically the phase in which most captures occur, often as results from so-called combinations.
Finally, the endgame is the phase of the game in which only few pieces remain on the board.
Important goals in this stage are promotion of pawns, strategic positioning of the king, and forcing
the opponent to make certain moves—a situation called zugzwang. Players win either by checkmate
or resignation of their opponents. A game can also end in a draw for a number of reasons, including
agreement or a stalemate.
Classic tools for computer-aided studying of chess games, such as Fritz 16 [17], typically feature a
simple chessboard visualization of one game state at a time. Instead of focusing on single snapshots
of the game, Lu et al. visualize the evolution of entire games [32]. They introduced the evolution
graph: a decision-tree visualization that combines the actual moves performed by the players with
alternative moves calculated by AI. However, this approach remains limited to a single game.
Using our visualization approach, we explore possible similarities between many games, and
analyze how the games proceed through the different phases. We apply our visualization approach
to chess by viewing the chessboard as a state space, with each configuration of pieces(i.e., each
so-called position) corresponding to one possible state. Each of the players’ moves causes the game
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths
22:17
Table 2. State-space representations for board states before and after various kinds of moves on a simplified
2 × 2 chessboard with two different pieces. The pieces are encoded as ■= (0, 1, 0) and △= (0, 0, 1), and empty
fields as (0, 0, 0). For simplicity of the representation, castling and promotion are performed across colors. The
listed distances are Euclidean distances with respect to the initial state given in the first row.
Movement
Board
Tensor
Vector
Distance
None (initial)
 (0, 0, 0) (0, 0, 1)
(0, 1, 0) (0, 0, 0)

(0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0)
0
Simple
 (0, 1, 0) (0, 0, 1)
(0, 0, 0) (0, 0, 0)

(0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0)
√
2
Capture
 (0, 0, 0) (0, 1, 0)
(0, 0, 0) (0, 0, 0)

(0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0)
√
3
Castling
 (0, 0, 0) (0, 1, 0)
(0, 0, 1) (0, 0, 0)

(0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0)
2
Promotion
 (0, 0, 1) (0, 0, 1)
(0, 0, 0) (0, 0, 0)

(0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0)
√
2
to proceed from one state to the next. The number of reachable positions has been estimated to lie
between 2 × 1043 and 1.8 × 1046 [9].
5.2.1
State-Space Representation. In order to represent the possible configurations of pieces nu-
merically, we started by viewing the chessboard as an 8 × 8 matrix. Each field can be empty or
populated by one of 12 different pieces (six different pieces each for black and white). We thus
represented the state of one field by a one-hot code of length 13, which resulted in a 8 × 8 × 13
tensor encoding the full board state. Flattening this tensor yieldedtensor a vector of length 832. As
in the case of the Rubik’s cube visualization, we chose to use the Euclidean distance. The results of
this choice for the different kinds of moves are detailed in Table 2.
Using this encoding and the Euclidean distance has the consequence that moving a bishop
diagonally by 1 or 4 fields, for instance, does not result in different state-space distances (as long
as no captures occur). Both resulting states have a distance of
√
2 to the previous state, and the
same is true for all simple movementsand promotions (see first and last row of Table 2). The states
resulting from castling, however, have distance 2 to the previous state, and captures result in a
state-space distance of
√
3. The type of move (capture, castling, promotion, etc.) leading to each
state can additionally be regarded as metadata.
5.2.2
Implementation and Visualization Details. The chess game records used for the visualizations
in this section are freely available at KingBase [20] in the Portable Game Notation (PGN) format.
We parsed the PGN files using the chess module of the pgn2gif Python package [49]. The resulting
sequences of chessboard states were encoded as described above.
The trajectories for different opening moves are visually encoded by hue. Each intermediate
state is represented by a marker. We visualize the initial state (standard chess setup) as crosses,
and the final states of the games as stars. The detail view for a single state selection is simply the
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

22:18
A. Hinterreiter, C. Steinparz, M. Schöfl, H. Stitz, and M. Streit
Fig. 7. Visualization of 200 chess game trajectories for two different openings, Queen’s Pawn Game (d3) and
Zukertort Opening (Nf3), respectively. Several trajectory bundles (P7) emerge from the cluster of identical
initial states (a). Two smaller clusters of intermediate game states (P2) are visible near the center of the plot.
Both clusters consist of game states resulting from earlier castling moves. The lower cluster (b) has black
pawns placed on c6 and d5. The upper cluster (c) has black pawns placed on c7 and d6, respectively. Game
states resulting from a certain kind of pawn defense cluster towards the upper right side of the plot (d). Finally,
endgames with only few pieces remaining form a more densely packed cluster (e), while other endgames are
spread out evenly across the embedding space (P6)
.
chessboard. The fingerprint for multiple selected states uses a similarity encoding comparable
to that used in the Rubik’s cube application. Fields with varying chess pieces across the selected
states show only the most prevalent piece. The piece is made transparent, with an alpha value
proportional to the counts for the most prevalent piece on that field across all selected states.
A deployed version of our prototype implementation with pre-selected chess game data can be
accessed at https://jku-vds-lab.at/projection-path-explorer/?set=chess.
5.2.3
Results . Figure 7 shows decision trajectories for 200 randomly selected chess games between
players with Elo scores greater than 2,000. The games are colored depending on the first move by
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths
22:19
white, which was either the Queen’s Pawn Game (d3) or the Zukertort Opening (Nf3). Together
with the King’s Pawn Game, these two moves are among the three most common openings.
Since each game starts from the same board state, a dense cluster of initial states (P1) is visible in
Figure 7 (a). From this cluster, two trajectory bundles (P7) emerge—one for each of the two openings.
Subsequently, the bundle resulting from the Queen’s Pawn Game splits up into one narrow bundle
going down and one wide bundle going up. These bundles reflect the first move performed by
black (f5 and e6, respectively). A similar splitting can be observed for the games starting with the
Zukertort opening. Even several states later, only a few trajectory bundles are visible in the lower
right and right parts of Figure 7. For early timestamps, no sparse intermediate point patterns (P5)
are visible. This makes sense, as for each opening there are only a few established reactions.
The later intermediate states, roughly between the opening phases and the middlegames, form
three particular structures that are of type P2, but do not give rise to path bundles. Two clusters,
seen in Figure 7 (b) and (c), are collections of game states resulting from earlier castling moves.
The transparency encoding in the interactive detail view revealed that the main difference between
these two clusters is the position of two black pawns. In the lower cluster (b), two of the black
pawns are placed on c6 and d5. In the upper cluster (c), they are instead placed on c7 and d6.
Interestingly, games for the two different openings are not represented equally in each cluster. The
Queen’s Pawn Game seems to be overrepresented in the cluster related to black pawn positions
c6 and d5, while the Zukertort Opening is slightly overrepresented among games in the cluster
related to black pawn positions c7 and d6.
Finally, at some point the trajectories tend to make large jumps to a distinct region in the state
space where each game culminates in a sequence of densely threaded intermediate states. These
dense sequences (P2) before the endstates are representations of endgames. Endgames in which
only few pieces remain converge in a similar region of the state space, as seen in Figure 7 (e).
The final states of all other games are sparsely distributed across large regions of the embedding
space (P6).
Considering the simple encoding of the chessboard we chose as our state-space representation, it
is surprising to see actual gameplay patterns emerge from the embedded trajectories. These patterns
are only possible when many trajectories are constructed together. Furthermore, the application
of decision trajectories to chess games showed that interactive exploration is vital for relating
visual patterns to the real-world meaning. As part of future work, we plan to cooperate with a
professional chess player to explore how exactly the patterns correlate with strategic decisions
made by players.
5.3
Neural Network Training
Deep neural networks are a class of powerful, nonlinear models that can learn complex represen-
tations of data. They have greatly improved the state of the art in a diverse range of application
domains, including computer vision, speech recognition, drug discovery, and genomics [29]. How-
ever, the learning behavior of deep neural networks is difficult to interpret. It is usually not clear,
how a certain choice of hyperparameters or a certain train/test split affect the final performance
of the model. With the growing impact of deep learning on real-world decision-making, these
difficulties have led to an increased demand for explainable or interpretable models. One possi-
ble way of analyzing, understanding, and communicating the processes during deep learning is
visualization [24].
The behavior of deep neural networks depends on many different aspects: training and test
data, the network architecture, choice of optimization technique and hyperparameters, the actual
learned weights, and the resulting activations for each input. Most of these aspects can be visualized,
and almost all of them—even architecture and training data—may change over the course of the
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

22:20
A. Hinterreiter, C. Steinparz, M. Schöfl, H. Stitz, and M. Streit
training. As such, the training of neural networks can be viewed as sequential steps through a
high-dimensional state space. Furthermore, developing well-functioning deep models is a highly
incremental and iterative process, that requires model builders as well as model users to compare
the behavior for many different experimental configurations. This combination of “temporality”
and the need for comparative analysis makes training of neural networks a perfect candidate for a
visualization using multiple embedded trajectories.
While dimensionality reduction has been applied to visualize the representations learned by
different network architectures [2, 10, 19, 35, 36], in most cases only the projections for one time
step are shown—usually for the final network state after termination of the training. Only few
works combine dimensionality reduction techniques with the temporal progression of the training
process. Rauber et al. visualized the inter-epoch evolution of neuron activations as trajectories in
an embedding space [42]. Even more closely related to our work is a visualization used by Erhan et
al. in their study of pre-training of neural networks [13]. They show learning trajectories through
function space, which is one particular state-space representation. We will show results for two
other choices of representations, one of which will also motivate why Erhan et al. chose their
function space representation.
5.3.1
State Space Representation. We chose two different state-space representations: a representa-
tion of the weight space and a representation of the confusion matrix.
The weight representation corresponds directly to the weights learned by the network. For a given
layer, we flatten the associated weight matrix to a single vector. After each training epoch, the
weights are updated and a new weight vector can be obtained. The length of the vectors, and thus
the dimensionality of the state space for this representation, depends on the network architecture.
It is equal to the number of units in that layer, times the number of units in the previous layer. We
use the Euclidean distance as a metric for comparing weight vectors.
The confusion matrix representation is more closely connected to network performance. At
each epoch, we let the network classify all test instances, and construct the resulting confusion
matrix. Each cell (𝑖, 𝑗) in the confusion matrix lists the number of instances with ground truth class
label 𝑖and predicted class label 𝑗. This state-space representation is only suitable for supervised
classification problems. The length of the flat confusion vector is 𝑘2, where 𝑘is the number of
different classes. We experimented with using the Euclidean distance as well as the cosine distance
for comparing confusion states, but found that the resulting plots look very similar for both metrics.
Here, we only show trajectories constructed using the Euclidean distance.
5.3.2
Implementation and Visualization Details. We used PyTorch (https://pytorch.org/) to train a
simple neural network to classify MNIST [28] images. We decided to use a preliminary dimension-
ality reduction from the number of weights down to 50 components by means of PCA. According
to van der Maaten, this preliminary dimensionality reduction can reduce noise and speed up the
computation of the subsequent embedding [53]. We found that this preprocessing step reduces
the computation time significantly, while affecting the plots only negligibly. We also chose 50 as
the number of units in the hidden layer, resulting in 2,500 weights between the input and hidden
layers. We used ReLU as activation function, stochastic gradient descent for optimization, and cross
entropy loss. We tried different learning rates between 0.01 and 1. In most of our experiments, we
trained the networks for 20 epochs, and used the standard MNIST train/test split.
For our experiments with different learning rates, we colored the trajectories categorically by
learning rate. The detail view for single state selection is a visualization of the confusion matrix of
the network at this state. The confusion matrices were evaluated for the MNIST test sets. Since all
networks learned relatively fast, a naive visualization of the confusion matrix would look similar to
a diagonal matrix already after the first epoch. To instead direct the users’ attention to the errors,
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths
22:21
(a) Distances between weight matrices of hidden layer
(b) Distances between confusion matrices
Fig. 8. Learning processes of neural networks trained with different learning rates using a dimensionality
reduced (PCA) version of the MNIST images as training data. The initialization was the same for all networks.
Trajectories projected by t-SNE from two different state-space representations are shown: (a) based on the
weight matrices of the hidden layer; and (b) on the confusion matrices for the test dataset. Both representations
resulted in groups of trajectories with similar patterns (P1, P7, P9). The state space of the confusion matrix
representation can be made interpretable by augmenting it with the confusion matrix of perfect classification,
denoted by diag(x1, . . . , xk).
i.e., the off-diagonal values, we left the diagonal blank and adjusted the color scale accordingly. We
recently used a similar approach in a visualization tool for comparing confusion matrices across
time [22].
A deployed version of our prototype implementation with pre-selected learning trajectories can
be accessed at https://jku-vds-lab.at/projection-path-explorer/?set=neural.
5.3.3
Results . For our first experiments, we wanted to see whether the notion of “learning speed”
is conserved in the embedded trajectories for neural network training. To this end, we used several
different learning rates, and initialized all networks with the same (randomly chosen) initial weights.
The corresponding trajectories are shown in Figure 8, where the top plot (a) shows trajectories
constructed from the weight space representation, while the bottom plot (b) shows trajectories
constructed from the confusion matrix representation. Different learning rates are encoded by hue,
and the values are listed in colored insets.
In both plots, the equal initial states are represented by a cluster of dense states (P1). It can be seen
that the dimensionality reduction technique—in this case t-SNE with perplexity 40—does not always
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

22:22
A. Hinterreiter, C. Steinparz, M. Schöfl, H. Stitz, and M. Streit
behave in the same way with regards to clustering equal states, even with equal hyperparameters.
In the weight space representation, the initial states are slightly spread apart, while in the confusion
embedding space, they are extremely tightly packed. The overall trend, however, is the same for
both representations.
Lower learning rates lead to smaller changes in the networks’ weights, as well as in their
classification behavior. This slow progression through the state space is reflected in the trajectories
by a high density of intermediate states, i.e., the learning rate is directly reflected in the different
state-space velocities in the path bundle (P9). This is also the case near the end of the training,
when the optimization starts to converge.
Figure 8 (a) shows that, in the weight space, the trajectories for learning rates between 0.01, 0.2
all move in the same direction. The trajectories for 0.5 and 1 move into a different region of the
embedded state space. However, from the weight space representation, no insight about performance
can be gained. Even from the confusion embedding, without any additional tricks, only insight
about similarity of performances can be gained. Absolute performance, i.e., overall accuracy, cannot
readily be determined from the embedding. To fix this shortcoming, we added additional structure
to the confusion embedding space, by augmenting it with the projected confusion matrix for perfect
classification. This single state was added to all other confusion matrices before performing the
dimensionality reduction. It is shown as a gray star in Figure 8 (b), and denoted by diag(𝑥1, . . . ,𝑥𝑘),
since it is a diagonal matrix with the class distribution along its main diagonal. In this augmented
state space it is possible to interpret intermediate state in terms of network performance, by
assessing the distance to the added diagonal matrix. Calculating the classification accuracy for all
learning rates after 20 epochs gives slightly lower values for 0.5 and 1. A learning rate of 0.2 yielded
the best classifier in terms of accuracy, as would be expected from the embedded trajectories.
From Figure 8, one might draw the conclusion that the two representations—based on weights
or confusion—carry mostly the same information. However, this is generally not the case! Figure 9
shows 30 networks trained on MNIST data, all with the same learning rate (chosen as 0.2 based on
the insight from the previous example) and the same architecture. The only difference between
the 30 networks is the random initialization of the weights. Starting from a dense cluster of initial
states (P1) in the weight space embedding, all networks quickly move towards their own region,
where they converge in a chain of densely packed intermediate states (P2). Near the end of this
chain, almost all trajectories exhibit a similar, bulge-like shape (P10). This pattern corresponds to
the final convergence, when the differences between states become so small that their embedded
representations start to form a ball rather than a chain.
The reason for the appearance of similarly shaped trajectories (P10) in different parts of the
embedding space—rather than parallel path bundles (P7)—in Figure 9 (a) is a phenomenon known
as weight space symmetries. Many different weight configurations can result in the exact same
mapping function from inputs to outputs.
To address this issue, Erhan et al. [13] chose their function space representation.
We chose a confusion matrix representation, which—as detailed above—in addition to revealing
differences in the mapping functions also can be interpreted in terms of classification accuracy. In
this embedding, shown in Figure 9 (b), it becomes clear that the networks are indeed much more
similar with respect to their classification and learning behavior as one would expect from the
weight space embedding. Especially in the early learning phases, distinct path bundles form (P7).
However, regardless of whether the function or the weight space representation is chosen, care
must be taken in interpreting the distances in the trajectory visualizations. In Figure 9 (b), absolute
distances between final confusion matrices for differently initialized weights are artificially “blown
up” by the projection technique trying to conserve relative distances within the chains of very
similar matrices near the end of each trajectory. Nevertheless, this example demonstrates the power
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths
22:23
(a) Distances between weight matrices of hidden layer
(b) Distances between confusion matrices
Fig. 9. Learning process of neural networks trained equal learning rates but different random initialization,
using a dimensionality reduced (PCA) version of the MNIST images as training data. Trajectories embedded
using t-SNE, based on two different state-space representations, are shown: (a) based on the weight matrices of
the hidden layer; and (b) on the confusion matrices for the test dataset. For the confusion matrix representation,
the state space is augmented with the confusion matrix of perfect classification, which is denoted by the
gray star.
of using different state-space representations for showing different aspects of high-dimensional
processes with embedded trajectories.
6
DISCUSSION
6.1
Patterns in the Embedding Space
Based on the results described in Section 5 and our experience with additional data from Go
games and user interactions, we are confident that finding patterns (P1–P10, as described in
Section 3.3)—in combination with interactive exploration of the detail and fingerprint views—can
provide interesting insights. However, we want to stress the importance of verifying that the
patterns found are “real” and not just the side effects of the dimensionality reduction technique.
In general, patterns which are stable across multiple different embeddings are most useful (here,
embeddings can differ in terms of technique or hyperparameters). In the case of Rubik’s cube,
for instance, we found the shared trajectory bundles (P7) of both solution strategies to be stable.
Likewise, the additional “coils” for lengthy rotation sequences appeared across multiple t-SNE and
UMAP runs (see also Figure 1, which shows a different embedding than Figure 4).
Generally speaking, we found the dense point-cluster patterns (P1–P3) and the resulting path
bundle-patterns (P7) to be most reliable across all application scenarios. Sparse patterns (P4–P6)
are harder to relate to the real-world processes, as they cover many, often considerably different,
high-dimensional states. Only when the association with the real-world process is straightforward
(e.g., with random initialization of algorithms), have we found these patterns to be useful anchor
points in the analysis.
In the case of the pattern P9 in the neural network example (Figure 8 in Section 5.3), we were
surprised how well the state-space velocity correlated with the “true” velocity (i.e., the learning
rate). We think that this pattern has considerable potential in exploring processes that converge
with different speeds.
Finally, the hypothetical pattern P8, which would arise from trajectory bundles with different
directions, could not be found in any of the examples presented. However, we are currently
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

22:24
A. Hinterreiter, C. Steinparz, M. Schöfl, H. Stitz, and M. Streit
investigating user-interaction data and expect to find such patterns when users backtrack to revisit
earlier parts of their analysis.
6.2
Dimensionality Reduction
Clearly, when high-dimensional states are represented in a two-dimensional embedding space,
it is impossible to preserve all original distance information. Additionally, hyperparameters of
the projection techniques must be set appropriately. Depending on the dimensionality reduction
technique, several challenges arise.
The most obvious challenge when using t-SNE is to set the perplexity. Figure 10 shows the same
data as Figure 7, but embedded with perplexity values of (a) 5, and (b) 3000. Two types of patterns
are stable across all perplexity values: the presence of path bundles at the early games stages and
the chains of states towards the ends. However, in the case of perplexity 5 the path bundles appear
more “messy”, and regions of more densely packed intermediate states (as in Figure 7 (b–e)) cannot
be made out. Both of these differences are a result of using a perplexity value that was too low to
preserve global structure.
While van der Maaten stated that “typical values for the perplexity range between 5 and 50” [52],
we generally found higher perplexity values to be more useful for our purposes. Okolkov suggested
a square-root law, that is, choosing a perplexity of
√
𝑁for a dataset with 𝑁points [37]. We suggest
experimenting with even higher perplexity values. Plots often remain relatively stable in a wide
perplexity range above
√
𝑁. Higher perplexity values work around the fact that the objective
function of t-SNE, as compared to that of UMAP, does not strictly penalize for two points with
large high-dimensional distance to be embedded close together.
Another challenge related to t-SNE is that the result heavily depends on the initialization. In the
t-SNE implementation that we used [41], random initialization of low-dimensional positions can
be replaced by initialization with PCA results. In our experience, this PCA initialization greatly
improves comparability of multiple embeddings, even across different perplexity values.
Occasionally, we experienced some unexpected behavior with t-SNE: We noticed significant
“jumps” between similar states. While t-SNE is known for sometimes putting points of high-
dimensionally large distance close to each other in the embedding space (see above), it should not
put high-dimensionally close points very far apart in the embedding. In experiments with user
interaction-data, we noticed that UMAP did not produce these jumps as often. However, UMAP
introduces other challenges related to setting the minimal-distance parameter such that interesting
patterns related to dense clusters are not hidden.
6.3
State Space Representations and Distance Metrics
Choosing a meaningful combination of state-space representation and distance metric for con-
structing decision trajectories can be challenging. As already hinted at in Section 5.1 about Rubik’s
cube solution strategies, it might not always be possible to find a state-space representation that can
accurately preserve the real-world notion of distances between states. For the Rubik’s cube example,
a combination of representation and metric would be ideal if it put two cube states at a distance of
1 if one state could be reached from the other in a single quarter-turn of a cube face. Even if such a
representation existed, it would have to be based on finding the shortest path between two cube
states in terms of rotations. An algorithm capable of solving Rubik’s cube with the shortest possible
sequence of moves has been termed God’s Algorithm, and proving the lower bound of necessary
moves alone took 35 CPU-years in 2010 [43]. To the best of our knowledge, there is still no efficient
implementation for finding the shortest path between two arbitrary states. Therefore, the Rubik’s
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths
22:25
(a) t-SNE, perplexity 5
(b) t-SNE, perplexity 300
Fig. 10. Embeddings (t-SNE) of chess games from Figure 7, re-run with different perplexity values.
cube visualization shows that sometimes a simpler state-space representationmust be used in the
hope that the representation and metric preserve interesting features of the real-world processes.
Furthermore, for many applications certain symmetries could be exploited in the state space.
In the case of the Rubik’s cube, many cubes are equivalent with regards to solutions involving,
for instance, the yellow or green cross as a first checkpoint. Likewise, chessboard states could
be seen as equivalent if the white and black pieces are swapped. For chess, it could be argued
that this symmetry is broken by the rule of white always performing the first move. Nonetheless,
reflection-symmetrical states could be regarded as equivalent. In case of Rubik’s cube, we broke the
symmetries consciously by forcing each cube to pass the same checkpoint (yellow cross)—essentially
disregarding more efficient solutions involving different checkpoints.
For both the chess and the Rubik’s cube visualizations, disregarding the symmetry still led to
interpretable trajectory patterns. However, many applications could benefit from a state-space
representation and/or distance metric that takes symmetries into account. In recent experiments
with Go game data, we found that only symmetry-preserving distance metrics based on wavelet or
Fourier transforms of the Go boards led to interpretable visualizations.
6.4
Construction of Trajectories
In order to keep visualizations with hundreds of trajectories readable, interpolation between points
is extremely important. However, each interpolation technique may introduce artifacts, such as
overshooting splines. An example of such artifacts can be seen close to the final chain of points for
each game in Figure 7.
Additionally, not all interpolation techniques are equally suited for adding points to trajectories on
the fly, which is necessary when our visualization technique is used for streaming data. Newly added
points may change the shapes of trajectories through many of the previous points considerably. For
our interactive physical Rubik’s cube demonstrator (see Supplementary Information), we used cubic
cardinal splines to make this addition as unobtrusive as possible. This spline interpolation technique
makes sure that adding a point alters only the trajectory through the last three intermediate points.
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

22:26
A. Hinterreiter, C. Steinparz, M. Schöfl, H. Stitz, and M. Streit
Even with a suitably chosen interpolation technique, trajectories through the embedded state
space may cause visual clutter. We plan to experiment with edge-bundling techniques to address
this issue in future versions of our applications of decision trajectories. In addition to path bundling,
smoothing of trajectories (e.g., by 1D Laplacian filtering) could help to reduce this clutter.
6.5
Detail View and Fingerprint Encoding
We mentioned in Section 4 that adapting the ProjectionPathExplorer visualization prototype to
new application domains requires only designing appropriate detail and fingerprint views. For
most real-world processes to which we have applied ProjectionPathExplorer so far, choosing a
detail view for the single state selection was relatively straightforward. However, the design of
an appropriate fingerprint view for multiple state selections poses a greater challenge. Should the
fingerprint focus on similarities or differences between the selected states? And how can similarities
or differences be encoded in a way that intuitively extends the detail view for single states?
In the cases of Rubik’s cube and chess, we were able to extend the single-state views by trans-
parency and/or size encodings of shared attributes across selected clusters. For the neural network
data, we did not implement any fingerprint encoding, but it seems that a difference encoding
would be more informative in this case. Finally, in our experiments with user-interaction data, the
high-dimensional states are combinations of multiple categorical and numerical attributes, together
with representations of sets. These heterogeneous data types are all combined into mixed-type
feature vectors that are then projected. Designing effective fingerprint encodings for such complex
cases, requires a more in-depth study of the design space of similarity and/or difference encodings.
6.6
Future Work
As stated in Section 5.2, we plan to examine the correlation between players’ strategies and patterns
in trajectories of chess games in more detail. To this end, we are currently initiating a collaboration
with a professional chess player. We will apply our visualization technique not only to chess games
by human players, but also to games played by chess computer programs. removedEspecially, itIt
would be particularly interesting to compare strategies used in classic chess computer programs
with those learned by state-of-the art reinforcement learning algorithms such as AlphaZero [45].
In light of potential future collaborations with domain experts, we plan to further improve
the interactivity of our ProjectionPathExplorer prototype. We have already started to implement
automatic detection of state clusters (P1–P3) based on hierarchical density estimates [8]. We plan
to use the detected clusters to draw the user’s attention to specific regions in the embedding
space. By ranking the clusters according to a degree-of-interest function, we plan to automatically
create insets as demonstrated in a recent work by Lekschas et al. on patter-driven navigation [30].
These insets will make use of the fingerprint view described in Section 4. Furthermore, building on
techniques from trajectory data mining [57], the detected clusters can be used to automatically
find interesting patterns related to trajectory bundles (P7–P9).
We are also currently working on a project aimed at finding and understanding user actions in
interactive visualizations. We plan to employ a similar, but less domain-specific, approach as Brown
et al. did in ModelSpace [6]. Our goal is to extract interaction data from provenance graphs of visu-
alization applications, and to visualize the data as multiple trajectories through the same embedding
space. This embedding space will be based on a representation of the visualization’s properties that
are changed by user interactions. We hypothesize that patterns emerging from multiple projected
interaction trajectories can provide insights into the users’ sensemaking processes.
ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst., Vol. 11, No. 3–4, Article 22. Publication date: December 2021.

ProjectionPathExplorer: Exploring Visual Patterns in Projected Decision-Making Paths
22:27
7
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have explored visual patterns in projected problem-solution paths. This was made
possible by viewing the decisions—whether made by humans or resulting from the rules of an
algorithm—as transitions between states in a high-dimensional representation space.
To reveal and explore the patterns, we projected multiple paths through the high-dimensional
state space as trajectories in a shared, low-dimensional embedding space. We found this approach
sufficiently general to be applied in various application domains: Rubik’s cube solution algorithms,
Chess games, and neural network training.
In all our applications, we used our interactive visualization prototype, ProjectionPathExplorer,
to analyze the embedded trajectories. This general prototype can be adapted easily to new domains
by defining new encodings for the detail view and the fingerprint encoding for state clusters. In
the future, we plan to adapt the prototype for visualizing user interactions in visual analytics
applications.
We hope that our work will inspire further studies of projected decision trajectories in a variety
of interesting application domains.
