Adaptive​ ​Artificial​ ​Intelligent​ ​Q&A​ ​Platform 
 
​ ​ ​Akram​ ​M.R​*,​ ​a)​,​ ​Singhabahu​ ​C.P​*,​ ​b)​,​ ​Saad​ ​M.S.M​*,​ ​c)​,​ ​Deleepa​ ​P​*,​ ​d)​,​ ​Nugaliyadde​ ​A​*,​ ​e)​,​ ​Mallawarachchi​ ​Y​*,​ ​f)  
(*​ ​Department​ ​of​ ​Software​ ​Engineering) 
Sri​ ​Lanka​ ​Institute​ ​of​ ​Information​ ​Technology, 
Malabe​ ​10115,​ ​Sri​ ​Lanka. 

 
Abstract​— The paper presents an approach to build a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
question and answer system that is capable of processing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information in a large dataset and allows the user to gain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge from this dataset by asking questions in natural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
language
form.
Key
content of this research covers four
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dimensions
which
are;
Corpus
Preprocessing,
Question
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preprocessing, Deep Neural Network for Answer Extraction and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Answer Generation. The system is capable of understanding the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
question, responds to the user’s query in natural language form
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as well. The goal is to make the user feel as if they were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interacting​ ​with​ ​a​ ​person​ ​than​ ​a​ ​machine. 
Keywords—Artificial Neural Networks, TensorFlow, Recurrent
 
 
 
 
 
Neural
Networks,
(LSTM)
Long
short-term
memory,
Deep
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Learning,
Question
&
Answer,
Word
Embedding,
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sequence-To-Sequence​ ​model 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
The information growth rate in the world is increasing at a
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
rapid rate. It has become
impossible to keep up with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
amount of information that is being added to any given
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domain. Due to the wide availability of digital input and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
output devices and the ease of use of these devices people are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creating more and more raw data. If we are able to process this
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
data into meaningful information fast, it would be possible for
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
people to become more productive and to get the information
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they​ ​want​ ​faster. 
This paper presents an approach that uses domain specific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
datasets to train deep learning models that are capable of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answering domain specific queries. Deep learning can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
defined a subset of machine learning techniques that uses
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-linear information processing to identify and extract
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
features
and
patterns
in
data,
classification
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transformations. There are three key reasons that deep learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has become so popular in the recent past. First, the hugely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increased processing abilities and availability of general
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
purpose GPUs, the vast amount of training data that has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
become available and the many advances made in the recent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
past in the field of deep learning that has made the task of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
training​ ​artificial​ ​neural​ ​networks​ ​more​ ​efficient​ ​[1]. 
Since deep neural networks are exemplary at recognising
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
patterns and processing data extremely fast, we believe that by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applying deep learning techniques to this problem domain we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be able to overcome many of the drawbacks of the other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approaches. We will be able to have a higher accuracy because
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
of the state of the art neural network training paradigms,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reduce manual tasks by allowing an ANN to process and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
structure the corpus and automatically extract the required
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
features and we will not need to use an underlying database
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
engine so therefore we will not need to adopt or develop a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
different​ ​query​ ​language​ ​[2].  
The initial step of this research is to pre-process domain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
related data that can be fed into a deep neural network for
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
training and generates a machine learning model, further the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
inputs(questions) are being processed with word embedding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
techniques and output(answer) generation and formatting uses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neural network techniques in order to present an output that is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
human friendly, in-depth explanation of the methodology is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented in the next section. The future works section
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discusses the suggested improvements that can be made for a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
robust​ ​and​ ​effective​ ​implementation. 
II.
BACKGROUND 
An extensive prior study of various approaches used in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Q&A domain provided us with a clear roadmap for our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research. This resulted in we choosing a deep learning based
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
approach. Deep learning is a subset of techniques of machine
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
learning. 
A. Literature​ ​Survey 
An extensive prior study of various approaches used in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Q&A domain provided us with a clear roadmap for our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research. This resulted in we choosing a deep learning based
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
approach. Deep learning is a subset of techniques of machine
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
learning.  
Machine learning is a field of Artificial Intelligence that
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
has been gaining a lot of prominence in the current era. It is
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
specifically to do with building systems that are able to learn
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by themselves without having to be programmed. Deep
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning is a subset of techniques of machine learning. Deep
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning allows multiple processing layers to breakdown the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
given data into smaller parts and learn the representations of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these data [3]. Deep learning is the state of the art in areas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such as speech recognition, natural language understanding,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visual object recognition, etc. Convolutional neural networks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have brought many breakthroughs in areas such as processing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
images, pictures and speech, whereas Recurrent networks have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

been extremely successful in areas such as processing text and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
speech.  
QA is a well researched area from the point of NLP
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Natural Language Processing) research. QA has mostly been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used to develop intricate dialogue systems such as chatbots
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and
other
systems
that
mimic
human
interaction
[4].
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Traditionally most of these systems use the tried methods of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parsing, part-of-speech tagging, etc that come from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domain of NLP research. While there is absolutely nothing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wrong with these techniques, they do have their limitations.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[5] W.A. Woods et al. shows how we can use NLP as a front
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
end for extracting information from a given query and then
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
translate that into a logical query which can then then be
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
converted into a database query language that can be passed
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into the underlying database management system. In addition
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to that there needs to be a lexicon that functions as an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
admissible vocabulary of the knowledge base so that it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
possible to filter out unnecessary terminology. The knowledge
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
base is processed to an ontology that breaks it down into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
classes,
relations
and
functions
[6].
Natural
Language
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Database Interfaces (NLDBIS) are database systems that allow
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users to access stored data using natural language requests.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Some
popular
commercial
systems
are
IBM’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
LanguageAccess​ ​and​ ​Q&A​ ​from​ ​Symantec​ ​[7]. 
Information retrieval (IR) is another technique that has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been used to address the problem of QA. With IR systems pay
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attention to the organisation, representation and storage of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information artifacts such that when a user makes a query the
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
system is able to to return a document or a collection of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
artifacts that relate to the query [8]. Recent advances in OCR
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and other text scanning techniques have meant that it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible to retrieve passages of text rather than entire
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
documents. However IR is still widely seen as from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
document​ ​retrieval​ ​domain​ ​rather​ ​than​ ​from​ ​the​ ​QA​ ​domain.  
Template based question answering is another technique
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that has been used for QA and is currently being used by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
START system which has answered over a million questions
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
since 1993 [9]. START uses natural language annotations to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
match questions to candidate answers. An annotation will have
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the structure of ‘subject-relationship-object’ and when a user
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
asks a question, the question will be matched to all the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
available
annotation
entries
at
the
word
level
(using
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
synonyms, IS-A, etc) and the structure level. When a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
successful match is found, the annotation will point to an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information segment which will be returned as the answer.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When new information resources are incorporated into the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SMART system, the natural language annotations have to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
composed manually [10]. START uses Omnibase as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
underlying database system to store information and when the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
annotation match is found, the database query must be used to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
retrieve the information. While this system has been relatively
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
successful, it requires a lot of preprocessing which must be
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
done​ ​manually. 
Our literature survey has found that the QA domain has an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
active
community
of
researchers
and
many
different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approaches have been tried to tackle this problem. While the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problem of QA is a very old one, the origins of the problem
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can be traced back as far as the 1960’s, using our access to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cheaper and better computational power and newer techniques
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in data processing we believe we can attempt to solve this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issue​ ​using​ ​a​ ​different​ ​set​ ​of​ ​tactics. 
III.
METHODOLOGY 
To further narrow down our scope we have chosen to build
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
a question answer system using the Cornell movie quotes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corpus and not addressing open domain questions. The scope
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has been thus narrowed to, first, increase the accuracy of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answers provided and second, to ensure that the project can be
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
completed​ ​in​ ​the​ ​allocated​ ​time.  
In order to achieve the main objective, we have broken it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
down into four different sub objectives. Each of these sub
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
objectives form a critical part of the system and carry out a
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
critical function. They also have deeply integrated deep
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning techniques in each component, which we have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
described in great detail in the methodology section. In the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
next section we have a brief overview of what each of the sub
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
objectives are supposed to accomplish. Figure 1.0 shows how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the components have been arranged and how they will interact
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with​ ​each​ ​other.  
 
Figure​ ​1.0​ ​System​ ​Architecture 
A. Corpus​ ​preprocessing 
One of the first things we need to do with the data corpus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is to pre-process it, so that we can use a training network to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
create the model. Initially the corpus will be unstructured text
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data, which can be understood by humans, not by machines.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Word Embedding [11] is also used for semantic parsing, to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
extract the meaning from text to enable Natural Language
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Understanding. For a language model to understand the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
meaning of a word, it need to know the contextual similarity
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
of words. For example if we tend to find diseases in sentences,
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
where​ ​diabetes,​ ​diarrhea,​ ​HIV​ ​should​ ​be​ ​of​ ​close​ ​proximity.  
Batching is the process of breaking down the training data
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
set into multiple batches and adjusting the weights after each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
batch has been used to train the network. For example, if a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
training set has 1050 data points, we can train the neural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
network with 100 batches at a time. This increases the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
efficiency of the training process [12], as opposed to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

online training process. We chose to use this method because
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of​ ​the​ ​limitation​ ​of​ ​hardware​ ​resources​ ​and​ ​time​ ​constraints. 
An epoch is reached during the training process when the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
entire training dataset has been used to train the neural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
network and then the process is repeated with the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
training dataset. If this is done too much, the model will end
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
up overfitting the training dataset. So we chose to train our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model​ ​over​ ​30​ ​epochs. 
B. Question​ ​pre-processing 
The question that the user is asking need to be preprocessed
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
as well along with the other text data. Word embedding maps
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each word to a vector space.The Embedding layer will map
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
each token from the question to its corresponding vector
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
space, which preserves the contextual similarity of words in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the vector space. The embedding layer in the question
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
processing
component
can be done through a popular
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pretrained word embedding model known as word2vec or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
glove (exact model will be chosen based on further trial and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
error)​ ​[13].  
Since we are using the sequence-to-sequence model for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
training, we need to encode the question sequence into a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
fixed-size
state
vector.
When
creating
the
LSTM
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
encoder/decoder cells, we use the Tensorflow framework
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tf.contrib.rnn.BasicLSTMCell.
The
encoding
process
is
 
 
 
 
 
handled by the Tensorflow framework. A deeper explanation
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
of​ ​this​ ​will​ ​be​ ​given​ ​in​ ​the​ ​next​ ​section. 
C. Deep​ ​Neural​ ​Network​ ​for​ ​Answer​ ​Extraction 
This component basically acts as the part where the actual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decision making happens. The primary objective of this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
module is to generate an answer to the pre-processed question
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
by using the structured data available in the pre-processed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corpus. In this research we use a recurrent neural network
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(RNN) to extract the answers from the corpus. In previous
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
researches it was found that RNN’s perform much better than
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other​ ​neural​ ​networks​ ​when​ ​it​ ​comes​ ​to​ ​text​ ​processing.  
A sequence to sequence model consists of two recurrent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neural networks. One is an encoder that will deal with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
input and the other is a decoder that will generate the output.
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.0 shows the general architecture for such a network.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
As shown, generally the decoder cell will start after a custom
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
<go>​ ​tag. 
 
Figure​ ​2.0​ ​An​ ​RNN​ ​cell​ ​can​ ​be​ ​of​ ​type​ ​GRU​ ​(Gated​ ​Recurrent 
Unit)​ ​or​ ​LSTM​ ​(Long​ ​Short​ ​Term​ ​Memory).​ ​[14] 
 
In our DNN implementation, we are using LSTM’s because
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they are better at dealing with vanishing gradients and have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
some memory capacity [15]. We are using two LSTM layers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with a hidden size of 256. This was deemed the best approach
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
after reading through research papers. We did not have the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resources​ ​or​ ​time​ ​to​ ​test​ ​with​ ​different​ ​configurations. 
In the system this model gets its inputs from the question
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pre-processing component and outputs the generated tensor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into the answer generation component in order to generate a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
human​ ​readable​ ​answer.  
D. Answer​ ​Generation 
This component is required because the corpus will not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
always have the answer in the required format.The challenge
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with generating natural language from a single piece of text is
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
that it is the reverse approach to what is taken by most other
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
researchers. Usually deep neural networks are used to identify
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
patterns and are used as predictive models. In this case the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DNN​ ​must​ ​be​ ​used​ ​as​ ​a​ ​generative​ ​model​ ​instead. 
After the question is encoded and fed into the LSTM, the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
neural network will process the output and give the answer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that it located via the decoder. However we need to map the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decoder output into a word vector for better representation.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
For
this
we
use
a
Tensorflow
function:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tf.contrib.legacy_seq2seq.embedding_rnn_seq2seq.
This
 
 
function returns the decoder outputs as an embedded model
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[16]. This is gives us a set of words that the neural network
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thinks is the answer for the question. One of the future tasks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we​ ​have​ ​is​ ​to​ ​better​ ​process​ ​this​ ​output. 
IV.
RESULTS​ ​AND​ ​DISCUSSION 
The intended use of this system is to allow the user to ask
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
related questions based on the defined domain (i.e on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plugged dataset for training. eg: medical emergency, cornel,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ubuntu) in natural language form and the platform will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generate the most accurate answer and provide that answer in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
natural language form as well. The idea is to simulate a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
situation where the user is interacting with a person in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
medical​ ​profession​ ​as​ ​close​ ​as​ ​possible. 
The system was tested with multiple trained datasets such
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as Cornell movie dialogs [17], Ubuntu Q&A forum [18] and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OpenSubs​ ​[19].  
It is nearly impossible to make an algorithm to understand
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
a language and respond to questions. To overcome these type
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of issues artificial neural networks were introduced. ANN is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
an information processing paradigm that is inspired by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
way biological nervous systems. One of the famous ANN
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technique named recurrent neural networks was used. One of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the appeals of RNNs is the idea that they might be able to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
connect previous information to the present task, such as using
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
previous video frames might inform the understanding of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
present frame. But with RNN this capability is limited.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Predicting the last word in “the clouds are in the sky” is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

possible since it does not require any additional contextual
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding. But for “I grew up in France… I speak fluent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
French.” It requires more memory and understanding of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
context. This is the reason to use Long Short Term Memory
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
networks, called as “LSTMs” – are a special kind of RNN,
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
capable of learning long-term dependencies. With the use of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
these​ ​techniques​ ​results​ ​were​ ​given​ ​as​ ​in​ ​Figure​ ​3.0. 
 
Figure​ ​3.0 
 
But there were some edge cases where the system failed to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
produce results as expected as in Figure 4.0. This happens due
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
to training longer sentences or conversations. In that case, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
network is much slower to train. After 250000 iterations with
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
maxLength=10,
the
network
still
mainly gives evasive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answers (by answering most of the open ended questions by 'I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
don't know') but it seems to have integrated some basic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
semantic. 
 
Figure​ ​4.0 
 
V.
RESEARCH​ ​FINDING 
 
 
Figure​ ​5.0​ ​-​ ​Loss​ ​Function​ ​Graph​ ​from​ ​Tensor​ ​Board 
Loss functions presents the information about training
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
against testing. The graph in Figure 5.0 it shows the loss
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
reduction as the system trains for 30 epochs. An epoch is one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
complete presentation of the data set to be learned by a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
learning machine. To get better accuracy the model needs to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be trained until the loss graph reaches it lowest level. But it
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
should not increase again since it will introduce an issue called
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
overfitting as represented in Figure 6.0 by the red line. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overfitting, a statistical model describes random error or noise
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instead of the underlying relationship. That means
it will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bound to the given training dataset and making any questions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out​ ​of​ ​the​ ​dataset​ ​might​ ​provide​ ​inaccurate​ ​answers. 
 
Figure​ ​6.0​ ​-​ ​Representation​ ​of​ ​Overfitting​ ​[20] 
 
​ ​ ​ ​ ​ ​The​ ​purpose​ ​of​ ​word​ ​embedding​ ​[21]​ ​is​ ​to​ ​extract​ ​meaning 
from​ ​text​ ​to​ ​enable​ ​natural​ ​language​ ​understanding.​ ​To 
increase​ ​the​ ​semantic​ ​meaning​ ​of​ ​contextually​ ​similar​ ​of 
words,​ ​the​ ​corpus​ ​can​ ​be​ ​preprocessed​ ​by​ ​merging​ ​multi-word 
terms.​ ​Such​ ​as​ ​the​ ​terms​ ​Human​ ​Immunodeficiency​ ​Virus 
transformed​ ​to​ ​human_immunodeficiency_virus​ ​to​ ​understand 
it​ ​as​ ​a​ ​single​ ​term​ ​than​ ​three​ ​separate​ ​terms​ ​during​ ​the​ ​training 
process​ ​to​ ​enable​ ​improved​ ​semantic​ ​parsing. 
VI.
FUTURE​ ​WORK 
As improvements in the future that can enable the proposed
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach to perform better and cater to additional features, we
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
propose​ ​two​ ​main​ ​improvements. 
The current implementation can only answer queries for a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
single domain utilizing a single trained machine learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model. This limitation is because the system is not designed to
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
handle multiple machine learning models in a single running
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
instance of the system. We propose to perform classification at
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
question level where the input (question) will be classified to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understand its type/category and according to its relevant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
category the question will be passed over to its relevant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domain specific data model for processing. The classes for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
classification are directly the domains supported by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

running instance of the system. Due to the pluggable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
architecture of the system the implementation of the above
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improvement​ ​can​ ​be​ ​made.  
The other suggested improvement is to support
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dependencies between questions. Currently questions are
 
 
 
 
 
 
independent from each other. To enable dependencies between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions a straightforward approach would be to feed all
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
previous
questions
and answers to the encoder before
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generating the answer. Further, the network should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
retrained on QA pairs which make up a dialogue instead of
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
just​ ​individual​ ​QA.  
VII.
CONCLUSION 
Overall from this research we have been able to gain an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding into the complexities of Deep Neural Networks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and have managed to create an application that integrates with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a DNN to allow a user to interact with a knowledge base in
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
QA format. The main challenges we faced was to understand
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the concepts and the time that it takes to build a DNN and to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
train it. Here it was important to understand the importance of
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
not overtraining the model by keeping an eye on the loss
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
function. The accuracy of the output was another challenge
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and it requires a lot more work to understand how we can
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improve the accuracy of the neural network. Due to time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
constraints, it is not possible for us to divert from the current
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach and to adopt a new one. We have identified some
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
improvements for future work that will help us create a more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
viable​ ​product​ ​from​ ​this​ ​application.
