preprint in submission
Imagined versus Remembered Stories: Quantifying
Differences in Narrative Flow
Maarten Sap∗

University of Washington
Allen Institute for AI
Seattle, WA, USA
Anna Jafarpour∗

University of Washington
Seattle, WA, USA
Yejin Choi

University of Washington
Allen Institute for AI
Seattle, WA, USA
Noah A. Smith

University of Washington
Allen Institute for AI
Seattle, WA, USA
James W. Pennebaker

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, USA
Eric Horvitz

Microsoft
Redmond, WA, USA
Abstract
Lifelong experiences and learned knowledge lead to shared
expectations about how common situations tend to unfold.
Such knowledge of narrative event flow enables people to
weave together a story. However, comparable computational
tools to evaluate the flow of events in narratives are limited.
We quantify the differences between autobiographical and
imagined stories by introducing sequentiality, a measure of
narrative flow of events, drawing probabilistic inferences
from a cutting-edge large language model (GPT-3). Sequen-
tiality captures the flow of a narrative by comparing the
probability of a sentence with and without its preceding
story context. We applied our measure to study thousands
of diary-like stories, collected from crowdworkers about ei-
ther a recent remembered experience or an imagined story
on the same topic. The results show that imagined stories
have higher sequentiality than autobiographical stories and
that the sequentiality of autobiographical stories increases
when the memories are retold several months later. In pur-
suit of deeper understandings of how sequentiality measures
the flow of narratives, we explore proportions of major and
minor events in story sentences, as annotated by crowd-
workers. We find that lower sequentiality is associated with
higher proportions of major events. The methods and results
highlight opportunities to use cutting-edge computational
analyses, such as sequentiality, on large corpora of matched
imagined and autobiographical stories to investigate the in-
fluences of memory and reasoning on language generation
processes.
Keywords: Natural language processing | autobiographical
memory | memory consolidation | imagination | deep neural
network | pretrained language models
Introduction
When we tell a story, we weave together sets of events to
form a coherent narrative (1, 2, 28). The narrative flow of
∗Equal contribution
those events is influenced by our recollection of experiences
from episodic memory (10, 11, 51) as well as common knowl-
edge about prototypical sequences of events, referred to as
schema (1, 4, 17, 21, 25, 44). For example, telling an imagined
story about a friend’s wedding relies on common knowledge
about the schema of how a wedding in their culture unfolds.
In contrast, a recalled story drawn from memories about a
friend’s wedding involves an autobiographical recollection of
episodic details about experienced events in addition to the
knowledge of wedding schema (14). Furthermore, in autobi-
ographical stories, the extent to which schema and episodic
details are used in storytelling changes with time passing, as
memories of experience become consolidated and schema-
tized into more abstract, semantic, and “gist-like” versions
(9, 46, 54).
A key element of narrative storytelling is referencing oc-
currences of salient events (45), which often deviate from
prototypical schema (57). Such salient events can range from
major (e.g., big plot twists) to minor (e.g., subtle details) (23),
and from surprising to expected. Small-scale human studies
have demonstrated that salient events often mark surprising
or expected shifts in a story (e.g., of character focus, location,
or circumstances; 56), that they stand out as particularly
memorable to readers (13, 40), and they can influence the
emotional impact of a narrative (34). However, how salient
events contribute to the narrative flow of imagined or auto-
biographical stories is not well understood.
We introduce a novel computational measure, sequen-
tiality, to uncover how autobiographical and imagined sto-
ries differ with respect to narrative flow and occurrences of
salient events. Sequentiality leverages probabilities of words
and sentences in stories to determine the difference in the
likelihood of story sentences conditioned on a story’s topic
versus conditioned on the story topic and the context given
by all of the preceding sentences (Fig. 1). In this work, we
draw probabilities from a cutting-edge and large-scale lan-
guage model (GPT-3, with 175B parameters; 6), substantially
scaling up our previous investigations (41) that employed a
arXiv:2201.02662v2  [cs.CL]  8 Jul 2022

preprint in submission
Maarten Sap, Anna Jafarpour, Yejin Choi, Noah A. Smith, James W. Pennebaker, and Eric Horvitz
much smaller language model (GPT-1, with 115M parame-
ters; 37). By using large-scale language models, sequentiality
presents a novel characterization of narrative flow in stories,
contrasting with previous measures which either focused
on detecting event words from sentences (32, 45) or track-
ing attributes over time in stories (e.g., sentiment, emotion,
categories of words, or sentence embeddings; 5, 39, 50).
We studied sequentiality and salient events in a set of
7,000 diary-like short stories about memorable life experi-
ences, to analyze differences in narrative flow of imagined
or autobiographical stories. Collected through crowdsourc-
ing and made available in the Hippocorpus data set (41),
these stories were either written about an autobiographical
personal experience, recalled shortly after it happened and
retold several months later, or about an imagined experience
on the same topic. We extended a subset of 240 Hippocorpus
stories to additionally include sentence-level human anno-
tation of event saliency. We applied sequentiality to these
stories to analyze narrative flow difference in autobiographi-
cal and imagined stories, and to compare the sequentiality of
sentences with various levels of event saliency. We also ana-
lyzed coarser-grained metrics such as counting concrete and
non-hypothesized event terms (i.e., the proportion of realis
event) and counting words in the LIWC (48) and concrete-
ness (7) lexicons to further examine the differences in stories
and event types.
We hypothesized that autobiographical and imagined sto-
ries would differ in sequentiality and event distributions;
specifically, that imagined stories would have higher sequen-
tiality since they are more likely to follow commonly ex-
pected schema (11, 27). On the other hand, we hypothesized
that autobiographical stories would have lower sequentiality
but higher number of annotated salient events, based on the
intuition that those stories likely contain more specific de-
tails drawn directly from episodic memory (11, 18) and that
memorable details of a specific experience are more likely
to diverge from the expected flow of the narrative (40). We
also expected to find an increase in sequentiality for stories
that are retold after a period of time versus freshly recalled
memories, due to the consolidation and narrativization of
memories over time (46).
Sequentiality with Large-scale Language
Models
Sequentiality provides a measure of narrative flow based
on probabilities of story sentences given by large language
models (LLMs). We apply the measure to identify differences
in the sequencing of ideas in recalled versus imagined stories.
One might expect that imagined stories composed in real-
time would tend to be described by a contextual model where
a next sentence depends greatly on the prior sentences, with
a sequencing influenced by commonly understood schemas
(11, 27). In contrast, generating an autobiographical story
Figure 1. Graphical models depicting the two compo-
nents of sequentiality. Sequentiality reflects the proba-
bilistic relationship among consecutive sentences (𝑠0,𝑠1, ...,𝑠𝑖)
in a story about a topic T, and is computed as the difference
between the log-likelihood of a sentence conditioned only
on the story topic (i.e., topic-driven model; top row) and the
log-likelihood of that sentence conditioned on both the story
topic and all preceding sentences (i.e., contextual model; bot-
tom row). The log-likelihood of a sentence given a topic or
topic and prior sentences is provided by the GPT-3 neural
language model.
may rely less on such an incremental sequencing and pro-
totypical schemas (40) and be better explained by a process
of organizing and building a narrative from a set of events
encoded in episodic memory (11, 18).
The sequentiality metric compares, for all sentences of a
story, the differences in likelihood for each sentence as pre-
dicted by a contextual sequencing model versus as predicted
by a topic-driven model where each sentence is conditioned
only on the topic. That is, given sentences from a story writ-
ten about a topic T, sequentiality compares the likelihood of
each story sentence under two generative models, illustrated
in Fig. 1. The contextual generative model assumes that each
sentence is generated conditioned on the story topic as well
as all of its preceding sentences. The topic-driven generative
model assumes that every generated sentence is conditioned
only on the story topic. As such, higher values of sequen-
tiality for sentences suggests that the sentences follow the
common expectations given the context of the evolving story
and topic, whereas lower values suggest that sentences de-
viate more from expectation, given the preceding sequence
of sentences. Here, we first briefly introduce LLMs, then for-
mally define sequentiality, and finally discuss word-based
narrative measures that we also use in our experiments.
Large-scale language models
LLMs are a new family of language models (LMs) represented
as large-scale neural networks, which have rapidly come
to serve as the foundation of most current NLP systems
(3). Formally, a language model is a statistical model that
estimates the likelihood or probability of sequences of words,
i.e., one or more sentences. We denote this likelihood as

preprint in submission
Imagined versus Remembered Stories: Quantifying Differences in Narrative Flow
𝑝LM(𝑠0:𝑖) where 𝑠0:𝑖= {𝑠0, ...,𝑠𝑖} are consecutive sentences.
LLMs are trained to estimate the likelihoods of sentences
using massive amounts of text. For example, the model we
use in our experiments (GPT-3; 6) is a 175B parameter neural
LM trained on over 45TB of text data (e.g., books, news
articles, Wikipedia pages). Through training on such large
amounts of text, LLMs also learn an estimate of the general
ordering or expected narrative flow of events and sentences
in stories (8, 30).
Formalization
Sequentiality 𝑐(𝑠𝑖,ℎ) is measured for each sentence 𝑠𝑖of a
story about topic T for a number ℎof preceding sentences
(the history under consideration, 𝑠𝑖−ℎ:𝑖−1). 𝑐(𝑠𝑖,ℎ) is com-
puted for each sentence 𝑠𝑖, as the difference in the negative
log-likelihood (NLL) of the sentence, as computed by the
contextual and topic-driven models. This requires comput-
ing the likelihood of each sentence, conditioned on ℎprior
sentences, per the history 𝑠𝑖−ℎ:𝑖−1 under consideration, in
addition to the words in the story topic T and, separately,
computing the likelihood of the same sentences when each
is conditioned only on the story topic T:
𝑐(𝑠𝑖,ℎ) = −1
|𝑠𝑖| [log𝑝LM(𝑠𝑖| T)
|        {z        }
topic-driven
−log𝑝LM(𝑠𝑖| T,𝑠𝑖−ℎ:𝑖−1)
|                   {z                   }
contextual
]
where we obtain the likelihood of sentences 𝑝LM from LLMs,
and normalize the likelihoods by sentence length |𝑠𝑖| to ac-
count for sentence-length variation. We then define the over-
all sequentiality of the entire story as the average sequen-
tiality of its sentences.
In our analyses, we examined the average sequentiality
per story for history sizes ranging from one to nine preceding
sentences (ℎ= 1, ..., 9) to the full preceding history (ℎ= full).
We use the story summaries written by the storytellers as
the topic T. We compare sequentiality to the topic-driven
likelihood of sentences, computed by conditioning the sen-
tences of stories only on the topic; we report the negative log-
likelihood of sentences, NLLT = −1
|𝑠𝑖| log𝑝LM(𝑠𝑖| T). We
also compare to the fully contextual negative log-likelihood:
NLLC = −1
|𝑠𝑖| log𝑝LM(𝑠𝑖| T,𝑠0:𝑖−1).
Lexicon-centric measures
In addition to sequentiality, we examined the events in nar-
ratives and employed several word-based metrics to ana-
lyze narratives. The latter lexicon-centric measures, include
counts of the prevalence of realis event words, i.e., non-
hypothetical references to concrete events that took place
(e.g., “she tripped”) in contrast to hypothesized events (e.g.,
“she feared tripping”, but she did not trip.). To find those
words, we used an automated tagger trained on an annotated
corpus of realis terms (45). We also noted average numbers of
words in stories falling in psychologically related categories
using the Linguistic Inquiry Word Count (LIWC; 48) lexi-
con, and measured the average concreteness level of words
using a concreteness lexicon (7). To ensure the validity of
the concepts measured by these lexicon-based measures (24),
we show the most frequent words in each lexicon category
along with our results.
Results
Analysis of Hippocorpus stories
We determined the difference in sequentiality across the
three story types (recalled, retold, and imagined stories) us-
ing a factorial linear regression with the story type as the
grouping factor and the story length. We included the story
length because recalled stories are longer than retold stories
(𝑝= 0.001), and retold stories are longer than imagined sto-
ries (𝑝< 0.001; Fig. 2C). We report the 𝑅2, which quantifies
the proportion of variance in the data that is explained by
the group difference, the effect size, and the 𝑝-values after
correction for multiple comparisons using the Bonferroni
method.
Imagined stories flow in a more expected manner than
autobiographical stories. The comparisons between the
sequentiality across story types (𝑁= 6854 stories on 𝑁=
2788 unique topics) show that imagined stories have higher
sequentiality than autobiographical memories (𝑝< 0.001
for the main effect of the story type on all sequentiality
history lengths; see Fig.2 for the effect sizes). The pairwise
comparisons demonstrate that imagined stories have higher
sequentiality than both retold (𝑝< 0.001) and recalled (𝑝<
0.001) stories. While there were no differences in contextual
likelihood (NLLC) between story types, we observe lower
topic-driven likelihood (i.e., higher NLLT) for sentences of
imagined stories versus autobiographical stories. This sug-
gests that the sentences of imagined stories on average have
weaker links to the topic than sentences of autobiographical
stories, despite both types of sentences having strong links
to the preceding sentences. However, in general, sequen-
tiality (with increasing history size) has much larger effect
sizes and 𝑅2 compared to the likelihood or realis metrics
(Fig. 2D), which shows that sequentiality is a better measure
for capturing differences in the narratives of imagined and
autobiographical stories.
Retold autobiographical stories have higher sequen-
tiality than fresh recollections. In comparison to freshly
recalled stories, stories retold after several months have
higher sequentiality (𝑝< 0.001), are shorter (𝑝< 0.001),
and contain fewer realis events (𝑝< 0.001; Fig. 2). This
finding demonstrates systematic shifts in the narratives of
autobiographical stories with time, posing questions and
framing future research on the consolidation of memories in
and influences of such processes on recollection. We found

preprint in submission
Maarten Sap, Anna Jafarpour, Yejin Choi, Noah A. Smith, James W. Pennebaker, and Eric Horvitz
Figure 2. Differences in sequentiality in recalled, retold, and imagined stories. (A) Mean sequentiality of stories with
varying history lengths (ℎ= 1 to h = full story length) are different across the story types. Imagined stories have higher
average sequentiality than autobiographical stories, and retold stories more sequentiality than recalled stories. (B) Stories
about imagined events are shorter than autobiographical stories. (C) Proportion of realis events is higher in autobiographical
stories than in imagined stories. (D) Effect sizes: Percentage difference in parameter estimates (left) and 𝑅2 (right), reflecting the
magnitude of difference in sequentiality, the total number of words (story length), the topic-driven and contextual likelihoods
of sentences (NLLT and NLLC) and the proportion of realis across story types.
that participants’ assessments of the frequency of recall-
ing or retelling autobiographical stories is not associated
with sequentiality but that sequentiality is negatively corre-
lated with the number of realis events in stories (𝑟= −0.08,
𝑝< 0.001).
Autobiographical stories contain more realis events
and concrete and time-and-space words than imagined
stories. We found that the proportion of realis events is
higher in recalled autobiographical stories than in imagined
stories (𝑝= 0.001; Fig. 2B), but did not differ when comparing
recalled and retold (𝑝> 0.1) or retold and imagined (𝑝> 0.1)
stories. The proportion of concrete words, measured with
LIWC and concreteness lexicons (7, 35), is different across
story types (𝑝< 0.001; supplementary Tab. 1) with fewer con-
crete words being used in imagined versus autobiographical
stories (recall: 𝑝< 0.001; retold: 𝑝< 0.001). The proportion
of concrete words is not different between recalled and retold
stories (𝑝> 0.1). Additionally, we found that recalled and
retold stories contain greater proportions of words related
to cognitive processes, time, space, and motion (𝑝< 0.001;
supplementary Table. 1).
Event-annotated subset
Next, we review the differences in the proportion of salient
events in a subset of the Hippocorpus that consists of 240
stories on 80 different topics across the three story types.
Each story sentence was annotated by eight crowdworkers
for whether a sentence expressed a major or minor event,
and whether the identified event was expected versus sur-
prising. To control for the variability in schematic knowledge
and subjective understanding of what constitutes a major or
minor event, the same groups of eight people annotated sen-
tences from the three stories (imagined, recalled, retold) on
each topic. We summarized the annotations based on major-
ity voting and evaluated the difference in the proportion of
major and minor events in the stories across the three story
types using ANOVA including consideration of sentence
length (sentences with major events are significantly longer
than those with no events or with minor events; 𝑝< 0.001;

preprint in submission
Imagined versus Remembered Stories: Quantifying Differences in Narrative Flow
Figure 3. Proportions of salient event annotations
across the stories. Graphs of the mean and standard error
of the mean of the proportion of events annotated as salient
(from left: major, minor, surprising, and expected events)
in the imagined, recalled, and retold stories. (* 𝑝< 0.05, **
𝑝< 0.01)
Fig. 4B). Then we studied the relationships among event an-
notation and sequentiality, LIWC, and concreteness lexicons
at the sentence level.
Autobiographical stories contain more salient events
than imagined stories. We observed a main effect for story
type on minor events and expected salient events, but not on
major events or surprising events (Fig. 3). Specifically, higher
proportions of sentences in recalled and retold stories were
annotated as minor events (𝑝= 0.007) and expected events
(𝑝= 0.025) as compared to events in imagined stories. We
found no significant difference in the number of minor, major,
expected, or surprising events (𝑝> 0.1) between recalled
stories and their retold versions.
Sentences with salient events have lower sequential-
ity. We examined the effect of event type (major, minor, or
no event) on the sequentiality of sentences, similar to how
we analyzed the effect on story types. Sequentiality with any
history length show a significant main effect of event type
(𝑝< 0.001; Fig. 4A). The sentences marked as containing ma-
jor events have lower sequentiality than those with no events
(𝑝< 0.001, all history lengths; no difference with the minor
events, 𝑝> 0.1). Whereas, sentences with minor events have
lower sequentiality than sentences with no events (𝑝< 0.05)
only when the sequentiality is measured considering the
previous sentence (h = 1) but not with longer history (ℎ> 1,
𝑝> 0.1). The results provide evidence that major events
have more global influence in a story than minor events.
Sentences with salient events have a higher propor-
tions of realis event terms and concrete, present-related,
and space-related words. We found a higher proportion
of realis event term in sentences with minor events than
in those with a major (𝑝< 0.001) or no events (𝑝< 0.001;
Figure 4. Sequentiality of sentences relative to event
annotations. (A) The average sequentiality, with varying
history, is grouped by the event type. The sentences with
no event (none) follow the narrative flow of the story topics
more than sentences with major (all sequentiality history
length) or minor events do (with sequentiality history of one
sentence). Sequentiality of minor and major events are not
different. (B) The sentences with no event are shorter than
sentences with major events. (C) The realis in sentences with
major or minor events is higher than in sentences with no
event. Error bars show standard error of the mean.
Fig. 4C). Using the LIWC and concreteness lexicons, we gen-
erally observe more differences between sentences with no
event and those with a salient event, compared to between
sentences with a minor vs. major event (see supplementary
Table 2). Notably, in addition to lower proportions of con-
crete and time-and-space words, we see higher proportions
of words related to cognitive and affective processes in sen-
tence with no events.
Sentences with surprising events have lower sequen-
tiality than those with expected major events. We found
that major events are often annotated as surprising (72%)
rather than expected (28%), whereas all minor events are
annotated as expected. Sentences annotated as describing
major events have a lower sequentiality when they are noted
to be surprising versus expected (𝑝< 0.001). sequentiality
is also lower for expected major events compared to ex-
pected minor events (𝑝< 0.001; the difference increased
with increasing history length). In general, we found that
sequentiality of sentences is not different for surprising and
expected sentences (𝑝> 0.05; the difference decreased with
increasing history length; for h = 1, uncorrected 𝑝= 0.014),
suggesting that sequentiality captures more than the event
expectancy.
Discussion
We introduced sequentiality as a new computational measure
of narrative flow of events instantiated by large-scale neural
language models. We used the measure to probe hypotheses
about the generative processes of constructing experienced
versus imagined stories, paired via a matched topical de-
scription starting point. Sequentiality measures the extent
to which story events and sentences flow from their pre-
ceding context and overall story topic versus from only the

preprint in submission
Maarten Sap, Anna Jafarpour, Yejin Choi, Noah A. Smith, James W. Pennebaker, and Eric Horvitz
story topic (Fig. 1), using likelihoods given by the GPT-3
large-scale language model (6). As such, sequentiality can
be considered a proxy for quantifying how much a story
follows the expected or common narrative flow for a specific
story topic (schematic knowledge) versus is grounded in
experiential details (episodic memory).
We used sequentiality to study differences in narrative
flow across (1) recalled stories based on fresh autobiograph-
ical experiences, (2) retold stories about those same auto-
biographical experiences after three to six months, and (3)
imagined stories matched to the topics of the autobiographi-
cal stories. With sequentiality and word-based metrics such
as the count of realis event terms (that refer to concrete, non-
hypothesized event occurrences) and LIWC and concreteness
lexicon scores, we observed differences in episodic details
and differing reliance on schematic knowledge for construct-
ing narratives. Based on sequentiality differences, imagined
stories have greater alignment with expected schematic flow
of events than autobiographical stories. Autobiographical
stories contain more minor detailed events than imagined
stories (Fig. 3), and they tend to have higher proportions of
concrete words as well as words related to time and space
(supplementary Table 1). Below, we discuss implications of
our findings for analyzing narrative flow of events using
large-scale neural LMs, as well as for understanding cogni-
tive processes of storytelling with computational methods.
Using sequentiality to quantify narrative flow
Sequentiality is a novel measure to quantify the extent to
which the flow of events follows expected schema, using
large-scale neural language models. This is a departure from
previous measures of narrative flow, which have predomi-
nantly approached the task by examining word usage, such
as the rates of emotion-related words over time. In prior
work, researchers have argued that emotional flow plays a
role in the persuasiveness of stories (34), an approach which
was later operationalized through word-counting of emotion
words in books (39) and consumer reviews (55). In addition
to emotion words, recent work computed the progression
of the rate of function words and words related to cognitive
processes to study narrative progression and their relation-
ship to story quality (5). Beyond studying word frequencies,
a recent study (50) employed high-dimensional word vectors
to compute the speed and complexity of stories. In contrast
to previous work which analyzed narratives through surface-
level features, sequentiality leverages a story’s topic and the
language modeling capabilities of large-scale neural LMs to
infer the predictability of words. Sequentiality does not rely-
ing on specific word categories or high-dimensional word
vectors. Sequentiality was initially used to measure the lin-
earity of sentences, in a preliminary investigation (42) where
we used a much smaller neural LM (GPT-1; 37) than the one
used in this study.
Conceptually, the sequentiality generative model provides
a new lens on how sentences and events are produced or read,
adding to several models of sentence and event processing
from cognitive science. Sequentiality relates to word-level
surprisal theory (20, 31), which posits that humans form
expectations of which word should come next in text, before
observing it. Contextual generative models can formalize
those expectations (e.g., Fig. 1; bottom), and neural LMs can
approximate these human expectations about words given
sufficient context (15).
However, surprisal theory does not account for the vari-
ation in non-contextual likelihood of events depending on
the story topic, which may play a role in how humans form
expectations. For example, a story about driving on a high-
way for 30 miles might have fewer expected events than one
about a birthday party, which has opportunities for details
on whose birthday it was, where it took place, who attended,
how the cake tasted, etc. We account for this variation by
conditioning both the topic-driven and contextual models on
the story topic. Although we find no differences in contextual
likelihood (NLLC) and only small differences in topic-driven
likelihoods (NLLT), the largest difference across story types
is measured as the ratio of contextual and topic-driven likeli-
hoods using sequentiality (Fig. 2D). Corroborating this need
for comparing likelihoods, recent work has shown the use-
fulness of comparing contextual and non-contextual event
likelihoods in a visual event segmentation tasks (13).
Sequentiality is built on the assumption that large-scale
neural language models encode knowledge about the com-
monly expected narrative flow of events. Previous work sug-
gests that this is a valid assumption, since LLMs can deter-
mine the correct ordering of sentence in text (37, 38) and
can be used to generate expected schemas for events (30).
However, the extent to which LLMs learn the common flow
of events is influenced by the knowledge contained in their
training data (16). Specifically, the culture and identities of
the authors of training data can influence the schema that
are deemed likely by the model; a language model trained ex-
clusively on British text only will likely learn British-specific
schema (e.g., tea time) that other models might not encode.
However, our findings with sequentiality remain similar
when using language models trained on other data sets (41),
such as OpenAI-GPT (trained on 5GBs of English fiction; 37)
and GPT-2 (trained on 40GBs of news-like English text; 38),
suggesting this may not be a substantial issue.
Cognitive processes of recalling versus imagining
The results reveal differences in the cognitive processes of
how people form narratives grounded in their own expe-
riences versus from their imagination, and the differential
role of salient events in both types of storytelling. Although
imagination and remembering may engage similar mental
processes (43) and imagination could leverage one’s own life
experiences (19), we found series of systematic differences

preprint in submission
Imagined versus Remembered Stories: Quantifying Differences in Narrative Flow
between imagined and autobiographical stories. In all stories,
storytellers appear to combine schematic knowledge with
references to major events. We found that major events tend
to be relayed in surprising sentences that tend to deviate
from expectation, per likelihoods provided by the neural
language model. These sentences are associated with the
lowest sequentiality (Fig. 3 and Fig. 4), and they are often
about personal concerns and core drives and needs (supp.
Table 2). For example, in the recalled story on "A warm sum-
mer morning with a hummingbird. How I had a communal
moment with nature by misting a hummingbird with a garden
hose.", the major event is that "At first, I thought he [the hum-
mingbird] was just doing his early morning pollen rituals, but
to my surprise he wanted water." In an imagined story on the
same topic, the major event is that "[animal started to come
to the garden.] Mostly squirrels at first and a few deer, and one
tiny hummingbird." Similarly in the recalled story, the major
event is that "I saw a hummingbird at the corner of my eye."
A significant difference between the autobiographical and
imagined stories is in the proportion of minor events, as
identified through human annotations (Fig. 3). The minor
events tend to be non-hypothesized, concrete details of the
stories that are noted as expected but typically not part of
the general schema of the story topic. The minor events have
local saliency and can be identified only with computation of
sequentiality with a one sentence history. These events often
contain words on biological processes and social references.
As an example, a minor event in a recalled story on the same
topic as the example above is that "I was feeling kind of low
due to not seeing many of my friends anymore due to everyone
being busy with their schedule, and work being a little slow
was also on my mind." and in an imagined story was that "For
the first few weeks I got nothing and no activity, then about a
month ago animals came."
Shedding some new light on the nature of salient events,
we found that sentences annotated as describing salient
events tend to have more concrete words, first-person refer-
ences, social words, and words related to cognitive processes,
biological processes, core drives and needs, and relativity to
time, space, and motion. Only a subset of these observations,
including the change in time, character, and space, has been
previously reported in studies on detection of salient events
to mark an event boundary (29). We also observed that the
length of stories showed small differences among the story
types. This observation on length is congruent with the un-
derstanding that the stories that rely largely on commonly
expected schema are generally shorter (26, 49).
We found that the proportion of salient events (major and
minor) are similar in stories about freshly recalled memo-
ries and about memories retold after 3–6 months (Fig. 3).
The retold stories have higher sequentiality and are shorter
than the initial recall of stories (Fig. 4). The self-reported
frequency of revisiting and retelling autobiographical stories
does not appear to influence the sequentiality of the stories.
The retold stories that were noted as more frequently re-
visited memories were found to contain fewer realis events,
which may reflect processes of abstraction.The sequentiality
measure provides a means of quantifying the observation
that, with passing time and memory consolidation, retelling
autobiographical memories relies less on recall from episodic
memory, instead increasingly invokes common semantic
knowledge of schema (1, 4, 46), especially since certain events
may be forgotten (47).
Open research directions
The methods and results presented show promise as tools
for exploring processes of memory, reasoning, and imagina-
tion employed to generate narratives. The methods also hold
opportunity to help with building deeper understandings of
influences of common schema and personal experiences on
the stories that people tell. From a computational perspective,
we see rich opportunities ahead for harnessing large-scale
neural models to explore narrative theories, including con-
sideration and comparative study of different generative
models (36). From a cognitive perspective, directions include
pursuing answers to standing questions about the contribu-
tions of memory and reasoning to the stories that people
generate about experienced and imagined events, and how
memories—and the autobiographical stories that flow from
them—evolve over time since events are experienced. From
a cultural perspective, the methods can provide opportunity
to study differences across communities and cultures of the
nature and influences of common schema and personal expe-
riences on stories. Opportunities for study include seeking
insights about the influences and interpretations of world
events over time on fiction and non-fiction narrativizations
(52, 53). Other research directions include applying the re-
sults, methods, and measures in studies of narrativizations
with different motivations (33) such as recall, storytelling,
persuasion, lie-detection, false confessions, recovered mem-
ories, and the propagation and effects of misinformation.
Materials and Methods
Building Hippocorpus
In our analyses, we make use of our previously collected
corpus of autobiographical, imagined, and retold stories
(Hippocorpus; 41). This corpus contains 6,854 stories col-
lected from crowdworkers in three stages (depicted in Fig. 5).
In the recalled stage, workers write a short diary-like story
and a short summary. Then, in the imagined stage, workers
are given a summary and asked to write a short diary-like
story. Finally, in the retold stage, workers from the first stage
are given their original summary and asked to re-tell their
story, after 3-6 months have passed. For both the recalled and
retold tasks, we collect from workers the time elapsed since
they experienced the event (timeSinceEvent, in weeks or
months), as well as the frequency at which they thought or

preprint in submission
Maarten Sap, Anna Jafarpour, Yejin Choi, Noah A. Smith, James W. Pennebaker, and Eric Horvitz
talked about the event (freqOfRecall, on a five-point Likert
scale of “never” to “constantly”). For more details, see our
preliminary work (41) and the Supplementary materials A.1.
Collecting event annotations
We additionally collected sentence-level event annotations
for a subset of the Hippocorpus stories. We randomly se-
lected 80 topics and their associated recalled-imagined-retold
stories (𝑁= 240 stories). Since people’s individual percep-
tions of what constitutes an expected, surprising, major, or
minor event could differ depending on their experiences,
background, or culture, we make sure all stories about the
same topic are annotated by the same worker. We collected
event annotations from 8 crowdworkers per set of three
stories.
Participants read each of the sentences in each of the
three stories, one sentence at a time, and indicated if the
story sentences mark a start of a new event. Specifically,
annotators marked whether a sentence represented a new
event that is minor or major and if the events are expected
or unexpected. See Supplementary A.2 for further details.
Extracting sequentiality, realis events, and lexicon
counts
To compute the sequentiality of each story sentence, we first
split each story in the Hippocorpus into sentences, using a
version of the NLTK sentence tokenizer1 adapted to avoid
splitting sentences into one-word sentences. We then used
the OpenAI API to obtain the likelihoods under GPT-3 of each
sentence conditioned on the story topic and various history
sizes. Specifically, we compute the log-likelihood of a sen-
tence 𝑝GPT-3(𝑠𝑖) by summing the word-level log-probabilities
yielded by the API for the sentence at hand. We can then
compute sequentiality for each history size.
For computing the proportions of realis event terms, we
use a realis term tagger from our preliminary investigations
(41). This tagger is a BERT (12) model trained on a realis
annotated corpus of literary fiction (45), which achieves F1
accuracy scores of 83.7% and 75.8%, on the validation and
test sets, respectively.
We used the LIWC 2015 software2 for counting the pro-
portion of words that belong to specific LIWC categories
(35). For the concreteness lexicon (7), we averaged the con-
creteness lexicon of each story by matching words in the
story with words in the lexicon.
Data analysis
For each story, we averaged the sequentiality of all sentences
and had one representative value for each of the sequentiality
with history length of 1 sentence to full story. We also took
1https://www.nltk.org/api/nltk.tokenize.html
2https://www.liwc.app/
the averaged proportion of major or minor events, the aver-
aged proportion of realis events, the total number of words
(story length), and the averaged negative log likelihoods
(NLLC, NLLT) per story. We applied a factorial linear regres-
sion on each of the parameters, to identify the differences
between story types. We either included three factors for
three story types (imagined, retold, recalled) or we included
two factors for pairwise comparisons.
We similarly used a factorial linear regression to evalu-
ate the characteristics of sentences with various event type
(major, minor, or no events). A sentence was accepted to
be a minor or major event if the majority of the annotators
marked the sentence as such. We also evaluated the pro-
portion of events that were expected or surprising by the
majority of the annotators. This analysis was done at the sen-
tence level with 9412 major, 6835 minor, and 17477 no event
annotation. We used Bonferroni correction to adjust the sig-
nificance threshold for multiple comparisons. All reported
p-values are Bonferroni corrected.
