An Exploration of Embodied Visual Exploration
Santhosh K. Ramakrishnan1,3, Dinesh Jayaraman2,3, and Kristen Grauman1,3
1 The University of Texas at Austin
2 University of Pennsylvania
3 Facebook AI Research

Abstract. Embodied computer vision considers perception for robots in novel,
unstructured environments. Of particular importance is the embodied visual ex-
ploration problem: how might a robot equipped with a camera scope out a new
environment? Despite the progress thus far, many basic questions pertinent to
this problem remain unanswered: (i) What does it mean for an agent to explore
its environment well? (ii) Which methods work well, and under which assump-
tions and environmental settings? (iii) Where do current approaches fall short,
and where might future work seek to improve? Seeking answers to these ques-
tions, we ﬁrst present a taxonomy for existing visual exploration algorithms and
create a standard framework for benchmarking them. We then perform a thor-
ough empirical study of the four state-of-the-art paradigms using the proposed
framework with two photorealistic simulated 3D environments, a state-of-the-art
exploration architecture, and diverse evaluation metrics. Our experimental results
offer insights and suggest new performance metrics and baselines for future work
in visual exploration. Code, models and data are publicly available. 4
Keywords: Visual navigation · Visual exploration · Learning for navigation
1
Introduction
Visual recognition has seen tremendous success in recent years that is driven by large-
scale collections of internet data [55,39,62,35] and massive parallelization. However,
the focus on passively analyzing manually captured photos after learning from curated
datasets does not fully address issues faced by real-world robots, who must actively cap-
ture their own visual observations. Embodied active perception [1,8,7,71] tackles these
problems by learning task-speciﬁc motion policies for navigation [76,26,25,56,3] and
recognition [43,32,74] often via innovations in computer vision and deep reinforcement
learning (RL), where the agent is rewarded for reaching a speciﬁc target or inferring the
right label.
In contrast, in embodied visual exploration [49,57,16,54], the goal is inherently
more open-ended and task-agnostic: how does an agent learn to move around in an
environment to gather information that will be useful for a variety of tasks that it may
have to perform in the future?
4 Code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/exploring_exploration
arXiv:2001.02192v2  [cs.CV]  21 Aug 2020

2
S. Ramakrishnan et al.
Automatically gather information
Solve downstream tasks
Please get me coffee in the 
living room.
Fig. 1. An intelligent agent is dropped into an unknown, unmapped environment. The agent’s
observations are the egocentric RGB-D views it sees as it moves around. There is no map provided
to the agent; it must look around for obstacles and objects of interest as it moves. Given a limited
time budget, it has to intelligently explore the environment and gather useful information about its
geometry and semantics. Such intelligent exploration prepares an agent to efﬁciently solve future
tasks. For example, if the robot is asked to fetch coffee for a person in the living room, it should
use its knowledge of objects, rooms, and the layout of the environment to efﬁciently perform
this task. This article organizes and systematically evaluates current paradigms for handling the
exploration phase (lefthand panel).
Intelligent exploration in 3D environments is important as it allows unsupervised
preparation for future tasks. Embodied agents that have the ability to explore are ﬂex-
ible to deploy, since they can use knowledge about previously seen environments to
quickly gather useful information in the new one, without having to rely on humans.
This ability allows them to prepare for unspeciﬁed downstream tasks in the new en-
vironment. For example, a newly deployed home-robot could prepare itself by auto-
matically discovering rooms, corridors, and objects in the house. After this exploration
stage, it could quickly adapt to instructions such as “Bring coffee from the kitchen to
Steve in the living room.” See Fig. 1.
A variety of exploration methods have been proposed both in the reinforcement
learning and computer vision literature. They employ ideas like curiosity [59,49,11],
novelty [65,9,57], coverage [16,15], and reconstruction [33,54,61] to overcome sparse
rewards [9,49,11,57] or learn task-agnostic policies that generalize to new tasks [33,16,54].
In this study, we consider algorithms designed to handle complex photorealistic indoor
environments where a mobile agent observes the world through its camera’s ﬁeld of
view and can exploit common semantic priors from previously seen environments (as
opposed to exploration in randomly generated mazes or Atari games).
How do different exploration algorithms work for different types of environments
and downstream tasks? Despite the growing literature on embodied visual exploration,
it has been hard to analyze what works when and why. This difﬁculty is due to sev-
eral reasons. First, prior work evaluates on different simulation environments such
as SUN360 [54,61], ModelNet [54,61], VizDoom [49,57], SUNCG [16], DeepMind-
Lab [57], and Matterport3D [15]. Second, prior work uses different baselines with
varying implementations, architectures, and reinforcement learning algorithms. Finally,

An Exploration of Embodied Visual Exploration
3
exploration methods have been evaluated from different perspectives such as overcom-
ing sparse rewards [49,11], pixelwise reconstruction of environments [33,53,54,61],
area covered in the environment [16,15], object interactions [50,27], or as an infor-
mation gathering phase to solve downstream tasks such as navigation [16], recogni-
tion [33,54,61], or pose estimation [54]. Due to this lack of standardization, it is hard to
compare any two methods in the literature.
This paper presents a uniﬁed view of exploration algorithms for visually rich 3D
environments, and a common evaluation framework to understand their strengths and
weaknesses. First, we formally deﬁne the exploration task. Next, we provide a taxon-
omy of exploration approaches and sample representative methods for evaluation. We
evaluate these methods and several baselines on common ground: two well-established
3D datasets [2,14] and a state-of-the-art neural architecture [16]. Unlike navigation and
recognition, which have clear-cut success measures, exploration is more open-ended.
Hence, we quantify exploration quality along multiple meaningful dimensions such as
mapping, robustness to sensor noise, and relevance for different downstream tasks. Fi-
nally, by systematically evaluating different exploration methods using this benchmark,
we highlight their strengths and weaknesses, and we identify key factors for learning
good exploration policies.
Our main contribution is the ﬁrst uniﬁed and systematic empirical study of explo-
ration paradigms on 3D environments. In the spirit of recent inﬂuential studies in other
domains [20,42,24,45,44], we aim ﬁrst and foremost to provide a reliable, unbiased, and
thorough view of the state of the art that can be a reference to the ﬁeld moving forward.
To facilitate this, we introduce technical improvements to shore up existing approaches,
and we propose new baselines and performance metrics. We will publicly release all
code to standardize the development and evaluation of exploration algorithms.
Next, we detail the empirical study framework in Sec. 2, the taxonomy of existing
exploration paradigms in Sec. 3, and the exploration evaluation framework in Sec. 4. Fi-
nally, we present the experiments and ablation studies in Sec. 5 and conclude in Sec. 6.
2
Empirical study framework
First, we deﬁne a framework for systematically studying different exploration algo-
rithms. We formulate exploration as a sequential information-gathering task: at each
time step, the agent takes as input the current view and history of accumulated views,
updates its internal model of the environment (e.g., a spatial memory or map), and se-
lects the next action (i.e., camera motion) to maximize the information it gathers about
the environment. How the latter is deﬁned is speciﬁc to the exploration algorithm, as
we will detail in Sec. 3. This process may be formalized as a ﬁnite-horizon partially
observed Markov decision process (POMDP). In the next few sections, we describe the
POMDP formulation, the 3D simulators used to realize it, the policy architecture that
accounts for partial observability while taking actions, and the policy learning algo-
rithm.

4
S. Ramakrishnan et al.
Active Vision Dataset
Matterport3D Dataset
Fig. 2. Examples of 3D environment layouts in the Active Vision Dataset [2] (ﬁrst two columns)
and Matterport3D [14] (last three columns). The top row shows a ﬁrst-person view and the bottom
row shows the 3D layout of the environment with free space in gray, occupied space in white,
and the viewpoint as the blue arrow.
2.1
The exploration POMDP
We model exploration as a partially observed Markov decision process (POMDP) [41].
A POMDP can be represented as a tuple (S,O,A,Λ,T ,R,ρ0,γ,Texp) with state space
S, observation space O, action space A, state-conditioned observation distribution Λ,
transition distribution T , reward function R, initial state distribution ρ0, and discount
factor γ. The agent is spawned at an initial state s0∼ρ0 in an unknown environment.
At time t, the agent at state st receives an observation ot ∼Λ(.|st), executes a cam-
era motion action at ∼π(ˆst), receives a reward rt ∼R(.|st,at,st+1), and reaches state
st+1∼T (.|st,at). The state representation ˆst is obtained using the history of observa-
tions {ok}t
k=1, and π is the agent’s policy. We assume a ﬁnite episode length Texp.
The goal is to learn an optimal exploration policy π∗that maximizes the expected
cumulative sum of the discounted rewards over an episode:
π∗= argmax
π
Eτ∼π
Texp
∑
t=0
γtrt

,
(1)
where τ is a sequence of {(st,at,rt)}T
t=1 tuples generated by starting at s0 ∼ρ0 and
behaving according to policy π at each time step. The reward function R captures the
method-speciﬁc incentive for exploration (see Sec. 3). Next, we concretely deﬁne the
instantiation of the POMDP in terms of photorealistic 3D simulators.
2.2
Simulators for embodied perception
In order to standardize the experimentation pipeline, we use simulators built on top
of two realistic 3D datasets: Active Vision Dataset [2] (AVD) and Matterport3D [14]
(MP3D). See Fig. 2. There are several other valuable 3D assets in the community [72,37,6,64];

An Exploration of Embodied Visual Exploration
5
Properties
Active Vision Dataset [2] Matterport3D [14]
View sampling
Discrete
Continuous
Size (average navigable space)
Small (9.7m2)
Large (516.34m2)
Train / val / test splits
9 / 2 / 4
61 / 11 / 18
Large scale data
No
Yes
Outdoor components
No
Yes
Clutter
Signiﬁcant
Mild
Forward motion
0.3 m
0.25 m
Rotation angle
30◦
10◦
Table 1. The contrasting properties of AVD and MP3D provide diverse testing conditions. Last
two rows show the action magnitudes.
we choose MP3D and AVD for this study due to their complementary attributes (see
Tab. 1). We anticipate that the different facets of the two datasets will allow us to better
elicit any differences in behavior between the paradigms we test.
The Active Vision Dataset (AVD) is a dataset of dense RGB-D scans from 15
unique indoor houses and ofﬁce buildings [2]. We simulate embodied motion by con-
verting the dataset into a connectivity graph with discrete points and moving along the
edges of the graph (similar to [5]). Compared to Matterport3D, AVD environments are
relatively smaller in size, fewer in number, and have noisy depth inputs and coarsely dis-
cretized movements. The coarse sampling of views in AVD prevents continuous sim-
ulation of camera motion, as the reconstructed meshes tend to have signiﬁcant mesh
defects. However, movement along discrete nodes placed approximately 0.3m apart al-
lows a realistic simulation for an embodied agent in cluttered home interiors, which are
lacking in real estate photos or computer graphics datasets.
Matterport3D (MP3D) is a dataset of photorealistic 3D meshes from 90 indoor
buildings [14]. The MP3D environments are generally larger in size, greater in quan-
tity, and offer more ﬁnely discretized movements than AVD. Some MP3D environments
contain outdoor components such as swimming pools, porches, and gardens which
present unique challenges to exploration, as we will see in Sec. 5.3. We use the publicly
available Habitat simulator [44], which provides fast simulation.
In these simulation environments, the state space S consists of the agent’s position
and orientation within the environment. The observation space O consists of an RGB-D
sensor, an odometer to track the camera position, and a bump sensor to detect collisions.
We consider exploration under both idealized noise-free sensing and realistic noisy con-
ditions. The action space A is discrete and has three actions: move forward, turn left,
and turn right. The motion values are given in Tab. 1.
We stress that though the agents we test are simulated robots, the 3D visual spaces
in which we test them are real—they are comprised of real meshes captured from real
images, not generated from models with computer graphics. While real robots do in-
troduce challenges beyond perception, realistic simulations have the advantage of repro-
ducibility and scaling agent experience, and hence are widely used today [4,14,18,44,58,64,72].

6
S. Ramakrishnan et al.
Furthermore, our experiments examine the effects of noisy odometry and noisy occu-
pancy in these environments. Finally, recent work shows promising results transferring
from simulated environments (including Matterport3D) to real-world exploration and
navigation, supporting simulators as a meaningful testbed for our benchmark [15,34].
2.3
Policy architecture
In order to successfully explore an unknown environment, the agent needs to keep track
of where it is currently located, how much of the environment has been explored, what
information was contained in the explored regions, and what are the potentially un-
explored parts of the environment. We select a state-of-the-art policy architecture that
is well-suited to these objectives and has shown successful exploration in partially-
observed and visually rich 3D environments [16].
The agent receives sensory readings from an RGB-D sensor, an odometer that mea-
sures the motion resulting from the past action, and a bump sensor that detects collisions
resulting from past actions. The policy architecture consists of three parts: (1) spatial
memory, (2) temporal memory, and (3) an actor-critic model (see Fig. 3). We elaborate
on these parts in the following.
Spatial memory As the agent explores an environment, it needs to keep track of what
areas are explored and where the obstacles are present, and then decide where to navi-
gate next in order to explore further. This is done by maintaining a top-down occupancy
map that represents free, occupied, and unexplored regions in the environment (see
Fig. 3). The map is built geometrically by using depth inputs to estimate the occupied
and free regions based on pixel heights at a given location, and then registering them to
the allocentric map based on the agent’s pose.
Let {(Di, pi)}N
i=1 be the sequence of depth maps Di and pose estimates pi of the
agent up to time N. The agent’s pose at time i is expressed as pi = (Ri,t i), with Ri,t i
representing the agent’s camera rotation and translation in the world coordinates. Let
the agent initially start at the origin of the map, i.e., p0 = 0, and let K ∈R3×3 be the
intrinsic camera matrix, which is assumed to be provided. Each pixel xij in the depth
map Di can then be projected to the 3D point cloud as follows:
wi j =

Ri t i
0 1

K−1xij, ∀j ∈{1,...,Si}, ∀i ∈{1,...,N},
(2)
where Si is the total number of pixels in Di. This gives us the set of points W =
SN
i=1
SSi
j=1 wi j representing all observed points during exploration. We discretize the
top-down view of the environment into discrete 2D cells of size s and classify each cell
b into three categories—free space, obstacle, and unexplored space—as follows:
class(b) =





obstacle,
if ∃w ∈W b | height(w) ∈[ηl,ηh]
free space,
if height(w) < ηl ∀w ∈W b
unexplored,
if W b = ∅
(3)
where height(w) is the height of point w, ηl and ηh are height thresholds in meters used
to determine occupancy, and W b ⊂W is the set of points present within cell b with

An Exploration of Embodied Visual Exploration
7
Bump sensor
𝝅
𝑉
Allocentric map
Encoders
Actor
Critic
Collision encoder
Action encoder
ResNet-18
GRU
Obstacle
Free space
Unexplored
Depth
RGB
Odometer
Fig. 3. Policy architecture: The agent receives RGB-D, collision, and odometer inputs from the
environment at each time-step. The agent maintains a spatial occupancy memory (allocentric
map) that is constructed from the depth and pose inputs over time. Local egocentric crops cen-
tered around the agent are extracted (orange and red boxes, top left) and encoded along with the
RGB input using ResNet encoders. The encoded information is aggregated over time by a tem-
poral recurrent memory (GRU) that additionally encodes the semantics of the environment. The
aggregated state of the temporal memory is used by the Actor module to select actions that move
the agent around the environment.
heights less than ηh. This gives us the agent’s allocentric spatial memory specifying
which regions are free space, obstacle, and unexplored space. Based on the allocentric
memory and the agent’s current pose, egocentric crops at two resolutions Scoarse×Scoarse
and Sﬁne ×Sﬁne are provided to the next stages, where Scoarse and Sﬁne are measured in
meters.
Temporal memory While the spatial memory purely encodes geometric information, the
agent needs to additionally store other textural and semantic cues in the environment
over time. This is done via a temporal memory that jointly encodes all sensor inputs
and aggregates them over time.
The RGB and the coarse and ﬁne occupancy maps are encoded as 128-D feature
vectors via independent pre-trained ResNet-18 [29] models, then concatenated and
fused into a 512-D feature vector using a fully connected (FC) layer. The previous ac-
tion and binary collision signal are encoded as learned 32-D embeddings. The encoded
image, action, and collision features are concatenated, and then fused using an FC layer
to obtain a 512-D feature vector at each time-step. This is temporally aggregated using
a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [17] with one hidden-layer and 512-D hidden-state.
Actor critic model Given the encoded information from the sensors over time, the agent
needs to decide what action to execute in the environment during exploration. We learn

8
S. Ramakrishnan et al.
the exploration policy via the actor-critic paradigm, which consists of an actor to sample
actions and a critic to model the value of the agent’s current state [67]. The actor and
critic are each modeled using two fully connected layers. The actor outputs the action
probabilities for the policy at each time-step, and the critic predicts a scalar state value.
This policy architecture facilitates long-term information storage and effective plan-
ning by exploiting geometric and semantic cues in the environment. Unlike traditional
SLAM, such a learned spatio-temporal memory—popular in recent embodied percep-
tion approaches [25,30,16,15]—allows the agent to leverage both statistical visual pat-
terns learned from training environments as well as geometry to extrapolate what it
learns to novel environments.
2.4
Policy learning algorithm
In order to train the policy architecture, we adapt current methods [18,19,16] and divide
the learning into two stages: (1) imitation learning, and (2) ﬁne-tuning with reinforce-
ment learning. The imitation learning stage is intended to reduce sample complexity for
the reinforcement learning stage by offering a better initialization of the policy.
Imitation learning: We ﬁrst pre-train the exploration policy via imitation learning [10,23].
We generate synthetic expert trajectories by treating the environment as a graph of con-
nected nodes and exploiting this connectivity graph to greedily explore the environment
(discussed more in Sec. 4.1). Given these trajectories, we minimize the cross-entropy
error between the predicted and expert actions at each step. Additionally, we diversify
the training trajectories by sampling actions from the agent’s policy with probability ε,
instead of exclusively following the expert trajectories. We use inﬂection weighting to
prevent the policy from simply repeating the previous action [70]. The perturbation ε
is varied from εstart to εend during the course of training with a constant increase of 0.1
after every E updates. For AVD, εstart = 0, εend = 0.3, E = 100. For MP3D, εstart = 0,
εend = 0.5, E = 1000. These values were obtained through validation on the validation
environments.
Reinforcement learning: We then ﬁne-tune the policy with the RL training objective
using Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [60]. The PPO surrogate objective is:
LCLIP(θ) = ˆEt

min(¯rt(θ) ˆAt, clip(¯rt(θ),1−ε,1+ε) ˆAt

,
(4)
where θ are the policy parameters, ¯rt(θ) =
πθ (at|st)
πθold (at|st) is the probability ratio of the up-
dated and old policies at time t, ˆAt is the advantage estimate, and ε is the clipping factor.
We optimize for this objective using the Adam optimizer [36]. More implementation
details can be found in Appendix C.
Given this empirical study framework consisting of standardized task deﬁnitions,
simulators, policy architecture, and learning algorithm, we can plug in different reward
functions to train different exploration agents, as we describe next.

An Exploration of Embodied Visual Exploration
9
3
Taxonomy of exploration paradigms
We now present a taxonomy for exploration algorithms in the literature. We identify
four core paradigms (see Fig. 4):
(1) curiosity: encourages visiting states where the agent’s uncertainty is high.
(2) novelty: encourages visiting states that are unvisited.
(3) coverage: encourages visiting states that reveal unseen areas in the environment.
(4) reconstruction: encourages visiting states that lead to better prediction of un-
seen states.
Each paradigm can be viewed as a particular reward function in the POMDP. In
the following, we review their key ideas and related work, and choose representative
methods for benchmarking that capture the essence of each paradigm.
3.1
Curiosity
In the curiosity paradigm, the agent is encouraged to visit states where its predictive
model of the environment is uncertain [59,47,40,49]. See Fig. 4, top left. We focus
on the dynamics-based formulation of curiosity, which was shown to perform well
on large-scale scenarios [49,11]. The agent learns a forward-dynamics model F that
predicts the effect of an action on the agent’s state, i.e, ˆst+1 = F(st,at). Then, the
curiosity reward at each time step is:
rt ∝||ˆst+1 −st+1||2
2.
(5)
The forward-dynamics model is trained online to minimize the loss in forward-
dynamics prediction: ||f(st,at)−st+1||2
2. Thus, the curiosity reward encourages the
agent to move to newer states once its forward-dynamics predictions on the past states
are accurate. We adapt the curiosity formulation from [49] for our experiments. Instead
of using image features as the state representation for the forward dynamics model, we
use the GRU hidden state in Sec. 2.3 as we found it helped alleviate the partial observ-
ability. We follow recommended practices such as using PPO for policy optimization,
reward normalization, observation normalization, and using feature normalization in
the CNN [11].
Past work on curiosity-driven exploration The forward-dynamics based formulation
of curiosity uses an inverse-dynamics prediction loss to learn features that ignore parts
of the environment not useful for dynamics prediction [49]. Stable features kept ﬁxed
during policy learning are found to perform better in many cases [11]. Further variants
of curiosity aim to overcome the “noisy-TV” problem where the curiosity agent ﬁxates
on parts of the environment where stochasticity is a function of its actions [11,12,51].
For example, if the agent has access to a TV remote that allows it to randomly change
channels, it does that repeatedly to accumulate rewards. Due to the inherently random
nature of the transitions, they can never be predicted accurately and always reward the
agent. Random Network Distillation attempts to overcome this limitation by deﬁning
a ﬁxed random neural network as the predictive function since it is a deterministic
function of the inputs [12]. Exploration via Disagreement attempts to resolve the issue

10
S. Ramakrishnan et al.
Fig. 4. The four paradigms of exploration in 3D visual environments. Curiosity rewards visiting
states that are predicted poorly by the current forward-dynamics model. Novelty rewards visiting
less frequently visited states. Coverage rewards visiting “all possible” parts of the environment.
Reconstruction rewards visiting states that allow better reconstruction (hallucination) of the full
environment.
by learning an ensemble of forward-prediction models and using their disagreement as
intrinsic motivation rather than the prediction error [51]. Curiosity is also demonstrated
to work on physically realistic 3D simulators with the addition of a self-aware model
that learns to anticipate errors in the agent’s predictions [27].
3.2
Novelty
While curiosity seeks hard-to-predict states, novelty seeks previously unvisited states [65,9,46,68,57].
See Fig. 4, top right. Each s ∈S is assigned a visitation count n(s). The novelty re-
ward is inversely proportional to the square-root of visitation frequency at the current
state:
rt ∝
1
p
n(st)
.
(6)
For our experiments, we adapt the Grid Oracle method from [57]: we discretize the 3D
environment into a 2D grid where each grid cell is considered to be a unique state, and
assign rewards according to Eqn. 6. We deﬁne square grid cells of width 0.3m in AVD
and 0.5m in MP3D, and consider all points within a grid cell to correspond to that state.

An Exploration of Embodied Visual Exploration
11
Past work on novelty-based exploration Early methods on interval estimation or count-
based exploration deﬁne a conﬁdence interval over the optimal value function of the
underlying Markov Decision Processes (MDP) and apply this idea to tabular RL set-
tings [65]. More recent work extends this idea to function approximation settings by
using the notion of pseudo-counts [9] combined with complex density models [46], or
discretizing high-dimensional continuous spaces into discrete representations through
hash functions [68], which facilitates a tabular RL setting. Rather than using dynamics
prediction, episodic curiosity [57] rewards states that look dissimilar from previously
visited ones, yielding a binary variant of Eqn. 6. We use the GridOracle from [57] as it
was shown to explore successfully in a variety of settings.
3.3
Coverage
The coverage paradigm aims to observe as many things of interest as possible—typically
the area seen in the environment [16,15]. See Fig. 4, bottom left. Whereas novelty en-
courages explicitly visiting all locations, coverage encourages observing all of the en-
vironment. Note that the two are distinct: at any given location, how much and how far
a robot can see varies depending on the surrounding 3D structures. The coverage ap-
proach from [16] learns RL policies that maximize area coverage. The area-coverage
reward is:
rt ∝At −At−1,
(7)
where At is the area covered by the agent till time t (blue and green regions in Fig. 3).
An agent maximizing area seen prioritizes those locations and viewing angles which
provide high visibility of unseen parts of the environment.
While this is shown to work well on diverse environments [16], the agent is never
rewarded for revisiting the same regions. In our experiments, we ﬁnd that this leads
to a speciﬁc form of reward sparsity in large environments (as we will highlight in
Sec. 5.4). Consider the case where an agent starts exploring from the center of a very
large building. After it explores one half of the building, there will be no learning signal
for the agent to move back to the center in order to continue exploring the other half.
Therefore, we incorporate ideas from the novelty reward to design a shaped version
of coverage that addresses this limitation, which we call smooth-coverage:
rt ∝
1
|At| ∑
i∈At
1
√ni
,
(8)
where At is the set of regions seen in the environment at time t and ni is the number
of times a region i has been observed so far. Instead of only rewarding the agent for
the ﬁrst time it sees a region (as in Eq. 7), we reward the agent based on the number of
times that region was observed. This allows the agent to navigate across less frequently
visited regions to discover unexplored parts of the environment.
While we use area as our primary quantity of interest, this idea can more generally
be exploited for learning to visit other interesting things such as objects (similar to the
search task from [21]) and landmarks. See Appendix D for comparative results.

12
S. Ramakrishnan et al.
Past work on coverage-based exploration Recent work explores using novel architec-
tures that better optimize the coverage objective. The area coverage objective is op-
timized through a combination of imitation and reinforcement learning to learn ex-
ploration policies that generalize well to novel environments [16]. A new hierarchi-
cal architecture combines classic-planning and learned controllers to successfully op-
timize the area coverage objective in a sample-efﬁcient manner under realistic noise
models [15]. Scene memory transformers propose an architecture based on transform-
ers [69] that encode observations at each time-step into a feature space where self-
attention is used to perform reasoning [21]. The model is shown to be successful on
several tasks including area coverage and object class coverage (i.e., visiting as many
object classes as possible). These architectural variants are orthogonal to our study since
our primary goal is to explore the choice of reward function to facilitate exploration.
3.4
Reconstruction
Reconstruction-based methods [33,53,54,61] use the objective of active observation
completion [33] to learn exploration policies. The idea is to gather views that best facil-
itate the prediction of unseen viewpoints in the environment. See Fig. 4, bottom right.
The reconstruction reward scores the quality of the predicted outputs:
rt ∝−d(V(P), ˆVt(P)),
(9)
where V(P) is a set of true “query” views at camera poses P in the environment, ˆVt
is the set of view reconstructions generated by the agent after t time steps, and d is a
distance function. Whereas curiosity rewards views that are individually surprising,
reconstruction rewards views that bolster the agent’s correct hallucination of all
other views.
Prior attempts at exploration with reconstruction are limited to pixelwise reconstruc-
tions on 360◦panoramas and CAD models, where d(·,·) is ℓ2 on pixels. To scale the
idea to 3D environments, we propose a novel adaptation that predicts concepts present
in unobserved views rather than pixels, i.e., a form of semantic reconstruction. This re-
formulation requires the agent to predict whether, say, an instance of a “door” concept is
present at some query location, rather than reconstruct the door pixelwise as in [33,54].
We automatically discover these visual concepts from the training environments,
which has the advantage of not relying on supervised object detectors or semantic anno-
tations. Speciﬁcally, we sample views uniformly from training environments and cluster
them into discrete concepts C = {ci}K
i=1 using K-means applied to ResNet-50 features.
Each cluster centroid is a concept and may be semantic (doors, pillars) or geometric
(arches, corners).
Then, we reward the agent for acquiring views that help it accurately predict the
dominant concepts in all query views V(P) sampled from a uniform grid of locations
in each environment. Let v(pi) ∈V(P) denote the ResNet-50 feature for the i-th query
view. We deﬁne its true “reconstructing” concepts Ci = {c1
i ,...,cJ
i } ⊂C to be the J near-
est cluster centroids to v(pi), and assign equal probability to those J concepts. The agent
has a multilabel classiﬁer that takes a query pose pi as input—not the view v(pi)—and
returns ˆCi, the posteriors for each concept c ∈C being present in v(pi). The distance d

An Exploration of Embodied Visual Exploration
13
in Eqn (9) is the KL-divergence between the true concept distribution Ci and the agent’s
inferred distribution ˆCi, summed over all pi ∈P. The reward rt thus encourages reduc-
ing the prediction error in reconstructing the true concepts. In practice, we shape the
reward function to be the reduction in the KL divergence over time (as opposed to the
absolute KL divergence value) as this leads to better performance; see Appendix A.2.
Past work on reconstruction-based exploration The original reconstruction-based ex-
ploration approach [33] rewards exploration that permits more accurate pixelwise re-
constructions of scenes and objects. It was shown that the resulting exploratory poli-
cies accelerate recognition tasks. Sidekick policy learning [53] exploits full state infor-
mation available only at training time to accelerate training and learn better policies.
Broader transferability of exploration policies on the tasks of recognition, volume es-
timation, and other tasks are demonstrated in [54], and the quality of pixelwise recon-
structions are enhanced using a pix2pix [31] model. Architectural improvements based
on a spatial memory and foveated viewpoints yield high-quality reconstructions with
lower viewing costs [61].
Reconstruction-based exploration approaches also relate to classical information-
gain based exploration, where the goal is to explore in order to reduce the uncertainty
in the agent’s model of the world [13,63,66]. The action entropy control strategy in [13]
explores in order to maximize the information gained about the agent’s belief state when
the certainty of the optimal action is low. In [63], the agent is encouraged to take ac-
tions that minimize the uncertainty in pose estimation and mapping. Optimal Bayesian
exploration is used to maximize the agent’s knowledge about a parameterized world
model [66]. Our proposed formulation that reconstructs in a discrete concept space
can be viewed as a form of information-gain based exploration. The high-dimensional
image-state representation is projected to a smaller concept space, and the reward func-
tion encourages maximizing the the information gain between the agent’s knowledge
of the concepts present in the environment and the states visited by the agent.
4
Exploration evaluation framework
Having deﬁned the taxonomy of exploration algorithms, we now deﬁne baselines and
metrics to evaluate them.
4.1
Baseline methods
Heuristic baselines: Aside from the learned paradigms introduced above, we also eval-
uate four non-learned heuristics for exploration:
(1) random-actions [54,44] samples from a uniform distribution over all actions.
(2) forward-action [44] always samples the forward action.
(3) forward-action+ samples the forward action unless a collision occurs, in which
case, it turns left.
(4) frontier-exploration [73] uses the egocentric map from Fig. 3 and iteratively
visits the frontiers, i.e., the edges between free and unexplored spaces (see Appendix E).

14
S. Ramakrishnan et al.
Training / Testing
GT depth
GT pose
GT objects
GT state
random-actions
- / No
- / No
- / No
- / No
forward-action(+)
- / No
- / No
- / No
- / No
imitation-X
Yes / Yes*
Yes / Yes*
Yes / No
Yes / No
curiosity
Yes / Yes*
Yes / Yes* No / No
No / No
novelty
Yes / Yes*
Yes / Yes* No / No
Yes / No
frontier-exploration
- / Yes
- / Yes
- / No
- / No
coverage
Yes / Yes*
Yes / Yes* Yes / No
No / No
oracle
No / No
No / No
Yes / Yes
Yes / Yes
Table 2. Assumptions about information availability: the information required for each method
(including the architecture assumptions) during training/testing. In our experiments, we assume
all information is given during training, but only sensory inputs are given for testing. * - learned
methods may adapt to noisy inputs.
The frontier approach is closely related to area-coverage, but depends on hand-
crafted heuristics and may be vulnerable to noisy sensors and actuators.
Oracle graph exploration: As an upper bound on exploration performance, we also
include an oracle model. It cheats by exploiting the underlying graph structure in the
environment (which reveals reachability and obstacles) to visit a sequence of sampled
target locations via the true shortest paths. In contrast, all methods we benchmark are
not given this graph, and must discover it through exploration. We deﬁne three oracles
that visit (1) randomly sampled locations, (2) landmark views (see Sec. 4.2), and (3)
objects within the environment.
Imitation learning: We imitate the oracle trajectories to get three imitation vari-
ants, one for each oracle above. Whereas the oracles assume full observability and there-
fore are not viable exploration approaches, these imitation learning baselines are viable,
assuming disjoint training data with full observability is available.
Tab. 2 lists the assumptions on information availability made by the different ap-
proaches. Methods requiring less information are more ﬂexible. While we assume ac-
cess to the full environment during training, there is ongoing work [9,46,57] on relaxing
this assumption.
4.2
Evaluation metrics
A good exploration method visits interesting locations and collects information that is
useful for a variety of downstream tasks. Different methods may be better suited for
different tasks. For example, a method optimizing for area coverage may not interact
sufﬁciently with objects, leading to poor performance on object-centric tasks. We mea-
sure exploration performance with two families of metrics:
(1) Visiting interesting things. These metrics quantify the extent to which the agent
visits things of interest such as area [16,73,15,21], objects [21,27], and landmarks. The
area visited metric measures the amount of area covered in m2. For the objects visited

An Exploration of Embodied Visual Exploration
15
metric, we use the object annotations provided by both AVD and MP3D to measure
how many objects are visited during exploration. We consider an object to be visited
if the agent is close to it and the object is unoccluded within its ﬁeld of view. For the
landmarks visited metric, we mine a set of “landmark” viewpoints from the environ-
ment which contain distinctive visual components that do not appear elsewhere in that
environment, e.g., a colorful painting or a decorated ﬁreplace.5 The exact visitation cri-
teria for both objects and landmarks are given in Appendix B. Together, these visitation
metrics capture the different levels of semantic and geometric reasoning that an agent
may need to perform in the environment. To account for varying environment sizes and
content, we normalize each metric into [0,1] by dividing by the best oracle score on
each episode.
(2) Downstream task transfer. These metrics directly evaluate exploration’s impact on
downstream tasks. The setup is as follows: an exploration agent is given a time budget of
Texp to explore the environment, after which the information gathered must be utilized to
solve a task within the same environment. More efﬁcient exploration algorithms gather
better information and are expected to have higher task performance.
We consider three tasks from the literature that ask fundamental, yet diverse ques-
tions: (i) PointNav: how to quickly navigate from point A to point B? (ii) view localiza-
tion: where was this photo taken? and (iii) reconstruction: what can I expect to see at
point B?
In PointNav, the agent is respawned at the original starting point after exploration,
and given a navigation goal (x,y,z) relative to its position [4,58]. The agent must use its
map acquired during exploration to navigate to the goal within a maximum of Tnav time
steps. Intuitively, for efﬁcient navigation, an exploration algorithm needs to explore po-
tential dead ends in the environment that may cause planning failure. We use an A*
planner that navigates using the spatial occupancy map built during exploration [28].
While other navigation algorithms are possible, A* is a consistent and lightweight
means to isolate the impact of the exploration models. We evaluate using the success
rate normalized by the path length (SPL) [4].
In view localization, the agent is presented with images sampled from distinct land-
mark viewpoints (introduced previously in Sec. 4.2) and must localize them relative to
its starting location [54]. This task captures the agent’s model of the overall layout, e.g.,
“where would you need to go to see this view?”. While PointNav requires planning a
path to a point target around obstacles, view localization requires locating a visual tar-

of views localized within k mm of their ground truth pose.
In reconstruction, the agent is presented with uniformly spread query locations, and
must predict the set of concepts present at each location [33,54,61] (cf. Sec. 3.4). This
can be viewed as the inverse problem of view localization: the agent has to predict views

dicted concepts and the ground truth.
5 See Appendix G for more details on how landmarks are mined.

16
S. Ramakrishnan et al.
For each task, we deﬁne a standard pipeline that uses the exploration experience to
solve the task in Appendix A. We do not ﬁne-tune exploration policies for downstream
tasks since we treat them as independent evaluation metrics.
Together, the proposed metrics capture both geometric and semantic aspects of spa-
tial sensing. For example, the area-visited metric reﬂects 2D SLAM (occupancy) and
the reconstruction task metric measures semantic SLAM, where the goal is to map con-
cepts present in the environment.
5
Experiments
We next present the results on various exploration metrics.
Implementation details All policies are trained for Texp = 200/500 on AVD/MP3D for
2000 episode batches. We sample 100/342 episodes on AVD/MP3D uniformly from all
test environments. For navigation, we deﬁne 46/195 difﬁcult test episodes by selecting
challenging pairs of start-goal positions on AVD/MP3D. They are selected such that
the agent’s navigation would be inefﬁcient unless the environment was already well ex-
plored prior to navigation (see Appendix F). More implementation details are provided
in Appendix C.
5.1
Results on exploration metrics
We compare the performance of different paradigms on visitation metrics and down-
stream task transfer in AVD and MP3D. Since the two datasets exhibit a variety of con-
trasting properties by design (see Sec. 2.2), we may expect to see corresponding differ-
ences in the results. For brevity, only the best of the three oracle and imitation vari-
ants on each metric are reported. Note that coverage here corresponds to smooth-coverage,
which we found to consistently outperform area-coverage.
Fig. 5 shows the results on both datasets, and Fig. 7 shows example exploration
episodes. These results are for the ideal noise-free odometry case. We will separately
analyze the impact of noisy odometry in the next section. We see two clear trends
emerging:
AVD: coverage > reconstruction > novelty > curiosity
MP3D: novelty > coverage ≥reconstruction > curiosity
In AVD, both coverage and reconstruction clearly outperform novelty. While
novelty assigns equal rewards to all locations in the environment, coverage and
reconstruction prioritize viewpoints that are useful for quickly covering area and
concepts, respectively. This signiﬁcantly improves exploration performance in the small,
cluttered rooms of AVD. However, we do not observe a similar effect in MP3D as
novelty outperforms both these methods. This is due to two reasons. First, since
the rooms in MP3D are generally open and large, the advantage of prioritizing the
viewpoints is smaller than in AVD. Second, the reward functions of coverage and
reconstruction are inherently sparser than novelty. The reconstruction method

An Exploration of Embodied Visual Exploration
17
SPL

Matterport3D
# time steps
Active Vision Dataset
Area
Objects
Landmarks
Area
Objects
Landmarks
SPL
View localization
Navigation
Reconstruction
View localization
Navigation
Reconstruction
Fig. 5. Exploration results: The plots compare the different paradigms and select baselines (for
clarity) on all exploration metrics. The table shows the performance averaged over three random
seeds on each metric at the last time step and includes all baselines. The visitation metrics are
area-, object-, and landmark-visitation. The downstream tasks are view localization, navigation,
and reconstruction. The best results are bolded.

18
S. Ramakrishnan et al.
does not reward the agent for reconstructing concepts that it already reconstructed in
the past (reduction in KL divergence is smaller). The original area-coverage method
does not reward the agent for seeing the same area more than once. As we will show
in an ablation in Sec. 5.4, the improved smooth-coverage method bridges the gap
between area-coverage and novelty to a good extent.
The performance of curiosity is worse than that of other paradigms on both
datasets, likely due to the signiﬁcant partial observability that is characteristic of these
visually rich 3D environments. Its performance deteriorates further on MP3D envi-
ronments which tend to be much larger, and it even underperforms the imitation
baseline. curiosity needs a good state representation that accounts for partial observ-
ability to learn a good forward dynamics model that leads to better reward estimates.
This is naturally harder in larger MP3D environments. As we will show in ablations in
Sec. 5.4, the memory architecture that we use here is better for curiosity than using
only image features. It is possible that incorporating better memory architectures could
boost the performance even further.
Good baselines are essential for measuring progress on any benchmark. Our pro-
posed baseline imitation is signiﬁcantly better than the standard baselines random-actions,
forward-action, and forward-action+ used in prior work [54,44,16]. While learned
methods generally outperform these baselines, frontier-exploration outperforms
most learned methods on MP3D. Since fronter-exploration relies on clean depth
inputs with a perfectly registered map, it underperforms in AVD since the depth inputs
are naturally noisy (see Sec. 2). As we will show in the next section, a similar phe-
nomenon can also be in observed in MP3D where noisy sensor inputs deteriorate its
performance, echoing past ﬁndings [16].
In Fig. 5, we see that the navigation performance for all methods in MP3D are infe-
rior to the state-of-the-art performance reported in standard navigation benchmarks on
MP3D [44] due to the increased difﬁculty of the test episodes. Additionally, we observe
that the trends on the navigation metric on both AVD and MP3D differ from the other
metrics. The gaps between different methods are reduced, imitation closely com-
petes with other paradigms, and much larger values of Texp are required to improve the
performance in MP3D. This hints at the inherent difﬁculty of exploring well to navigate:
efﬁcient navigation requires exploration agents to uncover potential obstacles that re-
duce path planning efﬁciency. Notably, existing exploration methods do not incorporate
such priors into their rewards.
The radar plots in Fig. 6 concisely summarize the results thus far along ﬁve skills:
Mapping, Navigation, Object discovery, Localization, and Reconstruction. The metrics
corresponding to these skills are area visited, pointnav SPL, objects visited, view local-

to [0, 1] where 0 and 1 represent the performance of random-actions and oracle,
respectively. In each case, a method’s performance on the metric is normalized as fol-
lows:
skill value = method score−random-actions score
oracle score−random-actions score .
(10)
As we can see in Fig. 6, coverage dominates the other paradigms on most skills,
closely followed by reconstruction in AVD. In the larger MP3D environments, dif-
ferent methods are stronger on different skills. For example, novelty performs best on

An Exploration of Embodied Visual Exploration
19
        S1 - Navigation            S2 - Mapping            S3 - Object discovery  
        S4 - Localization          S5 - Reconstruction   
AVD
MP3D
Fig. 6. Exploration skills: Each exploration agent is assigned a 0-1 value for a set of ﬁve skills.
The most general agents have larger polygon areas (see text). Best viewed in color.
object discovery, frontier-exploration dominates on localization and reconstruc-
tion, and both dominate on mapping. This highlights the need for diverse evaluation
metrics for exploration.
Fig. 7 shows qualitative examples of exploration in AVD and MP3D for the four
paradigms. Better methods cover larger areas of the environment during exploration.
5.2
Impact of sensor noise on exploration
In the previous section, we evaluated the exploration performance of various algorithms
under noise-free odometry. Now, we evaluate the impact of sensor noise during explo-
ration, speciﬁcally the noise arising from two sources: (1) the occupancy map, and (2)
odometer readings. We perform our experiments in MP3D as it contains larger and more
diverse testing environments.
Impact of noisy occupancy estimation Noisy occupancy maps can result from mesh
defects, noisy depth, and incorrect estimates of affordances from the height-based es-
timation method (see Sec. 2.3) [52]. This noise occurs naturally and is not explicitly
simulated, meaning all results reported thus far are where the methods do experience
noisy occupancy. The noise-free case can be simulated by directly extracting occupancy
maps from the navigability information stored in the simulator, instead of estimating it
from visual cues. We characterize the impact of this noise through the noise robustness
coefﬁcient (NRC), the ratio of the area visited6 by an agent with the original depth-based
6 We select area visited because it is a simple metric that does not require additional semantic
annotations.

20
S. Ramakrishnan et al.
curiosity
novelty
coverage
reconstruction
t = 0
t = 100
t = 0
t = 1000
Fig. 7. Visualizing exploration behaviors: Exploration trajectories for each paradigm are vi-
sualized from the top-down view of the environment (AVD in ﬁrst two rows, MP3D in the re-
maining rows). Black and green locations represent unexplored and explored areas, respectively.
The agent’s trajectory uses color changes to represent time. The behaviors are largely correlated
with the quantitative performance of each paradigm in Sec. 5.1: better exploration methods cover
larger parts of the environment. For example, in AVD, coverage explores efﬁciently and ob-
serves most of the environment within 100 time-steps, closely followed by reconstruction
and novelty (top two rows). In MP3D, novelty covers signiﬁcantly larger areas during ex-
ploration in large environments (rows 5, 7 and 8). In fact, novelty is the only approach that
successfully crosses the narrow corridor in the middle and explores both sides of the environment
in row 5.

An Exploration of Embodied Visual Exploration
21
Effect of incorrectly estimated occupancy maps on exploration
Method
Inferred occupancy GT occupancy NRC
imitation
0.452
0.386
1.17
frontier-exploration
0.579
0.748
0.77
coverage
0.522
0.508
1.03
novelty
0.622
0.599
1.04
curiosity
0.317
0.317
1.00
reconstruction
0.510
0.503
1.01
Table 3. Noise robustness: We show the average area visited by each method with our original
depth-based occupancy estimates which tend to be noisy (second column) and the ground-truth
occupancy maps obtained from the simulator which are noise-free (third column). The area vis-
ited has been normalized by the best oracle score on a per-episode basis. In the fourth column, we
show the noise robustness coefﬁcient (NRC) which is the ratio of performance with the original
and ground truth (GT) occupancy maps (higher is better).
occupancy maps (noisy) and ground-truth occupancy maps obtained from the simulator
(noise-free). Larger NRC indicates better adaptation to noisy test conditions.
Tab. 3 shows the exact values of area visited with noisy and noise-free occupancy,
and the corresponding NRC values. As we can see, learned approaches have an NRC
close to 1.0, indicating that they perform similarly under both conditions. 7 However,
a purely geometric approach like frontier-exploration has a much lower NRC
(∼0.77). Since the simulation conditions in MP3D are generally noise-free and the
noise levels are low, frontier-exploration still gets better absolute performance
than most approaches. In contrast, the depth maps in AVD lead to persistent noise in the
occupancy estimates, which causes frontier-exploration to do worse than other
approaches there (see Fig. 5).
Impact of noisy odometry Next, we measure the impact of a noisy odometer during the
exploration evaluation phase. Noisy odometry leads to incorrect registration of local
point clouds, estimated from the depth map to the allocentric map (see Sec. 2.3). This
noise affects the spatial memory of the agent and effectively leads to noisy occupancy
inputs to the exploration policy. Note that this is different from the noisy occupancy
maps case where we measure the impact of per-frame noise in occupancy. Here, we are
more interested in the noise occurring in the long-term map registration.
We consider two variants: noisy training and noise-free training. Adding noise to
odometry during training additionally affects the reward functions used for policy learn-
ing. For curiosity, the features used for forward-dynamics prediction are noisy, since
they include the noisy occupancy estimates. For novelty, the state visitation counts
will be noisier since the agent is unsure of its position in the global coordinates. For
coverage, this directly affects the measure of coverage used in the reward function
since coverage measurements rely on accurate odometry. For reconstruction, this
7 The NRC values may be larger than 1.0 for learned methods. This is due to domain differences
between the inferred occupancy used in training and the GT occupancy used in testing.

22
S. Ramakrishnan et al.
Noise level (𝜂)
Area
Objects
Landmarks
Fig. 8. The plots show exploration performance as a function of noise levels in the odometer (η)
during testing. Note that the legend for the plots is shown in the table. The dashed lines in the
plots denote noisy training conditions (η = 0.15). The table compares the performance of various
paradigms and baselines with noisy testing conditions (η = 0.15), and both noise-free and noisy
training conditions.
affects the pose inputs pt associated with each observation obtained during exploration,
which may lead to worse predictions.
Following past work [16], we use a truncated Gaussian noise model whose standard
deviation is proportional to the action magnitudes (see Tab. 1). Speciﬁcally, at each time
step, we sample a random perturbation from a truncated Gaussian with mean 0, standard
deviation η∆a, and a truncation width of η∆a on either sides of the mean. Here, η is
the noise level and ∆a is the action magnitude. The agent estimates its current position
by summing up the odometer readings over time. Therefore, the noise gets accumulated
over time leading to increasingly large deviations in the agent’s pose estimates.
Fig. 8 compares the four paradigms along with baselines. When trained under noise-
free conditions, the learned methods generalize relatively well to different testing noise
levels, despite not being exposed to noisy inputs during training. Interestingly, their
relative trends are consistent across the different noise levels during testing. However,
the performance of frontier-exploration deteriorates rapidly as the noise level
increases. For noisy training conditions, we set the noise level as η = 0.15. While
coverage remains robust to noisy training conditions, the exploration performance
deteriorates for most learning-based methods when compared to the noise-free train-
ing conditions. This is expected since the reward function becomes less reliable under
noise-free training conditions. Nevertheless, the learning-based approaches outperform
frontier-exploration at higher noise levels.

An Exploration of Embodied Visual Exploration
23
5.3
Scale factors that inﬂuence performance
We now analyze how scaling factors affect exploration quality.
How does dataset size affect learning? First we analyze how the exploration perfor-
mance varies with the training dataset size, i.e., the number of unique training envi-
ronments in MP3D. We select novelty and smooth-coverage as they are the top
performers on MP3D. We additionally select area-coverage to compare its behavior
with smooth-coverage. We train agents on 3 random subsets of {10,20,40} MP3D
environments and measure their exploration performance at Texp = 1000 on the full
MP3D test set.
Fig. 9 shows the results. Interestingly, all agents achieve very good performance
with only 10 training environments. We observe the beneﬁt of well-shaped rewards pro-
vided by novelty and smooth-coverage, which decay exponentially based on the
visitation/observation frequency. While their performances improve with the number
of environments, it saturates quickly for area-coverage. There is gradual but steady
improvement in the performance from 10 environments to the full training set, suggest-
ing that these approaches might continue to beneﬁt from signiﬁcantly larger training
environment sets.
# training environments
Fig. 9. The impact of varying the number of training environments on exploration performance.
How does environment size affect exploration? Next we select the top ﬁve methods on
MP3D and measure their performance as a function of testing environment size (see
Fig. 10). First, we group test episodes based on area visited by the best oracle. Within
each group, we report the % of episodes in which each method ranks in the top 3 out of
5. The larger this value, the better the method is on those environments. The novelty
and coverage approaches are robust and perform well on most environment sizes.
The reconstruction approach also competes well, especially in larger environments.
However, frontier-exploration struggles in large MP3D environments as they
tend to contain mesh defects where the agent gets stuck. Please see Appendix H for
qualitative examples.

24
S. Ramakrishnan et al.
Fig. 10. The impact of varying the testing environment size on exploration performance.
Active Vision Dataset
Method
Area
Objects Landmarks View Local. Navigation Reconstruction
area-coverage
0.85±0.02 0.72±0.00 0.57±0.01
0.43±0.02
0.62±0.01
0.67±0.05
smooth-coverage 0.88±0.02 0.76±0.05 0.60±0.02
0.41±0.02
0.63±0.02
0.69±0.04
Matterport3D
Method
Area
Objects Landmarks View Local. Navigation Reconstruction
area-coverage
0.54±0.06 0.52±0.07 0.34±0.07
0.20±0.02
0.66±0.03
0.44±0.01
smooth-coverage 0.58±0.06 0.56±0.05 0.35±0.07
0.21±0.02
0.67±0.01
0.44±0.01
Table 4. Ablation study on designing a smoother coverage reward function.
5.4
Ablation studies
In the foregoing experiments, we have proposed two changes to implementations of
prior work: (1) using a smoother variant of the area-coverage reward function pro-
posed in [16], and (2) using the feature representation from a memory architecture for
curiosity as opposed to image representations as done in [49,11,16]. We now evalu-
ate the effect of these changes on exploration performance.
How do smoother rewards affect exploration? As we discussed in Sec. 3.3, the formula-
tion of area-coverage leads to speciﬁc forms of reward sparsity. We addressed this by
proposing the smooth-coverage method. We now evaluate the impact of making this
change across different metrics and datasets. In Tab. 4, we compare the two coverage
approaches on all six metrics on AVD and MP3D. As we can see, smooth-coverage
leads to consistent improvements across most metrics on AVD and across the visitation
metrics in MP3D.
How do memory-based representations inﬂuence curiosity-driven exploration? As dis-
cussed in Sec. 5.1, curiosity requires good feature representations that account for
partial observability in large 3D environments. Using better memory architectures for
learning can improve the performance by maintaining longer-term state representations.
In Fig. 11, we compare the performance between the spatio-temporal memory (spa-
tial map + RNN) based representation that we use (curiosity-rnn) and the version

An Exploration of Embodied Visual Exploration
25
# time steps
Active Vision Dataset
Matterport3D
Fig. 11. Ablation study on feature representations for curiosity-driven exploration.
used in [16] where pre-trained ImageNet features were used as the feature represen-
tation (curiosity-cnn). As we can see, using the RNN feature representation leads
to signiﬁcant improvements on all visitation metrics. In fact, curiosity-cnn fails
to learn any meaningful behaviors in MP3D. Despite the improvement seen here, the
overall performance of curiosity is signiﬁcantly worse than the other paradigms.
Curiosity-driven exploration may therefore beneﬁt from having even better memory ar-
chitectures. In addition, having a large number of parallel environments is critical for
training curiosity-based agents [11]. This is not practical in our case where we use large-
scale 3D environments that have signiﬁcantly higher computational and data constraints
than simpler 2D scenarios.
6
Conclusions
We considered the problem of visual exploration in 3D environments. Prior work presents
results on varying experimental conditions, making it hard to analyze what works when.
Motivated by this, we proposed a novel benchmark for consistently evaluating explo-
ration algorithms under common experimental conditions: policy architecture, 3D en-
vironments, learning algorithm, and diverse evaluation metrics. We then presented a
comparative study of four popular exploration paradigms on this standardized bench-
mark.
To enable this study, we introduced new metrics and baselines, and we improved
upon some existing approaches to scale well to 3D environments. Speciﬁcally, we ex-
tend the ideas from reconstruction-based exploration 360◦scene exploration approaches
to work on general 3D environments. We also introduced a new coverage reward func-
tion that improves upon the existing area-coverage method. Our analysis provides a

26
S. Ramakrishnan et al.
comprehensive view of the state of the art and each paradigm’s strengths and weak-
nesses.
To recap some of our key ﬁndings:
– In the small and cluttered environments from Active Vision Dataset, the coverage
and reconstruction methods are the strongest paradigms as they prioritize se-
lecting views that maximally increase information.
– In the large and open environments from Matterport3D, novelty and smooth-coverage
approaches are the strongest paradigms as they have smoother reward functions
which are easier to optimize in large environments.
– In the diverse Matterport3D testing environments, different approaches tend to
dominate on different skills, highlighting the need for diverse evaluation metrics.
– The performance trends among learned approaches remain consistent in noise-free
and noisy test conditions, whereas a purely geometric approach like frontier-exploration
tends to deteriorate rapidly in the presence of sensor noise.
– Our proposed smooth-coverage method improves over a prior coverage approach
by using a smoother reward function that eases optimization and leads to consis-
tently better performance on a variety of conditions.
– Our proposed adaptation of reconstruction successfully explores 3D environ-
ments and competes closely with the best methods on most settings.
– Improved memory architectures may be the key to scaling curiosity-driven explo-
ration to visually-rich 3D environments under extreme partial observability.
– An easy-to-implement heuristic imitation signiﬁcantly outperform baselines typ-
ically employed, and can serve as a better baseline for future research.
We hope that our study serves as a useful starting point and a reliable benchmark
for future research in embodied visual exploration. Code, data, and models are publicly
available.
