Active Learning with Gaussian Processes for High
Throughput Phenotyping
Sumit Kumar
Carnegie Mellon University

Wenhao Luo
Carnegie Mellon University

George Kantor
Carnegie Mellon University

Katia Sycara
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
A looming question that must be solved before robotic plant phenotyping capa-
bilities can have signiﬁcant impact to crop improvement programs is scalability.
High Throughput Phenotyping (HTP) uses robotic technologies to analyze crops
in order to determine species with favorable traits, however, the current practices
rely on exhaustive coverage and data collection from the entire crop ﬁeld being
monitored under the breeding experiment. This works well in relatively small
agricultural ﬁelds but can not be scaled to the larger ones, thus limiting the progress
of genetics research. In this work, we propose an active learning algorithm to
enable an autonomous system to collect the most informative samples in order
to accurately learn the distribution of phenotypes in the ﬁeld with the help of a
Gaussian Process model. We demonstrate the superior performance of our pro-
posed algorithm compared to the current practices on sorghum phenotype data
collection.
1
Introduction
World population is projected to reach 9.6 billion by 2050, and yields of most staple crops are not
increasing at a fast enough rate to meet the corresponding nutritional needs. To make matters worse,
the total cultivable landmass is more likely to decline due to a number of factors like ever-increasing
urbanization, non-biodegradable waste generation, etc. Hence, it is important to ﬁnd genetic varieties
of crops with favorable traits like disease resistance, high yield, etc. via plant breeding processes [1]
to ensure food security for the next generations. Plant phenotyping evaluates crops based on physical
characteristics to support plant breeding and genetic activities. Since the current standard practice
in collecting phenotype data needs human specialists to assess thousands of plants, phenotyping is
currently the bottleneck in the breeding process. To increase efﬁciency, High Throughput Phenotyping
(HTP) uses sensors and robotic platforms to gather phenotype data [2].
Current ﬁeld phenotyping systems rely on exhaustive coverage of the crop ﬁeld being studied in
the breeding experiment. This works well in relatively small proof-of-concept trials but requires
signiﬁcant time and resources for a large ﬁeld which in turn limits the progress of genetics research.
This is especially true for ground-based platforms which can collect higher quality data than aerial
platforms, but have much lower coverage rates. With the aim to accelerate the breeding process, we
propose an active learning algorithm for an autonomous ground robot to collect a subset of samples
with high utility in a short time. The agent models the distribution of a target phenotype of interest
in the ﬁeld with a Gaussian Process and actively selects the next locations to sample instead of
exhaustively visiting the whole ﬁeld.
Preprint. Work in progress.
arXiv:1901.06803v1  [cs.LG]  21 Jan 2019

In HTP, phenotypes like plant height, stalk width, etc. are measured with the help of state-of-the-art
computer vision and deep learning techniques [3, 4, 5] on images captured by on-board cameras.
Note that images can be captured by the robot even when it is in motion. This means that as the robot
is travelling from one place to another, it can gather phenotype measurements from all the sampling
locations or plots along the path. This is different from conventional adaptive sampling where the
robot selects some locations to collect high utility data and plans a path to reach them by optimizing a
cost function like path length. In this model, the robot learns about the distribution of a target variable
of interest by taking measurements at the selected locations and there is no information gain as the
robot is travelling from one location to another as it is not taking any measurements along the way.
In contrast, in this work, we consider the case where the robot collects data (through images) not
only at some selected locations but also while moving along the planned path in the ﬁeld as shown in
Figure 1. Formally, there are two types of measurements:
• Static measurements: The robot stops at a sampling location or plot in the ﬁeld and takes
images after orienting itself properly with respect to the plants in order to minimize the
measurement noise and gather highly accurate data.
• Mobile measurements: As the robot is travelling from one point to another in the ﬁeld, it
takes phenotype measurements from the images captured from all the plots along the path
without any adjustments.
Naturally, the static measurements are more accurate than the mobile ones due to localization errors
and noisy images resulting from robot’s motion on the uneven terrains of the ﬁeld. In fact, the larger
the speed of the robot, the noisier is the mobile data. However, gathering static measurements requires
more time and resources than mobile ones. As a result, there is a trade-off between the quality of
data and the required resources. Hence, it is important to develop statistical machine learning models
and adaptive sampling algorithms to incorporate information gain also from mobile measurements to
build autonomous systems capable of high throughput phenotyping.
This paper makes the following contributions:
• We present an active learning algorithm with a Gaussian Process model that incorporates the
two types of measurements with different noise levels and determines high utility samples
in order to actively learn the distribution of phenotypes in the ﬁeld. (Section 3.1)
• We propose an informative planning algorithm to determine the path with maximum joint
information gain resulting from both static and mobile measurements. (Section 3.2)
• On a sorghum phenotype dataset collected by a robotic platform from a ﬁeld in South
Carolina, USA, we perform a detailed comparative analysis of our proposed algorithm with
the current practices in crop phenotyping. (Section 4)
• We have open-sourced our code repository, simulation environment and the sorghum dataset1
for the research community to carry out further work in this direction.
2
Related Work
Gaussian process [6] is a probabilistic non-parametric method widely used for modelling a scalar
phenomenon as a multivariate normal distribution over the observable features. By utilizing the
uncertainty estimate of this Bayesian model, many approaches have been proposed to address the
problem of selecting a subset of available samples with the highest utilities to efﬁciently learn the
scalar ﬁeld [7, 8]. Planning paths for a robot to navigate to those sampling locations is called Informa-
tive Planning [9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. Several metrics have been used to quantify the information gain of a
sample or a set of samples, such as mutual information [14], entropy [15], Fisher information [16] and
the average reduction in variance [17]. In this work, we use the entropy as the information-theoretic
criteria.
Informative planning and adaptive sampling are widely studied topics in the robotics and machine
learning communities. Informative planning algorithms based on a recursive-greedy style [18, 19]
have been proposed with a sequential allocation mechanism in order to obtain subsequent waypoints.
1Our github repository can be found at https://github.com/sumitsk/algp.git
2

(a) Environment
(b) Iteration 1
(c) Iteration 2
Figure 1: (a) The grid environment used in simulation. The red cell depicts the current position of the robot.
The black cells are obstacles whereas the rest is free space. The sampling locations or plots in the ﬁeld are
shown in orange. (b) The robots determines some most informative sensing locations (shown as dark green cells)
to collect high quality phenotype measurements. It then plans a path from its current position to visit all the
sampling locations. As the robot traverses the planned path (shown as a sequence of green arrows), it gathers
noisy measurements from all the plots along the way. (c) After completing the traversal, it repeats this process
from its current position. For picture clarity, all the static samples collected in previous iterations are shown in
light green color. The dark orange colored regions are the areas visited by the agent so far.
Low et al. [20] presented an entropy based framework which uses dynamic programming to obtain
a batch of waypoints for determining the optimal path. Ma et al. [21] also proposed a similar
informative planning method based on dynamic programming in order to compute the informative
waypoints. All these approaches consider a single source of data acquisition and has the same
measurement uncertainty for all the samples. Here, we consider two types of measurements with
different noise levels resulting in a data-dependent noise model and seek to examine how the noisy
data affects the ability of the agent to learn the environmental model. Note that our proposed method
is directly applicable in situations where the robot has two sources of data acquisition - an expensive
but accurate primary source and a noisier secondary source. For example, a robot equipped with
the task of mapping the distribution of temperature in an indoor environment can take accurate
thermometer readings from some locations and can also get temperature estimates from images
captured by on-board cameras using deep learning techniques [22]. Similarly, in crop phenotyping,
penetrometers can be used for accurate measurement of stalk width and images can also provide the
same estimates with the help of computer vision techniques [4].
Binney at al. [17] proposed a branch and bound algorithm for informative planning in a grid environ-
ment where each cell is a sampling location similar to the setup considered in this work. However,
their proposed algorithm performs exhaustive search over a ﬁnite horizon and hence is limited to only
small grids. In this work, we decompose the informative planning problem into two parts where the
robot ﬁrst selects some discrete locations to collect high quality measurements (static samples) and
then plans a path to maximize information gain from comparatively noisier measurements (mobile
samples) along the path too. As a result, our method can be applied to much larger environments than
the ones considered in their work.
Mueller et al. [2] presented a robotic platform for efﬁcient crop phenotyping. The robot is capable of
collecting physiological and morphological traits of crops. For example, the robot can measure the
number and width of stalks, the height of plants, the area and color of leaves, etc. in each plot. The
collected data can be used in various ways such as evaluating crops based on physical characteristics
and can also be relayed to geneticists who use it to validate hypotheses and determine future plant
crosses. Although the robotic platform enables high-throughput and robust phenotyping compared
to human labor, its efﬁciency can be signiﬁcantly increased by collecting high utility data in a short
time which will enable the deployment of such systems to large ﬁelds where exhaustive coverage is
not possible. Also, the amount of data needed to analyze crop genetics can be signiﬁcantly reduced
by learning the distribution of phenotypes via GP models so as to estimate unobserved data as shown
in this work.
3

3
Methodology
In this section, we describe our Gaussian Process model for incorporating both static and mobile
measurements and informative planning algorithm to ﬁnd the optimal path in the environment
obtained by maximizing the joint information gain from both types of samples.
3.1
Gaussian Process Model
Let V = {v1, . . . , vn} be the set of all sampling data points in the environment where vi ∈Rd
represents an observable feature vector. There exists a latent function f : Rd →R that maps the
input v ∈Rd to the objective value f(v). In our work, the agricultural ﬁeld is divided into plots and
each plot represents a data point. The feature vector v comprises of location, vegetation index and
mean leaf angle density of the plants in a plot whereas the target function f is the mean stalk height in
the plot. Formally, v = {location, vegetation index, leaf angle density} and y = {stalk height}. In
Section 5.2, we give a detailed reasoning behind selecting these features as input and output variables
of the GP model.
After sampling a set of data points D ⊂V and observing the corresponding target values Y =
{y(v) | v ∈D}, where y(v) is a noisy estimate of the true value f(v), the robot uses Gaussian
Process regression to learn the underlying mapping f assuming the joint distribution of the observed
readings is Gaussian. A GP is a distribution over functions fully deﬁned by a mean function m and a
covariance function k:
f ∼GP(m, k)
(1)
The mean function m is typically assumed to be zero without any loss of generality. The covariance
function k, also known as kernel, encodes assumptions about the structure of the latent function f. It
describes the relation between two data points and typically has some free hyperparameters to control
this relation. We used the popular Matern [23] Kernel as our covariance function:
kMatern(x, x′) = σ2 21−ν
Γ(ν)
 √
2ν|x −x′|
l
!ν
Kν
 √
2ν|x −x′|
l
!
(2)
where Γ is the gamma function, Kν is the modiﬁed Bessel function, and σ and l are the output-scale
and the length-scale parameters of the kernel respectively. In this work, we used ν = 1.5.
Since there are two types of samples here, the associated measurement noise is not same for all the
data points but instead depends on the type of sampling - static or mobile. We denote the variances
associated with static and mobile measurements as σ2
s and σ2
m respectively. One can see that σ2
m
depends on the quality of images captured while the robot is in motion which in turn depends on the
speed of robot. For simplicity, we assume that the robot moves at a uniform speed and hence σ2
m is
constant. Furthermore, σ2
s is also a constant as the robot is at rest while collecting static samples in
order to minimize measurement errors and get high quality data.
As the robot collects mobile data while moving in the environment, it is possible that it has acquired
multiple measurements for the same feature vector v. This happens when the robot travels through
a region it has visited before. Since Gaussian Processes are non-parametric method, there can not
be two different target values for the same input v. We combine all the mobile measurements into a
single equivalent measurement by taking their mean value:
ˆym(v) =
1
nm(v)
nm(v)
X
k=1
yk
m(v)
where nm(v) is the number of mobile measurements for data point v and {yk
m(v)}nm(v)
k=1
are the
observed values. This averaging step reduces the noise in the observed data by biasing it towards
the true mean value. Furthermore, a robot may have acquired a static measurement ys(v) for a same
data point v for which it has gathered mobile measurement(s) before. Instead of substituting all the
comparatively noisy mobile data with a single static data, we fuse them together as the product of the
4

two probability density functions:
y(v) =
ys(v)
σ2s
+ ˆym(v)
σ2m
1
σ2s +
1
σ2m
σ2(v) =
σ2
sσ2
m
σ2s + σ2m
Essentially, the cumulative output value y(v) is a weighted mean of the measurement from the two
sources where the weights are the precision of each source and the resulting variance σ2(v) drops
below the measurement variance of each of the sources. If a data point v has been sampled by only
one medium (static or mobile), then the associated data-dependent noise is either σ2
s or σ2
m depending
on the type of sampling. The covariance due to the sample-dependent measurement noise can be
represented by using a white noise kernel:
kw(vi, vj) = σ2(vi)δij
(3)
where δij is the Kronecker delta function which is 1 if i = j and 0 otherwise. We model the inter-
sample covariance function as the sum of Matern covariance function and the white noise covariance
function:
˜k(vi, vj) = kMatern(vi, vj) + kw(vi, vj)
(4)
The hyperparameters of the model can be estimated by maximizing the log marginal likelihood of the
observed data as done in [6]. With the GP model fully deﬁned, we can now write the posterior target
distribution of a set of samples A ⊂V conditioned on the sampled set D as:
f(A) | A, D, Y ∼N(µA|D, ΣA|D)
µA|D = ΣADΣ−1
DDY
ΣA|D = ΣAA −ΣADΣ−1
DDΣDA
(5)
where ΣAB is the pairwise covariance matrix whose (i, j)th element is the covariance between the
ith sample of A and the jth sample of B as deﬁned in Equation 4.
The notion of differential entropy is often used in spatial statistic optimization problems to specify
the informativeness of a set of samples given a set of previously collected samples. Formally, the
entropy of a set A conditioned on a sampled set D is deﬁned as:
H (A|D) = 1
2 log

(2πe)|A| det
 ΣA|D

where the conditional covariance matrix ΣA|D is estimated from the posterior distributed as described
in Equation 5.
3.2
Informative Planning
We now describe our proposed two-step informative planning algorithm which takes into account
both static and mobile measurements to ﬁnd the most informative path in the environment. In this
work, we use differential entropy of a set of samples as its information gain metric.
In the ﬁrst step, the robot selects a set A∗of p points (see Figure 1b) from the unsampled space with
the maximum entropy conditioned on the already sampled set D. Formally,
A∗=
arg max
A∈P(V \D), |A|=p
H(A|D)
(6)
where P(S) is the power set of S. Since, this is an NP-Hard problem [8], we use the greedy strategy
proposed by Krause et al. [7] where the ith sample ai is selected from the unsampled set as the one
which results in the maximum information gain:
a∗
i =
arg max
ai∈V \(A∗
i−1,D)
H
 ai|A∗
i−1, D

(7)
where A∗
i−1 = {a∗
1, . . . , a∗
i−1}. The white noise associated with these samples is the static measure-
ment noise, i.e., σ2(v) = σ2
s ∀v ∈A∗.
5

(a) Environment
(b) Graph
Figure 2: (a) In the ﬁrst step of Informative Planning, the robot determines the p most informative samples
(here p = 4) in the ﬁeld which are shown in green. (b) In the second step, it constructs a graph whose nodes
are the entry and exit of all the narrow corridors in the ﬁeld shown in orange plus the static sampling locations
determined in the ﬁrst step shown in green. Path planning in the original grid environment is equivalent to that
on this graph G however signiﬁcantly faster.
In the next step, the robot plans a path from its current location x0 ∈R2 (see Figure 1b) to collect
data from all the selected data points A∗while maximizing the joint information gain from both static
and mobile samples encountered in the path.
Let, ΩA,x be the set of all possible paths originating from a location x ∈R2 in the environment and
passing through the plot of all samples a ∈A. Also, let Pm be the set of mobile samples along the
path P. The robot determines the most informative path P ∗while satisfying the budget constraints:
P ∗=
arg max
P ∈ΩA∗,x0, c(P )<B
H (A∗, Pm|D)
where c(P) is the cost of the path considered to be the length here and B is the budget or the
maximum allowed path length. Using the chain rule of entropy, we can write:
P ∗=
arg max
P ∈ΩA∗,x0, c(P )<B
H (Pm|A∗, D)
(8)
The robot aims to ﬁnd the path which results in the maximum information gain from mobile samples
Pm conditioned on the previously sampled set D and the static samples A∗. This is expected as
all the candidate paths have the same set of static samples so the best path is the one which results
in maximum conditional information gain from mobile samples. Normally, the path optimization
criteria in adaptive sampling applications is the cost of travel and once a set of sampling locations
is determined, the planner generates the shortest route to traverse all of them [10]. However, in our
case, due to the presence of an additional medium of gathering data, the robot seeks to ﬁnd the path
which results in joint maximum information gain from both the mediums.
We set the budget B to be the shortest path length cmin plus a slack term ξ:
cmin =
min
P ∈ΩA∗,x0
c(P)
B = cmin + ξ
(9)
This adaptive budget ensures that there exists at least one path which satisﬁes all the required
conditions. The slack term ξ controls the freedom given to the robot to explore areas not necessarily
along its shortest path. If we enforce a constant budget instead, the robot may go to far off places if
the shortest path length is much smaller than the budget. Also, there may not be any feasible path if
the budget is inadequate. Moreover, in the adaptive sampling cases where the robot is required to do
multiple traversals, having a budget that ensures the existence of at least one feasible path while also
providing some freedom to explore distant areas is desirable.
Since there is very narrow space between two rows of crops in the ﬁeld, it is not possible for the robot
to take a 180◦turn without damaging the plants. This means that once the robot enters the narrow
6

region (corridor) between two rows of crops, it can only move in its heading direction till it reaches
the end of it where it can either take a 90◦turn or keep moving forward (see Figure 2a). This no
U-turn constraint signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes the planning problem by reducing the search space from the
entire ﬁeld to a small graph G as shown in Figure 2b. The nodes of this graph are the intersection
points or junctions in the environment and edges are the straight line paths connecting them. To ﬁnd
the optimal path from the robot’s initial location x0 traversing through the set of location of all the
static samples a∗
i ∈A∗denoted by W = {wi = loc(a∗
i )| a∗
i ∈A∗}, we add the initial position of
robot x0 and the waypoints W to the graph G. One can easily see that path planning on this graph is
equivalent to that on the original grid environment but highly efﬁcient.
The robot runs a graph search on G to determine the set of potential paths ΩA∗,x0 which satisfy the
budget constraints and then selects the optimal path P ∗as per equation 8. As is common in path
planning, we use a heuristic to approximate the goal distances to focus the search in order to obtain
solutions faster than uninformed search method [24]. In our case, there is no explicit goal node but a
goal state achieved when all the waypoints have been visited.
We use a simple method to ﬁnd a lower bound on the distance to cover all the remaining sampling
locations. Let, the current position of the robot and the waypoints left to be visited be x = {x1, x2} ∈
R2 and W respectively. We denote W 1 = {w1|w ∈W} and W 2 = {w2|w ∈W}. We compute a
lower bound on the path cost by determining the bounding box formed by x and the set of waypoints
W. Note that the agent’s path will touch or intersect all 4 edges of this bounding box in order to
visit all the remaining waypoints. In other words, the agent has to travel at least the distance from
its current position to the nearest edge and then to the opposite edge along each of the two axes.
Formally, the proposed heuristic cost-to-go h(x, W) can be written as:
h(x, W) = max
 {x1, W 1}

−min
 {x1, W 1}

+max
 {x2, W 2}

−min
 {x1, W 1}

+min
 max
 {x1, W 1}

−x1, x1 −min
 {x1, W 1}

+min
 max
 {x2, W 2}

−x2, x2 −min
 {x2, W 2}

The ﬁrst two terms are the dimensions of the bounding box whereas the last two terms are the distance
of the agent from the nearest edge along each axes. This lower bound on the cost-to-go can be further
tightened by incorporating the no 180◦turn constraint and the initial orientation of the agent in the
analysis, however, for the size of environment considered in this work, the proposed heuristic was
able to signiﬁcantly speed up the search and provide optimal plans in real-time.
In this work, we exhaustively compute all the paths which satisfy the budget constraints, however,
this can be computationally very expensive as the size of the environment increases. For the crop
ﬁeld considered here, exhaustive evaluation was computationally tractable. For larger environments,
however, this step can be the computational bottleneck in the entire pipeline. One way to solve this
problem is to construct the desired path in segments. Instead of determining all possible paths from
the start location at once, one can ﬁrst ﬁnd an order of visiting waypoints by minimizing the total
travel cost, for example, and then select the optimal path between two consecutive waypoints in the
determined order.
4
Data collection
The phenotype measurements are collected by a robotic platform (see Figure 4) from a sorghum
ﬁeld in South Carolina, USA. The sorghum ﬁeld we are studying is laid out in the form of a grid of
25 × 15 plots. For taking phenotype measurements, the robot exhaustively visits all the plots from
North to South (see Figure 3) and captures images in each plot from its on-board cameras. After
reaching the end of a column, it shifts two columns East and then moves from South to North till it
reaches the end. The robot continues this process till it has covered the whole ﬁeld. As one can see,
this exhaustive coverage strategy is time and fuel consuming as the robot has to stop or move slowly
in each plot to get accurate measurements. The objective of this work is to develop an intelligent
and adaptive strategy to enable fast data acquisition for further use by scientists to validate genetic
hypotheses and determine desirable plant crosses.
As the robot drives through the ﬁeld, it measures the width, height and the number of stalks in each
plot from the images of stalk regions of plants as shown in Figure 5a. It also measures the leaf angle,
7

Figure 3: The ﬁgure shows the data collection pro-
cess. The robot (shown in red) takes phenotypes
measurements from all the plots in the ﬁrst column.
After that, it shifts to the next free column contain-
ing an array of plants and continues in the same
manner till it has covered the whole ﬁeld.
Figure 4: Our robotic platform Robotanist in a sorghum
ﬁeld in South Carolina, USA.
surface area of leafs and the vegetation index which is the ratio of dry to green leaf area from the
images of leafs as shown in Figures 5b, 5c and 5d respectively. We have developed sophisticated
deep learning and computer vision techniques in our previous works to extract these measurements
directly from images.
We are interested in studying these phenotype measurements and determining their correlation with
the yield produced at the end of the harvest season. With the help of such a correlation model,
scientists will be able to determine early in the season which genetic varieties of a crop are expected
to give high yield and need not have to wait till harvest to obtain the results of their experiments.
Furthermore, by actively taking high utility measurements from some plots only and not the entire
ﬁeld, the data acquisition process can be accelerated and the research work can be further extended to
large agricultural ﬁelds.
(a) Detected stalks
(b) Leaf angle
(c) Leaf area
(d) Vegetation index
Figure 5: (a) The robot detects stalks and measures their width, height and count in each plot from images.
Similarly, (b) leaf angle, (c) leaf area and (d) vegetation index or the ratio of dry to green leaf area are measured
from the captured images.
5
Analysis
In this section, we describe our simulation environment, implementation details of our algorithm and
the experiments we performed to evaluate the efﬁcacy of our proposed algorithm.
5.1
Implementation
For rapid testing and experimentation purposes, we have built a grid-based simulation environment
(shown in Figure 1) which imitates the actual layout of plots in the sorghum ﬁeld. Each obstacle-free
column represents an array of crops planted with intermittent spacing allowing the robot to shift
to an adjacent array. The measurement received by a robot in simulation is drawn from a normal
8

distribution with mean as the ground truth value and variance as either static variance or mobile
variance depending on the type of sampling. Formally,
ys(v) ∼N
 y(v), σ2
s

ym(v) ∼N
 y(v), σ2
m

where ys(v) and ym(v) are the static and mobile measurements respectively and y(v) is the ground
truth ﬁeld data for the sample v.
Our GP model as described in Section 3.1 is built on top of GPyTorch [25] which is a Gaussian
Process library implemented using PyTorch [26]. We used zero mean and Matern covariance function
with ν = 1.5 (see Equation 2) as the mean and covariance modules of the GP model respectively. The
hyperparameters of the GP model are learned by maximizing the log likelihood of a subset of training
data and are ﬁxed thereafter. The informative planning and graph search algorithms are implemented
with the help of NetworkX [27] package. Our simulation environment, code repository and the
sorghum dataset are open-sourced and can be found at https://github.com/sumitsk/algp.git.
5.2
Experiments
Since true yield data will be available only after the harvest season, we used the mean stalk height
in each plot as a metric for quality of produce from that plot. The density of crops is more or less
same throughout the ﬁeld, so the average plant height in a plot directly reﬂects the expected yield
at harvest. The agent aims to actively learn the distribution of mean stalk height as a function of
location, mean vegetation index and mean leaf angle density using a GP model. We included the last
two features in the set of input variables as sorghum phenotypes are poorly correlated with location
as suggested by crop scientists and no meaningful mapping can be learned between them. Both leaf
angle and vegetation index are measured from the images of leafs which can be captured by aerial
vehicles from the top in a short time. So, we reasonably assumed that the ground robot has access to
mean vegetation index and mean leaf angle density in each plot prior to starting its adaptive sampling
routine.
In each simulation, the robot starts from the top left corner of the grid as shown in Figure 1a and
performs a total of 8 iterations. In each iteration, it determines p = 4 most informative static sampling
locations and the corresponding optimal path (see Figure 1b). After collecting all the data from the
planned path, it updates its GP model. The robot repeats this process in the next iteration (see Figure
1c).
5.2.1
Comparison with baselines
We compared our proposed Maximum Entropy algorithm (MaxEnt) as described in Section 3.2
against four baseline methods:
• Naive static: The robot sequentially visits all the plots in each column as shown in Figure 3.
In order to get accurate measurements, the robot slows down or stops in each plot. In this
case, the white noise variance is equal to the static measurement variance for all the samples,
i.e., σ2(v) = σ2
s ∀v ∈V .
• Naive mobile: This strategy is same as Naive static except that the agent does not stop in
each plot and measures phenotypes while moving. The data collected in this process is
noisier than that in the previous strategy. Here, the white noise variance for all the samples
is the mobile measurement variance, i.e., σ2(v) = σ2
m where σ2
m > σ2
s.
• Shortest: Like MaxEnt, in this case, the agent determines the set of all the feasible paths
ΩA∗,x0 as described in Section 3.2. It then selects the path with the shortest length.
• Equi-sample: After computing the set of all the feasible paths ΩA∗,x0, the agent selects
the path which has the same number of sampling locations as the one selected by MaxEnt
algorithm.
Note that MaxEnt, Shortest and Equi-sample are informative strategies, i.e., they adaptively select
the next sensing locations and plan paths to maximize information gain instead of naively covering
the entire ﬁeld as done by Naive static and Naive mobile strategies. In Shortest and Equi-sample
strategies, ties among multiple candidate paths are broken arbitrarily.
9

(a) Test MAE v/s distance
(b) Number of samples v/s distance
Figure 6: The plot shows the (a) MAE of agent’s prediction on the test set against distance travelled and (b)
number of samples collected against distance travelled. For clarity of the picture, only 50% conﬁdence interval
is shown.
We ran 20 simulations to compare the 5 strategies. In each simulation, out of 375 sensing locations,
we reserved a set of randomly chosen 40 locations as a test set denoted by VT . The robot can not
observe this test set while learning the distribution of target variable. The metric used to quantify the
performance of a strategy is Mean Absolute Error (MAE) between the true phenotype values and the
ones predicted by the model on the test set samples:
MAE =
1
|VT |
X
v∈VT
|µ(v) −y(v)|
where µ(v) is the predicted mean value by the GP model and y(v) is the ground truth phenotype
value collected from the ﬁeld.
For this experiment, we set σs = 0.5, σm = 2.5 and ξ = 0. We would like to mention that the true
values of stalk width varies from 20 cm to 85 cm and we did not perform any normalization on the
dataset.
The graphic plot of agent’s prediction against distance travelled is shown in Figure 6a. Each grid cell
in the environment corresponds to 1 unit distance. Note that for the same distance, the informative
strategies gather less number of samples than the naive ones (see Figure 6b) as the planned path often
requires travelling along a row in the grid (see Figure 1b) where there are no sampling sites. On
the other hand, the naive strategies move to the next column only after sampling all the plots in the
current column (see Figure 3). In each iteration, the agent collects a variable number of samples,
so we decided to use the distance covered as our independent axis in the plot in order to ensure fair
comparison among all the strategies.
Unlike the naive strategies, all 3 informative strategies are able to quickly predict the phenotype
distribution by actively visiting places with high utility. Our proposed MaxEnt consistently achieves
the lowest prediction error on the test set indicating its ability to accurately estimate the target
distribution. Shortest and Equi-sample strategies are also able to learn the target distribution and
closely match the performance of MaxEnt. On the other hand, the two naive strategies perform poorly
and even after covering more than half of the ﬁeld and collecting more samples that the informative
strategies, they are unable to match the predictive performance of the informative strategies. The
experiment validates that the agent can learn the target distribution in a short time by actively sensing
locations and does not need to exhaustively cover the entire ﬁeld and collect data from all the plots as
done in the current practices.
5.2.2
Effect of noise ratio
We deﬁne the noise ratio k as the ratio of mobile to static measurement noise, i.e., k = σm/σs.
Assuming a ﬁxed static measurement noise σs, the noise ratio depends on the speed of the robot.
The faster the motion of robot, the larger is the noise ratio and vice-versa. This is because if the
robot is moving fast, then the measurement uncertainty will increase due to increase in localization
errors and poor image quality. However, moving too slow is also undesirable as it slows down the
data collection process, hence there is a trade-off between the quality of collected data and the time
consumed in the process.
10

We compare the predictive performance of MaxEnt on the test set samples against different values of
noise ratio. For this experiment, we set σs = 0.5 and ξ = 0. We ran 20 simulations and the results
obtained are shown in Table 1.
MaxEnt prediction with different k
k = 1
k = 2
k = 5
k = 10
MAE
4.08(0.70)
4.10(0.77)
4.09(0.78)
4.40(0.68)
Table 1: MAE on the test set for σs = 0.5 and σm = kσs averaged over 20 simulations. In each simulation, the
robot travels 250 distance units. The ﬁrst term is the mean whereas the one inside the parentheses is the standard
deviation of the metric.
We observe that there is not much signiﬁcant difference in the predictive accuracy of the learned
model till k = 5. This is an interesting ﬁnding as it suggests that the robot does not need to stop
or move extremely slowly in each plot in order to learn an accurate model of the distribution of
phenotypes in the ﬁeld but an intelligent and adaptive combination of static and mobile samples
can also achieve the same level of accuracy. Since, noise ratio depends on speed, one can estimate
the speed at which the robot should move in the ﬁeld in order to collect samples rapidly without
deteriorating the quality of learned GP model. However, there are many other factors that affect the
measurement noise like terrain complexity, camera quality, weather conditions, etc. and an in-depth
analysis of their effect along with the speed of robot is left for future work.
5.2.3
Effect of budget
In the previous experiments, we set ξ = 0 which means that the robot does not have any extra budget
to explore nearby areas in each iteration. We would like to mention that even in this case, there
exists many candidate paths of the same length because of the structured warehouse-like layout of the
environment. Here, we want to understand how does some slack on the maximum allowed path length
or extra budget affects the quality of the learned model. Increasing slack does provide some freedom
to the robot to explore areas not necessarily along its shortest path, however, that comes at the expense
of increased computational cost. Hence, it is necessary to determine how much additional budget, if
any, is useful in adaptive crop phenotyping applications while maintaining tractable computational
requirements.
We compare the ﬁnal predictions made by MaxEnt algorithm on the samples in the test set for different
values of slack length ξ. We set σs = 0.5 and σm = 2.5 for this experiment and ran 20 simulations.
The results are shown in Table 2.
MaxEnt prediction with different slack ξ
ξ = 0
ξ = 5
ξ = 10
ξ = 15
MAE
4.22(0.58)
4.00(0.51)
4.08(0.54)
4.19(0.40)
Table 2: MAE on the test set for σs = 0.5 and σm = 2.5 for different slack values averaged over 20 simulations.
In each simulation, the robot travels 250 distance units. The ﬁrst term is the mean whereas the one inside the
parentheses is the standard deviation of the reported metric.
We observe an interesting trend in the ﬁnal predictions made by the learned model. Increasing the
slack value improves the performance of the model, however, the increase is not monotonic, i.e.,
providing additional budget does not necessarily results in increased performance of the learned GP
model for the same distance travelled. This is because samples lying nearby along a path exhibit
high correlation due to the local smoothness modelling assumptions of the GP kernel, hence, the
information gained along a path does not always increase with increase in path length. As a result,
a large budget does not necessarily lead to large improvement in model performance although it
signiﬁcantly increases the total computational cost of evaluating feasible paths. On the other hand, a
small extra budget is sufﬁcient for the agent to gather any useful additional information helpful in
learning an accurate model of the target distribution while maintaining a reasonable computational
load.
6
Conclusion
We presented an active learning framework that alternates between adaptively sampling plots with
high utility and learning a GP model of the target distribution for High Throughput Phenotyping. We
11

have also released our code repository for further work by other researchers. Through simulation
experiments, we demonstrated the superior performance of our proposed approach compared to the
current practices. We also performed several ablation experiments to understand the contribution of
various components in the whole planning and learning pipeline.
We believe this is just the beginning and there is a lot of work to be done for developing reliable
robotics and machine learning technologies to accelerate the breeding process. Here, we used only
one phenotype (mean stalk height) as an indicator of crop health. In future work, we will analyze
correlations between multiple phenotypes by modelling them in a Multi-task Gaussian Process
framework for active learning and efﬁcient data gathering. Also, we will deploy a team of robots
working in a fully decentralized manner to adaptively estimate the quality of produce.
