OpenNMT: Open-Source Toolkit for Neural Machine Translation
Guillaume Klein†, Yoon Kim∗, Yuntian Deng∗, Jean Senellart†, Alexander M. Rush∗
Harvard University∗, SYSTRAN †
Abstract
We describe an open-source toolkit for
neural machine translation (NMT). The
toolkit prioritizes efﬁciency, modularity,
and extensibility with the goal of support-
ing NMT research into model architec-
tures, feature representations, and source
modalities, while maintaining competitive
performance and reasonable training re-
quirements. The toolkit consists of mod-
eling and translation support, as well as
detailed pedagogical documentation about
the underlying techniques.
1
Introduction
Neural machine translation (NMT) is a new
methodology for machine translation that has led
to remarkable improvements, particularly in terms
of human evaluation, compared to rule-based and
statistical machine translation (SMT) systems (Wu
et al., 2016; Crego et al., 2016). Originally de-
veloped using pure sequence-to-sequence models
(Sutskever et al., 2014; Cho et al., 2014) and im-
proved upon using attention-based variants (Bah-
danau et al., 2014; Luong et al., 2015), NMT has
now become a widely-applied technique for ma-
chine translation, as well as an effective approach
for other related NLP tasks such as dialogue, pars-
ing, and summarization.
As NMT approaches are standardized, it be-
comes more important for the machine translation
and NLP community to develop open implemen-
tations for researchers to benchmark against, learn
from, and extend upon.
Just as the SMT com-
munity beneﬁted greatly from toolkits like Moses
(Koehn et al., 2007) for phrase-based SMT and
CDec (Dyer et al., 2010) for syntax-based SMT,
NMT toolkits can provide a foundation to build
upon. A toolkit should aim to provide a shared
Figure 1: Schematic view of neural machine translation.
The red source words are ﬁrst mapped to word vectors and
then fed into a recurrent neural network (RNN). Upon seeing
the ⟨eos⟩symbol, the ﬁnal time step initializes a target blue
RNN. At each target time step, attention is applied over the
source RNN and combined with the current hidden state to
produce a prediction p(wt|w1:t−1, x) of the next word. This
prediction is then fed back into the target RNN.
framework for developing and comparing open-
source systems, while at the same time being efﬁ-
cient and accurate enough to be used in production
contexts.
Currently there are several existing NMT im-
plementations. Many systems such as those de-
veloped in industry by Google, Microsoft, and
Baidu, are closed source, and are unlikely to be
released with unrestricted licenses. Many other
systems such as GroundHog, Blocks, tensorﬂow-
seq2seq, lamtram, and our own seq2seq-attn, ex-
ist mostly as research code. These libraries pro-
vide important functionality but minimal support
to production users. Perhaps most promising is the
University of Edinburgh’s Nematus system orig-
inally based on NYU’s NMT system. Nematus
provides high-accuracy translation, many options,
clear documentation, and has been used in sev-
eral successful research projects.
In the devel-
opment of this project, we aimed to build upon
the strengths of this system, while providing addi-
tional documentation and functionality to provide
a useful open-source NMT framework for the NLP
arXiv:1701.02810v2  [cs.CL]  6 Mar 2017

community in academia and industry.
With these goals in mind,
we introduce
OpenNMT (http://opennmt.net), an open-
source framework for neural machine translation.
OpenNMT is a complete NMT implementation.
In addition to providing code for the core trans-
lation tasks, OpenNMT was designed with three
aims: (a) prioritize ﬁrst training and test efﬁciency,
(b) maintain model modularity and readability, (c)
support signiﬁcant research extensibility.
This engineering report describes how the sys-
tem targets these criteria. We begin by brieﬂy sur-
veying the background for NMT, describing the
high-level implementation details, and then de-
scribing speciﬁc case studies for the three criteria.
We end by showing benchmarks of the system in
terms of accuracy, speed, and memory usage for
several translation and translation-like tasks.
2
Background
NMT
has
now
been
extensively
described
in many excellent tutorials (see for instance
https://sites.google.com/site/
acl16nmt/home). We give only a condensed
overview.
NMT takes a conditional language modeling
view of translation by modeling the probability
of a target sentence w1:T given a source sentence
x1:S as p(w1:T |x) = QT
1 p(wt|w1:t−1, x; θ). This
distribution is estimated using an attention-based
encoder-decoder architecture (Bahdanau et al.,
2014).
A source encoder recurrent neural net-
work (RNN) maps each source word to a word
vector, and processes these to a sequence of hid-
den vectors h1, . . . , hS. The target decoder com-
bines an RNN hidden representation of previously
generated words (w1, ...wt−1) with source hidden
vectors to predict scores for each possible next
word. A softmax layer is then used to produce
a next-word distribution p(wt|w1:t−1, x; θ). The
source hidden vectors inﬂuence the distribution
through an attention pooling layer that weights
each source word relative to its expected contribu-
tion to the target prediction. The complete model
is trained end-to-end to minimize the negative log-
likelihood of the training corpus. An unfolded net-
work diagram is shown in Figure 1.
In practice, there are also many other impor-
tant aspects that improve the effectiveness of the
base model. Here we brieﬂy mention four areas:
(a) It is important to use a gated RNN such as
Figure 2:
Live demo of the OpenNMT system across
dozens of language pairs.
an LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) or
GRU (Chung et al., 2014) which help the model
learn long-term features. (b) Translation requires
relatively large, stacked RNNs, which consist of
several vertical layers (2-16) of RNNs at each time
step (Sutskever et al., 2014). (c) Input feeding,
where the previous attention vector is fed back into
the input as well as the predicted word, has been
shown to be quite helpful for machine translation
(Luong et al., 2015). (d) Test-time decoding is
done through beam search where multiple hypoth-
esis target predictions are considered at each time
step. Implementing these correctly can be difﬁ-
cult, which motivates their inclusion in an NMT
framework.
3
Implementation
OpenNMT is a complete library for training and
deploying neural machine translation models. The
system is successor to seq2seq-attn developed at
Harvard, and has been completely rewritten for
ease of efﬁciency, readability, and generalizability.
It includes vanilla NMT models along with sup-
port for attention, gating, stacking, input feeding,
regularization, beam search and all other options
necessary for state-of-the-art performance.
The main system is implemented in the
Lua/Torch mathematical framework, and can be
easily be extended using Torch’s internal stan-
dard neural network components. It has also been
extended by Adam Lerer of Facebook Research
to support Python/PyTorch framework, with the
same API.
The system has been developed completely in
the open on GitHub at (http://github.com/
opennmt/opennmt) and is MIT licensed. The
ﬁrst version has primarily (intercontinental) con-
tributions from SYSTRAN Paris and the Harvard
NLP group. Since ofﬁcial beta release, the project
has been starred by over 1000 users, and there

have been active development by those outside of
these two organizations. The project has an active
forum for community feedback with over ﬁve hun-
dred posts in the last two months. There is also a
live demonstration available of the system in use
(Figure 3).
One nice aspect of NMT as a model is its rela-
tive compactness. The Lua OpenNMT system in-
cluding preprocessing is roughly 4K lines of code,
and the Python version is less than 1K lines (al-
though slightly less-feature complete). For com-
parison the Moses SMT framework including lan-
guage modeling is over 100K lines. This makes
the system easy to completely understand for new-
comers.
The project is fully self-contained de-
pending on minimal number of external Lua li-
braries and including also a simple language in-
dependent reversible tokenization and detokeniza-
tion tools.
4
Design Goals
As the low-level details of NMT have been cov-
ered previously, we focus this report on the design
goals of OpenNMT: system efﬁciency, code mod-
ularity, and model extensibility.
4.1
System Efﬁciency
As NMT systems can take from days to weeks to
train, training efﬁciency is a paramount concern.
Slightly faster training can make be the difference
between plausible and impossible experiments.
Memory Sharing
When training GPU-based
NMT models, memory size restrictions are the
most common limiter of batch size, and thus di-
rectly impact training time. Neural network toolk-
its, such as Torch, are often designed to trade-off
extra memory allocations for speed and declar-
ative simplicity.
For OpenNMT, we wanted to
have it both ways, and so we implemented an ex-
ternal memory sharing system that exploits the
known time-series control ﬂow of NMT systems
and aggressively shares the internal buffers be-
tween clones. The potential shared buffers are dy-
namically calculated by exploration of the network
graph before starting training. In practical use, ag-
gressive memory reuse provides a saving of 70%
of GPU memory with the default model size.
Multi-GPU
OpenNMT
additionally
supports
multi-GPU training using data parallelism. Each
GPU has a replica of the master parameters
Batch
Beam
GPU
CPU
CPU/C
1
5
209.0
24.1
62.2
1
1
166.9
23.3
84.9
30
5
646.8
104.0
116.2
30
1
535.1
128.5
392.7
Table 1: Performance numbers in source tokens per second
for the Torch CPU/GPU implementations and for the multi-
threaded CPU C implementation. (Run with Intel i7/GTX
1080)
and process independent batches during training
phase.
Two modes are available: synchronous
and asynchronous training. In synchronous train-
ing, batches on parallel GPU are run simultane-
ously and gradients aggregated to update master
parameters before resynchronization on each GPU
for the following batch. In asynchronous training,
batches are run independent on each GPU, and
independent gradients accumulated to the master
copy of the parameters.
Asynchronous SGD is
known to provide faster convergence (Dean et al.,
2012).
Experiments with 8 GPUs show a 6×
speed up in per epoch, but a slight loss in training
efﬁciency. When training to similar loss, it gives a
3.5× total speed-up to training.
C/Mobile/GPU
Translation
Training
NMT
systems requires signiﬁcant code complexity to
facilitate fast back-propagation-through-time. At
deployment, the system is much less complex,
and only requires (i) forwarding values through
the network and (ii) running a beam search that
is much simpliﬁed compared to SMT. OpenNMT
includes several different translation deployments
specialized for different run-time environments:
a batched CPU/GPU implementation for very
quickly translating a large set of sentences, a
simple single-instance implementation for use
on mobile devices, and a specialized C imple-
mentation.
The ﬁrst implementation is suited
for research use, for instance allowing the user
to easily include constraints on the feasible set
of sentences and ideas such as pointer networks
and copy mechanisms. The last implementation
is particularly suited for industrial use as it can
run on CPU in standard production environments;
it reads the structure of the network and then
uses the Eigen package to implement the basic
linear algebra necessary for decoding. Table 4.1
compares
the
performance
of
the
different
implementations based on batch size, beam size.

4.2
Modularity for Research
A secondary goal was a desire for code readability
for non-experts. We targeted this goal by explic-
itly separating out many optimizations from the
core model, and by including tutorial documenta-
tion within the code. To test whether this approach
would allow novel feature development we exper-
imented with two case studies.
Case Study: Factored Neural Translation
In
feature-based factored neural translation (Sen-
nrich and Haddow, 2016), instead of generating a
word at each time step, the model generates both
word and associated features. For instance, the
system might include words and separate case fea-
tures. This extension requires modifying both the
inputs and the output of the decoder to generate
multiple symbols. In OpenNMT both of these as-
pects are abstracted from the core translation code,
and therefore factored translation simply modiﬁes
the input network to instead process the feature-
based representation, and the output generator net-
work to instead produce multiple conditionally in-
dependent predictions.
Case Study: Attention Networks
The use of
attention over the encoder at each step of transla-
tion is crucial for the model to perform well. The
default method is to utilize the global attention
mechanism. However there are many other types
of attention that have recently proposed including
local attention (Luong et al., 2015), sparse-max at-
tention (Martins and Astudillo, 2016), hierarchi-
cal attention (Yang et al., 2016) among others. As
this is simply a module in OpenNMT it can easily
be substituted. Recently the Harvard group devel-
oped a structured attention approach, that utilizes
graphical model inference to compute this atten-
tion. The method is quite computationally com-
plex; however as it is modularized by the Torch
interface, it can be used in OpenNMT to substitute
for standard attention.
4.3
Extensibility
Deep learning is a quickly evolving ﬁeld. Recently
work such as variational seq2seq auto-encoders
(Bowman et al., 2016) or memory networks (We-
ston et al., 2014), propose interesting extensions
to basic seq2seq models. We next discuss a case
study to demonstrate that OpenNMT is extensible
to future variants.
Figure 3: 3D Visualization of OpenNMT source embed-
ding from the TensorBoard visualization system.
Multiple Modalities
Recent work has shown
that NMT-like systems are effective for image-
to-text generation tasks (Xu et al., 2015).
This
task is quite different from standard machine
translation as the source sentence is now an
image.
However,
the future of translation
may require this style of (multi-)modal inputs
(e.g.
http://www.statmt.org/wmt16/
multimodal-task.html).
As a case study, we adapted two systems with
non-textual inputs to run in OpenNMT. The ﬁrst
is an image-to-text system developed for mathe-
matical OCR (Deng et al., 2016). This model re-
places the source RNN with a deep convolution
over the source input. Excepting preprocessing,
the entire adaptation requires less than 500 lines
of additional code and is also open-sourced as
github.com/opennmt/im2text. The sec-
ond is a speech-to-text recognition system based
on the work of Chan et al. (2015).
This sys-
tem has been implemented directly in OpenNMT
by replacing the source encoder with a Pyrimidal
source model.
4.4
Additional Tools
Finally we brieﬂy summarize some of the addi-
tional tools that extend OpenNMT to make it more
beneﬁcial to the research community.
Tokenization
We aimed for OpenNMT to be
a standalone project and not depend on com-
monly used tools.
For instance the Moses tok-
enizer has language speciﬁc heuristics not neces-
sary in NMT. We therefore include a simple re-
versible tokenizer that (a) includes markers seen
by the model that allow simple deterministic deto-
kenization, (b) has extremely simple, language-
independent tokenization rules. The tokenizer can
also perform Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) which has
become a popular method for sub-word tokeniza-

ES
FR
IT
PT
RO
ES
-
32.7 (+5.4)
28.0 (+4.6)
34.4 (+6.1)
28.7 (+6.4)
FR
32.9 (+3.3)
-
26.3 (+4.3)
30.9 (+5.2)
26.0 (+6.6)
IT
31.6 (+5.3)
31.0 (+5.8)
-
28.0 (+5.0)
24.3 (+5.9)
PT
35.3 (+10.4)
34.1 (+4.7)
28.1 (+5.6)
-
28.7 (+5.0)
RO
35.0 (+5.4)
31.9 (+9.0)
26.4 (+6.3)
31.6 (+7.3)
-
Table 2: 20 language pair single translation model. Table shows BLEU(∆) where ∆compares to only
using the pair for training.
Vocab
System
Speed tok/sec
BLEU
Train
Trans
V=50k
Nematus
3393
284
17.28
ONMT
4185
380
17.60
V=32k
Nematus
3221
252
18.25
ONMT
5254
457
19.34
Table 3:
Performance Results for EN→DE on WMT15
tested on newstest2014. Both system 2x500 RNN, embed-
ding size 300, 13 epochs, batch size 64, beam size 5. We
compare on a 50k vocabulary and a 32k BPE setting.
tion in NMT systems (Sennrich et al., 2015).
Word Embeddings
OpenNMT includes tools
for simplifying the process of using pretrained
word embeddings, even allowing automatic down-
load of embeddings for many languages. This al-
lows training in languages or domain with rela-
tively little aligned data. Additionally OpenNMT
can export the word embeddings from trained
models to standard formats. This allows analy-
sis is external tools such as TensorBoard, shown
in Figure 4.4.
5
Benchmarks
We now document some runs of the model. We
expect performance and memory usage to im-
prove with further development.
Public bench-
marks are available at http://opennmt.
net/Models/, which also includes publicly
available pre-trained models for all of these tasks
and tutorial instructions for all of these tasks. The
benchmarks are run on a Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-

1 GPU GeForce GTX 1080 (Pascal) with CUDA
v. 8.0 (driver 375.20) and cuDNN (v. 5005).
The comparison, shown in Table 3, is on
English-to-German (EN→DE) using the WMT
20151 dataset. Here we compare, BLEU score,
as well as training and test speed to the publicly
available Nematus system. 2
We additionally trained a multilingual trans-
lation model following Johnson (2016).
The
model translates from and to French, Spanish, Por-
tuguese, Italian, and Romanian. Training data is
4M sentences and was selected from the open par-
allel corpus3, speciﬁcally from Europarl, Glob-
alVoices and Ted. Corpus was selected to be multi-
source, multi-target: each sentence has its trans-
lation in the 4 other languages. Corpus was tok-
enized using shared Byte Pair Encoding of 32k.
Comparative results between multi-way transla-
tion and each of the 20 independent training are
presented in Table 2. The systematically large im-
provement shows that language pair beneﬁts from
training jointly with the other language pairs.
Additionally we have found interest from the
community in using OpenNMT for non-standard
MT tasks like sentence document summarization
dialogue response generation (chatbots), among
others. Using OpenNMT, we were able to repli-
cate the sentence summarization results of Chopra
et al. (2016), reaching a ROUGE-1 score of 33.13
on the Gigaword data.
We have also trained a
model on 14 million sentences of the OpenSub-
titles data set based on the work Vinyals and Le
(2015), achieving comparable perplexity.
6
Conclusion
We introduce OpenNMT, a research toolkit for
NMT that prioritizes efﬁciency and modularity.
We hope to further develop OpenNMT to maintain
strong MT results at the research frontier, provid-
ing a stable and framework for production use.
1http://statmt.org/wmt15
2https://github.com/rsennrich/nematus.
Comparison
with
OpenNMT/Nematus
github
revisions
907824/75c6ab1.
3http://opus.lingfil.uu.se
