Quantum speedup for active learning agents
Giuseppe Davide Paparo1, Vedran Dunjko2,3,4, Adi Makmal2,3,
Miguel Angel Martin-Delgado1, and Hans J. Briegel2,3
1Departamento de Fisica Teorica I, Universidad Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain
2Institut f¨ur Theoretische Physik, Universit¨at Innsbruck,
Technikerstraße 25, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria
3Institut f¨ur Quantenoptik und Quanteninformation der ¨Osterreichischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria
4Division of Molecular Biology, Rud¯er Boˇskovi´c Institute, Bijeniˇcka cesta 54, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia
Can quantum mechanics help us build intelligent learning agents? A deﬁning signature of intelli-
gent behavior is the capacity to learn from experience. However, a major bottleneck for agents to
learn in real-life situations is the size and complexity of the corresponding task environment. Even
in a moderately realistic environment, it may simply take too long to rationally respond to a given
situation. If the environment is impatient, allowing only a certain time for a response, an agent
may then be unable to cope with the situation and to learn at all. Here we show that quantum
physics can help and provide a quadratic speed-up for active learning as a genuine problem of ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence. This result will be particularly relevant for applications involving complex task
environments.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The levels of modern day technology have, in many
aspects, surpassed the predictions made in the mid-
20th century, as is easily witnessed, for example, by
the sheer computing power of the average ‘smart’ mo-
bile phone. Arguably, the most striking exception to
this, apart from, perhaps, human space exploration,
lies in the development of genuine artiﬁcial intelligence
(AI), the challenge of which has initially been greatly
underestimated. The unceasing setbacks in the gen-
eral AI problem caused research to shift emphasis to
the production of useful technology, a direction now
called applied AI. That is, emphasis was placed to spe-
ciﬁc algorithmic AI tasks – modules, such as data clus-
tering, pattern matching, binary classiﬁcation, and
similar – and reduced from the holistic task of de-
signing an autonomous and intelligent agent.
The discovery that the laws of quantum physics can
be employed for dramatically enhanced ways of in-
formation processing [1–6] has already had a positive
inﬂuence on speciﬁc algorithmic tasks of applied AI
[7–12]. However, to our knowledge, it has so far not
been demonstrated that quantum physics can help in
the complemental task of designing autonomous and
learning agents. The latter task is studied in the ﬁelds
of embodied cognitive sciences and robotics [13–18],
which promote a behavior-based approach to intel-
ligence and put a strong emphasis on the physical
aspects of an agent. The approach to AI we adopt
in this work is along the lines of the latter perspec-
tive.
We are guided by a few basic principles, in-
spired by biological agents, which include autonomy
(implying that the agent must learn in, and adapt to,
unknown dynamic environments), embodiedness (im-
plying that the agent is situated in, and actively in-
teracts with, a physical environment), and homogene-
ity (meaning that all possible separate cognitive units
arise as possible conﬁgurations of one, or a few, ho-
mogeneous underlying systems that are, in principle,
capable of growth). An example of a model that one
could consider homogenous, aside from the projective
simulation model [19] we will consider here, would for
example be artiﬁcial neural networks. One may then
envision that true AI will emerge by growth and the
learning of an agent, rather than through deliberate
design. In this paper, we show that in such an embod-
ied framework of AI provable advancements of a broad
class of learning agents can be achieved when we take
the full laws of quantum mechanics into account.
II.
LEARNING AGENTS AND QUANTUM
PHYSICS
How could quantum physics help design better
agents?
An embodied agent is always situated in
an environment from which it receives a sensory in-
put, that is, a percept (from some set of percepts
S = {s1, s2 . . .}) and, based on the percept, it pro-
duces an action from the possible set of actions A =
{a1, a2, . . .}, see Fig. 1.
The capacity to learn im-
plies that the agent is at every instant of time in
some internal state, that can change based on pre-
vious sequences of percept-action events. That is, it
has memory which reﬂects the agents history.
The
typical model for such autonomous learning agents
we consider here is the reinforcement learning model
[20, 21], where to each percept-action event a reward
in Λ = {0, 1} (for simplicity, we consider binary re-
wards, but this reward system can be easily general-
ized in our model) is assigned when the action was
correct.
Each percept-action-reward sequence constitutes an
arXiv:1401.4997v2  [quant-ph]  14 Jul 2014

1
FIG. 1. An agent is always situated in an environment.
It is equipped with sensors, through which it receives per-
cepts from the environment, and with actuators, through
which it can act on the environment. Based on perceptual
input, the agent will after some internal processing engage
its actuators and output an action. Adapted and modiﬁed
from [20].
external time-step (or cycle) of the activity of an
agent. The learning process of the agent is charac-
terized by an update rule of the internal state (based
on the previous percept-action-reward sequences), and
the (local) policy of the agent [21] is deﬁned by what
action is output given the current internal state and
the received percept. Unlike in typical reinforcement
learning settings, in embodied active agents the re-
quired time to evaluate the policy (decide on an ac-
tion) must be taken into account, and we refer to it
as internal time.
The agent’s learning process is reminiscent to com-
putational oracle query models, in which an unknown
oracle (environment), is queried (via an action) by the
agent, in an iterative quest for the best responses. It is
tantalizing to consider employing the powerful quan-
tum searching machinery [3, 22, 23], which has been
proven to outperform classical algorithms in compu-
tational settings, in an attempt to improve the agent.
However, contrary to computer algorithms, an em-
bodied agent, such as a robot, operates in a physical
environment which is, for most existing applications,
classical [47]. This prohibits querying in quantum su-
perposition, a central ingredient to all quantum search
algorithms. Thus, such na¨ıve approaches to quantiz-
ing learning agents are doomed to fail [48].
Nonetheless, while the physical nature of the agent
and the environment prohibits speed-up through
quantum queries of the environment, the physical pro-
cesses within the agent, which lead to the performed
actions, can be signiﬁcantly improved by employ-
ing full quantum mechanics [49]. In particular, the
required internal time can be polynomially reduced
in the model we present next.
In general learning
settings, this speedup alone will constitute an over-
all qualitative improvement of performance, for in-
stance when the environment changes on time-scales
not overwhelmingly larger than the agent’s internal
‘thinking’ time.
III.
QUANTUM AGENTS BASED ON
PROJECTIVE SIMULATION
A.
The PS agent model
The AI model of the agents we consider in the
following is the so-called Projective Simulation (PS)
model [19], whose conceptual framework is in line with
the desired guiding principles we highlighted earlier.
The PS model is based on a speciﬁc memory system,
which is called episodic and compositional memory
(ECM). This memory provides the platform for sim-
ulating future action before real action is taken. The
ECM can be described as a stochastic network of so-
called clips, which constitute the elementary excita-
tions of episodic memory and can be implemented as
excitations of suitable physical systems. The percepts
(S) and actions (A), along with sequences thereof,
are represented within an agent as the aforementioned
clips, and the set of these comprises the clip space
C = {c = (c(1), c(2), . . .)|c(k) ∈S ∪A}. In this work
we consider clips which are unit length sequences, rep-
resenting a memorized percept or an action, which we
denote using the same symbols, so C = S ∪A [50], but
this can be easily generalized. The internal states of
the agent, i.e. the total memory, comprise weighted
graphs Gs over subsets of the clip space, which are
assigned to each percept s. This graph dictates the
hopping probabilities from one clip to another, and
the hopping process realizes a Markov chain (MC).
Thus, the elementary internal processes of the agent,
which implement the transitions from clip to clip, are
discrete-time stochastic diﬀusion processes. These dif-
fusion processes can be realized in a variety of physical
systems, as we discuss later.
The deliberation process of the agent is based only
on the diﬀusion processes over the clip space of a
certain (and, in general, variable) size, making this
model homogeneous in the sense we explained earlier.
The PS agents also perceive rewards Λ = {0, 1} and,
based on the percieved percept s, realized action a,
and the resulting reward, the weights of the graph
Gs (that is, transition probabilities) are updated via
simple rules [51].
While the PS framework allows for many addi-
tional structures (see the Appendix, section V C for
further details on the PS model), we will, for sim-
plicity, only consider percept-speciﬁc ﬂags – corre-
sponding to rudimentary emoticons in [19] – which are
subsets of actions assigned to each percept, formally
F = {f(s)|f(s) ⊆A, s ∈S}. Such ﬂags may be used
to represent the agent’s short-term memory, in which
case they signiﬁcantly improve the performance of the
model [19]. For example, one can consider a possible
mechanism in which for each percept, all actions are
initially ﬂagged. If the agent outputs some action a,
given a percept s, and this action is not rewarded, a

2
is removed from f(s). Once the set f(s) has been de-
pleted (indicating, for instance, that the environment
changed its policy), it is re-set to contain all actions.
The meaning of ﬂags may be more general, and in
this work we only assume the sets of ﬂags are always
non-empty.
In the process of deliberation, the relevant Markov
chain is diﬀused a particular number of times, depend-
ing on the particular PS model, until an action is out-
put via so-called output couplers [52]. The choice of
the action - and thereby the policy of the agent - is
dictated by the probability distribution over the clip
space, which is realized by the diﬀusion process. The
latter depends on the agent’s experience manifest in
the speciﬁed MC. Intuitively, this distribution repre-
sents the agent’s state of belief on what is the right
action in the given situation.
A particular model of PS we introduce here, so-
called reﬂecting PS (r-PS) agents, draw their name
from the reﬂection process [19] in which the diﬀusion
processes are repeated many times. Such agents ap-
proximate the complete mixing of their MCs, simu-
lating inﬁnite deliberation times. Once the mixing is
(approximately) complete, the reﬂecting agent sam-
ples from the realized stationary distribution over the
clip space (and, if needed, iterates the mixing process)
until a ﬂagged action clip has been sampled.
The
internal states of reﬂecting PS agents are thus irre-
ducible, aperiodic and reversible MCs over subsets of
the clip space (which contain all action clips). Reﬂect-
ing PS agents can be seen as a generalization of so-
called standard PS agents, and a comparison between
a well-studied class of PS agents, and r-PS agents is
provided in the Appendix, section V E.
In the limit of complete mixing, given a percept s
and the current internal state (the MC Ps), the r-PS
agents output an action a distributed according to ˜πs
given as follows: let πs be the stationary distribution
of Ps, and let f(s) be the subset of ﬂagged actions,
then
˜πs(i) =





πs(i)
P
j∈f(s) πs(j), if i ∈f(s)
0,
otherwise,
(1)
that is the re-normalized stationary distribution πs
modiﬁed to have support only over ﬂagged actions.
We will often refer to ˜πs as the tailed distribution.
In general, complete mixing is not possible or
needed. To realize the (approximate) tailed distribu-
tion, as given in Eq. 1, the classical agent will have to,
iteratively, prepare the approximate stationary distri-
bution of Ps (by applying Ps to the initial distribution
tc
mix times), and sample from it, until a ﬂagged action
is hit. It is well known that, in order to mix the MC,
tc
mix should be chosen in ˜O(1/δs) [53] (where δs is
the spectral gap of MC Ps deﬁned as δs = 1 −|λ2|
and λ2 is the second largest eigenvalue of Ps in ab-
solute value), and the expected number of iterations
of mixing and checking which have to be performed is
tc
check ∈˜O(1/ϵs) (where ϵs = P
i∈f(s) π(i) is the prob-
ability of sampling a ﬂagged action from the station-
ary distribution πs). Here, we will use the label Ps of
the transition matrix as a synonym for the MC itself.
Note that the internal time of the classical agent, i.e.
the number of primitive processes (diﬀusion steps), is
therefore governed by the quantities 1/δs and 1/ϵs.
B.
Quantum speed-up of reﬂecting PS agents
The procedure the r-PS agent performs in each de-
liberation step resembles a type of a random walk-
based search algorithm which can be employed to ﬁnd
targeted items in directed weighted graphs [23].
In
that context, the theory of quantum walks provides us
with analogs of discrete-time diﬀusion processes, using
which the search time can be quadratically reduced
[22, 23, 26, 27]. To design the quantum agent, inspired
by these approaches to searching, here we introduce
a quantum walk procedure which can be seen as a
randomized Grover-like search algorithm (the quan-
tum counterparts of classical search algorithms), most
closely matching the main protocol in [23].
However, there are essential diﬀerences between
searching problems and the problems of designing in-
telligent AI agents, which we expose and resolve in
this work. First, we note that, for the task of sim-
ple searching, the procedure the r-PS agent follows is
known not to be optimal in general [23, 28]. In con-
trast, for the task of the r-PS agent, which is to output
a ﬂagged action according to a good approximation of
the tailed distribution in Eq. 1, this algorithm is, in
general, optimal [54]. This can be seen by the known
lower bounds for mixing times tc
mix of reversible MCs
(see the Appendix, section V B for details).
Furthermore, while as a direct consequence of the
results in [23], the quantum r-PS produces a ﬂagged
action in times quadratically faster than is achieved
using the procedure employed by the classical agent,
prior works provide no guarantees that the output ac-
tions will be distributed according to the desired tailed
distribution. Recall, in the context of AI, all agents
produce some action, and it is precisely the output
distribution which diﬀerentiates one agent from an-
other in terms of behavior (and, thus success). In this
work we prove that both the output distributions of
the reﬂecting classical and quantum agents approxi-
mate the distribution of Eq. 1, and thus are approxi-
mately equal. That is, they belong to the same behav-
ioral class (for a formal deﬁnition of behavioral classes
we introduce see the Appendix, section V D). Conse-
quently, the quantum reﬂecting agent construction we
give realizes, in full sense, quantum-enhanced analogs
of classical reﬂecting agents.

3
While quantum approaches to sampling problems
have not until now been exploited in AI, we observe
that the methodology we use is, in spirit, related to
the problem of sampling from particular distributions.
Such sampling tasks have been extensively studied,
often in the context of Markov chain Monte Carlo
methods, where quantum speed-up can also be ob-
tained [29, 30, 32? ]. There the quantum walks were
mostly used for the important purpose of sampling
from Bolzmann-Gibbs distributions of (classical and
quantum) Hamiltonians.
In order to deﬁne the quantum reﬂecting agent,
we ﬁrst review the standard constructions and re-
sults from the theory of classical and quantum ran-
dom walks [22, 23, 27], and refer the reader to the
Appendix, section V B, for more details.
The quantum r-PS agent we propose uses the stan-
dard quantum discrete time diﬀusion operators UPs
and VPs which act on two quantum registers, suf-
ﬁciently large to store the labels of the nodes of
the MC Ps.
The diﬀusion operators are deﬁned as
UPs |i⟩|0⟩= |i⟩|pi⟩and VPs |0⟩|j⟩=
p∗
j

|j⟩where
|pi⟩= P
j
p
[Ps]ji |j⟩,
p∗
j

= P
i
p
[P ∗s ]ij |i⟩. Here,
P ∗
s is the time reversed MC deﬁned by πiPji = πjP ∗
ij,
where π = (πi)i is the stationary distribution of Ps
[55].
Using four applications of the diﬀusion oper-
ators above, it has been shown that one can con-
struct the standard quantum walk operator W(Ps)
(sometimes referred to as the Szegedy walk operator),
which is a composition of two reﬂections in the men-
tioned two-register state space. In particular, let Π1
be a projection operator on the space Span{|i⟩|pi⟩}i
and Π2 be the projector on Span{
p∗
j

|j⟩}j.
Then
W(Ps) = (2Π2 −I)(2Π1 −I).
Using the quantum walk operator and the well-
known phase detection algorithm [5, 23] the agent
can realize the R(Ps)(q, k) subroutine which approx-
imates the reﬂection operator 2 |πs⟩⟨πs| −1, where
|πs⟩= P
i
p
πs(i) |i⟩is the coherent encoding of the
stationary distribution πs. The parameters q and k
control the ﬁdelity (and the time requirement) of this
process, i.e. how well the reﬂection is approximated as
a function of the number of applications of the quan-
tum walk operator.
More precisely,
in the implementation of the
R(Ps)(q, k) operator, the quantum r-PS agent utilizes
an ancillary register of q × k qubits. To ensure the
correct behavior, q is chosen as q ∈˜O(1/√δs), which
depends on the square root of the spectral gap of the
MC Ps. Under this condition, it has been shown that
the distance between the ideal reﬂection operator and
the realized approximate operator is upper bounded
by 21−k, under a suitable metric (see the Appendix,
section V B, Theorem 3 for details). That is, the ﬁ-
delity of this reﬂection operator approaches unity ex-
ponentially quickly in the parameter k [23].
To produce a ﬂagged action according to the de-
sired distribution, the quantum r-PS agent will ﬁrst
initialize its quantum register to the state |πinit⟩=
UPs |πs⟩|0⟩which requires just one application of the
diﬀusion operator UPs, provided the state |πs⟩=
P
i
p
πs(i) |i⟩is available. Here, like in the standard
frameworks of algorithms based on quantum walks
with non-symmetric Markov chains, we assume that
the state |πs⟩is available, and in the Appendix, sec-
tion V E, we provide an example of reﬂecting classical
and quantum agents where this is easily achieved [56].
Following this, the agent performs a randomized
Grover-like sequence of reﬂections, reﬂecting over
ﬂagged actions (denoted ref(f(s))), interlaced with
reﬂections using the approximate reﬂection operator
described previously. After the reﬂections have been
completed the required number of times, the result-
ing state is measured, and the found ﬂagged action is
output. In the case a non-action clip is hit, the entire
procedure is repeated [57].
Since Grover-like search engines guarantee that the
overlap between the ﬁnal state, and a state with sup-
port just over the actions is constant, this implies
that the probability of not hitting a ﬂagged action
decreases exponentially quickly in the total number
of iterations, and does not contribute signiﬁcantly to
our analysis. In the Appendix, section V D, we pro-
vide a detailed analysis, and propose a method for the
eﬃcient re-preparation of the required initial state (by
recycling of the residual state), in the event the delib-
eration procedure should be repeated. The deliber-
ation process is detailed in Fig. 2. The total num-
ber of reﬂections required is tq
check ∈R [0, ˜O(1/√ϵs)]
(this choice is uniform at random as for the ran-
domized Grover algorithm [35]), and the approxi-
mate reﬂection operator is applied with parameters
R(Ps)(tq
mix, ˜O(1)), where tq
mix ∈˜O(1/√δs) [58].
This implies that the total number of calls to the dif-
fusion operators UPs and VPs is in ˜O(1/(√ϵsδs) (and
the total number of reﬂections over ﬂagged actions
– equivalents of checks in the classical agent – is in
˜O(1/√ϵs)), which is a quadratic improvement over
the classical agent. As we have mentioned previously,
the remaining key ingredient to our result is the fact
that the proposed quantum agent produces actions
(approximately) according to the tailed distribution
in Eq. 1, and that the approximations for both agents
can be made arbitrarily good within at most logarith-
mic overhead. The proof of this claim we leave for the
Appendix section V D. We note that in this paper we
have presented constructions for reversible MCs for
simplicity, but the constructions can be extended to
general irreducible chains using approaches analogous
to those in [23].
We have thus presented a method for generic quan-
tization of reﬂecting PS agents, which maintains the
behavior of the agents, and provably yields a quadratic
speed-up in internal times vital in real environment

4
settings.
1. Initialize: Prepare
|πinit⟩=
X
i∈X
p
πs(i) |i⟩|pi⟩,
with |pi⟩= P
j
√pji |j⟩, and pji is the transition prob-
ability from i to j as dictated by the MC Ps.
2. For tq
check time-steps do
(a) Check: Apply the ref(f(s)) operator which ﬂips
the phase of all components of the current state of
the ﬁrst register which are not in f(s).
(b) Diﬀuse: Apply the approximate reﬂection opera-
tor R(Ps)(tq
mix, O(1)), as described in main text.
3. Measure the ﬁrst register, and if it is a ﬂagged action,
output it, else reiterate the procedure.
FIG. 2. Both the classical and the quantum r-PS are char-
acterized by their internal Markov chains over the clip
space.
The procedures the quantum agent performs in
order to choose the desired actions are listed. The values
tq
mix and tq
check are chosen in ˜O(1/√δs) and uniformly at
random in [0, ˜O(1/√ϵs)], respectively, see text for details.
IV.
DISCUSSION
We have presented a class of quantum learning
agents that use quantum memory for their internal
processing of previous experience. These agents are
situated in a classical task environment that rewards
a certain behavior but is otherwise unknown to the
agent, which corresponds to the situation of conven-
tional learning agents.
The agent’s internal ‘program’ is realized by phys-
ical processes that correspond to quantum walks.
These quantum walks are derived from classical ran-
dom walks over directed weighted graphs, which rep-
resent the structure of its episodic memory. We have
shown how, using quantum coherence and known re-
sults from the study of quantum walks, the agent can
explore its episodic memory in superposition in a way
which guarantees a provable quadratic speedup in its
active learning time over its classical analogue.
Regarding potential realizations for such quantum
learning agents, modern quantum physics laborato-
ries are exploring varieties of systems which can serve
as suitable candidates. Quantum random walks and
related processes can naturally be implemented in lin-
ear optics setups by, for instance, arrays of polarizing
beam splitters [36] and highly versatile setups can also
be realized using internal states of trapped ions [37].
Such advancements, all of which belong to the ﬁeld
of quantum simulation [38], could be used as ingredi-
ents towards the implementation of quantum reﬂect-
ing agents, without the need to develop a full-blown
universal quantum computer.
An entirely diﬀerent route towards realizing the pro-
posed quantum (and classical) learning agents might
employ condensed matter systems in which the pro-
posed Markov chains could e.g. be realized through
cooling or relaxation processes towards target dis-
tributions that then encode the state of belief of
the agent. Here we envision rather non-trivial cool-
ing/relaxation schemes in complex many-body sys-
tems, the study of which is also a prominent topic
in the ﬁeld of quantum simulation.
In conclusion, it seems to us that the embodied
approach to artiﬁcial intelligence acquires a fur-
ther fundamental perspective by combining it with
concepts from the ﬁeld of quantum physics.
The
implications of embodiment are, in the ﬁrst place,
described by the laws of physics, which tell us not
only about the constraints but also the ultimate
possibilities of physical agents.
In this paper we
have shown an example of how the laws of quantum
physics can be fruitfully employed in the design of
future intelligent agents that will outperform their
classical relatives in complex task environments.
Acknowledgments:
MAMD acknowledgs support by the Spanish MICINN
grant FIS2009-10061, FIS2012-33152, the CAM re-
search consortium QUITEMAD S2009-ESP-1594, the
European Commission PICC: FP7 2007-2013, Grant
No. 249958, and the UCM-BS grant GICC-910758.
HJB acknowledges support by the Austrian Science
Fund (FWF) through the SFB FoQuS: F 4012, and
the Templeton World Charity Fund (TWCF) grant
TWCF0078/AB46.
GDP and VD have contributed equally to this work.
V.
APPENDIX
A.
Formal deﬁnitions and behavior of
reinforcement learning agents
Here we formally deﬁne the model of reinforcement
learning agents as employed in this work.
Deﬁnition 1. (Reinforcement learning agent) A re-
inforcement learning agent is an ordered sextuplet

5
(S, A, Λ, C, D, U) where:
• S = {s1, . . . , sm}, A = {a1, . . . , an} are the sets
of percepts and actions, respectively.
• Λ = {0, 1} is the set of rewards, oﬀered by the
environment.
• C = {C1, . . . , Cp} is the set of possible internal
states of the agent.
• D : S × C →A is the decision function, which
outputs some action given a percept and the in-
ternal state.
• U : S × A × Λ × C →C is the update func-
tion, which updates the internal state based on
the success or failure of the last percept-action
sequence.
A few comments are in order.
In this work, the
sets of percepts, actions and internal states are de-
ﬁned to be ﬁnite, but, in general, this need not be the
case. The set of rewards is binary, and this can again
be generalized. The update function may take addi-
tional information into account, based on additional
outputs of the decision function, which are only pro-
cessed internally, but this does not occur in the models
we consider.
The decision function is not necessarily determinis-
tic. In the non-deterministic case it can be formally
deﬁned as
D : S × C →Distr(A)
(2)
that is, a function which takes values in the set of
distributions over A. In this case we also assume that
this distribution is sampled before actual output is
produced, and that the sampled action is the input to
the update function.
Next, we consider equivalences between agents in
so-called passive settings.
In the algorithmic tradition of machine learning,
the learning pace is measured by external time (steps)
alone, and the typical ﬁgure of merit is the percentage
of rewarded actions of the agent, as the function of ex-
ternal time. From an embodied agent perspective, this
set-up corresponds to a special passive setting where
a static environment always waits for the responses
of the agent.
This constraint imposes a restriction
on the universality of statements which can at all be
made about the performance of an agent. In particu-
lar, in that setting it is well-known that no two agents
can be meaningfully compared without reference to a
speciﬁc (or a class of) learning tasks - a collection of
results dubbed ‘no free lunch theorems’, and ‘almost
no free lunch theorems’ [39, 40] [59].
These results
prove that when one agent outperforms another in a
certain environment, there exists a diﬀerent environ-
ment where the ranking according to performance is
reversed. This, for instance, implies that every choice
of environment settings, for which results of agent per-
formance are presented, must be ﬁrst well justiﬁed.
More critically for our agenda, in which we wish to
make no assumptions on the environment, passive set-
tings would imply no comparative statements relating
the performances of agents are possible. In active sce-
narios internal time does matter, but nonetheless the
passive setting plays a part. It provides a baseline for
deﬁning a passive behavioral equivalence of agents,
which will be instrumental in our analysis of active
scenarios.
Let us denote the elapsed sequence of triplets
(percept, action, reward) which had occurred up to
time-step k (the history of the agent) with Hk, for
two agents A and A′ who can perceive and produce
the same sets of percepts (S) and actions (A), respec-
tively. Then we will say that A and A′ are passively
(ϵ−)equal if at every external time step k the proba-
bilities PA and PA′ of agents A and A′, respectively,
outputting some action a ∈A, given every percept
s ∈S, and given all possible identical histories Hk
are (ϵ−)equal, in terms of the variational distance on
distributions:
1
2
X
a
|PA(a|Hk, s) −PA′(a|Hk, s)| ≤ϵ,
(3)
which we abbreviate with
A ≈ϵ A′.
(4)
If the agents considered are equipped with an extra
parameter τ (a precision parameter), which ﬁne tunes
the behavior of the agent, we can demand more and
require that the approximate equality above converges
to an equality (i.e. ϵ →0, as τ →∞). Then in the
limit, the relation above induces passive behavioral
equivalence classes for ﬁxed sets of possible percepts
and actions. In the case of the classical and quantum
agents we consider in the main text, such precision
parameters do exist, and, as we show later in this
Supplementary Information, the approximate equality
converges to an equality.
In passive settings, by deﬁnition, two passively
equal agents perform equally well, and comparison of
agents within a class is pointless. However, in the ac-
tive scenario, with the classes in place, we can mean-
ingfully compare agents within the same class, with no
assumptions on the environment [60] Indeed, in an ac-
tive learning setting, two passively equal agents A and
A′ may have vastly diﬀerent success chances. To see
this, suppose that the environment changes its policies
on a timescale that is long compared to the internal
timescale of agent A, but short relative to the inter-
nally slower agent A′. The best policy of both agents
is to query the environment as frequently as possible,
in order to learn the best possible actions. However,
from the perspective of the slow agent, the environ-

6
ment will look fully inconsistent - once rewarded ac-
tions are no longer the right choice, as that agent sim-
ply did not have the time to learn. Thus, in active
scenarios, internal speed of the agent is vital.
B.
Classical and quantum walk basics
A random walk on a graph is described by a MC,
speciﬁed by a transition matrix P which has entries
Pji = Prob(j|i). For an irreducible MC there exists a
stationary distribution π such that Pπ = π. For an
irreducible and aperiodic MC this distribution can be
approximated by P tπ0 i.e. by applying, to any initial
distribution π0, the MC t number of times where t ≥
tmix
ϵ′
. This time is known as mixing time and is deﬁned
as follows.
Deﬁnition 2. (Mixing Time).
The mixing time is:
tmix
ϵ′
= min{t|∀s ≥t, π0 : ||P sπ0 −π|| ≤ϵ′}
The latter can be related to the spectral properties
of the MC P, in the case of reversible chains, via the
following theorem [42]:
Theorem 1. The mixing time satisﬁes the following
inequalities:
1
δ
λ2
log 2ϵ′ ≤tmix
ϵ′
≤1
δ (max log π−1
i
+ log(ϵ′)−1)
Here, we use ϵ′ instead of the standard ϵ for consis-
tency with the rest of the Supplementary Information,
as ϵ has a reserved meaning.
For the purpose of clarity let us introduce some def-
initions and theorems, originally provided in [22, 23]
that will be useful to introduce the notation and to
prove the main results for the speedup of quantum
agents.
The quantum analog of the applying the MC P is
given by:
Deﬁnition 3. (Quantum Diﬀusion Operators).
The quantum diﬀusion operators, the analogs of the
classical diﬀusion operators are given by the the fol-
lowing transformations:
UP : |i⟩|0⟩7→|i⟩|pi⟩
(5)
VP : |0⟩|j⟩7→
p∗
j

|j⟩,
(6)
where |pi⟩= P
j
p
Pji |j⟩,
p∗
j

= P
i
pP ∗
ij |i⟩and P ∗
is the time reversed MC deﬁned by πiPji = πjP ∗
ij.
We will consider the application of the MC P (for
the classical agent) and the quantum diﬀusion opera-
tors (for the quantum agent) as the (equally time con-
suming) primitive processes, as is done in the theory of
quantum random walks [23]. Next, we can deﬁne the
quantum walk operator W(P), for the Markov chain
P.
Deﬁnition 4. (Walk Operator or Quantum Markov
Chain).
The walk operator or Quantum Markov Chain is
given by
W(P) = (2Π2 −I)(2Π1 −I),
(7)
where Π1 is the projection operator onto the space
Span{|i⟩|pi⟩}i and Π2 is the projection operator onto
Span{
p∗
j

|j⟩}j.
The quantum walk operator can be easily realized
through four applications of the quantum diﬀusion op-
erators, see e.g. [23] for details.
Another standard operation which both the classi-
cal and the quantum agents do is checking whether
the clip found is ﬂagged (corresponding to checking
whether an item is marked). The quantum check op-
erator is deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 5. (Check). The quantum check operator
is the reﬂection denoted as ref(f(s)) performing
|i⟩|j⟩7→
−|i⟩|j⟩, if i ∈f(s)
|i⟩|j⟩, otherwise
,
(8)
where f(s) denotes the set of ﬂagged actions corre-
sponding to the percept s.
In order to prove our main theorems we will be us-
ing the ideas introduced in the context of quantum
searching [22, 23] which we now brieﬂy expose. In the
quantum walk over graphs approach to searching, one
deﬁnes an initial state, which encodes the stationary
distribution of a MC,
|π⟩=
X
i
p
π(i) |i⟩|pi⟩,
(9)
and performs a rotation onto the state containing the
’marked items’
|˜π⟩:=
Πf(s) |π⟩
||Πf(s) |π⟩||,
(10)
where
Πf(s)
is
the
projector
on
the
space
of
marked items i.e Πf(s) = P
i∈f(s) |i⟩⟨i| ⊗I. Let us
point out that Span{|˜π⟩, |π⟩} ⊆Span{|i⟩|pi⟩}i +
Span{
p∗
j

|j⟩}j.
In order to achieve this rotation one makes use of
two reﬂections. The ﬁrst is the reﬂection over
˜π⊥
(denoted ref(
˜π⊥
) ), the state orthogonal to |˜π⟩in
Span{|˜π⟩, |π⟩}. This operator can be realized using
the primitive of checking. Indeed, we have the follow-
ing claim (stated in [23]) given by:
Lemma 6. Restricted on the subspace Span{|˜π⟩, |π⟩},
the action of ref(
˜π⊥
) is identical to −ref(f(s)).
Proof. Let α |π⟩+ β |˜π⟩be a vector in Span{|˜π⟩, |π⟩}.
We have that:
−ref(f(s)) (α |π⟩+ β |˜π⟩) =
(11)

7
= α(I −2Πf(s)) |π⟩−β |˜π⟩
where Πf(s) is the projector on the set f(s). The result
easily follows by noting that
ref(
˜π⊥
) (α |π⟩+ β |˜π⟩) =
(12)
= α

I −2Πf(s) |π⟩⟨π| Πf(s)
||Πf(s) |π⟩||2

|π⟩−β |˜π⟩,
and that
Πf(s) |π⟩⟨π| Πf(s)
||Πf(s) |π⟩||2
|π⟩= ⟨π| Πf(s) |π⟩
||Πf(s) |π⟩||2 Πf(s) |π⟩
= Πf(s) |π⟩,
since ⟨π| Πf(s) |π⟩
||Πf(s) |π⟩||2 = 1.
On the other hand, the reﬂection over |π⟩is not
straightforward.
One can devise an approximated
scheme to implement this reﬂection using the phase
estimation algorithm. Indeed, one can build a unitary
operator, using phase estimation applied to the quan-
tum walk operators, which approximates the reﬂec-
tion over |π⟩. Before we state the theorem regarding
this approximate reﬂection operator (constructively
proven in [23]), we will ﬁrst give another result re-
garding the spectrum of the quantum walk operator,
which will be relevant to us presently.
Theorem 2. (Szegedy [22]) Let P be an irreducible,
reversible MC with stationary distribution π.
Then
the quantum walk operator W(P) is such that:
1. W(P) |π⟩= |π⟩.
2. W(P) |ψ⟩= exp(±2iθ) |ψ⟩, where cos(θ) = |λ|
is the absolute value of an eigenvalue of P and
|ψ⟩∈Span{|i⟩|pi⟩}i + Span{
p∗
j

|j⟩}j.
3. W(P)
has
no
other
eigenvalue
in
Span{|i⟩|pi⟩}i + Span{
p∗
j

|j⟩}j.
Note that the phase gap ∆, deﬁned as the mini-
mum nonzero 2θ, is such that cos ∆= |λ2|, where λ2
is the second-largest eigenvalue of P with respect to
the absolute value. One can then, with some algebra,
conclude that ∆≥2
√
δ.
Let us note that any unitary able to approximately
detect whether the eigenvalue of W(P) of a state in
Span{|i⟩|pi⟩}i + Span{
p∗
j

|j⟩}j is diﬀerent from one
(or equivalently, its eigenphase is diﬀerent from zero)
and conditionally ﬂip the state, will do. We will use
such a unitary to approximate ref(|π⟩). Let us use this
intuition to build such a unitary, R(P), that takes as a
parameter the precision s and refer to it in the follow-
ing as the approximate reﬂection operator R(P) [23]:
Theorem 3. (Approximate Reﬂection Operator [23]).
Let P be an ergodic, irreducible Markov chain on
a space of size |X| with (unique) stationary distri-
bution π.
Let W(P) be the corresponding quantum
Markov Chain with phase gap ∆. Then, if s is cho-
sen in O(log2(1/∆)) , for every integer k there exist
a unitary R(P) that acts on 2⌈log2 |X|⌉+ ks qubits,
such that:
1. R(P) makes at most k2s+1 calls to the (con-
trolled) W(P) and W(P)†.
2. R(P) |π⟩|0⟩⊗ks = |π⟩|0⟩⊗ks .
3. If
|ψ⟩
∈
Span{|i⟩|pi⟩}i
+
Span{
p∗
j

|j⟩}jand
is
orthogonal
to
|π⟩,
then || (R(P) + I) |ψ⟩|0⟩⊗ks || ≤21−k.
By the approximate reﬂection theorem above, there
exists a subroutine R(P)(q, k), where s from the state-
ment of Theorem 3 is taken as log2(q), and k explicitly
controls the ﬁdelity of the reﬂection. Note that, in the
deﬁnition of the quantum reﬂecting agent from the
main text, the parameter q was chosen in ˜O(1/
√
δ),
and since by a Theorem of Szegedy [22], as we have
commented, it holds that 1/
√
δ ∈O(1/∆), we have
that the ﬁdelity of the approximation reﬂection ap-
proaches unity exponentially quickly in k. We note
that the parameter k should be additionally increased
by a logarithmic factor of O(log(1/√ϵ)), in order to
compensate for the accumulated error stemming from
the iterations of the ARO operator, which, as clariﬁed,
we omit in this analysis.
For the explicit construction of the approximate re-
ﬂection operators, we refer the reader to [23].
C.
The PS model
The PS model is a reinforcement learning agent
model, thus it formally ﬁts within the speciﬁcation
provided with Def. 1. Here we will recap the standard
PS model introduced in [19] but note that the philos-
ophy of the projective simulation-based agents is not
ﬁrmly conﬁned to the formal setting we provide here,
as it is more general. PS agents are deﬁned on a more
conceptual level as agents whose internal states rep-
resent episodic and compositional memory and whose
deliberation comprises an association driven hops be-
tween memory sequences - so called clips. Nonethe-
less, the formal deﬁnitions we give here allow us to
precisely state our main claims.
Following the ba-
sic deﬁnitions, we provide a formal treatment of a
slight generalization of the standard PS model which
subsumes both the standard and the reﬂecting agent
model we refer to in the main text, and formally treat
in this Supplementary Information later.
The PS model comprises the percept and action
spaces as given in Def. 1. The central component of

8
PS is the so-called episodic and compositional mem-
ory (ECM), and it comprises the internal states of the
agent. The ECM is a directed weighted network (for-
mally represented as a directed weighted graph) the
vertices of which are called clips.
Each clip c represents fragments of episodic experi-
ences, which are formally tuples
c = (c(1), c(2), . . . , c(L)),
(13)
where each ck is an internal representation of a per-
cept or an action, so
c(k) = µ(i), i ∈S ∪A,
(14)
where µ is a mapping from real percepts and actions
to the internal representations. We will assume that
each ECM always contains all the unit-length clips
denoting elementary percepts and actions.
Within the ECM, each edge between two clips ci
and cj is assigned a weight h(ci, cj) ≥1 and the
weights are collected in the so-called h−matrix. The
elementary process of the PS agent is a Markov chain,
in which the excitations of the ECM hop from one clip
to another, where the transition probabilities are de-
ﬁned by the h-matrix:
p(cj|ci) =
h(ci, cj)
P
k h(ci, ck),
(15)
thus the h−matrix is just the non-normalized transi-
tion matrix. In the standard PS model, the decision
function is realized as follows: given a percept s, the
corresponding clip in the ECM is excited and hopping
according to the ECM network is commenced. In the
simplest case, the hopping process is terminated once
a unit-length action clip is encountered, and this ac-
tion is coupled out and output by the actuator (see
Fig. 1). The moment when an action is coupled out
can be deﬁned in a more involved way, as we explain
presently.
Finally, the update rule, in the standard model nec-
essarily involves the re-deﬁnition of the weights in the
h-matrix. A prototypical update rule, for a fully clas-
sical agent, deﬁning an update from external time-
step t to t + 1 depends on whether an action has been
rewarded. If the previous action has been rewarded,
and the transition between clips ci, cj had actually oc-
curred in the hopping process then the update is as
follows:
h(t+1)(ci, cj) =
h(t)(ci, cj) −γ(h(t)(ci, cj) −1) + λ
(16)
where 0 < λ is a positive reward and 0 ≤γ ≤1
is a dissipation (forgetfulness) parameter. If the ac-
tion had not been rewarded, or the clips ci, cj had not
played a part in the hopping process then the weights
are updated as follows:
h(t+1)(ci, cj) = h(t)(ci, cj) −γ(h(t)(ci, cj) −1).(17)
The update rule can also be deﬁned such that the
update only requires the initial and terminal clip of
the hopping process, which is always the case in the
simple PS model, where all the clips are just actions
or percepts, and hopping always involves a transi-
tion from a percept to an action. This example was
used in section V E. For that particular example, the
update function can be exactly deﬁned by the rules
above. As mentioned, aside from the basic structural
and diﬀusion rules, the PS model allows for additional
structures, which we repeat here. 1) Emoticons - the
agents short term memory, i.e. ﬂags which notify the
agent whether the currently found action, given a per-
cept was previously rewarded or not.
For our pur-
poses, we shall use only the very rudimentary mode of
ﬂags, which designate that the particular action (given
a particular percept) was not already unsuccessfully
tried before. If it was, the agent can ’reﬂect on its de-
cision’ and re-evaluate its strategies, by re-starting the
diﬀusion process. This reﬂection process is an exam-
ple of a more complicated out-coupling rule we have
mentioned previously. 2) Edge and clip glow - mech-
anisms which allow for the establishing of additional
temporal correlations. 3) Clip composition - the PS
model based on episodic and compositional memory
allows the creation of new clips under certain varia-
tional and compositional principles. These principles
allow the agent to develop new behavioral patterns un-
der certain conditions, and allow for a dynamic recon-
ﬁguration of the agent itself. For more details we refer
the reader to [19, 43, 44].
As illustrated, the PS model allows for a great ﬂex-
ibility. A straightforward generalization would allow
for the ECM network to be percept-speciﬁc, which
is the view we adopt in the deﬁnition of reﬂecting
agents. However, the same notion can be formalized
without introducing multiple networks (one for every
percept). In particular, the ECM network allows for
action and percept clips to occur a multiple number
of times. Thus the ECM network can be represented
as |S| disjoint sub-networks, each of which comprises
all elementary action clips, and only one elementary
percept clip. This structure is clearly within the stan-
dard PS model, and it captures all the features of the
reﬂecting PS agent model. A simple case of such a net-
work, relative to the standard picture, is illustrated in
Fig. 3, part b). Thus, the reﬂecting PS agent model
is, structurally, a standard PS model as well.
D.
Behavioral equivalence of classical and
quantum reﬂecting agents
In this section, we show that the classical and
quantum reﬂecting agents (r-PS), denoted Ac
r−P S and
Aq
r−P S are approximately equal, that is Ac
r−P S ≈α
Aq
r−P S, where α can be made arbitrarily small without

9
incurring a signiﬁcant overhead in the internal time of
the agents.
We do so by separately showing that the output dis-
tributions of both the classical and the quantum r-PS
are α-close to the previously mentioned tailed distri-
bution, for an arbitrarily small α.
The main claim
will then follow by the triangle inequality on the be-
havioral distance (which holds since the behavioral
distance is the variational distance on the output dis-
tributions).
For completeness, we begin by explicitly giving the
deliberation process of the classical r-PS, described
in the main text, and proceed with the behavioral
theorem for classical r-PS.
The agent’s decision-making process (implementing
the decision function D, see section V A of this Sup-
plementary Information for details), given percept s,
is given by the following steps.
Let tc
mix ∈˜O(1/δs);
1. Sample y from some ﬁxed distribution π0.
2. Repeat:
(a) Diﬀuse: (re-)mix the Markov chain by
π = P tc
mix
s
y.
(b) Check: Sample y from π. If y is a ﬂagged
action, break and output y.
In the following, when π and π′ are distributions
then ∥π−π′∥denotes the standard variational distance
(Kolmogorov distance) on distributions, so
∥π −π′∥= 1
2
X
x
|π(x) −π′(x)|.
Theorem 4. (Behavior of classical reﬂecting agents)
Let Ps be the transition matrix of the Markov chain
associated to percept s, let f(s) be the (non-empty) set
of ﬂagged action clips. Furthermore, let πs(x) be the
probability mass function of the stationary distribution
πs of Ps and let ˜πs be the renormalized distribution of
πs, where the support is retained only over the ﬂagged
actions, so:
˜πs(i) =





πs(i)
P
j∈f(s) πs(j), if i ∈f(s)
0, otherwise
(18)
Let κ be the probability distribution over the clips as
outputted by the classical reﬂecting agent, upon receiv-
ing s. Then the distance ∥κ−˜πs∥is constant (ignoring
logarithmic factors), and can be eﬃciently made arbi-
trarily small.
Proof. Note that, since the Markov chain is regular, by
Theorem 1, the distribution P
˜
O(1/δs)
s
π0, for any initial
distribution π0 is arbitrarily close to the stationary
distribution of Ps, more precisely,
∥P (k0+log(1/ϵ′))/δs)
s
π0 −π∥≤ϵ′,
(19)
or, equivalently
∥P (k0+k1)/δs)
s
π0 −π∥≤e−k1,
(20)
where k0 = maxi log(π(i)−1). While π(i)−1 can in
principle be very large, it only logarithmically con-
tributes to the overhead, so it can be eﬀectively
bounded, and omitted from the analysis. Thus, we
can achieve an exponentially good approximation of
the stationary distribution with ˜O(1/δs) iterations. In
the remainder we will denote π′ = P
˜
O(1/δs)
s
π0
The reﬂecting agent mixes its Markov chain (achiev-
ing π′) and then samples from this distribution, itera-
tively until a ﬂagged action is hit. Thus κ = ˜π′, where
˜π′ is the tailed π′ distribution in the sense of Eq. (18)
(substituting πs with π′).
Hence we have that
∥κ −˜πs∥= ∥˜π′ −˜πs∥.
(21)
Next, we only need to bound ∥˜π′ −˜πs∥. Note that
∥˜π′ −˜πs∥= ∥1
ϵπ′ π′
sub −1
ϵ (πs)sub∥
(22)
where ϵ and ϵπ′ are the probabilities of sampling
a ﬂagged action from πs and π′, respectively, and
π′
sub and (πs)sub are the sub-normalized distributions
π′
sub = ϵπ′ ˜π′ and (πs)sub = ϵ ˜πs. Note that it holds
that ∥π′
sub −(πs)sub∥≤∥π′ −πs∥. So we have that
∥1
ϵπ′ π′
sub −1
ϵ (πs)sub∥=
∥1
ϵπ′ π′
sub −1
ϵ π′
sub + 1
ϵ π′
sub −1
ϵ (πs)sub∥≤
| 1
ϵπ′ −1
ϵ |∥π′
sub∥+ 1
ϵ ∥π′
sub −(πs)sub∥≤
| 1
ϵπ′ −1
ϵ |ϵπ′ + 1
ϵ ∥π′ −πs∥≤|ϵ −ϵπ′|
ϵ
+ e−k1
ϵ
.
(23)
Next note that e−k1 ≥∥π′ −πs∥≥|ϵπ′ −ϵ|, so ﬁnally
we have
∥˜π′ −˜πs∥≤2e−k1
ϵ
= 2e−k1+log(1/ϵ).
(24)
Since we are interested in the analysis at the ˜O level,
we can omit the logarithmically contributing factor
above. This concludes the proof
.
Note that since the ideal stationary distribution π
(of MC Ps) and the approximation realized by mixing
are no further than e−k1 apart, and since the expected
time of producing an action when sampling from the

10
ideal distribution is O(1/ϵs), this entails that the ex-
pected number of checks the classical r-PS will per-
form is in ˜O(1/ϵs).
Next, we prove an analogous theorem for the quan-
tum agents.
Theorem 5. (quantum reﬂecting agents) Let Ps be
the transition matrix of the Markov chain associated
to percept s, let f(s) be the (non-empty) set of ﬂagged
action clips. Furthermore, let πs(i) be the probability
mass function of the stationary distribution πs of Ps
and let ˜πs be the renormalized distribution of πs, where
the support is retained only over the ﬂagged actions,
so:
˜πs(i) =





πs(i)
P
j∈f(s) πs(j), if i ∈f(s)
0, otherwise
(25)
Let κ be the probability distribution over the clips as
output by the quantum reﬂecting agent, upon receiving
s. Then the distance ∥κ −˜π∥is constant (up to loga-
rithmically contributing terms), and can be eﬃciently
made arbitrarily small.
Proof. The proof consists of two parts. First, we prove
that, if the reﬂection operators (used in the diﬀusion
step of the quantum agent) are ideal, then the claim
follows.
The remainder of the proof, which consid-
ers imperfect reﬂection operators which are actually
used, follows from the proof of Theorem 7 in [45]. In
the following, we will, by abuse of notation, denote
with |πs⟩both the coherent encoding of the stationary
distribution, and the state |πinit⟩, which is the initial
state of the quantum agent, and also the state over
which reﬂections occur, following the notation of [45].
Note that the latter state is obtained by applying the
quantum diﬀusion operator UP once to |πs⟩|0⟩, and
the statistics of measuring the ﬁrst register in |πinit⟩
match the statistics of measuring |πs⟩in the compu-
tational basis.
Assuming the procedure the agent follows starts
from the perfect stationary distribution, and that the
reﬂections over |πs⟩are perfect then, by Lemma 6 we
have that the state of the system never leaves the span
of |˜πs⟩and
˜π⊥
s

where
˜π⊥
s

is the state orthogonal
to |˜πs⟩in Span{|˜πs⟩, |πs⟩}.
Note that the agent outputs an action only con-
ditional on the result being a ﬂagged action.
This
is equivalent to ﬁrst projecting the state of the sys-
tem onto the subspace of ﬂagged actions, using the
projector Πf(s) = P
x∈f(s) |x⟩⟨x|, followed by renor-
malization and a measurement. The state after this
projection is, for any state in Span{|˜πs⟩, |πs⟩} a (sub-
)normalized state |˜πs⟩, hence, after normalization,
measurement outcomes always follow the distribution
˜πs.
However, any state in Span{|˜πs⟩, |πs⟩} which is not
exactly |˜πs⟩still has a non-zero support on the non-
ﬂagged clips. However, it is the key feature of Grover-
like search algorithms (like the search algorithm in
[45], the reﬂections of which make up the decision
process of the quantum agent) that the reﬂection it-
erations produce a state which has a constant overlap
with the target state (in our case |˜πs⟩, which has sup-
port only over ﬂagged actions). This property implies
that the probability of failing to hit a ﬂagged action is
at most some constant β < 1. Now, if the deliberation
process is iterated some constant k3 number of times
it is straightforward to see that ∥κ −˜πs∥≤βk3, thus
decays exponentially quickly as desired.
Next, we need to consider the errors induced by the
approximate reﬂections.
The analysis in [45] (proof of Theorem 7) directly
shows that the terminal quantum (after t′
2 ∈[0, t2]
iterations) state |ψ⟩is close to the state |φ⟩the algo-
rithm would produce had the reﬂections been perfect,
formally,
∥|ψ⟩−|φ⟩∥≤21−c,
(26)
where c is a constant only additively increasing the in-
ternal parameter k of the approximate reﬂection sub-
routine.
Thus the error on the ﬁnal state produced by the
quantum agent induced by the approximate reﬂection
algorithm can be made arbitrarily small within the
allowed cost ˜O(1/√δs), which also means that all dis-
tributions obtained by measurements of these states
will not diﬀer by more than 4 × 21−c [46].
Returning to the inequality proven for the perfect
reﬂections, we see that the error of magnitude 4×21−c
can only increase the probability of failing to output
a ﬂagged action from β to 4×21−c +β. Thus, by tun-
ing the parameters only linearly, we can make sure the
agent produces an action with an exponentially high
probability in terms of the parameter k3 (the number
of iterations of the deliberation process). If an action
has been produced, then, as we have shown above,
it holds that it has been sampled from a distribu-
tion within 4×21−c distance of the tailed distribution
˜πs, which again can be eﬃciently made exponentially
small. Thus the theorem holds.
A corollary of the two theorems above is that the
classical and quantum agents are passively approxi-
mately equal. But then, from the deﬁnitions of these
embodied agents we can see that the quantum agent
exhibits a consistent quadratic speed up, in terms
of the required number of applications of their ele-
mentary operations. That is, the quantum agent is
quadratically faster as claimed. This proves the main
claim of this paper.
The quantum agent may be required to reiterate
the deliberation procedure if the ﬁnal measurement
ﬁnds a non-action clip. This procedure is easy if mul-

11
tiple copies of the initial state are always available.
Alternatively, a way of re-creating the desired initial
coherent encoding of the stationary distribution can
be achieved by ‘inverting’ the quantum search algo-
rithm in [23] by ‘unsearching’ the found non-action
clip – that is, by inverting the (unitary) Grover itera-
tions which would be applied to in order to search for
the found clip from the initial state. This process will,
with high ﬁdelity, again recreate a good approxima-
tion of the initial stationary distribution [61], but may
be costly if the found non-action clip has a low fre-
quency in the stationary distribution. A more eﬃcient
resolution to the problem of reiteration of delibera-
tion can be achieved if the quantum agent can, addi-
tionally, perform a generalized measurement given by
a positive operator-valued measure (POVM), which
projects the state produced by the Grover-like iter-
ations to the subspaces spanned by non-ﬂagged and
ﬂagged clips, deﬁned by POVM elements
Πf(s) =
X
i∈f(s)
|i⟩⟨i| ,
(27)
Πnon−f(s) = 1 −Πf(s).
(28)
If the ﬁrst outcome of this measurement is obtained,
the agent will output the required action according
to the desired distribution, by measuring the residual
state. If the other outcome is obtained, then the re-
sulting state is the coherent encoding of the stationary
distribution, re-normalized so that it has support only
over non-ﬂagged clips. Starting from this state (which
is in the work space of the Grover-like iterations), the
agent can ‘unsearch’ for all non-ﬂagged clips to regain
the initial distribution. Crucially, the number of steps
here will scale as ˜O(1/√1 −ϵs) which will in interest-
ing cases be eﬀectively constant.
E.
Comparison of PS agent models
In this section we compare reﬂecting PS agents with
the standard PS agents, which have been previously
studied [19, 43].
The main diﬀerence between the
standard and the reﬂecting model is that the stan-
dard agents evolve their Markov chain until the ﬁrst
instance where an action clip has been hit, whereas
the reﬂecting agents allow for the Markov chain to
fully mix. In the standard PS model, the underlying
Markov chain should never mix, as indeed in that case,
the construction will guarantee that the actual action
performed is independent from the received percept (if
the Markov chain is irreducible). This suggests that
large clip networks of high conductivity which could,
e.g., appear in agents which have undergone a rich
complex set of episodic experiences (for instance any
type of clip compositions we mentioned previously)
are better suited for the reﬂecting, rather than the
standard PS agents.
Conversely, since the reﬂecting agent must always
fully mix its Markov chain, and the standard does not,
it would seem that the standard model should typi-
cally outperform the reﬂecting model on simple clip
networks (as the hitting time may be much smaller
than the mixing time). This would suggest that the
standard and reﬂecting PS models should not be com-
pared on simple structures, as no quantum advantage
can be demonstrated.
In contrast to these hypotheses, here we show that
even for the simplest (but non-trivial) standard PS
agent construction [19, 43], there exists a natural re-
ﬂecting agent analog, where the performance of the
classical reﬂecting agent matches the standard PS con-
struction, and consequently, the quantum reﬂecting
agent yields a quadratic speed-up over both.
1.
Simple standard PS agent with ﬂags
Recall that, in the standard PS model, the inter-
nal state of the agent is deﬁned by an h−matrix,
which deﬁnes the transition probabilities of the di-
rected Markov chain over the clip space. In the sim-
plest case, the clip space comprises only percepts and
actions, the agent is initialized so that each percept is
connected to each action with unit weight (implying
equiprobable transitions), and no other connections
exist. Furthermore, the update function we assume is
the standard update function as deﬁned in [19] and re-
peated in the Appendix V C. In this particular model,
the internal elementary time-step is one evolution of
the Markov chain, so the agent always decides in one
step, and there is nothing to improve.
However, if
we introduce short term memory, which signiﬁcantly
improves the performance of the model [19], then the
fact that the agent may hit an un-ﬂagged item implies
it may have to walk again. If ϵs denotes the proba-
bility (for the clip s) that the agent hits a ﬂagged
item, then the expected number of elementary tran-
sitions, and checks, the agent will perform is O(1/ϵs)
(see Fig. 3 for an illustration).
For this model, we
next introduce a direct reﬂecting agent analog.
2.
Simple reﬂecting agent with ﬂags
It is relatively straightforward to construct a reﬂect-
ing PS agent which is behaviorally equivalent to the
simple standard agent with ﬂags, given above. To each
percept we assign a Markov chain over just the ac-
tion space, such that the transition matrix is column-
constant, and the column simply contains the tran-
sition probabilities for that particular percept in the
standard model above, see Fig. 3 for an illustration.
The stationary distribution of this Markov chain then
matches the desired transition probabilities. The up-

12
FIG. 3.
a) The simple PS model with ﬂags.
Transi-
tion from percept to action occurs in one step. Flags are
percept-dependent. b) Intermediary step: The graph of
a) can be broken up into two graphs, by duplication of
actions. c) The straightforward analog of the simple PS
in the reﬂecting agent model. To each percept, a MC over
the actions only is assigned, such that the stationary dis-
tribution recovers the initial output probabilities. Flags
are trivially inherited.
date function for this agent is then exactly the same as
in the standard model (that is, internally, the reﬂect-
ing agent can also keep and update the same h−matrix
which induces the Markov chains), and the ﬂags are
also treated in exactly the same way.
Note that the transition matrix of such a Markov
chain is rank-1, meaning it has only one non-zero
eigenvalue, and since the trace of this matrix is unit
(and trace is invariant under diagonalization/basis
change), this implies the largest eigenvalue is 1 and all
the others are zero. Thus we have that the spectral
gap is always 1. This spectral gap immediately im-
plies that the Markov chain is fully mixed after just a
single transition (as δ = 1). Thus the classical reﬂect-
ing agent will also perform O(1/ϵs) transitions and
checks until an action is performed, given the per-
cept s.
However, the quantum agent only requires
O(1/√ϵs) calls to the quantum walk operator. Thus,
even in the very simple setting we see that the re-
ﬂecting agents can be compared to the standard PS
agent model, and maintain a generic quadratic speed-
up when quantized.
This simple model also serves as an illustration of
a setting in which the initial state |πs⟩is easily pre-
pared. Since the relevant transition matrix Ps is of
rank-1 it is straightforward to see that one applica-
tion of the quantum diﬀusion operator UPs applied
on the register initialized to |1⟩|0⟩generates the state
|1⟩⊗P
j
p
Pj,1 |j⟩= |1⟩|πs⟩, since the Ps is a column-
constant matrix containing the stationary distribution
as columns.
While the scenario considered in this section is
somewhat restricted, it is not without importance as
for the standard PS agents we already have a body of
results in the classical case [19, 43]. We emphasize,
however, that the quadratic speed-up proven in this
work is not restricted to this scenario.
References:
[1] Deutsch, D.
Quantum theory, the Church-Turing
principle and the universal quantum computer. Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society of London A 400, 97–
117 (1985).
URL http://www.qubit.org/oldsite/
resource/deutsch85.pdf.
[2] Deutsch, D. & Jozsa, R. Rapid solution of problems
by quantum computation. Proc Roy Soc Lond A 439,
553–558 (1992).
[3] Grover, L. K. Proceedings, 28th Annual ACM Sym-
posium on the Theory of Computing (STOC) 212
(1996).
[4] Shor, P. W. Algorithms for quantum computation:
discrete logarithms and factoring. In Proceedings of
the 35th symposium on foundations of computer sci-
ence, FOCS ’94, 124–134 (IEEE, 1994).
[5] Nielsen, M. A. & Chuang, I. L. Quantum Computa-
tion and Quantum Information (Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2000).
[6] Charles
H.
Bennett,
D.
P.
D.
Quantum
in-
formation
and
computation.
Nature
247255
(2000).
URL
http://www.nature.com/nature/
journal/v404/n6775/full/404247a0.html.
[7] Sasaki, M. & Carlini, A. Quantum learning and uni-
versal quantum matching machine. Phys. Rev. A 66,
022303 (2002). URL http://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevA.66.022303.
[8] Neven, H., Denchev, V. S., Rose, G. & Macready,
W. G. Training a binary classiﬁer with the quantum
adiabatic algorithm (2008). arXiv/0811.0416.
[9] Lloyd, S., Mohseni, M. & Rebentrost, P. Quantum
algorithms for supervised and unsupervised machine
learning. ArXiv:1307.0411 (2013).
[10] Manzano, D., Paw lowski, M. & Brukner, ˇC.
The
speed of quantum and classical learning for perform-
ing the k th root of not.
New Journal of Physics
11, 113018 (2009).
URL http://stacks.iop.org/
1367-2630/11/i=11/a=113018.
[11] Pudenz, K. L. & Lidar, D. A.
Quantum adiabatic
machine learning. Quantum Information Processing
12, 2027–2070 (2013). URL http://dx.doi.org/10.

13
1007/s11128-012-0506-4.
[12] A¨ımeur, E., Brassard, G. & Gambs, S.
Quantum
speed-up for unsupervised learning. Machine Learn-
ing 90, 261–287 (2013). URL http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s10994-012-5316-5.
[13] Braitenberg, V. Vehicles: Experiments in Synthetic
Psychology (MIT Press, Cambridge Massachusetts,
1986).
[14] Brooks, R.
Cambrian intelligence:
The early his-
tory of the new AI (The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
1999).
[15] Pfeifer, R. & Scheier, C. Understanding Intelligence
(MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1999).
[16] Pfeifer, R. & Bongard, J. C. How the Body Shapes the
Way We Think: A New View of Intelligence (Brad-
ford Books) (The MIT Press, 2006).
[17] Floreano, D. & Mattiussi, C. Bio-inspired artiﬁcial in-
telligence : theories, methods, and technologies (The
MIT Press, 2008).
[18] Barsalou, L. W. Grounded cognition. Annual Review
of Psychology 59, 617–645 (2008).
[19] Briegel, H. J. & De las Cuevas, G. Projective simula-
tion for artiﬁcial intelligence. Sci. Rep. 2 (2012).
[20] Russel, S. J. & Norvig, P. Artiﬁcial intelligence - A
modern approach (Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 2003),
second edition.
[21] Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Reinforcement learn-
ing: An introduction (MIT Press, Cambridge Mas-
sachusetts, 1998), ﬁrst edn.
[22] Szegedy, M.
Quantum speed-up of markov chain
based algorithms. In Foundations of Computer Sci-
ence, 2004. Proceedings. 45th Annual IEEE Sympo-
sium on, 32 – 41 (2004).
[23] Magniez, F., Nayak, A., Roland, J. & Santha, M.
Search via quantum walk. SIAM Journal on Comput-
ing 40, 142–164 (2011). URL http://epubs.siam.
org/doi/abs/10.1137/090745854.
[24] Kohonen, T. Self-organizing maps (Springer-Verlag,
1995).
[25] Toussaint, M. A sensorimotor map: Modulating lat-
eral interactions for anticipation and planning. Neural
Comput. 18, 1132–1155 (2006). URL http://dx.doi.
org/10.1162/089976606776240995.
[26] Magniez, F., Santha, M. & Szegedy, M.
Quantum
algorithms for the triangle problem. In Proceedings
of the Sixteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’05, 1109–1117 (Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadel-
phia, PA, USA, 2005).
URL http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?id=1070432.1070591.
[27] Ambainis, A. Quantum walk algorithms for element
distinctness.
In 45th Annual IEEE Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science, OCT 17-19, 2004.
IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 22–
31 (2004).
[28] Magniez, F., Nayak, A., Richter, P. C. & Santha, M.
On the hitting times of quantum versus random walks.
Algorithmica 63, 91–116 (2012).
URL http://dx.
doi.org/10.1007/s00453-011-9521-6.
[29] Temme, K., Osborne, T. J., Vollbrecht, K. G. H.,
Poulin, D. & Verstraete, F. Quantum metropolis sam-
pling. Nature 471, 87–90 (2011).
[30] Yung, M.-H. & Aspuru-Guzik, A.
A quantum-
quantum Metropolis algorithm. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
(2012). 10.1073/pnas.1111758109
[31] Somma, R. D., Boixo, S., Barnum, H. & Knill,
E.
Quantum
simulations
of
classical
anneal-
ing
processes.
Phys.
Rev.
Lett.
101,
130504
(2008).
URL http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.101.130504.
[32] Wocjan,
P.
&
Abeyesinghe,
A.
Speedup
via
quantum sampling.
Phys. Rev. A 78,
042336
(2008).
URL http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevA.78.042336.
[33] Paparo, G. D. & Martin-Delgado, M.
Google in a
quantum network. Scientiﬁc reports 2 (2012).
[34] Paparo, G., Mueller, M., Comellas, F. & Martin-
Delgado, M. Quantum google in a complex network.
Scientiﬁc reports 3 (2013).
[35] Boyer, M., Brassard, G., Hoeyer, P. & Tapp, A. Tight
bounds on quantum searching.
Fortsch. Phys. 46,
493–506 (1996). arXiv:quant-ph/9605034.
[36] Aspuru-Guzik, A. & Walther, P. Photonic quantum
simulators. Nature Physics 8, 285–291 (2012). URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nphys2253.
[37] Blatt, R. & Roos, C. F. Quantum simulations with
trapped ions. Nature Physics 8, 277–283 (2012). URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nphys2252.
[38] Schaetz, T., Monroe, C. R. & Esslinger, T.
Fo-
cus on quantum simulation. New Journal of Physics
15, 085009 (2013).
URL http://stacks.iop.org/
1367-2630/15/i=8/a=085009.
[39] Wolpert, D. H. The lack of a priori distinctions be-
tween learning algorithms. Neural Comput. 8, 1341–
1390 (1996).
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/
neco.1996.8.7.1341.
[40] Droste, S., Jansen, T. & Wegener, I. Optimization
with randomized search heuristics – the (a)nﬂtheo-
rem, realistic scenarios, and diﬃcult functions. Theo-
retical Computer Science 287, 2002 (1997).
[41] Introduction to discussions regarding the no free lunch
theorems, and their interpretations, can be found
at the following web page. http://no-free-lunch.
org/.
[42] Sinclair, A.
Algorithms for random generation and
counting: a Markov chain approach, vol. 7 (Springer,
1993).
[43] Mautner, J., Makmal, A., Manzano, D., Tiersch, M.
& Briegel, H. J.
Projective simulation for classical
learning agents:
a comprehensive investigation. To
appear in New Generation Comput..
[44] Briegel, H.
On creative machines and the physical
origins of freedom. Scientiﬁc reports 2, 522 (2012).
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep00522.
[45] Magniez, F., Santha, M. & Szegedy, M.
Quantum
algorithms for the triangle problem. SIAM Journal on
Computing 37, 413–424 (2007). URL http://epubs.
siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/050643684.
[46] Bernstein, E. & Vazirani, U.
Quantum complexity
theory. In in Proc. 25th Annual ACM Symposium on
Theory of Computing, ACM, 11–20 (1993).
[47] Examples of such applications include the problems
of navigation, or human-robot interaction. We note
that the focus on such classical environments is by no
means a restriction of our scheme. For a quantum en-
vironment, the actions which the agent can perform

14
could e.g. be quantum measurements (as components
of his actuators), and percepts the measurement out-
comes – such scenarios are certainly not without inter-
est. The results we present in this work apply equally
to such environments. However, we will not explore
the applications of learning agents in quantum envi-
ronments in this paper.
[48] Even if we were to allow superpositions of actions, the
amount of control the agent must have over the de-
grees of freedom of the environment, in order to apply
quantum query algorithms, may be prohibitive. This
constitutes one of the fundamental operative distinc-
tions between quantum algorithms, where full control
is assumed, and quantum agents, where such control
is limited.
[49] In embodied agents, these physical processes may e.g.
realize some internal representation of the environ-
ment, which the agent itself has to develop as it inter-
acts with the environment. For example, in the con-
text of artiﬁcial neural networks such internal models
are known as self-organizing maps and, more speciﬁ-
cally, sensorimotor maps [24, 25].
[50] In the PS framework one formally distinguishes be-
tween real percepts and actions s, a, and their in-
ternal representations denoted µ(s), µ(a), which com-
prise clips. For our purposes, by abuse of notation,
we will omit the mapping µ. For more details see the
Appendix, section V C.
[51] In the PS, the hopping probabilities themselves are
encoded in the so-called h−matrix, which is an un-
normalized representation of the transition matrix
[19].
[52] Each agent is equipped with input and output cou-
plers, which translate, through sensors and actuators
(see Fig. 1), real percepts to the internal representa-
tions of percepts, and internal representations of ac-
tions to real actions.
[53] In this paper we do not consider logarithmically con-
tributing terms in the complexity analysis, thus we
use the ˜O-level analysis of the limiting behavior (in-
stead of the standard ’big O’ O).
[54] The optimality claim holds, provided that no addi-
tionaly mechanisms except for diﬀusion and checking
are available.
[55] In the case of reversible MCs, which will be the main
focus of this paper, P = P ∗, so V can be constructed
from U by conjugating it with the swap operator of
the two registers. Here, we present the construction
for the general case of irreducible, aperiodic Markov
chains.
[56] Here, we note that concrete applications of quan-
tum walks speciﬁed by non-symmetric Markov chains
have, to our knowledge and aside from this work, only
been studied in [33, 34], by two of the authors and
other collaborators, in a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent con-
text.
[57] For completeness we note as a technicality, following
[23], that if ϵs is always bounded below by a known
constant (say 3/4 as in [35]), the quantum agent can
immediately measure the initial state and eﬃciently
produce the desired output by iterating this process a
constant number of times. However, in the scenarios
we envision, ϵs is very small.
[58] We note that some of the only logarithmically con-
tributing terms, which appear in a more detailed anal-
ysis omitted here, can be further avoided using more
complicated constructions as has, for instance, been
done in [23].
[59] We acknowledge that the interpretation of these re-
sults in the sense of their practical impact on the ﬁeld
are not without controversy. Nonetheless, the validity
of the mathematical statements is not contested. See
[41] for more details.
[60] That is, a comparison can be made with no further
assumptions on the environment beyond the trivial
onesthat the percept and action sets are compatible
with the environment and that the environment pro-
vides a rewarding scheme.
[61] Additionally, the quality of the approximation can
be, probabilistically, arbitrarily raised by one round
of phase estimation algorithm for the walk operator,
provided no phase is detected. Should this fail, the
‘unsearching’ process is repeated.
