Ensemble Methods of Classiﬁcation for Power
Systems Security Assessment
Alexei Zhukov, Victor Kurbatsky
Nikita Tomin, Denis Sidorov, Daniil Panasetsky
Energy Systems Institute
Russian Academy of Sciences
Irkutsk, Russia

Aoife Foley
School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
Queens University Belfast
Belfast, UK

Abstract—One of the most promising approaches for complex
technical systems analysis employs ensemble methods of classi-
ﬁcation. Ensemble methods enable to build a reliable decision
rules for feature space classiﬁcation in the presence of many
possible states of the system. In this paper, novel techniques
based on decision trees are used for evaluation of the reliability
of the regime of electric power systems. We proposed hybrid
approach based on random forests models and boosting models.
Such techniques can be applied to predict the interaction of
increasing renewable power, strage devices and swiching of
smart loads from intelligent domestic appliances, storage heaters
and air-conditioning units and electric vehicles with grid for
enhanced decision making. The ensemble classiﬁcation methods
were tested on the modiﬁed 118-bus IEEE power system showing
that proposed technique can be employed to examine whether the
power system is secured under steady-state operating conditions.
Index Terms—power system, ensemble methods; boosting;
classiﬁcation; heuristics; random forests; security assessment.
I. INTRODUCTION
Assessment of security of bulk electric power systems is one
of the pressing problems in the modern power engineering.
The trends towards liberalization and the need to increase
electricity transmission due to growing loads and generation
expansion make existing power companies operate their elec-
trical networks in critical conditions, close to their admissible
security limits [1]. In such conditions the unforeseen excess
disturbances, weak connections, hidden defects of the relay
protection system and automated devices, human factors as
well as a great amount of other factors can cause a drop in
the system security or even the development of catastrophic
accidents.
For the time being there is a wide spectrum of approaches
and tools for the assessment of security. All the variety of the
methods can be divided into:
• Traditional approaches based on a detailed modeling
of potential disturbances in electric power systems and
This work is funded by the RSF project “Development of an intelligent
system for preventing large-scale emergencies in power systems” under grant
No. 14-19-00054.
numerical calculations of nonlinear capacity equations [3,
4];
• Intelligent approaches which involve the artiﬁcial intel-
ligence algorithms learning on a limited set of power
system states, such as artiﬁcial neural networks, support
vector machine, decision trees, etc. [1, 2, 5, 19].
An analysis of methods for the assessment of security and
voltage stability of electric power system shows that the exist-
ing traditional approaches cannot be effectively applied in the
online and real time conditions because of their computation
complexity. For example load ﬂow calculation for the assess-
ment of the aftermath of a system component fault, which
underlies the classical approaches to the assessment of security
in electric power systems and does not seem to be fully
implemented because of complex modeling of corresponding
protections, that trip the overloaded line or load feeder in case
of inadmissible voltage level. Moreover, currently to meet the
demand for electricity as well to ensure quality and reliability
of electricity supply systems, the distributed generation is
connected as a local energy source.
Although, many of the developed approaches on the basis
of intelligent models are more adapted to real changes in the
power system topology and system conditions, they still do not
have sufﬁcient sensitivity to these changes, not always offer
the possibility of predicting voltage stability losses, and do not
allow us to estimate the probability of identifying a potentially
dangerous state.
At the transmission level (i.e. bulk power), phasor mea-
surement units (PMU’s) have been introduced to improve
grid reliability. A PMU is a calculated real time phasor mea-
surement synchronised to an absolute reference unit provided
by a Global Positioning System (GPS). These PMU’s are
used to assess grid (e.g. MVARs, kV, frequency changes etc.)
conditions because they synchronise power quality in real time
by comparing phase angle measurements. To date PMU are
only deployed for Wide Area Measurement (WAM) [20, 21].
One of the issues of applying and using the large amounts
of PMU datasets for rapid decision making. The decision
making and onus is usually still with the expertise of the
grid operators. However, as the number of market participants,
renewable power sources, storage devices and smart loads
arXiv:1601.01675v1  [cs.AI]  7 Jan 2016

increase in the power system both at the transmission (and
distribution) level the decision making will become ever more
complex. Hence this research employs the ensemble methods
on the basis of decision trees. The calculations involved the
following modiﬁcations of random forest models (Extremely
Randomized Trees, Oblique Random Forests) and boosting
models (Stochastic Gradient Boosting, AdaBoost). The effec-
tiveness of their application is conﬁrmed by a great number
of calculations on the basis of power system test scheme. The
suggested ensemble methods of classiﬁcation are implemented
in the free software environment R intended for calculations
with an open-source code.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT
Security is an ability of electric power system to withstand
sudden disturbances without unforeseen effects on the electric-
ity consumers. It is provided by control capabilities of power
systems. In the operational practices the required level of
security can be achieved by both the preventive control actions
(before a disturbance) and the emergency control actions
(after disturbance). Control in the pre-emergency conditions is
mainly a responsibility of the operational dispatching control.
At the same time there can be situations where the speed of
power system control by the dispatching personnel appears to
be insufﬁcient to avoid dangerous situations. The complexity
of a problem here lies in the fact that most of dangerous
(pre-emergency) states of electric power system which lead
to large-scale blackouts are unique and there is no single
algorithm (for solving) to effectively reveal such conditions
as the time. The problem gets complicated by the fact that
the security limit of electric power system constantly changes,
therefore fast methods for real time security monitoring are
required to analyze the current level of security and accurately
trace the limit and detect the most vulnerable regions along it.
The key idea of the pre-emergency control concept is the
fact that the voltage instability following the emergency distur-
bance which accompanies many system emergencies does not
develop as fast as the dynamic instability of the electric power
system [6]. Thus, when the phase of slow emergency develop-
ment comes, the balance between generation and consumption
is maintained for a long time and this makes it possible to
detect potentially dangerous states, which appear after the
disturbance, and generate respective preventive control actions
[2].
III. ENSEMBLE ALGORITHMS OF CLASSIFICATION AND
THE PROBLEM OF POWER SECURITY ASSESSMENT
A great many studies show that the effective solution to
this problem can be found on the basis of machine learning
methods which normally include artiﬁcial neural networks,
decision trees, ensemble (committee) models, etc. This is
related to their capabilities of fast detection of the images,
patterns (i.e. typical samples), learning/generalization and,
which is important, high speed of identifying the instability
boundaries.
One of the advanced approaches to the analysis of complex
technical systems is ensemble methods of classiﬁcation. They
make it possible to form reliable decision rules of classiﬁcation
for a set of potential system states. In this approach the
key idea is to build a universal classiﬁer of power system
states which is capable of tracing dangerous pre-emergency
conditions and predicting emergency situations on the basis
of certain system security indices. In this case the detection of
dangerous operation patterns is not effective without consid-
ering probable disturbance/faults, whose calculation leads to a
considerable increase in the computational complexity and a
potential decrease in the accuracy for basic algorithms. This
leads to the need of ﬁnding a way to improve the accuracy
of the classiﬁer of power system states. One of such methods
is the creation of ensembles of the classiﬁcation models and
their training.
One of the ﬁrst most general theory of algorithmic ensem-
bles was proposed in the algebraic approach by Y.I. Zhuravlev
[7]. According to this theory the composition of N basic
algorithms ht = C(at(x)), t = 1, . . . , N is taken to mean
a superposition of algorithmic operators at : X →R, of
a correction operation F : RN
→R and decision rule
C : R →Y such as H(x) = C (F(a1(x), . . . , aN(x))), where
x ∈X, X is a space of objects, Y is a set of answers, and R
is a space of estimates.
Later Valiant and Kearns [8] were the ﬁrst to pose the
question about whether or not a weak learning algorithm can
be strengthened to an arbitrary accurate learning algorithm.
This process was called boosting. Schapire [9] developed
the ﬁrst provable polynomial-time boosting algorithm. It was
intended for the conversion of weak models into strong ones
by constructing an ensemble of classiﬁers. The main idea of
the boosting algorithm is step-by-step enhancement of the
algorithm ensemble. One of the popular implementations of
this idea is Schapires AdaBoost algorithm which involves
ensemble of decision trees [10].
Another approach to the classiﬁcation and regression prob-
lems using the ensembles was suggested by Leo Breiman
[11]. This approach is an extension of the bagging idea.
According to this idea, a collective decision can be obtained
by using an elementary committee method which classiﬁes
an object according to a decision of most of the algorithms.
Unlike the boosting method bagging is based on parallel
learning of base classiﬁers. One of the progressive bagging-
based approaches is the method called Random Forest [11, 12].
Later there appeared the most effective modiﬁcations of both
Random forests and boosting algorithms such as Extremely
Randomized Trees, Oblique Random Forests and Stochastic
Gradient Boosting [13].
In the researches devoted to the security assessment there
are many approaches oriented to the construction of models
on the basis of decision trees [1, 2, 5,13]. These models
use both off-line (periodically updated) and on-line methods.
Single trees are easily interpretable, yet do not always allow us
to obtain the required accuracy when approximating complex

target relationships. Therefore, it is considered reasonable to
use compositions [14].
IV. CALCULATION OF A POWER SYSTEM SECURITY ON
THE BASIS OF ENSEMBLE MODELS
Figure 1 presents a general scheme of the suggested ap-
proach for the estimation of power system security. The pri-
mary principle of the approach lies in the mathematical model
learning on the basis of the ensemble method of classiﬁcation
to automatically make a sufﬁciently accurate assessment of
the power system conditions according to the criterion se-
cure/insecure on the basis of signiﬁcant classiﬁcation attributes
of a power system state, for example active and reactive power
ﬂows, bus voltage, etc. A great amount of such attributes
are obtained on the basis of randomly generated data sample
consisting of a set of really possible states of electric power
system [2].
DATA BASE 
OF 
OPERATING 
POWER 
STATES
Training 
sample 1
Training 
sample 2
Training 
sample 3
Training 
sample N
Classifier 1
Classifier 2
Classifier 3
Classifier 
N
COMBINE 
POWER SYSTEM 
CLASSIFICATION 
TOOL
Security 
Index
Ensemble classification method 
(software environment R )
QUASI-
DYNAMIC 
MODELING 
Modeling calculated 
power system states 
(MATLAB/PSAT environment)
Figure 1.
A general scheme of the assessment of potential power system
security, using compositional models.
Depending on the ensemble method applied each deci-
sion rule will be trained by its subsampling according to
the bagging and boosting principles. The ﬁnal decision on
the classiﬁcation of any power system state is made within
the generalized classiﬁer according to different principles of
simple majority voting, weighted voting or by choosing the
most competent decision rule.
In the paper a list of potential power system states for the
model learning is formed using quasi-dynamic modeling with
a special program in the MATLAB environment (Fig.2). The
load model was represented by static characteristics depending
on voltage. When critical values of voltage are achieved the
load is automatically transferred to shunts. The method of a
proportional increase in load at all nodes of the test scheme
was optimized for the security analysis in such a way that the
initial condition for each emergency disturbance is a stable
condition closest to it, from those calculated. Thus, at each
stage of an increase in the test scheme load the emergency
events (primary disturbances) are randomly modeled by the
N −1 reliability principle. As a result, the database including
a set of various pre-emergency and emergency states of the
test scheme is built.
SYSTEM LOADING PROCEDURE
Topology
Load/generation models
VALIDATION
Loadflow computation
Secondary voltage control
HV shunt compensation
Normal and heavy load 
operating states
Pre-disturbance
Attributes (voltages, power 
flows, loads…) 
Security classes
Just after disturbance
Attributes (voltages, power 
flows, loads…) 
DATA BASES
DISTURBANCES SIMULATION
Apply a random disturbanse  (t=0)
Time domain simulation  
CLASSIFICATION 
Compute security index
CLASS («normal», «alarm», 
«emergency», «in-extreme»)
Figure 2. A scheme of modeling calculated states of electric power system
in the problem of security monitoring and assessment on the basis of quasi-
dynamic modeling in the MATLAB/PSAT environment.
In order to obtain a problem book each of such states is
assigned a security index (here readers may refer to [14])
which is calculated by the following expression:
SI = w1 · PnL
i=1 LOIi + w2 · PnB
i=1 V DIi
nL + nB
,
(1)
where w1 and w2 are the weighting factors of system security;
LOI is line overload index; V DI is index of voltage deviation
at nodes; nL and nB represent the number of lines and buses
respectively.
Thus, the security index is determined by calculating the
VDI and LOI, which are obtained using the following expres-
sions:
LOIkm =
(
Skm−Slim
Skm
· 100,
if Skm > Slim;
0,
if Skm < Slim.
(2)
V DIk =







|U min
k
|−|Uk|
|U min
k
|
· 100,
if |Uk| < |U min
k
|;
0,
if |U min
k
| ≤|Uk| ≤|U max
k
|;
|Uk|−|U max
k
|
|U max
k
|
· 100,
if |Uk| > |U max
k
|,
(3)
where Skm and Slim represent the MVA ﬂow and MVA limit
of branch k-m correspondingly, |Uk|, |U max
k
| and |U max
k
| are
the minimum voltage limit, maximum voltage limit and bus
voltage magnitude of k-bus respectively.
Evaluating the security index as given by (1), each pattern
is labeled as belonging to one of the four classes as shown in
Table IV.
To give an idea of the criteria without going into details,
the system states are presented.
• Normal state implies that all parameters of the power
system are maintained within speciﬁed normal operation
limits.

Security Index
Class Category/Power State
SI = 0
Normal state
0 < SI ≤5%
Alarm state
5% < SI ≤15%
Emergency 1 state
SI > 15%
Emergency 2 state
TABLE I.
CLASS LABELS FOR POWER SECURITY ANALYSIS.
• Alarm state that some of the system parameters exceed
the speciﬁed normal limits (for example, bus voltage can
exceed 5%, but remain within 10%). Depending on the
operation rules, actions can take place to bring the system
to the normal state.
• Emergency 1 state implies the system is still intact; how-
ever, some system constraints are violated. The system
can be restored to the normal state (or at least to the
alarm state), if the suitable corrective actions are taken.
• Emergency 2 state implies that the current situation
cannot be corrected and will lead to major emergency.
Control actions, like load shedding or controlled system
separation are used for saving as much of the system as
possible from a widespread blackout.
In the case where the values of the indices exceed the spec-
iﬁed limits on security and the high probability of emergency
situations that correspond to these values, respective preventive
or emergency control measures can be formed.
V. CASE STUDY
The feasibility of the approach in a proof-of-concept has
been demonstrated on the IEEE 118 power system consisting
of more than 118 buses, 54 generators, and 186 transmission
lines. An open-source environment R [16] with caret package
[17] is used as a computing environment for proposed models
design and testing.
A. Data base generation
Operating conditions are all generated using the Powertrain
System Analysis Toolkit (PSAT) [18]. The database generation
and data conversion are conducted in MATLAB. The overall
data base generation procedure, whose aim was to provide a
representative sample of possible power system states, com-
bining various prefault operating states and disturbances, is
illustrated in Fig. 2.
A data base representative of the potential power system
states was obtained by generating, ﬁrstly, a sample of various
prefault situations, and applying to each state the random
disturbances to produce the corresponding stability scenarios.
To obtain the data base composed of 6877 states, each of the
prefault normal or heavy load states was combined with the
possible disturbances. These have been simulated with a vari-
able step MATLAB/PSAT quasi-dynamic simulation program,
which computed the attribute values and allowed us to classify
based on the security index the scenarios as normal, alarm,
emergency 1 and emergency 2. The 490 initial candidate
attributes such as active and reactive power ﬂow, voltages
used to characterize the power system states. They represent
essentially power system quantities which may be available
from the SCADA system or the Phasor Data Concentrator
system in the power system state.
B. Estimating Performance For Classiﬁcation
In current paper we need to use proper performance mea-
surement metrics for classiﬁcation problems. We used the
following metrics:
• The overall accuracy of a model indicates how well the
model predicts the actual data.
• the Kappa statistic takes into account the expected error
rate:
k = O −E
1 −E
(4)
where O is the observed accuracy and E is the expected
accuracy under chance agreement.
C. Overview of obtained results
Ensemble and single trees methods have been built for
classifying the power system states, for various candidate
attributes and four different security classiﬁcations. Tab. II
shows comparison of accuracy achieved by the state-of-the-art
classiﬁcation tree learning algorithms. Namerly, the follow-
ing classiﬁers where tested: J48 decision tree, conventional
Breiman’s non-parametric decision tree learning technique
CART, bagged CART (BCART), Random Forest, Extra Trees
(ET) and Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGB) method. The
ensemble and single tree methods were trained on 6877
samples dataset and tested on 1715 samples. Confusion matrix
is shown in Tab. I. Each column of the matrix represents the
instances in a predicted class while each row represents the
instances in an actual class
Metrics
Ensemble Methods
J48
CART
BCART
RF
ET
SGB
Accuracy %
99.83
99.07
99.88
100.00
100.00
100.00
Kappa %
99.72
98.52
99.81
100.00
100.00
100.00
TABLE II.
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY COMPARISON.
alarm
emergency1
emergency2
normal
class error
alarm
947.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
emerg1
4.00
279.00
5.00
0.00
0.03
emerg2
0.00
4.00
252.00
0.00
0.02
normal
2.00
0.00
0.00
225.00
0.01
TABLE III.
CONFUSION MATRIX.
Fig. 3 shows testing errors with respect to the number of
trees for normal, alarm, emergency1 and emergency2 cases. As
footnote its to be noted that all obtained accuracy values are
close. But some of the models enjoy additional useful proper-
ties. For example Extra Trees needs less memory comparing
with classical Random Forest but comparable with Stohastical
gradient boosting.
Fig. 4 shows variable importance for all classes obtained
by computing of mean gini index decrease. The classiﬁcation
trees select voltages under normal states as the most important
attributes for security monitoring and assessment. It may be

0
20
40
60
80
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
Number of trees
Error, %
*
*
*
*
*
Test
alarm
emergency1
emergency2
normal
Figure 3. Testing error with respect to the number of trees.
explained by the fact that the voltage sag observed in the
power system state reﬂects proportional increase in load, when
the static characteristics of the load model depend on voltage.
Under alarm and emergency states the power and reactive ﬂow
attributes were selected in preference to voltages. A possible
explanation lies in the fact that this security criterion is more
preventive like.
We also demonstrated the feasibility of dealing with incom-
plete and distorted data. Taking into consideration SCADA
malfunctions, the corrupted patterns were used to train en-
semble classiﬁcation trees. The results showed that the test
error rate did not changed even if 50% of gaps (Tab. IV).
% of gaps
time in sec.
test error, %
10
0.0123
0.93
30
0.0411
0.93
50
0.0514
0.93
TABLE IV.
FILLING THE GAPS IN DATA
VI. CONCLUSION
The ensemble classiﬁcation methods were tested on the
modiﬁed IEEE 118 power system showing that proposed
technique can be employed to examine whether the power
system is secured under steady-state operating conditions. The
experimental studies showed that the ensemble methods can
identify key system parameters as security indicators with
high accuracy and, if required, the obtained security tree-based
model can produce an alarm for triggering emergency control
system. The next stage of this work will involve taking real
power system data and modelling multiply decision making
with many grid participants.
