Under consideration for publication in Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
1
Functional Answer Set Programming
Pedro Cabalar
Department of Computer Science,
University of Corunna, Spain.

submitted 21 June 2009; revised ; accepted
Abstract
KEYWORDS: Answer Set Programming, Equilibrium Logic, Partial Functions, Functional
Logic Programming.
1 Introduction
Since its introduction two decades ago (Gelfond and Lifschitz 1988), the paradigm
of Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Marek and Truszczy´nski 1999) has gradu-
ally become one of the most successful and practical formalisms for Knowledge
Representation due to its ﬂexibility, expressiveness and current availability of ef-
ﬁcient solvers. This success can be easily checked by the continuous and plentiful
presence of papers on ASP in the main conferences and journals on Logic Program-
ming, Knowledge Representation and Artiﬁcial Intelligence during the last years.
The declarative semantics of ASP has allowed many syntactic extensions that have
simpliﬁed the formalisation of complex domains in diﬀerent application areas like
constraint satisfaction problems, planning or diagnosis.
In this paper we consider one more syntactic extension that is an underlying
feature in most application domains: the use of (partial) evaluable functions. Most
ASP programs include some predicates that are nothing else than relational rep-
resentations of functions from the original domain being modelled. For instance,
when modelling the typical educational example of family relationships, we may
use a predicate mother(X, Y ) to express that X’s mother is Y , but of course, we
must add an additional constraint to ensure that Y is unique wrt X, i.e., that
the predicate actually acts as the function mother(X) = Y . In fact, it is quite
common that ﬁrst time Prolog students use this last notation as their ﬁrst at-
tempt. Functions are not only a natural element for knowledge representation, but
can also simplify in a considerable way ASP programs. Apart from avoiding con-
straints for uniqueness of value, the possibility of nesting functional terms like
in W = mother(father(mother(X))) allows a more compact and readable rep-
resentation than the relational version mother(X, Y ), father(Y, Z), mother(Z, W)
involving extra variables, which may easily mean a source of formalisation errors.
arXiv:1006.3678v1  [cs.LO]  18 Jun 2010

2
P. Cabalar
Similarly, as we will see later, the use of partial functions can also save the pro-
grammer from including explicit conditions in the rule bodies to check that the rule
head is actually deﬁned.
The addition of functions to ASP is not new at all. In fact, there exist two
diﬀerent ways in which functions are actually understood. The ﬁrst way of treating
functions is followed by most of the existing work in the topic (like the general
approaches (Syrj¨anen 2001; Bonatti 2004; ˇSimkus and Eiter 2007) or the older
use of function Result for Situation Calculus inside ASP (Gelfond and Lifschitz
1993)). These approaches treat functions in the same way as Prolog, that is, they
are just a way for constructing the Herbrand universe, and so they satisfy the
unique names assumption – e.g. mother(john) = mary is always false. A second
way of treating functions is dealing with them as in Predicate Calculus, as done
for instance in Functional Logic Programming (Hanus 1994). The ﬁrst and most
general approach in this direction is due to the logical characterisation of ASP in
terms of Equilibrium Logic (Pearce 1996) and, in particular, to its extension to ﬁrst
order theories, Quantiﬁed Equilibrium Logic (QEL) (Pearce and Valverde 2004).
As a result of this characterisation, the concept of stable model is now deﬁned
for any theory from predicate calculus with equality. In fact, stable models can be
alternatively described by a second-order logic operator (Ferraris et al. 2004) quite
close to Circumscription (McCarthy 1980), something that has been already used,
for instance, to study strong equivalence for programs with variables (Lifschitz et al.
2007). Another alternative for ASP with (non-Herbrand) functions has been very
recently presented in (Lin and Wang 2008) and, as we will show later, can be seen
as a particular case of the current approach, when we restrict to total functions.
As we will explain in the next section, we claim that the exclusive use of Her-
brand functions and the currently proposed interpretation of equality in QEL or
the requirement for functions to be total, as in (Lin and Wang 2008), yield some
counterintuitive results when introducing functions for knowledge representation.
In order to overcome these problems, we propose a variation of QEL that sepa-
rates Herbrand functions (or constructors) from evaluable functions, as also done
in logical characterisations (Gonz´alez-Moreno et al. 1999; Rodr´ıguez-Artalejo 2001;
Hanus 2007) of Functional Logic Programming. We further show how our semantics
for partial functions has a direct relation to the Logic of Existence (or E-logic)
proposed by Scott (Scott 1979).
The rest of the paper1 is organized as follows. In the next section, we informally
consider some examples of knowledge representation with functions in ASP, com-
menting the apparently expected behaviour and the problems that arise when using
the current proposal for QEL. In Section 3, we introduce our variant called QEL=
F.
Section 4 deﬁnes some useful derived operators, many of them directly extracted
from E-logic and showing the same behaviour. In Section 5 we consider a syntac-
1 This paper extends (Cabalar 2008) and improves it in many diﬀerent ways. The most signiﬁcant
are, ﬁrstly, the inclusion of Section 6 with a complete formal comparison to (Lin and Wang 2008)
plus a small discussion on expressiveness. Second, the safety condition has been corrected (some
cases dealing with equality were wrong) and improved to cover more cases. Third, all proofs
have been completed now and included in an appendix.

Functional Answer Set Programming
3
tic subclass of logic programs with evaluable functions and Herbrand constants,
and show how they can be translated into (non-functional) normal logic programs
afterwards. This includes a deﬁnition of safety that guarantees that the ﬁnal trans-
lation results in a safe program, something crucial for the current ASP grounders.
Section 6 establishes a formal comparison showing how (Lin and Wang 2008) can
be encoded into our functional logic programs by forcing functions to be total, and
also includes a discussion showing that QEL=
F is more suitable for nonmontonic
reasoning with functions. Finally, Section 7 contains a brief discussion about other
related work and Section 8 concludes the paper.
2 A Motivating Example
Consider the following simple scenario with a pair of rules.
Example 1
When deciding the second course of a given meal once the ﬁrst course is ﬁxed,
we want to apply the following criterion: on Fridays, we repeat the ﬁrst course as
second one; the rest of week days, we choose fish if the ﬁrst was pasta.
□
A straightforward encoding of these rules2 into ASP would correspond to the pro-
gram Π1:
second(fish)
←
first(pasta) ∧¬friday
(1)
second(X)
←
first(X) ∧friday
(2)
⊥
←
first(X) ∧first(Y ) ∧X ̸= Y
(3)
⊥
←
second(X) ∧second(Y ) ∧X ̸= Y
(4)
where the last two rules just represent that each course is unique, i.e., first(salad)
and first(pasta) cannot be simultaneously true, for instance. In fact, these con-
straints immediately point out that first and second are 0-ary functions. A very
naive attempt to use these functions for representing our example problem could
be the pair of formulas Π2:
second = fish
←
first = pasta ∧¬friday
(5)
second = first
←
friday
(6)
Of course, Π2 is not a logic program, but it can still be given a logic programming
meaning by interpreting it under Herbrand models of QEL, or the equivalent re-
cent characterisation of stable models for ﬁrst order theories (Ferraris et al. 2004).
Unfortunately, the behaviour of Π2 in QEL with Herbrand models (and decidable
equality) will be quite diﬀerent to that of Π1 by several reasons that can be easily
foreseen. First of all, there exists now a qualitative diﬀerence between functions
first and second with respect to fish and pasta. For instance, while it is clear that
2 As a diﬀerence wrt to the typical ASP notation, we use ¬ to represent default negation and,
instead of a comma, we use ∧to separate literals in the body.

4
P. Cabalar
fish = pasta must be false, we should allow second = first to cope with our Fri-
days criterion. If we deal with Herbrand models or unique names assumption, the
four constants would be pairwise diﬀerent and (5) would be equivalent to ⊥←⊥,
that is, a tautology, whereas (6) would become the constraint ⊥←friday.
Even after limiting the unique names assumption only to constants fish and
pasta, new problems arise. For instance, the approaches in (Pearce and Valverde
2004; Ferraris et al. 2004; Lifschitz et al. 2007; Lin and Wang 2008) deal with
complete functions and the axiom of decidable equality:
x = y ∨¬(x = y)
(DE)
This axiom is equivalent to x = y ←¬¬(x = y) which informally implies that we
always have a justiﬁcation to assign any value to any function. Thus, for instance,
if it is not Friday and we do not provide any information about the ﬁrst course, i.e.,
no atom first(X) holds, then Π1 will not derive any information about the second
course, that is, no atom second(X) is derived. In Π2, however, functions first and
second must always have a value, which is further justiﬁed in any stable model by
(DE). As a result, we get that a possible stable model is, for instance, first = fish
and second = pasta. A related problem of axiom (DE) is that it allows rewriting a
rule like (5) as the constraint:
⊥
←
first = pasta ∧¬friday ∧¬(second = fish)
whose relational counterpart would be
⊥
←
first(pasta) ∧¬friday ∧¬second(fish)
(7)
and whose behaviour in logic programming is very diﬀerent from the original rule
(1). As an example, while Π1 ∪{first(pasta)} entails second(fish), the same pro-
gram after replacing (1) by (7) has no stable models.
Finally, even after removing decidable equality, we face a new problem that has
to do with directionality in the equality symbol when used in the rule heads. The
symmetry of ‘=’ allows rewriting (6) as:
first = second
←
friday
(8)
that in a relational notation would be the rule:
first(X)
←
second(X) ∧friday
(9)
which, again, has a very diﬀerent meaning from the original (2). For instance
Π1∪{friday, second(fish)} does not entail anything about the ﬁrst course, whereas
if we replace in this program (2) by (9), we obtain first(fish). This is counterin-
tuitive, since our program was intended to derive facts about the second course,
and not about the ﬁrst one. To sum up, we will need some kind of new directional
operator to specify the function value in a rule head.
3 Quantiﬁed Equilibrium Logic with Evaluable Functions
The deﬁnition of propositional Equilibrium Logic (Pearce 1996) relied on estab-
lishing a selection criterion on models of the intermediate logic, called the logic of

Functional Answer Set Programming
5
Here-and-There (HT) (Heyting 1930). The ﬁrst order case (Pearce and Valverde
2004) followed similar steps, introducing a quantiﬁed version of HT, called SQHT=
that stands for Quantiﬁed HT with static domains3 and equality. In this section
we describe the syntax and semantics of a variant, called SQHT=
F, for dealing with
evaluable functions.
We begin by deﬁning a ﬁrst-order language by its signature, a tuple Σ = ⟨C, F, P⟩
of disjoint sets where C and F are sets of function names and P a set of predicate
names. We assume that each function (resp. predicate) name has the form f/n
where f is the function (resp. predicate) symbol, and n ≥0 is an integer denoting
the number of arguments (or arity). Elements in C will be called Herbrand func-
tions (or constructors), whereas elements in F will receive the name of evaluable4
functions (or operations). The sets C0 (Herbrand constants) and F0 (evaluable con-
stants) respectively represent the elements of C and F with arity 0. We assume C0
contains at least one element.
First-order formulas are built up in the usual way, with the same syntax of
classical predicate calculus with equality =. We assume that ¬ϕ is deﬁned as ϕ →⊥
whereas x ̸= y just stands5 for ¬(x = y). An atom like t = t′ is called an equality
atom, whereas an atom like p(t1, . . . , tn) with n ≥0 for any predicate p diﬀerent
from equality receives the name of predicate atom. Given any set of functions A
we write Terms(A) to stand for the set of ground terms built from functions (and
constants) in A. In particular, the set of all possible ground terms for signature
Σ = ⟨C, F, P⟩would be Terms(C ∪F) whereas the subset Terms(C) will be called
the Herbrand Universe of L. The Herbrand Base HB(C, P) is a set containing all
atoms that can be formed with predicates in P and terms in the Herbrand Universe,
Terms(C).
From now on, we assume that all free variables are implicitly universally quanti-
ﬁed. We use letters x, y, z and their capital versions to denote variables, t to denote
terms, and letters c, d to denote ground terms. Boldface letters like x, t, c, . . . rep-
resent tuples (in this case of variables, terms and ground terms, respectively). The
corresponding semantics for SQHT=
F is described as follows.
Deﬁnition 1 (state)
A state for a signature Σ = ⟨C, F, P⟩is a pair (σ, A) where A ⊆HB(C, P) is a set
of atoms from the Herbrand Base and
σ : Terms(C ∪F) →Terms(C) ∪{u} is a function assigning to any ground term
in the language some ground term in the Herbrand Universe or the special value
u ̸∈Terms(C ∪F) (standing for undeﬁned). Function σ must satisfy:
(i) σ(c) = c for all c ∈Terms(C).
3 The term static domain refers to the fact that the universe is shared among all worlds in the
Kripke frame.
4 In (Hanus 2007), elements of F are called deﬁned functions instead – we avoid this terminology
because it could be mistakenly understood as the opposite of being undeﬁned or partial.
5 We hope that, depending on the context, the reader will be aware of the diﬀerent use of symbols
‘=’ and ‘̸=’ as formulas in the language from their standard use in the semantic metalanguage.

6
P. Cabalar
(ii) σ(f(t1, . . . , tn)) =
 u
if σ(ti) = u for some i = 1 . . . n
σ(f(σ(t1), . . . , σ(tn)))
otherwise
□
As we can see, our domain is exclusively formed by the terms from the Herbrand
Universe, Terms(C). These elements are used as arguments of ground atoms in the
set A, that collects the true atoms in the state. Similarly, the value of any functional
term is an element from Terms(C), excepting the cases in which operations are left
undeﬁned (i.e., they are partial functions) – if so, they are assigned the special
element u (diﬀerent from any syntactic symbol) instead. Condition (i) asserts, as
expected, that any term c from the Herbrand Universe has the ﬁxed valuation
σ(c) = c. Condition (ii) establishes two important restrictions. On the one hand, it
guarantees that a functional term with an undeﬁned argument becomes undeﬁned in
its turn6. On the other hand, Condition (ii) also guarantees that functions preserve
their interpretation through subterms – for instance, if we have σ(f(a)) = c we
expect that σ(g(f(a)) and σ(g(c)) coincide. It is easy to see that (ii) implies that
σ is completely determined by the values it assigns to all terms like f(c) where f
is any operation and c a tuple of elements in Terms(C).
Deﬁnition 2 (Ordering ⪯among states)
We say that state S = (σ, A) is smaller than state S′ = (σ′, A′), written S ⪯S′,
when both:
i) A ⊆A′.
ii) σ(d) = σ′(d) or σ(d) = u, for all d ∈Terms(C ∪F).
□
We write S ≺S′ when the relation is strict, that is, S ⪯S′ and S ̸= S′. The
intuitive meaning of S ⪯S′ is that the former contains less information than the
latter, so that any true atom or deﬁned function value in S must hold in S′.
Deﬁnition 3 (HT-interpretation)
An HT interpretation I for a signature Σ = ⟨C, F, P⟩is a pair of states I = ⟨Sh, St⟩
with Sh ⪯St.
□
The superindices h, t represent two worlds (respectively standing for here and
there) with a reﬂexive ordering relation further satisfying h ≤t. An interpretation
like ⟨St, St⟩is said to be total, referring to the fact that both states contain the
same information7.
Given an interpretation I = ⟨Sh, St⟩, with Sh = (σh, Ih) and St = (σt, It), we
deﬁne when I satisﬁes a formula ϕ at some world w ∈{h, t}, written I, w |= ϕ,
inductively as follows:
• I, w |= p(t1, . . . , tn) if p(σw(t1), . . . , σw(tn)) ∈Iw;
• I, w |= t1 = t2 if σw(t1) = σw(t2) ̸= u;
6 Using Functional Logic Programming terminology, this means that functions are strict, as op-
posed to non-strict functions with lazy evaluation.
7 Note that by total we do not mean that functions cannot be left undeﬁned. We may still have
some term d for which σt(d) = u.

Functional Answer Set Programming
7
• I, w ̸|= ⊥; I, w |= ⊤;
• I, w |= α ∧β if I, w |= α and I, w |= β;
• I, w |= α ∨β if I, w |= α or I, w |= β;
• I, w |= α →β if for all w′ ≥w: I, w′ ̸|= α or I, w′ |= β;
• I, w |= ∀x α(x) if for each w′ ≥w and each c ∈Terms(C): I, w′ |= α(c);
• I, w |= ∃x α(x) if for some c ∈Terms(C): I, w |= α(c).
□
An important observation is that the ﬁrst condition above implies that an atom
with an undeﬁned argument will always be valuated as false since, by deﬁnition, u
never occurs in ground atoms of Ih or It. Something similar happens with equality:
t1 = t2 will be false if any of the two operands, or even both, are undeﬁned. As
usual, we say that I is a model of a formula ϕ, written I |= ϕ, when I, h |= ϕ.
Similarly, I is a model of a theory Γ when it is a model of all of its formulas.
From the deﬁnition of ¬ as derived operator, we can easily check that:
Proposition 1
I, w |= ¬ϕ iﬀI, t ̸|= ϕ.
□
Nonmonotonicity is obtained by the next deﬁnition, which introduces the idea of
equilibrium models for SQHT=
F.
Deﬁnition 4 (Equilibrium model)
A model ⟨St, St⟩of a theory Γ is an equilibrium model if there is no strictly smaller
state Sh ≺St that ⟨Sh, St⟩is also model of Γ.
□
The Quantiﬁed Equilibrium Logic with evaluable functions (QEL=
F) is the logic
induced by the SQHT=
F equilibrium models.
For space reasons we describe SQHT= (resp. QEL) as a particular instance of
SQHT=
F (resp. QEL=
F). It can be easily checked that this description is equivalent
to the one in (Pearce and Valverde 2008). The syntax for SQHT= is the same as for
SQHT=
F (that is, Predicate Calculus with equality) but starting from a signature
⟨F, P⟩where no distinction is made among functions in set F. Each SQHT= inter-
pretation for signature ⟨F, P⟩further deals with a universe domain, a set U ̸= ∅
which is said to be static, that is, common to both worlds h and t. To capture this
in SQHT=
F we can just use signature ⟨C, F, P⟩and deﬁne C as a set of constant
names, one c′ per each individual c ∈U. The most important feature of SQHT= in-
terpretations is that they satisfy the axiom t = t for any term t. In other words, any
ground term d ∈Terms(C ∪F) is deﬁned σh(d) ̸= u and, in fact, by construction of
interpretations, this also means σh(d) = σt(d). As a result, SQHT= actually uses a
unique σ function for both worlds h and t and interpretations can be represented
instead as ⟨σ, Ih, It⟩. Under this restriction, it is easy to see that decidable equality
t1 = t2 ∨t1 ̸= t2 is a valid formula.
Herbrand models from SQHT= and signature ⟨C, P⟩can be easily captured by
just considering SQHT=
F interpretations for signature ⟨C, ∅, P⟩. Finally, the models
selection criterion in the deﬁnition of equilibrium models need not be modiﬁed.
Since σh = σt = σ and all terms and deﬁned, the ⪯ordering relation among states
in QEL actually amounts to a simple inclusion of sets of ground atoms.

8
P. Cabalar
4 Useful Derived Operators
From the SQHT=
F semantics, it is easy to see that the formula (t = t), usually
included as an axiom for equality, is not valid in SQHT=
F. In fact, I, w |= (t = t) iﬀ
σw(t) ̸= u, that is, term t is deﬁned. In this way, we can introduce Scott’s (Scott
1979) existence operator8 in a standard way: E t
def
=
(t = t). Condition (ii) in
Deﬁnition 1 implies the strictness condition of E-logic, formulated by the axiom
E f(t) →E t. As happens with (t = t), the substitution axiom for functions:
t1 = t2 →f(t1) = f(t2)
is not valid, since it may be the case that the function is undeﬁned. However, the
following weaker version is an SQHT=
F tautology:
t1 = t2 ∧E f(t1)
→
f(t1) = f(t2)
Usual axioms for equality that are valid in SQHT=
F are, for any predicate P:
t1 = t2
→
t2 = t1
t1 = t2 ∧t2 = t3
→
t1 = t3
t1 = t2 ∧P(t1)
→
P(t2)
At this point, it is perhaps convenient to introduce a few terms to talk about
particular types of functions. We say that an evaluable function f is decidable under
a given interpretation I, when I satisﬁes the excluded middle axiom:
f(t) = t′ ∨f(t) ̸= t′
(10)
and we say that f is decidable in a given theory when it is decidable under any
of its models. The models of (10) correspond to interpretations where σh(f(c)) =
σt(f(c)) for any tuple of elements c ∈Terms(C), that is, function f has the same
interpretation in both worlds, and so, it somehow behaves “classically.” As example
of decidable functions, think about integer arithmetic operations like +, -, × or
÷, for which we expect a ﬁxed interpretation in worlds h and t with their usual
meaning. Of course, an evaluable function is always decidable under any equilibrium
model I of a theory Γ, since σh = σt in that case, but this does not necessarily
mean that (10) holds for all SQHT=
F models of Γ.
A function is said to be total under an interpretation I when I satisﬁes:
E t →E f(t)
(11)
and called partial under I otherwise. We say that a decidable function f is total in
a theory Γ if it is total under any of its models; otherwise it is partial in Γ. Seman-
tically, total functions satisfy σw(f(c)) ̸= u for any tuple of terms c ∈Terms(C)
and any world w, while partial functions no. From this, and the SQHT=
F semantics,
it can be observed that (11) actually implies (10), that is, a total function is always
8 Contrarily to the original Scott’s E-logic, variables in SQHT=
F are always deﬁned. This is not
an essential diﬀerence: terms may be left undeﬁned instead, and so most theorems, like (x =
y) →(y = x) are expressed here using metavariables for terms (t1 = t2) →(t2 = t1).

Functional Answer Set Programming
9
decidable. The opposite does not necessarily hold. Back to the example, under their
usual interpretation, +, - and × are total functions, whereas ÷ is partial although,
as we said before, still decidable; in particular the formula E x →E x÷0, is always
false, since a variable x is always deﬁned, E x, whereas σw(x ÷ 0) = u. Again, a
function may be total under equilibrium models of a theory Γ without being so
under any SQHT=
F model of Γ.
Similarly to these distinctions among types of functions, we have now several
types of equalities and inequalities. In E-logic there exists a second and weaker
equality (which Scott called equivalence) that can be deﬁned as t1 ≡t2
def
= (E t1 ∨
E t2) →t1 = t2. In other words, t1 and t2 have the same deﬁned value, provided
that any of them is deﬁned. This equality is perhaps not so interesting for knowledge
representation and its inclusion in logic programs, but may have a crucial impor-
tance when studying properties of programs, like for instance, strongly equivalent9
transformations. In this sense, t1 ≡t2 means that t1 can be replaced by t2 and
vice versa, that is, they have the same behaviour. For instance, the following valid
formula:
t1 ≡t2 →f(t1) ≡f(t2)
allows us replacing f(t1) by f(t2) when we know that t1 can be replaced by t2. Note
that, if we just use equality for that purpose
t1 = t2 →f(t1) = f(t2)
we would be forcing f to become a total function, since taking t2 to be t1 above
we actually get E t1 →E f(t1), and this is not what we want. To understand the
diﬀerence, note that t = 0 →(1 ÷ t) = (1 ÷ 0) is always false because (1 ÷ 0) is
undeﬁned, whereas t ≡0 →(1 ÷ t) ≡(1 ÷ 0) is valid.
To represent the diﬀerence between two terms, we may also have several alterna-
tives. The straightforward one is just ¬(t1 = t2), or abbreviated t1 ̸= t2. However,
this formula can be satisﬁed when any of the two operands is undeﬁned. We may
sometimes want to express a stronger notion of diﬀerence that behaves as a posi-
tive formula (this is usually called apartness in the intuitionistic literature (Heyting
1956)). In our case, we are especially interested in an apartness operator t1 # t2
where both arguments are required to be deﬁned:
t1 # t2
def
=
E t1 ∧E t2 ∧¬(t1 = t2)
The semantic eﬀect of this operator is that I, w |= t1 # t2 iﬀσw(t1) ̸= u, σw(t2) ̸= u
and σw(t1) ̸= σw(t2). To understand its meaning, consider the diﬀerence between
¬(King(France) = LouisXIV ) and King(Spain) # LouisXIV . The ﬁrst ex-
pression means that we cannot prove that the King of France is Louis XIV, what
includes the case in which France has not a king. The second expression means that
we can prove that the King of Spain (and so, such a concept exists) is not Louis
XIV.
9 Two theories Γ1, Γ2 are said to be strongly equivalent when, for any theory Γ, the equilibrium
models of Γ1 ∪Γ and Γ2 ∪Γ coincide.

10
P. Cabalar
The next operator we introduce has to do with deﬁnedness of rule heads in logic
programs (as far as we know, it has not been considered in the literature). The
inclusion of a formula in the consequent of an implication may have an undesired
eﬀect when thinking about its use as a rule head. For instance, consider the rule
visited(next(x)) ←visited(x) and assume we have the fact visited(1) but there is
no additional information about next(1). We would expect that the rule above does
not yield any particular eﬀect on next(1). Unfortunately, as visited(next(1)) must
be true, the function next(1) must become deﬁned and, as a collateral eﬀect, it will
be assigned some arbitrary value, say next(1) = 10 so that visited(10) is made true.
To avoid this problem, we will use a new operator :- to deﬁne a diﬀerent type of
implication where the consequent is only forced to be true when all the functional
terms that are “necessary to build” the atoms in the consequent are deﬁned. Given
a term t we deﬁne its set of structural arguments Args(t) as follows:
• Args(t)
def
= {t1, . . . , tn} if t has the form f(t1, . . . , tn) for any evaluable func-
tion f/n ∈F.
• Args(t)
def
= t otherwise.
We extend this deﬁnition for any atom A, so that its set of structural arguments
Args(A) corresponds to:
Args(P(t1, . . . , tn))
def
=
{t1, . . . , tn}
Args(t = t′)
def
=
Args(t) ∪Args(t′)
In our previous example, Args(visited(next(x))) = {next(x)}. Notice that, for an
equality atom t = t′, we do not consider {t, t′} as arguments as we have done for
the rest of predicates, but go down one level instead, considering Args(t)∪Args(t′)
in its turn. For instance, if A is the atom friends(mother(x), mother(y)), then
Args(A) would be {mother(x), mother(y)}, whereas for an equality atom A′ like
mother(x) = mother(y), Args(A′) = {x, y}. We deﬁne [ϕ] as the result of replacing
each atom A in ϕ by the conjunction of all E t →A for each t ∈Args(A). We can
now deﬁne the new implication operator as follows ϕ :- ψ
def
=
ψ →[ϕ]. Back to
the example, if we use now visited(next(x)) :- visited(x) we obtain, after applying
the previous deﬁnitions, that it is equivalent to:
visited(x) →[visited(next(x))]
↔
visited(x) →(E next(x) →visited(next(x)))
↔
visited(x) ∧E next(x) →visited(next(x))
Another important operator will allow us to establish a direction in a rule head
assignment – remember the discussion about distinguishing between (6) and (8) in
Section 2. We deﬁne this assignment operator as follows:
f(t) := t′
def
=
E t′ →f(t) = t′
Now, our Example 1 would be encoded with the pair of formulas:
second := fish :- first = pasta ∧¬friday
second := first :- friday

Functional Answer Set Programming
11
that, after some elementary transformations, lead to:
second = fish ←first = pasta ∧¬friday
second = first ←E first ∧friday
Using these operators, a compact way to ﬁx a default value t′ for a function f(t)
would be f(t) := t′ :- ¬(f(t) # t′). Finally, we introduce a nondeterministic choice
assignment with the following set-like expression:
f(t) ∈{x | ϕ(x)}
(12)
where ϕ(x) is a formula (called the set condition) that contains the free variable
x. The intuitive meaning of (12) is self-explanatory. As an example, the formula
a ∈{x | ∃y Parent(x, y)} means that a should take a value among those x that
are parents of some y. Expression (12) is deﬁned as the conjunction of:
∀x (ϕ(x) →f(t) = x ∨f(t) ̸= x)
(13)
¬∃x (ϕ(x) ∧f(t) = x) →⊥
(14)
Other typical set constructions can be deﬁned in terms of (12):
f(t) ∈{t′(y) | ∃y ϕ(y)}
def
=
f(t) ∈{x | ∃y (ϕ(y) ∧t′(y) = x)}
f(t) ∈{t′
1, . . . , t′
n}
def
=
f(t) ∈{x | t′
1 = x ∨· · · ∨t′
n = x}
It must be noticed that variable x in (12) is not free, but implicitly quantiﬁed
and local to this expression. Note that ϕ(x) may contain other quantiﬁed and/or
free variables. For instance, observe the diﬀerence between:
Person(y) →a(y) ∈{x | Parent(x, y)}
(15)
Person(y) →a(y) ∈{x | ∃y Parent(x, y)}
(16)
In (15) we assign, per each person y, one of her parents to a(y), whereas in (16)
we are assigning any parent as, in fact, we could change the set condition to
∃z Parent(x, z).
At a ﬁrst sight, it could seem that the formula ∃x(ϕ(x)∧f(t) = x) could capture
the expected meaning of f(t) ∈{x | ϕ(x)} in a more direct way. Unfortunately, such
a formula would not “pick” a value x among those that satisfy ϕ(x). For instance, if
we translate a ∈{x | ∃y Parent(x, y)} as ∃x(∃y Parent(x, y) ∧a = x) would allow
the free addition of facts for Parent(x, y). Notice also that a formula like a ∈{t} is
stronger than an assignment a := t since when t is undeﬁned, the former is always
false, regardless the value of a (it would informally correspond to an expression like
a ∈∅).
5 Logic Programs with Evaluable Functions
In this section we consider a subset of QEL=
F which corresponds to a certain kind
of logic programs that allow evaluable functions but not constructors other than a
ﬁnite set of Herbrand constants C = C0. The interest of this syntactic class is that
it can be translated into ground normal logic programs, and so, equilibrium models

12
P. Cabalar
can be computed by any of the currently available answer set provers. From now
on, we assume that any function f/n with arity n > 0 is evaluable, f/n ∈F, and
any constant c is a constructor, c ∈C, unless we include a declaration c/0 ∈F.
As usual in logic programming notation, we use in this section capital letters to
represent variables.
In what follows we will use the tag ‘FLP’ to refer to functional logic programming
deﬁnitions, and ‘LP’ to talk about the more restrictive syntax of normal logic
programs (without functions). An FLP-atom has the form p(t), t1 = t2 or t1 # t2,
where p is a predicate name, t a tuple of terms and t1, t2 a pair of terms. An FLP-
literal is an FLP-atom A (called positive literal) or its default negation ¬A (called
negative literal). We call LP-terms (resp. LP-atoms, resp. LP-literals) to those not
containing evaluable function symbols.
Deﬁnition 5 (FLP-rule)
An FLP-rule is an implication α :- β where β (called body) is a conjunction of
literals, and α (called head) has the form of one the following expressions:
(i) an FLP-atom p(t);
(ii) the truth constant ⊥;
(iii) an assignment f(t) := t′ with f ∈F;
(iv) or a choice like f(t) ∈{x | ϕ(x)} with f ∈F and ϕ(x) a conjunction of
literals. We call x the choice variable and ϕ(x) the choice condition.
□
Function f in (iii) and (iv) is called the head function. A choice rule is a rule
with a choice head. A functional logic program is a set of FLP-rules. The following
is an example of a program in FLP syntax:
Example 2 (Hamiltonian cycles)
A Hamiltonian cycle is a cyclic path in a graph that visites all its nodes exactly
once. We encode this problem using a function next(X) that speciﬁes which is the
next node in the path for node X, and visited(X) that keeps track of visited nodes.
The program Π2 consists of the following rules:
next(X) ∈{Z | arc(X, Z)} :- node(X)
(17)
visited(next(0))
(18)
visited(next(X)) :- visited(X)
(19)
⊥:- node(X) ∧¬visited(X)
(20)
where we assume we always have some node 0, we can call the “initial” one.
□
An LP-rule is such that its body exclusively contains LP-literals and its head is
either ⊥or an LP-atom p(t). An LP-program is a set of LP-rules. As LP-rules do
not contain evaluable functions, any LP-rule α :- β is simply equivalent to β →α.
Thus, an LP-program has the form of a (standard) normal logic program with
constraints and without evaluable functions. The absence of evaluable functions
guarantees that QEL=
F and QEL coincide for this kind of program:

Functional Answer Set Programming
13
Proposition 2
QEL=
F equilibrium models of an LP-program Π correspond to QEL equilibrium
models of Π.
□
5.1 Translation to programs without functions
The translation of an FLP-program Π will be done in two steps. In a ﬁrst step,
we will deﬁne a QEL theory Γ(Π) for a diﬀerent signature and prove that it is
SQHT=
F equivalent modulo the original signature. This theory Γ(Π) is not an LP-
program yet, as it will allow existential quantiﬁers and double negations in the rule
bodies. However, these features can be removed in a second step by introducing
auxiliary predicates, so that the resulting LP-program preserves strong equivalence
wrt equilibrium models (modulo the original signature). We will focus here on the
ﬁrst translation step – for a description on the transformations removing existential
quantiﬁers and double negations and its complete proof of correctness see (Cabalar
2009).
The main idea of the translation is that, for each evaluable function f/n ∈F
occurring in Π we will introduce a predicate like holds f(X1, . . . , Xn, V ) in Π∗, or
holds f(X, V ) for short. The technique of converting a function into a predicate
and shifting the function value as an extra argument is well known in Functional
Logic Programming and has received the name of ﬂattening (Naish 1991; Rouveirol
1994). Flattening in ASP was also applied for translating the languages in (Cabalar
and Lorenzo 2004; Cabalar 2005) into (function-free) logic programs, and in (Lin
and Wang 2008) to show that total functions can be removed in favour of predicates.
Obviously, once we deal with a predicate, we will need that no two diﬀerent values
are assigned to the same function. This can be simply captured by:
⊥
←
holds f(X, V ) ∧holds f(X, W) ∧¬(V = W)
(21)
with variables V, W not included in X.
Given the original signature Σ = ⟨C, F, P⟩for program Π, the theory Γ(Π) will
deal with a new signature Σ∗= ⟨C, ∅, P∗⟩where P∗consists of P plus a new
predicate holds f/(n + 1) per each evaluable function f/n ∈F.
Deﬁnition 6 (Correspondence of interpretations)
Given an HT interpretation I = ⟨Sh, St⟩for signature Σ = ⟨C, F, P⟩we deﬁne a
corresponding interpretation I∗= ⟨(σh, Jh), (σt, Jt)⟩for signature Σ∗= ⟨C, ∅, P∗⟩
so that, for any f/n ∈F, any tuple c of n elements from C, any predicate p/n ∈P
and any w ∈{h, t}:
1. holds f(c, d) ∈Jw iﬀσw(c) = d with d ∈C.
2. p(c) ∈Jw iﬀp(c) ∈Iw.
□
Once (21) is ﬁxed, the correspondence between I and I∗is bidirectional:
Proposition 3
Given signature Σ = ⟨C, F, P⟩and an interpretation J for Σ∗satisfying (21), then
there exists an interpretation I for Σ such that I∗= J.

14
P. Cabalar
Deﬁnition 7 (Translation of terms)
We deﬁne the translation of a term t as the triple ⟨t∗, Φ(t)⟩where t∗is an LP-term
and Φ(t) is a formula s.t.:
1. For an LP-term t, then t∗def
= t and Φ(t)
def
= ⊤.
2. When t is like f(t) with f an evaluable function, then t∗def
= X and Φ(t)
def
=
Φ(t)∧holds f(t∗, X) where X is a new fresh variable and Φ(t) stands for the
conjunction of all Φ(ti) for all terms ti in the tuple t.
□
For 0-ary evaluable functions, we would have that t is empty – in this case we just
assume that Φ(t) = ⊤. We introduce now some additional notation. Given a term
t, subterms(t) denotes all its subterms, including t itself. Given a set of terms T, by
T ∗we mean {t∗| t ∈T}. If ρ is a replacement of variables by Herbrand constants
[X/c], we write I, w, ρ |= ϕ to stand for I, w |= ϕ[X/c]. Given a conjunction of
literals B = L1 ∧· · · ∧Ln, we denote B∗def
= L∗
1 ∧· · · ∧L∗
n.
Deﬁnition 8 (Translation of literals)
The translation of an atom (or positive literal) A is a formula A∗deﬁned as follows:
1. If A has the form p(t), then A∗def
=
∃X
 p(t∗) ∧Φ(t)

where X is the set
of new fresh variables in subterms(t)∗(those not occurring in the original
literal).
2. If A is like (t1 = t2), then A∗def
=
∃X
 t∗
1 = t∗
2 ∧Φ(t1) ∧Φ(t2)

where X is
the set of new fresh variables in subterms(t1)∗∪subterms(t1)∗.
3. If A is like (t1 # t2), then A∗def
=
∃X
 t∗
1 ̸= t∗
2 ∧Φ(t1) ∧Φ(t2)

where X is
the set of new fresh variables in subterms(t1)∗∪subterms(t1)∗.
The translation of a negative literal L = ¬A is the formula L∗def
= ¬A∗.
□
Notice the diﬀerence in the translation of the two kinds of inequalities ̸= and
# . For instance, while f(X) = 0 becomes the negated formula ¬∃X′ (X′ =
0∧holds f(X, X′)), i.e., either f has no value or it has a non-zero value, the literal
f(X) # 0 becomes the formula ∃X′ (X′ ̸= 0 ∧holds f(X, X′)) which can be seen
as “positive,” as negation does not aﬀect to any predicate appart from equality.
Deﬁnition 9 (Translation of rules)
The translation of an (FLP) rule r like H :- B is a conjunction of formulas Γ(r)
deﬁned as follows:
1. If H = ⊥, then Γ(r) is the formula ⊥←B∗.
2. If H is like p(t) then Γ(r) is the formula p(t∗) ←Φ(t) ∧B∗
3. If H has the form f(t) := t′ then Γ(r) is the formula
holds f(t∗, t′∗) ←Φ(t) ∧Φ(t′) ∧B∗
4. If H has the form f(t) ∈{X | ϕ(X)} then Γ(r) is the conjunction of:
holds f(t∗, X) ∨¬holds f(t∗, X) ←Φ(t) ∧B∗∧ϕ(X)∗
(22)
⊥←¬∃X(holds f(t∗, X) ∧ϕ(X)∗) ∧Φ(t) ∧B∗
(23)
where we assume that, if X happened to occur in B, we have previously
replaced it in the choice by a new fresh variable symbol, say {Y | ϕ(Y )}.

Functional Answer Set Programming
15
Deﬁnition 10 (Translation of a program Γ(Π))
The translation of an FLP program Π is a theory Γ(Π) consisting of the union of
all Γ(r) per each rule r ∈Π plus, for each evaluable function f/n, the schemata
(21).
□
Theorem 1 (Correctness of Γ(Π))
For any FLP-program Π with signature Σ = ⟨C, F, P⟩any pair of interpretations I
for Σ and J for Σ∗such that J = I∗: I, w |= Π iﬀI∗, w |= Γ(Π).
□
As an example, the translation of Π2 is the theory Γ(Π2):
holds next(X, Z) ∨¬holds next(X, Z) ←arc(X, Z) ∧node(X)
(24)
⊥←¬∃Z(holds next(X, Z) ∧arc(X, Z)) ∧node(X)
(25)
visited(X) ←holds next(0, X)
(26)
visited(X2) ←holds next(X, X2) ∧visited(X)
(27)
⊥←node(X) ∧¬visited(X)
(28)
⊥←holds next(X, V ) ∧holds next(X, W) ∧¬(V = W)
(29)
Of course, Γ(Π) is not a normal logic program, since in the general case it contains
rule heads like ϕ ∨¬ϕ for some atom ϕ, as in (24), or expressions in the body like
∃X ϕ(X) with ϕ(X) a conjunction of literals, as in (25). However, as we said before
and is detailed in (Cabalar 2009) and (Lee and Palla 2009), we can always build
an LP-program Π∗by removing these constructions and introducing new auxiliary
predicates. For instance, a formula like ϕ ∨¬ϕ ←β, which is strongly equivalent
to a double negation in the body ϕ ←¬¬ϕ ∧β, can be replaced by the pair of
rules (ϕ ←¬aux ∧β) and (aux ←¬ϕ ∧β) where aux is a new auxiliary predicate.
Similarly, we can replace a formula ∃X ϕ(X) in a rule body by a new auxiliary
predicate aux′, and include a rule (aux′ ←ϕ(X)) for its deﬁnition. Of course,
the auxiliary predicates must incorporate as arguments all the free variables of the
original expression they replace. In our example, the ﬁnal program Π∗
2 would result
from replacing in Γ(Π2) the formula (24) by rules:
holds next(X, Z) ←¬aux(X, Z) ∧arc(X, Z) ∧node(X)
aux(X, Z) ←¬holds next(X, Z) ∧arc(X, Z) ∧node(X)
and (25) by rules:
aux′(X) ←holds next(X, Z) ∧arc(X, Z) ∧node(X)
⊥←¬aux′(X) ∧node(X)
5.2 Safety
As we will translate a set of FLP-rules into a set of LP-rules, when trying to ground
the latter we will need to guarantee their domain independence, i.e., that the set
of stable models are not aﬀected by extending the set of constants. To this aim we
introduce a notion of safety for FLP-rules that guarantees the safety of the resulting
LP program.

16
P. Cabalar
Deﬁnition 11 (Restricted variable)
A variable X is said to be restricted in a conjunction of literals β by a positive
literal A in β when X occurs in A and one of the following holds:
1. A has the form p(t);
2. A contains a term f(t) and X is one of the arguments in t;
3. A has the form f(t) = X or X = f(t).
4. A has the form X = Y or Y = X and, in its turn, Y is restricted by a diﬀerent
positive literal A′ in β.
We just say that X is restricted in β if it is restricted by some A in β.
□
As an example, given the conjunction of literals:
p(X, f(Y )) ∧f(Z) # W ∧¬q(V ) ∧V = Y
(30)
X and Y are restricted by the ﬁrst literal in (30), Z is restricted by the second
literal and V is restricted by V = Y , since Y is already restricted by the ﬁrst
literal. Similarly, in Example 2, observe that X is restricted in the bodies of (17),
(19) and (20).
Deﬁnition 12 (Safe rule)
A rule r, of one of the forms in Deﬁnition 5, is said to be safe when each variable
X occurring in r satisﬁes:
1. If X is not a choice variable and is not restricted in the body of r then:
• X does not occur in the scope of negation and
• X is not t′ nor one of the arguments in t, in any of the possible forms
of the head of r.
2. If X is a choice variable, then it is restricted in the choice condition ϕ(x). □
For instance, the rules p(f(X), Y ) :- q(Y ) and g ∈{Y | p(Y )} are safe, whereas
the rules f(Z) := 0 or g ∈{Y | ¬p(Y )} are not safe. A safe program is a set of safe
rules. It can be easily checked that the FLP-program Π2 in Example 2 is safe.
When we restrict our deﬁnition of safety to the case of LP-programs, Deﬁnition 12
trivially amounts to the standard concept of safe rule, with a minor exception due to
our slightly weakened concept of restricted variable. In particular, when we do not
have functions, the standard concept of restricted variable X is requiring that X is
the argument of some positive literal formed with a non-equality predicate (Item 1
of Deﬁnition 11). In our case, we also allow that a variable becomes restricted by
an equality atom X = Y (Item 2 of Deﬁnition 11) in the trivial case where Y is
restricted by another positive literal, like in the example:
p(X) ←q(Y ) ∧X = Y
(31)
This rule, for instance, is considered unsafe by current implementations of grounders
DLV (Leone et al. 2006) and GrinGo (Gebser et al. 2007), although it is strongly
equivalent to p(X) ←q(X) which is obviously safe. Of course, rejecting a rule
like (31) is not a great restriction, since a programmer would rarely write this

Functional Answer Set Programming
17
kind of redundant code. In our case, however, accepting (31) as safe gets a relative
importance since bodies like this may easily arise from our automated translation
from FLP-programs to LP-programs. Anyway, in order to make rules like (31)
acceptable by current ASP grounders, we assume that our ﬁnal LP-program Π∗can
be post-processed to remove these redundant variables by exhausting the rewriting
rule:
β ∧X = Y →α
β[Y/X] →α[Y/X]
As Π∗is free of functions, its set of QEL=
F equilibrium models coincides with
its QEL equilibrium models, and these in their turn, in the case of safe programs,
coincide with the set of stable models of the grounded version of the program Π∗.
So, given the correspondence between Π∗and Π established in Theorem 1, we just
remain to prove the following.
Theorem 2
If Π is safe then Π∗is safe.
□
6 Lin and Wang’s evaluable total functions
As we commented in the introduction, (Lin and Wang 2008) introduced a closely
related approach for dealing with (evaluable) functions in ASP. We will refer to
this approach as FASP, taking the name of its associated implementation. In what
follows, we show that FASP can be embedded into a subclass of QEL=
F where all
functions are total, that is, they satisfy axiom (11).
FASP formalism is a many-sorted ﬁrst order language, so that all constants,
variables, predicate arguments and function arguments and values belong to a pre-
deﬁned type or sort, containing a ﬁnite and non-empty set of elements.
Deﬁnition 13 (FASP-signature)
A FASP-signature has the form ⟨C, F, P, T , ρ⟩where C, F and P have the same
meaning as before and:
• C = C0 that is, all constructors are 0-ary (like in our FLP-programs);
• F0 = ∅, that is, there are no 0-ary evaluable functions;
• T is a non-empty ﬁnite set of type names, at least including bool;
• ρ is a rank function that assigns a pair (T, τ) to each predicate, function
and variable in the language, so that T is a (possibly empty) tuple of type
names called the domain10 and τ is a type name called the range, so that, for
predicates, τ = bool, and for variables T = ϵ (the empty tuple).
□
We will use the following abbreviations for rank declarations:
p
⊆
τ1 × · · · × τn
(32)
f
:
τ1 × · · · × τn −→τn+1
(33)
X
:
τ
(34)
10 Sometimes also called arity, but we prefer here to maintain this name for the number of argu-
ments in the tuple.

18
P. Cabalar
that respectively stand for ρ(p) = ((τ1, . . . , τn), bool), ρ(f) = ((τ1, . . . , τn), τn+1)
and ρ(X) = (ϵ, τ).
A FASP-rule is an expression of the form:
A ←B1 ∧· · · ∧Bm ∧¬C1 ∧· · · ∧¬Cm
where A is ⊥(empty) or a predicate atom and Bi, 1 ≤i ≤m, and Cj, 1 ≤j ≤n are
atoms. As a many-sorted formalism, all terms and atoms occurring in the rule are
supposed to additionally satisfy a type coherence restriction: for short, all arguments
of predicates and functions must be of a compatible sort with respect to their rank.
In the case of equality, t1 = t2 both t1 and t2 must belong to the same sort.
A FASP-program Π is a set of FASP-rules together with a set of type deﬁnitions,
one for each type τ used in the rules of Π and having the form τ : {c1, . . . , cn}
where the ci is an enumeration of constant names with n > 0. The following are a
pair of examples extracted from (Lin and Wang 2008).
Example 3 (Graph colouring problem)
We must assign a colour to each node of a graph so that no two adjacent nodes have
the same colour. A possible formalisation in FASP uses a function clr : node −→
colour, a predicate arc ⊆node × node, a pair of variables X, Y : node and the
program Π3 containing the single rule:
⊥
←
arc(X, Y ) ∧clr(X) = clr(Y )
(35)
□
Example 4 (Hamiltonian Cycles in FASP)
For instance, the Hamiltonian Cycles are encoded in FASP with the program Π4
consisting of rules:
⊥
←
¬arc(X, next(X))
(36)
visited(next(0))
(37)
visited(next(X))
←
visited(X)
(38)
⊥
←
¬visited(X)
(39)
together with the following domain and range declarations
arc
⊆
node × node
next
:
node −→node
visited
⊆
node
X
:
node
□
Deﬁnition 14 (FASP-Interpretation)
Given a signature ⟨C, F, P, T , ρ⟩, a FASP-interpretation S is a state (σ, A) for
⟨C, F, P⟩additionally satisfying:
• σ(f(c)) ̸= u (functions are total)
• For each predicate p with domain p ⊆τ1 × · · · × τn then, each atom p(c) ∈A
satisﬁes c ∈τ1 × · · · × τn.
• For each funcion f with domain and range f : τ1 × · · · × τn −→τn+1, n > 0,
then for any c ∈τ1 × · · · × τn, σ(f(c)) ∈τn+1.
□

Functional Answer Set Programming
19
Given a FASP program Π, its grounding contains all type deﬁnitions in Π plus the
rules that are obtained by replacing all variables in the rules of Π by the elements
in their respective ranges in all the possible ways. Notice that the grounding of Π
may introduce constant symbols that did not occur in the non-ground rules, but
were elements of some type τi ⊆C in the signature.
Deﬁnition 15 (Reduction ΠS)
We deﬁne the reduction of a (ground) FASP-program Π under a FASP-interpretation
S = (σ, A), written ΠS, as the set of rules obtained from Π by iterating the following
transformations:
• replace each functional term f(c) in a rule by σ(f(c));
• replace by ⊥any equality literal like c ̸= c or c = d with constants c and d
syntactically diﬀerent;
• replace by ⊥any body literal ¬p(c) such that p(c) ∈A;
• replace by ⊤the rest of literals ¬p(c) and the rest of equality literals from
the bodies of the remaining rules.
□
We further assume that rules containing ⊥in their body are removed whereas all
⊤constants are removed from rule bodies.
It is easy to see that the ground program ΠS does not contain negation, equal-
ity or functions, although it may contain constraints. Let ΠS
nc be the set of non-
constraint rules in ΠS. This program has a propositional least model, a set of ground
atoms we denote as LM(ΠS
nc).
Deﬁnition 16 (Answer Set)
We say that a FASP-interpretation S = (σ, A) is an answer set of a (ground)
FASP-program Π if A = LM(ΠS
nc) and A satisﬁes all the constraints in ΠS.
□
6.1 Correspondence to FLP-programs
It may be noticed that the main syntactic diﬀerence between FASP and FLP-
programs relies in that the former are many-sorted. To overcome this diﬃculty,
we will introduce sorts in FLP-programs as abbreviations of additional conditions
and constraints. To this aim, given a FASP-program, we deﬁne the corresponding
FLP-program ˆΠ as follows.
For each type declaration τ : {c1, . . . , cn} in a FASP-program Π we include a
new fresh predicate with the same name τ in the signature of ˆΠ plus the set of
FLP-atoms τ(ci) for 1 ≤i ≤n. For each function rank declaration like (33) we
include in ˆΠ the rule:
f(X1, . . . , Xn) ∈{X′ | τn+1(X′)} ←τ1(X1) ∧· · · ∧τn(Xn)
(40)
and for any FASP-rule α ←β containing variables X1 . . . Xn with their respective
ranges τ1, . . . , τn, we include in ˆΠ the FLP-rule:
α ←β ∧τ1(X1) ∧· · · ∧τn(Xn)
(41)

20
P. Cabalar
For instance, program ˆΠ3 would correspond to:
clr(X) ∈{Y | colour(Y )}
←
node(X)
(42)
⊥
←
arc(X, Y ) ∧clr(X) = clr(Y )
∧node(X) ∧node(Y )
(43)
plus a set of facts for unary predicates node and colour. Similarly, ˆΠ4 would consist
of:
next(X) ∈{Y | node(Y )}
←
node(X)
(44)
⊥
←
¬arc(X, next(X)) ∧node(X)
(45)
visited(next(0))
(46)
visited(next(X))
←
visited(X) ∧node(X)
(47)
⊥
←
¬visited(X) ∧node(X)
(48)
It can be noticed that, for translating FASP-programs, we do not actually need
using operator
:-
because functions are total (when applied to arguments in
their domain). As a second observation, it is easy to see that, since all variables
in any FASP program Π are sorted, the resulting program ˆΠ will be safe, since
any rule where a variable X occurs will include in its body a predicate atom11
τ(X). As a result, we can just focus the comparison on the ground versions of Π
and ˆΠ, we respectively denote grnd(Π) and grnd(ˆΠ). Note that the grounding of
a rule like (40) corresponds to its deﬁnition as derived operator in terms of (13)
and (14). Furthermore, as types have a ﬁnite extension τ : {c1, . . . , cn}, a formula
like ∃X(τ(X) ∧α(X)) can be unfolded as a ﬁnite disjunction (τ(c1) ∧α(c1)) ∨· · · ∨
(τ(cn) ∧α(cn)).
For instance, the grounding of (42) for node : {1, 2} and colour : {r, g} would
contain (among other with false body) the set of rules:
clr(1) = r ∨clr(1) ̸= r
←
node(1) ∧colour(r)
clr(1) = g ∨clr(1) ̸= g
←
node(1) ∧colour(g)
⊥
←
node(1) ∧¬(colour(g) ∧f(1) = g ∨colour(r) ∧f(1) = r)
clr(2) = r ∨clr(2) ̸= r
←
node(2) ∧colour(r)
clr(2) = g ∨clr(2) ̸= g
←
node(2) ∧colour(g)
⊥
←
node(2) ∧¬(colour(g) ∧f(2) = g ∨colour(r) ∧f(2) = r)
which, since the extent of node and colour is ﬁxed, can be further simpliﬁed into
11 In fact, this works in the same way as directive #domain directive in lparse, Section 5.5
in (Syrj¨anen 2007), for declaring sorted variables.

Functional Answer Set Programming
21
the equivalent program:
clr(1) = r ∨clr(1) ̸= r
clr(1) = g ∨clr(1) ̸= g
⊥
←
¬f(1) = g ∧¬f(1) = r
clr(2) = r ∨clr(2) ̸= r
clr(2) = g ∨clr(2) ̸= g
⊥
←
¬f(2) = g ∧¬f(2) = r
Generalising this process, the following lemma is relatively simple to check.
Lemma 1
The grounding in ˆΠ of a choice rule like (40) with respect to FASP program Π and
signature ⟨C, F, P, T , ρ⟩is equivalent to the set of ground formulas:
f(d) = ci ∨f(d) ̸= ci
(49)
⊥←f(d) ̸= c1 ∧· · · ∧f(d) ̸= cn
(50)
for any 1 ≤i ≤n, being τ : {c1, . . . , cn} the range of f, and for any d tuple of
constants in C such that d belongs to the domain of f.
□
After examining the satisfaction of formulas in SQHT=
F, from this we easily con-
clude the next result.
Lemma 2
Any SQHT=
F interpretation I = (Sh, St), with Sh = (σh, Ah) and St = (σt, At), is
a model of (49) and (50) iﬀσh(f(d)) = σt(f(d)) = c being d a tuple of constants
in the domain of f, and c some constant in the range of f.
□
Lemma 3
Let Π be a FASP-program for signature ⟨C, F, P, T , ρ⟩and I any SQHT=
F in-
terpretation (Sh, S) with Sh = (σh, Ah) and S = (σ, A). Then I |= grnd(ˆΠ) iﬀ
I |= grnd(Π)S.
□
Theorem 3
Given a ground FASP-program Π for signature ⟨C, F, P, T , ρ⟩, S = (σ, A) is an
answer set for grnd(Π) iﬀ(S, S) is an equilibrium model for grnd(ˆΠ).
6.2 Some remarks on expressiveness
At the sight of (Lin and Wang 2008), the reader may wonder about the real need for
partial functions for knowledge representation. For instance, any partial function
can be easily encoded as a total one by just adding a new special value (typically
called none) to denote undeﬁnedness12. However, the real diﬀerence between FASP
12 In fact, (Lin and Wang 2008) does not specify the way in which, for instance, a division by zero
should be treated.

22
P. Cabalar
and and QEL=
F is not so related to totality versus partiality, but has more to do
instead with a “classical” behaviour (what we called decidable functions) versus a
true non-monotonic one. To illustrate this concept, consider the following example.
Example 5 (Empty chessboard cells)
When describing a chess ending situation, we want to specify the content of each
chessboard cell. Typically, most cells will be empty, and in a few cases they will
contain a chessman. To this aim, we want to use a function board(X, Y ) that spec-
iﬁes the content of a given cell position X : {a, . . . , h} and Y : {1, . . . , 8}, and a
set of facts to describe the occupied cells, like: board(a, 1) = blkKing, board(b, 1) =
blkPawn, board(d, 3) = whtHorse, etc.
□
Typically, when encoding this problem in a relational ASP setting, we would
include a rule asserting that all cells are empty by default. In a functional setting,
this means that we need declaring a default value for a given function, something
that, as we saw in Section 4, can be compactly represented with the rule:
board(X, Y ) := empty
:-
row(X) ∧column(Y ) ∧¬(board(X, Y ) # empty)
whose informal reading is “assign an empty content when there is no evidence that
the cell is non-empty.” An important remark is that, although there may exist
SQHT=
F models in which function board is partial, this function will be total in
any equilibrium model (for any correct cell position X, Y ), since the default above
cannot leave board(X, Y ) undeﬁned.
On the other hand, a default like this does not seem easily representable in FASP,
unless we make use of additional auxiliary predicates, i.e., we end up resorting to
the relational fragment of FASP. The reason for this diﬃculty is that functions are
decidable, and so, their value can be deﬁned “from the start.” In this way, in FASP,
we would have a free choice for selecting any value for any function, and then only
choices satisfying the rules and constraints eventually lead to an answer set. In our
example, this means that if we just enumerate the occupied cells, we would have
an answer set for any possible combination of contents of the rest of cells, but no
way to assume they are empty by default.
A similar diﬃculty would arise when representing inertia for functions when
dealing with an actions and change scenario, something that in QEL=
F would have
a quite natural representation. For instance, if board became a ﬂuent, with a third
parameter I for representing a situation number, its inertia could be written as:
board(X, Y, I + 1) := board(X, Y, I)
:-
¬(board(X, Y, I + 1) # board(X, Y, I))
Finally, QEL=
F allows a functional interpretation of predicates, as done for in-
stance in (Cabalar and Lorenzo 2004; Cabalar 2005) so that we can deﬁne them as
functions with a boolean range {true, false}. As shown in (Cabalar and Lorenzo
2004), if we further assert that false is a default value for all boolean functions, we

Functional Answer Set Programming
23
obtain the same expressiveness as standard ASP. To put an example, the program
p
←
¬q
q
←
r ∧¬p
r
←
¬s
would be re-encoded using this technique as:
p = true
←
q = false
q = true
←
r = true ∧q = false
r = true
←
s = false
A := false
:-
¬(A # false)
for A varying in p, q, r, s, so that the functional equilibrium models of this FLP-
program correspond to the (standard) answer sets of the original program. In other
words, we can encode full Answer Set Programming by exclusively using (boolean)
functions with default values and without resorting to any predicate (excepting
equality). In the case of FASP, the impossibility of representing defaults when only
dealing with functions (that is, when we supress the use of predicates) would make
this enconding to collapse into classical propositional logic.
7 Related Work
The present approach has incorporated many of the ideas previously presented
in (Cabalar and Lorenzo 2004; Cabalar 2005). For instance, (Cabalar and Lorenzo
2004) can be seen as the fragment of our FLP-programs where we disable the use
of predicates and restrict default negation exclusively for specifying default values
of functions.
With respect to other logical characterisations of Functional Programming lan-
guages, the closest one is perhaps (Gonz´alez-Moreno et al. 1999), from where we
extracted the separation of constructors and evaluable functions. The main diﬀer-
ence is that QEL=
F provides a completely logical description of all operators, al-
lowing an arbitrary syntax (including rules with negation, disjunction in the head,
negation and disjunction of rules, etc). Another important diﬀerence is that QEL=
F
is constrained to strict functions, while (Gonz´alez-Moreno et al. 1999) is based on
non-strict functions.
Scott’s E-Logic is not the only choice for logical treatment of partial functions.
A related approach is the so-called Logic of Partial Functions (LPF) (Barringer
et al. 1984). The main diﬀerence is that LPF is a three-valued logic – formulas
containing undeﬁned terms have a third, undeﬁned truth value. The relation to
(relational) ASP in this way is much more distant than the current approach, since
stable models and their logical counterpart, equilibrium models, are two-valued13.
As for the relation to other approaches exclusively dealing with Herbrand func-
tions (Syrj¨anen 2001; Bonatti 2004; ˇSimkus and Eiter 2007) an interesting topic
13 Note that in this work we are not considering explicit negation.

24
P. Cabalar
for future study is analysing to which extent they could be captured by QEL=
semantics, i.e., the fragment of QEL=
F without evaluable functions.
8 Conclusions
We can summarize the main contributions of this paper into the introduction of a
new language for dealing with functions in ASP and the discussion about several
modelling issues not easily solvable within other ASP modelling paradigms. In this
way, the paper has tried to clarify some relevant aspects related to the use of func-
tions in ASP for Knowledge Representation. These aspects include the distinction
between Herbrand and evaluable (and possibly partial) functions, the concept of
deﬁnedness, the treatment of equality, the directionality in function assignments or
a new nondeterministic choice operation for selecting a function value.
The functional nature of some predicates is hidden in many ASP domains. When
functions are represented in a relational way, we require the continuous addition of
constraints for uniqueness of value, and a considerable amount of extra variables to
replace the ability of nesting functional terms. All this additional eﬀort may easily
become a source for programming errors.
Although, as we have shown, the proposed approach can be translated into re-
lational ASP and merely considered as syntactic sugar, we claim that the use of
functions may provide a more natural, compact and readable way of representing
many scenarios. The previous experience with a very close language to that of Sec-
tion 5, implemented in an online interpreter14 and used for didactic purposes in
the past, shows that the functional notation helps the student concentrate on the
mathematical deﬁnition of the domain to be represented, and forget some of the
low level representation tasks, as those commented above, or as the deﬁnedness
conditions, that must be also considered in the relational representation, but the
functional interpreter checks in an automatic way.
We hope that the current approach will help to integrate, in the future, the ex-
plicit treatment of arithmetic functions made by some ASP tools, that are currently
handled outside the formal setting. For instance, the ASP grounder lparse15 syn-
tactically accepts a program like p(div(10, X)) ←q(X) but raises a “divide by
zero” runtime error if fact q(0) is added to the program. On the other hand, when
div is replaced by a non-built-in function symbol, say f, the meaning is quite dif-
ferent, and we get {p(f(10, 0)), q(0)} as a stable model. In this paper we have also
identiﬁed and separated evaluable and (possibly) partial functions (like div above)
from constructors (like f in the previous example).
We have provided a translation of our functional language into normal logic
programs to show that: (1) it can be implemented with current ASP solvers; but
more important (2) that the proposed semantics is sensible with respect to the way
14 Available at http://www.dc.fi.udc.es/~cabalar/fal/
15 Available at http://www.tcs.hut.fi/Software/smodels/.

Functional Answer Set Programming
25
in which we usually program in the existing ASP paradigm. This translation has
been implemented in a tool called lppf (logic programs with partial functions)16.
For future work, we plan to follow (Lin and Wang 2008) work on loop formu-
las for converting their programs with total functions into Constraint Satisfaction
Problems and extend their work for our functional logic programs. As in (Lin and
Wang 2008), we expect to obtain a reduction on the size of ground functional logic
programs, with respect to the size of their relational counterparts.
A topic for future study is the implementation of a solver that directly handles
the functional semantics. Other open topics are the axiomatisation of the current
logical framework, the addition of a second, explicit (or strong) negation, or the
extension of lppf to combine evaluable functions with constructors of arity greater
than zero, using as a back-end the recently available tool DLV-complex17.
