Machine Teaching in Hierarchical Genetic
Reinforcement Learning: Curriculum Design of
Reward Functions for Swarm Shepherding
Nicholas R. Clayton
School of Engineering & IT
University of New South Wales
Canberra, Australia

Hussein Abbass
School of Engineering & IT
University of New South Wales
Canberra, Australia

Abstract—The design of reward functions in reinforcement
learning is a human skill that comes with experience. Unfortu-
nately, there is not any methodology in the literature that could
guide a human to design the reward function or to allow a human
to transfer the skills developed in designing reward functions to
another human and in a systematic manner. In this paper, we
use Systematic Instructional Design, an approach in human ed-
ucation, to engineer a machine education methodology to design
reward functions for reinforcement learning. We demonstrate the
methodology in designing a hierarchical genetic reinforcement
learner that adopts a neural network representation to evolve a
swarm controller for an agent shepherding a boids-based swarm.
The results reveal that the methodology is able to guide the design
of hierarchical reinforcement learners, with each model in the
hierarchy learning incrementally through a multi-part reward
function. The hierarchy acts as a decision fusion function that
combines the individual behaviours and skills learnt by each
instruction to create a smart shepherd to control the swarm.
Index Terms—Curriculum Design, Machine Teaching, Machine
Education, Reinforcement Learning, Swarm Control, Systematic
Instructional Design
I. INTRODUCTION
Machine learning systematically applies algorithms to es-
timate and approximate the underlying relationships hidden
in a set of features [1]. The role of the machine could stop
at ﬁnding these relationships, as in the case of data mining,
or at using them to act by actuating on the environment, as
in the case of robotic control. A common form of learning
for robotic control is reinforcement learning, where an agent
relies on the signal it receives from its interaction with the
environment or other agents to update its internal states to
improve its performance over time [2]. The internal states of
the agent classically get represented using a tabular form. In
continuous domains, a function approximator such as a neural
network becomes essential to compress the inﬁnite state space
an agent is embedded within. The agent needs to learn at least
the parameters of the function approximator, but sometimes
the learning algorithm also affords the agent with the ability
to learn the structure of the function [3].
John H. Holland [4] was the ﬁrst to explore genetic rein-
forcement learning by designing Genetic algorithms for func-
tion optimisation, which witnessed the replacement of the clas-
sical concept of an objective function by a new concept: ﬁtness
function. A ﬁtness function rewards a solution/chromosome
based on how ﬁt the solution is relative to the remainder of the
population. Genetic reinforcement learning became popular
with Whitley et al. [5] paper in 1993. An agent uses selection,
crossover and mutation as the three primary operators to
evolve a functional approximator capable of performing the
task at hand. Extending the concept to multi-objective genetic
reinforcement learning, Abbass [6] introduced the Pareto-
based formulation of the neural network learning problem
and applied a self-adaptive differential evolution algorithm to
evolve neural architectures. The work was extended in [3] to
the evolution of the body and controllers of robots.
Simple reward functions demonstarted success in tasks such
as game play [7]. Greve et al. [8] explored the problem of
adaptation of the continuous T maze challenge with a double
T maze. The simulation environment takes the form of an
H like structure with an extra leg in the middle. Rewards
are placed at the ends of the arms of the H, three are small
values and one is a large reward. If the location of the large
reward is not known, the visiting of an arm end returns a
one point of reward. Once the high reward has been located,
only the visiting of the high reward gives a point, until it is
moved again. This result is then normalised with the number
of double T mazes run. This simple point based system was
successful in guiding the agent. However, its objective to
achieve a successful completion of the task independent of
the skills being learnt by the agent. In fact, the skills to reach
the arms with smaller rewards get forgotten in the simulation
as the reward function switches to rewarding only when the
agent reaches the arm with high reward.
Designing reward functions for swarm control is a non-
trivial task due to the complexity of the search space and
behaviours needed. One example of swarm control in practice
is a sheepdog shepherding a group of sheep swarming using
boids rules [9]. The Shepherding problem arises when one
agent or a collection of agents aim at steering swarm of
agents towards a targeted location. It ﬁts in a broad category
arXiv:1901.00949v1  [cs.AI]  4 Jan 2019

of problems alongside crowd control, oil spill recovery, and
environmental protection, due to the collect and drive nature of
these tasks [10]. The problem is modelled as a swarm control
problem using Boids rules for the sheep, with the results being
validated against real-world shepherding [11].
One factor of complexity when designing reward functions
for reinforcement shepherding learners lies in the challenge
of breaking down the problem into smaller sub tasks. This
led to many papers on Hierarchical reinforcement learning
approaches [12]. However, the design of the reward function
and the hierarchy has always remained as an art that relies on
human’s experience.
The reward function is classically obtained by running each
solution within a simulator that evaluates the performance and
returns some performance metrics. This approach comes with a
number of disadvantages. First, these simulations are normally
very expensive causing the evolution to take enormous amount
of time to complete. Second, the evolution could fail to ﬁnd
an appropriate solution either because the reward function
does not offer sufﬁcient gradient information to guide the
evolutionary process, or the target behaviour is too complex
to learn in one go. Third, even if evolution was successful
in ﬁnding an appropriate solution, the resultant solution is
normally a convolution of a complex behaviour that is hard
to understand of explain. Fourth, the design of performance
metrics to evaluate each solution are almost never discussed
in the literature and are assumed to be readily exist.
The aim of this paper is to attempt overcoming these limita-
tions. As a starting point, a need exists to design a systematic
methodology to the design of the reward algorithm. We use
the shepherding problem as the test case to demonstrate the
methodology, whereby a (genetic) reinforcement learner can
learn how to shepherd in a multi-shepherd environment. The
aim of the proposed methodology is to ease out the design
requirements for the ﬁtness and reward functions in complex
problems.
II. BACKGROUND MATERIALS
This section covers background information on shepherding
and curriculum design.
A. Shepherding
The absence of sufﬁcient data on shepherding, the need to
generate novel and optimised behaviours, and the complexity
of the task motivated the work in this paper to explore the use
of a reinforcement learning approach that could get adopted
by a smart shepherd to collect and drive a group of sheep
towards a goal. Lien and Pratt [10] discussed the practical
signiﬁcance of the shepherding problem and its applications
in security, civil crowd control, environmental protection,
agriculture, transportation safety, education and training and
in entertainment. They offered an insight into the complexity
in breaking the task down into logical sub tasks due to its
“highly actuated nature”.
The literature looks at deﬁning the characteristics of both
herding and shepherding animals and the way that shepherding
behaviours arise from the interaction between these two. Many
attempts at deﬁning these behaviours and the mathematical
models behind them have been made, each with varying
degrees of success [13]–[16]. Successful attempts at solving
the problem simplify it with the addition of obstacles and road
blocks however this limits the applicability of the solution to
the general case. Others have incorporated a combination of
human interaction and artiﬁcial intelligence to reduce com-
plexity [10]. The ability for an artiﬁcial intelligence agent to
solve the Shepherding problem in the general case currently
does not exist.
Lien et. al. [13] deﬁned herding as one of the four major
behaviours performed by a shepherd, based on observations of
sheepdogs in ﬁeld tests. Here herding is performed alongside
‘patrolling’, ‘collecting’ and ‘covering’. Strömbom et al. in
[11] contributed a biologically plausible algorithm to model
the behaviour of sheepdogs. The performance of the algorithm
was validated against real-world data collected from ﬁeld trips
in the Australian environment. For herding animals, behaviour
was broken into a combination of three vectors: the repulsion
from the predator or “herding agent”, a natural grouping vector
that mapped the tendency of herd animals to group together
for safety with their nearest neighbours and a close range
repulsion vector that repels herd agents away from each other
to model “comfortable personal space”. Strömbom grouped
shepherding behaviour into two categories, being “collecting”
herding agents into a single group and then “driving” the
collected group towards the target location.
Strömbom’s algorithm utilised the Boids work of C.W.
Reynolds [9] in modelling the behaviour of sheep ﬂock/herd.
In particular, the model imposed three behaviours, Collision
avoidance, Velocity Matching and Flock Centring. Two of
these behaviours were extended to the shepherds in Ström-
bom’s model demonstrating their validity in the generation of
multi shepherd dynamics. Hartman and Benes [17] extended
the work of Reynolds a step further and introduced a dynamic
leadership force that accounted for chaotic behaviour without
imposing a leadership structure.
We adopt the following notations to describe different
aspects of Strömbom’s algorithm and the overall shepherding
task. Ψ denotes the shepherd’s position; σ denotes a separated
sheep or sheeps; Φ denotes the sheep global centre of mass
(GCM); F denotes the application of force; Pd denotes
driving position; Pc denotes collecting position; PG denotes
goal location; ∆denotes acceptable error; α denotes a single
shepherd from a team; N denotes the number of sheep; θ
denotes angles; Σ denotes reward value for an agent; ra
denotes agent to agent interaction distance; rs denotes the
shepherd agent interaction distance.
Building off of the work that Strömbom et al. completed,
Fujioka K. and Hayashi F. [15] changed the collecting be-
haviour from the original Strömbom solution to what they
labelled as V-Formation Control. In this case, when the furthest
sheep distance dfurthest > drN ( 2
3 ) instead of moving to
the collecting point behind the furthest sheep, the shepherd
acts with V control logic in which it traces a V notch

shape behind the herd, orientated towards the target location.
They demonstrated that the V control performs better than
the Strömbom solution for a lower number of observable
neighbours for sheep agents. In a different, but older, approach,
Balch and Arkin [18] looked into the control of a group in
formation and then control to formation to achieve the goal.
In a more recent piece of work Lee and Kim [16], developed
an algorithm that would control individual agents as a part of
a steering ﬂock without centralised control. In their work, the
steering agents only aim to steer the nearest sheep agent to
the target location without consideration for other members of
the ﬂock. All agents detect the presence of the shepherd and
also the target location. This is combined with a shepherds
ability to collect members separated from the main ﬂock, much
like that suggested by Strömbom. The interaction between
steering agents is dominated by an algorithm that considers
current actions of other steering agents and closeness of itself
to the current required task (collection/patrolling or herding)
but relies on no centralised control.
Successful attempts have been made in the past to use
genetic reinforcement learning to learn the shepherding be-
haviour. However, these attempts were limited in their utility.
For example, Brule et al. [14] used a decision tree model
alongside a genetic algorithm to develop solutions to the
shepherding problem. They focused on the ability of the AI
to choose a path among a predetermined set of allowable
actions. The work did not attempt to learn the component skills
associated with a shepherding behaviour and assumed their
readiness for the genetic algorithm to synthesise. However,
the attempt demonstrated the feasibility of using reinforcement
learning to successfully learn this complex behaviour.
B. Curriculum Design
Machine education is a growing ﬁeld of research [19], [20].
In general terms, a curriculum refers to the academic content
and lessons taught in a speciﬁc course [21]. It typically refers
to the knowledge and skills students are expected to learn. In
the ﬁeld of machine learning, ideas from curriculum design
have been explored to structure the learning process for a
machine learner. Most of the work took the form of structuring
the samples needed to teach a machine learning agent. The aim
of this paper is to use curriculum design techniques to take
the target compound behaviour expected from a Reinforcement
learning agent and break it down into meaningful and essential
behaviours and skills, then systematically design a reward
function(s) targeted at learning each skill and sub-skill.
The Dick and Carey Model for Systematic Instructional
Design (SID) is an example of a curriculum design model that
has been around since 1978 [22]. It was intended to be used
by people developing things like textbooks, workshops and
computer-based training with a speciﬁc aim of converting an
aim, in this paper shepherding, into a set of instructions ready
for implementation. This model consists of ten steps [23] listed
below and while these broadly apply at developing instructions
for human learners, we adapt the model to develop instructions
(rewards) for a reinforcement learner.
The ten steps of the Dick and Carey Model are:
• Identify an Instructional Goal
• Conduct and Instructional Analysis
• Identify Entry Behaviours and Characteristics
• Write Performance Objectives
• Develop Criterion-Referenced Assessments
• Develop Instructional Strategy
• Develop and/or Select Instruction
• Design and Conduct the Formative evaluation
• Revise the Instruction
• Conduct the Summative Evaluation
Other models for instructional design could be used such as
Analyse, Design, Develop, Implement and Evaluate (ADDIE)
model. ADDIE is a conceptual way for breaking down require-
ments to a series of repeatable steps that can be broadened
or focused as required [24]. The mantra of the model and its
speciﬁc application largely differs from one context to another.
However, Dick and Carey’s SID model seems to encapsulate
the ADDIE model as well and as such, we use the SID model
in this paper.
III. METHODOLOGY
We adopt the Self-Adaptive Pareto Artiﬁcial Neural Net-
work algorithm (SPANN) [25], [26], which evolves a neural
network using the Pareto-frontier Differential Evolution (PDE)
algorithm [25]. In particular, we use the SPANN-R variation
of the algorithm [3], which is more suitable for reinforcement
learning tasks whereby back propagation is removed and a
repair function is used to evolve the crossover and mutation
rates. The general steps for the SPANN-R Algorithm are
shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 SPANN-R [3]
Input: : ΩG−1.
Output: : ΩG.
1: repeat
2:
Select all non-dominated set
3:
if The number of networks in the non-dominated set is
less than three networks then
4:
Add second layer of non-dominated set by excluding
the previously non-dominated solutions
5:
Keep doing the previous step until there are more
than three solutions selected
6:
end if
7:
Delete all remaining networks
8:
repeat
9:
Select a network to be a parent α1
10:
Select two supporting parents α2 and α3
11:
Select a random network connection z
12:
Crossover - conduct element wise with a uniform
chance and on element z
13:
Mutation - conduct with a Uniform Chance
14:
until Population has been ﬁlled with new networks
15: until All generations have been completed

The ten steps of the Dick and Carey systematic instructional
design model are used in this section to guide the methodology
for designing the reward functions and the hierarchy for a
hierarchical reinforcement learner.
1) Identify an Instructional Goal: In the case of a human-
based learning curriculum, this step involves the decision
of the broader topic to be taught. For this paper, Shep-
herding is the instructional goal. We use the Strömbom
algorithm as the basic model to guide the design of
overall expected behaviour. While the machine learner
is focusing on controlling the shepherd, the control of
the sheep will be pre-scripted similar to the original
Strömbom model and was adopted from a code developed
in [27].
2) Conduct Instructional Analysis:
This is probably the
greatest contribution that the adaptation of curriculum
design have to the design of the reward algorithm. This
step looks at breaking the instructional goal down into the
step-by-step behaviours that a student needs to exhibit to
reach the goal. For our task, this step breaks the Shep-
herding goal down into two core behaviours representing
the two basic skills required for shepherding: collection
and driving. These skills need to be broken down into
further sub-skills. The criteria to stop the decomposition
is when a sub-skill is sufﬁciently deﬁned such that it
is completely measurable mathematically to conﬁrm if
the skill has been learnt. The overall decomposition to
achieve shepherding is given in the hierarchy charts
in Figure 1. Each sub-skill is then transformed into a
concrete mathematical expression representing the suc-
cess metric. The algorithms including these mathematical
expressions are shown in Algorithms 2 and 3. These
mathematical expressions would differ from one problem
to another. However, the methodology guides the designer
through the decomposition to continue decomposing the
problem until concrete mathematical metrics could be
designed.
3) Identify Entry Behaviours and Characteristics:
The
identiﬁcation of entry Behaviours in the original Dick and
Carey Model looks at understanding the context in which
students come to the instruction, and identifying the
prerequisites, knowledge skills and attitudes required by
students before undertaking the newly developed instruc-
tion. In adapting the concept to Reinforcement learning,
we need to deﬁne the state for agents, identifying the
required inputs and realistic outputs.
Agents in this paper are single layer Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks with a maximum hidden layer of 20 nodes.
The initial state of the network is deﬁned at the start of
the simulation where the original population of agents are
given network weighting between -1 and 1 according to
a normal distribution. A population consists of 50 agents
with a simulation running a series of 250 generations.
For agents learning to shepherd, the inputs are the relative
positions of: the shepherd to the GCM, the shepherd to
Fig. 1: Hierarchy Chart
the furthest sheep, shepherd to the target, the GCM to the
target and a bias unit with a constant input of 1.
For each agent that, the network was controlling two
outputs: one deﬁning a radian direction between 0 and
2π, and a second representing a scalar speed value that
would vary the size of the step that the shepherd would
take.
4) Write Performance Objectives:
The development of
performance objectives in the Dick and Carey Model
is a set of statements that deﬁne what a student will
be able to do when the course has been completed (ie
graduate attributes). The performance objectives need
to be stated unambiguously in plain English such that
they could be transformed into mathematical expressions
for assessment in the next step. For shepherding, the
following performance objectives stem from the task
deﬁnition and the instructional analysis step:
a) Collecting
i) The Shepherd is able to detect from the simulation
environment that collecting of agents is required.
ii) The Shepherd is able to move to a collecting
position without causing unnecessary disruption of
otherwise separated or already clustered sheep
iii) The Shepherd is able to identify and guide all
separated sheep back to a central herd position
b) Driving
i) Detect that the conditions for Driving have been
met
ii) Move to a driving position without causing herd
spread or by pushing the herd away
iii) Guide the Herd Center of Mass to the target loca-
tion.

Algorithm 2 Instruction Set for the Collection Reward
Input: : Statet−1, Statet.
Output: : Σt.
1: Reset reward.
2: if Furthest Sheep is outside of herd distance then
3:
Award C(t)
4: end if
5: Determine ˆΨ
6: Determine ˆPc
7: if (ˆΨ ± ∆θ) = ˆPc then
8:
Award (∆θ −||ˆΨ −ˆPc||
9: else
10:
Punish ||ˆΨ −ˆPc||
11: end if
12: if ||Ψ −Pc||t < ||Ψ −Pc||t−1 then
13:
Reward ||Ψ −Pc||t −||Ψ −Pc||t−1
14: else
15:
Punish 2 × (||Ψ −Pc||t−1 −||Ψ −Pc||t)
16: end if
17: if then||Ψ −Pc|| > ∆Ψ and ⃗
F on sheep
18:
Punish U(t)
19: end if
20: if Ψ ± ∆= Pc then
21:
Reward (∆−||Pc −Ψ)||
22: end if
23: Calculate ˆσ
24: Calculate ˆΦ
25: if (ˆσ ± ∆θ) = ˆΦ then
26:
Award (∆θ −||ˆσ −ˆΦ||
27: else
28:
Punish ||ˆσ −ˆΦ||
29: end if
30: if ||σ −Φ||t < ||σ −Φ||t−1 then
31:
Reward 2 × (||σ −Φ||t −||σ −Φ||t−1)
32: else
33:
Punish 4 × (||σ −Φ||t−1 −||σ −Φ||t)
34: end if
35: if FΨ→σ then
36:
Award CF(t)
37: end if
5) Develop Criterion Based Assessments: Criterion based
assessments look to take the performance objectives and
translate them into measurable assessments. Due to the
way that a reinforcement learner learns from repeating the
task a signiﬁcant number of times, the adapting of this
step saw the generation of the simulation environments.
Figure 2 shows the two simulation environments that
were used for the three basic behaviours. These simula-
tion environments were later adapted further to conduct
multi-behaviour testing at the Summative assessment
stage which will be discussed later.
6) Develop Instructional Strategy:
In order to deﬁne
instructional strategy, the Dick and Carey Model looks
Algorithm 3 Instruction Set for the Driving Reward
Input: : Statet−1, Statet.
Output: : Σt.
1: Reset reward.
2: if Furthest Sheep is inside of herd distance then
3:
Award D(t)
4: end if
5: Determine ˆΨ
6: Determine ˆ
Pd
7: if (ˆΨ ± ∆θ) = ˆ
Pd then
8:
Award (∆θ −||ˆΨ −ˆ
Pd||
9: else
10:
Punish ||ˆΨ −ˆ
Pd||
11: end if
12: if ||Ψ −Pd||t < ||Ψ −Pd||t−1 then
13:
Reward ||Ψ −Pd||t −||Ψ −Pd||t−1
14: else
15:
Punish 2 × (||Ψ −Pd||t−1 −||Ψ −Pd||t)
16: end if
17: if then||Ψ −Pd|| > ∆Ψ and ⃗
F on sheep
18:
Punish U(t)
19: end if
20: if Ψ ± ∆= Pd then
21:
Reward (∆−||Pd −Ψ)||
22: end if
23: Calculate ˆΦ
24: Calculate ˆ
PG
25: if (ˆΦ ± ∆θ) = ˆ
PG then
26:
Award (∆θ −||ˆΦ −ˆ
PG||
27: else
28:
Punish ||ˆΦ −ˆ
PG||
29: end if
30: if ||Φ −PG||t < ||Φ −PG||t−1 then
31:
Reward 2 × (||Φ −PG||t −||Φ −PG||t−1)
32: else
33:
Punish 4 × (||Φ −PG||t−1 −||Φ −PG||t)
34: end if
35: if FΨ→Φ then
36:
Award DF(t)
37: end if
to identify the method of instructional delivery. This
includes things such as presentation of information, prac-
tice of skills, feedback to students, testing and follow
up activities. In the context of reinforcement learning,
this step translates into the simulation strategy. We used
250 generations, a population size of 50, and 8 selected
parents. The output of simulation was a ﬁtness graph
showing the maximum, average and minimum ﬁtness
of the agents across each generation as well as record-
ings of the performance of key individuals at preset
generations throughout the simulation in the form of a
video recording. These outputs were compared across
10 simulations for each behaviour and the results were

Fig. 2: The two simulation environments that were used to train for collection (on left) and for driving (on right).
graphed, while statistics were tabulated and reported in
the results section.
7) Develop and/or Select Instruction:
Development or
selection of instruction in the classical case refers to
executing the strategy so as to produce learning pack-
ages, tests, learning materials and instructor guides. For
the reinforcement learning model, this step represents
the development of the Reward algorithm for each of
the behaviour classes; that is, the transformation of the
mathematical expressions in Algorithms 2 and 3 into
executable code.
8) Design and Conduct Formative Assessment:
The
conduct of formative assessment saw the reinforcement
learner attempt to learn the skills in isolated environments
with the reward algorithms that had been developed
for the corresponding skill. This was then followed the
simulation strategy generated as a part of the Instructional
strategy stage and the outputs of this stage are displayed
graphically alongside the statistics data in the results
section.
9) Revise Instruction: The revision of instruction, or in this
case the revision of the reward design, occurred concur-
rently throughout the conduct of formative assessment.
In this way, as the running of simulations allowed for
the identiﬁcation of patterns that were not desirable, it
meant that small changes in the ways that reward was
implemented could be made.
10) Conduct of Summative Assessments: The conduct of
summative assessment was executed in two stages and
looked to provide insight in how well the skills could
be learned concurrently. The ﬁrst assessment looked at
the ability for the AI to learn to drive and collect at
the same time. The output of this allowed an informed
statement about the nature of the skills and whether they
were constructive or destructive skills sets. This was then
compared with the baseline model to show whether or not
an improvement when using the systematic methodology
was experienced.
Final Reward Algorithms: At the completion of the ten
steps, a reward algorithm for each of the two core behaviours
had been developed as well as a meaningful way of linking
these behaviours in order to learn skills simultaneously.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Baseline Performance
We adopt an intuitive reward function to baseline the
performance of the proposed methodology. The aim of the
baseline reward, Σ, is to reward and punish the performance
on the agent based on ﬁve performance metrics:
1) Movement towards the driving location;
2) Movement towards the GCM;
3) Changes in the average spread;
4) Changes to the distance the GCM is from the target
location;
5) A ﬁnal state reward component that combines the ﬁnal
state of the shepherds distance to the Sheep GCM (||Ψ−
Φ||), the sheep GCM distance to the target (||Ψ −PG||)
and the distance of the furthest sheep from the GCM
(||σ||).
These are combined together with a reward starting value
(τ) to generate an overall ﬁtness score (µ ) for a single agent’s
performance in the simulation as shown in Equation 1.
Σ = τ + Σ −4 × (||Ψ −Φ|| + ||Ψ −PG|| + ||σ||)
(1)
This baseline reward function achieved a 20% success rate.
Major shortfalls in this reward function is the lack of incentive
for a shepherd to collect agents separated from the main ﬂock
and the fact that the reward or punishment for the performance
is given in discrete steps and doesn’t scale with the size of the
change being made.

B. Formative and Summative Assessments
This section presents the quantitative and trend information
for formative and summative assessments. Figure 3 shows a
typical ﬁtness model showing the evolution of agents across
the 250 generations looking speciﬁcally at the minimum,
maximum and average agent. This trend was consistent across
all simulations.
Fig. 3: A Typical ﬁtness evolution throughout a simulation
for a driving behaviour (top) and a statistical summary of the
evolutionary results across all behaviours (bottom).
Table I shows the statistical variations and success rate for
each of the behaviour simulations.
Skill
Min
Avg ± Std Dev
Max
Success
Rate
Collecting
-2045.8
3710.2 ± 696.69
9188.1
90%
Driving
-2513.78
2879.6 ± 679.61
7661.2
80%
Collect + Drive
-2027.2
3236.8 ± 1630.36
8801.5
50%
TABLE I: The mean values of min, average and max ﬁtness
values across different simulations.
When compared to baseline, the results for formative as-
sessment exhibit a higher success rate for the individual skills.
Nevertheless, it is important to recognise that a skill such as
driving the herd will only work when the herd is clustered.
As such, the formative assessment for the individual skills are
not suited for the variety of contexts that the task may exhibit.
To have a better comparison against the baseline, summative
assessment of collecting and driving is conducted, whereby the
Fig. 4: Foot print of the Shepherd (red) and centre of mass
of the herd or the furthest sheep (blue) for collection (top)
and driving (bottom).
success rate is more than double the corresponding success
rate for the baseline. While the success rate of learning the
skills individually was at a higher success rate than learning
both skills concurrently, both were still learnt at a signiﬁcantly
greater rate.
Considering that the sheep behaviour is modelled on Ström-
bom’s algorithm there is some insight to be taken in comparing
the learned solution that was developed by the AI and the
hard coded solution that was output by Strömbom’s work.
Figure 4 show heat maps of the individual behaviours and
show the distinctive differences between the driving and
collecting behaviours. Similar observations could be made in
Strömbom’s own algorithm, in that he was able to distinctly
differentiate between the conduct of collection and driving.
Visual inspection of the simulation running for the simultane-
ous learning of the collecting and driving skills show obvious
sharp turns indicating a distinct change in behaviour. In this
way it was insightful to see similar solutions developed and
provides further validation to Strömbom’s interpretation of the
problem.
Learning the individual behaviors independently demon-
strated high success rate. When learning both skills concur-
rently, the success rate dropped, while was still more than

double the corresponding success rate in the baseline reward
function. From human learning perspective, this could have
been attributed to human’s limited cognition and cognitive
load. For a neural network, this could be attributed to two
main primary contributing factors. One is the larger space as
discussed by Lien et al. [10].
The second is the interaction effect of both skills when
learnt concurrently. How to reward the agent when it is
performing better on one skill than another and will an equal
weighting work for this problem or different weighting is
important? These are fundamental questions that have im-
pacted the variance obtained in the success rate of different
evolutionary robotics for centuries.
The machine teaching solution opts for learning individual
skills, which comes with two primary advantages. The ﬁrst
is the smaller search space that the machine learner needs to
work on, which increases the success rate as we demonstrated
above. The second is having a model specialised on each skill
promotes modularity, transparency and explainability of the
overall aggregate behaviour of the agent. Moreover, the scoped
behavioral set associated with each individual skills allows for
a better a validation of performance and diagnosis of when the
learner succeeds or fails to learn.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We proposed a machine teaching methodology to assist
in structuring the process for designing the reward function
for genetic reinforcement learners. The shepherding problem
was used as the use case to demonstrate the methodology
and showcase the challenges associated with the inﬂuence of
the reward function design and possible interaction that the
different skills an agent learns could have on the performance
of reinforcement learning.
Our future work will expand the behavioural set with
more complex behaviours to assist the machine teaching
methodology to create machine learners with richer skills and
behaviors. The use of machine teaching as a design tool to
offer transparent and explainable modular neural networks is
another direction that we are currently exploring. Moreover,
the shepherding problem is a good testbed for our objectives
because of the complex dynamics that exist in the interaction
between the sheepdog and the sheep. Shepherding is only one
of the four herding behaviours that was identiﬁed in [13].
We will expand the work to cover the other three herding
behaviours using a reinforcement learning approach.
