Funnel Libraries for Real-Time Robust Feedback Motion Planning
Anirudha Majumdar and Russ Tedrake
Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Lab
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, USA

May 2, 2017
Abstract
We consider the problem of generating motion plans for a robot that are guaranteed to suc-
ceed despite uncertainty in the environment, parametric model uncertainty, and disturbances.
Furthermore, we consider scenarios where these plans must be generated in real-time, because
constraints such as obstacles in the environment may not be known until they are perceived (with
a noisy sensor) at runtime. Our approach is to pre-compute a library of “funnels” along diﬀerent
maneuvers of the system that the state is guaranteed to remain within (despite bounded distur-
bances) when the feedback controller corresponding to the maneuver is executed. We leverage
powerful computational machinery from convex optimization (sums-of-squares programming in
particular) to compute these funnels. The resulting funnel library is then used to sequentially
compose motion plans at runtime while ensuring the safety of the robot. A major advantage of
the work presented here is that by explicitly taking into account the eﬀect of uncertainty, the
robot can evaluate motion plans based on how vulnerable they are to disturbances.
We demonstrate and validate our method using extensive hardware experiments on a small
ﬁxed-wing airplane avoiding obstacles at high speed (∼12 mph), along with thorough simulation
experiments of ground vehicle and quadrotor models navigating through cluttered environments.
To our knowledge, these demonstrations constitute one of the ﬁrst examples of provably safe
and robust control for robotic systems with complex nonlinear dynamics that need to plan in
real-time in environments with complex geometric constraints.
1
Introduction
Imagine an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) ﬂying at high speed through a cluttered environment in
the presence of wind gusts, a legged robot traversing rough terrain, or a mobile robot grasping and
manipulating previously unlocalized objects in the environment. These applications demand that
the robot move through (and in certain cases interact with) its environment with a very high degree
of agility while still being in close proximity to obstacles. Such systems today lack guarantees on
their safety and can fail dramatically in the face of uncertainty in their environment and dynamics.
The tasks mentioned above are characterized by three main challenges. First, the dynamics
of the system are nonlinear, underactuated, and subject to constraints on the input (e.g. torque
limits). Second, there is a signiﬁcant amount of uncertainty in the dynamics of the system due
to disturbances and modeling error. Finally, the geometry of the environment that the robot is
operating in is unknown until runtime, thus forcing the robot to plan in real-time.
1
arXiv:1601.04037v3  [cs.RO]  29 Apr 2017

X
Y
Planned
Actual
(a) A plane deviating from its nominal planned trajec-
tory due to a heavy cross-wind.
X
Y
(b) The “funnel” of possible trajectories.
Figure 1: Not accounting for uncertainty while planning motions can lead to disastrous consequences.
1.1
Contributions
In this paper, we address these challenges by combining approaches from motion planning, feedback
control, and tools from Lyapunov theory and convex optimization in order to perform robust real-
time motion planning in the face of uncertainty. In particular, in an oﬄine computation stage,
we ﬁrst design a ﬁnite library of open loop trajectories. For each trajectory in this library, we
use tools from convex optimization (sums-of-squares (SOS) programming in particular) to design
a controller that explicitly attempts to minimize the size of the worst case reachable set of the
system given a description of the uncertainty in the dynamics and bounded external disturbances.
This control design procedure yields an outer approximation of the reachable set, which can be
visualized as a “funnel” around the trajectory, that the closed-loop system is guaranteed to remain
within. A cartoon of such a funnel is shown in Figure 1(b). Finally, we provide a way of sequentially
composing these robust motion plans at runtime in order to operate in a provably safe manner in
previously unseen environments.
One of the most important advantages that our approach aﬀords us is the ability to choose
between the motion primitives in our library in a way that takes into account the dynamic eﬀects
of uncertainty. Imagine a UAV ﬂying through a forest that has to choose between two motion
primitives: a highly dynamic roll maneuver that avoids the trees in front of the UAV by a large
margin or a maneuver that involves ﬂying straight while avoiding the trees only by a small distance.
An approach that neglects the eﬀects of disturbances and uncertainty may prefer the former ma-
neuver since it avoids the trees by a large margin and is therefore “safer”. However, a more careful
2

consideration of the two maneuvers could lead to a diﬀerent conclusion: the dynamic roll maneuver
is far more susceptible to wind gusts and perturbations to the initial state than the second one.
Thus, it may in fact be more robust to execute the second motion primitive. Further, it may be
possible that neither maneuver is guaranteed to succeed and it is safer to abort the mission and
simply transition to a hover mode. Our approach allows robots to make these critical decisions,
which are essential if robots are to move out of labs and operate in real-world environments.
We demonstrate and validate our approach using thorough simulation experiments of ground
vehicle and quadrotor models navigating through cluttered environments, along with extensive
hardware experiments on a small ﬁxed-wing airplane avoiding obstacles at high speed (∼12 miles
per hour) in an indoor motion capture environment. To the best of our knowledge, the resulting
demonstrations constitute one of the ﬁrst examples of provably safe and robust control for robotic
systems with complex nonlinear dynamics that need to plan in real-time in cluttered environments.
1.2
Outline
The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses prior work; Section 3 provides a brief back-
ground on semideﬁnite and sums-of-squares (SOS) programming, which are used heavily throughout
the paper; Section 4 shows how to use SOS programming to compute funnels; Section 5 introduces
the notion of a funnel library; Section 6 describes our algorithm for using funnel libraries for real-
time robust planning in environments that have not been seen by the robot before; Section 7
presents extensive simulation results on a ground vehicle model and compares our approach with
an approach based on trajectory libraries; Section 7 also considers a quadrotor model and shows
how one can use our approach to guarantee collision-free ﬂight in certain environments; Section 8
presents hardware experiments on a small ﬁxed-wing airplane in order to demonstrate and validate
our approach; Section 9 concludes the paper with a discussion of challenges and open problems.
2
Relevant Work
2.1
Motion Planning
Motion planning has been the subject of signiﬁcant research in the last few decades and has en-
joyed a large degree of success in recent years. Planning algorithms like the Rapidly-exploring
Randomized Tree (RRT) [Kuﬀner and Lavalle, 2000] (along with variants that attempt to ﬁnd op-
timal motion plans [Karaman and Frazzoli, 2011] [Kobilarov, 2012]) and related trajectory library
approaches [Liu and Atkeson, 2009] [Frazzoli et al., 2005] [Stolle and Atkeson, 2006] can handle
large state-space dimensions and complex diﬀerential constraints. These algorithms have been suc-
cessfully demonstrated on a wide variety of hardware platforms [Kuwata et al., 2008] [Shkolnik,
2010] [Sermanet et al., 2008] [Satzinger et al., 2016]. However, an important challenge is their
inability to explicitly reason about uncertainty and feedback. Modeling errors, state uncertainty
and disturbances can lead to failure if the system deviates from the planned nominal trajectories.
The motion planning aspect of our approach draws inspiration from the vast body of work
that is focused on computing motion primitives in the form of trajectory libraries. For example,
trajectory libraries have been used in diverse applications such as humanoid balance control [Liu and
Atkeson, 2009], autonomous ground vehicle navigation [Sermanet et al., 2008], grasping [Berenson
et al., 2007] [Dey et al., 2011], and UAV navigation [Dey et al., 2014] [Barry, 2016]. The Maneuver
Automaton [Frazzoli et al., 2005] attempts to capture the formal properties of trajectory libraries
3

as a hybrid automaton, thus providing a unifying theoretical framework.
Maneuver Automata
have also been used for real-time motion planning with static and dynamic obstacles [Frazzoli
et al., 2002]. Further theoretical investigations have focused on the oﬄine generation of diverse but
sparse trajectories that ensure the robot’s ability to perform the necessary tasks online in an eﬃcient
manner [Green and Kelly, 2007]. More recently, tools from sub-modular sequence optimization have
been leveraged in the optimization of the sequence and content of trajectories evaluated online [Dey
et al., 2011, Dey, 2015]. Prior work has also been aimed at learning maneuver libraries in the form
of “skill trees” from expert demonstrations [Konidaris et al., 2011].
Robust motion planning has also been a very active area of research in the robotics community.
Early work [Brooks, 1982] [Lozano-Perez et al., 1984] [Jacobs and Canny, 1990] [Latombe et al.,
1991] focused on settings where the dynamics of the system are not dominant and one can treat the
system as a kinematic one. The problem is then one of planning paths through conﬁguration space
that are robust to uncertainty in the motion of the robot and geometry of the workspace. Our work
with funnels takes inspiration from the early work on ﬁne-motion planning, where the notions of
funnels [Mason, 1985] and preimage backchaining [Lozano-Perez et al., 1984] (also known as goal
regression or sequential composition) were ﬁrst introduced. The theme of robust kinematic motion
planning has persisted in recent work [Missiuro and Roy, 2006] [Guibas et al., 2009] [Malone et al.,
2013], which deals with uncertainty in the geometry of the environment and obstacles.
2.2
Planning under Uncertainty
In settings where the dynamics of the system must be taken into account (e.g., for underactuated
systems), the work on planning under uncertainty attempts to address the challenges associated
with uncertainty in the dynamics, state, and geometry of the environment. In particular, chance-
constrained programming [Charnes and Cooper, 1959] provides an elegant mathematical framework
for reasoning about stochastic uncertainty in the dynamics, initial conditions, and obstacle geometry
[Blackmore et al., 2006] [Oldewurtel et al., 2008] [Toit and Burdick, 2011] and allows one to generate
motion plans with bounds on the probability of collision with obstacles. In settings where the state
of the system is partially observable and there is signiﬁcant uncertainty in the observations, one
can extend this framework to plan in the belief space of the system (i.e., the space of distributions
over states) [Vitus and Tomlin, 2011] [Vitus and Tomlin, 2012]. While these approaches allow one
to explicitly reason about uncertainty in the system, they are typically restricted to handling linear
dynamical systems with Gaussian uncertainty. This is due to the computational burden of solving
chance constrained problems for nonlinear and non-Gaussian systems.
Similarly, other approaches for belief space planning [Bry and Roy, 2011] [Platt et al., 2010]
[Prentice and Roy, 2007] [Berg et al., 2012] [Agha-Mohammadi et al., 2014] [Patil et al., 2015] also
approximate the belief state as a Gaussian distribution over state space (however, see [Platt et al.,
2012] for an exception to this) for computational eﬃciency and hence the true belief state is not
tracked. Thus, in general, one does not have robustness guarantees. The approach we take in this
work is to assume that disturbances/uncertainty are bounded and provide explicit bounds on the
reachable set to facilitate safe operation of the nonlinear system.
More generally, the rich literature on Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs)
[Kaelbling et al., 1998] is also relevant here. POMDPs present an elegant mathematical framework
for reasoning about uncertainty in state and dynamics. However, we note that our focus in this work
is on dynamical systems with continuous state and action spaces, whereas the POMDP literature
typically focuses on discretized state/action spaces for the most part.
4

2.3
Reachable Sets
Reachability analysis for linear and nonlinear control systems has a long history in the controls
community. For linear systems subject to bounded disturbances, there exist a number of techniques
for eﬃciently computing (approximations of) backwards and forwards reachable sets [Kurzhanski
and Varaiya, 2000] [Girard, 2005] [Yazarel and Pappas, 2004]. One can apply techniques from
linear reachability analysis to conservatively approximate reachable sets of nonlinear systems by
treating nonlinearities as bounded disturbances [Althoﬀet al., 2008]. This idea has been used in
[Althoﬀand Dolan, 2014] for performing online safety veriﬁcation for ground vehicles. A similar
idea was used in [Althoﬀet al., 2015] to perform online safety veriﬁcation for UAVs and to decide
when the UAV should switch to an emergency maneuver (a “loiter circle”). In this paper we will
also compute outer approximations of reachable sets (which we refer to as “funnels”). However, the
approach we present here is not based on a linearization of the system and thus has the potential
to be less conservative for highly nonlinear systems. Further, the scope of our work extends beyond
veriﬁcation; the emphasis here is on safe real-time planning with funnels.
Approximations of reachable sets for nonlinear systems can be computed via Hamilton-Jacobi-
Bellman (HJB) diﬀerential game formulations [Mitchell et al., 2005]. This method was used in
[Gillula et al., 2010] for designing motion primitives for making a quadrotor perform an autonomous
backﬂip in a 2D plane. While this approach handles unsafe sets that the system is not allowed
to enter, it is assumed that these sets are speciﬁed a priori.
In this paper, we are concerned
with scenarios in which unsafe sets (such as obstacles) are not speciﬁed until runtime and must
thus be reasoned about online. Further, techniques for computing reachable sets based on the HJB
equation have historically suﬀered from the curse of dimensionality since they rely on discretizations
of the state space of the system. Hence, unless the system under consideration has special structure
(e.g., decoupled systems [Chen and Tomlin, 2015]), these methods have diﬃculty scaling up beyond
approximately 5-6 dimensional state spaces.
An approach that is closely related to our work is the work presented in [Ny and Pappas,
2012]. The authors propose a randomized planning algorithm in the spirit of RRTs that explicitly
reasons about disturbances and uncertainty. Speciﬁcations of input to output stability with respect
to disturbances provide a parameterization of “tubes” (analogous to our “funnels”) that can be
composed together to generate motion plans that are collision-free. The factors that distinguish
the approach we present in this paper from the one proposed in [Ny and Pappas, 2012] are our
focus on the real-time aspect of the problem and use of sums-of-squares programming as a way
of computing reachable sets. In [Ny and Pappas, 2012], the focus is on generating safe motion
plans when the obstacle positions are known a priori. Further, we provide a general technique for
computing and explicitly minimizing the size of tubes.
Another approach that is closely related to ours is Model Predictive Control with Tubes [Mayne
et al., 2005]. The idea is to solve the optimal control problem online with guaranteed “tubes” that
the trajectories stay in. A closely related idea is that of “ﬂow-tubes”, which have been used for
high-level planning for autonomous systems [Li and Williams, 2008]. However, these methods are
generally limited to linear systems.
2.4
Lyapunov Theory and SOS programming
A critical component of the work presented here is the computation of “funnels” for nonlinear
systems via Lyapunov functions. The metaphor for thinking about Lyapunov functions as deﬁning
5

funnels was introduced to the robotics community in [Burridge et al., 1999], where funnels were
sequentially composed in order to produce dynamic behaviors in a robot. However, computational
tools for automatically searching for Lyapunov functions were lacking until very recently. In recent
years, sums-of-squares (SOS) programming has emerged as a way of checking the Lyapunov function
conditions associated with each funnel [Parrilo, 2000]. The technique relies on the ability to check
nonnegativity of multivariate polynomials by expressing them as a sum of squares of polynomials.
This can be written as a semideﬁnite optimization program and is amenable to eﬃcient computa-
tional algorithms such as interior point methods [Parrilo, 2000]. Assuming polynomial dynamics,
one can check that a polynomial Lyapunov candidate, V (x), satisﬁes V (x) > 0 and ˙V (x) < 0 in
some region Br. Importantly, the same idea can be used for computing funnels along time-indexed
trajectories of a system [Tedrake et al., 2010] [Tobenkin et al., 2011]. In this paper, we will use
a similar approach to synthesize feedback controllers that explicitly seek to minimize the eﬀect of
disturbances on the system by minimizing the size of the funnel computed along a trajectory. Thus,
we are guaranteed that if the system starts oﬀin the set of given initial conditions, it will remain in
the computed “funnel” even if the model of the dynamics is uncertain and the system is subjected
to bounded disturbances.
The ability to compute funnels using SOS programming was leveraged by the LQR-Trees al-
gorithm [Tedrake et al., 2010] for feedback motion planning for nonlinear systems. The algorithm
works by creating a tree of locally stabilizing controllers which can take any initial condition in some
bounded region in state space to the desired goal. However, LQR-Trees lack the ability to handle
scenarios in which the task and environment are unknown till runtime: the oﬄine precomputation
of the tree does not take into account potential runtime constraints like obstacles, and an online
implementation of the algorithm is computationally infeasible.
The SOS programming approach has also been used to guarantee obstacle avoidance conditions
for nonlinear systems by computing barrier certiﬁcates [Prajna, 2006] [Barry et al., 2012]. Barrier
functions are similar to Lyapunov functions in spirit, but are used to guarantee that trajectories
starting in some given set of initial conditions will never enter an “unsafe” region containing obsta-
cles. This approach, however, is limited to settings where the locations and geometry of obstacles
are known beforehand since the barrier certiﬁcate one computes depends on this data and comput-
ing barrier certiﬁcates in real-time using SOS programming is not computationally feasible at the
present time.
3
Background
In this section we provide a brief background on the key computational tools that will be employed
throughout this paper.
3.1
Semideﬁnite Programming (SDP)
Semideﬁnite programs (SDPs) form an important class of convex optimization problems. They
are optimization problems over the space of symmetric positive semideﬁnite (psd) matrices. Recall
that a n × n symmetric matrix Q is positive semideﬁnite if xT Qx ≥0, ∀x ∈Rn. Denoting the set
of n × n symmetric matrices as Sn, a SDP in standard form is written as:
6

min
X∈Sn
⟨C, X⟩
(1)
s.t.
⟨Ai, X⟩= bi
∀i ∈{1, . . . , m},
X ⪰0,
where C, Ai ∈Sn and ⟨X, Y ⟩:= Tr(XT Y ) = P
i,j XijYij. In other words, a SDP involves mini-
mizing a cost function that is linear in the elements of the decision matrix X subject to linear and
positive semideﬁniteness constraints on X.
Semideﬁnite programming includes Linear Programming (LP), Quadratic Programming (QP)
and Second-Order Cone Programming (SOCP) as special cases. As in these other cases, SDPs are
amenable to eﬃcient numerical solution via interior point methods. The interested reader may wish
to consult [Vandenberghe and Boyd, 1996] and
[Blekherman et al., 2013, Section 2] for a more
thorough introduction to SDPs.
3.2
Sums-of-Squares (SOS) Programming
An important application of SDPs is to check nonnegativity of polynomials. The decision problem
associated with checking polynomial nonnegativity is NP–hard in general [Parrilo, 2000]. However,
the problem of determining whether a polynomial is a sum-of-squares (SOS), which is a suﬃcient
condition for nonnegativity, is amenable to eﬃcient computation. A polynomial p in indetermi-
nates1 x1, x2, . . . , xn is SOS if it can be written as p(x) = Pm
i=1 q2
i (x) for a set of polynomials
{qi}m
i=1. This condition is equivalent to the existence of a positive semideﬁnite (psd) matrix Q that
satisﬁes:
p(x) = v(x)T Qv(x), ∀x ∈Rn,
(2)
where v(x) is the vector of all monomials with degree less than or equal to half the degree of p
[Parrilo, 2000]. Note that the equality constraint (2) imposes linear constraints on the elements
of the matrix Q that come from matching coeﬃcients of the polynomials on the left and right
hand sides. Thus, semideﬁnite programming can be used to certify that a polynomial is a sum
of squares. Indeed, by allowing the coeﬃcients of the polynomial p to be decision variables, we
can solve optimization problems over the space of SOS polynomials of some ﬁxed degree. Such
optimization problems are referred to as sums-of-squares (SOS) programs. The interested reader
is referred to [Parrilo, 2000] and
[Blekherman et al., 2013, Sections 3,4] for a more thorough
introduction to SOS programming.
In addition to being able to prove global nonnegativity of polynomials, the SOS programming
approach can also be used to demonstrate nonnegativity of polynomials on basic semialgebraic sets
(i.e., sets described by a ﬁnite number of polynomial inequalities and equalities). Suppose we are
given a set B:
B = {x ∈Rn | geq,i(x) = 0, gineq,j(x) ≥0},
(3)
where geq,i and gineq,j are polynomials for i ∈{1, ..., Neq}, j ∈{1, ..., Nineq}. We are interested in
showing that a polynomial p is nonnegative on the set B:
x ∈B =⇒p(x) ≥0.
(4)
1Throughout this paper, the variables x that a polynomial p(x) depend on will be referred to as “indeterminates”.
This is to distinguish these variables from decision variables in our optimization problems, which will typically be
the coeﬃcients of the polynomial.
7

We can write the following SOS constraints in order to impose (4):
q(x) := p(x)
r(x)
z
}|
{
−
Neq
X
i=1
Leq,i(x)geq,i(x) −
Nineq
X
j=1
Lineq,j(x)gineq,j(x) is SOS,
(5)
Lineq,j(x) is SOS, ∀j ∈{0, ..., Nineq}.
(6)
Here, the polynomials Leq,i and Lineq,j are “multiplier” polynomials analogous to Lagrange multi-
pliers in constrained optimization. In order to see that (5) and (6) are suﬃcient conditions for (4),
note that when a point x satisﬁes geq,i(x) = 0 and gineq,j(x) ≥0 for i ∈{1, ..., Neq}, j ∈{1, ..., Nineq}
(i.e., when x ∈B) then the term r(x) is non-positive. Hence, for q(x) to be nonnegative (which
must be the case since q is SOS), p(x) must be nonnegative. Thus, we have the desired implication
in (4). This process for using multipliers to impose nonnegativity constraints on sets is known as
the generalized S-procedure [Parrilo, 2000] and will be used extensively in Section 4 for computing
funnels.
4
Computing Funnels
In this section we describe how the tools from Section 3 can be used to compute outer approx-
imations of reachable sets (“funnels”) around trajectories of a nonlinear system. The approach
in Section 4.1 builds on the work presented in [Tobenkin et al., 2011, Tedrake et al., 2010] while
Sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 are based on [Majumdar and Tedrake, 2012] and [Majumdar et al., 2013]
respectively. In contrast to this prior work however, we consider the problem of computing outer ap-
proximations of forwards reachable sets as opposed to inner approximations of backwards reachable
sets. This leads to a few subtle diﬀerences in the cost functions of our optimization problems.
Consider the following dynamical system:
˙x = f(x(t), u(t)),
(7)
where x(t) ∈Rn is the state of the system at time t and u(t) ∈Rm is the control input. Let x0 :
[0, T] →Rn be the nominal trajectory that we would like the system to follow and u0 : [0, T] →Rm
be the nominal open-loop control input. Deﬁning new coordinates ¯x = x −x0(t) and ¯u = u −u0(t),
we can rewrite the dynamics (7) in these variables as:
˙¯x = ˙x −˙x0 = f(x0(t) + ¯x(t), u0(t) + ¯u(t)) −˙x0.
(8)
We will ﬁrst consider the problem of computing funnels for a closed-loop system subject to no
uncertainty. To this end, we assume that we are given a feedback controller ¯uf(t, ¯x) that corrects
for deviations around the nominal trajectory (we will consider the problem of designing feedback
controllers later in this section). We can then write the closed-loop dynamics of the system as:
˙¯x = fcl(t, ¯x(t)).
(9)
Given a set of initial conditions X0 ⊂Rn with x0(0) ∈X0, our goal is to ﬁnd a tight outer
approximation of the set of states the system may evolve to at time t ∈[0, T]. In particular, we are
concerned with ﬁnding sets F(t) ⊂Rn such that:
¯x(0) ∈X0 =⇒¯x(t) ∈F(t), ∀t ∈[0, T].
(10)
8

Deﬁnition 1. A funnel associated with a closed-loop dynamical system ˙¯x = fcl(t, ¯x(t)) is a map
F : [0, T] →P(Rn) from the time-interval [0, T] to the power set (i.e., the set of subsets) of Rn
such that the sets F(t) satisfy the condition (10) above.
Thus, with each time t ∈[0, T], the funnel associates a set F(t) ⊂Rn. We will parameterize
the sets F(t) as sub-level sets of nonnegative time-varying functions V : [0, T] × Rn →R+:
F(t) = {¯x(t) ∈Rn|V (t, ¯x(t)) ≤ρ(t)}.
(11)
Letting X0 ⊂F(0, ¯x), the following constraint is a suﬃcient condition for (10):
V (t, ¯x) = ρ(t) =⇒
˙V (t, ¯x) < ˙ρ(t), ∀t ∈[0, T].
(12)
Here, ˙V is computed as:
˙V (t, ¯x) = ∂V (t, ¯x)
∂¯x
fcl(t, ¯x) + ∂V (t, ¯x)
∂t
.
(13)
Intuitively, the constraint (12) says that on the boundary of the funnel (i.e., when V (t, ¯x) = ρ(t)),
the function V grows slower than ρ. Hence, states on the boundary of the funnel remain within
the funnel. This intuition is formalized in [Tedrake et al., 2010, Tobenkin et al., 2011].
While any function that satisﬁes (12) provides us with a valid funnel, we are interested in
ﬁnding tight outer approximations of the reachable set. A natural cost function for encouraging
tightness is the volume of the sets F(t). Combining this cost function with our constraints, we
obtain the following optimization problem:
inf
V,ρ
Z T
0
vol(F(t)) dt
(14)
s.t.
V (t, ¯x) = ρ(t) =⇒
˙V (t, ¯x) < ˙ρ(t), ∀t ∈[0, T],
X0 ⊂F(0, ¯x).
Note that our formulation for computing funnels diﬀers in an important respect from a number
of prior approaches on feedback motion planning and sequential composition using funnels [Tedrake
et al., 2010, Burridge et al., 1999, Conner et al., 2011]. In particular, the formulation presented here
considers a given set of initial conditions and attempts to bound the eﬀects of uncertainty going
forwards in time. This leads to the volume of funnels being minimized rather than maximized. This
is in contrast to [Tedrake et al., 2010, Burridge et al., 1999, Conner et al., 2011], which consider a
ﬁxed goal set and seek to maximize the set of initial conditions that are stabilized to this set (which
leads to a formulation where the volume of funnels is maximized). The minimization strategy here
is better suited to the use of funnels for real-time planning in previously unseen environments since
one is interested in bounding the eﬀect of uncertainties on the system in order to prevent collisions
with obstacles.
4.1
Numerical implementation using SOS programming
Since the optimization problem (14) involves searching over spaces of functions, it is inﬁnite dimen-
sional and hence not directly amenable to numerical computation. However, we can use the SOS
programming approach described in Section 3 to obtain ﬁnite-dimensional optimization problems
9

in the form of semideﬁnite programs (SDPs). We ﬁrst concentrate on implementing the constraints
in (14). We will assume that the initial condition set X0 is a semi-algebraic set (i.e., described in
terms of polynomial inequalities):
X0 = {¯x ∈Rn | g0,i(¯x) ≥0, ∀i = 1, . . . , N0}.
(15)
Then the constraints in (14) can be written as:
V (t, ¯x) = ρ(t) =⇒˙ρ(t) −˙V (t, ¯x) > 0
(16)
g0,i(¯x) ≥0 ∀i ∈{1, . . . , N0} =⇒ρ(0) −V (0, ¯x) ≥0.
(17)
If we restrict ourselves to polynomial dynamics and polynomial functions V and ρ, these constraints
are precisely in the form of (4) in Section 3.2. We can thus apply the procedure described in Section
3.2 and arrive at the following suﬃcient conditions for (16) and (17):
˙ρ(t) −˙V (t, ¯x) −L(t, ¯x)[V (t, ¯x) −ρ(t)] −Lt(t, ¯x)[t(T −t)] is SOS,
(18)
ρ(0) −V (0, ¯x) −
N0
X
i
L0,i(¯x)g0,i(¯x) is SOS,
(19)
Lt(t, ¯x), L0,i(¯x) are SOS, ∀i ∈{1, . . . , N0}.
(20)
As in Section 3.2, the polynomials L, Lt and L0,i are “multiplier” polynomials whose coeﬃcients
are decision variables.
Next, we focus on approximating the cost function in (14) using semideﬁnite programming. This
can be achieved by sampling in time and replacing the integral with the ﬁnite sum PN
k=1 vol(F(tk)).
In the special case where the function V is quadratic in ¯x:
V (tk, ¯x) = ¯xT Sk¯x, Sk ⪰0,
(21)
the set F(tk) is an ellipsoid and we can use semideﬁnite programming (SDP) to directly minimize
the volume by maximizing the determinant of Sk (recall that the volume of the ellipsoid F(tk) is
a monotonically decreasing function of the determinant of Sk). Note that while the problem of
maximizing the determinant of a psd matrix is not directly a problem of the form (1), it can be
transformed into such a form
[Ben-Tal and Nemirovski, 2001, Section3]. Further note that the
fact that our cost function can be handled directly in the SDP framework is in distinction to the
approaches for computing inner approximations of backwards reachable sets [Tedrake et al., 2010]
[Tobenkin et al., 2011] [Majumdar et al., 2013]. This is because the determinant of a psd matrix is
a concave function and hence minimizing the determinant is not a convex problem. Hence, in the
previous work, the authors used heuristics for maximizing volume.
In the more general case, we can minimize an upper bound on the cost function
PN
k=1 vol(F(tk)) by introducing ellipsoids E(tk):
E(tk) = {¯x ∈Rn|¯xT Sk¯x ≤1, Sk ⪰0}
(22)
such that F(tk) ⊂E(tk) and minimizing PN
k=1 vol(E(tk)).
The containment constraint can be
equivalently expressed as the constraint:
V (tk, ¯x) ≤ρ(tk) =⇒¯xT Sk¯x ≤1,
(23)
10

and can thus be imposed using SOS constraints:
1 −¯xT Sk¯x −LE,k(¯x)[ρ(tk) −V (tk, ¯x)] is SOS,
(24)
LE,k(¯x) is SOS.
(25)
Combining our cost function with the constraints (18) - (20), we obtain the following optimization
problem:
inf
V,ρ,L,Lt,L0,i,Sk,LE,k
N
X
k=1
vol(E(tk)) =
N
X
k=1
vol({¯x|¯xT Sk¯x ≤1})
(26)
s.t.
˙ρ(t) −˙V (t, ¯x) −L(t, ¯x)[V (t, ¯x) −ρ(t)] −Lt(t, ¯x)[t(T −t)] is SOS, (27)
ρ(0) −V (0, ¯x) −
N0
X
i
L0,i(¯x)g0,i(¯x) is SOS,
1 −¯xT Sk¯x −LE,k(¯x)[ρ(tk) −V (tk, ¯x)] is SOS,
∀k ∈{1, . . . , N},
Sk ⪰0,
∀k ∈{1, . . . , N},
Lt(t, ¯x), L0,i(¯x), LE,k(¯x) are SOS,
∀i ∈{1, . . . , N0}, ∀k ∈{1, . . . , N}.
While this optimization problem is ﬁnite dimensional, it is non-convex in general since the ﬁrst
constraints are bilinear in the decision variables (e.g., the coeﬃcients of the polynomials L and
V are multiplied together in the ﬁrst constraint). To apply SOS programming, we require the
constraints to be linear in the coeﬃcients of the polynomials we are optimizing. However, note
that when V and ρ are ﬁxed, the constraints are linear in the other decision variables. Similarly,
when the multipliers L and LE,k are ﬁxed, the constraints are linear in the remaining decision
variables. Thus, we can eﬃciently perform this optimization by alternating between the two sets
of decision variables (L, Lt, L0,i, Sk, LE,k) and (V, ρ, Lt, L0,i, Sk). In each step of the alternation, we
can optimize our cost function PN
k=1 vol(E(tk)). These alternations are summarized in Algorithm
1. Note that Algorithm 1 requires an initialization for V and ρ. We will discuss how to obtain
these in Section 4.4.
Remark 1. It is easy to see that Algorithm 1 converges (though not necessarily to an optimal
solution). Each iteration of the alternations is guaranteed to achieve a cost function that is at
least as good as the previous iteration (since the solution from the previous iteration is a valid
one). Hence, the sequence of optimal values in each iteration form a monotonically non-increasing
sequence. Combined with the fact that the cost function is bounded below by 0, we conclude that
this sequence converges and hence that Algorithm 1 terminates.
4.2
Approximation via time-sampling
As observed in [Tobenkin et al., 2011] in practice it is often the case that the nominal trajectory
x0 : [0, T] →Rn is diﬃcult to approximate with a low degree polynomial in time. This can lead to
the constraint (27) in the problem (26) having a high degree polynomial dependence on t. Thus it is
often useful to implement an approximation of the optimization problem (26) where the condition
(16) is checked only at a ﬁnite number of sample points tk ∈[0, T], k ∈{1, . . . , N}. We can use a
11

1: Initialize V and ρ.
2: costprev = ∞;
3: converged = false;
4: while ¬converged do
5:
STEP 1 : Minimize PN
k=1 vol(E(tk)) by searching for multiplier polynomials
(L, Lt, L0,i, LE,k) and Sk while ﬁxing V and ρ.
6:
STEP 2 : Minimize PN
k=1 vol(E(tk)) by searching for (V, ρ, Lt, L0,i, Sk) while ﬁxing L and
LE,k.
7:
cost = PN
k=1 vol(E(tk));
8:
if costprev−cost
costprev
< ϵ then
9:
converged = true;
10:
end if
11:
costprev = cost;
12: end while
Algorithm 1: Funnel Computation
piecewise linear parameterization of ρ and can thus compute:
˙ρ(tk) = ρ(tk+1) −ρ(tk)
tk+1 −tk
.
(28)
Similarly we can parameterize the function V by polynomials Vk(¯x) at each time sample and
compute:
∂V (t, ¯x)
∂t
≈Vk+1(¯x) −Vk(¯x)
tk+1 −tk
.
(29)
We can then write the following modiﬁed version of the problem (26):
inf
Vk,ρ,Lk,L0,i,Sk,LE,k
N
X
k=1
vol(E(tk)) =
N
X
k=1
vol({¯x|¯xT Sk¯x ≤1})
(30)
s.t.
˙ρ(tk) −˙Vk(¯x) −Lk(¯x)[Vk(¯x) −ρ(tk)],
∀k ∈{1, . . . , N},
ρ(t1) −V1(¯x) −
N0
X
i
L0,i(¯x)g0,i(¯x) is SOS,
1 −¯xT Sk¯x −LE,k(¯x)[ρ(tk) −Vk(¯x)] is SOS,
∀k ∈{1, . . . , N},
Sk ⪰0,
∀k ∈{1, . . . , N},
L0,i(¯x), LE,k(¯x) are SOS,
∀i ∈{1, . . . , N0}, ∀k ∈{1, . . . , N}.
This program does not have any algebraic dependence on the variable t and can thus provide
signiﬁcant computational gains over (26). However, it does not provide an exact funnel certiﬁcate.
One would hope that with a suﬃciently ﬁne sampling in time, one would recover exactness. Partial
results in this direction are provided in [Tobenkin et al., 2011] along with numerical examples
showing that the loss of accuracy from the sampling approximation can be quite small in practice.
The problem (30) is again bilinear in the decision variables. It is linear in the two sets of decision
variables (Lk, L0,i, Sk, LE,k) and (Vk, ρ, L0,i, Sk). Thus, Algorithm 1 can be applied directly to (30)
with the minor modiﬁcation that V and ρ are replaced by their time-sampled counterparts and the
multipliers (L, Lt) are replaced by the multipliers Lk.
12

4.3
Extensions to the basic algorithm
Next we describe several extensions to the basic framework for computing funnels described in
Section 4.1. Section 4.3.1 discusses the scenario in which the dynamics of the system are subject
to bounded disturbances/uncertainty, Section 4.3.2 considers the problem of synthesizing feedback
controllers that explicitly attempt to minimize the size of the funnel, Section 4.3.3 demonstrates
how to handle input saturations, and Section 4.3.4 considers a generalization of the cost function.
4.3.1
Uncertainty in the dynamics
Suppose that the dynamics of the system are subject to an uncertainty term w(t) ∈Rd that models
external disturbances or parametric model uncertainties. The closed-loop dynamics (9) can then
be modiﬁed to capture this uncertainty:
˙¯x = fcl(t, ¯x(t), w(t)).
(31)
We will assume that the dynamics fcl depend polynomially on w. Given an initial condition set
X0 ⊂Rn as before, our goal is to ﬁnd sets F(t) such that x(t) is guaranteed to be in F(t) for any
valid disturbance proﬁle:
¯x(0) ∈X0 =⇒¯x(t) ∈F(t), ∀t ∈[0, T], ∀w : [0, T] →W.
(32)
Parameterizing the sets F(t) as sub-level sets of nonnegative time-varying functions V : [0, T] ×
Rn →R+ as before, the following condition is suﬃcient to ensure (32):
V (t, ¯x) = ρ(t) =⇒
˙V (t, ¯x, w) < ˙ρ(t), ∀t ∈[0, T], ∀w(t) ∈W,
(33)
where ˙V is computed as:
˙V (t, ¯x, w) = ∂V (t, ¯x)
∂¯x
fcl(t, ¯x, w) + ∂V (t, ¯x)
∂t
.
(34)
This is almost identical to the condition (12), with the exception that the function V is required
to decrease on the boundary of the funnel for every choice of disturbance. Assuming that the set
W is a semi-algebraic set W = {w ∈Rd | gw,j(w) ≥0, ∀j = 1, . . . , Nw}, the optimization problem
(26) is then easily modiﬁed by replacing condition (27) with the following constraints:
(35)
˙ρ(t) −˙V (t, ¯x, w) −L(t, ¯x, w)[V (t, ¯x) −ρ(t)] −Lt(t, ¯x, w)[t(T −t)] . . .
. . . −
Nw
X
j=1
Lw,j(t, ¯x, w)gw,j(w) is SOS,
Lw,j(t, ¯x, w) is SOS, ∀j = {1, . . . , Nw}.
These SOS constraints now involve polynomials in the indeterminates t, ¯x and w.
Since these
constraints are linear in the coeﬃcients of the newly introduced multipliers Lw,j, Algorithm 1 can be
directly applied to the modiﬁed optimization problem by adding Lw,j to the list of polynomials to be
searched for in both Step 1 and Step 2 of the iterations. Similarly, the time-sampled approximation
described in Section 4.2 can also be applied to (35).
13

4.3.2
Feedback control synthesis
So far we have assumed that we have been provided with a feedback controller that corrects for
deviations around the nominal trajectory. We now consider the problem of optimizing the feedback
controller in order to minimize the size of the funnel. We will assume that the system is control
aﬃne:
˙x = f(x(t)) + g(x(t))u(t),
(36)
and parameterize the control policy as a polynomial ¯uf(t, ¯x). We can thus write the dynamics in
the ¯x coordinates as:
˙¯x = f(x0(t) + ¯x(t)) + g(x(t))[u0(t) + ¯uf(t, ¯x)] −˙x0.
(37)
The feedback controller can then be optimized by adding the coeﬃcients of the polynomial ¯uf(t, ¯x)
to the set of decision variables in the optimization problem (26) while keeping all the constraints
unchanged. Note that ¯uf appears in the constraints only through ˙V , which is now bilinear in the
coeﬃcients of V and ¯uf since:
˙V (t, ¯x) = ∂V (t, ¯x)
∂¯x
˙¯x + ∂V (t, ¯x)
∂t
.
(38)
With the (coeﬃcients of) the feedback controller ¯uf as part of the optimization problem, note
that the constraints of the problem (26) are now bilinear in the two sets of decision variables
(L, Lt, L0,i, Sk, LE,k, ¯uf) and (V, ρ, Lt, L0,i, Sk). Thus, in principle we could use a bilinear alternation
scheme similar to the one in Algorithm 1 and alternatively optimize these two sets of decision
variables. However, in this case we would not be searching for a controller that explicitly seeks
to minimize the size of the funnel (since the controller would not be searched for at the same
time as V or ρ, which deﬁne the funnel). To get around this issue, we add another step in each
iteration where we optimize our cost function PN
k=1 vol(E(tk)) by searching for (¯uf, ρ, Lt, L0,i, Sk)
while keeping (V, L, LE,k) ﬁxed. This allows us to search for ¯uf and ρ at the same time, which
can signiﬁcantly improve the quality of the controllers and funnels we obtain. These steps are
summarized in Algorithm 2. By a reasoning identical to the one in Remark 1 it is easy to see that
the sequence of optimal values produced by Algorithm 2 converges.
We note that the approach for taking into account uncertainty described in Section 4.3.1 can
easily be incorporated into Algorithm 2. Similarly, by parameterizing the controller ¯uf as poly-
nomials uf,k(¯x) at the times tk, we can also apply the time-sampled approximation described in
Section 4.2.
4.3.3
Actuator saturations
A. Approach 1
Our approach also allows us to incorporate actuator limits into the veriﬁcation procedure.
Although we examine the single-input case in this section, this framework is easily extended to
handle multiple inputs. Let the control input u(t) at time t be mapped through the following
control saturation function:
s(u(t)) =





umax
if u(t) ≥umax
umin
if u(t) ≤umin
u(t)
o.w.
14

1: Initialize V and ρ.
2: costprev = ∞;
3: converged = false;
4: while ¬converged do
5:
STEP 1 : Minimize PN
k=1 vol(E(tk)) by searching for controller ¯uf and (L, Lt, L0,i, LE,k, Sk)
while ﬁxing V and ρ.
6:
STEP 2 : Minimize PN
k=1 vol(E(tk)) by searching for controller ¯uf and (ρ, Lt, L0,i, Sk)
while ﬁxing (V, L, LE,k).
7:
STEP 3 : Minimize PN
k=1 vol(E(tk)) by searching for (V, ρ, Lt, L0,i, Sk) while ﬁxing
(L, LE,k, ¯uf).
8:
cost = PN
k=1 vol(E(tk));
9:
if costprev−cost
costprev
< ϵ then
10:
converged = true;
11:
end if
12:
costprev = cost;
13: end while
Algorithm 2: Feedback Control Synthesis
Then, in a manner similar to [Tedrake et al., 2010], a piecewise analysis of ˙V (t, ¯x) can be used to
check the Lyapunov conditions are satisﬁed even when the control input saturates. Deﬁning:
˙Vmin(t, ¯x) :=∂V (t, ¯x)
∂¯x

f(x0 + ¯x) + g(x0 + ¯x)umin

+ ∂V (t, ¯x)
∂t
,
(39)
˙Vmax(t, ¯x) :=∂V (t, ¯x)
∂¯x

f(x0 + ¯x) + g(x0 + ¯x)umax

+ ∂V (t, ¯x)
∂t
,
(40)
we must check the following conditions:
u0(t) + ¯uf(t, ¯x) ≤umin, V (t, ¯x) = ρ(t) =⇒
˙Vmin(t, ¯x) < ˙ρ(t),
(41)
u0(t) + ¯uf(t, ¯x) ≥umax, V (t, ¯x) = ρ(t) =⇒
˙Vmin(t, ¯x) < ˙ρ(t),
(42)
umin ≤u0(t) + ¯uf(t, ¯x) ≤umax, V (t, ¯x) = ρ(t) =⇒
˙V (t, ¯x) < ˙ρ(t),
(43)
where u0 is the open-loop control input and ¯uf is the feedback controller as before. These conditions
can be enforced by adding additional multipliers to the optimization program (26) or its time-
sampled counterpart (30).
B. Approach 2
Although one can handle multiple inputs via the above method, the number of SOS conditions
grows exponentially with the number of inputs (3m conditions for ˙V are needed in general to handle
all possible combinations of input saturations). Thus, for systems with a large number of inputs,
an alternative formulation was proposed in [Majumdar et al., 2013] that avoids this exponential
growth in the size of the SOS program at the cost of adding conservativeness to the size of the
funnel. Given limits on the control vector u ∈Rm of the form umin < u < umax, we can ask to
satisfy:
¯x ∈F(t) =⇒umin < u0(t) + ¯uf(t, ¯x) < umax, ∀t ∈[0, T].
(44)
15

This constraint implies that the applied control input remains within the speciﬁed bounds inside
the veriﬁed funnel (a conservative condition). The number of extra constraints grows linearly with
the number of inputs (since we have one new condition for every input), thus leading to smaller
optimization problems.
4.3.4
A more general cost function
We end our discussion of extensions to the basic algorithm for computing funnels presented in
Section 4.1 by considering a generalization of the cost function (volume of the funnel) we have
used so far. In particular, it is sometimes useful to minimize the volume of the funnel projected
onto a subspace of the state space. Suppose this projection map is given by π : Rn →Rnp with
a corresponding np × n projection matrix P. For an ellipsoid E = {¯x ∈Rn | ¯xT Sk¯x ≤1}, the
projected set π(E) is also an ellipsoid Ep = {¯x ∈Rnp | ¯xT S(p)
k ¯x ≤1} with:
S(p)
k
= (PS−1
k P T )−1.
(45)
Recall that the ability to minimize the volume of the ellipsoid E using SDP relied on being able
to maximize the determinant of Sk. In order to minimize the volume of Ep, we would have to
maximize det(S(p)
k ), which is a complicated (i.e. nonlinear) function of Sk. Hence, in each iteration
of Algorithm 1 we linearize the function det(S(p)
k ) with respect to Sk at the solution of Sk from
the previous iteration and maximize this linearization instead. The linearization of det(S(p)
k ) with
respect to Sk at a nominal value Sk,0 can be explicitly computed as:
Tr

P T (PS−1
k,0P T )−1PS−1
k,0SkS−1
k,0

,
(46)
where Tr refers to the trace of the matrix.
4.4
Implementation details
We end this section on computing funnels by discussing a few important implementation details.
4.4.1
Trajectory generation
An important step that is necessary for the success of our approach to computing funnels is the
generation of a dynamically feasible open-loop control input u0 : [0, T] 7→Rm and corresponding
nominal trajectory x0 : [0, T] 7→Rn. A method that has been shown to work well in practice
and scale to high dimensions is the direct collocation trajectory optimization method [Betts, 2001].
While this is the approach we use for the results in Section 7, other methods like the Rapidly
Exploring Randomized Tree (RRT) or its asymptotically optimal version, RRT⋆can be used too
[Kuﬀner and Lavalle, 2000, Karaman and Frazzoli, 2011].
4.4.2
Initializing V and ρ
Algorithms 1 and 2 require an initial guess for the functions V and ρ. In [Tedrake et al., 2010], the
authors use the Lyapunov function candidate associated with a time-varying LQR controller. The
control law is obtained by solving a Riccati diﬀerential equation:
−˙S(t) = Q −S(t)B(t)R−1BT S(t) + S(t)A(t) + A(t)T S(t)
(47)
16

with ﬁnal value conditions S(t) = Sf. Here A(t) and B(t) describe the time-varying linearization
of the dynamics about the nominal trajectory x0.
The matrices Q and R are positive-deﬁnite
cost-matrices. The function:
Vguess(t, ¯x) = (x −x0(t))T S(t)(x −x0(t)) = ¯xT S(t)¯x
(48)
is our initial Lyapunov candidate. Setting ρ to a quickly increasing function such as an exponential
is typically suﬃcient to obtain a feasible initialization. However, note that since Algorithms 1 and
2 are not guaranteed to converge to globally optimal solutions, their initialization can impact the
quality of the resulting solutions. Thus, standard strategies such as multiple (possibly random)
initializations can help address issues related to local solutions.
Another strategy that can be
used when computing libraries of funnels (Section 5) is to initialize a funnel computation with the
solution computed from a neighboring maneuver in the library.
5
Funnel Libraries
5.1
Sequential composition
One can think of funnels computed using the machinery described in Section 4 as robust motion
primitives (the robustness is to initial conditions and uncertainty in the dynamics). While we could
deﬁne a funnel library simply as a collection F of funnels and associated feedback controllers, it will
be fruitful to associate some additional structure with F. In particular, it is useful to know how
funnels can be sequenced together to form composite robust motion plans. In order to consider this
more formally, we will ﬁrst introduce the notion of sequential composition of funnels [Burridge et al.,
1999]. We note that our deﬁnition of sequential composition below diﬀers slightly from the one
proposed in [Burridge et al., 1999], which considers inﬁnite-horizon control policies in contrast to
the ﬁnite-horizon funnels we consider here. In this regard, our notion of a funnel (and corresponding
notion of sequential composition) is akin to that of conditional invariance considered in [Kantor
and Rizzi, 2003, Conner et al., 2011].
Deﬁnition 2. An ordered pair (F1, F2) of funnels F1 : [0, T1] →P(Rn) and F2 : [0, T2] →P(Rn)
is sequentially composable if F1(T1) ⊂F2(0).
In other words, two funnels are sequentially composable if the “outlet” of one is contained within
the “inlet” of the other. A pictorial depiction of this is provided in Figure 2. We note that the
sequential composition of two such funnels is itself a funnel.
5.2
Exploiting invariances in the dynamics
For our purposes here, it is useful to introduce a slightly generalized notion of sequential com-
posability that will allow us to exploit invariances (continuous symmetries) in the dynamics. In
particular, the dynamics of large classes of mechanical systems such as mobile robots are often
invariant under certain transformations of the state space. For Lagrangian systems, the notion of
“cyclic coordinates” captures such invariances. A cyclic coordinate is a (generalized) coordinate
of the system that the Lagrangian does not depend on. We can then write the dynamics of the
system ˙x = f(x(t), u(t)) as a function of a state vector x = [xc, xnc] which is partitioned into cyclic
17

Figure 2: The ordered pair of funnels (F1, F2) is sequentially composable. The outlet of F1 is contained within the
inlet of F2, i.e., F1(T1) ⊂F2(0).
coordinates xc and non-cyclic coordinates xnc in such a way that the dynamics only depend on the
non-cyclic coordinates:
˙x = f(xnc(t), u(t)).
(49)
For example, the dynamics of a quadrotor or ﬁxed-wing airplane (expressed in an appropriate
coordinate system) do not depend on the x −y −z position of the system or the yaw angle.
Invariance of the dynamics of the system also implies that if a curve t 7→(x(t), u(t)) is a valid
solution to the dynamics ˙x = f(x(t), u(t)), then so is the transformed solution:
t 7→(Ψc(x(t)), u(t)),
(50)
where Ψc is a mapping from the state space to itself that shifts (i.e., translates) the state vector
along the cyclic coordinates (and does not transform the non-cyclic coordinates). This allows us to
make the following important observation.
Remark 2. Suppose we are given a system whose dynamics are invariant to shifts Ψc along cyclic
coordinates xc. Let F : [0, T] →P(Rn) given by t 7→F(t) be a funnel associated with this system.
Then the transformed funnel given by t 7→Ψc(F(t)) is also a valid funnel. Hence, one can in fact
think of invariances in the dynamics giving rise to an inﬁnite family of funnels parameterized by
shifts Ψc(F) of a funnel F along cyclic coordinates of the system.
Note that here we have implicitly assumed that the feedback controller:
uf(t, x) = u0(t) + ¯uf(t, ¯x) = u0(t) + ¯uf(t, x −x0(t))
(51)
associated with the funnel has also been transformed to:
u0(t) + ¯uf(t, x −Ψc(x0(t))).
(52)
In other words, we have shifted the reference trajectory we are tracking by Ψc. Henceforth, when
we refer to transformations of funnels along cyclic coordinates we will implicitly assume that the
feedback controller has also been appropriately modiﬁed in this manner.
18

Figure 3: Sequential composition modulo invariances. The top row of the ﬁgure shows two funnels that are not
sequentially composable in the sense of Deﬁnition 2. However, as shown in the bottom row of the ﬁgure, they are
sequentially composable in the more general sense of Deﬁnition 3. By shifting the funnel F2 (whose outline is plotted
using dotted lines for reference) in the cyclic coordinate (xc), we can ensure that the outlet of F1 lies in the inlet of
this shifted funnel Ψc(F2).
These observations allow us to deﬁne a generalized notion of sequential composition that ex-
ploits invariances in the dynamics. We will refer to this notion as sequential composition modulo
invariances (MI).
Deﬁnition 3. An ordered pair (F1, F2) of funnels F1 : [0, T1] →P(Rn) and F2 : [0, T2] →P(Rn) is
sequentially composable modulo invariances (MI) if there exists a shift Ψc of the state along cyclic
coordinates such that F1(T1) ⊂Ψc
 F2(0)

.
Informally, two funnels F1 and F2 are sequentially composable in this generalized sense if one can
shift F2 along the cyclic coordinates of the system and ensure that its inlet contains the outlet of
F1 (note that the deﬁnition requires the entire inlet of the shifted funnel to contain the outlet of
F1, i.e., not just containment in the cyclic coordinates). Figure 3 provides a pictorial depiction of
this.
One may think of sequential composability MI of funnels as being analogous to the compatibility
condition required for sequencing trajectories in the library of a Maneuver Automaton [Frazzoli
et al., 2005]. Let πnc denote the projection operator that maps a state x = [xc, xnc] to the non-
cyclic coordinates xnc. In order to be able to sequence together two trajectories x1 : [0, T1] →Rn
19

and x2 : [0, T2] →Rn, one requires:
πnc(x1(T1)) = πnc(x2(0)).
(53)
Note, however that imposing this compatibility condition on the nominal trajectories associated
with two funnels is neither necessary nor suﬃcient for the funnels being sequentially composable MI.
Sequentially composability MI is concerned with the compatibility between funnels themselves and
not the underlying nominal trajectories, which distinguishes our notion of compatibility between
maneuvers from that of [Frazzoli et al., 2005].
5.3
Runtime composability
The two notions of sequential composability we have considered so far allow us to produce new
funnels from a given set of funnels by stitching them together appropriately in an oﬄine prepro-
cessing stage. We now introduce another notion of composability that is particularly important for
reasoning about how funnels can be executed sequentially at runtime. We will refer to this notion
as runtime composability.
Deﬁnition 4. An ordered pair (F1, F2) of funnels F1 : [0, T1] →P(Rn) and F2 : [0, T2] →P(Rn)
is runtime composable if for all xout ∈F1(T1), there exists a shift Ψc of the state along cyclic
coordinates such that xout ∈Ψc
 F2(0)

.
In other words, for any state xout in the outlet of F1, one can shift F2 along cyclic coordinates
and ensure that its inlet contains xout. Hence, we can guarantee that it will be possible to execute
the funnel F2 (after appropriate shifting in the cyclic coordinates) once the funnel F1 has been
executed (though the particular shift Ψc required depends on xout and thus will not be known until
runtime). Hence, runtime composability of funnels allows us to exploit invariances in the dynamics
of the system at runtime and eﬀectively reuse our robust motion plans in diﬀerent scenarios. As a
simple example, a UAV ﬂying through a cluttered environment can reuse a funnel computed for a
certain starting position by shifting the funnel so its inlet contains the UAV’s current state.
Remark 3. It is easy to see from Deﬁnition 4 that two funnels F1 and F2 are runtime composable
if and only if:
∀xout = [xc, xnc] ∈F1(T1), ∃x0,c s.t. [x0,c, xnc] ∈F2(0).
(54)
This condition is simply stating that we can shift the point xout along cyclic coordinates in such a
way that it is contained in the inlet of F2. This condition in turn is equivalent to:
πnc(F1(T1)) ⊂πnc(F2(0)),
(55)
where as before πnc denotes the projection onto the non-cyclic coordinates of the state space.
Figure 4 shows two funnels that are not sequentially composable MI. However, since πnc(F1(T1)) ⊂
πnc(F2(0)), they are runtime composable.
We end our discussion on composability of funnels by noting the following relationship between
the three notions of sequential composability we have discussed.
20

Figure 4: The ﬁgure shows two funnels that are not sequentially composable MI (since the inlet of funnel F2 isn’t
large enough in the xc dimension). However, since πnc(F1(T1)) ⊂πnc(F2(0)), they are runtime composable.
Remark 4. The three notions of sequential composability we have discussed are related as follows:
Sequential composability =⇒Sequential composability MI =⇒Runtime composability.
The ﬁrst implication is immediate from Deﬁnitions 2 and 3. The second implication follows from
the following reasoning:
F1(T1) ⊂Ψc
 F2(0)

(Sequential composability MI, ref. Deﬁnition 3)
=⇒πnc(F1(T1)) ⊂πnc
 Ψc(F2(0))

= πnc(F2(0))
(Runtime composability, ref. Remark 3).
5.4
Checking composability
Given two funnels F1 : [0, T1] →P(Rn) and F2 : [0, T2] →P(Rn) deﬁned as F1(t) = {¯x ∈
Rn | V1(t, ¯x) ≤ρ1(t)} and F2(t) = {¯x ∈Rn | V2(t, ¯x) ≤ρ2(t)} for polynomials V1 and V2, this
section describes how we can check sequential composability, sequential composability MI and
runtime composability in an oﬄine preprocessing stage.
5.4.1
Sequential composability
Sequential composability of (F1, F2) is equivalent to the following condition:
V1(T1, ¯x) ≤ρ1(T1) =⇒V2(0, ¯x) ≤ρ2(0).
(56)
21

We can thus apply the generalized S-procedure (described in Section 3.2) and check sequential
composability using the following simple SOS program:
Find
L(¯x)
(57)
s.t.
ρ2(0) −V2(0, ¯x) −L(¯x)(ρ1(T1) −V1(T1, ¯x)) is SOS,
L(¯x) is SOS.
5.4.2
Sequential composition MI
In order to check sequential composability MI, we need to search for a shift Ψc along cyclic coordi-
nates of the state such that F1(T1) ⊂Ψc(F2(0)). For the important special case in which the sets
F1(T1) and F2(0) are ellipsoids (corresponding to V1(T1, ¯x) and V2(0, ¯x) being quadratic2 in ¯x), we
can cast this search as a semideﬁnite program (SDP). Suppose the sets F1(T1) and F2(0) are given
by:
F1(T1) = {x ∈Rn | (x −x1(T1))T S1(x −x1(T1)) ≤1}
(58)
F2(0) = {x ∈Rn | (x −x2(0))T S2(x −x2(0)) ≤1},
(59)
where x1 : [0, T1] →Rn and x2 : [0, T2] →Rn are the nominal trajectories around which the funnels
were computed and S1 and S2 are positive deﬁnite matrices. We would like to search for a shift
∆c ∈Rn (where the components of ∆c corresponding to the non-cyclic coordinates are set to zero)
such that the ellipsoid:
Ψc(F2(0)) = {x ∈Rn | [x −(x2(0) + ∆c)]T S2[x −(x2(0) + ∆c)] ≤1}
(60)
is contained within the ellipsoid F1(T1). The ﬁrst step in obtaining the desired SDP is to note that
the set Ψc(F2(0)) can be represented equivalently as the image of the unit ball under an aﬃne map:
Ψc(F2(0)) = {Bu + x2(0) + ∆c | ∥u∥2 ≤1},
(61)
where B = chol(S2))−1. Here, chol(S2) is the Cholesky factorization of S2 (guaranteed to exist and
be invertible since S2 is positive deﬁnite). Such a representation is a standard trick in semideﬁnite
programming (see for example [Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004, Section 8.4.2]).
Introducing the notation b := −S1x1(T1) and c := x1(T1)T S1x1(T1) −1, the condition that the
ellipsoid F1(T1) is a subset of the ellipsoid Ψc(F2(0)) is then equivalent to being able to ﬁnd a scalar
λ > 0 such that the following matrix semideﬁniteness constraint holds ( [Boyd and Vandenberghe,
2004, Section 8.4.2]):


−λ −c + bT S−1
1 b
01×n
(x2(0) + ∆c + S−1
1 b)T
0n×1
λIn×n
B
x2(0) + ∆c + S−1
1 b
B
S−1
1

⪰0.
(62)
Here, the matrices I and 0 represent the identity matrix and the all-zeros matrix respectively. Since
this semideﬁniteness condition is linear in λ and ∆c, the problem of searching for these decision
variables subject to λ > 0 and (62) is a SDP. This SDP will be feasible if and only if F1 and F2 are
sequentially composable MI.
2Note that the restriction to quadratic V1(T1, ¯x) and V2(0, ¯x) is a relatively mild one. We are not imposing any
conditions on the degree of V1 and V2 at times other than the endpoints.
22

The problem of checking sequential composability MI in the more general non-ellipsoidal case is
not directly amenable to such a SDP based formulation. However, if we ﬁx Ψc, then the problem of
checking sequential composability MI reduces to the problem of checking sequential composability.
Thus, we can use the SOS program (57) to verify if a given Ψc yields the desired containment con-
straint F1(T1) ⊂Ψc(F2(0)). One natural choice is to set Ψc such that πc(Ψc(x2(0))) = πc(x1(T1)),
where πc is the projection of the state onto the cyclic coordinates. Intuitively, this corresponds to
shifting the funnel F2 so that the start of its nominal trajectory is lined up along cyclic coordinates
with the end of the nominal trajectory of F1. If the SOS program is infeasible, a local search around
this Ψc could yield the desired shift.
5.4.3
Runtime composability
In order to check runtime composability of F1 and F2, we need to check the inclusion πnc(F1(T1)) ⊂
πnc(F2(0)). For the important special case where the sets F1(T1) and F2(0) are ellipsoids, we can
compute the projections exactly. This is because the projection of an ellipsoid onto a linear subspace
is also an ellipsoid (see equation (45) for the exact formula for the projected ellipsoid). Checking
if a given ellipsoid contains another is a straightforward application of semideﬁnite programming
[Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2004, Example B.1, Appendix B].
For the more general case, one might hope for a SOS programming based condition for checking
πnc(F1(T1)) ⊂πnc(F2(0)). However, the existential quantiﬁer inherent in the projection (see the
equivalent condition (54)) makes it challenging to formulate such SOS conditions. Nevertheless,
there exist general purpose tools such as quantiﬁer elimination [Collins and Hong, 1998] for checking
quantiﬁed polynomial formulas such as (54). While the worst-case complexity of doing general
purpose quantiﬁer elimination is poor, software packages such as QEPCAD [Brown, 2003] (or
dReal [Gao et al., 2013], which is based on a diﬀerent theoretical framework) can often work well in
practice for specialized problems. We note however that in the examples considered in Sections 7
and 8 we will only be using funnels with ellipsoidal inlets and outlets and thus will not be concerned
with this complexity.
5.5
Funnel library
A simple but useful generalization of the notions of composability introduced above can be obtained
by checking the associated containment conditions at a given time τ1 rather than at time T1. For
example, we will say that the ordered pair of funnels (F1, F2) is sequentially composable at time τ1
if F1(τ1) ⊂F2(0). We will use similar terminology for the other notions of composability. Given a
collection F of funnels associated with a dynamical system, we will associate a directed graph G(F)
whose vertices correspond to funnels F ∈F. Two vertices corresponding to funnels Fi and Fj are
connected by a directed edge (Fi, Fj) if and only if the ordered pair (Fi, Fj) is runtime composable
at some speciﬁed time τi. We will sometimes refer to τi as the execution time of funnel Fi.
We now introduce the primary data structure that will be used for robust real-time planning
(Section 6).
Deﬁnition 5. A funnel library FL associated with a given dynamical system is a tuple FL =
(F, G(F), C, {τi}), where F is a set of funnels for the dynamical system, G(F) is the directed graph
representing which funnels are runtime composable, C is the set of feedback controllers associated
with the funnels in F, and {τi} is the set of execution times.
23

We note that while the deﬁnition of funnel libraries only makes explicit reference to runtime com-
posability of funnels, we are implicitly exploiting the notion of sequential composability (MI) since
each funnel in F may be constructed from simpler funnels that have been sequentially composed. It
is also important to note that while we do not impose restrictions such as connectedness or strong
connectedness on the graph G(F), it may be useful to impose such conditions based on the task
at hand. For example, for tasks which require continuous operation (such as a UAV navigating
indeﬁnitely through a forest or a factory arm continuously placing objects onto a conveyor belt),
we should require that G(F) be strongly connected (since if G(F) is not strongly connected, we are
ruling out the possibility of executing certain funnels in the future). On a similar note, properties
of the graph such as its diameter or girth may be related to the eﬃciency with which a certain task
can be accomplished. Identifying which graph theoretic properties should be imposed on G(F) for
diﬀerent tasks is an interesting research avenue, but we do not pursue this in the present work.
6
Real-time Planning with Funnels
Given a funnel library FL = (F, G(F), C, {τi}) computed oﬄine, we can proceed to use it for robust
real-time planning in previously unseen environments. The robot’s task speciﬁcation may be in
terms of a goal region that must be reached (as in the case of a manipulator arm grasping an
object), or in terms of a nominal direction the robot should move in while avoiding obstacles (as in
the case of a UAV ﬂying through a forest or a legged robot walking over rough terrain). For the sake
of concreteness, we adopt the latter task speciﬁcation although one can adapt the contents of this
section to the former speciﬁcation. We further assume that the robot is provided with regions in the
conﬁguration space that obstacles are guaranteed to lie in and that the robot’s sensors only provide
this information up to a ﬁnite spatial horizon around the robot. Our task is to choose funnels from
our library in a way that avoids obstacles while moving forward in the nominal direction.
The key step in our real-time planning approach is the selection of a funnel from the funnel
library that doesn’t intersect any obstacles in the environment. This selection process is sketched in
the ReplanFunnel algorithm (Algorithm 3). Given the current state x of the robot and the locations
and geometry of obstacles O in the environment, the algorithm searches through the funnels in the
library that are runtime composable with the previous funnel that was executed. We assume that
for any given funnel, the set of funnels in the library that are runtime composable with it (easily
computed given the graph G(F)) is (totally) ordered in a preference list. This ordering may be
prespeciﬁed oﬄine or generated online based on the current state of the robot. For example, this
ordering can be based on aggressiveness of the maneuvers for a UAV (less aggressive maneuvers are
given preference) or likely progress towards the goal. For each funnel Fi, the algorithm tries to ﬁnd
a shift Ψc along cyclic coordinates of the system such that the shifted funnel Ψc(Fi) satisﬁes two
properties: (i) the current state x is contained in the inlet of the shifted funnel, (ii) the projection
of the shifted funnel onto the coordinates of the state space corresponding to the conﬁguration
space3 doesn’t intersect any obstacles in O. If we are able to ﬁnd such a shift, we are guaranteed
that the system will remain collision-free when the funnel is executed despite the uncertainties and
disturbances that the system is subjected to.
The simplest way to try to choose Ψc is to set it such that the nominal trajectory xi associated
with the funnel lines up with the current state in the cyclic coordinates (i.e., using the notation
3Note that these projections can be computed in the oﬄine computation stage.
24

1: Inputs: x (current state of system), O (reported obstacles in environment), previousFunnel
(previous funnel that was executed)
2: for i = 1, . . . , #(F) such that (previousFunnel, Fi) ∈G(F) do
3:
success ⇐Find a shift Ψc along cyclic coordinates such that x is contained in the inlet of
Ψc(Fi) and Ψc(Fi) is collision-free w.r.t. O
4:
if success then
5:
return Ψc(Fi)
6:
end if
7: end for
8: return Ffailsafe
Algorithm 3: ReplanFunnel
of Section 5, πc(Ψc(xi(0))) = πc(x)). Intuitively, this corresponds to shifting the funnel so that it
is executed from the current location of the robot. We can then use standard collision-checking
libraries such as the Bullet Collision Detection & Physics Library [Coumans, 2014] to check if
Ψc(Fi) (projected onto the conﬁguration space) intersects any obstacles.
We will discuss more
sophisticated ways of ﬁnding Ψc in Section 6.1.
If the search for a collision-free funnel in Algorithm 3 doesn’t succeed, we assume the existence
of a failsafe maneuver (Ffailsafe in Algorithm 3) that can be executed in order to keep the robot safe
(we assume that the failsafe is veriﬁed to be executable from any state the robot may ﬁnd itself in
when replanning). For a ground vehicle, this could entail coming to a stop while for a quadrotor
or ﬁxed-wing airplane this may involve transitioning to a hover or propellor-hang mode. In certain
cases, it is possible to derive geometric conditions on the environment that the robot will operate in
(e.g., constraints on obstacle size and gaps between obstacles) that guarantee that a collision-free
funnel will always be found by Algorithm 3 if the environment satisﬁes these conditions. We will
see an example of this in Section 7.2 for a quadrotor system navigating through a forest of polytopic
obstacles.
Algorithm 4 provides a sketch of the real-time planning and control loop, which applies the
ReplanFunnel algorithm in a receding-horizon manner. At every control cycle, the robot’s sensors
provide it with a state estimate and report the locations and geometry of the set of obstacles O
in the sensor horizon. The algorithm triggers a replanning of funnels if any of the following three
criteria are met: (i) if the system has executed the current funnel Fi for the associated execution
time τi, (ii) if the current state of the system is no longer in the funnel being executed, or (iii) if
the current funnel being executed is no longer collision-free. In principle, (ii) should not happen.
However, in practice this can happen if the system received a disturbance that was larger than the
ones taken into account for the funnel computations. Option (iii) can happen if the robot’s sensors
report new obstacles that were previously unseen.
25

1: x ⇐Initialize current state of the robot
2: O ⇐Initialize obstacles in sensor horizon
3: Fi ∈F ⇐Initialize current planned funnel
4: for t = 0, . . . do
5:
x ⇐Update current state of robot
6:
O ⇐Update obstacles in sensor horizon
7:
replan ⇐Check if we have ﬁnished executing current funnel Fi for the associated execution
time τi
8:
insideFunnel ⇐Check if current state is still inside the current funnel Fi being executed
9:
collisionFree ⇐Check if current funnel Fi is still collision-free with O
10:
if replan or ¬insideFunnel or ¬collisionFree then
11:
Fi ⇐ReplanFunnels(x, O, Fi)
12:
else
13:
apply feedback control input u associated with current funnel Fi
14:
end if
15: end for
Algorithm 4: Real-time planning loop
6.1
Shifting funnels at runtime
The main step in Algorithm 3 is the search for a shift Ψc along cyclic coordinates such that the
shifted funnel Ψc(Fi) will be collision-free with respect to the obstacles in O while containing the
current state x in its inlet:
Find
Ψc
(63)
s.t.
x ∈Ψc(Fi(0)),
(64)
πconf(Ψc(Fi)) ∩O = Ø.
Here, πconf is the projection onto the conﬁguration space variables of the state space. This opti-
mization problem is non-convex in general since the free-space of the environment is non-convex.
However, the number of decision variables is very small. In particular, if we parameterize the shift
Ψc by a vector ∆c ∈Rn (where the coordinates of ∆c corresponding to the non-cyclic coordinates
are set to zero) such that Ψc(x) = x + ∆c, the number of decision variables is equal to the number
of cyclic coordinates of the system.
We can thus apply general-purpose nonlinear optimization tools such as gradient-based methods
to solve this problem. In particular, the ﬁrst constraint is equivalent to checking that the value
of the Lyapunov function V (0, ¯x) = V (0, x −(xi(0) + ∆c)) at time 0 is less than or equal to ρ(0)
(recall that the funnel is described as the ρ(t) sub-level set of the function V (t, ¯x)). As in Section
4, xi here is the nominal trajectory corresponding to the funnel Fi. The second constraint can be
evaluated using oﬀ-the-shelf collision-checking libraries.
Despite the small number of decision variables, for some applications general-purpose nonlinear
optimization may be too slow to run in real-time. For the important special case where the cyclic
coordinates form a subset of the conﬁguration space variables (e.g., for a UAV), we propose another
approach that allows us to search over a restricted family of shifts Ψc but has the advantage of being
posed using convex quadratic constraints. The ﬁrst observation is that the containment constraint
26

Figure 5: The two red regions are obstacles. The shaded green region represents the set in which the
funnel segment must be entirely contained in order to satisfy the linear constraints given by the
collision normals and collision distances.
(64) is a convex quadratic constraint for the case where the inlet of the funnel is an ellipsoid (i.e.,
the function V (0, ¯x) is a positive deﬁnite quadratic). If the inlet is not an ellipsoid, we can ﬁnd an
ellipsoidal inner approximation by solving a simple SOS program oﬄine.
Next, we seek to ﬁnd a set of convex constraints that will guarantee non-collision of the funnel.
We will assume that πconf(Fi) is represented as a union of convex segments Sk and that the
obstacles in the environment are also convex (we assume that non-convex obstacles have been
decomposed into convex segments). For each funnel segment, we can ﬁnd collision normals njk and
collision distances djk to each obstacle oj ∈O (these are easily extracted from a collision-checking
software). Figure 5 provides an illustration of this for a single convex segment S1. The two regions
colored in red are obstacles. The collision normals are n11 and n21. By deﬁnition, collision normals
provide us with constraints such that any shift ∆c of the segment S1 satisfying the linear constraint
nT
jk∆c < djk will be collision-free. The region corresponding to this is shaded in green in the ﬁgure.
The constraints described above (containment of the current state in an ellipsoid and the linear
constraints given by the collision normals) form a special case of convex Quadratically Constrained
Quadratic Programs (QCQPs), for which there exist very mature software packages.
For our
examples in Section 7, we use the FORCES Pro package [Domahidi and Jerez, 2014]. The package
generates solver code tailored to the speciﬁc optimization problem at hand and is faster in our
experience than using general-purpose convex QCQP solvers.
27

6.2
Global Planning
Algorithm 4 employed a receding horizon strategy for real-time planning. For tasks such as robot
navigation through previously unmapped environments, such a replanning-based strategy is un-
avoidable since the robot’s sensors will only report obstacles in the environment in some ﬁnite
sensor horizon around the robot. Thus, the robot will need to replan as it makes progress through
the environment and more obstacles are reported by its sensors. However, in certain scenarios
where the robot has access to a larger portion of the environment, a planning strategy that is more
global in nature may be appropriate. In general, the funnel primitives provide a discrete action
space which can be searched by any heuristic planner - the primary considerations here are the
additional constraint of containment of the current state in the inlet and the moderately more
signiﬁcant cost of collision checking. Here we brieﬂy mention a few ways in which global planning
may be achieved.
Grid-based planners: One can build on existing trajectory library-based planning approaches to
quickly ﬁnd collision-free sequences of funnels that minimize a certain performance criterion (e.g.,
distance traversed by the nominal trajectories in the sequence). For example, [Stolle and Atkeson,
2006] uses a variant of the grid-based planning algorithm A⋆to search through possible sequences
of trajectories in a library. The additional cost of extending such an approach for planning with
funnels is the cost that comes from pruning sequences of funnels that are in collision with obstacles
in the environment.
Maneuver automata: The Maneuver Automaton [Frazzoli et al., 2005] provides an alternative
trajectory library-based approach that exploits continuous symmetries (such as shift invariance for
ground vehicles or UAVs) to achieve eﬃcient planning. The approach relies on having a number
of “trim trajectories” and maneuvers that transition between them. One can then eﬃciently plan
sequences of trims and maneuvers that start and end at prescribed points in space by solving a set
of equations that has the same structure as an inverse kinematics problem. In order to extend this
approach for real-time planning with funnels, one needs to (potentially approximately) solve the
inverse kinematics problem subject to the constraint that the funnel sequence is collision-free.
Planning backwards: The real-time planning approaches we have discussed so far all plan for-
ward in time. However, in cases where there is a well-deﬁned goal set that one needs to reach, it
may be more eﬃcient to plan backwards. This kind of planning is a direct analog of the preimage
backchaining approach [Lozano-Perez et al., 1984] in the motion planning literature. One way to
perform this backwards search would be to employ a randomized strategy similar to the Rapidly-
exploring Randomized Tree (RRT). In particular, we can grow a tree of funnels backwards from
the goal set by using the funnels in our funnel library as primitives for the extension operator
for the RRT. One can again exploit invariances in the dynamics when performing this extension
operation by randomly sampling shifts/rotations of funnels (while still maintaining sequential com-
posability and non-collision of funnels). The termination criterion for this RRT-like algorithm is
the containment of the current state of the robot in the tree of funnels. This is very similar to the
LQR-Trees approach [Tedrake et al., 2010], with the following diﬀerences: (i) one would only use
a pre-computed library of funnels in the tree rather than computing new funnels (which would be
computationally infeasible for real-time implementation), and (ii) the extension operator for the
tree would take into account possible collisions of funnels with obstacles in the environment.
28

Figure 6: Illustration of the ground vehicle model.
7
Examples
In this section we apply the techniques presented in this paper on two simulation examples. We
will consider a hardware example in Section 8. An example implementation of our approach for
a model of the quadrotor system (Section 7.2) is available as part of the Drake toolbox [Tedrake,
2014]. The computations in this section were performed on a 3.4 GHz desktop computer with 16
GB RAM and 4 cores.
7.1
Ground Vehicle Model
As our ﬁrst example we consider a ground vehicle model based on the Dubins car [Dubins, 1957]
navigating an environment of polytopic obstacles. A pictorial depiction of the model is provided in
Figure 6. The vehicle is constrained to move at a ﬁxed forward speed and can control the second
derivative of its yaw angle ψ. We introduce uncertainty into the model by assuming that the speed
of the vehicle is only known to be within a bounded range and is potentially time-varying. The full
non-linear dynamics of the system are then given by:
x =


x
y
ψ
˙ψ

,
˙x =


−v(t) sin ψ
v(t) cos ψ
˙ψ
u


(65)
with the speed of the plane v(t) ∈[9.0, 11.0] m/s.
The control input is bounded in the range
[−1000, 1000] rad/s2.
The trajectory library, T , computed for the ground vehicle consists of 20 trajectories and is
shown in Figure 7(a). The trajectories xi(t) : [0, Ti] 7→R4 and the corresponding nominal open-loop
control inputs were obtained via the direct collocation trajectory optimization method [Betts, 2001]
for the vehicle dynamics in (65) with v(t) = 10 m/s. The initial state xi(0) was constrained to be
[0, 0, 0, 0] and the ﬁnal state xi(Ti) was varied in the x direction while keeping the y component
29

(a)
(b)
Figure 7: The plot on the left shows the trajectory library for the ground vehicle model. The plot on the right shows
a selection of funnels from the funnel library projected onto the x −y plane.
ﬁxed. We locally minimized a cost of the form:
J =
Z Ti
0
[1 + u0(t)T R(t)u0(t)] dt
where R is a positive-deﬁnite matrix. We constrained the nominal control input to be in the range
[−500, 500] rad/s2 to ensure that feedback controllers computed around the nominal trajectories
do not immediately saturate.
For each xi(t) in T we obtain controllers and funnels using the method described in Section 4.
In order to obtain polynomial dynamics, we computed a (time-varying) degree 3 Taylor expansion
of the dynamics of the system around the nominal trajectory. We note that with the right change
of coordinates, one can express the dynamics of this system directly as a polynomial. In particular,
we can introduce new indeterminates s and c for sin(ψ) and cos(ψ), and impose the constraint
that s2 + c2 = 1 (this equality constraint is easily imposed in the sums-of-squares programming
framework). However, this increases the dimensionality of the state space and in practice we ﬁnd
that the time-varying Taylor approximation accurately captures the nonlinearities of the system.
The approach from Section 4.3.2 along with the time-sampled approximation described in Sec-
tion 4.2 (with 15 time samples) was used to synthesize a (time-varying) linear feedback controller
around each trajectory. The methods described in Section 4.3.1 and 4.3.3 were used to take into ac-
count the parametric uncertainty and input saturations that the system is subject to. As described
in Section 4.4.2, we used a time-varying LQR controller to initialize the funnel computations. The
computation time for each funnel was approximately 5-10 minutes.
A subset of the funnels is
shown in Figure 7(b). Note that the four-dimensional funnels have been projected down to the
x −y dimensions for the purpose of visualization; the true funnels take into account variations in
all four state dimensions. The directed graph G(F) that encodes real-time composability between
funnels (ref. Section 5.5) is fully connected.
The resulting funnel library was employed by Algorithm 4 for planning in real-time through
environments with randomly placed obstacles. Figure 8 shows the funnels that were executed in
30

Figure 8: This plot shows the funnels that were executed in order for the ground vehicle model to traverse a randomly
generated obstacle environment using the funnel library based real-time planning approach.
order to traverse a representative environment. The obstacle positions were randomly generated
from a spatial Poisson process (with a density/rate parameter of 0.6 obstacles per m2). Two further
“barrier” obstacles were placed on the sides of the environment to prevent the vehicle from leaving
the region containing obstacles. The planner was provided with a sensor horizon of 3m in the y
direction (forward) and ±2m in the x direction (side-to-side) relative to the position of the vehicle.
Only obstacles in this sensor window were reported to the planner at every instant in time. The
execution times τi for each funnel were set such that replanning occurred once 80% of the funnel
was executed. The parametric uncertainty in the speed of the vehicle was taken into account in
our simulation by randomly choosing a speed v(t) ∈{9.0, 11.0} m/s after every execution time
period has elapsed. The real-time planner employs the QCQP-based algorithm from Section 6.1
for shifting funnels in the x −y directions (we did not exploit invariances in the yaw dimension
of the state space in order to ensure that the vehicle moves in the forward direction and doesn’t
veer oﬀto the sides). We use the FORCES Pro solver [Domahidi and Jerez, 2014] for our QCQP
problems. This resulted in our implementation of the real-time planner running at approximately
31

Figure 9: A bar plot comparing the performance of the funnel library approach with one based on a trajectory library.
50 Hz in the worst-case (i.e., when all the funnels in the library have to be evaluated for collisions).
We performed extensive simulation experiments to compare our funnel library based robust
planning approach with a more traditional trajectory library based method. In order to facilitate
a meaningful comparison, we used the underlying trajectory library corresponding to our funnel
library. The trajectory-based planner employs essentially the same outer-loop as our funnel-based
approach (Algorithm 4). The key diﬀerence is that the planner chooses which maneuver to execute
by evaluating which trajectory has the maximal clearance from the obstacles (as measured by
Euclidean distance):
max
i
min
t,j dist(xi(t), oj)
(66)
where xi(t) ∈T is a trajectory in the library and oj ∈O is an obstacle in the environment. Once
a maneuver is chosen based on this metric, a time-varying LQR feedback controller computed
along this trajectory is applied (the same LQR controller that is used to initialize the funnel
computations).
To compare the two planners, we generated 100 obstacle environments randomly as described
previously.
For each environment, we ran the diﬀerent planning algorithms until there was a
collision of the vehicle with an obstacle. The distance in the y direction at the time of collision
was recorded for each run. Figure 9 compares the performance of the diﬀerent approaches. For
32

each distance on the x-axis of the plot the height of the bar indicates the number of runs for which
the vehicle traveled beyond this distance. As is evident from the plot, our funnel library based
approach provides a signiﬁcant advantage over the trajectory-based method.
This advantage can be partially understood by considering a speciﬁc example. In particular,
Figure 10 demonstrates the utility of explicitly taking into account uncertainty during the planning
process. There are two obstacles in front of the vehicle. The two options available to the plane are
to ﬂy straight in between the obstacles or to maneuver aggressively to the right and attempt to
go around them. If the motion planner didn’t take uncertainty into account and simply chose to
maximize the clearance in terms of Euclidean distance from the nominal trajectory to the obstacles
(see equation (66)), it would choose the trajectory that goes right around the obstacles. However,
taking the funnels into account leads to a diﬀerent decision: going straight in between the obstacles
is guaranteed to be safe even though the distance to the obstacles is smaller. In contrast, the
maneuver that avoids going in between obstacles is less robust to uncertainty and could lead to a
collision. The utility of safety guarantees in the form of funnels is especially important when the
margins for error are small and making the wrong decision can lead to disastrous consequences.
Figure 10: This ﬁgure shows the utility of explicitly taking uncertainty into account while planning. The intuitively
more risky strategy of ﬂying in between two closely spaced obstacles is guaranteed to be safe, while the path that
avoids going in between obstacles is less robust to uncertainty and could lead to a collision.
33

Figure 11: Visualization of the quadrotor system.
7.2
Quadrotor Model
The next example we consider is a model of a quadrotor system navigating through a forest of
polygonal obstacles.
A visualization of the system is provided in Figure 11.
The goal of this
example is to demonstrate that we can derive simple geometric conditions on the environment
that guarantee collision-free ﬂight. In other words if the environment satisﬁes these conditions, the
Algorithm 3 presented in Section 6 will always succeed in ﬁnding a collision-free funnel from the
library and the quadrotor will ﬂy forever through the environment with no collisions.
The quadrotor model has a 12 dimensional state space consisting of the x-y-z position of the
centre of mass, the roll-pitch-yaw of the body, and the time derivatives of these conﬁguration space
variables. The dynamics model we use is identical to the one presented in [Mellinger et al., 2010]
with an additional uncertainty term in the form of a “cross wind”. We modeled this with a bounded
uncertainty term on the acceleration of the x position: ¨x = ¨xnominal+∆, with ∆∈[−0.1, 0.1] m/s2.
Figure 12(a) plots the trajectory library we use. The funnel library consists of 20 maneuvers
and was created in a manner similar to the ground vehicle example. In particular, the trajectories
xi(t) : [0, Ti] 7→R12 and the corresponding nominal open-loop control inputs were obtained via
the direct collocation trajectory optimization method [Betts, 2001]. The initial state xi(0) was
constrained to have a forwards speed of 2 m/s (i.e, xi(0) = [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 2, 0, 0, 0, 0]).
The
ﬁnal state xi(Ti) was varied in the x-direction while keeping the y-component ﬁxed to 2m (all other
components of the ﬁnal state were chosen to be the same as the initial state). We locally minimized
a cost of the form:
J =
Z Ti
0
[1 + u0(t)T R(t)u0(t)] dt
where R is a positive-deﬁnite matrix. In addition to the 20 maneuvers, the library also consists of
a “trim” trajectory corresponding to the quadrotor ﬂying forward at a constant speed of 2 m/s.
For each xi(t) in T we obtain controllers and funnels using the method described in Section 4.
We obtained time-varying Taylor expansions of degree 3 computed around the nominal trajectory.
The approach from Section 4.3.2 along with the time-sampled approximation described in Sec-
tion 4.2 (with 15 time samples) was used to synthesize a (time-varying) linear feedback controller
34

(a)
(b)
Figure 12: The plot on the left shows the trajectory library for the quadrotor model. The plot on the right shows a
selection of funnels from the funnel library projected onto the x −y −z space.
around each trajectory. The methods described in Section 4.3.1 were used to take into account
the parametric uncertainty that the system is subject to. The computation time for each funnel
was approximately 20-25 minutes. The directed graph G(F) that encodes real-time composability
between funnels (ref. Section 5.5) is fully connected. Moreover, the funnel corresponding to the
trim trajectory is sequentially composable modulo invariances (ref. Section 5.2) with the other ma-
neuvers in the library, allowing us to apply the trim trajectory before or after any of the maneuvers.
A subset of the funnels is shown in Figure 12(b). Note that the twelve-dimensional funnels have
been projected down to the x −y −z dimensions for the purpose of visualization.
Given this funnel library F, we will show how one can derive simple geometric conditions
on the environment that guarantee that a collision-free funnel will always be found during real-
time planning. In order to simplify the analysis, we will assume that the quadrotor is navigating
through a 2.5D environment (i.e., the obstacles in the environment are 2D polygons extruded
in the z-direction). But, we note that our analysis can be extended to fully three dimensional
environments. We will treat the geometry of the quadrotor as a sphere of radius rquad.
Since we are only considering 2.5D environments, it is suﬃcient to project the environment and
funnels down to the x −y plane. Consider (axis aligned) bounding boxes for the 2D obstacles (see
Figure 13). Denote the center of the bounding box for obstacle oi as (oi,x,, oi,y) for i ∈{1, . . . , Nobs}
(Nobs is the number of obstacles in the robot’s sensor horizon). Suppose without loss of generality
that the quadrotor’s x-y-z position is (0, 0, 0). We will ﬁrst derive conditions on the distances oi,y,
dx,ij := |oi,x −oj,x|, and sizes rx,i, ry,i (ref. Figure 13) such that there exists a collision-free funnel
in F assuming the quadrotor’s x-y-z position is (0, 0, 0). We will then extend this analysis to derive
conditions that guarantee that a collision-free funnel will always be found as the quadrotor applies
Algorithm 3 in a receding horizon manner to ﬂy continuously through the environment.
For each funnel Fi ∈F compute bounding boxes for the inlet and outlet of the funnel (see
Figure 14(b)). We will refer to the dimensions of these bounding boxes as depicted in the ﬁgure as
fout
i,y , fout
i,x , fin
i,y, fin
i,x. Deﬁne
fx := max(fout
1,x , ..., fout
N,x, fin
1,x, ..., fin
N,x) + rquad,
where N is the number of funnels in the library (21 in our case). Similarly, deﬁne:
fy := max(fout
1,y , ..., fout
N,y, fin
1,y, ..., fin
N,y) + rquad.
35

Figure 13: Obstacle bounding boxes and quadrotor radius.
Next, deﬁne δ as shown in Figure 14(a) as the distance (in the x-dimension) of the endpoints
of trajectories in T . Denote by ∆x the distance (in the x-dimension) between the endpoints of the
most aggressive trajectories in T and let ∆y be the distance in the y-direction that each trajectory in
the library covers (see Figure 14(a)). Deﬁne rx := max(r1,x, ..., rNobs,x), ry := max(r1,y, ..., rNobs,y).
Then consider the following conditions on the obstacles:
oi,y > ∆y, ∀i ∈{1, . . . , Nobs}
(67)
ry < fy
(68)
rx < ∆x −2fx
(69)
dx,ij > 2fx + δ, ∀i, j ∈{1, . . . , Nobs}, i ̸= j.
(70)
It is straightforward to see that these conditions imply the existence of a funnel in F that is
collision-free when executed from the quadrotor’s location at (0, 0, 0) (i.e., Algorithm 3 will succeed
assuming that the full 12 dimensional state of the quadrotor is contained within the inlet of all
the funnels in F). In particular, the condition (67) ensures that the funnels are not too close to
the quadrotor’s starting location. Condition (68) prevents an obstacle from extending so far in
the y-direction that it collides with the middle segments of a funnel. Condition (69) ensures that
obstacles do not extend so far in the x-direction that there is no funnel in the library that goes
around the obstacle (e.g., imagine a wall in front of the quadrotor). And ﬁnally (70) ensures that
36

(a)
(b)
Figure 14: Notation for geometry of trajectories and funnels.
37

Figure 15: The plot shows the quadrotor maneuvering through a forest of polytopic obstacles in a collision-free
manner. The environment satisﬁes simple geometric conditions that allow us to guarantee collision-free ﬂight forever.
Note that the visualized funnels have been inﬂated to take into account the size of the quadrotor.
the gap in the x-direction between any two obstacles is large enough for some funnel in F to ﬁt
through. Then conditions (69) and (70) ensure that this gap occurs in a portion of the space that
is reachable by one of the funnels in the library (and not in some far oﬀlocation in the x-direction
where a funnel in F does not extend to).
We can now extend this analysis to the scenario in which the quadrotor is ﬂying along contin-
uously through the environment by applying Algorithm 3 in a receding horizon manner. We will
assume that the sensor horizon of the quadrotor (i.e., the range in which obstacles are reported)
is greater than ∆y in the y-direction and greater than ∆x/2 in the x-direction. We then need to
ensure that when the quadrotor ﬁnishes executing a funnel, it does not ﬁnd itself in a position
where there are obstacles that are very close to it. In order to do this, we will ﬁrst replace the
conditions (67) and (70) with the following condition on the separation between obstacles:
dy,ij := |oi,y −oj,y| > ∆y + fy
(71)
OR
dx,ij > 2fx + δ.
(72)
This condition ensures that obstacles are separated enough in either the x or y directions. However,
this is still not enough to prevent cases where the quadrotor executes a funnel and ﬁnds itself too
close to an obstacle. In particular, suppose that the quadrotor starts oﬀat location (0, 0, 0) and
that there is a single obstacle in the environment located at (0, 1.1∆y +fy) (the size of the obstacle
will not matter in this example). When the quadrotor applies Algorithm 3 at location (0, 0, 0) to
ﬁnd a funnel, all the funnels in the library will be collision-free. Let us suppose that the algorithm
38

chooses the funnel corresponding to the quadrotor ﬂying straight and ends up in location (0, ∆y).
At this point, the obstacle is too close to the quadrotor and a collision-free funnel will not be found.
To prevent cases such as this, we can use the trim maneuver in F corresponding to the quadrotor
ﬂying straight in order to “pad” the distance to the obstacles. In particular, we can apply the trim
maneuver until the quadrotor is at distance ∆y from the obstacle (in the y-direction) and then use
Algorithm 3 to replan. This will guarantee that Algorithm 3 will succeed and thus our analysis is
complete.
Figure 15 shows an example of the quadrotor system navigating through an environment that
satisﬁes the geometric conditions derived above. The ﬁgure shows the sequence of funnels executed
by the quadrotor to traverse the environment. Note that the funnels depicted in the plot have been
inﬂated by rquad in order to take into account the physical extent of the quadrotor.
We end this section by noting that our goal here has been to demonstrate the possibility of
imposing geometric conditions on the environment that guarantee collision-free ﬂight. While fairly
straightforward, this analysis may provide a useful starting point for more sophisticated analyses.
Going forwards, our analysis may be varied or tightened in many ways.
For example, we can
extend it in a straightforward manner to fully 3D environments. Further, we have assumed that
the quadrotor is only planning a single funnel at a time (in contrast to sequences of funnels).
Planning sequences of funnels may help loosen some of the restrictions on the environment that we
have made in our analysis. Another avenue is to consider cases where the locations of obstacles in
the environment are drawn from a (known) stochastic process. We discuss a few possibilities for
handling such settings in Section 9.1.3.
8
Hardware experiments on a ﬁxed-wing airplane
In this section, we will validate the key components of the approach presented in this paper on
a small ﬁxed-wing airplane performing a challenging obstacle avoidance task. The goal of these
hardware experiments is to answer the following important practical questions:
• Can we obtain models of a real-world challenging nonlinear dynamical system that are accu-
rate enough to compute funnels that are valid in reality?
• Can we implement the real-time planning algorithm described in Section 6 to operate at the
required rate given realistic computational constraints?
• Can we demonstrate our planning algorithm on a realistic and challenging obstacle avoidance
task?
8.1
Hardware platform
The hardware platform chosen for these experiments is the SBach RC airplane manufactured by
E-ﬂite shown in Figure 16(a). The airplane is very light (76.6 g) and highly maneuverable, thus
allowing for dramatic obstacle avoidance maneuvers in a tight space. The control inputs to the
SBach are raw servo commands to the control surfaces (ailerons, rudder, elevator) and a raw throttle
setting. These commands are sent through a modiﬁed 2.4 GHz RC transmitter at an update rate
of 50 Hz.
39

(a) The E-ﬂite SBach RC airplane used for hardware experiments.
(b) Experimental setup and coordinate system.
Figure 16: Airplane hardware and experimental setup.
40

8.2
Task and experimental setup
The experimental setup is shown in Figure 16(b). The airplane is launched from a simple rubber-
band powered launch mechanism at approximately 4 −5 m/s. The goal is to traverse the length of
the room while avoiding the obstacles placed in the experimental arena. The airplane’s planner is
not informed where the obstacles are beforehand; rather, the obstacle positions and geometry are
reported to the planner only once the airplane clears the launcher. This simulates the receding-
horizon nature of realistic obstacle avoidance tasks where the obstacle positions are not known
beforehand and planning decisions must be taken in real-time. The experiments are performed in a
Vicon motion capture arena that reports the airplane and obstacle poses at 120 Hz. All the online
computation is performed on an oﬀ-board computer with four Intel i7 2.9GHz processors and 16
GB RAM.
8.3
Modeling and system identiﬁcation
Our dynamics model of the airplane is based on the model described in [Sobolic, 2009] ([Stevens
and Lewis, 1992] is also a good reference for modeling ﬁxed-wing airplanes). The model has 12
states:
x = [x, y, z, φ, θ, ψ, ˙x, ˙y, ˙z, P, Q, R].
Here, +x is in the forward direction, +y is to the right and +z is downwards as depicted in Figure
16(b) (this is the standard North-East-Down coordinate frame used in aeronautics). The states
φ, θ, ψ are the roll, pitch and yaw angles. The variables P, Q, R are the components of the angular
velocity expressed in the body coordinate frame. The control inputs of the model are the angles of
the ailerons, rudder and elevator, along with the speed of the propellor. Thus, we have 4 control
inputs since the ailerons are coupled to deﬂect in opposite directions by the commanded magnitude.
The airplane is treated as a rigid body with aerodynamic and gravitational forces acting on it.
Here, we provide a brief description of our model of the aerodynamic forces:
Propellor thrust
The thrust from the propellor is proportional to the square of the propellor
speed. The constant of proportionality was obtained by hanging the airplane (with the propellor
pointing downwards) from a digital ﬁsh scale and measuring the thrust produced for a number of
diﬀerent throttle settings.
Lift/drag on aerodynamic surfaces The lift and drag forces on the ailerons, rudder, elevator
and tail of the airplane were computed using the ﬂat-plate model. The ﬂat-plate model was also
used as a baseline for the lift and drag coeﬃcients of the wings, but an angle-of-attack dependent
correction term was added. This correction term was ﬁt from experimental data obtained from
passive (i.e., unactuated) ﬂights in a manner similar to [Moore, 2014]. Since lift and drag forces are
dependent on the airspeed over the aerodynamic surface, we need to take into account the eﬀect
of “propwash” (i.e. the airﬂow from the propellor). The relationships between the throttle speed
command and the propellor downwash speed over the diﬀerent control surfaces were measured using
a digital anemometer in a manner similar to [Sobolic, 2009].
Body drag The drag on the airplane body is approximated as a quadratic drag term whose drag
coeﬃcient is ﬁt from data.
41

(a) A depiction of the funnel that was validated on hard-
ware.
The funnel has been projected down to the
x −y −z coordinates of the state space and then re-
projected onto the camera image.
(b) The value of the Lyapunov function (V ) plotted as a
function of time for 30 diﬀerent trials of the airplane
started from diﬀerent initial conditions in the inlet
of the funnel.
The 1-sublevel set of the Lyapunov
function corresponds to the funnel (i.e., a Lyapunov
function of 1 or less corresponds to the airplane being
inside the funnel). All 30 of the trajectories remain
inside the computed funnel for the entire duration of
the maneuver.
Figure 17: Validating funnels on the ﬁxed-wing airplane.
As described above, many of the parameters in the model were obtained directly from physical
experiments and measurements. However, some model parameters are more diﬃcult to measure
directly. These include the moments of inertia of the airplane and the coeﬃcient of drag associated
with the airplane body. The prediction-error minimization method in the Matlab System Iden-
tiﬁcation Toolbox [Ljung, 2007] was used to ﬁt these parameters and to ﬁne-tune the measured
parameters. In particular, we collected data from 15-20 ﬂights (each lasting approximately 0.5–0.7
seconds) where the control inputs were excited using sinusoidal signals of varying frequency and
amplitude.
8.4
Funnel validation
The ﬁrst major goal of our hardware experiments was to demonstrate that our model of the SBach
airplane is accurate enough to compute funnels that are truly meaningful for the hardware system.
To this end, we computed a funnel (shown in Figure 17(a)) for the airplane using the approach
described in Section 4. We ﬁrst estimated the set of initial states that the launcher mechanism
causes the airplane to start oﬀin (here, by “initial state” we mean the state of the airplane as
soon as it has cleared the launcher mechanism). This was done by ﬁtting an ellipsoid around the
initial states observed from approximately 50 experimental trials. We then used direct collocation
trajectory optimization [Betts, 2001] to design an open-loop maneuver that makes the airplane
bend towards the left. The initial state of the trajectory is constrained to be equal to the mean of
the experimentally observed initial states and the control inputs are constrained to satisfy the limits
imposed by the hardware. Next we computed a time-varying LQR (TVLQR) controller around this
42

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 18: Still images of the SBach ﬂying through a funnel. The funnel has been projected down to the x −y −z
coordinates of the state space and then reprojected onto the camera image. A video with a visualization of the
funnel and ﬂights through it is available online at https://youtu.be/cESFpLgSb50.
nominal trajectory. This controller was tuned largely in simulation to ensure good tracking of the
trajectory from the estimated initial condition set. The resulting closed-loop dynamics were then
Taylor expanded around the nominal trajectory to degree 3 in order to obtain polynomial dynamics.
Finally, we used SOS programming to compute the funnel depicted in Figure 17(a) using the time-
sampled approximation described in Section 4.2 (with 10 time samples). The inlet of the funnel
was constrained to contain the experimentally estimated set of initial conditions. We observed that
the tuned TVLQR controller does not saturate the control inputs for the most part and thus we did
not ﬁnd it necessary to take input saturations into account in our funnel computation. Further, we
wanted to assess the validity of our funnel for the nominal dynamics model of the airplane and did
not take into account any uncertainty in the model. The funnel computation took approximately
1 hour.
We validate the funnel shown in Figure 17(a) with 30 experimental trials of the airplane ex-
ecuting the maneuver corresponding to the funnel. The airplane is started oﬀin diﬀerent initial
conditions in the inlet of the funnel and the TVLQR controller is applied for the duration of the
maneuver. Figure 18 shows still images of a sample ﬂight of the airplane executing the maneuver
43

with the funnel superimposed onto the images. A video with a visualization of the funnel and
ﬂights through it is available online at https://youtu.be/cESFpLgSb50.
Figure 17(b) provides a more quantitative perspective on the ﬂights. In particular, the ﬁgure
shows the value of the Lyapunov function V (¯x, t) as a function of time achieved during the 30
experimental trials.
Here, the Lyapunov function has been normalized so that the 1-level set
corresponds to the boundary of the funnel. As the plot illustrates, all 30 trajectories remain inside
the computed 12 dimensional funnel for the entire duration of the maneuver. This suggests that our
model of the airplane is accurate enough to produce funnels that are indeed valid for the hardware
system.
8.5
Obstacle avoidance experiments
The second major goal of our hardware experiments was to demonstrate the funnel library based
real-time planning algorithm proposed in Section 6 on the obstacle avoidance task described in
Section 8.2. Our ﬁrst step was to design a rich trajectory library consisting of a large number of
diﬀerent maneuvers. We initialized the library with the maneuver from Section 8.4 and augmented
it by computing trajectories with varying ﬁnal states.
In particular, the library consists of 40
trajectories which were obtained by discretizing the ﬁnal state in the y and z coordinates and using
direct collocation trajectory optimization to compute locally optimal trajectories for the airplane
model described in Section 8.3. The x −y −z components of this trajectory library are depicted
in Figure 19, with the trajectory from Section 8.4 highlighted in blue.
Figure 19: Trajectory library for the SBach airplane. The library consists of 40 diﬀerent maneuvers. The maneuver
from Section 8.4 is highlighted in blue.
For each trajectory in our library, we computed a TVLQR controller with the same state/action
costs as the controller for the maneuver in Section 8.4. As in Section 8.4, we used SOS programming
to compute funnels for each trajectory in the library. We note that since our model of the dynamics
of the airplane is symmetric with respect to reﬂection about the x axis, we were able to halve the
amount of computation involved in constructing the trajectory/funnel library by exploiting this
44

symmetry.
As mentioned in Section 8.2, the positions and geometry of the obstacles are not reported to
the planner until the airplane has cleared the launcher. This forces planning decisions to be made
in real-time. We use the planning algorithm described in Section 6 to choose a funnel from our
library. The planner employs the QCQP-based algorithm from Section 6.1 for shifting funnels in
the x−y−z directions. As in the other examples considered in this paper, we use the FORCES Pro
solver [Domahidi and Jerez, 2014] for our QCQP problems. If no satisfactory funnel is found by
the planner, we revert to a “failsafe” option which involves switching oﬀthe propellor and gliding
to a halt. A more sophisticated failsafe would be to transition to a “propellor-hang” mode (with a
corresponding funnel whose inlet contains the set of initial conditions the airplane may be in when
it is launched). However, we found that our failsafe provides adequate protection to the airplane’s
hardware as it usually glides on to the safety net before colliding with any obstacles. Finally, we
note that since the experimental arena is quite limited in space, we do not replan funnels once one
has been chosen; the airplane executes the feedback controller corresponding to the chosen funnel
for the whole duration of the ﬂight.
We tested our approach on 15 diﬀerent obstacle environments of varying diﬃculty.
These
environments are shown in Figures 20 and 21. The obstacles include poles of diﬀerent lengths
in varying orientations and also a hoop of diameter equal to 0.9 m (as a reference the airplane’s
wingspan is 0.44 m, thus only leaving 0.23 m of margin on either side of the airplane assuming it
passes through the center of the hoop). We model the poles as cuboids with heights equal to that
of the poles and widths equal to the diameter. The hoop is approximated with eight polytopic
segments (see Figure 23).
Figure 22 presents a more quantitative perspective on the obstacle environments. Here we we
have plotted a histogram of the gaps between obstacles in the environment and compared it to the
wingspan of the airplane. In particular, for each obstacle in a given environment we consider the
distance4 to the closest obstacle that is at least 5 cm away (the 5 cm threshold is chosen to prevent
obstacles that are right next to each other being considered as having a small gap. For example, the
obstacle closest to one of the horizontal poles in the ﬁrst environment in Figure 20 should be the
other horizontal pole and not the adjacent vertical pole). As the histogram illustrates, a signiﬁcant
fraction (approximately 35%) of the gaps are less than the airplane wingspan and about 66% of
the gaps are less than two wingspans. Of course, it is worth noting that not all of the gaps greater
than the wingspan are in fact negotiable (e.g., obstacles placed far apart along the x direction).
A video of the airplane traversing a few representative environments is available online at
https://youtu.be/cESFpLgSb50. For our experiments, we ﬂew the airplane in each of the 15 en-
vironments once5. Out of the 15 environments the airplane was able to successfully negotiate 14
of them, thus demonstrating the eﬃcacy of our real-time planner on this challenging task. We
further performed ﬁve more ﬂights on a single environment (the one in the bottom right corner of
Figure 20). The repeated ﬂights on this environment were all successful, thus demonstrating the
4Here, the distance between obstacles is deﬁned in the usual way for sets. In particular, for any pair of obstacles O1
and O2, we deﬁne the distance between them as
min
x1∈O1,x2∈O2 ∥x1 −x2∥2.
5The only exception to this was a small number of occasions during our experiments where we observed the “failsafe”
option being employed by the planner (i.e., switching oﬀthe throttle and gliding to a halt). This was typically
caused by failures in the launching mechanism such as the airplane making contact with the operator’s hand on its
way out of the launcher. Due to the altered initial conditions in these cases the airplane is not in the inlet of most
or all of the funnels and thus has to resort to the failsafe. On these occasions we simply repeated the experiment to
obtain a successful launch.
45

Figure 20: Environments 1-8 on which the online planning algorithm was tested. The obstacles include poles of
diﬀerent lengths in varying orientations and also a hoop of diameter equal to 0.9 m.
46

Figure 21: Environments 9-15 on which we tested our planning algorithm. The bottom most image shows the only
failure case. Here the airplane brushed one of the obstacles on its way across the room.
47

0
0.5
1
1.5
0
5
10
15
Gap between obstacles (meters)
Frequency
Airplane Wingspan
Figure 22: Histogram of gaps between objects in our test environments compared with the airplane’s wingspan
(0.44 m). As the plot shows, a signiﬁcant number of the gaps between obstacles are less than then wingspan.
robustness of our approach to initial conditions.
Figure 23 presents the output of our real-time planner on four of the more challenging environ-
ments. In particular we plot the funnel chosen by the planner (which have been shifted using the
QCQP-based algorithm presented in Section 6.1) alongside an image sequence showing the airplane
executing the plan. We note that the increased expressivity aﬀorded to us by the ability to shift
funnels in the cyclic coordinates has a large impact on the planner being able to ﬁnd collision free
funnels. Perhaps the best example of this is the environment which contains the hoop (top row of
Figure 23). Without the ability to make small adjustments to the funnels, the chances of ﬁnding
a collision free funnel are extremely low (we would require a funnel that passes almost exactly
through the center of the hoop). Figure 24 compares the output of the planner with and without
applying the QCQP-based algorithm for shifting funnels. As we can observe, the best funnel found
in the former case is well in collision with the obstacles while in the latter case the planner is able
to ﬁnd a collision free funnel. This illustrates the crucial role that exploiting invariances plays in
the success of the planner on this task.
As mentioned before, the airplane was able to successfully negotiate 14 out of our 15 environ-
ments. The single failure case occurred on the environment shown at the bottom of Figure 21,
where the airplane clipped one of the poles close to the end of its ﬂight. This failure can be at-
tributed to the fact that the planner chose to execute one of a small handful of maneuvers that are
more aggressive than the funnel we validated in Section 8.4. The controller saturates the control
inputs signiﬁcantly on this maneuver and hence violates our assumption about input limits not
being reached. Hence this funnel is not entirely valid on the hardware system. While we could have
48

Figure 23: This ﬁgure depicts the planned funnel along with the polygonal obstacle representations for four of our
ﬁfteen test environments. Note that the funnels have been inﬂated to take into account the collision geometry of the
airplane (modeled as a sphere of diameter equal to the wingspan).
49

Figure 24: The QCQP-based algorithm for shifting funnels (Section 6.1) plays a crucial role in the planner’s ability
to ﬁnd collision free funnels. Here we compare the output of the planner with and without applying the QCQP-based
algorithm for shifting funnels. The best funnel found in the former case is well in collision with the obstacles while
in the latter case the planner is able to ﬁnd a collision free funnel. Note that the funnels chosen in the diﬀerent cases
correspond to diﬀerent maneuvers.
taken actuator saturations into account while computing the funnels (see Section 4.3.3), we chose
not to do so in order to reduce the computation time. In hindsight, a more careful treatment of
the system would have included saturations when computing funnels.
8.6
Implementation details
We end this section by mentioning a few implementation details that were important in achieving
the results presented above.
First, while the Vicon motion tracking system provides accurate
position and orientation estimates at 120 Hz, a ﬁnite diﬀerence of these measurements can lead to
noisy estimates of the derivative states. For our experiments we ﬁltered the ﬁnite diﬀerences using
a simple Luenberger observer [Luenberger, 1971].
Second, we observed a delay of approximately 55 ms in our closed-loop hardware system. While
there are several ways to explicitly take this into account by adding delay states to our airplane
model, we accommodate for the delay during execution by simulating our model forwards by 55 ms
from the estimated current state and using this simulated future state to compute the current
control input. This simple strategy is a common one and has previously been found to be eﬀective
in a wide range of applications [Horiuchi et al., 1999, Moore et al., 2014, Sipahi et al., 2012].
9
Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper we have presented an approach for real-time motion planning in a priori unknown
environments with dynamic uncertainty in the form of bounded parametric model uncertainty
and external disturbances. The method augments the traditional trajectory library approach by
constructing stabilizing controllers around the nominal trajectories in a library and computing
outer approximations of reachable sets (funnels) for the resulting closed-loop controllers via sums-
of-squares (SOS) programming. The pre-computed funnel library is then used to plan online by
sequentially composing them together in a manner that ensures obstacles are avoided.
We have demonstrated our approach using extensive simulation experiments on a ground vehicle
model. These experiments demonstrate that our approach can aﬀord signiﬁcant advantages over a
50

trajectory-based approach. We also applied our approach to a quadrotor model and demonstrated
how for certain classes of environments we can guarantee that the system will ﬂy forever in a
collision-free manner. We have also validated our approach using thorough hardware experiments
on a small ﬁxed-wing airplane ﬂying through previously unseen cluttered environments at high
speeds. To our knowledge, these simulation and hardware results are among the ﬁrst examples
of provably safe and robust control for robotic systems with complex nonlinear dynamics that
need to plan in real-time in environments with complex geometric constraints. It is also worth
noting that while one often associates robustness with very conservative behavior, our hardware
experiments demonstrate that this need not be the case. In particular, the airplane performs some
very aggressive maneuvers while still being robust.
9.1
Challenges and extensions
9.1.1
Numerical diﬃculties
There are a number of challenges associated with our approach. One of the main diﬃculties in
implementing our method is the relative immaturity of solvers for semideﬁnite programs (SDPs).
While recently released software such as the MOSEK solver [Mosek, 2010] have improved the speed
with which solutions can be obtained, SDP solvers are still in their infancy as compared to solvers
for Linear Programs (LPs).
Thus, numerical issues (e.g., due to the scaling of problem data)
inevitably arise in practice and must be dealt with in a relatively ad hoc manner (e.g., rescaling
problem data or removing redundant decision variables). However, preprocessing of sums-of-squares
(SOS) programs and SDPs is an active area of inquiry [Permenter and Parrilo, , Lofberg, 2009, Seiler
et al., 2013] and solver technology is bound to improve as SDPs are more widely adopted in practice.
9.1.2
Robots with complex geometries
Another challenge associated with our method has to do with implementing the approach on robots
with complex kinematics/geometry. One option (as described in Section 6) is to project the funnel
onto the conﬁguration space (C-space) of the system and perform collision checking against the
C-space representation of obstacles. However, computing C-space representations of obstacles is
typically challenging for non-trivial geometries, especially since it needs to be done as obstacles are
reported in real-time.
For the examples considered in this paper, the geometry of the robots were approximated
relatively accurately by spheres. This allowed us to project the funnel onto the x −y −z space
(in contrast to the full conﬁguration space of the system) and inﬂate this projection by the radius
of the corresponding sphere. These inﬂated funnels were then used for collision-checking during
real-time planning. For robots with complex geometries, inﬂating the funnel in x −y −z space
in this manner is not an entirely straightforward operation. However, this is potentially a more
promising approach than performing collision-checking against C-space obstacles since the inﬂation
can computed in the oﬄine computation stage as it depends only on the geometry of the robot and
not the obstacles.
9.1.3
Designing funnel libraries
There is an inherent tradeoﬀin our approach between the richness of the funnel library and the
amount of computation that needs to be performed in real-time in order to be able to search through
51

it. For extremely large funnel libraries, it may be computationally diﬃcult to search through all the
funnels while planning online. It is thus important to explore ways in which one could speed up this
search. For example, one could exploit the observation that funnels in close proximity to a funnel
that is in collision are also likely to be in collision and use this to choose the sequence in which to
evaluate funnels for collisions. Further, given certain features of the environment one may be able to
predict which funnels are likely to be in collision (without actually performing collision-checking)
and evaluate these funnels ﬁrst. These intuitions have been formalized and exploited using the
theory of submodular optimization in the context of trajectory libraries [Dey et al., 2012, Dey,
2015]. The approach allows one to optimize the sequence in which trajectories are evaluated and
should be generalizable to funnel libraries as well.
A closely related question is how to choose the funnels in the library in the ﬁrst place. As
we observed in Section 7.2 for the quadrotor system, one can derive relatively simple geometric
conditions on the environment in order for us to be able to guarantee that the system will be able
to navigate through it without collisions. If we know a priori that our environment will satisfy
these geometric conditions, this provides a way to check if our funnel library is suﬃciently rich.
However, for real-world environments (e.g., forests) we may not be able to make such assumptions.
Instead, we might have a generative (probabilistic) model of our environments and could use this
to evaluate/design our funnel library. For instance, it is known that the locations of trees in a
forest are modeled well by spatial Poisson processes [Stoyan and Penttinen, 2000]. In such settings,
it may be possible to design a randomized algorithm for generating the funnel library where one
samples diﬀerent realizations of the environment, searches through the existing library to ﬁnd a
collision-free funnel for the sampled environment, and adds a new funnel to the library when such
a funnel doesn’t exist.
In a similar vein, extending the results presented in [Karaman and Frazzoli, 2012] on ﬂight
through ergodic forests to the funnel library setting is an interesting direction to pursue. In par-
ticular, [Karaman and Frazzoli, 2012] uses results from percolation theory to provide bounds on
the speed at which a robot can ﬂy safely through a forest in which obstacles have been sampled
from an ergodic spatial process. Extending the results from [Karaman and Frazzoli, 2012] to reason
about funnel libraries could allow us to check if a given funnel library is suﬃciently rich under the
assumption that the spatial process from which obstacles are drawn is ergodic and known.
9.1.4
Probabilistic guarantees
Throughout this paper, we have assumed that all disturbances and uncertainty are bounded with
probability one. In practice, this assumption may either not be fully valid or could lead to overly
conservative performance. In such situations, it is more natural to provide guarantees of a proba-
bilistic nature. Recently, results from classical super-martingale theory have been combined with
sums-of-squares programming in order to compute such probabilistic certiﬁcates of ﬁnite time in-
variance [Steinhardt and Tedrake, 2012], i.e.
provide upper bounds on the probability that a
stochastic nonlinear system will leave a given region of state space. Combining the techniques
presented in [Steinhardt and Tedrake, 2012] with the approach presented in this work to perform
robust online planning on stochastic systems will be the subject of future work.
52

9.1.5
Reasoning about perception systems
In this paper, we have focused most of our attention on reasoning about the real-time planning and
control systems. In particular, we assumed that the robot is equipped with a perception system that
reports (at runtime) regions in which obstacles are guaranteed to lie within. This may not always be
a valid assumption; in practice, perceptual systems can often have false negatives and fail to report
an obstacle in the environment. In such scenarios, it is unreasonable to expect to guarantee with
probability one that the system will remain collision-free and we can only hope for probabilistic
guarantees. One could envision modeling this perceptual uncertainty by considering an occupancy
map with probabilities of occupancy associated with each voxel. Modeling and reasoning about
such perceptual uncertainty remains an important open problem.
9.1.6
Real-time computation of funnels
Due to the computation time associated with funnels, the approach presented in this work had
two phases: an oﬄine phase for computing funnels and an online stage for real-time planning
with funnels.
Recently, more scalable alternatives to SOS programming have been introduced
[Ahmadi and Majumdar, 2016, Ahmadi and Majumdar, 2014]. These alternatives rely on linear
and second-order cone programming instead of semideﬁnite programming. This makes it possible to
obtain large computational gains in terms of scalability and running time using DSOS and SDSOS
programming as compared to SOS programming (see [Majumdar et al., 2014] for comparisons of
DSOS/SDSOS with SOS on large-scale controls applications). In addition to the ability to handle
higher dimensional robotic systems, this also raises the interesting possibility of being able to
dispense with the oﬄine computation stage and compute a funnel and feedback controller in real-
time based on the geometry of the environment. Currently, this would only be feasible for relatively
low-dimensional systems but may be an exciting direction to pursue.
We believe that the work presented in this paper has the potential to be deployed on real robots
to make them operate safely in real-world environments. Our hope is that by building upon this
work and pursuing the directions for future research presented above we can make this a reality.
