PREPRINT VERSION
A First Attempt to Cloud-Based User Veriﬁcation in
Distributed System
M. Wo´zniak, D. Połap, G. Borowik and C. Napoli

FINAL VERSION PUBLISHED ON:
Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Computer Aided System Engineering (APCASE), pp.
226–231 (2015)
BIBITEX:

author = {Wozniak, M. and Polap, D. and Borowik, G. and Napoli, C.},
title = {A First Attempt to Cloud-Based User Veriﬁcation in Distributed System},
booktitle = {Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Computer Aided System Engineering (APCASE)},
year = {2015},
pages = {226–231},
address = {14-16 July, Quito, Ecuador},
publisher = {IEEE},
doi = {10.1109/APCASE.2015.47},
url = {http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs all.jsp?arnumber=7287024}
}
Published version copyright © 2015 IEEE
UPLOADED UNDER SELF-ARCHIVING POLICIES
NO COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT INTENDED
arXiv:1601.07446v1  [cs.NE]  27 Jan 2016

A First Attempt to Cloud-Based User Veriﬁcation
in Distributed System
Marcin Wo´zniak∗, Dawid Połap∗, Grzegorz Borowik‡, Christian Napoli†
∗Institute of Mathematics, Silesian University of Technology, Kaszubska 23, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland

‡Warsaw University of Technology, Nowowiejska 15/19, 00-665 Warsaw, Poland

†Department of Mathematics and Informatics, University of Catania, Viale A. Doria 6, 95125 Catania, Italy

Abstract—In this paper, the idea of client veriﬁcation in
distributed systems is presented. The proposed solution presents
a sample system where client veriﬁcation through cloud resources
using input signature is discussed. For different signatures
the proposed method has been examined. Research results are
presented and discussed to show potential advantages.
Index Terms—user veriﬁcation, distributed system, Cloud-
Computing.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, signature recognition is one of the most im-
portant operations in various agencies. At each step we are
required to verify our identity. A few of the most impor-
tant examples in which we use the signature are ﬁnancial
institutions such as banks or even stores where people use
cards or checks that require conﬁrmation of identity. Another
example is approving of labor contracts or any other type of
transactions. These are real-life examples in which we use
signatures. All these systems use distributed computing. When
a client sign documents the computer system is using data
stored remotely. Therefore intelligent solutions dedicated for
this process are required. Conﬁrmation of identity by signature
brings the possibility of forgery, which is driving force for
many people to create system not only to conﬁrm but also to
detect a possible attempt to forge a signature. It is not an easy
task because a person can sign at a certain angle, invert the
lines, write letters quickly or even with some defects such as
trembling hand.
Distributed computing system to signature veriﬁcation
should be able to counter check in each of mentioned situ-
ations. This is the main problem of decision support systems,
which in some way have to process the input signatures to
the format or size that allows correct veriﬁcation. Moreover,
mentioned systems should ﬁnd some speciﬁc features in
signatures, which are divided into groups describing local
and global features. As a global features, the signature is
considered as a whole, so for instance a feature will be
time or speed of folding. On the other hand, the local will
contain characteristic features due to a person’s handwriting.
In many cases, it is a difﬁcult problem to ask a person to
provide many signatures, so it is important to create more
signatures in different conﬁguration by computer application
on the assumption of saving the most important characteristic
features. In recent years, many new ideas for preprocessing
and signature veriﬁcation were presented [1], [2], [3].
A. Related Works
Examinations of distributed systems concern workﬂow man-
agement [4]. This is very important for overall performance of
processing data over cloud resources [5], [6], [7], [8]. Another
aspect is proper positioning for request management [9], [10],
[11], [12], [13], which makes the system faster and more
reliable. In various aspects of positioning and optimization
Computational Intelligence (CI) provides interesting solutions.
CI methods are applicable in various complex problems [4],
[14], [15], [16], dynamic systems positioning [17] and image
processing [18], [19], [20]. Therefore proposed solution of
signature veriﬁcation in distributed system will use CI method
for intelligent data aggregation. The importance of the pre-
sented solution is to efﬁciently assist in signature veriﬁcation
in distributed systems. The novel approach is based on Cloud-
Computed knowledge for various users machines that are
about to verify input signatures form serviced clients.
II. GENERAL IDEA OF CLOUD-COMPUTING
Cloud-Computing is becoming more popular in the recent
years. It is a widely offered service, which basis is a shift of
all IT services to the external provider (server) what creates
a permanent, remote access to the services for various users
located in remote positions. It may use an agent, which
is an encapsulated computer system located in the special
environment to serve as a core station for data processing,
which role is an automatic operations management [21].
Cloud-Computing is often used by companies in order
to provide an efﬁcient service to the clients and the users
(workers). Instead of creating an infrastructure in all company
branches and hiring employers to manage it, the headquarters
use central infrastructure and computing power to offer ded-
icated service for users and clients. In [22] authors analyzed
Mobile Cloud Computing in terms of heterogeneity. In Cloud-
Computing an important issue is security [23], [24], because
users should not be allowed to integrate activities and their
resources should be protected from other, unwanted persons.

Computing power can increase and decrease according to
the customer needs in speciﬁc time. However tailored system
composition and application of dedicated methods can improve
the overall efﬁciency and reduce energy consumption [25],
[26], [27]. According to research conducted for the European
Commission in 2011, Cloud-Computing can decrease amount
of money spend on IT by 20% and lower energy consumption.
Cloud-Computing is usually used in one of three ways:
• Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), model in which a
special infrastructure is available to the users.
• Platform as a Service (PaaS), model in which a special
platform of virtual machines and operation systems is
available for users to work in.
• Software as a Service (SaaS), where users get an access
to applications without integrating into system.
However mainly some compositions of the mentioned above
are most practical. In the article we discuss a combination of
IaaS and SaaS applied together to serve as an infrastructure
for distributed user requests processing and intelligent software
for veriﬁcation of the processed requests.
A. Applied Model of Processing
In the proposed solution cloud architecture is composed.
There are deﬁned two models: one for veriﬁcation request
processing (as shown in Fig. 1) and the other for knowledge
acquisition process (as shown in Fig. 2).
Request processing (Fig. 1) in the system starts when a user
of the system wants to verify personality of the client signing
documents. The client machine sends the veriﬁcation request
to the processing server. This computing unit is connected
to database of signature models. The request is processed
(veriﬁed) using this knowledge, however recognition goes
along with assistance of managing supervisor. This does not
mean that all the veriﬁed requests must be accepted by the
managing unit, but that if the processing server hesitates, i.e.
the acceptance ration is under certain limit, the managing su-
pervisor takes action to judge the request using the knowledge
stored in the database. After acceptance or rejection of the
request, this knowledge is reused again to improve the database
for further processing.
The other part of the system is a model of knowledge
acquisition for future clients veriﬁcation (Fig. 2). The system
must have the knowledge proper for veriﬁcation purposes.
Therefore the ﬁrst operation is to help the system learn about
the features to verify. Clients give a set of signatures that
are send to processing server as an input sample. This set
is processed in intelligent aggregation to establish knowledge
stored in database. This knowledge can be improved any
time, after each successful client veriﬁcation the new signature
is sent to the processing server as a new input sample to
be stored in the database after intelligent aggregation with
previous knowledge. That means, each new client veriﬁcation
is an important possibility to extend the knowledge in the
distributed system. Therefore the system not only performs
veriﬁcation but also learns all the time. Learning process is
supervised by an experienced workers to ensure that only the
important information helpful for further veriﬁcation is stored
in the database. The system is equipped in backup server,
which is to store backup of the knowledge and control the
process in the main server. This type of backup ensures that
any operation in the system is easily erased and the knowledge
can be restored if any demand can happen. For the veriﬁcation
purposes main role plays intelligent signature aggregation
method. It is responsible for analyzing input signatures and
composing an aggregated knowledge.
III. INTELLIGENT AGGREGATION METHOD
Generally, the signature is a ﬁgurative mark containing
the name of the signatory. In the electronic version, it is
an image made up of black and white pixels where black
ones represent the signature. Each pixel can be treated as a
given discrete two-dimensional point, and that is why we can
use an idea of creating new samples based on set of several
samples aggregated into one shape. Proposed system process
a few signatures at the same time transforming them into
a single form using the method described in [3] and place
this aggregation into the database. Aggregated structure is
perfect for knowledge transfer over connection in distributed
systems due to low size of the knowledge portion. The method
is presented in Algorithm 1. Processing model [3] is based
on interpolation. At the beginning signature is simpliﬁed -
for all vertical points one as an arithmetic sum of all them
is calculated. After that operation, all created points from
simpliﬁed signature are subjected to the chosen interpolation
method. In the end, graph of the interpolated function is
created as a new simpliﬁed sample.
Next step is a new approach to create more samples based
on existing ones. In the situation, when client is creating a
few samples of his/her signatures for the ﬁrst time, it would
be stored in database, and then signatures are to be duplicated
in various combinations to improve the knowledge in the
database. At ﬁrst, all samples would be combined to create one
sample with a complete area of black pixel. In this area, basis
points would be created using Simulated Annealing described
in section III-A. Then, according to the position of basic points
on the x-axis, these points should be connected. As a result of
that operation, new aggregated sample is created and added to
the database for further veriﬁcation. The model is presented
in in Fig. 3 and discussed in Algorithm 1.
A. Simulated Annealing
Annealing is a metallurgical process where ﬁrst metal
heating to a high temperature is performed, then instantaneous
annealing which means holding the metal at a given tempera-
ture and in the end slow cooling. The cooling rate is essential
in this process. Supervising cooling keeps the metal state
close to thermodynamic equilibrium, i.e. the state in which
parameters such as pressure and volume remain constant in
time. However to maintain a balance we must be aware of the
following components:
1) thermal equilibrium - the constant temperature with no
heat exchange with the environment,

Fig. 1.
Proposed model of requests processing for client veriﬁcation in Cloud-Computing system.
Fig. 2.
Proposed model of knowledge acquisition for future client veriﬁcation in Cloud-Computing system.
2) mechanical equilibrium - pressure at any point is con-
stant,
3) chemical equilibrium - there are no chemical reactions
which could change the composition of the metal.
Basic equation which is used to describe the thermodynamics
of the process is
P(E) ≈e−E
kT ,
(1)
where E is a thermodynamic system, k is Boltzmann’s con-
stant, and T means absolute temperature.
In the metallurgical industry there are several types of
that process, for instance homogenizing or plasticizes. The
ﬁrst one involves heating the metal to a temperature of
1000◦C −1200◦C, then cooling in the air. The advantage
of this is reduction of the crystallization effect. This process
has been modeled for optimization purposes.
1) Mathematical Model: Simulated Annealing (SA) algo-
rithm for the ﬁrst time was presented in 1983 by Kirkpatrick
and others [28]. In [29] authors presented the possibility of
modifying the algorithm by introducing a further annealing
which will speed up the algorithm. The algorithm was also
used in other areas, authors of [30] showed possibility of using
SA to deﬁne populations models. In [31] the use of SA in
quantum chemistry was demonstrated.
The algorithm assumes that the temperature at the beginning

Fig. 3.
Proposed model of intelligent input data aggregation for the knowledge applied in Cloud-Computing based veriﬁcation process.
Algorithm 1 Proposed Signature Processing Model
1: Get several signatures from the client and send it to the
processing server in the input sample,
2: k is the number of signatures in the input sample,
3: t := 0,
4: while t ≤k do
5:
Simplify the input sample,
6:
Deﬁne a limited area,
7:
Find basis points using Simulated Annealing presented
in Algorithm 2,
8:
Create a new aggregated sample based on these points,
9:
Add new aggregation to the database for further veriﬁ-
cation,
10:
Next iteration t + +,
11: end while
of the process is high, which allows frequent changes in
conﬁgurations. Choosing a solution depends on a certain prob-
ability and that is why there exist possibility of choosing the
worst solution. The advantage of this solution is the situation
when algorithm is located in local optimum - the choice of
worse solution makes it possible to leave the optimum and
further searching of the global optimum. If the temperature is
lower, the probability of choosing a worse solution is smaller,
so it is a criterion for the acceptation of the solution. SA uses
a modiﬁed (1) in the form
P(E) ≈e−δ
T ,
(2)
where δ is the difference between the value of the ﬁtness
function of the current solution x and the new, random solution
x′ from neighborhood of x, which is presented in
δ = f(x′) −f(x).
(3)
The criterion of acceptance of the new solution is
γ < e−δ
T ,
(4)
where γ ∈(0, 1) is random value. Other important aspect of
the algorithm is a temperature function and stop criterion. The
change in temperature might be deﬁned similarly to authors
of [32], [31] by introducing the following equation
Tk+1 = r ∗Tk,
(5)
where Tk means value of the temperature in k-th iteration, and
r is constant deﬁned before the beginning of the algorithm.
The presented algorithm is an iterative method so it is
important to deﬁne a stop criterion - the number of iterations
or minimum temperature. These are important parameters, as
many iterations will lower probability to ﬁnd best solution.
Simulated Annealing is presented in Algorithm 2.
IV. DISCUSSION
Many classiﬁers are designed to verify signatures, and all
of them need a huge database, what is not efﬁcient in Cloud-
Computing where the amount of data to be transfered over
the network can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence workﬂow. Presented
approach to creating new samples based on existing ones can
be a strong advantage for distributed systems. Adding to this
process a new technology for computers on which veriﬁcation
software is installed will accelerate operations not burdened
by typical workﬂow restrictions.
The proposed intelligent method can manage input signature
to make it aggregated for recognition over Cloud-Computing,

Algorithm 2 Simulated Annealing
1: Deﬁne the value of the initial temperature T, the ﬁtness
function f, the number of iterations it and the temperature
change r,
2: Generate a random initial solution x,
3: k:=0,
4: while k ≤it do
5:
i:=0,
6:
for i to k do
7:
Generate random neighboring solution x′,
8:
Calculate the difference δ using (3),
9:
if δ < 0 then
10:
x = x′
11:
else
12:
Generate a random value γ,
13:
if equation (4) is compiled then
14:
x = x′,
15:
end if
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
Reduce the temperature using (5),
19:
Increase the iterator variable k := k + 1,
20: end while
21: Return x from the last iteration.
where by the presented method we can only get the aggregated
shape of the clients signature. This aggregated shape is then
passed to the database, where it serves for on-line veriﬁcation
and further training. In Fig. 4 a sample set of input signa-
tures is presented, for which proposed intelligent aggregation
method evaluated the shape to be passed to the database.
The input sample is processed using one of the methods
Fig. 4.
Input sample from the client.
presented in [3] what gives a set for simpliﬁed signatures
shapes presented in Fig. 5. These shapes are aggregated in
one ﬁnal shape that is to present the possible way the client
sign documents. This aggregated shape is used for veriﬁcation,
where the SA method shows points crucial for veriﬁcation.
This knowledge goes to database and is used whenever a client
has signed a document and system user requests veriﬁcation. In
veriﬁcation the signature is simpliﬁed using methods examined
in [3] to obtain simpliﬁed shape which is compared with
important points showed by SA over the aggregated shape.
Fig. 5.
Input sample processed in the intelligent system.
Fig. 6.
Aggregated data with veriﬁed important points and the main line for
ad-hoc signature veriﬁcation.
V. FINAL REMARKS
In the article we present a novel approach to creating
aggregated knowledge for distributed systems. Proposed novel
recognition method is easy to implement with possibility
to improve. Moreover it can be implemented in Cloud-
Computing where low data packages inﬂuence workﬂow sta-
bility and performance. Because of that it will make it easier
and cheaper for many small companies to use. Since the data
package for client veriﬁcation is aggregated transfer over the
network will be fast even for slow connections.
Future research will lead to deﬁne improvements of dis-
cussed approach leading to create fast and efﬁcient signature
veriﬁcation system for large distributed systems.
