arXiv:1901.02354v2  [cs.LG]  13 Jan 2019
1
Geometrization of deep networks for the interpretability of deep
learning systems
Xiao Dong, Ling Zhou
Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
How to understand deep learning systems remains an open problem. In this paper we propose that the answer may lie in the
geometrization of deep networks. Geometrization is a bridge to connect physics, geometry, deep network and quantum computation
and this may result in a new scheme to reveal the rule of the physical world. By comparing the geometry of image matching and
deep networks, we show that geometrization of deep networks can be used to understand existing deep learning systems and it may
also help to solve the interpretability problem of deep learning systems.
Index Terms—deep networks, geometrization, physics, computation
I. MOTIVATION
As a general tool to solve complex problems, the thriving
deep learning technology is showing its power in almost all
research ﬁelds. But we are still lacking a general theoretical
framework to to answer the following questions: Why does
deep learning work so well? What’s the relationship between
the structure of a deep network and its functionality? How to
design a proper deep network structure for a given task? How
can we predict and control the behaviour of a deep network
during training? How can our brain construct efﬁcient network
structures for different tasks with limited resources?
In this work we propose a general framework to understand
deep learning systems, the geometrization of deep networks.
A. Why geometrization
Our motivation to understand deep learning systems from a
geometric perspective falls in three folds.
Deep networks are physical The reason that deep learning
is so powerful and universally effective in different ﬁelds is
that deep networks reveal the structures of physical systems.
That’s to say, deep networks are effective representations of
physical systems and their evolutions. Besides the enormous
examples of AI based applications on computer vision, nat-
ural language processing and robot control, deep networks
are also closely related with the fundamental laws of our
world, for example the effective representation of many-
body quantum systems[1], renormalization group and entan-
glement renormalization[2][3], tensor networks and AdS/CFT
duality[4][5][6][7][8][9][10]. So we believe the effectiveness
of deep networks has a fundamental physical origin. That is,
the deep network is at least a replica of our physical world so
that every physical system has a correspondent deep network
representation. Deep networks may share the same structure
of the physical world and they may obey the same rules. The
great success of geometrization of physics inspires our idea
that geometrization may also be the ultimate framework to
understand deep networks and deep learning systems.
Deep networks are computational programmes From
the quantum computation point of view, any physical system
can be regarded as being generated from an initial simple
state by an unitary operation. Similarly the evolution of any
physical system is also an unitary operation or equivalently
a computation process. As effective descriptions of physical
systems and their evolutions, deep networks are essentially
computation processes and can be understood as computa-
tional programmes to generate and evolve physical systems.
Then the geometrization of quantum states and quantum
computations[11][12] also leads to the geometrization of deep
learning systems. For example, quantum computation com-
plexity has a clear geometric picture and concrete physi-
cal meanings as discussed in complexity=action, complex-
ity=volume, Hamiltonian complexity, tensor networks and the
emergent spacetime structure from quantum information.
Deep networks as optimal control and optimization
systems Recently there are emerging efforts to formulate deep
learning systems as either optimization or optimal control
problems[13][14]. It’s well-known that these are also closely
related with geometry and physics. We will show this point
with a concrete example of template image matching, which
has a clear geometric picture as an optimization or an optimal
control problem.
All the above observations lead to the same conclusion,
geometrization scheme may bring us new perspectives to
understand deep networks and deep learning systems. What’s
more, if the geometrization of deep networks can be accom-
plished, this may also change our ways to understand the
physical world, i.e. a physical world built by deep networks.
Now we show how to build the geometrization of deep net-
works and how this can help us to understand deep networks
and deep learning.
B. An abstract description of deep networks
In order to establish the geometric picture of deep networks,
we now give an abstract description of it.
As mentioned above, deep networks are programmes or
data processing systems, which can achieve a transformation
from the input data space Vin to the output data space Vout.
Normal deep learning tasks, such as feature extraction and
generative models, are all mappings between different data
spaces. And usually we prefer one of them to be a vector

2
space so that algebraic operations or classiﬁcations can be
easily carried out on it. From the general computation point
of view, a data processing or a computation system can be
abstracted as a mapping C : V × G →V , where V is the
space of data and G is the space of operations on data. A
computation process is given by C(vin, g) = g(vin) = vout,
where vi, so ∈V are the input and output data and g ∈G
is an operation or transformation on data. A programme or
an algorithm is a realization of g, which is usually achieved
by a series of simple primitive operations as in both classical
and quantum computers. The structure of a deep network is
essentially a parametric realization of g and the process of
training is to ﬁnd the proper network parameters that achieve
g. Here we would like to note that the parameters may also
include part of the network structure so that network structure
itself may also be learned during training.
The key feature of deep networks, the deep structure means
that g is realized by a discrete time sequence of transforma-
tions {¯gn|n ∈[0, N], ¯g0 = Id, ¯gN = g}, where Id stands for
the identity transformation. In this transformation sequence,
the nth step achieves an operation ¯gn ◦¯g−1
n−1, which is usually
a simple low complexity operation. To make an analytical
study of deep learning networks, we introduce a continuous
time ﬂow {gt|t ∈[0, 1], g0 = Id, g1 = g}. The validity
of this continuous ﬂow fundamentally lies in the continuous
evolution of quantum states. This is to say, a discrete time
model of quantum information processing system such as the
quantum circuit model is essentially only an approximation
of a continuous time quantum evolution. Similarly a discrete
time deep network is only an approximation of a continuous
ﬂow of transformation.
Obviously the continuous time ﬂow of transformation has
a geometric picture. It is a continuous curve in the space
of transformation connecting the identity operation I and the
target operation g. Accordingly for each input data vin, there
is a curve in the data space given by {vi,t|t ∈0, 1, v0 =
vin, v1 = vout}. The purpose of deep learning systems is
to ﬁnd an optimal transformation ﬂow to realize the target
transformation, where the correspondent collection of the
trajectories of all the input data {vk
in,t, vk
in ∈Vin} should
show a good shape, where a good shape means the trajectories
should be smooth, stable and well distributed so that the the
network has a good genearalization performace.
We now focus on the continuous transformation curve
gt, t ∈[0, 1]. If we regard the space of transformation G
as a manifold, then we can build a Riemannian structure on
it. We can deﬁne the time derivative of gt as ˙gt = ut ◦gt
and a right invariant metric on the tangent space T G of
G as < ˙gt, ˙gt >T G=< ut, ut >Id. Then we can calculate
the length of the curve gt, t ∈[0, 1], g0 = I, g1 = g as
R 1
0 < ut, ut > dt, which is the algorithmic complexity of
the realization gt, t ∈[0, 1] of g.
Now we have a simple geometric picture of deep networks.
The structure of a deep network and the metric determines
the length of the curve. Network parameters and the metric
determines the shape of the curve. The optimal realization of
g under a constraint to minimize the length of the curve is the
geodesic from Id to g.
Of course, keen readers will argue that above geometric
picture is too abstract for a quantitative or even a qualitative
understanding of deep learning systems. In the remaining part
of this paper, we will ﬁrstly give a solid example of the
geometrization of deep networks by comparing deep networks
with the geometry of image matching. Then we scratch a
broader picture of the geometrization of deep networks by
comparing deep networks with other physical systems in-
cluding quantum information processing, quantum many-body
systems, spacetime structure and general relativity.
II. GEOMETRY OF IMAGE REGISTRATION
Computational anatomy[15] is a research ﬁeld to study
the variability of anatomical shapes, where the comparison
between shapes is the key issue. Mathematically a shape can
be described by a function on a spatial space I : Rn →Rm,
which we call an image I. Here n = 2, 3 stands for a 2D
or a 3D image. m = 1 and m > 1 mean scalar images
and vector/tensor images. For two different shapes represented
by correspondent images I0, I1, the task of image registration
is to ﬁnd a transformation ϕ so that the difference between
the target image I1 and the transformed source image I0
is minimized, i.e. minϕ ∥I1 −I0 ◦ϕ∥. The details of the
transformation I0 ◦ϕ depends on the type of the image I0[15].
A. Diffeomorphic image registration: optimization vs opti-
mal control
Diffeomorphic image registration is a framework for shape
comparison by modeling transformations between shapes as a
smooth invertible function ϕ : Rn →Rn. For example the
space of transformations of volumetric images can be taken
as G = Diff(R3), which is the diffeomorphism group of
R3, and V = I(R3) as the space of volumetric images on R3.
Deforming an image I0 ∈V by a transformation ϕ ∈G is just
the change of coordinate as I0 ◦ϕ. Following [16][17], image
registration can be abstracted as a map G× V →V , where G
is the group of diffeomorphic image transformations and V is
the vector space of images. Large deformation diffeomorphic
metric mapping (LDDMM)[18] generates a deformation ϕ as
a ﬂow ϕu
t of a time-dependent vector ﬁeld ut ∈Te(G) = g
so that
˙ϕu
t = ut ◦ϕu
t , ϕu
0 = Id, ϕu
1 = ϕ
(1)
The diffeomorphic matching of two images I0 and I1 with
LDDMM is to ﬁnd a vector ﬁeld ut, t ∈[0, 1] to minimize the
cost function
E(ut) =
Z 1
0
l(ut)2dt+β|I1−Io◦ϕu
1|2, ˙ϕu
t = ut◦ϕu
t , ϕu
0 = Id
(2)
Here the regularity on ut is a kinetic energy term l(ut) =
1
2
R 1
0 |ut|2dt with |ut| a norm on the vector ﬁeld deﬁned
as |ut|2 = ⟨Lut, ut⟩L2. The operator L is a positive self-
adjoint differential operator, for example Lut = ut −α2∆ut.
Obviously the norm |ut|2 = ⟨Lut, ut⟩L2 deﬁnes a Riemannian
metric on the manifold of the diffeomorphic transformation
group Diff(Rn). The second term of E(ut) computes the
difference between the transformed image Io ◦ϕu
1 and I1.

3
A necessary condition DE(ut) = 0 to minimize the cost
function is that the vector ﬁeld ut should satisfy the Euler-
Poincar´e (E-P) equation
Lut = −ϕu
0,tI0 ⋄ϕu
0,tϕu
1,0π
(3)
where ϕu
s,t = ϕu
t ◦ϕu
s−1, π := β(ϕu
0,tI0 −I1)♭∈V ∗. The
♭operator is deﬁned as ♭: V →V ∗, ⟨u♭, v⟩V ∗×V = ⟨u, v⟩
and ⋄: T V ∗→g∗, ⟨I ⋄π, u⟩g∗×g = ⟨π, ζu(I)⟩V ∗×V is the
momentum map.
The E-P equation can also be given as
d
dt
∂l(ut)
∂ut
= −ad∗
ut
∂l(ut)
∂ut
(4)
where ∂l(ut)
∂ut
is the momentum and ad∗: g →gl(g) is the
coadjoint representation of the Lie algebra g of the Lie group
G. For more details please refer to [16][17].
In LDDMM framework, the curve satisfying the E-P equa-
tion is found by a gradient descent algorithm, while the
gradient is given by ut + Kϕu
0,tI0 ⋄ϕu
0,tϕu
1,0π with K = L−1.
The geometric picture of LDDMM is quite simple: LD-
DMM ﬁnds a minimal length curve, i.e. a geodesic given
by the E-P equation, in Diff(Rn) connecting Id and ψ,
which can transform the source I0 to a near neighbour of the
target image I1. Equivalently we can also induce a Riemannian
structure on the image space V by the map G × V →V so
that the geodesic on G leads to a geodesic on V[17].
Here we point out that this is exactly the same as in the
geometry of quantum computation[11][19] that a Riemannian
metric on the quantum operation group induces a Rieman-
nian metric on the Hilbert space of quantum states. Another
interesting observation is that the map G × V
→V can
also be understood as a typical computation system, where
V is the data representation space and G is the data operation
space. So in fact image registration and quantum computation
essentially have the same abstract descriptions and geometric
pictures[10].
LDDMM based image registration is formulated as an
optimization problem and solved by a gradient descent based
optimization. The optimal solution ϕt is parameterized by the
time-dependent vector ﬁeld ut and the optimization procedure
is a parameter estimation of ut. We can easily see this is
very similar with the abstract model of deep networks we
introduced above.
An alternative framework of LDDMM is to formulate it as
an optimal control problem[20], where the image registration
procedure is regarded as a dynamical process. The state of
the dynamical system is the transformed source image I0 ◦ϕt
and the vector ﬁeld ut is taken as the control signal to adjust
the transformation ϕt. The problem is then to minimize the
energy function
E(ut, J0
t , λt, γ)
=
Z 1
0
l(ut) + ⟨λt, ˙J0
t + ∇It · ut⟩dt(5)
+
< γ, J0
0 −I0 > +β|J0
1 −I1|
(6)
where J0
t
= I0 ◦ϕu
0,t, J1
t
= I1 ◦ϕu
1,t and λt, γ are the
Lagrangian multipliers.
This leads to the optimality conditions as follows
˙J0
t + ∇J0
t · ut
=
0
(7)
˙λt + ∇· (λt · ut)
=
0
(8)
ut + K ⋆∇J0
t λt
=
0
(9)
J0
0
=
I0
(10)
λ1
=
β(I1 −J0
1)
(11)
The optimization procedure is a bi-directional information
ﬂow. Given the current control signal ut and initial values
of J0
0 = I0, the forward information ﬂow compute J0
t for
t ∈[0, 1]. In the backward adjoint ﬂow, we update λt starting
from λ1 = β(I1 −J0
1) and then ut can be updated by a
gradient descent using both J0
t and the adjoint variable λt.
We note that the gradient based update of ut here is in fact
the same as the updating of ut in the optimization formulation
to fulﬁll the E-P equation. But the idea of bi-directional adjoint
computation is a new characteristic. This is different from the
direct computation of gradient in the optimization formulation.
The Lagrangian multiplier based formulation can lead to more
general strategies for parameter optimization as will be shown
later.
B. Geodesic shooting
In LDDMM, both the optimization and optimal control
formulations aim to ﬁnd a geodesic by ﬁnding a vector ﬁeld
ut satisfying the E-P equation. It’s well known that for a given
Riemannian manifold, a geodesic is completely determined by
the starting point and the initial velocity of the geodesic. So
if our goal is to ﬁnd a geodesic, then the vector ﬁeld ut as a
control signal is highly redundant since it can be completely
determined by u0 and the E-P equation.
Geodesic shooting[21] can ﬁnd the initial vector ﬁeld u0 or
equivalently the initial momentum Lu0 with the E-P equation
as an explicit constraint. Obviously here the geodesic shoot-
ing is also formulated as an optimal control problem. The
correspondent optimization procedure is also a bi-directional
information ﬂow. Starting from the initial momentum and
the E-P equation, the forward ﬂow updates the vector ﬁeld
ut, the transformation ϕu
t and the transformed source image
J0
t = I0 ◦ϕu
t . The backward adjoint ﬂow updates the adjoint
variables, the Lagrangian multipliers of the constraints, and
ﬁnally the initial vector ﬁeld u0 can be updated by a gradient
descent. For more details of geodesic shooting and the related
adjoint calculation, please refer to [21][15].
The lesson we can draw from geodesic shooting is that,
when the optimal conﬁguration of a subset of the parameters
can be determined as a function of all the other parameters, this
function can be regarded as a constraint and the optimization
can be simpliﬁed as an optimal problem. Or in another word,
when there exists explicit constraints among parameters, the
optimization can be simpliﬁed. This may help to design the
network structure in deep learning systems.
This idea can be generalized to the case of a general optimal
control, where explicit constraints among parameters should
be respected. Then the Lagrangian multiplier based variational
method will lead to a similar bi-directional information passing

4
algorithm which can be shown later to be closely related with
deep learning systems.
C. Semiproduct group and metamorphosis
Metamorphosis is used to modify the original LDDMM or
the geodesic shooting to support a second transformation ﬂow
ηt, vt = ϕu
t ˙ηt, which is used to change the image appearance
of the template image I0 so that the image transformation is
a composition of both the coordinate transformation and the
image appearance transformation. Essentially this is to replace
the Lie group G with a semiproduct group[17][22]. That’s
to say, we are now working with a composite operation of
multiple operations.
Under the composite transformation, the image is trans-
formed as ˙J0
t = vt+ut◦ϕu
t . This is a new constraint involving
both the coordinate and image appearance transformations.
Accordingly the energy function to be minimized includes
both the kinetic energies of ut and vt. In another word, the
Riemannian manifold of transformations is extended and a
new composite metric is deﬁned. But basically the geometric
picture is similar with the original LDDMM or the geodesic
shooting framework. An alternative perspective of the meta-
morphosis is that the transformation on the image appearance
ηt can be regarded as introducing noise on the image. The
constraint on the kinetic energy of vt can be understood as to
constrain the power of the noise. For more details of the idea
of metamorphesis, please refer to [15][22][23].
D. Summary of diffeomorphic image registration
Image registration can be formalized by either energy based
optimization or an optimal control problem. It has a clear
geometric picture, where the optimal solution is a geodesic
on the Riemannian manifold on the transformation space.
The geodesic is represented by a parameterized model and is
obtained by a parameter estimation procedure. What’s more,
the image registration problem is closely related with the
geometric mechanics in that they share lots of geometric
structures.
A complete description of the geometric structure of image
registration is given in [16][17][21][22][23][15] and references
therein.
III. GEOMETRIC PICTURE OF DEEP LEARNING SYSTEMS
To show the validness of the geometrization of deep net-
works, we now compare the diffeomorphic image registration
and deep learning systems to build a dictionary between
correspondent concepts in both ﬁelds. Since image registra-
tion has both a clear geometric and a physical (geometric
mechanical) picture, we hope the dictionary will give us a
new understanding of deep networks from both the geometric
and physical points of view. Here we directly give a list of the
content of the dictionary with a brief explaination. Interested
readers can check the details by themselves.
A. A dictionary between image registration and deep net-
works
(1)Network structure and G: Geometrically the network
structure deﬁnes the space of possible solutions, which is a set
of curves in the transformation space. Also the network struc-
ture deﬁnes in which way this space is explored as explained in
the relational inductive bias[24]. Due to the limited complexity
of the network and limited allowed operations, the network
structure only represents a subset of all possible curves that
can reach the target transformation ϕ in image registration or
g in deep learning from the identical transformation Id. In
fact the deep network structure deﬁnes the operation group G
and the network parameters θ falls in its Lie algebra g of G.
Normal CNNs are just discretisized transformation curves and
the norms of network parameters θ along the curve can be
roughly regarded as the non-uniform discretization step sizes.
(2)Constraints and Riemannian metric: The network
structure only deﬁnes the space of possible solutions. To ﬁnd
the optimal solution by solving an optimization problem, we
need to introduce constraints on the parameters of the network.
Geometrically constraints can be regarded as Riemannian
metrics on G deﬁned on the manifold of possible solutions
encoded in the network structure and network parameters.
Carefully adjusting constraints can change the curvature dis-
tribution of the solution manifold and generally we prefer to
work on a ﬂat manifold so that the optimal solution can be
easily found.
(3)Supervised training and landmark registration: Given
the parametric description of the manifold of possible solutions
and the Riemannian metric deﬁned by constraint, supervised
training on a set of N labeled training data estimates the
parameters ut(θ) to ﬁnd the optimal transformation curve gt to
reach the desired target transformation. This can be understood
to achieve a diffeomorphic image registration based on N
pairs of landmarks on the image or to simultaneously match
N images using the same diffeomorphic transformation.
(4)Optimal deep networks and geodesics: In LDDMM,
the optimal transformation is achieved by a geodesic on G
determined by the E-P equation. In deep networks, an optimal
network should also exist as a geodesic on the Riemannian
manifold deﬁned by the network structure and constraints,
which is the deep network with a minimal complexity. Accord-
ingly, if the E-P equation of deep networks can be explicitly
described as in LDDMM, then geodesic shooting can also
be implemented on the optimization of deep networks. Since
geodesic shooting only optimize the initial momentum of
the geodesic, the training of an optimal deep network has a
much smaller degree of freedom than a normal non-optimal
deep network. Network distillation and network pruning are
essentially both efforts to ﬁnd the optimal deep networks.
(5)Back propagation and LDDMM: The back propagation
based optimization of deep networks are essentially the same
as the gradient descent based LDDMM optimization[18].
(6)Neural ODE and optimal control framework: The
optimal control based optimization procedure of LDDMM is
essentially the same as the optimization used in neural ODE
and other related works[13][14].

5
(7)Equilibrium propagation and geodesic shooting: Ben-
gio’s equilibrium propagation[25] share the same structure as
geodesic shooting used in LDDMM framework[21].
(8)Attention mechanism and semiproduct group: Es-
sentially attention mechanism is a composition of multiple
deep networks. It shares lots of similarity with the semiprod-
uct group and metamorphoses in LDDMM framework since
semiproduct group also plays with composite operations. In the
semiproduct group case of LDDMM, the multiple operations
are coupled and a generalized E-P equation can obtained to
represent the optimal ﬂow. This indicates that theoretically we
also have an optimal attention mechanism and the geodesic
shooting scheme can be applied.
(9)Generalization and Riemannian curve length: The
generalization capability of deep networks is a key issue of
the performance of deep networks. Usually generalization is
described by a norm based factor, which can be understood
as the complexity of the network[26]. It has been found that
deep networks have the tendency to reduce complexity during
training and a lower complexity means a better generalization
capability. In LDDMM, the complexity of the registration
transformation is the length of the transformation curve evalu-
ated using the Riemannian metric on G. In deep networks, we
also have a correspondent network complexity using a special
Riemannian metric, the Fisher-Rao metric[26]. In fact this
metric is closely related with general relativity[27][28][29],
which is another evidence that deep networks have a deep
physical origin. We will give more details on this point in the
discussion section.
(10) Batch normalization and geodesics: It’s well known
that batch normalization can help the convergence of deep
networks. From the geometrical point of view, since CNNs
are just discretisized transformaition curves and the norms
of θ are the discretization step sizes, BN can be regarded
as an operation to adaptively adjust the ratio of thrown-away
information (energy) along the curve. This is because CNNs
are the same as the entanglement renormalization algorithm,
which extracts global information by iteratively throwing away
local information[2]. By normalizing the data, BN aims to
keep a constant speed of throwing away information along the
network. In entanglement renormalization algorithms, this is
to throw away a ﬁxed percentage of low amplitude states and
keep only those high amplitude states so that the strong global
information patterns are kept. This will result in a transforma-
tion curve with an isometric-like property, which coincides the
property of geodesics. So geometrically BN can be understood
as a constraint to force the network to be a geodesic-alike
curve. This geometric picture is the same as the conclusion of
[30]. In [30] the Hessian matrix was introduced, which is in
fact the Fisher-Rao metric to evaluate the complexity of the
deep network or the length of the transformation curve. If the
network can be constrained by BN to form a geodesic-like
curve, then it has the minimal curve length or equivalently
the minimal deformation energy as in the geometry of image
registration problem. Or BN forces the Fisher-Rao metric to
vary smoothly along the network. Obviously a transformation
with a minimal deformation energy or a smooth curve will
have a smooth loss landscape, which coincides with a key
conclusion of [30].
(11)Training convergence and curvature: The conver-
gence of deep networks highly depends on the back propa-
gation of gradients along deep networks. From the geometric
picture of LDDMM, we know that this is related with the
curvature of the manifold since the curvature determines the
stability of geodesics. In deep learning ﬁelds, random matrix
based analysis[31] shows that when the network has a dynamic
isometric property, the forward and backward information can
ﬂow freely along the network so that a better convergence
can be achieved. In fact, isometry is exactly the property of a
geodesic. So the dynamic isometric property of a deep network
is essentially to say, the network is a geodesic on Euclidean
manifold, i.e. a straight line. Similarly, batch normalization is
essentially to adjust the curvature of the manifold by adjusting
the Fisher-Rao metric along the network.
(12)GAN and current based shape matching: The key
goal of GAN is to approximate a distribution density. The main
challenge of GAN is to ﬁnd a proper metric to measure the
difference of distributions. This is why WGAN emerges as a
break-through since it provides an efﬁcient metric for distribu-
tions without one-to-one correspondence between samples of
distributions. In LDDMM, there is also a way to compare two
shapes without position correspondence using current based
shape representation[32]. It will be interesting to ﬁnd if there
exists a correspondence between WGAN and currents.
(13)Dropout and stachastic shape evolutions: As a so-
lution to enhance the robustness of deep networks, dropout
achieves its goal by adding perturbations on the network,
either on the operation group G (dropout of neurons) or
on the data space V by adding perturbation layers[33]. In
LDDMM framework, there are also similar shape registration
methods by adding perturbations on either the momentum or
the positions of landmarks on shapes[34]. Obviously dropout
aims to ﬁnd a curve that is robust against perturbations on
either G or V. But how about a perturbation on the Lie algebra
g? We will also address this issue in the following section.
(14)ResNet, Lie algebra,curvature and reparameteriza-
tion of curves: ResNet as the most successful deep network
structure shows a superior performance than normal CNNs.
From a geometric point of view, the success of ResNet falls
in that ResNet is a network running on the Lie algebra g,
while normal CNNs run on G. This can be understood by
taking the quantum computation as an analogue of CNNs[10],
where normal CNNs try to construct an quantum algorithm by
composing elementary unitary gates and ResNets achieve the
same algorithm by ﬁnding the proper Hamiltonian. It’s well
known that ResNet is essentially a differential equation, which
perfectly matches the structure of LDDMM. For ResNets, the
curvature along the network is much smoother than normal
CNNs since the network parameters of ResNets are only weak
perturbations and therefore can not lead to rough curvature
change along the network. ResNets can also easily achieve
reparameterization of the curve gt by just adjusting the ampli-
tudes of the weights. In another word, compared with normal
CNNs, ResNets run on a much smoother manifold and can
approach a smooth geodesic much easier than normal CNNs.
(15) Geometric structure of deep networks and Rie-

6
mannian structure on V : In deep learning ﬁelds, there
are also works to explore the geometric structure of deep
networks[35][36]. These works are closely related with the
geometrization of deep networks. But both of them are work-
ing on the Riemannian geometry on V as described in [17]
instead of on the Riemannian geometry on G. Since the
geometry on V is induced by a projection from the geometry
of G, a complete geometrization of deep networks should be
accomplished on G and only the geometry of G can fully
explore the dynamics of deep networks.
This is only a partial list of the correspondence between the
geometry of image registration and deep learning systems. We
hope we have convinced readers to believe the geometrization
of deep networks is a promising candidate for the interpreta-
tion of deep learning systems.
B. A concrete example
Now we will give a concrete sample on how we can
understand deep learning using the geometrization framework.
In [37] the problem of how the training data will inﬂuence the
prediction of a deep network was addressed. They considered
a supervised training with n data points zi = xi, yi, i = 1....n
and the cost function is L(z, θ) 1
nΣn
i=1L(zi, θ) with θ as the
network parameters. The optimal network conﬁguration is
given by
ˆ
theta = arg min mintheta L(z, θ).
The key results of [37] are two items to evaluate how the
perturbation on the training data will inﬂuence the parameter
ˆ
theta and the loss at a test point ztest given by
Iup,params(z) = −H−1
ˆθ ∇θL(z, ˆθ)
(12)
Iup,loss(z, ztest) = −∇θL(ztest, ˆθ)H−1
ˆθ ∇θL(z, ˆθ)
(13)
where Hˆθ = 1
n
Pn
i=1 ∇2
ˆθL(zi, ˆθ) is the Hessian.
To interpret the results using our geometrization framework,
we can regard the supervised network training as an optimiza-
tion problem following the formulation of image registration
with a cost function
E(ut) =
Z 1
0
l(θ)dt + L(z, θ)
(14)
where l(θ)
=
⟨θI(θ)θ⟩, I(θ)
=
Pn
i=1[∇θL(zi, θ) ⊗
∇θL(zi, θ)] is the Fisher-Rao metric used in [26] to describe
complexity of deep networks. Obviously the Fisher-Rao metric
is essentially the same as the Hessian Hˆθ since I(θ) = −Hˆθ
from information geometry.
This can be understood as either to match n pairs of
images simultaneously using diffeomorphic transformations on
a higher dimensional space (due to the overparameterization
of deep networks) or a landmark based image registration
taking all the training data as paired landmarks on an image.
The goal of the optimization is to ﬁnd a proper transforma-
tion that can match the training data and also show good
generalization performance. The Riemannian metric on the
Riemannian manifold to measure the deformation energy of
the transformation or the curve length or equivalently the
complexity of the deep network is the Fisher-Rao metric of
the deep network. From a physical point of view, it’s obvious
to see that why the Fisher-Rao norm is used in [26] to
represent the generalization capability. This is because a lower
complexity network means a lower deformation energy and
therefore a smoother image deformation ﬁeld. Of course for a
landmark based image registration, a smooth deformation will
have a better generalization performance.
Comparing (14) with (2)(3)(4), we can observe that
∇θL(z, ˆθ) in (12) is exactly the momentum in g∗of E-P
equation and (12) is the correspondent vector in g. 13 is related
with the angle between two vectors in g using the Fisher-Rao
metric. We can easily draw a clear physical or a geometric
picture of (12)(13). If the deep network is a geodesic under
the Fisher-Rao metric, then roughly (12) indicates how the
direction of the geodesic will be shifted with a perturbation
of a landmark. (13) shows under a perturbation of a training
landmark, how the direction of the trajectory of a test data
ztest transformed by the perturbed geodesic will be shifted.
Of course generally deep networks are not geodesics. Then
the networks in [37] are just normal non-geodesic curves. But
still the above geometric picture holds approximately.
The drawback of [37] is that it only consider a perturbation
around the current conﬁguration ˆˆθ so that the Fisher-Rao
metric is ﬁxed by the network conﬁguration. Another more
interesting work [38] tried to explore the complete dynamics
of the Fisher-Rao metric by iteratively updating the weighting
of training data and the network conﬁguration ˆθ. Similar to
[37] this can be formulated as an image registration problem
give by
E(ut) =
Z 1
0
l( ˆ
θ(ǫ))dt + L(z, θ, )
(15)
with ǫi, i = 1, ..., n are the weights of the training data and
l( ˆ
θ(ǫ)) are deﬁned on the Fisher-Rao metric determined by
the optimal network parameters
ˆ
θ(ǫ) which are ǫ dependent.
What’s new here? The main difference with the image
registration problem is that the Fisher-Rao metric on G is
now data dependent! In another word, the Riemannian metric
is not a ﬁxed background metric as in the image registration
problem, instead the metric is emergent from the deep network
itself. Readers with a physics background can immediately
see that we have an analogue of this in physics. The data
independent image registration is the Neutonian mechanics
with a ﬁxed spacetime background and the data dependent
deep network systems correspond to general relativity with a
dynamic spacetime. What’s more, the Fisher-Rao metric used
here is in fact closely related with general relativity since
gravitation equation can be derived from it[27][28][29]. So in
(15) the network structure and data (information) are coupled
just as spacetime and matter are coupled in general relativity.
Following John Wheeler, in our physical world, spacetime tells
matter how to move, matter tells spacetime how to curve. In
deep networks, network tells data (information) how to move,
data (information) tells network how to curve. We believe this
is not just an analogue between the physical world and deep
networks, this should be regarded as a general principle to
design and understand deep networks. The key component
of interpret deep networks is to understand how the network

7
structure and data information interact. That’s to say to ﬁnd
the gravitation equation for deep networks. Here we point out,
since the Fisher-Rao metric is data dependent, the optimal
solution can not be written as the E-P equation with a ﬁxed
Riemannian metric any more since the metric is also dynamic.
In [38], the solution is approximated by a two-level gradient
descent algorithm which updates the network parameter ˆθ and
sample weights ǫ iteratively. The ﬁnal solution is a critical
point that ˆθ is stable with respect to the perturbation of ǫ. At
the critical point, the solution still satisﬁes the E-P equation
with a Fisher-Rao metric determined by the network parameter
ˆθ.
As a conclusion of this section, the geometrization frame-
work tells us that (1)The Fisher-Rao based network complexity
measure is an effective signature for the generalization prop-
erty for deep networks since it’s a measure for the network
complexity; (2)The network structure and data information
are coupled just as matter and spacetime are coupled in
general relativity and the ultimate law of deep networks is
a gravitational equation of deep networks; (3)The optimal
solution is a result of the competition between the two terms,
the network complexity and training error, in (15).
IV. DISCUSSION
Till now we have seen the validness of the geometrization
framework on the interpretability of deep learning systems by
showing that deep networks can correspond to geometrical
mechanics and general relativity. The basic idea of geometriza-
tion is that deep networks have correspondence in the physical
world. Therefore we can regard deep networks as physical
systems and ask the following questions:
(1) Is there a GUT (grand uniﬁed theory) of deep networks?
If there is a correspondence between deep networks and
our physical world, then the ultimate interpretability of deep
networks lies in ﬁnding the GUT of deep networks just as the
interpretability of the physical world lies in the GUT of the
physical world. It’s a common sense that the physical GUT is
deﬁnitely a geometrical theory. So we believe geometrization
should be the right roadmap for the interpretability problem
of deep learning systems. Also the GUT of deep networks
should have the same structure as the GUT of our physical
world. Therefore even the GUT of our physical world is
not available yet, exploring the similarity between physical
systems and deep networks can provide guidelines for us to
better understand deep networks.
(2) Real physical systems obey a least action principle,
is this also true for deep networks? We have seen that the
geometry of image registration results in an optimal solution
given by the E-P equation. But for deep networks, generally we
are working with systems far from optimal. But still usually
these non-optimal systems work well in practice. There are
also works taking deep networks as general dynamic systems
such as in neural ODE[13]. Shall we investigate non-optimal
deep networks as general information processing systems or
should we stick to optimal deep networks since they are more
physical? Our geometrization framework will deﬁnitely work
better on the optimal deep networks. But non-optimal systems
might not be properly geometrized. So maybe we should
ﬁrst focus on understanding the optimal systems with clear
geometric pictures.
(3) What can we learn from the geometrization of physics?
Till now we are only working with Riemannian structures as in
the geometry of image registration. In fact the geometrization
of physics is far beyond Riemannian structures. A natural
extension is the ﬁbre bundle structure which plays a key
role in gauge theory. Can we describe deep networks using
ﬁbre bundles? Good candidates in deep networks that may be
described by ﬁbre bundles are transfer learning, meta learning,
neural Turing machines (NTM) and differentiable neural com-
puters(DNC). They all aim to ﬁnd some kind of reconﬁgurable
systems. In the language of Riemannian geometry, this usually
means to reconﬁgure the metric of the system so that the
optimal geodesic curves can be reconﬁgurable. A natural way
to achieve this is to reconﬁgure the connection form on ﬁbre
bundles. Roughly transfer learning can be understood as to
transfer (part of) a geodesic to another task. Meta learning
aims to ﬁnd some universal descriptions of different but similar
geodesics. NTM and DNC mainly achieve the reﬁguration of
systems by carefully changing their memories. We can see the
memory can be understood as the ﬁbre bundle above the base
space of the LSTM states. It’s interesting to check if NTM
and DNC can be written as deﬁning a connection on their
ﬁbre bundles.
Another possibility is that ﬁbre bundles can be used to
describe the coupling of multiple deep networks. It’s get-
ting more and more obvious that complex tasks can only
be achieved by coupling multiple deep networks just as in
our human brains. In AI systems, typical coupled composite
systems are GANs and attention. The coupling of systems
leads to interactions between subsystems, just as interactions
(forces) between physical systems. In physics, interactions are
described by ﬁbre bundles. Accordingly interactions between
coupled deep networks should also be described by ﬁbre
bundles.
The last but not the least, the coupling of multiple deep
networks might be related with the existence of consciousness.
We hypothesize that when multiple neural networks in our
brains are coupled, the coupling may be achieved by an inde-
pendent coupling system, which not only couples the multiple
neural subsystems but also has its own latent state space and
a stable dynamics. This independent coupling system may be
the origin of our consciousness. If this is the case, then can
our consciousness also be geometrized?
(4) How to geometrize reinforcement (RF) learning sys-
tems? Geometrically RF is essentially to learn the metric
of G from the interaction with the system and then ﬁnd
geodesics using the learned metric. Imitation learning can
be understood to design a metric so that the expert’s action
becomes a geodesic. Can we formulate a geometrization of
these procedures?
(5) What’s the curvature of the emergent Fisher-Rao metric
in deep networks? If deep networks can be formulated as a
dynamic system using emergent Fisher-Rao metric, we need
to check what’s the curvature of this metric. Because the
curvature will determine the stability of the geodesic. And the

8
metric is dependent on both the structure and the parameters of
the network. Just as in general relativity, the solution spacetime
can have either positive or negative curvature, deep networks
may have the same problem. Taking CNN as an example,
in quantum information ﬁeld the correspondent system is
MERA or the entanglement renormalization algorithm which
show a similar structure as CNN. We know that MERA
builds a negative curvature geometry and is related with the
famous AdS/CFT duality. Similarly the geometry of quantum
computation, which is another analogues of image registration
and CNNs also has an almost negative curvature[19], where
the Riemannian metric used here is static just as in image
registration. It’s reasonable to guess that CNN may also have a
similar negative curvature. This might be an explaination of the
existence of adversarial examples in CNN based classiﬁcation
networks.
(6) How to understand the overparameterization of deep
networks? Overparameterization plays a key role in nowadays
deep networks. It’s closely related with the training conver-
gence, generalization and adversarial attacks. Geometrically
this means to choose a higher dimensional group G to accom-
plish the transformation. In physics we also meet overparam-
eterization problems. For example, in quantum computation
overparameterization means to achieve a quantum algorithm
using auxiliary qubits[19]. In tensor network representation of
quantum states, overparameterization is closely related with
the concepts of parent and uncle Hamiltonians[39]. Overpa-
rameterization not only brings a higher dimensional G but
also a potentially more ﬂexible network structure. As we
see above, the structure of deep networks will inﬂuence the
curvature of the geometry built by the Fisher-Rao metric of
networks. A complete understanding of the consequence of
overparameterization is still needed.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, inspired by the geometrization of physics, we
proposed a geometrization framework for the interpretabil-
ity of deep learning systems. By comparing the geometry
of image registration with deep networks, we showed that
geometrization does bring us new pictures of deep networks.
Under this framework, we also discussed some key problems
for the understanding of deep learning systems. Our future
work will be then to answer these questions.
As a ﬁnal remark, besides the geometrization of physics to
connect physics and geometry, currently there is a trend to
understand physical laws from the computation point of view
so that computational complexity starts to play a key role in
physics. If we further bring deep networks into this game, we
hope the interactions among physics, geometry, computation
and deep networks may completely change our understanding
of the world. A possible picture of our world may be: The
world is an information processing (computation) system
that generates our universe by a deep network of basic
computational operators. The structure of the deep network
is determined by the information structure of our universe.
That’s to say the deep network is the optimal network to gen-
erate the information pattern of our universe, i.e. a geodesic
according to a certain Riemannian metric to measure the
computational complexity. Physical laws are encoded in
the correspondence between the geometric structure of the
network and the information pattern of our universe. So still
our world obeys a least action principle with the action is
given by the computational complexity of the physical world.
