A Comprehensive Study on Optimization Strategies
for Gradient Descent In Deep Learning
Kaustubh Yadav
School of Computer Science and Engineering, SCOPE
Vellore Institute of Technology
Vellore, Tamil Nadu

Abstract—One of the most important parts of Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks is minimizing the loss functions which tells us how
good or bad our model is. To minimize these losses we need
to tune the weights and biases. Also to calculate the minimum
value of a function we need gradient. And to update our
weights we need gradient descent. But there are some problems
with regular gradient descent ie. it is quite slow and not that
accurate. This article aims to give an introduction to optimization
strategies to gradient descent. In addition, we shall also discuss
the architecture of these algorithms and further optimization of
Neural Networks in general.
Index Terms—Gradient Descent, Loss Functions, Optimization
I. INTRODUCTION
Gradient Descent is one of the most important parts of Deep
Learning used for optimizations of Neural Network. It is used
to update weights so as to get the best result possible. Gradient
Descent is a mathematical concept to calculate the minimum
of a function, in case of deep learning it is calculated for
minimizing the loss function or the cost functions by tuning the
weights. The gradient of a single neuron is dependent on the
gradient of the previous neurons, and if you imagine a set fully
connected layers how hard it can be to calculate this gradient
and how computationally tedious it can be, this is the idea
behind backpropagation which is itself derived from the chain
rule. There are also problems regarding Backpropagation like
the vanishing gradient and the exploding gradient problems
which can be solved by weight initialization. With this article,
we aim to provide a better understanding of gradient descent
and its optimization and why this optimization is necessary.
We shall also shed some light on other optimizing strategies
that are being used in today’s Deep Learning Models. In
Section 2, we will start with loss functions and backpropaga-
tion. In Section 3, we will discuss types of Gradient Descent
and their optimizations in Section 4. Further, we will look at
the performance of these optimizations on standard datasets
in Section 5. With this, we will look at other optimization
strategies and regularization in Section 6.
II. LOSS FUNCTIONS
Loss Functions are the measure of how good the neural
network performs. In layman’s terms loss function is needed
to calculate the deﬁcit between the actual values and the
predicted values by our network. Lower the value of the
loss the better our network’s performance is and higher
the value means that our predicted values are far from the
actual values. And ﬁnally, our goal is to minimize this loss.
Loss functions are of three types on the basis of what our
network is known to perform, for example, Regression and
classiﬁcation. Let the input values are xi and our outputs are
yi, the loss function can be deﬁned as:
L = 1
N
N
X
i=1
Li[f(x, W), yi] + λ(R)
(1)
Here L is the average of the total loss incurred and Li is
the loss function we will discuss in the following subsection.
The λ(R) term signiﬁes regularization, which is another
optimizing strategy that we will discuss in Section 6.
A. Loss Functions for Regression Problems
1) Mean Square Error Loss: Mean Square Error is one
of the most common error function used in regression
problems, it’s given by averaging the sum of the squared of
the difference between the actual and the predicted values.
This function is given by:
L = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(yi −ypi)2
(2)
Mean squared Error is ideal when the distribution of the target
variable is Gaussian. The range of MSE lies from 0 to inﬁnity,
it can never be negative. Also, one important fact about MSE
is that it gives a higher value of error when the deﬁcit is
higher, which means that model corrects itself when the error
is larger.
2) Mean Absloute Error Loss: Although MSE works satis-
factorily for Gaussian distribution, its performance decreases if
our dataset has outliers, and continues to worsen if the outlies
farther from the mean value. To solve this problem, MAE
is used. It is calculated by averaging the absolute difference
between the actual and predicted values. It is given by:
L = 1
N
N
X
i=1
|yi −ypi|
(3)
arXiv:2101.02397v1  [cs.LG]  7 Jan 2021

MAE could be used if the distribution is not Gaussian. And as
shown by Nie et. al [1] outperforms any other loss functions
if our dataset is noisy.
3) Mean Square Log Error Loss: MSLE is an intermediate
between MAE and MSE, it gives almost the same priority to
the values that are off by a larger magnitude and the values that
are off by a smaller magnitude, which means that it doesn’t
give too much priority to outliers. It is given by:
L = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(log(yi + 1) −log(ypi + 1))2
(4)
But MSLE gives an asymmetric error curve because it gives
a higher loss if our predictions have undershot the actual
values. A padding of 1 is added because of the fact log(0)
is undeﬁned.
B. Loss Functions for Classiﬁcation Problems
The reason why we have separated both regression and
classiﬁcation is that we cannot use the losses we saw in the
previous subsection as they won’t give a valid result. For
example, we will take the case of MSE and we have to perform
classiﬁcation on a target value of 0 or 1. And our classiﬁer will
yield a value between 0 and 1. So if the value by the network
is totally off ie. the actual value is 1 and the predicted value
was 0 so by the MSE equation the loss incurred will not be that
large. Hence for classiﬁcation problems, a different set of Loss
Functions were deﬁned. But this doesn’t mean we cannot use
the aforementioned Loss functions in Classiﬁcation problems,
Ghosh et al. [2] proved that MAE actually performs better at
classiﬁcation than Cross-Entropy when tested on the MNIST
dataset.
1) Categorical Cross Entropy Loss: Categorical Cross En-
tropy is used to measure loss between a softmax layer which
contains the predicted class and one hot encoding which
contains the true class. There are actually two variants of
CCE. one is used for binary classiﬁcation, this loss function is
used when our target distribution is binary ie. there are only
2 output classes. This loss function actually a derived version
of Cross-Entropy Loss with is another loss function for multi-
class classiﬁcation, but both of them have the same intuition.
Binary Cross-Entropy Loss is given by:
L = 1
N
N
X
i=1
yilog(ypi) + (1 −yi)log(1 −ypi)
(5)
Here ypi is the probability of the class so its value ranges
from 0 to 1 and yi is the true class and its value is either
1 or 0. The values of both the terms under summation will
be negative because the log is negative from 0 to 1 hence
we have a negative sign outside the summation. The reason
why we use Binary cross-entropy is that it gives a very high
loss for misclassiﬁcation. For example, if our model gives a
totally wrong result ie the actual value is 1 and the predicted
value was 0. Because of the ﬁrst log term, the Loss becomes
inﬁnity. Although this property is crucial, this makes the loss
function prone to outliers. A generalized approach to CCE was
introduced by Zhang et. al [3] where they used the robustness
of MAE and the implicit weighting mechanism of the Cross-
Entropy Loss which focuses on samples that are hard to
learn. The other variant of Cross-Entropy is Multiclass Cross-
Entropy, which is a broader generalization of Binary Cross-
Entropy, so instead of two target classes in this can be and a
number of target classes. It is given by:
L = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(yi)log(ypi)
(6)
As we discussed earlier Cross-Entropy has a drawback that it
is quite prone to outliers but it does have a plus point in the
sense that it focuses learning on ”difﬁcult examples” which
mean it foucuses on the cases that are futher from the actual
pediction than the labels that are closer to our samples, that’s
what makes it prone to outliers.
2) Kullback-Leibler Divergence Loss: KL divergence is
deﬁned as the deﬁcit between the joint distribution and the
product distribution of two variables in the case of Loss
functions it is the probabilities of the true and the predicted
labels. KL divergence is similar to entropy in the sense that
they both have a logarithm term, but the difference is that
Entropy is used with probabilities and KL Divergence is used
with Probability Density Functions. A Probability function can
be deﬁned as:
F(x) = P(a ≤x ≤b) =
Z b
a
p(x)dx
(7)
And we deﬁned entropy by equation 6 but that was for discrete
variables but PDF is continuous hence it can be deﬁned as
p(xi)∆xi hence new entropy will be:
H(x) = −
n
X
i=1
p(xi)∆xi.log(p(xi).∆xi)
(8)
By properties of logarithms, we can write equation 8 as:
H(x) = −
n
X
i=1
p(xi)log(p(xi))∆xi−

n
X
i=1
p(xi)∆xi

log(∆xi)
(9)
Taking the limits as ∆xi tends to 0
H(x) =
Z +∞
−∞
p(x)log(p(x)).dx −
lim
max(∆x)→o log(∆xi)
(10)
But there are problems with these equations that are they
are not valid, a rule in applied math is that transcendental
functions [4] and Probability density function do have units
so the logarithms are invalid. Also as ∆xi approaches 0,
p(x)dx also approaches zero meaning that a little difference
will give a huge value for H(x). To solve this problem we
use KL-Divergence, which is the difference between the joint
distribution and the product distribution. Let X be a variable
with density p(x) and Y be a variable with density q(x) the
difference between joint distribution and product distribution is

given by equation 11 which is also known as Relative Entropy
or Kullback-Leibler Divergence.
D(X||Y ) = −
Z +∞
−∞
p(x)log(q(x)).dx+
Z +∞
−∞
p(x)log(p(x)).dx
(11)
Taking p(x) as the common term
D(X||Y ) = −
Z +∞
−∞
p(x)[log(p(x)) −log(q(x))].dx
(12)
And ﬁnally by using the quotient rule for logarithms
D(X||Y ) =
Z +∞
−∞
p(x).log p(x)
q(x).dx
(13)
So now we have a ratio under the logarithm hence this equation
is totally valid. Also if X = Y the value for D(X||Y )
becomes 0 and not inﬁnty like in the case for equation 10.
C. Robustness Of Loss Functions
The concept of robustness of loss functions [5] has been
there for a long time and it is the ﬁrst step in achieving
optimization in deep learning. Here robustness of a Loss
function means that it is not much inﬂuenced by larger errors.
And a loss function with this capability can be universally
applied on any dataset. For example, MAE is more robust
to outliers than MSE, due to the fact that the difference is
squared in case of MSE hence the outliers have a higher loss
than the loss in MAE. But when we are optimizing our losses
with gradient descent it is the derivative that matters. A larger
value for the loss doesn’t mean that that the derivate would
large as well. The derivative depends on the loss function
that is in use. A larger value for the loss(outlier) will have
a negligible derivative. In addition to this, the entries in our
dataset or examples can be classiﬁed into two types- easy
and hard examples. Easy examples are easier to learn and
the model focuses on these sorts of examples which usually
have a lower error, but these examples are known to slow
convergence ie. during Gradient Descent these examples will
take a lot of time so as to achieve optimal results. The
other type is hard examples, these examples are known to
accelerate the convergence to achieve optimal results faster.
Hence Hard Example mining [6] is a big part of the research
on optimization. Hence when someone says more the data
better the performance it is quite an oversimpliﬁcation, in the
end, these hard examples are the key to achieve the results we
require faster. But when it comes to hard or easy examples we
ourselves cannot differentiate between them and nor can our
model. It is after some training we can be a little certain with
the difference between them. Even then robustness matters
that is our model might start to focus on noisy data, this can
be solved by some variations of Stochastic Gradient Descent
as discussed in Section 4. This also brings up the concept
of learning, as with human leaning patterns we can apply
the same patterns in machine learning, some of the popular
learning patterns are Curriculum Learning and Self Paced
Learning.
1) Curriculum Learning: This method is quite inspired by
how humans learn. It was introduced into machine learning by
Bengio et al. [7] as a concept for attaining convergence faster
and ﬁnding a local minima for non- convex functions. The
intuition behind CL is to give the machine easier examples
and then consequently give harder examples when it’s ready.
This can also be observed while training a CNN, at every
layer, our model learns a new level of abstraction.
2) Self-Paced Learing: The motivation behind this method
is quite similar to Curriculum Learning in the sense that we
initially cannot give our model everything and expect it to
learn the parameters, instead we start with easier examples and
then move to harder ones. If we have a dataset of animals and
we need the model to classify it into its corresponding label,
the measure of easiness is totally ambiguous, furthermore, if
the dataset has manually boxed images it’s not conclusive
that the example is easy or hard. Technically, the algorithm
for self-paced learning takes inspiration from the Concave
Convex Procedure (CCCP)[8] which is a solution to Latent
SVM[9]. For a binary linear SVM classiﬁer, the objective is
to get the maximum distance between two hyperplanes for the
corresponding classes, which is given by:
max

(⃗x+ −⃗x−).
⃗w
||w||

= min1
2||⃗w||2
(14)
And the Decision Rule is given by:
yi(⃗wxi + b) ≥1 −ξi
(15)
Here ⃗x+ and ⃗x−are the two classes and ⃗w is the weight
vector and yi is +1 for positive samples and -1 for negative
samples. The minimization can be calculated by taking the
gradient with respect to weight and bias. But we cannot
get a perfect hyperplane always because the data might be
inseparable hence there are two methods for a generalized
result, the ﬁrst one is transforming a vector using a kernel
function[10], but this virtually increases the complexity of the
function, hence we use the second method which is by using
a slack variable ξ, which is a penalty of how much we are not
able to satisfy our Decision Rule. Now Latent SVM works on
the premise that we have to ﬁnd a value of the hidden variable
that should be consistent with our labels should be better than
any other pairs of ground truth and hidden variables, if not
so we will add a penalty(slack variable) which we can further
minimize. So in the following equations, hi are the set of
hidden variables on a dataset D = xi, yi and ψ(x, y, h) is our
feature space.
maxhiwT ψ(xi, yi, hi) −wT ψ(xi, y, h) ≥∇(yi, y, h) −ξi
(16)
But this is still a Non-Convex Solution, hence we use CCCP,
which ﬁrst initializes w0 randomly and then updates:
1
2||⃗w||2 + C
n
X
i=1
ξi
(17)
And
ﬁnally
update
wt+1
by
solving
convex
problem,
min||w||2 + C P
i ξi and equation 16. But this still does’nt

solve the problem of harder and easier example hence Self
Paced Leaning introduces a new variable to equation 17,
vi ∈0, 1 where 1 deﬁnes easier examples and 0 deﬁnes that
we will not be bothered by that example for now. Making the
equation as min||w||2 + C P
i viξi. But this will be trivial as
we can put all vi to be 0. Hence adding penalty, which doesn’t
allow all the values to be 0 and for every value 0 the penalty
will be higher and higher. Making equation 17 as:
min||w||2 + C
X
i
viξi −
X
i
vi
K
(18)
Where K is the self-paced learing rate weight, initially K
is large hence hard examples are excluded and sequentially
decreased to inclued hard examples.
III. DISCREPANCIES IN NON-CONVEX OPTIMIZATIONS
In this section, we will look into the problems that arise
while optimizing non-convex problems, the reason for this is
that when we look at our loss functions against the weights,
through every round of backpropagation [11] we are looking
for the set of weights that minimize our loss function. Hence
here the word optimization really means that we have to
minimize the cost function which is non-convex. The best
way to minimize any function is to compute the gradients
and move along the direction of its decrease. But this is quite
an overstatement when it comes to saddle points and local
minima or even local maxima as the gradient at these points
is zero. Although gradient descent performs well in a convex
setting as it converges in O(1/ϵ) iterations and even better in
stong convex as the convergence rate is poly-logarithmic ie. it
is almost not dependant on the dimensions. But deep learning
problems are highly non-convex, with saddle points, local
minima, low gradient regions and we cannot expect regular
gradient descent to converge to the global minimum and not
get stuck at these sub-optimal regions. Fortunately, we can sort
of rule out local minima as they give quite satisfactory results,
this was proved for many cases including dictionary learning
[12], matrix completion [13], tensor decomposition [14], and
some cases of deep learning [15]. Generally, for deep learning,
a local minimum is almost as good as global minima [16]. But
this still doesn’t address saddle points and bad local minima.
A. Saddle Points
When we use gradient descent on these non-convex prob-
lems, it cannot distinguish between a saddle point and a local
minimum as the gradient is 0 in both the cases. Hence Gradient
Descent gets stuck maybe indeﬁnitely or as long making
training time infeasible, and we get a sub-optimal result. Prior
works on escaping saddle points involved ﬁrstly getting to a
stationary point and if it is a local minimum we stop but if it
is a saddle point we have to escape from it. Escaping from the
saddle point involves following the negative eigenvector of the
Hessian when the gradient is 0(∇f(x) = 0) and the hessian
is positive semideﬁnate (∇2f(x) ⪰0). In a 2-D approach, if
we look at the gradient ﬂow around a saddle point we have
a direction where the gradient is ﬂowing towards the saddle
point and a direction where the gradient is ﬂowing away from
the saddle point, hence if we start at a point which is not on the
central line, we can escape the saddle point using Stochastic
Gradient Descent in O(1/ϵ4) rounds [14] and O(1/ϵ2) in full
Gradient Descent [17].But this result is highly constrained to
ﬁrst-order saddle points where a saddle point is nth order:
f(x′) ≥f(x) −O(∥x −x′∥n+1)
(19)
Hence a normal saddle point ie. z = x2 −y2 is a ﬁrst-
order saddle point. But there are a lot of different types of
saddle points speciﬁcally of higher orders, for example, a
monkey saddle which is a second-order saddle point given
by(y = x13−3x22x1) and hyperbolic paraboloid which is also
a ﬁrst-order saddle point. Optimality conditions are deﬁned
for the ﬁrst-order saddle point that if the gradient is not zero
we move in the direction of the negative gradient and if the
Hessian is not positive semideﬁnite we follow the direction of
the negative eigenvector of the Hessian, but these conditions
don’t include second-order saddle points. Hence an extension
by Anandkumar and Ge [18] where they included a special
constraint that is any vector should be negative in the null
space of the Hessian and the third derivative should be zero
in this direction which is given by:
∀u, [∇2f(x)]u = 0; [∇3f(x)](u, u, u) = 0
(20)
which is not true for the Monkey Saddle and hence this can
also be an optimality condition when the second term is not
equal to zero and hence in that case we pick a random u in
the null space of the hessian and move in the direction of
either u or −u. In case of deep learning problems, it is quite
rare to see higher-order saddle points so the ﬁnal optimality
conditions really sums it all up.
Although the methods mentioned above are quite robust, they
do have two limitations, one that we have to be in the
saddle point and then switch to a strategy to escape it which
inherently leads to longer training times, and secondly, we
need 3rd order information which is hard to compute. Hence a
method by Zeyuan Allen-Zhu [19] we just “swing by” a saddle
point, which means that we have knowledge on when our point
will get stuck in a saddle point and with that knowledge we
perturb so as to avoid the saddle points. A saddle point is
called a δ strict saddle point if eigenvalue is below −δ hence
if we have any point y and ∥y −x∥≤γ where γ < δ due
second order Lipschitz conditions some eigenvalue of ∇2f(y)
are below −γ. Hence if we have multiply it with a vector(v)
and a transpose we can almost be sure if that vector is close
to the saddle point. Also now we can move in the direction of
the negative or positive of this vector ie. y′ = y ± δv which
will steer us away from a saddle point.
B. Bad Local Minima
This might seem a bit counter argumentative to the state-
ment that local minima are as good as global minima but
when we see the holistic picture, we have to avoid those local
optimum that give sub-optimal results and our loss functions
have a lot of local minima. Some studies have shown that

by adding one neuron can actually eliminate all the bad
local minima, the theoretical proof has been given in multiple
studies [20] and [21]but was initially proved by Auer et al.
[22] for square loss using logistic activation function for the
extra neuron. The original study changes the loss function
to a different form and then gives the evaluations based on
that transformation, in general, we deﬁne our loss function as
L(f(x, W), yi) but now we have a separate function l which
takes one argument l(−yif0(x, W)) where l is assumed to be
twice differentiable and non decreasing and all critical points
to be the global minima, one another strong assumption is
that the dataset is serializable that is the model can classify
the given parameters correctly which is not a common attribute
when it comes to datasets in general. It was observed by the
original authors that the new loss functions can be visualized
as a polynomial hinge loss. Hence we modify our loss function
to become:
L =
X
i
l(−yif(xi)) + λa2
2
(21)
Where λ is the regularization term and we change our model
output to f(x, W) = f0(x, W) + fe(xi) where fe(xi) =
a ∗exp(xiW T + b) and a is the scale and b is the bias.
After making a new loss function, usually, we calculate the
derivatives respect to weights, but in order to show that effect
of the extra neuron vanishes when we reach a global minimum,
derivatives with respect to scale and bias are needed, which
will be same but the derivative with respect to the scale will
have an extra λ ∗a term and ﬁnally to ﬁnd the minimum we
equate both the deviates to zero. Now just by subtracting both
the derivatives and multiplying a on both sides we e λ∗a2 = 0
which says with a non-zero λ, a has to be zero and hence for
the global minimum the extra neuron becomes inactive.
IV. GRADIENT DESCENT AND IT’S VARIANTS
The idea of gradient descent is a derivative of the descent
methods that were introduced about 150 years ago, hence
before going into what gradient descent is we will start with
the initial idea, which is the steepest descent and was given
for strongly convex functions. A function f is convex if domf
is a convex set and it satisﬁes:
f(θx + (1 −θ)y) ≤θf(x) + (1 −θ)f(y), ∀x, y ∈0 ≤θ ≤1
(22)
And using the ﬁrst-order conditions for convexity the ﬁrst-
order Taylor approximation is always a global underestimator
of the function ie. f(y) ≥f(x) + ∇f(x)T (y −x). Also, we
can deﬁne a function as α strong convex if it satisﬁes:
f(y) ≥f(x) + ∇f(x)T (y −x) + α
2 ∥x −y∥2
(23)
Where the quadratic implies that there exists a lower bound to
the growth of the function which in turn means that strong
convex growth is strictly greater than linear growth, also
strong convexity is a dual-assumption to Lipschitz smoothness.
Also let q∗be the optimum value for the function using
Polyak-Lojasiewicz inequality we can also derive f(x)−q∗≤
1
2α∥∇f(x)∥2 which also calls for a stopping criterion as the
gradient tends to zero. To optimize smooth convex problems
descents methods are the key and generally, they can be
deﬁned as:
xk+1 = xk −η∆xk, f(xk+1) < f(xk)
(24)
Where ∆xk is called the normalized step direction which
is usually a vector and η signiﬁes the step size which is
always positive. Hence general descent methods involve the
calculation of the step direction ∆x and then doing a ray
search [23] to for the step size η and then updating equation
24, until we satisfy the stop criterion. The reason we used
the word ray search in place of line search is that we only
look for positive values of η. A basic line search or exact line
search works on the premise η = argminη>0f(x + η∆x)
which really means that we are choosing η to achieve the
minimum of the plot. Another variant of line search is the
backtracking line search which performs a bit better than exact
line search [24]. In backtracking line search, we start with
η = 1 and we update η = βη until the following condition
is satisﬁed f(x + η∆x) < f(x) + αη∆f(x)T ∇x where the
parameters α ∈(0, 0.5) and β ∈(0, 1) also this condition is
invalid if the α ≥1 due to preservation of convexity and as
the ﬁrst-order taylor approximation is a global underestimator
of the function. When we observe the equation for steepest
descent, there is an anomaly ie. it is not normalized which
means in order to multiply with the step size we have to get
them into the same norm. As our intuition, Deltax should
have the gradient with respect to x hence normalized step
direction can be given by ∆xn = argmin∥∇f(x)T v∥where v
is the direction derivative. General descent methods use the un-
normalized step direction that is ∆x = ∥∇f(x)∥∆xn. Also,
Gradient Descent is actually steepest descent in the Euclidian
Norm or the 2-norm. Hence now the only thing changed from
the deﬁnition of Steepest descent is that Gradient Descent has
a step direction negative to the gradient with respect to x. Also,
with ﬁxed step size, the convergence rate is of O(1/k) where k
is the number of iterations and is same even with backtracking
line search but as η changes in every iteration, we replace η
with ηmin = min{1, β/L} where L is the Lipschitz Constant
and is always greater than 0.
Fig. 1. Sub-level sets of a function f(x, y) = x2 + by2 or f(x) = 1
2 xT Ax

As we can see it is the norm that matters, it is only useful if
we can change the norm for better convergence. As in Figure
1 if the sublevel sets are oval and narrow, here when we apply
the steepest descent it works very poorly, but if the sub-level
sets are isotropic, ie. almost spherical then the direction of the
negative gradient will either be on the minimum or extremely
close to it. Also when we get close to the minimum of the
function the gradient tends to zero, but that doesn’t mean
we are at the minimum, so as that happens we switch to
the second-order Taylor approximation which can be written
by appending
1
2(y −x)T ∇2f(x)(y −x) to the ﬁrst-order
approximation. Hence near the optimum, the sub-level sets
look like ellipsoids due to the hessian almost similar to Figure
1, so initially, if we have some intuition about the hessian we
can change the norm in accordance to the hessian and then
we can apply steepest descent, this is called Newton’s step.
So by the newton’s step we change the step direction ∆x
as ∆xns = −∇2f(x)−1∇f(x) or else another interpretation
would be that we take the second-order approximation and
minimize that or else we need to ﬁnd a v such the ∇f(x + v)
is zero. After changing the norm and using newton’s step as the
new step direction we have to change the stopping criterion as
well, which is described as Newton’s decrement and is given
by λ(x) = (∇f(x)T ∇2f(x)−1∇f(x))1/2 which is a measure
of closeness to the optimum similar to the stopping criterion
of the Descent methods, hence the best approximation ie.
f(x)−q∗is λ2/2. So in conclusion, Newton’s method requires
to calculate Newton’s step ∆xns and Newton’s decrement λ2
and update x(k+1) := x(k)+η∇xns until the stopping criterion
that is λ2/2 ≤ϵ Although gradient descent is a derivative of
steepest descent the assumption that it performs better than
other descent methods is totally arbitrary because if we have
a norm which makes our function align with which geometry
of the sublevel sets, the convergence would be extremely fast.
Also, Newton’s method is more advantageous in the sense that
if we scale it or maybe take a different norm, it will converge
almost in the same number of steps whereas gradient descent
will lead to a drastic impact on changing the norm.
But in deep learning and machine learning, we generally
tend to use gradient descent, hence going into depth with
more descent methods and second-order methods are out of
the scope of this paper. As gradient descent is a quite widely
researched area, there are 3 types of gradient descent variants
that differ on the amount of data required of the calculation
of gradient for the loss functions.
A. Batch Gradient Descent
Also known as vanilla gradient descent, is the ﬁrst intuitive
step in optimizing our cost functions, as this classiﬁcation was
based on the amount of data, in batch gradient descent entire
dataset is used for the gradient update.
xk+1 := xk −η∇:nf(x:n)
(25)
where n is the number of entries in the dataset. Hence to
make one gradient update the gradient for every parameter
is calculated. For large datasets, this is an extremely tedious
process and might take hours just for one update, and for
extremely large datasets, it doesn’t converge at all. But it is
extremely accurate for small size problems in the sense that
it will converge to a global minimum for convex and a local
minimum for a non-convex setting.
B. Mini-Batch Gradient Descent
As the name states, mini-batch gradient descent is a trun-
cated version of vanilla gradient descent, what that means is
that in mini-batch gradient descent we divide our parameters
and the labels into smaller sets and with each iteration calcu-
late the gradients with respect to one of the mini-batches.
xk+1 := xk −η∇i:i+nf(xi:i+n)
(26)
Hence instead of calculating the gradient for the entire
dataset, we calculate the gradient for only a mini-batch. The
convergence plot is a little different from batch gradient
descent in the sense that in batch gradient descent the plot
with respect to cost and iterations only goes downward but in
the case of mini-batch the plot is noisier because in every
iteration we are taking a new batch for our descent. Now
another ambiguity that arises is the size of the mini-batch
if our training data is small that is, 3000-4000 entries it’s
recommended to use Batch gradient descent because even if
we divide it into mini-batches the convergence wouldn’t have
a that signiﬁcant improvement if any, although in case of large
datasets mini-batches it’s recommended to use mini-batches of
the powers of two [25], also larger the batch size small the
gradient improvement hence there is a trade-off between the
batch size and the convergence.
C. Stochastic Gradient Descent
Stochastic Gradient Descent is essentially a condensed form
of mini-batch gradient descent, here the size of the mini-batch
is 1.
xk+1 := xk −η∇if(xi); i ∈rand{1, 2, ..n}
(27)
Hence during a gradient update, we only need to get the
gradient of one training example, which is usually picked at
random. Now if we compare Batch gradient descent with SGD,
it is quite a jump in the sense if we have 1 million training
examples, Batch gradient descent has to compute 1 million
gradients each iteration and if we have 1000 iterations, so
we have to calculate gradients 10 billion times whereas in
SGD we only need one gradient per iteration hence SGD is
1 million times faster than Batch Gradient Descent, on the
premise both reach convergence. Another feature for SGD is
that it is very sensitive to the learning rate,η [26], and as the
leaning rate increases so does the variance. The reason why
SGD is common in machine learning is that, as stated earlier
we are not looking for the perfect solution in the sense that
the optimum should most deﬁnitely be a global solution, our
aim is to get an optimum that performs well on unseen data,
so in SGD essentially we get a considerable drop in the cost

initially and that is what we need, so with early-stopping we
get the result that we need [27].
V. OPTIMIZATION OF GRADIENT DESCENT
Now, when we talk about optimization there’s a lot that can
be done as gradient descent itself has a lot of moving parts.
Although we did touch upon some optimizations that do give
better results in the early parts of the previous section but those
methods involve the use of second-order methods which are
not easy to compute talking from a deep learning perspective.
Also, the problems discussed like bad local minima and saddle
points arise here as well and hence here we shall provide
an GD approach to those problems rather than second-order
methods.
A. Gradient with Momentum
As we saw in Section 3, saddle points are mostly responsible
for the sub-optimal results when it comes to optimization
and even if the surface for our loss function is ﬂat, gradient
descent still runs into problems pertaining to the low gradi-
ents and hence slow movements. Momentum with Gradient
Descent[28] [11] is based on the intuition we have from
motion that is an object in motion will continue in the same
direction until an equivalent force is applied in the opposite
direction, here we care about the ﬁrst part of the previous
statement. Now in the sense of optimization, we move in the
direction of the negative gradient and continue to update in
that direction. Also, when we see convergence on our sublevel
sets in Figure 1, we can see that it’s a zig-zag motion, if the
step size is high then we might overshoot out of the sub-
level sets and then even convergence towards the minimum
is not guaranteed. So it is quite obvious that along the y-
axis should be as minimum as possible and along the x-axis
should have considerable but constrained updates, this can be
solved by momentum. As shown earlier, gradient descent can
be represented as
xk+1 := xk −ηZk
(28)
where Zk = ∇fk so with every step we go in the direction
of the negative gradient, after introducing the momentum term
we have a memory of the previous update ie. k −1, so
Zk = ∇fk + βZk−1
(29)
where β is essentially the momentum parameter and Zk−1
holds the information of the previous step direction. Now, by
using the same example from Figure 1, the gradient is actually
Ax so by replacing ∇fk in equation 29 and replacing k as k+1
we get a system of equations,
xk+1 := xk −ηZk; Zk+1 −AXk+1 = βZk
(30)
which can be written in a matrix form as,
 1
0
−A
1
 xk+1
Zk+1

=
1
η
0
β
 xk
Zk

(31)
And ﬁnally, at every step, we have to compute the matrix
ck+1
dk+1

=
1
−η
λ
β −ηλ
 ck
dk

(32)
Which depends on both β and η, hence we have to minimize
that matrix, which in turn is dependent on the eigenvalues, so
we minimize over a whole range of eigenvalues. Let m and M
be the upper bound and the lower bound on our eigenvalues,
hence we have to choose β and η so as to minimize that
eigenvalues for a whole range of λ between m and M and it
has been proven[11]for the optimality points for η and β,
ηoptimal =

2
√
M + √m
2
(33)
βoptimal =
√
M −√m
√
M + √m
2
(34)
Usually, β is set at 0.9. Now, what the momentum term does
is that as it records the previous step direction it moves in that
direction, by the magnitude of β hence the frequency of the
oscillations drops and the convergence is accelerated.
B. Nesterov’s Accelerated Gradient
After the introduction of the momentum term, the frequency
oscillations were considerably reduced but there is always a
scope for more. Secondly, the momentum term works well on
the premise that our data is free from any sort of considerable
outliers which means that while updating if we have an outlier
and the gradient at that points in a direction opposite to
the minima, every consequent update will have point to that
direction at least for the foreseeable updates, increasing the
convergence time. Also, this phenomenon is quite common in
a stochastic setting as the update only looks at one entry while
update. Nesterov’s Accelerated Gradient(NAG)[29] introduced
the concept of a lookahead term in extension with classical
momentum. So instead of ﬁrst calculating the gradient and
then moving in that direction and doing a ﬁnal update with
regards to the previous step, we can just move with regards to
the previously recorded step and then calculate the gradient at
that point and then move accordingly. So we are calculating
the gradient essentially at a different pointyk than the initial
starting point(xk). Firstly as we need to compute the gradient
for the sake of simplicity we can deﬁne a functiong(x) as
g(x) = x −η∇f(x) which is same as computing the gradient
and updating in its direction of decrease. So as we have to
compute the gradient at a different point we can write the
function g(x) as g(yk)
xk = g(yk) = yk −η∇f(yk)
(35)
Also, initially y1 = x0. After the calculation of gradient at
the new point yk we have to make a correction, that is we
have to change the direction of the previous momentum step
which is given by,
yk+1 = xk −tk −1
tk+1
(xk −xk + 1)
(36)

Here, tk −1/tk+1 is essentially known as Nesterov’s
coefﬁcient also represented by κ. And tk+1 is deﬁned by
tk+1 =
1+√
1+4tk2
2
and initially t1 = 1. Now, these set of
equations can guarantee fewer oscillations as compared with
Classical Momentum, as a matter of fact, the convergence rate
is O(1/k2)(k-iterations) in Nesterov’s Momentum whereas the
convergence rate in Gradient descent is O(1/k) hence there
is a signiﬁcant boost in convergence rates. But, it still doesn’t
address the problems with SGD as mentioned earlier and as
a matter of fact, the convergence rate drops to O(1/
√
k)
while using Accelerated Gradient with SGD, which is even
worse than normal Gradient Descent. So we can actually
improve the performance of SGD with Nesterov’s Momentum
to O(1/k) quite easily, by using Variance Reduction with
Stochastic Gradient Descent, also known as SVRG[30]. But
getting the convergence rate of O(1/k2) is still under research.
Although a method known as Katyusha’s Momentum[31] was
introduced for getting a convergence rate of O(1/k2) and it
was an extension to the concepts of Nesterov’s Momentum.
Instead of computing the gradients and taking the step with
respect to prior momentum, we compute the next point with
our momentum term form the previous time step but instead of
making a deﬁnitive update, we compute the midpoint between
the new and the initial point and do the further updates in
the same manner from the midpoints. And this method gave
a convergence rate congruent to NAG but was also dependent
on the number of examples we are using in total.
C. Adaptive Gradient Algorithm (AdaGrad)
Although we have seen a good convergence rate from Nes-
terov’s Momentum and Katyusha’s Momentum it’s important
to note that these convergence rates are not universal and may
vary tremendously under certain cases. Another ﬂaw that is
quite common in the aforementioned methods is overshoot-
ing, although quite reduced with Nesterov’s and Katyusha’s
Momentum but still prevalent. Adaptive Gradient Algorithm
or AdaGrad[32] solved this discrepancy by introducing the
concepts of adaptive step size, which when tested performed
really well on large scale and distributed networks. They also
work well for sparse data like word embeddings[33] also due
to the fact step size changes for every iteration. The intuition
behind the adaptive gradient is that when we start the sum
of the prior gradients will be smaller compared to the sum
considered after simultaneous iterations. As we just make a
change in the step size which is a scalar quantity the update
equation is quite similar to that of Gradient Descent.
xk+1 = xk −η′∆xk
(37)
where η′ indicates the new step size for the kth iteration, so
η′ changes with every iteration, although as a hyperparameter
we have to decide the initial step size which is usually kept at
0.01, which gets decrimented later on. Now, η′ is deﬁned as,
η′ =
η
p
diag(Gi) + ϵI
(38)
where ϵ is a small positive scalar quantity which is appended
to make sure that η′ is constrained even if the other term
is zero. And Gi is the matrix that stores the sum of the
products of the gradients till the ith iteration represented as
Gi = Pi
1
 ∇xk(i)2. Hence the diagonal of the matrix G will
hold the elements that we actually need and taking the square
root of the entire matrix isn’t actually required. As we are
multiplying the gradient by itself, if the value for diag(Gi) is
large during the later iterations of gradient descent hence the
step size automatically drops down. Hence, a small gradient
pertains to bigger step size and a bigger gradient pertains to
smaller step size. But if the initial gradients are large then
the step sizes for the rest of the iterations will be smaller
and smaller this can be corrected by using a higher learning
rate than 0.01. But there are problems with this method too
ﬁrstly, it doesn’t perform well in a non-convex or dense setting,
AdaGrad can get easily stuck in saddle points and to get out
we are only dependent on the value of ϵ which will lead
to increased training time. Also if the value for the sum of
gradient becomes extremely large, it will eventually make the
learning rate so small that our model won’t learn anything
after that point on, that is why AdaGrad is usually used in
cases of sparse data.
D. AdaDelta
Adadelta[34] was introduced as an extension of AdaGrad,
improving on the drawbacks it had which are the accumulation
of gradients leading to preponed stoppage of training and
manual setting of the initial learning rate. The ﬁrst constraint
introduced in the paper was limiting the window size of the
previous gradients, hence instead of storing the t iterations, we
keep information for w iterations. By doing the denominator
term in AdaGrad will not reach inﬁnity and updates will be
done on the basis of recent gradient information which in
turn doesn’t terminate learning prematurely. Also storing the
previous, squares of the gradient is really inefﬁcient as we
have to deﬁne a separate matrix and use and update that it
each step, instead we can compute the average of the square
of gradients or expectation given by,
E[g2]t = ρE[g2]t−1 + (1 −ρ)g2
t
(39)
here ρ represents the decay constant and has a similar function
to β in classical momentum. The value of ρ is usually kept at
0.9, so by Equation 39, we can intuitively say that expectation
at a point t is inﬂuenced both by the expectation of the
square of gradients at the previous point and square of the
gradients at the point more so in the previous steps. As
described in AdaGrad we require the square root of the squares
of the gradients, we get the square root of E[g2]t which is
also Root Mean Square(RMS). Also, we still need a small
positive number ϵ to escape regions of low gradients, hence
RMS[g]t =
p
E[g2]t + ϵ and the new learning rate becomes,
η′ =
η
RMS[g]t
(40)

The original paper also pointed out another discrepancy
which was the units of the parameter update term, η∇xk
which is proportional to the units of 1/x on the premise that
the cost function doesn’t have any units, but if we compare
these ﬁnding with second-order methods such as Newton’s
method the units for the update will be directly proportional
to x using the formula ∆xns = −∇2f(x)−1∇f(x) where
∆xns is the update parameter for Newton’s step as explained
in Section 4. Hence with a little rearrangement, we can show
that the inverse of the Hessian is equal to
∆xns
∇f(x), also here
the parameter ∆x is given by η′∇xt hence as the RMS
information is represented as the denominator hence ∆xt is in
the numerator, which needs to be calculated for the time step
t but by assuming Lipchitz smoothness we can approximate
∆xt as RMS[∆x]t−1 so the parameter update becomes,
∆xt = RMS[∆]t−1
RMS[g]t
gt
(41)
And the ﬁnal update is, xt+1 = xt−∆xt. Now the introduction
of RMS[∆x]t−1, which essentially lags behind one-time step,
made an improvement ie. it made this model robust to sudden
changes which can stall the learning rates. Also, this method
is analogous to Momentum as the RMS information holds the
information of the previous time steps as momentum holds the
history of the previous time steps
Another novel idea which is quite similar to Adadelta is RM-
Sprop which also pursued the same goal of having an adaptive
learning rate and intuitively is very similar to Adadelta as it
is also governed by
E[g2]t = γE[g2]t−1 + (1 −γ)g2
t
xt+1 = xt −η′gt
(42)
Where η′ is the same as the one deﬁned in Equation 40.
The only difference is this method doesn’t involve the RMS
values of the previous time step, but the rest is the same.
Performance-wise, there’s is not a monumental difference but
Adadelta performs better in cases of highly non-convex loss
functions[35] but Adadelta still outperforms SGD, momentum
and Adagrad under certain tasks[34].
E. Adam
Adam [36] is yet another ﬁrst-order optimization for gra-
dient descent and in some sense is the union of RMSprop
and Momentum. Hence it retains the information for both
the square of the past gradient as in RMSprop and also
the gradient information as in Momentum. Although Adam
works with adaptive learning rates, it has 2 parameters that
have to be tuned manually β1 and β2 where β1, β2 ∈[0, 1),
which are decay rates that control the expectations of gradients
and the sum of squares of gradients. Hence ﬁrst we deﬁne
mt which is deﬁned as the ﬁrst movement and involves the
gradient information of the previous time steps, this variable
is intuitively similar to the one in Equation 29 given by,
mt = β1mt−1 + (1 −β1)gt
(43)
and gt is the gradient of the objective function at time t. It’s
obvious that this term is quite similar to the momentum update
as we are keeping a record of the previous gradients. The
second variable is vt which records the sum of the squares of
gradient till the time step t similar to Equation 42 in RMSprop
given by,
vt = β2vt−1 + (1 −β2)gt
2
(44)
here gt2 stores the sum of gradient till time step t. Now if
the gradient update is done with these variables as is we might
run into some problems like for example if the gradient is low
and we are leaving a sparse region the values for both mt and
vt will be low and will continue that way for the rest of the
iteration, to correct this Bias Correction was introduced in the
original paper, which would counteract this situation. Now, to
prove for Bias Correction the authors assumed a very strong
assumption that all the gradients at every time step have the
same distribution hence E[gi] = E[g]. With bias correction the
new ˆ
mt and ˆvt are deﬁned as,
ˆ
mt =
mt
1 −β1
t
ˆvt =
vt
1 −β2
t
(45)
And the ﬁnal update is given by,
xt = xt−1 −η
ˆ
mt
√ˆvt + ϵ
(46)
Here the ratio of ˆ
mt/√ˆvt was termed as Signal to Noise
ratio and intuitively speaking as this ratio becomes smaller
and smaller so with the effective step size as when the ratio
is smaller there is increasing uncertainty if the direction ˆ
mt
is same as the direction of the true gradient and with this, the
value will tend to zero when we approach an optimum.
F. AdaMax
Adamax was introduced in accordance with Adam and had
a similar idea but with only a simple but a counter-intuitive
change. As we have been working with Adam we were using
the L2 norm hence all the updates and parameters were scaled
to L2 norm, we can still generalize for Lp norm where the
stepsize update is now proportional to vt1/p and both β1 and
β2 are in powers of p. Hence the new mt and vt are,
mt = βp
1mt−1 + (1 −βp
1)gt
vt = βp
2vt−1 + (1 −βp
2)|gt|p
(47)
Now, as p increases harder will be to compute and trace
the gradients as we compute them but as the authors found
as p →∞we get a stable and a descriable result and
the transformation lead to the AdaMax algorithm. As the
step size depends on the vt1/p we need to ﬁnd the limit as
p →∞, which is given by, ut = limp→∞(vt)
1
p and can be
written as max(βt−1
2
|g1|, βt−2
2
|g2|, ...) after solving for the
limit in vt. And can be written as a recursive formula as

ut = max(β2ut−1, |gt|) which is the new vt. And ﬁnally the
new update will become,
xt = xt−1 −
η
1 −βt
1
mt
ut
(48)
G. Nadam
As the name suggests Nadam is the integration of Nesterov’s
accelerated Momentum and Adam and was collectively called
Nesterov-accelerated adaptive moment[37]. Now to use Adam
with NAG, we have to modify NAG a little bit to work with the
bias correction and the symbology of Adam. We can redeﬁne
NAG in the following sense,
gt = ∇xtf(xt−1)
mt = β1tmt−1 + gt
ˆ
mt = t + 1mt + gt
xt+1 = xt −η ˆ
mt
(49)
Where µt is the same as tk−1
tk+1 at a time step k as deﬁned
in subsection C. An important observation in this variation is
that the ﬁnal moment term has the gradient term of the current
time step and hence there is no need to calculate the gradient
twice. Now, after redeﬁning NAG it is also important to note
that the intuition behind it remains the same, this version just
improves deﬁnitions of the concepts mentioned in the previous
subsection. Next, when we look at the Adam optimizer and
especially at the ﬁnal update that is given by equation 46 we
know that
ˆ
mt and ˆvt are the bias-corrected terms for sake
of solving we are assuming they are not although the ﬁnal
results do include the bias correction as well. So now we can
substitute the newly calculated ˆ
mt in equation 46,
xt = xt−1 −η
β1mt
Ψ
−(1 −β1)gt
Ψ

(50)
Where Ψ is given by (Ψ =
p
β2 ˆvt + (1 −β2)gt2 +ϵ). Now
an assumption that the original suthour took was that vt ≈
vt−1 due to the fact that β2 is initailized as > 0.9 hence we
can change the denominator as √vt−1 + ϵ hence when we
replace for the denominator of both the terms we get,
xt = xt−1 −η
 β1mt
√ˆvt + ϵ
(1 −β1)gt
√ˆvt + ϵ

(51)
Now for the sake of readability, we can introduce a new
variable ˆ
mt which is deﬁned by,
ˆ
mt = (1 −β1)gt + β1mt
(52)
And the ﬁnal update becomes,
xt = xt−1 −η
ˆ
mt
√ˆvt + ϵ
(53)
H. AMSGrad
Before we get into the workings of AMSGrad or any further
optimizer we have to follow a different set of notations. Let
F be the ﬁnite space containing the set of parameters such
that xt ∈F. And as deﬁned previously let ft be the loss
function at time step t and the incurred loss at time step will
be ft(xt). Now due to the uncertainty of the subspace of the
cost function at each time step, we have to evaluate using
regret which is given by R(T) = PT
t=1[ft(xt) −ft(x∗)]
where x∗
= argminx∈F
PT
t=1 ft(x). In case of Adam,
the regret bound is of the order O(
√
T). Although we
have been using the notion of the ﬁnal update we haven’t
speciﬁed the subspace that it belongs to F hence we deﬁne
a new ﬁnal update that projects the ﬁnal update to the set
F ie., xt+1 = ΠF(xt−1 −ηgt). Also as another measure
we deﬁne Γt+1 as the inverse of η in adaptive methods
and is given by Γt+1 =
√
ˆ
vt+1
ηt+1
−
√ˆ
vt
ηt

which is quite
important in sense of measuring the step sizes in each iteration.
AMSGrad [38] was essentially an improvement on Adam in
that sense that the original authors found out that we cannot
get a good convergence on adaptive methods with only a
limited history of the gradients and they even proved for
Adam optimizer. Hence to have a meaningful convergence
the optimizer should support the storage of past gradients
rather than expectations or moving averages. Another thing
to notice is that the learning rates for SGD and ADAGrad
can only be decremented that is after initializing the step
size can only be reduced or Γt ≽0 for every timestep t, but
for Adam and RMSprop the values for Γt can be indeﬁnite,
which leads to bad convergence for the both. The authors
also proved that for β1, β2 ∈[0, 1] such that β1/√β2 < 1
Adam doesn’t converge to the optimal solution in a stochastic
setting, and even the regret R hence the focus for AMSGrad
was to develop an algorithm that has similar implications
as Adam that it has bias corrections and adaptive gradients
but it should converge to the optimal solution. As mentioned
earlier that Γt in case of Adam is indeﬁnite but was taken
as an assumption that it is positive semideﬁnite. A correction
for the step sizes that were introduced with gamma correction
was that ﬁrstly the step size was initialized as a comparatively
smaller quantity as compared to Adam but AMSGrad still has
the running notion of suppressing the effect of gradient given
that Γt is positive semideﬁnite. Another difference between
Adam and AMSGrad is that incase of AMSGrad we use the
maximum value for vt for moving averages of the gradient
instead of vt itself hence we can represent the modiﬁcation
as,
ˆvt = max( ˆ
vt−1, vt)
(54)
Hence this actually shows that is the gradients are positive
instead of taking a large step size as in the case of Adam,
AMSGrad decreases the value for vt which checks the learning
rates even if the gradients are large. And the ﬁnal update
similar to equation is given by,

xt+1 = ΠF

xt −ηt
ˆ
mt
√ˆvt + ϵ

(55)
I. Padam
Padam[39] was an extension of AMSGrad which gave an
option to switch between SGD and AMSGrad by introducing
a new parameter p whose values lie in the range of [0, 1/2],
where at 0 the algorithm is same as SGD with Momentum
and at 1/2 it is similar to AMSGrad. The parameter p was
introduced at the ﬁnal update term for AMSGrad given by,
xt+1 = ΠF, ˆ
vtp

xt −ηt
ˆ
mt
ˆvt
p

(56)
Now, this technique is quite similar to what we saw for
AdaMax optimizer as shown by equation 46 but the only key
difference is that here we are only changing the ﬁnal step
instead of the norm as above. Now choosing the value p is
the most important task when it comes to this optimizer, but
the value of p is highly sensitive to the value of the step size,
yet the most promising results were from p = 0.125. This is
quite justiﬁable as if the value for p was large initially, the
value for η/ ˆvt
p would also large for small ˆvt and this can
be resolved easily by using small values for η. The authors
also give a notion of early stopping due to the much decay
in the learning rate terming it “small learning rate dilemma”
and formulated that as the value for p becomes larger and
larger(constrained under [0,1]) a greater effect of the dilemma
is observed and if p < 1/2 then Padam performs as well,
even if the step size is changed a bit. An important note here
is that the authors have focussed on improving ˆvt instead of
ηt because the concept of generality as we strive for better not
for a singular problem but we need results that can be applied
to a variety of problems, this loss of generality is the reason
why optimizers like Adam don’t give remarkably better results
than SGD with momentum[40] on datasets like CIFAR-10 and
CIFAR-100 [41]
J. AdamW
After introducing a good foundation of gradient descent
optimization, there is quite a strong connection between
concepts of loss functions and optimization. As introduced
in section 2 the loss functions have a regularization term
which is called the L2 regularization term, which exists to
prevent overﬁtting. As a prerequisite, we assume that the loss
functionft(x) includes the regularization term. Another notion
of weight decay although not introduced earlier, is just adding
a decay term to the weights hence it is given by,
xt+1 = (1 −λ)xt −η∇ft(xt)
(57)
Here λ is the rate at which decay is happening. Although
these terms L2 regularization and weight decay are used
interchangeably which is not correct. Although while working
with SGD with Momentum we can assume that these are the
same. For representation, we will deﬁne a new representation
for the regularized loss functions as,
f ′
t(x) = ft(x) + λ′
2 ||x||2
2
(58)
Where again λ deﬁnes the weight decay. And now if we
substitute equation 57 in equation 58 we will get,
xt+1 = xt −η∇f ′
t(xt)
xt+1 = xt −η∇ft(xt) −ηλ′xt
xt+1 = (1 −λ)xt −η∇ft(xt)
(59)
Here the only assumption is to take λ′ = λ/η. This
is probably the reason why both methods are mentioned
interchangeably. But with this also comes this notion that
λ′ and η are strongly coupled which shouldn’t be the case
as these hyperparameters are responsible for two separate
phenomena. Hence in SGDW, the authors proposed that the
weight decay and gradient update to be done simultaneously
which is worked by introducing a new variable δt which can
be ﬁxed or can have the decay effect as well, hence the update
is given by
xt+1 = xt −mt −δtηxt
(60)
Now, as we proved that for SGDW that L2 regularization is
the same as weight decay, this is not the case for adaptive
methods. Let us deﬁne a new update for generic adaptive
methods(without weight decay) which is given by xt+1 =
(1−λ)xt−ηMt∇ft(xt) where Mt is a called a preconditioner
matrix and is deﬁned as Mt ̸= kI and it can be assumned that
it holds the ratio of ˆ
mt/√ˆvt also the update with weight decay
can be written xt+1 = (1−λ)xt−ηMt∇ft(xt) so if we follow
the previous notion as given by equation 58 we get,
xt+1 = xt −ηMt∇ft(xt) −ηMtλ′xt
xt+1 = (1 −λ)xt −ηMt∇ft(xt)
(61)
Now for the condition to hold that L2-regularization is
the same as weighed decay even for adaptive methods both
subequations under equation 59 should be equal that is λxt =
ηλ′Mtxt should hold good, but for this to be satisﬁed Mt has
to be a diagonal matrix, which it is not hence this relation
doesn’t hold good. Hence for adaptive methods, L2 is not the
same as weighted decay. And due to this reason, we have to
make changes to Adam by introducing a weighted decay term.
As we did for SGD with momentum even for adam, the ﬁnal
update now becomes, 5
xt = xt−1 −δt

η
ˆ
mt
√ˆvt + ϵ + λxt−1

(62)
VI. CONCLUSION
The conclusion goes here.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
